The Oration of Eusebius in Praise of Constantine (Eusebius of Caesarea)
Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, Series 2, 1892. Public domain.
Source: Christian Classics Ethereal Library.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

======================================================================

 The Oration

 of

 Eusebius Pamphilus,

 in praise of

 the Emperor Constantine.

 Pronounced on the thirtieth anniversary of his reign.

 ------------------------

 Prologue to the Oration. [3494]

 1. I come not forward prepared with a fictitious narrative, nor with
 elegance of language to captivate the ear, desiring to charm my hearers
 as it were, with a siren's voice; nor shall I present the draught of
 pleasure in cups of gold decorated with lovely flowers (I mean the
 graces of style) to those who are pleased with such things. Rather
 would I follow the precepts of the wise, and admonish all to avoid and
 turn aside from the beaten road, and keep themselves from contact with
 the vulgar crowd.

 2. I come, then, prepared to celebrate our emperor's praises in a newer
 strain; and, though the number be infinite of those who desire to be my
 companions in my present task, I am resolved to shun the common track
 of men, [3495] and to pursue that untrodden path which it is unlawful
 to enter on with unwashed feet. Let those who admire a vulgar style,
 abounding in puerile subtleties, and who court a pleasing and popular
 muse, essay, since pleasure is the object they have in view, to charm
 the ears of men by a narrative of merely human merits. Those, however
 who are initiated into the universal science, [3496] and have attained
 to Divine as well as human knowledge, and account the choice of the
 latter as the real excellence, will prefer those virtues of the emperor
 which Heaven itself approves, and his pious actions, to his merely
 human accomplishments; and will leave to inferior encomiasts the task
 of celebrating his lesser merits.

 3. For since our emperor is gifted as well with that sacred wisdom
 which has immediate reference to God, as with the knowledge which
 concerns the interests of men; let those who are competent to such a
 task describe his secular acquirements, great and transcendent as they
 are, and fraught with advantage to mankind (for all that characterizes
 the emperor is great and noble), yet still inferior to his diviner
 qualifies, to those who stand without the sacred precincts.

 4. Let those, however, who are within the sanctuary, and have access to
 its inmost and untrodden recesses, close the doors against every
 profane ear, and unfold, as it were, the secret mysteries of our
 emperor's character to the initiated alone. And let those who have
 purified their ears in the streams of piety, and raised their thoughts
 on the soaring wing of the mind itself, join the company which
 surrounds the Sovereign Lord of all, and learn in silence the divine
 mysteries.

 5. Meanwhile let the sacred oracles, given, not by the spirit of
 divination (or rather let me say of madness and folly), but by the
 inspiration of Divine truth, [3497] be our instructors in these
 mysteries; speaking to us of sovereignty, generally: of him who is the
 Supreme Sovereign of all, and the heavenly array which surrounds the
 Lord of all; of that exemplar of imperial power which is before us, and
 that counterfeit coin: and, lastly, of the consequences which result
 from both. With these oracles, then, to initiate us in the knowledge of
 the sacred rites, let us essay, as follows, the commencement of our
 divine mysteries.

 [3494] The conventional heading has been retained. Literally it is
 "Tricennial oration of Eusebius, addressed to the Emperor Constantine.
 Prologue to the praises addressed to Constantine." The translation of
 this oration shows, even more than that of the Life or Constantine's
 Oration, a sympathy on the part of the translator with the florid style
 of Eusebius, and, trying as the style itself is, the success of Bag. in
 presenting the spirit of the original with, on the whole, very
 considerable accuracy of rendering has been a constant matter of
 surprise during the effort to revise.

 [3495] Cf. Hom. Il. 6. 202, tr. Bryant, 6. 263-4, "shunning every haunt
 of human-kind."

 [3496] Eusebius seems to use this phrase much as the modern phrases
 "The final philosophy," "The science of sciences," "The queen of
 sciences," when applied to theology.

 [3497] "Divine light."

 Chapter I.--The Oration.

 1. To-day is the festival of our great emperor: and we his children
 rejoice therein, feeling the inspiration of our sacred theme. He who
 presides over our solemnity is the Great Sovereign himself; he, I mean,
 who is truly great; of whom I affirm (nor will the sovereign who hears
 me be offended, but will rather approve of this ascription of praise to
 God), that HE is above and beyond all created things, the Highest, the
 Greatest, the most Mighty One; whose throne is the arch of heaven, and
 the earth the footstool of his feet. [3498] His being none can worthily
 comprehend; and the ineffable splendor of the glory which surrounds him
 repels the gaze of every eye from his Divine majesty.

 2. His ministers are the heavenly hosts; his armies the supernal
 powers, who own allegiance to him as their Master, Lord, and King. The
 countless multitudes of angels, the companies of archangels, the chorus
 of holy spirits, draw from and reflect his radiance as from the
 fountains of everlasting light. Yea every light, and specially those
 divine and incorporeal intelligences whose place is beyond the heavenly
 sphere, celebrate this august Sovereign with lofty and sacred strains
 of praise. The vast expanse of heaven, like an azure veil, is
 interposed between those without, and those who inhabit his royal
 mansions: while round this expanse the sun and moon, with the rest of
 the heavenly luminaries (like torch-bearers around the entrance of the
 imperial palace), perform, in honor of their sovereign, their appointed
 courses; holding forth, at the word of his command, an ever-burning
 light to those whose lot is cast in the darker regions without the pale
 of heaven.

 3. And surely when I remember that our own victorious emperor renders
 praises to this Mighty Sovereign, I do well to follow him, knowing as I
 do that to him alone we owe that imperial power under which we live.
 The pious Cæsars, instructed by their father's wisdom, acknowledge him
 as the source of every blessing: the soldiery, the entire body of the
 people, both in the country and in the cities of the empire, with the
 governors of the several provinces, assembling together in accordance
 with the precept of their great Saviour and Teacher, worship him. In
 short, the whole family of mankind, of every nation, tribe, and tongue,
 both collectively and severally, however diverse their opinions on
 other subjects, are unanimous in this one confession; and, in obedience
 to the reason implanted in them, and the spontaneous and uninstructed
 impulse of their own minds, unite in calling on the One and only God.
 [3499]

 4. Nay, does not the universal frame of earth acknowledge him her Lord,
 and declare, by the vegetable and animal life which she produces her
 subjection to the will of a superior Power? The rivers, flowing with
 abundant stream, and the perennial fountains, springing from hidden and
 exhaustless depths, ascribe to him the cause of their marvellous
 source. The mighty waters of the sea, enclosed in chambers of
 unfathomable depth, and the swelling surges, which lift themselves on
 high, and menace as it were the earth itself, shrink back when they
 approach the shore, checked by the power of his Divine law. The duly
 measured fall of winter's rain, the rolling thunder, the lightning's
 flash, the eddying currents of the winds, and the airy courses of the
 clouds, all reveal his presence to those to whom his Person is
 invisible.

 5. The all-radiant sun, who holds his constant career through the lapse
 of ages, owns him Lord alone, and obedient to his will, dares not
 depart from his appointed path. The inferior splendor of the moon,
 alternately diminished and increased at stated periods, is subject to
 his Divine command. The beauteous mechanism of the heavens, glittering
 with the hosts of stars, moving in harmonious order, and preserving the
 measure of each several orbit, proclaims him the giver of all light:
 yea, all the heavenly luminaries maintaining at his will and word a
 grand and perfect unity of motion, pursue the track of their ethereal
 career, and complete in the lapse of revolving ages their distant
 course. The alternate recurrence of day and night, the changing
 seasons, the order and proportion of the universe, all declare the
 manifold wisdom of [his boundless power]. To him the unseen agencies
 which hold their course throughout the expanse of space, render the due
 tribute of praise. To him this terrestrial globe itself, to him the
 heavens above, and the choirs beyond the vault of heaven, give honor as
 to their mighty Sovereign: the angelic hosts greet him with ineffable
 songs of Praise; and the spirits which draw their being from
 incorporeal light, adore him as their Creator. The everlasting ages
 which were before this heaven and earth, with other periods beside
 them, infinite, and antecedent to all visible creation, acknowledge him
 the sole and supreme Sovereign and Lord.

 6. Lastly, he who is in all, before, and after all, [3500] his only
 begotten, pre-existent Word, the great High Priest of the mighty God,
 elder than all time and every age, devoted to his Father's glory, first
 and alone makes intercession with him for the salvation of mankind.
 [3501] Supreme and pre-eminent Ruler of the universe, he shares the
 glory of his Father's kingdom: for he is that Light, which,
 transcendent above the universe, encircles the Father's Person,
 interposing and dividing between the eternal and uncreated Essence and
 all derived existence: that Light which, streaming from on high,
 proceeds from that Deity who knows not origin or end, and illumines the
 super-celestial regions, and all that heaven itself contains, with the
 radiance of wisdom bright beyond the splendor of the sun. This is he
 who holds a supreme dominion over this whole world, [3502] who is over
 and in all things, and pervades all things [3503] visible and
 invisible; the Word of God. From whom and by whom our divinely favored
 emperor, receiving, as it were a transcript of the Divine sovereignty,
 directs, in imitation of God himself, the administration of this
 world's affairs.

 [3498] Paraphrased from Is. lxvi. 1.

 [3499] [We must be content here (and probably in other passages of this
 Oration) to tolerate as rhetorical embellishment that which, regarded
 literally, is in every sense palpably untrue.--Bag.] The intention of
 the passage is probably like that of those who say now that there is no
 nation where, in some form, God is not worshiped.

 [3500] [Referring possibly to Rev. i. 8. "I am Alpha and Omega, the
 beginning and the ending saith the Lord, which is, and which was, and
 which is to come, the Almighty."--Bag.] Or, possibly, refers to Eph.
 iv. 6, as it seems to be simply some verbal suggestion.

 [3501] [The Arianism implied in this passage, if referred to the Word
 as God, disappears if we regard it as spoken of Christ as the Word
 manifested in human nature. See the note of Valesius ad loc.--Bag.]

 [3502] Universe.

 [3503] This is directly from Eph. iv. 6: "Who is over all and through
 all and in all." It is thus directly referred to the Father, and on the
 basis of the above note of Bag. seems to convict of Arianism, but in
 reality the conception of a pre-existing Word is distinctly orthodox.

 Chapter II.

 1. This only begotten Word of God reigns, from ages which had no
 beginning, to infinite and endless ages, the partner of his Father's
 kingdom. And [our emperor] ever beloved by him, who derives the source
 of imperial authority from above, and is strong in the power of his
 sacred title, [3504] has controlled the empire of the world for a long
 period of years.

 2. Again, that Preserver of the universe orders these heavens and
 earth, and the celestial kingdom, consistently with his Father's will.
 Even so our emperor whom he loves, by bringing those whom he rules on
 earth to the only begotten Word and Saviour renders them fit subjects
 of his kingdom.

 3. And as he who is the common Saviour of mankind, by his invisible and
 Divine power as the good shepherd, drives far away from his flock, like
 savage beasts, those apostate spirits which once flew through the airy
 tracts above this earth, and fastened on the souls of men; [3505] so
 this his friend, graced by his heavenly favor with victory over all his
 foes, subdues and chastens the open adversaries of the truth in
 accordance with the usages of war.

 4. He who is the pre-existent Word, the Preserver of all things,
 imparts to his disciples the seeds of true wisdom and salvation, and at
 once enlightens and gives them understanding in the knowledge of his
 Father's kingdom. Our emperor, his friend, acting as interpreter to the
 Word of God, aims at recalling the whole human race to the knowledge of
 God; proclaiming clearly in the ears of all, and declaring with
 powerful voice the laws of truth and godliness to all who dwell on the
 earth.

 5. Once more, the universal Saviour opens the heavenly gates of his
 Father's kingdom to those whose course is thitherward from this world.
 Our emperor, emulous of his Divine example, having purged his earthly
 dominion from every stain of impious error, invites each holy and pious
 worshiper within his imperial mansions, earnestly desiring to save with
 all its crew that mighty vessel of which he is the appointed pilot. And
 he alone of all who have wielded the imperial power of Rome, being
 honored by the Supreme Sovereign with a reign of three decennial
 periods, now celebrates this festival, not, as his ancestors might have
 done, in honor of infernal demons, or the apparitions of seducing
 spirits, or of the fraud and deceitful arts of impious men; but as an
 act of thanksgiving to him by whom he has thus been honored, and in
 acknowledgment of the blessings he has received at his hands. He does
 not, in imitation of ancient usage, defile his imperial mansions with
 blood and gore, nor propitiate the infernal deities with fire and
 smoke, and sacrificial offerings; but dedicates to the universal
 Sovereign a pleasant and acceptable sacrifice, even his own imperial
 soul, and a mind truly fitted for the service of God.

 6. For this sacrifice alone is grateful to him: and this sacrifice our
 emperor has learned, with purified mind and thoughts, to present as an
 offering without the intervention of fire and blood, while his own
 piety, strengthened by the truthful doctrines with which his soul is
 stored, he sets forth in magnificent language the praises of God, and
 imitates his Divine philanthropy by his own imperial acts. Wholly
 devoted to him, he dedicates himself as a noble offering, a first-fruit
 of that world, the government of which is intrusted to his charge. This
 first and greatest sacrifice our emperor first dedicates to God; and
 then, as a faithful shepherd, he offers, not "famous hecatombs of
 firstling lambs," but the souls of that flock which is the object of
 his care, those rational beings whom he leads to the knowledge and
 pious worship of God.

 [3504] [It is difficult to know precisely what is meant here. Possibly
 the name of Christian.--Bag.]

 [3505] This is an allusion to what was afterwards known as
 Vampireism,--a belief of unknown antiquity and especially prevalent in
 various forms in the East. Rydberg (Magic of the Middle Ages, p. 207)
 describes the mediæval form thus: "The vampires, according to the
 belief of the Middle Ages, are disembodied souls which clothe
 themselves again in their buried bodies, steal at night into houses,
 and suck from the nipple of the sleeping all their blood." (Cf. Perty,
 d. myst. Ersch. 1 [1872], 383. 91; Görres' Chr. myst. Vol. 3, etc.)
 Similar in nature was that notion of the spirits who sucked away the
 breath of sleeping persons, which has left its trace in the modern
 superstition that cats suck away the breath of sleeping children.

 Chapter III.

 1. And gladly does he accept and welcome this sacrifice, and commend
 the presenter of so august and noble an offering, by protracting his
 reign to a lengthened period of years, giving larger proofs of his
 beneficence in proportion to the emperor's holy services to himself.
 Accordingly he permits him to celebrate each successive festival during
 great and general prosperity throughout the empire, advancing one of
 his sons, at the recurrence of each decennial period, to a share of his
 own imperial power. [3506]

 2. The eldest, who bears his father's name, he received as his partner
 in the empire about the close of the first decade of his reign: the
 second, next in point of age, at the second; and the third in like
 manner at the third decennial period, the occasion of this our present
 festival. And now that the fourth period has commenced, and the time of
 his reign is still further prolonged, he desires to extend his imperial
 authority by calling still more of his kindred to partake his power;
 and, by the appointment of the Cæsars, [3507] fulfills the predictions
 of the holy prophets, according to what they uttered ages before: "And
 the saints of the Most High shall take the kingdom." [3508]

 3. And thus the Almighty Sovereign himself accords an increase both of
 years and of children to our most pious emperor, and renders his sway
 over the nations of the world still fresh and flourishing, as though it
 were even now springing up in its earliest vigor. He it is who appoints
 him this present festival, in that he has made him victorious over
 every enemy that disturbed his peace: he it is who displays him as an
 example of true godliness to the human race.

 4. And thus our emperor, like the radiant sun, illuminates the most
 distant subjects of his empire through the presence of the Cæsars, as
 with the far piercing rays of his own brightness. To us who occupy the
 eastern regions he has given a son worthy of himself; [3509] a second
 and a third respectively to other departments of his empire, to be, as
 it were, brilliant reflectors of the light which proceeds from himself.
 Once more, having harnessed, as it were, under the self-same yoke the
 four most noble Cæsars [3510] as horses in the imperial chariot, he
 sits on high and directs their course by the reins of holy harmony and
 concord; and, himself every where present, and observant of every
 event, thus traverses every region of the world.

 5. Lastly, invested as he is with a semblance of heavenly sovereignty,
 he directs his gaze above, and frames his earthly government according
 to the pattern of that Divine original, feeling strength in its
 conformity to the monarchy of God. And this conformity is granted by
 the universal Sovereign to man alone of the creatures of this earth:
 for he only is the author of sovereign power, who decrees that all
 should be subject to the rule of one.

 6. And surely monarchy far transcends every other constitution and form
 of government: for that democratic equality of power, which is its
 opposite, may rather be described as anarchy and disorder. Hence there
 is one God, and not two, or three, or more: for to assert a plurality
 of gods is plainly to deny the being of God at all. There is one
 Sovereign; and his Word and royal Law is one: a Law not expressed in
 syllables and words, not written or engraved on tablets, and therefore
 subject to the ravages of time; but the living and self-subsisting
 Word, who himself is God, and who administers his Father's kingdom on
 behalf of all who are after him and subject to his power.

 7. His attendants are the heavenly hosts; the myriads of God's angelic
 ministers; the super-terrestrial armies, of unnumbered multitude; and
 those unseen spirits within heaven itself, whose agency is employed in
 regulating the order of this world. Ruler and chief of all these is the
 royal Word, acting as Regent of the Supreme Sovereign. To him the names
 of Captain, and great High Priest, Prophet of the Father, Angel of
 mighty counsel, Brightness of the Father's light, Only begotten Son,
 with a thousand other titles, are ascribed in the oracles of the sacred
 writers. And the Father, having constituted him the living Word, and
 Law and Wisdom, the fullness of all blessing, has presented this best
 and greatest gift to all who are the subjects of his sovereignty.

 8. And he himself, who pervades all things, and is every where present,
 unfolding his Father's bounties to all with unsparing hand, has
 accorded a specimen of his sovereign power even to his rational
 creatures of this earth, in that he has provided the mind of man, who
 is formed after his own image, with Divine faculties, whence it is
 capable of other virtues also, which flow from the same heavenly
 source. For he only is wise, who is the only God: he only is
 essentially good: he only is of mighty power, the Parent of justice,
 the Father of reason and wisdom, the Fountain of light and life, the
 Dispenser of truth and virtue: in a word, the Author of empire itself,
 and of all dominion and power.

 [3506] A general statement, such as Eusebius is fond of making. The
 elevation of his sons was about these times, but not on them exactly.
 Compare Prolegomena, Life.

 [3507] [Dalmatius and Hanniballianus.--Bag.]

 [3508] [Dan. vii. 18. It is surely needless to remark on so singular
 and vicious an application of Scripture as this, further than that it
 is either a culpable rhetorical flourish, or else an indication of a
 lamentable defect of spiritual intelligence in the most learned writer
 of the fourth century.--Bag.] "But the saints of the Most High shall
 receive the kingdom."--Revised Version.

 [3509] [Constantius Cæsar.--Bag.]

 [3510] Compare Prolegomena, under Life.

 Chapter IV.

 1. But whence has man this knowledge, and who has ministered these
 truths to mortal ears? Or whence has a tongue of flesh the power to
 speak of things so utterly distinct from fleshly or material substance?
 Who has gazed on the invisible King, and beheld these perfections in
 him? The bodily sense may comprehend elements and their combinations,
 of a nature kindred to its own: but no one yet has boasted to have
 scanned with corporeal eye that unseen kingdom which governs all things
 nor has mortal nature yet discerned the beauty of perfect wisdom. Who
 has beheld the face of righteousness through the medium of flesh? And
 whence came the idea of legitimate sovereignty and imperial power to
 man? Whence the thought of absolute dominion to a being composed of
 flesh and blood? Who declared those ideas which are invisible and
 undefined, and that incorporeal essence which has no external form, to
 the mortals of this earth?

 2. Surely there was but one interpreter of these things; the
 all-pervading Word of God. [3511] For he is the author of that rational
 and intelligent being which exists in man; and, being himself one with
 his Father's Divine nature, he sheds upon his offspring the
 out-flowings of his Father's bounty. Hence the natural and untaught
 powers of thought, which all men, Greeks or Barbarians, alike possess:
 hence the perception of reason and wisdom, the seeds of integrity and
 righteousness, the understanding of the arts of life, the knowledge of
 virtue, the precious name of wisdom, and the noble love of philosophic
 learning. Hence the knowledge of all that is great and good: hence
 apprehension of God himself, and a life worthy of his worship: hence
 the royal authority of man, and his invincible lordship over the
 creatures of this world.

 3. And when that Word, who is the Parent of rational beings, had
 impressed a character on the mind of man according to the image and
 likeness of God, [3512] and had made him a royal creature, in that he
 gave him alone of all earthly creatures capacity to rule and to obey
 (as well as forethought and foreknowledge even here, concerning the
 promised hope of his heavenly kingdom, because of which he himself
 came, and, as the Parent of his children, disdained not to hold
 converse with mortal men); he continued to cherish the seeds which
 himself had sown, and renewed his gracious favors from above; holding
 forth to all the promise of sharing his heavenly kingdom. Accordingly
 he called men, and exhorted them to be ready for their heavenward
 journey, and to provide themselves with the garment which became their
 calling. And by an indescribable power he filled the world in every
 part with his doctrine, expressing by the similitude of an earthly
 kingdom that heavenly one to which he earnestly invites all mankind,
 and presents it to them as a worthy object of their hope.

 [3511] "And no one knoweth who the Son is, save the Father; and who the
 Father is, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son willeth to reveal
 him."-- Luke x. 22.

 [3512] Eusebius, in making it the Word who impresses the image of God
 on men, shows good philosophy and good theology.

 Chapter V.

 1. And in this hope our divinely-favored emperor partakes even in this
 present life, gifted as he is by God with native virtues, and having
 received into his soul the out-flowings of his favor. His reason he
 derives from the great Source of all reason: he is wise, and good, and
 just, as having fellowship with perfect Wisdom, Goodness, and
 Righteousness: virtuous, as following the pattern of perfect virtue:
 valiant, as partaking of heavenly strength.

 2. And truly may he deserve the imperial title, who has formed his soul
 to royal virtues, according to the standard of that celestial kingdom.
 But he who is a stranger to these blessings, who denies the Sovereign
 of the universe, and owns no allegiance to the heavenly Father of
 spirits; who invests not himself with the virtues which become an
 emperor, but overlays his soul with moral deformity and baseness; who
 for royal clemency substitutes the fury of a savage beast; for a
 generous temper, the incurable venom of malicious wickedness; for
 prudence, folly; for reason and wisdom, that recklessness which is the
 most odious of all vices, for from it, as from a spring of bitterness,
 proceed the most pernicious fruits; such as inveterate profligacy of
 life, covetousness, murder, impiety and defiance of God; surely one
 abandoned to such vices as these, however he may be deemed powerful
 through despotic violence, has no true title to the name of Emperor.

 3. For how should he whose soul is impressed with a thousand absurd
 images of false deities, [3513] be able to exhibit a counterpart of the
 true and heavenly sovereignty? Or how can he be absolute lord of
 others, who has subjected himself to the dominion of a thousand cruel
 masters? a slave of low delights and ungoverned lust, a slave of
 wrongfully-extorted wealth, of rage and passion, as well as of
 cowardice and terror; a slave of ruthless demons, and soul-destroying
 spirits?

 4. Let, then, our emperor, on the testimony of truth itself, be
 declared alone worthy of the title; who is dear to the Supreme
 Sovereign himself; who alone is free, nay, who is truly lord: above the
 thirst of wealth, superior to sexual desire; victorious even over
 natural pleasures; controlling, not controlled by, anger and passion.
 [3514] He is indeed an emperor, and bears a title corresponding to his
 deeds; a Victor in truth, who has gained the victory over those
 passions which overmaster the rest of men: whose character is formed
 after the Divine original [3515] of the Supreme Sovereign, and whose
 mind reflects, as in a mirror, the radiance of his virtues. Hence is
 our emperor perfect in discretion, in goodness, in justice, in courage,
 in piety, in devotion to God: he truly and only is a philosopher, since
 he knows himself, and is fully aware that supplies of every blessing
 are showered on him from a source quite external to himself, even from
 heaven itself. Declaring the august title of supreme authority by the
 splendor of his vesture, he alone worthily wears that imperial purple
 which so well becomes him.

 5. He is indeed an emperor, who calls on and implores in prayer the
 favor of his heavenly Father night and day, and whose ardent desires
 are fixed on his celestial kingdom. For he knows that present things,
 subject as they are to decay and death, flowing on and disappearing
 like a river's stream, are not worthy to be compared with him who is
 sovereign of all; therefore it is that he longs for the incorruptible
 and incorporeal kingdom of God. And this kingdom he trusts he shall
 obtain, elevating his mind as he does in sublimity of thought above the
 vault of heaven, and filled with inexpressible longing for the glories
 which shine there, in comparison with which he deems the precious
 things of this present world but darkness. For he sees earthly
 sovereignty to be but a petty and fleeting dominion over a mortal and
 temporary life, and rates it not much higher than the goatherd's, or
 shepherd's, or herdsman's power: nay, as more burdensome than theirs,
 and exercised over more stubborn subjects. The acclamations of the
 people, and the voice of flattery, he reckons rather troublesome than
 pleasing, because of the steady constancy of his character, and genuine
 discipline of his mind.

 6. Again, when he beholds the military service of his subjects, the
 vast array of his armies, the multitudes of horse and foot, entirely
 devoted to his command, he feels no astonishment, no pride at the
 possession of such mighty power; but turns his thoughts inward on
 himself, and recognizes the same common nature there. He smiles at his
 vesture, embroidered with gold and flowers, and at the imperial purple
 and diadem itself, when he sees the multitude gaze in wonder, like
 children at a bugbear, on the splendid spectacle. [3516] Himself
 superior to such feelings, he clothes his soul with the knowledge of
 God, that vesture, the broidery of which is temperance, righteousness,
 piety, and all other virtues; a vesture such as truly becomes a
 sovereign.

 7. The wealth which others so much desire, as gold, silver, or precious
 gems, he regards to be, as they really are, in themselves mere stones
 and worthless matter, of no avail to preserve or defend from evil. For
 what power have these things to free from disease, or repel the
 approach of death? And knowing as he does this truth by personal
 experience in the use of these things, he regards the splendid attire
 of his subjects with calm indifference, and smiles at the childishness
 of those to whom they prove attractive. Lastly, he abstains from all
 excess in food and wine, and leaves superfluous dainties to gluttons,
 judging that such indulgences, however suitable to others, are not so
 to him, and deeply convinced of their pernicious tendency, and their
 effect in darkening the intellectual powers of the soul.

 8. For all these reasons, our divinely taught and noble-minded emperor,
 aspiring to higher objects than this life affords, calls upon his
 heavenly Father as one who longs for his kingdom; exhibits a pious
 spirit in each action of his life; and finally, as a wise and good
 instructor, imparts to his subjects the knowledge of him who is the
 Sovereign Lord of all.

 [3513] There seems to be a clear hint of Philonism here, or Philonism
 as developed by the Neo-Platonists and the Christian Theologians. The
 history of the thought seems to begin in the Platonic ideas. These
 self-existing forms which impress themselves on the soul naturally
 become personalities to which the soul submits, and whose images are
 impressed on the soul. These personalized ideas are in the thought of
 Philo the thoughts or ideas of God, "powers" who do his will, like the
 Valkyr of the Northern mythology,--the personified thoughts or will of
 Odin. These objective ideas in organized whole were the Word. The
 objectivity of ideas, placed in relation with "mind reading," "thought
 transference," and the like, and with the modern conceptions of the
 conservation of energy and transmission of force by vibrations, give an
 interesting suggestion of a material basis for the conception. If
 thought is accompanied by vibration of brain molecules, it is of course
 quite conceivable that that vibration be projected through any medium
 which can transmit vibration, whether the nerves of another person or
 the air. A person of supreme energy of will would make these vibrations
 more intense, and an Infinite personality would make tangible even
 perhaps to the point of that resistance which we call matter. The
 conception of one great central Personality issuing an organized
 related system of thoughts in various stages of embodiment, in one
 massive, constant forth-streaming of will, is most interesting.
 According to it, all will forms of the individual are true as they are
 in harmony with these norms. Where, however, the lesser wills project
 incongruous will forms, they are in conflict with the greater.
 According to it, the human soul is beaten upon by all ideas which have
 ever been projected, either in individual or in some combined total of
 force, and is formed according to what it submits itself to, whether to
 the lesser and mal-organized or to the Great Norm.

 [3514] Compare Prolegomena, Character. This peculiar self-control, it
 is to be remembered, was characteristic also of his father, and in a
 measure the product of the Neo-Platonic philosophy.

 [3515] Literally, the "archetypal idea,"--the same phrase as that used
 by Philo, 1. 4 (ed. Lips., 1828, I. p. 7); i.e. that incorporeal model
 or image of God on which the corporeal world was formed.

 [3516] This may be true; but compare Prolegomena, Character, for his
 practice, at least.

 Chapter VI.

 1. And God himself, as an earnest of future reward, assigns to him now
 as it were tricennial crowns [3517] composed of prosperous periods of
 time; and now, after the revolution of three circles of ten years, he
 grants permission to all mankind to celebrate this general, nay rather,
 this universal festival.

 2. And while those on earth thus rejoice, crowned as it were with the
 flowers of divine knowledge, surely, we may not unduly suppose that the
 heavenly choirs, attracted by a natural sympathy, unite their joy with
 the joy of those on earth: nay, that the Supreme Sovereign himself, as
 a gracious father, delights in the worship of duteous children, and for
 this reason is pleased to honor the author and cause of their obedience
 through a lengthened period of time; and, far from limiting his reign
 to three decennial circles of years, he extends it to the remotest
 period, even to far distant eternity.

 3. Now eternity [3518] in its whole extent is beyond the power of
 decline or death: its beginning and extent alike incapable of being
 scanned by mortal thoughts. Nor will it suffer its central point to be
 perceived, nor that which is termed its present duration to be grasped
 by the inquiring mind. Far less, then, the future, or the past: for the
 one is not, but is already gone; while the future has not yet arrived,
 and therefore is not. As regards what is termed the present time, it
 vanishes even as we think or speak, more swiftly than the word itself
 is uttered. Nor is it possible in any sense to apprehend this time as
 present; for we must either expect the future, or contemplate the past;
 the present slips from us, and is gone, even in the act of thought.
 Eternity, then, in its whole extent, resists and refuses subjection to
 mortal reason.

 4. But it does not refuse to acknowledge its own Sovereign and Lord,
 [3519] and bears him as it were mounted on itself, rejoicing in the
 fair trappings which he bestows. [3520] And he himself, not binding it,
 as the poet imagined, with a golden chain, [3521] but as it were
 controlling its movements by the reins of ineffable wisdom, has
 adjusted its months and seasons, its times and years, and the
 alterations of day and night, with perfect harmony, and has thus
 attached to it limits and measures of various kinds. For eternity,
 being in its nature direct, and stretching onward into infinity, and
 receiving its name, eternity, as having an everlasting existence,
 [3522] and being similar in all its parts, or rather having no division
 or distance, progresses only in a line of direct extension. But God,
 who has distributed it by intermediate sections, and has divided it,
 like a far extended line, in many points, has included in it a vast
 number of portions; and though it is in its nature one, and resembles
 unity itself, he has attached to it a multiplicity of numbers, and has
 given it, though formless in itself, an endless variety of forms.

 5. For first of all he framed in it formless matter, as a substance
 capable of receiving all forms. He next, by the power of the number
 two, imparted quality to matter, and gave beauty to that which before
 was void of all grace. Again, by means of the number three, he framed a
 body compounded of matter and form, and presenting the three dimensions
 of breadth, and length, and depth. Then, from the doubling of the
 number two, he devised the quaternion of the elements, earth, water,
 air, and fire, and ordained them to be everlasting sources for the
 supply of this universe. Again, the number four produces the number
 ten. For the aggregate of one, and two, and three, and four, is ten.
 [3523] And three multiplied with ten discovers the period of a month:
 and twelve successive months complete the course of the sun. Hence the
 revolutions of years, and changes of the seasons, which give grace,
 like variety of color in painting, to that eternity which before was
 formless and devoid of beauty, for the refreshment and delight of those
 whose lot it is to traverse therein the course of life.

 6. For as the ground is defined by stated distances for those who run
 in hope of obtaining the prize; and as the road of those who travel on
 a distant journey is marked by resting-places and measured intervals,
 that the traveler's courage may not fail at the interminable prospect;
 even so the Sovereign of the universe, controlling eternity itself
 within the restraining power of his own wisdom, directs and turns its
 course as he judges best. The same God, I say, who thus clothes the
 once undefined eternity as with fair colors and blooming flowers,
 gladdens the day with the solar rays; and, while he overspreads the
 night with a covering of darkness, yet causes the glittering stars, as
 golden spangles, to shine therein. It is he who lights up the
 brilliancy of the morning star, the changing splendor of the moon, and
 the glorious companies of the starry host, and has arrayed the expanse
 of heaven, like some vast mantle, in colors of varied beauty. Again,
 having created the lofty and profound expanse of air, and caused the
 world in its length and breadth to feel its cooling influence, he
 decreed that the air itself should be graced with birds of every kind,
 and left open this vast ocean of space to be traversed by every
 creature, visible or invisible, whose course is through the tracts of
 heaven. In the midst of this atmosphere he poised the earth, as it were
 its center, and encompassed it with the ocean as with a beautiful azure
 vesture.

 7. Having ordained this earth to be at once the home, the nurse, and
 the mother of all the creatures it contains, and watered it both with
 rain and water-springs, he caused it to abound in plants and flowers of
 every species, for the enjoyment of life. And when he had formed man in
 his own likeness, the noblest of earthly creatures, and dearest to
 himself, a creature gifted with intellect and knowledge, the child of
 reason and wisdom, he gave him dominion over all other animals which
 move and live upon the earth. For man was in truth of all earthly
 creatures the dearest to God: man, I say, to whom, as an indulgent
 Father, he has subjected the brute creation; for whom he has made the
 ocean navigable, and crowned the earth with a profusion of plants of
 every kind; to whom he has granted reasoning faculties for acquiring
 all science; under whose control he has placed even the creatures of
 the deep, and the winged inhabitants of the air; to whom he has
 permitted the contemplation of celestial objects, and revealed the
 course and changes of the sun and moon, and the periods of the planets
 and fixed stars. In short, to man alone of earthly beings has he given
 commandment to acknowledge him as his heavenly Father, and to celebrate
 his praises as the Supreme Sovereign of eternity itself.

 8. But the unchangeable course of eternity the Creator has limited by
 the four seasons of the year, terminating the winter by the approach of
 spring, and regulating as with an equal balance that season which
 commences the annual period. Having thus graced the eternal course of
 time with the varied productions of spring, he added the summer's heat;
 and then granted as it were a relief of toil by the interval of autumn:
 and lastly, refreshing and cleansing the season by the showers of
 winter, he brings it, rendered sleek and glossy, like a noble steed, by
 these abundant rains, once more to the gates of spring.

 9. As soon, then, as the Supreme Sovereign had thus connected his own
 eternity by these cords of wisdom with the annual circle, he committed
 it to the guidance of a mighty Governor, even his only begotten Word,
 to whom, as the Preserver of all creation, he yielded the reins of
 universal power. And he, receiving this inheritance as from a
 beneficent Father, and uniting all things both above and beneath the
 circumference of heaven in one harmonious whole, directs their uniform
 course; providing with perfect justice whatever is expedient for his
 rational creatures on the earth, appointing its allotted limits to
 human life, and granting to all alike permission to anticipate even
 here the commencement of a future existence. For he has taught them
 that beyond this present world there is a divine and blessed state of
 being, reserved for those who have been supported here by the hope of
 heavenly blessings; and that those who have lived a virtuous and godly
 life will remove hence to a far better habitation; while he adjudges to
 those who have been guilty and wicked here a place of punishment
 according to their crimes.

 10. Again, as in the distribution of prizes at the public games, he
 proclaims various crowns to the victors, and invests each with the
 rewards of different virtues: but for our good emperor, who is clothed
 in the very robe of piety, he declares that a higher recompense of his
 toils is prepared; and, as a prelude to this recompense, permits us now
 to assemble at this festival, which is composed of perfect numbers, of
 decades thrice, and triads ten times repeated.

 11. The first of these, the triad, is the offspring of the unit, while
 the unit is the mother of number itself, and presides over all months,
 and seasons, and years, and every period of time. It may, indeed, be
 justly termed the origin, foundation, and principle of all number, and
 derives its name from its abiding character. [3524] For, while every
 other number is diminished or increased according to the subtraction or
 addition of others, the unit alone continues fixed and steadfast,
 abstracted from all multitude and the numbers which are formed from it,
 and resembling that indivisible essence which is distinct from all
 things beside, but by virtue of participation in which the nature of
 all things else subsists.

 12. For the unit is the originator of every number, since all multitude
 is made up by the composition and addition of units; nor is it possible
 without the unit to conceive the existence of number at all. But the
 unit itself is independent of multitude, apart from and superior to all
 number; forming, indeed, and making all, but receiving no increase from
 any.

 13. Kindred to this is the triad; equally indivisible and perfect, the
 first of those sums which are formed of even and uneven numbers. For
 the perfect number two, receiving the addition of the unit, forms the
 triad, the first perfect compound number. And the triad, by explaining
 what equality is, first taught men justice, having itself an equal
 beginning, and middle, and end. And it is also an image of the
 mysterious, most holy, and royal Trinity, which, though itself without
 beginning or origin, yet contains the germs, the reasons, and causes of
 the existence of all created things.

 14. Thus the power of the triad may justly be regarded as the first
 cause of all things. Again, the number ten, which contains the end of
 all numbers, and terminates them in itself, may truly be called a full
 and perfect number, as comprehending every species and every measure of
 numbers, proportions, concords, and harmonies. For example, the units
 by addition form and are terminated by the number ten; and, having this
 number as their parent, and as it were the limit of their course, they
 round this as the goal of their career.

 15. Then they perform a second circuit, and again a third, and a
 fourth, until the tenth, and thus by ten decades they complete the
 hundredth number. Returning thence to the first starting point, they
 again proceed to the number ten, and having ten times completed the
 hundredth number, again they recede, and perform round the same
 barriers their protracted course, proceeding from themselves back to
 themselves again, with revolving motion.

 16. For the unit is the tenth of ten, and ten units make up a decade,
 which is itself the limit, the settled goal and boundary of units: it
 is that which terminates the infinity of number; the term and end of
 units. Again, the triad combined with the decade, and performing a
 threefold circuit of tens, produces that most natural number, thirty.
 For as the triad is in respect to units, so is the number thirty in
 respect to tens.

 17. It is also the constant limit to the course of that luminary which
 is second to the sun in brightness. For the course of the moon from one
 conjunction with the sun to the next, completes the period of a month;
 after which, receiving as it were a second birth, it recommences a new
 light, and other days, being adorned and honored with thirty units,
 three decades, and ten triads.

 18. In the same manner is the universal reign of our victorious emperor
 distinguished by the giver of all good, and now enters on a new sphere
 of blessing, accomplishing, at present, this tricennalian festival, but
 reaching forward beyond this to far more distant intervals of time, and
 cherishing the hope of future blessings in the celestial kingdom;
 where, not a single sun, but infinite hosts of light surround the
 Almighty Sovereign, each surpassing the splendor of the sun, glorious
 and resplendent with rays derived from the everlasting source of light.

 19. There the soul enjoys its existence, surrounded by fair and
 unfading blessings; there is a life beyond the reach of sorrow; there
 the enjoyment of pure and holy pleasures, and a time of unmeasured and
 endless duration, extending into illimitable space; not defined by
 intervals of days and months, the revolutions of years, or the
 recurrence of times and seasons, but commensurate with a life which
 knows no end. And this life needs not the light of the sun, nor the
 lustre of the moon or the starry host, since it has the great Luminary
 himself, even God the Word, the only begotten Son of the Almighty
 Sovereign.

 20. Hence it is that the mystic and sacred oracles reveal him to be the
 Sun of righteousness, and the Light which far transcends all light. We
 believe that he illumines also the thrice-blessed powers of heaven with
 the rays of righteousness, and the brightness of wisdom, and that he
 receives truly pious souls, not within the sphere of heaven alone, but
 into his own bosom, and confirms indeed the assurances which he himself
 has given.

 21. No mortal eye has seen, nor ear heard, nor can the mind in its
 vesture of flesh understand what things are prepared for those who have
 been here adorned with the graces of godliness; blessings which await
 thee too, most pious emperor, to whom alone since the world began has
 the Almighty Sovereign of the universe granted power to purify the
 course of human life: to whom also he has revealed his own symbol of
 salvation, whereby he overcame the power of death, and triumphed over
 every enemy. And this victorious trophy, the scourge of evil spirits,
 thou hast arrayed against the errors of idol worship, and hast obtained
 the victory not only over all thy impious and savage foes, but over
 equally barbarous adversaries, the evil spirits themselves.

 [3517] [Alluding (says Valesius) to the crowns of gold which the people
 of the several provinces were accustomed to present to the Roman
 emperors on such occasions as the present.--Bag.] In his prologue to
 the Life, Eusebius calls this very oration a weaving of tricennial
 crowns (or garlands). These crowns had their historical origin in the
 triumphal crowns under the Roman system. Cf. Rich, in Smith, Dict. Gr.
 and Rom. Ant. p. 361.

 [3518] [It is perhaps difficult to find a better word to express the
 original ai& 240;n.--Bag.]

 [3519] Compare 1 Tim. i. 17 (marg.), "King of the ages" ("æons," or
 according to this translation "eternity").

 [3520] [Days, months, years, seasons, &c., are here intended. Valesius,
 ad loc.--Bag.]

 [3521] Hom. Il. 8, 19.

 [3522] [Ai& 241;n, hosper aei on.--Bag.]

 [3523] From what source Eusebius draws this particular application of
 the Pythagorean principle is uncertain. This conception of the
 derivation of ten from four is found in Philo, de Mund. Opif. ch. 15,
 and indeed it is said (Ueberweg) that with the earliest Pythagoreans
 four and ten were the especially significant numbers in creation. This
 mixture of Neo-Pythagoreanism with Platonism and Philonism was
 characteristic of the time.

 [3524] [Monas, para to menein onomasmene. The analogies from number in
 this chapter (which the reader will probably consider puerile enough)
 seem to be an imitation of some of the mystical speculations of
 Plato.--Bag.]

 Chapter VII.

 1. For whereas we are composed of two distinct natures, I mean of body
 and spirit, of which the one is visible to all, the other invisible,
 against both these natures two kinds of barbarous and savage enemies,
 the one invisibly, the other openly, are constantly arrayed. The one
 oppose our bodies with bodily force: the other with incorporeal
 assaults besiege the naked soul itself.

 2. Again, the visible barbarians, like the wild nomad tribes, no better
 than savage beasts, assail the nations of civilized men, ravage their
 country, and enslave their cities, rushing on those who inhabit them
 like ruthless wolves of the desert, and destroying all who fall under
 their power. But those unseen foes, more cruel far than barbarians, I
 mean the soul-destroying demons whose course is through the regions of
 the air, had succeeded, through the snares of vile polytheism, in
 enslaving the entire human race, insomuch that they no longer
 recognized the true God, but wandered in the mazes of atheistic error.
 For they procured, I know not whence, gods who never anywhere existed,
 and set him aside who is the only and the true God, as though he were
 not.

 3. Accordingly the generation of bodies was esteemed by them a deity,
 and so the opposite principle to this, their dissolution and
 destruction, was also deified. The first, as the author of generative
 power, was honored with rites under the name of Venus: [3525] the
 second, as rich, and mighty in dominion over the human race, received
 the names of Pluto, and Death. For men in those ages, knowing no other
 than naturally generated life, declared the cause and origin of that
 life to be divine: and again, believing in no existence after death,
 they proclaimed Death himself a universal conqueror and a mighty god.
 Hence, unconscious of responsibility, as destined to be annihilated by
 death, they lived a life unworthy of the name, in the practice of
 actions deserving a thousand deaths. No thought of God could enter
 their minds, no expectation of Divine judgment, no recollection of, no
 reflection on, their spiritual existence: acknowledging one dread
 superior, Death, and persuaded that the dissolution of their bodies by
 his power was final annihilation, they bestowed on Death the title of a
 mighty, a wealthy god, and hence the name of Pluto. [3526] Thus, then,
 Death became to them a god; nor only so, but whatever else they
 accounted precious in comparison with death, whatever contributed to
 the luxuries of life.

 4. Hence animal pleasure became to them a god; nutrition, and its
 production, a god; the fruit of trees, a god; drunken riot, a god;
 carnal desire and pleasure, a god. Hence the mysteries of Ceres and
 Proserpine, the rape of the latter, and her subsequent restoration, by
 Pluto: hence the orgies of Bacchus, and Hercules overcome by
 drunkenness as by a mightier god: hence the adulterous rites of Cupid
 and of Venus: hence Jupiter himself infatuated with the love of women,
 and of Ganymede: [3527] hence the licentious legends of deities
 abandoned to effeminacy and pleasure.

 5. Such were the weapons of superstition whereby these cruel barbarians
 and enemies of the Supreme God afflicted, and indeed entirely subdued,
 the human race; erecting everywhere the monuments of impiety, and
 rearing in every corner the shrines and temples of their false
 religion.

 6. Nay, so far were the ruling powers of those times enslaved by the
 force of error, as to appease their gods with the blood of their own
 countrymen and kindred; to whet their swords against those who stood
 forward to defend the truth; to maintain a ruthless war and raise
 unholy hands, not against foreign or barbarian foes, but against men
 bound to them by the ties of family and affection, against brethren,
 and kinsmen, and dearest friends, who had resolved, in the practice of
 virtue and true piety, to honor and worship God.

 7. Such was the spirit of madness with which these princes sacrificed
 to their demon deities men consecrated to the service of the King of
 kings. On the other hand their victims, as noble martyrs in the cause
 of true godliness, resolved to welcome a glorious death in preference
 to life itself, and utterly despised these cruelties. Strengthened, as
 soldiers of God, with patient fortitude, they mocked at death in all
 its forms; at fire, and sword, and the torment of crucifixion; at
 exposure to savage beasts, and drowning in the depths of the sea; at
 the cutting off and searing of limbs, the digging out of eyes, the
 mutilation of the whole body; lastly, at famine, the labor of the
 mines, and captivity: nay, all these sufferings they counted better
 than any earthly good or pleasure, for the love they bore their
 heavenly King. In like manner women also evinced a spirit of constancy
 and courage not inferior to that of men.

 8. Some endured the same conflicts with them, and obtained a like
 reward of their virtue: others, forcibly carried off to be the victims
 of violence and pollution, welcomed death rather than dishonor; while
 many, very many more, endured not even to hear the same threats
 wherewith they were assailed by the provincial governors, but boldly
 sustained every variety of torture, and sentence of death in every
 form. [3528] Thus did these valiant soldiers of the Almighty Sovereign
 maintain the conflict with steadfast fortitude of soul against the
 hostile forces of polytheism: and thus did these enemies of God and
 adversaries of man's salvation, more cruel far than the ferocious
 savage, delight in libations of human blood: thus did their ministers
 drain as it were the cup of unrighteous slaughter in honor of the
 demons whom they served, and prepare for them this dread and impious
 banquet, to the ruin of the human race.

 9. In these sad circumstances, what course should the God and King of
 these afflicted ones pursue? Could he be careless of the safety of his
 dearest friends or abandon his servants in this great extremity? Surely
 none could deem him a wary pilot, who, without an effort to save his
 fellow-mariners should suffer his vessel to sink with all her crew:
 surely no general could be found so reckless as to yield his own
 allies, without resistance, to the mercy of the foe: nor can a faithful
 shepherd regard with unconcern the straying of a single sheep from his
 flock, but will rather leave the rest in safety, and dare all things
 for the wanderer's sake, even, if need be, to contend with savage
 beasts.

 10. The zeal, however, of the great Sovereign of all was for no
 unconscious [3529] sheep: his care was exercised for his own faithful
 host, for those who sustained the battle for his sake: whose conflicts
 in the cause of godliness he himself approved, and honored those who
 had returned to his presence with the prize of victory which he only
 can bestow, uniting them to the angelic choirs. Others he still
 preserved on earth, to communicate the living seeds of piety to future
 generations; to be at once eye-witnesses of his vengeance on the
 ungodly, and narrators of the events.

 11. After this he outstretched his arm in judgment on the adversaries,
 and utterly destroyed them with the stroke of Divine wrath, compelling
 them, how reluctant soever to confess with their own lips and recant
 their wickedness, but raising from the ground and exalting gloriously
 those who had long been oppressed and disclaimed by all.

 12. Such were the dealings of the Supreme Sovereign, who ordained an
 invincible champion to be the minister of his heaven-sent vengeance
 (for our emperor's surpassing piety delights in the title of Servant of
 God), and him he has proved victorious over all that opposed him,
 having raised him up, an individual against many foes. For they were
 indeed numberless, being the friends of many evil spirits (though in
 reality they were nothing, and hence are now no more); but our emperor
 is one, appointed by, and the representative of, the one Almighty
 Sovereign. And they, in the very spirit of impiety, destroyed the
 righteous with cruel slaughter: but he, in imitation of his Saviour,
 and knowing only how to save men's lives, has spared and instructed in
 godliness the impious themselves.

 13. And so, as truly worthy the name of Victor, he has subdued the
 twofold race of barbarians; soothing the savage tribes of men by
 prudent embassies, compelling them to know and acknowledge their
 superiors, and reclaiming them from a lawless and brutal life to the
 governance of reason and humanity; at the same time that he proved by
 the facts themselves that the fierce and ruthless race of unseen
 spirits had long ago been vanquished by a higher power. For he who is
 the preserver of the universe had punished these invisible spirits by
 an invisible judgment: and our emperor, as the delegate of the Supreme
 Sovereign, has followed up the victory, bearing away the spoils of
 those who have long since died and mouldered into dust, and
 distributing the plunder with lavish hand among the soldiers of his
 victorious Lord. [3530]

 [3525] Or Aphrodite.

 [3526] [Megan theon kai plousion, para kai Ploutona, ton th?naton
 anegoreuon.--Bag.]

 [3527] On these various names, compare Smith, Dict. of Gr. and Rom.
 Biog.

 [3528] For account of the various details of persecution mentioned,
 compare the Church History.

 [3529] "alogou."

 [3530] [That is, stripping the images of those whose temples he
 destroyed, and apportioning the spoils among his Christian followers:
 See the next chapter, which is mostly a transcript of the 54th and 55th
 chapters of the Third Book of the Life of Constantine.--Bag.]

 Chapter VIII.

 1. For as soon as he understood that the ignorant multitudes were
 inspired with a vain and childish dread of these bugbears of error,
 wrought in gold and silver, he judged it right to remove these also,
 like stumbling-stones thrown in the path of men walking in the dark,
 and henceforward to open a royal road, plain and unobstructed, to all.

 2. Having formed this resolution, he considered that no soldiers or
 military force of any sort was needed for the repression of the evil: a
 few of his own friends sufficed for this service, and these he sent by
 a simple expression of his will to visit each several province.

 3. Accordingly, sustained by confidence in the emperor's piety and
 their own personal devotion to God, they passed through the midst of
 numberless tribes and nations, abolishing this ancient system of error
 in every city and country. They ordered the priests themselves, in the
 midst of general laughter and scorn, to bring their gods from their
 dark recesses to the light of day. They then stripped them of their
 ornaments, and exhibited to the gaze of all the unsightly reality which
 had been hidden beneath a painted exterior: and lastly, whatever part
 of the material appeared to be of value they scraped off and melted in
 the fire to prove its worth, after which they secured and set apart
 whatever they judged needful for their purposes, leaving to the
 superstitious worshipers what was altogether useless, as a memorial of
 their shame.

 4. Meanwhile our admirable prince was himself engaged in a work similar
 to that we have described. For at the same time that these costly
 images of the dead were stripped, as we have said, of their precious
 materials, he also attacked those composed of brass; causing those to
 be dragged from their places with ropes, and, as it were, carried away
 captive, whom the dotage of mythology had esteemed as gods. The next
 care of our august emperor was to kindle, as it were, a brilliant
 torch, by the light of which he directed his imperial gaze around, to
 see if any hidden vestiges of error might yet exist.

 5. And as the keen-sighted eagle in its heavenward flight is able to
 descry from its lofty height the most distant objects on the earth: so
 did he, whilst residing in the imperial palace of his own fair city,
 discover, as from a watch-tower, a hidden and fatal snare of souls in
 the province of Phoenicia. This was a grove and temple, not situated in
 the midst of any city, or in any public place, as for splendor of
 effect is generally the case, but apart from the beaten and frequented
 road, on part of the summit of Mount Lebanon, and dedicated to the foul
 demon known by the name of Venus.

 6. It was a school of wickedness for all the abandoned votaries of
 impurity and such as destroyed their bodies with effeminacy. Here men
 undeserving the name forgot the dignity of their sex, and propitiated
 the demon by their effeminate conduct: here too unlawful commerce of
 women, and adulterous intercourse, with other horrible and infamous
 practices, were perpetrated in this temple as in a place beyond the
 scope and restraint of law.

 Meantime these evils remained unchecked by the presence of any
 observer, since no one of fair character ventured to visit such scenes.

 7. These proceedings, however, could not escape the vigilance of our
 august emperor, who, having himself inspected them with characteristic
 forethought, and judging that such a temple was unfit for the light of
 heaven, gave orders that the building with its offerings should be
 utterly destroyed. Accordingly, in obedience to the imperial edict,
 these engines of an impure superstition were immediately abolished, and
 the hand of military force was made instrumental in purging the place.
 And now those who had heretofore lived without restraint, learned,
 through the imperial threat of punishment, to practice self-control.

 8. Thus did our emperor tear the mask from this system of delusive
 wickedness, and expose it to the public gaze, at the same time
 proclaiming openly his Saviour's name to all. No advocate appeared;
 neither god nor demon, prophet nor diviner, could lend his aid to the
 detected authors of the imposture. For the souls of men were no longer
 enveloped in thick darkness: but enlightened by the rays of true
 godliness, they deplored the ignorance and pitied the blindness of
 their forefathers, rejoicing at the same time in their own deliverance
 from such fatal error. [3531]

 9. Thus speedily, according to the counsel of the mighty God, and
 through our emperor's agency, was every enemy, whether visible or
 unseen, utterly removed: and henceforward peace, the happy nurse of
 youth, extended her reign throughout the world. Wars were no more, for
 the gods were not: no more did warfare in country or town, no more did
 the effusion of human blood, distress mankind, as heretofore, when
 demon-worship and the madness of idolatry prevailed.

 [3531] "The Pharisee stood and prayed thus with himself, God, I thank
 thee that I am not as the rest of men."

 Chapter IX.

 1. And now we may well compare the present with former things, and
 review these happy changes in contrast with the evils that are past,
 and mark the elaborate care with which in ancient times porches and
 sacred precincts, groves and temples, were prepared in every city for
 these false deities, and how their shrines were enriched with abundant
 offerings.

 2. The sovereign rulers of those days had indeed a high regard for the
 worship of the gods. The nations also and people subject to their power
 honored them with images both in the country and in every city, nay,
 even in their houses and secret chambers, according to the religious
 practice of their fathers. The fruit, however, of this devotion, far
 different from the peaceful concord which now meets our view, appeared
 in war, in battles, and seditions, which harassed them throughout their
 lives, and deluged their countries with blood and civil slaughter.

 3. Again, the objects of their worship could hold out to these
 sovereigns with artful flattery the promise of prophecies, and oracles,
 and the knowledge of futurity: yet could they not predict their own
 destruction, nor forewarn themselves of the coming ruin: and surely
 this was the greatest and most convincing proof of their imposture.

 4. Not one of those whose words once were heard with awe and wonder,
 had announced the glorious advent of the Saviour of mankind, [3532] or
 that new revelation of divine knowledge which he came to give. Not
 Pythius himself, nor any of those mighty gods, could apprehend the
 prospect of their approaching desolation; nor could their oracles point
 at him who was to be their conqueror and destroyer.

 5. What prophet or diviner could foretell that their rites would vanish
 at the presence of a new Deity in the world, and that the knowledge and
 worship of the Almighty Sovereign should be freely given to all
 mankind? Which of them foreknew the august and pious reign of our
 victorious emperor, or his triumphant conquests everywhere over the
 false demons, or the overthrow of their high places?

 6. Which of the heroes has announced the melting down and conversion of
 the lifeless statues from their useless forms to the necessary uses of
 men? Which of the gods have yet had power to speak of their own images
 thus melted and contemptuously reduced to fragments?

 7. Where were the protecting powers, that they should not interpose to
 save their sacred memorials, thus destroyed by man? Where, I ask, are
 those who once maintained the strife of war, yet now behold their
 conquerors abiding securely in the profoundest peace? And where are
 they who upheld themselves in a blind and foolish confidence, and
 trusted in these vanities as gods; but who, in the very height of their
 superstitious error, and while maintaining an implacable war with the
 champions of the truth, perished by a fate proportioned to their
 crimes?

 8. Where is the giant race whose arms were turned against heaven
 itself; the hissings of those serpents whose tongues were pointed with
 impious words against the Almighty King? These adversaries of the Lord
 of all, confident in the aid of a multitude of gods, advanced to the
 attack with a powerful array of military force, preceded by certain
 images of the dead, and lifeless statues, as their defense. On the
 other side our emperor, secure in the armor of godliness, opposed to
 the numbers of the enemy the salutary and life-giving Sign, as at the
 same time a terror to the foe, and a protection against every harm; and
 returned victorious at once over the enemy and the demons whom they
 served. [3533] And then, with thanksgiving and praise, the tokens of a
 grateful spirit, to the Author of his victory, he proclaimed this
 triumphant Sign, by monuments as well as words, to all mankind,
 erecting it as a mighty trophy against every enemy in the midst of the
 imperial city, and expressly enjoining on all to acknowledge this
 imperishable symbol of salvation as the safeguard of the power of Rome
 and of the empire of the world.

 9. Such were the instructions which he gave to his subjects generally;
 but especially to his soldiers, whom he admonished to repose their
 confidence, not in their weapons, or armor, or bodily strength, but to
 acknowledge the Supreme God as the giver of every good, and of victory
 itself.

 10. Thus did the emperor himself, strange and incredible as the fact
 may seem, become the instructor of his army in their religious
 exercises, and teach them to offer pious prayers in accordance with the
 divine ordinances, uplifting their hands towards heaven, and raising
 their mental vision higher still to the King of heaven, on whom they
 should call as the Author of victory, their preserver, guardian, and
 helper. He commanded too, that one day should be regarded as a special
 occasion for religious worship; I mean that which is truly the first
 and chief of all, the day of our Lord and Saviour; that day the name of
 which is connected with light, and life, and immortality, and every
 good.

 11. Prescribing the same pious conduct to himself, he honored his
 Saviour in the chambers of his palace, performing his devotions
 according to the Divine commands, and storing his mind with instruction
 through the hearing of the sacred word. The entire care of his
 household was intrusted to ministers devoted to the service of God, and
 distinguished by gravity of life and every other virtue; while his
 trusty body-guards, strong in affection and fidelity to his person,
 found in their emperor an instructor in the practice of a godly life.

 12. Again, the honor with which he regards the victorious Sign is
 founded on his actual experience of its divine efficacy. Before this
 the hosts of his enemies have disappeared: by this the powers of the
 unseen spirits have been turned to flight: through this the proud
 boastings of God's adversaries have come to nought, and the tongues of
 the profane and blasphemous been put to silence. By this Sign the
 Barbarian tribes were vanquished: through this the rites of
 superstitious fraud received a just rebuke: by this our emperor,
 discharging as it were a sacred debt, has performed the crowning good
 of all, by erecting triumphant memorials of its value in all parts of
 the world, raising temples and churches on a scale of royal costliness,
 and commanding all to unite in constructing the sacred houses of
 prayer.

 13. Accordingly these signal proofs of our emperor's magnificence
 forthwith appeared in the provinces and cities of the empire, and soon
 shone conspicuously in every country; convincing memorials of the
 rebuke and overthrow of those impious tyrants who but a little while
 before had madly dared to fight against God, and, raging like savage
 dogs, had vented on unconscious buildings that fury which they were
 unable to level against him; had thrown to the ground and upturned the
 very foundations of the houses of prayer, causing them to present the
 appearance of a city captured and abandoned to the enemy. Such was the
 exhibition of that wicked spirit whereby they sought as it were to
 assail God himself, but soon experienced the result of their own
 madness and folly. But a little time elapsed, when a single blast of
 the storm of Heaven's displeasure swept them utterly away, leaving
 neither kindred, nor offspring, nor memorial of their existence among
 men: for all, numerous as they were, disappeared as in a moment beneath
 the stroke of Divine vengeance.

 14. Such, then, was the fate which awaited these furious adversaries of
 God: but he who, armed with the salutary Trophy, had alone opposed them
 (nay rather, not alone, but aided by the presence and the power of him
 who is the only Sovereign), has replaced the ruined edifices on a
 greater scale, and made the second far superior to the first. For
 example, besides erecting various churches to the honor of God in the
 city which bears his name, and adorning the Bithynian capital with
 another on the greatest and most splendid scale, he has distinguished
 the principal cities of the other provinces by structures of a similar
 kind.

 15. Above all, he has selected two places in the eastern division of
 the empire, the one in Palestine (since from thence the life-giving
 stream has flowed as from a fountain for the blessing of all nations),
 the other in that metropolis of the East which derives its name from
 that of Antiochus; in which, as the head of that portion of the empire,
 he has consecrated to the service of God a church of unparalleled size
 and beauty. The entire building is encompassed by an enclosure of great
 extent, within which the church itself rises to a vast elevation, of an
 octagonal form, surrounded by many chambers and courts on every side,
 and decorated with ornaments of the richest kind. [3534]

 16. Such was his work here. Again, in the province of Palestine, in
 that city which was once the seat of Hebrew sovereignty, on the very
 site of the Lord's sepulchre, he has raised a church of noble
 dimensions, and adorned a temple sacred to the salutary Cross with rich
 and lavish magnificence, honoring that everlasting monument, and the
 trophies of the Saviour's victory over the power of death, with a
 splendor which no language can describe.

 17. In the same country he discovered three places venerable as the
 localities of three sacred caves: and these also he adorned with costly
 structures, paying a fitting tribute of reverence to the scene of the
 first manifestation of the Saviour's presence; while at the second
 cavern he hallowed the remembrance of his final ascension from the
 mountain top; and celebrated his mighty conflict, and the victory which
 crowned it, at the third. [3535] All these places our emperor thus
 adorned in the hope of proclaiming the symbol of redemption to all
 mankind;

 18. that Cross which has indeed repaid his pious zeal; through which
 his house and throne alike have prospered, his reign has been confirmed
 for a lengthened series of years, and the rewards of virtue bestowed on
 his noble sons, his kindred, and their descendants.

 19. And surely it is a mighty evidence of the power of that God whom he
 serves, that he has held the balances of justice with an equal hand,
 and has apportioned to each party their due reward. With regard to the
 destroyers of the houses of prayer, the penalty of their impious
 conduct followed hard upon them: forthwith were they swept away, and
 left neither race, nor house, nor family behind. On the other hand, he
 whose pious devotion to his Lord is conspicuous in his every act, who
 raises royal temples to his honor, and proclaims his name to his
 subjects by sacred offerings throughout the world, he, I say, has
 deservedly experienced him to be the preserver and defender of his
 imperial house and race. Thus clearly have the dealings of God been
 manifested, and this through the sacred efficacy of the salutary Sign.

 [3532] He seems to disagree with the view of the heathen prophecy which
 his imperial hearer maintained in his Oration to the Saints.

 [3533] For details respecting the following enumeration, compare the
 Life of Constantine, of which this is a résumé. This sentence and the
 preceding are taken almost word for word from ch. 16 of Bk. II.

 [3534] Almost word for word from the Life, Bk. III. ch. 50.

 [3535] [In the Life of Constantine (vide [Bk. III. ch. 41] supra),
 Eusebius mentions two caves only, and speaks of the churches built by
 Helena at Bethlehem and on the Mount of Olives. He here alludes to the
 magnificent church erected by Constantine at the Lord's sepulchre, and
 ascribes to him those of Helena also, as having been raised at the
 emperor's expense. Valesius, ad loc.--Bag.]

 Chapter X.

 1. Much might indeed be said of this salutary Sign, by those who are
 skilled in the mysteries of our Divine religion. For it is in very
 truth the symbol of salvation, wondrous to speak of, more wondrous
 still to conceive; the appearance of which on earth has thrown the
 fictions of all false religion from the beginning into the deepest
 shade, has buried superstitious error in darkness and oblivion, and has
 revealed to all that spiritual light which enlightens the souls of men,
 even the knowledge of the only true God.

 2. Hence the universal change for the better, which leads men to spurn
 their lifeless idols, to trample under foot the lawless rites of their
 demon deities, and laugh to scorn the time-honored follies of their
 fathers. Hence, too, the establishment in every place of those schools
 of sacred learning, wherein men are taught the precepts of saving
 truth, and dread no more those objects of creation which are seen by
 the natural eye, nor direct a gaze of wonder at the sun, the moon, or
 stars; but acknowledge him who is above all these, that invisible Being
 who is the Creator of them all, and learn to worship him alone.

 3. Such are the blessings resulting to mankind from this great and
 wondrous Sign, by virtue of which the evils which once existed are now
 no more, and virtues heretofore unknown shine everywhere resplendent
 with the light of true godliness.

 4. Discourses, and precepts, and exhortations to a virtuous and holy
 life, are proclaimed in the ears of all nations. Nay, the emperor
 himself proclaims them: and it is indeed a marvel that this mighty
 prince, raising his voice in the hearing of all the world, like an
 interpreter of the Almighty Sovereign's will, invites his subjects in
 every country to the knowledge of the true God.

 5. No more, as in former times, is the babbling of impious men heard in
 the imperial palace; but priests and pious worshipers of God together
 celebrate his majesty with royal hymns of praise. The name of the one
 Supreme Ruler of the universe is proclaimed to all: the gospel of glad
 tidings connects the human race with its Almighty King, declaring the
 grace and love of the heavenly Father to his children on the earth.

 6. His praise is everywhere sung in triumphant strains: the voice of
 mortal man is blended with the harmony of the angelic choirs in heaven;
 and the reasoning soul employs the body which invests it as an
 instrument for sounding forth a fitting tribute of praise and adoration
 to his name. The nations of the East and the West are instructed at the
 same moment in his precepts: the people of the Northern and Southern
 regions unite with one accord, under the influence of the same
 principles and laws, in the pursuit of a godly life, in praising the
 one Supreme God, in acknowledging his only begotten Son their Saviour
 as the source of every blessing, and our emperor as the one ruler on
 the earth, together with his pious sons.

 7. He himself, as a skillful pilot, sits on high at the helm of state,
 and directs the vessel with unerring course, conducting his people as
 it were with favoring breeze to a secure and tranquil haven. Meanwhile
 God himself, the great Sovereign, extends the right hand of his power
 from above for his protection, giving him victory over every foe, and
 establishing his empire by a lengthened period of years: and he will
 bestow on him yet higher blessings, and confirm in every deed the truth
 of his own promises. But on these we may not at present dwell; but must
 await the change to a better world: for it is not given to mortal eyes
 or ears of flesh, fully to apprehend the things of God. [3536]

 [3536] At this point, according to some (compare Special Prolegomena),
 one oration ends and another begins.

 Chapter XI.

 1. And now, victorious and mighty Constantine, in this discourse, whose
 noble argument is the glory of the Almighty King, let me lay before
 thee some of the mysteries of his sacred truth: not as presuming to
 instruct thee, who art thyself taught of God; nor to disclose to thee
 those secret wonders which he himself, not through the agency of man,
 but through our common Saviour, and the frequent light of his Divine
 presence has long since revealed and unfolded to thy view: but in the
 hope of leading the unlearned to the light, and displaying before those
 who know them not the causes and motives of thy pious deeds.

 2. True it is that thy noble efforts for the daily worship and honor of
 the Supreme God throughout the habitable world, are the theme of
 universal praise. But those records of gratitude to thy Saviour and
 Preserver which thou hast dedicated in our own province of Palestine,
 and in that city from which as from a fountain-head the Saviour Word
 [3537] has issued forth to all mankind; and again, the hallowed
 edifices and consecrated temples which thou hast raised as trophies of
 his victory over death; and those lofty and noble structures, imperial
 monuments of an imperial spirit, which thou hast erected in honor of
 the everlasting memory of the Saviour's tomb; the cause, I say, of
 these things is not equally obvious to all.

 3. Those, indeed, who are enlightened in heavenly knowledge by the
 power of the Divine Spirit, well understand the cause, and justly
 admire and bless thee for that counsel and resolution which Heaven
 itself inspired. On the other hand the ignorant and spiritually blind
 regard these designs with open mockery and scorn, and deem it a strange
 and unworthy thing indeed that so mighty a prince should waste his zeal
 on the graves and monuments of the dead.

 4. "Were it not better," such a one might say, "to cherish those rites
 which are hallowed by ancient usage; to seek the favor of those gods
 and heroes whose worship is observed in every province; instead of
 rejecting and disclaiming them, because subject to the calamities
 incident to man? Surely they may claim equal honors with him who
 himself has suffered: or, if they are to be rejected, as not exempt
 from the sorrows of humanity, the same award would justly be pronounced
 respecting him." Thus, with important and contracted brow, might he
 give utterance in pompous language to his self-imagined wisdom.

 5. Filled with compassion for this ignorance, the gracious Word of our
 most beneficent Father freely invites, not such a one alone, but all
 who are in the path of error, to receive instruction in Divine
 knowledge; and has ordained the means of such instruction throughout
 the world, in every country and village, in cultivated and desert lands
 alike, and in every city: and, as a gracious Saviour and Physician of
 the soul, calls on the Greek and the Barbarian, the wise and the
 unlearned, the rich and the poor, the servant and his master, the
 subject and his lord, the ungodly, the profane, the ignorant, the
 evil-doer, the blasphemer, alike to draw near, and hasten to receive
 his heavenly cure. And thus in time past had he clearly announced to
 all the pardon of former transgressions, saying, "Come unto me, all ye
 that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest." [3538] And
 again, "I am not come to call the righteous, but sinners, to
 repentance." [3539] And he adds the reason, saying, "For they that are
 whole need not a physician, but they that are sick." [3540] And again,
 "I desire not the death of a sinner, but rather that he should repent."
 [3541]

 6. Hence it is only for those who are themselves instructed in Divine
 things and understand the motives of that zeal of which these works are
 the result, to appreciate the more than human impulse by which our
 emperor was guided, to admire his piety toward God, and to believe his
 care for the memorial of our Saviour's resurrection to be a desire
 imparted from above, and truly inspired by that Sovereign, to be whose
 faithful servant and minister for good is his proudest boast.

 7. In full persuasion, then, of thy approval, most mighty emperor, I
 desire at this present time to proclaim to all the reasons and motives
 of thy pious works. I desire to stand as the interpreter of thy
 designs, to explain the counsels of a soul devoted to the love of God.
 I propose to teach all men, what all should know who care to understand
 the principles on which our Saviour God employs his power, the reasons
 for which he who was the pre-existent Controller of all things at
 length descended to us from heaven: the reasons for which he assumed
 our nature, and submitted even to the power of death. I shall declare
 the causes of that immortal life which followed, and of his
 resurrection from the dead. Once more, I shall adduce convincing proofs
 and arguments, for the sake of those who yet need such testimony:

 8. and now let me commence my appointed task.

 Those who transfer the worship due to that God who formed and rules the
 world to the works of his hand; who hold the sun and moon, or other
 parts of this material system, nay, the elements themselves, earth,
 water, air, and fire, in equal honor with the Creator of them all; who
 give the name of gods to things which never would have had existence,
 or even name, except as obedient to that Word of God who made the
 world: such persons in my judgment resemble those who overlook the
 master hand which gives its magnificence to a royal palace; and, while
 lost in wonder at its roofs and walls, the paintings of varied beauty
 and coloring which adorn them, and its gilded ceilings and sculptures,
 ascribe to them the praise of that skill which belongs to the artist
 whose work they are: whereas they should assign the cause of their
 wonder, not to these visible objects, but to the architect himself, and
 confess that the proofs of skill are indeed manifest, but that he alone
 is the possessor of that skill who has made them what they are.

 9. Again, well might we liken those to children, who should admire the
 seven-stringed lyre, and disregard him who invented or has power to use
 it: or those who forget the valiant warrior, and adorn his spear and
 shield with the chaplet of victory: or, lastly, those who hold the
 squares and streets, the public buildings, temples, and gymnasia of a
 great and royal city in equal honor with its founder; forgetting that
 their admiration is due, not to lifeless stones, but to him whose
 wisdom planned and executed these mighty works.

 10. Not less absurd is it for those who regard this universe with the
 natural eye to ascribe its origin to the sun, or moon, or any other
 heavenly body. Rather let them confess that these are themselves the
 works of a higher wisdom, remember the Maker and Framer of them all,
 and render to him the praise and honor above all created objects. Nay
 rather, inspired by the sight of these very objects, let them address
 themselves with full purpose of heart to glorify and worship him who is
 now invisible to mortal eye, but perceived by the clear and unclouded
 vision of the soul, the supremely sovereign Word of God. To take the
 instance of the human body: no one has yet conferred the attribute of
 wisdom on the eyes, or head, the hands, or feet, or other members, far
 less on the outward clothing, of a wise and learned man: no one terms
 the philosopher's household furniture and utensils, wise: but every
 rational person admires that invisible and secret power, the mind of
 the man himself.

 11. How much more, then, is our admiration due, not to the visible
 mechanism of the universe, material as it is, and formed of the
 selfsame elements; but to that invisible Word who has moulded and
 arranged it all, who is the only-begotten Son of God, and whom the
 Maker of all things, who far transcends all being, has begotten of
 himself, and appointed Lord and Governor of this universe?

 12. For since it was impossible that perishable bodies, or the rational
 spirits which he had created, should approach the Supreme God, by
 reason of their immeasurable distance from his perfections, for he is
 unbegotten, above and beyond all creation, ineffable, inaccessible,
 unapproachable, dwelling, as his holy word assures us, [3542] in the
 light which none can enter; but they were created from nothing, and are
 infinitely far removed from his unbegotten Essence; well has the
 all-gracious and Almighty God interposed as it were an intermediate
 Power [3543] between himself and them, even the Divine omnipotence of
 his only-begotten Word. And this Power, which is in perfect nearness
 and intimacy of union, with the Father which abides in him, and shares
 his secret counsels, has yet condescended, in fullness of grace, as it
 were to conform itself to those who are so far removed from the supreme
 majesty of God. How else, consistently with his own holiness could he
 who is far above and beyond all things unite himself to corruptible and
 corporeal matter? Accordingly the Divine Word, thus connecting himself
 with this universe, and receiving into his hands the reins, as it were,
 of the world, turns and directs it as a skillful charioteer according
 to his own will and pleasure.

 13. The proof of these assertions is evident. For supposing that those
 component parts of the world which we call elements, as earth, water,
 air, and fire, the nature of which is manifestly without intelligence,
 are self-existent; and if they have one common essence, which they who
 are skilled in natural science call the great receptacle, mother, and
 nurse of all things; and if this itself be utterly devoid of shape and
 figure, of soul and reason; whence shall we say it has obtained its
 present form and beauty? To what shall we ascribe the distinction of
 the elements, or the union of things contrary in their very nature? Who
 has commanded the liquid water to sustain the heavy element of earth?
 Who has turned back the waters from their downward course, and carried
 them aloft in clouds? Who has bound the force of fire, and caused it to
 lie latent in wood, and to combine with substances most contrary to
 itself? Who has mingled the cold air with heat, and thus reconciled the
 enmity of opposing principles? Who has devised the continuous
 succession of the human race, and given it as it were an endless term
 of duration? Who has moulded the male and female form, adapted their
 mutual relations with perfect harmony, and given one common principle
 of production to every living creature? Who changes the character of
 the fluid and corruptible seed, which in itself is void of reason, and
 gives it its prolific power? Who is at this moment working these and
 ten thousand effects more wonderful than these, nay, surpassing all
 wonder, and with invisible influence is daily and hourly perpetuating
 the production of them all?

 14. Surely the wonder-working and truly omnipotent Word of God may well
 be deemed the efficient cause of all these things: that Word who,
 diffusing himself through all creation, pervading height and depth with
 incorporeal energy, and embracing the length and breadth of the
 universe within his mighty grasp, has compacted and reduced to order
 this entire system, from whose unreasoned and formless matter he has
 framed for himself an instrument of perfect harmony, the nicely
 balanced chords and notes of which he touches with all-wise and
 unerring skill. He it is who governs the sun, and moon, and the other
 luminaries of heaven by inexplicable laws, and directs their motions
 for the service of the universal whole.

 15. It is this Word of God who has stooped to the earth on which we
 live, and created the manifold species of animals, and the fair
 varieties of the vegetable world. It is this same Word who has
 penetrated the recesses of the deep, has given their being to the finny
 race, and produced the countless forms of life which there exist. It is
 he who fashions the burden of the womb, and informs it in nature's
 laboratory with the principle of life. By him the fluid and heavy
 moisture is raised on high, and then, sweetened by a purifying change,
 descends in measured quantities to the earth, and at stated seasons in
 more profuse supply.

 16. Like a skillful husbandman, he fully irrigates the land, tempers
 the moist and dry in just proportion, diversifying the whole with
 brilliant flowers, with aspects of varied beauty, with pleasant
 fragrance, with alternating varieties of fruits, and countless
 gratifications for the taste of men. But why do I dare essay a hopeless
 task, to recount the mighty works of the Word of God, and describe an
 energy which surpasses mortal thought? By some, indeed, he has been
 termed the Nature of the universe, by others, the World-Soul, by
 others, Fate. Others again have declared him to be the most High God
 himself, strangely confounding things most widely different; bringing
 down to this earth, uniting to a corruptible and material body, and
 assigning to that supreme and unbegotten Power who is Lord of all an
 intermediate place between irrational animals and rational mortals on
 the one hand, and immortal beings on the other. [3544]

 [3537] Here the author seems to speak doubly of the Word and the word.

 [3538] Matt. xi. 28.

 [3539] Matt. xi. 13. R.V.: "For I came not to call the righteous, but
 sinners." The text here has the reading eismetanoian, omitted by
 Tischendorf and the revisers with ' B, etc., but supported by CEGKL,
 sab. cop., etc. It is worth noting that it is not in the Sinaitic, and
 if this text reading is correct it would nearly overthrow the
 possibility that this ms. was one of those prepared under the direction
 of Eusebius.

 [3540] Matt. xi. 12.

 [3541] Ezek. xviii. 23. R.V.: "Have I any pleasure in the death of the
 wicked, saith the Lord God: and not rather that he should return from
 his way and live?"

 [3542] 1 Tim. vi. 16.

 [3543] [This whole passage (which is defended by Valesius) appears, if
 rigidly interpreted, to lie under suspicion of a tinge of
 Arianism.--Bag.] It savors directly of Philo. His doctrine was of an
 ineffable God, above and separate from matter, and defiled by any
 contact with it. To bring him into connection with created things he
 introduced intermediate beings, or "powers," the universal power
 including all the rest being the Logos. Compare brief account in
 Zeller's Outlines of Greek Philosophy, p. 320-325; Siegfried, Philo von
 Alexandria (Jena, 1875), especially p. 199 sq., 219 sq., and p.
 362-364, where he treats very inadequately of Eusebius' dependence on
 Philo; also works of Philo and Eusebius' Præp. and Demonst. Ev. There
 is a chance of viewing the Word thus as created, but if this is guarded
 against (as it is by him in the use of "begotten"), there is nothing
 intrinsically heterodox in making the Word the Creator of the world and
 only Revealer of the Father. The direct Philonian influence is seen in
 the phraseology of the following sentences.

 [3544] [Of this somewhat obscure passage, a translator can do no more
 than give as nearly as possible a literal version. The intelligent
 reader will not fail to perceive that the author, here and in the
 following chapter, has trodden on very dangerous ground.--Bag.] Compare
 above notes on the relations of Eusebius and Philo.

 Chapter XII.

 1. On the other hand, the sacred doctrine teaches that he who is the
 supreme Source of good, and Cause of all things, is beyond all
 comprehension, and therefore inexpressible by word, or speech, or name;
 surpassing the power, not of language only, but of thought itself.
 Uncircumscribed by place, or body; neither in heaven, nor in ethereal
 space, nor in any other part of the universe; but entirely independent
 of all things else, he pervades the depths of unexplored and secret
 wisdom. The sacred oracles teach us to acknowledge him as the only true
 God, [3545] apart from all corporeal essence, distinct from all
 subordinate ministration. Hence it is said that all things are from
 him, but not through him. [3546]

 2. And he himself dwelling as Sovereign in secret and undiscovered
 regions of unapproachable light, ordains and disposes all things by the
 single power of his own will. At his will whatever is, exists; without
 that will, it cannot be. And his will is in every case for good, since
 he is essentially Goodness itself. But he through whom are all things,
 even God the Word, proceeding in an ineffable manner from the Father
 above, as from an everlasting and exhaustless fountain, flows onward
 like a river with a full and abundant stream of power for the
 preservation of the universal whole.

 3. And now let us select an illustration from our own experience. The
 invisible and undiscovered mind within us, the essential nature of
 which no one has ever known, sits as a monarch in the seclusion of his
 secret chambers, and alone resolves on our course of action. From this
 proceeds the only-begotten word from its father's bosom, begotten in a
 manner and by a power inexplicable to us; and is the first messenger of
 its father's thoughts, declares his secret counsels, and, conveying
 itself to the ears of others, accomplishes his designs.

 4. And thus the advantage of this faculty is enjoyed by all: yet no one
 has ever yet beheld that invisible and hidden mind, which is the parent
 of the word itself. [3547] In the same manner, or rather in a manner
 which far surpasses all likeness or comparison, the perfect Word of the
 Supreme God, as the only-begotten Son of the Father (not consisting in
 the power of utterance, nor comprehended in syllables and parts of
 speech, nor conveyed by a voice which vibrates on the air; but being
 himself the living and effectual Word of the most High, and subsisting
 personally as the Power and Wisdom of God), [3548] proceeds from his
 Father's Deity and kingdom. [3549] Thus, being the perfect Offspring of
 a perfect Father, and the common Preserver of all things, he diffuses
 himself with living power throughout creation, and pours from his own
 fullness abundant supplies of reason, [3550] wisdom, light, and every
 other blessing, not only on objects nearest to himself, but on those
 most remote, whether in earth, or sea, or any other sphere of being.

 5. To all these he appoints with perfect equity their limits, places,
 laws, and inheritance, allotting to each their suited portion according
 to his sovereign will. To some he assigns the super-terrestrial
 regions, to others heaven itself as their habitation: others he places
 in ethereal space, others in air, and others still on earth. He it is
 who transfers mankind from hence to another sphere, impartially reviews
 their conduct here, and bestows a recompense according to the life and
 habits of each. By him provision is made for the life and food, not of
 rational creatures only, but also of the brute creation, for the
 service of men;

 6. and while to the latter he grants the enjoyment of a perishable and
 fleeting term of existence, the former he invites to a share in the
 possession of immortal life. Thus universal is the agency of the Word
 of God: everywhere present, and pervading all things by the power of
 his intelligence, he looks upward to his Father, and governs this lower
 creation, inferior to and consequent upon himself, in accordance with
 his will, as the common Preserver of all things.

 7. Intermediate, as it were, and attracting the created to the
 uncreated Essence, this Word of God exists as an unbroken bond between
 the two, uniting things most widely different by an inseparable tie. He
 is the Providence which rules the universe; the guardian and director
 of the whole: he is the Power and Wisdom of God the only-begotten God,
 the Word begotten of God himself. For "In the beginning was the Word,
 and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. All things were made
 by him and without him was not anything made that hath been made"; as
 we learn from the words of the sacred writer. [3551] Through his
 vivifying power all nature grows and flourishes, refreshed by his
 continual showers, and invested with a vigor and beauty ever new.

 8. Guiding the reigns of the universe, he holds its onward course in
 conformity to the Father's will and moves, as it were, the helm of this
 mighty ship. This glorious Agent, the only-begotten Son of the Supreme
 God, begotten by the Father as his perfect Offspring, the Father has
 given to this world as the highest of all goods; infusing his word, as
 spirit into a lifeless body, into unconscious nature; imparting light
 and energy to that which in itself was a rude, inanimate, and formless
 mass, through the Divine power. Him therefore it is ours to acknowledge
 and regard as everywhere present, and giving life to matter and the
 elements of nature: [3552] in him we see Light, even the spiritual
 offspring of inexpressible Light: one indeed in essence, as being the
 Son of one Father; but possessing in himself many and varied powers.

 9. The world is indeed divided into many parts; yet let us not
 therefore suppose that there are many independent Agents: nor, though
 creation's works be manifold, let us thence assume the existence of
 many gods. How grievous the error of those childish and infatuated
 advocates of polytheistic worship, who deify the constituent parts of
 the universe, and divide into many that system which is only one!

 10. Such conduct resembles theirs who should abstract the eyes of an
 individual man, and term them the man himself, and the ears, another
 man, and so the head: or again, by an effort of thought should separate
 the neck, the breast and shoulders, the feet and hands, or other
 members, nay, the very powers of sense, and thus pronounce an
 individual to be a multitude of men. Such folly must surely be rewarded
 with contempt by men of sense. Yet such is he who from the component
 parts of a single world can devise for himself a multitude of gods, or
 even deem that world which is the work of a Creator, and consists of
 many parts, to be itself a god: [3553] not knowing that the Divine
 Nature can in no sense be divisible into parts; since, if compounded,
 it must be so through the agency of another power; and that which is so
 compounded can never be Divine. How indeed could it be so, if composed
 of unequal and dissimilar, and hence of worse and better elements?
 Simple, indivisible, uncompounded, the Divine Nature exists at an
 infinite elevation above the visible constitution of this world.

 11. And hence we are assured by the clear testimony of the sacred
 Herald, [3554] that the Word of God, who is before all things, must be
 the sole Preserver of all intelligent beings: while God, who is above
 all, and the Author of the generation of the Word, being himself the
 Cause of all things, is rightly called the Father of the Word, as of
 his only-begotten Son, himself acknowledging no superior Cause. God,
 therefore, himself is One, and from him proceeds the one only-begotten
 Word, the omnipresent Preserver of all things. And as the many-stringed
 lyre is composed of different chords, both sharp and flat, some
 slightly, others tensely strained, and others intermediate between the
 two extremes, yet all attuned according to the rules of harmonic art;
 even so this material world, compounded as it is of many elements,
 containing opposite and antagonist principles, as moisture and dryness,
 cold and heat, yet blended into one harmonious whole, may justly be
 termed a mighty instrument framed by the hand of God: an instrument on
 which the Divine Word, himself not composed of parts or opposing
 principles, but indivisible and uncompounded, performs with perfect
 skill, and produces a melody at once accordant with the will of his
 Father the Supreme Lord of all, and glorious to himself. Again, as
 there are manifold external and internal parts and members comprised in
 a single body, yet one invisible soul, one undivided and incorporeal
 mind pervades the whole; so is it in this creation, which, consisting
 of many parts, yet is but one: and so the One mighty, yea, Almighty
 Word of God, pervading all things, and diffusing himself with
 undeviating energy throughout this universe, is the Cause of all things
 that exist therein.

 12. Survey the compass of this visible world. Seest thou not how the
 same heaven contains within itself the countless courses and companies
 of the stars? Again, the sun is one, and yet eclipses many, nay all
 other luminaries, by the surpassing glory of his rays. Even so, as the
 Father himself is One, his Word is also One, the perfect Son of that
 perfect Father. Should any one object because they are not more, as
 well might he complain that there are not many suns, or moons, or
 worlds, and a thousand things beside; like the madman, who would fain
 subvert the fair and perfect course of Nature herself. As in the
 visible, so also in the spiritual world: in the one the same sun
 diffuses his light throughout this material earth; in the other the One
 Almighty Word of God illumines all things with invisible and secret
 power.

 13. Again, there is in man one spirit, and one faculty of reason, which
 yet is the active cause of numberless effects. The same mind,
 instructed in many things, will essay to cultivate the earth, to build
 and guide a ship, and construct houses: nay, the one mind and reason of
 man is capable of acquiring knowledge in a thousand forms: the same
 mind shall understand geometry and astronomy, and discourse on the
 rules of grammar, and rhetoric, and the healing art. Nor will it excel
 in science only, but in practice too: and yet no one has ever supposed
 the existence of many minds in one human form, nor expressed his wonder
 at a plurality of being in man, because he is thus capable of varied
 knowledge.

 14. Suppose one were to find a shapeless mass of clay, to mould it with
 his hands, and give it the form of a living creature; the head in one
 figure, the hands and feet in another, the eyes and cheeks in a third,
 and so to fashion the ears, the mouth and nose, the breast and
 shoulders, according to the rules of the plastic art. The result,
 indeed, is a variety of figure, of parts and members in the one body;
 yet must we not suppose it the work of many hands, but ascribe it
 entirely to the skill of a single artist, and yield the tribute of our
 praise to him who by the energy of a single mind has framed it all. The
 same is true of the universe itself, which is one, though consisting of
 many parts: yet surely we need not suppose many creative powers, nor
 invent a plurality of gods. Our duty is to adore the all-wise and
 all-perfect agency of him who is indeed the Power and the Wisdom of
 God, whose undivided force and energy pervades and penetrates the
 universe, creating and giving life to all things, and furnishing to
 all, collectively and severally, those manifold supplies of which he is
 himself the source.

 15. Even so one and the same impression of the solar rays illumines the
 air at once, gives light to the eyes, warmth to the touch, fertility to
 the earth, and growth to plants. The same luminary constitutes the
 course of time, governs the motions of the stars, performs the circuit
 of the heavens, imparts beauty to the earth, and displays the power of
 God to all: and all this he performs by the sole and unaided force of
 his own nature. In like manner fire has the property of refining gold,
 and fusing lead, of dissolving wax, of parching clay, and consuming
 wood; producing these varied effects by one and the same burning power.

 16. So also the Supreme Word of God, pervading all things, everywhere
 existent, everywhere present in heaven and earth, governs and directs
 the visible and invisible creation, the sun, the heaven, and the
 universe itself, with an energy inexplicable in its nature,
 irresistible in its effects. From him, as from an everlasting fountain,
 the sun, the moon, and stars receive their light: and he forever rules
 that heaven which he has framed as the fitting emblem of his own
 greatness. The angelic and spiritual powers, the incorporeal and
 intelligent beings which exist beyond the sphere of heaven and earth,
 are filled by him with light and life, with wisdom and virtue, with all
 that is great and good, from his own peculiar treasures. Once more,
 with one and the same creative skill, he ceases not to furnish the
 elements with substance, to regulate the union and combinations, the
 forms and figures, and the innumerable qualities of organized bodies;
 preserving the varied distinctions of animal and vegetable life, of the
 rational and the brute creation; and supplying all things to all with
 equal power: thus proving himself the Author, not indeed of the
 seven-stringed lyre, [3555] but of that system of perfect harmony which
 is the workmanship of the One world-creating Word. [3556]

 [3545] [Referring, apparently, to John xvii. 3, "And this is life
 eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ
 whom thou hast sent:" a passage which has been called a stronghold of
 the impugners of the Deity of Christ; but which, simply considered with
 its context, cannot fairly be understood to indicate any inferiority of
 the Son to the Father; but rather appears to speak of the mission of
 the former as the manifestation of the grace of him who is called "the
 only true God" in contradistinction to the polytheism of the heathen
 world. In other words, the knowledge of "the only true God," in
 connection with that of "Jesus Christ whom he has sent," constitutes
 "eternal life"; the one being ineffectual, and indeed impossible,
 without the other.--Bag.] Compare 1 John v. 20-21: "That we know him
 that is true and we are in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus
 Christ. This is the true God and eternal life," which seems to show
 that John had no idea of any subordination in essence in this matter.

 [3546] [But see, for a refutation of this statement, Rom. xi. 36, and
 Heb. ii. 10.--Bag.] Yet the second of these references clearly refers
 to the Son. Eusebius, speaking of God the Father, has in mind the truth
 that all things were made by the Son, "and without him was not anything
 made that hath been made." John i. 3.

 [3547] The author is now speaking especially of the spoken or
 "expressed" word.

 [3548] Compare 1 Cor. i. 24.

 [3549] This conception that the Divine Word stands in something the
 same relation with the Father that the human word (internal and
 external) does to the human spirit has, at least, an interesting
 suggestion towards the unraveling of this curious mystery, which, for
 lack of a better word, it is the fashion just now to call a human
 personality, and which certainly is made in the image and likeness of
 God. Unless there lurks in the idea some subtle heresy, one may venture
 to accept as an interesting analogy this relation of invisible self,
 self expressed to self (internal word), self revealed (external word),
 and an expression carried to the point of embodiment (incarnation).

 [3550] "Logos" again,--here the internal word.

 [3551] John i. 1-3.

 [3552] One on the scent for heresy might prick up his ears, and sound
 the alarm of "Gnosticism."

 [3553] A curious work just issued (anonymous), under the authority of
 the Bureau of Education, very complacently evolves the truth of
 existence out of the author's pure, untrammeled consciousness,--for he
 has never read any works either on science or on theology,--and arrives
 at the condescending conclusion that there is a God; or rather, in the
 words of Eusebius, the author comes to "deem that world...to be itself
 God."

 [3554] [Referring (says Valesius) to St. John, whose words Eusebius had
 lately cited, "In the beginning was the Word," &c., and now explains
 paraphrastically. The reader will decide for himself on the merits of
 the paraphrase.--Bag.]

 [3555] [In reference, singularly enough, to the illustration of the
 lyre in the preceding chapter.--Bag.]

 [3556] It is idle to treat as philosophically or theologically unworthy
 of consideration a system of thought so definitely unified, and with
 such Scriptural basis as the above. It may not be profound or original,
 but is definite and clear.

 Chapter XIII.

 1. And now let us proceed to explain the reasons for which this mighty
 Word of God descended to dwell with men. Our ignorant and foolish race,
 incapable of comprehending him who is the Lord of heaven and earth,
 proceeding from his Father's Deity as from the supreme fountain, ever
 present throughout the world, and evincing by the clearest proofs his
 providential care for the interests of man; have ascribed the adorable
 title of Deity to the sun, and moon, the heaven and the stars of
 heaven. Nor did they stop here, but deified the earth itself, its
 products, and the various substances by which animal life is sustained,
 and devised images of Ceres, of Proserpine, of Bacchus, [3557] and many
 such as these.

 2. Nay, they shrank not from giving the name of gods to the very
 conceptions of their own minds, and the speech by which those
 conceptions are expressed; calling the mind itself Minerva, and
 language Mercury, [3558] and affixing the names of Mnemosyne and the
 Muses to those faculties by means of which science is acquired. Nor was
 even this enough: advancing still more rapidly in the career of impiety
 and folly, they deified their own evil passions, which it behooved them
 to regard with aversion, or restrain by the principles of self-control.
 Their very lust and passion and impure disease of soul, the members of
 the body which tempt to obscenity, and even the very uncontrol [3559]
 in shameful pleasure, they described under the titles of Cupid,
 Priapus, Venus, [3560] and other kindred terms.

 3. Nor did they stop even here. Degrading their thoughts of God to this
 corporeal and mortal life, they deified their fellow-men, conferring
 the names of gods and heroes on those who had experienced the common
 lot of all, and vainly imagining that the Divine and imperishable
 Essence could frequent the tombs and monuments of the dead. Nay, more
 than this: they paid divine honors to animals of various species, and
 to the most noxious reptiles: they felled trees, and excavated rocks;
 they provided themselves with brass, and iron, and other metals, of
 which they fashioned resemblances of the male and female human form, of
 beasts, and creeping things; and these they made the objects of their
 worship.

 4. Nor did this suffice. To the evil spirits themselves which lurked
 within their statues, or lay concealed in secret and dark recesses,
 eager to drink their libations, and inhale the odor of their
 sacrifices, they ascribed the same divine honors. Once more, they
 endeavored to secure the familiar aid of these spirits, and the unseen
 powers which move through the tracts of air, by charms of forbidden
 magic, and the compulsion of unhallowed songs and incantations. Again,
 different nations have adopted different persons as objects of their
 worship. The Greeks have rendered to Bacchus, Hercules, Æsculapius,
 Apollo, and others who were mortal men, the titles of gods and heroes.
 The Egyptians have deified Horus and Isis, Osiris, and other mortals
 such as these. And thus they who boast of the wondrous skill whereby
 they have discovered geometry, astronomy, and the science of number,
 know not, wise as they are in their own conceit, nor understand how to
 estimate the measure of the power of God, or calculate his exceeding
 greatness above the nature of irrational and mortal beings.

 5. Hence they shrank not from applying the name of gods to the most
 hideous of the brute creation, to venomous reptiles and savage beasts.
 The Phoenicians deified Melcatharus, Usorus, [3561] and others; mere
 mortals, and with little claim to honor: the Arabians, Dusaris [3562]
 and Obodas: the Getæ, Zamolxis: the Cicilians, Mopsus: and the Thebans,
 Amphiaraus: [3563] in short, each nation has adopted its own peculiar
 deities, differing in no respect from their fellow-mortals, being
 simply and truly men. Again, the Egyptians with one consent, the
 Phoenicians, the Greeks, nay, every nation beneath the sun, have united
 in worshiping the very parts and elements of the world, and even the
 produce of the ground itself. And, which is most surprising, though
 acknowledging the adulterous, unnatural, and licentious crimes of their
 deities, they have not only filled every city, and village, and
 district with temples, shrines, and statues in their honor, but have
 followed their evil example to the ruin of their own souls.

 6. We hear of gods and the sons of gods described by them as heroes and
 good genii, titles entirely opposed to truth, honors utterly at
 variance with the qualifies they are intended to exalt. It is as if one
 who desired to point out the sun and the luminaries of heaven, instead
 of directing his gaze thitherward, should grope with his hands on the
 ground, and search for the celestial powers in the mud and mire. Even
 so mankind, deceived by their own folly and the craft of evil spirits,
 have believed that the Divine and spiritual Essence which is far above
 heaven and earth could be compatible with the birth, the affections,
 and death, of mortal bodies here below. To such a pitch of madness did
 they proceed, as to sacrifice the dearest objects of their affection to
 their gods, regardless of all natural ties, and urged by frenzied
 feeling to slay their only and best beloved children.

 7. For what can be a greater proof of madness, than to offer human
 sacrifice, to pollute every city, and even their own houses, with
 kindred blood? Do not the Greeks themselves attest this, and is not all
 history filled with records of the same impiety? The Phoenicians
 devoted their best beloved and only children as an annual sacrifice to
 Saturn. The Rhodians, on the sixth day of the month Metageitnion,
 [3564] offered human victims to the same god. At Salamis, a man was
 pursued in the temple of Minerva Agraulis and Diomede, compelled to run
 thrice round the altar, afterwards pierced with a lance by the priest,
 and consumed as a burnt offering on the blazing pile. In Egypt, human
 sacrifice was most abundant. At Heliopolis three victims were daily
 offered to Juno, for whom king Amoses, impressed with the atrocity of
 the practice, commanded the substitution of an equal number of waxen
 figures. In Chios, and again in Tenedos, a man was slain and offered up
 to Omadian Bacchus. At Sparta they immolated human beings to Mars. In
 Crete they did likewise, offering human sacrifices to Saturn. In
 Laodicea of Syria a virgin was yearly slain in honor of Minerva, for
 whom a hart is now the substitute. The Libyans and Carthaginians
 appeased their gods with human victims. The Dumateni of Arabia buried a
 boy annually beneath the altar. History informs us that the Greeks
 without exception, the Thracians also, and Scythians, were accustomed
 to human sacrifice before they marched forth to battle. The Athenians
 record the immolation of the virgin children of Leus, [3565] and the
 daughter of Erechtheus. [3566] Who knows not that at this day a human
 victim is offered in Rome itself at the festival of Jupiter Latiaris?

 8. And these facts are confirmed by the testimony of the most approved
 philosophers. Diodorus, the epitomizer of libraries, [3567] affirms
 that two hundred of the noblest youths were sacrificed to Saturn by the
 Libyan people, and that three hundred more were voluntarily offered by
 their own parents. Dionysius, the compiler of Roman history, [3568]
 expressly says that Jupiter and Apollo demanded human sacrifices of the
 so-called Aborigines, in Italy. He relates that on this demand they
 offered a proportion of all their produce to the gods; but that,
 because of their refusal to slay human victims, they became involved in
 manifold calamities, from which they could obtain no release until they
 had decimated themselves, a sacrifice of life which proved the
 desolation of their country. Such and so great were the evils which of
 old afflicted the whole human race.

 9. Nor was this the full extent of their misery: they groaned beneath
 the pressure of other evils equally numerous and irremediable. All
 nations, whether civilized or barbarous, throughout the world, as if
 actuated by a demoniac frenzy, were infected with sedition as with some
 fierce and terrible disease: insomuch that the human family was
 irreconcilably divided against itself; the great system of society was
 distracted and torn asunder; and in every corner of the earth men stood
 opposed to each other, and strove with fierce contention on questions
 of law and government.

 10. Nay, more than this: with passions aroused to fury, they engaged in
 mutual conflicts, so frequent that their lives were passed as it were
 in uninterrupted warfare. None could undertake a journey except as
 prepared to encounter an enemy; in the very country and villages the
 rustics girded on the sword, provided themselves with armor rather than
 with the implements of rural labor, and deemed it noble exploit to
 plunder and enslave any who belonged to a neighboring state.

 11. Nay, more than this: from the fables they had themselves devised
 respecting their own deities, they deduced occasions for a vile and
 abandoned life, and wrought the ruin of body and soul by licentiousness
 of every kind. Not content with this, they even overstepped the bounds
 which nature had defined, and together committed incredible and
 nameless crimes, "men with men (in the words of the sacred writer)
 working un-seemliness, and receiving in themselves that recompense of
 their error which was due."

 12. Nor did they stop even here; but perverted their natural thoughts
 of God, and denied that the course of this world was directed by his
 providential care, ascribing the existence and constitution of all
 things to the blind operation of chance, or the necessity of fate.

 13. Once more: believing that soul and body were alike dissolved by
 death, they led a brutish life, unworthy of the name: careless of the
 nature or existence of the soul, they dreaded not the tribunal of
 Divine justice, expected no reward of virtue, nor thought of
 chastisement as the penalty of an evil life.

 14. Hence it was that whole nations, a prey to wickedness in all its
 forms, were wasted by the effects of their own brutality: some living
 in the practice of most vile and lawless incest with mothers, others
 with sisters, and others again corrupting their own daughters. Some
 were found who slew their confiding guests; others who fed on human
 flesh; some strangled, and then feasted on, their aged men; others
 threw them alive to dogs. The time would fail me were I to attempt to
 describe the multifarious symptoms of the inveterate malady which had
 asserted its dominion over the whole human race.

 15. Such, and numberless others like these, were the prevailing evils,
 on account of which the gracious Word of God, full of compassion for
 his human flock, had long since, by the ministry of his prophets, and
 earlier still, as well as later, by that of men distinguished by pious
 devotion to God, invited those thus desperately afflicted to their own
 cure; and had, by means of laws, exhortations, and doctrines of every
 kind, proclaimed to man the principles and elements of true godliness.
 But when for mankind, distracted and torn as I have said, not indeed by
 wolves and savage beasts, but by ruthless and soul-destroying spirits
 of evil, human power no longer sufficed, but a help was needed superior
 to that of man; then it was that the Word of God, obedient to his
 all-gracious Father's will, at length himself appeared, and most
 willingly made his abode amongst us.

 16. The causes of his advent I have already described, induced by which
 he condescended to the society of man; not in his wonted form and
 manner, for he is incorporeal, and present everywhere throughout the
 world, proving by his agency both in heaven and earth the greatness of
 his almighty power, but in a character new and hitherto unknown.
 Assuming a mortal body, he deigned to associate and converse with men;
 desiring, through the medium of their own likeness, to save our mortal
 race.

 [3557] "Of Demeter, of Cora, of Dionysius."

 [3558] "Athene...Hermes."

 [3559] The word used here, akr?teia, is the opposite of the famous
 philosophical word for self-control--enkr?teia

 [3560] "Eros, Priapus, Aphrodite."

 [3561] It is probably that "Melkathros" and "Usous" referred to in the
 Præp. Evang. 1. 10 (ed. Gaisford, Oxon. 1843, 1. p. 77 and 84). The
 same passage may be found with English translation in Cory's Ancient
 Fragments, Lond. 1832, p. 6-7, 13.

 [3562] Dusaris was, it is said, equivalent to Bacchus.

 [3563] All the above names, excepting those specially noted, may be
 found in Smith, Dict. of Greek and Roman Biog. and Mythol.

 [3564] Corresponding nearly to our August. Key. Calendarium, in Smith,
 Dict. Gr. and R. Ant. p. 223.

 [3565] [Leus is said to have offered his three daughters, Phasithea,
 Theope, and Eubule; the oracle at Delphi having declared that the
 relief of the city from famine could only be effected by the shedding
 of the blood of his daughters by one of the citizens.--Bag.]

 [3566] [Alluding to the sacrifice of his daughter Chthonia by
 Erechtheus, son of Pandion; the Athenians having been promised victory,
 by the oracle, over the Eleusinians and their Thracian allies, on the
 condition of the death of a daughter of Erechtheus.--Bag.]

 [3567] Diodorus Siculus, whose work is mentioned elsewhere (Præp.
 Evang. 1. 6, ed. Gaisford, p. 40) as a "historical library."

 [3568] Dionysius of Halicarnassus.

 Chapter XIV.

 1. And now let us explain the cause for which the incorporeal Word of
 God assumed this mortal body as a medium of intercourse with man. How,
 indeed, else than in human form could that Divine and impalpable, that
 immaterial and invisible Essence manifest itself to those who sought
 for God in created and earthly objects, unable or unwilling otherwise
 to discern the Author and Maker of all things?

 2. As a fitting means, therefore, of communication with mankind, he
 assumed a mortal body, as that with which they were themselves
 familiar; for like, it is proverbially said, loves its like. To those,
 then, whose affections were engaged by visible objects, who looked for
 gods in statues and lifeless images, who imagined the Deity to consist
 in material and corporeal substance, nay, who conferred on men the
 title of divinity, the Word of God presented himself in this form.

 3. Hence he procured for himself this body as a thrice-hallowed temple,
 a sensible habitation of an intellectual power; a noble and most holy
 form, of far higher worth than any lifeless statue. The material and
 senseless image, fashioned by base mechanic hands, of brass or iron, of
 gold or ivory, wood or stone, may be a fitting abode for evil spirits:
 but that Divine form, wrought by the power of heavenly wisdom, was
 possessed of life and spiritual being; a form animated by every
 excellence, the dwelling-place of the Word of God, a holy temple of the
 holy God.

 4. Thus the indwelling Word [3569] conversed with and was known to men,
 as kindred with themselves; yet yielded not to passions such as theirs,
 nor owned, as the natural soul, subjection to the body. He parted not
 with aught of his intrinsic greatness, nor changed his proper Deity.
 For as the all-pervading radiance of the sun receives no stain from
 contact with dead and impure bodies; much less can the incorporeal
 power of the Word of God be injured in its essential purity, or part
 with any of its greatness, from spiritual contact with a human body.

 5. Thus, I say, did our common Saviour prove himself the benefactor and
 preserver of all, displaying his wisdom through the instrumentality of
 his human nature, even as a musician uses the lyre to evince his skill.
 The Grecian myth tells us that Orpheus had power to charm ferocious
 beasts, and tame their savage spirit, by striking the chords of his
 instrument with a master hand: and this story is celebrated by the
 Greeks, and generally believed, that an unconscious instrument could
 subdue the untamed brute, and draw the trees from their places, in
 obedience to its melodious power. But he who is the author of perfect
 harmony, the all-wise Word of God, desiring to apply every remedy to
 the manifold diseases of the souls of men, employed that human nature
 which is the workmanship of his own wisdom, as an instrument by the
 melodious strains of which he soothed, not indeed the brute creation,
 but savages endued with reason; healing each furious temper, each
 fierce and angry passion of the soul, both in civilized and barbarous
 nations, by the remedial power of his Divine doctrine. Like a physician
 of perfect skill, he met the diseases of their souls who sought for God
 in nature and in bodies, by a fitting and kindred remedy, and showed
 them God in human form.

 6. And then, with no less care for the body than the soul, he presented
 before the eyes of men wonders and signs, as proofs of his Divine
 power, at the same time instilling into their ears of flesh the
 doctrines which he himself uttered with a corporeal tongue. In short,
 he performed all his works through the medium of that body which he had
 assumed for the sake of those who else were incapable of apprehending
 his Divine nature.

 7. In all this he was the servant of his Father's will, himself
 remaining still the same as when with the Father; unchanged in essence,
 unimpaired in nature, unfettered by the trammels of mortal flesh, nor
 hindered by his abode in a human body from being elsewhere present.
 [3570]

 8. Nay, at the very time of his intercourse with men, he was pervading
 all things, was with and in the Father, and even then was caring for
 all things both in heaven and earth. Nor was he precluded, as we are,
 from being present everywhere, or from the continued exercise of his
 Divine power. He gave of his own to man, but received nothing in
 return: he imparted of his Divine power to mortality, but derived no
 accession from mortality itself.

 9. Hence his human birth to him brought no defilement; nor could his
 impassible Essence suffer at the dissolution of his mortal body. For
 let us suppose a lyre to receive an accidental injury, or its chord to
 be broken; it does not follow that the performer on it suffers: nor, if
 a wise man's body undergo punishment, can we fairly assert that his
 wisdom, or the soul within him, are maimed or burned.

 10. Far less can we affirm that the inherent power of the Word
 sustained any detriment from his bodily passion, any more than, as in
 the instance we have already used, the solar rays which are shot from
 heaven to earth contract defilement, though in contact with mire and
 pollution of every kind. We may, indeed, assert that these things
 partake of the radiance of the light, but not that the light is
 contaminated, or the sun defiled, by this contact with other bodies.

 11. And indeed these things are themselves not contrary to nature; but
 the Saviour, the incorporeal Word of God, being Life and spiritual
 Light itself, whatever he touches with Divine and incorporeal power
 must of necessity become endued with the intelligence of light and
 life. Thus, if he touch a body, it becomes enlightened and sanctified,
 is at once delivered from all disease, infirmity, and suffering, and
 that which before was lacking is supplied by a portion of his fullness.

 12. And such was the tenor of his life on earth; now proving the
 sympathies of his human nature with our own, and now revealing himself
 as the Word of God: wondrous and mighty in his works as God;
 foretelling the events of the far distant future; declaring in every
 act, by signs, and wonders, and supernatural powers, that Word whose
 presence was so little known; and finally, by his Divine teaching,
 inviting the souls of men to prepare for those mansions which are above
 the heavens.

 [3569] All these various conceptions of the Word are strictly Biblical:
 (1) The Word the only revealer of the Father, who otherwise could not
 be known; (2) The human body the temple of God; (3) The indwelling
 Word.

 [3570] This ought to relieve Eusebius from any charge of Arianism in
 this relation, however "dangerous" the ground he has trodden on may be.

 Chapter XV.

 1. What now remains, but to account for those which are the crowning
 facts of all; I mean his death, so far and widely known, the manner of
 his passion, and the mighty miracle of his resurrection after death:
 and then to establish the truth of these events by the clearest
 testimonies?

 2. For the reasons detailed above he used the instrumentality of a
 mortal body, as a figure becoming his Divine majesty, and like a mighty
 sovereign employed it as his interpreter in his intercourse with men,
 performing all things consistently with his own Divine power.
 Supposing, then, at the end of his sojourn among men, he had by any
 other means suddenly withdrawn himself from their sight, and, secretly
 removing that interpreter of himself, the form which he had assumed,
 had hastened to flee from death, and afterwards by his own act had
 consigned his mortal body to corruption and dissolution: doubtless in
 such a case he would have been deemed a mere phantom by all. Nor would
 he have acted in a manner worthy of himself, had he who is Life, the
 Word, and the Power of God, abandoned this interpreter of himself to
 corruption and death.

 3. Nor, again, would his warfare with the spirits of evil have received
 its consummation by conflict with the power of death. The place of his
 retirement must have remained unknown; nor would his existence have
 been believed by those who had not seen him for themselves. No proof
 would have been given that he was superior to death nor would he have
 delivered mortality from the law of its natural infirmity. His name had
 never been heard throughout the world nor could he have inspired his
 disciples with contempt of death, or encouraged those who embraced his
 doctrine to hope for the enjoyment of a future life with God. Nor would
 he have fulfilled the assurances of his own promise, nor have
 accomplished the predictions of the prophets concerning himself. Nor
 would he have undergone the last conflict of all; for this was to be
 the struggle with the power of death.

 4. For all these reasons, then, and inasmuch as it was necessary that
 the mortal body which had rendered such service to the Divine Word
 should meet with an end worthy its sacred occupant, the manner of his
 death was ordained accordingly. For since but two alternatives
 remained: either to consign his body entirely to corruption, and so to
 bring the scene of life to a dishonored close, or else to prove himself
 victorious over death, and render mortality immortal by the act of
 Divine power; the former of these alternatives would have contravened
 his own promise. For as it is not the property of fire to cool, nor of
 light to darken, no more is it compatible with life, to deprive of
 life, or with Divine intelligence, to act in a manner contrary to
 reason. For how would it be consistent, with reason, that he who had
 promised life to others, should permit his own body, the form which he
 had chosen, to perish beneath the power of corruption? That he who had
 inspired his disciples with hopes of immortality, should yield this
 exponent of his Divine counsels to be destroyed by death?

 5. The second alternative was therefore needful: I mean, that he should
 assert his dominion over the power of death. But how? should this be a
 furtive and secret act, or openly performed and in the sight of all? So
 mighty an achievement, had it remained unknown and unrevealed, must
 have failed of its effect as regards the interests of men; whereas the
 same event, if openly declared and understood, would, from its wondrous
 character, redound to the common benefit of all. With reason,
 therefore, since it was needful to prove his body victorious over
 death, and that not secretly but before the eyes of men, he shrank not
 from the trial, for this indeed would have argued fear, and a sense of
 inferiority to the power of death, but maintained that conflict with
 the enemy which has rendered mortality immortal; a conflict undertaken
 for the life, the immortality, the salvation of all.

 6. Suppose one desired to show us that a vessel could resist the force
 of fire; how could he better prove the fact than by casting it into the
 furnace and thence withdrawing it entire and unconsumed? Even thus the
 Word of God who is the source of life to all, desiring to prove the
 triumph of that body over death which he had assumed for man's
 salvation, and to make this body partake his own life and immortality,
 pursued a course consistent with this object. Leaving his body for a
 little while, [3571] and delivering it up to death in proof of its
 mortal nature, he soon redeemed it from death, in vindication of that
 Divine power whereby he has manifested the immortality which he has
 promised to be utterly beyond the sphere of death.

 7. The reason of this is clear. It was needful that his disciples
 should receive ocular proof of the certainty of that resurrection on
 which he had taught them to rest their hopes as a motive for rising
 superior to the fear of death. It was indeed most needful that they who
 purposed to pursue a life of godliness should receive a clear
 impression of this essential truth: more needful still for those who
 were destined to declare his name in all the world, and to communicate
 to mankind that knowledge of God which he had before ordained for all
 nations.

 8. For such the strongest conviction of a future life was necessary,
 that they might be able with fearless and unshrinking zeal to maintain
 the conflict with Gentile and polytheistic error: a conflict the
 dangers of which they would never have been prepared to meet, except as
 habituated to the contempt of death. Accordingly, in arming his
 disciples against the power of this last enemy, he delivered not his
 doctrines in mere verbal precepts, nor attempted to prove the soul's
 immortality, by persuasive and probable arguments; but displayed to
 them in his own person a real victory over death.

 9. Such was the first and greatest reason of our Saviour's conflict
 with the power of death, whereby he proved to his disciples the
 nothingness of that which is the terror of all mankind, and afforded a
 visible evidence of the reality of that life which he had promised;
 presenting as it were a first-fruit of our common hope, of future life
 and immortality in the presence of God.

 10. The second cause of his resurrection was, that the Divine power
 might be manifested which dwelt in his mortal body. Mankind had
 heretofore conferred Divine honors on men who had yielded to the power
 of death, and had given the titles of gods and heroes to mortals like
 themselves. For this reason, therefore, the Word of God evinced his
 gracious character, and proved to man his own superiority over death,
 recalling his mortal body to a second life, displaying an immortal
 triumph over death in the eyes of all, and teaching them to acknowledge
 the Author of such a victory to be the only true God, even in death
 itself.

 11. I may allege yet a third cause of the Saviour's death. He was the
 victim offered to the Supreme Sovereign of the universe for the whole
 human race: a victim consecrated for the need of the human race, and
 for the overthrow of the errors of demon worship. For as soon as the
 one holy and mighty sacrifice, the sacred body of our Saviour, had been
 slain for man, to be as a ransom for all nations, heretofore involved
 in the guilt of impious superstition, thenceforward the power of impure
 and unholy spirits was utterly abolished, and every earth-born and
 delusive error was at once weakened and destroyed.

 12. Thus, then, this salutary victim taken from among themselves, I
 mean the mortal body of the Word, was offered on behalf of the common
 race of men. This was that sacrifice delivered up to death, of which
 the sacred oracles speak: "Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away
 the sin of the world." [3572] And again, as follows: "He was led as a
 sheep to the slaughter, and as a lamb before the shearer is dumb." They
 declare also the cause, saying: "He bears our sins, and is pained for
 us: yet we accounted him to be in trouble, and in suffering, and in
 affliction. But he was wounded on account of our sins, and bruised
 because of our iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him;
 and by his bruises we were healed. All we as sheep have gone astray;
 every one has gone astray in this way; and the Lord gave him up for our
 sins." [3573]

 13. Such were the causes which led to the offering of the human body of
 the Word of God. But forasmuch as he was the great high priest,
 consecrated to the Supreme Lord and King, and therefore more than a
 victim, the Word, the Power, and the Wisdom of God; he soon recalled
 his body from the grasp of death, presented it to his Father as the
 first-fruit of our common salvation, and raised this trophy, a proof at
 once of his victory over death and Satan, and of the abolition of human
 sacrifices, for the blessing of all mankind.

 [3571] [These words (as Valesius observes) need not be too rigidly
 interpreted.--Bag.]

 [3572] John i. 29.

 [3573] [Isaiah liii. 4, 5, 6, 7. Septuagint, English translation p.
 728.--Bag.] P. 889 of the Bagster ed., 1879. Though the first reasons
 make one feel as if the author had been in danger of slighting the
 atoning work of the Word, he here very clearly comes up, as usual, to
 the Biblical position.

 Chapter XVI.

 1. And now the time is come for us to proceed to the demonstration of
 these things; if indeed such truths require demonstration, and if the
 aid of testimony be needful to confirm the certainty of palpable facts.
 Such testimony, however, shall be here given; and let it be received
 with an attentive and gracious ear.

 2. Of old the nations of the earth, the entire human race, were
 variously distributed into provincial, national, and local governments,
 [3574] subject to kingdoms and principalities of many kinds. The
 consequences of this variety were war and strife, depopulation and
 captivity, which raged in country and city with unceasing fury. Hence,
 too, the countless subjects of history, adulteries, and rapes of women;
 hence the woes of Troy, and the ancient tragedies, so known among all
 peoples.

 3. The origin of these may justly be ascribed to the delusion of
 polytheistic error. But when that instrument of our redemption, the
 thrice holy body of Christ, which proved itself superior to all Satanic
 fraud, and free from evil both in word and deed, was raised, at once
 for the abolition of ancient evils, and in token of his victory over
 the powers of darkness; the energy of these evil spirits was at once
 destroyed. The manifold forms of government, the tyrannies and
 republics, the siege of cities, and devastation of countries caused
 thereby, were now no more, and one God was proclaimed to all mankind.

 4. At the same time one universal power, the Roman empire, arose and
 flourished, while the enduring and implacable hatred of nation against
 nation was now removed: and as the knowledge of one God, and one way of
 religion and salvation, even the doctrine of Christ, was made known to
 all mankind; so at the self-same period, the entire dominion of the
 Roman empire being vested in a single sovereign, profound peace reigned
 throughout the world. And thus, by the express appointment of the same
 God, two roots of blessing, the Roman empire, and the doctrine of
 Christian piety, sprang up together for the benefit of men.

 5. For before this time the various countries of the world, as Syria,
 Asia, Macedonia, Egypt, and Arabia, had been severally subject to
 different rulers. The Jewish people, again, had established their
 dominion in the land of Palestine. And these nations, in every village,
 city, and district, actuated by some insane spirit, were engaged in
 incessant and murderous war and conflict. But two mighty powers,
 starting from the same point, the Roman empire, which henceforth was
 swayed by a single sovereign, and the Christian religion, subdued and
 reconciled these contending elements.

 6. Our Saviour's mighty power destroyed at once the many governments
 and the many gods of the powers of darkness, and proclaimed to all men,
 both rude and civilized, to the extremities of the earth, the sole
 sovereignty of God himself. Meantime the Roman empire, the causes of
 multiplied governments being thus removed, effected an easy conquest of
 those which yet remained; its object being to unite all nations in one
 harmonious whole; an object in great measure already secured, and
 destined to be still more perfectly attained, even to the final
 conquest of the ends of the habitable world, by means of the salutary
 doctrine, and through the aid of that Divine power which facilitates
 and smooths its way.

 7. And surely this must appear a wondrous fact to those who will
 examine the question in the love of truth, and desire not to cavil at
 these blessings. [3575] The falsehood of demon superstition was
 convicted: the inveterate strife and mutual hatred of the nations was
 removed: at the same time One God, and the knowledge of that God, were
 proclaimed to all: one universal empire prevailed; and the whole human
 race, subdued by the controlling power of peace and concord, received
 one another as brethren, and responded to the feelings of their common
 nature. Hence, as children of one God and Father, and owning true
 religion as their common mother, they saluted and welcomed each other
 with words of peace. Thus the whole world appeared like one
 well-ordered and united family: each one might journey unhindered as
 far as and whithersoever he pleased: men might securely travel from
 West to East, and from East to West, as to their own native country: in
 short, the ancient oracles and predictions of the prophets were
 fulfilled, more numerous than we can at present cite, and those
 especially which speak as follows concerning the saving Word. "He shall
 have dominion from sea to sea, and from the river to the ends of the
 earth." And again, "In his days shall righteousness spring up; and
 abundance of peace." "And they shall beat their swords into
 plough-shares, and their spears into sickles: and nation shall not take
 up sword against nation, neither shall they learn to war any more."
 [3576]

 8. These words, predicted ages before in the Hebrew tongue, have
 received in our own day a visible fulfillment, by which the testimonies
 of the ancient oracles are clearly confirmed. And now, if thou still
 desire more ample proof, receive it, not in words, but from the facts
 themselves. Open the eyes of thine understanding; expand the gates of
 thought; pause awhile, and consider; inquire of thyself as though thou
 wert another, and thus diligently examine the nature of the case. What
 king or prince in any age of the world, what philosopher, legislator,
 or prophet, in civilized or barbarous lands, has attained so great a
 height of excellence, I say not after death, but while living still,
 and full of mighty power, as to fill the ears and tongues of all
 mankind with the praises of his name? Surely none save our only Saviour
 has done this, when, after his victory over death, he spoke the word to
 his followers, and fulfilled it by the event, saying to them, "Go ye,
 and make disciples of all nations in my name." [3577] He it was who
 gave the distinct assurance, that his gospel must be preached in all
 the world for a testimony to all nations, and immediately verified his
 word: for within a little time the world itself was filled with his
 doctrine.

 9. How, then, will those who caviled at the commencement of my speech
 be able to reply to this? For surely the force of ocular testimony is
 superior to any verbal argument. Who else than he, with an invisible
 and yet potent hand, has driven from human society like savage beasts
 that ever noxious and destructive tribe of evil spirits who of old had
 made all nations their prey, and by the motions of their images had
 practiced many a delusion among men? Who else, beside our Saviour, by
 the invocation of his name, and by unfeigned prayer addressed through
 him to the Supreme God, has given power to banish from the world the
 remnant of those wicked spirits to those who with genuine and sincere
 obedience pursue the course of life and conduct which he has himself
 prescribed? Who else but our Saviour has taught his followers to offer
 those bloodless and reasonable sacrifices which are performed by prayer
 and the secret worship of God?

 10. Hence is it that throughout the habitable world altars are erected,
 and churches dedicated, wherein these spiritual and rational sacrifices
 are offered as a sacred service by every nation to the One Supreme God.
 Once more, who but he, with invisible and secret power, has suppressed
 and utterly abolished those bloody sacrifices which were offered with
 fire and smoke, as well as the cruel and senseless immolation of human
 victims; a fact which is attested by the heathen historians themselves?
 For it was not till after the publication of the Saviour's Divine
 doctrine, about the time of Hadrian's reign, that the practice of human
 sacrifice was universally abandoned.

 11. Such and so manifest are the proofs of our Saviour's power and
 energy after death. Who then can be found of spirit so obdurate as to
 withhold his assent to the truth, and refuse to acknowledge his life to
 be Divine? Such deeds as I have described are done by the living, not
 the dead; and visible acts are to us as evidence of those which we
 cannot see. It is as it were an event of yesterday that an impious and
 godless race disturbed and confounded the peace of human society, and
 possessed mighty power. But these, as soon as life departed, lay
 prostrate on the earth, worthless as dung, breathless, motionless,
 bereft of speech, and have left neither fame nor memorial behind. For
 such is the condition of the dead; and he who no longer lives is
 nothing: and how can he who is nothing be capable of any act? But how
 shall his existence be called in question, whose active power and
 energy are greater than in those who are still alive? And though he be
 invisible to the natural eye, yet the discerning faculty is not in
 outward sense. We do not comprehend the rules of art, or the theories
 of science, by bodily sensation; nor has any eye yet discerned the mind
 of man. Far less, then, the power of God: and in such cases our
 judgment is formed from apparent results.

 12. Even thus are we bound to judge of our Saviour's invisible power,
 and decide by its manifest effects whether we shall acknowledge the
 mighty operations which he is even now carrying on to be the works of a
 living agent; or whether they shall be ascribed to one who has no
 existence; or, lastly, whether the inquiry be not absurd and
 inconsistent in itself. For with what reason can we assert the
 existence of one who is not? Since all allow that that which has no
 existence is devoid of that power, and energy, and action, for these
 are characteristics of the living, but the contrary is characteristic
 of the dead.

 [3574] Eparchies, ethnarchies, and toparchies.

 [3575] This is a fair appeal, applicable to his present hearers. It at
 least was true of Constantine's reign, that it produced a state of
 relative peace and prosperity.

 [3576] [Psalm lxxi. 7, 8; Isaiah ii. 4. Septuagint.--Bag.] Psalm
 lxxii., English version.

 [3577] Matt. xxviii. 19. There is an interesting various reading here,
 where Eusebius, with B. as against Aleph, adds something; but where B.
 and others have oun, and D. and others have nun, Eusebius has goun.

 Chapter XVII.

 1. And now the time is come for us to consider the works of our Saviour
 in our own age, and to contemplate the living operations of the living
 God. For how shall we describe these mighty works save as living proofs
 of the power of a living agent, who truly enjoys the life of God? If
 any one inquire the nature of these works, let him now attend.

 2. But recently a class of persons, impelled by furious zeal, and
 backed by equal power and military force, evinced their enmity against
 God, by destroying his churches, and overthrowing from their
 foundations the buildings dedicated to his worship. In short, in every
 way they directed their attacks against the unseen God, and assailed
 him with a thousand shafts of impious words. But he who is invisible
 avenged himself with an invisible hand.

 3. By the single fiat of his will his enemies were utterly destroyed,
 they who a little while before had been flourishing in great
 prosperity, exalted by their fellow men as worthy of divine honor, and
 blessed with a continued period of power and glory, [3578] so long as
 they had maintained peace and amity with him whom they afterwards
 opposed. As soon, however, as they dared openly to resist his will, and
 to set their gods in array against him whom we adore; immediately,
 according to the will and power of that God against whom their arms
 were raised, they all received the judgment due to their audacious
 deeds. Constrained to yield and flee before his power, together they
 acknowledged his Divine nature, and hastened to reverse the measures
 which they had before essayed.

 4. Our Saviour, therefore, without delay erected trophies of this
 victory everywhere, and once more adorned the world with holy temples
 and consecrated houses of prayer; in every city and village, nay,
 throughout all countries, and even in barbaric wilds, ordaining the
 erection of churches and sacred buildings to the honor of the Supreme
 God and Lord of all. Hence it is that these hallowed edifices are
 deemed worthy to bear his name, and receive not their appellation from
 men, but from the Lord himself, from which circumstances they are
 called churches (or houses of the Lord). [3579]

 5. And now let him who will stand forth and tell us who, after so
 complete a desolation, has restored these sacred buildings from
 foundation to roof? Who, when all hope appeared extinct, has caused
 them to rise on a nobler scale than heretofore? And well may it claim
 our wonder, that this renovation was not subsequent to the death of
 those adversaries of God, but whilst the destroyers of these edifices
 were still alive; so that the recantation of their evil deeds came in
 their own words and edicts. [3580] And this they did, not in the
 sunshine of prosperity and ease (for then we might suppose that
 benevolence or clemency might be the cause), but at the very time that
 they were suffering under the stroke of Divine vengeance.

 6. Who, again, has been able to retain in obedience to his heavenly
 precepts, after so many successive storms of persecution, nay, in the
 very crisis of danger, so many persons throughout the world devoted to
 philosophy, and the service of God and those holy choirs of virgins who
 had dedicated themselves to a life of perpetual chastity and purity?
 Who taught them cheerfully to persevere in the exercise of protracted
 fasting, and to embrace a life of severe and consistent self-denial?
 Who has persuaded multitudes of either sex to devote themselves to the
 study of sacred things, and prefer to bodily nutriment that
 intellectual food which is suited to the wants of a rational soul?
 [3581] Who has instructed barbarians and peasants, yea, feeble women,
 slaves, and children, in short, unnumbered multitudes of all nations,
 to live in the contempt of death; persuaded of the immortality of their
 souls, conscious that human actions are observed by the unerring eye of
 justice, expecting God's award to the righteous and the wicked, and
 therefore true to the practice of a just and virtuous life? For they
 could not otherwise have persevered in the course of godliness. Surely
 these are the acts which our Saviour, and he alone, even now performs.

 7. And now let us pass from these topics, and endeavor by inquiries
 such as these that follow to convince the objector's obdurate
 understanding. Come forward, then, whoever thou art, and speak the
 words of reason: utter, not the thoughts of a senseless heart, but
 those of an intelligent and enlightened mind: speak, I say, after deep
 solemn converse with thyself. Who of the sages whose names have yet
 been known to fame, has ever been fore-known and proclaimed from the
 remotest ages, as our Saviour was by the prophetic oracles to the once
 divinely-favored Hebrew nation? But his very birth-place, the period of
 his advent the manner of his life, his miracles, and words and mighty
 acts, were anticipated and recorded in the sacred volumes of these
 prophets.

 8. Again, who so present an avenger of crimes against himself; so that,
 as the immediate consequence of their impiety, the entire Jewish people
 were scattered by an unseen power, their royal seat utterly removed,
 and their very temple with its holy things levelled with the ground?
 Who, like our Saviour, has uttered predictions at once concerning that
 impious nation and the establishment of his church throughout the
 world, and has equally verified both by the event? Respecting the
 temple of these wicked men, our Saviour said: "Your house is left unto
 you desolate": [3582] and, "There shall not be left one stone upon
 another in this place, that shall not be thrown down." [3583] And
 again, of his church he says: "I will build my church upon a rock, and
 the gates of hell shall not prevail against it." [3584]

 9. How wondrous, too, must that power be deemed which summoned obscure
 and unlettered men from their fisher's trade, and made them the
 legislators and instructors of the human race! And how clear a
 demonstration of his deity do we find in the promise so well performed,
 that he would make them fishers of men: in the power and energy which
 he bestowed, so that they composed and published writings of such
 authority that they were translated into every civilized and barbarous
 language, [3585] were read and pondered by all nations, and the
 doctrines contained in them accredited as the oracles of God!

 10. How marvelous his predictions of the future, and the testimony
 whereby his disciples were forewarned that they should be brought
 before kings and rulers, and should endure the severest punishments,
 not indeed as criminals, but simply for their confession of his name!
 Or who shall adequately describe the power with which he prepared them
 thus to suffer with a willing mind, and enabled them, strong in the
 armor of godliness, to maintain a constancy of spirit indomitable in
 the midst of conflict?

 11. Or how shall we enough admire that steadfast firmness of soul which
 strengthened, not merely his immediate followers, but their successors
 also, even to our present age, in the joyful endurance of every
 infliction, and every form of torture, in proof of their devotion to
 the Supreme God? Again, what monarch has prolonged his government
 through so vast a series of ages? Who else has power to make war after
 death, to triumph over every enemy, to subjugate each barbarous and
 civilized nation and city, and to subdue his adversaries with an
 invisible and secret hand?

 12. Lastly, and chief of all, what slanderous lip shall dare to
 question that universal peace to which we have already referred;
 established by his power throughout the world? [3586] For thus the
 mutual concord and harmony of all nations coincided in point of time
 with the extension of our Saviour's doctrine and preaching in all the
 world: a concurrence of events predicted in long ages past by the
 prophets of God. The day itself would fail me, gracious emperor, should
 I attempt to exhibit in a single view those cogent proofs of our
 Saviour's Divine power which even now are visible in their effects; for
 no human being, in civilized or barbarous nations, has ever yet
 exhibited such power of Divine virtue as our Saviour.

 13. But why do I speak of men, since of the beings whom all nations
 have deemed divine, none has appeared on earth with power like to his?
 If there has, let the fact now be proved. Come forward, ye
 philosophers, and tell us what god or hero has yet been known to fame,
 who has delivered the doctrines of eternal life and a heavenly kingdom
 as he has done who is our Saviour? Who, like him, has persuaded
 multitudes throughout the world to pursue the principles of Divine
 wisdom, to fix their hope on heaven itself, and look forward to the
 mansions there reserved for them that love God? What god or hero in
 human form has ever held his course from the rising to the setting sun,
 a course co-extensive as it were with the solar light, and irradiated
 mankind with the bright and glorious beams of his doctrine, causing
 each nation of the earth to render united worship to the One true God?
 What god or hero yet, as he has done, has set aside all gods and heroes
 among civilized or barbarous nations; has ordained that divine honors
 should be withheld from all, and claimed obedience to that command: and
 then, though singly conflicting with the power of all, has utterly
 destroyed the opposing hosts; victorious over the gods and heroes of
 every age, and causing himself alone, in every region of the habitable
 world, to be acknowledged by all people as the only Son of God?

 14. Who else has commanded the nations inhabiting the continents and
 islands of this mighty globe to assemble weekly on the Lord's day, and
 to observe it as a festival, not indeed for the pampering of the body,
 but for the invigoration of the soul by instruction in Divine truth?
 What god or hero, exposed, as our Saviour was, to so sore a conflict,
 has raised the trophy of victory over every foe? For they indeed, from
 first to last, unceasingly assailed his doctrine and his people: but he
 who is invisible, by the exercise of a secret power, has raised his
 servants and the sacred houses of their worship to the height of glory.

 But why should we still vainly aim at detailing those Divine proofs of
 our Saviour's power which no language can worthily express; which need
 indeed no words of ours, but themselves appeal in loudest tones to
 those whose mental ears are open to the truth? Surely it is a strange,
 a wondrous fact, unparalleled in the annals of human life; that the
 blessings we have described should be accorded to our mortal race, and
 that he who is in truth the only, the eternal Son of God, should thus
 be visible on earth.

 [3578] [Referring to Diocletian, and others of the persecuting
 emperors.--Bag.]

 [3579] [Kuriakon exiontai ton eponumion. The German "Kirche," the
 Scotch "Kirk," and the English "Church" are said, probably enough, to
 derive their origin from this Greek word.--Bag.]

 [3580] Compare literature on the edicts of toleration.

 [3581] [There is nothing which need surprise us in the praises of
 virginity, monkery, and asceticism, in a writer of the fourth century.
 The intelligent Christian will surely shrink from the thought of
 ascribing, with Eusebius, these fruitful sources of corruption to the
 Lord himself.--Bag.]

 [3582] Matt. xxiii. 38.

 [3583] Matt. xxiv. 2,--apparently a paraphrase from memory.

 [3584] Matt. xvi. 18.

 [3585] The Syriac, Peschito, and possibly the Curetonian, the old Latin
 (Itala), probably both the Thebaic and Memphitic Coptic versions, at
 least, had been made at this time.

 [3586] [The peace which Christ, at his birth, bestowed on the Roman
 world (Valesius).--Bag.]

 Chapter XVIII.

 1. These words of ours, however, [gracious] Sovereign, may well appear
 superfluous in your ears, convinced as you are, by frequent and
 personal experience, of our Saviour's Deity; yourself also, in actions
 still more than words, a herald of the truth to all mankind. Yourself,
 it may be, will vouchsafe at a time of leisure to relate to us the
 abundant manifestations which your Saviour has accorded you of his
 presence, and the oft-repeated visions of himself which have attended
 you in the hours of sleep. I speak not of those secret suggestions
 which to us are unrevealed: but of those principles which he has
 instilled into your own mind, and which are fraught with general
 interest and benefit to the human race. You will yourself relate in
 worthy terms the visible protection which your Divine shield and
 guardian has extended in the hour of battle; the ruin of your open and
 secret foes; and his ready aid in time of peril. To him you will
 ascribe relief in the midst of perplexity; defence in solitude;
 expedients in extremity; foreknowledge of events yet future; your
 forethought for the general weal; your power to investigate uncertain
 questions; your conduct of most important enterprises; your
 administration of civil affairs; [3587] your military arrangements, and
 correction of abuses in all departments; your ordinances respecting
 public right; and, lastly, your legislation for the common benefit of
 all. You will, it may be, also detail to us those particulars of his
 favor which are secret to us, but known to you alone, and treasured in
 your royal memory as in secret storehouses. Such, doubtless, are the
 reasons, and such the convincing proofs of your Saviour's power, which
 caused you to raise that sacred edifice which presents to all,
 believers and unbelievers alike, a trophy of his victory over death, a
 holy temple of the holy God: to consecrate those noble and splendid
 monuments of immortal life and his heavenly kingdom: to offer memorials
 of our Almighty Saviour's conquest which well become the imperial
 dignity of him by whom they are bestowed. With such memorials have you
 adorned that edifice which witnesses of eternal life: thus, as it were
 in imperial characters, ascribing victory and triumph to the heavenly
 Word of God: thus proclaiming to all nations, with clear and
 unmistakable voice, in deed and word, your own devout and pious
 confession of his name.

 [3587] Literally, "Your political economies."

 THE CHURCH HISTORY OF EUSEBIUS.

INDEX OF SUBJECTS.

 Aaron, [1]373.

 Abdus of Edessa, [2]101.

 Abdus, the father of the preceding, [3]101.

 Abgarus, Prince of Edessa, correspondence of, with Christ, 100, [4]101;
 healed by Thaddeus, [5]101, [6]104.

 Abilius, second bishop of Alexandria, [7]147, [8]149.

 Abraham, [9]83, [10]87, [11]88.

 Achæus, a judge at Cæsarea, [12]303.

 Achillas, presbyter of Alexandria, [13]321.

 Achior, the Ammonite, [14]93.

 Acolyths, [15]288.

 Actium, [16]263.

 Acts, book of, [17]88, [18]98, [19]112, [20]113, [21]117, [22]122,
 [23]136, [24]137, [25]163, 172, [26]261, [27]310; written by Luke
 during Paul's imprisonment in Rome, [28]124 (and note [29]14), [30]273;
 rejected by the Severians, [31]209; part of N. T. Canon, [32]155.

 Adam, [33]92; salvation of, denied by Tatian, [34]208.

 Adamantius, name given to Origen, [35]261.

 Adiabene, [36]113.

 Adrianus, a martyr, [37]354.

 Advocate (parakletou), 213.

 Ædesius, introduces Christianity into Ethiopia, [38]105 (note 30).

 Ædesius, a martyr, [39]347.

 Ælia, [40]113 (note 7), [41]294, [42]352; colonized, [43]177; library
 of, 268.

 Ælianus, [44]313.

 Ælius Adrian. See Hadrian.

 Ælius Publius Julius, bishop of Debeltum in Thrace, [45]237.

 Æmilian, Roman emperor, [46]298 (note 1).

 Æmilianus, prefect of Egypt, [47]299, [48]301.

 Æmilius Frontinus, proconsul at Ephesus, [49]236.

 Africa, [50]286, [51]287, [52]296, [53]328, [54]356, [55]381, [56]382.

 Africanus, Julius, on Herod, [57]89-[58]90, [59]93; on the genealogy of
 Christ, [60]91-[61]94; life and writings of, [62]276, [63]277; his
 epistle to Origen, [64]277; goes to Alexandria to see Heraclas,
 [65]276; epistle of, to Aristides, [66]277.

 Agabus, the prophet, [67]107, [68]110, [69]234.

 Agapius, bishop of Cæsarea, [70]320.

 Agapius, a martyr, [71]344, [72]347, [73]348.

 Agapius, a martyr, [74]345.

 Agathobuli, the two, [75]319.

 Agathonice, a martyr, [76]193.

 Agrapha, or extra-canonical sayings of Christ, [77]296 (note 3).

 Agrippa I. See Herod Agrippa I.

 Agrippa II. See Herod Agrippa II.

 Agrippa, Castor, [78]178.

 Agrippinus, bishop of Alexandria, [79]197, [80]224.

 Albinus, procurator of Judea, [81]127, [82]143 (note 8).

 Alburnus, an idol, [83]106.

 Alce, sister of the eirenarch Herod, [84]191.

 Alcibiades, a Montanist, [85]218.

 Alcibiades, a Gallic witness in the persecution under Marcus Aurelius,
 [86]218.

 Alcibiades, opponent of Montanism, [87]234.

 Alexander, husband of Salome, [88]95.

 Alexander, the Alabarch, brother of Philo, [89]108.

 Alexander, bishop of Jerusalem, [90]260, [91]274, [92]280, [93]281,
 [94]291, [95]294 (?; see note 2); becomes coadjutor of Narcissus,
 bishop of Jerusalem, [96]255-[97]257, 256 (note 1); quoted, [98]256,
 [99]261, [100]268.

 Alexander, bishop of Rome, [101]174, [102]175, [103]221.

 Alexander, a Gallic witness in the persecution under Marcus Aurelius,
 [104]216.

 Alexander, a martyr of Eumenia, [105]233.

 Alexander, a martyr under Decius, [106]284.

 Alexander, a martyr at Cæsarea under Valerian, [107]302.

 Alexander of Egypt, a martyr under Maximin, [108]345.

 Alexander of Gaza, a martyr under Maximin, [109]345.

 Alexander, a Montanist, [110]236.

 Alexander of Tyre, [111]294 (see note 2).

 Alexander Severus, Roman emperor, [112]269, [113]270, [114]272,
 [115]274.

 Alexandria, [116]108, [117]109, [118]149, [119]175, [120]178, [121]182,
 [122]195, [123]197, [124]205, 224, [125]240, [126]249, [127]251,
 [128]253, [129]254, [130]262, [131]267, [132]268, [133]271, [134]272,
 [135]274, [136]276, [137]278, [138]298, [139]302, 305, [140]312,
 [141]313, [142]318, [143]319, [144]321, [145]322, [146]332, [147]334,
 [148]337, [149]347, [150]360; church of, founded by Mark, [151]116;
 library of, [152]223; school of, [153]225; martyrs of, under Decius,
 [154]283; sedition in, [155]205; pestilence in, [156]306, [157]307;
 mutilation of Christians in, during the Diocletian persecution,
 [158]332; table of bishops of, [159]401.

 Allegorical interpretation of the Scriptures, [160]266 (note 1).

 Allegorists, refuted by Nepos, [161]308.

 Alphaeus, a martyr, [162]343.

 Amaseia, a city of Pontus, [163]386.

 Amastris, [164]201.

 Ambrose, friend of Origen, [165]264; gives Origen financial aid, 271,
 [166]274.

 Ammia, a prophetess of Philadelphia, [167]234.

 Ammon, martyr under Decius, [168]285.

 Ammon, of Bernice, addressed by Dionysius, [169]311.

 Ammonarium, martyr under Decius, [170]284.

 Ammonite. See Achior the Ammonite.

 Ammonius, the Neo-Platonist, [171]265, [172]266.

 Ammonius, a Christian writer, [173]266, [174]267.

 Ammonius, a martyr, [175]334.

 Ananias, a courier, [176]100, [177]101.

 Ananus, high priest, [178]127, [179]128.

 Anatolius of Alexandria, becomes bishop of Laodicea, [180]318; conduct
 of, during the siege of the Pyrucheium, [181]318; writings of,
 [182]319, [183]320; Paschal canons of, [184]319; Institutes of,
 [185]320; death of, [186]320.

 Anchialus, [187]237.

 Ancient Martyrdoms, Collection of, [188]190, [189]211, [190]219,
 [191]240.

 Ancyra, in Galatia, [192]230.

 Andrew, the Apostle, [193]171; labors in Scythia, [194]132; "Acts of,"
 157.

 Anea, [195]351.

 Anencletus, second bishop of Rome, [196]147, [197]149, [198]221.

 Anicetus, bishop of Rome, [199]182, [200]183, [201]187, [202]197,
 [203]198, [204]199, [205]221, 243; concedes the administration of the
 Eucharist to Polycarp in Rome, [206]244.

 Annas, or Ananus, the high priest, [207]96, [208]97.

 Annianus, first bishop of Alexandria, [209]128, [210]149.

 Anteros, bishop of Rome, [211]275.

 Anthimus, bishop of Nicomedia, [212]327, [213]333.

 Antichrist, [214]222.

 Antilegomena (antilegdmena, or antilegesthai), 135; meaning of, as used
 by Eusebius, [215]155 (note 1).

 Antinoites, addressed by Alexander of Jerusalem, [216]257.

 Antinous, slave of Hadrian, [217]180.

 Antioch, [218]104, [219]107, [220]113, [221]149, [222]165, [223]168,
 [224]197, [225]202, [226]237, [227]240, 250, [228]257, [229]269,
 [230]271, [231]275, [232]281, [233]283, [234]286, [235]290, [236]291,
 [237]294. [238]303, [239]314, [240]315, [241]317, [242]320, 332,
 [243]333, [244]334, [245]343, [246]358, [247]359, [248]360, [249]368;
 heresy of Paul of Samosata introduced at, [250]312-[251]316; table of
 bishops of, [252]402.

 Antipater, [253]89, [254]90, [255]92, [256]93.

 Antiquity of Christianity, [257]82 sq.

 Antiquity of the Hebrew nation, [258]87.

 Antoninus (Pius), [259]114, [260]180, [261]182, [262]185, [263]188,
 [264]196, [265]220; edict of, to the Common Assembly of Asia, [266]186;
 Eusebius' confusion in regard to the successors of, discussed,
 [267]390, [268]391.

 Antoninus (Elagabalus), [269]268.

 Antoninus (Caracalla), [270]255, [271]268.

 Antoninus, a martyr, [272]350.

 Antony (Mark), [273]88, [274]93.

 Anulinus, proconsul of Africa, [275]380, [276]381, [277]383.

 Apamea, on the Maeander, [278]233.

 Apelles, disciple of Marcion, [279]227, [280]229.

 Apion, an ecclesiastical writer, [281]245.

 Apion, an Alexandrian grammarian and enemy of the Jews, [282]108.

 Apocalypse of John, [283]147, [284]171; probably written by John the
 Presbyter, [285]171; Eusebius' view of, [286]155; part of N. T. Canon,
 [287]156.

 Apocalypse of Peter, [288]134, [289]156.

 Apolinarius, bishop of Hierapolis, [290]198, [291]203, [292]230;
 writings of, [293]206, [294]207, [295]237; narrates the story of the
 "Thundering Legion," [296]220.

 Apollo, [297]90, [298]92.

 Apollonia, a martyr under Decius, [299]283.

 Apollonides, a follower of Theodotus the cobbler, [300]248.

 Apollonius, work of, against the Montanists quoted, [301]235, 236.

 Apollonius, a Roman martyr, [302]239.

 Apollophanes, a Stoic philosopher, [303]266.

 Apologists, during reign of Hadrian, [304]175.

 Apostle, the, referring to Paul, [305]209.

 Apostles, successions of the, [306]81, [307]82; appointed by Christ,
 98, [308]99; careers of, after the ascension of Christ,
 [309]103-[310]105, [311]132; epistles of, [312]133; first successors
 of, [313]136; preach to all nations, [314]138; "Teaching of the
 Twelve," placed among the ndthoi, [315]156; which of them were married,
 [316]161, [317]171.

 Apphianus, a martyr, [318]345, [319]347.

 Aquila, companion of Paul, [320]121.

 Aquila, governor and judge, [321]251, [322]253.

 Aquila, companion of Dionysius of Alexandria, [323]301.

 Aquila of Pontus, translator of the Old Testament, [324]223, [325]262,
 263.

 Arabia, [326]267, [327]268, [328]294, [329]332.

 Arabian, [330]89.

 Arabian mountain, [331]285.

 Arabians, dissension of, healed by Origen, [332]279.

 Arabianus, an ecclesiastical writer, [333]245.

 Archelaus, son of Herod the Great, [334]90, [335]95, [336]96.

 Ardeban, in Mysia, [337]231.

 Areopagite. See Dionysius the Areopagite.

 Ares, a martyr, [338]351.

 Aretas, king of Petra, [339]97.

 Aristarchus, Paul's fellow-prisoner, [340]123.

 Aristides, epistle to, from Africanus, [341]91, [342]277.

 Aristides, the apologist, [343]175.

 Aristion, [344]171.

 Aristo of Pella, [345]177.

 Aristobulus, king and high priest of the Jews, [346]90, [347]93.

 Aristobulus, a Jewish writer, [348]260.

 Aristobulus, Hellenistic philosopher of Alexandria, [349]319.

 Aristotelian school, [350]318.

 Aristotle, admired by the Theodotians, [351]247.

 Arithmetic, Anatolius' Institutes of, [352]320.

 Aries, Synod of, summoned by Constantine, [353]382.

 Armenia, [354]291; Christianization of, [355]362 (note 2).

 Armenians go to war with Maximin, [356]362.

 Arsinoë, in Egypt, [357]309.

 Artaxerxes, [358]145, [359]224.

 Artemon, or Artemas, heresy of, [360]246; relation of, to Paul of
 Samosata, [361]315.

 Ascalon, [362]89, [363]92, [364]351.

 Asclepiades, bishop of Antioch, [365]257, [366]269.

 Asclepiodotus, a disciple of Theodotus the cobbler, [367]247, 248.

 Asclepius, a martyr, [368]351.

 Asia, [369]132, [370]136, [371]185, [372]186, [373]187, [374]188,
 [375]190, [376]192, [377]205, [378]206, [379]212, 219, [380]222,
 [381]223, [382]229, [383]230, [384]232, [385]236, [386]237, [387]238,
 [388]241, [389]242, [390]277, [391]310.

 Asphaltites, Lake of, [392]95.

 Asterius Urbanus, [393]232.

 Astyrius, remarkable story in regard to, [394]304.

 Ater, martyr under Dionysius, [395]284.

 Atheists, Christians called, [396]190.

 Athenagoras, author of a lost apology, [397]196 (note 3).

 Athenians, [398]200, [399]206.

 Athenodorus, brother of Gregory Thaumaturgus, [400]276, [401]303,
 [402]312.

 Athens, [403]138, [404]201, [405]277.

 Attalus, a Gallic witness in the persecution under Marcus Aurelius,
 [406]213, [407]215, [408]216, [409]218.

 Attica, [410]321.

 Atticus, proconsul of Judea, [411]164.

 Atticus, bishop of Synada, [412]268.

 Augustus, emperor of Rome, [413]88, [414]89, [415]90, [416]93, [417]96,
 [418]205.

 Aurelian, becomes emperor, [419]313; petitioned to adjudicate the case
 of Paul of Samosata, [420]316; friendliness toward Christians,
 [421]316; plans to persecute Christians, [422]316; death of, [423]316.

 Aurelius. See Marcus Aurelius.

 Aurelius Cyrenius, a witness, [424]237.

 Aurelius Cyrenius, imperial official in Egypt, [425]302.

 Auses (Joshua), [426]85.

 Autolycus, addressed by Theophilus, [427]202.

 Auxentius, a martyr, [428]348.

 Avercius Marcellus, addressed by Apolinarius, [429]230.


 Babylas, bishop of Antioch, [430]275, [431]281.

 Babylon, [432]90, [433]273.

 Bacchius, grandfather of Justin, [434]185.

 Bacchylides, [435]201.

 Bacchylus, bishop of Corinth, [436]240, [437]241.

 Baptism, [438]151 (note [439]16); clinical, received by Novatus,
 [440]288; called "seal" (sphragis), [441]289; discussion regarding
 baptism of heretics, [442]294-[443]297; of the Church, rejected by
 Novatus, [444]297.

 Baptism of John, [445]98.

 Barabbas, the robber, [446]347.

 Barcabbas, prophet invented by Basilides, [447]179.

 Barcocheba, leader of the Jews, [448]177, [449]181.

 Barcoph, prophet invented by Basilides, [450]179.

 Bardesanes, the Syrian, works of, [451]209.

 Barnabas, [452]310; one of the Seventy, [453]98, [454]104; called
 "prophet," 107, [455]110, [456]113; probable author of Epistle to the
 Hebrews, [457]134 (note [458]17); epistle of, [459]260, [460]261;
 epistle of, placed among the ndthoi, 156.

 Barsabas, [461]99 (note [462]10), [463]172.

 Basilica of Tyre, [464]375 sq.

 Basilicus, a Marcionite, [465]228.

 Basilides, the Gnostic, [466]178; works of, [467]179.

 Basilides, pupil of Origen, suffers martyrdom, [468]253.

 Basilides, bishop in Pentapolis, addressed by Dionysius, 311.

 Basilidians, [469]199.

 Benjamin, bishop of Jerusalem, [470]176.

 Bernice, church of, [471]311.

 Beryllus, bishop of Bostra in Asia, [472]268; error of, [473]277; his
 conception of Christ, [474]277; brought back to orthodoxy by Origen,
 [475]277.

 Berytus, now Beirut, [476]345.

 Besas, martyr under Decius, [477]284.

 Beseleel, [478]370, [479]373.

 Bethlehem, [480]88, [481]94, [482]95.

 Biblias, a Gallic witness in the persecution under Marcus Aurelius,
 [483]214.

 Bishop, among the Therapeutæ, [484]119; relation of, to presbyter in
 the early church, [485]150; only one in a city, [486]287.

 Bithynia, [487]132, [488]136, [489]294.

 Bithara, fortress of, [490]177.

 Blandina, a Gallic witness in the persecution under Marcus Aurelius,
 [491]213, [492]215-[493]217.

 Blastus, schism of, at Rome, [494]229, [495]237.

 Bolanus, [496]313.

 Bostra, in Arabia, [497]268, [498]277, [499]312.

 Brethren of the Lord, [500]99 (note [501]14).

 Brucheium. See Pyrucheium.


 Cæcilianus, bishop of Carthage, [502]381, [503]382, [504]383.

 Cæsarea in Cappadocia, [505]274, [506]303, [507]312.

 Cæsarea in Palestine, [508]107, [509]111, [510]163, [511]240, [512]241,
 [513]255, [514]267, 268, [515]271, [516]274, [517]275, [518]277,
 [519]294, [520]303, [521]312, [522]320, [523]334, [524]343, [525]346,
 [526]347, [527]348, [528]349, [529]351, 352, [530]354.

 Cæsarea Philippi, famous wonder at, [531]304.

 Caiaphas, the high priest, [532]96, [533]97.

 Caius, emperor of Rome, [534]107, [535]108; hostility of, toward the
 Jews, [536]109; alters temple, [537]109.

 Caius, an ecclesiastical writer, [538]129; attitude of, towards the
 Apocalypse, [539]160 (note 4); dialogue of, [540]163, [541]268.

 Caius, bishop of Rome, [542]317.

 CallirhoE, a town east of the Dead Sea, [543]95.

 Callistio, addressed by Rhodo, [544]228.

 Callistus, bishop of Rome, [545]268.

 Camithus, father of Simon the high priest, [546]97.

 Candidus, an ecclesiastical writer, [547]245.

 Canon, of N. T. Scriptures. See N. T. Canon. Of Old Testament. See O.
 T. Canon.

 Capito, Gentile bishop of Jerusalem, [548]226.

 Cappadocia, [549]132, [550]136, [551]257, [552]274, [553]291, [554]294,
 [555]295, [556]303, [557]312, [558]313, 332, [559]353, [560]354.

 Caracalla, emperor of Rome, [561]255, [562]263, [563]268.

 Caricus, receives letter from Serapion, [564]237, [565]258.

 Carinus becomes emperor, [566]316.

 Carpocrates, the Gnostic, [567]179.

 Carpocatians, immorality of, [568]114 (note [569]18), [570]199.

 Carpus, a martyr, [571]193.

 Carthage, [572]294, [573]381, [574]382.

 Carus, emperor of Rome, [575]316.

 Cassianus, Gentile bishop of Jerusalem, [576]226.

 Cassianus, an ecclesiastical writer, [577]260.

 Cassius, bishop of Tyre, [578]244.

 Catechumens, training of, [579]297 (note 3).

 Cathari, followers of Novatus, [580]286.

 Catholic Church, [581]380, [582]381, [583]383.

 Catholic epistles, [584]128, [585]261.

 Celadion, bishop of Alexandria, [586]184, [587]197.

 Celerinus, a Roman confessor, [588]287.

 Celibacy, preached by the Encratites, [589]208.

 Celsus, the Epicurean, [590]268; work against, by Origen, [591]278.

 Cemeteries of the Christians, [592]303, [593]358.

 Cephas, one of the "Seventy," [594]99.

 Cephro, in Libya, [595]300, [596]301.

 Cerdon, third bishop of Alexandria, [597]149.

 Cerdon, the Gnostic, [598]182, [599]183.

 Cerinthus, the heretic, [600]160, [601]161; avoided and denounced by
 John the Apostle, [602]187; chiliasm of, [603]309.

 Chæremon, the Stoic, [604]266.

 Chæremon, bishop of Nilus, [605]285.

 Chæremon, a deacon, companion of Dionysius of Alexandria, 299,
 [606]300, [607]301.

 Chiliasm, in the third century, [608]308 (note 1); of Cerinthus and the
 Cerinthians, [609]309.

 Chrestus, bishop of Syracuse, [610]381.

 Christ, pre-existence and divinity of, [611]82-[612]85; the name of,
 known from the beginning, [613]85-[614]87; divinity of, [615]86; types
 of, [616]86; time of his appearance among men, [617]88, [618]89; birth
 of, [619]88; genealogy of, [620]91-[621]94; beginning of his ministry,
 [622]96; testimony of John the Baptist, in regard to, [623]98; spread
 of doctrine of, [624]107; predictions of, [625]141; family of,
 [626]148; age of, [627]150 (note 5); spoken of as God (theologeitai),
 247; taught to be God and man by Irenæus and Melito, [628]247; denial
 of, an indifferent matter according to the Elkesites, [629]280; body
 and blood of, [630]289; worshiped as "Very God," [631]372; the
 bridegroom of the church, [632]376; dwells in the bishops and
 presbyters, [633]378; as high priest receives the sacrifices of his
 people and bears them to God, [634]378.

 Christianity, antiquity and divinity of, [635]82 sq.

 Christians, origin of name, [636]107; accusations against, [637]180;
 called Atheists, [638]190; mutilations of, [639]333; right of holding
 property guaranteed to them by Constantine and Licinius, [640]380;
 property of, restored by Constantine and Licinius, [641]380.

 Christophany, [642]83 (note [643]11).

 Chronicle of Eusebius, [644]82.

 Chronological Canons of Eusebius. See Chronicle of Eusebius.

 Chrysophora, addressed by Dionysius of Corinth, [645]202.

 Church, the bride of Christ, [646]376, [647]377.

 Church, Holy Catholic, [648]188, [649]189, [650]191, [651]299,
 [652]313, [653]315.

 Churches, destruction of, under Diocletian, [654]324; restoration of,
 after the great persecution, [655]370; dedication of, [656]370 sq.

 Cilicia, [657]291, [658]294, [659]295, [660]350, [661]351, [662]352.

 Circumcision given to Abraham, [663]88.

 Clarus, bishop of Ptolemais, [664]244.

 Claudius I., emperor of Rome, [665]110, [666]114; drives Jews out of
 Rome, [667]121; death of, [668]122.

 Claudius II., emperor of Rome, [669]313.

 Claudius Apolinarius. See Apolinarius of Hierapolis.

 Clement, of Alexandria, [670]99, [671]225, [672]226; Hypotyposes of,
 quoted, [673]104, [674]110, [675]125, [676]150, [677]161, [678]162;
 work of, on the Passover, [679]205; his Stromata, [680]225, [681]254;
 speaks of Christ as God, [682]247; succeeds Pantaenus as principal of
 the catechetical school of Alexandria, [683]253; gives chronological
 table extending to the reign of Commodus, [684]254; with Alexander of
 Jerusalem, 257; writings of, [685]258-[686]261.

 Clement, of Rome, third bishop of Church of Rome, [687]137, [688]149,
 221; epistle of, [689]147, [690]169, [691]260; death of, [692]165;
 traditional translator of the Epistle to the Hebrews, [693]169;
 writings falsely ascribed to, [694]170; Epistle of, to the Corinthians,
 [695]198; read in the Corinthian Church in the time of Dionysius, 201;
 author of the Epistle to the Hebrews according to some, [696]273; his
 relation to the epistle according to Origen, [697]273.

 Clement, consul of Rome. See Flavius Clement.

 "Clementines." See Clement of Rome.

 Cleobians. See Cleobius.

 Cleobius, a heretic, [698]199.

 Cleopatra, [699]88.

 Clergy, [700]289; exempted by Constantine from political duties, 383.

 Clopas, father of Simeon and brother of Joseph, [701]146, [702]163,
 164, [703]199.

 Cnosians, inhabitants of Cnosus of Crete, [704]201.

 Cochaba, a village of Judea, [705]93.

 Coele-Syria, [706]226.

 Colluthion, [707]300.

 Commodus, emperor of Rome, [708]224, [709]239, [710]240, [711]245,
 [712]254.

 Confession of faith, attitude of Novatus towards, [713]297 (note 3).

 Confessors, (dmologoi), 218; addressed by Novatus, [714]292.

 Confirmation, [715]289 (note [716]25).

 Conon, bishop of Hermopolis, [717]291.

 Constantine, becomes emperor, [718]335; conquers Maxentius, [719]363,
 364; enters Rome in triumph, [720]364; erects a statue in Rome with the
 cross in its hand, [721]364; issues in conjunction with Licinius an
 edict of toleration, [722]364, 365, [723]368; edict of toleration, copy
 of, [724]378-[725]380; summons a synod at Rome, [726]381; summons a
 synod at Aries, [727]381; grants money to the churches, [728]382;
 favors shown by him to Licinius, [729]384; conquers Licinius, [730]386;
 becomes sole emperor and enjoys lasting peace and prosperity, [731]386,
 [732]387.

 Constantius, joins Galerius in issuing an edict of toleration,
 [733]339; friendliness of, toward Christians, [734]335, [735]341; death
 of, [736]335, [737]341.

 Coracion, a Chiliast, opposed by Dionysius, [738]309.

 Corinth, church of, founded by Peter and Paul, [739]130, [740]138, 169,
 [741]197, [742]198, [743]200, [744]221, [745]242.

 Corinthians, addressed by Paul, [746]199.

 Cornelius, bishop of Antioch, [747]197.

 Cornelius, bishop of Rome, [748]280, [749]293; epistles of, concerning
 Novatus, [750]286-[751]287, [752]289, [753]290, [754]291.

 Cornelius, the centurion, conversion of, [755]107.

 Cornutus, a philosopher and rhetorician, [756]266.

 Creed, of the Church, attitude of Novatus toward, [757]297 (note 3);
 early existence of, in the Roman Church, [758]297 (note 3).

 Crescens, companion of Paul, [759]137.

 Crescens, an enemy of Justin, [760]193, [761]194, [762]195.

 Crete, [763]136, [764]197, [765]201.

 Crispus, son of Constantine, [766]386.

 Cronion Eunus, martyr under Decius, [767]284.

 Cronius, a Pythagorean philosopher, [768]266.

 Culcianus, a favorite of Maximin, [769]368.

 Cumanus, procurator of Judea, [770]122 (note 1).

 Cynics, life and manners of, [771]193.

 Cyprian, epistles of, concerning the Novatian schism, [772]287; on
 rebaptism of heretics, [773]294, [774]296 (note 6).

 Cyprus, [775]104, [776]355.

 Cyrene, [777]174, [778]175.

 Cyrenius, governor of Syria, census under, [779]88, [780]89.

 Cyril, bishop of Antioch, [781]317.


 Damas, bishop of Magnesia, [782]168.

 Damascus, [783]359.

 Damnæus, father of Jesus the high priest, [784]128.

 Daniel, the prophet, [785]85, [786]90, [787]276, [788]352.

 David, [789]86, [790]90.

 Deacons, not to be identified with the "Seven," [791]103 (note 2a);
 limited to seven in the Roman Church, [792]288 (note [793]18).

 Decius, becomes emperor, [794]280; persecution under,
 [795]280-[796]286, 301; slain, [797]293; wickedness of, [798]307,
 [799]326.

 Demetrianus, bishop of Antioch, [800]303, [801]312, [802]315.

 Demetrius, a Jewish writer, [803]260.

 Demetrius, companion of Dionysius of Alexandria, [804]301.

 Demetrius, bishop, addressed by the Emperor Gallienus, [805]302.

 Demetrius, bishop of Alexandria, [806]240, [807]250, [808]254,
 [809]255, [810]262, 267, [811]268, [812]274, [813]275, [814]291,
 [815]294; hostility of, to Origen, [816]255; relations of, with Origen
 discussed, [817]394.

 Desposyni, or the relatives of Christ, [818]93.

 Diaconal epistle of Dionysius, [819]291.

 Diaconate, [820]103, [821]104; among the Therapeutoe, [822]119.

 Diatessaron, of Tatian, [823]209.

 Didymus, addressed by Dionysius of Alexandria, [824]301, [825]305.

 Diocletian, becomes emperor, [826]316; persecution of, [827]316;
 friendliness of, toward Christians, [828]323; first edict of, against
 Christians, 324, [829]342; second edict of, against Christians,
 [830]325, [831]342; third edict of, against Christians, [832]325,
 [833]328, [834]342; abdication of, [835]335, [836]340, [837]345; death
 of, [838]340; martyrs under, in Palestine, [839]342; so-called fourth
 edict of, issued by Maximian, [840]344 (note 2); so-called fifth edict
 of, issued by Galerius and Maximinus, [841]350 (note 1), [842]364,
 [843]366; causes of the persecution of, discussed, [844]397-[845]400.

 Dionysia, martyr under Decius, [846]284.

 Dionysius, the Areopagite, [847]137; first bishop of Athens, [848]138,
 200.

 Dionysius, bishop of Alexandria, quoted, [849]160, [850]281,
 [851]283-[852]286, 300; succeeds Heraclas as principal of the
 catechetical school, [853]275, [854]278; epistle of, to Germanus,
 [855]281; sufferings of, during the Decian persecution, 282, [856]301,
 [857]302; epistle of, to Fabius, [858]283-[859]286, [860]290; attitude
 of, toward the lapsed, [861]283 (note 1), [862]285, [863]286, [864]290;
 his account of Serapion, [865]290; epistle of, to Novatus, [866]290,
 [867]291; various epistles of, [868]291, [869]311, [870]312; on
 Repentance, [871]291; on Martyrdom, [872]291; against Novatus,
 [873]291; epistles of, on the re-baptism of the lapsed, [874]294,
 [875]295, [876]296, [877]297; appealed to by Eusebius as an authority,
 [878]293, [879]318; on Sabellius and his heresy, [880]295, [881]311;
 attitude of, toward heretical teachings, 295; on the persecution under
 Valerian, [882]298-[883]302; sufferings of, during persecution under
 Valerian, [884]299-[885]301; addressed by the Emperor Gallienus,
 [886]302; festal epistles of, [887]305, [888]307; Paschal canon of,
 [889]305; on the Sabbath, [890]307; to Hermammon, [891]307; on the
 Promises, [892]308; on the Apocalypse of John, [893]309; to Ammon of
 Bernice, [894]311; to Telesphorus, Euphranor, and Euporus, [895]311; on
 Nature, on Temptations, Exposition of Ecclesiastes, [896]311; to
 Dionysius of Rome, to Basilides of Pentapolis, [897]311; invited to
 attend synod called against Paul of Samosata, [898]312; death of,
 [899]313, [900]321.

 Dionysius, bishop of Corinth, [901]130, [902]197, [903]202; epistles
 of, 200, [904]201.

 Dionysius of Rome, [905]295, [906]296, [907]311, [908]312, [909]313,
 [910]316.

 Dionysius, a martyr of Palestine, [911]345.

 Dioscorus, companion of Dionysius of Alexandria, [912]301.

 Dioscorus, confessor under Decius, [913]284, [914]285.

 Disciples, careers of, after ascension of Christ, [915]132.

 Dispensation (oikogomia) of Christ, [916]81, [917]82.

 Dispersion, Hebrews of the, [918]136.

 Dius, bishop of Jerusalem, [919]256.

 Dius, a martyr, [920]334.

 Divinity of Christ (the ologia), discussed by Eusebius,
 [921]82-[922]86.

 Divinity of Christianity, [923]82 sq.

 Docetæ, [924]258.

 Dolichianus, Gentile bishop of Jerusalem, [925]226.

 Domitian, becomes emperor, [926]147; persecution under, [927]147,
 [928]148, 205, [929]222; commands that descendants of David be slain,
 [930]148, [931]150, [932]163, [933]164.

 Domitius, addressed by Dionysius of Alexandria, [934]301, [935]305.

 Domninus, an apostate, addressed by Serapion, [936]257.

 Domninus, a martyr, [937]348.

 Domnus, bishop of Antioch, [938]315, [939]316, [940]317.

 Domnus, bishop of Cæsarea, [941]303.

 Donatist schism, [942]380 (note [943]16), [944]383 (note [945]12).

 Dorotheus, presbyter of Antioch, [946]317.

 Dorotheus, a member of Diocletian's household, [947]323, [948]327.

 Dositheans. See Dositheus.

 Dositheus, a heretic, [949]199.


 Ebionites, heresy of, [950]158-[951]160, [952]223, [953]264; relation
 of, to the Elkeites, [954]280.

 Ecclesiastes, commentary on, by Dionysius, [955]311.

 Eden, [956]306.

 Edessa, visit of Thaddeus to, [957]100-[958]102; Christianity
 introduced into, [959]100-[960]102, [961]104.

 Egypt, [962]88, [963]93, [964]94, [965]95, [966]174, [967]175,
 [968]226, [969]249, [970]250, [971]267, [972]291, 298, [973]299,
 [974]300, [975]301, [976]305, [977]307, [978]308, [979]328, [980]329,
 [981]334, [982]351, [983]355, [984]360, [985]368.

 Egyptian false prophet, mentioned in the Acts, sedition of, 123.

 Egyptian nation, [986]305.

 Elagabalus, Roman emperor, [987]268, [988]269.

 Elders, account of appointment of, in Acts vi., [989]103 (note 2a);
 "The Ancient Elders," [990]133, [991]171.

 Eleazer, the high priest, [992]97.

 Eleazer of Bathezor, [993]140.

 Eleutheropolis, [994]350, [995]351.

 Eleutherus, bishop of Rome, [996]184, [997]199, [998]211,
 [999]219-[1000]221, [1001]240.

 Eli, son of Melchi, [1002]91, [1003]92, [1004]94.

 Elias, a martyr, [1005]351.

 Elijah, [1006]352.

 Elkesites, heresy of, [1007]280.

 Elpistus, of Amastris, [1008]201.

 Emesa, [1009]334.

 Emesa in Phoenicia, [1010]360.

 Encratites, [1011]207, [1012]208.

 Ennathas, a martyr, [1013]350.

 Enoch, book of. [1014]310.

 Ephesus, [1015]162, [1016]163, [1017]167, [1018]171, [1019]186,
 [1020]187, [1021]196, [1022]222, [1023]223, [1024]236, 237, [1025]241,
 [1026]242, [1027]310; church of, founded by Paul, [1028]150.

 Ephres, bishop of Jerusalem, [1029]176.

 Epimachus, martyr under Decius, [1030]284.

 Epistles, of the Apostles, [1031]133; Catholic, [1032]261; thirteen of
 Paul, [1033]268.

 Eros, bishop of Antioch, [1034]197.

 Essenes, Jewish sect, [1035]199.

 Estha, wife of Matthan and Melchi, [1036]91.

 Ethiopia, Christianity introduced into, [1037]105 (note [1038]30),
 [1039]347.

 Ethiopian eunuch, conversion of, [1040]105.

 Eubulus, a martyr, [1041]354.

 Eucharist, the, [1042]243, [1043]290.

 Euclid, studied by the Theodotians, [1044]248.

 Euelpis, [1045]268.

 Eumenes, bishop of Alexandria, [1046]177, [1047]184.

 Eumenia, [1048]233, [1049]242.

 Eunuchs, eligibility of, to clerical offices, [1050]317 (note
 [1051]12).

 Eunus. See Cronion Eunus.

 Euphranor, addressed by Dionysius, [1052]311.

 Euphrates river, [1053]100.

 Eupolemus, a Jewish writer, [1054]260.

 Euporus, addressed by Dionysius, [1055]311.

 Eusebius, claim of, to be called the "Father of Church History,"
 [1056]81 (note 5); Canon of, [1057]155-[1058]157.

 Eusebius of Alexandria, a deacon and companion of Dionysius of
 Alexandria, [1059]299, [1060]301, [1061]302; becomes bishop of
 Laodicea, [1062]302, [1063]318; conduct of, during the siege of the
 Pyrucheium, [1064]319, [1065]320; death of, [1066]320.

 Eutychianus, bishop of Rome, [1067]317.

 Eutychius, [1068]313.

 Evangelists, still eminent in time of Trajan, [1069]169.

 Evarestus, bishop of Rome, [1070]165, [1071]174, [1072]221.

 Evodius, first bishop of Antioch, [1073]149.

 Exodus, the, [1074]319.

 Exorcists, [1075]288.

 Ezekiel, Origen's commentary on, [1076]277.

 Ezra, the Jewish priest, [1077]224.


 Fabi, father of Ishmael the high priest, [1078]97.

 Fabianus, miraculously chosen bishop of Rome, [1079]274-[1080]275;
 Origen's epistle to, [1081]279; suffers martyrdom, [1082]280.

 Fabius, bishop of Antioch, [1083]281, [1084]303; epistle of Dionysius
 to, [1085]283; epistle of Cornelius to, [1086]286-[1087]287, [1088]290.

 Fadus, procurator of Judea, [1089]112, [1090]113.

 False prophets of the Phrygians. See Montanists.

 Famine, under Claudius, [1091]110; in Jerusalem, [1092]139-[1093]141.

 Faustinus, companion of Dionysius of Alexandria, [1094]301, [1095]334.

 Faustus, companion of Dionysius of Alexandria, [1096]282, [1097]299,
 [1098]300, 301, [1099]302.

 Felix, procurator, [1100]122; subdues Egyptian false prophet,
 [1101]123.

 Felix, bishop of Rome, [1102]316, [1103]317.

 Fertur, pheretai, the use of the word in connection with writings,
 discussed, [1104]388 sq.

 Festus, procurator of Judea, [1105]123, [1106]125.

 Firmilian, bishop of Cæsarea in Cappadocia, [1107]274, [1108]291,
 [1109]294, 295, [1110]303, [1111]312, [1112]313; attitude of, toward
 Paul of Samosata, [1113]314; death of, [1114]314.

 Firmilianus, governor of Palestine, [1115]349, [1116]350, [1117]352,
 [1118]353, [1119]354.

 Flavia Domitilla, [1120]148.

 Flavia Neapolis, [1121]185.

 Flavianus, governor of Palestine, [1122]342.

 Flavius, addressed by Dionysius, [1123]305.

 Flavius Clement, consul of Rome, [1124]148.

 Flavius Josephus. See Josephus.

 Florinus, schism of, at Rome, [1125]229, [1126]237, [1127]238.

 Florus. See Gessius Florus.

 Frumentius, introduces Christianity into Ethiopia, [1128]105 (note 30).

 Fundanus, proconsul and governor of Asia, [1129]206.


 Gaius I., Gentile bishop of Jerusalem, [1130]226.

 Gaius II., Gentile bishop of Jerusalem, [1131]226.

 Gaius, martyr of Eumenia, [1132]233.

 Gaius, companion of Dionysius of Alexandria, [1133]282.

 Galatia, [1134]132, [1135]136, [1136]230, [1137]295.

 Galatians, Epistle of Paul to, [1138]99.

 Galba, Roman emperor, [1139]138.

 Galen, reverenced by the Theodotians, [1140]248.

 Galerius, fatal illness of, [1141]338; his edict of toleration, 339,
 [1142]340, [1143]356; effect of it upon Christians, [1144]357,
 [1145]358; original author of the Diocletian persecution, [1146]340;
 death of, [1147]340; fifth edict of, [1148]350.

 Galilean, [1149]89.

 Galileans, Jewish sect, [1150]199.

 Galilee, [1151]88, [1152]95.

 Gallienus, emperor of Rome, [1153]300, [1154]313; peace under,
 [1155]302, [1156]307.

 Gallus, becomes emperor, [1157]293; epistle of Dionysius to, [1158]293;
 persecutes Christians, [1159]293.

 Gamala, a city of Gaulonitis, [1160]89.

 Gamaliel, [1161]112.

 Gaul, [1162]137, [1163]198, [1164]211, [1165]216, [1166]242, [1167]243,
 [1168]381.

 Gaulonite. See Judas the Gaulonite.

 Gaza, [1169]334, [1170]344, [1171]345, [1172]349, [1173]355.

 Genealogy of Christ, alleged discrepancy in the Gospels in regard to,
 [1174]91-[1175]94, [1176]277.

 Gentiles, divine word attacked by, [1177]81; preached to by Paul, 136.

 Geon, one of the rivers of Eden, [1178]306.

 Georæ, the strangers that went out of Egypt with the Israelites,
 [1179]93.

 Germanicus, martyr of Smyrna, [1180]189.

 Germanio, bishop of Jerusalem, [1181]256.

 Germans, the, [1182]219.

 Germanus, epistle to, from Dionysius, [1183]281, [1184]299, [1185]301.

 Germanus, a martyr, [1186]350.

 Germany, [1187]220.

 Gessius Florus, Procurator of Judea, [1188]130.

 Gitto, a village of Samaria, [1189]114.

 Gnosticism, [1190]179; commonly misunderstood, [1191]114 (note
 [1192]17).

 Gomorrah, [1193]83.

 Goratheni. See Gorthæus.

 Gordianus, emperor of Rome, [1194]274, [1195]278.

 Gordius, bishop of Jerusalem, [1196]256.

 Gorgonius, a member of Diocletian's household, [1197]323.

 Gorthæus, a heretic, [1198]199.

 Gortyna, [1199]201, [1200]203.

 Gospel, why not preached in ancient times, [1201]84.

 Gospels, Irenæus on the, [1202]222; of Matthew, see Matthew; of Mark,
 see Mark; of Luke, see Luke; of John, see John; order of, [1203]152,
 [1204]155; of the Nazarenes, see Nazarenes; according to the Hebrews,
 see Hebrews, Gospel of; of Peter, see Peter; order of the, according to
 Clement, [1205]261; the four, [1206]273; used by the Elkesites,
 [1207]280.

 Gratus, proconsul of Asia, [1208]231.

 Greece, [1209]226, [1210]240.

 Greek learning, [1211]276.

 Gregory, "the Illuminator," the apostle of Armenia, [1212]362 (note 2).

 Gregory Thaumaturgus, [1213]275, [1214]303, [1215]312.


 Hades, descent of Christ into, [1216]102.

 Hadrian becomes Emperor, [1217]175, [1218]176; war of the Jews under,
 177, [1219]180, [1220]226; rescript in favor of Christians, [1221]181,
 [1222]182, [1223]206; friendliness toward the Christians, [1224]220.

 Hebrew Gospel of Matthew, [1225]222.

 Hebrew nation, antiquity of, [1226]87.

 Hebrews, [1227]84, [1228]87, [1229]98; of the dispersion, [1230]136.

 Hebrews, Epistle to; not included among Paul's Epistles by Caius,
 [1231]268; authorship of, [1232]388; according to Origen, [1233]273;
 referred to as Paul's, 117, [1234]134; canonicity of, view of Eusebius,
 [1235]155, [1236]159, [1237]173, [1238]260, [1239]278; placed among the
 ndthoi, [1240]156, [1241]169; used by Hegesippus, 200; mentioned by
 Irenæus, [1242]244.

 Hebrews, Gospel of, written originally in Hebrew, and translated by
 Luke, [1243]261.

 Hegesippus, memoirs of, used by Eusebius, [1244]81 (note 5); account of
 death of James, the Lord's brother, [1245]125-[1246]127; visits Rome,
 [1247]184, [1248]198; quoted, [1249]146, [1250]148, [1251]149,
 [1252]163, [1253]164, [1254]180, [1255]197, [1256]198, [1257]199.

 Helen, Queen of the Osrhoenians, [1258]113.

 Helena, companion of Simon Magus, [1259]114; worshiped by his
 followers, [1260]114.

 Helenus, bishop of Tarsus, [1261]291, [1262]295, [1263]312, [1264]313.

 Heliodorus, of Laodicea, [1265]294.

 Hemerobaptists, Jewish sect, [1266]199.

 Heraclas, pupil of Origen, and his successor in the catechetical school
 of Alexandria, [1267]251, [1268]262, [1269]274; successor of Dementrius
 as bishop of Alexandria, [1270]251, [1271]274, [1272]275, [1273]297;
 earnest student of Greek philosophy, 267; removes to Cæsarea,
 [1274]274; visited by Africanus, [1275]276; dies, [1276]278; opinion of
 on the re-baptism of heretics, [1277]296.

 Heracleides, imperial treasurer under Constantine, [1278]383.

 Heraclides, pupil of Origen, martyrdom of, [1279]252.

 Heraclitus, an ecclesiastical writer, [1280]245.

 Herais, pupil of Origen, martyrdom of, [1281]252.

 Heresy, Phrygian. See Montanism.

 Heretics, arise after the death of the apostles, [1282]164, [1283]202;
 re-baptism of, [1284]294-[1285]297.

 Hermammon, addressed by Dionysius of Alexandria, [1286]298, [1287]307.

 Hermas, Shepherd of, [1288]135, [1289]223; placed among the ndthoi,
 156.

 Hermogenes, written against by Theophilus, [1290]202.

 Hermon, bishop of Jerusalem, [1291]321.

 Hermophilus, a follower of Theodotus the cobbler, [1292]248.

 Hermopolis, [1293]291.

 Hero, bishop of Antioch, [1294]197.

 Hero, pupil of Origen, martyrdom of, [1295]252.

 Herod of Ascalon, [1296]89, [1297]92.

 Herod the Great, becomes king, [1298]89, [1299]90, [1300]93; lineage
 of, [1301]93; cruelty toward the infants, [1302]94; death of, [1303]94,
 [1304]95; succeeded by Archelaus, [1305]96; puts John to death,
 [1306]98; fears the coming of Christ, [1307]149.

 Herod the Younger, or Herod Antipas, [1308]96; exiled with Herodias,
 [1309]107.

 Herod Agrippa I., appointed king of the Jews, [1310]107; kills James,
 and imprisons Peter, [1311]111; eaten of worms, [1312]111; death of,
 [1313]112.

 Herod Agrippa II., appointed king of the Jews by Claudius, 122;
 deprives Ananus of the high priesthood, [1314]128; testifies to the
 truthfulness of Josephus, [1315]146.

 Herod, the Eirenarch, [1316]191.

 Herodias, wife of Philip and of Herod Antipas, [1317]97, [1318]98.

 Heron, martyr under Decius, [1319]284.

 Hesychius, Egyptian bishop and martyr, [1320]334.

 Hexæmeron, work of Hippolytus on the, [1321]270; works by Candidus and
 various Fathers on the, [1322]245.

 Hexapla, of Origen, [1323]263.

 Hierapolis, burial-place of Philip, [1324]162, [1325]163, [1326]165,
 [1327]172, [1328]206, 230, [1329]237, [1330]242.

 Hierax, a bishop in Egypt, addressed by Dionysius, [1331]305,
 [1332]313.

 Hippolytus, a bishop and ecclesiastical writer, [1333]268; writings of,
 [1334]269, [1335]270; Paschal canon of, [1336]270; work of, on the
 Hexæmeron, [1337]270; against Marcion, [1338]270; on the Song of Songs,
 [1339]270; on Ezekiel, [1340]270; on the Passover, [1341]270; against
 all heresies, [1342]270.

 Hippolytus, a messenger by whom Dionysius sends an epistle to Rome,
 [1343]291.

 Homologoumena (dmologoumena), meaning of, as used by Eusebius,
 [1344]155 (note 1).

 Hosius of Cordova, [1345]383.

 Hyginus, bishop of Rome, [1346]182, [1347]183, [1348]221, [1349]242.

 Hymenæus, bishop of Jerusalem, [1350]303, [1351]312, [1352]313,
 [1353]321.

 Hymns, celebrating Christ as God, [1354]247.

 Hypotyposes, of Clement. See Clement of Alexandria.

 Hyrcanus, high priest of the Jews, [1355]90, [1356]92.


 Iconium, [1357]268, [1358]312; synod of, [1359]296.

 Idea, Gnostic, [1360]114 (note [1361]13).

 Idumean, [1362]89, [1363]90, [1364]92.

 Ignatius, second bishop of Antioch, [1365]149, [1366]165; epistles of,
 166-[1367]169; martyrdom of, [1368]166-[1369]169; quoted, [1370]223.

 Illyricum, [1371]121, [1372]132, [1373]136, [1374]273, [1375]356.

 India, [1376]225, [1377]347.

 Ingenes, martyr under Decius, [1378]285.

 Ionian, spoken of by Clement of Alexandria, [1379]225.

 Irenæus, [1380]114, [1381]158, [1382]172, [1383]178, [1384]179,
 [1385]199, [1386]242, [1387]244, [1388]260; life and writings of,
 [1389]198, [1390]244; writes against Marcion, [1391]203; quoted,
 [1392]148, [1393]150, [1394]168, 170, [1395]182, [1396]183, [1397]187,
 [1398]188, [1399]197, [1400]207, [1401]209, [1402]223, [1403]224,
 [1404]238, [1405]239; recommended by the Gallic confessors, [1406]219;
 becomes bishop of Lyons, [1407]220; his catalogue of the bishops of
 Rome, [1408]221; gives an account of post-apostolic miracles,
 [1409]221; his work against heresies, [1410]221; on the Scriptures,
 [1411]222-[1412]224; writes against Blastus and Florinus, [1413]237; on
 Monarchy, [1414]238; on the Ogdoad, [1415]238; admonishes Victor not to
 excommunicate the Asiatic church, [1416]243; teaches that Christ is God
 and man, 247.

 Isaac, [1417]83-[1418]87.

 Isaiah, [1419]86, [1420]299, [1421]307, [1422]352; commentary on, by
 Origen, [1423]277.

 Ischyrion, slain by his master for not sacrificing, [1424]285.

 Ishmael, the high priest, [1425]97.

 Isidorus, martyr under Decius, [1426]284.

 Israel, [1427]83, [1428]91, [1429]93, [1430]306, [1431]324, [1432]352.

 Italy, [1433]286, [1434]287, [1435]316, [1436]356.


 Jacob, the patriarch, [1437]83, [1438]87.

 Jacob, son of Matthan, [1439]91, [1440]92, [1441]94.

 James, the son of Zebedee, death of, [1442]104, [1443]110, [1444]111,
 [1445]138; cited as an authority by Papias, [1446]171; by Clement of
 Alexandria, [1447]226; brother of John the apostle, [1448]309,
 [1449]310.

 James, the so-called brother of the Lord, [1450]99; called the Just by
 the ancients, [1451]104; why called brother of the Lord, [1452]104;
 made first bishop of Jerusalem, [1453]104, [1454]142, [1455]146,
 [1456]176, [1457]199; death of, [1458]104; martyrdom of,
 [1459]125-[1460]128, 138; epistle of, placed among the Antilegomena,
 [1461]156; episcopal chair of, preserved until the time of Eusebius,
 [1462]305.

 Jamna, [1463]352.

 Janitors, [1464]288.

 Jeremiah, [1465]85, [1466]324, [1467]352.

 Jericho, [1468]83, [1469]95, [1470]263.

 Jerusalem, [1471]90, [1472]100, [1473]132, [1474]136, [1475]165,
 [1476]177, [1477]223, [1478]235, [1479]241, [1480]255, 256, [1481]257,
 [1482]268, [1483]273, [1484]274, [1485]291, [1486]303, [1487]310,
 [1488]321, [1489]352, [1490]370, [1491]378.

 Jerusalem, church of, persecuted, [1492]104, [1493]280, [1494]281,
 [1495]312; bishops of, belonging to the circumcision, [1496]176;
 Gentile bishops of, [1497]226, [1498]240; full table of bishops of,
 down to time of Eusebius, [1499]302.

 Jesus, the name of, known from the beginning, [1500]85-[1501]87; statue
 of, erected by the woman with an issue of blood, [1502]304.

 Jesus (Joshua), [1503]85, [1504]90.

 Jesus, the high priest, [1505]128.

 Jesus, son of Ananias, [1506]142.

 Jesus, son of Sirach, "Wisdom of," [1507]260.

 Jews, [1508]90, [1509]92, [1510]93, [1511]95, [1512]96, [1513]98,
 [1514]101, [1515]224, [1516]234; misfortunes of, in consequence of
 plots against Christ, [1517]81; first persecution of, [1518]104; driven
 out of Rome by Claudius, [1519]121; calamity at feast of Passover under
 Claudius, 122; disturbances under Nero, [1520]122, [1521]123; last war
 of, against the Romans, [1522]130, 131; calamities of, under Trajan,
 [1523]174; war of, under Hadrian, [1524]177, [1525]181; assist in
 persecuting Christians at Smyrna, [1526]190-[1527]192; Justin writes
 against, [1528]196; mutilate the Scriptures, [1529]197; heresies among,
 [1530]199.

 John the Baptist, [1531]96, [1532]153; testimony of Josephus in regard
 to, [1533]97, [1534]98.

 John, the apostle, [1535]104, [1536]163, [1537]170, [1538]171,
 [1539]226, [1540]236, [1541]239, [1542]242, 244, [1543]309, [1544]310;
 receives his revelation in the time of Domitian, [1545]222; labors in
 Asia, and dies at Ephesus, [1546]132, [1547]138; banished to Patmos,
 [1548]148; after banishment, resides in Ephesus, [1549]149, [1550]150;
 narrative of, [1551]150; writings of, [1552]154; speaks against
 Cerinthus, [1553]161, [1554]187; death and burial place, [1555]162; two
 monuments of, in Ephesus, [1556]310; same marks in Gospel and epistle
 of, [1557]311; Gospel of, [1558]152, [1559]222, 261, [1560]273,
 [1561]309; reason for composition of, [1562]153; commentary on, by
 Origen, [1563]271;. compared with the Apocalypse by Dionysius,
 [1564]310; First Epistle of, [1565]173, [1566]222, 309; a part of the
 N. T. Canon, [1567]156; Second and Third Epistles of, placed among the
 Antilegomena, [1568]156; discussed by Dionysius, [1569]310; Acts of,
 [1570]157; Apocalypse of, work on, by Melito, [1571]204; spoken of, by
 Irenæus, [1572]222; by Apollonius, [1573]236; by Origen, [1574]273; by
 Nepos, [1575]308; by Dionysius, [1576]309; authorship of, assigned to
 Cerinthus, [1577]309; author of, [1578]310.

 John, surnamed Mark, [1579]310.

 John, bishop of Jerusalem, [1580]176.

 John, the presbyter, friend of Papias, [1581]170 (note 4), [1582]171,
 172.

 John, a confessor, wonderful memory of, [1583]355.

 Jonathan, the high priest, [1584]123.

 Jordan, river, [1585]95, [1586]304.

 Joseph, the father of Christ, [1587]91, [1588]92, [1589]94, [1590]95,
 [1591]104, [1592]146, [1593]223, 264.

 Joseph, bishop of Jerusalem, [1594]176.

 Joseph Barsabbas. See Barsabbas.

 Josephus, [1595]88, [1596]90, [1597]96, [1598]97, [1599]107; quoted,
 [1600]89, [1601]94, [1602]95, [1603]98, [1604]108, [1605]109, 110,
 [1606]111, [1607]112, [1608]122, [1609]127, [1610]138, [1611]139,
 [1612]260, [1613]319; testimonies of, in regard to John the Baptist,
 and Christ, [1614]97, [1615]98; on the death of James the Just,
 [1616]127, [1617]128; work of, on the Jewish War, [1618]130, [1619]131;
 life and works of, [1620]143; O. T. Canon of, [1621]144.

 Josephus Caiaphas. See Caiaphas.

 Joshua, [1622]83.

 Judah, [1623]89, [1624]90.

 Judas (Iscariot), [1625]99.

 Judas, candidate with Matthias, [1626]103, [1627]172.

 Judas, the prophet, [1628]234.

 Judas, bishop of Jerusalem, [1629]176.

 Judas, an ecclesiastical writer, [1630]254.

 Judas of Galilee, or Judas the Gaulonite, [1631]88, [1632]89.

 Judas Thomas. See Thomas.

 Jude, brother of the Lord, [1633]148, [1634]164; Epistle of, [1635]128,
 [1636]260, 261; placed among the Antilegomena, [1637]156.

 Judea, [1638]88, [1639]93, [1640]94, [1641]95, [1642]96, [1643]100,
 [1644]104, [1645]175.

 Julian, bishop of Alexandria, [1646]224, [1647]240, [1648]250.

 Julian, bishop of Apamea.

 Julian I., Gentile bishop of Jerusalem, [1649]226.

 Julian II., Gentile bishop of Jerusalem, [1650]226.

 Julian, martyr under Decius, [1651]284.

 Julian, a Cappadocian martyr, [1652]354.

 Juliana, friend of Origen, [1653]264.

 Jupiter Philius, [1654]359.

 Justin, apology of, quoted, [1655]114, [1656]158, [1657]180, [1658]181,
 [1659]184, [1660]185, 193, [1661]195, [1662]196, [1663]223; work
 against Marcion, [1664]184; against heresies, [1665]185; martyrdom of,
 [1666]193; works of, [1667]196, [1668]197, [1669]208; speaks of Christ
 as God, [1670]247.

 Justus, bishop of Alexandria, [1671]176.

 Justus, bishop of Jerusalem, [1672]165, [1673]176.

 Justus of Tiberias, [1674]145.

 Justus Barsabbas. See Barsabbas.


 klerog, used in the sense of "order" or "class," [1675]213.

 Knowledge, "falsely so-called," [1676]81, [1677]178, [1678]221,
 [1679]317.


 Lacedæmonians, [1680]200.

 Lætus, governor of Alexandria, [1681]250.

 Laity, [1682]286, [1683]287, [1684]289.

 Laodicea, [1685]205, [1686]242, [1687]291, [1688]294, [1689]318,
 [1690]319, [1691]320.

 Lapsed, the, attitude of Dionysius toward, [1692]283 (note 1),
 [1693]285 (note 6); attitude of Novatus toward, [1694]286; attitude of
 Cornelius and the church of Rome toward, [1695]286; controversy
 concerning, [1696]293 (note 3).

 Laranda, [1697]268.

 Larissæans, [1698]206.

 Latronianus, corrector of Sicily, [1699]382.

 Lebanon, [1700]355, [1701]375.

 Leonides, father of Origen, [1702]249.

 Levi, bishop of Jerusalem, [1703]176.

 Levi, tribe of, [1704]224.

 Liberty, full religious, granted by Constantine and Licinius,
 [1705]379.

 Libya, [1706]300, [1707]301, [1708]355.

 Licinius, becomes emperor, [1709]335; joins Galerius in issuing an
 edict of toleration, [1710]339; conquers Maximin, [1711]363, [1712]366;
 issues in conjunction with Constantine an edict of toleration,
 [1713]364, [1714]365; puts to death the favorites and the children of
 Maximin, [1715]386; edict of toleration, text of, [1716]378-[1717]380;
 plots against Constantine, [1718]384; persecutes the Christians,
 [1719]384-[1720]386; extortions and cruel laws of, [1721]385; conquered
 by Constantine, [1722]386.

 Linus, bishop of Rome, [1723]132, [1724]137, [1725]147, [1726]149,
 [1727]221.

 logia, of Papias, [1728]170; of Matthew, [1729]173.

 Longinus, a philosopher and rhetorician, [1730]266.

 Lucian, presbyter of Antioch, [1731]333, [1732]360.

 Lucius (Verus), emperor of Rome, [1733]185, [1734]188.

 Lucius, a martyr, [1735]195, [1736]196.

 Lucius, bishop of Rome, [1737]293.

 Lucius, companion of Dionysius of Alexandria, [1738]301, [1739]313.

 Lucius Quintus, a Roman general, [1740]175.

 Lucuas, leader of the Jews, [1741]174, [1742]175.

 Luke, on the genealogy of Christ, [1743]91, [1744]92, [1745]277; author
 of the Acts, [1746]112, [1747]136, [1748]137; wrote Acts during Paul's
 imprisonment, [1749]124, [1750]273; parentage and profession of,
 [1751]136; Gospel of, [1752]136, [1753]137, [1754]153, [1755]222,
 [1756]273; reason for composition of the Gospel, [1757]154, [1758]163;
 traditional translator of the Epistle to the Hebrews, [1759]169,
 [1760]261; author of the Epistle to the Hebrews according to some, 273.

 Lupus, governor of Egypt, [1761]174.

 Lycia, [1762]345.

 Lyons, account of Martyrs of, [1763]211; Epistle of Church of, 212,
 [1764]220.

 Lysanias, Tetrarch of Abilene, [1765]96, [1766]107.


 Macar, a Libyan, martyr under Decius, [1767]284.

 Macedonian months, table of, [1768]403.

 Macedonians, [1769]223.

 Machæra, citadel of, [1770]98.

 Macrianus, financial minister of Valerian, [1771]298.

 Macrinus, becomes emperor, [1772]268, [1773]307.

 Mæander, [1774]168, [1775]233.

 Magi, the visit of, to Christ, [1776]94.

 Magna Græcia, [1777]226.

 Magnesia, [1778]168.

 Malchion, a Sophist, opponent of Paul of Samosata, [1779]313.

 Malchus, martyr at Cæsarea, under Valerian, [1780]302.

 Mambre, oak of, [1781]83.

 Mammæa, mother of Emperor Alexander Severus, has an interview with
 Origen, [1782]269.

 Manes, [1783]316; proclaims himself the Paraclete, [1784]317.

 Manganea, probably northeast of Palestine, [1785]354.

 Manichæans, heresy of, [1786]316, [1787]317.

 Marcella, mother of Potamiæna, martyrdom of, [1788]253.

 Marcellinus, bishop of Rome, [1789]317.

 Marcellus, companion of Dionysius of Alexandria, [1790]300.

 Marcian, a friend of Irenæus, [1791]244.

 Marcianus, a heretic, [1792]258.

 Marcion, asceticism of, [1793]114 (note [1794]18); heresy of,
 [1795]182, [1796]183, 233; Justin's work against, [1797]184, [1798]197;
 meets Polycarp in Rome, [1799]187, [1800]201; written against by
 Theophilus, [1801]202; mentioned by Tatian, [1802]208; written against
 by Bardesanes, [1803]210; work against, promised by Irenæus, [1804]223;
 written against by Rhodo, [1805]227; holds two principles, [1806]228; a
 martyr of the sect of, at Cæsarea under Valerian, [1807]302; and in
 Palestine, [1808]351.

 Marcionists, [1809]199.

 Marcionites, [1810]233.

 Marcius Turbo, a Roman general, [1811]174.

 Marcus, bishop of Alexandria, [1812]184.

 Marcus, first Gentile bishop of Jerusalem, [1813]178, [1814]226.

 Marcus, addressed by Constantine, [1815]381.

 Marcus, the Gnostic, [1816]183.

 Marcus Aurelius, [1817]106, [1818]185, [1819]186, [1820]188, [1821]196,
 [1822]197, [1823]205, [1824]210, 211, [1825]219, [1826]220, [1827]224;
 Eusebius' confusion in regard to, discussed, [1828]390, [1829]391.

 Mareotis in Egypt, [1830]300, [1831]301.

 Mareotis, lake of, [1832]118.

 Maria, lake of. See Mareotis.

 Marinus of Aries, [1833]381.

 Marinus, a martyr at Cæsarea, [1834]303.

 Marinus of Tyre, [1835]294.

 Mark, the Evangelist, [1836]128; preaches in Egypt, [1837]116,
 [1838]310; interpreter of Peter, [1839]172, [1840]173, [1841]222;
 Gospel of, [1842]115, [1843]153, [1844]261, [1845]273; composition of
 Gospel of, [1846]116.

 Marriage, pronounced fornication by Tatian, [1847]208.

 Mars, [1848]360.

 mdrtns, [1849]164, [1850]213, [1851]218, 237.

 Martyrdom, Dionysius of Alexandria on, [1852]291.

 Martyrdoms, collection of, [1853]211. See Ancient Martyrdoms.

 Martyrdoms of the Ancients. See Ancient Martyrdoms.

 Martyrs, in Palestine, under Diocletian, [1854]342-[1855]356; in
 Alexandria, under Decius, [1856]283; in Cæsarea, under Valerian,
 [1857]302.

 Mary, the mother of Christ, [1858]94, [1859]264.

 Mary, daughter of Eleazar, [1860]140.

 Mary, wife of Clopas, [1861]164.

 Masbotheans, Jewish sect, [1862]199.

 Masbotheus, a heretic, [1863]199.

 Maternus of Cologne, [1864]381.

 Mattathias, father of Josephus, [1865]143.

 Matthew, the Apostle, [1866]91, [1867]92, [1868]94; wrote a Hebrew
 Gospel, 152, [1869]173, [1870]222, [1871]225; Gospel of, used by the
 Ebionites, [1872]159 (note 8), [1873]171; Gospel of, found by
 Bartholomew in India, [1874]225; Gospel of, written first in Hebrew,
 273; commentary on Gospel of, by Origen, [1875]279; on the genealogy of
 Christ, [1876]91, [1877]92, 277.

 Matthias, chosen to the Apostolate, [1878]99, [1879]103, [1880]172;
 ascetic teaching of, [1881]161; one of the Seventy, [1882]103; Gospel
 of, excluded from the Canon, 157.

 Matthias, bishop of Jerusalem, [1883]176.

 Maturus, a Gallic witness in the persecution under Marcus Aurelius,
 [1884]213, [1885]215.

 Mauritania, [1886]328, [1887]356, [1888]382.

 Maxentius, usurps the imperial purple, [1889]335 (note [1890]21),
 [1891]336; character of, [1892]336; his treatment of female Christians,
 [1893]337; defeated by Constantine, [1894]363, [1895]364.

 Maximian, treatment of female Christians, [1896]332 (note 2); fourth
 edict of, against Christians, [1897]332 (note 2), [1898]344 (note 2);
 abdication of, 335, [1899]340, [1900]345; conspires against Constantine
 and meets a shameful death, [1901]336, 340, [1902]364, [1903]366.

 Maximilla, Montanist prophetess, [1904]229, [1905]231 (note [1906]18),
 [1907]232, 233, [1908]234, [1909]236.

 Maximinus, bishop of Antioch, [1910]202, [1911]237.

 Maximinus I., Roman emperor, [1912]274.

 Maximinus II., treatment of female Christians, [1913]332 (note 2), 337;
 seizes the imperial dignity, [1914]336; character of, [1915]336;
 persecution of, [1916]345-[1917]355; fifth edict of. [1918]350; gives
 verbal orders to relax the persecution, [1919]357; renews the
 persecution, [1920]358-[1921]361; decree of against the Christians
 engraved on pillars, 360; famine, pestilence, and war, during the reign
 of, [1922]362; first edict of toleration, [1923]364, [1924]365;
 defeated by Licinius, [1925]366; second edict of toleration, 366,
 [1926]367; death of, [1927]367; honors of, revoked after his death by
 Constantine and Licinius, [1928]368; children of, put to death,
 [1929]368.

 Maximus, bishop of Alexandria, [1930]299, [1931]300, [1932]301,
 [1933]302, [1934]313, [1935]321.

 Maximus, bishop of Bostra, [1936]312.

 Maximus, Gentile bishop of Jerusalem, [1937]226.

 Maximus, a Roman confessor, [1938]287.

 Maxys, a military tribune, [1939]350.

 Mazabanes, bishop of Jerusalem, [1940]281, [1941]294, [1942]303.

 Melchi, father of Eli, [1943]91, [1944]92, [1945]94.

 Melchizedec, [1946]86, [1947]373.

 Meletius, bishop in Pontus, [1948]321; called "honey of Attica," 320.

 Melitene, in Cappadocia, [1949]328.

 Melitene legion, the so-called "Thundering Legion," [1950]219.

 Melito, bishop of Sardis, [1951]186; life and writings of, [1952]198,
 203-[1953]206, [1954]242, [1955]261; teaches Christ is God and man,
 [1956]247.

 Menander, the sorcerer, successor of Simon Magus, [1957]157, [1958]158,
 178.

 Menandrianists, [1959]199.

 Mercuria, martyr under Decius, [1960]284.

 Merozanes, bishop of Armenia, [1961]291.

 Mesopotamia, [1962]175, [1963]294, [1964]332.

 Metras, martyr under Decius, [1965]283.

 Metrodorus, Marcionite martyr at Smyrna, [1966]192.

 Micah, the prophet, [1967]94.

 Milan, edict of, [1968]379, [1969]380.

 Miltiades, writings of, [1970]233, [1971]234; writes against
 Montanists, 234; speaks of Christ as God, [1972]247.

 Miltiades, bishop of Rome, addressed by Constantine, [1973]381.

 Miltiades, a Montanist, [1974]230.

 Minucius Fundanus, proconsul of Asia, receives rescript from Hadrian in
 favor of Christians, [1975]181, [1976]182.

 Miracles, of the Post-Apostolic age, [1977]221; of Narcissus of
 Jerusalem, [1978]255.

 Moabitess. See Ruth the Moabitess.

 Moderatus, a Pythagorean philosopher, [1979]266.

 Modestus, [1980]197; writes against Marcion, [1981]203.

 Monarchy, work on, by Irenæus, [1982]238.

 Montanism, [1983]103, [1984]207, [1985]229-[1986]237, [1987]268.

 Montanists, false prophets of, [1988]229.

 Montanus, [1989]218, [1990]229, [1991]232, [1992]233, [1993]234,
 [1994]235, [1995]236.

 Months, table showing Roman method of computing the days of, 402; table
 of Macedonian, [1996]403.

 Moses, [1997]82, [1998]83, [1999]84, [2000]85, [2001]87, [2002]94,
 [2003]145, [2004]224, [2005]239, [2006]319, [2007]363, [2008]364; shown
 by Tatian to be older than the most celebrated Greeks, [2009]209,
 [2010]260; "Harmony of," [2011]267; murmured against, [2012]305.

 Moses, a Roman confessor, [2013]289.

 Musæus, [2014]319.

 Musanus, [2015]197, [2016]207.

 Mysia, [2017]231.


 Narcissus, Gentile bishop of Jerusalem, [2018]226, [2019]240,
 [2020]241, [2021]244, 257; miracles of, [2022]255; goes into
 retirement, [2023]256; comes out of retirement, [2024]256.

 Natalius, bishop of the sect of Theodotus, [2025]247.

 Nathan, son of David, [2026]91, [2027]92, [2028]94.

 Nature, work on, by Dionysius, [2029]311.

 Nave, father of Joshua, [2030]85.

 Nazara, a village of Judea, [2031]93.

 Nazarenes, Gospel of, [2032]168 (note [2033]15).

 Nebuchadnezzar, [2034]224.

 Nemesion, an Egyptian, martyr under Decius, [2035]285.

 Neon, [2036]268.

 Neo-Platonism, [2037]264 (note 1).

 Nepos, schism of, [2038]308, [2039]309.

 Nero, succeeds Claudius, [2040]122; more cruel in his later years, 125
 (note [2041]15); persecutions and crimes of, [2042]128, [2043]129,
 [2044]138, [2045]147, [2046]149, [2047]163, [2048]205.

 Nerva, becomes emperor, [2049]149.

 New Testament Canon, [2050]133, [2051]155, [2052]273.

 Nicetes, father of the Eirenarch Herod, [2053]191.

 Nicolaitans. See Nicolaus, sect of.

 Nicolaus, sect of, [2054]161.

 Nicomachus, a Pythagorean philosopher, [2055]266.

 Nicomas, bishop of Iconium in Lycaonia, [2056]312, [2057]313.

 Nicomedia, [2058]333, [2059]360, [2060]365; persecutions in, under
 Diocletian, 326, [2061]327, [2062]328; fire in palace of, [2063]327.

 Nicomedians, [2064]201.

 Nicopolis, near Actium, [2065]263.

 Nilus, in Egypt, [2066]285.

 Nilus, an Egyptian bishop and martyr, [2067]334, [2068]355.

 Noah, [2069]82, [2070]306.

 nothod, Eusebius' use of, [2071]128 (note [2072]46), [2073]155 (note
 1).

 Nomes, of Egypt, [2074]118.

 Novatian. See Novatus.

 Novatus, [2075]294; schism of, [2076]286-[2077]290, [2078]296; attitude
 of, toward the lapsed, [2079]286; Cornelius writes epistles concerning,
 [2080]286; epistle of Cyprian concerning, [2081]286; character of,
 according to Cornelius, [2082]287; character of, [2083]287 (note
 [2084]13); ordination of, to the episcopate, [2085]288, [2086]290;
 addressed by Dionysius, 290, [2087]291; attitude of, toward Catholic
 baptism, [2088]297.

 Novatus, a presbyter of Carthage, [2089]289 (note [2090]29).

 Numenius, a philosopher and rhetorician, [2091]266.

 Numerianus, becomes emperor, [2092]316.

 Numidia, [2093]382.


 OEdipodean intercourse, [2094]213.

 Ogdoad, work on, by Irenæus, [2095]238.

 oikogomia. See Dispensation of Christ.

 Old Testament Canon, according to Josephus, [2096]144, [2097]155,
 [2098]206; according to Melito, [2099]206; according to Origen,
 [2100]272; used by the Elkesites, [2101]280.

 Olympiads, [2102]110.

 Onesimus, pastor of church of Ephesus, [2103]168.

 Onesimus, addressed by Melito, [2104]206.

 Ophites, immorality of, [2105]114 (note [2106]18).

 Oracles of the Lord. See logia.

 Oracles of Matthew. See logia.

 Origen, quoted, [2107]133, [2108]264; training of, [2109]249; eager for
 martyrdom, [2110]250; proficient in the Scriptures while yet a boy,
 [2111]250; refuses to join in prayer with heretics, [2112]250; takes
 charge of the catechetical school of Alexandria, [2113]251; proficiency
 in secular literature, [2114]251; shows bravery during the persecution,
 but escapes all harm, [2115]251; asceticism of, [2116]252; pupils of,
 suffering martyrdom, [2117]252; studies under Clement, [2118]253; makes
 himself a eunuch, 254; ordained a presbyter, [2119]255, [2120]271;
 accused by Demetrius, [2121]255; addressed by Alexander, [2122]261;
 earnest study of the Scriptures, [2123]262; his Hexapla, [2124]263; his
 Tetrapla, [2125]263; his learning attracts many students, including
 heretics and philosophers, [2126]264; slandered by Porphyry, [2127]265;
 allegorical interpretation of the Scriptures, [2128]266 (note 1);
 proficiency in Grecian learning, [2129]267; visits Arabia, [2130]267;
 preaches in Cæsarea, [2131]267; visits Mammæa, mother of Emperor
 Alexander Severus, at Antioch, [2132]269; his great zeal in composing
 commentaries, 271; commentaries prepared by him at Alexandria,
 [2133]271; visits Greece on ecclesiastical business, [2134]271; passes
 through Palestine, [2135]271; commentary on the Gospel of John,
 [2136]271; on Genesis, [2137]271, [2138]272; on the Psalms, [2139]272;
 on Lamentations, 272; works on the Resurrection, [2140]272; De
 Principiis, [2141]272; his Old Testament Canon, [2142]272; friendship
 of Palestinian bishops towards, [2143]274; work on martyrdom,
 [2144]274; pupils of, in Cæsarea, [2145]275; epistle of, to Africanus,
 [2146]276; his commentaries, composed in Cæsarea in Palestine,
 [2147]277; on Isaiah, [2148]277; on Ezekiel, [2149]277; second visit to
 Athens, [2150]277; on the Song of Songs, [2151]277; brings Beryllus
 back to the orthodox faith, [2152]277; apology for, by Eusebius and
 Pamphilus, [2153]271, [2154]278; work of, against Celsus, [2155]278;
 permits his discourses to be taken by stenographers, [2156]278;
 commentaries of, on Matthew and the minor prophets, [2157]279; various
 epistles of, [2158]279; heals dissension of the Arabians, [2159]279; on
 the Elkesites, [2160]280; sufferings of, in persecution under Decius,
 [2161]281; addressed by Dionysius on the subject of martyrdom,
 [2162]291; school of, [2163]303; life and writings of, discussed,
 [2164]391-[2165]394; relations of, with Demetrius, discussed, 394,
 [2166]395; visit to Greece, cause and date of, discussed,
 [2167]395-[2168]397; final departure of, from Alexandria discussed,
 [2169]395-[2170]397; ordination of, discussed, 397.

 Osrhoene, [2171]242.

 Osrhoenians, Gospel preached to, [2172]104.

 Otho, Roman emperor, [2173]138.

 Otrous, or Otrys, in Phrygia, [2174]230.


 Pachymius, Egyptian bishop and martyr, [2175]334.

 Pæsis, a martyr, [2176]345.

 Pagæ, in Lycia, [2177]345.

 Palestine, [2178]92, [2179]93, [2180]185, [2181]226, [2182]240,
 [2183]241, [2184]244, [2185]254, [2186]267, [2187]271, 277, [2188]280,
 [2189]291, [2190]302, [2191]303, [2192]320, [2193]328, [2194]343,
 [2195]344, [2196]347, [2197]348, [2198]350, [2199]355; martyrs of,
 342-[2200]356.

 Palmas, bishop of Amastris, [2201]201, [2202]242.

 Pamphilus, presbyter of Cæsarea, [2203]320, [2204]334; Eusebius' Life
 of, [2205]277; library of, in Cæsarea, [2206]277, [2207]278; tortured,
 [2208]348; martyrdom of, [2209]351-[2210]354.

 Pamphylia, [2211]310.

 Paneas. See Cæsarea Philippi.

 Panegyric of Eusebius on the building of the churches,
 [2212]370-[2213]378.

 Panius Mountain, source of the Jordan, [2214]304.

 Pantænus, the Philosopher, [2215]224, [2216]225, [2217]253, [2218]259,
 [2219]261, [2220]267.

 Paphos, [2221]310.

 Papias, of Hierapolis, [2222]116, [2223]165; writings of, [2224]170;
 quoted, 172-[2225]174; not a hearer of the Apostles, [2226]170; hearer
 of Aristion and the Presbyter John, [2227]171; of limited
 understanding, [2228]172; a chiliast, [2229]172.

 Papirius, a martyr, [2230]242.

 Papylus, a martyr, [2231]193.

 Paraclete, the, [2232]229; Manes proclaims himself to be the,
 [2233]317.

 Parætonium, [2234]301.

 Parthia, [2235]132.

 Parthicus, [2236]90.

 Paschal Canon, of Hippolytus, [2237]270; of Dionysius, [2238]305; of
 Anatolius, [2239]319.

 Paschal controversy. See Passover.

 Passover, work on, by Melito, [2240]205; controversy concerning the,
 [2241]241-[2242]244; agreement in regard to, reached, [2243]244;
 Clement's work on, [2244]259, 260.

 Patermuthius, a martyr, [2245]355.

 Patmos, [2246]310.

 Patricius, vicar of the prefects, [2247]383.

 Paul, the Apostle, [2248]99, [2249]226, [2250]246, [2251]283,
 [2252]304, [2253]310; mentions James the Just, [2254]104; persecutor of
 Christians, [2255]104; appointed an Apostle, [2256]105; called
 "prophet," [2257]107, [2258]110, [2259]113; preaches from Jerusalem to
 Illyricum, [2260]121, 132, [2261]136, [2262]273; sent to Rome as
 captive, [2263]123; release and second imprisonment, 124; death of,
 [2264]128, [2265]129, [2266]130, [2267]132; burial place of, [2268]130;
 with Peter founds churches of Corinth and Rome, [2269]130, [2270]222;
 fellow-laborers mentioned, [2271]136, [2272]137; mentions Luke's
 Gospel, [2273]137, [2274]149, [2275]154, [2276]273; married, [2277]161,
 [2278]168; rejected by the Severians, [2279]209; rejected by the
 Elkesites [2280]280; quoted, [2281]352; Epistles of, [2282]134, 152,
 [2283]168; Epistles of, a part of the N. T. Canon, [2284]155; Epistles
 to Timothy, 124, [2285]133; not author of Epistle to the Hebrews,
 [2286]135; writes to Hebrews in his native tongue, [2287]169,
 [2288]174, [2289]187, [2290]201; author of Epistle to the Hebrews
 according to the ancients, [2291]273; "Acts of," [2292]135; "Acts of,"
 placed among the Antilegomena, 156.

 Paul, an Antiochian heretic, [2293]250.

 Paul, a martyr of Cæsarea, [2294]349.

 Paul, companion of Dionysius of Alexandria, [2295]282, [2296]301.

 Paul of Jamna, a martyr, [2297]352.

 Paul of Samosata, [2298]246; character of, [2299]315, [2300]316; heresy
 of, 312-[2301]316, [2302]318; refuted by Malchion, [2303]313;
 excommunicated, [2304]313; Epistle of the bishops against,
 [2305]313-[2306]315; Synod held against, [2307]320.

 Paulinus of Iconium, [2308]268.

 Paulinus of Tyre, [2309]369; the tenth book of the Church History
 inscribed to, [2310]369; Eusebius' panegyric addressed to, [2311]370;
 builder of the great church of Tyre, [2312]370 sq.

 Peace after the great persecution, [2313]369 sq.; finally assured to
 the Christians after the defeat of Licinius, [2314]387.

 Peleus, Egyptian bishop and martyr, [2315]334, [2316]355.

 Pella, a town in Perea, [2317]138, [2318]177.

 Penance, rules for, in the early Church, [2319]278.

 Pentapolis, [2320]295, [2321]311.

 Pepuza, in Phrygia, named Jerusalem by Montanus, [2322]235, [2323]236.

 Perea, [2324]122 b.

 Perennius, a Roman judge, [2325]239, [2326]240.

 Perga, in Pamphylia, [2327]310.

 Pergamos, [2328]192, [2329]213.

 Persecution under Trajan, [2330]165; under Severus, [2331]249,
 [2332]251; under Maximinus, [2333]274; under Decius,
 [2334]280-[2335]286; followed by peace, [2336]294; under Valerian,
 [2337]298-[2338]302; under Diocletian, [2339]316, [2340]317, [2341]322,
 [2342]323-[2343]356; under Licinius, 384-[2344]386; causes of
 persecution under Diocletian, discussed, [2345]397-[2346]400.

 Persia, [2347]317.

 Persians, [2348]224.

 Pertinax becomes emperor, [2349]245.

 Pestilence in Alexandria, [2350]306, [2351]307.

 Peter, the Apostle, [2352]99, [2353]104, [2354]226, [2355]258,
 [2356]261, [2357]304, [2358]310, [2359]311; detects Simon Magus,
 [2360]105, [2361]115; instructs Cornelius, [2362]107; imprisoned,
 [2363]111; preaches in Rome, [2364]115, [2365]116; authorizes Mark's
 Gospel, [2366]116, [2367]261, [2368]273; meets Philo in Rome,
 [2369]117; death of, [2370]128, [2371]129, [2372]130, [2373]162;
 burial-place of, [2374]130, [2375]162; with Paul, founds churches of
 Rome and Corinth, [2376]130, [2377]222; preaches in Pontus, etc.,
 [2378]132, [2379]136; married, [2380]162; martyrdom of wife of,
 [2381]162, [2382]165, [2383]168; writings of, 133, [2384]134,
 [2385]149; First Epistle of, [2386]116, [2387]122, [2388]133,
 [2389]173, [2390]222, [2391]273; First Epistle of, a part of the N. T.
 Canon, [2392]156; Second Epistle of, [2393]133, [2394]273; "Acts of,"
 133; "Apocalypse of," [2395]134, [2396]261; Apocalypse of, placed among
 the ndthoi, 156; "Gospel of," [2397]133, [2398]258; Gospel of, excluded
 from the Canon, [2399]157; "Preaching of," [2400]133; "Teaching of,"
 [2401]168 (note [2402]15), [2403]171, [2404]172, [2405]173, [2406]174.

 Peter, bishop of Alexandria, [2407]322, [2408]334, [2409]360.

 Peter, companion of Dionysius of Alexandria, [2410]282, [2411]301.

 Peter, a member of Diocletian's household, [2412]327.

 Peter Apselamus, a martyr, [2413]351.

 Petra, [2414]97.

 Peucetius, a favorite of Maximin, [2415]368.

 Phaeno, mines of, [2416]334, [2417]348.

 Pharaoh, [2418]363.

 Pharisee, [2419]89, [2420]199.

 Philadelphia, [2421]168, [2422]192.

 Phileas, bishop of Thmuis, Epistle of, quoted, [2423]330; martyrdom of,
 [2424]330, [2425]334.

 Philemon, a Roman presbyter addressed by Dionysius of Alexandria,
 [2426]295.

 Philetus, bishop of Antioch, [2427]269, [2428]271.

 Philip, the Tetrarch, [2429]96, [2430]107.

 Philip, the Asiarch, [2431]190.

 Philip, bishop of Jerusalem, [2432]176.

 Philip of Gortyna, [2433]198, [2434]201; writes against Marcion,
 [2435]203.

 Philip of Arabia, Roman emperor, reported to have been a Christian and
 to have done penance, [2436]278; Origen's Epistle to, [2437]279; slain,
 [2438]280.

 Philip, son of Emperor Philip, [2439]278.

 Philip, one of the Twelve, [2440]242; preaches in Samaria, [2441]104;
 encounters Simon Magus, [2442]105; instructs Ethiopian eunuch,
 [2443]105; married, [2444]161; confounded with Philip, the Evangelist,
 [2445]162, [2446]171; burial-place of, [2447]162; daughters of,
 [2448]162, [2449]169, [2450]172, [2451]234, [2452]242.

 Philip, the Evangelist, confounded with Philip, the Apostle, 162,
 [2453]171; death of, and of his daughters, [2454]163, [2455]242;
 resided at Hierapolis, [2456]172, 242.

 Philippians, [2457]168; Polycarp's Epistle to, [2458]188.

 Philo, of Alexandria, family and culture of, [2459]107; embassy to
 Rome, [2460]108; on the Embassy, [2461]109; on the Virtues, [2462]109;
 meets Peter in Rome, [2463]117; describes the Therapeutæ,
 [2464]117-[2465]119; De Vita Contemplativa, [2466]117; writings of,
 [2467]119-[2468]121; reads his "On the Virtues" before Roman Senate,
 [2469]121; referred to by Clement of Alexandria, [2470]260; by
 Anatolius, [2471]319.

 Philomelium, letter to church of, [2472]188.

 Philoromus, a martyr in the persecution under Diocletian, 330.

 Philosophical mode of life, in sense of asceticism, [2473]117, 169,
 [2474]252, [2475]256.

 Philosophy, used in sense of asceticism. See the preceding.

 Philumene, virgin and companion of Apelles, [2476]227.

 Phoenicia, [2477]104, [2478]328, [2479]359, [2480]360, [2481]370;
 martyrs in, [2482]333, [2483]345.

 Phoenicians, [2484]304.

 Phrygia, [2485]212, [2486]218, [2487]219, [2488]229, [2489]230,
 [2490]231, [2491]235; burning of an entire city of, during Diocletian's
 persecution, [2492]331, [2493]332.

 Phrygian heresy. See Montanism.

 Pierius, presbyter of Alexandria, [2494]321, [2495]322.

 Pilate, procuratorship of, [2496]96; condemns Christ, [2497]98; reports
 to Tiberius, [2498]105; tyranny of, [2499]109; stirs up tumult among
 the Jews, [2500]109, [2501]110; suicide of, [2502]110 (note 1); forged
 acts of, [2503]96, [2504]359, [2505]360; Christ crucified under, 222.

 Pinnas, bishop, addressed by the Emperor Gallienus, [2506]302.

 Pinytus, bishop of Crete, [2507]197, [2508]201.

 Pionius, a martyr, [2509]162.

 Pius, bishop of Rome, [2510]182, [2511]183, [2512]221, [2513]243.

 Pius, emperor of Rome. See Antoninus Pius.

 Plato, [2514]181, [2515]266.

 Plinius Secundus, governor of Bithynia, writes concerning Christians,
 [2516]164.

 Plutarch, pupil of Origen, [2517]251; martyrdom of, [2518]252.

 Polybius, bishop of Tralles, [2519]168.

 Polycarp, bishop of Smyrna, [2520]161, [2521]165, [2522]167, [2523]168,
 [2524]170, [2525]187, 188, [2526]220, [2527]238, [2528]239, [2529]242,
 [2530]243; martyrdom of, [2531]188-[2532]192; communes with Anicetus
 and administers the eucharist in Rome, [2533]244.

 Polycrates, bishop of Ephesus, quoted, [2534]162, [2535]240; on the
 Paschal controversy, [2536]242.

 Pompey, the Roman general, [2537]90, [2538]92.

 Pontianus, bishop of Rome, [2539]271, [2540]274.

 Ponticus, a Gallic witness in the persecution under Marcus Aurelius,
 [2541]216.

 Pontius, addressed by Serapion, [2542]237, [2543]258.

 Pontius Pilate. See Pilate.

 Pontus, [2544]132, [2545]136, [2546]183, [2547]184, [2548]188,
 [2549]201, [2550]223, [2551]242, [2552]276, [2553]294, 303, [2554]312,
 [2555]321, [2556]333, [2557]345, [2558]386.

 Porphyry, a martyr, [2559]353; his death reported to Pamphilus by
 Seleucus, [2560]353.

 Porphyry, the Neo-Platonist, [2561]264; gives account of Origen, 265;
 writes against the Christians, [2562]265, [2563]266.

 Potamiaena, martyrdom of, [2564]253.

 Pothinus, bishop of Lyons, a Gallic witness in the persecution under
 Marcus Aurelius, [2565]214, [2566]220.

 Potitus, a Marcionite, [2567]228.

 Pre-existence of Christ, discussed by Eusebius, [2568]82, [2569]85.

 Preparation, day of, [2570]346, [2571]347 (note 8).

 Presbyter, nature of office of, in the early church, [2572]150 (note
 [2573]14); ancient, [2574]261; office mentioned, [2575]223, [2576]243,
 [2577]286, [2578]287, [2579]290, [2580]301, [2581]305, [2582]313, 320.

 presbuterod, used in an unofficial sense, [2583]278 (note 5).

 Primus, bishop of Alexandria, [2584]174, [2585]175.

 Prisca, wife of Diocletian, friendliness of, toward Christians,
 [2586]323 (note 2).

 Priscilla, [2587]121.

 Priscilla, Montanist prophetess, [2588]229, [2589]231 (note [2590]18),
 [2591]235, 237.

 Priscus, father of Justin, [2592]185.

 Priscus, martyr at Cæsarea under Valerian, [2593]302.

 Probus, Roman emperor, [2594]316.

 Probus, a martyr, [2595]351.

 Proclus, opponent of Caius, [2596]163.

 Proclus, an ecclesiastic, [2597]313.

 Proclus, a Montanist, and an opponent of Caius of Rome, [2598]130, 163,
 [2599]268.

 Procopius, a Palestinian martyr, [2600]342.

 Prophets, from Jerusalem, [2601]107.

 Proselyte, Jewish, [2602]93.

 Protoctetus, a presbyter of Cæsarea, [2603]274.

 Protogenes, [2604]313.

 Proverbs of Solomon, called "All-virtuous Wisdom," [2605]200.

 Psalms, celebrating Christ as God, [2606]247; Hexapla of the,
 [2607]263.

 Ptolemæus, a martyr, [2608]195.

 Ptolemais, in Pentapolis, [2609]244, [2610]295.

 Ptolemies of Egypt, close of dynasty of, [2611]88.

 Ptolemy, martyr under Decius, [2612]285.

 Ptolemy Lagus, king of Egypt, [2613]223.

 Ptolemy Philadelphus, [2614]319.

 Publius, bishop of Athens, [2615]200.

 Publius, Gentile bishop of Jerusalem, [2616]226.

 Pyrucheium, siege of, [2617]318.

 Pythagoreans, one of the most famous referred to, [2618]266.


 Quadratus, the Apologist, [2619]175.

 Quadratus, bishop of Athens, [2620]200.

 Quadratus, the prophet, [2621]169, [2622]234.

 Quinta, martyr under Decius, [2623]283.

 Quintus, a Phrygian, [2624]189.


 Rechabites, [2625]126.

 Regeneration, [2626]376.

 Remission of sins, according to the Elkesites, [2627]280.

 Repentance, Dionysius of Alexandria on, [2628]291, [2629]292.

 Resurrection, [2630]376.

 Retecius of Autun, [2631]381.

 Revelation. See Apocalypse of John.

 Rhodo of Asia, writes against Marcion, [2632]227; quoted, [2633]227,
 228.

 Rhone, river, [2634]211.

 Rhossus, in Syria, [2635]258.

 Roman church, [2636]225, [2637]242, [2638]271, [2639]286, [2640]290,
 [2641]312, [2642]317.

 Roman emperors, table of, [2643]401.

 Roman empire, [2644]89, [2645]90, [2646]101, [2647]223.

 Roman learning, [2648]276.

 Romans, Epistle to, integrity of, [2649]135, [2650]203, [2651]205;
 relation of the last chapter to the remainder of the epistle,
 [2652]388.

 Romanus, a martyr, [2653]343.

 Rome, [2654]106, [2655]167, [2656]168, [2657]169, [2658]183, [2659]186,
 [2660]197, [2661]198, [2662]210, [2663]219, [2664]220, 228, [2665]239,
 [2666]241, [2667]243, [2668]246, [2669]261, [2670]262, [2671]381,
 [2672]382; Peter and Simon Magus in, [2673]115; gathering place of
 heretics, [2674]115 (note 6); origin of church of, [2675]115 (note 1);
 church of, founded by Peter and Paul, [2676]130, [2677]222; Linus,
 first bishop of, [2678]133; church of, disputes epistle to the Hebrews,
 [2679]135; liberality of church of, [2680]201; list of early bishops
 of, [2681]174 (note 1), [2682]175; bishops of, during reign of
 Antoninus Pius, [2683]182; Irenæus' catalogue of bishops of, [2684]221;
 table of bishops of, during the first three centuries, [2685]401.

 Romulus, a martyr, [2686]345.

 Rufus, governor of Judea, [2687]168, [2688]177.

 Ruth, the Moabitess, [2689]93.


 Sabbath, Dionysius on the, [2690]307.

 Sabellius, heresy of, [2691]295; epistles of Dionysius against, 311.

 Sabinus, prefect of Egypt under Decius, [2692]282, [2693]301.

 Sabinus, an imperial official under Maximin, epistle of, to the
 provincial governors in regard to the Christians, [2694]357, [2695]358,
 [2696]364.

 Sadducees, most cruel of all the Jews, [2697]127; Jewish sect, 199.

 Sadduchus, a Pharisee, [2698]89.

 Sagaris, martyrdom of, [2699]205, [2700]242.

 Salome, sister of Herod the Great, [2701]95.

 Samaria, [2702]104.

 Samaritans, Jewish sect, [2703]199.

 Samosata, [2704]246, [2705]312-[2706]316.

 Samuel, [2707]352.

 Sanctus, one of the Gallic witnesses in the persecution under Marcus
 Aurelius, [2708]213, [2709]214, [2710]215.

 Saracens, enslave fugitive Christians, [2711]285.

 Sardis, [2712]186, [2713]203, [2714]242.

 Sarmatians, [2715]219.

 Saturnilians, [2716]199.

 Saturninus, the Gnostic, [2717]178, [2718]208; asceticism of, [2719]114
 (note 18).

 Saul, king of Israel, [2720]90.

 Scriptures, Irenæus' account of, [2721]222; allegorical interpretation
 of, [2722]266 (note 1).

 Scythia, [2723]132.

 Seal, (sphragis). See Baptism.

 Sects, the seven, among the Jews, [2724]199.

 Seleucus, a martyr, [2725]353.

 Senate, the Roman, [2726]105.

 Seneca, bishop of Jerusalem, [2727]176.

 Septuagint, composition of, [2728]223, [2729]319; Origen's study of,
 262; edited by Origen, [2730]263.

 Serapion, bishop of Antioch, writings of, [2731]257; writes against
 Montanists, [2732]237, [2733]240, [2734]257, [2735]258.

 Serapion, martyr under Decius, [2736]283.

 Serapion, an aged believer of Alexandria, [2737]290.

 Serennius Granianus, proconsul of Asia, [2738]181, [2739]182.

 Serenus, pupil of Origen, suffers martyrdom by fire, [2740]252.

 Serenus, another pupil of Origen, is beheaded, [2741]252.

 Servilius Paulus, proconsul of Asia, [2742]205.

 Seven, the, appointment of, [2743]103, [2744]104; not deacons, but
 elders, [2745]103 (note 2a), [2746]163.

 Seventy, the, [2747]97, [2748]98, [2749]100, [2750]101, [2751]103,
 [2752]104, [2753]152.

 Severa, wife of Emperor Philip, Origen's epistle to, [2754]279.

 Severians. See Severus.

 Severus, a heretic, [2755]209.

 Severus, Roman emperor, [2756]245, [2757]247, [2758]249, [2759]254,
 [2760]255, [2761]263.

 Sextus, an ecclesiastical writer, [2762]245.

 Shepherd of Hermas. See Hermas.

 Sicily, [2763]356, [2764]364, [2765]382.

 Sidon, [2766]333.

 Sidonius, a Roman confessor, [2767]287.

 Silas, companion of Paul, [2768]234.

 Silvanus, bishop of Emesa, [2769]333, [2770]360.

 Silvanus, bishop of Gaza, [2771]334, [2772]348, [2773]355.

 Simeon, bishop of Jerusalem, [2774]146, [2775]149, [2776]176,
 [2777]199; martyrdom of, [2778]163, [2779]164; date of martyrdom of,
 [2780]164, [2781]165.

 Simon, the high priest, [2782]97.

 Simon Barjona, [2783]310.

 Simon Magus, attracted by Philip, [2784]104; reputation of, [2785]105;
 the "great power of God," [2786]105; pretends conversion, [2787]105;
 baptism of, [2788]105; detected and rebuked by Peter, [2789]105,
 [2790]113; denounced in Justin's Apology, [2791]114; honored with
 statue in Rome, [2792]114, [2793]115; author of all heresy, [2794]114;
 meets Peter at Rome, [2795]115; destroyed, [2796]116, [2797]158,
 [2798]178, [2799]199.

 Simonians, immorality of, [2800]114, [2801]199.

 Sion, Mount, [2802]352.

 Sixtus. See Xystus.

 Smyrna, [2803]165, [2804]167, [2805]168, [2806]187, [2807]188,
 [2808]192; letter of church of, to the church of Philomelium, [2809]188
 sq.

 Socrates, the philosopher, quoted, [2810]194.

 Socrates, bishop of Laodicea, [2811]318.

 Sodom, [2812]83.

 Solomon, [2813]91, [2814]94, [2815]370; "Wisdom of," [2816]223,
 [2817]244, [2818]260.

 Song of Songs, commentary on, by Origen, [2819]277.

 Sophists, [2820]313.

 Sosthenes, a companion of Paul, [2821]99.

 Sotas, bishop of Anchialus, [2822]237.

 Soter, bishop of Rome, [2823]197, [2824]190, [2825]201, [2826]210,
 [2827]211, [2828]221, [2829]243.

 Spain, [2830]356.

 Statius Quadratus, proconsul of Asia, [2831]189 (note 9).

 Statue, erected by the woman with an issue of blood, [2832]304.

 Stephen, one of the Seven, [2833]104, [2834]161, [2835]218; martyrdom
 of, [2836]104, 107, [2837]138.

 Stephen, bishop of Laodicea, [2838]320.

 Stephen, bishop of Rome, on the re-baptism of the lapsed, 293,
 [2839]294, [2840]295.

 Stocks, the, [2841]193, [2842]214, [2843]281, [2844]331, [2845]343,
 [2846]344.

 Stoics, some famous ones referred to, [2847]266.

 Strato's Tower, [2848]111.

 Stromata. See Clement of Alexandria.

 Sub-deacons, [2849]288.

 Subintroductæ, [2850]315.

 Suicide of women, to escape defilement, [2851]332, [2852]337; opinions
 of the Fathers in regard to, [2853]333 (note 3).

 Susannah, story of, fictitious, according to Africanus, [2854]276.

 Symeon. See Simeon.

 Symmachus, translator of the Old Testament, [2855]262, [2856]263,
 [2857]264; an Ebionite, [2858]264.

 Synada, in Phrygia, [2859]268; synod of, [2860]269.

 Syneros, a Marcionite, [2861]228.

 Synod, at Rome, in behalf of the unity of the Church on occasion of the
 Donatist schism, [2862]380, [2863]381; at Arles, summoned by
 Constantine, 381, [2864]382.

 Syracuse, [2865]381.

 Syria, [2866]88, [2867]89, [2868]167, [2869]168, [2870]178, [2871]185,
 [2872]294, [2873]302, [2874]318, [2875]328, [2876]355.


 Taposiris, near Alexandria, [2877]282.

 Tarsus, [2878]291, [2879]294, [2880]312, [2881]314.

 Tatian, asceticism of, [2882]114 (note [2883]18); authority for
 martyrdom of Justin, [2884]194; life and writings of,
 [2885]207-[2886]209; heresy of, [2887]207-[2888]209: his Book of
 Problems, [2889]228, [2890]229; instructor of Rhodo at Rome, [2891]222,
 [2892]228; speaks of Christ as God, [2893]247; mentioned by Clement of
 Alexandria, [2894]260.

 Teaching of Peter. See Peter.

 Telesphorus, bishop of Rome, [2895]177, [2896]182, [2897]221,
 [2898]242.

 Telesphorus, addressed by Dionysius, [2899]311.

 Temptations, work on, by Dionysius, [2900]311.

 Tertullian, family and culture of, [2901]106; apology for Christians,
 [2902]105; on Nero, [2903]129; quoted, [2904]149, [2905]165; narrates
 the story of the Thundering Legion, [2906]220.

 Tetrapla, of Origen, [2907]263.

 Thaddeus, one of the "Seventy," [2908]99; in Edessa,
 [2909]100-[2910]102, [2911]104.

 Thaumaturgus. See Gregory Thaumaturgus.

 Thebais, [2912]249, [2913]328, [2914]329, [2915]334, [2916]349,
 [2917]350.

 Thebuthis, a heretic, [2918]199.

 Thecla, a martyr, [2919]344, [2920]347.

 Thelymidres, bishop of Laodicea, [2921]291, [2922]294.

 Themisto, a Montanist, [2923]233, [2924]235.

 Theoctistus, bishop of Cæsarea in Palestine, [2925]268, [2926]274,
 [2927]291, [2928]294, 303.

 Theodolus, a martyr, [2929]353.

 Theodorus. See Gregory Thaumaturgus.

 Theodorus, of Synada, [2930]268.

 Theodorus, an ecclesiastic, [2931]313.

 Theodorus, Egyptian bishop and martyr, [2932]334.

 Theodosia, a martyr, [2933]348.

 Theodotion, translator of the Old Testament, [2934]262, [2935]263.

 Theodotus of Ephesus, [2936]223.

 Theodotus, bishop of Laodicea, [2937]320.

 Theodotus, a Montanist, [2938]218, [2939]232.

 Theodotus, the elder, the cobbler, [2940]247, [2941]248.

 Theodotus, the younger, the banker, [2942]247.

 theologia. See Divinity of Christ.

 Theonas, bishop of Alexandria, [2943]321.

 Theophanies, to be regarded as appearances of Christ, [2944]83.

 Theophilus, bishop of Antioch, [2945]197, [2946]202.

 Theophilus, bishop of Cæsarea, [2947]240, [2948]241, [2949]244,
 [2950]313.

 Theophilus, martyr under Decius, [2951]285.

 Theophrastus, admired by the Theodotians, [2952]248.

 Theotecnus, bishop of Cæsarea, [2953]303, [2954]312, [2955]313,
 [2956]320.

 Theotecnus, curator of Antioch, [2957]358; death of, [2958]368.

 Theraputæ, described by Philo, [2959]117-[2960]119.

 Thessalonians, [2961]206.

 Theudas, the Impostor, [2962]112, [2963]113.

 Thomas, the apostle, [2964]100, [2965]101; sends Thaddeus to Edessa,
 104; labors in Parthia, [2966]132; Gospel of, excluded from the canon,
 [2967]156, [2968]171.

 Thrace, [2969]237.

 Thraseas, bishop and martyr of Eumenia, [2970]236, [2971]242.

 "Thundering Legion," story of, [2972]220.

 Thyestean banquets, [2973]213.

 Tiberias, [2974]145.

 Tiberius, emperor of Rome, [2975]96; reception of Pilate's report, 105,
 [2976]106; favors Christianity, [2977]106; death of, [2978]107.

 Timæus, bishop of Antioch, [2979]317.

 Timolaus, a martyr, [2980]345.

 Timotheus, a martyr, [2981]344.

 Timothy, Paul's Epistles to, [2982]124, [2983]133, [2984]137,
 [2985]221; first bishop of Ephesus, [2986]136.

 Timothy, companion of Dionysius of Alexandria, [2987]282, [2988]311.

 Titus, first bishop of Crete, [2989]136.

 Titus, son of Vespian, conducts war against Jews, [2990]138, [2991]146;
 becomes emperor, [2992]147.

 Tobias, bishop of Jerusalem, [2993]176.

 Tobias of Edessa, [2994]101.

 Tobias, the father of the former, [2995]101.

 Trajan, Roman emperor, [2996]149, [2997]150, [2998]164, [2999]173,
 [3000]175, [3001]220; forbids Christians to be sought after,
 [3002]164-[3003]166.

 Tralles, [3004]168.

 Tripolis, [3005]345.

 Troas, [3006]168.

 "True Discourse," Origen's work against Celsus, [3007]278.

 Trypho, the Jew, Dialogue of Justin against, [3008]196, [3009]197.

 Twelve (apostles), the [3010]99; scattered abroad, [3011]104.

 Twelve Prophets, the, commentary on, by Origen, [3012]279.

 Tymium in Phrygia, named Jerusalem by Montanus, [3013]235.

 Tyrannion, bishop of Tyre, [3014]333.

 Tyrannus, bishop of Antioch, [3015]317.

 Tyre, [3016]294, [3017]317, [3018]328, [3019]348, [3020]360; the great
 church of, [3021]370 sq.; description of the church,
 [3022]375-[3023]378; Eusebius' panegyric on the building of the
 churches delivered at, [3024]370 sq.


 Ulpianus, a martyr, [3025]347.

 Urbanus, bishop of Rome, [3026]269, [3027]271.

 Urbanus, a Roman confessor, [3028]287.

 Urbanus, governor of Palestine, [3029]344, [3030]345, [3031]346,
 [3032]348, [3033]349.

 Urbicius, a Roman governor, [3034]195, [3035]196.

 Ursus, finance mister of Africa, [3036]382.


 Valens, Gentile bishop of Jerusalem, [3037]226.

 Valentina, a martyr of Cæsarea, [3038]349.

 Valentinians, [3039]199.

 Valentinus, the Gnostic, [3040]182, [3041]183, [3042]187, [3043]208,
 [3044]210, [3045]238, [3046]264.

 Valeria, daughter of Diocletian, friendliness of, toward Christians,
 [3047]323 (note 3).

 Valerian, Roman emperor, at first friendly to Christians, 298;
 persecution under, [3048]298-[3049]302, [3050]326.

 Valerius Gratus, procurator of Judea, [3051]97.

 Vales, deacon from Ælia, and martyr, [3052]352.

 Vatican, [3053]130.

 Verissimus (Marcus Aurelius), [3054]185.

 Verus, Roman emperor. See Marcus Aurelius.

 Vespasian, emperor, [3055]110, [3056]138, [3057]220; besieges the Jews,
 [3058]127, 131 (note 4), [3059]141, [3060]143; commands to seek
 descendants of David, [3061]146, [3062]147.

 Vettius Epagathus, one of the Gallic witnesses, [3063]212.

 Victor, bishop of Rome, letter of Polycrates to, [3064]162;
 excommunicates church of Asia, [3065]240, [3066]241, [3067]242,
 [3068]244, [3069]246, [3070]247; admonished by Irenæus and others for
 his treatment of the Asiatic church, [3071]243.

 Vienne, a city of Gaul, [3072]98; account of martyrs of, [3073]211;
 Epistle of church of, [3074]212.

 Volusian, [3075]298 (note 1).


 "Wisdom of Solomon." See Solomon.

 Witnesses. See mdrtns.


 Xerxes, [3076]145.

 Xystus I., bishop of Rome, [3077]176, [3078]221, [3079]243.

 Xystus II., bishop of Rome, [3080]294, [3081]297, [3082]303, [3083]312;
 receives Epistle on Baptism from Dionysius, [3084]295.


 Zacchæus, bishop of Jerusalem, [3085]176.

 Zacchæus, a martyr, [3086]343.

 Zacharias, [3087]212, [3088]213.

 Zambdas, bishop of Jerusalem, [3089]321.

 Zebedee, father of James and John, [3090]309.

 Zebinas, a martyr, [3091]350.

 Zeno, martyr under Decius, [3092]285.

 Zenobius, presbyter of Sidon, [3093]333.

 Zenobius, physician and martyr, [3094]334.

 Zephyrinus, bishop of Rome, [3095]130, [3096]246, [3097]247, [3098]248,
 [3099]261, [3100]268.

 Zerubabel, [3101]371, [3102]374.

 Zeus. See Jupiter.

 Zion, mount of, [3103]378.

 Zosimus, [3104]168.

 Zoticus, bishop of Comana, [3105]233, [3106]236.

 Zoticus, of Otrous, [3107]230.

 EUSEBIUS: CONSTANTINE.

GENERAL INDEX.

 Note.--The references to prolegomena and notes are in italics.


 Ablavius, letter of C. to, [3108]437.

 "Aborigines," [3109]602.

 Abraham at Mambre, [3110]533.

 Acacius, Count, [3111]533, [3112]538.

 Accident, [3113]564, [3114]565.

 Achaian bishops at Nicæa, [3115]521.

 Acheron, [3116]567.

 Achilles, [3117]577.

 Acrostic "Jesus Christ, Son of God, Saviour, Cross," [3118]574.

 Adrianople, battle of, [3119]418.

 Advent of Christ predicted, [3120]573.

 Aegae, [3121]535.

 Aelafius = Ablavius.

 Aesculapius, [3122]601; Temple of, [3123]535.

 Aëtius, letter of C. to, [3124]538.

 Africa, controversies in, [3125]516.

 Agathangelus (source), [3126]449.

 Alexander of Alexandria, letter of C. to, [3127]438; letter of C. to,
 [3128]515; appoints George of Arethusa, presbyter, [3129]538.

 Alexander and Arius, origin of controversy between, [3130]516;
 continuation of, [3131]518.

 Alexander of Thessalonica, [3132]551, note.

 Alexander the Great, [3133]483.

 Alexandria, Arian, controversies at, [3134]515; worships at,
 prohibited, [3135]546.

 Amasia of Pontus, cruelties at, [3136]500.

 Ambrosius of Milan (source), [3137]447.

 Ammianus Marcellinus (source), [3138]448.

 Amomum, [3139]576.

 Amoses, [3140]602.

 Amphiaraus, [3141]601.

 Anastasia, [3142]417, note.

 Anastasius Bibliothecarius (source), [3143]452.

 Ancyrona, [3144]420.

 Anna Comnena (source), [3145]454.

 Anonymous Acts of Metrophanes and Alexander (source), 452.

 Anonymous, qui Dionis Cassii historias continuavit (source), [3146]451.

 Anonymus Valesianus (source), [3147]449.

 Antioch, church built in [3148]532, [3149]594; disturbance at by
 Eustathius, [3150]536.

 Antiochians, letter of C. to, [3151]438.

 Antonius, letter to C. and of C. to him, [3152]439.

 Antony, [3153]575.

 Anulinus, letters of C. to, [3154]437.

 Aphaca in Phoenicia, [3155]534.

 Apollo, [3156]512, [3157]534, [3158]574, [3159]601, [3160]602.

 Apparition of Constantine's troops, [3161]502.

 Arabian bishops at Nicæa, [3162]521; at Jerusalem, [3163]551.

 Arborius, [3164]429.

 Arethusa, [3165]538.

 Argo, [3166]577.

 Arius, letters of C. to, [3167]438, [3168]439; controversies
 concerning, at Alexandria, [3169]515; letter of C. to, [3170]515.

 Arius and Alexander, origin of controversy between, [3171]516;
 continuation of controversy, [3172]518.

 Aries, Council of, [3173]417 note.

 Asian bishops at Nicæa, [3174]521.

 Assyria, laws of, [3175]573.

 Assyrian Empire, overthrow of, [3176]574.

 Assyrians, [3177]576.

 Athanasius, letters of C. to, [3178]439; (source), 446.

 Attaliata, Michæl (source), [3179]453.

 Augustinus (source), [3180]447.

 Augustus, [3181]575.

 Aurelian, [3182]579.


 Babylon, [3183]573.

 Bacchus, [3184]590, [3185]601.

 Bacchus, Omadian, [3186]602.

 Banquet given to bishops at Nicæa, [3187]523, [3188]524.

 Baptism (mythical) of C., [3189]439.

 Baptism of C, [3190]556.

 Bassianus, [3191]417, note.

 Bethlehem, erection of church in, [3192]530. [3193]531, [3194]594.

 Bindings, elaborate, [3195]549.

 "Bishop," C. as, [3196]546.

 Bithynian bishops at Jerusalem, [3197]551.

 Blemmyans, [3198]483, [3199]542.

 Brescia, battle of, [3200]416.

 Britannic ocean, [3201]507.

 Britons, [3202]483, [3203]489, [3204]553.

 Bructeri, [3205]413.

 Byzantium, [3206]418; becomes Constantinople, [3207]419.


 Cæcilianus, letter of C. to, [3208]437.

 Calendarium Romanum Constantine Magni (source), [3209]448.

 Calocærus, revolt of, [3210]420.

 Cambyses, [3211]574.

 Cantacusenus, Joannes (source), [3212]454.

 Cappadocian bishops at Nicæa, [3213]521.

 Cappadocian bishops at Jerusalem, [3214]551.

 Carthagenians, [3215]602.

 Cassiodorus (source), [3216]415.

 Cataphrygians, [3217]539.

 Catholicus, [3218]549.

 Cave of the nativity, [3219]530.

 Cave of the ascension, [3220]530, [3221]594.

 Cedrenus, Georgius (source), [3222]453.

 Cemeteries, [3223]510.

 Ceres, [3224]590.

 Chalcedon, [3225]419.

 Chance, [3226]565.

 Chastity, esteem among Christians, [3227]492.

 Childless persons, law concerning, [3228]546.

 Chios, [3229]602.

 Chrestus, letter of C. to, [3230]437.

 Christ appears to C. in a dream, [3231]490; the Son of God, [3232]563;
 the creator of all things, [3233]563; coming of in the flesh,
 [3234]568; is God, and the Son of God, [3235]568; miraculous conception
 of, [3236]569; the Preserver, [3237]569; doctrines and miracles of,
 [3238]572; teaching of, [3239]572; coming of, predicted, [3240]573;
 cares for Daniel, [3241]574; prophesied by the Sibyl, [3242]575;
 miraculous birth of, [3243]575, [3244]576; divinity of, [3245]576,
 [3246]577; the author of Constantine's victories, [3247]578; the Son of
 God, [3248]578. See under Word.

 Christian Conduct, [3249]578.

 Christians promoted to office, [3250]511; persecution of, [3251]496,
 [3252]497; cf. persecution, [3253]512-[3254]13; kindly received by
 barbarians, [3255]513; in Persia, [3256]542; not to be held slaves by
 Jews, [3257]547; hypocritical Christians, [3258]554.

 Chronicon Paschale (source), [3259]451.

 Chrysopolis, battle of, [3260]419.

 Church, the, appeal to, [3261]562; heir to the property of those dying
 without kindred, [3262]509.

 Church of the Apostles (see Constantinople).

 Church of the Holy Sepulchre. See Holy Sepulchre.

 Church festivals, honored by C., [3263]545.

 Churches built at Constantinople, [3264]532; restoration of property
 to, [3265]510; building of, [3266]511 et pass.

 Cicero, [3267]575.

 Cilicia, demon worship in, [3268]535.

 Cilician bishops at Nicæa, [3269]521; at Jerusalem, [3270]551.

 Codinus (source), [3271]454.

 Coins, [3272]544, [3273]559.

 Cole, Old King, mythical grandfather of C., [3274]441.

 Confessors, [3275]508; laws in favor of, [3276]505; property of,
 [3277]509.

 Constans, made consul, [3278]419, [3279]420; appointed Cæsar, 550,
 [3280]584.

 Constantia, marriage, [3281]417; asks to have Licinius spared,
 [3282]419,

 Constantin, city of, [3283]549, [3284]550.

CONSTANTINE.

  EVENTS, ACTS, CIRCUMSTANCES.

 Early years, [3285]411 sq.; name, [3286]411 and note; surnamed Great,
 [3287]411; date of birth, [3288]411 and note; born at Naïssus,
 [3289]411 and note; son of Constantius Chlorus and Helena, 411; brought
 up at Drepanum, [3290]411; sent to court of Diocletian, 412; takes part
 in various campaigns, [3291]412; with Diocletian in Egypt, 412;
 alliance with Minervina, [3292]412 and note; at Nicomedia, [3293]412;
 at abdication of Diocletian and Maximinus, [3294]412; physique of,
 [3295]412; courage of, [3296]412; created tribune of first order,
 [3297]412; nominated Cæsar by Diocletian, rejected by Galerius,
 [3298]412; death sought by Galerius, 412; gains permission to go,
 [3299]412; maims post horses, [3300]412; joins his father at Boulogne,
 [3301]412; accompanies him to Britain, [3302]412; named as successor by
 Constantius at York, [3303]412; proclaimed Augustus, [3304]413, 414;
 supported by Erocus, [3305]413; claims title from Galerius, [3306]413;
 is given title of Cæsar, [3307]413; war against France, [3308]413;
 against Bructeri, [3309]413; exposes captives to wild beasts,
 [3310]413; C. and Maximinus, named "sons of the emperors," [3311]413;
 acknowledged emperor by Galerius, [3312]413; marries Fausta, [3313]414;
 plot of Maximian, [3314]413; capture of Maximian, [3315]413; another
 plot, [3316]413; saved by Fausta, [3317]413; puts Maximian to death,
 [3318]413; internal improvements, [3319]413; favors the Christians,
 [3320]414; writes to Maximinus in their behalf, [3321]414; named
 Augustus by Maximian, [3322]414; campaign against Maxentius and capture
 of Rome, [3323]416, [3324]417; returns to Milan, [3325]417; marriage of
 Constantia, 417; edict of Milan, [3326]417 and note; returns to Gaul,
 [3327]417; C. and the Donatists, [3328]417 and note; falls out with
 Licinius, [3329]417 and note; defeats of Licinius at Cibalis and
 Mardia, and redistribution of territory, [3330]418; Decennalia,
 [3331]418; at Arles, [3332]418; in Dacia and Pannonia, [3333]418;
 campaign against Sarmatians, [3334]418; war with Licinius, [3335]418;
 defeats Licinius, [3336]418, [3337]419; favors the Christians, 419;
 takes part in Council of Nicæa, [3338]419; Vicennalia, [3339]419; at
 Aries and Milan, [3340]419; puts Crispus and others to death,
 [3341]419; tricennalia, 420; at Jerusalem, [3342]420; death, [3343]420;
 burial, [3344]420; myths concerning, [3345]441; C. and his mother
 Helena, [3346]441; C. the son of a British princess, [3347]441,
 [3348]442; leprosy and baptism, [3349]442; donation, 442, [3350]443;
 dream, [3351]443; voyage of Helena, [3352]443, [3353]444; finding of
 the cross, [3354]444; sword, [3355]445; remorse of, [3356]445; C. and
 Tiridates, [3357]445; compared with Cyrus and Alexander the Great,
 [3358]483, [3359]484; compared with Moses, [3360]585; contrasted with
 Licinius, [3361]496; contrasted with the persecutors, [3362]519;
 vicennalia, [3363]481 and note; tricennalia, [3364]481; reigned thirty
 years and lived above sixty, [3365]489; conquered nearly the whole
 world, [3366]483; obtains authority over more nations than any who had
 preceded him, [3367]483; eldest son and successor of Constantius,
 [3368]487; accompanied Diocletian to Palestine, 487; plots of
 Diocletian and Galerius against, [3369]488; flight of, to his father,
 488; present at death of his father, [3370]487, [3371]488; assumes the
 purple, [3372]488; proclaimed Augustus by army, [3373]488; resolves to
 deliver Rome, [3374]489; chooses Christianity, [3375]489; vision of the
 cross, [3376]489; has standard of the cross made, 490, [3377]491;
 resolves to worship God and receives instruction, [3378]491; makes
 ministers his advisers, [3379]491; goes against Maxentius, [3380]491;
 advances into Italy and thrice defeats forces of Maxentius, [3381]492;
 defeats Maxentius at the Milvian bridge, [3382]492, [3383]493; enters
 Rome, [3384]493; acts of grace, [3385]494; honors bishops, [3386]494;
 builds churches, [3387]494; decennalia, [3388]481, [3389]495; victories
 over barbarians, [3390]495; aroused in behalf of Christians persecuted
 by Licinius, [3391]500; prepares for war, 501; victory of C.,
 [3392]502, [3393]503; lets Licinius escape, [3394]503; prayers in
 tabernacle, 503, [3395]504; victory, [3396]504; puts Licinius to death,
 [3397]504; surnamed Victor, [3398]505, [3399]591; sends Hosius to
 Alexandria in the interest of peace, [3400]515; anxiety for peace, 516;
 adjusts controversies in Africa, [3401]516; presides at Council of
 Nicæa, [3402]521; address to council, [3403]522, [3404]523; brings
 council to harmony, [3405]523; entertains the bishops, [3406]523;
 farewell address to the bishops, [3407]525, [3408]526; honors his
 mother, 532; subdues Scythians (Goths) and Sarmatians, [3409]541,
 [3410]542; affirms validity of decrees of councils, [3411]547; listens
 standing to Eusebius, [3412]548; appoints his sons Cæsars, [3413]550;
 founds cities, [3414]550; convenes council at Tyre, [3415]550;
 dedicates church at Jerusalem, [3416]551; divides empire between sons,
 [3417]553; mourning at Rome, 558; honor paid them, [3418]558; length of
 reign, [3419]554; age at death, [3420]554; war against Persians,
 [3421]554; takes bishops with him, [3422]554; also tent in the form of
 a church, 555; embassy from the Persians, [3423]555; erects sepulchral
 monument, [3424]555; sickness at Helenopolis, [3425]555; proceeds to
 Nicomedia, [3426]556; baptism, [3427]556; thanksgiving for baptism,
 [3428]556; death, [3429]557; removal of body to Constantinople,
 [3430]557; burial, [3431]558.

  CHARACTER AND RELIGIOUS ACTS.

 Character, [3432]420-[3433]435; inherited characteristics, 421;
 physical characteristics: height, countenance, complexion, hair, beard,
 nose, eyes, expression, figure, [3434]421; shoulders, neck, strength,
 vigor, bearing, manners, dress, [3435]422; mental characteristics:
 education, orations, delivery, literary style, patronage of learning,
 [3436]422, [3437]423; moral characteristics: energy, determination,
 rapidity of action, impetuosity, courage and valor, ambition, prudence,
 patience, perseverance, steadfastness, faithfulness, self-control,
 chastity, amiability, mildness, mercifulness, and forbearance,
 kindness, generosity, prodigality, hospitality, justice, righteousness,
 tact, vanity, magnificence, conceit, humility, arrogance(?), jealousy,
 suspiciousness, faithlessness; as son, husband, father, friend, as
 general, legislator, statesman, [3438]423-[3439]430; religious
 characteristics, 430-[3440]433; honored by God, [3441]482; the servant
 of God and conqueror of nations, [3442]483; proclaims name of God in
 his edicts, [3443]484; emperor by the will of God, [3444]489;
 liberality to poor, [3445]494; present at synods, [3446]494, [3447]495;
 divine manifestation to, 495; humane treatment of prisoners, [3448]503;
 declares God to be the author of his prosperity, [3449]506; chosen by
 God, [3450]507; exhortation to worship God, [3451]510; prayers of,
 [3452]513, [3453]544, [3454]555, [3455]556; piety of, [3456]519,
 [3457]520; orders erection of church at Jerusalem, [3458]526,
 [3459]528; presents of, at his vicennalia, [3460]526; builds churches
 at Constantinople, [3461]532; at Nicomedia, [3462]532; abolishes
 idolatry at Constantinople, 532; destroys idol temples, [3463]534,
 [3464]535; builds church at Heliopolis, [3465]536; presents by,
 [3466]541; remission of taxes, [3467]541; forbids idolatrous worship,
 [3468]545; honors martyrs and church festivals, [3469]545; observance
 of Easter, [3470]545; requires soldiers to pray on Sunday, [3471]545;
 form of prayer given, [3472]545; zeal in prayer, 545; calls himself a
 bishop, [3473]546; prohibits sacrifices, mystic rites, combats of
 gladiators, and worship of Nile, [3474]546; gifts of, to churches,
 virgins, and the poor, [3475]547; excessive clemency, [3476]548;
 rebukes a covetous man, [3477]548; liberality, [3478]551, [3479]552;
 displeased with excessive praise, [3480]552; instructs his children in
 politics and religion, [3481]553, [3482]554; benevolence, [3483]554;
 vigor of body, 554; builds Church of the Apostles, [3484]555; gifts,
 [3485]556; honored by God, [3486]559; surpassed preceding emperors in
 devotion, [3487]559; ascribes all things to God, [3488]580; gifted with
 divine and human wisdom, [3489]581; wise, good, just, [3490]585;
 self-control, 586; abolishes idolatry, [3491]591, [3492]592; churches
 built by, [3493]594.

  LAWS, LETTERS, AND WRITINGS.

 Laws and internal improvements, [3494]418; writings, 436; oratorical,
 [3495]436; letters and edicts, [3496]436-[3497]440; laws, 440; style,
 [3498]440; (spurious) treaty with Sylvester and Tiridates, 439; laws
 of, [3499]440, [3500]445; oration to the assembly of the saints,
 prolegomena, [3501]466, [3502]467, [3503]469; edicts in favor of
 confessors, [3504]505; laws concerning martyrs and concerning
 ecclesiastical property, [3505]505; letters of, 506; rescripts,
 [3506]506; law respecting piety, [3507]506, [3508]507; law granting
 release from exile, etc., [3509]508; law forbidding sacrifice,
 [3510]511; letter to Eusebius concerning the building of churches,
 [3511]511; law ordering building of churches, [3512]511; letter to the
 people of the provinces concerning the error of polytheism, [3513]512;
 letter to Alexander and Arius, [3514]515; letter to churches concerning
 Council of Nicæa, 524, [3515]525; letters to bishops met at the Council
 of Nicæa, [3516]526; letters to the Egyptians exhorting peace,
 [3517]526; letter to Eusebius (Macarius) concerning Mambre, [3518]533;
 letters to the Antiochians concerning Eustathius, [3519]536; letter to
 Antiochians concerning Eusebius, [3520]536, [3521]537; letter to the
 council concerning the removal of Eusebius from Cæsarea, [3522]538;
 letter to Eusebius on his refusing the bishopric of Antioch, [3523]538;
 edict against the heretics, [3524]539; letter to Sapor, 543, [3525]544;
 law for observance of Sunday, [3526]544; amends laws concerning the
 childless and concerning wills, [3527]546; law that no Christian shall
 be slave to a Jew, [3528]547; discourses and declamations, [3529]547;
 oration to the saints, [3530]548; writes to Eusebius concerning Easter,
 [3531]548, [3532]549; and concerning copies of the Scriptures,
 [3533]548, [3534]549; letter to Council of Tyre, [3535]550, [3536]551;
 writings of, [3537]554; employs himself in compositions, [3538]554;
 oration of, [3539]561.

 Constantine, arch of, [3540]417, note.

 Constantine, coins of, [3541]544, [3542]559.

 Constantine, life of, by Eusebius, editions, [3543]466; translations,
 466, [3544]467; translation (text), [3545]481.

 Constantine, literature on, [3546]455-[3547]465.

 Constantine, picture of, [3548]520, [3549]544.

 Constantine, sources for life, [3550]444-[3551]455.

 Constantine, statue of, [3552]493.

 Constantine II. made Cæsar, [3553]418, [3554]550, [3555]584; war
 against Goths, [3556]419.

 Constantine, sons of. See Sons of Constantine.

 Constantinople, founding of, [3557]419; description of, 555.

 Constantinople, Church of Apostles at, [3558]420.

 Constantinople, founding of, mythical dream of C. concerning,
 [3559]443.

 Constantinople, Church of Apostles, [3560]555; funeral service in, 558.

 Constantinus Porphyrogenitus (source), [3561]452.

 Constantius, son of C., appointed Cæsar, [3562]550, [3563]584; marriage
 of, [3564]553; buries his father, [3565]558.

 Constantius Chlorus, Emperor, [3566]411; father of Constantine,
 [3567]411; husband of Helena, [3568]411 and note; made Cæsar, 411,
 [3569]412; divorces Helena, [3570]412; becomes Augustus, [3571]412,
 [3572]414; asks to have Constantine sent to him, [3573]412; expedition
 to Britain, [3574]412; death at York, [3575]412, [3576]414; names C.
 successor, [3577]412; internal improvements continued by his son,
 [3578]414, note; character, [3579]421, [3580]485 and note; mildness of
 rule, [3581]485; numberless virtues, [3582]485; refuses to persecute,
 [3583]485; reproached with poverty by Diocletian, [3584]486; his
 answer, [3585]487; secured subjects free worship, [3586]485; stratagem
 of, [3587]486; becomes chief Augustus, [3588]487; sole Augustus,
 [3589]487; blessed with numerous offspring, [3590]487; devotion to
 Supreme God, 487; reward of devotion, [3591]487; his Christian manner
 of life, [3592]487; death of, [3593]488; bequeaths empire to his son,
 [3594]488; burial, [3595]488; his happy end, [3596]488; honors the one
 God, [3597]489; humanity and piety of, [3598]512.

 Controversy between Alexander and Arius, origin of, [3599]516;
 continuation of, [3600]518.

 Covetous man rebuked by C., [3601]548.

 Creation by Christ, [3602]563; works of, [3603]564.

 Creator, [3604]569; wisdom of, [3605]565, etc., cf. words God and Word.

 Crescentius = Chrestus, [3606]437.

 Crete, [3607]602.

 Crispus, son of Constantine and Minervina, [3608]412 and note; made
 Cæsar, [3609]418; defeats the Franks, [3610]418; death of, 419; tutored
 by Lactantius, [3611]423; death of, discussion of, [3612]428, 429.

 Cross, vision of, [3613]416, [3614]490 and note; the sign of
 immortality, [3615]491 and note; sign of. See Sign of Cross and
 Standard of Cross, 232.

 Cross-bearers, one slain, another preserved, [3616]502.

 Cumæan Sibyl, [3617]575.

 Cupid, [3618]590, [3619]601.

 Cyriacus, St. (mythical), death of, [3620]444.

 Cyril of Jerusalem (source), [3621]447.

 Cyrus the Great, [3622]483.


 Dalmatius, [3623]584 and note; made Cæsar, [3624]420.

 Dalmatius, letter of C. to, [3625]439.

 Daniel, [3626]573, [3627]574.

 Daniel and the lions, figure of, [3628]532.

 Daphne, [3629]574.

 Death, worship of, [3630]590.

 Decennalia of C., [3631]550.

 Decius, [3632]579.

 Declamations of C., [3633]547.

 Delphic tripods, [3634]534.

 Demon worship in Cicilia, [3635]535.

 Design, [3636]564; evidence of, [3637]565.

 Diceto, Ralph de (source), [3638]455.

 Diocletian, C. hostage with, [3639]412 and note; palace struck by
 lightning, [3640]412; abdication, [3641]412, [3642]414; urges
 appointment of C. as Cæsar, [3643]414; "Fourth Edict" of persecution,
 [3644]415.

 Diocletian, persecution by, [3645]485, [3646]486; passes through
 Palestine, [3647]487; abdication of, [3648]487, [3649]579; insanity and
 cruelty of, [3650]512; terrified by lightning, [3651]579.

 Diodorus Siculus, [3652]602 and note.

 Diomede, [3653]602.

 Dionysius, [3654]551.

 Dionysius of Halicarnassus, [3655]602.

 Discourses of C., [3656]547.

 Discourses by bishops at Jerusalem, [3657]552.

 Divination, practice by Licinius, [3658]501.

 Donatists, [3659]417 and note, [3660]418.

 Donatist bishops, letter of C. to, [3661]437.

 Donation of C., [3662]442, [3663]443.

 Dracilianus, [3664]528.

 Dragon in picture of C., [3665]520.

 Dream of C. concerning the founding of Constantinople (mythical),
 [3666]443.

 Drepanum, refounded as Helenopolis, [3667]419.

 Ducas (source), [3668]455.

 Dumateni, [3669]602.

 Dusaris, [3670]601.


 East, the religion came from, [3671]516.

 Easter, [3672]555; celebration of, [3673]520, [3674]521; declaration of
 Council of Nicæa, [3675]523; observance of, [3676]524; observance by
 C., [3677]545; remarks on, 561.

 Eastern Nations, [3678]483.

 Edict of Licinius, [3679]497.

 Edict of toleration by Galerius, [3680]498.

 Edict of toleration by Maximinus, [3681]498, [3682]499.

 Egypt, Arian disturbance in, [3683]515, 5 [3684]20; controversies in,
 550; travels of Pythagoras in, [3685]566; laws of, [3686]573.

 Egyptian bishops at Nicæa, [3687]521; at Jerusalem, [3688]551.

 Ephræmius (source), [3689]454.

 Epirus, bishops from, at Nicæa, [3690]521.

 Erechtheus, [3691]602.

 Erocus, king of the Allemanni, [3692]413.

 Erythræan Sibyl, the, [3693]574, [3694]575.

 Eternal life, [3695]567, [3696]570, [3697]579, [3698]580.

 Ethiopians, [3699]483.

 Eusebius, letter of C. to, [3700]437, [3701]439; (source), 446; Life of
 C., editions, [3702]466; translations, [3703]466, [3704]467; date, 467;
 trustworthiness, [3705]467; value, [3706]469; oration in praise of C.,
 Prolegomena, [3707]466, [3708]467, [3709]469; translation, [3710]481;
 purpose of the work, [3711]484; address at Nicæa, [3712]522; called to
 Antioch, [3713]536; letter to, concerning Mambre, 533; letter of C. to
 Antiochians concerning, [3714]537; letter of C. to, on his refusing the
 bishopric of Antioch, [3715]538; letters of, respecting bishopric of
 Antioch, [3716]538; declamation in honor of our Saviour's Sepulchre,
 [3717]548; letter of C. to, concerning copies of the Scriptures,
 [3718]548, [3719]549; discourse concerning Easter, [3720]548,
 [3721]549; letter of C. to, concerning Easter, [3722]549; pronounces
 discourse at Jerusalem, [3723]552; at Constantinople, [3724]552;
 tricennial oration, before Constantine, [3725]552; oration in praise of
 C., [3726]581.

 Eusebius of Nicomedia, letter of C. against, [3727]438.

 Ethiopians, [3728]542.

 Eumalius Vicarius, letter of C. to, [3729]437.

 Eumenius (source), [3730]446.

 Eunapius (source), [3731]448.

 Euphronius, [3732]538.

 Eustathius, [3733]536.

 Eutropius (source), 447.

 Evagrius (source), 451.

 Everlasting life. See Eternal life.

 Evil, propensity to, [3734]571.


 Famine at Rome, [3735]492.

 Fate, [3736]564.

 Fausta marries C., 413; reveals plot of Maximian, [3737]413; death of,
 [3738]419.

 Faustus of Byzantium (source), [3739]449.

 Finding of the Cross, 444.

 "Fourth Edict" of Persecution, [3740]415.

 Francs, [3741]413.

 Future life, [3742]568; cf. eternal life.

 Future retribution, [3743]578, [3744]579.


 Galatian bishops at Nicæa, [3745]521.

 Galerius, C. hostage with, [3746]412 and note; refuses to appoint C.
 Cæsar, [3747]412; jealousy of C., 412; rage at the escape of C.,
 [3748]412; refuses C. the title of Augustus, [3749]413; becomes
 Augustus, [3750]414; death, [3751]414, [3752]416; character, [3753]414;
 Galerius real author of "Fourth Edict" of Persecution, [3754]415;
 issues edict of toleration, [3755]416; persecution by, [3756]485;
 expedition against Rome, [3757]489 and note; edict of toleration,
 [3758]498.

 Galerius (Maximian G.), death of, [3759]498.

 Ganymede, [3760]590.

 Gaza becomes Constantia, [3761]550.

 Gelasius of Cyzicus (source), [3762]450.

 Generation, [3763]562, [3764]563.

 Generation of the Son, [3765]569.

 Generation of the Word, [3766]562, etc.

 Gentiles in office, forbidden to sacrifice, [3767]511; abandon idol
 worship, [3768]535.

 Geoffrey of Monmouth (source), [3769]455.

 George of Arethusa, [3770]538 and note.

 Getæ, [3771]601.

 Giants, [3772]482 and note.

 Gladiatorial combats forbidden, [3773]546.

 Glycas, Mich (source), 454.

 God, known through his government of the universe, [3774]514; the
 teacher of good, [3775]514; the Father, [3776]562, [3777]566,
 [3778]568; the Saviour, [3779]562; the Creator of all things,
 [3780]562; the Father of the Word, [3781]562; benevolent care of,
 [3782]563; intellectual essence of, [3783]565; Providence of,
 [3784]565; the source of all things, 580; one, [3785]584; knowledge of,
 [3786]571, [3787]606; cf. Christ, the Word, etc.

 Good, propensity to, [3788]571.

 Good Shepherd, figure of, [3789]532.

 Goths, [3790]542, note; war with, [3791]419.

 Gregoras, Nicephoras (source), 454.

 Gregory of Tours (source), [3792]451.


 Hannibalianus, 420, [3793]584 and note.

 Helena, wife of Constantius, 411 and note; mother of C., [3794]411;
 lived at Drepanum, [3795]411 and note; divorced by Constantius,
 [3796]412; visit to Jerusalem, [3797]419; character of, [3798]421;
 spurious letter of C. to, [3799]439; spurious letter to C., [3800]439;
 (mythical) Constantine and, [3801]441; (mythical) a British princess,
 [3802]441, [3803]442; (mythical) voyage of, [3804]443; finds the cross,
 444; makes will, [3805]531; death, [3806]531; builds churches at
 Bethlehem and Mount of Olives, [3807]530; pious conduct of, [3808]531;
 generosity of, [3809]531; has titles of Augusta and empress, [3810]532;
 coins struck in her name, [3811]532.

 Helenopolis, [3812]555; founding of, [3813]419.

 Helicon, [3814]534.

 Heliopolis, [3815]602; inhabitants of, letter of C. to, [3816]439;
 Temple of Venus destroyed, [3817]535; church built, 536.

 Henry of Huntingdon (source), [3818]455.

 Heraclea, battle near, 417.

 Hercules, [3819]590, [3820]601.

 Heretics, edict against, [3821]539; deprived of their meeting places,
 [3822]539; may return to Catholic Church, [3823]540.

 Hesychius Milesius (source), [3824]450.

 Hieronymus (source), [3825]447.

 Holy Sepulchre, [3826]527, [3827]548; discovery of, [3828]527,
 [3829]528; church of, 526, [3830]528, [3831]594; description of,
 [3832]528, [3833]530.

 Honors paid C. after death, [3834]557.

 Horns, [3835]601.

 Hosius, friend of C., 423.

 Houses, restoration of, [3836]509, [3837]510.


 Iberia, [3838]577.

 Idatius (source), 450.

 Idol worship abandoned, [3839]535.

 Idolatrous worship forbidden, [3840]545; error of, [3841]563.

 Images, overthrow of, [3842]534.

 Indian Ocean, [3843]553.

 Indians, [3844]483, [3845]542, [3846]553.

 Ingentius, [3847]437.

 Inscription on statue of C., [3848]493.

 Inspiration of the Sibyl, [3849]575.

 Invention of the Cross. See Finding of the Cross.

 Isis, [3850]601.

 Italians, [3851]566.


 Jacobus of Sarug (source), [3852]450.

 Jerome. See Hieronymus.

 Jerusalem, improvements in, [3853]419; dedication of church at,
 [3854]420, [3855]550, [3856]551.

 Jerusalem, Synod of, [3857]552.

 Jews, 806; may not have Christian slaves, [3858]547.

 Joannes the Meletian, letter of C. to, [3859]439.

 Johannes Antiochenus (source), [3860]452.

 Jordan, the, [3861]556, [3862]569.

 Jordanes (or Jornandes) (source), [3863]451.

 Jove, [3864]577.

 Judgment, the, [3865]578, [3866]579.

 Julian the Apostate (source), [3867]448.

 Juno, [3868]602.

 Jupiter, [3869]590, [3870]602.

 Jupiter Latiaris, [3871]602.

 Justice, [3872]564.


 Knowledge, desire of, [3873]566.


 Labarum, [3874]490 and note, [3875]491 and notes.

 Lactantius (source), 446.

 Lactantius, tutor to Crispus, [3876]423.

 Lamentation at death of C., [3877]557.

 Lands, restoration of, [3878]509, [3879]510.

 Laodicea, [3880]602.

 Law respecting piety, [3881]506, [3882]507; granting release for exile,
 etc., [3883]508; forbidding sacrifice, [3884]511; ordering building of
 churches, [3885]511; of wills, [3886]546; respecting childless persons,
 [3887]546.

 Laws, human, [3888]564.

 Lebanon, Mount, [3889]534, [3890]592.

 Leo Diaconus (source), 453.

 Leprosy (mythical) of C., [3891]442.

 Letter of C. to the churches, [3892]524.

 Leus, [3893]602.

 Libanius (source), 448.

 Libya, Arian disturbance in, [3894]515; controversies in, [3895]550.

 Libyan bishops at Nicæa, [3896]521; at Jerusalem, [3897]551.

 Libyans, [3898]602.

 Licinius appointed Augustus, [3899]414; character, [3900]414; marriage
 to Constantia, [3901]417; edict of Milan, [3902]417; defeats Maximinus,
 [3903]417; falls out with C., [3904]417; defeated at Cibalis and
 Mardia, [3905]418; persecution of Christians, [3906]418; war with C.
 and defeat by, [3907]418, [3908]419; surrender, [3909]419; life spared,
 [3910]419; death, 419; conspiracy of, against C., [3911]496; contrasted
 with C., [3912]496; oppresses the East, [3913]496; intrigues against
 the bishops, [3914]496; persecutes Christians, [3915]496, [3916]497,
 498, [3917]500; lawless conduct and covetousness of, [3918]497; address
 to soldiers, [3919]501; sacrifices to idols, [3920]501, [3921]504;
 flight of, [3922]503; advises soldiers not to attack the Cross,
 [3923]504; treachery of, [3924]504; death of, [3925]504.

 Licinius, son of Licinius, made Cæsar, [3926]418; death of, 419.

 Linus, [3927]577.

 Logos used as personalty, [3928]481, note; cf. [3929]482, note.

 Lord's Day. See Sunday.

 Lucina, [3930]576.

 Lydus, Joannes, (Laurentius) (source), [3931]451.


 Macarius, Letters of C. to, [3932]438, [3933]439; letter of C. to,
 [3934]528; letter to, concerning Mambre, [3935]533.

 Macedonian bishops at Nicæa, [3936]521; at Jerusalem, [3937]551.

 Magic, practised by the persecuting emperors, [3938]489; by Maxentius,
 [3939]492; by Licinius, [3940]501, [3941]503.

 Malalas (source), 452.

 Mambre, oak of, [3942]533; church built at, [3943]533.

 Marcionites, [3944]539.

 Mararianus, the notary, [3945]551.

 Maro. See Virgil.

 Mars, [3946]602.

 Martyrs, in the palaces, [3947]486; laws in favor of, [3948]505;
 property of, [3949]509; tombs of, [3950]510; churches in honor of, at
 Constantinople, [3951]532; honored by C., [3952]545; life and death of,
 [3953]571.

 Material objects, existence of, [3954]562.

 Material world, [3955]571.

 Maxentius, proclaimed emperor by Prætorian guards, [3956]413,
 [3957]414; persuades Maximian to resume purple, [3958]413; quarrels
 with M., [3959]413; character, [3960]415; prepares for war against C.,
 [3961]416; death, [3962]416; tyranny and lust of, [3963]491; causes
 slaughter of Roman people, [3964]492; armies of, defeated thrice,
 [3965]492; employs magic arts, [3966]492; death of, [3967]492,
 [3968]493; death compared with that of Pharaoh, [3969]493.

 Maximian, abdication of, [3970]412, [3971]414; resumes purple, 414;
 quarrels with Maxentius, [3972]413; alliance with C., [3973]413; plots
 against C., [3974]413; defeated at Marseilles, [3975]413; another plot,
 [3976]413; death, [3977]413, [3978]414, [3979]416; character,
 [3980]415; persecution by, [3981]485; abdication of, [3982]487;
 insanity and cruelty of, [3983]512; death of, [3984]495.

 Maximinus, with C. made "sons of the emperors," [3985]413, [3986]414;
 acknowledged emperor, [3987]413, [3988]414; letter of C. to, 414;
 appointment as Cæsar, [3989]414; assumes title of Augustus, [3990]414;
 character, [3991]415; persecution by, [3992]415; war against Licinius,
 defeat, flight, and death, [3993]417, [3994]578; persecution of,
 [3995]498; flight and death of, [3996]498; edict in favor of
 Christians, [3997]498, [3998]499.

 Maximinus (for Maximianus), death of, [3999]495.

 Melcatharus, [4000]601.

 Melchiades, letter of C. to, [4001]437.

 Memphis, [4002]573.

 Mercury, [4003]601.

 Mesopotamian bishops at Nicæa, [4004]521; at Jerusalem, [4005]551.

 Metageitnion, [4006]601.

 Milan, edict of, [4007]417.

 Miltiades = Melchiades.

 Minerva, [4008]601, [4009]602.

 Minerva Agraulis, [4010]602.

 Minervina, alliance of C., [4011]412 and note.

 Miracles, [4012]572.

 Mnemosyne, [4013]601.

 Moesians at Jerusalem, [4014]551.

 Mopsus, [4015]601.

 Moses, C. compared with, [4016]485; wisdom of, [4017]573.

 Mount of Olives, erection of church on, [4018]530, [4019]531,
 [4020]594.

 Muses, [4021]534.

 Musonius, [4022]536.

 Mystic rites, prohibition of, [4023]546.


 Naïssus, [4024]411 and note.

 Narcissus, letter of C. to, [4025]538.

 Nazarius (source), [4026]446; delivers oration, [4027]418.

 Nature, [4028]565, [4029]571; parent of all, [4030]561.

 Nebuchadnezzar, [4031]573.

 Nero, [4032]484.

 Nicæa, Council of, [4033]419, [4034]481, note; calling of, [4035]521;
 bishops present, [4036]521; number of bishops, [4037]522; deacons,
 etc., present, [4038]522; character of the bishops, [4039]521; held in
 the palace, [4040]522; Constantine present at, [4041]522; address of
 Eusebius, [4042]522; address of Constantine, [4043]522, [4044]523;
 declaration of, [4045]523; letter of C. to the churches concerning,
 [4046]524; farewell address of C. to, [4047]525, [4048]526.

 Nicephorus Callistus (source), [4049]454.

 Nicetas Choniatas (source), [4050]454.

 Nicomedia, [4051]579, etc.; churches built in, [4052]532.

 Nicomedians, letter of C. to, [4053]438.

 Nile, worship of, forbidden, [4054]546.

 Novatians, [4055]539.

 Number, [4056]566, [4057]587-[4058]589.

 Numidian bishops, letter of C. to, [4059]438.


 Obodas, [4060]601.

 Omadian Bacchus, [4061]602.

 Optatian (= Porphyrius), (source), [4062]446.

 Oracle of Apollo, [4063]512.

 Oracle, Pythian, [4064]513.

 Oration of C. to the Saints, [4065]548; translation of, [4066]561.

 Orosius, Paulus (source), [4067]450.

 Orphans, Care of C. for, [4068]494.

 Orpheus, [4069]577, [4070]603.

 Osiris, [4071]601.


 Painting, encaustic, [4072]482 and note.

 Palestinian bishops at Nicæa, [4073]521; at Jerusalem, [4074]551.

 Pamphylian bishops at Nicæa, [4075]521.

 Pan, [4076]577.

 Panegyrists (source), [4077]446

 Pannonians at Jerusalem, [4078]551.

 Passion, day of, [4079]561.

 Paulians, [4080]539.

 Pentecost, feast of, [4081]557.

 Persecution by colleagues of Constantius, [4082]485; edict of, 512;
 origin of, [4083]512.

 Persecutions, [4084]415, [4085]416, [4086]507.

 Persecutors, the, [4087]507; end of, [4088]507, [4089]513, [4090]543,
 [4091]593, [4092]594; contrasted with C, [4093]519.

 Persia, Christians in, [4094]542-[4095]544.

 Persian bishop at Nicæa, [4096]521; at Jerusalem, [4097]551.

 Persian War, [4098]554, [4099]555.

 Petrus Patricius (source), [4100]451.

 Pharaoh, [4101]573.

 Pharaoh and Maxentius, [4102]493.

 Philosophers, the, [4103]566; doctrines of, [4104]567.

 Philosophy, [4105]546 and note, [4106]547.

 Philostorgius (source), [4107]450.

 Phoebus, [4108]577.

 Phoenician bishops at Nicæa, [4109]521; at Jerusalem, [4110]551.

 Phoenix, the, [4111]558.

 Photius (source), [4112]452.

 Phrygian bishops at Nicæa, [4113]521.

 Picture of C. with Cross and Dragon, [4114]520.

 Plato, [4115]573; doctrines of, [4116]566.

 Plots of Diocletian and Galerius against C, [4117]488 and note.

 Pluto, [4118]590.

 Poets, sayings of, [4119]567.

 Pontus, bishops from, at Nicæa, [4120]521.

 Porfirius = Optatian.

 Porphyrius = Optatian.

 Porphyrius, letter of C. to, [4121]438.

 Portraits of C., [4122]544.

 Prætorian Præfect, [4123]511 and note, [4124]528.

 Praxagoras Atheniensis (source), [4125]448.

 Prayer, form of, given by C. to soldiers, [4126]545.

 Priapus, [4127]601.

 Probianus, letter of C. to, [4128]437.

 Procopius Cæsariensis (source), [4129]451.

 Prohibited books, [4130]539.

 Prophecies of Christ's coming, [4131]573.

 Prophecy of Sibyl, [4132]575.

 Proserpine, [4133]590, [4134]601.

 Prosper Aquitanus (source), [4135]450.

 Providence, [4136]565; supplies all needs, [4137]566; = Christ,
 [4138]569, 570, etc., etc.

 Pseudo-Isidore (source), [4139]452.

 Pseudo-Leo (source), [4140]453.

 Pyriphlegethno, [4141]567.

 Pythagoras, [4142]566, [4143]573.

 Pythian Apollo, [4144]534.

 Pythian Oracle, [4145]513.

 Pythius, [4146]592.


 Resurrection, [4147]605.

 Rhine, [4148]489.

 "Righteous men, The," [4149]512.

 Rome, famine at, [4150]492.


 Sabbath, [4151]544.

 Sacrifices, prohibition of, [4152]546.

 Sapor, [4153]579; letter of C. to, [4154]439, [4155]542, and note;
 desires to make alliance with C., [4156]542; letter of C. to,
 [4157]543. [4158]544.

 Sarmatians, defeated by C., [4159]418; war in behalf of, 419; received
 into Roman Empire, [4160]420; revolt of slaves, [4161]542; seek
 protection of C., [4162]541; attacked by Scythians, [4163]542; received
 into Roman Empire, 542; conquest of, [4164]542.

 Saturn, [4165]601, [4166]602.

 Saviour, the, appears to Abraham, [4167]533.

 Scriptores Histories Augusta (source), [4168]448.

 Scriptures, copies of, [4169]549 and notes.

 Scythia, subdued by C, [4170]483.

 Scythians, [4171]602; conquest of, [4172]541;

 Self-control, [4173]564.

 Sepulchre, Holy. See Holy Sepulchre.

 Severus, becomes Cæsar, [4174]414; Augustus, [4175]414; death, 414,
 [4176]416; character of, [4177]414; expedition against Rome, [4178]489
 and note.

 Sibyl, the, [4179]574; prophecy concerning Christ, [4180]575.

 Sign of the Cross. See Standard of the Cross.

 Sign of cross, [4181]513, [4182]520, [4183]541, [4184]593, [4185]594;
 engraved on soldiers' shields, [4186]545.

 Sigusium, capture of, [4187]416.

 Sminthian Apollo, [4188]534.

 Socrates (source), [4189]450.

 Socrates, [4190]566.

 Son, the revealer of light, [4191]514.

 Sons of C, [4192]505, [4193]582; heirs of Helena, [4194]530, [4195]531;
 appointed Cæsars, 550; empire divided between, [4196]553; instruction
 of, [4197]553, [4198]554; Christians, [4199]553; proclaimed Augustus by
 the army, [4200]557.

 Soul, the breath of God, [4201]567.

 Sozomen (source), [4202]449.

 Spanish bishops at Nicæa, [4203]521.

 Sparta, [4204]602.

 Standard of the Cross, [4205]490, [4206]502; victory follows,
 [4207]502; fifty men selected to carry, [4208]502. See Sign of the
 Cross.

 Stephen of Byzantium (source), [4209]449.

 Strategius, Count, [4210]538. See Musonius.

 Sunday, law for observance of, [4211]544, [4212]545; pagan soldiers
 required to pray on, [4213]545.

 Sword of C. (mythical), [4214]445.

 Sylvester, Pope (spurious), treaty with C. and Tiridates, 439; letter
 of C. to (the Donation), [4215]440; baptism of C., [4216]442; mythical
 appearance to C. in a dream, [4217]443.

 Symplegades, [4218]520 and note.

 Syrian bishops at Nicæa, [4219]521; at Jerusalem, [4220]551.


 Tabernacle of the Cross, [4221]503.

 Taxes, equalization of, [4222]541; remission of, [4223]541.

 Temple, destruction of idol, [4224]534, [4225]535, etc.

 Tenedos, [4226]602.

 Tent in the form of a church, [4227]554, [4228]555.

 Thebaid, Arian disturbance in, [4229]515; bishops from at Jerusalem,
 [4230]551.

 Theban bishops at Nicæa, [4231]521.

 Theoaoret (source), [4232]450.

 Theodorus, letter of C. to, [4233]538.

 Theodorus of Perinthus, [4234]551, note.

 Theodotus, letter of C. to, [4235]438; letter of C. to, [4236]538.

 Theognis, letter of C. against, [4237]438.

 Theogonius, [4238]551, note.

 Theophanes (source), [4239]452.

 Thracian bishops at Nicæa, [4240]521; at Jerusalem, [4241]551.

 Thracians, [4242]602.

 Tiber, [4243]492.

 Tiberius, [4244]575.

 Tiphys, [4245]577.

 Tiridates, [4246]445; (spurious) treaty with C. and Sylvester,
 [4247]439.

 Toleration, edicts of, [4248]417 and note; first edict, [4249]416;
 second edict, [4250]437. See under Edict.

 Tombs of martyrs, [4251]510.

 Torture practised against Christians, [4252]513.

 Tricennalia, [4253]550, [4254]552, [4255]582.

 Tripods, [4256]534, [4257]574.

 Troy, [4258]577, [4259]606.

 Turin, battle of, [4260]416.

 Tyrants, destruction of, [4261]482, [4262]488. See Persecutors, end of.

 Tyre, Synod of, [4263]420, [4264]550; letter of C. concerning, 439;
 letter of C. to, [4265]439; letter of C. to, [4266]550, [4267]551;
 adjourns to Jerusalem, [4268]551.


 Ursacius, [4269]551, note.

 Usorus, [4270]601.


 Valens, [4271]551, note.

 Valerian, [4272]543 and note, [4273]579.

 Valentinians, [4274]539.

 Venus, [4275]601; worship of, [4276]534, [4277]590, [4278]592; Temple
 of, [4279]535.

 Verona, capture of, [4280]416.

 Vice, [4281]564.

 Vicennalia of C., [4282]419, [4283]550, [4284]552.

 Victor, Sextus Aurelius (source), [4285]448.

 Virgil, [4286]575, [4287]576.

 Virgin, the, [4288]575, [4289]576.

 Virginity, [4290]546 and note.

 Virgins, C. gives dowries to, [4291]494.

 Virtue, [4292]564.

 Virtue, life of, [4293]571.

 Vision of the Cross, [4294]416, [4295]490 and note.

 Voragine (source), [4296]455.


 Western ocean, [4297]483, [4298]489, [4299]553.

 Widows, care of C. for, [4300]494.

 Will of God, [4301]564.

 Will of man, [4302]571.

 William of Malmesbury (source), [4303]455.

 Wills, law of, [4304]546, [4305]547.

 Women's apartments, [4306]508.

 Word, the, [4307]482, [4308]561; Son of God, [4309]562; is Son of God
 and with God, [4310]566; is God himself, the High Priest, the Light,
 pervades and rules all things, [4311]583; only-begotten Saviour of the
 universe, pre-existent, [4312]583; the source of all things, [4313]585;
 author of thought and knowledge of God, produces the likeness of God,
 [4314]585; doctrine of, [4315]595. (Creator, Preserver, only begotten,
 etc., etc.)


 Zalmolxis, [4316]601.

 Zenobius of Klag (source), [4317]449.

 Zonaras, Johannes (source), [4318]453.

 Zosimus (source), [4319]449.

 Indexes

Index of Scripture References

 Genesis

 [4320]1:26 [4321]2:13 [4322]4:15 [4323]6:1-4 [4324]6:11-12
 [4325]9:20 [4326]9:21 [4327]9:24 [4328]11:1-9 [4329]11:1-9
 [4330]12:1-6 [4331]12:3 [4332]14:18 [4333]15:6 [4334]16:1-6
 [4335]16:6-14 [4336]17:1-22 [4337]18:1 [4338]18:1 [4339]18:18
 [4340]18:25 [4341]19:24 [4342]28:12 [4343]31:11 [4344]32:28
 [4345]32:30 [4346]37 [4347]49:10

 Exodus

 [4348]3:4-6 [4349]6:6 [4350]7:21 [4351]9:12 [4352]12:6
 [4353]12:19 [4354]12:30 [4355]12:38 [4356]15:1 [4357]15:1-2
 [4358]15:4 [4359]15:4-5 [4360]15:5 [4361]15:5 [4362]15:10
 [4363]15:10 [4364]15:11 [4365]15:11 [4366]17:6 [4367]20:3
 [4368]20:5 [4369]22:20 [4370]25:40 [4371]28:36 [4372]33:7
 [4373]35:30 [4374]35:31

 Leviticus

 [4375]4:5 [4376]4:16 [4377]6:22


 Numbers

 [4378]13:16 [4379]20:20 [4380]24:17 [4381]36:6-7 [4382]66

 Deuteronomy

 [4383]1:7 [4384]1:23 [4385]4 [4386]4 [4387]19:14 [4388]25:5

 Joshua

 [4389]1:6-7 [4390]1:9 [4391]5:13 [4392]5:13-15

 1 Samuel

 [4393]2:8

 1 Chronicles

 [4394]2:55 [4395]16:22

 Ezra

 [4396]14:44

 Job

 [4397]9:10

 Psalms

 [4398]2:1-2 [4399]2:7-8 [4400]2:8 [4401]3:3-5 [4402]4:16
 [4403]5:15 [4404]7:15-16 [4405]7:15-16 [4406]7:20 [4407]7:40
 [4408]8:2 [4409]9:5 [4410]9:6 [4411]10:1 [4412]10:4
 [4413]13:7 [4414]18:8 [4415]18:31 [4416]18:41 [4417]19:4
 [4418]19:4 [4419]22:1 [4420]26:8 [4421]31:7 [4422]32:7
 [4423]32:11 [4424]33:9 [4425]33:9 [4426]33:16-19 [4427]36:4
 [4428]36:4 [4429]37:14-15 [4430]37:35-36 [4431]44:1
 [4432]45:2 [4433]45:6-7 [4434]46:3-4 [4435]46:8-9 [4436]48:1
 [4437]48:8 [4438]58:6 [4439]71:7-8 [4440]72 [4441]73:20
 [4442]74:5-6 [4443]74:7 [4444]80:12-13 [4445]87:3
 [4446]89:39-45 [4447]96:1 [4448]98:1-2 [4449]103:10
 [4450]103:12-13 [4451]136:17 [4452]136:23-24

 Proverbs

 [4453]3:12 [4454]8:12 [4455]8:15 [4456]8:16 [4457]8:22-25

 Ecclesiastes

 [4458]11:28

 Isaiah

 [4459]2:4 [4460]3:10 [4461]6:9 [4462]7:14 [4463]9:2
 [4464]9:6 [4465]27:1 [4466]27:1 [4467]30:6 [4468]35:1
 [4469]35:1 [4470]35:3 [4471]35:3-4 [4472]35:4 [4473]35:6
 [4474]35:6-7 [4475]35:7 [4476]42:9 [4477]49:8 [4478]49:18-21
 [4479]51:17-18 [4480]51:22-23 [4481]52:1-2 [4482]53:4-6
 [4483]53:7 [4484]53:8 [4485]54:4 [4486]54:6-8 [4487]54:11-14
 [4488]61:1 [4489]61:10-11 [4490]65:15-16 [4491]66:1
 [4492]66:3-4 [4493]66:8

 Jeremiah

 [4494]5:21 [4495]35 [4496]35:19 [4497]35:19

 Lamentations

 [4498]2:1-2 [4499]4:20

 Ezekiel

 [4500]12:2 [4501]13:3 [4502]18:23 [4503]33:11 [4504]37:7

 Daniel

 [4505]2:21 [4506]7:9-10 [4507]7:13-14 [4508]7:18 [4509]9:26
 [4510]9:26 [4511]9:27 [4512]10:21 [4513]12:1

 Micah

 [4514]5:2 [4515]5:2

 Habakkuk

 [4516]2:11

 Zephaniah

 [4517]3:8

 Haggai

 [4518]2:9 [4519]2:9 [4520]2:9

 Matthew

 [4521]1:6 [4522]1:18 [4523]1:23 [4524]2 [4525]2:2
 [4526]2:11 [4527]2:19-20 [4528]2:22 [4529]2:22 [4530]4:5
 [4531]4:12 [4532]6:24 [4533]6:34 [4534]7:13-14 [4535]7:15
 [4536]7:15-16 [4537]9:20 [4538]10:8 [4539]10:9-10 [4540]10:10
 [4541]10:18 [4542]10:32 [4543]11:12 [4544]11:13 [4545]11:27
 [4546]11:28 [4547]12:33 [4548]13:17 [4549]13:55 [4550]16:13
 [4551]16:17 [4552]16:18 [4553]16:18 [4554]18:7 [4555]19:12
 [4556]19:21 [4557]19:23 [4558]19:28 [4559]22:11 [4560]22:16
 [4561]23:34 [4562]23:38 [4563]24 [4564]24:2 [4565]24:19-21
 [4566]24:24 [4567]24:24 [4568]25:12 [4569]26:52 [4570]26:52
 [4571]27:6 [4572]27:56 [4573]28:19 [4574]28:19

 Mark

 [4575]1:14 [4576]3:14-19 [4577]3:14-19 [4578]4:12 [4579]5:15
 [4580]6:3 [4581]6:17 [4582]10:1 [4583]10:17 [4584]13:14
 [4585]14:62 [4586]15:11 [4587]15:40 [4588]15:42

 Luke

 [4589]1:1-4 [4590]1:2-3 [4591]1:6 [4592]1:52-53 [4593]1:67
 [4594]2:2 [4595]2:2 [4596]3:1 [4597]3:1 [4598]3:1 [4599]3:2
 [4600]3:20 [4601]3:23 [4602]3:24 [4603]6:13-16 [4604]6:13-16
 [4605]6:14 [4606]8:35 [4607]10:1 [4608]10:1-20 [4609]10:22
 [4610]16 [4611]16:9 [4612]19:40 [4613]19:42-44 [4614]21:12
 [4615]21:12 [4616]21:20 [4617]21:20 [4618]21:23-24
 [4619]22:18 [4620]23:7-11 [4621]23:34 [4622]24:13 [4623]24:39

 John

 [4624]1:1 [4625]1:1 [4626]1:1-3 [4627]1:3 [4628]1:3
 [4629]1:3 [4630]1:13 [4631]1:14 [4632]1:14 [4633]1:29
 [4634]2:11 [4635]3:23 [4636]3:24 [4637]3:31 [4638]5:19
 [4639]5:29 [4640]7:5 [4641]8:56-57 [4642]9 [4643]11:49
 [4644]13:23 [4645]13:23 [4646]13:23 [4647]13:25 [4648]14:16
 [4649]15:13 [4650]16:2 [4651]17:3 [4652]17:3 [4653]18:31
 [4654]19:15 [4655]19:25 [4656]19:25 [4657]19:25 [4658]19:25
 [4659]19:25 [4660]19:26 [4661]20:2 [4662]20:29 [4663]20:31
 [4664]21:7 [4665]21:10 [4666]21:18 [4667]21:20 [4668]21:25

 Acts

 [4669]1:13 [4670]1:21 [4671]1:23 [4672]1:23-26 [4673]2:3
 [4674]2:5 [4675]2:30 [4676]2:45 [4677]3:14 [4678]4:36
 [4679]5:29 [4680]5:29 [4681]5:36 [4682]5:37 [4683]5:37
 [4684]5:37 [4685]5:37 [4686]6 [4687]6 [4688]6 [4689]6
 [4690]6 [4691]6:1-6 [4692]6:2-5 [4693]6:9 [4694]7 [4695]7:8
 [4696]7:60 [4697]8 [4698]8:1 [4699]8:3 [4700]8:5 [4701]8:9
 [4702]8:9 [4703]8:9 [4704]8:10 [4705]8:26 [4706]9 [4707]9:3
 [4708]9:15 [4709]9:27 [4710]9:32 [4711]10:1 [4712]11:19
 [4713]11:20 [4714]11:22 [4715]11:26 [4716]11:28 [4717]11:28
 [4718]11:28 [4719]11:28 [4720]11:29-30 [4721]11:29-30
 [4722]11:29-30 [4723]11:30 [4724]12 [4725]12:1-2 [4726]12:2
 [4727]12:2 [4728]12:3 [4729]12:3 [4730]12:12 [4731]12:12
 [4732]12:19 [4733]12:21 [4734]12:23 [4735]12:23 [4736]12:25
 [4737]12:25 [4738]13:1 [4739]13:5 [4740]13:5 [4741]13:13
 [4742]13:13 [4743]13:13 [4744]15 [4745]15 [4746]15
 [4747]15:22 [4748]15:27 [4749]15:32 [4750]15:37 [4751]15:37
 [4752]15:39 [4753]15:39 [4754]15:40 [4755]16:1 [4756]17:24
 [4757]17:34 [4758]17:34 [4759]18 [4760]18:2 [4761]18:17
 [4762]18:18 [4763]18:19 [4764]19:22 [4765]19:29 [4766]19:29
 [4767]20 [4768]20:4 [4769]20:4 [4770]20:4 [4771]21
 [4772]21:8 [4773]21:8-9 [4774]21:9 [4775]21:9 [4776]21:9
 [4777]21:10 [4778]21:23-24 [4779]21:29 [4780]21:38
 [4781]22:20 [4782]23:2 [4783]23:30 [4784]24:5 [4785]25
 [4786]26 [4787]26:25 [4788]27:2 [4789]28:26-28 [4790]28:30

 Romans

 [4791]1:3 [4792]1:20 [4793]1:25 [4794]2:16 [4795]8:18
 [4796]8:25 [4797]10:2 [4798]11:7 [4799]11:36 [4800]13:1
 [4801]15:19 [4802]15:19 [4803]15:19 [4804]15:19 [4805]16
 [4806]16:3 [4807]16:5 [4808]16:7 [4809]16:14 [4810]1755

 1 Corinthians

 [4811]1 [4812]1 [4813]1:1 [4814]1:24 [4815]1:27-28
 [4816]2:9 [4817]4:4 [4818]4:13 [4819]5:3 [4820]7:8
 [4821]9:5 [4822]9:5 [4823]13 [4824]15:5-7 [4825]15:7
 [4826]15:8-10 [4827]15:22 [4828]57

 2 Corinthians

 [4829]1:1 [4830]1:19 [4831]2:15 [4832]3:3 [4833]3:6
 [4834]3:18 [4835]6:16 [4836]8:18 [4837]8:18 [4838]10:5
 [4839]11:6 [4840]11:32 [4841]12:1 [4842]12:2-4

 Galatians

 [4843]1:1 [4844]1:11 [4845]1:16 [4846]1:19 [4847]1:19
 [4848]2 [4849]2:1 [4850]2:2 [4851]2:9 [4852]2:9 [4853]2:11
 [4854]4:26 [4855]4:26 [4856]5:5 [4857]6:11

 Ephesians

 [4858]1:10 [4859]4:6 [4860]4:6 [4861]4:11 [4862]6:22

 Philippians

 [4863]1:18 [4864]1:23 [4865]2:6 [4866]2:6-8 [4867]2:25
 [4868]2:25 [4869]4:3 [4870]4:3 [4871]4:3 [4872]4:3 [4873]4:8

 Colossians

 [4874]1:6 [4875]2:23 [4876]3:2-4 [4877]4:3 [4878]4:8
 [4879]4:10 [4880]4:10 [4881]4:10 [4882]4:13 [4883]4:14
 [4884]4:14 [4885]435

 1 Thessalonians

 [4886]5:21-22 [4887]5:21-22 [4888]5:21-22

 2 Thessalonians

 [4889]1:1

 1 Timothy

 [4890]1:17 [4891]3:15 [4892]6:5 [4893]6:16 [4894]6:20
 [4895]6:20 [4896]6:20 [4897]6:20 [4898]6:20

 2 Timothy

 [4899]2:8 [4900]2:15 [4901]4:6 [4902]4:10 [4903]4:10
 [4904]4:10 [4905]4:10 [4906]4:11 [4907]4:11 [4908]4:16
 [4909]4:16-17 [4910]4:18 [4911]4:21 [4912]4:21 [4913]4:21

 Titus

 [4914]1:5 [4915]3:5 [4916]3:10-11

 Philemon

 [4917]1:2 [4918]1:2 [4919]1:12 [4920]1:24 [4921]1:24

 Hebrews

 [4922]1:3 [4923]2:10 [4924]3:13 [4925]5:6 [4926]5:10
 [4927]6:20 [4928]8 [4929]10:34 [4930]12:6 [4931]12:22
 [4932]12:22-23 [4933]13:17 [4934]13:23

 1 Peter

 [4935]1:1 [4936]1:1 [4937]2:13 [4938]5:6 [4939]5:12
 [4940]5:13 [4941]5:13 [4942]5:13

 1 John

 [4943]1:1 [4944]1:1 [4945]1:1 [4946]1:1-2 [4947]1:2-3
 [4948]4:2 [4949]4:18 [4950]5:19-20 [4951]5:20-21

 2 John

 [4952]1:1 [4953]1:1 [4954]1:7

 3 John

 [4955]1:1 [4956]1:1

 Jude

 [4957]1:1 [4958]1:14

 Revelation

 [4959]1:1-2 [4960]1:4 [4961]1:5 [4962]1:8 [4963]1:9
 [4964]1:11 [4965]2:6 [4966]2:7-10 [4967]2:12 [4968]2:13
 [4969]2:15 [4970]3:14 [4971]3:14 [4972]4 [4973]10:4
 [4974]13:5 [4975]13:18 [4976]13:18 [4977]14:4 [4978]20:1-6
 [4979]20:4 [4980]21:2 [4981]21:2 [4982]21:7 [4983]22:7-8
 [4984]22:7-8 [4985]22:11 [4986]22:18 [4987]22:18-19
 [4988]1857 [4989]1870

 Tobit

 [4990]12:7

 Baruch

 [4991]6

 1 Maccabees

 [4992]8:17

 Sirach

 [4993]25

Index of Greek Words and Phrases

 * ?gnomen: [4994]1
 * ?k te tou kath' 'Ebraious euangeliou kai tou Suriakou kai idios ek
 tes Ebraidos dialektou tina tithesin: [4995]1
 * ?ktisen: [4996]1
 * ?lenchos kai apologia: [4997]1
 * ?luon: [4998]1
 * ?mpsuchon ton enanthropesanta: [4999]1
 * ?n te hois pros Ellenas sunetaxe logois, kai tois pros 'Ioudaious:
 [5000]1
 * ?nnoia: [5001]1 [5002]2
 * ?xo de touton esti ta Makkabaik?: [5003]1
 * ?xo tou me boulesthai autous eidololatrein: [5004]1
 * ?pempsa: [5005]1 [5006]2
 * ?sti gar auto pente biblia suntetagmena: [5007]1
 * 'Gig?nton: [5008]1
 * angelon: [5009]1
 * agnoei: [5010]1
 * ad?mas: [5011]1
 * adelphos: [5012]1 [5013]2
 * adikia: [5014]1
 * aei: [5015]1
 * atheotetos: [5016]1
 * atheei: [5017]1
 * athetousin: [5018]1
 * akolouthoi: [5019]1
 * akoes: [5020]1
 * akoinonetous p?ntas arden tous ekeise anakerutton adelphous:
 [5021]1
 * akolasia: [5022]1 [5023]2
 * akr?teia: [5024]1
 * akrostichis: [5025]1
 * alogou: [5026]1
 * alogou zoou: [5027]1
 * alethes logos: [5028]1
 * all' 'I?kobon ton dikaion episkopon ton Ierosolumon helesthai:
 [5029]1
 * all' outi ge pro tes aletheias timeteos aner: [5030]1
 * amunteria: [5031]1
 * amunterion: [5032]1 [5033]2
 * amphi tou soteriou mnematos logos: [5034]1
 * aner ta p?nta hoti m?lista logiotatos kai tes graphes eidemon:
 [5035]1
 * anistasthai heothen: [5036]1
 * an?gnosma: [5037]1
 * an?stasin: [5038]1
 * anab?tas trist?tas: [5039]1
 * anagnostai: [5040]1
 * anakupsas d' oun met' oligon: [5041]1
 * analephtheison: [5042]1
 * anapl?smata hairetikon andron: [5043]1
 * anapl?smata airetikon andron: [5044]1
 * aneousa ten pistin auton kai hen neosti apo ton apostolon par?dosin
 eilephei: [5045]1
 * anthropogonias: [5046]1
 * antigr?psai: [5047]1
 * antigraphe: [5048]1
 * antilegesthai: [5049]1 [5050]2
 * antilegomena: [5051]1 [5052]2 [5053]3
 * antilegomenos: [5054]1 [5055]2
 * antilegomenon graphon: [5056]1
 * anomologemenas: [5057]1
 * anot?te tis dunamis: [5058]1
 * apo Biennes: [5059]1
 * apo mnemes: [5060]1
 * ap' euthalous kai gonimou peges: [5061]1
 * apobrexai: [5062]1
 * apodoches: [5063]1
 * apolousasthai: [5064]1
 * apologeomai: [5065]1 [5066]2
 * apomnemoneumata: [5067]1
 * apomnemoneum?ton: [5068]1
 * aporountos: [5069]1
 * apotumpanisthenai: [5070]1
 * archen tina ou ten tuchousan tes kat' 'Alex?ndreian basilikes
 dioikeseos enkecheirismenos: [5071]1
 * archonton: [5072]1
 * archaion marturion sunagoge: [5073]1
 * archego tes zoes tou theou: [5074]1
 * archiproselutous: [5075]1
 * archiproseluton: [5076]1
 * asbesto puri: [5077]1
 * aph' hon kai to tes sukophantias alogo sunethei& 139; peri tous
 toioutous rhuenai sumbebeke pseudos: [5078]1
 * aphormai pros ta noet?: [5079]1
 * hagias: [5080]1
 * hagiois: [5081]1
 * angelon: [5082]1 [5083]2
 * alle tis hupothesis: [5084]1
 * allos te: [5085]1
 * allon: [5086]1
 * allon eis tas graphas hermeneion: [5087]1
 * amomoi: [5088]1
 * aneu: [5089]1
 * aromen: [5090]1 [5091]2 [5092]3
 * achri proseluton: [5093]1
 * hama te ?o diegeiromenous: [5094]1
 * hanthrax: [5095]1
 * ego eimi peripsem? sou: [5096]1
 * engr?phos: [5097]1
 * enkuklia gr?mmata: [5098]1
 * enkr?teia: [5099]1
 * enkratitai: [5100]1
 * enkratetai: [5101]1
 * enk. mathemata: [5102]1
 * enk. paideia: [5103]1 [5104]2
 * edokei proaspizein: [5105]1
 * ethelothreskeia: [5106]1
 * ek mnemes: [5107]1 [5108]2
 * ek petras akrotomou: [5109]1
 * ek tes Ebraidos dialektou: [5110]1
 * ek ton biblion: [5111]1
 * ekdikethes tou euangeliou: [5112]1
 * ekeinais tais hemerais: [5113]1
 * ekeinou: [5114]1 [5115]2
 * ekeinon: [5116]1
 * ekeinon ton logon: [5117]1
 * ekei heuresete proton Nerona touto to dogma, henika m?lista en Rome
 ten anatolen pasan hupot?xas omos en eis p?ntas, dioxonta: [5118]1
 * ekeinoi: [5119]1 [5120]2
 * ekeinos: [5121]1
 * ekklesias: [5122]1
 * ekklesiastike historia: [5123]1
 * ekklesiastikos anher: [5124]1
 * ekklesiastikon andron: [5125]1 [5126]2
 * ekklesiastikous andras: [5127]1
 * ekkrinesthai: [5128]1
 * eklogai: [5129]1 [5130]2
 * ekoinonesan heautois: [5131]1
 * ekpeptokota epi ten 'Ioudaiken ethelothreskeian: [5132]1
 * elenchou kai anatropes tes pseudonumou gnoseos: [5133]1
 * elaphebolion: [5134]1
 * eleutheria: [5135]1 [5136]2
 * empesontos kata kairon: [5137]1
 * en homologoumenois: [5138]1
 * en ho phesi suntetachenai kai peri diathekon proton kai deuteron:
 [5139]1
 * en Iericho: [5140]1
 * en de tais grapheisais auto eklogais: [5141]1
 * en nothois: [5142]1
 * en oikei& 251; sungr?mmati paradontes, auto basilei
 prosephonesamen: [5143]1
 * en hois akindunos he hupotage: [5144]1
 * en p?se ekklesi& 139;: [5145]1
 * en palaiot?to bibli& 251; stichero: [5146]1
 * en pleistais ekklesiais: [5147]1
 * en pneumati: [5148]1
 * en te basilike aule: [5149]1
 * en te dedelomene 'Apologi& 139;: [5150]1
 * en te deutera pheromene 'Io?nnou kai trite: [5151]1
 * en te delotheise pros philippesious autou graphe pheromene eis
 deuro: [5152]1
 * en te kata ten Phrugian Musi& 139;: [5153]1
 * en te katechesei: [5154]1
 * en to 'Arsinoeite: [5155]1
 * en to auto logo to kata 'Asterion Ourbanon: [5156]1
 * en tais allais polesi: [5157]1
 * en toutois: [5158]1
 * en tois nothois: [5159]1
 * en tois tetraplois epikataskeu?sas: [5160]1
 * enepresen auton tas anagraphas ton genon: [5161]1
 * enneadekaeterida: [5162]1
 * enteron kai spl?nchnon: [5163]1
 * entol?s: [5164]1
 * exepeson: [5165]1
 * exetrosan: [5166]1
 * exegesis eis to p?scha: [5167]1
 * exelthes tou sosai ton laon sou dia 'Iesou tou christou: [5168]1
 * exairetos: [5169]1
 * exegeseon: [5170]1
 * exendrapodismenous: [5171]1
 * epesteil? tina hos edunethen, paraschontos tou theou,
 didaskalikoteron huphegoumenos, hon ta antigrapha ?pemps? soi:
 [5172]1
 * epi: [5173]1
 * epi 'Attikou tou hupatikou: [5174]1
 * epi Romes: [5175]1
 * epi Traianou kaisaros kai hupatikou 'Attikou: [5176]1
 * epi xenes: [5177]1
 * epi pasi kai to pros 'Antoninon biblidion biblidion: [5178]1
 * epi polu kratein egonismenon 'Eusebi& 251; kat' autou: [5179]1
 * epi schoiniou tinos: [5180]1
 * epi ta hupo ton archaion katast?thenta: [5181]1
 * epi ta grammatik?: [5182]1
 * epi telei: [5183]1
 * epi ten Galatian: [5184]1
 * epi ten theosebeian: [5185]1
 * epi to pterunion tou naou: [5186]1
 * epi tes meses ton potamon: [5187]1
 * epi tes makarizomenes lamprotetos: [5188]1
 * epi ton katholou logon: [5189]1
 * epi to auto logo: [5190]1
 * epi taute te phronesei, mallon de aphrosune: [5191]1
 * epimiktos polus: [5192]1
 * episkopoi: [5193]1 [5194]2
 * episkopon biktora delousa: [5195]1
 * episkopos: [5196]1 [5197]2
 * epitropos: [5198]1 [5199]2
 * epi ton katholou logon: [5200]1
 * epi schoiniou, tinos: [5201]1
 * epib?s: [5202]1
 * epideiknunai: [5203]1
 * epidemesantos te Rome: [5204]1
 * epieikes: [5205]1
 * epimikton: [5206]1
 * episkopes proedrian: [5207]1
 * episteme: [5208]1
 * epistole: [5209]1 [5210]2 [5211]3 [5212]4
 * epistolen: [5213]1
 * epistolge: [5214]1
 * epistreptike: [5215]1
 * epitedeuousin, hosan ek tes ges ontes kai ek tes ges lalountes:
 [5216]1
 * epozesas: [5217]1
 * eporeuthe: [5218]1
 * erchomenon: [5219]1
 * ephotise: [5220]1
 * hekatera& 184;dios hupothesei en dusin hupantesas sungr?mmasin:
 [5221]1
 * hekkaidekaeterida: [5222]1
 * henos deonta tes zoes hebdomekonta apoplesas ?te teleut?: [5223]1
 * hexes taute kai hetera tis epistole tois en Rome tou Dionusiou
 pheretai diakonike dia Ippolutou: [5224]1
 * hexaemeros: [5225]1
 * heortastiken graphen: [5226]1
 * heortastikos: [5227]1
 * heptaeteris: [5228]1
 * hermeneutes: [5229]1
 * heteras pou ekklesias: [5230]1
 * helesthai: [5231]1
 * hena ge tina ton eis tauta epitedeion auto: [5232]1
 * herma: [5233]1
 * hermaiou: [5234]1
 * etuchei: [5235]1 [5236]2
 * he orasis ton tetrapodon ton en te eremo: [5237]1
 * he huper 'Ioudaion apologia: [5238]1
 * he Mareotis: [5239]1
 * he aute periodos tou chronou: [5240]1
 * he graphe: [5241]1
 * he dunamis tou theou he kaloumene: [5242]1
 * he eiriarmene: [5243]1
 * he kath' hemas Thekla: [5244]1
 * he kleis: [5245]1
 * he lego: [5246]1
 * he presbeia: [5247]1 [5248]2 [5249]3
 * he tou Pamphilou biou anagraphe: [5250]1
 * he pheromene Barn?ba epistole: [5251]1
 * hegemones: [5252]1
 * hegoumenon: [5253]1
 * hegoumenos: [5254]1
 * hemas de mallon en hodo kai protous katalephthesomenous ?taxen:
 [5255]1
 * hemin: [5256]1 [5257]2
 * e: [5258]1
 * e noos: [5259]1 [5260]2 [5261]3
 * he kai Sophia: [5262]1
 * e: [5263]1 [5264]2 [5265]3
 * ede: [5266]1 [5267]2
 * hemisu: [5268]1
 * elthon d' oun eis hemas epistolai Korneliou: [5269]1
 * en en hois: [5270]1
 * esan gar, esan eiseti: [5271]1
 * idias deomenon scholes: [5272]1
 * idiotikas apographas: [5273]1
 * idiotikas apograph?s: [5274]1
 * hierodoulos: [5275]1
 * hieros: [5276]1
 * hieron gramm?ton, kai ton antilegomenon men,
 homos...dedemosieumenon: [5277]1
 * historeitai: [5278]1
 * historousi: [5279]1
 * hina he graphe plerothe: [5280]1
 * hina gnoen, peraitero autois toutou tou gr?mmatos phrontida
 poieisthai me prosekein: [5281]1
 * ogdoas: [5282]1
 * opisthodomos: [5283]1
 * ho apostolos: [5284]1
 * ho anothen erchomenos ep?no p?nton estin: [5285]1
 * ho epi ton katholou logon: [5286]1
 * ho epigegrammenos kanon ekklesiastikos, e pros tous 'Ioudaizontas:
 [5287]1
 * ho esti peri 'Abra?m: [5288]1
 * ho hiereus ho christos: [5289]1
 * ho 'Alexandros e peri tou logou ?chein ta aloga zoa: [5290]1
 * ho gamikos logos: [5291]1
 * ho de holos skopos hosanei hermeneiai tunch?nousi tes Gegeseos
 k.t.l: [5292]1
 * ho kakon te polei taute m?ntis kai poietes: [5293]1
 * ho logos: [5294]1
 * ho logos protreptikos pros Ellenas: [5295]1
 * ho megas 'Alexandreon episkopos: [5296]1
 * ho maneis tas phrenas: [5297]1
 * ho nautes: [5298]1
 * ho paidagogos: [5299]1
 * ho peri: [5300]1
 * ho peri enkrateias: [5301]1
 * ho peri ekklesias: [5302]1
 * ho peri ensom?tou theou: [5303]1
 * ho peri hupakoes: [5304]1
 * ho peri hupakoes pisteos aistheterion: [5305]1
 * ho peri hupakoes pisteos, ho peri aistheterion: [5306]1
 * ho peri hupakoes pisteos, kai ho peri aistheterion: [5307]1
 * ho peri kuriakes logos: [5308]1
 * ho peri loutrou: [5309]1
 * ho peri pl?seos: [5310]1
 * ho peri tou doulon einai p?nta phaulon, ho exes estin ho peri tou
 p?nta spoudaion eleutheron einai: [5311]1
 * ho peri psuches kai somatos e noos: [5312]1
 * ho politikos: [5313]1
 * ho protreptikos eis hupomonen e pros tous neosti bebaptismenous:
 [5314]1
 * ho tes 'Arabias hegoumenos: [5315]1
 * ho tes parasemeioseos chronos: [5316]1
 * ho ton katholou logon ?parchos: [5317]1
 * ho ton par' hemin archaion logos: [5318]1
 * ho te P?mphilos m?rtus kai heteroi pleistoi: [5319]1
 * ho tou megistou pr?gmatos prostateuon: [5320]1
 * ho tou ton stratopedon archein epitetagmenos: [5321]1
 * homen hustatos: [5322]1
 * homologoi: [5323]1
 * homilias: [5324]1
 * homoethnon: [5325]1
 * homologiais: [5326]1
 * homologethenai: [5327]1
 * homologetes: [5328]1 [5329]2
 * homologeton: [5330]1
 * homologoi: [5331]1
 * homoousion: [5332]1 [5333]2
 * homoousios: [5334]1 [5335]2 [5336]3 [5337]4 [5338]5
 * hon ho prophetes sunonta pollois ?tesin agnoei: [5339]1
 * onuchos: [5340]1
 * ophis: [5341]1
 * homoia: [5342]1
 * hopos apo ton topon ton threskeusimon apochoresosi: [5343]1
 * hopos an ekdikeseias: [5344]1
 * hos proteron men epi ton katholou logon legomenos einai basileos,
 ouden eulogon oude katholikon ephronesen: [5345]1
 * hoti atrepton: [5346]1
 * huios 'Ioseph: [5347]1
 * huion: [5348]1 [5349]2
 * humin: [5350]1
 * humon: [5351]1
 * huper: [5352]1 [5353]2
 * huper limnes Marias: [5354]1
 * huper p?nta anthropon: [5355]1
 * hupaspistes: [5356]1
 * hupatikos: [5357]1
 * hupnopsuchitai: [5358]1
 * hupoulos: [5359]1
 * hupomnemata: [5360]1 [5361]2 [5362]3 [5363]4
 * hupomnemata eis Esaian: [5364]1
 * huposemeioseis: [5365]1
 * hupotuposeis: [5366]1
 * hos ?pos eipein: [5367]1
 * hos anamphilekto: [5368]1
 * hos apostolike phone suntrechon: [5369]1
 * hos hagi& 251; pneumati kai prophetiko charismati: [5370]1
 * hos en graphes tupo tes p?lai diaboetou metropoleos autes: [5371]1
 * hos enomizeto: [5372]1 [5373]2 [5374]3 [5375]4 [5376]5 [5377]6
 [5378]7 [5379]8
 * hos eipein: [5380]1
 * hos eipen: [5381]1
 * hos eipen ho apostolos: [5382]1
 * hos eipon: [5383]1
 * hos me an dia mones tes eis ton christon pisteos kai tou kat' auten
 biou sothesomenois: [5384]1
 * hos monon auto graphenton: [5385]1
 * hos nekrous exetrose: [5386]1
 * hos ouk exon en 'An?no choris tes autou gnomes kathisai sunedrion:
 [5387]1
 * hosan apo dogmatos sunkletou: [5388]1
 * hos?n: [5389]1 [5390]2 [5391]3
 * hosanei tou patros hup?rchonta dunamin kai sophian: [5392]1
 * hosanei tou patros huparchon: [5393]1
 * hosper ex anabioseos: [5394]1
 * hon ?ti ekseiei tous adelphous: [5395]1
 * hon ?ti kai seiei: [5396]1
 * hon en to proto peri heautou deloi hos ?ngista tes ton apostolon
 genomenou diadoches: [5397]1
 * hon aitei kai seiei k.t.l.: [5398]1
 * hon dia to medemian ?chein aphormen ouch hoi& 231;n te oute tous
 chronous paradounai graphe, outh' historias mnemen huposemenasthai:
 [5399]1
 * hon kai eis hemas tes apostolikes paradoseos, he tes hugious
 pisteos ?ngraphos katelthen orthodoxia: [5400]1
 * hon monen mian gnesian ?gnon: [5401]1
 * a kai b': [5402]1
 * he graphe: [5403]1
 * ho ho prophetes sunon pollois ?tesin agnoei: [5404]1
 * 'Aberkie: [5405]1
 * 'Abilios: [5406]1
 * 'Abirkie: [5407]1
 * 'Anchinoia: [5408]1
 * 'Adam?ntios: [5409]1
 * 'Albinou: [5410]1
 * 'Alkes, Elkeis: [5411]1
 * 'Alkibi?den: [5412]1 [5413]2
 * 'Anairetheises keraunon bolais: [5414]1
 * 'Antibole Papiskou kai philonos 'Ioudaion pros monachon tina:
 [5415]1
 * 'Antibole Papiskou kai philonos: [5416]1
 * 'Antinoeia: [5417]1
 * 'Aouirkie: [5418]1
 * 'Apion, hoi de Kapiton: [5419]1
 * 'Apollonidou: [5420]1
 * 'Apolloniou: [5421]1
 * 'Apolloni?dou: [5422]1
 * 'Apologia huper 'Origenous: [5423]1
 * 'Arithmetikas eisagog?s: [5424]1
 * 'Artemisios: [5425]1
 * 'Asklepi?dou: [5426]1 [5427]2 [5428]3
 * 'Asklepiodotou: [5429]1 [5430]2
 * 'Attikon tess?ron: [5431]1
 * 'Auirkie: [5432]1
 * 'Enkrateis: [5433]1
 * 'Ekklesiastike 'Apodeixis: [5434]1
 * 'Ekklesiastike Proparaskeue: [5435]1
 * 'Eklogon: [5436]1
 * 'Elenchou kai 'Apologias logoi duo: [5437]1
 * 'Exegetikoi: [5438]1
 * 'Euangelike apodeixis: [5439]1
 * 'Eukleides: [5440]1
 * 'Elchasai: [5441]1
 * 'Iesou: [5442]1
 * 'Iesoun christon k?tothen: [5443]1
 * 'Ioudas 'Iakobou: [5444]1
 * 'Ioudaike 'Archaiologia: [5445]1
 * 'Ourbikos: [5446]1
 * 'Ossaioi: [5447]1
 * 'Ourbikios: [5448]1
 * 'Oblias: [5449]1
 * 'Origenes: [5450]1 [5451]2
 * Abdon ton tou Abdou pod?gran ?chonta: [5452]1
 * Alkes: [5453]1
 * Alkibi?dou: [5454]1
 * Elenchos kai anatrope tes pseudonumou gnoseos: [5455]1
 * Esdras: [5456]1
 * Onper kata phusin dedokas: [5457]1
 * Ellenas: [5458]1
 * Elkesaitai: [5459]1
 * E katholou stoicheiodes eisagoge: [5460]1
 * Egesippos historei: [5461]1
 * Emin: [5462]1
 * Idrosei gar chthon, k.t.l: [5463]1
 * Istoria 'Ioudaikou polemou pros Romaious: [5464]1
 * Rachabeim: [5465]1
 * Rech?b: [5466]1
 * Aiphiopas, toi dichtha dedaiatai, ?schatoi andron: [5467]1
 * Ai& 241;n, hosper aei on: [5468]1
 * Ause: [5469]1
 * Bemarchios: [5470]1
 * Biththera: [5471]1
 * B?bios: [5472]1
 * Bardes?nes: [5473]1
 * Basileus: [5474]1
 * Benetia: [5475]1
 * G?ios: [5476]1
 * Gaianos: [5477]1
 * Galatia: [5478]1
 * Galatian: [5479]1
 * Gallia: [5480]1
 * Gallian: [5481]1
 * Geon: [5482]1
 * Geon: [5483]1
 * Gri?dos logo: [5484]1
 * Dustros: [5485]1
 * D?lkes: [5486]1
 * Dia touto: [5487]1
 * Diodoros: [5488]1
 * Di? touto hupomeinon me, legei Kurios, eis hemeran anast?seos mou
 eis marturion: [5489]1
 * Didache ton dodeka apostolon: [5490]1
 * Eirenaios: [5491]1
 * Eusebes, Eutuches, Sebastos: [5492]1
 * Eusebiou: [5493]1
 * Eusebiou sungramma peri ton kat' auton martures?nton en to oktaetei
 Diokletianou kai ephexes Galeriou tou Maximinou diogmo: [5494]1
 * Eusebiou tou Pamphilou peri ton en Palaistine martures?nton telos:
 [5495]1
 * Ellenas: [5496]1
 * Ellenist?s: [5497]1
 * Z: [5498]1
 * Zebennos: [5499]1
 * Zebenos: [5500]1
 * Z?bdas: [5501]1
 * Z?mbdas: [5502]1
 * Zabadas: [5503]1
 * Zebinos: [5504]1
 * Zotikos: [5505]1
 * Theodotos:: [5506]1
 * Theoteknos: [5507]1
 * Kerugma Petrou: [5508]1
 * Kition: [5509]1
 * Kubeis: [5510]1
 * Kurie thee p?ter: [5511]1
 * Kai ton m?lista epi Romes lampron: [5512]1
 * Kapiton: [5513]1
 * Kerochutou graphes: [5514]1
 * Kom?nes: [5515]1
 * Komphektora: [5516]1
 * Kornoutos: [5517]1
 * Kouleianos: [5518]1
 * Koum?nes: [5519]1
 * Kuriakon exiontai ton eponumion: [5520]1
 * Leonides ho legomenos 'Origenous pater: [5521]1
 * Libukoterous topous: [5522]1
 * Lougdounos kai Bienna: [5523]1
 * Longinou: [5524]1 [5525]2
 * Megan theon kai plousion, para kai Ploutona, ton th?naton
 anegoreuon: [5526]1
 * M?nes: [5527]1
 * M?ximos: [5528]1
 * M?xus: [5529]1
 * M?rkon hou to eungelion pheretai: [5530]1
 * M?rkos 'Aimilios houtos peri tinos eidolou pepoieken 'Albournou:
 [5531]1
 * Manganaia: [5532]1
 * Makkabaikon: [5533]1
 * Makrianos: [5534]1
 * Mammaia: [5535]1
 * Manichaios: [5536]1
 * Mareia limne: [5537]1
 * Markion: [5538]1
 * Markianos: [5539]1
 * Markianistai: [5540]1 [5541]2
 * Markianoi: [5542]1
 * Markionistai: [5543]1 [5544]2
 * Masbotheoi: [5545]1
 * Masbothaioi: [5546]1
 * Milti?den: [5547]1 [5548]2 [5549]3 [5550]4
 * Milti?dou: [5551]1
 * Monas, para to menein onomasmene: [5552]1
 * Mousianos ekklesiastikos sungrapheus egnorizeto: [5553]1
 * Naue: [5554]1
 * Nau?tos: [5555]1
 * Nauatiano: [5556]1
 * Naissos: [5557]1
 * Naissos: [5558]1
 * Noou?tos: [5559]1
 * Noouati?nos: [5560]1
 * Noouatiano: [5561]1
 * Noouatianoi: [5562]1
 * Hoi men dusomenou huperionos, hoi d' aniontos: [5563]1
 * Ouelesmoth: [5564]1
 * Petrou: [5565]1
 * P?lin: [5566]1
 * Panegurikos epi te ton ekklesion oikodome, Paulino Turion episkopo
 prospephonemenos: [5567]1
 * Paraleipomenon: [5568]1
 * Politeuton andron: [5569]1
 * Pollou chronou: [5570]1
 * Probos: [5571]1
 * Promos: [5572]1
 * Prophetikai 'Eklogai: [5573]1
 * Puketious: [5574]1
 * S: [5575]1
 * S?ddochon: [5576]1
 * Sabb?tou meg?lou: [5577]1
 * Sardianos: [5578]1
 * Sebouaioi: [5579]1
 * Serennios Granianos: [5580]1
 * Stauroi: [5581]1
 * Stromateis: [5582]1 [5583]2 [5584]3
 * Suriakou: [5585]1
 * Sotas: [5586]1
 * Tordios: [5587]1
 * Phabianos: [5588]1
 * Phlabianos: [5589]1
 * Chiazomenou tou rh kata to mesaitaton.: [5590]1
 * aireseis: [5591]1
 * ai& 240;n: [5592]1
 * hairetikon andron anapl?smata: [5593]1
 * aition: [5594]1 [5595]2
 * autographoi semeioseis: [5596]1
 * automaton: [5597]1 [5598]2 [5599]3 [5600]4 [5601]5 [5602]6
 * aute phr?sei: [5603]1
 * autes: [5604]1
 * auton: [5605]1 [5606]2
 * autou: [5607]1 [5608]2 [5609]3 [5610]4 [5611]5 [5612]6 [5613]7
 * b: [5614]1
 * biblion ti dialexeon diaphoron: [5615]1
 * biblos ton hemeron: [5616]1
 * bios kai politeia ton hagion theostepton meg?lon basileon kai
 isapostolon Konstantinou kai Elenes: [5617]1
 * bios politikos hoper esti peri 'Ioseph: [5618]1
 * bios politikos: [5619]1
 * bema: [5620]1 [5621]2
 * bema men kai thronon hupselon: [5622]1
 * b?ptetai: [5623]1
 * bathezor: [5624]1
 * bathechor: [5625]1
 * basileus: [5626]1
 * basileis 'Ioudaioi hoi en tois stemmasi: [5627]1
 * basilike: [5628]1
 * benephikialion: [5629]1
 * bethezob: [5630]1
 * biblid?rion: [5631]1
 * biou sophou tou kata dikaiosunen teleiothentos, e nomon agr?phon:
 [5632]1
 * blasphemon: [5633]1
 * boubon: [5634]1
 * boubona: [5635]1
 * boubona epi schoiniou tinos: [5636]1
 * boubona de hoi Romaioi ton ornin touton kalousi: [5637]1
 * gegraptai: [5638]1 [5639]2
 * genos: [5640]1 [5641]2
 * ginesthe de dokimoi trapezitai, ta men apodokim?zontes, to de kalon
 katechontes: [5642]1
 * ginesthe dokimoi trapezitai: [5643]1
 * ges: [5644]1
 * g?r: [5645]1
 * gametais: [5646]1
 * gegonos: [5647]1 [5648]2
 * geioras: [5649]1
 * genesthai: [5650]1
 * genomenos de en Rome diadochen epoies?mn mechris 'Aniketou: [5651]1
 * geometrian: [5652]1
 * geometreitai: [5653]1
 * gnomas: [5654]1
 * gnorimoi: [5655]1
 * gnorimon: [5656]1
 * goun: [5657]1
 * gr?mma: [5658]1 [5659]2 [5660]3 [5661]4
 * gr?mmata: [5662]1 [5663]2 [5664]3 [5665]4 [5666]5 [5667]6
 * gr?mmatos: [5668]1 [5669]2 [5670]3
 * graphe: [5671]1
 * graphe: [5672]1 [5673]2 [5674]3
 * graphe: [5675]1
 * gunaikeia: [5676]1
 * d: [5677]1
 * de: [5678]1
 * demou: [5679]1
 * desantes de hoi demioi allo ti plethos epi sk?phais, tois
 thalattiois enape& 207;rhipton buthois: [5680]1
 * desomen: [5681]1 [5682]2
 * doxais: [5683]1
 * dunamis: [5684]1
 * dodeka: [5685]1
 * dodeka ton en k.t.l: [5686]1
 * dodeka tou en Smurne marturesantos: [5687]1
 * daimonion asomaton: [5688]1
 * dedoxasmenos en hagiois: [5689]1
 * dexios: [5690]1
 * dexios: [5691]1
 * desposunoi: [5692]1
 * deutero: [5693]1
 * demosion archeion: [5694]1 [5695]2
 * dia Ippolutou: [5696]1
 * dia gr?mmatos: [5697]1
 * dia gramm?ton: [5698]1
 * dia mones tes eis ton christon pisteos: [5699]1
 * dia pleionon kleron: [5700]1
 * dia to dokoun hikanon en logo: [5701]1
 * dia touto: [5702]1
 * di?konos: [5703]1 [5704]2
 * diagogen: [5705]1
 * diadochen: [5706]1 [5707]2 [5708]3
 * diadochen epoies?men: [5709]1
 * diadochen poieisthai: [5710]1
 * diadoche: [5711]1
 * diadochen: [5712]1
 * diadochen epoies?men: [5713]1
 * diadoches: [5714]1 [5715]2
 * diadoche: [5716]1
 * diadochon ton katarxamenon: [5717]1
 * diathekon: [5718]1
 * diakonia: [5719]1 [5720]2 [5721]3
 * diakonia tou logou: [5722]1
 * diakonein: [5723]1 [5724]2
 * diakonein tais trapezais: [5725]1
 * diakonike: [5726]1
 * diakonountes: [5727]1 [5728]2
 * dialexeis peri nesteias kai peri katalalias: [5729]1
 * diatriben: [5730]1 [5731]2 [5732]3 [5733]4
 * diatribon: [5734]1
 * diaphonia: [5735]1
 * diaphonias euangelion: [5736]1
 * didask?lion: [5737]1
 * didaskalian: [5738]1 [5739]2
 * didaskaleion: [5740]1
 * didaches: [5741]1
 * didache: [5742]1
 * didachai: [5743]1
 * diekrinonto: [5744]1
 * diexagoge: [5745]1
 * diexagogein: [5746]1
 * dikaiosune: [5747]1 [5748]2 [5749]3
 * dikaiosunen: [5750]1 [5751]2
 * dikastes: [5752]1
 * dioikein: [5753]1
 * dokeo: [5754]1
 * dr?kon: [5755]1
 * drachmon: [5756]1
 * dodekaton en Sm. marturesanta: [5757]1
 * dodekatos: [5758]1
 * dodekatos en Sm. marturesas: [5759]1
 * dodekatemorion: [5760]1
 * eidololatrein: [5761]1
 * eidolos: [5762]1
 * eikosaeterikoi humnoi: [5763]1
 * eirenarchos: [5764]1
 * eirene: [5765]1
 * eirenik?: [5766]1
 * eis agathen prothesin epanelthoien: [5767]1
 * eis epideixin tou apostolikou kerugmatos: [5768]1
 * eis Galatian: [5769]1
 * eis Konstantinon ton basilea triakontaeterikos: [5770]1
 * eis Makkabaious logos he peri autokr?toros logismou: [5771]1
 * eis Phl?kkon: [5772]1
 * eis marturion protreptikos logos: [5773]1
 * eis ta kat' Aigupton ?rga: [5774]1
 * eis ta meta ten exaemeron: [5775]1
 * eis tas Gallias: [5776]1
 * eis ten hexaemeron: [5777]1
 * eis ten hexaemeron hupomnema: [5778]1
 * eis ten Genesin hupomnematieisthein: [5779]1
 * eis ten ton kata Milti?den legomenon hairesin: [5780]1
 * eis to euangelion biblia: [5781]1
 * eis to kata Loukan euallelion: [5782]1
 * eis to p?thos: [5783]1
 * eis ton bion tou makariou Konstantinou tou basileos: [5784]1
 * eis tous psalmous: [5785]1
 * eiseti de pheretai para pleistois: [5786]1
 * eisedexanto kai sunegagon kai sunestesan kai proseuchon autois kai
 hesti?seon ekoinonesan: [5787]1
 * eiskrinesthai: [5788]1
 * ei phaneie: [5789]1
 * eige phaneie: [5790]1
 * eiden angelon touton euthus enoese kakon einai aition k.t.l:
 [5791]1
 * eidos theou: [5792]1
 * einai: [5793]1
 * einai dokon: [5794]1
 * eita epipseus?menos to onomati tou kuriou apolelutai planesas tous
 ekei pistous: [5795]1
 * heis basileus: [5796]1
 * euangelion: [5797]1
 * euangelion kath' Ebraious: [5798]1 [5799]2
 * euangeliou: [5800]1
 * eugnomonon: [5801]1
 * eugnomonon: [5802]1
 * euthus: [5803]1
 * euktaios: [5804]1
 * eulabes: [5805]1
 * euches kai ton topon historias heneken: [5806]1
 * eismetanoian: [5807]1
 * zonta kaiesthai: [5808]1
 * zelosai: [5809]1
 * zelosai: [5810]1
 * zetemata kai luseis: [5811]1 [5812]2
 * eutuchei: [5813]1 [5814]2
 * thura: [5815]1
 * thorax: [5816]1 [5817]2
 * thambothesesthai: [5818]1
 * thanatos: [5819]1
 * theos: [5820]1
 * theoteta idian: [5821]1
 * theios logos: [5822]1
 * theo: [5823]1
 * theous: [5824]1
 * theou gar en boulema: [5825]1
 * theologia: [5826]1
 * theologeitai ho christos: [5827]1
 * theopneuston: [5828]1
 * theosebest?te: [5829]1
 * theoph?neia: [5830]1
 * therapeuo: [5831]1
 * therapeutai: [5832]1
 * therapeutrides: [5833]1
 * thnetopsuchitai: [5834]1 [5835]2
 * thronos: [5836]1 [5837]2 [5838]3
 * thuroroi: [5839]1
 * i: [5840]1
 * ia: [5841]1
 * ib: [5842]1 [5843]2
 * imotheos ho pais: [5844]1
 * kago 'Io?nnes ho akouon kai blepon tauta: [5845]1
 * kago oun: [5846]1
 * kurioi mou adelphoi: [5847]1
 * kai: [5848]1 [5849]2 [5850]3 [5851]4 [5852]5 [5853]6 [5854]7
 * kai ha meta tauta sunegrapse: [5855]1
 * kai egr?phe tauta: [5856]1
 * kai eme hos: [5857]1 [5858]2 [5859]3 [5860]4 [5861]5 [5862]6
 * kai eme hoion: [5863]1
 * kai eme hous: [5864]1
 * kai en te ekklesi& 139; parechoresen ho 'Aniketos ten eucharistian
 to Poluk?rpo kat' entropen delonoti: [5865]1
 * kai ophelon ge: [5866]1
 * kai ophelon ge heis: [5867]1
 * kai 'Ammon?rion hetera: [5868]1
 * kai di' ekeinon: [5869]1
 * kai di' ekeinon rhethenai ti ton blasphemon: [5870]1
 * kai euthus Ouespasianos poliorkei autous: [5871]1
 * kai therapeias kai dexioseos ou tes tuchouses: [5872]1
 * kai logos autou peri propheteias: [5873]1
 * kai noos: [5874]1
 * kai paragagon eis auto [ton adelphon 'Iesou tou christou legomenou,
 'I?kobos onoma auto, kai] tinas [heterous], k.t.l: [5875]1
 * kai peri politeias kai peri propheton: [5876]1
 * kai peri psuches kai somatos: [5877]1 [5878]2
 * kai pros 'Ioudaious proton kai deuteron: [5879]1
 * kai propheton: [5880]1
 * kai ta Maximou peri tou poluthruletou para tois hairesiotais
 zetematos, tou pothen he kakia, kai peri tou geneten hup?rchein ten
 hulen: [5881]1
 * kai ta peri tou diabolou, kai tes apokalupseos 'Io?nnou: [5882]1
 * kai ten prokeimenen genealogian ?k te tes biblou ton hemeron k.t.l:
 [5883]1
 * kai tauta ?n tini antigr?pho en to ogdo& 251; tomo heuromen:
 [5884]1
 * kai touto huper tou hemon logou pepoietai: [5885]1
 * kai: [5886]1 [5887]2 [5888]3
 * kai toi mallon enantion en to terein tois me terousi: [5889]1
 * kathodou: [5890]1
 * katholou: [5891]1 [5892]2 [5893]3
 * kath' hemas: [5894]1 [5895]2 [5896]3
 * katharoi: [5897]1
 * katholiken epistolen: [5898]1
 * katholike: [5899]1
 * katholikotes: [5900]1
 * katholikes: [5901]1 [5902]2 [5903]3
 * kai ten Ellada: [5904]1
 * kainotometheises: [5905]1
 * kaloumena: [5906]1
 * kaloumene: [5907]1
 * kanonas: [5908]1
 * kanones deka: [5909]1
 * kanon ekklesiastikos: [5910]1
 * kata: [5911]1
 * kata Markellou tou 'Ankuras episkopou: [5912]1
 * kata Ponton: [5913]1
 * kata Porphurion: [5914]1
 * kata theon: [5915]1
 * kata kairon: [5916]1
 * kata logon: [5917]1 [5918]2
 * kata meros sunagogai: [5919]1
 * kata p?nta tropon: [5920]1
 * kata ten dunamin tou hamartematos: [5921]1
 * kata to dunaton: [5922]1
 * kata ton auton kairon: [5923]1
 * kata ton deloumenon chronon: [5924]1
 * kata ton paronta logon: [5925]1
 * kata topon: [5926]1 [5927]2
 * kata tou stomatos epist?xai: [5928]1
 * katebe monos, anebe de meta pollou ochlou pros ton patera autou:
 [5929]1
 * kat' an?lusin: [5930]1 [5931]2 [5932]3
 * kat' epipnoian: [5933]1
 * katelthen eis ta katachthonia, hina kakeithen lutrosetai tous
 dikaious: [5934]1
 * kat?logon: [5935]1
 * kat?strosin pepoietai: [5936]1
 * katabas gar monos sunegeiren pollous, eith' houtos anebe pros ton
 patera autou: [5937]1
 * katangelousa: [5938]1 [5939]2
 * katakrinas christianous tinas kai tes axias ekbalon: [5940]1
 * katarxamenon autou: [5941]1
 * katapseudomenoi tou theou: [5942]1
 * kateilephenai: [5943]1
 * katenoesamen: [5944]1
 * katorthomena, toutestin ephanismena: [5945]1
 * kekeruchenai ?oiken: [5946]1
 * kestoi: [5947]1
 * kerugmata: [5948]1
 * klero hena ge tina kleroson: [5949]1
 * kline: [5950]1
 * kleron: [5951]1
 * kleros: [5952]1 [5953]2 [5954]3
 * kleis: [5955]1
 * koimethentos 'Alex?ndrou: [5956]1
 * koimeteria: [5957]1 [5958]2
 * koinonia: [5959]1
 * korban: [5960]1
 * korbanas: [5961]1 [5962]2
 * kosmopoiian or demiourgian: [5963]1
 * ktiseos: [5964]1 [5965]2
 * ktisis: [5966]1
 * kurenios: [5967]1
 * kuroteon: [5968]1
 * legetai: [5969]1
 * legousin: [5970]1
 * lego de ten Ierousalem: [5971]1
 * logia: [5972]1 [5973]2 [5974]3 [5975]4 [5976]5 [5977]6
 * logoi: [5978]1
 * logon: [5979]1
 * logos: [5980]1 [5981]2 [5982]3 [5983]4 [5984]5 [5985]6 [5986]7
 * logos ?chei: [5987]1 [5988]2 [5989]3 [5990]4 [5991]5 [5992]6
 [5993]7 [5994]8 [5995]9 [5996]10
 * logos endi?thetos: [5997]1
 * logos ho pros Ellenas: [5998]1
 * logos huper tes pisteos: [5999]1
 * logos katechei: [6000]1 [6001]2 [6002]3
 * logos philalethes pros tous christianous: [6003]1
 * logou: [6004]1
 * laon hikanon: [6005]1
 * laon polun: [6006]1
 * laon: [6007]1
 * lamprotetos: [6008]1
 * leipo: [6009]1
 * legomene: [6010]1 [6011]2
 * leop?rdois: [6012]1
 * lipon: [6013]1 [6014]2
 * logion kuriakon exegeseis: [6015]1
 * logikon: [6016]1
 * logistai: [6017]1
 * loipon: [6018]1 [6019]2
 * loutron: [6020]1
 * m: [6021]1
 * megethos phuseos: [6022]1
 * mene 'Iakobou pheretai: [6023]1
 * mere: [6024]1
 * mechri: [6025]1 [6026]2
 * mechri toutou: [6027]1
 * me heuriskon: [6028]1
 * me prosekein: [6029]1
 * me prouphest?nai kat' idian ousias perigraphen: [6030]1
 * monon hena Theon kai christon basilea 'Iesoun homologes?ntes
 Basileus: [6031]1
 * muthon ou muthon, alla onta logon: [6032]1
 * m?nganon: [6033]1
 * m?kar: [6034]1
 * m?rtur: [6035]1
 * m?rturas: [6036]1
 * m?rtures: [6037]1
 * m?rtus: [6038]1 [6039]2 [6040]3 [6041]4
 * matheton: [6042]1 [6043]2
 * makari& 231;tetos: [6044]1
 * makariotatos: [6045]1
 * makr?n: [6046]1
 * mania: [6047]1
 * marturon: [6048]1 [6049]2
 * martus: [6050]1
 * marturion: [6051]1
 * marturi& 139;: [6052]1
 * martures?nton: [6053]1
 * meg?lo: [6054]1 [6055]2 [6056]3
 * meg?le paraskeue: [6057]1
 * meg?le te kai thaumasia: [6058]1
 * meta ton apostolon: [6059]1
 * meta tauta de loipon eis pan eidos diereito ta marturia tes exodou
 auton: [6060]1
 * meta tous apostolous: [6061]1
 * meta touto: [6062]1
 * meta touton: [6063]1
 * metabainomen: [6064]1
 * metabainomen: [6065]1
 * metabletheison: [6066]1
 * metadidosi ten hegemonian: [6067]1
 * metanoias choran: [6068]1
 * mikros tomos: [6069]1
 * mnemoneusantes: [6070]1
 * monobibla autou pheretai: [6071]1
 * mononouchi ex ankonon tes encheireseos auton epidesmousa: [6072]1
 * muria: [6073]1
 * murioi d' alloi: [6074]1
 * murious hosous: [6075]1
 * murion allon: [6076]1
 * nean auten kai ektetopismenen: [6077]1
 * nothen: [6078]1
 * nothoi: [6079]1 [6080]2 [6081]3 [6082]4 [6083]5 [6084]6 [6085]7
 [6086]8 [6087]9 [6088]10 [6089]11 [6090]12 [6091]13 [6092]14
 [6093]15 [6094]16 [6095]17 [6096]18 [6097]19 [6098]20 [6099]21
 [6100]22 [6101]23 [6102]24 [6103]25 [6104]26 [6105]27 [6106]28
 * nothos: [6107]1 [6108]2
 * nomos: [6109]1
 * nomon hieron allegoriai: [6110]1 [6111]2
 * noos: [6112]1
 * naos: [6113]1
 * neanis: [6114]1
 * nesteia: [6115]1
 * nik?o: [6116]1
 * noos: [6117]1 [6118]2 [6119]3 [6120]4 [6121]5
 * notheuetai: [6122]1
 * nomoi: [6123]1
 * nun: [6124]1
 * xiphos distomon: [6125]1
 * xulo entinagenai: [6126]1
 * xulon: [6127]1 [6128]2 [6129]3 [6130]4
 * xanthikos: [6131]1
 * xusteras: [6132]1
 * oiketia: [6133]1
 * oikonomia: [6134]1 [6135]2 [6136]3 [6137]4 [6138]5
 * oikonomia tou christou: [6139]1
 * oikonomian: [6140]1
 * oikoumene: [6141]1 [6142]2
 * hoi amphi ton G?llon: [6143]1
 * hoi anthropoi: [6144]1
 * hoi en oiketiais: [6145]1 [6146]2 [6147]3
 * hoi epigegrammenoi hupotuposeon autou logoi: [6148]1
 * hoi de: [6149]1
 * hoi de demosieuontes hupo ton pr?xeon egonto: [6150]1
 * hoi kata s?rka sungeneis: [6151]1
 * hoi men: [6152]1
 * hoi p?lai presbuteroi: [6153]1
 * hoi paides: [6154]1
 * hoi peri phuseos: [6155]1
 * hoi polloi: [6156]1
 * hoi pro sou presbuteroi tois apo ton paroikion terousin ?pempon
 eucharistian: [6157]1
 * hoi pros M?rkellon ?lenchoi peri tes ekklesiastikes Theologias:
 [6158]1
 * hoi tes paroikias politai: [6159]1
 * hoi tede episkopoi: [6160]1
 * hoia theo: [6161]1
 * hoia theo proskunesai: [6162]1
 * hoios ho logos toios ho bios: [6163]1
 * ou: [6164]1
 * ou gar en te Galati& 139; hos tines planethentes nomizousin, alla
 en te Galli& 139;: [6165]1
 * ou gar suneke ten katholou pronoian: [6166]1
 * ou mentoi t?xei: [6167]1
 * ou pros monon ton sunethon, alla kai ton epi xenes episkopon.
 sunethon: [6168]1
 * ou toiautais: [6169]1
 * oude men tas legomenas autou pr?xeis en anamphilektois pareilepha:
 [6170]1
 * oude ton anapesonta epi to stethos autou: [6171]1
 * oud' holos en katholikais ismen paradedomena: [6172]1
 * ouk agathon polukoiranie heis koiranos ?sto,: [6173]1
 * ouk endi?thekon men einai pareilephamen: [6174]1
 * ouk endiathekous men, alla kai antilegomenas: [6175]1
 * ouk episteuon an?stasin, oute erchomenon apodounai, k.t.l: [6176]1
 * ouk eis makron tanantia peri hemon ebouleusato te kai di' engr?phon
 nomon edogm?tise: [6177]1
 * ouk eis makron: [6178]1
 * ouk oid' hopos: [6179]1
 * ousia tis prokosmios zosa kai huphestosa: [6180]1
 * ouch hugios: [6181]1
 * oupo manentos tote: [6182]1
 * oupo manentos tote: [6183]1
 * oupo tote eph' hen husteron ekpeptoke manian, ten di?noian
 ektrapeis: [6184]1
 * hou para tois posin epi tes steles autes: [6185]1
 * houtoi de: [6186]1 [6187]2
 * oun: [6188]1
 * petagon: [6189]1
 * petra: [6190]1
 * petros: [6191]1
 * pisteos: [6192]1 [6193]2 [6194]3 [6195]4 [6196]5
 * polin: [6197]1
 * poma: [6198]1
 * pas: [6199]1 [6200]2 [6201]3
 * pasi apologounto: [6202]1
 * pasi men apologounto: [6203]1
 * p?lai: [6204]1
 * p?nton: [6205]1
 * p?pa: [6206]1
 * p?sas: [6207]1
 * p?ses ekklesias: [6208]1
 * pais: [6209]1
 * paida onta: [6210]1 [6211]2
 * paides: [6212]1 [6213]2
 * paidos: [6214]1
 * palaios katechei logos: [6215]1
 * palinodia: [6216]1
 * pan?retos: [6217]1
 * pan?retos sophia: [6218]1
 * pantoious than?tous hupepheron: [6219]1
 * para: [6220]1
 * para tou doulou para Sebero prodotheis christianos einai: [6221]1
 * paredosan kai touto: [6222]1
 * par?dosin: [6223]1
 * par?dosis periechei: [6224]1
 * par?kleton: [6225]1 [6226]2
 * parab?tes: [6227]1
 * paraginomenas: [6228]1
 * paraginomenois: [6229]1
 * paradoseis Matthiou: [6230]1 [6231]2
 * paras: [6232]1
 * paraskeue: [6233]1 [6234]2
 * pareilephamen: [6235]1
 * parechoresen: [6236]1 [6237]2
 * parechoresen ten eucharistian: [6238]1
 * parthenos: [6239]1
 * parthenous: [6240]1
 * patrida: [6241]1
 * patrias: [6242]1
 * patrike theotes: [6243]1
 * peri aletheias: [6244]1
 * peri apoikias: [6245]1
 * peri aron: [6246]1
 * peri areton: [6247]1 [6248]2
 * peri areton kai presbeias pros G?ion: [6249]1
 * peri archon: [6250]1 [6251]2
 * peri archaiotetos 'Ioudaion kata 'Apionos: [6252]1
 * peri athlon kai epitimion: [6253]1
 * peri enkrateias e peri eunouchias: [6254]1
 * peri enkrateias, e peri eunouchias: [6255]1
 * peri ensomatoseos theou: [6256]1
 * peri epangelion: [6257]1
 * peri epistemes: [6258]1
 * peri hupsous: [6259]1
 * peri hon nepsas ho nous euchetai kai kataratai: [6260]1
 * peri 'Ioudaion: [6261]1
 * peri auton: [6262]1
 * peri autous: [6263]1
 * peri biou Moseos: [6264]1
 * peri biou theoretikou e hiketon: [6265]1
 * peri biou politikou: [6266]1
 * peri georgias: [6267]1
 * peri georgias duo: [6268]1
 * peri gig?nton: [6269]1 [6270]2
 * peri gig?nton, e peri tou me trepesthai to theion: [6271]1
 * peri eusebeias: [6272]1 [6273]2
 * peri kakologias: [6274]1
 * peri kanonon ekklesiastikon: [6275]1
 * peri logou tes propheteias autou: [6276]1
 * peri methes tosauta: [6277]1
 * peri metanoias: [6278]1
 * peri pisteos: [6279]1 [6280]2
 * peri pisteos anthropou: [6281]1 [6282]2
 * peri p?thous: [6283]1
 * peri peirasmon: [6284]1
 * peri presbeias pros G?ion: [6285]1
 * peri pronoias: [6286]1
 * peri propheteias autou: [6287]1
 * peri sarkoseos christou: [6288]1
 * peri staurou: [6289]1
 * peri sunkuseos ton dialekton: [6290]1
 * peri tagathou: [6291]1
 * peri tagathou kai pothen to kakon: [6292]1
 * peri ta theia logia: [6293]1
 * peri tes hules: [6294]1
 * peri tes Mouseos kai 'Iesou sumphonias: [6295]1
 * peri tes autou propheteias: [6296]1
 * peri tes pros ta paideumata sunodou: [6297]1
 * peri tes skenes: [6298]1
 * peri tes ton palaion andron polupaidias: [6299]1
 * peri tes tou bibliou ton propheton onomasias kai apo merous ti
 periechei hekastos: [6300]1
 * peri tes tou p?scha he& 231;rtes: [6301]1
 * peri ton en Palaistine martures?nton: [6302]1
 * peri ton en Palaistine martures?nton telos: [6303]1
 * peri ton endiathekon kai homologoumenon: [6304]1
 * peri ton deka logion: [6305]1
 * peri ton eis tas hierourgias zoon, kai tina ta ton thusion eide:
 [6306]1
 * peri ton kath' hemon psephism?ton: [6307]1
 * peri ton metonomazomenon kai hon heneka metonom?zontai: [6308]1
 * peri ton prokeimenon en to nomo tois men agathois athlon, tois de
 ponerois epitimion kai aron: [6309]1
 * peri ton topikon onom?ton ton en te thei& 139; graphe: [6310]1
 * peri ton trion areton, has sun allais anegrapse Mouses: [6311]1
 * peri te tou kata Mousea theopemptous einai tous oneirous proton,
 deuteron, k.t.l: [6312]1
 * peri te tou, tis ho ton theion esti kleronomos, e peri tes eis ta
 isa kai enantia tomes: [6313]1
 * peri toutou: [6314]1
 * peri touton: [6315]1
 * peri tou ensomaton einai ton theon: [6316]1
 * peri tou exenepse Noe: [6317]1
 * peri tou kata ton sotera katartismou: [6318]1
 * peri tou p?scha: [6319]1 [6320]2
 * peri tou tis ho ton theion pragm?ton kleronomos: [6321]1
 * peri trion areton etoi peri andreias kai philanthropias kai
 metanoias: peri andreias: [6322]1
 * peri phuseos anthropou: [6323]1
 * peri philanthropias: [6324]1
 * peri philoxenias: [6325]1
 * peri phuges kai haireseos kai ho peri phuseos kai heureseos:
 [6326]1
 * peri phuges kai heureseos: [6327]1
 * peri phug?don: [6328]1
 * peri phutourgias Noe to deuteron: [6329]1
 * peri psuches kai somatos: [6330]1
 * peri psuches: [6331]1
 * periodoi: [6332]1 [6333]2
 * periodoi ton apostolon: [6334]1
 * peripsema: [6335]1
 * perioche tou laou kai dikaiosune: [6336]1
 * peristera kai: [6337]1
 * peges: [6338]1
 * planathai: [6339]1
 * planesai: [6340]1
 * pleistoi: [6341]1
 * pleiston chronon: [6342]1
 * pneuma: [6343]1 [6344]2
 * pneumatikoi: [6345]1
 * pod?gra: [6346]1
 * poiesantos tou: [6347]1
 * poiesantos tou theou hoper hebouleto: [6348]1
 * poiesontas ta: [6349]1
 * poiesontas touto hoper ebouleto: [6350]1
 * poieisthai: [6351]1
 * poietes: [6352]1
 * poimen: [6353]1
 * poinen einai ta nosemata legein: [6354]1
 * poinen einai ton sophiston ta nosemata legein: [6355]1
 * politeuma: [6356]1
 * polichnen: [6357]1
 * poliorkei autous: [6358]1
 * pro gar touton ton hemeron: [6359]1
 * pros: [6360]1 [6361]2
 * pros hap?sas tas haireseis: [6362]1
 * pros Ellenas logos...peri epistemes: [6363]1
 * pros Ellenas, peri eusebeias: [6364]1
 * pros Aireseis: [6365]1
 * pros Germanon: [6366]1
 * pros Konona idia tis peri metanoias graphe: [6367]1
 * pros Marinon: [6368]1
 * pros P?rthous: [6369]1
 * pros Stephanon peri ton en euangeliois zetem?ton kai luseon:
 [6370]1
 * pros hous met' oligon esometha: [6371]1
 * pros to ten epistemen auton diaphul?ssein: [6372]1
 * pros tous adelphous: [6373]1
 * pros tous huper 'Apolloniou tou tuaneos Ierokleous logous: [6374]1
 * pros tous kosmikous archontas: [6375]1
 * proedros: [6376]1 [6377]2
 * pros: [6378]1 [6379]2
 * protera: [6380]1
 * proteron: [6381]1
 * prote: [6382]1 [6383]2 [6384]3 [6385]4
 * protes kai deuteras: [6386]1
 * proton kai deuteron: [6387]1 [6388]2
 * pr?gma: [6389]1
 * pr?gmatos: [6390]1 [6391]2 [6392]3
 * pr?xeis: [6393]1 [6394]2
 * pr?xeis Paulou: [6395]1
 * praoteron: [6396]1
 * presbuteros: [6397]1 [6398]2 [6399]3
 * presbeia: [6400]1
 * proegoros: [6401]1
 * problem?ton biblion: [6402]1
 * progr?mmata: [6403]1
 * proestotas: [6404]1
 * propaideias tes kath' Ellenas: [6405]1
 * proparaskeue euangelike: [6406]1
 * prosechon, te anagnosei te apostolik & 135;n?gnosis: [6407]1
 * pros?bbatos: [6408]1
 * prosabb?tou hemera: [6409]1
 * proselutous: [6410]1
 * proseloun auton: [6411]1
 * proskunesai: [6412]1
 * protera: [6413]1 [6414]2 [6415]3
 * propheteias: [6416]1 [6417]2
 * puloroi: [6418]1
 * puri asbesto: [6419]1
 * sekreton: [6420]1
 * sungramma: [6421]1
 * sumbios: [6422]1
 * somatos: [6423]1 [6424]2
 * seismous: [6425]1
 * semneion kai monasterion: [6426]1
 * semnunomenos: [6427]1
 * semaiai kalountai: [6428]1
 * sthragizo: [6429]1
 * sk?phe: [6430]1
 * skandalisai: [6431]1
 * sophia: [6432]1
 * spoudaiotaton: [6433]1
 * stephanos: [6434]1
 * stele: [6435]1 [6436]2
 * stomachos: [6437]1
 * staurothentos: [6438]1
 * steil?menos: [6439]1
 * stibizetai: [6440]1
 * stratoped?rches: [6441]1
 * sunkekrotemenon: [6442]1
 * sumbebekos: [6443]1
 * sumpresbuteros: [6444]1
 * sunagoge: [6445]1
 * sunaskoumenos: [6446]1
 * suneisaktoi: [6447]1
 * sphodra smikros ton noun: [6448]1
 * sphragis: [6449]1 [6450]2
 * soteri: [6451]1
 * sophrosune: [6452]1 [6453]2 [6454]3
 * ta: [6455]1 [6456]2 [6457]3 [6458]4 [6459]5
 * ta hexapla, to hexaploun, to hexaselidon: [6460]1
 * ta Kollouthionos: [6461]1
 * ta koinonika gr?mmata: [6462]1
 * ta loipa tou ekklesiastikou logou: [6463]1
 * ta peri tes Romaion sunodou kai ta doxanta pasi tois kata ten
 'Italian k.t.l: [6464]1
 * ta peri ton anapheromenon en eidei nomon eis ta sunteinonta
 keph?laia ton deka logon, a'b'g'd': [6465]1
 * ta somatik?: [6466]1
 * tas anagraphas: [6467]1
 * tas hup' ouranon: [6468]1
 * tas Gallias: [6469]1
 * tas Gallias: houto gar ekalounto p?lai: [6470]1
 * tas diexodous ton mastigon tas ekeise eithismenas: [6471]1
 * tas katholou dioikeseis tes tar' autois kaloumenes magistrotetos te
 kai katholikotetos: [6472]1
 * tas ton ethnon hegemonias: [6473]1
 * tas pheromenas heortastik?s: [6474]1
 * ten anaphoran poies?menos he& 240;s tou 'Adam, tou theou kat'
 an?lusin. oude men anapodeikton k.t.l: [6475]1
 * ten hupostasin: [6476]1
 * ten 'Asphaltitin limnen: [6477]1
 * ten Gallian: [6478]1
 * ten Kaisaros tuchen: [6479]1
 * ten auten hermeneian gr?phein: [6480]1
 * ten auten hermeneuein graphen: [6481]1
 * ten gar asotian hegeito philotimian: [6482]1
 * ten de pheromenen autou deuteran: [6483]1
 * ten demosian epistemen: [6484]1
 * ten kath' hemas: [6485]1
 * ten kath' hemas gene?n: [6486]1
 * ten legomenen kata Phrugas hairesin: [6487]1
 * ten me bl?ptousan hemas: [6488]1
 * ten meg?len dunamin tou theou: [6489]1
 * ten peri touton katelthousan eis hemas historian: [6490]1
 * ten sphragida kuriou: [6491]1
 * ten ton apostolon diadochen: [6492]1
 * ten pseudonumon gnosin: [6493]1
 * teganon: [6494]1
 * ti dikaion: [6495]1
 * tinon: [6496]1
 * tis ho sozomenos plousios: [6497]1 [6498]2
 * to: [6499]1
 * to asma: [6500]1
 * to 'Ar?bion oros: [6501]1
 * to 'Ar?bion ouros,: [6502]1
 * to Suriakon euangelion: [6503]1
 * to Suriakon: [6504]1
 * to b?rbaron tolmema: [6505]1
 * to dia tess?ron: [6506]1
 * to dia tess?ron euangelion: [6507]1
 * to katholou me blepousin: [6508]1
 * to klema: [6509]1
 * to mega S?bbaton: [6510]1
 * to meli tes 'Attikes: [6511]1
 * to peri politeias kai propheton: [6512]1
 * to peri pronoias: [6513]1
 * to peri tou p?scha sungramma: [6514]1
 * ton ekklesiastikon kanona: [6515]1
 * ton boubona: [6516]1 [6517]2
 * ton thronon tes episkopes: [6518]1
 * ton logon: [6519]1
 * ton p?lai lanthanousas chronon: [6520]1
 * ton proton theon: [6521]1
 * ton skutea: [6522]1
 * to: [6523]1
 * topon: [6524]1 [6525]2
 * tuche: [6526]1 [6527]2 [6528]3 [6529]4 [6530]5 [6531]6 [6532]7
 [6533]8
 * tes axias: [6534]1
 * tes heautou kephales huper kathezomenon eiden: [6535]1
 * tes hieras pisteos to didaskaleion: [6536]1
 * tes hup' ouranon: [6537]1
 * tes 'Aristotelous diadoches ten diatriben: [6538]1
 * tes 'Iamniton poleos: [6539]1
 * tes d' eis to pan euangelion auto de touto pragmateias: [6540]1
 * tes didaskalias: [6541]1 [6542]2
 * tes p?lai 'Ioudaias apo p?ses Biblou katagraphen pepoiemenos kai
 tas en aute ton dodeka phulon diairon klerous: [6543]1
 * tes tou bibliou diexagoges legomenes: [6544]1
 * tes christou diatribes ouk asemos aner: [6545]1
 * te aute aponoi& 139; diamenonton: [6546]1
 * te sumbi& 251; heautou: [6547]1
 * te ton enkuklion paidei& 139;: [6548]1
 * tede: [6549]1
 * ton: [6550]1 [6551]2
 * ton ana ten oikoumenen ethnon epi ten hell?da phonen metabalon tas
 en te thei& 139; graphe keimenas hebraiois onomasi prosreseis:
 [6552]1
 * ton antilegomenon: [6553]1 [6554]2 [6555]3
 * ton apostolon ai legomenai didachai: [6556]1
 * ton en nomo de kai prophetais 'Ebraikon onom?ton hai hermeneiai:
 [6557]1
 * ton epi Romes: [6558]1
 * ton biblion: [6559]1
 * ton goneon ton heauton ten hairesin: [6560]1
 * ton dodeka en monobiblo: [6561]1
 * ton eis ten genealogian tou soteros hemon zetem?ton kai luseon:
 [6562]1
 * ton katholou logon ?parchos: [6563]1
 * ton kath' hemas oi presbuteroi: [6564]1
 * ton kata ten alethe philosophian gnostikon hupomnem?ton stromateis:
 [6565]1
 * ton kata phusin theon: [6566]1
 * ton katarxamenon autou: [6567]1
 * ton legomenon empsuchon: [6568]1
 * ton para phusin: [6569]1
 * ton propheton: [6570]1
 * ton sophiston: [6571]1
 * t?: [6572]1
 * tais hermeneiais: [6573]1
 * taboul?rioi: [6574]1
 * te: [6575]1 [6576]2 [6577]3
 * teleioo: [6578]1
 * teleiothenai: [6579]1
 * tess?ron: [6580]1
 * tessarakoste: [6581]1
 * ti para tous nomous: [6582]1
 * ti suneseos: [6583]1
 * timen: [6584]1
 * times epeilemmenous: [6585]1
 * tina: [6586]1
 * tina katechetika biblia: [6587]1
 * tines ethetekasi: [6588]1
 * tis hupothesis: [6589]1
 * tous emphanesterous hes kateilephen apostolikes diadoches
 episemainomenos: [6590]1
 * tous en oiketiais: [6591]1 [6592]2
 * tous de en oiketiais, ei epimenoien te tou christianismou prothesei
 eleutherias stereisthai: [6593]1
 * tous de te sumphor? peripeptokotas: [6594]1
 * tous oikous, en hois sunegonto, sunthosin: [6595]1
 * tous podas hupo tessara tou kolasteriou xulou paratetheis
 diastemata: [6596]1
 * tous pantachose ton ekklesion proestotas: [6597]1 [6598]2
 * tous ton ekklesion archontas: [6599]1
 * tous ton ekklesion proedrous p?ntas: [6600]1
 * tous te kaloumenous geioras: [6601]1
 * touto nika: [6602]1
 * toutou: [6603]1 [6604]2
 * toutou de adelphon: [6605]1
 * toutou metrios tas graphas epi tes ekklesias diegoumenou
 katekousamen: [6606]1
 * touton: [6607]1 [6608]2
 * tois amunteriois: [6609]1
 * tois ektos: [6610]1
 * tois homologoumenois: [6611]1
 * tois kat' agrous epitetagmenois: [6612]1
 * tou hierou: [6613]1
 * tou Eli: [6614]1 [6615]2
 * tou Suriakou: [6616]1
 * tou autou spoudai einai legontai: [6617]1
 * tou de Sarapionos tes peri logous askeseos kai alla men eikos
 sozesthai par' eterois hupomnemata: [6618]1
 * tou despotou mou: [6619]1
 * tou theou: [6620]1
 * tou kath' hemas para pasi logou: [6621]1
 * tou kanonos: [6622]1
 * tou kata theon politeumatos: [6623]1
 * tou peri tou hagiou p?scha sungr?mmatos: [6624]1
 * tou te en aute hierou ten eikona diachar?xas meta paratheseos ton
 eis tous tupous hupomnem?ton: [6625]1
 * tou te sphragisthenai hupo tou episkopou sphragisthenai: [6626]1
 * touto: [6627]1 [6628]2
 * touton: [6629]1 [6630]2 [6631]3
 * touton euthus enoese kakon einai, ton kai pote ton agathon
 genomenon: [6632]1
 * touton katechei logos christianon onta: [6633]1
 * topikon: [6634]1
 * toutesti para ton diadochon ton katarxamenon autou, ohus Doketas
 kaloumen, (ta gar phronemata ta pleiona ekeinon esti tes
 didaskalias), k.t.l: [6635]1
 * triton: [6636]1 [6637]2 [6638]3 [6639]4 [6640]5
 * tropon: [6641]1 [6642]2 [6643]3 [6644]4
 * trapezites: [6645]1
 * treis te oi tou epigegrammenou paidagogou: [6646]1
 * triakontaeterikon: [6647]1
 * trist?tes: [6648]1
 * huiou: [6649]1
 * pheretai: [6650]1
 * pheromai: [6651]1
 * philetos e philippos: [6652]1
 * phuseos: [6653]1
 * phusis: [6654]1 [6655]2 [6656]3
 * ph?bion: [6657]1
 * phabianon: [6658]1
 * phasin: [6659]1
 * phasi: [6660]1 [6661]2 [6662]3 [6663]4
 * pheromene: [6664]1 [6665]2
 * phesi: [6666]1 [6667]2 [6668]3
 * philosophias: [6669]1
 * phlabianos: [6670]1
 * phr?zein: [6671]1
 * phr?sei: [6672]1
 * phr?sis: [6673]1
 * phronemata: [6674]1
 * phrontida peri christianon poieithai: [6675]1
 * phule: [6676]1
 * phul?tton exeti paidos kanona: [6677]1
 * photizo: [6678]1
 * chthes de kai proen: [6679]1
 * chiliarches: [6680]1
 * christon: [6681]1
 * christos: [6682]1
 * christianos: [6683]1
 * christianous monous: [6684]1
 * chronikoi kanones: [6685]1
 * chronographia: [6686]1 [6687]2
 * choris tes tou oikeiou gnomes episkopou: [6688]1
 * psalmon Dabid: [6689]1
 * pseudographa: [6690]1
 * pseudonumou gnoseos: [6691]1
 * psephizetai metastenai men apo 'Alexandreias ton 'Origenen, kai
 mete diatribein en aute, mete did?skein: [6692]1
 * psephon: [6693]1
 * psilos anthropos: [6694]1
 * psuche: [6695]1
 * psuches: [6696]1 [6697]2 [6698]3
 * psuchichoi: [6699]1
 * s.v.: [6700]1

Index of Hebrew Words and Phrases

 * ': [6701]1
 * 'vyvn: [6702]1
 * 'phl m: [6703]1
 * vr kvzyv': [6704]1
 * vr kvkv': [6705]1
 * gychvn: [6706]1
 * gr: [6707]1
 * dvry hymym : [6708]1
 * n'dr bqds: [6709]1
 * zr': [6710]1
 * lmh: [6711]1
 * qrbn: [6712]1
 * slys: [6713]1
 * slysyv: [6714]1

Index of German Words and Phrases

 * Agrapha: [6715]1
 * Chronologie d. röm. Bischöfe: [6716]1
 * Chronologie der röm. Bischöfe: [6717]1
 * Conciliengesch: [6718]1
 * Dabey ein Antwort auff Constantini Donation, welche der Luther
 spöttlich nennet den Hohen Artickel des allerheyligisten
 Bebstlichen glaubens: [6719]1
 * Der Brief des Origenes an Gregorios: [6720]1
 * Die byz. Kaiser. Hist.-stud.: [6721]1
 * Dionysius der Grosse: [6722]1
 * Eine Darstellung seines Lebens und seiner Lehre: [6723]1
 * Einleitung in das N. T.: [6724]1
 * Jabrbücher f. prot. Theologie: [6725]1
 * Kaiser Licinius, eine historische Untersuchung nach dem bestern
 alten und neueren Quellen: [6726]1
 * Kirchen og Romerstaten indtil Constantin den Stre: [6727]1
 * Regierung und Christenverfolgung des Kaisers Diocletianus und
 seiner Nachfolger: [6728]1
 * Texte und Untersuchungen: [6729]1
 * Ueber Constantin und sein Verhältniss zum Christenthum: [6730]1
 * Urchristenthum: [6731]1
 * Vita Constantini Magni, herausgegeben von A. Jäger: [6732]1
 * Wider die Natterzungen: [6733]1
 * Zeit Constantins: [6734]1
 * ein Teuffelische lügen und Gottes lasterung (wie sie der Luther
 nennet): [6735]1

Index of French Words and Phrases

 * Bibl. ec. des Chartes: [6736]1
 * Bibliothèque de la Ville: [6737]1
 * Bull. de la soc. des arch. de la Saintogne: [6738]1
 * Dissertation critique sur la famille de Constantin, & en
 particulier sur Constantin le Jeune: [6739]1
 * Essais d'histoire religieuse, I. un dernier mot sur les
 persecutions; II. la conversion de Constantin.: [6740]1
 * Histoire de la délivrance de l'Église: [6741]1
 * La fausse donation de Constantini, examen de quelques théories
 récentes: [6742]1
 * Les statues au portail des églises: [6743]1
 * Limoges: [6744]1
 * Mémoire sur Ies statues équestres de Constantin placées dans Ies
 églises de l'ouest de la France.: [6745]1
 * Nouv. biog. gén: [6746]1 [6747]2 [6748]3
 * Numismatique: [6749]1
 * Rép. des sources hist. du Moyen Age: [6750]1
 * Recueil des Chroniques: [6751]1
 * Rev. d. deux mondes: [6752]1

Index of Pages of the Print Edition

 [6753]i  [6754]v  [6755]vii  [6756]ix  [6757]x  [6758]3  [6759]4
 [6760]5  [6761]6  [6762]7  [6763]8  [6764]9  [6765]10  [6766]11
 [6767]12  [6768]13  [6769]14  [6770]15  [6771]16  [6772]17  [6773]18
 [6774]19  [6775]20  [6776]21  [6777]22  [6778]23  [6779]24  [6780]25
 [6781]26  [6782]27  [6783]28  [6784]29  [6785]30  [6786]31  [6787]32
 [6788]33  [6789]34  [6790]35  [6791]36  [6792]37  [6793]38  [6794]39
 [6795]40  [6796]41  [6797]42  [6798]43  [6799]44  [6800]45  [6801]46
 [6802]47  [6803]48  [6804]49  [6805]50  [6806]51  [6807]52  [6808]53
 [6809]54  [6810]55  [6811]56  [6812]57  [6813]58  [6814]59  [6815]60
 [6816]61  [6817]62  [6818]63  [6819]64  [6820]65  [6821]66  [6822]67
 [6823]68  [6824]69  [6825]70  [6826]71  [6827]72  [6828]81  [6829]82
 [6830]83  [6831]84  [6832]85  [6833]86  [6834]87  [6835]88  [6836]89
 [6837]90  [6838]91  [6839]92  [6840]93  [6841]94  [6842]95  [6843]96
 [6844]97  [6845]98  [6846]99  [6847]100  [6848]101  [6849]102
 [6850]103  [6851]104  [6852]105  [6853]106  [6854]107  [6855]108
 [6856]109  [6857]110  [6858]111  [6859]112  [6860]113  [6861]114
 [6862]115  [6863]116  [6864]117  [6865]118  [6866]119  [6867]120
 [6868]121  [6869]122  [6870]123  [6871]124  [6872]125  [6873]126
 [6874]127  [6875]128  [6876]129  [6877]130  [6878]131  [6879]132
 [6880]133  [6881]134  [6882]135  [6883]136  [6884]137  [6885]138
 [6886]139  [6887]140  [6888]141  [6889]142  [6890]143  [6891]144
 [6892]145  [6893]146  [6894]147  [6895]148  [6896]149  [6897]150
 [6898]151  [6899]152  [6900]153  [6901]154  [6902]155  [6903]156
 [6904]157  [6905]158  [6906]159  [6907]160  [6908]161  [6909]162
 [6910]163  [6911]164  [6912]165  [6913]166  [6914]167  [6915]168
 [6916]169  [6917]170  [6918]171  [6919]172  [6920]173  [6921]174
 [6922]175  [6923]176  [6924]177  [6925]178  [6926]179  [6927]180
 [6928]181  [6929]182  [6930]183  [6931]184  [6932]185  [6933]186
 [6934]187  [6935]188  [6936]189  [6937]190  [6938]191  [6939]192
 [6940]193  [6941]194  [6942]195  [6943]196  [6944]197  [6945]198
 [6946]199  [6947]200  [6948]201  [6949]202  [6950]203  [6951]204
 [6952]205  [6953]206  [6954]207  [6955]208  [6956]209  [6957]210
 [6958]211  [6959]212  [6960]213  [6961]214  [6962]215  [6963]216
 [6964]217  [6965]218  [6966]219  [6967]220  [6968]221  [6969]222
 [6970]223  [6971]224  [6972]225  [6973]226  [6974]227  [6975]228
 [6976]229  [6977]230  [6978]231  [6979]232  [6980]233  [6981]234
 [6982]235  [6983]236  [6984]237  [6985]238  [6986]239  [6987]240
 [6988]241  [6989]242  [6990]243  [6991]244  [6992]245  [6993]246
 [6994]247  [6995]248  [6996]249  [6997]250  [6998]251  [6999]252
 [7000]253  [7001]254  [7002]255  [7003]256  [7004]257  [7005]258
 [7006]259  [7007]260  [7008]261  [7009]262  [7010]263  [7011]264
 [7012]265  [7013]266  [7014]267  [7015]268  [7016]269  [7017]270
 [7018]271  [7019]272  [7020]273  [7021]274  [7022]275  [7023]276
 [7024]277  [7025]278  [7026]279  [7027]280  [7028]281  [7029]282
 [7030]283  [7031]284  [7032]285  [7033]286  [7034]287  [7035]288
 [7036]289  [7037]290  [7038]291  [7039]292  [7040]293  [7041]294
 [7042]295  [7043]296  [7044]297  [7045]298  [7046]299  [7047]300
 [7048]301  [7049]302  [7050]303  [7051]304  [7052]305  [7053]306
 [7054]307  [7055]308  [7056]309  [7057]310  [7058]311  [7059]312
 [7060]313  [7061]314  [7062]315  [7063]316  [7064]317  [7065]318
 [7066]319  [7067]320  [7068]321  [7069]322  [7070]323  [7071]324
 [7072]325  [7073]326  [7074]327  [7075]328  [7076]329  [7077]330
 [7078]331  [7079]332  [7080]333  [7081]334  [7082]335  [7083]336
 [7084]337  [7085]338  [7086]339  [7087]340  [7088]341  [7089]342
 [7090]343  [7091]344  [7092]345  [7093]346  [7094]347  [7095]348
 [7096]349  [7097]350  [7098]351  [7099]352  [7100]353  [7101]354
 [7102]355  [7103]356  [7104]357  [7105]358  [7106]359  [7107]360
 [7108]361  [7109]362  [7110]363  [7111]364  [7112]365  [7113]366
 [7114]367  [7115]368  [7116]369  [7117]370  [7118]371  [7119]372
 [7120]373  [7121]374  [7122]375  [7123]376  [7124]377  [7125]378
 [7126]379  [7127]380  [7128]381  [7129]382  [7130]383  [7131]384
 [7132]385  [7133]386  [7134]387  [7135]388  [7136]389  [7137]390
 [7138]391  [7139]392  [7140]393  [7141]394  [7142]395  [7143]396
 [7144]397  [7145]398  [7146]399  [7147]400  [7148]401  [7149]402
 [7150]403  [7151]405  [7152]408  [7153]411  [7154]412  [7155]413
 [7156]414  [7157]415  [7158]416  [7159]417  [7160]418  [7161]419
 [7162]420  [7163]421  [7164]422  [7165]423  [7166]424  [7167]425
 [7168]426  [7169]427  [7170]428  [7171]429  [7172]430  [7173]431
 [7174]432  [7175]433  [7176]434  [7177]435  [7178]436  [7179]437
 [7180]438  [7181]439  [7182]440  [7183]441  [7184]442  [7185]443
 [7186]444  [7187]445  [7188]446  [7189]447  [7190]448  [7191]449
 [7192]450  [7193]451  [7194]452  [7195]453  [7196]454  [7197]455
 [7198]456  [7199]457  [7200]458  [7201]459  [7202]460  [7203]461
 [7204]462  [7205]463  [7206]464  [7207]465  [7208]466  [7209]467
 [7210]468  [7211]469  [7212]471  [7213]481  [7214]482  [7215]483
 [7216]484  [7217]485  [7218]486  [7219]487  [7220]488  [7221]489
 [7222]490  [7223]491  [7224]492  [7225]493  [7226]494  [7227]495
 [7228]496  [7229]497  [7230]498  [7231]499  [7232]500  [7233]501
 [7234]502  [7235]503  [7236]504  [7237]505  [7238]506  [7239]507
 [7240]508  [7241]509  [7242]510  [7243]511  [7244]512  [7245]513
 [7246]514  [7247]515  [7248]516  [7249]517  [7250]518  [7251]519
 [7252]520  [7253]521  [7254]522  [7255]523  [7256]524  [7257]525
 [7258]526  [7259]527  [7260]528  [7261]529  [7262]530  [7263]531
 [7264]532  [7265]533  [7266]534  [7267]535  [7268]536  [7269]537
 [7270]538  [7271]539  [7272]540  [7273]541  [7274]542  [7275]543
 [7276]544  [7277]545  [7278]546  [7279]547  [7280]548  [7281]549
 [7282]550  [7283]551  [7284]552  [7285]553  [7286]554  [7287]555
 [7288]556  [7289]557  [7290]558  [7291]559  [7292]561  [7293]562
 [7294]563  [7295]564  [7296]565  [7297]566  [7298]567  [7299]568
 [7300]569  [7301]570  [7302]571  [7303]572  [7304]573  [7305]574
 [7306]575  [7307]576  [7308]577  [7309]578  [7310]579  [7311]580
 [7312]581  [7313]582  [7314]583  [7315]584  [7316]585  [7317]586
 [7318]587  [7319]588  [7320]589  [7321]590  [7322]591  [7323]592
 [7324]593  [7325]594  [7326]595  [7327]596  [7328]597  [7329]598
 [7330]599  [7331]600  [7332]601  [7333]602  [7334]603  [7335]604
 [7336]605  [7337]606  [7338]607  [7339]608  [7340]609  [7341]610

 This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
 Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
 generated on demand from ThML source.

References
