The Martyrs of Palestine (Eusebius of Caesarea)
Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, Series 2, 1892. Public domain.
Source: Christian Classics Ethereal Library.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

======================================================================

 Martyrs of Palestine.^ [2613]

 ------------------------

 The Following also we found in a Certain Copy in the Eighth Book.
 [2614]

 It was in the nineteenth year of the reign of Diocletian, in the month
 Xanthicus, [2615] which is called April by the Romans, about the time
 of the feast of our Saviour's passion, while Flavianus [2616] was
 governor of the province of Palestine, that letters were published
 everywhere, commanding that the churches be leveled to the ground and
 the Scriptures be destroyed by fire, and ordering that those who held
 places of honor be degraded, and that the household servants, if they
 persisted in the profession of Christianity, be deprived of freedom.

 Such was the force of the first edict against us. But not long after
 other letters were issued, commanding that all the bishops of the
 churches everywhere be first thrown into prison, and afterward, by
 every artifice, be compelled to sacrifice.

 [2613] On this work, see above, p. 29 sq. As remarked there, the
 shorter form of the work, the translation of which follows, is found in
 most, but not all, of the mss. of Eusebius' Church History, in some of
 them at the close of the tenth book, in one of them in the middle of
 Bk. VIII. chap. 13, in the majority of them between Bks. VIII. and IX.
 It is found neither in the Syraic version of the History, nor in
 Rufinus. Musculus omits it in his Latin version, but a translation of
 it is given both by Christophorsonus and Valesius. The Germans Stroth
 and Closs omit it; but Stigloher gives it at the close of his
 translation of the History. The English translators insert it at the
 close of the eighth book. The work is undoubtedly genuine, in this, its
 shorter, as well as in its longer form, but was in all probability
 attached to the History, not by Eusebius himself, but by some copyist,
 and therefore is not strictly entitled to a place in a translation of
 the History. At the same time it has seemed best in the present case to
 include it and to follow the majority of the editors in inserting it at
 this point. In all the mss. except one the work begins abruptly without
 a title, introduced only by the words kai tauta ?n tini antigr?pho en
 to ogdo& 251; tomo heuromen: "The following also we found in a certain
 copy in the eighth book." In the Codex Castellanus, however, according
 to Reading (in his edition of Valesius, Vol. I. p. 796, col. 2), the
 following title is inserted immediately after the words just quoted:
 Eusebiou sungramma peri ton kat' auton martures?nton en to oktaetei
 Diokletianou kai ephexes Galeriou tou Maximinou diogmo. Heinichen
 consequently prints the first part of this title
 (Eusebiou...martures?nton) at the head of the work in his edition, and
 is followed by Burton and Migne. This title, however, can hardly be
 looked upon as original, and I have preferred to employ rather the name
 by which the work is described at its close, where we read Eusebiou tou
 Pamphilou peri ton en Palaistine martures?nton telos. This agrees with
 the title of the Syriac version, and must represent very closely the
 original title; and so the work is commonly known in English as the
 Martyrs of Palestine, in Latin as de Martyribus Palestinæ. The work is
 much more systematic than the eighth book of the Church History; in
 fact, it is excellently arranged, and takes up the persecution year by
 year in chronological order. The ground covered, however, is very
 limited, and we can consequently gather from the work little idea of
 the state of the Church at large during these years. All the martyrs
 mentioned in the following pages are commemorated in the various
 martyrologies under particular days, but in regard to most of them we
 know only what Eusebius tells us. I shall not attempt to give
 references to the martyrologies. Further details gleaned from them and
 from various Acts of martyrdom may be found in Ruinart, Tillemont, &c.
 I shall endeavor to give full particulars in regard to the few martyrs
 about whom we have any reliable information beyond that given in the
 present work, but shall pass over the others without mention.

 [2614] The Martyrs of Palestine, in all the mss. that contain it, is
 introduced with these words. The passage which follows, down to the
 beginning of Chap. 1, is a transcript, with a few slight variations, of
 Bk. VIII. chap. 2, §§4 and 5. For notes upon it, see that chapter.

 [2615] The month Xanthicus was the eighth month of the Macedonian year,
 and corresponded to our April (see the table on p. 403, below). In Bk.
 VIII. chap. 2, Eusebius puts the beginning of the prosecution in the
 seventh month, Dystrus. But the persecution really began, or at least
 the first edict was issued, and the destruction of the churches in
 Nicomedia took place, in February. See Bk. VIII. chap. 2, note 3.

 [2616] Flavianus is not mentioned in Bk. VIII. chap. 2. In the Syriac
 version he is named as the judge by whom Procopius was condemned
 (Cureton, p. 4). Nothing further is known of him, so far as I am aware.

 Chapter I.

 1. The first of the martyrs of Palestine was Procopius, [2617] who,
 before he had received the trial of imprisonment, immediately on his
 first appearance before the governor's tribunal, having been ordered to
 sacrifice to the so-called gods, declared that he knew only one to whom
 it was proper to sacrifice, as he himself wills. But when he was
 commanded to offer libations to the four emperors, having quoted a
 sentence which displeased them, he was immediately beheaded. The
 quotation was from the poet: "The rule of many is not good; let there
 be one ruler and one king." [2618]

 2. It was the seventh [2619] day of the month Desius, [2620] the
 seventh before the ides of June, [2621] as the Romans reckon, and the
 fourth day of the week, when this first example was given at Cæsarea in
 Palestine.

 3. Afterwards, [2622] in the same city, many rulers of the country
 churches readily endured terrible sufferings, and furnished to the
 beholders an example of noble conflicts. But others, benumbed in spirit
 by terror, were easily weakened at the first onset. Of the rest, each
 one endured different forms of torture, as scourgings without number,
 and rackings, and tearings of their sides, and insupportable fetters,
 by which the hands of some were dislocated.

 4. Yet they endured what came upon them, as in accordance with the
 inscrutable purposes of God. For the hands of one were seized, and he
 was led to the altar, while they thrust into his right hand the
 polluted and abominable offering, and he was dismissed as if he had
 sacrificed. Another had not even touched it, yet when others said that
 he had sacrificed, he went away in silence. Another, being taken up
 half dead, was cast aside as if already dead, and released from his
 bonds, and counted among the sacrificers. When another cried out, and
 testified that he would not obey, he was struck in the mouth, and
 silenced by a large band of those who were drawn up for this purpose,
 and driven away by force, even though he had not sacrificed. Of such
 consequence did they consider it, to seem by any means to have
 accomplished their purpose.

 5. Therefore, of all this number, the only ones who were honored with
 the crown of the holy martyrs were Alphæus and Zacchæus. [2623] After
 stripes and scrapings and severe bonds and additional tortures and
 various other trials, and after having their feet stretched for a night
 and day over four holes in the stocks, [2624] on the seventeenth day of
 the month Dius, [2625] --that is, according to the Romans, the
 fifteenth before the Kalends of December,--having confessed one only
 God and Christ Jesus as king, [2626] as if they had uttered some
 blasphemy, they were beheaded like the former martyr.

 [2617] The account of Procopius was somewhat fuller in the longer
 recension of the Martyrs of Palestine, as can be seen from the Syriac
 version (English translation in Cureton, p. 3 sq.). There exists also a
 Latin translation of the Acts of St. Procopius, which was evidently
 made from that longer recension, and which is printed by Valesius and
 also by Cureton (p. 50 sq.), and in English by Crusè in loco. We are
 told by the Syriac version that his family was from Baishan. According
 to the Latin, he was a native of Ælia (Jerusalem), but resided in
 Scythopolis (the Greek name of Baishan). With the Latin agrees the
 Syriac version of these Acts, which is published by Assemani in his
 Acta SS. Martt. Orient. et Occident. ed. 1748, Part II. p. 169 sq. (see
 Cureton, p. 52). We learn from the longer account that he was a lector,
 interpreter, and exorcist in the church, and that he was exceedingly
 ascetic in his manner of life. It is clear from this paragraph that
 Procopius was put to death, not because he was a Christian, but because
 he uttered words apparently treasonable in their import. To call him a
 Christian martyr is therefore a misuse of terms. We cannot be sure
 whether Procopius was arrested under the terms of the first or under
 the terms of the second edict. If in consequence of the first, it may
 be that he was suspected of complicity in the plot which Diocletian was
 endeavoring to crush out, or that he had interfered with the imperial
 officers when they undertook to execute the decree for the destruction
 of the church buildings. The fact that he was commanded by the governor
 to sacrifice would lead us to think of the first, rather than of the
 second edict (see above, Bk. VIII. chap. 6, note 3, and chap. 2, note
 8). Still, it must be admitted that very likely many irregularities
 occurred in the methods by which the decrees were executed in the
 province, and the command to sacrifice can, therefore, not be claimed
 as proving that he was not arrested under the terms of the second
 edict; and in fact, the mention of imprisonment as the punishment which
 he had to expect would lead us to think of the second edict as at least
 the immediate occasion of his arrest. In any case, there is no reason
 to suppose that his arrest would have resulted in his death had he not
 been rash in his speech.

 [2618] ouk agathon polukoiranie heis koiranos ?sto, heis basileus. The
 sentence is from Homer's Iliad, Bk. II. vers. 204 and 205. It was a
 sort of proverb, like many of Homer's sayings, and was frequently
 quoted. As a consequence the use of it by Procopius does not prove at
 all his acquaintance with Homer or Greek literature in general.

 [2619] The majority of the mss. read "eighth," which according to
 Eusebius' customary mode of reckoning the Macedonian months is
 incorrect. For, as Valesius remarks, he always synchronizes the
 Macedonian with the Roman months, as was commonly done in his time. But
 the seventh before the Ides of June is not the eighth, but the seventh
 of June (or Desius). In fact, a few good mss. read "seventh" instead of
 "eighth," and I have followed Burton, Schwegler, and Heinichen in
 adopting that reading.

 [2620] Desius was the tenth month of the Macedonian year, and
 corresponded to our June (see the table on p. 403, below).

 [2621] On the Roman method of reckoning the days of the month, see
 below, p. 402.

 [2622] We may gather from §5, below, that the sufferings to which
 Eusebius refers in such general terms in this and the following
 paragraphs took place late in the year 303. In fact, from the Syriac
 version of the longer recension (Cureton, p. 4) we learn that the
 tortures inflicted upon Alphæus and Zacchæus were, in consequence of
 the third edict, issued at the approach of the emperor's vicennalia,
 and intended rather as a step toward amnesty than as a sharpening of
 the persecution (see above, Bk. VIII. chap. 5, note 8). This leads us
 to conclude that all the tortures mentioned in these paragraphs had the
 same occasion, and this explains the eagerness of the judges to set the
 prisoners free, even if they had not sacrificed, so long as they might
 be made to appear to have done so, and thus the law not be openly
 violated. Alphæus and Zacchæus alone suffered death, as we are told in
 §5, and they evidently on purely political grounds (see note 10).

 [2623] We learn from the Syriac version that Zacchæus was a deacon of
 the church of Gadara, and that Alphæus belonged to a noble family of
 the city of Eleutheropolis, and was a reader and exorcist in the church
 of Cæsarea.

 [2624] See above, Bk. IV. chap. 16, note 9.

 [2625] The month Dius was the third month of the Macedonian year, and
 corresponded with our November (see below, p. 403).

 [2626] monon hena Theon kai christon basilea 'Iesoun homologes?ntes
 Basileus was the technical term for emperor, and it is plain enough
 from this passage that these two men, like Procopius, were beheaded
 because they were regarded as guilty of treason, not because of their
 religious faith. The instances given in this chapter are very
 significant, for they reveal the nature of the persecution during its
 earlier months, and throw a clear light back upon the motives which had
 led Diocletian to take the step against the Christians which he did.

 Chapter II.

 1. What occurred to Romanus on the same day [2627] at Antioch, is also
 worthy of record. For he was a native of Palestine, a deacon and
 exorcist in the parish of Cæsarea; and being present at the destruction
 of the churches, he beheld many men, with women and children, going up
 in crowds to the idols and sacrificing. [2628] But, through his great
 zeal for religion, he could not endure the sight, and rebuked them with
 a loud voice.

 2. Being arrested for his boldness, he proved a most noble witness of
 the truth, if there ever was one. For when the judge informed him that
 he was to die by fire, [2629] he received the sentence with cheerful
 countenance and most ready mind, and was led away. When he was bound to
 the stake, and the wood piled up around him, as they were awaiting the
 arrival of the emperor before lighting the fire, he cried, "Where is
 the fire for me?"

 3. Having said this, he was summoned again before the emperor, [2630]
 and subjected to the unusual torture of having his tongue cut out. But
 he endured this with fortitude and showed to all by his deeds that the
 Divine Power is present with those who endure any hardship whatever for
 the sake of religion, lightening their sufferings and strengthening
 their zeal. When he learned of this strange mode of punishment, the
 noble man was not terrified, but put out his tongue readily, and
 offered it with the greatest alacrity to those who cut it off.

 4. After this punishment he was thrown into prison, and suffered there
 for a very long time. At last the twentieth anniversary of the emperor
 being near, [2631] when, according to an established gracious custom,
 liberty was proclaimed everywhere to all who were in bonds, he alone
 had both his feet stretched over five holes in the stocks, [2632] and
 while he lay there was strangled, and was thus honored with martyrdom,
 as he desired.

 5. Although he was outside of his country, yet, as he was a native of
 Palestine, it is proper to count him among the Palestinian martyrs.
 These things occurred in this manner during the first year, when the
 persecution was directed only against the rulers of the Church.

 [2627] We learn from the Syriac version that the death of Romanus
 occurred on the same day as that of Alphæus and Zacchæus. His arrest,
 therefore, must have taken place some time before, according to §4,
 below. In fact, we see from the present paragraph that his arrest took
 place in connection with the destruction of the churches; that is, at
 the time of the execution of the first edict in Antioch. We should
 naturally think that the edict would be speedily published in so
 important a city, and hence can hardly suppose the arrest of Romanus to
 have occurred later than the spring of 303. He therefore lay in prison
 a number of months (according to §4, below, a "very long time,"
 pleiston chronon). Mason is clearly in error in putting his arrest in
 November, and his death at the time of the vicennalia, in December. It
 is evident from the Syriac version that the order for the release of
 prisoners, to which the so-called third edict was appended, preceded
 the vicennalia by some weeks, although issued in view of the great
 anniversary which was so near at hand. It is quite possible that the
 decree was sent out some weeks beforehand, in order that time might be
 given to induce the Christians to sacrifice, and thus enjoy release at
 the same time with the others.

 [2628] There is no implication here that these persons were commanded,
 or even asked, to sacrifice. They seem, in their dread of what might
 come upon them, when they saw the churches demolished, to have hastened
 of their own accord to sacrifice to the idols, and thus disarm all
 possible suspicion.

 [2629] As Mason remarks, to punish Romanus with death for dissuading
 the Christians from sacrificing was entirely illegal, as no imperial
 edict requiring them to sacrifice had yet been issued, and therefore no
 law was broken in exhorting them not to do so. At the same time, that
 he should be arrested as a church officer was, under the terms of the
 second edict, legal, and, in fact, necessary; and that the judge should
 incline to be very severe in the present case, with the emperor so near
 at hand, was quite natural. That death, however, was not yet made the
 penalty of Christian confession is plain enough from the fact that,
 when the emperor was appealed to, as we learn from the Syriac version,
 he remanded Romanus to prison, thus inflicting upon him the legal
 punishment, according to the terms of the second edict. Upon the case
 of Romanus, see Mason, p. 188 sq.

 [2630] Valesius assumes that this was Galerius, and Mason does the
 same. In the Syriac version, however, he is directly called Diocletian;
 but on the other hand, in the Syriac acts published by Assemani
 (according to Cureton, p. 55), he is called "Maximinus, the son-in-law
 of Diocletian"; i.e. Galerius, who was known as Maximianus (of which
 Maximinus, in the present case, is evidently only a variant form). The
 emperor's conduct in the present case is much more in accord with
 Galerius' character, as known to us, than with the character of
 Diocletian; and moreover, it is easier to suppose that the name of
 Maximinus was later changed into that of Diocletian, by whose name the
 whole persecution was known, than that the greater name was changed
 into the less. I am therefore convinced that the reference in the
 present case is to Galerius, not to Diocletian.

 [2631] See above, Bk. VIII. chap. 2, note 8.

 [2632] See above, Bk. IV. chap. 16, note 9, and Bk. VIII. chap. 10,
 note 5.

 Chapter III.

 1. In the course of the second year, the persecution against us
 increased greatly. And at that time Urbanus [2633] being governor of
 the province, imperial edicts were first issued to him, commanding by a
 general decree that all the people should sacrifice at once in the
 different cities, and offer libations to the idols. [2634]

 In Gaza, a city of Palestine, Timotheus endured countless tortures, and
 afterwards was subjected to a slow and moderate fire. Having given, by
 his patience in all his sufferings, most genuine evidence of sincerest
 piety toward the Deity, he bore away the crown of the victorious
 athletes of religion. At the same time Agapius [2635] and our
 contemporary, Thecla, [2636] having exhibited most noble constancy,
 were condemned as food for the wild beasts.

 2. But who that beheld these things would not have admired, or if they
 heard of them by report, would not have been astonished? For when the
 heathen everywhere were holding a festival and the customary shows, it
 was noised abroad that besides the other entertainments, the public
 combat of those who had lately been condemned to wild beasts would also
 take place.

 3. As this report increased and spread in all directions, six young
 men, namely, Timolaus, a native of Pontus, Dionysius from Tripolis in
 Phoenicia, Romulus, a sub-deacon of the parish of Diospolis, [2637]
 Pæsis and Alexander, both Egyptians, and another Alexander from Gaza,
 having first bound their own hands, went in haste to Urbanus, who was
 about to open the exhibition, evidencing great zeal for martyrdom. They
 confessed that they were Christians, and by their ambition for all
 terrible things, showed that those who glory in the religion of the God
 of the universe do not cower before the attacks of wild beasts.

 4. Immediately, after creating no ordinary astonishment in the governor
 and those who were with him, they were cast into prison. After a few
 days two others were added to them. One of them, named Agapius, [2638]
 had in former confessions endured dreadful torments of various kinds.
 The other, who had supplied them with the necessaries of life, was
 called Dionysius. All of these eight were beheaded on one day at
 Cæsarea, on the twenty-fourth day of the month Dystrus, [2639] which is
 the ninth before the Kalends of April.

 5. Meanwhile, a change in the emperors occurred, and the first of them
 all in dignity, and the second retired into private life, [2640] and
 public affairs began to be troubled.

 6. Shortly after the Roman government became divided against itself,
 and a cruel war arose among them. [2641] And this division, with the
 troubles which grew out of it, was not settled until peace toward us
 had been established throughout the entire Roman Empire.

 7. For when this peace arose for all, as the daylight after the darkest
 and most gloomy night, the public affairs of the Roman government were
 re-established, and became happy and peaceful, and the ancestral
 good-will toward each other was revived. But we will relate these
 things more fully at the proper time. Now let us return to the regular
 course of events.

 [2633] Of Urbanus governor of Palestine, we know only what is told us
 in the present work (he is mentioned in this passage and in chaps. 4,
 7, and 8, below) and in the Syriac version. From the latter we learn
 that he succeeded Flavianus in the second year of the persecution
 (304), and that he was deposed by Maximinus in the fifth year (see also
 chap. 8, §7, below), and miserably executed.

 [2634] This is the famous fourth edict of Diocletian, which was issued
 in the year 304. It marks a stupendous change of method; in fact,
 Christianity as such is made, for the first time since the toleration
 edict of Gallienus, a religio illicita, whose profession is punishable
 by death. The general persecution, in the full sense, begins with the
 publication of this edict. Hitherto persecution had been directed only
 against supposed political offenders and church officers. The edict is
 a complete stultification of Diocletian's principles as revealed in the
 first three edicts, and shows a lamentable lack of the wisdom which had
 dictated those measures. Mason has performed an immense service in
 proving (to my opinion conclusively) that this brutal edict, senseless
 in its very severity, was not issued by Diocletian, but by Maximian,
 while Diocletian was quite incapacitated by illness for the performance
 of any public duties. Mason's arguments cannot be reproduced here; they
 are given at length on p. 212 sq. of his work. He remarks at the close
 of the discussion: "Diocletian, though he might have wished
 Christianity safely abolished, feared the growing power of the Church,
 and dared not persecute (till he was forced), lest he should rouse her
 from her passivity. But this Fourth Edict was nothing more nor less
 than a loud alarum to muster the army of the Church: as the centurions
 called over their lists, it taught her the statistics of her numbers,
 down to the last child: it proved to her that her troops could endure
 all the hardships of the campaign: it ranged her generals in the exact
 order of merit. Diocletian, by an exquisite refinement of thought,
 while he did not neglect the salutary fear which strong penalties might
 inspire in the Christians, knew well enough that though he might
 torture every believer in the world into sacrificing, yet Christianity
 was not killed: he knew that men were Christians again afterwards as
 well as before: could he have seen deeper yet, he would have known that
 the utter humiliation of a fall before men and angels converted many a
 hard and worldly prelate into a broken-hearted saint: and so he rested
 his hopes, not merely on the punishment of individuals, but on his
 three great measures for crushing the corporate life,--the destruction
 of the churches, the Scriptures, and the clergy. But this Fourth Edict
 evidently returns with crass dullness and brutal complacency to the
 thought that if half the church were racked till they poured the
 libations, and the other half burned or butchered, Paganism would reign
 alone forever more, and that the means were as eminently desirable as
 the end. Lastly, Diocletian had anxiously avoided all that could rouse
 fanatic zeal. The first result of the Fourth Edict was to rouse it."
 According to the Passio S. Sabini, which Mason accepts as in the main
 reliable, and which forms the strongest support for his theory, the
 edict was published in April, 304. Diocletian, meanwhile, as we know
 from Lactantius (de Mort. pers. 17) did not recover sufficiently to
 take any part in the government until early in the year 305, so that
 Maximian and Galerius had matters all their own way during the entire
 year, and could persecute as severely as they chose. As a result, the
 Christians, both east and west, suffered greatly during this period.

 [2635] Agapius, as we learn from chap. 6, below, survived his contest
 with the wild beasts at this time, and was thrown into prison, where he
 remained until the fourth year of the persecution, when he was again
 brought into the arena in the presence of the tyrant Maximinus, and was
 finally thrown into the sea.

 [2636] he kath' hemas Thekla. Thecla seems to be thus designated to
 distinguish her from her more famous namesake, whom tradition connected
 with Paul and who has played so large a part in romantic legend (see
 the Acts of Paul and Thecla in the Ante-Nicene Fathers, VIII. 487 sq.,
 and the Dict. of Christ. Biog., s.v.). She is referred to again in
 chap. 6, below, but we are not told whether she actually suffered or
 not.

 [2637] A city of Palestine, lying northwest of Jerusalem, and identical
 with the Lydda of Acts ix. 32 sq. For many centuries the seat of a
 bishop, and still prominent in the time of the crusades. The persons
 referred to in this paragraph are to be distinguished from others of
 the same names mentioned elsewhere.

 [2638] To be distinguished from the Agapius mentioned earlier in the
 chapter, as is clear from the date of his death, given in this
 paragraph.

 [2639] Dystrus was the seventh month of the Macedonian year,
 corresponding to our March. See the table on p. 403, below.

 [2640] Diocletian and Maximian abdicated on May 1, 305. See above, Bk.
 VIII. chap. 13, note 16.

 [2641] When Maxentius usurped the purple in Rome, in the year 306. See
 above, Bk. VIII. chap. 13, note 21.

 Chapter IV.

 1. Maximinus Cæsar [2642] having come at that time into the government,
 as if to manifest to all the evidences of his reborn enmity against
 God, and of his impiety, armed himself for persecution against us more
 vigorously than his predecessors.

 2. In consequence, no little confusion arose among all, and they
 scattered here and there, endeavoring in some way to escape the danger;
 and there was great commotion everywhere. But what words would suffice
 for a suitable description of the Divine love and boldness, in
 confessing God, of the blessed and truly innocent lamb,--I refer to the
 martyr Apphianus, [2643] --who presented in the sight of all, before
 the gates of Cæsarea, a wonderful example of piety toward the only God?

 3. He was at that time not twenty years old. He had first spent a long
 time at Berytus, [2644] for the sake of a secular Grecian education, as
 he belonged to a very wealthy family. It is wonderful to relate how, in
 such a city, he was superior to youthful passions, and clung to virtue,
 uncorrupted neither by his bodily vigor nor his young companions;
 living discreetly, soberly and piously, in accordance with his
 profession of the Christian doctrine and the life of his teachers.

 4. If it is needful to mention his native country, and give honor to it
 as producing this noble athlete of piety, we will do so with pleasure.

 5. The young man came from Pagæ, [2645] --if any one is acquainted with
 the place,--a city in Lycia of no mean importance. After his return
 from his course of study in Berytus, though his father held the first
 place in his country, he could not bear to live with him and his
 relatives, as it did not please them to live according to the rules of
 religion. Therefore, as if he were led by the Divine Spirit, and in
 accordance with a natural, or rather an inspired and true philosophy,
 regarding this preferable to what is considered the glory of life, and
 despising bodily comforts, he secretly left his family. And because of
 his faith and hope in God, paying no attention to his daily needs, he
 was led by the Divine Spirit to the city of Cæsarea, where was prepared
 for him the crown of martyrdom for piety.

 6. Abiding with us there, and conferring with us in the Divine
 Scriptures diligently for a short time, and fitting himself zealously
 by suitable exercises, he exhibited such an end as would astonish any
 one should it be seen again.

 7. Who, that hears of it, would not justly admire his courage,
 boldness, constancy, and even more than these the daring deed itself,
 which evidenced a zeal for religion and a spirit truly superhuman?

 8. For in the second attack upon us under Maximinus, in the third year
 of the persecution, edicts of the tyrant were issued for the first
 time, commanding that the rulers of the cities should diligently and
 speedily see to it that all the people offered sacrifices. [2646]
 Throughout the city of Cæsarea, by command of the governor, the heralds
 were summoning men, women, and children to the temples of the idols,
 and besides this, the chiliarchs were calling out each one by name from
 a roll, and an immense crowd of the wicked were rushing together from
 all quarters. Then this youth fearlessly, while no one was aware of his
 intentions, eluded both us who lived in the house with him and the
 whole band of soldiers that surrounded the governor, and rushed up to
 Urbanus as he was offering libations, and fearlessly seizing him by the
 right hand, straightway put a stop to his sacrificing, and skillfully
 and persuasively, with a certain divine inspiration, exhorted him to
 abandon his delusion, because it was not well to forsake the one and
 only true God, and sacrifice to idols and demons.

 9. It is probable that this was done by the youth through a divine
 power which led him forward, and which all but cried aloud in his act,
 that Christians, who were truly such, were so far from abandoning the
 religion of the God of the universe which they had once espoused, that
 they were not only superior to threats and the punishments which
 followed, but yet bolder to speak with noble and untrammeled tongue,
 and, if possible, to summon even their persecutors to turn from their
 ignorance and acknowledge the only true God.

 10. Thereupon, he of whom we are speaking, and that instantly, as might
 have been expected after so bold a deed, was torn by the governor and
 those who were with him as if by wild beasts. And having endured
 manfully innumerable blows over his entire body, he was straightway
 cast into prison.

 11. There he was stretched by the tormentor with both his feet in the
 stocks for a night and a day; and the next day he was brought before
 the judge. As they endeavored to force him to surrender, he exhibited
 all constancy under suffering and terrible tortures. His sides were
 torn, not once, or twice, but many times, to the bones and the very
 bowels; and he received so many blows on his face and neck that those
 who for a long time had been well acquainted with him could not
 recognize his swollen face.

 12. But as he would not yield under this treatment, the torturers, as
 commanded, covered his feet with linen cloths soaked in oil and set
 them on fire. No word can describe the agonies which the blessed one
 endured from this. For the fire consumed his flesh and penetrated to
 his bones, so that the humors of his body were melted and oozed out and
 dropped down like wax.

 13. But as he was not subdued by this, his adversaries being defeated
 and unable to comprehend his superhuman constancy, cast him again into
 prison. A third time he was brought before the judge; and having
 witnessed the same profession, being half dead, he was finally thrown
 into the depths of the sea.

 14. But what happened immediately after this will scarcely be believed
 by those who did not see it. Although we realize this, yet we must
 record the event, of which to speak plainly, all the inhabitants of
 Cæsarea were witnesses. For truly there was no age but beheld this
 marvelous sight.

 15. For as soon as they had cast this truly sacred and thrice-blessed
 youth into the fathomless depths of the sea, an uncommon commotion and
 disturbance agitated the sea and all the shore about it, so that the
 land and the entire city were shaken by it. And at the same time with
 this wonderful and sudden perturbation, the sea threw out before the
 gates of the city the body of the divine martyr, as if unable to endure
 it. [2647]

 Such was the death of the wonderful Apphianus. It occurred on the
 second day of the month Xanthicus, [2648] which is the fourth day
 before the Nones of April, on the day of preparation. [2649]

 [2642] On Maximinus and his attitude toward the Christians, see above,
 Bk. VIII. chap. 14, note 2. He was made a Cæsar at the time of the
 abdication of Diocletian and Maximian, May 1, 305, and Egypt and Syria
 were placed under his supervision.

 [2643] Apphianus is called, in the Syriac version, Epiphanius. We know
 him only from this account of Eusebius. For some remarks upon his
 martyrdom, see above, p. 8 sq.

 [2644] The modern Beirût. A celebrated school of literature and law
 flourished there for a number of centuries.

 [2645] The mss., according to Valesius, are somewhat at variance in the
 spelling of this name, and the place is perhaps to be identified with
 Araxa, a city of some importance in northwestern Lycia.

 [2646] This was simply a republication in its fullness of Maximian's
 fourth edict, which was referred to in chap. 3 (see note 2 on that
 chapter). Eusebius does not mean to say that this was the first time
 that such an edict was published, but that this was the first edict of
 Maximinus, the newly appointed Cæsar.

 [2647] It is perhaps not necessary to doubt that an earthquake took
 place at this particular time. Nor is it surprising that under the
 circumstances the Christians saw a miracle in a natural phenomenon.

 [2648] Xanthicus was the eighth month of the Macedonian year, and
 corresponded to our April (see table on p. 403, below). The martyrdom
 of Apphianus must have taken place in 306, not 305; for according to
 the direct testimony of Lactantius (de Mort. pers. chap. 19; the
 statement is unaccountably omitted in the English translation given in
 the Ante-Nicene Fathers), Maximinus did not become Cæsar until May 1,
 305; while, according to the present chapter, Apphianus suffered
 martyrdom after Maximinus had been raised to that position. Eusebius
 himself puts the abdication of the old emperors and the appointment of
 the new Cæsars early in April or late in March (see above, chap. 3, §5,
 and the Syriac version of the Martyrs, p. 12), and with him agree other
 early authorities. But it is more difficult to doubt the accuracy of
 Lactantius' dates than to suppose the others mistaken, and hence May
 1st is commonly accepted by historians as the day of abdication. About
 the year there can be no question; for Lactantius' account of
 Diocletian's movements during the previous year exhibits a very exact
 knowledge of the course of events, and its accuracy cannot be doubted.
 (For a fuller discussion of the date of the abdication, see Tillemont's
 Hist. des Emp., 2d ed., IV. p. 609.) But even if it were admitted that
 the abdication took place four or five weeks earlier (according to
 Eusebius' own statement, it did not at any rate occur before the
 twenty-fourth of March: see chap. 3, above, and the Syriac version, p.
 12), it would be impossible to put Apphianus' death on the second of
 April, for this would not give time for all that must intervene between
 the day of his appointment and the republication and execution of the
 persecuting edicts. In fact, it is plain enough from the present
 chapter that Apphianus did not suffer until some time after the
 accession of Maximinus, and therefore not until the following year.
 Eusebius, as can be seen from the first paragraph of this work on the
 martyrs, reckoned the beginning of the persecution in Palestine not
 with the issue of the first edict in Nicomedia on Feb. 24, 303, but
 with the month of April of that same year. Apphianus' death therefore
 took place at the very close of the third year of the persecution,
 according to this reckoning.

 [2649] i.e. Friday, the old Jewish term being still retained and widely
 used, although with the change of the Sabbath from the seventh to the
 first day of the week it had entirely lost its meaning. Upon the
 prevalence of the word among the Fathers as a designation of Friday,
 see Suicer's Thesaurus, s.v. paraskeue and nesteia. The day of Christ's
 crucifixion was called meg?le paraskeue, the "great preparation."

 Chapter V.

 1. About the same time, in the city of Tyre, a youth named Ulpianus,
 [2650] after dreadful tortures and most severe scourgings, was enclosed
 in a raw oxhide, with a dog and with one of those poisonous reptiles,
 an asp, and cast into the sea. Wherefore I think that we may properly
 mention him in connection with the martyrdom of Apphianus.

 2. Shortly afterwards, Ædesius, [2651] a brother of Apphianus, not only
 in God, but also in the flesh, being a son of the same earthly father,
 endured sufferings like his, after very many confessions and protracted
 tortures in bonds, and after he had been sentenced by the governor to
 the mines in Palestine. He conducted himself through them all in a
 truly philosophic manner; for he was more highly educated than his
 brother, and had prosecuted philosophic studies.

 3. Finally in the city of Alexandria, when he beheld the judge, who was
 trying the Christians, offending beyond all bounds, now insulting holy
 men in various ways, and again consigning women of greatest modesty and
 even religious virgins to procurers for shameful treatment, he acted
 like his brother. For as these things seemed insufferable, he went
 forward with bold resolve, and with his words and deeds overwhelmed the
 judge with shame and disgrace. After suffering in consequence many
 forms of torture, he endured a death similar to his brother's, being
 cast into the sea. But these things, as I have said, happened to him in
 this way a little later.

 [2650] The martyrdom of Ulpian is omitted in the Syriac version. It was
 apparently a later addition, made when the abridgment of the longer
 version was produced; and this perhaps accounts for the brevity of the
 notice and the words of explanation with which the mention of him is
 concluded.

 [2651] Called Alosis in the Syriac version.

 Chapter VI.

 1. In the fourth year of the persecution against us, on the twelfth day
 before the Kalends of December, which is the twentieth day of the month
 Dius, [2652] on the day before the Sabbath, [2653] while the tyrant
 Maximinus was present and giving magnificent shows in honor of his
 birthday, the following event, truly worthy of record, occurred in the
 city of Cæsarea.

 2. As it was an ancient custom to furnish the spectators more splendid
 shows when the emperors were present than at other times, new and
 foreign spectacles taking the place of the customary amusements, such
 as animals brought from India or Ethiopia or other places, or men who
 could astonish the beholders with skillful bodily exercises,--it was
 necessary at this time, as the emperor was giving the exhibition, to
 add to the shows something more wonderful. And what should this be?

 3. A witness of our doctrine was brought into the midst and endured the
 contest for the true and only religion. This was Agapius, who, as we
 have stated a little above, [2654] was, with Thecla, the second to be
 thrown to the wild beasts for food. He had also, three times and more,
 marched with malefactors from the prison to the arena; and every time,
 after threats from the judge, whether in compassion or in hope that he
 might change his mind, had been reserved for other conflicts. But the
 emperor being present, he was brought out at this time, as if he had
 been appropriately reserved for this occasion, until the very word of
 the Saviour should be fulfilled in him, which through divine knowledge
 he declared to his disciples, that they should be brought before kings
 on account of their testimony unto him. [2655]

 4. He was taken into the midst of the arena with a certain malefactor
 who they said was charged with the murder of his master.

 5. But this murderer of his master, when he had been cast to the wild
 beasts, was deemed worthy of compassion and humanity, almost like
 Barabbas in the time of our Saviour. And the whole theater resounded
 with shouts and cries of approval, because the murderer was humanely
 saved by the emperor, and deemed worthy of honor and freedom.

 6. But the athlete of religion was first summoned by the tyrant and
 promised liberty if he would deny his profession. But he testified with
 a loud voice that, not for any fault, but for the religion of the
 Creator of the universe, he would readily and with pleasure endure
 whatever might be inflicted upon him.

 7. Having said this, he joined the deed to the word, and rushed to meet
 a bear which had been let loose against him, surrendering himself most
 cheerfully to be devoured by him. After this, as he still breathed, he
 was cast into prison. And living yet one day, stones were bound to his
 feet, and he was drowned in the depths of the sea. Such was the
 martyrdom of Agapius.

 [2652] The month Dius was the third month of the Macedonian year, and
 corresponded to our November (see table on p. 403, below).

 [2653] prosabb?tou hemera, i.e. on Friday, pros?bbatos being sometimes
 used among the Jews as a designation of that day, which was more
 commonly called paraskeue (cf. Mark xv. 42). Whether it was widely used
 in the Christian Church of Eusebius' day I am unable to say (Suicer
 does not give the word); but the use of it here shows that it was
 familiar at least in Palestine. It is said in Kraus' Real-Encyclop. d.
 christ. Alterth, s.v. Wochentage, to occur in a decree of Constantine,
 quoted in Eusebius' Vita Const. IV. 18; but the text is doubtful, and
 at best, the use of it there proves no more as to the prevalence of the
 word than its use in the present case, for Eusebius simply gives, in
 his own language, the substance of Constantine's edict.

 [2654] See above, chap. 3, §1.

 [2655] Cf. Matt. x. 18

 Chapter VII.

 1. Again, in Cæsarea, when the persecution had continued to the fifth
 year, on the second day of the month Xanthicus, [2656] which is the
 fourth before the Nones of April, on the very Lord's day of our
 Saviour's resurrection, [2657] Theodosia, a virgin from Tyre, a
 faithful and sedate maiden, not yet eighteen years of age, went up to
 certain prisoners who were confessing the kingdom of Christ and sitting
 before the judgment seat, and saluted them, and, as is probable,
 besought them to remember her when they came before the Lord.

 2. Thereupon, as if she had committed a profane and impious act, the
 soldiers seized her and led her to the governor. And he immediately,
 like a madman and a wild beast in his anger, tortured her with dreadful
 and most terrible torments in her sides and breasts, even to the very
 bones. And as she still breathed, and withal stood with a joyful and
 beaming countenance, he ordered her thrown into the waves of the sea.
 Then passing from her to the other confessors, he condemned all of them
 to the copper mines in Phæno in Palestine.

 3. Afterwards on the fifth of the month Dius, [2658] on the Nones of
 November according to the Romans, in the same city, Silvanus [2659]
 (who at that time was a presbyter and confessor, but who shortly after
 was honored with the episcopate and died a martyr), and those with him,
 men who had shown the noblest firmness in behalf of religion, were
 condemned by him to labor in the same copper mines, command being first
 given that their ankles be disabled with hot irons.

 4. At the same time he delivered to the flames a man who was
 illustrious through numerous other confessions. This was Domninus, who
 was well known to all in Palestine for his exceeding fearlessness.
 [2660] After this the same judge, who was a cruel contriver of
 suffering, and an inventor of devices against the doctrine of Christ,
 planned against the pious punishments that had never been heard of. He
 condemned three to single pugilistic combat. He delivered to be
 devoured by wild beasts Auxentius, a grave and holy old man. Others who
 were in mature life he made eunuchs, and condemned them to the same
 mines. Yet others, after severe tortures, he cast into prison.

 Among these was my dearest friend Pamphilus, [2661] who was by reason
 of every virtue the most illustrious of the martyrs in our time.

 5. Urbanus first tested him in rhetorical philosophy and learning; and
 afterwards endeavored to compel him to sacrifice. But as he saw that he
 refused and in nowise regarded his threats, being exceedingly angry, he
 ordered him to be tormented with severest tortures.

 6. And when the brutal man, after he had almost satiated himself with
 these tortures by continuous and prolonged scrapings in his sides, was
 yet covered with shame before all, he put him also with the confessors
 in prison.

 7. But what recompense for his cruelty to the saints, he who thus
 abused the martyrs of Christ, shall receive from the Divine judgment,
 may be easily determined from the preludes to it, in which immediately,
 and not long after his daring cruelties against Pamphilus, while he yet
 held the government, the Divine judgment came upon him. For thus
 suddenly, he who but yesterday was judging on the lofty tribunal,
 guarded by a band of soldiers, and ruling over the whole nation of
 Palestine, the associate and dearest friend and table companion of the
 tyrant himself, was stripped in one night, and overwhelmed with
 disgrace and shame before those who had formerly admired him as if he
 were himself an emperor; and he appeared cowardly and unmanly, uttering
 womanish cries and supplications to all the people whom he had ruled.
 And Maximinus himself, in reliance upon whose favor Urbanus was
 formerly so arrogantly insolent, as if he loved him exceedingly for his
 deeds against us, was set as a harsh and most severe judge in this same
 Cæsarea to pronounce sentence of death against him, for the great
 disgrace of the crimes of which he was convicted. Let us say this in
 passing.

 8. A suitable time may come when we shall have leisure to relate the
 end and the fate of those impious men who especially fought against us,
 [2662] both of Maximinus himself and those with him.

 [2656] i.e. April 2, 307. Eusebius is inconsistent with himself in this
 case. In chap. 3, above, he states that Apphianus suffered on April 2,
 in the third year of the persecution. But as shown in the note on that
 passage, Apphianus suffered in April, 306, and therefore, in that case,
 Eusebius reckons the first year of the persecution as beginning after
 the second of April. But in the present case he reckons it as beginning
 before the second of April, and the latter date as falling early in a
 new year of the persecution. That the martyrdom recorded in the present
 case actually took place in 307, and not in 308, as it must have done
 if Eusebius were consistent with himself, is proved, first, by the fact
 that, in entering upon this new chapter, he says, "the persecution
 having continued to the fifth year," implying thereby that the event
 which he is about to relate took place at the beginning, not at the
 end, of the fifth year; and secondly, by the fact that later on, in
 this same chapter, while still relating the events of the fifth year,
 he recounts martyrdoms as taking place in the month of November (Dius).
 This is conclusive, for November of the fifth year can be only
 November, 307, and hence the April mentioned in the present paragraph
 can be only April of the same year. Evidently Eusebius did not reckon
 the beginning of the persecution in Palestine from a fixed day, but
 rather from the month Xanthicus (April). As a consequence, the
 inconsistency into which he has fallen is not very strange; the second
 day of April might easily be reckoned either as one of the closing days
 of a year, or as the beginning of the ensuing year. In the present
 case, he evidently forgot that he had previously used the former
 reckoning.

 [2657] i.e. on Easter Sunday. In the Syriac version, the events
 recorded in the present chapter are put on a Sunday; but that it was
 Easter is not stated.

 [2658] i.e. November fifth.

 [2659] On Silvanus, who afterward became bishop of Gaza, see above, Bk.
 VIII. chap. 13.

 [2660] Or "frankness"; literally, "freedom" (eleutheria).

 [2661] On Pamphilus, see above, Bk. VII. chap. 32, note 40.

 [2662] The death of Maximinus is related in Bk. IX. chap. 10. Nothing
 further is said in regard to Urbanus; but the fate of his successor
 Firmilianus is recorded in chap. 11, below. It is quite possible that
 Eusebius, in the present case, is referring to a more detailed
 statement of the fates of the various persecutors, which was to form
 the second part of the present work; and it is possible, still further,
 that the appendix printed at the close of the eighth book is a fragment
 of this second part, as suggested by Lightfoot (see above, p. 29).

 Chapter VIII.

 1. Up to the sixth year the storm had been incessantly raging against
 us. Before this time there had been a very large number of confessors
 of religion in the so-called Porphyry quarry in Thebais, which gets its
 name from the stone found there. Of these, one hundred men, lacking
 three, together with women and infants, were sent to the governor of
 Palestine. When they confessed the God of the universe and Christ,
 Firmilianus, [2663] who had been sent there as governor in the place of
 Urbanus, directed, in accordance with the imperial command, that they
 should be maimed by burning the sinews of the ankles of their left
 feet, and that their right eyes with the eyelids and pupils should
 first be cut out, and then destroyed by hot irons to the very roots.
 And he then sent them to the mines in the province to endure hardships
 with severe toil and suffering.

 2. But it was not sufficient that these only who suffered such miseries
 should be deprived of their eyes, but those natives of Palestine also,
 who were mentioned just above as condemned to pugilistic combat, since
 they would neither receive food from the royal storehouse nor undergo
 the necessary preparatory exercises.

 3. Having been brought on this account not only before the overseers,
 but also before Maximinus himself, and having manifested the noblest
 persistence in confession by the endurance of hunger and stripes, they
 received like punishment with those whom we have mentioned, and with
 them other confessors in the city of Cæsarea.

 4. Immediately afterwards others who were gathered to hear the
 Scriptures read, were seized in Gaza, and some endured the same
 sufferings in the feet and eyes; but others were afflicted with yet
 greater torments and with most terrible tortures in the sides.

 5. One of these, in body a woman, but in understanding a man, would not
 endure the threat of fornication, and spoke directly against the tyrant
 who entrusted the government to such cruel judges. She was first
 scourged and then raised aloft on the stake, and her sides lacerated.

 6. As those appointed for this purpose applied the tortures incessantly
 and severely at the command of the judge, another, with mind fixed,
 like the former, on virginity as her aim,--a woman who was altogether
 mean in form and contemptible in appearance; but, on the other hand,
 strong in soul, and endowed with an understanding superior to her
 body,--being unable to bear the merciless and cruel and inhuman deeds,
 with a boldness beyond that of the combatants famed among the Greeks,
 cried out to the judge from the midst of the crowd: "And how long will
 you thus cruelly torture my sister?" But he was greatly enraged, and
 ordered the woman to be immediately seized.

 7. Thereupon she was brought forward and having called herself by the
 august name of the Saviour, she was first urged by words to sacrifice,
 and as she refused she was dragged by force to the altar. But her
 sister continued to maintain her former zeal, and with intrepid and
 resolute foot kicked the altar, and overturned it with the fire that
 was on it.

 8. Thereupon the judge, enraged like a wild beast, inflicted on her
 such tortures in her sides as he never had on any one before, striving
 almost to glut himself with her raw flesh. But when his madness was
 satiated, he bound them both together, this one and her whom she called
 sister, and condemned them to death by fire. It is said that the first
 of these was from the country of Gaza; the other, by name Valentina,
 was of Cæsarea, and was well known to many.

 9. But how can I describe as it deserves the martyrdom which followed,
 with which the thrice-blessed Paul was honored. He was condemned to
 death at the same time with them, under one sentence. At the time of
 his martyrdom, as the executioner was about to cut off his head, he
 requested a brief respite.

 10. This being granted, he first, in a clear and distinct voice,
 supplicated God in behalf of his fellow-Christians, [2664] praying for
 their pardon, and that freedom might soon be restored to them. Then he
 asked for the conversion of the Jews to God through Christ; and
 proceeding in order he requested the same things for the Samaritans,
 and besought that those Gentiles, who were in error and were ignorant
 of God, might come to a knowledge of him, and adopt the true religion.
 Nor did he leave neglected the mixed multitude who were standing
 around.

 11. After all these, oh! great and unspeakable forbearance! he
 entreated the God of the universe for the judge who had condemned him
 to death, and for the highest rulers, and also for the one who was
 about to behead him, in his hearing and that of all present, beseeching
 that their sin toward him should not be reckoned against them.

 12. Having prayed for these things with a loud voice, and having, as
 one who was dying unjustly, moved almost all to compassion and tears,
 of his own accord he made himself ready, and submitted his bare neck to
 the stroke of the sword, and was adorned with divine martyrdom. This
 took place on the twenty-fifth day of the month Panemus, [2665] which
 is the eighth before the Kalends of August.

 13. Such was the end of these persons. But not long after, one hundred
 and thirty admirable athletes of the confession of Christ, from the
 land of Egypt, endured, in Egypt itself, at the command of Maximinus
 the same afflictions in their eyes and feet with the former persons,
 and were sent to the above-mentioned mines in Palestine. But some of
 them were condemned to the mines in Cilicia.

 [2663] Of Firmilianus, the successor of Urbanus, we know only what is
 told us here and in chaps. 9 and 11, below. In the latter chapter, §31,
 his execution is recorded.

 [2664] homoethnon.

 [2665] i.e. July 25 (a.d. 308). See the table on p. 403, below.

 Chapter IX.

 1. After such noble acts of the distinguished martyrs of Christ, the
 flame of persecution lessened, and was quenched, as it were by their
 sacred blood, and relief and liberty were granted to those who, for
 Christ's sake, were laboring in the mines of Thebais, and for a little
 time we were beginning to breath pure air.

 2. But by some new impulse, I know not what, he who held the power to
 persecute was again aroused against the Christians. Immediately letters
 from Maximinus against us were published everywhere in every province.
 [2666] The governors and the military prefect [2667] urged by edicts
 and letters and public ordinances the magistrates and generals and
 notaries [2668] in all the cities to carry out the imperial decree,
 which ordered that the altars of the idols should with all speed be
 rebuilt; and that all men, women, and children, even infants at the
 breast, should sacrifice and offer oblations; and that with diligence
 and care they should cause them to taste of the execrable offerings;
 and that the things for sale in the market should be polluted with
 libations from the sacrifices; and that guards should be stationed
 before the baths in order to defile with the abominable sacrifices
 those who went to wash in them.

 3. When these orders were being carried out, our people, as was
 natural, were at the beginning greatly distressed in mind; and even the
 unbelieving heathen blamed the severity and the exceeding absurdity of
 what was done. For these things appeared to them extreme and
 burdensome.

 4. As the heaviest storm impended over all in every quarter, the divine
 power of our Saviour again infused such boldness into his athletes,
 [2669] that without being drawn on or dragged forward by any one, they
 spurned the threats. Three of the faithful joining together, rushed on
 the governor as he was sacrificing to the idols, and cried out to him
 to cease from his delusion, there being no other God than the Maker and
 Creator of the universe. When he asked who they were, they confessed
 boldly that they were Christians.

 5. Thereupon Firmilianus, being greatly enraged, sentenced them to
 capital punishment without inflicting tortures upon them. The name of
 the eldest of these was Antoninus; of the next, Zebinas, who was a
 native of Eleutheropolis; and of the third, Germanus. This took place
 on the thirteenth of the month Dius, the Ides of November. [2670]

 6. There was associated with them on the same day Ennathas, a woman
 from Scythopolis, who was adorned with the chaplet of virginity. She
 did not indeed do as they had done, but was dragged by force and
 brought before the judge.

 7. She endured scourgings and cruel insults, which Maxys, a tribune of
 a neighboring district, without the knowledge of the superior
 authority, dared to inflict upon her. He was a man worse than his name,
 [2671] sanguinary in other respects, exceedingly harsh, and altogether
 cruel, and censured by all who knew him. This man stripped the blessed
 woman of all her clothing, so that she was covered only from her loins
 to her feet and the rest of her body was bare. And he led her through
 the entire city of Cæsarea, and regarded it as a great thing to beat
 her with thongs while she was dragged through all the market-places.

 8. After such treatment she manifested the noblest constancy at the
 judgment seat of the governor himself; and the judge condemned her to
 be burned alive. He also carried his rage against the pious to a most
 inhuman length and transgressed the laws of nature, not being ashamed
 even to deny burial to the lifeless bodies of the sacred men.

 9. Thus he ordered the dead to be exposed in the open air as food for
 wild beasts and to be watched carefully by night and day. For many days
 a large number of men attended to this savage and barbarous decree. And
 they looked out from their post of observation, as if it were a matter
 worthy of care, to see that the dead bodies should not be stolen. And
 wild beasts and dogs and birds of prey scattered the human limbs here
 and there, and the whole city was strewed with the entrails and bones
 of men,

 10. so that nothing had ever appeared more dreadful and horrible, even
 to those who formerly hated us; though they bewailed not so much the
 calamity of those against whom these things were done, as the outrage
 against themselves and the common nature of man.

 11. For there was to be seen near the gates a spectacle beyond all
 description and tragic recital; for not only was human flesh devoured
 in one place, but it was scattered in every place; so that some said
 that limbs and masses of flesh and parts of entrails were to be seen
 even within the gates.

 12. After these things had continued for many days, a wonderful event
 occurred. The air was clear and bright and the appearance of the sky
 most serene. When suddenly throughout the city from the pillars which
 supported the public porches many drops fell like tears; and the market
 places and streets, though there was no mist in the air, were moistened
 with sprinkled water, whence I know not. Then immediately it was
 reported everywhere that the earth, unable to endure the abomination of
 these things, had shed tears in a mysterious manner; and that as a
 rebuke to the relentless and unfeeling nature of men, stones and
 lifeless wood had wept for what had happened. I know well that this
 account may perhaps appear idle and fabulous to those who come after
 us, but not to those to whom the truth was confirmed at the time.
 [2672]

 [2666] This is the so-called Fifth Edict, and was issued (according to
 the Passio S. Theodori) by Galerius and Maximinus, but was evidently
 inspired by Maximinus himself. Mason speaks of it as follows: "It would
 be inaccurate to say that this Fifth Edict (if so we may call it) was
 worse than any of the foregoing. But there is in it a thin bitterness,
 a venomous spitefulness, which may be noticed as characteristic of all
 the later part of the persecution. This spitefulness is due to two main
 facts. The first was that Paganism was becoming conscious of defeat;
 the Church had not yielded a single point. The second fact was that the
 Church had no longer to deal with the sensible, statesmanlike hostility
 of Diocletian,--not even with the bluff bloodiness of Maximian.
 Galerius himself was now, except in name, no longer
 persecutor-in-chief. He was content to follow the lead of a man who was
 in all ways even worse than himself. Galerius was indeed an Evil Beast;
 his nephew was more like the Crooked Serpent. The artful sour spirit of
 Maximin employed itself to invent, not larger measures of solid policy
 against his feared and hated foes, but petty tricks to annoy and sting
 them." For a fuller discussion of the edict, see Mason, p. 284 sq. It
 must have been published in the autumn of the year 308, for the
 martyrdom of Paul, recorded in the previous chapter, took place in July
 of that year, and some little time seems to have elapsed between that
 event and the present. On the other hand, the martyrdoms mentioned
 below, in §5, took place in November of this same year, so that we can
 fix the date of the edict within narrow limits.

 [2667] ho tou ton stratopedon archein epitetagmenos. Many regard this
 officer as the prætorian prefect. But we should naturally expect so
 high an official to be mentioned before the governors (hegemones). It
 seems probable, in fact, that the commander in charge of the military
 forces of Palestine, or possibly of Syria, is referred to in the
 present case. See Valesius' note, ad locum.

 [2668] Or "town clerks," taboul?rioi

 [2669] Literally, "its athletes" (autes), the antecedent of the pronoun
 being "the divine power."

 [2670] i.e. Nov. 13, 308.

 [2671] M?xus is not a Greek word. Ruinart, Acta Martt., p. 327,
 remarks, An a Syris repetenda, apud quos mochos est pulicanus a casas
 increpare? But the derivation is, to say the least, very doubtful.
 Cureton throws no light on the matter. The word in the Syriac version
 seems to be simply a reproduction of the form found in the Greek
 original.

 [2672] This is a glaring instance of uncritical credulity on Eusebius'
 part, and yet even Crusè can say: "Perhaps some might smile at the
 supposed credulity of our author, but the miracle in this account was
 not greater than the malignity, and if man can perform miracles of
 vice, we can scarcely wonder if Providence should present, at least,
 miracles of admonition." Cureton more sensibly remarks: "This, which
 doubtless was produced by natural causes, seemed miraculous to
 Eusebius, more especially if he looked upon it as fulfilling a prophecy
 of our Lord--Luke xix. 40: I tell you, that if these should hold their
 peace, the stones would immediately cry out.' See also Hab. ii. 11."

 Chapter X.

 1. On the fourteenth day of the following month Appellæus, [2673] the
 nineteenth before the Kalends of January, certain persons from Egypt
 were again seized by those who examined people passing the gates. They
 had been sent to minister to the confessors in Cilicia. They received
 the same sentence as those whom they had gone to help, being mutilated
 in their eyes and feet. Three of them exhibited in Ascalon, where they
 were imprisoned, marvelous bravery in the endurance of various kinds of
 martyrdom. One of them named Ares was condemned to the flames, and the
 others, called Probus [2674] and Elias, were beheaded.

 2. On the eleventh day of the month Audynæus, [2675] which is the third
 before the Ides of January, in the same city of Cæsarea, Peter an
 ascetic, also called Apselamus, [2676] from the village of Anea, [2677]
 on the borders of Eleutheropolis, like purest gold, gave noble proof by
 fire of his faith in the Christ of God. Though the judge and those
 around him besought him many times to have compassion on himself, and
 to spare his own youth and bloom, he disregarded them, preferring hope
 in the God of the universe to all things, even to life itself. A
 certain Asclepius, supposed to be [2678] a bishop of the sect of
 Marcion, possessed as he thought with zeal for religion, but "not
 according to knowledge," [2679] ended his life on one and the same
 funeral pyre. These things took place in this manner.

 [2673] i.e. Dec. 14, 308 (see the tables on p. 403, below).

 [2674] The majority of the codices read Promos, but as Valesius
 remarks, such a proper name is quite unknown in Greek, and the form
 probably arose from a confusion of b and m, which in ancient mss. were
 written alike. Two of our existing codices read Probos, and this has
 been adopted by Zimmermann and Heinichen, whom I have followed in the
 text.

 [2675] i.e. Jan. 11, 309.

 [2676] In the Syriac version "Absalom."

 [2677] Of this village we know nothing, but Eleutheropolis (originally
 Bethozabris) was an important place lying some forty miles southwest of
 Jerusalem.

 [2678] einai dokon. Eusebius did not wish to admit that he was a bishop
 in a true sense.

 [2679] Rom. x. 2.

 Chapter XI.

 1. It is time to describe the great and celebrated spectacle of
 Pamphilus, [2680] a man thrice dear to me, and of those who finished
 their course with him. They were twelve in all; being counted worthy of
 apostolic grace and number.

 2. Of these the leader and the only one honored with the position of
 presbyter at Cæsarea, was Pamphilus; a man who through his entire life
 was celebrated for every virtue, for renouncing and despising the
 world, for sharing his possessions with the needy, for contempt of
 earthly hopes, and for philosophic deportment and exercise. He
 especially excelled all in our time in most sincere devotion to the
 Divine Scriptures and indefatigable industry in whatever he undertook,
 and in his helpfulness to his relatives and associates.

 3. In a separate treatise on his life, [2681] consisting of three
 books, we have already described the excellence of his virtue.
 Referring to this work those who delight in such things and desire to
 know them, let us now consider the martyrs in order.

 4. Second after Pamphilus, Vales, who was honored for his venerable
 gray hair, entered the contest. He was a deacon from Ælia, [2682] an
 old man of gravest appearance, and versed in the Divine Scriptures, if
 any one ever was. He had so laid up the memory of them in his heart
 that he did not need to look at the books if he undertook to repeat any
 passage of Scripture.

 5. The third was Paul from the city of Jamna, [2683] who was known
 among them as most zealous and fervent in spirit. Previous to his
 martyrdom, he had endured the conflict of confession by cauterization.

 After these persons had continued in prison for two entire years, the
 occasion of their martyrdom was a second arrival of Egyptian brethren
 who suffered with them.

 6. They had accompanied the confessors in Cilicia to the mines there
 and were returning to their homes. At the entrance of the gates of
 Cæsarea, the guards, who were men of barbarous character, questioned
 them as to who they were and whence they came. They kept back nothing
 of the truth, and were seized as malefactors taken in the very act.
 They were five in number.

 7. When brought before the tyrant, being very bold in his presence,
 they were immediately thrown into prison. On the next day, which was
 the nineteenth of the month Peritius, [2684] according to the Roman
 reckoning the fourteenth before the Kalends of March, they were
 brought, according to command, before the judge, with Pamphilus and his
 associates whom we have mentioned. First, by all kinds of torture,
 through the invention of strange and various machines, he tested the
 invincible constancy of the Egyptians.

 8. Having practised these cruelties upon the leader [2685] of all, he
 asked him first who he was. He heard in reply the name of some prophet
 instead of his proper name. For it was their custom, in place of the
 names of idols given them by their fathers, if they had such, to take
 other names; so that you would hear them calling themselves Elijah or
 Jeremiah or Isaiah or Samuel or Daniel, thus showing themselves
 inwardly true Jews, and the genuine Israel of God, not only in deeds,
 but in the names which they bore. When Firmilianus had heard some such
 name from the martyr, and did not understand the force of the word, he
 asked next the name of his country.

 9. But he gave a second answer similar to the former, saying that
 Jerusalem was his country, meaning that of which Paul says, "Jerusalem
 which is above is free, which is our mother," [2686] and, "Ye are come
 unto Mount Sion, and unto the city of the living God, the heavenly
 Jerusalem." [2687]

 10. This was what he meant; but the judge thinking only of the earth,
 sought diligently to discover what that city was, and in what part of
 the world it was situated. And therefore he applied tortures that the
 truth might be acknowledged. But the man, with his hands twisted behind
 his back, and his feet crushed by strange machines, asserted firmly
 that he had spoken the truth.

 11. And being questioned again repeatedly what and where the city was
 of which he spoke, he said that it was the country of the pious alone,
 for no others should have a place in it, and that it lay toward the far
 East and the rising sun.

 12. He philosophized about these things according to his own
 understanding, and was in nowise turned from them by the tortures with
 which he was afflicted on every side. And as if he were without flesh
 or body he seemed insensible of his sufferings. But the judge being
 perplexed, was impatient, thinking that the Christians were about to
 establish a city somewhere, inimical and hostile to the Romans. And he
 inquired much about this, and investigated where that country toward
 the East was located.

 13. But when he had for a long time lacerated the young man with
 scourgings, and punished him with all sorts of torments, he perceived
 that his persistence in what he had said could not be changed, and
 passed against him sentence of death. Such a scene was exhibited by
 what was done to this man. And having inflicted similar tortures on the
 others, he sent them away in the same manner.

 14. Then being wearied and perceiving that he punished the men in vain,
 having satiated his desire, he proceeded against Pamphilus and his
 companions. And having learned that already under former tortures they
 had manifested an unchangeable zeal for the faith, he asked them if
 they would now obey. And receiving from every one of them only this one
 answer, as their last word of confession in martyrdom, he inflicted on
 them punishment similar to the others.

 15. When this had been done, a young man, one of the household servants
 of Pamphilus, who had been educated in the noble life and instruction
 of such a man, learning the sentence passed upon his master, cried out
 from the midst of the crowd asking that their bodies might be buried.

 16. Thereupon the judge, not a man, but a wild beast, or if anything
 more savage than a wild beast, giving no consideration to the young
 man's age, asked him only the same question. When he learned that he
 confessed himself a Christian, as if he had been wounded by a dart,
 swelling with rage, he ordered the tormentors to use their utmost power
 against him.

 17. And when he saw that he refused to sacrifice as commanded, he
 ordered them to scrape him continually to his very bones and to the
 inmost recesses of his bowels, not as if he were human flesh but as if
 he were stones or wood or any lifeless thing. But after long
 persistence he saw that this was in vain, as the man was speechless and
 insensible and almost lifeless, his body being worn out by the
 tortures.

 18. But being inflexibly merciless and inhuman, he ordered him to be
 committed straightway, as he was, to a slow fire. And before the death
 of his earthly master, though he had entered later on the conflict, he
 received release from the body, while those who had been zealous about
 the others were yet delaying.

 19. One could then see Porphyry, [2688] like one who had come off
 victorious in every conflict, his body covered with dust, but his
 countenance cheerful, after such sufferings, with courageous and
 exulting mind, advancing to death. And as if truly filled with the
 Divine Spirit, covered only with his philosophic robe thrown about him
 as a cloak, soberly and intelligently he directed his friends as to
 what he wished, and beckoned to them, preserving still a cheerful
 countenance even at the stake. But when the fire was kindled at some
 distance around him in a circle, having inhaled the flame into his
 mouth, he continued most nobly in silence from that time till his
 death, after the single word which he uttered when the flame first
 touched him, and he cried out for the help of Jesus the Son of God.
 Such was the contest of Porphyry.

 20. His death was reported to Pamphilus by a messenger, Seleucus. He
 was one of the confessors from the army. As the bearer of such a
 message, he was forthwith deemed worthy of a similar lot. For as soon
 as he related the death of Porphyry, and had saluted one of the martyrs
 with a kiss, some of the soldiers seized him and led him to the
 governor. And he, as if he would hasten him on to be a companion of the
 former on the way to heaven, commanded that he be put to death
 immediately.

 21. This man was from Cappadocia, and belonged to the select band of
 soldiers, and had obtained no small honor in those things which are
 esteemed among the Romans. For in stature and bodily strength, and size
 and vigor, he far excelled his fellow-soldiers, so that his appearance
 was matter of common talk, and his whole form was admired on account of
 its size and symmetrical proportions.

 22. At the beginning of the persecution he was prominent in the
 conflicts of confession, through his patience under scourging. After he
 left the army he set himself to imitate zealously the religious
 ascetics, and as if he were their father and guardian he showed himself
 a bishop and patron of destitute orphans and defenceless widows and of
 those who were distressed with penury or sickness. It is likely that on
 this account he was deemed worthy of an extraordinary call to martyrdom
 by God, who rejoices in such things more than in the smoke and blood of
 sacrifices.

 23. He was the tenth athlete among those whom we have mentioned as
 meeting their end on one and the same day. On this day, as was fitting,
 the chief gate was opened, and a ready way of entrance into the kingdom
 of heaven was given to the martyr Pamphilus and to the others with him.

 24. In the footsteps of Seleucus came Theodulus, a grave and pious old
 man, who belonged to the governor's household, and had been honored by
 Firmilianus himself more than all the others in his house on account of
 his age, and because he was a father of the third generation, and also
 on account of the kindness and most faithful conscientiousness which he
 had manifested toward him. [2689] As he pursued the course of Seleucus
 when brought before his master, the latter was more angry at him than
 at those who had preceded him, and condemned him to endure the
 martyrdom of the Saviour on the cross. [2690]

 25. As there lacked yet one to fill up the number of the twelve martyrs
 of whom we have spoken, Julian came to complete it. He had just arrived
 from abroad, and had not yet entered the gate of the city, when having
 learned about the martyrs while still on the way, he rushed at once,
 just as he was, to see them. When he beheld the tabernacles of the
 saints prone on the ground, being filled with joy, he embraced and
 kissed them all.

 26. The ministers of slaughter straightway seized him as he was doing
 this and led him to Firmilianus. Acting as was his custom, he condemned
 him to a slow fire. Thereupon Julian, leaping and exulting, in a loud
 voice gave thanks to the Lord who had judged him worthy of such things,
 and was honored with the crown of martyrdom.

 27. He was a Cappadocian by birth, and in his manner of life he was
 most circumspect, faithful and sincere, zealous in all other respects,
 and animated by the Holy Spirit himself. Such was the company which was
 thought worthy to enter into martyrdom with Pamphilus.

 28. By the command of the impious governor their sacred and truly holy
 bodies were kept as food for the wild beasts for four days and as many
 nights. But since, strange to say, through the providential care of
 God, nothing approached them,--neither beast of prey, nor bird, nor
 dog,--they were taken up uninjured, and after suitable preparation were
 buried in the customary manner.

 29. When the report of what had been done to these men was spread in
 all directions, Adrianus and Eubulus, having come from the so-called
 country of Manganaea [2691] to Cæsarea, to see the remaining
 confessors, were also asked at the gate the reason for their coming;
 and having acknowledged the truth, were brought to Firmilianus. But he,
 as was his custom, without delay inflicted many tortures in their
 sides, and condemned them to be devoured by wild beasts.

 30. After two days, on the fifth of the month Dystrus, [2692] the third
 before the Nones of March, which was regarded as the birthday of the
 tutelary divinity of Cæsarea, [2693] Adrianus was thrown to a lion, and
 afterwards slain with the sword. But Eubulus, two days later, on the
 Nones of March, that is, on the seventh of the month Dystrus, when the
 judge had earnestly entreated him to enjoy by sacrificing that which
 was considered freedom among them, preferring a glorious death for
 religion to transitory life, was made like the other an offering to
 wild beasts, and as the last of the martyrs in Cæsarea, sealed the list
 of athletes.

 31. It is proper also to relate here, how in a short time the heavenly
 Providence came upon the impious rulers, together with the tyrants
 themselves. For that very Firmilianus, who had thus abused the martyrs
 of Christ, after suffering with the others the severest punishment, was
 put to death by the sword. Such were the martyrdoms which took place at
 Cæsarea during the entire period of the persecution.

 [2680] On Pamphilus, see above, Bk. VII. chap. 32, note 40.

 [2681] On Eusebius' Life of Pamphilus, see above, p. 28 sq.

 [2682] i.e. Jerusalem.

 [2683] tes 'Iamniton poleos. Jamna, or Jamnia, was a town of Judea,
 lying west of Jerusalem, near the sea.

 [2684] i.e. Feb. 19 (see the table on p. 403, below). We learn from
 chap. 7, §§3-5, that Pamphilus was thrown into prison in the fifth year
 of the persecution and as late as November of that year, i.e. between
 November, 307, and April, 308. Since he had lain two whole years in
 prison (according to §5, above), the date referred to in the present
 passage must be February of the year 310. The martyrdom of Pamphilus is
 commonly, for aught I know to the contrary, uniformly put in the year
 309, as the seventh year of the persecution is nearly synchronous with
 that year. But that the common date is a mistake is plain enough from
 the present chapter.

 [2685] proegoros, literally "advocate," or "defender."

 [2686] Gal. iv. 26.

 [2687] Heb. xii. 22. Upon Eusebius' view of the authorship of the
 Epistle to the Hebrews, see above, Bk. III. chap. 25, note 1.

 [2688] The reference is still to the same slave of Pamphilus whose
 tortures Eusebius has just been describing, as we learn from the Syriac
 version, where the slave's name is given at the beginning of the
 account.

 [2689] I read peri auton with Zimmermann, Heinichen, Burton, and Migne.
 The mss. all have peri autous, which can hardly have stood in the
 original.

 [2690] The common mode of punishment inflicted on slaves.

 [2691] Of the so-called country of Manganaia I know nothing. The Syriac
 version reads Batanea, which was a district of country lying to the
 northeast of Palestine, and it may be that Manganea was another name
 for the same region.

 [2692] i.e. March 5, 310.

 [2693] It was the universal custom in ancient times for a city to have
 its special tutelary divinity, to which it looked for protection and to
 which it paid especial honor. The name of the Cæsarean deity is unknown
 to us.

 Chapter XII.

 1. I think it best to pass by all the other events which occurred in
 the meantime: such as those which happened to the bishops of the
 churches, when instead of shepherds of the rational [2694] flocks of
 Christ, over which they presided in an unlawful manner, the divine
 judgment, considering them worthy of such a charge, made them keepers
 of camels, [2695] an irrational beast [2696] and very crooked in the
 structure of its body, or condemned them to have the care of the
 imperial horses;--and I pass by also the insults and disgraces and
 tortures they endured from the imperial overseers and rulers on account
 of the sacred vessels and treasures of the Church; and besides these
 the lust of power on the part of many, the disorderly and unlawful
 ordinations, and the schisms among the confessors themselves; also the
 novelties which were zealously devised against the remnants of the
 Church by the new and factious members, who added innovation after
 innovation and forced them in unsparingly among the calamities of the
 persecution, heaping misfortune upon misfortune. I judge it more
 suitable to shun and avoid the account of these things, as I said at
 the beginning. [2697] But such things as are sober and praiseworthy,
 according to the sacred word,--"and if there be any virtue and praise,"
 [2698] --I consider it most proper to tell and to record, and to
 present to believing hearers in the history of the admirable martyrs.
 And after this I think it best to crown the entire work with an account
 of the peace which has appeared unto us from heaven.

 [2694] logikon

 [2695] "It was a punishment among the Romans that freemen should be
 condemned to take care of the emperor's horses or camels, and to
 perform other personal offices of that kind" (Valesius). For fuller
 particulars, see Valesius' note ad locum. In the Acts of St. Marcellus
 (who was bishop of Rome) we are told that he was set by Maximian to
 groom his horses in a church which the emperor had turned into a
 stable.

 [2696] alogou zoou.

 [2697] Cf. Bk. VIII, chap. 2, §§2 and 3, and the note on that passage.

 [2698] Phil. iv. 8.

 Chapter XIII.

 1. The seventh year of our conflict was completed; and the hostile
 measures which had continued into the eighth year were gradually and
 quietly becoming less severe. A large number of confessors were
 collected at the copper mines in Palestine, and were acting with
 considerable boldness, so far as even to build places of worship. But
 the ruler of the province, a cruel and wicked man, as his acts against
 the martyrs showed, having come there and learned the state of affairs,
 communicated it to the emperor, writing in accusation whatever he
 thought best.

 2. Thereupon, being appointed superintendent of the mines, he divided
 the band of confessors as if by a royal decree, and sent some to dwell
 in Cyprus and others in Lebanon, and he scattered others in different
 parts of Palestine and ordered them to labor in various works.

 3. And, selecting the four who seemed to him to be the leaders, he sent
 them to the commander of the armies in that section. These were Peleus
 and Nilus, [2699] Egyptian bishops, also a presbyter, [2700] and
 Patermuthius, who was well known among them all for his zeal toward
 all. The commander of the army demanded of them a denial of religion,
 and not obtaining this, he condemned them to death by fire.

 4. There were others there who had been allotted to dwell in a separate
 place by themselves,--such of the confessors as on account of age or
 mutilations, or for other bodily infirmities, had been released from
 service. Silvanus, [2701] a bishop from Gaza, presided over them, and
 set a worthy and genuine example of Christianity.

 5. This man having from the first day of the persecution, and
 throughout its entire continuance, been eminent for his confessions in
 all sorts of conflicts, had been kept all that time that he might, so
 to speak, set the final seal upon the whole conflict in Palestine.

 6. There were with him many from Egypt, among whom was John, who
 surpassed all in our time in the excellence of his memory. He had
 formerly been deprived of his sight. Nevertheless, on account of his
 eminence in confession he had with the others suffered the destruction
 of his foot by cauterization. And although his sight had been destroyed
 he was subjected to the same burning with fire, the executioners aiming
 after everything that was merciless and pitiless and cruel and inhuman.

 7. Since he was such a man, one would not be so much astonished at his
 habits and his philosophic life, nor would he seem so wonderful for
 them, as for the strength of his memory. For he had written whole books
 of the Divine Scriptures, "not in tables of stone" [2702] as the divine
 apostle says, neither on skins of animals, nor on paper which moths and
 time destroy, but truly "in fleshy tables of the heart," [2703] in a
 transparent soul and most pure eye of the mind, so that whenever he
 wished he could repeat, as if from a treasury of words, any portion of
 the Scripture, whether in the law, or the prophets, or the historical
 books, or the gospels, or the writings of the apostles.

 8. I confess that I was astonished when I first saw the man as he was
 standing in the midst of a large congregation and repeating portions of
 the Divine Scripture. While I only heard his voice, I thought that,
 according to the custom in the meetings, he was reading. But when I
 came near and perceived what he was doing, and observed all the others
 standing around him with sound eyes while he was using only the eyes of
 his mind, and yet was speaking naturally like some prophet, and far
 excelling those who were sound in body, it was impossible for me not to
 glorify God and wonder. And I seemed to see in these deeds evident and
 strong confirmation of the fact that true manhood consists not in
 excellence of bodily appearance, but in the soul and understanding
 alone. For he, with his body mutilated, manifested the superior
 excellence of the power that was within him.

 9. But as to those whom we have mentioned as abiding in a separate
 place, and attending to their customary duties in fasting and prayer
 and other exercises, God himself saw fit to give them a salutary issue
 by extending his right hand in answer to them. The bitter foe, as they
 were armed against him zealously through their prayers to God, could no
 longer endure them, and determined to slay and destroy them from off
 the earth because they troubled him.

 10. And God permitted him to accomplish this, that he might not be
 restrained from the wickedness he desired, and that at the same time
 they might receive the prizes of their manifold conflicts. Therefore at
 the command of the most accursed Maximinus, forty, lacking one, [2704]
 were beheaded in one day.

 11. These martyrdoms were accomplished in Palestine during eight
 complete years; and of this description was the persecution in our
 time. Beginning with the demolition of the churches, it increased
 greatly as the rulers rose up from time to time against us. In these
 assaults the multiform and various conflicts of those who wrestled in
 behalf of religion produced an innumerable multitude of martyrs in
 every province,--in the regions extending from Libya and throughout all
 Egypt, and Syria, and from the East round about to the district of
 Illyricum.

 12. But the countries beyond these, all Italy and Sicily and Gaul, and
 the regions toward the setting sun, in Spain, Mauritania, and Africa,
 suffered the war of persecution during less than two years, [2705] and
 were deemed worthy of a speedier divine visitation and peace; the
 heavenly Providence sparing the singleness of purpose and faith of
 those men.

 13. For what had never before been recorded in the annals of the Roman
 government, first took place in our day, contrary to all expectation;
 for during the persecution in our time the empire was divided into two
 parts. [2706] The brethren dwelling in the part of which we have just
 spoken enjoyed peace; but those in the other part endured trials
 without number.

 14. But when the divine grace kindly and compassionately manifested its
 care for us too, then truly our rulers also, those very ones through
 whom the wars against us had been formerly carried on, changed their
 minds in a most wonderful manner, and published a recantation; [2707]
 and by favorable edicts and mild decrees concerning us, extinguished
 the conflagration against us. This recantation also must be recorded.
 [2708]

 The End of the Book of Eusebius Pamphili concerning those who suffered
 Martyrdom in Palestine. [2709]

 [2699] On Peleus and Nilus, see above, Bk. VIII. chap. 13, note 8.
 Paleus is called Paul in the Syriac version.

 [2700] The name of this man is given as Elias in the Syriac version;
 but both he and Patermuthius are called laymen.

 [2701] On Silvanus, bishop of Gaza, see above, Bk. VIII. chap. 13, note
 6.

 [2702] 2 Cor. iii. 3.

 [2703] Ibid.

 [2704] The Syriac version says forty.

 [2705] On the cessation of the persecution in the West at the accession
 of Maxentius, see Bk. VIII. chap. 14, note 1.

 [2706] On the division of the empire to which Eusebius here refers, see
 above, Bk. VIII. chap. 13, note 17.

 [2707] i.e. the toleration edict of Galerius, published in the spring
 of 311. See above, Bk. VIII. chap. 17, note 1.

 [2708] It would seem that the edict was originally appended to this
 shorter recension of the martyrs (the longer recension is complete in
 its present form, and contains no hint of such an addition). Very
 likely it was dropped with the second half of the work (see above, p.
 29) as unnecessary, when the first half was inserted in the History.
 The edict is given in full in Bk. VIII. chap. 17, above.

 [2709] peri ton en Palaistine martures?nton telos. On the title of the
 work, see above, p. 342, note 1.

 Book IX.

 Chapter I.--The Pretended Relaxation.

 1. The imperial edict of recantation, which has been quoted above,
 [2710] was posted in all parts of Asia and in the adjoining provinces.
 After this had been done, Maximinus, the tyrant in the East,--a most
 impious man, if there ever was one, and most hostile to the religion of
 the God of the universe,--being by no means satisfied with its
 contents, [2711] instead of sending the above-quoted decree to the
 governors under him, gave them verbal commands to relax the war against
 us.

 2. For since he could not in any other way oppose the decision of his
 superiors, keeping the law which had been already issued secret, and
 taking care that it might not be made known in the district under him,
 he gave an unwritten order to his governors that they should relax the
 persecution against us. They communicated the command to each other in
 writing.

 3. Sabinus, [2712] at least, who was honored with the highest official
 rank among them, communicated the will of the emperor to the provincial
 governors in a Latin epistle, the translation of which is as follows:

 4. "With continuous and most devoted earnestness their Majesties, our
 most divine masters, the emperors, [2713] formerly directed the minds
 of all men to follow the holy and correct course of life, that those
 also who seemed to live in a manner foreign to that of the Romans,
 should render the worship due to the immortal gods. But the obstinacy
 and most unconquerable determination of some went so far that they
 could neither be turned back from their purpose by the just reason of
 the command, nor be intimidated by the impending punishment.

 5. Since therefore it has come to pass that by such conduct many have
 brought themselves into danger, their Majesties, our most powerful
 masters, the emperors, in the exalted nobility of piety, esteeming it
 foreign to their Majesties' purpose to bring men into so great danger
 for such a cause, have commanded their devoted servant, myself, to
 write to thy wisdom, [2714] that if any Christian be found engaging in
 the worship of his own people, thou shouldst abstain from molesting and
 endangering him, and shouldst not suppose it necessary to punish any
 one on this pretext. For it has been proved by the experience of so
 long a time that they can in no way be persuaded to abandon such
 obstinate conduct.

 6. Therefore it should be thy care to write to the curators [2715] and
 magistrates and district overseers [2716] of every city, that they may
 know that it is not necessary for them to give further attention to
 this matter." [2717]

 7. Thereupon the rulers of the provinces, thinking that the purpose of
 the things which were written was truly made known to them, declared
 the imperial will to the curators and magistrates and prefects of the
 various districts [2718] in writing. But they did not limit themselves
 to writing, but sought more quickly to accomplish the supposed will of
 the emperor in deeds also. Those whom they had imprisoned on account of
 their confession of the Deity, they set at liberty, and they released
 those of them who had been sent to the mines for punishment; for they
 erroneously supposed that this was the true will of the emperor.

 8. And when these things had thus been done, immediately, like a light
 shining forth in a dark night, one could see in every city
 congregations gathered and assemblies thronged, and meetings held
 according to their custom. And every one of the unbelieving heathen was
 not a little astonished at these things, wondering at so marvelous a
 transformation, and exclaiming that the God of the Christians was great
 and alone true.

 9. And some of our people, who had faithfully and bravely sustained the
 conflict of persecution, again became frank and bold toward all; but as
 many as had been diseased in the faith and had been shaken in their
 souls by the tempest, strove eagerly for healing, beseeching and
 imploring the strong to stretch out to them a saving hand, and
 supplicating God to be merciful unto them.

 10. Then also the noble athletes of religion who had been set free from
 their sufferings in the mines returned to their own homes. Happily and
 joyfully they passed through every city, full of unspeakable pleasure
 and of a boldness which cannot be expressed in words.

 11. Great crowds of men pursued their journey along the highways and
 through the market-places, praising God with hymns and psalms. And you
 might have seen those who a little while before had been driven in
 bonds from their native countries under a most cruel sentence,
 returning with bright and joyful faces to their own firesides; so that
 even they who had formerly thirsted for our blood, when they saw the
 unexpected wonder, congratulated us on what had taken place.

 [2710] The toleration edict of Galerius, given in Bk. VIII. chap. 17.

 [2711] For the reason of Maximin's failure to join with the other
 emperors in the issue of this edict, see Bk. VIII. chap. 17, note 1.

 [2712] Of Sabinus we know only what is told us here. He seems to have
 been Maximin's prime minister, or prætorian prefect (to ton exochot?ton
 ep?rchon axiomati tetimemenos, Eusebius says of him). He is mentioned
 again in chap. 9, where an epistle of Maximin addressed to him is
 quoted.

 [2713] Literally, "the divinity of our most divine masters, the
 emperors." The style throughout the epistle is of an equally stilted
 character.

 [2714] Literally, "have commanded my devotedness to write to thy
 wisdom." It is clear that the communication was dictated, or at least
 directly inspired, by Maximin himself.

 [2715] tous logist?s, commonly used to translate the Latin curatores
 urbium.

 [2716] tous strategous (the common designation for the chief
 magistrates of cities in the eastern part of the empire) kai tous
 praipositous tou p?gou.

 [2717] The mss. all read gr?mmatos, but Valesius conjectures that
 pr?gmatos is the true reading, and his conjecture is supported by
 Nicephorus, who has phrontida peri christianon poieithai. Stroth
 follows Valesius, and I have done the same. Heinichen remarks: "Sed non
 necessaria, credo, est hæc emendatio, immo eadem fere exsistet
 sententia per gr?mmatos, hoc modo: ut scient sibi non licere operam
 dare sc. ut facile intelligitur persequendis Christianis, ultra hoc
 scriptum, id est, magis quam hoc scripto est designatum." Closs
 interprets in the same way, translating: "dass sie sich nicht weiter,
 als in diesem Schreiben befohlen ist, mit den Christen zu befassen
 haben." The Greek, however, does not seem to me to admit of this
 interpretation (it reads hina gnoen, peraitero autois toutou tou
 gr?mmatos phrontida poieisthai me prosekein), and there seems to be no
 other alternative than to change the word gr?mmatos to pr?gmatos, or at
 least give it the meaning of pr?gmatos, as Mason does, without emending
 the text (though I am not aware that gr?mma can legitimately be
 rendered in any such way). I am inclined to think that the word
 negotium stood in the original, and that it was translated by the word
 pr?gma. Had epistola or litteræ been used, referring to the present
 document,--and it could not well refer to anything else,--we should
 expect Eusebius to translate by epistolge, for he calls the document an
 epistole in §3, above. On the other hand, if scriptura, or any other
 similar word, had been used and translated gr?mma by Eusebius, we
 should have expected him to call the document a gr?mma, not an epistole
 in §3. The general drift of the letter cannot be mistaken. As Mason
 paraphrases it: "In other words, Christianity strictly is still
 illicit, though in particular cases not to be punished as severely as
 heretofore; and the emperor, though forced for the present not to
 require you to persecute, will expect you not to relax your exertions
 more than can be helped." Mason justly emphasizes in the same
 connection the use of the words me prosekein in the last clause, which
 do not mean non licere ("it is not permitted") as Valesius, followed by
 many others, render them, but "it is not necessary," "they need not."
 It is plain that Maximin made his concessions very unwillingly and only
 because compelled to; and it is clear that he suppressed the edict of
 Galerius, and substituted general and not wholly unambiguous directions
 of his own, in order that as little as possible might be done for the
 Christians, and that he might be left free for a future time when he
 should find himself in a more independent position; he evidently did
 not care to compromise and hamper himself by officially sanctioning the
 full and explicit toleration accorded in the edict of Galerius. For a
 fuller discussion of Maximin's attitude in the matter, see Mason, p.
 309 sq. As he remarks, it is "almost a wonder that the judges
 interpreted Maximin's document in a sense so favorable to the
 brotherhood as they really did. Though no effectual security was given
 against the recurrence of the late atrocities, the Persecution of
 Diocletian was at an end, even in the East. The subordinate officers
 issued and posted local mandates, which conceded more than they were
 bidden to concede."

 [2718] tois kat' agrous epitetagmenois

 Chapter II.--The Subsequent Reverse.

 1. But the tyrant who, as we have said, ruled over the districts of the
 Orient, a thorough hater of the good and an enemy of every virtuous
 person, as he was, could no longer bear this; and indeed he did not
 permit matters to go on in this way quite six months. [2719] Devising
 all possible means of destroying the peace, he first attempted to
 restrain us, under a pretext, [2720] from meeting in the cemeteries.

 2. Then through the agency of some wicked men he sent an embassy to
 himself against us, [2721] inciting the citizens of Antioch to ask from
 him as a very great favor that he would by no means permit any of the
 Christians to dwell in their country; and others were secretly induced
 to do the same thing. The author of all this in Antioch was Theotecnus,
 [2722] a violent and wicked man, who was an impostor, and whose
 character was foreign to his name. [2723] He appears to have been the
 curator [2724] of the city.

 [2719] The Edict of Galerius was issued in April, 311 (see Lactantius,
 de Mort. pers. 35, and Bk. VIII. chap. 17, note 1, above), so that
 Maximin's change of policy, recorded in this chapter, must have begun
 in October, or thereabouts. Valesius supposes that the death of
 Galerius was the cause of Maximin's return to persecuting measures. But
 Galerius died, not some months after the issue of the edict, as
 Valesius, and others after him, assert, but within a few days after it,
 as is directly stated by Lactantius (ibid.), whose accuracy in this
 case there is no reason to question. Another misstatement made by
 Valesius in the same connection, and repeated by Heinichen, Crusè, and
 others, is that Maximin became Augustus only after the death of
 Galerius. The truth is, he was recognized as an Augustus in 308 (see
 Lactantius, ibid. chap. 32; and Bk. VIII. chap. 13, note 22, above).
 The cause of the renewal of the persecution seems to have been simply
 impatience at the exultation of the Church and at the wonderful
 recuperative power revealed the moment the pressure was taken off. That
 it was not renewed sooner was doubtless due to the more important
 matters which engaged the attention of Maximinus immediately after the
 death of Galerius, in connection with the division of the Eastern
 Empire between himself and Licinius (see Lactantius, ibid. chap. 36).
 It would seem from the passage just referred to, that as soon as these
 matters were satisfactorily adjusted, Maximin turned his attention
 again to the Christians, and began to curtail their liberty.

 [2720] Very likely under the pretext that night gatherings at the tombs
 of the martyrs, with the excitement and enthusiasm necessarily
 engendered under such circumstances, were of immoral tendency.
 Naturally, the honor shown by the Christians to their fellows who had
 been put to death at the command of the state was looked upon as an
 insult to the authorities, and could not but be very distasteful to
 them. They imagined that such meetings would only tend to foster
 discontent and disloyalty on the part of those who engaged in them, and
 consequently they were always suspicious of them.

 [2721] The same account is given by Lactantius, ibid. chap. 36 ("First
 of all he took away the toleration and general protection granted by
 Galerius to the Christians, and, for this end, he secretly procured
 addresses for the different cities, requesting that no Christian church
 might be built within their walls; and thus he meant to make that which
 was his own choice appear as if extorted from him by importunity"). It
 is possible that the account is correct, but it is more probable that
 the embassies were genuine, and were voluntarily sent to the emperor,
 while he was on a tour through his dominions, by the pagan population
 of some of the cities who knew the emperor's own position in the
 matter, and desired to conciliate him and secure favors from him. Of
 course such deputations would delight him greatly; and what one city
 did, others would feel compelled to do also, in order not to seem
 behindhand in religious zeal and in order not to run the risk of
 offending the emperor, who since the death of Galerius was of course a
 more absolute master than before. Cf. Mason, p. 313 sq.

 [2722] Theotecnus, according to the Passion of St. Theodotus
 (translated in Mason, p. 354 sq.) an apostate from Christianity, was
 for some time chief magistrate of Galatia, where he indulged in the
 most terrible cruelties against the Christians. Beyond the account
 given in the Passion referred to we know in regard to Theotecnus only
 what is told us by Eusebius in the present book, in which he is
 frequently mentioned. His hatred of the Christians knew no bounds. He
 seems, moreover, to have been something of a philosopher and literary
 man (Mason calls him a Neo-Platonist, and makes him the author of the
 anti-Christian Acta Pilati; but see below, chap. 5, note 1). He was
 executed by command of Licinius, after the death of Maximinus (see
 below, chap. 11).

 [2723] Theoteknos, "child of God."

 [2724] The logistai, or curatores urbium, were the chief finance
 officers of municipalities. See Valesius' note on Bk. VIII. chap. 11.

 Chapter III.--The Newly Erected Statue at Antioch.

 After this man had carried on all kinds of war against us and had
 caused our people to be diligently hunted up in their retreats, as if
 they were unholy thieves, and had devised every sort of slander and
 accusation against us, and become the cause of death to vast numbers,
 he finally erected a statue of Jupiter Philius [2725] with certain
 juggleries and magic rites. And after inventing unholy forms of
 initiation and ill-omened mysteries in connection with it, and
 abominable means of purification, [2726] he exhibited his jugglery, by
 oracles which he pretended to utter, even to the emperor; and through a
 flattery which was pleasing to the ruler he aroused the demon against
 the Christians and said that the god had given command to expel the
 Christians as his enemies beyond the confines of the city and the
 neighboring districts.

 [2725] Jupiter Philius, the god of friendship or good-will, was widely
 honored in the East. He seems to have been the tutelary divinity of
 Antioch, and, according to Valesius, a temple of his at Antioch is
 mentioned by the emperor Julian and by Libanius.

 [2726] "The ceremonies of the Gentiles, used in the erection and
 consecration of images to their gods, were various. Jupiter Ctesius was
 consecrated with one sort of rites, Herceus with another, and Philius
 with a third sort" (Valesius). For farther particulars, see his note ad
 locum.

 Chapter IV.--The Memorials against us. [2727]

 1. Thefact that this man, who took the lead in this matter, had
 succeeded in his purpose was an incitement to all the other officials
 in the cities under the same government to prepare a similar memorial.
 [2728] And the governors of the provinces perceiving that this was
 agreeable to the emperor suggested to their subjects that they should
 do the same.

 2. And as the tyrant by a rescript declared himself well pleased with
 their measures, [2729] persecution was kindled anew against us. Priests
 for the images were then appointed in the cities, and besides them high
 priests by Maximinus himself. [2730] The latter were taken from among
 those who were most distinguished in public life and had gained
 celebrity in all the offices which they had filled; and who were
 imbued, moreover, with great zeal for the service of those whom they
 worshiped.

 3. Indeed, the extraordinary superstition of the emperor, to speak in
 brief, led all his subjects, both rulers and private citizens, for the
 sake of gratifying him, to do everything against us, supposing that
 they could best show their gratitude to him for the benefits which they
 had received from him, by plotting murder against us and exhibiting
 toward us any new signs of malignity.

 [2727] peri ton kath' hemon psephism?ton

 [2728] psephon.

 [2729] psephismasi

 [2730] Lactantius (ibid. chap. 36) says: "In compliance with those
 addresses he [Maximinus] introduced a new mode of government in things
 respecting religion, and for each city he created a high priest, chosen
 from among the persons of most distinction. The office of those men was
 to make daily sacrifices to all their gods, and, with the aid of the
 former priests, to prevent the Christians from erecting churches, or
 from worshiping God, either publicly or in private; and he authorized
 them to compel the Christians to sacrifice to idols, and, on their
 refusal, to bring them before the civil magistrate; and, as if this had
 not been enough, in every province he established a superintendent
 priest, one of chief eminence in the state; and he commanded that all
 those priests newly instituted should appear in white habits, that
 being the most honorable distinction of dress." Maximin perceived the
 power that existed in the Catholic Church with its wonderful
 organization, and conceived the stupendous idea of rejuvenating
 paganism by creating a pagan Catholic Church. The Roman religion should
 cease to be the loose, unorganized, chaotic thing it had always been,
 and should be made a positive aggressive power over against
 Christianity by giving it a regular organization and placing the entire
 institution in the hands of honorable and able men, whose business it
 should be to increase its stability and power in every way and in all
 quarters. We are compelled to admire the wisdom of Maximin's plan. No
 persecutor before him had ever seen the need of thus replacing the
 Christian Church by another institution as great and as splendid as
 itself. The effort, like that of Julian a half-century later, must
 remain memorable in the annals of the conflict of paganism with
 Christianity.

 Chapter V.--The Forged Acts.

 1. Having therefore forged Acts of Pilate [2731] and our Saviour full
 of every kind of blasphemy against Christ, they sent them with the
 emperor's approval to the whole of the empire subject to him, with
 written commands that they should be openly posted to the view of all
 in every place, both in country and city, and that the schoolmasters
 should give them to their scholars, instead of their customary lessons,
 to be studied and learned by heart.

 2. While these things were taking place, another military commander,
 whom the Romans call Dux, [2732] seized some infamous women in the
 market-place at Damascus in Phoenicia, [2733] and by threatening to
 inflict tortures upon them compelled them to make a written declaration
 that they had once been Christians and that they were acquainted with
 their impious deeds,--that in their very churches they committed
 licentious acts; and they uttered as many other slanders against our
 religion as he wished them to. Having taken down their words in
 writing, he communicated them to the emperor, who commanded that these
 documents also should be published in every place and city.

 [2731] These Acts are no longer extant, but their character can be
 gathered from this chapter. They undoubtedly contained the worst
 calumnies against Christ's moral and religious character. They cannot
 have been very skillful forgeries, for Eusebius, in Bk. I. chap. 9,
 above, points out a palpable chronological blunder which stamped them
 as fictitious on their very face. And yet they doubtless answered every
 purpose; for few of the heathen would be in a position to detect such
 an error, and perhaps fewer still would care to expose it if they
 discovered it. These Acts are of course to be distinguished from the
 numerous Acta Pilati which proceeded from Christian sources (see above,
 Bk. II. chap. 2, note 1). The way in which these Acts were employed was
 diabolical in its very shrewdness. Certainly there was no more
 effectual way of checking the spread of Christianity than
 systematically and persistently to train up the youth of the empire to
 look with contempt and disgust upon the founder of Christianity, the
 Christian's Saviour and Lord. Incalculable mischief must inevitably
 have been produced had Maximin's reign lasted for a number of years. As
 it was, we can imagine the horror of the Christians at this new and
 sacrilegious artifice of the enemy. Mason assigns "the crowning,
 damning honor of this masterstroke" to Theotecnus, but I am unable to
 find any proof that he was the author of the documents. It is, of
 course, not impossible nor improbable that he was; but had Eusebius
 known him to be the author, he would certainly have informed us. As it
 is, his statement is entirely indefinite, and the Acts are not brought
 into any connection with Theotecnus.

 [2732] The commandant of the Roman garrison in Damascus.

 [2733] Damascus, from the time of Hadrian (according to Spruner-Menke),
 or of Severus (according to Mommsen), was the capital of the newly
 formed province of Syria-Phoenice, or Syro-Phoenicia.

 Chapter VI.--Those who suffered Martyrdom at this Time.

 1. Not long afterward, however, this military commander became his own
 murderer and paid the penalty for his wickedness. But we were obliged
 again to endure exile and severe persecutions, and the governors in
 every province were once more terribly stirred up against us; so that
 even some of those illustrious in the Divine Word were seized and had
 sentence of death pronounced upon them without mercy. Three of them in
 the city of Emesa [2734] in Phoenicia, having confessed that they were
 Christians, were thrown as food to the wild beasts. Among them was a
 bishop Silvanus, [2735] a very old man, who had filled his office full
 forty years.

 2. At about the same time Peter [2736] also, who presided most
 illustriously over the parishes in Alexandria, a divine example of a
 bishop on account of the excellence of his life and his study of the
 sacred Scriptures, being seized for no cause and quite unexpectedly,
 was, as if by command of Maximinus, immediately and without
 explanation, beheaded. With him also many other bishops of Egypt
 suffered the same fate.

 3. And Lucian, [2737] a presbyter of the parish at Antioch, and a most
 excellent man in every respect, temperate in life and famed for his
 learning in sacred things, was brought to the city of Nicomedia, where
 at that time the emperor happened to be staying, and after delivering
 before the ruler an apology for the doctrine which he professed, was
 committed to prison and put to death.

 4. Such trials were brought upon us in a brief time by Maximinus, the
 enemy of virtue, so that this persecution which was stirred up against
 us seemed far more cruel than the former.

 [2734] Emesa was an important city in Northern Phoenicia, the
 birthplace of the Emperor Elagabalus, and chiefly famous for its great
 temple of the Sun.

 [2735] On Silvanus, bishop of Emesa, see above, Bk. VIII. chap. 13,
 note 4.

 [2736] On Peter, bishop of Alexandria, see above, Bk. VII. chap. 32,
 note 54. According to that chapter he suffered in the ninth year of the
 persecution; that is, at least as early as April, 312.

 [2737] The presbyter Lucian, who is mentioned also in Bk. VIII. chap.
 13, above, was one of the greatest scholars of the early Church, and
 with Dorotheus (see above, Bk. VII. chap. 32, note 9) at the head of
 the famous theological school at Antioch. He produced a revised version
 of the LXX, which enjoyed a wide circulation (see Jerome's de vir. ill.
 77, and Westcott's Hist. of the N. T. Canon, p. 392 sq.); and also
 wrote some books on Faith (see Jerome, ibid.), some epistles (see
 ibid., and Suidas, s.v.), and a commentary on Job, of which a Latin
 fragment has been preserved and is given by Routh, Rel. Sacræ, IV. p.
 7-10. His works have perished, with the exception of a brief fragment
 of an epistle, the fragment from his commentary on Job just referred
 to, and a part of his defense before Maximinus (referred to in the
 present chapter) which is preserved by Rufinus, H. E. IX. 6, and is
 probably genuine (cf. Westcott, ibid. p. 393). These extant fragments
 are given, with annotations, by Routh, ibid. p. 5 sq. Lucian's chief
 historical significance lies in his relation to Arianism. On this
 subject, see above, p. 11 sq.

 Chapter VII.--The Decree against us which was engraved on Pillars.

 1. The memorials against us [2738] and copies of the imperial edicts
 issued in reply to them were engraved and set up on brazen pillars in
 the midst of the cities, [2739] --a course which had never been
 followed elsewhere. The children in the schools had daily in their
 mouths the names of Jesus and Pilate, and the Acts which had been
 forged in wanton insolence. [2740]

 2. It appears to me necessary to insert here this document of Maximinus
 which was posted on pillars, in order that there may be made manifest
 at the same time the boastful and haughty arrogance of the God-hating
 man, and the sleepless evil-hating divine vengeance upon the impious,
 which followed close upon him, and under whose pressure he not long
 afterward took the opposite course in respect to us and confirmed it by
 written laws. [2741]

 The rescript is in the following words:

 Copy of a translation of the rescript of Maximinus in answer to the
 memorials against us, taken from the pillar in Tyre.

 3. "Now at length the feeble power of the human mind has become able to
 shake off and to scatter every dark mist of error, which before this
 besieged the senses of men, who were more miserable than impious, and
 enveloped them in dark and destructive ignorance; and to perceive that
 it is governed and established by the beneficent providence of the
 immortal gods.

 4. It passes belief how grateful, how pleasing and how agreeable it is
 to us, that you have given a most decided proof of your pious
 resolution; for even before this it was known to every one how much
 regard and reverence you were paying to the immortal gods, exhibiting
 not a faith of bare and empty words, but continued and wonderful
 examples of illustrious deeds.

 5. Wherefore your city may justly be called a seat and dwelling of the
 immortal gods. At least, it appears by many signs that it flourishes
 because of the presence of the celestial gods.

 6. Behold, therefore, your city, regardless of all private advantages,
 and omitting its former petitions in its own behalf, when it perceived
 that the adherents of that execrable vanity were again beginning to
 spread, and to start the greatest conflagration,--like a neglected and
 extinguished funeral pile when its brands are rekindled,--immediately
 resorted to our piety as to a metropolis of all religiousness, asking
 some remedy and aid.

 7. It is evident that the gods have given you this saving mind on
 account of your faith and piety.

 "Accordingly that supreme and mightiest Jove, who presides over your
 illustrious city, who preserves your ancestral gods, your wives and
 children, your hearths and homes from every destructive pest, has
 infused into your souls this wholesome resolve; showing and proving how
 excellent and glorious and salutary it is to observe with the becoming
 reverence the worship and sacred rites of the immortal gods.

 8. For who can be found so ignorant or so devoid of all understanding
 as not to perceive that it is due to the kindly care of the gods that
 the earth does not refuse the seed sown in it, nor disappoint the hope
 of the husbandmen with vain expectation; that impious war is not
 inevitably fixed upon earth, and wasted bodies dragged down to death
 under the influence of a corrupted atmosphere; that the sea is not
 swollen and raised on high by blasts of intemperate winds; that
 unexpected hurricanes do not burst forth and stir up the destructive
 tempest; moreover, that the earth, the nourisher and mother of all, is
 not shaken from its lowest depths with a terrible tremor, and that the
 mountains upon it do not sink into the opening chasms. No one is
 ignorant that all these, and evils still worse than these, have
 oftentimes happened hitherto.

 9. And all these misfortunes have taken place on account of the
 destructive error of the empty vanity of those impious men, when it
 prevailed in their souls, and, we may almost say, weighed down the
 whole world with shame."

 10. After other words he adds: "Let them look at the standing crops
 already flourishing with waving heads in the broad fields, and at the
 meadows glittering with plants and flowers, in response to abundant
 rains and the restored mildness and softness of the atmosphere.

 11. Finally, let all rejoice that the might of the most powerful and
 terrible Mars has been propitiated by our piety, our sacrifices, and
 our veneration; and let them on this account enjoy firm and tranquil
 peace and quiet; and let as many as have wholly abandoned that blind
 error and delusion and have returned to a right and sound mind rejoice
 the more, as those who have been rescued from an unexpected storm or
 severe disease and are to reap the fruits of pleasure for the rest of
 their life.

 12. But if they still persist in their execrable vanity, let them, as
 you have desired, be driven far away from your city and territory, that
 thus, in accordance with your praiseworthy zeal in this matter, your
 city, being freed from every pollution and impiety, may, according to
 its native disposition, attend to the sacred rites of the immortal gods
 with becoming reverence.

 13. But that ye may know how acceptable to us your request respecting
 this matter has been, and how ready our mind is to confer benefits
 voluntarily, without memorials and petitions, we permit your devotion
 to ask whatever great gift ye may desire in return for this your pious
 disposition.

 14. And now ask that this may be done and that ye may receive it; for
 ye shall obtain it without delay. This, being granted to your city,
 shall furnish for all time an evidence of reverent piety toward the
 immortal gods, and of the fact that you have obtained from our
 benevolence merited prizes for this choice of yours; and it shall be
 shown to your children and children's children."

 15. This was published against us in all the provinces, depriving us of
 every hope of good, at least from men; so that, according to that
 divine utterance, "If it were possible, even the elect would have
 stumbled" [2742] at these things.

 16. And now indeed, when the hope of most of us was almost extinct,
 suddenly while those who were to execute against us the above decree
 had in some places scarcely finished their journey, God, the defender
 of his own Church, exhibited his heavenly interposition in our behalf,
 well-nigh stopping the tyrant's boasting against us.

 [2738] See above, chaps. 2 and 4.

 [2739] These decrees must have been published in this way in June, 312,
 or thereabouts; for in chap. 10, §12, we learn that they were thus made
 public a little less than a year before the final edict of toleration,
 which was apparently issued in May, 313.

 [2740] See chap. 5.

 [2741] ouk eis makron tanantia peri hemon ebouleusato te kai di'
 engr?phon nomon edogm?tise. Crusè translates, "So that he did not long
 devise hostilities and form decrees against us." It is true that the
 phrase ouk eis makron may in general bear the meaning "not for long,"
 as well as "not long afterward"; but an examination of the numerous
 passages in which the words are used by Eusebius (e.g. I. 11. 1; I. 13.
 4; II. 6. 5; II. 7; III. 5. 7; IV. 7. 12; VII. 13. 1) will show that,
 with a single exception, he uniformly employs them in the sense of "not
 long afterward." The single exception occurs in Bk. IV. chap. 7, §12,
 where the phrase is clearly used with the other meaning--"not for
 long." In view of this preponderance of instances for the former use of
 the phrase in this single work, it seems best in the present case--the
 only doubtful one, so far as I am aware--to follow Valesius, Stroth,
 and Closs in translating "not long afterward," which is in full accord
 with the context, and more in harmony than the other reading with the
 structure of this particular sentence.

 [2742] Matt. xxiv. 24.

 Chapter VIII.--The Misfortunes which happened in Connection with these
 Things, in Famine, Pestilence, and War.

 1. The customary rains and showers of the winter season ceased to fall
 in their wonted abundance upon the earth and an unexpected famine made
 its appearance, and in addition to this a pestilence, and another
 severe disease consisting of an ulcer, which on account of its fiery
 appearance was appropriately called a carbuncle. [2743] This, spreading
 over the whole body, greatly endangered the lives of those who suffered
 from it; but as it chiefly attacked the eyes, it deprived multitudes of
 men, women, and children of their sight.

 2. In addition to this the tyrant was compelled to go to war with the
 Armenians, who had been from ancient times friends and allies of the
 Romans. As they were also Christians [2744] and zealous in their piety
 toward the Deity, the enemy of God had attempted to compel them to
 sacrifice to idols and demons, and had thus made friends foes, and
 allies enemies.

 3. All these things suddenly took place at one and the same time, and
 refuted the tyrant's empty vaunt against the Deity. For he had boasted
 that, because of his zeal for idols and his hostility against us,
 neither famine nor pestilence nor war had happened in his time. [2745]
 These things, therefore, coming upon him at once and together,
 furnished a prelude also of his own destruction.

 4. He himself with his forces was defeated in the war with the
 Armenians, and the rest of the inhabitants of the cities under him were
 terribly afflicted with famine and pestilence, so that one measure of
 wheat was sold for twenty-five hundred Attic drachms. [2746]

 5. Those who died in the cities were innumerable, and those who died in
 the country and villages were still more. So that the tax lists which
 formerly included a great rural population were almost entirely wiped
 out; nearly all being speedily destroyed by famine and pestilence.

 6. Some, therefore, desired to dispose of their most precious things to
 those who were better supplied, in return for the smallest morsel of
 food, and others, selling their possessions little by little, fell into
 the last extremity of want. Some, chewing wisps of hay and recklessly
 eating noxious herbs, undermined and ruined their constitutions.

 7. And some of the high-born women in the cities, driven by want to
 shameful extremities, went forth into the market-places to beg, giving
 evidence of their former liberal culture by the modesty of their
 appearance and the decency of their apparel.

 8. Some, wasted away like ghosts and at the very point of death,
 stumbled and tottered here and there, and too weak to stand fell down
 in the middle of the streets; lying stretched out at full length they
 begged that a small morsel of food might be given them, and with their
 last gasp they cried out Hunger! having strength only for this most
 painful cry.

 9. But others, who seemed to be better supplied, astonished at the
 multitude of the beggars, after giving away large quantities, finally
 became hard and relentless, expecting that they themselves also would
 soon suffer the same calamities as those who begged. So that in the
 midst of the market-places and lanes, dead and naked bodies lay
 unburied for many days, presenting the most lamentable spectacle to
 those that beheld them.

 10. Some also became food for dogs, on which account the survivors
 began to kill the dogs, lest they should become mad and should go to
 devouring men.

 11. But still worse was the pestilence which consumed entire houses and
 families, and especially those whom the famine was not able to destroy
 because of their abundance of food. Thus men of wealth, rulers and
 governors and multitudes in office, as if left by the famine on purpose
 for the pestilence, suffered swift and speedy death. Every place
 therefore was full of lamentation; in every lane and market-place and
 street there was nothing else to be seen or heard than tears, with the
 customary instruments and the voices of the mourners. [2747]

 12. In this way death, waging war with these two weapons, pestilence
 and famine, destroyed whole families in a short time, so that one could
 see two or three dead bodies carried out at once.

 13. Such were the rewards of the boasting of Maximinus and of the
 measures of the cities against us.

 Then did the evidences of the universal zeal and piety of the
 Christians become manifest to all the heathen.

 14. For they alone in the midst of such ills showed their sympathy and
 humanity by their deeds. Every day some continued caring for and
 burying the dead, for there were multitudes who had no one to care for
 them; others collected in one place those who were afflicted by the
 famine, throughout the entire city, and gave bread to them all; so that
 the thing became noised abroad among all men, and they glorified the
 God of the Christians; and, convinced by the facts themselves,
 confessed that they alone were truly pious and religious.

 15. After these things were thus done, God, the great and celestial
 defender of the Christians, having revealed in the events which have
 been described his anger and indignation at all men for the great evils
 which they had brought upon us, restored to us the bright and gracious
 sunlight of his providence in our behalf; so that in the deepest
 darkness a light of peace shone most wonderfully upon us from him, and
 made it manifest to all that God himself has always been the ruler of
 our affairs. From time to time indeed he chastens his people and
 corrects them by his visitations, but again after sufficient
 chastisement he shows mercy and favor to those who hope in him.

 [2743] hanthrax: "a carbuncle, malignant pustule (acc. to some,
 small-pox)." Liddell and Scott. Eusebius is the only writer to tell us
 of this famine and pestilence during Maximin's reign, though Lactantius
 (De Mort. pers. 37) does refer in a single sentence to a famine,
 without giving us any particulars in regard to it, or informing us of
 its severity or extent.

 [2744] We do not know when Christianity was first preached in Armenia,
 but late in the third century Gregory, "the Illuminator," an Armenian
 of royal blood who had received a Christian training in Cappadocia,
 returned as a missionary to his native land, which was mainly heathen,
 and at the beginning of the fourth century succeeded in converting the
 king, Tiridates III., and a large number of the nobles and people, and
 Christianity was established as the state religion (see the articles
 Armenia and Gregory, the Illuminator, in the Dict. of Christ. Biog.).
 The Armenians had been friends of the Romans for many generations and
 allies in their wars with the Persians on many occasions. The present
 war is mentioned, so far as I know, only by Eusebius. According to §4,
 below, it ended in a defeat for Maximinus. It cannot have been a war of
 great consequence. It was very likely little more than a temporary
 misunderstanding, resulting perhaps in a few skirmishes between troops
 on the border, and speedily settled by a treaty of some kind or
 another. Maximinus at any rate could not afford to quarrel long with
 his Eastern neighbors, in view of the struggle with Licinius which he
 knew must come in time. Whether the Armenians or the Romans were the
 aggressors in this affair, Eusebius does not tell us. It is very
 probable, as Mason suggests, that Maximinus tried to put down
 Christianity in Lesser Armenia, which was a Roman province and
 therefore under his sway, and that their brethren in the kingdom of
 Armenia took up arms against Rome to avenge their kindred and their
 faith.

 [2745] See the previous chapter, § 8.

 [2746] An Attic drachm was a silver coin, worth about eighteen or
 nineteen cents.

 [2747] aulon te kai ktupon.

 Chapter IX.--The Victory of the God-Beloved Emperors. [2748]

 1. Thus when Constantine, whom we have already mentioned [2749] as an
 emperor, born of an emperor, a pious son of a most pious and prudent
 father, and Licinius, second to him, [2750] --two God-beloved emperors,
 honored alike for their intelligence and their piety,--being stirred up
 against the two most impious tyrants by God, the absolute Ruler and
 Saviour of all, engaged in formal war against them, with God as their
 ally, Maxentius [2751] was defeated at Rome by Constantine in a
 remarkable manner, and the tyrant of the East [2752] did not long
 survive him, but met a most shameful death at the hand of Licinius, who
 had not yet become insane. [2753]

 2. Constantine, who was the superior both in dignity and imperial rank,
 [2754] first took compassion upon those who were oppressed at Rome, and
 having invoked in prayer the God of heaven, and his Word, and Jesus
 Christ himself, the Saviour of all, as his aid, advanced with his whole
 army, [2755] proposing to restore to the Romans their ancestral
 liberty.

 3. But Maxentius, putting confidence rather in the arts of sorcery than
 in the devotion of his subjects, did not dare to go forth beyond the
 gates of the city, but fortified every place and district and town
 which was enslaved by him, in the neighborhood of Rome and in all
 Italy, with an immense multitude of troops and with innumerable bands
 of soldiers. But the emperor, relying upon the assistance of God,
 attacked the first, second, and third army of the tyrant, and conquered
 them all; and having advanced through the greater part of Italy, was
 already very near Rome.

 4. Then, that he might not be compelled to wage war with the Romans for
 the sake of the tyrant, God himself drew the latter, as if bound in
 chains, some distance without the gates, and confirmed those threats
 against the impious which had been anciently inscribed in sacred
 books,--disbelieved, indeed, by most as a myth, but believed by the
 faithful,--confirmed them, in a word, by the deed itself to all, both
 believers and unbelievers, that saw the wonder with their eyes.

 5. Thus, as in the time of Moses himself and of the ancient God-beloved
 race of Hebrews, "he cast Pharaoh's chariots and host into the sea, and
 overwhelmed his chosen charioteers in the Red Sea, and covered them
 with the flood," [2756] in the same way Maxentius also with his
 soldiers and body-guards "went down into the depths like a stone,"
 [2757] when he fled before the power of God which was with Constantine,
 and passed through the river which lay in his way, over which he had
 formed a bridge with boats, and thus prepared the means of his own
 destruction.

 6. In regard to him one might say, "he digged a pit and opened it and
 fell into the hole which he had made; his labor shall turn upon his own
 head, and his unrighteousness shall fall upon his own crown." [2758]

 7. Thus, then, the bridge over the river being broken, the passageway
 settled down, and immediately the boats with the men disappeared in the
 depths, and that most impious one himself first of all, then the
 shield-bearers who were with him, as the divine oracles foretold, "sank
 like lead in the mighty waters"; [2759] so that those who obtained the
 victory from God, if not in words, at least in deeds, like Moses, the
 great servant of God, and those who were with him, fittingly sang as
 they had sung against the impious tyrant of old, saying, "Let us sing
 unto the Lord, for he hath gloriously glorified himself; horse and
 rider hath he thrown into the sea; a helper and a protector hath he
 become for my salvation;" [2760] and "Who is like unto thee, O Lord;
 among the gods, who is like unto thee glorious in holiness, [2761]
 marvelous in glory, doing wonders." [2762]

 8. These and the like praises Constantine, by his very deeds, sang to
 God, the universal Ruler, and Author of his victory, as he entered Rome
 in triumph.

 9. Immediately all the members of the senate and the other most
 celebrated men, with the whole Roman people, together with children and
 women, received him as their deliverer, their saviour, and their
 benefactor, with shining eyes and with their whole souls, with shouts
 of gladness and unbounded joy.

 10. But he, as one possessed of inborn piety toward God, did not exult
 in the shouts, nor was he elated by the praises; but perceiving that
 his aid was from God, he immediately commanded that a trophy of the
 Saviour's passion be put in the hand of his own statue.

 11. And when he had placed it, with the saving sign of the cross in its
 right hand, in the most public place in Rome, he commanded that the
 following inscription should be engraved upon it in the Roman tongue:
 "By this salutary sign, the true proof of bravery, I have saved and
 freed your city from the yoke of the tyrant and moreover, having set at
 liberty both the senate and the people of Rome, I have restored them to
 their ancient distinction and splendor." [2763]

 12. And after this both Constantine himself and with him the Emperor
 Licinius, who had not yet been seized by that madness into which he
 later fell, [2764] praising God as the author of all their blessings,
 with one will and mind drew up a full and most complete decree in
 behalf of the Christians, [2765] and sent an account of the wonderful
 things done for them by God, and of the victory over the tyrant,
 together with a copy of the decree itself, to Maximinus, who still
 ruled over the nations of the East and pretended friendship toward
 them.

 13. But he, like a tyrant, was greatly pained by what he learned; but
 not wishing to seem to yield to others, nor, on the other hand, to
 suppress that which was commanded, for fear of those who enjoined it,
 as if on his own authority, he addressed, under compulsion, to the
 governors under him this first communication in behalf of the
 Christians, [2766] falsely inventing things against himself which had
 never been done by him.

 Copy of a translation of the epistle of the tyrant Maximinus.

 14. "Jovius Maximinus Augustus to Sabinus. [2767] I am confident that
 it is manifest both to thy firmness and to all men that our masters
 Diocletian and Maximianus, our fathers, when they saw almost all men
 abandoning the worship of the gods and attaching themselves to the
 party of the Christians, rightly decreed that all who gave up the
 worship of those same immortal gods should be recalled by open
 chastisement and punishment to the worship of the gods.

 15. But when I first came to the East under favorable auspices and
 learned that in some places a great many men who were able to render
 public service had been banished by the judges for the above-mentioned
 cause, I gave command to each of the judges that henceforth none of
 them should treat the provincials with severity, but that they should
 rather recall them to the worship of the gods by flattery and
 exhortations. [2768]

 16. Then when, in accordance with my command, these orders were obeyed
 by the judges, it came to pass that none of those who lived in the
 districts of the East were banished or insulted, but that they were
 rather brought back to the worship of the gods by the fact that no
 severity was employed toward them.

 17. But afterwards, when I went up last year [2769] under good auspices
 to Nicomedia and sojourned there, citizens of the same city came to me
 with the images of the gods, earnestly entreating that such a people
 should by no means be permitted to dwell in their country. [2770]

 18. But when I learned that many men of the same religion dwelt in
 those regions, I replied that I gladly thanked them for their request,
 but that I perceived that it was not proffered by all, and that if,
 therefore, there were any that persevered in the same superstition,
 each one had the privilege of doing as he pleased, even if he wished to
 recognize the worship of the gods. [2771]

 19. Nevertheless, I considered it necessary to give a friendly answer
 to the inhabitants of Nicomedia and to the other cities which had so
 earnestly presented to me the same petition, namely, that no Christians
 should dwell in their cities,--both because this same course had been
 pursued by all the ancient emperors, and also because it was pleasing
 to the gods, through whom all men and the government of the state
 itself endure,--and to confirm the request which they presented in
 behalf of the worship of their deity.

 20. Therefore, although before this time, special letters have been
 sent to thy devotedness, and commands have likewise been given that no
 harsh measures should be taken against those provincials who desire to
 follow such a course, but that they should be treated mildly and
 moderately,--nevertheless, in order that they may not suffer insults or
 extortions [2772] from the beneficiaries, [2773] or from any others, I
 have thought meet to remind thy firmness in this epistle [2774] also
 that thou shouldst lead our provincials rather by flatteries and
 exhortations to recognize the care of the gods.

 21. Hence, if any one of his own choice should decide to adopt the
 worship of the gods, it is fitting that he should be welcomed, but if
 any should wish to follow their own religion, do thou leave it in their
 power.

 22. Wherefore it behooves thy devotedness to observe that which is
 committed to thee, and to see that power is given to no one to oppress
 our provincials with insults and extortions, [2775] since, as already
 written, it is fitting to recall our provincials to the worship of the
 gods rather by exhortations and flatteries. But, in order that this
 command of ours may come to the knowledge of all our provincials, it is
 incumbent upon thee to proclaim that which has been enjoined, in an
 edict issued by thyself."

 23. Since he was forced to do this by necessity and did not give the
 command by his own will, he was not regarded by any one as sincere or
 trustworthy, because he had already shown his unstable and deceitful
 disposition after his former similar concession.

 24. None of our people, therefore, ventured to hold meetings or even to
 appear in public, because his communication did not cover this, but
 only commanded to guard against doing us any injury, and did not give
 orders that we should hold meetings or build churches or perform any of
 our customary acts.

 25. And yet Constantine and Licinius, the advocates of peace and piety,
 had written him to permit this, and had granted it to all their
 subjects by edicts and ordinances. [2776] But this most impious man did
 not choose to yield in this matter until, being driven by the divine
 judgment, he was at last compelled to do it against his will.

 [2748] All the mss., followed by Valesius and Crusè, give this as the
 title of the next chapter, and give as the title of this chapter the
 one which I have placed at the head of chapter 10. It is plain enough
 from the contents of the two chapters that the titles have in some way
 become transposed in the mss., and so they are restored to their proper
 position by the majority of the editors, whom I have followed.

 [2749] See above, Bk. VIII. chap. 13.

 [2750] On Licinius, see ibid. note 21. Constantine and Licinius were
 both Augusti, and thus nominally of equal rank. Nevertheless, both in
 the edict of Galerius, quoted in Bk. VIII. chap. 17, and in the edict
 of Milan, given in full in the De Mort. pers. chap. 48, Constantine's
 name precedes that of Licinius, showing that he was regarded as in some
 sense the latter's senior, and thus confirming Eusebius' statement, the
 truth of which Closs unnecessarily denies. It seems a little peculiar
 that Constantine should thus be recognized as Licinius' senior,
 especially in the edict of Galerius; for although it is true that he
 had been a Cæsar some time before Licinius had been admitted to the
 imperial college, yet, on the other hand, Licinius was made Augustus by
 Galerius before Constantine was, and enjoyed his confidence and favor
 much more fully than the latter.

 [2751] On Maxentius, see above, Bk. VIII. chap. 14, note 1.

 [2752] i.e. Maximinus. For an account of his defeat by Licinius and his
 death, see below, chap. 10.

 [2753] oupo manentos tote. This refers to Licinius' hostility to the
 Christians, which made its appearance some years later, and resulted in
 a persecution (see below, Bk. X. chap. 8). The clause, if a part of the
 original, obliges us to suppose that the ninth book was composed after
 Licinius had begun to persecute, but there are strong reasons for
 thinking that the first nine books were completed before 314 (see
 above, p. 45); indeed, we cannot explain Eusebius' eulogistic words in
 speaking of Licinius here and elsewhere in this book on any other
 ground. It seems necessary, therefore, to regard this clause and the
 similar clause in §12, below, as later insertions, made possibly at the
 time of the addition of the tenth book (see p. 45).

 [2754] See above, note 2.

 [2755] Constantine's battle with Maxentius, described in this chapter,
 took place on the sixth anniversary of the latter's accession, Oct. 27,
 312 (see Lactantius, De Mort. pers. 44 and 46). For particulars
 respecting Constantine himself and his campaign against Maxentius, see
 Dr. Richardson's prolegomena to his translation of the Life of
 Constantine, p. 416. sq. of this volume.

 [2756] Ex. xv. 4, 5. The phrase translated "charioteers" is anab?tas
 trist?tas, which is employed in the LXX to translate the Hebrew slysyv.
 The word slys, which means literally a "third," and hence a "third man"
 (Greek trist?tes, is used, according to Gesenius, to denote a chariot
 warrior, who was so called because "three always stood upon one
 chariot, one of whom fought, while the second protected him with the
 shield, and the third drove."

 [2757] Ex. xv. 5.

 [2758] Psa. vii. 15, 16.

 [2759] Ex. xv. 10.

 [2760] Ibid. verse 1. Eusebius, in this and the next passage, follows
 the LXX, which differs considerably from the Hebrew.

 [2761] The LXX, followed by Eusebius, reads dedoxasmenos en hagiois to
 translate the Hebrew n'dr bqds. It seems probable both from the Hebrew
 original and from the use of the plural doxais in the next clause, that
 the LXX translator used the plural hagiois, not to denote "saints," as
 Closs renders ("durch die Heiligen"), which would in strictness require
 the article, but "holiness." I have therefore ventured to render the
 word thus in the text, although quite conscious that the translation
 does not accurately reproduce the Greek phrase as it stands.

 [2762] Ex. xv. 11.

 [2763] Upon Constantine's conversion, see Dr. Richardson's prolegomena,
 p. 431, below. On the famous tale of the flaming cross with its
 inscription touto nika, related in the Life of Constantine, I. 28, see
 his note on that passage, p. 490, below.

 [2764] See abo'e, note 5.

 [2765] This is the famous edict of Milan, which was issued late in the
 year 312, and which is given in the Latin original in Lactantius' De
 Mort. pers. 48, and in a Greek translation in Eusebius' History, Bk. X.
 chap. 5, below. For a discussion of its date and significance, see the
 notes upon that chapter.

 [2766] This epistle or rescript (Eusebius calls it here a gr?mma, just
 below an epistole) of Maximin's was written before the end of the year
 312, as can be seen from the fact that in §17, below, his visit to
 Nicomedia is spoken of as having taken place in the previous year. But
 that visit, as we learn from the De Mort. pers. chap. 36, occurred in
 311 (cf. chap. 2, note 1, above). It must therefore have been issued
 immediately upon the receipt of the edict of Constantine and Licinius.
 As Mason remarks, his reasons for writing this epistle can hardly have
 been fear of Constantine and Licinius, as Eusebius states, for he was
 bent upon war against them, and attacked Licinius at the earliest
 possible moment. He cannot have cared, therefore, to take any special
 pains to conciliate them. He was probably moved by a desire to
 conciliate, just at this crisis, the numerous and influential body of
 his subjects whom he had persecuted, in order that he might not have to
 contend with disaffection and disloyalty within his own dominions
 during his impending conflict with Licinius. The document itself is a
 most peculiar one, full of false statements and contradictions. Mason
 well says: "In this curious letter Maximin contradicts himself often
 enough to make his Christian subjects dizzy. First he justifies bloody
 persecution, then plumes himself upon having stopped it, next
 apologizes for having set it again on foot, then denies that it was
 going on, and lastly orders it to cease. We cannot wonder at what
 Eusebius relates, that the people whose wrongs the letter applauded and
 forbade, neither built church nor held meeting in public on the
 strength of it; they did not know where to have it."

 [2767] On Sabinus, see above, chap. 1, note 3.

 [2768] Noteing chould be pharteer phrom tee trute tean teis and tee
 phollooing statement.

 [2769] That is, after the death of Galerius in the year 311.
 "Maximinus, on receiving this news (i.e. of the death of Galerius),
 hasted with relays of horses from the East that he might seize the
 provinces, and, while Licinius delayed, might arrogate to himself the
 Chalcedonian straits. On his entry into Bithynia, with the view of
 acquiring immediate popularity, he abolished the tax to the great joy
 of all. Dissension arose between the two emperors, and almost war. They
 stood on the opposite shores with their armies. But peace and
 friendship were established under certain conditions; a treaty was
 concluded on the narrow sea, and they joined hands" (Lactantius, De
 mort. pers. 36). See above, chap. 2, note 1.

 [2770] On these embassies, see ibid. note 3.

 [2771] There is no sign of such consideration in Maximin's rescript,
 quoted in chap. 7, above. The sentences which follow are quite
 contradictory. Certainly no one could gain from them any idea as to
 what the emperor had done in the matter.

 [2772] seismous, literally, "shakings," or "shocks." The word is
 doubtless used to translate the Latin concussio, which in legal
 language meant the extortion of money by threats or other similar
 means. The words concussio, concussor, concutit, are used very
 frequently by Tertullian in this sense; e.g. in his De fuga in
 persecutione, chap. 12, ad Scap. chaps. 4 and 5, Apol. chap. 7. See
 especially Oehler's note on the word in his edition of Tertullian's
 works, I. p. 484.

 [2773] benephikialion, a simple reproduction of the Latin beneficiarii.
 These beneficiarii were "free or privileged soldiers, who through the
 favor of their commander were exempt from menial offices" (Andrews'
 Lexicon). We are nowhere told, so far as I am aware, that these
 beneficiarii were especially active in thus practicing extortions upon
 the Christians; but we can gather from Tertullian's words in the
 various passages referred to that the Christians had to suffer
 particularly from the soldiers in this respect, and doubtless from the
 beneficiarii most of all; for they possessed more leisure than the
 common soldiers, and at the same time greater opportunity, because of
 their more intimate relations with the authorities, of bringing the
 Christians into difficulty by entering accusations against them.

 [2774] tois gr?mmasi. On the use of the plural in speaking of a single
 epistle, see above, Bk. IV. chap. 8, note 12.

 [2775] See note 24.

 [2776] See above, note 17, and below, Bk. X. chap. 5.

 Chapter X.--The Overthrow of the Tyrants and the Words which they
 uttered before their Death. [2777]

 1. The circumstances which drove him to this course were the following.
 Being no longer able to sustain the magnitude of the government which
 had been undeservedly committed to him, in consequence of his want of
 prudence and imperial understanding, he managed affairs in a base
 manner, and with his mind unreasonably exalted in all things with
 boastful pride, even toward his colleagues in the empire who were in
 every respect his superiors, in birth, in training, in education, in
 worth and intelligence, and, greatest of all, in temperance and piety
 toward the true God, he began to venture to act audaciously and to
 arrogate to himself the first rank. [2778]

 2. Becoming mad in his folly, he broke the treaties which he had made
 with Licinius [2779] and undertook an implacable war. Then in a brief
 time he threw all things into confusion, and stirred up every city, and
 having collected his entire force, comprising an immense number of
 soldiers, he went forth to battle with him, elated by his hopes in
 demons, whom he supposed to be gods, and by the number of his soldiers.

 3. And when he joined battle [2780] he was deprived of the oversight of
 God, and the victory was given to Licinius, [2781] who was then ruling,
 by the one and only God of all.

 4. First, the army in which he trusted was destroyed, and as all his
 guards abandoned him and left him alone, and fled to the victor, he
 secretly divested himself as quickly as possible of the imperial
 garments, which did not fitly belong to him, and in a cowardly and
 ignoble and unmanly way mingled with the crowd, and then fled,
 concealing himself in fields and villages. [2782] But though he was so
 careful for his safety, he scarcely escaped the hands of his enemies,
 revealing by his deeds that the divine oracles are faithful and true,
 in which it is said, "A king is not saved by a great force, and a giant
 shall not be saved by the greatness of his strength; a horse is a vain
 thing for safety, nor shall he be delivered by the greatness of his
 power.

 5. Behold, the eyes of the Lord are upon them that fear him, upon them
 that hope in his mercy, to deliver their souls from death." [2783]

 6. Thus the tyrant, covered with shame, went to his own country. And
 first, in frantic rage, he slew many priests and prophets of the gods
 whom he had formerly admired, and whose oracles had incited him to
 undertake the war, as sorcerers and impostors, and besides all as
 betrayers of his safety. Then having given glory to the God of the
 Christians and enacted a most full and complete ordinance in behalf of
 their liberty, [2784] he was immediately seized with a mortal disease,
 and no respite being granted him, departed this life. [2785] The law
 enacted by him was as follows:

 Copy of the edict of the tyrant in behalf of the Christians, translated
 from the Roman tongue.

 7. "The Emperor Cæsar Caius Valerius Maximinus, Germanicus, Sarmaticus,
 Pius, Felix, Invictus, Augustus. We believe it manifest that no one is
 ignorant, but that every man who looks back over the past knows and is
 conscious that in every way we care continually for the good of our
 provincials, and wish to furnish them with those things which are of
 especial advantage to all, and for the common benefit and profit, and
 whatever contributes to the public welfare and is agreeable to the
 views of each.

 8. When, therefore, before this, it became clear to our mind that under
 pretext of the command of our parents, the most divine Diocletian and
 Maximianus, which enjoined that the meetings of the Christians should
 be abolished, many extortions [2786] and spoliations had been practiced
 by officials; and that those evils were continually increasing, to the
 detriment of our provincials toward whom we are especially anxious to
 exercise proper care, and that their possessions were in consequence
 perishing, letters were sent last year [2787] to the governors of each
 province, in which we decreed that, if any one wished to follow such a
 practice or to observe this same religion, he should be permitted
 without hindrance to pursue his purpose and should be impeded and
 prevented by no one, and that all should have liberty to do without any
 fear or suspicion that which each preferred.

 9. But even now we cannot help perceiving that some of the judges have
 mistaken our commands, and have given our people reason to doubt the
 meaning of our ordinances, and have caused them to proceed too
 reluctantly to the observance of those religious rites which are
 pleasing to them.

 10. In order, therefore, that in the future every suspicion of fearful
 doubt may be taken away, we have commanded that this decree be
 published, so that it may be clear to all that whoever wishes to
 embrace this sect and religion is permitted to do so by virtue of this
 grant of ours; and that each one, as he wishes or as is pleasing to
 him, is permitted to practice this religion which he has chosen to
 observe according to his custom. It is also granted them to build
 Lord's houses.

 11. But that this grant of ours may be the greater, we have thought
 good to decree also that if any houses and lands before this time
 rightfully belonged to the Christians, and by the command of our
 parents fell into the treasury, or were confiscated by any
 city,--whether they have been sold or presented to any one as a
 gift,--that all these should be restored to their original possessors,
 the Christians, in order that in this also every one may have knowledge
 of our piety and care."

 12. These are the words of the tyrant which were published not quite a
 year after the decrees against the Christians engraved by him on
 pillars. [2788] And by him to whom a little before we seemed impious
 wretches and atheists and destroyers of all life, so that we were not
 permitted to dwell in any city nor even in country or desert,--by him
 decrees and ordinances were issued in behalf of the Christians, and
 they who recently had been destroyed by fire and sword, by wild beasts
 and birds of prey, in the presence of the tyrant himself, and had
 suffered every species of torture and punishment, and most miserable
 deaths as atheists and impious wretches, were now acknowledged by him
 as possessors of religion and were permitted to build churches; and the
 tyrant himself bore witness and confessed that they had some rights.

 13. And having made such confessions, as if he had received some
 benefit on account of them, he suffered perhaps less than he ought to
 have suffered, and being smitten by a sudden scourge of God, he
 perished in the second campaign of the war.

 14. But his end was not like that of military chieftains who, while
 fighting bravely in battle for virtue and friends, often boldly
 encounter a glorious death; for like an impious enemy of God, while his
 army was still drawn up in the field, remaining at home and concealing
 himself, he suffered the punishment which he deserved. For he was
 smitten with a sudden scourge of God in his whole body, and harassed by
 terrible pains and torments, he fell prostrate on the ground, wasted by
 hunger, while all his flesh was dissolved by an invisible and God-sent
 fire, so that the whole appearance of his frame was changed, and there
 was left only a kind of image wasted away by length of time to a
 skeleton of dry bones; so that those who were present could think of
 his body as nothing else than the tomb of his soul, which was buried in
 a body already dead and completely melted away.

 15. And as the heat still more violently consumed him in the depths of
 his marrow, his eyes burst forth, and falling from their sockets left
 him blind. Thereupon still breathing and making free confession to the
 Lord, he invoked death, and at last, after acknowledging that he justly
 suffered these things on account of his violence against Christ, he
 gave up the ghost.

 [2777] On the transposition of the titles of chaps. 9 and 10, see the
 previous chapter, note 1.

 [2778] That Maximin should arrogate to himself, as Eusebius says, the
 highest rank is not very surprising, when we realize that that
 position, in so far as any difference in rank between the different
 rulers was acknowledged, belonged to him by right, inasmuch as he was
 Constantine's senior (having been first Cæsar when the latter was only
 second), while Constantine (see above, chap. 9, note 2) was regarded as
 the senior of Licinius.

 [2779] The treaty made in 311, just after the death of Galerius (see De
 mort. pers. 36).

 [2780] This battle between Licinius and Maximin was fought on April 30,
 313, at Adrianople, in Thrace. For a more detailed but somewhat
 imaginative account of the battle, see De mort. pers. chap. 45 sq.
 Lactantius is considerate enough to accord Licinius the honor of a
 divine vision, that he may not be behind his imperial colleague
 Constantine; and he is pious enough to ascribe the victory wholly to
 the divine aid vouchsafed in response to the prayers of Licinius and
 his soldiers.

 [2781] The word Licinius is omitted by Laemmer and Heinichen, but
 without sufficient warrant, for it is found in nearly all the mss.

 [2782] Lactantius (ibid. chap. 47) informs us that Maximin's flight was
 so rapid that he reached Nicomedia, which was 160 miles from
 Adrianople, on the evening of the day following the battle. As Gibbon
 remarks, "The incredible speed which Maximin exerted in his flight is
 much more celebrated than his prowess in battle."

 [2783] Psa. xxxiii. 16-19

 [2784] The final toleration edict of Maximin must have been issued very
 soon after his defeat, and its occasion is plain enough. If he were to
 oppose Licinius successfully, he must secure the loyalty of all his
 subjects, and this could be done only by granting the Christians full
 toleration. He could see plainly enough that Licinius' religious policy
 was a success in securing the allegiance of his subjects, and he found
 himself compelled in self-defense to pursue a similar course,
 distasteful as it was to him. There is no sign that he had any other
 motive in taking this step. Religious considerations seem to have had
 nothing to do with it; he was doubtless as much of a pagan as ever. The
 edict itself is composed in an admirable vein. As Mason remarks,
 "Maximin made the concession with so much dignity and grace, that it is
 impossible to help wishing that his language were truer." As in the
 previous decree, he indulges his passion for lying without restraint;
 but, unlike that one, the present edict is straightforward and
 consistent throughout, and grants the Christians full liberty in the
 most unequivocal terms.

 [2785] Maximin's death took place at Tarsus (according to De mort.
 pers. chap. 49), and apparently within a few weeks after his defeat at
 Adrianople and the publication of his edict of toleration. The reports
 of his death are somewhat conflicting. Zosimus and the epitomist of
 Victor say merely that he died a natural death; Lactantius tells us
 that he took poison; while Eusebius in § 14 sq. gives us a horrible
 account of his last sickness which, according to him, was marked, to
 say the least, with some rather remarkable symptoms. Mason facetiously
 remarks that Eusebius seems to be thinking of a spontaneous combustion.
 It was quite the fashion in the early Church to tell dreadful tales in
 connection with the deaths of the persecutors, but in the present case
 exaggeration is hardly necessary, for it would seem from Lactantius'
 account, that he died not of poison, as he states, but of delirium
 tremens. As Mason remarks, "It is probable that Maximin died of nothing
 worse than a natural death. But the death which was natural to him was
 the most dreadful perhaps that men can die. Maximin was known as an
 habitual drunkard; and in his dying delirium he is said to have cried
 out that he saw God, with assessors, all in white robes, judging him."

 [2786] See chap. 9, note 24.

 [2787] i.e. the epistle addressed to Sabinus, and quoted in the
 previous chapter, which was written toward the end of 312 (see that
 chapter, note 18).

 [2788] See above, chap. 7.

 Chapter XI.--The Final Destruction of the Enemies of Religion.

 1. Thus when Maximinus, who alone had remained of the enemies of
 religion [2789] and had appeared the worst of them all, was put out of
 the way, the renovation of the churches from their foundations was
 begun by the grace of God the Ruler of all, and the word of Christ,
 shining unto the glory of the God of the universe, obtained greater
 freedom than before, while the impious enemies of religion were covered
 with extremest shame and dishonor.

 2. For Maximinus himself, being first pronounced by the emperors a
 common enemy, was declared by public proclamations to be a most
 impious, execrable, and God-hating tyrant. And of the portraits which
 had been set up in every city in honor of him or of his children, some
 were thrown down from their places to the ground, and torn in pieces;
 while the faces of others were obliterated by daubing them with black
 paint. And the statues which had been erected to his honor were
 likewise overthrown and broken, and lay exposed to the laughter and
 sport of those who wished to insult and abuse them.

 3. Then also all the honors of the other enemies of religion were taken
 away, and all those who sided with Maximinus were slain, especially
 those who had been honored by him with high offices in reward for their
 flattery, and had behaved insolently toward our doctrine.

 4. Such an one was Peucetius, [2790] the dearest of his companions, who
 had been honored and rewarded by him above all, who had been consul a
 second and third time, and had been appointed by him chief minister;
 [2791] and Culcianus, [2792] who had likewise advanced through every
 grade of office, and was also celebrated for his numberless executions
 of Christians in Egypt; [2793] and besides these not a few others, by
 whose agency especially the tyranny of Maximinus had been confirmed and
 extended.

 5. And Theotecnus [2794] also was summoned by justice which by no means
 overlooked his deeds against the Christians. For when the statue had
 been set up by him at Antioch, [2795] he appeared to be in the happiest
 state, and was already made a governor by Maximinus.

 6. But Licinius, coming down to the city of Antioch, made a search for
 impostors, and tortured the prophets and priests of the newly erected
 statue, asking them for what reason they practiced their deception.
 They, under the stress of torture, were unable longer to conceal the
 matter, and declared that the whole deceptive mystery had been devised
 by the art of Theotecnus. Therefore, after meting out to all of them
 just judgment, he first put Theotecnus himself to death, and then his
 confederates in the imposture, with the severest possible tortures.

 7. To all these were added also the children [2796] of Maximinus, whom
 he had already made sharers in the imperial dignity, by placing their
 names on tablets and statues. And the relatives of the tyrant, who
 before had been boastful and had in their pride oppressed all men,
 suffered the same punishments with those who have been already
 mentioned, as well as the extremest disgrace. For they had not received
 instruction, neither did they know and understand the exhortation given
 in the Holy Word:

 8. "Put not your trust in princes, nor in the sons of men, in whom
 there is no salvation; his spirit shall go forth and return to his
 earth; in that day all their thoughts perish." [2797]

 9. The impious ones having been thus removed, the government was
 preserved firm and undisputed for Constantine and Licinius, to whom it
 fittingly belonged. They, having first of all cleansed the world of
 hostility to the Divine Being, conscious of the benefits which he had
 conferred upon them, showed their love of virtue and of God, and their
 piety and gratitude to the Deity, by their ordinance in behalf of the
 Christians. [2798]

 [2789] Maximian died in 310 (see above, Bk. VIII. chap. 13, note 23),
 Galerius in 311 (see ibid. chap. 16, note 5), Maxentius in 312 (see
 above, chap. 9, note 7), and Diocletian early in 313 (see Bk. VIII.
 App. note 3).

 [2790] Of this Peucetius (Rufinus Peucedius) we know only what is told
 us here. Valesius says: "The name is to be rendered Picentius, a name
 which was borne by a certain calumniator in the time of Constantine, as
 is stated by Zosimus at the end of his second book. The Latins, indeed,
 call them Picentes whom the Greeks call Puketious."

 [2791] ton katholou logon ?parchos, apparently equivalent to the phrase
 epi ton katholou logon, used in Bk. VII. chap. 10, §5. On its
 significance, see the note on that passage, and cf. Valesius' note ad
 locum.

 [2792] This same Culcianus appears in the Acts of St. Phileas of Thmuis
 (Ruinart, p. 434 sq.; see the extract printed in Mason, p. 290 sq.) as
 the magistrate or governor under whom Phileas suffered in Thebais. He
 is doubtless to be identified, as Valesius remarks, with Culeianus
 (Kouleianos) mentioned by Epiphanius (Hær. LXVIII. 1) as governor of
 Thebais at the time of the rise of the Meletian schism, while Hierocles
 was governor of Alexandria.

 [2793] Culcianus seems to have been governor of Thebais (where Phileas
 suffered, according to Bk. VIII. chap. 9), not of Egypt. Possibly
 Eusebius employs the word Egypt in its general sense, as including
 Thebais.

 [2794] On Theotecnus, see above, chap. 2, note 4.

 [2795] See chap. 3.

 [2796] Lactantius (De mort. pers. chap. 50) tells us that Maximin left
 a wife and two children, a boy eight years old, named Maximus, and a
 daughter seven years old who was betrothed to Candidianus.

 [2797] Ps. cxlvi. 3, 4.

 [2798] See below, Bk. X. chap. 5.

 Book X.

 Chapter I.--The Peace granted us by God.

 1. Thanks for all things be given unto God the Omnipotent Ruler and
 King of the universe, and the greatest thanks to Jesus Christ the
 Saviour and Redeemer of our souls, through whom we pray that peace may
 be always preserved for us firm and undisturbed by external troubles
 and by troubles of the mind.

 2. Since in accordance with thy wishes, my most holy Paulinus, [2799]
 we have added the tenth book of the Church History to those which have
 preceded, [2800] we will inscribe it to thee, proclaiming thee as the
 seal of the whole work; and we will fitly add in a perfect number the
 perfect panegyric upon the restoration of the churches, [2801] obeying
 the Divine Spirit which exhorts us in the following words:

 3. "Sing unto the Lord a new song, for he hath done marvelous things.
 His right hand and his holy arm hath saved him. The Lord hath made
 known his salvation, his righteousness hath he revealed in the presence
 of the nations." [2802]

 4. And in accordance with the utterance which commands us to sing the
 new song, let us proceed to show that, after those terrible and gloomy
 spectacles which we have described, [2803] we are now permitted to see
 and celebrate such things as many truly righteous men and martyrs of
 God before us desired to see upon earth and did not see, and to hear
 and did not hear. [2804]

 5. But they, hastening on, obtained far better things, [2805] being
 carried to heaven and the paradise of divine pleasure. But,
 acknowledging that even these things are greater than we deserve, we
 have been astonished at the grace manifested by the author of the great
 gifts, and rightly do we admire him, worshiping him with the whole
 power of our souls, and testifying to the truth of those recorded
 utterances, in which it is said, "Come and see the works of the Lord,
 the wonders which he hath done upon the earth; he removeth wars to the
 ends of the world, he shall break the bow and snap the spear in sunder,
 and shall burn the shields with fire." [2806]

 6. Rejoicing in these things which have been clearly fulfilled in our
 day, let us proceed with our account.

 7. The whole race of God's enemies was destroyed in the manner
 indicated, [2807] and was thus suddenly swept from the sight of men. So
 that again a divine utterance had its fulfillment: "I have seen the
 impious highly exalted and raising himself like the cedars of Lebanon
 and I have passed by, and behold, he was not and I have sought his
 place, and it could not be found." [2808]

 8. And finally a bright and splendid day, overshadowed by no cloud,
 illuminated with beams of heavenly light the churches of Christ
 throughout the entire world. And not even those without our communion
 [2809] were prevented from sharing in the same blessings, or at least
 from coming under their influence and enjoying a part of the benefits
 bestowed upon us by God. [2810]

 [2799] Paulinus, bishop of Tyre, became afterward bishop of Antioch, as
 we are told by Eusebius, Contra Marcellum, I. 4, and by Philostorgius,
 H. E. III. 15. According to Jerome's Chron, year of Abr. 2345, he was
 the successor of Philogonius and the predecessor of Eustathius in the
 episcopate of Antioch. He was still alive when Eusebius completed his
 History, that is, at least as late as 323 (see above, p. 45), but he
 was already dead when the Council of Nicæa met; for Eustathius was at
 that time bishop of Antioch (see e.g. Sozomen, H. E. I. 17, Theodoret,
 H. E. I. 7, and the Acts of the Council of Nicæa, ed. Labbei et
 Cossartii, I. p. 51), and Zeno, bishop of Tyre (see the Acts of the
 Nicene Council, ibid.). Philostorgius (ibid.) informs us that he became
 bishop of Antioch but six months before his death, and there is no
 reason to doubt the statement. Eusebius speaks of him in the highest
 terms, both here and in his Contra Marcellum, and it was at the
 dedication of his church in Tyre that he delivered the panegyric
 oration quoted in chap. 4, below. He is claimed as a sympathizer by
 Arius in his epistle to Eusebius of Nicomedia (Theodoret, H. E. I. 5),
 and that he accepted Arius' tenets is implied by Eusebius of Nicomedia,
 who, however, feels obliged to admonish him for not showing greater
 zeal in the support of the cause (see this epistle quoted by Theodoret,
 H. E. I. 6). This is the extent of our information in regard to him.

 [2800] On the date of the composition of the tenth book of the History,
 and its relation to the earlier books, see above, p. 45.

 [2801] eikotos d' en arithmo telei& 251; ton teleion entautha kai
 panegurikon tes ton ekklesion ananeoseos logon katat?xomen. The meaning
 of this sentence is very obscure. Valesius translates: Nec absurde ut
 opinor, absolutam omnibus numeris orationem panegyricam de ecclesiarum
 instauratione hic in perfecto numero collocabimus. Stroth, followed by
 Closs, renders: "Mit Recht werden wir hier auch eine vollständige
 feierliche Rede, von der Wiedererneuerung der Kirchen, als einen
 ordentlichen Theil miteinrücken." Crusè reads: "Justly, indeed, shall
 we here subjoin in a perfect number a complete discourse and panegyric
 on the renovation of the churches." The "perfect number" seems to refer
 to the number of the book (the number ten being commonly so called in
 ancient times), to which he has referred in the previous clause. Could
 we regard the "perfect panegyric" as referring to the book as a whole,
 as Crusè does, the sentence would be somewhat clearer; but the phrase
 seems to be a plain reference to the oration given in chap. 4,
 especially since Eusebius does not say tes ekklesias, but ton ekklesi&
 242;n, as in the title of that oration. I have preserved the play of
 words, telei& 251;--teleion, in order to bring out Eusebius' thought
 more clearly, but it must be remarked that the word teleion does not
 imply praise of the quality of his oration on the author's part. It is
 used rather in the sense of complete or final, because it celebrates a
 completed work, as the tenth book completes his History, and thus
 crowns the whole.

 [2802] Psa. xcviii. 1, 2.

 [2803] Literally, "spectacles and narratives" (opseis te kai
 diegeseis).

 [2804] Cf. Matt. xiii. 17.

 [2805] Cf. Phil. i. 23

 [2806] Psa. xlvi. 8, 9.

 [2807] See chaps. 10 and 11 of the preceding book.

 [2808] Psa. xxxvii. 35, 36.

 [2809] tois ?xothen tou kath' hemas thi?sou.

 [2810] By the edict of Constantine and Licinius full religious liberty
 was granted, not only to the Christians, but to all men of whatever
 creed or cult.

 Chapter II.--The Restoration of the Churches.

 1. All men, then, were freed from the oppression of the tyrants, and
 being released from the former ills, one in one way and another in
 another acknowledged the defender of the pious to be the only true God.
 And we especially who placed our hopes in the Christ of God had
 unspeakable gladness, and a certain inspired joy bloomed for all of us,
 when we saw every place which shortly before had been desolated by the
 impieties of the tyrants reviving as if from a long and death-fraught
 pestilence, and temples again rising from their foundations to an
 immense height, and receiving a splendor far greater than that of the
 old ones which had been destroyed.

 2. But the supreme rulers also confirmed to us still more extensively
 the munificence of God by repeated ordinances in behalf of the
 Christians; and personal letters of the emperor were sent to the
 bishops, with honors and gifts of money. It may not be unfitting to
 insert these documents, translated from the Roman into the Greek
 tongue, at the proper place in this book, [2811] as in a sacred tablet,
 that they may remain as a memorial to all who shall come after us.

 [2811] See below, chaps. 5-7.

 Chapter III.--The Dedications in Every Place.

 1. After this was seen the sight which had been desired and prayed for
 by us all; feasts of dedication in the cities and consecrations of the
 newly built houses of prayer took place, bishops assembled, foreigners
 came together from abroad, mutual love was exhibited between people and
 people, the members of Christ's body were united in complete harmony.

 2. Then was fulfilled the prophetic utterance which mystically foretold
 what was to take place: "Bone to bone and joint to joint," [2812] and
 whatever was truly announced in enigmatic expressions in the inspired
 passage.

 3. And there was one energy of the Divine Spirit pervading all the
 members, and one soul in all, and the same eagerness of faith, and one
 hymn from all in praise of the Deity. Yea, and perfect services were
 conducted by the prelates, the sacred rites being solemnized, and the
 majestic institutions of the Church observed, [2813] here with the
 singing of psalms and with the reading of the words committed to us by
 God, and there with the performance of divine and mystic services; and
 the mysterious symbols of the Saviour's passion were dispensed.

 4. At the same time people of every age, both male and female, with all
 the power of the mind gave honor unto God, the author of their
 benefits, in prayers and thanksgiving, with a joyful mind and soul. And
 every one of the bishops present, each to the best of his ability,
 delivered panegyric orations, adding luster to the assembly.

 [2812] Ezek. xxxvii. 7.

 [2813] These sentences are excellent examples of Eusebius' rhetorical
 style, which marks the greater part of this tenth book. My endeavor has
 been to adhere as closely as possible to the original; and yet there
 are cases in which it is quite out of the question to give a literal
 translation without violating all grammatical laws, and in which the
 sense can be reproduced only by paraphrasing. The present sentence runs
 nai men kai ton proegoumenon enteleis threskeiai, hierourgiai te ton
 hieromenon, kai theoprepeis ekklesias thesmoi.

 Chapter IV.--Panegyric on the Splendor of Affairs.

 1. A certain one of those of moderate talent, [2814] who had composed a
 discourse, stepped forward in the presence of many pastors who were
 assembled as if for a church gathering, and while they attended quietly
 and decently, he addressed himself as follows to one who was in all
 things a most excellent bishop and beloved of God, [2815] through whose
 zeal the temple in Tyre, which was the most splendid in Phoenicia, had
 been erected.

 Panegyric upon the building of the churches, addressed to Paulinus,
 Bishop of Tyre.

 2. "Friends and priests of God who are clothed in the sacred gown and
 adorned with the heavenly crown of glory, the inspired unction and the
 sacerdotal garment of the Holy Spirit; and thou, [2816] oh pride of
 God's new holy temple, endowed by him with the wisdom of age, and yet
 exhibiting costly works and deeds of youthful and flourishing virtue,
 to whom God himself, who embraces the entire world, has granted the
 distinguished honor of building and renewing this earthly house to
 Christ, his only begotten and first-born Word, and to his holy and
 divine bride; [2817] --

 3. one might call thee a new Beseleel, [2818] the architect of a divine
 tabernacle, or Solomon, king of a new and much better Jerusalem, or
 also a new Zerubabel, who added a much greater glory than the former to
 the temple of God; [2819] --

 4. and you also, oh nurslings of the sacred flock of Christ, habitation
 of good words, school of wisdom, and august and pious auditory of
 religion: [2820]

 5. It was long ago permitted us to raise hymns and songs to God, when
 we learned from hearing the Divine Scriptures read the marvelous signs
 of God and the benefits conferred upon men by the Lord's wondrous
 deeds, being taught to say Oh God! we have heard with our ears, our
 fathers have told us the work which thou didst in their days, in days
 of old.' [2821]

 6. But now as we no longer perceive the lofty arm [2822] and the
 celestial right hand of our all-gracious God and universal King by
 hearsay merely or report, but observe so to speak in very deed and with
 our own eyes that the declarations recorded long ago are faithful and
 true, it is permitted us to raise a second hymn of triumph and to sing
 with loud voice, and say, As we have heard, so have we seen; in the
 city of the Lord of hosts, in the city of our God.' [2823]

 7. And in what city but in this newly built and God-constructed one,
 which is a church of the living God, a pillar and foundation of the
 truth,' [2824] concerning which also another divine oracle thus
 proclaims, Glorious things have been spoken of thee, oh city of God.'
 [2825] Since the all-gracious God has brought us together to it,
 through the grace of his Only-Begotten, let every one of those who have
 been summoned sing with loud voice and say, I was glad when they said
 unto me, we shall go unto the house of the Lord,' [2826] and Lord, I
 have loved the beauty of thy house and the place where thy glory
 dwelleth.' [2827]

 8. And let us not only one by one, but all together, with one spirit
 and one soul, honor him and cry aloud, saying, Great is the Lord and
 greatly to be praised in the city of our God, in his holy mountain.'
 [2828] For he is truly great, and great is his house, lofty and
 spacious and comely in beauty above the sons of men.' [2829] Great is
 the Lord who alone doeth wonderful things'; [2830] great is he who
 doeth great things and things past finding out, glorious and marvelous
 things which cannot be numbered'; [2831] great is he who changeth times
 and seasons, who exalteth and debaseth kings'; [2832] who raiseth up
 the poor from the earth and lifteth up the needy from the dunghill.'
 [2833] He hath put down princes from their thrones and hath exalted
 them of low degree from the earth. The hungry he hath filled with good
 things and the arms of the proud he hath broken.' [2834]

 9. Not only to the faithful, but also to unbelievers, has he confirmed
 the record of ancient events; he that worketh miracles, he that doeth
 great things, the Master of all, the Creator of the whole world, the
 omnipotent, the all-merciful, the one and only God. To him let us sing
 the new song, [2835] supplying in thought, [2836] To him who alone
 doeth great wonders: for his mercy endureth forever'; [2837] To him
 which smote great kings, and slew famous kings: for his mercy endureth
 forever'; [2838] For the Lord remembered us in our low estate and
 delivered us from our adversaries.' [2839]

 10. And let us never cease to cry aloud in these words to the Father of
 the universe. And let us always honor him with our mouth who is the
 second cause of our benefits, the instructor in divine knowledge, the
 teacher of the true religion, the destroyer of the impious, the slayer
 of tyrants, the reformer of life, Jesus, the Saviour of us who were in
 despair.

 11. For he alone, as the only all-gracious Son of an all-gracious
 Father, in accordance with the purpose of his Father's benevolence, has
 willingly put on the nature of us who lay prostrate in corruption, and
 like some excellent physician, who for the sake of saving them that are
 ill, examines their sufferings, handles their foul sores, and reaps
 pain for himself from the miseries of another, [2840] so us who were
 not only diseased and afflicted with terrible ulcers and wounds already
 mortified, but were even lying among the dead, he hath saved for
 himself from the very jaws of death. For none other of those in heaven
 had such power as without harm [2841] to minister to the salvation of
 so many.

 12. But he alone having reached our deep corruption, he alone having
 taken upon himself our labors, he alone having suffered the punishments
 due for our impieties, having recovered us who were not half dead
 merely, but were already in tombs and sepulchers, and altogether foul
 and offensive, saves us, both anciently and now, by his beneficent
 zeal, beyond the expectation of any one, even of ourselves, and imparts
 liberally of the Father's benefits,--he who is the giver of life and
 light, our great Physician and King and Lord, the Christ of God.

 13. For then when the whole human race lay buried in gloomy night and
 in depths of darkness through the deceitful arts of guilty demons and
 the power of God-hating spirits, by his simple appearing he loosed once
 for all the fast-bound cords of our impieties by the rays of his light,
 even as wax is melted.

 14. But when malignant envy and the evil-loving demon well-nigh burst
 with anger at such grace and kindness, and turned against us all his
 death-dealing forces, and when, at first, like a dog gone mad which
 gnashes his teeth at the stones thrown at him, and pours out his rage
 against his assailants upon the inanimate missiles, he leveled his
 ferocious madness at the stones of the sanctuaries and at the lifeless
 material of the houses, and desolated the churches,--at least as he
 supposed,--and then emitted terrible hissings and snake-like sounds,
 now by the threats of impious tyrants, and again by the blasphemous
 edicts of profane rulers, vomiting forth death, moreover, and infecting
 with his deleterious and soul-destroying poisons the souls captured by
 him, and almost slaying them by his death-fraught sacrifices of dead
 idols, and causing every beast in the form of man and every kind of
 savage to assault us--then, indeed, the Angel of the great Council,'
 [2842] the great Captain [2843] of God after the mightiest soldiers of
 his kingdom had displayed sufficient exercise through patience and
 endurance in everything, suddenly appeared anew, and blotted out and
 annihilated his enemies and foes, so that they seemed never to have had
 even a name.

 15. But his friends and relatives he raised to the highest glory, in
 the presence not only of all men, but also of celestial powers, of sun
 and moon and stars, and of the whole heaven and earth, so that now, as
 has never happened before, the supreme rulers, conscious of the honor
 which they have received from him, spit upon the faces of dead idols,
 trample upon the unhallowed rites of demons, make sport of the ancient
 delusion handed down from their fathers, and acknowledge only one God,
 the common benefactor of all, themselves included.

 16. And they confess Christ, the Son of God, universal King of all, and
 proclaim him Saviour on monuments, [2844] imperishably recording in
 imperial letters, in the midst of the city which rules over the earth,
 his righteous deeds and his victories over the impious. Thus Jesus
 Christ our Saviour is the only one from all eternity who has been
 acknowledged, even by those highest in the earth, not as a common king
 among men, but as a trite son of the universal God, and who has been
 worshiped as very God, [2845] and that rightly.

 17. For what king that ever lived attained such virtue as to fill the
 ears and tongues of all men upon earth with his own name? What king,
 after ordaining such pious and wise laws, has extended them from one
 end of the earth to the other, so that they are perpetually read in the
 hearing of all men?

 18. Who has abrogated barbarous and savage customs of uncivilized
 nations by his gentle and most philanthropic laws? Who, being attacked
 for entire ages by all, has shown such superhuman virtue as to flourish
 daily, and remain young throughout his life?

 19. Who has founded a nation which of old was not even heard of, but
 which now is not concealed in some corner of the earth, but is spread
 abroad everywhere under the sun? Who has so fortified his soldiers with
 the arms of piety that their souls, being firmer than adamant, shine
 brilliantly in the contests with their opponents?

 20. What king prevails to such an extent, and even after death leads on
 his soldiers, and sets up trophies over his enemies, and fills every
 place, country and city, Greek and barbarian, with his royal dwellings,
 even divine temples with their consecrated oblations, like this very
 temple with its superb adornments and votive offerings, which are
 themselves so truly great and majestic, worthy of wonder and
 admiration, and clear signs of the sovereignty of our Saviour? For now,
 too, he spake, and they were made; he commanded, and they were
 created.' [2846] For what was there to resist the nod of the universal
 King and Governor and Word of God himself? [2847]

 21. "A special discourse would be needed accurately to survey and
 explain all this; and also to describe how great the zeal of the
 laborers is regarded by him who is celebrated as divine, [2848] who
 looks upon the living temple which we all constitute, and surveys the
 house, composed of living and moving stones, which is well and surely
 built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, the chief
 cornerstone being Jesus Christ himself, who has been rejected not only
 by the builders of that ancient building which no longer stands, but
 also by the builders--evil architects of evil works--of the structure,
 which is composed of the mass of men and still endures. [2849] But the
 Father has approved him both then and now, and has made him the head of
 the corner of this our common church.

 22. Who that beholds this living temple of the living God formed of
 ourselves--this greatest and truly divine sanctuary, I say, whose
 inmost shrines are invisible to the multitude and are truly holy and a
 holy of holies--would venture to declare it? Who is able even to look
 within the sacred enclosure, except the great High Priest of all, to
 whom alone it is permitted to fathom the mysteries of every rational
 soul?

 23. But perhaps it is granted to another, to one only, to be second
 after him in the same work, namely, to the commander of this army whom
 the first and great High Priest himself has honored with the second
 place in this sanctuary, the shepherd of your divine flock who has
 obtained your people by the allotment and the judgment of the Father,
 as if he had appointed him his own servant and interpreter, a new Aaron
 or Melchizedec, made like the Son of God, remaining and continually
 preserved by him in accordance with the united prayers of all of you.

 24. To him therefore alone let it be granted, if not in the first
 place, at least in the second after the first and greatest High Priest,
 to observe and supervise the inmost state of your souls,--to him who by
 experience and length of time has accurately proved each one, and who
 by his zeal and care has disposed you all in pious conduct and
 doctrine, and is better able than any one else to give an account,
 adequate to the facts, of those things which he himself has
 accomplished with the Divine assistance.

 25. As to our first and great High Priest, it is said, [2850]
 Whatsoever he seeth the Father doing those things likewise the Son also
 doeth.' [2851] So also this one, [2852] looking up to him as to the
 first teacher, with pure eyes of the mind, using as archetypes
 whatsoever things he seeth him doing, produceth images of them, making
 them so far as is possible in the same likeness, in nothing inferior to
 that Beseleel, whom God himself filled with the spirit of wisdom and
 understanding' [2853] and with other technical and scientific
 knowledge, and called to be the maker of the temple constructed after
 heavenly types given in symbols.

 26. Thus this one also bearing in his own soul the image of the whole
 Christ, the Word, the Wisdom, the Light, has formed this magnificent
 temple of the highest God, corresponding to the pattern of the greater
 as a visible to an invisible, it is impossible to say with what
 greatness of soul, with what wealth and liberality of mind, and with
 what emulation on the part of all of you, shown in the magnanimity of
 the contributors who have ambitiously striven in no way to be left
 behind by him in the execution of the same purpose. And this
 place,--for this deserves to be mentioned first of all,--which had been
 covered with all sorts of rubbish by the artifices of our enemies he
 did not overlook, nor did he yield to the wickedness of those who had
 brought about that condition of things, although he might have chosen
 some other place, for many other sites were available in the city,
 where he would have had less labor, and been free from trouble.

 27. But having first aroused himself to the work, and then strengthened
 the whole people with zeal, and formed them all into one great body, he
 fought the first contest. For he thought that this church, which had
 been especially besieged by the enemy, which had first suffered and
 endured the same persecutions with us and for us, like a mother bereft
 of her children, should rejoice with us in the signal favor of the
 all-merciful God.

 28. For when the Great Shepherd had driven away the wild animals and
 wolves and every cruel and savage beast, and, as the divine oracles
 say, had broken the jaws of the lions,' [2854] he thought good to
 collect again her children in the same place, and in the most righteous
 manner he set up the fold of her flock, to put to shame the enemy and
 avenger,' [2855] and to refute the impious daring of the enemies of
 God. [2856]

 29. And now they are not,--the haters of God,--for they never were.
 After they had troubled and been troubled for a little time, they
 suffered the fitting punishment, and brought themselves and their
 friends and their relatives to total destruction, so that the
 declarations inscribed of old in sacred records have been proved true
 by facts. In these declarations the divine word truly says among other
 things the following concerning them:

 30. The wicked have drawn out the sword, they have bent their bow, to
 slay the righteous in heart; let their sword enter into their own heart
 and their bows be broken.' [2857] And again: Their memorial is perished
 with a sound' [2858] and their name hast thou blotted out forever and
 ever'; [2859] for when they also were in trouble they cried out and
 there was none to save: unto the Lord, and he heard them not.' [2860]
 But their feet were bound together, and they fell, but we have arisen
 and stand upright.' [2861] And that which was announced beforehand in
 these words,--O Lord, in thy city thou shalt set at naught their
 image,' [2862] --has been shown to be true to the eyes of all.

 31. But having waged war like the giants against God, [2863] they died
 in this way. But she that was desolate and rejected by men received the
 consummation which we behold in consequence of her patience toward God,
 so that the prophecy of Isaiah was spoken of her:

 32. Rejoice, thirsty desert, let the desert rejoice and blossom as the
 lily, and the desert places shall blossom and be glad.' [2864] Be
 strengthened, ye weak hands and feeble knees. Be of good courage, ye
 feeble-hearted, in your minds; be strong, fear not. Behold our God
 recompenseth judgment and will recompense, he will come and save us.'
 [2865] For,' he says, in the wilderness water has broken out, and a
 pool in thirsty ground, and the dry land shall be watered meadows, and
 in the thirsty ground there shall be springs of water.' [2866]

 33. These things which were prophesied long ago have been recorded in
 sacred books; but no longer are they transmitted to us by hearsay
 merely, but in facts. This desert, this dry land, this widowed and
 deserted one, whose gates they cut down with axes like wood in a
 forest, whom they broke down with hatchet and hammer,' [2867] whose
 books also they destroyed, [2868] burning with fire the sanctuary of
 God, and profaning unto the ground the habitation of his name,' [2869]
 whom all that passed by upon the way plucked, and whose fences they
 broke down, whom the boar out of the wood ravaged, and on which the
 savage wild beast fed,' [2870] now by the wonderful power of Christ,
 when he wills it, has become like a lily. For at that time also she was
 chastened at his nod as by a careful father; for whom the Lord loveth
 he chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom he receiveth.' [2871]

 34. Then after being chastened in a measure, according to the
 necessities of the case, she is commanded to rejoice anew; and she
 blossoms as a lily and exhales her divine odor among all men. For,' it
 is said, water hath broken out in the wilderness,' [2872] the fountain
 of the saving bath of divine regeneration. [2873] And now she, who a
 little before was a desert, has become watered meadows, and springs of
 water have gushed forth in a thirsty land.' [2874] The hands which
 before were weak' have become truly strong'; [2875] and these works are
 great and convincing proofs of strong hands. The knees, also, which
 before were feeble and infirm,' recovering their wonted strength, are
 moving straight forward in the path of divine knowledge, and hastening
 to the kindred flock [2876] of the all-gracious Shepherd.

 35. And if there are any whose souls have been stupefied by the threats
 of the tyrants, not even they are passed by as incurable by the saving
 Word; but he heals them also and urges them on to receive divine
 comfort, saying, Be ye comforted, ye who are faint-hearted; be ye
 strengthened, fear not.' [2877]

 36. This our new and excellent Zerubabel, having heard the word which
 announced beforehand, that she who had been made a desert on account of
 God should enjoy these things, after the bitter captivity and the
 abomination of desolation, did not overlook the dead body; but first of
 all with prayers and supplications propitiated the Father with the
 common consent of all of you, and invoking the only one that giveth
 life to the dead as his ally and fellow-worker, raised her that was
 fallen, after purifying and freeing her from her ills. And he clothed
 her not with the ancient garment, but with such an one as he had again
 learned from the sacred oracles, which say clearly, And the latter
 glory of this house shall be greater than the former.' [2878]

 37. Thus, enclosing a much larger space, he fortified the outer court
 with a wall surrounding the whole, which should serve as a most secure
 bulwark for the entire edifice. [2879]

 38. And he raised and spread out a great and lofty vestibule toward the
 rays of the rising sun, [2880] and furnished those standing far without
 the sacred enclosure a full view of those within, almost turning the
 eyes of those who were strangers to the faith, to the entrances, so
 that no one could pass by without being impressed by the memory of the
 former desolation and of the present incredible transformation. His
 hope was that such an one being impressed by this might be attracted
 and be induced to enter by the very sight.

 39. But when one comes within the gates he does not permit him to enter
 the sanctuary immediately, with impure and unwashed feet; but leaving
 as large a space as possible between the temple and the outer entrance,
 he has surrounded and adorned it with four transverse cloisters, making
 a quadrangular space with pillars rising on every side, which he has
 joined with lattice-work screens of wood, rising to a suitable height;
 and he has left an open space [2881] in the middle, so that the sky can
 be seen, and the free air bright in the rays of the sun.

 40. Here he has placed symbols of sacred purifications, setting up
 fountains opposite the temple which furnish an abundance of water
 wherewith those who come within the sanctuary may purify themselves.
 This is the first halting-place of those who enter; and it furnishes at
 the same time a beautiful and splendid scene to every one, and to those
 who still need elementary instruction a fitting station.

 41. But passing by this spectacle, he has made open entrances to the
 temple with many other vestibules within, placing three doors on one
 side, likewise facing the rays of the sun. The one in the middle,
 adorned with plates of bronze, iron bound, and beautifully embossed, he
 has made much higher and broader than the others, as if he were making
 them guards for it as for a queen.

 42. In the same way, arranging the number of vestibules for the
 corridors on each side of the whole temple, he has made above them
 various openings into the building, for the purpose of admitting more
 light, adorning them with very fine wood-carving. But the royal house
 he has furnished with more beautiful and splendid materials, using
 unstinted liberality in his disbursements.

 43. It seems to me superfluous to describe here in detail the length
 and breadth of the building, its splendor and its majesty surpassing
 description, and the brilliant appearance of the work, its lofty
 pinnacles reaching to the heavens, and the costly cedars of Lebanon
 above them, which the divine oracle has not omitted to mention, saying,
 The trees of the Lord shall rejoice and the cedars of Lebanon which he
 hath planted.' [2882]

 44. Why need I now describe the skillful architectural arrangement and
 the surpassing beauty of each part, when the testimony of the eye
 renders instruction through the ear superfluous? For when he had thus
 completed the temple, he provided it with lofty thrones in honor of
 those who preside, and in addition with seats arranged in proper order
 throughout the whole building, and finally placed in the middle [2883]
 the holy of holies, the altar, and, that it might be inaccessible to
 the multitude, enclosed it with wooden lattice-work, accurately wrought
 with artistic carving, presenting a wonderful sight to the beholders.

 45. And not even the pavement was neglected by him; for this too he
 adorned with beautiful marble of every variety. Then finally he passed
 on to the parts without the temple, providing spacious exedræ and
 buildings [2884] on each side, which were joined to the basilica, and
 communicated with the entrances to the interior of the structure. These
 were erected by our most peaceful [2885] Solomon, the maker of the
 temple of God, for those who still needed purification and sprinkling
 by water and the Holy Spirit, so that the prophecy quoted above is no
 longer a word merely, but a fact; for now it has also come to pass that
 in truth the latter glory of this house is greater than the former.'
 [2886]

 46. For it was necessary and fitting that as her shepherd and Lord had
 once tasted death for her, and after his suffering had changed that
 vile body which he assumed in her behalf into a splendid and glorious
 body, leading the very flesh which had been delivered [2887] from
 corruption to incorruption, she too should enjoy the dispensations of
 the Saviour. For having received from him the promise of much greater
 things than these, she desires to share uninterruptedly throughout
 eternity with the choir of the angels of light, in the far greater
 glory of regeneration, [2888] in the resurrection of an incorruptible
 body, in the palace of God beyond the heavens, with Christ Jesus
 himself, the universal Benefactor and Saviour.

 47. But for the present, she that was formerly widowed and desolate is
 clothed by the grace of God with these flowers, and is become truly
 like a lily, as the prophecy says, [2889] and having received the
 bridal garment and the crown of beauty, she is taught by Isaiah to
 dance, and to present her thank-offerings unto God the King in reverent
 words.

 48. Let us hear her saying, My soul shall rejoice in the Lord; for he
 hath clothed me with a garment of salvation and with a robe of
 gladness; he hath bedecked me like a bridegroom with a garland, and he
 hath adorned me like a bride with jewels; and like the earth which
 bringeth forth her bud, and like a garden which causeth the things that
 are sown in it to spring forth, thus the Lord God hath caused
 righteousness and praise to spring forth before all the nations.'
 [2890]

 49. In these words she exults. And in similar words the heavenly
 bridegroom, the Word Jesus Christ himself, answers her. Hear the Lord
 saying, Fear not because thou hast been put to shame, neither be thou
 confounded because thou hast been rebuked; for thou shalt forget the
 former shame, and the reproach of thy widowhood shalt thou remember no
 more.' [2891] Not [2892] as a woman deserted and faint-hearted hath the
 Lord called thee, nor as a woman hated from her youth, saith thy God.
 For a small moment have I forsaken thee, but with great mercy will I
 have mercy upon thee; in a little wrath I hid my face from thee, but
 with everlasting mercy will I have mercy upon thee, saith the Lord that
 hath redeemed thee.' [2893]

 50. Awake, awake, thou who hast drunk at the hand of the Lord the cup
 of his fury; for thou hast drunk the cup of ruin, the vessel of my
 wrath, and hast drained it. And there was none to console thee of all
 thy sons whom thou didst bring forth, and there was none to take thee
 by the hand.' [2894] Behold, I have taken out of thine hand the cup of
 ruin, the vessel of my fury, and thou shalt no longer drink it. And I
 will put it into the hands of them that have treated thee unjustly and
 have humbled thee.' [2895]

 51. Awake, awake, put on thy strength, put on thy glory. Shake off the
 dust and arise. Sit thee down, loose the bands of thy neck.' [2896]
 Lift up thine eyes round about and behold thy children gathered
 together; behold they are gathered together and are come to thee. As I
 live, saith the Lord, thou shalt clothe thee with them all as with an
 ornament, and gird thyself with them as with the ornaments of a bride.
 For thy waste and corrupted and ruined places shall now be too narrow
 by reason of those that inhabit thee, and they that swallow thee up
 shall be far from thee.

 52. For thy sons whom thou hast lost shall say in thine ears, The place
 is too narrow for me, give place to me that I may dwell. Then shalt
 thou say in thine heart, Who hath begotten me these? I am childless and
 a widow, and who hath brought up these for me? I was left alone, and
 these, where were they for me?' [2897]

 53. "These are the things which Isaiah foretold; and which were
 anciently recorded concerning us in sacred books and it was necessary
 that we should sometime learn their truthfulness by their fulfillment.

 54. For when the bridegroom, the Word, addressed such language to his
 own bride, the sacred and holy Church, this bridesman, [2898] --when
 she was desolate and lying like a corpse, bereft of hope in the eyes of
 men,--in accordance with the united prayers of all of you, as was
 proper, stretched out your hands and aroused and raised her up at the
 command of God, the universal King, and at the manifestation of the
 power of Jesus Christ; and having raised her he established her as he
 had learned from the description given in the sacred oracles.

 55. This is indeed a very great wonder, passing all admiration,
 especially to those who attend only to the outward appearance; but more
 wonderful than wonders are the archetypes and their mental prototypes
 and divine models; I mean the reproductions of the inspired and
 rational building in our souls.

 56. This the Divine Son himself created after his own image, imparting
 to it everywhere and in all respects the likeness of God, an
 incorruptible nature, incorporeal, rational, free from all earthly
 matter, a being endowed with its own intelligence; and when he had once
 called her forth from non-existence into existence, he made her a holy
 spouse, an all-sacred temple for himself and for the Father. This also
 he clearly declares and confesses in the following words: I will dwell
 in them and will walk in them; and I will be their God, and they shall
 be my people.' [2899] Such is the perfect and purified soul, so made
 from the beginning as to bear the image of the celestial Word.

 57. But when by the envy and zeal of the malignant demon she became, of
 her own voluntary choice, sensual and a lover of evil, the Deity left
 her; and as if bereft of a protector, she became an easy prey and
 readily accessible to those who had long envied her; and being assailed
 by the batteries and machines of her invisible enemies and spiritual
 foes, she suffered a terrible fall, so that not one stone of virtue
 remained upon another in her, but she lay completely dead upon the
 ground, entirely divested of her natural ideas of God.

 58. "But as she, who had been made in the image of God, thus lay
 prostrate, it was not that wild boar from the forest which we see that
 despoiled her, but a certain destroying demon and spiritual wild beasts
 who deceived her with their passions as with the fiery darts of their
 own wickedness, and burned the truly divine sanctuary of God with fire,
 and profaned to the ground the tabernacle of his name. Then burying the
 miserable one with heaps of earth, they destroyed every hope of
 deliverance.

 59. But that divinely bright and saving Word, her protector, after she
 had suffered the merited punishment for her sins, again restored her,
 securing the favor of the all-merciful Father.

 60. Having won over first the souls of the highest rulers, he purified,
 through the agency of those most divinely favored princes, the whole
 earth from all the impious destroyers, and from the terrible and
 God-hating tyrants themselves. Then bringing out into the light those
 who were his friends, who had long before been consecrated to him for
 life, but in the midst, as it were, of a storm of evils, had been
 concealed under his shelter, he honored them worthily with the great
 gifts of the Spirit. And again, by means of them, he cleared out and
 cleaned with spades and mattocks--the admonitory words of doctrine
 [2900] --the souls which a little while before had been covered with
 filth and burdened with every kind of matter and rubbish of impious
 ordinances.

 61. And when he had made the ground of all your minds clean and clear,
 he finally committed it to this all-wise and God-beloved Ruler, who,
 being endowed with judgment and prudence, as well as with other gifts,
 and being able to examine and discriminate accurately the minds of
 those committed to his charge, from the first day, so to speak, down to
 the present, has not ceased to build.

 62. Now he has supplied the brilliant gold, again the refined and
 unalloyed silver, and the precious and costly stones in all of you, so
 that again is fulfilled for you in facts a sacred and mystic prophecy,
 which says, Behold I make thy stone a carbuncle, and thy foundations of
 sapphire, and thy battlements of jasper, and thy gates of crystals, and
 thy wall of chosen stones; and all thy sons shall be taught of God, and
 thy children shall enjoy complete peace; and in righteousness shalt
 thou be built.' [2901]

 63. Building therefore in righteousness, he divided the whole people
 according to their strength. With some he fortified only the outer
 enclosure, walling it up with unfeigned faith; such were the great mass
 of the people who were incapable of bearing a greater structure. Others
 he permitted to enter the building, commanding them to stand at the
 door and act as guides for those who should come in; these may be not
 unfitly compared to the vestibules of the temple. Others he supported
 by the first pillars which are placed without about the quadrangular
 hall, initiating them into the first elements of the letter of the four
 Gospels. Still others he joined together about the basilica on both
 sides; these are the catechumens who are still advancing and
 progressing, and are not far separated from the inmost view of divine
 things granted to the faithful.

 64. Taking from among these the pure souls that have been cleansed like
 gold by divine washing, [2902] he then supports them by pillars, much
 better than those without, made from the inner and mystic teachings of
 the Scripture, and illumines them [2903] by windows.

 65. Adorning the whole temple with a great vestibule of the glory of
 the one universal King and only God, and placing on either side of the
 authority of the Father Christ, and the Holy Spirit as second lights,
 he exhibits abundantly and gloriously throughout the entire building
 the clearness and splendor of the truth of the rest in all its details.
 And having selected from every quarter the living and moving and
 well-prepared stones of the souls, he constructs out of them all the
 great and royal house, splendid and full of light both within and
 without; for not only soul and understanding, but their body also is
 made glorious by the blooming ornament of purity and modesty.

 66. And in this temple there are also thrones, and a great number of
 seats and benches, in all those souls in which sit the Holy Spirit's
 gifts, such as were anciently seen by the sacred apostles, and those
 who were with them, when there appeared unto them tongues parting
 asunder, like as of fire, and sat upon each one of them.' [2904]

 67. But in the leader of all it is reasonable to suppose [2905] that
 Christ himself dwells in his fullness, [2906] and in those that occupy
 the second rank after him, in proportion as each is able to contain the
 power of Christ and of the Holy Spirit. [2907] And the souls of some of
 those, namely, who are committed to each of them for instruction and
 care--may be seats for angels.

 68. But the great and august and unique altar, what else could this be
 than the pure holy of holies of the soul of the common priest of all?
 Standing at the right of it, Jesus himself, the great High Priest of
 the universe, the Only Begotten of God, receives with bright eye and
 extended hand the sweet incense from all, and the bloodless and
 immaterial sacrifices offered in their prayers, and bears them to the
 heavenly Father and God of the universe. And he himself first worships
 him, and alone gives to the Father the reverence which is his due,
 beseeching him also to continue always kind and propitious to us all.

 69. "Such is the great temple which the great Creator of the universe,
 the Word, has built throughout the entire world, making it an
 intellectual image upon earth of those things which lie above the vault
 of heaven, so that throughout the whole creation, including rational
 beings on earth, his Father might be honored and adored.

 70. But the region above the heavens, with the models of earthly things
 which are there, and the so-called Jerusalem above, [2908] and the
 heavenly Mount of Zion, and the supramundane city of the living God, in
 which innumerable choirs of angels and the Church of the first born,
 whose names are written in heaven, [2909] praise their Maker and the
 Supreme Ruler of the universe with hymns of praise unutterable and
 incomprehensible to us,--who that is mortal is able worthily to
 celebrate this? For eye hath not seen nor ear heard, neither have
 entered into the heart of men those things which God hath prepared for
 them that love him.' [2910]

 71. Since we, men, children, and women, small and great, are already in
 part partakers of these things, let us not cease all together, with one
 spirit and one soul, to confess and praise the author of such great
 benefits to us, Who forgiveth all our iniquities, who healeth all our
 diseases, who redeemeth our life from destruction, who crowneth us with
 mercy and compassion, who satisfieth our desires with good things.'
 [2911] For he hath not dealt with us according to our sins, nor
 rewarded us according to our iniquities;' [2912] for as far as the east
 is from the west, so far hath he removed our iniquities from us. Like
 as a father pitieth his own children, so the Lord pitieth them that
 fear him.' [2913]

 72. Rekindling these thoughts in our memories, both now and during all
 time to come, and contemplating in our mind night and day, in every
 hour and with every breath, so to speak, the Author and Ruler of the
 present festival, and of this bright and most splendid day, let us love
 and adore him with every power of the soul. And now rising, let us
 beseech him with loud voice to shelter and preserve us to the end in
 his fold, granting his unbroken and unshaken peace forever, in Christ
 Jesus our Saviour; through whom be the glory unto him forever and ever.
 [2914] Amen."

 [2814] This person was clearly Eusebius himself (see above, p. 11).
 Upon the date of this dedicatory service, at which Eusebius delivered
 the oration given in full in this chapter, see ibid.

 [2815] Paulinus, bishop of Tyre. See above, chap. 1, note 1.

 [2816] i.e. Paulinus.

 [2817] Cf. Rev. xxi. 2

 [2818] beseleel, which is the form found in the LXX. The Hebrew is
 l'ltsv, which the R.V. renders "Bezalel." See Ex. xxxv. 30 sq.

 [2819] See Hag. ii. 9

 [2820] Eusebius addresses first the assembled clergymen in general,
 then Paulinus in particular, and finally the people, calling the latter
 "nurslings," "habitation," "school," "auditory." The significance of
 the words as used by him is plain enough, but their collocation is
 rather remarkable.

 [2821] Psa. xliv. 1.

 [2822] Cf. Ex. vi. 6, et al.

 [2823] Psa. xlviii. 8.

 [2824] 1 Tim. iii. 15.

 [2825] Psa. lxxxvii. 3.

 [2826] Psa. cxxii. 1.

 [2827] Psa. xxvi. 8.

 [2828] Psa. xlviii. 1.

 [2829] Psa. xlv. 2.

 [2830] Psa. cxxxvi. 4.

 [2831] Job ix. 10.

 [2832] Dan. ii. 21.

 [2833] 1 Sam. ii. 8. (Psa. cxiii. 7).

 [2834] Luke i. 52, 53.

 [2835] Cf. Psa. xcvi. 1

 [2836] prosupakouontes. Eusebius seems to use this rather peculiar
 expression because the words of song which he suggests are not the
 words of the "new song" given by the Psalmist, but are taken from other
 parts of the book.

 [2837] Psa. cxxxvi. 4.

 [2838] Ibid. 17.

 [2839] Ibid. 23, 24.

 [2840] It is remarked by Valesius that these words are taken from some
 tragic poet. That they are quoted from an ancient writer is clear
 enough from the Ionic forms which occur (hore, allotriesi, xumphoresi),
 and if a few slight changes be made (kamnonton to kamonton, heneken to
 heineken, men to ta, ep' allotriesi te to allotriesi) the words resolve
 themselves into iambic trimeters:-- tes ton kamonton heineken soterias
 hore ta deina, thing?nei d' aedeon, allotriesi sumphoresin idias
 karpoutai lupas. According to Valesius, Gregory Nazianzen in his first
 Oratio quotes the last verse (kai to ep' allotriais sumphorais idias
 karpousthai lupas, in which there is no trace of the poetical form)
 with the remark hos?phe tis ton par' ekeinois sophon; and Valesius
 adds: "Ad quem locum Elias Cretensis notat verba hæc esse Hippocratis
 quem Gregorius Nazianzenus sapientis cujusdam nomine designat."
 Moreover, Schwegler remarks that the words are taken from Hippocrates.
 In a note ad locum he says: "Hippocratis medici (cf. Hippocr. de Flat.
 init. p. 78, ed. Foes) quæ eadem laudantur et ab aliis Scriptoribus,
 veluti a Luciano in Bis. Accus. c. I. p. 49, ed. Bip. Cf. quæ
 interpretes adnotaverunt ad Luciani, l.c. Tom. VII. p. 400, ed. Bip." I
 have not examined these references, and can therefore form no judgment
 in the matter.

 [2841] ablabos. The application of the word is not perfectly clear, but
 the meaning seems to be "without harm to himself," "unharmed." "He is
 the only one able to minister to our salvation without sinking under
 the weight of the burden, or suffering from his contact with us."
 Eusebius is perhaps thinking especially of Christ's absolute
 sinlessness and victory over all temptation; perhaps only in a more
 general way of the great strength needed for such a task, strength
 possessed by Christ alone in sufficient measure to prevent his own
 complete exhaustion under the immense task.

 [2842] Cf. Isa. ix. 6

 [2843] megas archistr?tegos; cf. Josh. v. 13.

 [2844] This seems to be simply a rhetorical expression of what is
 recorded in Bk. IX. chap. 9, in regard to the great statue of
 Constantine with a cross in his hand, erected in Rome after his victory
 over Maxentius. It is possible that other smaller monuments of a
 similar kind were erected at the same time.

 [2845] autotheon. The exact sense in which Eusebius uses this word is
 open to dispute. That it asserts the Son to be possessed per se, in and
 of himself, of absolute deity,--that is, that he is self-existent,--can
 hardly be maintained, though Valesius does maintain it. The word admits
 some latitude of meaning, as Heinichen shows (in his edition of
 Eusebius, III. p. 736 sq., Melet. XX.), and its use does not forbid a
 belief in the subordination of the Son. In my opinion it clearly
 indicates a belief in an essential deity of the Son, but not a full and
 absolute deity. Stein, in his Eusebius, p. 138, remarks: "Eusebius
 wendet hier dei platonischen Ausdrücke nach dem Vorbilde des Origenes
 auf das Wesen des Sohnes an. Nach Origines bezeichnen diese Ausdrücke
 die Absolutheit des Sohnes, nach den Platonikern jedoch bedeuten sie
 nicht das höchste Wesen. Es ist nun Zweifelhaft, ob Eusebius mit diesen
 Begriffen den Sinn des Origenes, oder den der Platoniker verknüpft
 habe." There can be little doubt, in my opinion, that Eusebius followed
 Origen so far as he understood him, but that he never carried the
 essential deity of the Son so far as to cease to think of some kind of
 an essential subordination. See the discussion of Eusebius' position,
 on p. 11 sq. of this volume. I have translated the word autotheon "very
 God," because there seems to be no other phrase which does not
 necessarily express more, or less, than Eusebius means by the word. It
 must be remembered, however, that in using the phrase which is commonly
 employed to translate the later Nicene alethinon theon, I do not use it
 in the full sense thus ordinarily attached to it.

 [2846] Psa. xxxiii. 9.

 [2847] tou pambasileos kai panegemonos kai autou theou logou. Valesius
 translates, Verbi omnium regis ac principis ac per se Dei; Closs, "des
 Wortes, das der König aller Könige, der oberste Fürst und selbst Gott
 ist"; Crusè, "The universal King, the universal Prince, and God, the
 Word himself." A conception is thus introduced which the clause as it
 stands, without the repetition of the article with logou, seems to me
 hardly to warrant. At any rate, the rendering which I have adopted
 seems more accurately to reproduce the original.

 [2848] theologoumeno. The use of the word theologeo in the sense of
 speaking of, or celebrating a person as divine, or attributing divinity
 to a person, was very common among the Fathers, especially in
 connection with Christ. See Suicer's Thesaurus, s.v. II. and Bk. V.
 chap. 28, § 4, above.

 [2849] Eusebius' reference to these various buildings is somewhat
 confusing. He speaks first of the Church of Christ, "the living temple
 which we all constitute"; then of the Jews, "the builders of that
 ancient temple which no longer stands"; and finally, as it seems, of
 the heathen, "builders of the structure which still endures and is
 composed of the mass of men" (ton pollon anthropon).

 [2850] Literally, "it says" (phesi), i.e. "the Scripture says."

 [2851] John v. 19.

 [2852] i.e. Paulinus.

 [2853] Ex. xxxv. 31.

 [2854] Psa. lviii. 6. Eusebius agrees with the LXX, which reads tas
 mulas ton leonton.

 [2855] Psa. viii. 2. The LXX has katalusai instead of Eusebius'
 kataischunai

 [2856] Literally, "the God-fighting, daring deeds of the impious" (tais
 theom?chois ton asebon tolmais).

 [2857] Psa. xxxvii. 14, 15.

 [2858] Psa. ix. 6. Eusebius agrees with the LXX in reading met' echou:
 "with a sound."

 [2859] Ibid. 5.

 [2860] Psa. xviii. 41.

 [2861] Ibid. xx. 8.

 [2862] Ibid. lxxiii. 20.

 [2863] Cf. Bk. I. chap. 2, § 19, above, and the note on that passage.

 [2864] Isa. xxxv. 1.

 [2865] Ibid. 3, 4.

 [2866] Ibid. 6, 7.

 [2867] Psa. lxxiv. 5, 6.

 [2868] Diocletian's first edict included the destruction of the sacred
 books of the Christians, as well as of their churches. See above, Bk.
 VIII. chap. 2.

 [2869] Psa. lxxiv. 7.

 [2870] Ibid. lxxx. 12, 13.

 [2871] Heb. xii. 6, with which Eusebius agrees exactly, differing from
 Prov. iii. 12 in the use of paideuei instead of elenchei.

 [2872] Isa. xxxv. 6.

 [2873] tes theias tou soteriou loutrou palingenesias. Cf. Titus iii. 5.

 [2874] Isa. xxxv. 7.

 [2875] Ibid. 3.

 [2876] ten oikeian poimnen.

 [2877] Isa. xxxv. 4.

 [2878] Hag. ii. 9.

 [2879] The description of the church of Tyre which follows is very
 valuable, as being the oldest detailed description which we have of a
 Christian basilica. Eusebius mentions other churches in his Vita
 Constantini, III. 30-39, 41-43, 48, 50, 51-53, 58, IV. 58, and
 describes some of them at considerable length. We have a number of
 descriptions from later sources, but rely for our knowledge of early
 Christian architecture chiefly upon the extant remains of the edifices
 themselves. For a very full discussion of the present church, which was
 an excellent example of an ancient Christian basilica, and for a
 detailed description of its various parts, see Bingham's Antiquities,
 Bk. VIII. chap. 3 sq., and compare also the article Basilika in Kraus'
 Real-Encyclopädie der Christ. Alterthümer. The literature on the
 general subject of early Christian architecture is very extensive. See
 more particularly the works referred to in the articles in Smith and
 Cheetham's Dict. of Christ. Antiq. and in the Encyclop. Britannica; and
 cf. also Schaff's Ch. Hist. III. p. 538 sq.

 [2880] Bingham remarks that the ancient basilicas commonly faced the
 west, and that therefore the position of this church of Tyre was
 exceptional; but this is a mistake. It is true that from the fifth
 century on, the altar almost uniformly occupied the east end of the
 church, but previous to that time the position observed in the present
 case was almost universally followed, so that the present building was
 not at all exceptional in its position. See the article Orientierung in
 Kraus' Real-Encyclopädie. Although the common custom was to have the
 church stand east and west, yet the rule was often neglected, and there
 exist many notable examples of churches standing north and south, or
 quite out of line with the points of the compass.

 [2881] aithrion, the Latin atrium.

 [2882] Psa. civ. 16.

 [2883] i.e. in the apse, or chancel, not in the middle of the nave, or
 body of the church.

 [2884] exedras kai oikous. Large basilicas were always provided with
 additional rooms, and adjacent buildings, such as baptisteries,
 diaconica, secretaria, &c., which were used for various ecclesiastical
 purposes, and which were often of considerable size, so that important
 synods frequently met in one or another of them. Cf. Bingham, ibid.
 chap. 7.

 [2885] The name Solomon (Heb. hmls) means "peaceful."

 [2886] Hag. ii. 9.

 [2887] lutheisan, which may mean also "dissolved, decayed." Crusè
 translates "dissolved"; Closs, "schon verwesend."

 [2888] Cf. Matt. xix. 28.

 [2889] See Isa. xxxv. 1

 [2890] Isa. lxi. 10, 11.

 [2891] Ibid. liv. 4.

 [2892] The word "not" is omitted in the Hebrew (and consequently in our
 English versions), but is found in the LXX.

 [2893] Isa. liv. 6-8.

 [2894] Ibid. li. 17, 18.

 [2895] Ibid. li. 22, 23.

 [2896] Ibid. lii. 1, 2.

 [2897] Ibid. xlix. 18-21.

 [2898] numphostolos, referring to Paulinus.

 [2899] 2 Cor. vi. 16.

 [2900] tais plektikais ton mathem?ton didaskalias

 [2901] Isa. liv. 11-14

 [2902] thei& 251; loutro; i.e. baptism.

 [2903] Heinichen, followed by Closs, reads tous men...tous de: "Some of
 them he supports by pillars...others of them he illumines by windows."
 But all the mss. read tous men...tois de, which, in view of the general
 character of Eusebius' style throughout this oration, we are hardly
 justified in changing. I have therefore followed Valesius, Burton, and
 Crusè in retaining the reading of the mss.

 [2904] Acts ii. 3.

 [2905] isos

 [2906] autos holos enk?thetai christos.

 [2907] Valesius remarks, "Sic Hieronymus seu quis alius de ordinibus
 ecclesiæ: in illis esse partes et membra virtutem, in episcopo
 plenitudinem divinitatis habitare." From what source the quotation
 comes I do not know.

 [2908] Cf. Gal. iv. 26

 [2909] Cf. Heb. xii. 22, 23.

 [2910] 1 Cor. ii. 9.

 [2911] Psa. ciii. 3-5.

 [2912] Ibid. 10.

 [2913] Ibid. 12, 13.

 [2914] eis tous sumpantas ai& 242;nas ton ai& 240;non.

 Chapter V.--Copies of Imperial Laws. [2915]

 1. Let us finally subjoin the translations from the Roman tongue of the
 imperial decrees of Constantine and Licinius.

 Copy of imperial decrees translated from the Roman tongue. [2916]

 2. "Perceiving long ago that religious liberty ought not to be denied,
 but that it ought to be granted to the judgment and desire of each
 individual to perform his religious duties according to his own choice,
 we had given orders that every man, Christians as well as others,
 should preserve the faith of his own sect and religion. [2917]

 3. But since in that rescript, in which such liberty was granted them,
 many and various conditions [2918] seemed clearly added, some of them,
 it may be, after a little retired from such observance.

 4. When I, Constantine Augustus, and I, Licinius Augustus, came under
 favorable auspices to Milan and took under consideration everything
 which pertained to the common weal and prosperity, we resolved among
 other things, or rather first of all, to make such decrees as seemed in
 many respects for the benefit of every one; namely, such as should
 preserve reverence and piety toward the deity. We resolved, that is, to
 grant both to the Christians and to all men freedom to follow the
 religion which they choose, that whatever heavenly divinity exists
 [2919] may be propitious to us and to all that live under our
 government.

 5. We have, therefore, determined, with sound and upright purpose, that
 liberty is to be denied to no one, to choose and to follow the
 religious observances of the Christians, but that to each one freedom
 is to be given to devote his mind to that religion which he may think
 adapted to himself, [2920] in order that the Deity may exhibit to us in
 all things his accustomed care and favor.

 6. It was fitting that we should write that this is our pleasure, that
 those conditions [2921] being entirely left out which were contained in
 our former letter concerning the Christians which was sent to your
 devotedness, everything that seemed very severe and foreign to our
 mildness may be annulled, and that now every one who has the same
 desire to observe the religion of the Christians may do so without
 molestation.

 7. We have resolved to communicate this most fully to thy care, in
 order that thou mayest know that we have granted to these same
 Christians freedom and full liberty to observe their own religion.

 8. Since this has been granted freely by us to them, thy devotedness
 perceives that liberty is granted to others also who may wish to follow
 their own religious observances; it being clearly in accordance with
 the tranquillity of our times, that each one should have the liberty of
 choosing and worshiping whatever deity he pleases. This has been done
 by us in order that we might not seem in any way to discriminate
 against any rank or religion. [2922]

 9. And we decree still further in regard to the Christians, that their
 places, in which they were formerly accustomed to assemble, and
 concerning which in the former letter sent to thy devotedness a
 different command was given, [2923] if it appear that any have bought
 them either from our treasury or from any other person, shall be
 restored to the said Christians, without demanding money or any other
 equivalent, with no delay or hesitation.

 10. If any happen to have received the said places as a gift, they
 shall restore them as quickly as possible to these same Christians:
 with the understanding that if those who have bought these places, or
 those who have received them as a gift, demand anything from our
 bounty, they may go to the judge of the district, that provision may be
 made for them by our clemency. All these things are to be granted to
 the society of Christians by your care immediately and without any
 delay.

 11. And since the said Christians are known to have possessed not only
 those places in which they were accustomed to assemble, but also other
 places, belonging not to individuals among them, but to the society
 [2924] as a whole, that is, to the society of Christians, you will
 command that all these, in virtue of the law which we have above
 stated, be restored, without any hesitation, to these same Christians;
 that is, to their society and congregation: the above-mentioned
 provision being of course observed, that those who restore them without
 price, as we have before said, may expect indemnification from our
 bounty.

 12. In all these things, for the behoof of the aforesaid society of
 Christians, you are to use the utmost diligence, to the end that our
 command may be speedily fulfilled, and that in this also, by our
 clemency, provision may be made for the common and public tranquillity.
 [2925]

 13. For by this means, [2926] as we have said before, the divine favor
 toward us which we have already experienced in many matters will
 continue sure through all time.

 14. And that the terms of this our gracious ordinance may be known to
 all, it is expected that this which we have written will be published
 everywhere by you and brought to the knowledge of all, in order that
 this gracious ordinance of ours may remain unknown to no one."

 Copy of another imperial decree which they issued, [2927] indicating
 that the grant was made to the Catholic Church alone.

 15. "Greeting to thee, our most esteemed Anulinus. It is the custom of
 our benevolence, most esteemed Anulinus, to will that those things
 which belong of right to another should not only be left unmolested,
 but should also be restored. [2928]

 16. Wherefore it is our will that when thou receivest this letter, if
 any such things belonged to the Catholic Church of the Christians, in
 any city or other place, but are now held by citizens [2929] or by any
 others, thou shalt cause them to be restored immediately to the said
 churches. For we have already determined that those things which these
 same churches formerly possessed shall be restored to them.

 17. Since therefore thy devotedness perceives that this command of ours
 is most explicit, do thou make haste to restore to them, as quickly as
 possible, everything which formerly belonged to the said
 churches,--whether gardens or buildings or whatever they may be,--that
 we may learn that thou hast obeyed this decree of ours most carefully.
 Farewell, our most esteemed and beloved Anulinus."

 Copy of an epistle in which the Emperor commands that a synod of
 bishops be held at Rome in behalf of the unity and concord of the
 churches. [2930]

 18. "Constantine Augustus to Miltiades, [2931] bishop of Rome, and to
 Marcus. [2932] Since many such communications have been sent to me by
 Anulinus, [2933] the most illustrious proconsul of Africa, in which it
 is said that Cæcilianus, [2934] bishop of the city of Carthage, has
 been accused by some of his colleagues in Africa, in many matters;
 [2935] and since it seems to me a very serious thing that in those
 provinces which Divine Providence has freely entrusted to my
 devotedness, and in which there is a great population, the multitude
 are found following the baser course, and dividing, as it were, into
 two parties, and the bishops are at variance,--

 19. it has seemed good to me that Cæcilianus himself, with ten of the
 bishops that appear to accuse him, and with ten others whom he may
 consider necessary for his defense, should sail to Rome, that there, in
 the presence of yourselves and of Retecius [2936] and Maternus [2937]
 and Marinus, [2938] your colleagues, whom I have commanded to hasten to
 Rome for this purpose, [2939] he may be heard, as you may understand to
 be in accordance with the most holy law.

 20. But in order that you may be enabled to have most perfect knowledge
 of all these things, I have subjoined to my letter copies of the
 documents sent to me by Anulinus, and have sent them to your
 above-mentioned colleagues. When your firmness has read these, you will
 consider in what way the above-mentioned case may be most accurately
 investigated and justly decided. For it does not escape your diligence
 that I have such reverence for the legitimate [2940] Catholic Church
 that I do not wish you to leave schism or division in any place. May
 the divinity of the great God preserve you, most honored sirs, for many
 years."

 Copy of an epistle in which the emperor commands another synod to be
 held for the purpose of removing all dissensions among the bishops.

 21. "Constantine Augustus to Chrestus, [2941] bishop of Syracuse. When
 some began wickedly and perversely to disagree [2942] among themselves
 in regard to the holy worship and celestial power and Catholic
 doctrine, [2943] wishing to put an end to such disputes among them, I
 formerly gave command that certain bishops should be sent from Gaul,
 and that the opposing parties who were contending persistently and
 incessantly with each other, should be summoned from Africa; that in
 their presence, and in the presence of the bishop of Rome, the matter
 which appeared to be causing the disturbance might be examined and
 decided with all care. [2944]

 22. But since, as it happens, some, forgetful both of their own
 salvation and of the reverence due to the most holy religion, do not
 even yet bring hostilities to an end, and are unwilling to conform to
 the judgment already passed, and assert that those who expressed their
 opinions and decisions were few, or that they had been too hasty and
 precipitate in giving judgment, before all the things which ought to
 have been accurately investigated had been examined,--on account of all
 this it has happened that those very ones who ought to hold brotherly
 and harmonious relations toward each other, are shamefully, or rather
 abominably, [2945] divided among themselves, and give occasion for
 ridicule to those men whose souls are aliens to this most holy
 religion. Wherefore it has seemed necessary to me to provide that this
 dissension, which ought to have ceased after the judgment had been
 already given by their own voluntary agreement, should now, if
 possible, be brought to an end by the presence of many.

 23. Since, therefore, we have commanded a number of bishops from a
 great many different places [2946] to assemble in the city of Arles,
 [2947] before the kalends of August, we have thought proper to write to
 thee also that thou shouldst secure from the most illustrious
 Latronianus, [2948] corrector of Sicily, [2949] a public vehicle, and
 that thou shouldst take with thee two others of the second rank, [2950]
 whom thou thyself shalt choose, together with three servants who may
 serve you on the way, and betake thyself to the above-mentioned place
 before the appointed day; that by thy firmness, and by the wise
 unanimity and harmony of the others present, this dispute, which has
 disgracefully continued until the present time, in consequence of
 certain shameful strifes, after all has been heard which those have to
 say who are now at variance with one another, and whom we have likewise
 commanded to be present, may be settled in accordance with the proper
 faith, and that brotherly harmony, though it be but gradually, may be
 restored.

 24. May the Almighty God preserve thee in health for many years."

 [2915] Heinichen gives 'Antigrapha basilikon nomon peri ton
 christianois prosekonton as the title of this chapter. All but three of
 the mss., however, agree in limiting the title to the first three
 words, the last four being given by the majority of them as the title
 of chap. 6. The words are quite out of place at the head of that
 chapter, which in two important mss., followed by Stroth, is made a
 part of chap. 5. Heinichen inserts the words at this point because they
 are out of place in the position in which they commonly occur; but the
 truth is, they are no better adapted to the present chapter than to
 that one, for only one of the edicts quoted in this chapter has
 reference to the property of Christians. It seems to me much more
 likely that the words were originally written in the margin of some
 codex opposite that particular rescript, and thence by an error slipped
 into the text at the head of a later one, which was then made a
 separate chapter. In view of the uncertainty, however, as to the
 original position of the words, I have followed Laemmer, Schwegler,
 Stroth, Closs, and Stigloher, in omitting them altogether.

 [2916] This is the famous Edict of Milan, issued by Constantine and
 Licinius late in the year 312, after the former's victory over
 Maxentius (see above, Bk. IX. chap. 9, note 7). The edict has a claim
 to be remembered as the first announcement of the great doctrine of
 complete freedom of conscience, and that not for one religion only, but
 for all religions. In this respect it was a great advance upon the
 edict of Galerius, which had granted conditional liberty to a single
 faith. The greater part of the edict (beginning with § 4) is extant in
 its original Latin form in Lactantius' De mort. pers. chap. 48. The
 Greek translation is still less accurate than the translation of the
 edict of Galerius given in Bk. VIII. chap. 17, above, but the
 variations from the original are none of them of great importance. The
 most marked ones will be mentioned in the notes.

 [2917] The reference in this sentence is not, as was formerly supposed,
 to a lost edict of Constantine and Licinius, but to the edict of
 Galerius, as is proved by Mason (p. 327 sq.), who has completely
 exploded the old belief in three edicts of toleration, and has shown
 that there were only two; viz. that of Galerius, Constantine, and
 Licinius, published in 311, and the present one, issued by Constantine
 and Licinius in 312.

 [2918] The Greek word is haireseis, which has been commonly translated
 "sects," and the reference has been supposed to be to various
 schismatic bodies included in the former edict, but, as Mason remarks,
 such an interpretation is preposterous, and introduces an idea in
 direct contradiction to the entire tenor of the present document. The
 fact is that, although "sects" is the natural translation of the word
 haireseis, we find the same word in § 6, below, used to translate
 conditiones, and it may be reasonably assumed--in fact, it may be
 regarded as certain in view of the context--that in the present case
 the same word stood in the Latin original. I have no hesitation,
 therefore, in adopting the rendering which I have given in the text.
 These "conditions," then, to which the edict refers were enumerated,
 not in the former edict itself, but in the rescript which accompanied
 it (see above, Bk. VIII. chap. 17, note 9). What these conditions were
 may be conjectured, as remarked in that note, from the provisions of
 the present edict (cf. Mason, p. 330 sq.).

 [2919] hoti pote esti theiotes kai ouraniou pr?gmatos. Latin: quo
 quidem divinitas in sede coelesti. The Greek is by no means a
 reproduction of the sense of the Latin, and indeed, as it stands, is
 quite untranslatable. I have contented myself with a paraphrase, which
 does not express what the Greek translator says, but perhaps is not
 entirely at variance with what he meant to say.

 [2920] In this sentence it is stated distinctly, not simply that
 Christians may remain Christians, but that anybody that pleases may
 become a Christian; that is, that the fullest liberty is granted to
 every man either to observe his ancestral religion or to choose
 another.

 [2921] Greek, haireseon; Latin, conditionibus (see note 4, above).

 [2922] medemi? time mede threskeia tini. Latin, honori, neque cuiquam
 religioni. Mason concludes from this clause that in the rescript which
 accompanied the previous edict Christians had been excluded from
 certain official positions.

 [2923] That there was some condition attached in the last rescript to
 the restoration of their property to the Christians is clear from these
 words. We may gather from what follows that the Christians were obliged
 to pay something for the restored property, either to the occupants or
 to the government. Constantine states that henceforth the imperial
 treasury will freely bear all the expense involved in the transfer.

 [2924] to somati& 251;. Latin, corpori. The use of this word (which we
 might almost translate "body corporate") is a distinct recognition of
 the full legal status of the Christian Church, and of their right as a
 corporation in the eyes of the law to hold property. The right did not
 on this occasion receive recognition for the first time, but more
 distinctly and in broader terms than ever before. Upon the right of the
 Church to hold property before the publication of this edict, see
 especially Hatch's Constitution of the Early Christian Churches, p.
 152, note 25.

 [2925] Greek, tes koines kai demosias hesuchias. Latin, more simply,
 quieti publicæ.

 [2926] touto gar to logismo. Latin, hactenus.

 [2927] It would seem that this communication was sent to Anulinus soon
 after the issue of the Edict of Milan; for it gives directions for the
 carrying out of some of the provisions made in that edict, and is very
 likely but a sample of special letters sent in connection with that
 document to the governors of the various provinces. We know from the
 next chapter that Anulinus was proconsul of the Roman province of
 Africa, of which Carthage was the capital city, and which was very
 thickly populated with Christians. Of Anulinus himself we know only
 what we can learn from this and the next two chapters. The title of the
 rescript as given by Eusebius is somewhat misleading. There is no
 indication in the document itself that it was written with the distinct
 purpose of distinguishing the Catholic Church from schismatic bodies,
 and granting it privileges denied to them. If such had been its aim, it
 would certainly have stated it more clearly. The term "Catholic Church"
 (in § 16) seems in fact to be used in a general sense to indicate the
 Christian Church as a whole. It is, to be sure, possible that
 Constantine may already have had some knowledge of the schismatics whom
 he refers to in another epistle, quoted in the next chapter; but his
 omission of all reference to them in the present case shows that he did
 not intend at this time to draw lines between parties, or to pass
 judgment upon any society calling itself a Christian church.

 [2928] i.e. that if they have been molested, or taken from their
 owners, they should be restored.

 [2929] politon. Valesius conjectures that politeuton should be read
 instead of politon, and therefore translates a decurionibus. Crusè,
 following him, reads "by the decurions." The correction, however,
 though an improvement, is not necessary, and I have not felt justified
 in adopting it.

 [2930] This and the next epistle were occasioned by the Donatist
 schism. This great schism arose after the close of the Diocletian
 persecution, and divided the church of North Africa for more than a
 century. Like the Novatian schism, it was due to the conflict of the
 more rigid and the more indulgent theories of discipline. In
 Novatianism, however, the burning question was the readmission of the
 lapsed; in Donatism, the validity of clerical functions performed by
 unholy or unfaithful clergymen. In the latter, therefore, the question
 was one of clerical, not lay discipline, and there was involved in it a
 very important theological principle. The Donatists maintained that the
 validity of clerical functions depended upon the character of the
 administering clergyman; the Catholic party maintained that the
 validity of those functions depended solely upon Christ, and was quite
 independent of the character of the officiating clergyman, provided he
 had been duly qualified by the Church for the performance of such
 functions. Augustine, nearly a century after the rise of the sect,
 found it necessary to oppose it, and it was in the controversy with it
 that he developed his doctrine of the Church and the Sacraments. The
 immediate occasion of the schism was the election of Cæcilianus, who
 favored the milder principles of church discipline, to the bishopric of
 Carthage, in 311. His election was opposed by the entire rigoristic
 party in Carthage and throughout North Africa. It was claimed that the
 Bishop Felix of Aptunga, by whom he was ordained, had been a traditor
 during the persecution, and that therefore Cæcilian's ordination was
 not valid. As a consequence the bishops of Numidia, who had not been
 invited to assist in the choice and ordination of Cæcilian, held a
 synod in Carthage, and elected a counter-bishop, Majorinus. Thus the
 schism was definitely launched. The party called itself for a time by
 the name of its first bishop, but in 315 he was succeeded by Donatus,
 called the Great, to distinguish him from Donatus, bishop of Casæ
 Nigræ, who had been one of the original leaders of the movement. From
 him the sect took the name by which it was thenceforth known. Doubtless
 personal jealousies and enmities had considerable to do with the origin
 of the schism, but it is quite inaccurate to ascribe it wholly to such
 causes. The fundamental ground lay in the deep-seated difference in
 principles between the two parties in the Church, and it was inevitable
 that that difference should make itself felt in some such rupture, even
 had personal reasons not co-operated to such an extent as they did. Our
 chief sources for a knowledge of Donatism are the anti-Donatistic works
 of Augustine (see The Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, first series,
 Vol. IV. p. 369 sq.), together with a number of his epistles, and
 Optatus' De Schismate Donatistarum. The literature on the subject is
 very extensive. See especially Valesius' essay, De Schismate Donat.,
 appended to his edition of Eusebius (Reading's edition, p. 775 sq.);
 Ribbeck, Donatus and Augustinus, 1858; the articles Cæcilianus and
 Donatism in the Dict. of Christ. Biog.; Neander's Church History,
 Torrey's translation, II. p. 182 sq.; Hefele's Conciliengesch. 2d ed.,
 I. p. 293 sq.; and Schaff's Church History, III. p. 360 sq. Constantine
 did not voluntarily meddle in the Donatistic controversy. He was first
 appealed to by the Donatists themselves, through the proconsul
 Anulinus, early in the year 313 (see Augustine, Epistle 88, for a copy
 of the letter in which Anulinus communicates their request to the
 emperor). In response to their appeal Constantine (in the present
 epistle) summoned the two parties to appear before a Roman synod, which
 was held in October, 313. The Donatists were unable to prove their
 charges, and the synod gave decision against them. Again, at their own
 request, their case was heard at a council held in Gaul the following
 year (the synod of Arles; see the next epistle of Constantine quoted in
 this chapter). This council also decided against them, and the
 Donatists appealed once more to the judgment of the emperor himself. He
 heard their case in Milan in 316, and confirmed the decisions of the
 councils, and soon afterward issued laws against them, threatening them
 with the banishment of their bishops and the confiscation of their
 property. He soon, however, withdrew his persecuting measures, and
 adopted a policy of toleration. During subsequent reigns their
 condition grew worse, and they were often obliged to undergo severe
 hardships; but they clung rigidly to their principles until the
 invasion of the Vandals in 428, when the entire North African Church
 was devastated.

 [2931] Miltiades (called also Melchiades) was bishop of Rome from July
 2, 310, to Jan. 10 or 11, 314. See Lipsius, Chron. der röm. Bischöfe,
 p. 257 sq.

 [2932] Marcus is an otherwise unknown personage, unless Valesius' not
 improbable conjecture be accepted, that he was at this time a presbyter
 of Rome, and is to be identified with the Marcus who was bishop of Rome
 for some eight months in 336.

 [2933] ch?rtai. The reference, as remarked by Valesius, seems to be not
 to epistles of Anulinus, but to the communications of the Donatists
 forwarded to the emperor by Anulinus. In his epistle to the emperor,
 which was written April 15, 313 (see Augustine, Ep. 88), Anulinus
 speaks of two communications handed to him by the Donatists, which he
 forwards to the emperor with his own letter. The former of them, which
 is no longer extant, bore the title Libellus ecclesiæ Catholicæ
 criminum Cæciliani. The other, which is preserved by Optatus (Du Pin's
 edition, p. 22, and Routh, Rel. Sac. IV. 280) contained the request
 that the emperor would appoint some Gallic bishops to hear the case,
 because the church of that country had not been subjected to the same
 temptation as themselves during the persecution, and could therefore
 render an impartial decision. It was in consequence of this request
 that the Gallic bishops mentioned below were directed by the emperor to
 proceed to Rome to join with Miltiades in the adjudication of the case.
 Constantine speaks of receiving many such communications, but no others
 are preserved to us.

 [2934] Cæcilianus had been arch-deacon of the church of Carthage under
 the bishop Mensurius, and had been a diligent supporter of the latter
 in his opposition to the fanatical conduct and the extreme rigor of the
 stricter party during the persecution. In 311 he became bishop, and
 lived until about 345. We know nothing about his life after the first
 few years of the conflict. His title to the bishopric was universally
 acknowledged outside of North Africa, and by all there except the
 Donatists themselves.

 [2935] The chief charge brought against Cæcilian was that he had been
 ordained by a traditor, Felix of Aptunga, and that his ordination was
 therefore invalid. The charge against Felix was carefully investigated
 at the Council of Arles, and pronounced quite groundless. Many personal
 charges, such as cruelty to the martyrs in prison (which had its
 ground, doubtless, in his condemnation of the foolish fanaticism which
 was so common during the persecution in Africa), tyranny,
 bloodthirstiness, &c., were brought against Cæcilian, but were
 dismissed in every case as quite groundless.

 [2936] Retecius was bishop of Autun in Gaul (see Optatus, I. 22, and
 the references given below). An extended account of him, largely
 legendary, is given by Gregory of Tours (De gloria Conf. 75, according
 to the Dict. of Christ. Biog.). The dates of his accession and death
 are unknown to us. He attended the Council of Arles in 313 (see the
 list of those present, in Routh, IV. p. 312), and is spoken of in high
 terms by Augustine (Contra Jul. I. 7; Opus imperf. cont. Jul. I. 55),
 and also by Jerome, who informs us that he wrote a commentary on the
 Song of Songs and a work against Novatian (see his de vir. ill. 82, Ep.
 ad Florentium, and ad Marcellam, Migne, Nos. 5 and 37).

 [2937] Maternus was bishop of Cologne, the first one of that see known
 to us, but the date of his accession and death are unknown. He is
 mentioned by Optatus (ibid.), and was present at the Council of Arles
 (Routh, ibid.).

 [2938] Marinus, whose dates are likewise unknown, was bishop of Arles
 (see Optatus, ibid.), and was present at the Council in that city in
 314 (see Routh, ibid. p. 313).

 [2939] This Roman Council convened in the house of Fausta, in the
 Lateran, on the second day of October, 313, and was attended by
 nineteen bishops,--the three from Gaul just mentioned, Miltiades
 himself, and fifteen Italian bishops (see Optatus, ibid.). The synod
 resulted in the complete victory of the party of Cæcilian, as remarked
 above (note 15).

 [2940] enthesmo.

 [2941] The name of Chrestus appears first in the list of those present
 at the Council of Arles (see Routh, IV. 312), and in consequence it has
 been thought that he presided at the Council, a conclusion which some
 have regarded as confirmed by Constantine's own words in § 24, below.
 But on the other hand, in the epistle of the synod addressed to
 Sylvester of Rome, and containing the canons of the Council, it is
 distinctly stated that Marinus, bishop of Arles, presided; and this in
 itself seems more probable, although the document in which the
 statement is found may not perhaps be genuine (see, for instance,
 Ffoulke's article Marinus in the Dict. of Christ. Biog., which needs,
 however, to be taken with allowance, for the case against the
 genuineness of the extant canons of the Council is by no means so
 strong as he implies). Of Chrestus himself we know nothing more than
 can be gathered from this epistle.

 [2942] apodiistasthai

 [2943] tes haireseos tes katholikes

 [2944] See the previous epistle.

 [2945] aischros, mallon de museros.

 [2946] ek diaphoron kai amutheton topon. Some old accounts give the
 number of bishops present at the Council as six hundred, but this is
 wild. Baronius gave the number as two hundred, and he has been followed
 by many others, but this rests upon a false reading in a passage in
 Augustine's works. The truth seems to be that there were not more than
 thirty-three bishops present, the number given in the only lists of the
 members of the synod which we have (see Routh, ibid., and see also
 Hefele, Conciliengesch. I. p. 201).

 [2947] Arles (Latin Arelate), a city of Southern France, situated not
 far from the mouth of the Rhone. It was at this time one of the most
 prominent episcopal sees of Gaul, and was the seat of more than one
 important council, of which the present is the first known to us. The
 one summoned by Constantine convened, as we may gather from this
 passage, on the first of August, 314. We do not know how long its
 sessions continued, nor indeed any particulars in regard to it, though
 twenty-two canons are extant in an epistle addressed to Sylvester of
 Rome, which purport to be the genuine canons of the Council, and are
 commonly so regarded. Their genuineness, however, is by no means
 universally admitted (cf. e.g. the article in the Dict. of Christ.
 Biog. referred to in note 27). If the canons are genuine, we see that
 the Council busied itself with many other maters besides the Donatistic
 schism, especially with the Easter question and with various matters of
 church discipline. See Hefele, Conciliengesch. I. p. 201 sq. (2d ed.).

 [2948] According to Valesius the name of Latronianus is found (teste
 Gualthero) in an ancient Palermo inscription (in tabulis Siculis,
 numero 164). He is an otherwise unknown personage.

 [2949] The Greek tou kor& 191;ektoros is evidently simply a
 transliteration of the original Latin correctoris. Corrector, in the
 time of the emperors, was "the title of a kind of land bailiff, a
 governor" (Andrews' Lexicon).

 [2950] ton ek tou deuterou thronou; i.e. presbyters. Valesius remarks
 ad locum that presbyters were commonly called "priests of the second
 order," as may be gathered from various authors. He refers among others
 to Jerome, who says in his Epitaph on the blessed Paula, "There were
 present the bishops of Jerusalem and other cities, and an innumerable
 company of priests and Levites of the lower order (inferioris gradus)";
 and to Gregory Nazianzen (Carm. iambic. de vita sua, p. 6), who says,
 "the bishops in the church sat on a higher throne, the presbyters on
 lower seats on either side, while the deacons stood by in white
 garments." Compare also Eusebius' description of the arrangement of the
 seats in the church of Tyre (chap. 4, § 67, above), and for other
 references see Valesius' note. Possibly the Latin phrase used by
 Constantine was similar to that employed by Jerome: secundi gradus.

 Chapter VI. [2951] --Copy of an Imperial Epistle in which Money is
 granted to the Churches. [2952]

 1. "Constantine Augustus to Cæcilianus, [2953] bishop of Carthage.
 Since it is our pleasure that something should be granted in all the
 provinces of Africa and Numidia and Mauritania to certain ministers of
 the legitimate [2954] and most holy catholic religion, to defray their
 expenses, I have written to Ursus, [2955] the illustrious finance
 minister [2956] of Africa, and have directed him to make provision to
 pay to thy firmness three thousand folles. [2957]

 2. Do thou therefore, when thou hast received the above sum of money,
 command that it be distributed among all those mentioned above,
 according to the brief [2958] sent to thee by Hosius. [2959]

 3. But if thou shouldst find that anything is wanting for the
 fulfillment of this purpose of mine in regard to all of them, thou
 shalt demand without hesitation from Heracleides, [2960] our treasurer,
 [2961] whatever thou findest to be necessary. For I commanded him when
 he was present that if thy firmness should ask him for any money, he
 should see to it that it be paid without delay.

 4. And since I have learned that some men of unsettled mind wish to
 turn the people from the most holy and catholic Church by a certain
 method of shameful corruption, [2962] do thou know that I gave command
 to Anulinus, the proconsul, and also to Patricius, [2963] vicar of the
 prefects, [2964] when they were present, that they should give proper
 attention not only to other matters but also above all to this, and
 that they should not overlook such a thing when it happened. Wherefore
 if thou shouldst see any such men continuing in this madness, do thou
 without delay go to the above-mentioned judges and report the matter to
 them; that they may correct them as I commanded them when they were
 present. [2965] The divinity of the great God preserve thee for many
 years."

 [2951] Upon the title of this chapter given in the majority of the
 mss., see above, chap. 5, note 1.

 [2952] The accompanying epistle furnishes the first instance which we
 have of financial support furnished the clergy by the state. From this
 time on the old system of voluntary contributions fell more and more
 into disuse, and the clergy gained their support from the income upon
 the church property, which accumulated rapidly, in consequence of
 special grants by the state and voluntary gifts and legacies by pious
 Christians, or from imperial bounties, as in the present case.
 Chrysostom, however, complains that the clergy in his time were not as
 well supported as under the ancient voluntary system. The accuracy of
 his statement, however, is open to doubt, as is the accuracy of all
 such comparisons between an earlier age and our own, unless it be based
 upon exhaustive statistics. Upon the general subject of the maintenance
 of the clergy in the early Church, see Bingham's Antiquities, Bk. V.
 Compare also Hatch's Constitution of the Early Christian Churches, p.
 150 sq. Upon the Montanistic practice of paying their clergy salaries,
 see above, Bk. V. chap. 18, note 8, and for an example of the same
 thing among the Theodotians, see Bk. V. chap. 28, § 10.

 [2953] On Cæcilianus, see above, chap. 5, note 20.

 [2954] enthesmou.

 [2955] Ursus is an otherwise unknown personage.

 [2956] katholikon. Cf. Bk. VIII. chap. 11, note 3.

 [2957] pholleis. We learn from Epiphanius (De pond. et mens., at the
 end of the work; Dindorf's ed. IV. p. 33) that there were two folles,
 one a small coin, and the other a sum of money of uncertain value. The
 latter is evidently referred to here. According to one computation it
 was worth 208 denarii. If this were correct, the present sum would
 amount to over ninety thousand dollars; but the truth is, we can reach
 no certainty in the matter. For an exhaustive discussion of the
 subject, see Petavius' essay in Dindorf's edition of Epiphanius, IV. p.
 109 sq.

 [2958] breou& 187;on; probably for the Latin breviarium.

 [2959] Doubtless to be identified with the famous Hosius, bishop of
 Cordova in Spain, who was for many years Constantine's most influential
 adviser and took a prominent part in all the great controversies of the
 first half of the fourth century, and who died shortly before 360, when
 he was upwards of a hundred years old. Upon his life, see especially
 the exhaustive article by Morse, in the Dict. of Christ. Biog.

 [2960] Heracleides is, so far as I am aware, mentioned only here.

 [2961] tou epitropou ton hemeteron ktem?ton.

 [2962] This would seem to be a reference to the Donatists. If it is, it
 leads us to suppose that Constantine had heard about the troubles in
 Carthage before he received the communication from Anulinus referred to
 in the previous chapter; for we can hardly suppose that pending the
 trial of Cæcilian Constantine would show him such signal marks of
 favor, which would lay him at once open to the charge of partiality,
 and would be practically a prejudgment of the case. On the other hand,
 he could not have referred to the Donatists in this way after the trial
 of the case, for his words imply that he is referring, not to an
 already well-established and well-known party, but simply to
 individuals whom he has recently learned to be making some kind of
 trouble in the church. These considerations seem to me to lead to the
 conclusion that this epistle preceded the one to Miltiades quoted in
 the previous chapter, and also the one from Anulinus to Constantine
 (see notes 16 and 19 on that chapter). If this be so, it must have been
 written as early as April, 313, and therefore soon after the epistle to
 Anulinus quoted in the previous chapter, § 15 sq. We might then be led
 to suppose that it was in consequence of this grant made by Constantine
 solely to Cæcilian and the clergy under him that the Donatists decided
 to appeal to the emperor, his treatment of all who were opposed to
 Cæcilian showing them that he had heard reports of them by no means to
 their advantage, and thus impelling them to try and set themselves
 right in his eyes and in the eyes of the world by a public
 investigation of their cause. There are difficulties connected with the
 exact order of events at this point which beset any theory we may
 adopt, but the one just stated seems to me most in harmony with our
 sources and with the nature of the case. For a full, though not
 altogether satisfactory, discussion of the matter, which I cannot dwell
 upon here, see Walch's Ketzergeschichte, IV. p. 116 sq.

 [2963] This Patricius is known to us, so far as I am aware, from this
 passage only.

 [2964] to ouikari& 251; ton ep?rchon, which doubtless represents the
 Latin Vicarius Præfectorum, the vicar or deputy of the prefects. See
 Valesius' note ad locum and the note of Heinichen (Vol. III. p. 463),
 with the additional references given by him.

 [2965] This is the first instance we have of an effort on Constantine's
 part to suppress schismatics. In 316 he enacted a stringent law against
 the Donatists (see the previous chapter, note 16), which, however, he
 withdrew within a few years, finding the policy of repression an unwise
 one. The same was done later in connection with the Arians, whom he at
 first endeavored to suppress by force, but afterward tolerated. His
 successors were in the main far less tolerant than he was, and heretics
 and schismatics were frequently treated with great harshness during the
 fourth and following centuries.

 Chapter VII.--The Exemption of the Clergy.

 Copy of an Epistle in which the emperor commands that the rulers of the
 churches be exempted from all political duties. [2966]

 1. "Greeting to thee, our most esteemed Anulinus. Since it appears from
 many circumstances that when that religion is despised, in which is
 preserved the chief reverence for the most holy celestial Power, great
 dangers are brought upon public affairs; but that when legally adopted
 and observed [2967] it affords the most signal prosperity to the Roman
 name and remarkable felicity to all the affairs of men, through the
 divine beneficence,--it has seemed good to me, most esteemed Anulinus,
 that those men who give their services with due sanctity and with
 constant observance of this law, to the worship of the divine religion,
 should receive recompense for their labors.

 2. Wherefore it is my will that those within the province entrusted to
 thee, [2968] in the catholic Church, over which Cæcilianus presides,
 [2969] who give their services to this holy religion, and who are
 commonly called clergymen, be entirely exempted from all public duties,
 that they may not by any error or sacrilegious negligence be drawn away
 from the service due to the Deity, but may devote themselves without
 any hindrance to their own law. For it seems that when they show
 greatest reverence to the Deity, the greatest benefits accrue to the
 state. Farewell, our most esteemed and beloved Anulinus."

 [2966] Municipal offices and magistracies were a great burden under the
 later Roman empire. They entailed heavy expenses for those who filled
 them, and consequently, unless a man's wealth was large, and his desire
 for distinction very great, he was glad to be exempted, if possible,
 from the necessity of supporting such expensive honors, which he was
 not at liberty to refuse. The same was true of almost all the offices,
 municipal and provincial offices, high and low. Discharging the duties
 of an office was in fact practically paying a heavy tax to government,
 and of course the fewer there were that were compelled to pay this tax,
 the greater the burden upon the few. As a consequence, the exemption of
 any class of persons always aroused opposition from those who were not
 exempted. In granting this immunity to the clergy, however, Constantine
 was granting them only what had long been enjoyed by the heathen
 priesthood, and also by some of the learned professions. The privilege
 bestowed here upon the African clergy was afterward extended to those
 of other provinces, as we learn from the Theodosian Code, 16. 2. 2
 (a.d. 319). The direct result of the exemption was that many persons of
 means secured admission to the ranks of the clergy, in order to escape
 the burden of office-holding; and this practice increased so rapidly
 that within a few years the emperor was obliged to enact various laws
 restricting the privilege. See Hatch's Constitution of the Early
 Christ. Churches, p. 144 sq.

 [2967] enthesmos analephtheisan kai phulattomenen

 [2968] i.e. the proconsular province of Africa (see above, chap. 5, §
 18).

 [2969] i.e. the Church of the entire province; for the bishop of
 Carthage was the metropolitan of the province, and indeed was the
 leading bishop of North Africa, and thus recognized as in some sense at
 the head of the church of that entire section of country.

 Chapter VIII.--The Subsequent Wickedness of Licinius, and his Death.

 1. Such blessings did divine and heavenly grace confer upon us through
 the appearance of our Saviour, and such was the abundance of benefits
 which prevailed among all men in consequence of the peace which we
 enjoyed. And thus were our affairs crowned with rejoicings and
 festivities.

 2. But malignant envy, and the demon who loves that which is evil, were
 not able to bear the sight of these things; and moreover the events
 that befell the tyrants whom we have already mentioned were not
 sufficient to bring Licinius to sound reason.

 3. For the latter, although his government was prosperous and he was
 honored with the second rank after the great Emperor Constantine, and
 was connected with him by the closest ties of marriage, abandoned the
 imitation of good deeds, and emulated the wickedness of the impious
 tyrants whose end he had seen with his own eyes, and chose rather to
 follow their principles than to continue in friendly relations with him
 who was better than they. Being envious of the common benefactor he
 waged an impious and most terrible war against him, paying regard
 neither to laws of nature, nor treaties, nor blood, and giving no
 thought to covenants. [2970]

 4. For Constantine, like an all-gracious emperor, giving him evidences
 of true favor, did not refuse alliance with him, and did not refuse him
 the illustrious marriage with his sister, but honored him by making him
 a partaker of the ancestral nobility and the ancient imperial blood,
 [2971] and granted him the right of sharing in the dominion over all as
 a brother-in-law and co-regent, conferring upon him the government and
 administration of no less a portion of the Roman provinces than he
 himself possessed. [2972]

 5. But Licinius, on the contrary, pursued a course directly opposite to
 this; forming daily all kinds of plots against his superior, and
 devising all sorts of mischief, that he might repay his benefactor with
 evils. At first he attempted to conceal his preparations, and pretended
 to be a friend, and practiced frequently fraud and deceit, in the hope
 that he might easily accomplish the desired end. [2973]

 6. But God was the friend, protector, and guardian of Constantine, and
 bringing the plots which had been formed in secrecy and darkness to the
 light, he foiled them. So much virtue does the great armor of piety
 possess for the warding off of enemies and for the preservation of our
 own safety. Protected by this, our most divinely favored emperor
 escaped the multitudinous plots of the abominable man.

 7. But when Licinius perceived that his secret preparations by no means
 progressed according to his mind,--for God revealed every plot and
 wickedness to the God-favored emperor,--being no longer able to conceal
 himself, he undertook an open war. [2974]

 8. And at the same time that he determined to wage war with
 Constantine, he also proceeded to join battle with the God of the
 universe, whom he knew that Constantine worshiped, and began, gently
 for a time and quietly, to attack his pious subjects, who had never
 done his government any harm. [2975] This he did under the compulsion
 of his innate wickedness which drove him into terrible blindness.

 9. He did not therefore keep before his eyes the memory of those who
 had persecuted the Christians before him, nor of those whose destroyer
 and executioner he had been appointed, on account of the impieties
 which they had committed. But departing from sound reason, being
 seized, in a word, with insanity, he determined to war against God
 himself as the ally of Constantine, instead of against the one who was
 assisted by him.

 10. And in the first place, he drove from his house every Christian,
 thus depriving himself, wretched man, of the prayers which they offered
 to God in his behalf, which they are accustomed, according to the
 teaching of their fathers, to offer for all men. Then he commanded that
 the soldiers in the cities should be cashiered and stripped of their
 rank unless they chose to sacrifice to the demons. And yet these were
 small matters when compared with the greater things that followed.

 11. Why is it necessary to relate minutely and in detail all that was
 done by the hater of God, and to recount how this most lawless man
 invented unlawful laws? [2976] He passed an ordinance that no one
 should exercise humanity toward the sufferers in prison by giving them
 food, and that none should show mercy to those that were perishing of
 hunger in bonds; that no one should in any way be kind, or do any good
 act, even though moved by Nature herself to sympathize with one's
 neighbors. And this was indeed an openly shameful and most cruel law,
 calculated to expel all natural kindliness. And in addition to this it
 was also decreed, as a punishment, that those who showed compassion
 should suffer the same things with those whom they compassionated; and
 that those who kindly ministered to the suffering should be thrown into
 bonds and into prison, and should endure the same punishment with the
 sufferers. Such were the decrees of Licinius.

 12. Why should we recount his innovations in regard to marriage or in
 regard to the dying--innovations by which he ventured to annul the
 ancient laws of the Romans which had been well and wisely formed, and
 to introduce certain barbarous and cruel laws, which were truly
 unlawful and lawless? [2977] He invented, to the detriment of the
 provinces which were subject to him, innumerable prosecutions, [2978]
 and all sorts of methods of extorting gold and silver, new measurements
 of land [2979] and injurious exactions from men in the country, who
 were no longer living, but long since dead.

 13. Why is it necessary to speak at length of the banishments which, in
 addition to these things, this enemy of mankind inflicted upon those
 who had done no wrong, the expatriations of men of noble birth and high
 reputation whose young wives he snatched from them and consigned to
 certain baser fellows of his own, to be shamefully abused by them, and
 the many married women and virgins upon whom he gratified his passions,
 although he was in advanced age [2980] --why, I say, is it necessary to
 speak at length of these things, when the excessive wickedness of his
 last deeds makes the first appear small and of no account?

 14. For, finally, he reached such a pitch of madness that he attacked
 the bishops, supposing that they--as servants of the God over
 all--would be hostile to his measures. He did not yet proceed against
 them openly, on account of his fear of his superior, but as before,
 secretly and craftily, employing the treachery of the governors for the
 destruction of the most distinguished of them. And the manner of their
 murder was strange, and such as had never before been heard of.

 15. The deeds which he performed at Amaseia [2981] and in the other
 cities of Pontus surpassed every excess of cruelty. Some of the
 churches of God were again razed to the ground, others were closed, so
 that none of those accustomed to frequent them could enter them and
 render the worship due to God.

 16. For his evil conscience led him to suppose that prayers were not
 offered in his behalf; but he was persuaded that we did everything in
 the interest of the God-beloved emperor, and that we supplicated God
 for him. [2982] Therefore he hastened to turn his fury against us.

 17. And then those among the governors who wished to flatter him,
 perceiving that in doing such things they pleased the impious tyrant,
 [2983] made some of the bishops suffer the penalties customarily
 inflicted upon criminals, and led away and without any pretext punished
 like murderers those who had done no wrong. Some now endured a new form
 of death: having their bodies cut into many pieces with the sword, and
 after this savage and most horrible spectacle, being thrown into the
 depths of the sea as food for fishes.

 18. Thereupon the worshipers of God again fled, and fields and deserts,
 forests and mountains, again received the servants of Christ. And when
 the impious tyrant had thus met with success in these measures, he
 finally planned to renew the persecution against all.

 19. And he would have succeeded in his design, and there would have
 been nothing to hinder him in the work, had not God, the defender of
 the lives of his own people, most quickly anticipated that which was
 about to happen, and caused a great light to shine forth as in the
 midst of a dark and gloomy night, and raised up a deliverer for all,
 leading into those regions with a lofty arm, his servant, Constantine.

 [2970] To speak of Licinius as alone responsible for the civil war
 between himself and Constantine, which ended in his own downfall, is
 quite unjustifiable; indeed, this entire chapter is a painful example
 of the way in which prejudice distorts facts. The positions of the two
 emperors was such that a final struggle between them for the sole
 supremacy was inevitable. Already, in 314, a war broke out, which seems
 to have resulted from Licinius' refusal to deliver up a relative of his
 own, who had in some way been concerned in a conspiracy against
 Constantine. The occasion of the war is not perfectly plain, but it is
 certain that Constantine, not Licinius, was the aggressor. Constantine
 came off victorious, but was not able to overthrow his rival, and a
 treaty was concluded by which Illyricum, one of Licinius' most
 important provinces, was ceded to Constantine. The two emperors
 remained at peace, each waiting for a time when he could with advantage
 attack the other, until 323, when a second and greater war broke out,
 to which Eusebius, who omits all reference to the former, refers in
 these two chapters. The immediate occasion of this war, as of the
 former, is obscure, but it was certainly not due to Constantine's pity
 for the oppressed Christian subjects of Licinius, and his pious desire
 to avenge their sufferings, as Eusebius, who in his Vita Const. II. 3,
 in contradiction to this present passage, claims for his prince the
 honor of beginning the war without any other provocation, would have us
 believe. Doubtless the fact that Licinius was persecuting his Christian
 subjects had much to do with the outbreak of the war; for Constantine
 saw clearly that Licinius had weakened his hold upon his subjects by
 his conduct, and that therefore a good time had arrived to strike the
 decisive blow. A pretext--for of course Constantine could not go to war
 without some more material and plausible pretext than sympathy with
 oppressed Christian brethren--was furnished by some sort of a
 misunderstanding in regard to the respective rights of the two
 sovereigns in the border territory along the Danube frontier, and the
 war began by Constantine taking the initiative, and invading his
 rival's territory. Two battles were fought,--one at Adrianople in July,
 and the other at Chrysopolis in September, 323,--in both of which
 Constantine was victorious, and the latter of which resulted in the
 surrender of Licinius, and the accession of Constantine to the supreme
 sovereignty of both East and West. Cf. Gibbon, Harper's ed., I. p. 490
 sq., and Burckhardt's Zeit Constantins, 2d ed., p. 328 sq.

 [2971] See below, p. 400.

 [2972] A more flagrant misrepresentation of facts could hardly be
 imagined. Licinius received his appointment directly from Galerius and
 owed nothing whatever to Constantine; in fact, was an Augustus before
 the latter was, and held his half of the empire quite independently of
 the latter, and indeed by a far clearer title than Constantine held
 his. See above, Bk. VIII. chap. 13, notes 18 and 21.

 [2973] There is no reason to suppose that Licinius was any more guilty
 than Constantine in these respects.

 [2974] This is in direct contradiction to Eusebius' own statement in
 his Vita Const. II. 3 (see above, note 1), and is almost certainly
 incorrect.

 [2975] Licinius, as Görres has shown in his able essay Die
 Licinianische Christenverfolgung, p. 5 sq., did not begin to persecute
 the Christians until the year 319 (the persecution was formerly
 commonly supposed to have begun some three or four years earlier). The
 causes of his change of policy in this matter it is impossible to state
 with certainty, but the exceedingly foolish step seems to have been
 chiefly due to his growing hatred and suspicion of the Christians as
 the friends of Constantine. Though he had not hitherto been hostile to
 them, he had yet never taken any pains to win their friendship and to
 secure their enthusiastic support as Constantine had, and as a
 consequence they naturally looked with envy upon their brethren in the
 west, who were enjoying such signal marks of imperial favor. Licinius
 could not but be conscious of this; and as the relations between
 himself and Constantine became more and more strained, it was not
 unnatural for him to acquire a peculiar enmity toward them, and finally
 to suspect them of a conspiracy in favor of his rival. Whether he had
 any grounds for such a suspicion we do not know, but at any rate he
 began to show his changed attitude in 319 by clearing his palace of
 Christians (see § 10). No more foolish step can be imagined than the
 opening of a persecution at this critical juncture. Just at a time when
 he needed the most loyal support of all his subjects, he wantonly
 alienated the affections of a large and influential portion of them,
 and in the very act gave them good reason to become devoted adherents
 of his enemy. The persecution of Licinius, as Görres has clearly shown
 (ibid. p. 29 sq.) was limited in its extent and mild in its character.
 It began, as Eusebius informs us, with the expulsion of Christians from
 the palace, but even here it was not universal; at least, Eusebius of
 Nicomedia and other prominent clergymen still remained Licinius'
 friends, and were treated as such by him. In fact, he evidently
 punished only those whom he thought to be his enemies and to be
 interested in the success of Constantine, if not directly conspiring in
 his behalf. No general edicts of persecution were issued by him, and
 the sufferings of the Christians seem to have been confined almost
 wholly to occasional loss of property or banishment, or, still less
 frequently, imprisonment. A few bishops appear to have been put to
 death, but there is no reason to suppose that they suffered at the
 command of Licinius himself. Of course, when it was known that he was
 hostile to the Christians, fanatical heathen officials might venture,
 occasionally at least, to violate the existing laws and bring hated
 bishops to death on one pretext or another. But such cases were
 certainly rare, and there seem to have been no instances of execution
 on the simple ground of Christianity, as indeed there could not be
 while the Edict of Milan remained unrepealed. Eusebius' statement that
 Licinius was about to proceed to severer measures, when the war with
 Constantine broke out and put a stop to his plans, is very likely true;
 but otherwise his report is rather highly colored, as many other
 sources fully warrant us in saying. For a careful and very satisfactory
 discussion of this whole subject, see Görres, ibid. p. 32 sq.

 [2976] Note the play on the word nomos. nomous anomous ho pananomotatos

 [2977] Another play upon the same word: nomous, anomous hos alethos kai
 paranomous

 [2978] episkepseis. The same word is used in connection with Maximinus
 in Bk. VIII. chap. 14, § 10, above. Valesius cites passages from
 Aurelius Victor, and Libanius, in which it is said that Licinius was
 very kindly disposed toward the rural population of his realm, and that
 the cities flourished greatly under him. Moreover, Zosimus gives just
 such an account of Constantine as Eusebius gives of Licinius. Allowance
 must undoubtedly be made on the one side for Eusebius' prejudice
 against Licinius, as on the other for Zosimus' well-known hatred of
 Constantine. Doubtless both accounts are greatly exaggerated, though
 they probably contain considerable truth, for there were few Roman
 emperors that did not practice severe exactions upon their subjects, at
 times at least, if not continually, and it is always easy in a case of
 this kind to notice the dark and to overlook the bright features of a
 reign. Licinius was certainly a cruel man in many respects, and one
 hardly cares to enter the lists in his defense, but it should be
 observed that, until he became the enemy of Constantine and the
 persecutor of the Christians, Eusebius uniformly spoke of him in the
 highest terms. Compare Stroth's note ad locum (quoted also by Closs).

 [2979] i.e. for the purpose of making new assessments, which is always
 apt to be looked upon as an oppressive act, whether unjust or not.

 [2980] eschatogeros. Valesius remarks that, according to the epitomist
 of Victor, Licinius died in the sixtieth year of his age, so that at
 the time of which Eusebius was speaking he was little more than fifty
 years of age.

 [2981] Amaseia, or Amasia, as it is more commonly called, was an
 important city of Pontus, situated on the river Iris.

 [2982] Eusebius makes it clear enough in this sentence that Licinius
 suspected a treasonable conspiracy on the part of the Christians. See
 above, note 1.

 [2983] See ibid.

 Chapter IX.--The Victory of Constantine, and the Blessings which under
 him accrued to the Subjects of the Roman Empire.

 1. To him, therefore, God granted, from heaven above, the deserved
 fruit of piety, the trophies of victory over the impious, and he cast
 the guilty one with all his counselors and friends prostrate at the
 feet of Constantine.

 2. For when Licinius carried his madness to the last extreme, the
 emperor, the friend of God, thinking that he ought no longer to be
 tolerated, acting upon the basis of sound judgment, and mingling the
 firm principles of justice with humanity, gladly determined to come to
 the protection of those who were oppressed by the tyrant, and
 undertook, by putting a few destroyers out of the way, to save the
 greater part of the human race. [2984]

 3. For when he had formerly exercised humanity alone and had shown
 mercy to him who was not worthy of sympathy, nothing was accomplished;
 for Licinius did not renounce his wickedness, but rather increased his
 fury against the peoples that were subject to him, and there was left
 to the afflicted no hope of salvation, oppressed as they were by a
 savage beast.

 4. Wherefore, the protector of the virtuous, mingling hatred for evil
 with love for good, went forth with his son Crispus, a most beneficent
 prince, [2985] and extended a saving right hand to all that were
 perishing. Both of them, father and son, under the protection, as it
 were, of God, the universal King, with the Son of God, the Saviour of
 all, as their leader and ally, drew up their forces on all sides
 against the enemies of the Deity and won an easy victory; [2986] God
 having prospered them in the battle in all respects according to their
 wish.

 5. Thus, suddenly, and sooner than can be told, those who yesterday and
 the day before breathed death and threatening were no more, and not
 even their names were remembered, but their inscriptions and their
 honors suffered the merited disgrace. And the things which Licinius
 with his own eyes had seen come upon the former impious tyrants he
 himself likewise suffered, because he did not receive instruction nor
 learn wisdom from the chastisements of his neighbors, but followed the
 same path of impiety which they had trod, and was justly hurled over
 the same precipice. Thus he lay prostrate.

 6. But Constantine, the mightiest victor, adorned with every virtue of
 piety, together with his son Crispus, a most God-beloved prince, and in
 all respects like his father, recovered the East which belonged to
 them; [2987] and they formed one united Roman empire as of old,
 bringing under their peaceful sway the whole world from the rising of
 the sun to the opposite quarter, both north and south, even to the
 extremities of the declining day.

 7. All fear therefore of those who had formerly afflicted them was
 taken away from men, and they celebrated splendid and festive days.
 Everything was filled with light, and those who before were downcast
 beheld each other with smiling faces and beaming eyes. With dances and
 hymns, in city and country, they glorified first of all God the
 universal King, because they had been thus taught, and then the pious
 emperor with his God-beloved children.

 8. There was oblivion of past evils and forgetfulness of every deed of
 impiety; there was enjoyment of present benefits and expectation of
 those yet to come. Edicts full of clemency and laws containing tokens
 of benevolence and true piety were issued in every place by the
 victorious emperor. [2988]

 9. Thus after all tyranny had been purged away, the empire which
 belonged to them was preserved firm and without a rival for Constantine
 and his sons alone. [2989] And having obliterated the godlessness of
 their predecessors, recognizing the benefits conferred upon them by
 God, they exhibited their love of virtue and their love of God, and
 their piety and gratitude to the Deity, by the deeds which they
 performed in the sight of all men.

 The end, with God's help, of the Tenth Book of the Church History of
 Eusebius Pamphili.

 [2984] Eusebius speaks in the same way of the origin of the war in his
 Vita Const. II. 3. Cf. the previous chapter, note 1.

 [2985] Krispo Basilei philanthropot?to. Crispus, the oldest son of
 Constantine, by his first wife Minervina, was born about the beginning
 of the fourth century, made Cæsar in 317, and put to death by
 Constantine in 326 on suspicion, whether justified or not we do not
 know, of conspiracy and treason. Our sources agree in pronouncing him a
 young man of most excellent character and marked ability; and indeed he
 proved his valor and military talents in the west in a campaign against
 the Franks, and also in the present war with Licinius, in which he won
 a great naval battle, and thus contributed materially to his father's
 victory. His execution is the darkest blot on the memory of
 Constantine, and however it may be palliated can never, as it seems, be
 excused. Eusebius prudently omits all reference to it in his Vita
 Const.

 [2986] The final battle was fought in September, 323. See the previous
 chapter, note 4.

 [2987] ten oikeian he& 252;an apel?mbanon. Constantine's sole right to
 the East was the right of conquest.

 [2988] Some of these laws of Constantine have been preserved by
 Eusebius in his Vita Const. Bk. II.

 [2989] It is clear from this statement, as well as from the references
 to Crispus in the previous paragraphs, that the History was completed
 before his execution. See above, p. 45.

 Supplementary Notes and Tables.

 ------------------------

 On Bk. III. chap. 3, § 5 (note 17, continued).

 Since this note was in type Dr. Gardiner's admirable and exhaustive
 essay on the authorship of the Epistle to the Hebrews (in the Nicene
 and Post-Nicene Fathers, First Series, Vol. XIV. p. 341 sq.) has come
 to hand, and I have been much pleased to see that the theory that
 Barnabas wrote the epistle is accepted and defended with vigor.

 On Bk. III. chap. 3, § 6 (note 22, continued).

 Upon the last chapter of Romans and its relation to the remainder of
 the epistle, see especially Farrar's Life and Work of St. Paul, p. 450
 sq., Weiss' Einleitung in das N. T. p. 245 sq., Pfleiderer's
 Urchristenthum, p. 145 , Renan's Saint Paul, p. 461 sq. (maintaining
 that an editor has combined four copies of the one encyclical letter of
 Paul, addressed severally to as many different churches), Lightfoot's
 Commentary on Philippians, p. 172 sq., and Schaff, Ch. History, I. p.
 765.

 On Bk. III. chap. 24, § 17 (note 18 continued).

 In three places in the Church History (Bk. III. chap. 24, § 17, chap.
 25, § 2, and chap. 39, § 16) John's "former" epistle is referred to, as
 if he had written only two. In the last passage the use of protera
 instead of prote might be explained as Westcott suggests (Canon of the
 New Testament, p. 77, note 2), by supposing Eusebius to be reproducing
 the words of Papias; but in the other passages this explanation will
 not do, for the words are certainly Eusebius' own. In the Muratorian
 Canon only two epistles of John are mentioned, and in Irenæus the
 second epistle is quoted as if it were the first (see Westcott, ibid.
 p. 384, note 1). These facts lead Westcott to ask: "Is it possible that
 the second epistle was looked upon as an appendix to the first? and may
 we thus explain the references to two epistles of John?" He continues:
 "The first epistle, as is well known, was called ad Parthos by
 Augustine and some other Latin authorities; and the same title pros
 P?rthous is given to the second epistle in one Greek manuscript (62
 Scholz). The Latin translation of Clement's Outlines (IV. 66) says:
 Secunda Johannis epistola quæ ad virgines (parthenous) scripta
 simplissima est. Jerome, it may be added, quotes names from the third
 epistle as from the second (De nom. Hebr.)." On the other hand, in Bk.
 V. chap. 8, § 7, Eusebius speaks of the "first" (prote) epistle of
 John, and in Bk. III. chap. 25, § 3, he expressly mentions a second and
 third epistle of John. It is evident, therefore, that whatever the use
 of protera instead of prote in connection with John's first epistle may
 mean as used by others, it does not indicate a knowledge of only a
 first and second as used by him. It is by no means impossible, however,
 that Westcott's suggestion may be correct, and that the first and
 second epistles were sometimes looked upon as but one, and it is
 possible that such use of them by some of his predecessors may account
 for Eusebius' employment of the word protera in three separate
 passages.

 On Bk. III. chap. 25, § 4 (note 18 continued).

 The words he pheromene Barn?ba epistole have been commonly translated
 "the so-called Epistle of Barnabas," or "the Epistle ascribed to
 Barnabas," implying a doubt in Eusebius' mind as to the authenticity of
 the work. This translation, however, is, in my opinion, quite
 unwarranted. There are passages in Eusebius where the word pheromai
 used in connection with writings cannot by any possibility be made to
 bear this meaning; cases in which it can be interpreted only "to be
 extant" or "in circulation." Compare, for instance, Bk. II. chap. 15, §
 1, M?rkon hou to eungelion pheretai; II. 18. 6, monobibla autou
 pheretai; III. 9. 4; III. 16; III. 25. 3, he legomene 'Iakobou
 pheretai; III. 37. 4; III. 39. 1; IV. 3. 1, eiseti de pheretai para
 pleistois; IV. 14. 9, en te delotheise pros philippesious autou graphe
 pheromene eis deuro. Compare also IV. 15. I; IV. 23. 4, 9, 12; IV. 24.
 1; IV. 28; V. 5. 6; 19. 3; 23. 2; 24. 10; VI. 15. 1; VI. 20, &c. These
 passages, and many others which are cited by Heinichen (Vol. III. p.
 91), prove that the word is frequently used in the sense of "extant" or
 "in circulation." But in spite of these numerous examples, Heinichen
 maintains that the word is also used by Eusebius in another and quite
 different sense; namely, "so-called" or "ascribed to," thus equivalent
 to legomene. A careful examination, however, of all the passages cited
 by him in illustration of this second meaning will show that in them
 too the word may be interpreted in the same way as in those already
 referred to; in fact, that in many of them that is in itself the more
 natural interpretation. The passages to which we refer are Bk. III.
 chap. 25, §§ 2, 3, and 4; III. 3. 1, ten de pheromenen autou deuteran;
 III. 39. 6 (where I ought to have translated "is extant under the name
 of John"). To draw a distinction between the meaning of the word as
 used in these and in the other passages is quite arbitrary, and
 therefore unwarranted. The sense in which, as we have found, Eusebius
 so commonly employs the word attaches also to the Latin word fertur in
 the Muratorian Canon. I have not endeavored to trace carefully the use
 of the word in other writers; but while many instances occur in which
 it is certainly used in this sense, others in which either
 interpretation is allowable, I have not yet found one in which this
 meaning is ruled out by the nature of the case or by the context. In
 view of these facts I believe we should be careful to draw a sharp
 distinction between legomene or kaloumene and pheromene when used in
 connection with written works.

 A considerable portion of my translation was in type before I had
 observed this distinction between the two words, which is commonly
 quite overlooked, and as a consequence in a few cases my rendering of
 the word pheromene is inaccurate. All such cases I have endeavored to
 call attention to in these supplementary notes.

 On Bk. III. chap. 28, § 1.

 For the Disputation which is ascribed to him, read his extant
 Disputation.

 On Bk. III. chap. 32, § 6 (note 14^a).

 The Greek reads p?ses ekklesias (without the article), and so, two
 lines below, en p?se ekklesi& 139;. All the translators (with the
 exception of Pratten in the Ante-Nicene Fathers, Vol. VIII., who reads,
 "the churches") render "the whole church," as if reading pas with the
 article. We have not, it is true, enough of Hegesippus' writings to be
 able to ascertain positively his use of pas, and it is possible that he
 carelessly employed it indifferently with or without the article to
 signify the definite "all" or "the whole." In the absence of positive
 testimony, however, that he failed to draw the proper distinction
 between its use with and its use without the article, and in view of
 the fact that Eusebius himself (as well as other early Fathers so far
 as I am able to recall) is very consistent in making the distinction, I
 have not felt at liberty in my translation to depart from a strict
 grammatical interpretation of the phrases in question. Moreover, upon
 second thought, it seems quite as possible that Hegesippus meant to say
 "every" not "all"; for he can hardly have supposed these relatives of
 the Lord to have presided literally over the whole Church, while he
 might very well say that they presided each over the church in the city
 in which he lived, which is all that the words necessarily imply. The
 phrase just below, "in every church," is perhaps as natural as "in the
 whole church."

 On Bk. III. chap. 36 § 13.

 For the Epistle to the Philippians which is ascribed to him, read his
 extant Epistle to the Philippians.

 On Bk. III. chap. 39, § 1 (note 1, continued).

 Since the above note was in type Resch's important work on the
 Agrapha(von Gebhardt and Harnack's Texte und Untersuchungen, Bd. V.
 Heft 4) has come to hand. On p. 27 sq. he discusses at considerable
 length the sources of the Synoptic Gospels. He accepts the theory which
 is most widely adopted by New-Testament critics, that the synoptic
 tradition as contained in our Synoptic Gospels rests upon an original
 Gospel of Mark (nearly if not quite identical with our present Gospel
 of Mark) and a pre-canonical Hebrew Gospel. In agreement with such
 critics he draws a sharp distinction between this original Hebrew
 Gospel and our canonical Greek Matthew, while at the same time
 recognizing that the latter reproduces that original more fully than
 either of the other Gospels does. This original Hebrew he then
 identifies with the logia referred to by Papias as composed by Matthew
 in the Hebrew tongue (see Bk. III. chap. 39, § 16); that is, with the
 traditional Hebrew Gospel of Matthew (see ibid. chap. 24, note 5). The
 arguments which he urges in support of this position are very strong.
 Handmann regards the Gospel according to the Hebrews as the second
 original source of the synoptic tradition, alongside of the Ur-Marcus,
 and even suggests its identification with the logia of Papias, and yet
 denies its identity with the Hebrew Matthew. On the other hand, Resch
 regards the Hebrew Matthew, which he identifies with the logia of
 Papias, as the second original source of the synoptic tradition,
 alongside of Mark or the Ur-Marcus, and yet, like Handmann, though on
 entirely different grounds, denies the identity of the Gospel according
 to the Hebrews with the Hebrew Matthew. Their positions certainly tend
 to confirm my suggestion that the Hebrew Matthew and the Gospel
 according to the Hebrews were originally identical (see above, Bk. III.
 chap. 27, note 8).

 On Bk. III. chap. 39, § 6.

 For ascribed by name to John, read extant under the name of John.

 On Bk. III. chap. 39, § 16.

 For from the first epistle of John and from that of Peter likewise,
 read from the former epistle of John and from the epistle of Peter
 likewise. See p. 388.

 On Bk. IV. chap. 10.

 For the Pious, read Pius.

 On Bk. IV. chap. 18, § 2.

 For the Pious, read Pius.

 On Bk. V. Introd. § I (note 3, continued). The Successors of Antoninus
 Pius.

 Antoninus Pius was succeeded in 161 by his adopted sons, Marcus
 Aurelius Antoninus Verus and Lucius Ceionius Ælius Aurelius Commodus
 Antoninus. Upon his accession to the throne the former transferred his
 name Verus to the latter, who was thenceforth called Lucius Aurelius
 Verus. In his Chronicle Eusebius keeps these two princes distinct, but
 in his History he falls into sad confusion in regard to them, and this
 confusion has drawn upon him the severe censure of all his critics. He
 knew of course, as every one did, that Antoninus Pius had two
 successors. In Bk. IV. chap. 14, § 10, he states this directly, and
 gives the names of the successors as "Marcus Aurelius Verus, who was
 also called Antoninus," and "Lucius." From that point on he calls the
 former of these princes simply Antoninus Verus, Antoninus, or Verus,
 dropping entirely the name Marcus Aurelius. In Bk. IV. chap. 18, § 2,
 he speaks of the emperor "whose times we are now recording," that is,
 the successor of Antoninus Pius, and calls him Antoninus Verus. In Bk.
 V. Introd. § I he refers to the same emperor as Antoninus Verus, and in
 Bk. V. chap. 4, § 3, and chap. 9, he calls him simply Antoninus, while
 in Bk. IV. chap. 13, § 8, he speaks of him as the "Emperor Verus." The
 death of this Emperor Antoninus is mentioned in Bk. V. chap. 9, and it
 is there said that he reigned nineteen years and was then succeeded by
 Commodus. It is evident that in all these passages he is referring to
 the emperor whom we know as Marcus Aurelius, but to whom he gives that
 name only once, when he records his accession to the empire. On the
 other hand, in Bk. V. chap. 5, § 1, Eusebius speaks of Marcus Aurelius
 Cæsar and expressly distinguishes him from the Emperor Antoninus, to
 whom he has referred at the close of the previous chapter, and makes
 him the brother of that emperor. Again, in the same chapter, § 6, he
 calls this Marcus Aurelius Cæsar, just referred to, the "Emperor
 Marcus," still evidently distinguishing him from the Emperor Antoninus.
 In this chapter, therefore, he thinks of Marcus Aurelius as the younger
 of the two sons left by Antoninus Pius; that is, he identifies him with
 the one whom we call Lucius Verus, and whom he himself calls Lucius in
 Bk. IV. chap. 14 § 10. Eusebius thus commits a palpable error. How are
 we to explain it?

 The explanation seems to me to lie in the circumstance that Eusebius
 attempted to reconcile the tradition that Marcus Aurelius was not a
 persecutor with the fact known to him as a historian, that the emperor
 who succeeded Antoninus Pius was. It was the common belief in the time
 of Eusebius, as it had been during the entire preceding century, that
 all the good emperors had been friendly to the Christians, and that
 only the bad emperors had persecuted. Of course, among the good
 emperors was included the philosophical Marcus Aurelius (cf. e.g.
 Tertullian's Apol. chap. 5, to which Eusebius refers in Bk. V. chap.
 5). It was of Marcus Aurelius, moreover, that the story of the
 Thundering Legion was told (see ibid.). But Eusebius was not able to
 overlook the fact that numerous martyrdoms occurred during the reign of
 the successor of Antoninus Pius. He had the documents recording the
 terrible persecution at Lyons and Vienne; he had an apology of Melito,
 describing the hardships which the Christians endured under the same
 emperor (see Bk. IV. chap. 26). He found himself, as an historian, face
 to face with two apparently contradictory lines of facts. How was the
 contradiction to be solved? He seems to have solved it by assuming that
 a confusion of names had taken place, and that the prince commonly
 known as Marcus Aurelius, whose noble character was traditional, and
 whose friendship to the Christians he could not doubt, was the younger,
 not the older of the two brothers, and therefore not responsible for
 the numerous martyrdoms which took place after the death of Antoninus
 Pius. And yet he is not consistent with himself even in his History;
 for he gives the two brothers their proper names when he first mentions
 them, and says nothing of an identification of Marcus Aurelius with
 Lucius. It is not impossible that the words Marcus Aurelius, which are
 used nowhere else of the older brother, are an interpolation; but for
 this there is no evidence, and it may be suggested as more probable
 that at the time when this passage was written the solution of the
 difficulty which he gives distinctly in Bk. V. chap. 5 had not yet
 occurred to him. That he should be able to fancy that Marcus Aurelius
 was identical with Lucius is perhaps not strange when we remember how
 much confusion was caused in the minds of other writers besides himself
 by the perplexing identity of the names of the various members of the
 Antonine family. To the two successors of Antoninus Pius, the three
 names, Aurelius, Verus, and Antoninus, alike belonged. It is not
 surprising that Eusebius should under the circumstances think that the
 name Marcus may also have belonged to the younger one. This supposition
 would seem to him to find some confirmation in the fact that the most
 common official designation of the older successor of Antoninus Pius
 was not Marcus Aurelius, but Antoninus simply, or M. Antoninus. The
 name Marcus Aurelius or Marcus was rather a popular than an official
 designation. Even in the Chronicle there seems to be a hint that
 Eusebius thought of a possible distinction between Antoninus the
 emperor and Marcus, or Marcus Aurelius; for while he speaks of the
 "Emperor Antoninus" at the beginning of the passages in which he
 recounts the story of the Thundering Legion (year of Abr. 2188), he
 says at the close: literæ quoque exstant Marci regis (the M. Aureli
 gravissimi imperatoris of Jerome looks like a later expansion of the
 simpler original) quibus testatur copias suas iamiam perituras
 Christianorum precibus servatas esse. But even when he had reached the
 solution pointed out, Eusebius did not find himself clear of
 difficulties; for his sources put the occurrence of the Thundering
 Legion after the date at which the younger brother was universally
 supposed to have died, and it was difficult on still other grounds to
 suppose the prince named Marcus Aurelius already dead in 169 (the date
 given by Eusebius himself in his Chronicle for the death of Lucius). In
 this emergency he came to the conclusion that there must be some
 mistake in regard to the date of his death, and possessing no record of
 the death of Marcus Aurelius as distinct from Antoninus, he simply
 passed it by without mention.

 That Eusebius in accepting such a lame theory showed himself altogether
 too much under the influence of traditional views cannot be denied; but
 when we remember that the tradition that Marcus Aurelius was not a
 persecutor was supported by writers whose honesty and accuracy he could
 never have thought of questioning, as well as by the very nature of the
 case, we must, while we smile at the result, at least admire his effort
 to solve the contradiction which he, as an historian, felt more keenly
 than a less learned man, unacquainted with the facts on the other side,
 would have done.

 On Bk. V. chap. 1, § 27 (note 26, continued).

 See also Bk. VIII. chap. 10, note 5.

 On Bk. VI. chap. 2 (note 1, continued). Origen's Life and Writings.

 Origen Adamantius (on the second name, see Bk. VI. chap. 14, note 12)
 was of Christian parentage and probably of Greek descent on his
 father's side (as stated in the previous note), but whether born in
 Alexandria or not we do not know. Westcott suggests that his mother may
 have been of Jewish descent, because in an epistle of Jerome (ad
 Paulam: Ep. 39, § 1, Migne's ed.) he is said to have learned Hebrew so
 thoroughly that he "vied with his mother" in the singing of psalms (but
 compare the stricture of Redepenning on this passage, p. 187, note 1).
 The date of his birth may be gathered from the fact (stated in this
 chapter) that he was in his seventeenth year at the time of his
 father's death, which gives us 185 or 186 as the year of his birth (cf.
 Redepenning, I. p. 417-420, Erste Beilage). We learn from the present
 chapter that as a boy he was carefully trained by his father in the
 Scriptures and afterward in Greek literature, a training of which he
 made good use in later life. He was also a pupil of Clement in the
 catechetical school, as we learn from chaps. 6 and 14 (on the time, see
 chap. 6, note 4). He showed remarkable natural ability, and after the
 death of his father (being himself saved from martyrdom only by a
 device of his mother), when left in poverty with his mother and six
 younger brothers (see § 13 of this chapter), he was able, partly by the
 assistance of a wealthy lady and partly by teaching literature, to
 support himself (§ 14). Whether he supported the rest of the family
 Eusebius does not state, but his thoroughly religious character does
 not permit us to imagine that he left them to suffer. In his eighteenth
 year, there being no one at the head of the catechetical school in
 Alexandria, he was induced to take the school in charge and to devote
 himself to the work of instruction in the Christian faith. Soon
 afterward the entire charge of the work was officially committed to him
 by Demetrius, the bishop of Alexandria (see chap. 3). He lived at this
 time a life of rigid asceticism (ibid.), and even went so far as to
 mutilate himself in his zeal for the prosecution of his work (see chap.
 8). His great influence naturally aroused the hostility of unbelievers
 against him; but though many of his pupils suffered martyrdom (see
 chap. 4), he himself escaped, we do not know how. Eusebius ascribes his
 preservation to the providence of God (ibid.). During these years in
 which he was at the head of the catechetical school, he devoted himself
 with vigor to the study of Greek philosophy, and was for a time a pupil
 of the Neo-Platonist Ammonius Saccas (chap. 19). He studied
 non-Christian thought, as he tells us, in order that he might be the
 better able to instruct his pagan and heretical pupils (ibid.). His
 labors in the school in time grew so heavy that he was obliged to
 associate with himself his friend and fellow-pupil Heraclas, to whom he
 committed the work of elementary instruction (chap. 15). It was during
 this time that he seems to have begun his Hexapla, having learned
 Hebrew in order to fit himself the better for his work upon the Old
 Testament (chap. 16). During this period (while Zephyrinus was bishop
 of Rome, i.e. before 217) he made a brief visit to Rome (chap. 14), and
 later he was summoned to Arabia, to give instruction to the governor of
 that country, and remained there a short time (chap. 19). Afterward, on
 account of a great tumult in Alexandria (see chap. 19, note 22), he
 left the city and went to Cæsarea in Palestine, where, although only a
 layman, he publicly expounded the Scriptures in the church (chap. 19).
 The bishop Demetrius strongly disapproved of this, and summoned him
 back to Alexandria (ibid.). Upon his return to Alexandria he entered
 upon the work of writing Commentaries on the Scriptures (see chap. 23).
 During this period he wrote also other important works (see chap. 24).

 In the tenth year of Alexander Severus (a.d. 231) he left Alexandria
 (according to chap. 26) and took up his residence in Cæsarea, leaving
 his catechetical school in charge of his assistant, Heraclas. The cause
 of his departure is stated in chap. 23 to have been "some necessary
 affairs of the church" which called him to Greece. (For a statement of
 the reasons which lead me, contrary to the common opinion, to identify
 the departure mentioned in chap. 23 with that mentioned in chap. 26,
 see below, p. 395 sq.) Jerome (de vir. ill. c. 54) says that he went to
 Achaia on account of heresies which were troubling the churches there.
 His words are: Et propter ecclesias Achaiæ, quæ pluribus hæresibus
 vexabantur, sub testimonio ecclesiasticæ epistolæ Athenas per
 Palæstinam pergeret. He passed through Palestine on his way to Greece,
 and it was at this time that he was ordained a presbyter by the
 Palestinian bishops (chap. 23), Theoctistus of Cæsarea and Alexander of
 Jerusalem (according to Jerome, l.c.; cf. also Euseb. chap. 8). Whether
 he remained long in Palestine at this time, or went on at once to
 Greece, we do not know; but that a visit (to be distinguished from the
 second visit mentioned in chap. 32; see note 4 on that chapter) was
 made we know from a fragment of one of Origen's epistles written from
 Athens (printed in Lommatzsch's ed. of Origen's works, XXV. p. 388);
 with which are to be compared Epiphanius, Hær. LXIV. 1, and the remark
 made by Eusebius in chap. 16, § 2. in regard to the finding of a copy
 of a translation in Nicopolis. Origen's ordination resulted in the
 complete alienation of the bishop Demetrius (upon his earlier and later
 attitude toward Origen, and the causes of the change, see below, p. 394
 sq.), and he called a council in Alexandria of bishops and presbyters
 (the council must have been held very soon after the receipt of the
 news of Origen's ordination, for Demetrius died in 232; see Bk. V.
 chap. 22, note 4) which decided that Origen should be required to leave
 Alexandria and not be allowed to reside or to teach there, but did not
 depose him from the priesthood. Afterward, however, Demetrius,
 combining with some bishops of like mind with himself, deposed Origen
 from his office, and the sentence was ratified by those who had before
 voted with him. Photius gives this account in Cod. 118, quoting from
 the lost Defense of Pamphilus and Eusebius. Eusebius himself tells us
 nothing about these proceedings in his History, but simply refers us
 (chap. 23) to the second book of his Defense, which he says contained a
 full account of the matter. (Upon the bearing of the words quoted by
 Photius from the Defense, see below, p. 395 sq.) Demetrius wrote of the
 result of the council "to the whole world" (according to Jerome's de
 vir. ill. c. 54), and the sentence was concurred in by the bishops of
 Rome and of all the other churches, except those of Palestine, Arabia,
 Phoenicia, and Achaia (see Jerome ad Paul. Ep. 33; and Apol. adv.
 libros Ruf. II. 18). Taking up his abode in Cæsarea, Origen made this
 place his headquarters for the rest of his life, and found there the
 most cordial sympathy and support (chap. 27). He carried on in Cæsarea
 a catechetical school, expounding the Scriptures, lecturing on
 theology, and at the same time continuing his literary labors in peace
 until the persecution of Maximinus (a.d. 235-237), during which some of
 his friends in Cæsarea suffered (see chaps. 27, 28, 30, 32, and 36).
 How Origen escaped and where he was during the persecution we do not
 know (see chap. 28, note 2). In 237 or 238 at any rate, he was (again)
 in Cæsarea and at this time Gregory Thaumaturgus delivered his
 Panegyric, which is our best source for a knowledge of Origen's methods
 of teaching and of the influence which he exerted over his pupils.
 (Upon the date, see Draeseke, Der Brief des Origenes an Gregoriosin the
 Jabrbücher f. prot. Theologie, 1887, p. 102 sq.) During this period he
 did considerable traveling, making another visit to Athens (see chap.
 32) and two to Arabia (see chaps. 33 and 37). It was while in Cæsarea,
 and when he was over sixty years old, that he first permitted his
 discourses to be taken down by shorthand writers (see chap. 26). His
 correspondence with the Emperor Philip and his wife is mentioned by
 Eusebius in the same chapter. He was arrested during the Decian
 persecution and suffered terrible torments, but not martyrdom (chap.
 39). He died not much more than a year after the close of the
 persecution, in the seventieth year of his age (see Bk. VII. chap. 1),
 at Tyre, and was buried there (Jerome, de vir. ill. c. 54).

 Origen was without doubt the greatest scholar and the most original
 thinker of his age. He was at the same time a man of most devout piety,
 and employed all his wonderful talents in the service of what he
 believed to be the truth. His greatest labors were in the field of
 exegesis, and here his writings were epoch-making, although his results
 were often completely vitiated by his use of the allegorical method of
 interpretation and his neglect of the grammatical and historical sense.
 His services in the cause of scientific theology cannot be
 overestimated, and his thinking long stimulated the brightest minds of
 the Church, both orthodox and heretical. Both his natural predilections
 and his training in the philosophy which prevailed in Alexandria in
 that day led him in the direction of idealism, and to an excess of
 this, combined with his deep desire--common also to Clement--to
 reconcile Christianity with reason and to commend it to the minds of
 philosophers, are due most of his errors, nearly all of which are
 fascinating and lofty in conception. Those errors led the Church to
 refuse him a place among its saints and even among its Fathers in the
 stricter sense. Even before his death suspicions of his orthodoxy were
 widespread; and although he had many followers and warm defenders, his
 views were finally condemned at a home synod in Constantinople in 543
 (?) (see Helele, II. 790). Into the bitter controversies which raged
 during the fourth and fifth centuries, and in which Jerome and Rufinus
 (the former against, the latter for, Origen) played so large a part we
 cannot enter here. See the article Origenistic Controversies in the
 Dict. of Christ. Biog., or any of the Church histories and lives of
 Origen.

 Origen was a marvelously prolific writer. Epiphanius (Hær. LXIV. 63)
 says that it was commonly reported that he had written 6000 works.
 Jerome reduces the number to less than a third (adv. Ruf. II. 22). But
 whatever the number, we know that he was one of the most
 voluminous--perhaps the most voluminous writer of antiquity. He wrote
 works of the most diverse nature, critical, exegetical, philosophical
 and theological, apologetic and practical, besides numerous epistles.
 (On his great critical work, the Hexpla, see chap. 16, note 8.) His
 exegetical works consisted of commentaries, scholia (or detached
 notes), and homilies. Of his commentaries on the Old Testament, which
 were very numerous, only fragments of those on Genesis, Exodus, the
 Psalms, and the Song of Solomon are presented in the version of
 Rufinus, and a fragment of the commentary on Ezekiel in the Philocalia.
 Of the New Testament commentaries we have numerous fragments both in
 Greek and Latin (especially on Matthew and John), and the whole of
 Romans in the translation of Rufinus. Upon the commentaries composed by
 Origen while still in Alexandria, see chap. 24; on those written
 afterwards, see chaps. 32 and 36. No complete scholia are extant; but
 among the numerous exegetical fragments which are preserved there may
 be portions of these scholia, as well as of the commentaries and
 homilies. It is not always possible to tell to which a fragment
 belongs. Of the homilies, over 200 are preserved, the majority of them
 in the translation of Rufinus.

 The philosophical and theological works known to us are the two books
 On the Resurrection (see chap. 24, note 5): the De principiis (see
 ibid. note 6); and the Stromata (see ibid. note 7).

 Origen's great apologetic work is his Contra Celsum (see chap. 36, note
 3).

 Two works of a practical character are known to us: On Martyrdom (see
 chap. 28, note 3); and On Prayer. The latter work is not mentioned by
 Eusebius in his History, but is referred to in Pamphilus' Apology for
 Origen, Chap. VIII. (Lommatzsch, XXIV. p. 397). It is extant in the
 original Greek, and is printed by Lommatzsch, XVII. p. 79-297. It is
 addressed to two of his friends, Ambrosius and Tatiana, and is one of
 his most beautiful works. As to the date at which Origen wrote the
 work, we know (from chap. 23 of the work) only that it was written
 after the composition of the commentary on Genesis (see above, Bk. VI.
 chap. 24), but whether before or after his departure from Alexandria we
 cannot tell.

 Of his epistles only two are preserved entire, one to Julius Africanus,
 and another to Gregory Thaumaturgus. On the former, see chap. 31, note
 1. On the latter and on Origen's other epistles, see chap. 36, note 7.

 Finally must be mentioned the Philocalia (Lommatzsch, XXV. p. 1-278), a
 collection of judiciously selected extracts from Origen's works in
 twenty-seven books. Its compilers were Gregory Nazianzen and Basil.

 The principal edition of Origen's works is that of the Benedictine
 Delarue in 4 vols. fol.; reprinted by Migne in 8 vols. 8vo. A
 convenient edition is that of Lommatzsch, in 25 vols. small 8vo., a
 revision of Delarue's. Only his De principiis, Contra Cels., and the
 epistles to Africanus and to Gregory have been translated into English,
 and are given in the Ante-Nicene Fathers, Vol. IV. p. 221 sqq. Of lives
 of Origen must be mentioned that of Huetius: Origeniana (Paris, 1679,
 in 2 vols.; reprinted in Delarue and Lommatzsch); also Redepenning's
 Origenes. Eine Darstellung seines Lebens und seiner Lehre (Bonn, 1841
 and 1846, in 2 vols.). The respective sections in Lardner and Tillemont
 should be compared, and the thorough article of Westcott in the Dict.
 of Christ. Biog. IV. 96-142. For a good list of the literature on
 Origen, see Schaff, Ch. Hist. II. p. 785.

 On Bk. VI. chap. 8, § 5 (note 4). Origen and Demetrius.

 The friendship of Demetrius for Origen began early and continued,
 apparently without interruption, for many years. In 203 he committed to
 him the charge of the catechetical school (chap. 3); in the present
 chapter we find him encouraging him after learning of his rash deed;
 some years afterward, upon Origen's return from a visit to Rome, where
 his fame as a teacher had already become very great, Demetrius still
 showed the very best spirit toward him (chap. 14); and a little later
 sent him into Arabia to give instruction to an officer in that country
 (chap. 19). It is soon after this that the first sign of a difference
 between the two men appears, upon the occasion of Origen's preaching in
 Cæsarea (ibid.). There seems, however, to have been no lasting quarrel,
 if there was any quarrel at all; for in 231 we find Demetrius giving
 Origen letters of recommendation upon the occasion of his visit to
 Achaia (see below, p. 396). The fact that he gives him these letters,
 thus recognizing him as a member of his church in good standing, and
 sending him upon his important mission with his official approval,
 shows that no open break between himself and Origen can as yet have
 taken place. But in his commentary on John (Tom. VI. præf.) Origen
 shows us that his last years in Alexandria were by no means pleasant
 ones. He compares his troubles there to the waves of a stormy sea, and
 his final departure to the exodus of the children of Israel. We know
 that he had been engaged for some time in writing commentaries, and
 that the first five books of his commentary on John--epoch-making in
 their significance, and sure to cause a sensation in orthodox,
 conservative circles--had recently appeared. We know that his
 reputation for heterodoxy was already quite widespread and that the
 majority of the Egyptian clergy were by no means upon his side. The
 trials to which he refers, therefore, may well have been a result of
 this hostility to his teachings existing among the clergy about him,
 and Demetrius may have shared to an extent in the common feeling. At
 the same time his disapproval cannot have been very pronounced, or he
 could not have given his official sanction to Origen's important visit
 to Achaia. But now, things being in this condition, Origen set out upon
 his mission, leaving Heraclas in charge of his school, and undoubtedly
 with the expectation of returning again, for he left the unfinished
 sixth book of his commentary on John behind him (see preface to the
 sixth book). He stopped in Palestine on his way to Athens, and there
 was ordained a presbyter by the bishops of that country (upon the
 motives which prompted him in the matter, see below, p. 397). The
 result was a complete break between Demetrius and himself, and his
 condemnation by an Alexandrian synod. To understand Demetrius' action
 in the matter, we must remember that both Eusebius and Jerome attribute
 the change in his attitude to jealousy of Origen. They may be too harsh
 in their judgment, and yet it is certainly not at all unnatural that
 the growing power and fame of his young catechumen should in time
 affect, all unconsciously, his attitude toward him. But we must not do
 Demetrius an injustice. There is no sign that his jealousy led him to
 attack Origen, or to seek to undermine his influence, and we have no
 right to accuse him, without ground, of such unchristian conduct. At
 the same time, while he remained, as he supposed, an honest friend of
 Origen's, the least feeling of jealousy (and it would have been
 remarkable had he never felt the least) would make him more suspicious
 of the latter's conduct, and more prone to notice in his actions
 anything which might be interpreted as an infringement of his own
 prerogatives, or a disregard of the full respect due him. We seem to
 see a sign of this over-sensitiveness (most natural under the
 circumstances) in his severe disapproval of Origen's preaching in
 Cæsarea, which surprised the Palestinian bishops, but which is not
 surprising when we realize that Demetrius might so easily construe it
 as a token of growing disrespect for his authority on the part of his
 rising young school principal. It is plain enough, if he was in this
 state of mind, that he might in all sincerity have given letters of
 recommendation to Origen and have wished him God speed upon his
 mission, and yet that the news of his ordination to the presbyterate by
 foreign bishops, without his own approval or consent, and indeed in
 opposition to his own principles and to ecclesiastical law, should at
 once arouse his ire, and, by giving occasion for what seemed righteous
 indignation, open the floodgates for all the smothered jealousy of
 years. In such a temper of mind he could not do otherwise than listen
 willingly to all the accusations of heresy against Origen, which were
 no doubt busily circulated in his absence, and it was inevitable that
 he should believe it his duty to take decided steps against a man who
 was a heretic, and at the same time showed complete disregard of the
 rules and customs of the Church, and of the rights of his bishop. The
 result was the definitive and final exclusion of Origen from communion
 with the Alexandrian church, and his degradation from the office of
 presbyter by decree of the Alexandrian synods described above, p. 392
 sq. The two grounds of the sentence passed by these synods were plainly
 his irregular ordination to the priesthood when constitutionally unfit
 for it (cf. what Eusebius says in this chapter), and his heterodoxy
 (cf. e.g. the synodical epistle of the Egyptian bishops given in
 Mansi's Collect. Concil. IX. col. 524, and also Jerome's epistle ad
 Pammachium et Oceanum, § 10, and Rufinus' Apologi in Hieron. II. 21).
 That the ordination to the priesthood of one who had mutilated himself
 was not universally considered uncanonical in the time of Origen is
 proved by the fact that the Palestinian bishops (whom Origen cannot
 have allowed to remain ignorant of his condition) all united in
 ordaining him. But the very fact that they all united (which has
 perplexed some scholars) leads us to think that they realized that
 their action was somewhat irregular, and hence wished to give it
 sanction by the participation of a number of bishops. The first canon
 of the Council of Nicæa forbids such ordination, and the canon is
 doubtless but the repetition of an older one (cf. Apost. Canons, 21 to
 24, and see Hefele, Conciliengesch. I. p. 377), and yet Origen's
 consent to his ordination makes it improbable that there was in force
 in his time, even in Alexandria, a canon placing absolute and
 unconditional clerical disabilities upon such as he. That the action,
 however, was considered at least irregular in Alexandria, is proved by
 the position taken in the matter by Demetrius; and the fact that he
 made so much of it leads us to believe that the synod, called by him,
 may now have made canon law of what was before only custom, and may
 have condemned Origen for violating that custom which they considered
 as binding as law. Certainly had there been no such custom, and had it
 not seemed to Demetrius absolutely binding, he would have ordained
 Origen to the priesthood long before. His ordination in Palestine was
 in violation of what was known to be Demetrius' own principle, and the
 principle of the Alexandrian church, even if the principle was not,
 until this time or later, formulated into a canon.

 On Bk. VI. chap. 12, § 6.

 Since this passage was printed, I have seen Westcott's translation of
 this fragment of Serapion's epistle in his Canon of the New Testament,
 5th ed. p. 390 sq. (cf. especially p. 391, note), and am glad to note
 that his rendering of the words katarxamenon autou is the same as my
 own. His interpretation of one or two other points I am unable to
 adopt.

 On Bk. VI. chap. 23, § 4 (note 6). Origen's Visit to Achaia.

 Eusebius gives as the cause of Origen's visit to Greece simply "a
 pressing necessity in connection with ecclesiastical affairs," but
 Jerome (de vir. ill. c. 54) tells us that it was on account of heresies
 which were troubling the churches of Achaia (propter ecclesias Achaiæ,
 quæ pluribus hæresibus vexabantur). Photius (Cod. 118) reports that
 Origen went to Athens without the consent of Demetrius (choris tes tou
 oikeiou gnomes episkopou), but this must be regarded as a mistake
 (caused perhaps by his knowledge that it was Origen's ordination, which
 took place during this trip, that caused Demetrius' anger; for Photius
 does not say that this statement rests upon the authority of Pamphilus,
 but prefaces his whole account with the words ho te P?mphilos m?rtus
 kai heteroi pleistoi), for Jerome (de vir. ill. c. 54) says that Origen
 went to Athens by way of Palestine sub testimonio ecclesiasticæ
 epistolæ, and in chap. 62 he says that Alexander, bishop of Jerusalem
 wrote an epistle in which he stated that he had ordained Origen juxta
 testimonium Demetrii. We must therefore assume that Origen left
 Alexandria for Athens with Demetrius' approval, and with letters of
 recommendation from him. It is the common opinion that Origen left
 Alexandria this time about 228 a.d., and after his visit in Achaia
 returned to Alexandria, where he remained until excommunicated by the
 council called by Demetrius. Upon searching the sources, however, I can
 find absolutely no authority for the statement that he returned to
 Alexandria after his visit to Achaia; in fact, that he did seems by
 most scholars simply to be taken for granted without further
 investigation. The opinion apparently rests upon the interpretation of
 two passages, one in a report of the proceedings of the Alexandrian
 synod taken by Photius from Pamphilus' Apology, the other in the
 preface to the sixth book of Origen's commentary on the Gospel of John.
 In the former it is said that the synod voted to exile Origen from
 Alexandria, and forbade him to reside or to teach there (psephizetai
 metastenai men apo 'Alexandreias ton 'Origenen, kai mete diatribein en
 aute, mete did?skein). But certainly such a decree is far from proving
 that Origen, at the time it was passed, was actually in Alexandria. It
 simply shows that he still regarded that city as his residence, and was
 supposed to be expecting to return to it after his visit was completed.
 In the preface to the sixth book of his commentary on John's Gospel, he
 speaks of the troubles and trials which he had been enduring in
 Alexandria before he finally left the city, and compares that departure
 to the exodus of the children of Israel. But certainly it is just as
 easy to refer these troubles to the time before his visit to Achaia, a
 time when in all probability the early books of his commentary on John,
 as well as others of his writings, had begun to excite the hostility of
 the Alexandrian clergy, and thus made his residence there
 uncomfortable. It is almost necessary to assume that this hostility had
 arisen some time before the synods were held, in order to account both
 for the hostility of the majority of the clergy, which cannot have been
 so seriously aroused in an instant, and also for the change in
 Demetrius' attitude, which must have found a partial cause in the
 already existing hostility of the clergy to Origen, hostility which led
 them to urge him on to take decisive steps against Origen when the
 fitting occasion for action came in the ordination of the latter (see
 above, p. 395). The only arguments which, so far as I am able to learn,
 have been or can be urged for Origen's return to Alexandria are thus
 shown to prove nothing. On the other hand, it is a fact that Origen was
 ordained on his way to Achaia, and then went on and did his business
 there, and it is difficult to imagine that Demetrius and the
 Alexandrian church would have waited so long before taking action in
 regard to this step, which appeared to them so serious. More than that,
 Origen reports that he had begun the sixth book of his commentary on
 John in Alexandria, but had left it there, and therefore began it anew
 in Palestine. It is difficult to imagine that his departure was so
 hasty that he could not take even his mss. with him; but if he left
 only for his visit to Achaia, expecting to return again, he would of
 course leave his mss. behind him, and when his temporary absence was
 changed by the synod into permanent exile, he might not have been in a
 position, or might not have cared, to send back for the unfinished
 work. Still further, it does not seem probable that, if he were leaving
 Alexandria an exile under the condemnation of the church, and in such
 haste as the leaving of his unfinished commentary would imply, he
 should be in a position to entrust the care of his catechetical school
 to his assistant Heraclas (as he is said in chap. 26 to have done).
 That matter would rather have been taken out of his hands by Demetrius
 and the rest of the clergy. But going away merely on a visit, he would
 of course leave the school in Heraclas' charge, and after his
 condemnation the clergy might see that Heraclas was the man for the
 place, and leave him undisturbed in it. After having, upon the grounds
 mentioned, reached the conclusion, shared so far as I knew by no one
 else, that it is at least unlikely that Origen returned to Alexandria
 after his visit to Greece, I was pleased to find my position
 strengthened by some chronological considerations urged by Lipsius
 (Chronologie d. röm. Bischöfe, p. 195, note), who says that "we do not
 know whether Origen ever returned to Alexandria after his ordination,"
 and who seems to think it probable that he did not. He shows that
 Pontianus did not become bishop of Rome until 230, and therefore, if
 Eusebius is correct in putting Origen's visit to Achaia in the time of
 Pontianus' episcopate, as he does in this passage, that visit cannot
 have taken place before 230 (the commonly accepted date, which rests
 upon a false chronology of Pontianus' episcopate, is 228); while on the
 other hand, according to chap. 26, Origen's final departure from
 Alexandria took place in the tenth year of Alexander's reign (231
 a.d.), shortly before Demetrius' death, which occurred not later than
 232 (see Bk. V. chap. 22, note 4). Supposing, then, that Origen
 returned to Alexandria, we must assume his journey to Palestine, his
 ordination there, his visit to Achaia and settlement of the disputes
 there, his return to Alexandria, the composition of at least some part
 of his commentary on John, the calling of a synod, his condemnation and
 exile,--all within the space of about a year. These chronological
 considerations certainly increase the improbability of Origen's return
 to Alexandria. (It may be remarked that Redepenning, who accepts the
 commonly received chronology, assigns two years to the Cæsarean and
 Achaian visit.) Assuming, then, that this departure for Achaia is
 identical with that mentioned in chap. 26, we put it in the year 231.
 It must have been (as of course we should expect, for he stopped in
 Palestine only on his way to Achaia) very soon after his departure that
 Origen's ordination took place; and the synod must have been called
 very soon after that event (as we should likewise expect), for
 Demetrius died the following year.

 As to the cause of Origen's ordination, it is quite possible, as
 Redepenning suggests, that when he went a second time to Palestine, his
 old friends, the bishops of Cæsarea, of Jerusalem, and of other cities,
 wished to hear him preach again, but that remembering the reproof of
 the bishop Demetrius, called forth by his preaching on the former
 occasion (see chap. 19), he refused, and that then the Palestinian
 bishops, in order to obviate that difficulty, insisted on ordaining
 him. It is not impossible that Origen, who seems never to have been a
 stickler for the exact observance of minor ecclesiastical rules and
 formalities, supposed that Demetrius, who had shown himself friendly in
 the past, and not hostile to him because of his youthful imprudence
 (see chap. 8), would concur willingly in an ordination performed by
 such eminent bishops, and an ordination which would prove of such
 assistance to Origen in the accomplishment of the work in Achaia which
 he was undertaking with the approval of Demetrius himself, even though
 the latter could not bring himself to violate what he considered an
 ecclesiastical canon against the ordination of eunuchs. We can thus
 best explain Origen's consent to the step which, when we consider his
 general character, it is difficult to suppose he would have taken in
 conscious opposition to the will of his bishop. (On Demetrius' view of
 the matter, see above, p. 394 sq.) He was ordained, according to
 Jerome's de vir. ill. c. 54 (cf. also chap. 8, above), by Theoctistus,
 bishop of Cæsarea, and Alexander, bishop of Jerusalem, together with
 "the most distinguished bishops of Palestine" (as Eusebius says in
 chap. 8).

 On Bk. VII. chap. 25, § 11.

 For in the reputed second or third Epistle of John, read in the extant
 second and third Epistles of John (en te deutera pheromene 'Io?nnou kai
 trite).

 On Bk. VII. chap. 26, § 1 (note 4, continued).

 On Dionysius' attitude toward Sabellianism and the occasion of the
 Apology (?lenchos kai apologia) in four books, which he addressed to
 Dionysius of Rome, see Bk. VI. chap. 40, note 1. This work is no longer
 extant, but brief fragments of it have been preserved by Athanasius (in
 his De Sent. Dionysii) and by Basil ( in his De Spir. Sancto). English
 translation in the Ante-Nicene Fathers, Vol. VI. p. 92 sq. The longer
 work was preceded by a shorter one, now lost, to which reference is
 made in one of the fragments of the longer work. We do not know the
 exact date of the work, but may assign it with considerable probability
 to the earlier part of the episcopate of Dionysius of Rome; that is,
 soon after 259. Upon this work and upon Dionysius' attitude toward
 Sabellianism, see especially Dittrich, Dionysius der Grosse, p. 91. sq.

 On Bk. VIII. chap. 2, § 4 (note 3, continued). The Causes of the
 Diocletian Persecution.

 The persecution of Diocletian, following as it did a period of more
 than forty years during which Christianity had been recognized as a
 religio licita, and undertaken as it was by a man who throughout the
 first eighteen years of his reign had shown himself friendly to the
 Christians, and had even filled his own palace with Christian servants,
 presents a very difficult problem to the historian. Why did Diocletian
 persecute? The question has taxed the ingenuity of many scholars and
 has received a great variety of answers. Hunziker (in his Regierung und
 Christenverfolgung des Kaisers Diocletianus und seiner Nachfolger,
 Leipzig, 1869), Burckhardt (in his Zeit Constantins, Basel, 1853, 2d
 and improved edition, Leipzig, 1880), and A. J. Mason (in his
 Persecution of Diocletian, Cambridge and London, 1876), not to mention
 other investigators, have treated the subject with great ability and at
 considerable length, and the student is referred to their works for a
 fuller examination of the questions involved. It is not my purpose here
 to discuss the various views that have been presented by others; but
 inasmuch as I am unable fully to agree with any of them, I desire to
 indicate my own conception of the causes that led to the persecution.
 We are left almost wholly to conjecture in the matter; for our only
 authority, Lactantius, makes so many palpably erroneous statements in
 his description of the causes which produced the great catastrophe that
 little reliance can be placed upon him (see Burckhardt's demonstration
 of these errors, ibid. p. 289 sq.). Nevertheless, he has preserved for
 us at least one fact of deep significance, and it is a great merit of
 Mason's discussion that he has proved so conclusively the correctness
 of the report. The fact I refer to is that the initiative came from
 Galerius, not from Diocletian himself. Lactantius states this very
 distinctly and repeatedly, but it has been argued by Hunziker and many
 others that the persecution had been in Diocletian's mind for a long
 time, and that it was but the culmination of his entire policy. Having
 settled political matters, it is said, he turned his attention to
 religious matters, and determined as a step toward the restoration of
 the old Roman religion in its purity to exterminate Christianity. But,
 as Mason shows, this is an entire misconception of Diocletian's policy.
 It had never been his intention to attack Christianity. Such an attack
 was opposed to all his principles, and was at length made only under
 the pressure of strong external reasons. But though Mason has brought
 out this important fact so clearly, and though he has shown that
 Galerius was the original mover in the matter, he has, in my opinion,
 gone quite astray in his explanation of the causes which led Diocletian
 to accede to the wishes of Galerius. According to Mason, Diocletian was
 induced against his will to undertake a course of action which his
 judgment told him was unwise. "But the Cæsar [Galerius] was the younger
 and the stronger man; and a determination to do has always an advantage
 over the determination not to do. At length Diocletian broke down so
 far as to offer to forbid the profession of the faith within the walls
 of his palace and under the eagles of his legions. He was sure it was a
 mistaken policy. It was certainly distasteful to himself. The army
 would suffer greatly by the loss. Diocletian would have to part with
 servants to whom he was attached," &c. To my mind, it is impossible to
 believe that Diocletian--great and wise emperor as he had proved
 himself, and with an experience of over eighteen years of imperial
 power during which he had always shown himself master--can thus have
 yielded simply to the importunity of another man. Our knowledge of
 Diocletian's character should lead us to repudiate absolutely such a
 supposition. Feeling the difficulty of his own supposition, Mason
 suggests that Diocletian may have felt that it would be better for him
 to begin the persecution himself, and thus hold it within some bounds,
 than to leave it for Galerius to conduct when he should become emperor
 two years later. But certainly if, as Mason assumes, Diocletian was
 convinced that the measure was in itself vicious and impolitic, that
 was a most remarkable course to pursue. To do a bad thing in order to
 leave no excuse for a successor to do the same thing in a worse
 way--certainly that is hardly what we should expect from the strongest
 and the wisest ruler Rome had seen for three centuries. If he believed
 it ought not to be done, we may be sure he would not have done it, and
 that neither Galerius nor any one else could compel him to. He was not
 such a helpless tool in the hands of others, nor was he so devoid of
 resources as to be obliged to prevent a successor's folly and
 wickedness by anticipating him in it, nor so devoid of sense as to
 believe that he could. It is, in my opinion, absolutely necessary to
 assume that Diocletian was convinced of the necessity of proceeding
 against the Christians before he took the step he did. How then are we
 to account for this change in his opinions? Burckhardt attributes the
 change to the discovery of a plot among the Christians. But the
 question naturally arises, what motive can the Christians have had for
 forming a plot against an emperor so friendly to them and a government
 under which they enjoyed such high honors? Burckhardt gives no
 satisfactory answer to this very pertinent query, and consequently his
 theory has not found wide acceptance. And yet I believe he is upon the
 right track in speaking of a plot, though he has not formed the right
 conception of its causes and nature, and has not been able to urge any
 known facts in direct support of his theory. In my opinion the key to
 the mystery lies in the fact which Lactantius states and the truth of
 which Mason demonstrates, but which Burckhardt quite overlooks, that
 the initiative came from Galerius, not Diocletian, viewed in the light
 of the facts that Galerius had long been known to be a bitter enemy of
 the Christians, and that he was to succeed Diocletian within a couple
 of years. The course of events might be pictured somewhat as follows.
 Some of the Christian officials and retainers of Diocletian, fearing
 what might happen upon the accession of Galerius, who was known to be a
 deadly enemy of the Christians, and who might be expected, if not to
 persecute, at least to be a deadly enemy of the Christian officials
 that had enjoyed Diocletian's favor (Galerius himself had only heathen
 officials in his court), conceived the idea of frustrating in some way
 the appointed succession and secure it for some one who would be more
 favorable to them (possibly for the young Constantine, who was then at
 Diocletian's court, and who, as we know, was later so cordially hated
 by Galerius). It may have been hoped by some of them that it would be
 possible in the end to win Diocletian himself over to the side of
 Christianity, and then induce him to change the succession and transmit
 the power to a fitter prince. There may thus have been nothing
 distinctly treasonable in the minds of any of them, but there may have
 been enough to arouse the suspicions of Galerius himself, who was the
 one most deeply interested, and who was always well aware of the hatred
 which the Christians entertained toward him. We are told by Lactantius
 that Galerius spent a whole winter with Diocletian, endeavoring to
 persuade him to persecute. The latter is but a conclusion drawn by
 Lactantius from the events which followed; for he tells us himself that
 their conferences were strictly private, and that no one knew to what
 they pertained. But why did the persecution of the Christians at this
 particular time seem so important a thing to Galerius that he should
 make this long and extraordinary visit to Nicomedia? Was it the result
 of a fresh accession of religious zeal on his part? I confess myself
 unable to believe that Galerius' piety lay at the bottom of the matter,
 and at any rate, knowing that he would himself be master of the empire
 in two years, why could he not wait until he could take matters into
 his own hands and carry them out after his own methods? No one, so far
 as I know, has answered this question; and yet it is a very pertinent
 one. It might be said that Galerius was afraid that he should not be
 able to carry out such measures unless they had had the sanction of his
 great predecessor. But Galerius never showed, either as Cæsar or
 Augustus, any lack of confidence in himself, and I am inclined to think
 that he would have preferred to enjoy the glory of the great
 undertaking himself rather than give it all to another, had he been
 actuated simply by general reasons of hostility toward the Church. But
 if we suppose that he had conceived a suspicion of such a plan as has
 been suggested, we explain fully his remarkable visit and his long and
 secret interviews with Diocletian. There was no place in which he could
 discover more about the suspected plot (which he might well fancy to be
 more serious than it really was) than in Nicomedia itself; and if such
 a plot was on foot, it was of vital importance to unearth it and reveal
 it to Diocletian. We may believe then that Galerius busied himself
 during the whole winter in investigating matters, and that long after
 he had become thoroughly convinced of the existence of a plot
 Diocletian remained skeptical.

 We may suppose that at the same time whatever vague plans were in the
 minds of any of the Christians were crystallizing during that winter,
 as they began to realize that Galerius' hold upon the emperor was such
 that the latter could never be brought to break with him. We may thus
 imagine that while Galerius was seeking evidence of a plot, the plot
 itself was growing and taking a more serious shape in the minds at
 least some of the more daring and worldly minded Christians. Finally,
 sufficient proof was gathered to convince even Diocletian that there
 was some sort of a plot on foot, and that the plotters were Christians.
 The question then arose what course should be pursued in the matter.
 And this question may well have caused the calling together of a number
 of counsellors and the consultation of the oracle of Apollo of which
 Lactantius tells us. Galerius naturally wished to exterminate the
 Christians as a whole, knowing their universal hostility to him; but
 Diocletian just as naturally wished to punish only such as were
 concerned in the plot, and was by no means convinced that the
 Christians as a whole were engaged in it. The decision which was
 reached, and which is exhibited in the edict of the 24th of February,
 303 seems to confirm in a remarkable manner the theory which has been
 presented. Instead of issuing an edict against Christians in general,
 Diocletian directs his blows solely against Christians in governmental
 circles,--public officials and servants in official families (cf. the
 interpretation of the edict given above in Bk. VIII. chap. 2, note 6).
 This is certainly not the procedure of an emperor who is persecuting on
 religious grounds. The church officers should in that case have been
 first attacked as they had been by Decius and Valerian. The singling
 out of Christians in official circles--and the low as well as the high
 ones, the servants as well as the masters--is a clear indication that
 the motive was political, not religious. Moreover, that the edict was
 drawn in such mild terms is a confirmation of this. These men were
 certainly not all guilty, and it was not necessary to put them all to
 death. It was necessary to put an end to the plot in the most
 expeditious and complete way. The plotters should be shown that their
 plot was discovered, and the whole thing should be broken up by causing
 some of them to renounce their faith, by degrading and depriving of
 citizenship all that would not renounce it. It was a very shrewd move.
 Executions would but have increased the rebellious spirit and caused
 the plot to spread. But Diocletian was well aware that any one that
 renounced his faith would lose caste with his fellow-Christians, and
 even if he had been a plotter in the past, he could never hope to gain
 anything in the future from the accession of a Christian emperor. He
 was careful moreover to provide against any danger from those who
 refused to renounce their faith, by putting them into a position where
 it would be impossible for them to accomplish anything in that line in
 the future. He knew that a plot which had no support within official
 circles would be of no account and was not to be feared. The action,
 based on the grounds given, was worthy of Diocletian's genius;
 explained in any other way it becomes, in my opinion, meaningless. A
 further confirmation of the view which has been presented is found in
 the silence of Lactantius and Eusebius. The former was in Nicomedia,
 and cannot have failed to know the ostensible if not the true cause of
 the great persecution. Diocletian cannot have taken such a step without
 giving some reason for it, and doubtless that reason was stated in the
 preambles of his edicts, as is the case in the edicts of other
 emperors; but as it happens, while we know the substance of all the
 edicts, not a single preamble has been preserved. May it not be
 possible that the Christians, who preserved the terms of the edicts,
 found the preambles distasteful because derogatory to some of
 themselves and yet unfortunately not untrue? The reasons which
 Lactantius gives are palpable makeshifts, and indeed he does not
 venture to state them categorically. "I have learned," he says, "that
 the cause of his fury was as follows." Doubtless he had heard it thus
 in Christian circles; but doubtless he had heard it otherwise from
 heathen or from the edicts themselves; and he can hardly, as a sensible
 man, have been fully satisfied with his own explanation of the matter.
 Eusebius attempts no explanation. He tells us in chapter I, above, that
 the Church just before the persecution was in an abominable state and
 full of unworthy Christians, and yet he informs us that he will pass by
 the unpleasant facts to dwell upon the brighter side for the
 edification of posterity. Was the cause of the persecution one of the
 unpleasant facts? He calls it a judgment of God. Was it a merited
 judgment upon some who had been traitors to their country? He gives us
 his opinion as to the causes of the persecution of Decius and Valerian;
 why is he silent about the causes of this greatest of all the
 persecutions? His silence in the present case is eloquent.

 The course of events after the publication of the First Edict is not
 difficult to follow. Fire broke out twice in the imperial palace.
 Lactantius ascribes it to Galerius, who was supposed to have desired to
 implicate the Christians; but, as Burckhardt remarks, Diocletian was
 not the man to be deceived in that way, and we may dismiss the
 suspicion as groundless. That the fires were accidental is possible,
 but extremely improbable. Diocletian at least believed that they were
 kindled by Christians, and it must be confessed that he had some ground
 for his belief. At any rate, whether true or not, the result was the
 torture (for the sake of extorting evidence) and the execution of some
 of his most faithful servants (see Bk. VIII. chap. 6). It had become an
 earnest matter with Diocletian, and he was beginning to feel--as he had
 never had occasion to feel before--that a society within the empire
 whose claims were looked upon as higher than those of the state itself,
 and duty to which demanded, in case of a disagreement between it and
 the state, insubordination, and even treason, toward the latter, was
 too dangerous an institution to tolerate longer, however harmless it
 might be under ordinary circumstances. It was at about this time that
 there occurred rebellions in Melitene and Syria, perhaps in consequence
 of the publication of the First Edict; at any rate, the Christians, who
 were regarded with ever increasing suspicion, were believed to be in
 part at least responsible for the outbreaks, and the result was that a
 second edict was issued, commanding that all the rulers of the churches
 should be thrown into prison (see above, Bk. VIII. chap. 6). Here
 Diocletian took the same step taken by Decius and Valerian, and
 instituted thereby a genuine religious persecution. It was now
 Christians as Christians whom he attacked; no longer Christian
 officials as traitors. The vital difference between the first and
 second edicts is very clear. All that followed was but the legitimate
 carrying out of the principle adopted in the Second Edict,--the
 destruction of the Church as such, the extermination of Christianity.

 On Bk. X. chap. 8, § 4 (note I, a).

 After Constantine's victory over Maxentius, his half-sister Constantia,
 daughter of Constantius Chlorus by his second wife, Theodora, was
 married to Licinius, and thus the alliance of the two emperors was
 cemented by family ties. Constantius Chlorus was a grandson of Crispus,
 brother of the Emperor Claudius II., and hence could claim to be, in a
 sense, of imperial extraction; a fact which gave him a dignity beyond
 that of his colleagues, who were all of comparatively low birth.
 Constantine himself and his panegyrists always made much of his
 illustrious descent.

 Table of Roman Emperors.

 Augustus...............................................................
 .......................................... b.c. 27-a.d. 14

 Tiberius...............................................................
 .................................................. a.d. 14-37

 Caius
 Caligula...............................................................
 ................................................. 37-41

 Claudius...............................................................
 ......................................................... 41-54

 Nero...................................................................
 .......................................................... 54-68

 Galba..................................................................
 .......................................................... 68-69

 Otho...................................................................
 ................................................................ 69

 Vitellius..............................................................
 ................................................................. 69

 Vespasian..............................................................
 ........................................................ 69-79

 Titus..................................................................
 ............................................................ 79-81

 Domitian...............................................................
 ......................................................... 81-96

 Nerva..................................................................
 .......................................................... 96-98

 Trajan.................................................................
 ........................................................ 98-117

 Hadrian................................................................
 ..................................................... 117-138

 Antoninus
 Pius...................................................................
 ........................................ 138-161

 Marcus Aurelius [Antoninus Verus]

 Lucius Verus

 }

 ............................................................. 161-180

 ............................................................. 161-169

 Commodus...............................................................
 ................................................. 180-192

 Pertinax...............................................................
 .............................................................. 193

 Didius
 Julianus...............................................................
 .................................................... 193

 Niger..................................................................
 ....................................................... 193-194

 Septimius
 Severus................................................................
 ...................................... 193-211

 Caracalla

 Geta

 }

 .......................................................................
 ................................ 211-217

 .......................................................................
 ................................ 211-212

 M. Opilius
 Macrinus...............................................................
 ................................... 217-218

 Heliogabalus, or
 Elagabalus.............................................................
 ........................... 218-222

 Alexander
 Severus................................................................
 ..................................... 222-235

 Maximin
 I......................................................................
 ............................................ 235-238

 The Gordians, I and
 II.....................................................................
 .......................... 237-238

 Maximus Pupienus

 Balbinus

 }

 .......................................................................
 ......................... 238

 Gordian
 III....................................................................
 ............................................ 238-244

 Philip.................................................................
 ........................................................ 244-249

 Decius.................................................................
 ...................................................... 249-251

 Gallus.................................................................
 ....................................................... 251-252

 Æmilian................................................................
 ............................................................. 253

 Valerian...............................................................
 ...................................................... 253-260

 Gallienus..............................................................
 ...................................................... 260-268

 Claudius
 II.....................................................................
 ............................................ 268-270

 Aurelian...............................................................
 ...................................................... 270-275

 Tacitus................................................................
 ...................................................... 275-276

 Probus.................................................................
 ..................................................... 276-282

 Carus..................................................................
 ...................................................... 282-283

 Carinus

 Numerian

 }

 .......................................................................
 ............................. 283-284

 Diocletian

 Maximian

 }

 .......................................................................
 ............................. 284-305

 .......................................................................
 ............................. 285-305

 Constantius

 Galerius

 Maxentius (not recognized by the others)

 Licinius

 Constantine

 Maximin II.

 }

 ..............

 ..............

 }

 ....................................... 305-306

 ....................................... 305-311

 ....................................... 306-312

 ....................................... 307-323

 ....................................... 308-313

 ....................................... 308-337

 The Bishops of Rome, Alexandria, Antioch, and Jerusalem, mentioned by
 Eusebius.

 Bishops of Rome.

 (Dates taken from the table given by Lipsius in his Chronologie der
 röm. Bischöfe, p. 263 sq.)

 Linus.

 Pontianus, 5 years 2 months 7 days; (July 21?), 230-Sept. 28, 235.

 Anencletus.

 Anteros, 1 month 12 days; Nov. 21, 235-Jan. 3, 236.

 Clement.

 Fabianus, 14 years 10 days; 236-Jan. 20, 250. Vacancy from Jan. 21,
 250-March, 251.

 Evarestus.

 Cornelius, 2 years 3 months 10 days; beginning of March, 251-middle of
 June, 253.

 Alexander.

 Lucius, 8 months 10 days; June (25?), 253-March 5, 254.

 Xystus I, for about ten years; died between 124 and 126.

 Stephanus, 3 years 2 months 21 days; (May 12?), 254-Aug. 6, 258.

 Telesphorus, 11 years; died between 135 and 137.

 Xystus II., 11 months 12 (6?) days; Aug. 24 (31?), 257-Aug. 6, 258.

 Hyginus, 4 years; died between 139 and 141.

 Dionysius, 9 years 5 months 2 days; July 22, 259-Dec. 27, 268.

 Pius, 15-16 years; died between 154 and 156.

 Felix I., 5 years 11 months 25 days; Jan. 5, 269-Dec. 30, 274.

 Anicetus, 11-12 years; died in 166 or 167.

 Eutychian, 8 years 11 months 3 days; (Jan. 5?) 275-Dec. 8, 283.

 Soter, 8-9 years; died in 174 or 175.

 Caius, 12 years 4 months 6 days; Dec. 17, 283-April 22, 296.

 Eleutherus, 15 years; died in 189.

 Marcellinus, 8 years 3 months 25 days; June 30, 296-(Oct. 25?), 304.
 Vacancy until 307.

 Victor, 9-10 years; 189-198 or 199.

 Marcellus, 1 year 7 months 21 days; (May 24?), 307-Jan. 15, 309.

 Zephyrinus, 18-19 years; 198 or 199-217 (Aug. 26?).

 Eusebius, 3 (4?) months 23 (16?) days; April 23 (16?), 309-Aug. 17,
 309. Vacancy until 310.

 Callistus, 5 years; 217-Oct. 14, 222.

 Miltiades, 3 years 6 months 8 days; July 2, 310-Jan. 10 (11?), 314.

 Urbanus, 8 years; 222-230 (May 19?).

 Bishops of Alexandria.

 Annianus.

 Justus.

 Agrippinus.

 Dionysius.

 Abilius.

 Eumenes.

 Julian.

 Maximus.

 Cerdon.

 Marcus.

 Demetrius.

 Theonas.

 Primus.

 Celadion.

 Heraclas.

 Peter.

 Bishops of Antioch.

 (Dates taken from the table given by Harnack in his Zeit des Ignatius,
 p. 62.)

 Evodius.

 Zebinus, died between 238 and 249.

 Ignatius.

 Babylas, died in 250, during the persecution of Decius.

 Hero.

 Fabius, died toward the end of 252 or early in 253.

 Cornelius.

 Demetrian, died between 257 and 260.

 Eros.

 Paul, deposed between 266 and 269 (probably in 268).

 Theophilus, died not earlier than 182.

 Domnus.

 Maximinus, died between 189 and 192.

 Timæus, died about 280.

 Serapion, died about 209.

 Cyril, sent to the mines in 303, and died probably toward the end of
 306.

 Asclepiades, died between 211 and 222.

 Tyrannus, succeeded Cyril probably in 303, possibly not until 306, and
 lived until the close of the persecution.

 Philetus, died not long before 229-231.

 Bishops of Jerusalem.

 James.

 Justus.

 Gaius I.

 Dius.

 Symeon.

 Levi.

 Symmachus.

 Germanio.

 Justus.

 Ephres.

 Gaius II.

 Gordius.

 Zacchæus.

 Joseph.

 Julian II.

 Narcisscus, a second time.

 Tobias.

 Judas.

 Capito.

 Alexander.

 Benjamin.

 Marcus.

 Maximus II.

 Antoninus.

 } [2990]

 Mazabanes.

 John.

 Cassianus.

 Hymenæus.

 Matthias.

 Publius.

 Valens.

 Zambdas.

 Philip.

 Maximus I.

 Dolichianus.

 Hermon.

 Seneca.

 Julian I.

 Narcissus.

 [2990] These two names are omitted by Eusebius in his History, but are
 given in his Chron. and also by Epiphanius. See above, Bk. V. chap. 12,
 note 2.

 Table showing the Roman Method of counting the Days of the Month.

 (Taken from the Encyclopedia Britannica, article Calendar.)

 Days of the Month.

 March.

 May.

 July.

 October.

 January.

 August.

 December.

 April.

 June.

 September.

 November.

 February.

 1

 Kalendæ.

 Kalendæ.

 Kalendæ.

 Kalendæ.

 2

 6

 4

 4

 4

 3

 5

 3

 3

 3

 4

 4

 Prid. Nonas.

 Prid. Nonas.

 Prid. Nonas.

 5

 3

 Nonæ.

 Nonæ.

 Nonæ.

 6

 Prid. Nonas.

 8

 8

 8

 7

 Nonæ.

 7

 7

 7

 8

 8

 6

 6

 6

 9

 7

 5

 5

 5

 10

 6

 4

 4

 4

 11

 5

 3

 3

 3

 12

 4

 Prid. Idus.

 Prid. Idus.

 Prid. Idus.

 13

 3

 Idus.

 Idus.

 Idus.

 14

 Prid. Idus.

 19

 18

 16

 15

 Idus.

 18

 17

 15

 16

 17

 17

 16

 14

 17

 16

 16

 15

 13

 18

 15

 15

 14

 12

 19

 14

 14

 13

 11

 20

 13

 13

 12

 10

 21

 12

 12

 11

 9

 22

 11

 11

 10

 8

 23

 10

 10

 9

 7

 24

 9

 9

 8

 6

 25

 8

 8

 7

 5

 26

 7

 7

 6

 4

 27

 6

 6

 5

 3

 28

 5

 5

 4

 Prid. Kal. Mart.

 29

 4

 4

 3

 30

 3

 3

 Prid. Kalen.

 31

 Prid. Kalen.

 Prid. Kalen.

 "Instead of distinguishing the days by the ordinal numbers, first,
 second, third, etc., the Romans counted backwards from three fixed
 epochs; namely, the Kalends, the Nones, and the Ides. The Kalends were
 invariably the first day of the month, and were so denominated because
 it had been an ancient custom of the pontiffs to call the people
 together on that day, to apprise them of the festivals, or days that
 were to be kept sacred during the month. The Ides (from an obsolete
 verb iduare, to divide) were at the middle of the month, either the
 13th or the 15th day; and the Nones were the ninth day before the Ides,
 counting inclusively. From these three terms the days received their
 denomination in the following manner:--

 "Those which were comprised between the Kalends and the Nones were
 called the days before the Nones; those between the Nones and the Ides
 were called the days before the Ides; and, lastly, all the days after
 the Ides to the end of the month were called the days before the
 Kalends of the succeeding month.

 "In the months of March, May, July, and October, the Ides fell on the
 15th day, and the Nones consequently on the 7th: so that each of these
 months had six days named from the Nones. In all the other months the
 Ides were on the 13th and the Nones were on the 5th; consequently there
 were only four days named from the Nones. Every month had eight days
 named from the Ides. The number of days receiving their denomination
 from the Kalends depended on the number of days in the month and the
 day on which the Ides fell. For example, if the month contained 31
 days, and the Ides fell on the 13th as was the case in January, August,
 and December, there would remain 18 days after the Ides, which, added
 to the first of the following month, made 19 days of Kalends. In
 January, therefore, the 14th day of the month was called the nineteenth
 before the Kalends of February (counting inclusively), the 15th was the
 18th before the Kalends, and so on to the 30th, which was called the
 third before the Kalends (tertio Kalendas), the last being the second
 of the Kalends, or the day before the Kalends (pridie Kalendas)."

 Table of Macedonian Months

 The months of the Macedonian year, as commonly employed in the time of
 Eusebius, corresponded exactly to the Roman months, but the year began
 with the first of September. The names of the months were as follows:--

 Macedonian.

 Roman.

 Macedonian.

 Roman.

 1. Gorpiæus.

 September.

 7. Dystrus.

 March.

 2. Hyperberetæus.

 October.

 8. Xanthicus.

 April.

 3. Dius.

 November.

 9. Artemisius.

 May.

 4. Apellæus.

 December.

 10. Dæsius.

 June.

 5. Audynæus.

 January.

 11. Panemus.

 July.

 6. Peritius.

 February.

 12. Loüs.

 August.
