Eutropius's Abridgment of Roman History
Eutropius (Rev. John Selby Watson, trans.)

Source: Internet Archive — https://archive.org/details/justincornelius00eutrgoog
Edition: Rev. John Selby Watson's translation (Bohn's Classical Library, 1853), via Internet Archive scan of the 1853 Henry G. Bohn edition.
Public domain. Staged for the Tower of Babel library, 2026-10-09.

NOTICE  OF  THE  LIFE  AND  WEITINGS


QF


EUTROPIUS.


Fkom  Eutropius*  himself  we  learn  that  he  served  under
Julian,  and  attended  him  in  his  expedition  to  the  east.  Fnmi
Geoi^us  Codinu3,  de  Originihus  ConstantinopolitanU.f  we
find  that  he  had  previously  been  secretary,  sm(fro}j^^d(pog,  to
Constantino  the  Great.  He  was  alive  in  the  age  of  Yalen-
tinian  and  Valens ;  to  the  latter  of  whom  he  dedicates  his
book. This  is  all  that  is  known  of  his  personal  history.

When  or  where  he  was  born,  it  is  useless  "to  attempt  to  dis-
cover. Suidas  calls  him  'iraXhg  <ro<piffr^g,  which  we  may
translate,  an  Italian  eminent  writer;  hut  Suidas,  as  Fabricius
and  others  have  observed,  may  merely  have  called  him  so
hecause  he  wrote  in  Latin.  The  authors  of  the  Histoire
LUtiraire  de  la  FranceX  wished  to  prove,  from  Symmachus,
that  he  was  the  countryman  of  Ausonius,  and  bom  near
Bourdeaux;  and  Vinetus,  from  his  name  and  other  suppo-
Bitions,  would  make  him  a  Greek ;  but  none  of  the  arguments
in  favour  of  either  hypothesis  deserve  the  least  regard.  Like
Justin,  he  has  but  one  name ;  for  though  he  is  called  Flavins

•  Lib.  X.  c.  16. t  Ed.  Par.  fol.  p.  9  ;  Test  Vet.  apud  Verheyk.
t  Tom.  L  p.  220 ;  Tzschucke,  Prolegom.  in  Eutrop.  p.  iii,  y.


SronCE  OF  EXTTBOPIUS.  16

Eutropius  by  Sigonius  acid  Boniface,  the  Flaviut  rests  on  no
sofficient  authority.*

Some,  as  Yossius  obserres,  have  sought  to  demonstrate
from  Gennadittst  that  he  was  a  disciple  of  Augustin.  But
Augustin  did  not  flotirish  till  the  end  of  the  fourth  and  begin-
ning of  the  fifth  century,  at  which  period  Eutropius  most
either  have  been  dead  or  extremely  old.  Others  have  en-
deavoured  to  make  bim  a  Christian  from  what  is  said  of
Julian,  nimius  insectator  religionis  Ckrutian<B,X  but  the  word
mmm  is  wanting  in  the  best  manuscripts,  and,  if  it  were
found  in  all,  would  be  of  little  weight.

It  seems,  indeed,  tolerably  evident,  that  Eutropius  must  have
been,  not  a  Christian,  but  a  heathen.  **  He  take^no  notice,"  says
Vossius,  '*  of  the  ten  persecutions,  and  in  his  notice  of  Jovian  §
plainly  advocates  dishonest  dealings."  But  direct  evidence  of
his  heathenism  is  given  by  Nicephorus  Gregoras,||  one  of  the
Byzantine  historians,  in  an  oration  on  the  character  of  Con-
stantino the  Great,  in  which  it  is  observed,  that  what  Eutropius
says  in  favour  of  Constantine  is  peculiarly  deserving  of  atten-
tion, as  proceeding  from  a  writer  who  must  have  had  some
feeling  against  him  m  consequence  of  being  of  a  different
religion,  hta  n  rh  rrig  d^ffxdag  dxoivoivfirov,  and  also  of  being
a  contemporary  and  partizan  of  Julian,  d/cc  rh  fi\ixiu)r9i¥  xai
at^tttarfiv  'louXtdvw  yivuf^ai.  Nicephorus  also  calls  him  a
Greek  or  Gentile,  *£XX9}v  xai  aXXo^uXou  ^^fi^xuag  r^S^ifMg,  and
speaks  in  such  a  way  as  to  leave  no  doubt  that  the  historian
Eutropius  is  meant.

According  to  Suidas,  he  wrote  other  things  besides  his
epitome,  but  what  they  were  is  unknown.  A  Eutropius  is
cited  by  Priscian  as  an  authority  for  the  sound  of  the  letter  Wf

*  Tzschiicke,  p.  viiL  f  De  lUustribvs  EccUiice  ScrijOoribui.

t  Eutrop.  X.  16.  §  Eutrop.  x.  17.

II  Test.  Vet  apud  Verheyk.


18  NOTICE OP  BUTROPIUS.

but  no  intimation  is  given  that  he  was  the  compiler  of  the
history.  Whether  he  executed  the  work  in  a  loftier  style,
which  he  promises  at  the  end  of  his  epitome,  is  uncertain.

As  a  historian,  he  is  guilty  of  some  errors  as  to  £a.cts  and
chronology,  which  are  minutely  particularized  by  TzschuckCj*
but  is  faithful  on  the  whole,  except  that  he  omits,  or  colours
too  favourably,  some  of  the  transactions  that  are  dishonour-
able to  Rome.

His  style  is  correct  and  sufficiently  polished,  but  exhibits
some  words,  as  medietciSy  duhietas^  and  some  expressions,  that
are  of  the  lower  age  of  the  Latin  language.  But  when  we
consider  how  late  he  lived,  we  may  rather  commend  him  for
having  so  few  cH  such  peculiarities,  than  blame  him  for  those
that  occur.

His  text  was  in  a  very  corrupt  state,  until  Ignatius,  in  1616,
and  Schonhovius,  in  1546,  exerted  themselves  to  clear  it  from
the  foreign  matter  that  had  been  attached  to  it  by  Paulus
Diaconus  and  others.  The"  best  editions  now  are  those  of
Havercamp,  1729;  Verheyk,  1762,  1793;  and  Tzschucke,
1796,  1804. Grosse  also  has  since  published  a  useful  edition.

Eutropius  was  twice  translated  into  Greek,  by  Capito
Lycius,f  whose  version  is  lost,  and  by  Paeanius,  whose  per-
formance survives  in  a  nearly  complete  state,  and  is  printed  in
the  editions  of  Cellarius  and  Verheyk.  Who  PsBanius  was,
we  do  not  know ;  Sylburgius  first  gave  the  translation  to  the
press  in  1590.  It  sometimes  deviates  from  the  sense,  but  is
in  general  faithful.

Eutropius  has  been  translated  into  English  by  Nicolas
Hayward,  1564;  by  Clarke,  1722,  aversion  that  has  been
several  times  reprinted,  and  by  Thomas,  1760.  None  of  these
performances  deserve  any  particular  notice.

•  P.  xxvi  9eqq.  t  Suidas  v.  Kairi'rwv.


JUSTIN'S

HISTORY  OF  THE  WORLD,


BXTRACTBO FROM


TROGUS  POMPEIUS.


PREFACE.

Afteb  many  Romans,*  men  even  of  consular  dignity,  had
committed  the  acts  of  their  countrymen  to  writing  in  Greek,
a  foreign  language,t  Trogus  Pompeius,  a  man  of  eloquence
equal  to  that  of  the  ancients,}  whether  prompted  by  a  desire
to  emulate  their  glory,  or  charmed  by  the  variety  and  novelty
of  the  undertaking,  composed  the  history  of  Greece,  and  of
the  whole  world,  in  the  Latin  tongue,  in  order  that,  as  our
actions  might  be  read  in  Greek,  so  those  of  the  Greeks  might
be  read  in  our  language ;  attempting  a  work  that  demanded
extraordinary  resolution  and  labour.  For  when,  to  most
authors  who  write  the  history  only  of  particular  princes  or
nations,  their  task  appears  an  afiGur  of  arduous  effort,  must
not  Trogus  Pompeius,  in  attempting  the  whole  world,  seem  to
have  acted  with  a  boldness  like  that  of  Hercules,  since  in  his
books  are  contained  the  actions  of  all  ages,  monarchs,  nations,
and  people?  All  that  the  historians  of  Greece  had  under-
taken separately,  according  to  what  was  suitable  to  each,
Trogus  Pompeius,  omitting  only  what  was  useless,  has  put

*  Among  these  were  Aulus  Albinus,  consul  a.u.c.  602,  Cic.  Brut.  c.
21 ;  AuL  GJell.  xi  8 ;  Lucius  Cincius,  mentioned  by  Dionys.  HaUcam.  i.
6 ;  Caius  Julius  a  senator,  Liv.  Epit.  liii. ;  Lucius  Lucullus,  consul
A..U.C.  679,  Cic.  Acad.  iL  1 ;  and  Cicero,  who  sent  an  account  of  his
consulship  (A.n.c.  690)  written  in  Greek  to  his  friend  Atticus;  Ep.  ad
Att.i  \9,—WetzeL

f  QrcBco  peregrvnoqw  sermone.]  Greek,  and  therefore  foreign,  not
Latin. —  Wetzd,

t  Vyr  pritca  doquentiof,]  More  literally,  ''A  man  of  ancient  elo-
quence."

B


2  JUSTIN'S  PREFACB.

together  in  one  narration,  eveiything  being  assigned  to  its
proper  period,  and  arranged  in  the  regular  order  of  events.
From  these  forty-four  volumes  therefore  (for  such  was  the  num-
ber that  he  published),  I  have  extracted,  during  the  leisure
that  I  enjoyed  in  the  city,  whatever  was  most  worthy  of  being
known;  and,  rejecting  such  parts  as  were  neither  attractive
for  the  pleasure  of  reading,  nor  necessary  by  way  of  example,
have  formed,  as  it  were,  a  small  collection  of  flowers,  that
those  who  are  acquainted  with  the  history  of  Greece  might
have  something  to  refresh  their  memories,  and  those  who  are
strangers  to  it  something  for  their  instruction.  This  work  I
have  sent  to  you,  *  not  so  much  that  it  may  add  to  your  know-
ledge, as  that  it  may  receive  your  correction ;  and  that,  at  the
same  time,  the  account  of  my  leisure,  of  which  Oato  thinks
that  an  account  must  be  given,  may  stand  fair  with  you.  For
your  approbation  is  sufficient  for  me  for  the  present,  with  the
expectation  of  receiving  from  posterity,  when  the  malice  of
detraction  has  died  away,  an  ample  testimony  to  my  diUgence.

*  Ad  te.']  In  the  editions  before  that  of  Bongarsius,  1581,  the  words
Marce  Antonine  followed  te,  but  as  they  did  not  appear  in  the  manu-
scripts which  Bongarsius  consulted,  he  omitted  them.  They  are
generally  supposed  to  have  been  inserted  by  some  editor  or  editors,
who  confounded  Justin  the  historian  with  Justin  Martyr,  who  lived  in
the  reign  of  Antoninus.  At  what  time  Justin  the  historian  lived  is
uncertain.  See  the  biographicsJ  notice  prefixed.  But  Fontanus  and
Isaac  Yossius  argued  for  the  words  being  retained ;  and  Scheffer,
observing  that  the  oldest  editions,  and  that  of  Bongarsius  himself,
based  on  at  least  eight  manuscripts,  have  Quod  ad  te  won  cognoscendi
magis  qaam  emendandi  ccmad  trcmsmisij  would  read.  Quod  ad  te  iion  tarn
cogruiscendi,  Marce  Antonme  Cossar,  quam  emendimdi,  die,  supposing
magta  to  be  a  corruption  of  M.  A.  C,  the  first  letters  of  the  emperor's
names.


BOOK  I.

The  monarchy  of  the  AsByrians,  Ninus,  I. — SemiramiB,  IL — Sardan»-
palus.  III. — The  monarchy  of  the  Medea;  Aatyages,  IV. — The
youth  of  Cyrus,  V. — He  becomes  king,  VI. — His  victory  over
Croesus;  Candaules  and"  Gyges,  VII. — Expedition  of  CyruB
« against  the  Scythians;  his  death,  VIIL — Cambyses;  the  Magi;
Otanea,  IX. — ^Darius,  the  son  of  Hystaspes,  X.

I.  Origin  ALLY,*  the  government  of  nations  and  tribes  was
in  the  bands  of  kings  ;f  whom  it  was  not  their  flattery  of  the
people,  but  their  discretion,  as  commended  by  the  prudent,  that
elevated  to  the  height  of  this  dignity.  The  people  were  not
then  bound  by  any  laws ;  the  wills  of  their  princes  were  instead
of  laws.  It  was  their  custom  to  defend,  rather  than  advance,^
the  boundaries  of  their  empire.  The  dominions  of  each  were
confined  within  his  own  country.

The  first  of  all  princes,  who,  firom  an  extravagant  desire  of
ruling,  changed  this  old  and,  as  it  were,  hereditaiy  custom,
was  Ninus,  king  of  the  Assyrians.  It  was-  he  who  first  made
war  upon  his  neighbours,  and  subdued  the  nations,  as  yet  too
barbarous  to  resist  him,  as  far  as  the  frontiers  of  Libya.
Sesostris,§  king  of  Egypt,  and  Tanaus,||  king  of  Scythia,
were  indeed  prior  to  him  in  time ;  the  one  of  whom  advanced
into  Pontus,  and  the  other  as  far  as  Egypt ;  but  these  princes
engaged  in  distant  wars,  not  in  struggles  with  their  neigh-

*  Privicipio  rerum.]  ''In  the  beginning  of  things^"  Le.,  as  soon  as
there  was  any  government  at  all.

t  Penes  n^es.}  See  Salliist»  Cat.  12;  Cig.  Leg.  2, 11,  de  OS.  il  12 ;
Arist  Polit.  i

t  See  Sail.  Cat  2 ;  Tacit.  Ann.  ill  26 ;  Ov.  Met.  I  89.

§  Justin,  ii.  3,  makes  Sesostris  fifteen  hundred  years  older  than
Kinns ;  but  the  tmth  is  that  his  age  and  actions  are  equally  involved
in  obscurity,  though  Usher  says  that  he  was  the  son  of  the  Amenophis
who  perished  in  the  Red  Sea,  and  that^  consequently,  he  began  his
reign  a.u,  2513.  But  Reitz,  on  Herod,  ii  102,  fixes  his  death  in  a.m.
2718,  eighty-seven  years  before  the  taking  of  Troy.  Marsham,  again,
in  his  Can.  Chr.  p.  22,  follows  Josephus  (Ant.  viiL  4)  in  placing  h\m
much  later,  and  in  making  him  the  same  with  Shishak,  who  took
Jerusalem  and  plundered  the  temple,  A.M.  3018,  two  hundred  and
thirteen  years  after  Troy  was  taken.  Diodorus  Siculus,  who  speaks  of
his  actions,  i  58 — 58,  settles  nothing  certain  concerning  his  age. —
WetzeL

y  Herodotus,  iv.  5,  calls  the  first  king  of  Scythia  Targitaus.

B  2


4  JUSTIN.  [B.I.  c.n.

bours ;  they  did  not  seek  dominion  for  themselves,  but  glory
for  their  people,  and,  content  with  victory,  declined  to  govern
those  whom  they  subdued.  But  Ninus  established  the  great-
ness of  his  acquired  dominion  by  immediately  possessing
himself  of  the  conquered  countries.*  Overcoming,  accord-
ingly, the  nearest  people,  and  advancing,  fortified  with  an
accession  of  strength,  against  others,  while  each  successive
victory  became  the  instrument  of  one  to  follow,  he  subjugated
the  nations  of  the  whole  east.  His  last  war  was  with  Zoro-
aster ,t  king  of  the  Bactrians,  who  is  said  to  have  been  the
•  first  that  invented  magic  arts,  and  to  have  investigated,  with
great  attention,  the  origin  of  the  world  and  the  motions  of  the
stars.  After  killing  Zoroaster,  Ninus  himself  died,  leaving  a
son  called  Ninyas,  still  a  minor,  and  a  wife,  whose  name  was

Semiramis.J

II.  Semiramis,  not  daring  to  entrust  the  government  to  a
youth,  or  openly  to  take  it  upon  herself  (as  so  many  great
nations  would  scarcelv  submit  to  one  man,  much  less  to
a  woman),  pretended  that  she  was  the  son  of  Ninus  instead  of
his  wife,  a  male  instead  of  a  female.  The  stature  of  both
mother  and  son  was  low,  their  voice  alike  weak,  and  the  cast
of  their  features  similar.  She  accordingly  clad  her  arms  and
legs  ill  long  garments,  and  decked  her  head  with  a  turban ;
and,  that  she  might  not  appear  to  conceal  any  thing  by  this
new  dress,  she  ordered  her  subjects  also  to  wear  the  same
apparel ;  a  fashion  which  the  whole  nation  has  since  retained.
Having  thus  dissembled  her  sex  at  the  commencement  of  her

*  CowtinuA  posaessione.']  His  establishment  of  his  power  over  the
countries  was  immediately  consequent  on  his  subjugation  of  them.

+  By  Diodorus,  ii.  6,  he  is  called  Oxyartes.  See  also  Plin.  H.  N.
XXX.  1 ;  August.  De  Civ.  Dei.  xxi.  14. —  Wetzel.  Concerning  the  age
of  Zoroaster  all  is  uncertainty ;  such  is  the  difference  of  opinions
about  it.  Agathias  and  others  think  that  he  must  have  lived  at  a  later
date,  about  the  commencement  of  the  Persian  empire.  See  Marsham
in  Canon,  -^gypt.  ad  Sec.  ix. — Gronovius.  It  has  not  yet  been  shown
that  Zoroaster  the  king  and  Zoroaster  the  Magus  were  the  same  person.

:J:  See  Diodorus,  xi  4 ;  Plutarch  in  Amator. ;  ^lian.  Var.  Hist.  vii.
1 ;  Polyeen.  Stratag.  viL  "  Conon  apud  Photium,  Narr.  ix.  states,  that
Semiramis  was  not  the  wife  but  the  daughter  of  Ninus  or  Ninyas,  and
says,  earn  igndram  cum,  fiUo  concubuiaise,  and  afterwards,  re  cognUG.,
married  him;  after  which  occurrence  it  was  lawful  among  the  Persians
for  sons  commisceri  matiibtis." — Vossius,  To  the  concuHtus  cvm  equo
Pliny  alludes,  H.  N.  viii.  64.


B.C.  2144—896.]  SARDANAPALUS.  6

reign,  she  'was  believed  to  be  a  male.  Sbe  afterwards  per-
formed many  noble  actions ;  ^and  when  she  thought  envy  was
overcome  by  the  greatness  of  them,  she  acknowledged  who  she
was,  and  whom  she  had  personated.  Nor  did  this  confession
detract  from  her  authority  as  a  sovereign,  but  increased'  the
admiration  of  her,  since  she,  being  a  woman,  surpassed,  not
only  women,  but  men,  in  heroism.

It  was  she  that  built  Babylon,*  and  constructed  round  the
city  a  wall  of  burnt  brick ;  bitumen,  a  substance  which  every-
where oozes  from  the  ground  in  those  parts,  being  spread
between  the  bricks  instead  of  mortar. t  Many  other  famous
acts,  too,  were  performed  by  this  queen ;  for,  not  content  with
preserving  the  territories  acquired  by  her  husband,  she  added
Ethiopia  also  to  her  empire;  and  she  even  made  war  upon
India,  into  which  no  priuce,$  except  her  and  Alexander  the
Great,  ever  penetrated.  At  last,  conceiving  a  criminal  passion
for  her  son,  she  was  killed  by  him,  after  holding  the  kingdom
two  and  forty  years  from  the  death  of  Ninus.

Her  son  Ninyas,  content  with  the  empire  acquired  by  his
parents,  laid  aside  the  pursuits  of  war,  and,  as  if  he  had  changed
sexes  with  his  mother,  was  seldom  seen  by  men,  but  grew  old
in  the  company  of  his  women.  His  successors  too,  following
bis  example,  gave  answers  to  their  people  through  their
ministers.  The  Assyrians,  who  were  afterwards  called  Syrians,
held  their  empire  thirteen  hundred  years.

III.  The  last  king  that  reigned  over  them  was  Sardanapa-
las,  a  man  more  effeminate  than  a  woman.  One  of  his  satraps,
named  Arbaces,  governor  of  the  Medes,  having,  with  great
difficulty  and  after  much  solicitation,  obtained  admission  to
visit  him,  found  him,  among  crowds  of  concubines,  and  in  the
dress  of  a  woman,  spinning  purple  wool  with  a  distaff,  and

'  *  Concemixig  the  real  bnilder  of  Babylon,  see  Strab.  xvi.  init.  ;
Piod.  Sic.  iL  17 ;  Q.  Curt.  v.  1,  42 ;  Euseb.  Chron.  init. ;  Jerome  on
Hob.  a  zi ;  Herod,  i.  184. ;  Amm.  Marcell.  xxii.  20. — Lemavre,

+  Artn/B  viceJ]  Understand  sand  mixed  with  lime. — Bemeccenu.
Bat  the  oignification  of  arena  is  not  always  confined  to  that  of  9tmd  ;
it  sometimes  means  ea/rth  or  mvd.  Thus  Virgil,  Georg.  i.  105,  has  male
pinguis  arena ;  and,  speaking  of  the  Nile,  says,  Vvrid&iti  ^gy^tvm,
nigrd  fcecundat  a/rend,  Biibner's  edition  has  arenati  vice,  I  know  not
on  what  authority.

t  Nemo."]  Justin  has  forgotten  the  expeditions  of  Hercules  and
Bacchus. — Lemaire.


0  JUSTIN.  [B,L  CH.IV.

distributing  tasks  to  girls,  but  surpassing  all  the  women  in  the
effeminacy  of  his  person  and  the  wantonness  of  his  looks.  At
that  sight,  feeling  indignant  that  so  many  men  should  be
subject  to  one  so  much  of  a  woman,  and  that  those  who  bore
swords  and  arms  should  obey  one  that  handled  wool,  he  pro-
ceeded to  his  companions,  and  told  them  what  he  had  seen,
protesting  that.he  could  not  submit  to  a  prince  who  had  rather
be  a  woman  than  a  man.  A  conspiracy  was  consequently  formed,
and  war  raised  against  Sardanapalus ;  who,  hearing  of  what
had  occurred,  and  acting,  not  like  a  man  that  would  defend
his  kingdom,  but  as  women  are  wont  to  do  under  fear  of
death,  first  looked  about  for  a  hiding-place,  but  afterwards
marched  into  the  field  with  a  few  ill-disciplined  troops.  Being
conquered  in  battie,  he  withdrew  into  his  palace,  and,
having  raised  and  set  fire  to  a  pile  of  combustibles,  threw
himself  and  his  riches  into  the  flames,  in  this  respect  only
acting  like  a  man.  After  him  Arbaces,  who  was  the  occasion
of  his  death,  and  who  had  been  governor  of  the  Modes,  was
made  king,  and  transferred  the  empire  from  the  Assyrians  to
the  Modes.

IV.  After  several  kings,  the  crown,  by  order  of  succession,
descended  to  Astyages.  This  prince,  in  a  dream,  saw  a
vine  spring  from  the  womb  of  his  only  daughter,  with  the
branches  of  which  all  Asia  was  overshadowed.  The  sooth-
sayers being  consulted  concerning  the  vision,  replied,  that  he
would  have  a  grandson  by  that  daughter,  whose  greatness  was
foreshown,  and  the  loss  of  Astyages's  kingdom  portended.
Alarmed  at  this  answer,  he  gave  his  daughter  in  marriage,  not
to  an  eminent  man,  nor  to  one  of  his  own  subjects  (lest
nobility  on  the  father  or  mother's  side  should  rouse  the  spirit
of  his  grandson),  but  to  Cambyses,  a  man  of  mean  fortune,
and  of  the  race  of  the  Persians,  which  was  at  that  time
obscure.  Bi^t  not  having,  even  thus,  got  rid  of  his  fear  of
the  dream,  he  sent  for  his  daughter,  while  she  was  pregnant,
that  her  child  might  be  put  to  death  under  the  very  eye  of
his  grandfather.  The  infant,  as  soon  as  it  was  bom,  was  given
to  Harpagus,  a  friend  of  the  king's  and  in  his  secrets,  to  be
killed.  Harpagus,  fearing  that  if  the  crown,  on  the  death  of
the  king  (as  Astyages  had  no  male  issue),  should  devolve  upon
his  daughter,  she  might  exact  from  the  agent,  for  the  murder
of  her  child,  that  revenge  which  she  could  not  inflict  on  her


RC.  561.]  CfYRUS.  7

&ther,  gave  the  izifant  to  'the  herdsman  of  the  king's  cattle  to
be  exposed.  The  herdsman,  by  chance,  had  a  son  bom  at  the
same  time  ;  and  his  i^rife,  hearing  of  the  exposure  of  the  royal
infant,  entreated,  with  the  utmost  earnestness,  that  the  child
might  be  brought  and  shown  to  her.  The  herdsman,  over-
come by  her  solicitations,  went  back  into  the  wood,  and  found
a  dog  by  the  infant,  giving  it  her  teats,  and  protecting  it  from
the  beasts  and  birds  of  prey.  Being  moved  with  pity,  with
which  he  saw  even  a  dog  moved,  he  carried  the  child  to  the
catde-folds,  the  dog  vigilantly  following  him.  When  the
woman  took  the  babe  into  her  hands,  it  smiled  upon  her  as  if
it  knew  her  ;  and  there  appeared  so  much  vivacity  in  it,  with
a  certain  sweetness  in  its  smile  as  it  clung  to  her,  that  the  wife
at  once  entreated  the  herdsman  to  expose  her  own  child
instead  of  the  other,  and  to  allow  her  to  bring  up  the  royal
infant,  whether  to  his  own  fortune  or  to  her  hopes.*  Thus
tbe  lot  of  the  children  being  changed,  the  one  was  brought
up  as  the  shepherd's  son,  and  the  other  exposed  as  the  king's
grandson.  The  nurse  had  afterwards  the  name  of  Space  ;  for
so  the  Persians  call  a  dog.

V.  The  boy  after  a  time,  while  he  was  among  the  shepherds,
received  the  name  of  Cyrus.  Subsequently,  being  chosen  by
lot  king  among  his  play-fellows,  and  having  boldly  scourged
such  of  them  as  were  disobedient  to  him,  a  complaint  was
made  to  the  king  by  the  parents  of  the  boys,  who  were  angry
that  free-bom  youths  should  be  lashed  with  servile  stripes  by
the  king's  slave.  Astyages  having  sent  for  the  boy  and
questioned  him,  and  the  boy  replying,  without  any  change  of
countenance,  that  **  he  had  acted  as  a  king,"  was  stmck  with
his  high  spirit,  and  reminded  of  his  dream  and  its  interpre-
tation. In  consequence,  as  both  the  resemblance^  of  his
features,  the  time  of  his  exposure,  and  the  x;onfession  of  the
herdsman,  concurred  exactly,  he  acknowledged  him  as  his
grandson.  And  since  he  seemed  to  have  had  his  dream
accomplished,  by  the  boy's  exercise  of  rule  among  the  shep*
herds,  he  subdued  his  feelings  of  animosity ;  but  with  regard
to  him  only ;  for,  being  incensed  with  his  friend  Harpagus,  he,
in  revenge  for  the  preservation  of  his  grandson,  killed  his  son,

*  Sive  fortunoB  ipgiua  tive  spei  sues  ptierum  mutrire,']  She  hoped  that
the  child  would  be  restored  to  the  regal  station  ;or  fortune  in  which  it
had  been  bom. — Lemaire,


8  JUSTIN.  [b.  I.  CH.  VL

and  gave  him  to  his  father  to  eat.  Harpagas,  dissembling
his  resentment  for  the  present,  deferred  showing  his  malice
towards  the  king,  until  a  proper  time  for  vengeance  should
occur.

Some  time « having  elapsed,  and  Cyrus  being  grown  up,
Harpagus,  prompted  by  his  resentment  for  the  loss  of  his
child,  wrote  him  an  account  how  he  had  been  banished  to  the
Persians  by  his  grandfather ;  how  his  grandfather  had  ordered
him  to  be  killed  when  he  was  an  infknt ;  how  he  had  been
saved  by  his  kindness ;  how  he  himself  had  incurred  the  king's
displeasure,  and  how  he  had  lost  his  son.  He  exhorted  him
to  raise  an  army,  and  march  directly  to  seize  the  throne,
promising  that  the  Medes  should  join  him.  This  letter,
because  it  could  not  be  conveyed  openly^  as  the  king's  guards
occupied  all  the  roads,  was  enclosed  In  the  body  of  a  hare,  of
which  the  bowels  had  been  taken  out ;  and  the  hare  was  com-
mitted to  a  trusty  slave,  to  be  carried  into  Persia  to  Cyrus.
Nets  were  also  given  him,  that  the  plot  might  be  concealed
under  the  appearance  of  a  hunting  expedition.

VI.  Cyrus,  after  reading  the  letter,  was  exhorted  in  a  dream
to  make  the  same  attempt ;  but  was  also  admonished  to  take
the  first  man  that  he  should  meet  on  the  following  day,  as
a  companion  in  his  enterprize.  Commencing  his  journey
from  the  country,  accordingly,  before  it  was  light,  he  met  a
slave  named  Soebaris,  coming  from  the  slave-house  of  a  certain
Mede.  Having  questioned  him  as  to  his  birth-place,  and
hearing  that  he  was  bom  in  Persia,  he  knocked  off  his  fetters,
took  him  with  him  as  his  companion,  and  returned  to  Per-
sepolis.  Here,  having  called  the  people  together,  he  ordered
them  all  to  attend  him  with  axes,  and  to  cut  down  a  wood
that  skifted  each  side  of  the  road.  When  they  had  thoroughly
accompHshed  this,  he  invited  them  on  the  following  day  to
a  feast  prepared  for  them.  Then,  as  soon  as  he  saw  them
exhilarated  with  the  banquet,  he  asked  them,  "if  an  offer
were  made  them,  which  sort  of  life  they  would  choose,  a. life  of
labour  like  that  of  yesterday,  or  of  feasting  like  the  present  ?"
As  they  all  exclaimed,  *•  A  life  of  feasting  like  the  present,"
he  told  them  that,  "  as  long  as  they  obeyed  the  Medes,  they
must  lead  a  life  hke  the  drudgery  of  yesterday ;  but,  if  they
would  follow  him,  a  life  like  the  present  entertainment"  All
expressing  their  joy,  he  made  war  upon  the  Medes.


B.C.  550.]  DEFEAT  OF  ASTYAGBS.  9

Astjages,  forgetting  his  treatment  of  Harpagus,  entrusted
him  with  the  management  of  the  war.  Harpagus  immediately
delivered  up  the  forces,  which  he  had  received  from  Astyages,
to  Cjrus,  and  took  revenge  for  the  king's  cruelty  by  a
treacherous  desertion  of  him.  Astyages,  hearing  of  this
occurrence,  and  collecting  troops  from  all  quarters,  marched
against  the  Persians  in  person.  Having  vigorously  renewed
the  contest,  he  posted  part  of  his  army,  while  his  men  were
fighting,  in  their  rear,  and  ordered  that  those  who  turned  back
should  be  driven  on  the  enemy  with  the  point  of  the  sword ;
teUing  them  that,  **  unless  they  conquered,  they  would  find  men
in  their  rear  not  less  stout  than  those  in  their  front ;  and  thev
were  therefore  to  consider  whether  they  would  penetrate  the
one  body  by  fleeing,  or  the  other  body  by  fighting."  In
consequence  of  this  obligation  to  fight,  great  spirit  and  vigour
was  infused  into  his  army.  As  the  Persian  troops,  therefore,
were  driven  back,  and  were  gradually  retiring,  their  mothers
and  wives  ran  to  meet  them,  and  besought  them  to  return  to
the  field.  While  they  hesitated,  they  took  up  their  garments,
and  showed  them  the  secret  parts  of  their  persons,  asking
them,  "if  they  would  shrink  back  into  the  wombs  of  their
mothers  or  their  wives."  Checked  with  this  reproach,  they
returned  to  the  battle,  and,  making  a  vigorous  assault,
compelled  those  from  whom  they  had  fled  to  flee  in  their  turn.
In  this  battle  Astyages  was  taken  prisoner ;  from  whom  Cyrus
tmk  nothing  but  his  kingdom,  and,  acting  towards  him  the
part  rather  of  a  grandson  than  of  a  conqueror,  made  him  ruler
of  the  powerful  nation  of  the  Hyrcanians ;  for  to  the  Medes  he
was  unwilling  to  return.  Such  was  the  termination  of  the
empire  of  the  Medes,  who  had  ruled  three  hundred  and  fifty
years.

VII.  In  the  beginning  of  his  reign,  Cyrus  appointed
Soebaris  (his  companion  in  his  undertakings,  whom,  in
conformity  with  his  dream,  he  had  released  from  the  slave-
house,  and  made  a  sharer  in  all  his  enterprises),  governor  of
Persia,  and  gave  him  his  sister  in  marriage.  But  several
cities,  which  had  been  tributary  to  the  Medes,  thinking  that
their  condition  was  changed  by  this  change  in  the  government,
revolted  from  Cyrus;  a  revolt  which  was  the  occasion  and
source  of  many  wars  against  him.  When  he  had  at  length,
however,  reduced  most  of  them  to  submission,  and  was  cariying


\


10  JUSTIN.  [B.LCH.VII.

on  war  against  the  Babylonians,  Croesus,  king  of  Lydia,  whose
power  and  riches  were  at  that  time  extraordinary,  came  to  the
aid  of  that  people,  but,  being  soon  defeated  and  abandoned,
fled  back  to  his  kingdom.  Cyrus,  after  his  victory,  as  soon  as
he  had  settled  affairs  in  Babylonia,  transferred  the  war  into
Lydia,  where  he  easily  routed  the  army  of  Croesus,  already
dispirited  by  the  event  of  the  former  battle.  Croesus  himself
was  taken  prisoner.  But  in  proportion  to  the  smallness  of  the
danger  in  the  battle,  was  the  greatness  of  the  clemency  shown
by  Cyrus  on  his  victory.  To  Croesus  was  granted  his  life,
part  of  his  hereditary  possessions,  and  the  city  Barene,*  in
which  he  lived,  though  not  the  life  of  a  king,  yet  one  scarcely
inferior  to  royal  dignity.  This  lenity  was  of  no  less  advantage
to  the  conqueror  than  to  the  conquered;  for  when  it  was
known  that  war  was  made  upon  Croesus,  auxiliaries  flocked  to
him  from  the  whole  of  Greece.!  as  if  to  extinguish  a
conflagration  that  threatened  them  all ;  so  popular  was  Creesus
in  alt  the  Greek  cities;  and  Cyrus  would  have  incurred  a
heavy  war  with  Greece,  if  he  had  resolved  on  any  severe
treatment  of  Croesus.

Some  time  after,  when  Cyrus  was  engaged  in  other  wars,  the
Lydians  rebelled,  and,  being  a  second  time  conquered,  their
arms  and  horses  were  taken  from  them,  and  they  were  compelled
to  keep  taverns,  to  turn  their  thoughts  to  amusements,  and
open  houses  of  pleasure.  Thus  a  nation,  formerly  powerful
through  its  industry,  and  brave  in  the  field,  was  rendered
effeminate  by  ease  and  luxury,  and  lost  its  ancient  spirit ;  and
those  whom  their  wars  had  proved  invincible  till  the  time  of
Cyrus,  idleness  and  sloth  overpowered  when  they  had  fallen
into  dissoluteness  of  manners.

The  Lydians  had  many  kings  before  Croesus,  remarkable  for
various  turns  of  fate ;  but  none  to  be  compared,  in  singularity

*  This  word  has  been  received  into  the  text  instead  of  the  old
Barce  (which  was  a  city  of  Cyrene,  into  which  country  the  arms  of
Cyrus  had  not  yet  penetrated),  on  the  coi^jecture  of  Bongarsius  and
authority  of  Ctssias,  who  states  that  this  city,  situated  near  Ecbatana,
was  given  to  Croesus. —  Wetzd.

f  £x  wiiversd  Grcecid.']  This  is  not  true.  Croesus  having  asked  aid
of  the  Athenians  and  Lacedaemonians  by  advice  of  the  Delphic  oracle,
t'le  Lacedaemonians  were  proceeding  to  assist  him,  but  having  heard,
at  the  commencement  of  their  march,  of  his  defeat,  they  went  back.
Herod  i.  58,  69,  70,  77,  82,  152,'-Wetzel.


B.C  696— 528.] MURDER  OP  OANDAUIiBS— CYRUS.  11

of  fortune,  to  Candaules.  This  prince  used  to  speak  of  his  wife,
on  whom  he  doated  for  her  extreme  beauty,  to  every  body,  for
he  was  not  content  with  the  quiet  consciousness  of  his  happiness,
unless  he  also  published  the  secrets  of  his  married  life ;  just  as
if  silence  concerning  her  beauty  had  been  a  detraction  from  it.
At  last,  to  gain  credit  to  his  representations,  he  showed  her
undressed  to  his  confidant,  Gyges ;  an  act  by  which  he  both
rendered  his  friend,  who  was  thus  tempted  to  corrupt  his  wife,
his  enemy,  and  alienatec^his  wife  from  him,  by  transferring,  as
it  were,  her  love  to  another;  for,  soon  after,  the  murder  ot
Candaules  was  stipulated  as  the  condition  of  her  marriage  with
Gyges,  and  the  wife,  making  her  husband's  blood  her  dowry,
b^towed  at  once  his  kingdom  and  herself  on  her  paramour.

VIII,  Cyrus,  after  subduing  Asia,*  and  reducing  the  whole
of  the  east  under  his  power,  made  war  upon  the  Scythians-
At  that  time,  the  Scythians  were  ruled  by  a  queen  named
Tomyris,  who,  not  alarmed  like  a  woman  at  the  approach  of  an
enemy,  suffered  them  to  pass  the  river  Araxes,  though  she
might  have  hindered  them  from  passing  it ;  thinking  that  it
would  be  easier  for  her  to  fight  within  the  limits  of  her  kingdom,
and  that  escape  would  be  harder  for  the  enemy  from  the
obstruction  of  the  river.  Cyrus  accordingly,  having  carried  his
troops  across,  and  advanced  some  distance  into  Scythia,  pitched
his  camp.  On  the  day  following,  having  quitted  his  camp  in
pretended  alarm,  and  as  if  in  full  flight,  he  left  behind  him
abundance  of  wine,  and  such  things  as  were  proper  for  a  feast.
The  news  of  this  event  being  brought  to  the  queen,  she
despatched  her  son,  a  very  young  man,  with  a  third  part  of  her
army,  in  pursuit, of  him.  When  they  reached  the  camp  of
Cyrus,  the  youth,  inexpeiienced  in  military  matters,  seeming  to
think  he  was  come  to  feast  and  not  to  fight,  paid  no  attention
to  the  enemy,  but  allowed  his  barbarians,  who  were  unused  to
wine,  to  overload  themselves  with  it;  so  that  the  Scythians
were  overcome  with  wine  before  they  were  subdued  by  the
enemy ;  for  Cyrus,  learning  what  had  happened,  and  retinrning
in  the  night,  fell  upon  them  unawares,t  ^^^  killed  all  the
Scythians  together  with  the  queen's  son.

*  That  is,  the  kingdom  of  Lydia,  which  included  almost  sR  Asia
Minor. Herod,  i.  28. — Wetzel.

t  Securoe.']  I  have  adopted  secv/ros  from  Aldus,  instead  of  the
other  reading  taucios,  for  which  Freinshemius  happily  conjectured


12  JUSTIN.  [B.I.  CH.IX.

But  Tomyris,  after  losing  so  great  an  army,  and,  what  she
still  more  lamented,  her  only  son,  did  not  pour  forth  her
sorrow  for  her  loss  in  tears,  but  turned  her  thoughts  to  the
solace  of  revenge,  and  entrapped  her  enemies,  exulting  in
their  recent  victory,  by  a  deception  and  stratagem  similar
to  their  own.  For,  counterfeiting  timidity  on  account  of  the
damage  which  she  had  received,  and  taking  to  flight,  she
allured  Cyrus  into  a  narrow  defile,  where,  placing  an  ambush
on  the  hills,  she  slew  two  hundred  thousand  of  the  Persians
with  their  king  himself ;  a  triumph  in  which  this  also  was
remarkable,  that  not  a  man  to  tell  of  such  a  massacre  survived.
The  queen  ordered  the  head  of  Cyrus  to  be  cut  off  and  thrown
into  a  vessel  full  of  human  blood,  adding  this  exclamation
against  his  cruelty,  "  Satiate  thyself  with  blood  for  which  thou
hast  thirsted,  and  of  which  thou  hast  always  been  insatiable.*'
Cyrus  reigned  thirty  years,  and  was  a  man  wonderfully  dis-
tinguished, not  only  in  the  beginning  of  his  reign,  but  during
the  whole  course  of  his  life.

IX.  He  was  succeeded  by  his  son  Cambyses,  who  added
Egypt  to  his  father's  dominions,  but,  disgusted  at  the  super-
stitions of  the  Egyptians,  ordered  the  temples  of  Apis  and  the
other  gods  to  be  demolished.  He  also  sent  an  army  to  destroy
the  celebrated  temple  of  Ammou ;  which  army  was  over-
whelmed with  tempests  and  heaps  of  sand,  and  utterly
annihilated.  After^^'ards  he  learned  in  a  dream  that  his
brother  Smerdis  was  to  be  king.  Alarmed  at  this  vision,  he
did  not  scruple  to  add  fratricide  *  to  sacrilege  ;  nor  was  it  to
be  expected,  indeed,  that  he,  who,  in  contempt  of  religion,
had  braved  the  gods  themselves,  would  spare  his  own  relations.
To  execute  this  cruel  service,  he  selected  from  his  confidants
a  man  named  Prexaspes,  one  of  the  Magi.  But  in  the  mean
time,  he  himself,  being  severely  hurt  in  the  thigh  by  his  sword,
which  had  started  out  of  its  sheath,f  died  of  the  wound,  and

»opit08.  Though  it  should  be  observed  that  Justin,  xxiv.  8,  has  mero
Mcmdua. —  Wetzel.

*  Parricidium.]  See  Pestus  in  voce  Parricif  and  note  on  Sail.  Cat.
c.  14,  Bohn's  CI.  Library.

f  Sponte  evaginato.]  Justin  seems  to  think  that  there  was  something
miraculous  in  the  unsheathing  of  the  sword.  Herodotus,  liL  64,  says
the  sword  fell  from  the  sheath  by  accident,  the  cap  at  the  end  of  the
sheath  having  dropped  off;  observing,  however,  that  the  occurrence


EC.  521.]  PSEUDO-SMERDIS.  13

pcdd  the  penalty  whether  'of  the  fratricide  which  he  had
intended,  or  of  the  sacrilege  which  he  had  perpetrated. The
Magas,  receiving  intelligence  of  this  event,  despatched  his
commission  before  the  report  of  the  king's  death  was  spread
abroad,  and,  having  killed  Smerdis,  to  whom  the  kingdom
belonged,  set  up  in  his  room  his  own  brother  Orospastes,  who
closely  resembled  him  in  features  and  person,  and,  no  one
suspecting  any  imposture  in  the  case,  Orospastes  was  declared
king  instead  of  Smerdis. This  transaction  was  the  more
easily  kept  secret,  as,  among  the Persians,  the  person of
the  king  is concealed  from  public  view,  under  pretext  of
keeping  his  majesty  inviolate. The  Magi,*  to  gain  the  favour
of  the  people,  granted  a  remission  of  the  taxes,  and  an  im-
munity from  military  service,  for  three  years,  that  they  might
secure  by  indulgence  and  bounties  the  kingdom  which  they
had  gained  by  fraud. The  imposition  was  first  suspected  by
Otanes,  a  man  of  noble  birth,  and  extremely  happy  in  forming
conjectures. He  accordingly,  by  the  aid  of  certain  agents,
inquired  of  his  daughter,  who  was  one  of  the  royal  concubines,
whether  the  son  of  king  Cyrus  was  now  king. She  replied
that  "  she  neither  knew,  nor  could  learn  from  any  other  woman,
as  all  the  females  were  shut  up  in  separate apartments."
He  then  desired  her  to  feel  his  head  while  he  was  asleep  ;  as
Cambyses  had  cut  off  both  the  Magus*s  ears. Being  then
assured  by  his  daughter  that  "  the  king  was  without  ears,"  he
disclosed  the  affair  to  some  of  the  Persian  noblemen,  and,
having  persuaded  them  to  murder  the  pretended  king,  bound
them  to  the  commission  of  the  deed  by  a  solemn  oath. To
this  conspiracy  seven  only  were  privy,  who  at  once  (lest  if
time  were  allowed  for  change  of  mind,  the  affair  should  be
made  public  by  any  one)  proceeded  to  lie  palace  with  swords
hidden  under  their  garments. Here,  having  killed  all  that
they  met,  they  made  their  way  to  the  Magi,  who  indeed  did
not  want  courage  to  defend  themselves,  for  they  drew  their
swords  and  killed  two  of  the  conspirators. They  were  over-
powered, however,  by  numbers. Gobryas,  having  seized  5ne
of  them  by  the  waist,  and  his  companions  hesitating  to  use

took  place  on  the  spot  where  Cambyses  had  previously  wounded  the
god  Apis.

*  The  rest  of  the  Magi  conspired  to  support  the  one  who  was  made
king.


1 4  JUSTIN.  [b.L  CH.X.

their  swords,  lest,  as  the  affair  was  transacted  in  the  dark,
they  should  stah  him  instead  of  the  Magus,  desired  them  to
thrust  the  weapon  into  the  Magus  even  through  his  hody ;  but,
as  good  fortune  directed,  the  Magus  was  slain,  and  Gobryas
escaped  unhurt

X.  The  Magi  being  slain,  the  glory  of  the  noblemen,  in
having  recovered  the  kingdom,  was  indeed  great,  but  proved
iax  greater  in  this,  that  when  they  came  to  debate  about  the
disposal  of  it,  they  were  able  to  act  in  concert. They  were
80  equal  in  merit  and  nobility  of  birth,  that  their  very  equality
would  have  rendered  it  hard  for  the  people  to  make  a  selection
from  them. They  themselves,  therefore,  contrived  a  method
by  which  they  might  refer  the  judgment  respecting  them  to
religion*  and  fortime,  and  agreed  that,  on  an  appointed  day,
they  should  all  bring  their  horses  early  in  the  morning  before
the  palace,  and  that  he  whose  horse  should  neigh  first,  on
the  rising  of  the  sun,!  should  be  king. For  the  Persians
believe  the  sun  to  be  the  only  god, and  regard  horses  as
sacred  to  the  god. Among  the  conspirators  was  Darius  the
son  of  Hystaspes,  to  whom,  when  h6  felt  .anxious  about  his
chance  of  the  kingdom,  his  groom  said  that,  *'  if  that  matter
was  the  only  obstacle  to  his  success,  there  would  not  be  the
least  difficulty  about  it." The  groom  then  took  the  horse,  in
the  night  before  the  appointed  day,  to  the  place  agreed  upon,
and  there  let  him  cover  a  mare,  thinking  that  from  the  pleasure
of  the  leap  would  result  what  actually  came  to  pass. On  the
next  day,  accordingly,  when  they  were  all  met  at  the  appointed
hour,  the  horse  of  Darius,  recognizing  the  place,  set  up  a
neigh  from  desire  for  the  mare,  and,  while  the  other  horses
were  silent,  was  the  first  to  give  a  fortunate  signal  for  his
master. Such  was  the  moderation  of  the  other  nobles,  that
when  they  heard  the  omen,  they  immediately  leaped  from  their
horses,  and  saluted  Darius  as  king. The  whole  people  too,
following  the  judgment  of  their  chiefs,  acknowledged  him  as
their  ruler. Thus  the  kingdom  of  the  Persians,  recovered  by

*  EeUgiofU.']  To  the  gods,  who  might  signify  their  will  by  omens.
—WetzeL

f  Inter  adlU  ortwrn."]  The  old  editions  have  a/rUe  96U9  ortwn,  but
inter,  which  Bongarsius  took  from  his  manuscripts,  agrees  better  with
the  account  of  Herodotus,  who  has  riXiov  dvaTiWovros,  and  lifia  nf
fiKitf  aviovri.  Inter  ortvm  eoUe  is  equivalent  to  dvm  »ol  oritiir.  —
Vorstitu.


B.C.  521.]  DARIUS HYSTASPES.  15

the  valour  of  seven  of  its  noblest  men,  was  by  so  easy  a  mode
of  decision  conferred  upon  one  of  them.  It  is  incredible
that  they  should  have  resigned,  with  so  much  patience,  their
pretensions  to  a  kingdom,  for  which,  in  order  to  recover  it
from  the  Magi,  they  had  not  hesitated  to  expose  their  lives.
However,  besides  possessing  gracefulness  of  person,  and  merit
deserving  of  such  an  empire,  Darius  was  related  to  the
preceding  kings  ;  and,  in  llie  beginning  of  his  reign,  he  took
to  wife  the  daughter  of  Cyrus,  in  order  to  strengthen  his
kingdom  by  a  royal  marriage,  so  that  it  might  not  so  much
seem  transferred  to  a  stranger,  as  to  be  restored  to  Cyrus's
family.

Some  time  after,  when  the  Assyrians  had  revolted  and
seized  upon  Babylon,  and  the  capture  of  the  city  proved
difficult,  so  that  the  king  was  in  great  anxiety  about  it,
Zopyrus,  one  of  the  assassins  of  the  Magi,  caused  himself  to
be  mangled  with  stripes,  in  his  own  house,  over  his  whole
body,  and  his  nose,  ears,  and  lips  to  be  cut  off,  and  in  this
condition  presented  himself  unexpectedly  before  the  king;
when  he  privately  informed  Darius,  who  was  astonished,  and
inquired  the  cause  and  author  of  so  dire  an  outrage,  with  what
object  he  had  done  it,  and,  having  settled  his  plan  of  action
for  the  future,  set  out  for  Babylon  in  the  character  of  a
deserter.  There  he  showed  the  people  his  lacerated  body ;
complained  of  the  barbarity  of  the  king,  by  whom,  in  the
competition  for  the  throne,  he  had  been  defeated,  not  by
merit  but  by  fortune,  not  by  the  judgment  of  men  but  by
the  neighing  of  a  horse ;  and  bade  them  form  an  opinion,
from  his  treatment  of  his  friends,  what  was  to  be  apprehended
by  his  enemies ;  exhorting  them  not  to  trust  to  their  walls
more  than  to  their  arms,  and  to  allow  him,  whose  resentment
was  fresher,  to  carry  on  the  war  in  common  with  them.  The
nobleness  and  bravery  of  the  man  was  known  to  them  all :
nor  did  they  doubt  of  his  sincerity,  of  which  they  had  the
wounds  on  his  person,  and  the  marks  of  his  ill-usage,  as
proofs.  He  was  therefore  chosen  general  by  the  suffrages  of
all ;  and,  having  received  a  small  body  of  men,  and  the
Persians,  once  or  twice,  purposely  retreating  from  the  field,  he
fought  some  successful  battles.  At  last  he  betrayed  the  whole
army,  with  which  he  had  been  entrusted,  to  Darius,  and
brought  the  city  under  his  power. Some  time  after,  Darius


16  JUSTIN.  [B.1I.  CH.I.

made  war  upon  the  Scythians,  as  shall  he  related in  the
following  book.


BOOK II.


Account  of  the  Scythians  and  their  actions,  I.,  II.,  III. — The  Ama-
zons, IV. — The  war  of  the  Scythians  with  their  slaves ;  the
expeditions  of  Darius  against  the  Scythians  and  lonians,  V. —
The  Athenians,  and  Solon,  VI.,  VII. — Pisistratus,  VIIT. — Hippias,
being  exiled,  brings  the  Persians  against  Greece;  the  battle  of
Marathon  ;  Miltiades,  IX. — The  sons  of  Darius ;  Xerxes  iayades
Qreece,  X. — ^Leonidas  at  Thermopylae,  XI. — ^The  battle  of  Salamis^
XII. — Mardonius;  the  flight  of  Xerxes,  XIII. — The  battle  of
Platseae,  XIV. — ^The  walls  of  Athens ;  Pausanias ;  Aristides  ;
Cimon,  XV.

I.  In  narrating  the  acts  of  the  Scythians,  which  were  very
great  and  glorious,  we  must  commence  from  their  origin  ;
for  they  had  a  rise  not  less  illustrious  than  their  empire ;  nor
were  they  more  famous  for  the  government  of  their  men  than
for  the  brave  actions  of  their  women.  As  the  men  were
fotmders  of  the  Parthians  and  Bactrians,  the  women  settled
the  kingdom  of  the  Amazons ;  so  that  to  those  who  compare
the  deeds  of  their  males  and  females,  it  is  difficult  to  decide
which  of  the  sexes  was  more  distinguished.

The  nation  of  the  Scythians  was  always  regarded  as  very
ancient ;  though  there  was  long  a  dispute  between  them  and
the  Egyptians  concerning  the  antiquity  of  their  respective
races ;  the  Egyptians  alleging  that,  "  In  the  beginning  of
things,  when  some  countries  were  parched  with  the  excessive
heat  of  the  sun,  and  others  frozen  with  extremity  of  cold,  so
that,  in  their  early  condition,  they  were  not  only  unable  to
produce  human  heings,  hut  were  incapable  even  of  receiving
and  supporting  such  as  came  from  other  parts  (before  coverings
for  the  body  were  found  out  against  heat  and  cold,  or  the  incon-
veniences of  countries  corrected  by  artificial  remedies),  Egypt
was  always  so  temperate,  that  neitiier  the  cold  in  winter  nor
the  sun's  heat  in  summer,  incommoded  its  inhabitants;
and  its  soil  so  fertile,  that  no  land  was  ever  more  productive  of
food  for  the  use  of  man ;  and  that,  consequentiy,  men  must


EGYPT  AND  SCYTHIA.  17

reasonably  be  considered  to  haye  been  first  produced  in  that
country,*  where  they  could  most  easily  be  nourished."

The  Scythians,  on  the  other  hand,  thought  that  the  tern
perateness  of  the  air  was  no  argument  of  antiquity ;  "  because
Nature,  when  she  first  distributed  to  different  countries  degrees
of  heat  and  cold,  immediately  produced  in  them  animals  fitted
to  endure  the  seveml  climates,  and  generated  also  numerous
sorts  of  trees  and  herbs,  happily  varied  according  to  the  con-
dition of  the  places  in  which  they  grew ;  and  that,  as  the
Scythians  have  a  sharper  air  than  the  Egyptians,  so  are  their
bodies  and  constitutions  in  proportion  more  hardy.  But  that
if  the  worid,  which  is  now  distinguished  into  parts  of  a  different
nature,  was  once  uniform  throughout;  whether  a  deluge  of
waters  originally  kept  the  earth  buried  under  it ;  or  whether
fire,  which  also  produced  the  world,f  had  possession  of  all  the
parts  of  it,  the  Scythians,  under  either  supposition  as  to  the
primordial  state  of  things,  had  the  advantage  as  to  origin.
For  if  fire  was  at  first  predominant  over  all  things,  and^  being
gradually  extinguished,  gave  place  to  the  earth,  no  part  of  it
would  be  sooner  separated  from  the  fire,  by  the  severity  of
winter  cold,  than  the  northern,  since  even  now  no  part  is  more
frozen  with  cold ;  but  Egypt  and  all  the  east  must  have  been
the  latest  to  cool,  as  being  now  burnt  up  with  the  parching
heat  of  the  sun.  But  if  originally  all  the  earth  were  sunk
under  water,  assuredly  the  highest  parts  would  be  first
uncovered  when  the  waters  decreased,  and  the  water  must
have  remained  longest  in  the  lowest  grounds;  while  the
sooner  any  portion  of  the  earth  was  dry,  the  sooner  it  must
have  begun  to  produce  animals ;  but  Scythia  was  so  much
higher  than  all  other  countries,  that  all  the  rivers  which  rise
in  it  run  down  into  the  Maeotis,  and  then  into  the  Pontic  and
Egyptian  seas ;  whereas  Egypt,  (which,  though  it  had  been
fenced  by  the  care  and  expense  of  so  many  princes  ard  gene-
rations, and  furnished  with  such  strong  mounds  against  the
violence  of  the  encroaching  waters,  and  though  it  had  been
intersected  also  by  so  many  canals,  the  waters  being  kept
out  by  the  one,  and  retained  by  the  other,  was  yet  unin-


Lucretiufl,

t  Ifffiit,  , „

and  some  other  philosopherti.


18  jusTiir,  [b.ii.  c?H.ir.

habitable,  unless  the  Nile  were  excluded,*)  could  not  be
thought  to  have  been  the  most  anciently  peopled;!  being
a  land,  which,  whether  from  the  accessions  of  soil  col-
lected by  its  kings,  or  those  from  the  Nile,  bringing  mud  with
it,  must  appear  to  have  been  the  most  recently  formed  of  alL
lands."  The  Egyptians  being  confounded  with  these  argu-
ments, the  Scythians  were  always  accounted  the  more  ancient.
II.  Scythia,  which  stretches  towards  the  east,  is  bounded  on
one  side  by  the  Pontus  Euxinus;  on  the  other,  by  the
Rhipeean  Mountains ;  at  the  back,|  by  Asia  §  and  the  river
Phasis,  It  extends  to  a  vast  distance,  both  in  length  and
breadth.  The  people  have  no  landmarks,  for  they  neither
cultivate  the  soil,  nor  have  they  any  house,  dwelling,  or  settled
place  of  abode,  but  are  always  engaged  in  feeding  herds  and
flocks,  and  wandering  through  uncultivated  deserts.  They
carry  their  wives  and  children  with  them  in  waggons,  ||  which,
as  tibey  are  covered  with  hides  against  the  rain  and  cold,  they
use  instead  of  houses.  Justice  is  observed  among  them,  more
from  the  temper  of  the  people,  than  from  the  influence  of
laws.  No  crime  in  their  opinion  is  more  heinous  than  theft ;
for,  among  people  that  keep  their  flocks  and  herds  without
fence  or  shelter  in  the  woods,  what  would  be  safe,  if  stealing
were  permitted  ?  Gold  and  silver  they  despise,  as  much  as
other  men  covet  them.  They  live  on  milk  and  honey.  The
use  of  wool  and  clothes  is  unknown  among  them,  although
they  are  pinched  by  perpetual  cold ;  they  wear,  however,  the
skins  of  wild  animals,  great  and  small. ^ Such  abstemiousness

*  Nisi  exduso  Nilo.'\  Excluded  from  the  land,  or  confined  to  its
channel. — Wetzd,

t  Hominum  vetustcUe  lUtimam.^  '*  The  farthest  back  in  the  antiquity
of  its  inhabitants."

X  A  tergo.]  i.  e.  towards  the  west.

§  Asia  Minor. — Wetzd.

II  Jn  plaustris^l  See  Hor.  Od.  iii.  24,  9.

%  Ferinia  ctut  muHnis.']  By  mures  is  to  be  understood  small  animals
in  general,  as  cats,  weasels,  badgers,  rabbits,  hares,  foxes.  Thus
Hesychius  says  that  the  cift(ap  is  a  fivbQ  dypiov  tidoQ  among  the
Farthians,  the  skin  of  which  they  use  for  garments.  So  Ammianus
Marcellinus,  xxxL  2,  says  of  the  Huns,  that  they  wear  garments
ex  peUHms  sUvestrium  mwrvum  consardncUis. — Wetzel.  By  mus  PonticuSf
Flin.  H.  N.  X.  73,  is  generally  understood  the  ermine  or  squirrel.
Seneca,  Ep.  90,  says,  that  the  Scythians  wear  skins  vtUpium  ac  muri-
um. See  also  Plin.  H.  ]^.  xxx.  6.


B.0. 1800.}  SESOSTBIS.  19

has  caused  justice  to  be  observed  among  them,  as  they  covet
nothing  belonging  to  their  neighbours ;  for  it  is  only  where
riches  are  of  use,  that  the  desire  of  them  prevails*  And
would  that  other  men  had  like  temperance,  and  like  freedom
from  desire  for  the  goods  of  others!  There  would  then
assuredly  be  fewer  wars  in  all  ages  and  countries,  and  the  sword
would  not  destroy  more  than  the  natural  course  of  destiny.
And  it  appears  extremely  wonderful,  that  nature  should  grant
that  to  them  which  the  Greeks  cannot  attain  by  long  instruc-
tion from  their  wise  men  and  the  precepts  of  their  philo-
sophers ;  and  that  cultivated  morals  should  have  the  disadvan-
tage in  a  comparison  with  those  of  unpolished  barbarians.  So
much  better  effect  has  the  ignorance  of  vice  in  the  one  people
than  the  knowledge  of  virtue  in  the  other.

III.  They  thrice  *  aspired  to  the  supreme  command  in  Asia ;
while  they  themselves  remained  always  either  unmolested  or
uneonquered  by  any  foreign  power.  Darius,  king  of  the  Per-
sians, they  forced  to  quit  Scythia  in  disgraceful  flight.  They
slew  Cyrus  with  his  whole  army.  They  cut  off  in  like  manner
Zopyrion,  a  general  of  Alexander  the  Great,  with  all  his
forces.  Of  the  arms  of  the  Romans  they  hav^e  heard,'  but
never  felt  them.  They  founded  the  Parthian  and  Bactrian
powers.  They  are  a  nation  hardy  in  toils  and  warfare ;  their
strength  of  body  is  extraordinary;  they  take  possession  of
nothing  which  they  fear  to  lose,  and  covet,  when  they  are
conquerors,  nothing  but  glory.

The  first  that  proclaimed  war  against  the  Scythians  was
Sesostris,  king  of  Egypt,  previously  sending  messengers  f  to
announce  conditions  on  which  they  might  become  his  subjects.
But  the  Scythians,  who  were  already  apprized  by  their  neigh-
bours of  the  king's  approach,  made  answer  to  the  deputies,
that  the  prince  of  so  rich  a  people  had  been  foolish  in  com-
mencing a  war  with  a  poor  one  (for  war  was  more  to  be
dreaded  by  himself  at  home),  as  the  result  of  the  contest  was
uncertain,  prizes  of  victory  there  were  none,  and  the  ill  con-
sequences of  defeat  were  apparent ;  and  that  the  Scythians,

•  One  expedition  only  is  mentioned  by  Herodotus. — Wetzd,
i*  Lenon&us.'l  Messenger,  mediator,  or  conciliator,  seems  to  have
been  the  primary  meaning  of  the  word  Utio. Priscian  derives  it  from
lemo. Maxima  Una  mora  eat,  says Ovid;  and  vox  8ua  Una  fuU,
A.  Am.  ill.  316.

C2


20  JUSTIN.  [B.ir.  CH.IV.

therefore,  would  not  wait  till  be  came  to  then),  since  there  was
so  much  more  to  be  desired  in  the  bands  of  the  enemy,  but
would  proceed  of  their  own  accord  to  seek  the  spoil."  Nor
were  tbeir  deeds  slower  than  their  words;  and  the  king,
bearing  that  they  were  advancing  with  such  speed,  took  to  flight,*
and  leaving  beMud  him  bis  army  and  all  bis  military  stores,
returned  in  consternation  to  bis  own  kingdom.  The  morasses
prevented  the  Scythians  from  invading  Egypt;  in  their
retreat  from  which  they  subdued  Asia,  and  made  it  tributary,
imposing,  however,  only  a  moderate  tribute,  rather  as  a  token
of  their  power  over  it,  than  as  a  recompence  for  their  victory.
After  spending  fifteen  years  in  the  reduction  of  Asia,  they
were  called  home  by  the  importunity  of  their  wives,  who  sent
them  word  that  **  unless  their  husbands  returned,  they  would
seek  issue  from  their  neighbours,  and  not  suffer  the  race  of  the
Scythians  to  fail  of  posterity  through  the  fault  of  their
women."  Asia  was  tributary  to  them  for  fifteen  hundred
years ;  and  it  was  Ninus,  king  of  Assyria,  that  put  a  stop  to
the  payment  of  the  tribute.

IV.  Among  the  Scythians,  in  the  meantime,  two  youths  f
of  royal  extrc^tion,  Ylinos  and  Scolopitus,  being  driven  from
their  country  by  a  faction  of  the  nobility,  took  with  them  a
numerous  band  of  young  men,  and  found  a  settlement  on  the
coast  of  Cappadocia,  near  the  river  Thermodon,  occupying  the
Themiscyrian  plains  that  border  on  it.  Here,  making  it  their
practice  for  several  years  to  rob  their  neighbours,  they  were  at
last,  by  a  combination  of  the  surrounding  people,  cut  to  pieces
in  an  ambuscade.  Their  wives,  when  they  found  that  to  exile
wad  added  the  loss  of  their  husbands,  took  arms  themselves,
and  maintained  their  position,  repelling  the  attacks  of  their
enemies  at  first,  and  aftei'wards  assailing  them  in  return.
They  relinquished  all  thoughts  of  mariying  with  their  neigh-
bours, saying  that  it  would  be  slavery,  not  matrimony.  Ven-
turing to  set  an  example  inimitated  through  ail  generations,
they  established  their  government  without  Uie  aid  of  men,  and

*  Herodotus,  on  the  contrary,  with  Diodorus  Siculus,  and  Dicsear-
chus,  say,  that  the  Scythians  were  put  to  flight  by  Sesostris,  who  con-
quered eveiy  nation  that  he  attacked. —  Wetzd.

f  Herodotus,  iv.  110,  117,  gives  a  different  account;  and  another
is  given  by  Diod.  Siculus,  ii.  45.  Compare  Orosius,  i.  15;  Ammian.
Maxcellinus,  lib.  xxii. ;  Eustath.  on  Dionysius;  Strabo,  lib.  ii.  saya
much  on  this  subject,  deeming  all  the  accounts  fabulous. — Lemaire*


THE  AMAZONS.  21

80011  maintained  their  power  in  defiance  of  them.  And  that
none  of  their  females  might  seem  more  fortunate  than  others,
they  put  to  death  all  the  men  who  had  remained  at  home.
They  also  took  revenge  for  their  husbands  that  were  killed  in
war,  by  a  great  slaughter  of  their  neighbours.

Having  thus  secured  peace  by  means  of  their  arms,  they
proceeded^  in  order  that  their  race  might  not  fail,  to  form  con-
nexions vnth  the  men  of  the  adjacent  nations.  If  any  male
children  were  bom,  they  put  them  to  death.  The  girls  they
bred  up  to  the  same  mode  of  life  with  themselves,  not  con-
signing them  to  idleness,  or  working  in  wool,  but  training
them  to  arms,  the  management  of  horses,  and  hunting;
burning  their  right  breasts  in  infancy,  that  their  use  of  the
bow  might  not  be  obstructed  by  them ;  and  hence  they  were
called  Amazons.*  They  had  two  queens,  Marpesia  and  Lam-
pedo,  who,  dividing  their  forces  into  two  bodies  (after  they
were  grown  famous  for  their  power),  conducted  their  wars,  and
defended  their  borders  separately  and  by  turns.  And  that  a
reason  for  their  success  might  not  be  wanting,  they  spread  a
report  that  they  were  the  daughters  of  Mars.

After  subduing  the  greater  part  of  Europe,  they  possessed
themselves  also  of  some  cities  in  Asia.f  Having  then  founded
Ephesus  and  several  other  tovms  there,  they  sent  a  detach
ment  of  their  army  home,  laden  with  a  vast  quantity  of  spoil.
The  rest,  who  remained  to  secure  their  power  in  Asia,  were
cut  to  pieces,  together  with  their  queen  Marpesia,  by  a  com-
bination of  the  barbarous  tribes.  Orithya,  the  daughter  of
Marpesia,  succeeded  to  the  government  in  her  room,  and  has
attracted  extraordinary  admiration,  not  only  for  her  etninent
skill  in  war,  but  for  having  preserved  her  virginity  to  the  end
of  her  life.  So  much  was  added  by  her  valour  and  conduct  to
the  fame  and  glory  of  the  Amazons,  that  the  king,  for  whom
Hercules  was  bound  to  perform  twelve  labours,  ordered  him,
as  if  it  were  a  thing  impossible,  to  bring  him  the  arms  of  the
queen  of  the  Amazons.  Hercules,  accordingly,  having  pro-
ceeded thither  with  nine  ships  of  war,  the  principal  young
men  of  Greece  accompanying  him,  attacked  the  Amazons
unawares.  Two  sisters  at  this  time  held  the  government,
Antiope  and  Orithya;  but  Orithya  was  engaged  in  a  war

*  From  A,  privative^  and  /lia^oc,  hreatt,
t  Asia  liinor.


29  JUSTIN.  [rii,  ch.iv.

abroad*  When  Hercules,  therefore,  landed  on  the  coast  of
the  Amazons,  there  was  but  a  small  number  of  them  there
with  their  queen  Antiope,  free  from  all  apprehension  of  hos*
tilities.  Hence  it  happened  that  a  few  only,  roused  by  the
sudden  alarm,  took  up  arms,  and  these  afforded  an  easy  con-
quest  to  the  enemy.  Many  were  slain,  and  many  taken
prisoners;  among  the  latter  were  two  sisters  of  Antiope,
Menalippe  being  taken  by  Hercules,  and  Hippol3rte  by  The-
seus. Theseus,  having  received  his  prisoner  as  his  share  of
the  spoil,  took  her  to  wife,  and  had  by  her  his  son  Hippolytus.
Hercules,  after  his  victory,  restored  his  captive  Menalippe  to
her  sister,  receiving  the  arms  of  the  queen  as  a  recompence ;
and  having  thus  executed  what  was  imposed  on  him,  he  returned
to  the  king.

But  Orithya,  when  she  found  that  war  bad  been  made  upon
her  sister,  and  that  the  assailant  was  a  chief  of  the  Athenians,
exhorted  her  followers  to  revenge  the  afiPront,  saying  that  the
"  coast  of  the  Fontus,  and  Asia,  had  been  conquered  in  vain,
if  they  were  still  exposed,  not  merely  to  the  wars,  but  to  the
marauding  invasions,  of  the  Greeks."  She  then  solicited  aid
from  Sa^us,  king  of  Scythia ;  representing  to  him  *'  their
Scythian  descent,  the  loss  of  their  husbands,  their  obligation  to
take  arms,  and  their  reasons  for  making  war ; "  adding,  *'  that
they  had  proved  by  their  valour,  that  tiie  Scythians  must  be
thought  to  have  women  not  less  spirited  than  their  men."
Sagillus,  alive  to  the  glory  of  his  nation,  sent  his  son  Panasa*
goras,  with  a  numerous  body  of  cavalry,  to  their  aid.  But
some  disagreement  having  occurred  before  the  battle,  they
were  deserted  by  their  auxiliaries,  and  worsted  in  the  conflict
by  the  Athenians.  They  had,  however,  the  camp  of  their
allies  as  a  place  of  refuge,  under  whose  protection  they
returned  to  their  kingdom  unmolested  by  other  nations.

After  Orithya,  Penthesilea  occupied  the  throne,  of  whose
valour  there  were  seen  great  proofs  among  the  bravest  heroes
in  the  Trojan  war,  when  she  led  an  auxiliary  force  thither
against  the  Greeks.  But  Penthesilea  being  at  last  killed,  and
her  army  destroyed,  a  few  only  of  the  Amazons,  who  had
remained  at  home  in  their  own  country,  established  a  power
that  continued  (defending  itself  with  difficulty  against  its
neighbours),  to  the  time  of  Alexander  the  Great.  Their
queen  Minithya,  or  Thalestris,  after  obtaining  from  Alexander


B.C.  512.]  DARIUS  INVADES  SCYTHIA.  23

the  enjoyment  of  his  society  for  thirteen  days,  in  order  to
have  issue  by  him,  returned  into  her  kingdom,  and  soon  after
died,  together  with  the  whole  name  of  the  Amazons.

Y.  The  Scythians,  in  their  Asiatic  expedition,  having  been
absent  from  their  wives  and  children  eight  yes^  were  met  on
their  return  home  by  a  war  raised  by  their  slaves.  For  their
wives,  weary  of  waiting  so  long  for  their  husbands,  and  think-
ing that  they  were  not  detained  by  war,  but  had  perished  in
the  field,  married  their  slaves  that  had  been  left  at  home
to  take  care  of  the  cattle  ;  who,  taking  up  arms,  repelled  their
masters,  returning  with  victory,  from  the  borders  of  their
country,  as  if  they  had  been  strangers.  Success  against  them
being  uncertain,  the  Scythians  were  advised  to  change  their
method  of  attack,  remembering  that  they  were  not  to  fight
with  soldiers,  but  with  slaves,  who  were  to  be  conquered,
not  by  means  of  arms,  but  of  magisterial  authority;  that
whips,  not  weapons,  were  to  be  used  in  the  field  ;  and  that,
swords  being  laid  aside,  rods  and  scourges,  and  other  instru-
ments  of  terror  to  slaves,  were  to  be  provided.  This  sugges-
tion being  approved,  and  all  being  equipped  as  was  prescribed,
the  Scythians,  as  soon  as  they  drew  near  the  enemy,  held
out  scourges  towards  them  unexpectedly,  and  struck  them
such  terror,  that  they  conquered  with  the  dread  of  stripes
those  whom  they  could  not  conquer  with  the  sword,  and  who
took  to  flight,  not  as  defeated  enemies,  but  as  fugitive
slaves.  .  As  many  as  could  be  taken,  paid  the  penalty  for  their
rebelUon  on  the  cross.  The  women  too,  conscious  of  their
ill  conduct,  put  an  end  to  their  lives  partly  by  the  sword  and
partly  by  hanging.

After  this  occurrence,  there  was  peace  among  the  Scythians
till  the  time  of  king  Jancyrus,  on  whom  Darius,  king  of
Persia,  as  was  said  above,  made  war,  because  he  could  not
obtain  his  daughter  in  marriage.  Darius,  having  entered
Scythia  with  seven '  hundred  thousand  armed  men,  and  tbe
enemy  allowing  him  no  opportunity  of  fighting,  dreading  lest,
if  the  bridge  over  tho'Ister  were  broken  down,  his  retreat
should  be  cut  off,  hurried  back  in  alarm,  with  the  loss  of
eighty  thousand  men  ;  which  loss,  ho^vever,  out  of  so  vast  a
number,  was  scarcely  accounted  a  disaster.  Darius  afterwards
subdued  Asia  and  Macedonia,  and  defeated  th»  lonians  in  a
fight  at  sea. Then,  learning  that  the  Athenians  had  given


24  JUSTIN.  [b^IL  CH.VI.

aid  to  the  lonians  against  him,  he  turned  all  his  warlike  fury
upon  them.

VI.  Since  we  have  now  come  to  the  wars  of  the  Athenians,
which  were  carried  on,  not  only  beyond  expectation  as  to  what
could  be  done,  but  even  beyond  belief  as  to  what  was  done,
the  efforts  of  that  people  having  been  successful  beyond  their
hopes,  the  origin  of  tiieir  city  must  be  briefly  set  forth ;  for
they  did  not,  like  other  nations,  rise  to  eminence  from  a  mean
commencement,  but  are  the  only  people  that  can  boast,
not  only  of  their  rise,  but  also  of  their  birth.  It  was
not  a  concourse  of  foreigners,  or  a  rabble  of  people  collected
from  different  parts,  that  raised  their  city,  but  men  who
were  bom  on  the  same  ground  which  they  inhabit ;  and  the
countiy  which  is  their  place  of  abode,  was  also  their  birth-
place. It  was  they  who  first  taught*  the  art  of  working
in  wool,  and  the  use  of  oil  and  wine.  They  also  showed  men,
who  had  previously  fed  on  acorns,  how  to  plough  and  sow.
Literature  and  eloquence,  it  is  certain,  and  the  state  of  civil
discipline  which  we  enjoy,  had  Athens  as  their  temple.
Before  Deucalion's  time,  they  had  a  king  named  Cecrops,
whom,  as  all  antiquity  is  full  of  fables,  they  represented  to
have  been  of  both  sexes,  because  he  was  the  first  to  join  male
and  female  in  marriage.  To  him  succeeded  Granaus,  whose
daughter  Atthis  gave  name  to  the  countiy.  After  him
reigned  Amphictyon,  who  first  copsecrated  the  city  to  Minerva,
and  gave  it  the  name  of  Athens.  In  his  days,  a  deluge
swept  away  the  greater  part  of  the  inhabitants  of  Greece.
Those  only  escaped,  whom  a  refuge  on  the  mountains  pro-
tected, or  who  went  off  in  ships  to  Deucalion,  king  of  Thessaly,
by  whom,  from  this  circumstance,. the  human  race  is  said  to
have  been  restored.  The  crown  then  descended,  in  the
course  of  succession,  to  Erectheus,  in  whose  reign  the  sowing
of  com  was  commenced  by  Triptolemus  at^  Eleusis;  in
commemoration  of  which  benefit  the  nights  sacred  to  the
mysteries  of  Ceres  were  appointed.  JEgeus  also,  the  father  of
Theseus,  was  king  of  Athens,  from  whom  Medea  divorcing
herself,  on  account  of  the  adult  age  of  her  step-son,  returned
to  Colchis  with  her  son  Medus,  whom  she  had  had  by  ^Egeus.
After  iEgeus  reigned  Theseus,  and  after  Theseus  his  son

*  See,  on  the  praise  of  Athens,  Lucret.  vi.  1 ;  JSlian.  Var.  Hist.  iii.
88 ;  Strabo,  Ub.  xix. ;  Thucyd.  Ub.  i. ;  Diod.  Sio.  lib.  i.


B.C.  1091.]  DEAra  OP  00DRU8.  25

Demophoon,  -who  afforded  aid  to  the  Greeks  against  the  Tro-
jans. Between  the  Athenians  and  Dorians  there  had  heen
animosities  of  long  standing,  which  the  Dorians,  intending  to
reyenge  in  war,  consnlted  the  oracle  about  the  event  of
the  contest.  The  answer  was,  that  the  **  Dorians  would
baye  the  advantage,  if  they  did  not  kill  the  king  of  the
Athenians."  When  they  c&me  into  the  field,  the  Doric
soldiers  were  charged  above  all  things  to  take  care  not  to
attack  the  king.  At  that  time  the  king  of  the  Athenians  was
Godrus,  who,  learning  the  answer  of  the  god  and  the  direc-
tions of  the  enemy,  laid  aside  his  royal  dress,  and  entered  the
camp  of  the  enemy  in  rags,  with  a  bundle  of  sticks  on  his
back.  Here,  among  a  crowd  of  people  that  stood  in  his  way,
he  was  killed  by  a  soldier  whom  he  had  purposely  wounded
with  a  pruning  knife.  His  body  being  recognized  as  that  of
the  king,  the  Dorians  went  off  without  coming  to  battle ;
and  thus  the  Athenians,  through  the  bravery  of  a  prince  who
submitted  to  death  for  the  safety  of  his  country,  were  relieved
from  war.

VII.  After  Codrus  there  was  no  king  at  Athens;  a  cir-
cumstance which  is  attributed  to  the  respect  paid  to  his
memory.  The  government  of  the  state  was  placed  in  the
hands  of  rot^strates  elected  annually.  At  this  period  the
people  had  no  laws,  for  the  wills  of  their  princes  had  always
been  received  instead  of  laws.  Solon,  a  man  of  eminent
integrity,  was  in  consequence  chosen  to  found  the  state,  as  it
were  afresh,  by  the  establishment  of  laws.  This  man  acted
with  such  judicious  moderation  between  the  commons  and  the
senate  (though  whatever  he  proposed  in  favour  of  one
class,  seemed  likely  to  displease  the  other),  that  he  received
equal  thanks  from  both  parties.  Among  many  illustrious  acts
of  Solon,  the  following  is  eminently  worthy  of  record.  A  war
had  been  carried  on  between  the  Athenians  and  Megarians,
concerning  their  respective  claims  to  the  island  of  Salamis,
almost  to  the  utter  destruction  of  both.  After  many  defeats,
it  was  made  a  capital  offence  at  Athens  to  propose  a  law  for
the  recovery  of  the  island.  Solon,  anxious  lest  he  should
injure  his  country  by  keeping  silence,  or  himself  by  expressing
his  opinion,  pretended  to  be  suddenly  seized  with  madness,
under  cover  of  which  he  might  not  only  say,  but  do,  what  was
prohibited* In  a  strange  garb,  like  an  insane  person,  he  rushed


26  JUSTIN.  [B.11.  ch.viii.

«

forth  into  the  public  streets,  where,  having  collected  a  crowd
about  him,  he  began,  that  he  might  the  better  conceal  his
design,  to  urge  the  people  in  verse  (which  he  was  unaccus-
tomed to  make),  to  do  what  was  forbidden,  and^  produced  such
an  effect  on  the  minds  of  all»  that  war  was  instantly  decreed
against  the  Megarians ;  and  the  enemy  being  defeated,  the
island  became  subject  to  the  Athenians.

VIII.  After  a  time,  the  Megarians,  cherishing  the  remem-
brance of  the  war  made  upon  them  by  the  Athenians,  and
fearing  that  they  might  be  said  to  have  taken  up  arms  to  no
purpose,  went  on  board  a  fleet  with  a  design  to  seize  the
Athenian  matrons  as  they  were  celebrating  the"  Eleusinian
mysteries  during  the  night.  Their  intention  becoming  known,
Pisistratus,  the  Athenian  general,  placed  a  body  of  young
men  in  ambush  to  receive  them,  directing  the  matrons,  at  the
same  time,  to  continue  the  celebration  of  the  sacred  rites  with
their  usual  cries  and  noise,  even  while  the  enemy  were  ap-
proaching, in  order  that  they  might  not  know  that  their  coming
was  expected ;  and  thus  attacking  the  Megarians  unawares,
Just  as  they  were  leaving  their  ships,  he  put  them  all  to  the
sword.  Immediately  after,  having  taken  some  women  with
his  men  on  board  the  fleet  which  he  had  seized,  to  appear
like  captured  matrons  of  the  Athenians,  he  set  sail  for  Megara,
The  Megarians^  seeing  ships  of  their  own  build  approaching,
apparently  with  the  desired  prey  on  board,  went  out  to  the
harbour  to  meet  them.  Pisistratus  cut  them  to  pieces,  and
almost  succeeded  in  taking  their  city.  Thus  the  Megarians,
having  their  own  stratagem  turned  against  them,  afforded  their
enemies  a  triumph.

But  Pisistratus,  as  if  he  had  conquered  for  himself  and  not
for  his  country,  possessed  himself  of  the  sovereign  authority
by  a  subtle  contrivance.  Having  undergone  a  voluntary
scourging  in  his.  own  house,  he  ran  out,  with  his  body  lace-
rated, into  the  open  street,  and,  having  summoned  an  as-
sembly of  the  people,  showed  them  his  wounds,  complaining  of
the  cruelty  of  the  great  men  of  the  city,  from  whom  he
pretended  to  have  received  this  treatment  Tears  were  joined
to  his  words,  and  the  credulous  mob  was  easily  inflamed  by
a  calumnious  speech,  in  which  he  affirmed  that  he  had
incurred  the  hatred  of  the  senate  by  showing  his  love  for  the
common  people. He  thus  obtained  a  guard  for  the  protection


B.C.  489.]  BATTLE  OF  MARATHON.  $7

of  his  person,  by  the  aid  of  which  he  got  the  soTereign  power
into  his  hands,  and  reigned  thirty-three  years.

IX.  After  his  death  Diodes,*  one  of  his  sons,  having
offered  violence  to  a  maiden,  was  slain  by  her  brother.  His
other  son,  whose  name  was  Hippias,  taking  upon  him  the
authority  of  his  father,  ordered  the  murderer  of  his  brother
to  be  apprehended;  who,  being  forced  by  torture  to  name
those  that  were  privy  to  the  murder,  named  all  the  intimate
friends  of  the  tyrant  These  being  put  to  death,  and  Hippias
asking  him  "  whether  any  of  the  guilty  still  survived,"  he
replied,  that  '*  there  was  no  one  surviving  whom  he  should
more  rejoice  to  see  die  than  the  tyrant  himself."  By  which
answer  he  proved  himself  superior  to  the  tyrant,  after  having
avenged,  too,  the  violated  honour  of  his  sister.

The  city  being  animated,  through  his  spirited  conduct,  with
a  desire  for  liberty,  Hippias  was  at  last  deprived  of  his  power,
and  driven  into  exile.  Setting  out  for  Persia,  he  offered  him-
self as  a  leader  to  Darius  against  his  own  country ;  Darius
being  then,  as  has  been  said  before,  ready  to  make  war  on
the  Athenians.  The  Athenians,  hearing  of  Darius 's  approach,
requested  assistance  from  the  Lacedaemonians,  who  were  then
in  alliance  with  them.  But  finding  that  they  delayed  at  home
four  days,  in  consequence  of  some  religious  scruple,  they  did
not  wait  for  their  help,  but,  having  mustered  ten  thousand  of
their  own  citizens,  and  a  thousand  auxiliaries  from  PlatSBSB,
went  out  to  battle  in  the  plain  of  Marathon,  against  six
hundred  thousand  of  the  enemy.  Miltiades  was  both  their
general  in  the  field,  and  the  person  who  advised  them  not  to
wait  for  assistance,  being  possessed  with  such  confidence  of
success,  that  he  thought  there  was  more  trust  to  be  placed  in
expedition  than  in  their  allies.  Great,  therefore,  was  their
spirit  as  they  proceeded  to  battle ;  so  that,  though  there  were  a
thousand  paces  between  the  two  armies,  they  came  full  speed
upon  the^emy  before  their  am.ws  were 'discharged.  V
did  the  result  fall  short  of  their  daring ;  for  such  was  the
courage  with  which  they  fought,  that  you  might  have  supposed
there  were  men  on  one  side  and  a  herd  of  cattle  on  the  other.
The  Persians,  utterly  defeated,  fied  to  their  ships,  of  which
many  were  sunk  and  many  taken.  In  this  battle,  the  bravery
of  every  individual  was  such,  that  it  was  difficult  to  determine

•  All  other  hiBtorians  call  him  Hipparchus. See  Thucyd.  i.  20.


2S  JUSTIN.  [B.  II.  CH.  X .

to  whom  the  highest  praise  was  due.  Amongst  others,  how-
ever, the  heroism  of  Themistocies,  then  a  young  man,  was
greatly  distinguished ;  in  whom,  even  then,  appeared  a  genius
indicative  of  his  future  eminence  as  a  general.  The  merit  of
Cynaegirus,  too,  an  Athenian  soldier,  has  met  with  great  com-
mendation from  historians;  for,  after  having  slain  a  great
number  in  the  battle,  and  having  chased  the  fleeing  enemy  to
their  ships,  he  seized  a  crowded  vessel  with  his  right  hand,
and  would  not  let  it  go  till  he  had  lost  his  hand ;  and  even
then,  when  his  right  hand  was  cut  off,  he  took  hold  of  the
ship  with  his  left,  and  having  lost  this  hand  also,  he  at  last
,  seized  the  ship  with  his  teeth.  So  undaunted  was  his  spirit,
that  neither  being  weary  with  killing  so  many,  nor  dis-
heartened with  the  loss  of  his  hands,  he  fought  to  the  last,
maimed  as  he  was,  with  his  teeth,  like  a  wild  beast.  The
Persians  lost  two  thousand  men  in  the  battle  or  by  shipwreck.
Hippias  also,  the  Athenian  tyrant,  who  was  the  promoter  and
encourager  of  the  war,  was  killed  on  the  occasion ;  the  gods,
the  avengers  of  his  country,  inflicting  on  him  the  penalty  of
his  perfidy.

X.  Some  time  after,  Darius,  when  he  was  going  to  renew
the  war,  died  in  the  midst  of  his  preparations  for  it,  leaving
behind  him  several  sons,  some  bom  before  his  accession  to
the  crown,  and  others  after  it.  Artemenes,  the  eldest  of  them,
claimed  the  kingd6m  by  the  law  of  primogeniture,  a  law  which
he  said  that  boSi  order  of  birth  and  nature  herself  had  pre-
scribed to  all  nations.  Xerxes,  however,  alleged,  that  the
dispute  was  not  so  much  about  the  order  as  the  good  fortune
of  their  birth;  for  that  "  Artemenes  was  bom  first  indeed  to
Darius,  but  while  he  was  in  a  private  station ;  that  he  himself
was  bom  to  him  first  after  he  was  king;  and  that,  conse-
quently, such  of  his  brothers  as  were  bom  before  him  might
claim  the  private  estate  which  Darius  then  possessed,  but
could  have  no  claim  to  the  kingdom ;  he  himself  being  the
first-bom  whom  his  father,  when  king,  had  bred  up  to  succeed
him  on  the  throne.*  In  addition  to  this,"  he  said,  "  Arte-
menes was  sprung,  not  only  from  a  father  but  from  a  mother
in  a  private  condition,  and  from  a  matemal  grandfether  of
similar  station;  but  he  himself  was  both  spmng  from  a

•  In  regnum,]  Wetzel,  with  most  editors,  has  in  regno,  but  in  regmm
is  much  more  to  the  purpose.


RC.  485.]  XEBXES  SUCCEEDS  DAfilTJS.  29

mother  who  was  a  queei},  and  had  never  known  his  father
except  as  a  king;  he  had  also  for  his  maternal  grandfather
king  Cyrus,  not  the  heir,  hut  the  founder  of  so  great  an  em-
pire ;  and  even  if  their  father  had  left  hoth  brothers  with  equal
claims,  yet  he  himself  ought  to  have  the  advantage  in  right  of
his  mother  and  grandfather/'  The  settlement  of  the  contro-
versy they  left,  with  mutual  consent,  to  their  uncle  Arta-
phemes,  as  the  fittest  judge  of  their  family  diiferences ;  who,
having  heard  their  pleas  in  his  own  house,  decided  in  favour
of  Xerxes.  But  the  contest  was  conducted  in  so  brotherly  a
way,  that  neither  did  he  who  gained  the  cause  show  any
unseemly  triumph,  nor  did  he  who  lost  it  express  dissatisfac-
tion ;  and,  during  the  very  time  of  the  contention,  they  sent
presents  to  one  another,  and  gave  such  entertainments,  as
showed  not  only  mutual  confidence,  but  pleasure  in  each
other's  society.  The  judgment,  too,  was  pronounced  without
witnesses,  and  heard  without  a  murmur.  So  much  more  con-
tentedly did  brothers  then  share  the  greatest  kingdoms,  than
they  now  divide  the  smallest  estates !

Xerxes  then  proceeded,  during  five  years,  with  his  prepa-
rations for  the  war  against  Greece,  which  his  father  had
commenced.  As  soon  as  Demai^tus,  king  of  the  Lacedaemo-
nians, who  was  then  an  exile  at  the  court  of  Xerxes,  under-
stood his  intentions,  he,  feeling  more  regard  for  his  country,
notwithstanding  his  banishment,  than  for  the  king  in  return
for  his  favours,  sent  full  intelligence  of  the  matter  to  the
magistrates  of  the  Lacedsemonians,  that  they  might  not  be
surprised  by  an  unexpected  attack;  writing  the  account  on
wooden  tablets,  and  hiding  the  writing  with  wax  spread  over
it;  taking  care,  however,  not  merely  that  writing  without
a  cover  might  not  give  proof  against  him,  but  that  too  fresh
wax  might  not  betray  the  contrivance.  These  tablets  he
committed  to  a  trusty  slave,  who  was  ordered  to  deliver  them
into  the  hands  of  the  authorities  at  Sparta.  When  they  were
received,  the  object  of  them  was  long  a  matter  of  inquiry,
because  the  magistrates  could  see  nothing  written  on  them,  and
yet  could  not  imagine  that  they  were  sent  to  no  purpose ;  and
they  thought  the  matter  must  be  momentous  in  proportion  to  its
mysteriousness.  While  the  men  were  still  engaged  in  conjec-
ture, the  sister  of  king  Leonidas  surmised  the  writer's  intention.
The  wax  being  accordingly  scraped  off,  the  account  of  the


so  JtJSTIN.  [b.  n.  OH  XI.

warlike  preparations  appeared.  Xerxes  had  already  armed
seven  hundred  thousand  men  of  his  own  kingdom,  and  three
hundred  thousand  of  his  auxiliaries ;  so  that  there  was  some
ground  for  the  assertion  that  rivers  were  drunk  up  hy  his
army,  and  that  all  Greece  could  scarcely  contain  it.  He  is
also  said  to  have  had  a  fleet  of  twelve  hundred  ships.  But
for  this  vast  army  a  general  was  wanting ;  for  if  you  contem-
plate its  king,  you  could  not  commend  his  capacity  as  a  leader,
however  you  might  extol  his  wealth,  of  which  there  was  such
'ahimdance  in  his  realm,  that,  while  rivers  were  drained  hy  his
forces,  his  treasury  was  still  unexhausted.  He  was  always  seen
foremost  in  flight,  and  hindmost  in  battle ;  he  was  a  coward
in  danger,  and  when  danger  was  away,  a  boaster ;  and,  in  fine,
before  he  made  trial  of  war,  elated  with  confidence  in  his
strength  (as  if  he  had  been  lord  of  nature  itself),  he  levelled
mountains,  filled  up  valleys,  covered  some  seas  with  bridges,
and  contracted  others,  for  the  convenience  of  navigation,  into
shorter  channels.

XI.  In  proportion  to  the  terror  of  his  entrance  into
Greece,  was  the  shame  and  dishonour  of  his  retreat  from  it.
Leonidas,  king  of  the  Spartans,  having  occupied  the  straits
of  Thermopylaj  'with  four  thousand  men,  Xerxes,  in  contempt
of  so  small  a  number,  ordered  such  of  the  Persians  as  had  lost
relatives  in  the  battle  of  Marathon,  to  commence  an  attack
upon  them ;  who,  while  they  endeavom'ed  to  avenge  their
friends,  were  the  first  to  be  slaughtered,  and  a  useless  multi-
tude taking  their  place,  the  havoc  became  still  greater.  For
three  days  was  the  struggle  maintained,  to  &e  grief  and
indignation  of  the  Persians.  On  the  fourth,  it  being  told
Leonidas  that  the  summit  of  the  mountain  was  occupied  by
twenty  thousand  of  the  enemy,  he  exhorted  the  allies  "  to
retire,  and  reserve  themselves  to  their  country  for  better
times ;"  saying,  that  "  he  himself  would  try  his  fortune  with
the  Spartans  ;  tliat  he  ought  to  care  more  for  his  country  than
for  his  life,  and  that  others  should  be  preserved  for  the
defence  of  Greece."  On  hearing  the  king's  resolution,  the
rest  retired,  the  Lacedaemonians  alone  remaining.

At  the  beginning  of  the  war,  when  the  Spartans  consulted
the  oracle  at  Delphi,  they  had  received  the  answer,  that
**  either  the  king  or  their  city  must  fall."  King  Leonidsis,
accoi'dingly,  when  he  proceeded  to  battle,  had  so  fixed  the


B.C.  479.]  XBRXBS'  INVASION  OF  OEBBOB.  81

resolution  of  his  men,  that  they  felt  they  must  go  to  the  field
with  minds  prepared  for  death. He  had  posted  himself  in  a
narrow  pass,  too,  that  he  might  either  conquer  more  gloriously
with  a  few,  or  fall  with  less  damage  to  his  country. The
allies  heing  therefore  sent  away,  he  exhorted  his  Spartans  **  to
remember  that,  however  they  struggled,  they  must  expect  to
perish  ;  to  take  care  not  to  show  more  resolution  to  stay  than
to  fight;**  adding  that,  "they  must  not  wait  till  they  were
surrounded  by  the  enemy,  but  when night  afforded  them
opportunity,  must  surprise  them  in  security  and  at  their  ease ;
as  conquerors  could  die  nowhere  more  honourably  than  in  the
camp  of  the  foe." There  was  no  diflBculty  in  stimulating  men
determined  to  die. They  immediately  seized  their  arms,  and
six  hundred  men  rushed  into  the  camp  of  five  hundred  thou-
sand, making  directly  for  the  king's  tent,  and  resolving  either
to  die  with  him,  or,  if  they  should  be  overpowered,  at  least  in
his  quarters. An  alarm  spread  through  the  whole  Persian
army. The  Spartans  being  unable  to  find  the  king,  marched
uncontrolled  through  the  whole  camp,  killing  and  overthrow-
ing all  that  stood  in  their  way,  like  men  who  knew  that  they
fought,  not  with  the  hope  of  victory,  but  to  avenge  their  own
deaths* The  contest  was  protracted  from  the  beginning  of
the  night  through  the  greater  part  of  the  following  day. At
last,  not  conquered,  but  exhausted  with  conquering,  they  fell
amidst  vast  heaps  of  slaughtered  enemies. Xerxes,  having
thus  met  with  two  defeats  by  land,  resolved  next  to  try  his
fortune  by  sea.

XII.  Themistocles,  the  general  of  the  Athenians,  having
discovered  that  the  lonians,  on  whose  account  they  had  under-
taken this  war  with  the  Persians,  were  come  to  tbe  assistance
of  the  king  with  a  fleet,  resolved  to  draw  them  over  to  his
own  side.  Being  unable  to  find  any  opportunity  of  speaking
with  them,  he  caused  placards  to  be  fixed,  and  inscriptions  to
be  written,  on  the  rocks  where  they  were  to  land,  to  the  follow-
ing effect ;  **  What  madness  possesses  you,  0  lonians  ?  What
evil  are  you  going  to  do  ?  Do  you  intend  to  make  war  on
those  who  were  formerly  your  founders,  and  lately  your
avengers?  Did  we  build  your  cities  that  a  people  might
arise  from  them  to  destroy  ours?  Was  it  not  Darius's
reason  *  for  attacking  us  before,  and  is  it  not  now  that  of

*  Quid  f  »i  non  hcec '  et  Dario  prvas,  et  nuTic  Xerxei,  belli  coMsa


32  JUSTIN,  [B.n.  CH.XII

Xerxes,  that  we  did  not  desert  you  when  you  rehelled  against
them? But pass  over  from  your  place of  confinement*
to our  camp ;  or,  if  this  course  is  unsafe,  withdraw  when
the battle  begins;  keep back  your  vessels  with  your  oars,
and  retire  from  the  engagement." Before  this  encounter  at
sea,  Xerxes  had  sent  four  thousand  armed  men  to  plund^^r  the
temple  of  Apollo,  as  if  he  had  been  at  war,  not  with  the
Greeks  only,  but  with  the  immortal  gods  ;  but  the  whole  of
this  detachment  was  destroyed  by  a  storm  of  rain  and  thunder,
that  he  might  be  convinced  how  feeble  human  strength  is
against  the  powers  of  heaven. Afterwards  he  burnt  Thespise,
PlataesB,  and  Athens,  all  abandoned  by  their  inhabitants ;  Tent-
ing his  rage  on  the  buildings  by  fire,  sino^  he  could  not
destroy  the  people  by  the  sword. For  the  Athenians,  after
the battle  of  Marathon, because Themistocles  forewarned
them  that  their  victory  would  not  be  the  termination  of  the
war,  but  the  cause  of  a  greater  one,  had  built  two  Hundred
ships ;  and  when,  at  the  approach  of  Xerxes,  he consulted
the  oracle  at  Delphi,  they  were  answered,  that  "  they  must
provide  for  their  safety  with  wooden  walls." Themistocles,
thinking  that  defence with  shipping  was  meant,  persuaded
them  all,  that  **  the  citizens,  not  the  walls,  constituted  their
country ;  that  a  city  consisted,  not  of  its  buildings,  but  of  its
inhabitants;  that  it  would  be  better  for  them,  therefore,  to
trust  their  safety  to  their  ships  than  to  their  city ;  and  that
the  god  was  the  adviser  of  this  course." The  counsel  being
approved,  they  committed  their  wives  and  children,  with  their
most  valuable  property,  to  certain  islands  out  of  the  way  ;f
while  the  men  went  in  arms  on  board  the  ships. Other  cities
also  followed  the  example  of  the  Athenians.  But  when  the  whole
fieet  of  the  allies  was  assembled,  ready  for  an  engagement,

fiohiseum  foretf  d:c,'\  I  have  not  attempted  to  translate  the  commence-
ment of  this  sentence  literally.  Some  editions  have  a  note  of  interro-
gation after  quid,  and  others  not,  and  some  have  quod  si;  but,  as
Scheffer  says,  no  one  of  these  readings  is  satisfactory.  Lemaire
plausibly  conjectures  Qt^m  non  hcec,  &c.

*  Ex  istd  ohsidione.]  They  being  hemmed  in  by  the  Persian  fleet
like  enemies. — Wetzel

f  Abdi^is  imulis.]  He  calls  the  islands  ahditce  because  they  were
situated  in  the  innermost  recess  of  the  [Saronic]  gulf. —  Fossius.
We  may  suppose  Salamis  and  ^Egina  to  be  meant. —  Vorstiva.  See
Com.  Nep,  Them.  2,  8  j  Herod,  viii.  41.


B.a  479.] DEFEAT  OF  XERXES.  83

and  had  posted  itself  in  the  narrow  strait  of  Salamis,  that  it
might  not  be  overwhelmed  by  superior  numbers,  a  dissension
arose  among  the  leading  men  of  the  different  cities,  who  were
disposed  to  relinquish  the  plan  of  a  general  war,  and  go  off
each  to  defend  his  own  country.  Themistocles,  fearing  that
the  strength  of  his  countrymen  would  be  too  much  weaJkened
by  such  desertion  of  their  allies,  sent  intimation  to  Xerxes
by  a  trusty  slave,  that  **  he  might  now  easily  make  himself
master  of  all  Greece,  when  it  was  collected  in  one  place;
but  that  if  the  several  states  which  were  inclined  to  go
away  should  once  be  dispersed,  he  would  have  to  pursue
each  of  them  singly  with  far  greater  trouble."  By  this
stratagem  he  induced  the. king  to  give  the  signal  for  battle.
The  Greeks,  at  the  same  time,  taken  by  surprise  by  the
enemy's  attack,  proceeded  to  oppose  them  with  their  united
force.  The  king,  meantime,  remained  on  shore  as  a  spectator
of  the  combat,  with  part  of  the  ships  near  him ;  while  Arte-
misia, queen  of  Halicarnassus,  who  had  come  to  the  assistance
of  Xerxes,  was  fighting  with  the  greatest  gallantry  among  the
foremost  leaders ;  so  that  you  might  have  seen  womanish
fear  in  a  man,*  and  manly  boldness  in  a  woman.  While  the
result  of  the  battle  was  still  doubtful,  the  lonians,  according
to  the  admoniticm  of  Themistocles,  began  gradually  to  with-
draw from  the  contest ;  and  their  desertion  broke  the  courage
of  the  rest.  The  Persians,  as  they  were  considering  in  which
direction  they  might  flee,  suffered  a  repulse,  and  were  soon
after  utterly  defeated,  and  put  to  flight.  In  the  confusion,
many  ships  were  taken,  and  many  sunk;  but  the  greater
number,  fearing  the  king's  cruelty  not  less  than  the  enemy,
went  off  to  their  respective  homes.

XIII.  While  Xerxes  was  confounded  at  his  disaster,  and
doubtful  what  course  to  pursue,  Mardonius  addressed  him,
advising  him /*  to  return  home  to  his  kingdom,  lest  fame,
carrying  the  news  of  his  defeat,  and  exaggerating  every  thing
according  to  her  custom,  should  occasion  any  sedition  in  bis
absence ;  and  to  leave  with  him  three  hundred  thousand  men-at-
arms,  chosen  from  the  whole  army,  with  which  force  he  would
either  subdue  Greece  to  the  king's  glory,  or,  if  the  result  should
prove  unfavourable,  would  retire  before  the  enemy  without
dishonour  to  him." Mardonius's  suggestion  being  approved,

*  Xerxes  himself.
D


34  JUSTIN.  [B.IL  C3H.XIV.

the  force  which  he  requested  was  given  him,  and  the  king
prepared  to  return  home  with  the  rest  of  the  army.  The
Greeks,  hearing  of  his  flight,  formed  a  design  to  hreak  down
the  hridge,  which,  as  conqueror  of  the  sea,  he  had  made  at
Ahydos ;  so  that,  his  retreat  heing  cut  off,  he  might  either  he
destroyed  with  his  army,  or  might  he  forced,  by  the  desperate
state  of  his  affairs,  to  sue  for  peace.  But  Themistocles,
fearing  that  the  enemy,  if  they  were  stopped,  might  take
courage  from  despair,  and  open  by  their  swords  a  passage  not
to  be  opened  by  other  means,  and  observing  that  "  there  were
enemies  enough  left  in  Greece,  and  that  the  number  ought  not
to  be  increased  by  preventing  their  escape,"  but  finding  that
he  was  unable  to  move  his  countrymen  by  his  admonitions,
despatched  the  same  slave  as  before  to  Xerxes,  acquainting  him
of  the  intention  of  the  Greeks  to  break  down  the  bridge,  and
urging  him  to  secure  a  passage  by  a  speedy  flight.  Xerxes,
alarmed  at  the  message,  left  his  army  to  be  conducted  by  his
generals,  and  hurried  away  himself,  with  a  few  attendants,  to
Abydos ;  where,  having  found  the  bridge  broken  down  by  the
winter  storms,  he  crossed  in  the  utmost  trepidation  in  a
flshing-boat.  It  was  a  sight  worth  contemplation  for  judging
of  the  condition  of  man,*  so  wonderful  for  its  vicissitudes,  to
see  him  shrinking  down  in  a  little  boat,  whom  shortly  before
the  whole  ocean  could  scarcely  contain ;  to  behold  him  wanting
servants  to  attend  him,  whose  armies  had  burdened  the  earth
with  their  numbers !  Nor  had  the  land-forces,  which  he  had
committed  to  his  generals,  a  more  fortunate  retreat;  for  to
their  daily  fatigue  (and  there  is  no  rest  to  men  in  fear)  was
added  the  want  of  provisions.  A  famine  of  several  days
produced  also  a  pestilential  distemper;  and  so  dire  was  the
mortality,  that  the  roads  were  filled  with  dead  bodies;  and
birds  and  beasts  of  prey,  allured  by  the  attraction  of  food,
followed  close  upon  the  army.

XIV. In Greece,  in the meantime,  Mardonius took
Olynthus  by  storm. He  also  invited  the  Athenians  to  listen

*  Brat  res  spectaciUo  dignOf  et  cBstimatione  sortta  humanat,  rerum  varie-
tate  mirandcB.]  Such  is  the  reading  of  Wetzel  and  Gronovius.  Some
editions  omit  the  et.  Wetzel  gives  this  comment :  **  It  was  a  spectacle
deserving  of  attentive  contemplation,  and  one  from  which  you  might
judge  of  the  lot  of  man ;  of  the  wonderful  changeableness  of  which
Xerxes  was  an  example."


aC.  478]  DEFEAT  OF  ICARDONIUS.  85

to  offers  of  peace,  and  of  the  king's  friendship ;  promising  to
rebuild  their  city,  which  had  been  burnt,  in  greater  splendour
than  before.  But  when  he  saw  that  they  would  not  sell  their
liberty  at  any  rate,  he  set  fire  to  what  they  had  begun  to
rebuild,  and  led  off  his  army  into  Bceotia.  lliither  the  army
of  the  Greeks,  which  consisted  of  a  hundred  thousand  men,
followed  him,  and  there  a  battle  was  fought  But  the  fortune
of  the  king  was  not  changed  with  the  general ;  for  Mardonius,
being  defeated,  escaped,  as  it  were  from  a  shipwreck,  with  but
a  small  number  of  followers.  His  camp,  which  was  filled  with
the  king's  treasures,  was  taken;  and  hence  it  was,  on  the
division  of  the  Persian  g6\d  among  them,  that  the  charms  of
wealth  first  attracted  the  Greeks.  By  chance,  on  the  same  day
on  which  the  army  of  Mardonius  was  defeated,  an  engagement
was  fought  by  sea  near  the  mountain  Mycale,  on  the  coast  of
Asia.  Before  the  encounter  began,  and  whilst  the  fleets  stood
opposite  one  another,  a  rumour  spread  through  both  parties,
that  the  Greeks  had  gained  a  victory,  and  that  the  army  of
Mardonius  was  utterly  destroyed.  It  is  said  that  so  great  was
the  speed  of  this  report,  that  when  the  battle  was  fought  in
Boeotia  in  the  morning,  the  news  of  the  victory  arrived  in  Asia
by  noon,  passing  over  so  much  sea,  and  so  large  a  space  of
ground,  in  so  very  short  a  time.  When  tlie  war  was  over,  and
they  proceeded  to  consider  the  respective  merits  of  the  cities
that  had  been  engaged  in  it,  the  bravery  of  the  Athenians  was
praised  above  that  of  any  other  people.  Among  the  leaders  too,
Themistocles,  being  pronounced  the  most  meritorious  by  the
judgment  of  the  several  states,  added  greatly  to  the  glory  of  his
country.

XV.  The  Athenians,  then,  being  enriched  by  the  spoils  of
war,  as  well  as  in  glory,  applied  themselves  to  rebuQd  their  city.
Having  enlarged  the  compass  of  their  walls,  they  became  an
object  of  suspicion  to  the  Lacedasmonians,  naturally  reflecting
bow  great  power  a  city,  when  fortified,  might  secure  to  a  people
for  whom  it  had  done  so  much  when  in  a  state  of  ruin.  They
.therefore  sent  ambassadors  to  admonish  them  that  "  they
should  not  build  what  might  prove  a  stronghold  for  the  enemy,
and  a  place  of  shelter  for  them  in  a  future  war.'*  Themistocles,
seeing  that  envy  was  entertained  towards  the  rising  hopes  of
his  city,  but  not  thinlang  it  prudent  to  deal  abruptly  with  the
Spartans,  made  answer  to  the  ambassadors,  that  "  deputies

d2


8ft  JUSTIN.  [an.  CH.XV.

should  be  sent  to  Lacedasmon  to  confer  mth  them  about  the
matter."  After  thus  dismissing  the  messengers,  he  exhorted
his  countrymen  "to  expedite  the  worf  Allowing  some  time
to  elapse,  he  set  out,  with  some  others,  as  an  embassy  to
8parta ;  but  sometimes  pretending  ill  health  on  the  road,  some-
times complaining  of  the  tardiness  of  lus  colleagues,  without,
whom  notMng  could  be  properly  done,  and  thus  putting  off
from  day  to  day,  he  endeavoured  to  gain  time  for  his  country-
men to  finish  the  erection  of  their  walls.  In  the  meanwhile,
word  was  brought  to  the  Spartans  that  the  work  was  advancing
at  Athens  with  great  speed;  and  they  accordingly  sent
ambassadors  a  second  time  to  ascertain  the  truth.  Themis-
tocles  then  sent  a  letter  by  the  hand  of  a  slave,  to  the  magis-
trates of  the  Athenians,  desiring  them  "  to  take  the  ambas-
sadors into  custody,  and  keep  them  as  hostages,  lest  any
violent  measures  should  be  adopted  against  himself  at  Sparta."
He  then  went  to  the  public  assembly  of  the  Lacedsemonians,
and  told  them  that  "  Athens  was  now  well  fortified,  and  could
sustain  a  war,  if  any  should  be  made  upon  it,  not  only  with
arms,  but  with  walls;  and  that  their  ambassadors  were
detained  by  way  of  hostages  at  Athens,  in  case  they  should  on
that  account  resolve  on  anything  injurious  towards  himself."
He  then  upbraided  them  severely  "for  seeking  to  increase  their
power,  not  by  their  own  valour,  but  by  weakening  their  allies."
Being  then  permitted  to  depart,  he  was  received  by  his
countryiaen  as  if  he  had  triumphed  over  Sparta.

After  this  occurrence,  the  Spartans,  that  they  might  not
impair  their  strength  in  idleness,  and  that  the/might  take
vengeance  for  the  war  which  had  been  twice  made  upon
Greece  by  the  Persians,  proceeded  to  lay  waste  the  Persian
territories.  They  chose  Pausanias  to  be  general  of  their  army,
and  that  of  their  allies,  who,  coveting,  instead  of  the  mere
office  of  general,  the  entire  sovereignty  of  Greece,  treated
with  Xerxes  for  a  marriage  with  his  daughter,  ajs  a  reward  for
betraying  his  country,  restoring  him,  at  the  same  time,  his
prisoners,  that  the  good  feeling  of  the  king  might  be  secured
by  such  an  obligation.  He  wrote  also  to  Xerxes,  "  to  put  to
death  whatever  messengers  he  sent  to  him,  lest  the  negociation
should  be  betrayed  by  their  babbling."  But  Aristides,  the
general  of  the  Athenians,  and  his  associate  in  the  command,  by
traversing  the  attempts  of  his  colleague,  and  taking  prudent


I B.C.  47a.] DEATH  OF  XEBXES.  87

I

precaations  on  the  occasion,  defeated  his  treasonable  designs*
Not  long  after,  Pausanias  was  brought  to  trial  and  condemned.
Xerxes,  when  he  found  that  this  perfidious  scheme  was  dis-
covered, made  fresh  preparations  for  war.  The  Greeks
nominated  as  their  general  Cimon  the  Athenian,  the  son  of
Miltiades,  under  whose  command  the  battle  of  Marathon  was
fought;  a  young  man  whose  future  greatness  his  manifestations
of  affection  towards  his  father  foretold.  For  be  redeemed  the
body  of  his  father  (who  had  been  thrown  into  prison  on  a
charge  of  embezzling  the  public  money,  and  had  died  there),
taking  his  fetters  on  himself,*  that  it  might  receive  the  rites
of  sepulture.  Nor  did  he,  in  his  conduct  of  the  war,  disappoint
the  opinion  of  those  who  chose  him ;  for,  not  falling  in  merit
below  his  father,  he  forced  Xerxes,  defeated  both  by  land  and
sea,  to  retreat  in  trepidation  to  his  own  dominions.


BOOK  III.


Death  of  Xerxes;  Artaxerxes;  Artabanus,  L — Origin  of  the  wars
between  the  Athenians  and  Lacedaemonians;  Lycurgus  and
the  Spartan  polity,  II.  III. — ^First  and  second  wars  between
the  Spartans  and  Messenians,  rV.,^V. — ^Third  war;  commence-
ment of  the  Peloponnesian  war,  YL— Continuation  of  it;
Pericles,  YIL

I.  Xerxes,  king  of  Persia,  once  the  terror  of  the  nations  around
him,  became,  after  his  unsuccessful  conduct  of  the  war  against
Greece,  an  object  of  contempt  even  to  his  own  su'^ects.
Artabanus,  his  chief  officer,  conceiving  hopes  of  usurping
the  throne,  as  the  king's  authority  was  every  day  declining,
entered  one  evening  into  the  palace  (which  from  his  intimacy
with  Xerxes  was  always  open  to  him),  accompanied  by  his
seven  stout  sons,  and,  having  put  the  king  to  death,  proceeded
to  remove  by  stratagem  such  of  the  king's  sons  as  opposed
his  wishes.  Entertaining  little  apprehension  from  Artaxerxes,
who  was  but  a  boy,  he  pretended  Ihat  the  king  had  been  slain
by  Darius,  who  was  of  full  age,  that  he  might  have  possession
of  the  throne  the  sooner,  and  instigated  Artaxerxes  to  revenge
parricide  by  firatricide. When  they  came  to  Darius's  house,

*  TramdatM  in  »e  vinctcZw.]  Whether  this  act  was  altogether  voltia-
iary  ia  discussed  by  J.  A  Bos  on  Com.  Nep.  Gim.  c.  1.


38  JUSTIN.  [B.in.  CH.II.

he  was  found  asleep,  and  killed  as  if  he  merely  counterfeited
sleep.*  But  seeing  that  one  of  the  king's  sons  was  still
uniigured  by  his  yillanj,  and  fearing  a  struggle  for  the  throne
on  the  part  of  the  nobles,  he  took  into  his  councils  a  certain
Bacabasus,  who,  content  that  the  government  should  remain
in  the  present  family,  disclosed  the  whole  matter  to  Artaxerxes,
acquainting  him  '*  by  what  means  his  father  had  been  killed,
and  how  his  brother  had  been  murdered  on  a  false  suspicion
of  parricide ;  and,  finally,  how  a  plot  was  laid  for  himself."
On  this  information,  Artaxerxes,  fearing  the  number  of  Arta-
banus's  sons,  gave  orders  for  the  troops  to  be  ready  under
arms  on  the  following  day,  as  if  he  meant  to  ascertain  their
strength,  and  their  respective  efficiency  for  the  field.  Arta-
banus,  accordingly,  presenting  himself  under  arms  among  the
rest,  the  king,  pretending  that  his  corslet  was  too  short  for
him,  desired  Artabanus  to  make  an  exchange  with  him,  and,
while  he  was  disarming  himself,  and  defenceless,  ran  him
through  with  his  sword,  ordering  his  sons,  at  the  same  time,
to  be  apprehended.  Thus  this  excellent  youth  at  once  took
revenge  for  his  father's  murder,  and  saved  himself  from  the
machmations  of  Artabanus.

II.  During  these  transactions  in  Persia,  all  Greece,  under
the  leadership  of  the  LacedaBmonians  and  Athenians,  was  split
into  two  parties,  and  turned  their  arms  firom  foreign  wars  as
it  were  against  their  own  bowels.  Of  one  people  were  formed
two  distinct  bodies  ;  and  they  who  had  so  recently  served  in
the  same  camp,  were  divided  into  two  hostile  armies.  On
the  one  side,  the  LacedsBmonians  drew  over  to  their  faction
the  cities  that  had  before  been  common  auxiliaries  to  both.
On  the  other  side,  the  Athenians,,  renowned  alike  for  their
antiquity  and  their  exploits,  relied  on  their  own  strength.
Thus  the  two  most  powerful  people  of  Greece,  made  equal  by
the  institutions  of  Solon  and  the  laws  of  Lycui^us,  rushed
into  war  through  envy  of  each  other's  power.

When  Lycurffus  had  succeeded  t  Polydectes  his  brother,
king  of  ihi  L^dffimomans,  and  might  have  secured  the

*  Quasi  sommMn  fingeretJ]  As  if,  being  guilty,  he  had  counterfdted
himself  to  be  asleep  on  purpose. — Codrmgton*8  Trcm^ation,

f  SuecesgiBtet.]  That  is,  ^e  Spartans  would  have  accepted  him  as
successor  to  his  brother,  had  he  not  preferred  to  give  the  throne  to  his
brotherls  son.


B.C.  904.]  LTCUBGUS.  39

kingdom  for  himself,  he  restored  it,  with  the  nohlest  integrity,
to  Gharilaus,  the  posthumous  son  of  Polydectes,  as  soon  as  he
became  of  age  ;  that  all  might  see  how  much  more  the  laws  of
integrity  prevail  with  good  men  than  all  the  charms  of  power.
In  the  meantime,  while  the  child  was  growing  up,  and  he
had  the  guardianship  of  him,  he  composed  laws  for  the  Spartans,
who  previously  had  had  none.  Nor  was  he  more  celebrated
for  the  making  of  these  laws,  than  for  his  exemplary  con-
formity to  them  ;  for  he  imposed  nothing  by  law  upon  others,
of  the  observation  of  which  he  did  not  first  give  an  example
in  his  own  conduct.  He  trained  the  people  to  be  obedient  to
those  in  authority,  and  those  in  authority  to  be  just  in  the
exercise  of  their  government.  He  ei\joined  frugality  on  all,
thinking  that  the  tolls  of  war  would  be  made  more  endurable  by  a
constant  observance  of  it.  He  ordered  all  purchases  to  be  made,
not  with  money,  but  by  exchange  of  commodities.  The  use  of
gold  and  silver  he  prohibited,  as  being  the  origin  of  all  evils.

ill.  He  divided  the  administration  of  the  government
among  the  several  orders ;  to  the  kings  he  gave  the  power  of
making  war,  to  the  magistrates  the  seats  of  justice  in  yearly
fiuccession ;  to  the  senate,  the  guardianship  of  the  laws ;  to  the
people,  the  power  of  choosing  the  senate,  or  of  creating  what
magistrates  they  pleased.  The  lands  of  the  whole  state  he
divided  equally  among  all,  that  equality  of  possession  might
leave  no  one  more  powerful  than  another.  He  ordered  all  to
take  their  meals  in  public,  that  no  man  might  secretly  indulge
in  splendour  or  luxury.  He  would  not  allow  the  young  people
to  wear  more  than  one  dress  in  a  year,  nor  any  one  to  walk
abroad  in  finer  garments  than  another,  or  to  fare  more
-sumptuously,  lest  imitation  of  such  practices  should  lead  to
general  luxury.  He  ordered  boys  to  be  carried,  not  into  the
forum,  but  into  the  field,  that  they  might  spend  their  early
years,  not  in  effeminate  employments,  but  in  hard  labour  and
exertion ;  not  suffering  them  to  put  any  thing  under  them  to
sleep  upon,  or  to  live  on  high  seasoned  food,  and  forbidding
them  to  return  into  the  city  till  they  arrived  at  manhood.
He  caused  virgins  to  be  married  without  portions,  that  wives,
not  money,  might  be  sought ;  and  that  husbands  might  govern
their  wives  more  strictly,  being  influenced  by  no  regard  to
dowry.  He  ordained  that  the  highest  respect  should  be  paid,
not  to  the  rich  and  powerful,  but  to  the  old,  according  to  their


40  JUSTIN.  [B.III.  CH.IV.

degrees  of  senioritj ;  nor  had  old  age»  indeed,  a  more  honour-
able habitation  anywhere  than  at  Sparta.

But  seeing  that  such  laws  would  at  first  be  thought  severe,
as  the  state  of  manners  had  previously  been  relaxed,  he
represented  that  Apollo  of  Delphi  was  the  author  of  them,  and
that  he  had  brought  them  from  thence  at  the  command  of  the
deity,  in  order  that  reverence  for  religion  might  overbalance
the  irksomeness  of  compliance  with  Qiem.  And  to  secure
perpetuity  to  his  laws,  he  bound  the  oity  by  an  oath  "  to  make
no  change  in  them  till  he  should  return,"  pretending  that  he  was
going  to  ask  the  oracle  at  Delphi  whether  any  thing  seemed
necessary  to  be  added  to  his  institutions,  or  changed  in  them.
But  he  went  in  reality  to  Crete,  and  continued  4here  in
voluntary  exile ;  and,  when  he  wp...%ing^r  ordered  his  bones
to  be  thrown  into  the  sea,  l^BtTifthey  were  taken  back  to
Lacedsemon,  the  Spartans  might  think  themselves  absolved
from  their  oath  respecting  alteration  in  his  laws.

IV.  Under  such  a  state  of  manners,  the  city  acquired,  in  a
short  time,'*'  such  a  degree  of  strength,  that,  on  going  to  war
with  the  Messenians  for  offering  violence  to  some  of  tilieir
maidens  at  a  solemn  sacrifice  of  that  people,  they  bound
themselves  under  a  severe  oath  not  to  return  till  they  had  taken
Messene,  promising  themselves  so  much  either  from  their
strength  or  good  fortune.  This  occurrence  was  the  commence-
ment of  dissension  in  Greece,  and  the  origin  and  cause  of  a
civil  war.  But  being  detained  in  the  siege  of  this  city,  con-
trary to  their  expectation,  for  ten  years,  and  called  cm  to  return
by  the  complaints  of  their  wives  after  so  long  a  widowhood,  and
heing  afraid  that  by  persevering  in  the  war  they  might  hurt
themselves  more  than  the  Messenians  (for,  in  Messene,
whatever  men  were  lost  in  the  war^  were  replaced  by  the
fruitfulness  of  their  women,  while  they  themselves  suffered
constant  losses  in  battle,  and  could  ^have  no  offspring  from
their  wives  in  the  absence  of  their  husbands),  they  in  conse-
quence selected,  out  of  the  soldiers  that  had  come,  after  the
military  oath  was  first  taken,!  as  recruits  to  the  army,  a

*  Brevi  ]  Not  in  so  very  short  a  time,  for  Lycnrgos  published  his
laws  130  yesfs  before  the  foundation  of  Borne,  and  this  war  com-
menced eleven  years  after  its  foundation,  i.e.  141  years  after  the  pro-
mulgatiBn  of  th«  laws,— Wetzd.

f  Pott  JMfmrandmn.']  That  is,  after  the  enrolment  of  the  army,
when  the  soldien  took  the  oath  of  service.  >


B.C.  703.]  TARENTUM  POUNDED.  41

namber  of  young  men ;  whom  they  sent  back  to  Sparta  with
permission  to  form  promiscuous  connexions  with  all  die  women
of  the  city,  thinking  that  conoepidon  would  be  more  speedy
if  each  of  the  females  made  the  experiment  with  seyeral  men.
Those  who  sprang  from  these  unions  were  called  Farthenife,*
as  a  reflection  on  their  mothers'  violated  chastity ;  and,  when
they  came  to  thirty  years  of  age,  being  alarmed  with  the  fear
of  want  (for  not  one  of  them  had  a  &ther  to  whose  estate  he
could  hope  to  succeed,)  they  chose  a  captain  named  Phalantus,
the  son  of  Aiatus,  by  whose  advice  the  Spartans  had  sent
borne  the  young  men  to  propagate,  that,  as  they  had  formerly
bad  the  father  for  the  author  of  their  birth,  they  might  now
bave  the  son  as  the  establisher  of  their  hopes  and  fortunes.
Without  taking  leave  of  thdr  mothers,  therefore,  irom  whose
adultery  they  thought  that  they  derived  dishonour,  they  set
out  to  seek  a  place  ^of  settlement,  and  being  tossed  about
a  long  time,  and  with  various  mischances,  they  at  last  arrived
oa  the  coast  of  Italy,  where,  after  seizing  the  citadel  ,of  the
Tarentines,  and  expelling  the  old  inhabitants,  they  fixed  their
abode.  But  several  years  after,  their  leader  Phalantus,  being
driven  into]  exile  by  a  popular  tumult,  went  to  Bnmdusium,
whither  the  former  inhabitants  of  Tarentnm  had  retreated
after  they  were  expelled  from  their  city.  When  he  was  at
the  point  of  death,  he  urged  the  exiles  "  to  have  his  bones,
and  last  relics,  bruised  to  dust,  and  privately  sprinkled  in  the
forum  of  Tarentum ;  for  that  Apollo  at  Delphi  had  s^ified
that  by  this  means  they  might  recover  their  city."  They,
thinking  that  he  had  revealed  the  destiny  of  his  countrymen
to  avenge  himself,  complied  with  his  directions;  but  the
intention  of  the  oracle  was  exactly  the  reverse;  for  it
promised  the  'Spartans,  upon  the  performance  of  what  he  had
said,  not  the  loss,  but  the  perpetual  possession  of  the  city.
Thus  by  the  subtlety  of  their  exiled  captain,  and  the  agency
of  their  enemies,  the  possession  of  Tarentum  was  secui^  to
the  ParthenisB  for  ever.

y.  Meantime  the  Messenians,  who  could  not  be  conquered
by  valour,  were  reduced  by  stratagem.  For  eighty  years  they
bore  the  severe  afflictions  of  slaves,  as  frequent  stripes,  and
chains,  and  other  evils  of  subjugation ;  and  then,  after  so  long  an

*  From  wap^ivo^,  virgo,']  It  answem  exactly  to  the  Qerman  em
IimfffraMnd, — Bmteccenu,


42  JUSTIN.  [B.m.  CH.VI.

endurance  of  suffering,  they  proceeded  to  resume  hostilities.
The  Lacedeemonians,  at  the  same  time,  ran  to  arms  with  the
greater  ardour  and  unanittdtj,  hecause  they  seemed  to  be
called  upon  to  fight  against  their  own  slaves.  While  ill-
treatment,  therefore,  on  tibe  one  side,  and  indignation  on  the
other,  exasperated  their  feelings,  the  Lacedaemonians  con-
sulted the  oracle  at  Delphi  concerning  the  event  of  the  war,
and  were  directed  to  ask  the  Athenians  for  a  leader  to  con-
duct it.  The  Athenians,  learning  the  answer  of  the  oracle,
sent,  to  express  their  contempt  of  the  Spartans,  a  lame  poet,
named  Tyrtieus ;  who,  being  routed  in  three  battles,  reduced
the  LacedaBmonians  to  so  despemte  a  condition,  that,  to  re-
cruit their  army,  they  liberated  a  portion  of  their  slaves,
promising  that  ikej  should'  marry  the  widows  of  those  who
were  slain,  and  thus  fill  up,  not  merely  the  number  of  the
lost  citizens,  but  their  offices.  The  kings  of  Sparta,  however^
lest,  by  contending  against  fortune,  they  should  bring  greater
losses  on  their  city,  would  have  drawn  off  their  army,  had  not
TyrtsBus  interposed,  and  recited  to  the  soldiers,  in  a  public
assembly,  some  vei^es  of  his  own  composition,  in  which  he
had  comprised  exhortations  to  courage,  consolations  for  their
losses,  and  counsels  concerning  the  war.  By  this  means  he
inspired  the  soldiers  with  such  resolution,  that,  being  no
longer  concerned  for  their  lives,  but  merely  for  the  rites  of
sepulture,  they  tied  on  their  right  arms  tickets,  inscribed  with
their  names  and  those  of  their  fathers,  that  if  an  unsuccessful
battle  should  cut  them  off,  and  their  features  after  a  time  be-
come indistinct,  they  might  be  consigned  to  burial  according
to  the  indication  of  the  inscriptions.  When  the  kings  saw
the  army  thus  animated,  they  took  care  that  the  state  of  it
should  be  made  known  to  liie  enemy;  the  report,  however,
raised  in  the  Messenians  no  alarm,  but  a  correspondent
ardour.  Both  sides  accordingly  encountered  with  such  fury,
that  there  scarcely  ever  was  a  more  bloody  battle.  But  at  last
victory  fell  to  the  LacedsBmonians.

VI.  Some  time  after,  the  Messenians  renewed  the  war  a
third  time,  when  the  Lacedaemonians,  among  their  other
allies,  called  also  upon  the  Athenians  for  assistance;  but
afterwards,  conceiving  some  mistrust  of  them,  they  prevented
them  from  joining  in  the  war,  pretending  that  they  had  no
need  for  their  services. The  Adienians,  not  liking  this  pro-


B.  C,  480.]  PBLOPONNBfilAN  WAJEL  43

ceeding,  removed  the  money,  which  had  heen  contributed  by
the  whole  of  Greece  to  defray  the  expense  of  the  Persian  war,
from  Delos  to  Athens,  that,  if  the  Lacedsemonians  broke  their
faith  as  allies,  it  might  not  be  an  object  of  plunder  to  them.
The  Lacedsemonians,  on  the  other  hand,  did  not  rest,  for  though
they  were  engaged  in  the  war  with  the  Messenians,  they  set
the  people  of  the  Peloponnesus  to  make  war  on  the  Athenians.
The  forces  of  the  Athenians  at  home  were  at  that  time  incon-
siderable, as  their  fleet  had  been  despatched  into  Egypt,  so
that,  engaging  in  battle  by  sea,  they  were  quickly  worsted. Soon
after,  on  the  return  of  their  fleet,  being  strengthened  both  by
sea  and  land, they  renewed  the  war;  when  the  Lacedse-
monians, leaving  the  Messenians  at  rest,  turned  their  full
force  against  the  Athenians. Victory  was  long  doubtful,  and
at  last  both  parties  gave  over  with  equal  loss. The  Lacedse-
monians being  then  recalled  to  the  war  with  the  Messenians,
but  not  wishing  to  leave  the  Athenians  in  the  meantime  un-
molested, bargained  with  the  Thebans  to  restore  them  the
supremacy  of  Bceotia,  which  they  had  lost  in  the  time  of  the
Persian  war,  if  they  would  but  take  up  arms  against  the  Athe-
nians. Such  was  the  fury  of  the  Spartans,  that,  though  they
were  involved  in  two  wars,  they  did  not  hesitate  to  occasion
a  third,  if  they  might  but  raise  up  enemies  against  their  ene-
mies. The  Athenians,  therefore,  to  meet  tins  storm  of  war,
made  choice  of  two  eminent  leaders,  Pericles,  a  man  of  tried
courage,  and  Sophocles,  the  writer  of  tragedies ;  who,  dividing
their  forces,  laid  waste  the  lands  of  the  Spartans,  and  brought
many  cities  of  Achaia*  under  the  power  of  the  Athenians.

VII.  The  LacedsBmonians,  being  humbled  by  these  losses,
agreed  upon  a  peace  for  thirty  years.  But  their  hostile
feelings  did  not  allow  of  so  long  a  period  of  repose.  Hence,
having  broken  the  treaty  before  the  fifteenth  year  was
ended,  they  laid  waste  the  territories  of  Attica  in  violation
of  their  obligations  towards  the  gods  and  towards  men.  And
lest  they  should  seem  to  have  desired  to  plunder  rather  than
to  flght,  they  challenged  the  enemy  to  ^e  field.  But  the
Athenians,  by  the  advice  of  their  leader  Pericles,  deferred

*  AckaicB.']  So  the  nortiiem  coast  of  the  Peloponnesus  was  called.
Taachnitz*s  edition  and  Diibner's  have  A^iat  instead  of  Achake;  hut
I  know  not  whence  they  took  it.  Ghronovius,  and  I  believe  all  the
older  editors,  read  AchoMB.


44  JUSTIN.  [B.m.  CH.V1I.

revenge  for  tbe  spoliation  of  their  lands  to  a  fitter  time  of
exacting  it,  thinking  it  needless  to  hazard  a  battle,  when  they
oould  avenge  themselves  on  the  enemy  without  risk.  Some
days  afterwards,  accordingly,  they  embarked  in  their  fleet,  and,
while  the  Lacedaemonians  expected  nothing  of  the  kind,  laid
waste  all  Sparta,*  carrying  off  much  more  than  they  had  lost ;
so  that,  in  a  comparison  of  their  respective  sufferings,  the
retaliation  was  much  greater  than  the  iniury  at  first  received.
This  expedition  of  Pe^cles  was  conside^e7as  greatly  to  his
honour;  but  his  disregard  of  his  private  property  was  far
more  honourable.  The  enemy,  while  they  wasted  the  lands  of
others,  had  left  his  uninjured ;  hoping,  by  this  means,  either
to  bring  danger  on  him  by  rendering  him  unpopular,  or  dis-
honour  by  making  him  suspected  of  treacheiy.  But  Pericles,
foreseeing  what  would  happen,  had  both  foretold  it  to  the
people,  and,  to  escape  the  effects  of  popular  odium,  had  made
over  his  lands  to  the  state  as  a  gift ;  and  thus  obtained  the
greatest  honour  from  that  by  which  his  ruin  had  been  in-
tended. Some  days  afterwards,  an  engagement  took  place  by
sea ;  and  the  Lacedemonians,  being  worsted,  fled.  Neverthe-
less they  did  not  cease  from  fierce  attacks  on  one  another,  by
sea  or  land,  with  various  success.  At  last,  exhausted  with
disasters  on  both  sides,  they  made  peace  for  fifty  years,  which
however  they  maintained  only  for  six;  for  they  broke  the
treaty  which  they  had  concluded  on  their  own  account,  under
pretence  of  assisting  their  allies  ;  as  if  they  were  less  guilty
of  peijury  by  aiding  their  dependants,  than  by  engaging  in
open  hostilities  themselves.

The  war  was  in  consequence  transferred  into  Sicily ;  but
before  I  relate  its  progress,  it  is  proper  to  give  some  ac-
count of  the  situation  of  that  island.

*  Totam  SpartamJ]  That  is,  all  the  neighbourhood  of  Sparta,  all
the  lands  of  the  Sps^ans ;  as  in  ziL  2,  we  find  in  Troja  for  im,  agro
Trojano.  Concerning  this  expedition,  see  Thucyd.  ii.  19 — 46 ;  Diod.
Sic.  ii  42.


45  '


BOOK  IV.

Sicily ;  Miaaa, ;  Scylla  and  GharybdiB,  I.— Ancient  inhabitants  of  Sicily,
IL — ^Dissension  between  Khegium  and  Himera;  the  Athenians
successful  in  Sicily  at  first,  III. — The  Syracusans  seek  aid  from,
the  Lacedsemonians ;  the  progress  of  the  war,  IV. — Utter  defeat
of  the  Athenians,  Y.

I.  It  is  said  that  Sicily  was  fonuerly  joined  to  Italy  by  a
narrow  pass,*  and  was  torn  off,  as  it  were,  from  the  larger  body,
by  the  violence  of  the  upper  sea,t  which  impels  itself  in  that
direction  with  the  whole  force  of  its  waters.  The  soil  itself,
too,  is  light  and  frangible,  and  so  perforated  with  caverns  and
passages,  that  it  is  alinost  everywhere  open  to  blasts  of  wind ;
and  tne  very  matter  of  it  is  naturally  adapted  for  generating
and  npurishing  fire,  as  it  is  said  to  be  impregnated  with
sulphur  and  bitumen,  a  circumstance  which  is  the  cause  that
when  air  contends  with  fire  in  the  subterraneous  parts,  the
earth  frequently,  and  in  several  places,  sends  forth  flame,  or
vapour,  or  smoke.  Hence  it  is  that  the  fire  of  Mount  ^tna
has  lasted  through  so  many  ages.  And  when  a  strong  wind
passes  in  through  the  openings  of  the  cavities,  heaps  of  sand
are  cast  up.

The  promontory  of  Italy  on  the  side  nearest  to  Sicily,  is
called  Khegium,^  because  things  broken  off  are  designated  by
that  term  in  Greek.  Nor  is  it  strange  that  antiquity  should
have  been  full  of  fables  concerning  these  parts,  in  which  so  many
extraordinary  things  are  found  together.  The  sea,  in  the  first
place,  is  nowhere  so  impetuous,  pouring  on  with  a  current  not
only  rapid  but  furious,  not  only  frightful  to  those  who  feel  its
effects,  but  to  those  who  view  it  from  a  distance.  So  fierce  is
the  conflict  of  the  waves  as  they  meet,  that  you  may  see  some
of  them,  put  to  flight  as  it  were,  sink  down  into  the  depths,
and  others,  as  if  victorious,  rising  up  to  the  skies.  Sometimes,
in  one  part,  you  may  hear  the  roaring  of  the  sea  as  it  boils

*  Anguttis  foMcihtuJ]  It  was  supposed  that  the  two  countries  had
formed  one  tract  of  land,  with  merely^  a  narrow  valley  or  defile
between  them,  and  that  the  sea  rushed  into  this  valley  and  split  them
asunder.

t  Superi  maris,]  The  Adriatic

X  From  pfiyvvfUf  to  break.


46  JUSTIN.  [B.IV.  CH.  II.

<

Up ;  and  again,  in  another  part,  the  groaning  of  it  as  it  sinks
into  a  whirlpool.  Next  are  to  be  observed  the  adjacent  and
everlasting  fires  of  Mount  ^tna  and  the  ^olian  islands,
-which  bum  as  if  their  heat  were  nourished  by  the  sea  itself ;
nor  indeed  could  such  a  quantity  of  fire  have  endured  in  such
narrow  bounds  for  so  many  ages  unless  it  were  supported  by
nourishment  from  the  water.*  Hence  fables  produced  Scylla
and  Charybdis;  hence  barkings  were  thought  to  have  been
heard ;  hence  the  appearances  of  monsters  gained  credit,  as
the  sailors,  frightened  at  the  vast  whirlpools  of  the  subsiding
waters,  imagined  that  the  waves,  which  the  vortex  of  the
absorbent  gulf  clashes  together,  actually  barked.  The  same
cause  makQS  the  fires  of  Mount  iEltna  perpetual;  for  the
shock  of  the  waters  forces  into  the  depths  a  portion  of  air
hurried  along  with  it,  and  then  keeps  it  confined  till,  being
diffused  through  the  pores  of  the  earth,  it  kindles  the  matter
which  nourishes  the  fire.

In  addition,  the  proximity  of  Italy  and  Sicily  is  to  be
noticed,  with  the  heights  of  their  respective  promontories,
which  are  so  similar,  that,  whatever  wonder  they  raise  in  us
in  the  present  day,  they  excited  proportionate  terror  in  the
ancients,  who  believed  tliat  whole  ships  were  intercepted  and
destroyed  by  the  promontories  closing  together  and  opening.
Nor  was  this  invented  by  the  ancients  to  gratify  the  hearer
with  a  fabulous  wonder,  but  occasioned  by  the  terror  and  con-
sternation of  those  who  passed  by  those  parts ;  for  such  is  the
appearance  of  the  coasts  to  any  one  beholding  them  from  a
distance,  that  you  would  take  the  passage  between  them  for  a
bay  in  the  sea,  and  not  a  strait ;  and,  as  you  draw  nearer,  you
would  think  that  the  promontories,  which  were  before  united,
part  asunder  and  separate.

II.  At  first  Sicily  had  the  name  of  Trinacria  ;t  afterwards


*  Niti  hvmoris  vmtrimenHs  aUretwr.'\  Justin  seems  to  mean  nothing
more  than  what  he  expresses  below,  that  the  water  carried  down  with
it  into  the  earth  a  certain  portion  of  air,  which  kindled,  or  at  least  ex-
cited, the  subterraneous  fires.  I  make  this  observation  lest  any  one
should  suppose  that  he  had  an  idea  like  that  of  Sir  Humphrey  Davy,
that  water,  by  coming  in  contact  with  certain  substances  beneath  the
earth,  might  be  decomposed  into  gases.

*t*  From  having  rpia  uKpa,  three  promontories,  or  three  great  angular
points.


B.O.  479.]  THE  CABTHAGINIAKS  XH  SICILY.  M

it  was  called  Sicania.*  It  was  originallj  the  abode  of  the
Gydope ;  when  they  became  extinct,  Cocalus  made  himself
ruler  of  the  island.  After  his  time  the  cities  fell  sererally
under  the  dominion  of  tyrantSy  of  whom  no  country  was
more  prodnctiYe.  One  of  them,  Anaxilaus,  strove  to  be  as
just  as  the  others  were  crael,  and  reaped  no  small  advantage
&om  his  equity ;  for  having  left,  at  his  death,  some  sons  very
young,  and  lutving  committed  the  guardianship  of  them  to
Micythus,  a  slave  of  tried  fidelity,  so  great  was  the  respect
paid  to  his  memory  among  all  his  subjects,  that  they  chose
rather  to  submit  to  a  slave  than  to  abandon  the  king's
children ;  and  the  noblemen  of  the  state,  forgetful  of  their
dignity,  suffered  the  authority  of  government  to  be  exercised
by  a  bondman.  The  Carthaginians,  too,  attempted  to  gain
the  sovereignty  of  Sicily,  and  fought  against  the  tyrants  for  a
long  time  with  various  success ;  but  at  Jength,  after  losing
their  general  Hamilcar  and  his  army,  they  remained  quiet  for
some  time  in  consequence  of  that  defeat.

III.  In  the  meantime,  the  people  of  Bhegium  being
troubled  with  dissension,  and  the  city  being  divided  by
£spute8  into  two  fiEictions,  a  body  of  veteran  soldiers  from
Himera,  who  were  invited  by  one  of  the  parties  to  their  assist-
ance, having  first  expelled  from  the  city  those  agaiast  whom
they  had  been  called,  and  then  put  to  the  sword  those  whom
they  had  come  to  aid,  took  the  government  into  their
own  hands,  and  made  prisoners  of  the  wives  and  children  of
their  allies ;  venturing  upon  an  atrocity  to  which  that  of  no
tyrant  can  be  compared  ;  so  that  it  would  have  been  better  for
tiie  Rhegians  to  have  been  conquered  than  to  conquer  ;f  for
whether  they  had  become  slaves  to  their  conquerors  by  the
laws  of  whTjX  or,  withdrawing  from  their  country,  had  been
necessitated  to  live  in  exile,  yet  they  would  not  have  been
butchered  amidst  their  altars  and  household  gods,  and  have
left  their  country,  with  their  wives  and  children,  a  prey  to
the  most  cruel  of  tyrants.

*  From  the  Sicani,  an  Iberian'  tribe,  according  to  DionyBius
Halicamaasensis,  lib.  L  The  Siculi,  from  whom  it  was  called  Sicilia,
are  said  to  have  come  into  the  island  from  Italy. —  Wetzd.

i*  A  remark  scarcely  applicable  to  the  subject.  Part  of  the  Rhe-
gians were  conquered  by  the  other  part^  with  the  aid  of  the  people  of
Himera.  ^

X  Jwre  captwitatU.


48  JUSTIN.  [B.  IV.  OH.  IV.

The  people  of  Catana,  ako,  finding  themselyes  oppressed
by  the  Syracusans,  and  distrusting  their  own  power  to  with-
stand them,  requested  assistance  from  the  Athenians,  who,
whether  from  desire  of  enlarging  their  dominions,  so  that
they  might  master  all  Greece  and  Asia,  or  from  apprehension
of  a  fleet  lately  built  by  the  Syracusans,  and  to  prevent  such
a  force  firom  joining  the  Lacedsemonians,  sent  Lamponius,  as
general,  with  a  naval  armament  into  Sicily,  that  under
pretence  of  assisting  the  people  of  Catana,  they  might
endeavour  to  secure  the  sovereignty  of  the  whole  island.
Having  succeeded  in  their  first  attempts,  and  made  havoo
among  the  enemy  on  several  occasions,  they  despatched
another  expedition  to  Sicily,  with  a  greater  fleet  and  more
numerous  army,  under  the  command  of  Laches  and  Ohariades.
But  the  people  of  Gatana,  whether  from  fear  of  the  Athenians,
or  from  being  weaxy  of  the  war,  made  peaxje  with  the  Syra-
cusans, and  sent  back  the  Athenian  force  that  had  come  to
assist  them.

IV.  After  a  lapse  of  some  time,  however,  as  the  articles  of  the
peace  were  not  observed  by  the  Syracusans,  they  sent  ambassa-
dors a  second  time  to  Athens,  who,  arriving  in  a  mean  dress,
with  long  hair  and  bear4s,  and  every  sign  of  distress  adapted
to  move  pity,  presented  themselves  in  that  wretched  plight
before  the  public  assembly.  To  their  entreaties  were  added
tears  ;  and  the  suppliants  so  moved  the  people  to  compassion,
that  the  commanders  who  had  withdrawn  the  auxiliary  force
from  them  received  a  sentence  of  condemnation.*  A  powerful
fleet  was  then  appointed  to  aid  them ;  Nicias,  Alcibiades,  and
Lamachus  were  made  captains ;  and  Sicily  was  revisited  with
such  a  force  as  was  a  terror  even  to  those  to  whose  aid  it  was
sent.  In  a  short  time,  Alcibiades  being  recalled  to  answer
certain  charges  made  against  him,  Nicias  and  Lamachus  fought
two  successM  battles  by  land,  and,  drawing  lines  of  circum-
vallation  around  Syracuse,  cut  ofl  all  supplies  from  the  enemy
by  sea,  keeping  tibem  closely  blocked  up  in  the  city.  The
Syracusans,  being  greatly  reduced  by  these  measures,  sought
assistance  from  tJ^e  Lacedsemonians,  by  whom  Gylippus  alone
was  sent ;  but  he  was  a  man  equal  to  whole  troops  of  aux-

*  It  is  not  easy  to  see  on  what  ground  such  a  sentence  was  pro-
nounced; for  it  is  stated  at  the  end  of  the  third  chapter  that  the
Catanians  themselves  sent  back  then:  Athenian  auxiliaries.


B.a  41  ft.] THE  ATHENIANS  DEFEATED  IN  SICILY.  49

iliaries.  He,  having  heard  on  his  way  of  the  declinitig  state
of  the  war,  and  having  collected  some  support  partly  from
Greece  and  partly  from  Sicily,  took  possession  of  some  posts
suitable  for  carrying  on  the  war.  He  was  then  conquered  in
two  battles,  but  engaging  in  a  third,  he  killed  Lamachus,  put
the  enemy  to  flight,  and  rescued  his  allies  from  the  siege.
But  as  the  Athenians  transferred  their  warlike  efforts  from
the  land  to  the  sea,  Gylippus  sent  for  a  fleet  and  army  from
Ijacedaemon;  upon  intelligence  of  which  the  Athenians
themselves,  too,  sent  out  Demosthenes  and  Eurymedon,  in  the
room  of  their  late  leader,  >vith  a  reinforcement  to  their  troops.
The  Peloponnesians  again,  by  a  general  resolution  of  their
cities,  sent  powerful  assistance  to  the  Syracusans,  and,  as  if
the  Greek  war  had  been  transported  into  Sicily,  the  contest
was  pursued  on  both  sides  with  the  utmost  vigour.

V.  In  the  first  encounter  at  sea,  the  Athenians  were
worsted,  and  lost  their  camp,  with  all  their  money,  both  what
was  public  and  what  belonged  to  private  individuals.  When,
in  addition  to  these  disasters,  they  were  also  beaten  in  a
battle  on  land,  Demosthenes  began  to  advise  that  **they
should  quit  Sicily,  while  their  condition,  though  bad,  was  not
yet  desperate;  and  that  they  should  not  persist  in  a  war  so
inauspiciously  commenced,  as  there  were  more  considerable,
and  perhaps  more  unhappy  wars,  to  be  dreaded  at  home,  for
which  it  was  expedient  that  they  should  reserve  the  present
force  of  their  city."  But  Nicias,  whether  from  shame  at  his
ill  success,  from  fear  of  the  resentment  of  his  countrymen  for
the  disappointment  of  their  hopes,  or  from  the  impulse  of
destiny,  contended  for  staying.  The  war  by  sea  was  therefore
renewed,  and  their  thoughts  turned  from  reflections  on  their
previous  ill-fortune  to  the  hopes  of  a  successful  struggle,  but,
through  the  unskilfulness  of  their  leaders,  who  attacked  the
Syracusans  when  advantageously  posted  in  a  strait,  they  were
easily  overcome.  Their  general,  Eurymedon,  was  the  first  to
fall,  fighting  bravely  in  the  front  of  the  battle ;  and  thirty
ships  which  he  commanded  were  burnt.  Demosthenes  and
Nicias  being  also  defeated,  set  their  forces  on  shore,  thinking
that  retreat  would  be  safer  by  land.  Gylippus  seized  a
hundred  and  thirty  ships  which  they  had  left,  and  then,
pursuing  them  as  they  fled,  took  some  of  them''  prisoners,  and
put  others  to  death. Demosthenes,  after  the  loss  of  his  troops,

E


60  JUSTIN.  [rv.  cast.  I.

saved  himself  from  captivity  by  voluntarily  falling  on  his  sword.
But  Niciaa,  not  induced,  even  by  the  example  of  Demosthenes,
to  put  himself  out  of  the  power  of  fortune,  added  to  the  loss  of
his  army  the  disgrace  of  being  made  prisoner.


BOOK  V.

Alcibiades  banished  from  Athens;  joins  the  Lacedsemonians,  I. —
Changes  sides,  defeats  the  Lacedaemonians,  and  returns  to  Athens,
II.-IV. — Defeated  by  Lysander,  and  goes  into  voluntary  exile,  V.
— Lysander  defeats  Conon,  VI, — ^Athens  surrenders  to  Lysander,
who  appoints  the  thirty  tyrants ;  death  of  Alcibiades,  Y IL  YIII.
— Theramenes,  one  of  the  tyrants,  killed;  Thrasybulus  over-
throws the  tyrants;  his  act  of  oblivion,  IX.  X.— Death  of
Darius;  Expedition  of  Cyrus,  and  his  death;  Artaxerxes  esta-
blished on  the  throne,  XI.

I.  Whilst  the  Athenians,  during  two  years,  were  carrying
on  the  war  in  Sicily,  with  more  eagerness  than  success,
Alcibiades,  the  promoter  and  leader  of  it,  was  accused  at
Athens  in  his  absence  of  having  divulged  the  mysteries  of
Ceres,  which  were  rendered  saxired  by  nothing  more  than  by
their  secrecy.  Being  recalled  from  the  war  to  take  his  trial,
and  being  unwilling,  either  from  the  consciousness  of  guilt
or  from  the  affront  put  upon  him,  to  obey,  he  retired,  without
offering  to  defend  himself,  to  Elis.  From  thence,  having
learned  that  he  was  not  only  condemned,  but  devoted  to
destruction  with  execrations  in  the  religious  ceremonies  of  all
the  priests,  he  betook  himself  to  Lacedaemon,  where  he  urged
the  king*  of  the  Lacedaemonians  to  make  war  on  the  Athenians
in  the  midst  of  their  distress  at  the  unfortunate  result  of  the
struggle  in  Sicily.  This  being  done,  all  the  powers  of
Greece  conspired  against  the  Athenians,  as  if  to  extinguish
a  common  conflagi'ation ;  such  hatred  had  they  brought  upon
themselves  by  their  desire  of  too  great  power.  Darius  also,
the  king  of  Persia,  not  forgetting  his  father's  and  grandfather's
hostility  to  that  city,  concluded  an  alliance  with  fiie  Lacedae-
monians through  Tissaphemes,  satrap  of  Lydia,  and  promised
to  defray  all  the  expense  of  the  war.  Such  at  least  was  his
pretext  for  meddling  in  the  affairs  of  Greece,  but  in  reality  he

*  Agis.


B.C.  410.] THE  PEBSIANS  AID  THE  8PABTANS.  51

was  afraid  that  the  LacedflBinoxuaiis,  if  they  conquered  the
AtheniaDS,  should  turn  their  arms  against  himself.  Who  then
can  wonder  that  the  flourishing  state  of  Athens  went  to  ruin,
when  the  whole  strength  of  the  east  conspired  to  overwhelm
one  city  ?  Yet  they  did  not  fall  with  merely  a  fiednt  struggle,
or  without  hloodshed,  hut  fighting  to  the  last,  and  sometimes
victorious,  heing  rather  worn  out  hy  changes  of  fortune  than
overcome  hy  force  of  arms.  At  the  commencement  of  the
war,  too,  all  their  allies  deserted  them,  according  to  common
practice;  for  whatever  way  fortune  leans,  in  the  same  direction
does  the  &vour  of  mankind  turn.

II.  Alcibiades  also  supported  the  war  raised  against  his
country,  not  with  the  services  of  a  common  soldier,  but  with
the  abilities  of  a  general.  Having  received  a  squadron  of  five
ships,  he  sailed  directly  to  Asia,  and,  by  the  authority  of  his
name,  prevailed  on  the  cities  tributary  to  the  Athenians  to
revolt  from  them.  They  knew  his  eminence  at  home ;  nor
did  they  think  his  influence  weakened  by  his  bamshment,  but
looked  on  him  rather  as  a  leader  taken  from  the  Athenians,*
than  added  to  the  Lacedaemonians,  and  balanced  the  command
which  he  had  gained  against  that  which  he  had  lost.  But
among  the  Lacedaemonians  the  abilities  of  Alcibiades  had
gained  him  more  envy  than  fsivour ;  and  the  chief  men  having
formed  a  plot  to  kill  him,  as  their  rival  in  glory,  Alcibiades,
receiving  intelligence  of  their  design  from  the  wife  of  Agis,
with  whom  he  had  an  intrigue,  fled  to  Tissaphemes,  the
satrap  of  king  Darius,  with  whom  he  quickly  ingratiated
himself  by  his  aflability  and  obligingness  of  manners.  He
was  then  in  the  flower  of  youth,  and  distinguished  for  personal
graces,  and  not  less  for  oratory,  even  among  the  Athenians.
But  he  was  better  fitted  to  gain  the  aflections  of  friends  than
to  keep  them ;  because  the  vices  in  his  character  were  thrown
into  the  shade  by  the  splendour  of  his  eloquence.  He  suc-
ceeded in  persuading  Tissaphemes  not  to  furnish  such  supplies

*  They  did  not  so  much  regard  him  as  a  leader  deprived  of  his
command  by  the  AthenianB,  as  one  who  had  been  entrusted  with  a
sunilar  command  by  the  Lacedaemonians.  "  Although  he  had  lost  his
appointment  with  the  Athenians,  they  considered  that  he  was  advanced
to  equal  dignity  among  the  Lacedeemonians.*' — Bemeccenu.  '"The
office  of  general,  which  he  had  lost  on  the  one  side,  he  had  recovered
on  the  other.**— ^'rcmtM.

E  3


62  JUSTIK.  [B.V.  CH.III.

of  money  for  the  LacedaBmonian  fleet ;  "  for  the  lonians/*
he  said,  "  should  be  called  upon  to  pay  their  share,  since  it
was  for  their  deliverance,  when  they  were  paying  tribute  to
the  Lacedsemoniaus,  that  the  war  was  undertaken.  Neither,
however,"  he  added,  '*  should  the  Lacedaemonians  be  too
greatly  assisted ;  for  he  should  remember  that  he  was  pre-
paring a  way  for  the  supremacy  of  others,  not  for  his  own ;
and  that  the  war  was  only  so  far  to  be  supported,  that  it
might  not  be  broken  off  for  want  of  supplies,  as  the  king
of  Persia,  while  the  Greeks  were  distracted  by  dissensions,
would  be  the  arbiter  of  peace  and  war,  and  would  vanquish
with  their  own  arms  those  whom  he  could  not  overcome  with
his  own ;  but  that,  if  the  war  were  brought  to  a  conclusion,
he  would  immediately  have  to  fight  with  the  conquerors.
That  Greece,  therefore,  ought  to  be  reduced  by  civil  wars,
so  that  it  might  have  no  opportunity  to  engage  in  foreign
ones;  that  the  strength  of  its  two  parties  should  be  kept
equal,  the  weaker  being  constantly  supported ;  since  the
Bpartans,  who  professed  themselves  the  defenders  of  the
liberty  of  Greece,  would  not  remain  quiet  after  their  present
elevation."  Such  arguments  were  very  agreeable  to  Tissa-
phemes ;  and  he  accordingly  furnished  supplies  to  the
Spartans  but  sparingly,  and  did  not  send  the  whole  of  the
king's  fleet  to  assist  them,  lest  he  should  gain  them  a  complete
victory,  or  bring  the  other  party  under  tihe  necessity  of  aban-
doning the  war.

III.  Meanwhile  Alcibiades  boasted  of  this  service  to  his
countrymen  ;  and  when  deputies  from  the  Athenians  came  to
him,  he  promised  to  secure  them  the  king's  friendship,  if  the
government  should  be  transferred  from  the  hands  of  the
people  to  those  of  the  senate ;  in  hopes,  either  that,  if  the
citizens  could  agree,  he  should  be  chosen  general  unanimously,
or  that,  if  dissension  arose  between  the  two  orders,  he  should
be  invited  by  one  of  the  parties  to  their  assistance.  The
Athenians,  as  a  dangerous  war  hung  over  them,  were  more
solicitous  about  their  safety  than  then*  dignity.*  The  govern-
ment, accordingly,  was  transferred,  with  the  consent  of  the

*  Major  talutis,  quam  digniiatisy  cwra  fuit^  The  Athenians  sub-
mitted to  the  condition  imposed  by  the  king  of  Persia,  viz.,  that  of
transferring  the  government  to  the  senate,  though  they  might  lower
thoir  dignity  by  the  submission.


B.C.  410.]  RETURN  OP  ALCIBIADES.  53

people,  to  the  senate.  But  as  the  nobility,  with  the  pride
natural  to  their  order,  treated  the  common  people  cruelly,  and
each  arrogated  to  himself  the  exorbitant  power  of  tyranny,  the
banished  Alcibiades  was  recalled  by  the  army,  and  appointed
to  the  command  of  the  fleet.  Upon  this,  he  at  once  sent  notice
to  Athens  that,  **  he  would  instantly  march  to  the  city  with
his  army,  and  recover  the  rights  of  the  people  from  the  four
hundred,*  unless  they  restored  them  of  themselves."  The
aristocracy,  alarmed  at  this  denunciation,  at  first  attempted  to
betray  the  city  to  the  Lacedaemonians,  but  being  unable  to
succeed,  went  into  exile.  Alcibiades,  having  delivered  his
country  from  this  intestine  evil,  fitted  out  his  fleet  with  the
utmost  care,  and  proceeded  to  carry  forward  the  war  with  the
Lacedaemonians.

IV.  Mindarus  and  Phamabazus,  the  leaders  of  the  Lacedae-
monians,t  were  already  waiting  at  Sestos  with  their  fleet
drawn  up.  A  battle  being  fought,  the  victory  fell  to  the
Athenians.  In  this  engagement,  the  greater  part  of  the  army
and  almost  all  the  enemy's  officers,  were  killed,  and  eighty
ships  taken.  Some  days  after,  the  Lacedaemonians,  trans-
feiTing  the  war  from  the  sea  to  the  land,  were  defeated  a
second  time.  Weakened  by  these  disasters,  they  sued  for
peace,  but  were  prevented  from  obtaining  it  by  the  efforts  of
those  to  whom  the  war  brought  private  advantage.  In  the
meantime,  too,  a  war  made  upon  Sicily  by  the  Carthaginians
called  home  the  aid  sent  by  the  Syracusans ,  and  the  Lacedae-
monians, in  consequence,  being  wholly  unsupported,  Alcibiades
ravaged  the  coast  of  Asia  with  his  victorious  fleet,  fought
several  battles,  and  being  every  where  victorious,  recovered
the  cities  which  had  revolted,  took  some  others,  and  added
them  to  the  dominion  of  the  Athenians.  Having  thus  re-
established their  ancient  glory  by  sea,  and  united  to  it
reputation  in  war  by  land,  he  returned  to  Athens  to  gratify
the  longing  of  his  countrymen,  to  behold  him.  In  all  these
battles  two  hundred  ships  of  the  enemy,  and  a  vast  quantity
of  spoils,  were  taken.

Upon  this  triumphant  return  of  the  army,  the  whole  multi-
tude from  Athens  poured  forth  to  meet  them,  and  gazed  with

♦  These  four  hundred  composed  the  BcncOe, See  Thucyd.  viiL  67,  68.
f  LabcedoBMonwrvm  ducea."]  Not  strictly ;  Mindarus  was  captain  of  the
Lacedsemonians :  Phamabazus,  a  Persian  satrap.


54  ' JUSTIN.  [b.v.  ch.v.

admiration  on  all  the  soldiers,  but  especially  on  Alcibiades ;
on  him  the  whole  city  turned  their  eyes  with  looks  of  wonder ;
they  regarded  him  as  sent  down  from  heaven,  and  as  victory
in  person;  they  extolled  what  he  had  done  for  his  country,  nor
did  they  less  admire  what  he  had  done  against  it  in  his  exile,
excusing  his  conduct  as  the  result  of  anger  and  provocation.
Such  power  indeed,  strange  to  say,  was  there  *  in  that  one
man,  that  he  was  the  cause  of  a  great  state  being  subverted
and  again  re-established ;  victory  removed  herself  to  the  side
on  which  he  stood ;  and  a  wonderful  change  of  fortune  always
attended  him.  They  therefore  heaped  upon  him  not  only  all
human,  but  divine  honours  ;  they  made  it  an  object  of  conten-
tion, whether  the  contumely  with  which  they  banished  him,  or
the  honour  with  which  they  recalled  him,  should  be  the  greater.
They,  by  whose  execrations  he  had  been  devoted,  carried  their
gods  to  meet  and  congratulate  him ;  and  him  to  whom  they
had  lately  refused  all  human  aid,  they  now  desired,  if  they
could,  to  exalt  to  heaven ;  they  made  amends  for  indignities
with  praises,  for  confiscations  with  gifts,  for  imprecations  with
prayers.  The  unfortunate  battle  on  the  coast  of  Sicilyf  was  no
longer  in  their  mouths,  but  their  success  in  Greece  ;f  the
fleets  which  he  had  lost  were  no  more  mentioned,  but  those
which  he  had  taken ;  they  did  not  speak  of  Syracuse,  but  of
Ionia  and  the  Hellespont.  Thus  Alcibiades  was  never
received  with  moderate  feelings  on  the  part  of  his  countrymen,
either  when  they  were  offended,  or  when  they  were  pleased
with  him.

V.  During  these  occurrences  at  Athens,  Lysander  was
appointed  by  the  Lacedaemonians  to  the  command  of  their
fleet  and  army;  and  Darius,  king  of  Persia,  made,  in  the
room  of  Tissaphemes,  his  son  Cyrus  governor  of  Ionia  and
Lydia ;  who,  by  his  assistance  and  support,  inspired  the
Lacedaemonians  with  hopes  of  recovering  their  former  position.
Their  strength  being  therefore  recruited,  the  Spartans,  when
their  approach  was  wholly  unexpected,  surprised  Alcibiades,

*  BiwiMOfTO  tcmtwn  in  uno  viro  fuiut  momenti,  vif  &;c.]  In  such  cod-
structions,  says  Weteel,  we  must  understand  miraiidwn  est,  or  some-
thing similar.  See  ii  14  :  Ta/iUam  famas  vdocitcUem  fuiMe  ;  viii.  2,  tub
fin.  ;  xiv.  6,  med.

+  See  iv.  6,  inU.

X  In  Greece,  Euboea,  Thrace,  and  Asia  Minor.— TTetee^


B.G.  407.]  COKON  SUCCEEDS  ALCIBIADES. .  55

who  had  gone  with  a  hundred  vessels  to  Asia,  while  he  was
laying  waste  the  country,  which  was  in  excellent  condition
from  a  long  continuance  of  peace,  and  while,  unapprehensive
of  any  attack,  he  had  allowed  his  soldiers  to  disperse  them-
selves under  the  attractions  of  plunder;  and  such  was  the
havoc  among  the  scattered  troops,  that  the  Athenians  received
more  injury  from  that  single  onslaught,  than  they  had  caused
the  enemy  in  their  previous  hattles  with  them.  Such,  too,
was  the  desperation  of  the  Athenians  on  the  occasion,  that
they  immediately  deposed  Alcibiades  to  make  room  for  Conon,
thinking  that  they  had  been  defeated,  not  by  the  fortune  of
war,  but  by  the  treachery  of  their  general,  on  whom  their
former  injuries  had  had  more  influence  than  their  recent
favours,  and  that  he  had  conquered  in  the  former  part  of  the
war,  only  to  show  the  enemy  what  a  leader  they  had  despised,
and  to  make  his  countrymen  pay  so  much  the  dearer  for  their
previous  victory ;  for  his  vigour  of  mind  and  laxity  of  morals
made  everything  that  was  said  of  Alcibiades  credible.  Fearing
therefore  the  rage  of  the  people,  he  went  again  into  voluntary
exile.

VI.  Conon,  being  put  in  the  place  of  Alcibiades,  and  seeing
to  what  sort  of  commander  he  had  succeeded,  fitted  out  his
fleet  with  the  utmost  exertion ;  but  troops  were  wanting  to
man  the  vessels,  as  the  stoutest  men  had  been  cut  ofif  in  ,the
plundering  of  Asia.  Old  men,  however,  and  boys  under  age,
were  furnished  with  arms,  and  the  number  of  an  army  was  com-
pleted, but  without  the  strength.  But  soldiers  of  an  age  so
unfit  for  war  could  not  long  protract  the  contest ;  they  were
everywhere  cut  to  pieces,  or  taken  prisoners  as  they  fled ;  and
so  great  was  the  loss  in  slain  and  captiired,  that  not
merely  the  power  of  the  Athenians,  but  even  their  very  name,
seemed  to  be  extinct.  Their  affairs  being  ruined  and  rendered
desperate  in  the  contest,  they  were  reduced  to  such  want  of
men,  all  of  militaiy  age  being  lost,  that  they  gave  the  freedom
of  the  city  to  foreigners,  liberty  to  slaves,  and  pardon  to  con-
demned malefactors.  With  an  army  raised  from  such  a  mix-
ture of  human  beings,  they  who  had  lately  been  lords  of
Greece  could  scarcely  preserve  their  liberty.  Yet  they  resolved
once  more  to  try  their  fortune  at  sea ;  and  such  was  their
spirit,  that  though  they  had  recently  despaired  of  safety,  they
now  did  not  despair  even  of  victory. But  it  was  not  such  a


50  JU8TIN.  [b.  V.  CH.  vn.

soldiery  that  could  support  the  Athenian  name ;  it  yms  not
such  troops  with  which  they  had  heen  used  to  conquer ;  nor
were  there  the  requisite  military  accomplishments  in  those
whom  prisons,  not  camps,  had  confined.  All  were  in  conse-
quence either  taken  prisoners  or  slain  ;  and  the  general  Gonon
alone  surviving  the.. battle,  and  dreading  the  resentment  of  his
countrymen,  went  off  with  eight  ships  to  Evagoras,  king  of
Cyprus.

VII.  The  general  of  the  Lacedaemonians,  after  managing
his  afi^rs  so  successfully,  grew  insolent  towards  his  enemies  in
their  evil  fortune.  He  sent  the  ships  which  he  had  taken,
laden  with  spoil,  and  decorated  as  in  triumph,  to  Lacedaemon.
He  received  at  the  same  time  voluntary  tenders  of  submission
from  cities  which  dread  of  the  doubtful  fortune  of  war  had  kept
in  allegiance  to  the  Athenians.  Nor  did  he  leave  anything  in
possession  of  the  Athenians  but  their  city  itself.

When  all  this  was  understood  at  Athens,  the  inhabitants,
leaving  their  houses,  ran  up  and  down  the  streets  in  a  frantic
manner,  asking  questions  of  one  another,  and  inquiring  for  the
author  of  the  news.  Neither  did  incapacity  keep  the  children
at  home,  nor  infirmity  the  old  men,  nor  the  weakness  of  their
sex  the  women :  so  deeply  had  the  feeling  of  such  calamity
affected  every  age.  They  met  together  in  the  forum,  where,
throagh  the  whole  night,  they  bewailed  the  public  distress.
Some  wept  for  their  lost  brothers,  or  sons,  or  parents ;  some
for  other  relatives ;  others  for  friends  dearer  than  relatives  •  all
mingling  their  lamentations  for  their  country  with  plaints  for
their  private  sufferings ;  sometimes  regarding  themselves,
sometimes  their  city,  as  on  the  brink  of  ruin ;  and  deeming
the  fate  of  those  who  survived  more  unhappy  than  that  of  the
slain.  Each  represented  to  himself  a  siege,  a  famine,  and  an
enemy  overbearing  and  fiushed  with  victory ;  sometimes  con-
templating in  imagination  the  desolation  and  burning  of  the
city,  and  sometimes  the  captivity  and  wretched  slavery  of  all
its  inhabitants ;  and  thinking  the  former  destruction  of  Athens,
which  was  attended  only  with  *  the  ruin  of  their  houses,  while
their  children  and  parents  were  safe,  much  less  calamitous
than  what  was  now  to  befal  them ;  since  there  remained  no
fleet  in  which,  as  before,  they  might  find  a  refuge,  and  no

*  Taxatce  tint.]  Was  at  the  expense  of.


B.C.  403.]  THE  THIRTY  TYRANTS.  57

army  by  vhose  valour  they  might  be  saved  to  erect  a  finer
city.

VIII.  While  the  city  was  thus  wept  over  ancl  almost  brought
to  nothing,  the  enemy  came  upon  it,  pressed  the  inhabitants
viiih  a  siege,  and  distressed  them  widi  famine.  They  knew
that  little  remained  of  the  provisions  which  they  had  laid  up,
and  had  taken  care  that  no  new  ones  should  be  imported.  The
Athenians,  exhausted  by  their  sufferings,  from  long  endurance
of  famine,  and  daily  losses  of  men,  sued  for  peace ;  but  it
was  long  "disputed  between  the  Spartans  and  their  allies
whether  it  should  be  granted  or  not.  Many  gave  their  opinion
that  the  very  name  of  the  Athenians  should  be  blotted  out,
and  the  city  destroyed  by  fire ;  but  the  Spartans  refused  ^*  to
pluck  out  one  of  the  two  eyes  of  Greece,"  and  promised  the
Athenians  peace,  on  condition  *'that  they  should  demolish  the
walls  *  extending  down  to  the  Pirseeus,  and  deliver  up  the  ships
which  they  had  left.;  and  that  the  state  should  receive  from
them  thirty  governors  of  their  own  citizens."  The  city  being
surrendered  on  these  terms,  the  Lacedsemonians  committed  it
to  Lysander  to  model  the  government  of  it.  This  year  was
rendered  remarkable,  not  only  for  the  reduction  of  Athens,
but  for  the  death  of  Darius,  king  of  Persia,  and  the  banish-
ment of  Dionysius,  tyrant  of  Sicily.

When  the  form  of  government  at  Athens  was  changed,  the
condition  of  the  citizens  was  likewise  altered.  Thirty  governors
of  the  state  were  appointed,  who  became  absolute  tyrants  ;  for,
at  the  very  first,  they  organized  for  themselves  a  guard  of
three  thousand  men,  though,  after  so  much  slaughter,  scarcely
as  many  citizens  survived  ;  and  as  if  this  force  was  too  small
to  overawe  the  city,  they  received  also  seven  hundred  men
from  the  victorious  army.  They  then  began  to  put  to  death
the  citizens,  intending  to  commence  with  Alcibiades,  lest  he
should  again  seize  the  government  under  pretence  of  deliver-
ing the  city ;  and  hearing  that  he  was  gone  to  Artaxerxes  king
of  Persia,  they  despatched  men  in  haste  to  stop  him  on  his
way.  By  these  deputies  he  was  beset,  and,  as  he  could  not
be  killed  openly,  was  burnt  alive  in  the  apartment  in  which
he  slept.

IX.  The  tyrants,  thus  freed  from  the  dread  of  an  avenger,
wasted  the  miserable  remains  of  the  citv  with  the  sword  and

*  Muri  brachia.]  The  arnis  of  the  wall.


58  .  JITSTIN.  [B.V.  CH.IX.

Spoliation ;  and  finding  that  their  proceedings  displeased
Theramenes,  one  of  their  own  body,  they  put  him  also  to
death  to  strike  terror  into  the  rest  In  consequence  a  general
dispersion  of  the  citizens  took  place  in  aU  directions,  and
Greece  was  filled  with  Athenian  fugitives.  But  the  privilege
of  flight  being  also  taken  from  them  (for  the  cities  were
forbidden,  by  an  edict  of  the  Lacedaemonians,  to  receive  the
exiles),  they  all  betook  themselves  to  Argos  and  Thebes,*
where  they  had  not  only  safe  places  of  refuge,  but  also  con-
ceived hopes  of  repossessing  themselves  of  their  country.
There  was  among  the  refugees  a  man  named  Thrasybulus,  a
person  of  great  bravery  and  of  noble  extraction,  who,  thinking
that  something  should  be  attempted,  even  at  the  utmost
hazard,  for  their  countrv  and  the  common  interest,  called
together  the  exiles,  and  took  post  at  Phyle,  a  fort  on  the
borders  of  Attica.  Some  of  the  cities,  pitying  the  severity
of  their  misfortunes,  afforded  them  countenance ;  Ismenias,
a  leading  man  among  the  Thebans,  though  he  could  not
assist  them  publicly,  yet  supported  them  with  his  private
means ;  and  Lycias,  the  Syracusan  orator,f  at  that  time  an
exile,  sent  five  hundred  soldiers,  equipped  at  his  own  charge,
to  the  aid  of  the  common  country  of  eloquence.  A  desperate
battle  ensued ;  but  as  those  on  Uie  one  side  fought  with  their
utmost  efforts  to  regain  their  country,  and  those  on  the  other,
with  less  eagerness,  in  support  of  the  power  of  others,  the
tyrants  were  overcome.  After  their  defeat  they  fled  back
into  the  city,  which,  already  exhausted  by  their  slaughters,
they  despoiled  also  of  its  arms.  Suspecting  all  the  Athenians,
too,  of  disaffection  towards  them,  they  ordered  them  to  remove
out  of  the  city,  and  to  take  up  their  abode  among  the  ruins  of
the  walls  which  had  been  demolished ;  supporting  their  own
authority  with  foreign  soldiers.  Next  they  endeavoured  to
corrupt  Thrasybulus,  by  promising  him  a  share  in  the  govern-
ment ;  but,  not  succeeding,  they  sought  assistance  from  Lace-
dffimon,  on  the  arrival  of  which  they  took  the  field  again. In

*  These  cities  had  not  obeyed  the  edict  of  the  LacedsemoniaDs;  but
had  resolved  to  receive  the  exiles.

f  Lysias  St/raaucmus  orator.']  He  was  bom  at  Athens,  but  is  called
a  Syracusan,  because  he  was  the  son  of  a  native  of  Syracuse.  He  had
left  Athens  at  the  age  of  fifteen,  among  the  colonists  that  went  to
Thurii  in  Italy,  and  did  not  return  to  Athens  till  the  age  of  forty-seven,
after  the  defeat  of  the  Athenians  in  Sicily.


B.C.  402.] OVERTHROW  OP  THE  TYRANTS.  59

this  encounter  Critias  and  Hippolochus,  the  two  most- cruel  of
the  tyrants,  were  killed.

X.  The  others  being  defeated,  and  their  army,  of  which
the  greater  part  consisted  of  Athenians,  running  away,
Thrasyhulus  called  out  to  them  with  a  loud  voice,  asking,
"  Why  they  should  flee  from  him  in  the  midst  of  victory,
rather  than  join  him  as  the  assei*tor  of  their  common  liberty  ?''
adding,  that  "  they  should  reflect  that  his  army  was  composed
of  their  countrymen,  not  of  enemies  ;  that  he  had  not  armed
himself  to  take  any  thing  away  from  the  conquered,  but
to  restore  them  what  they  had  lost ;  and  that  he  was  making
war,  not  on  the  city,  but  on  the  thirty  tyrants."  He  then
reminded  them  of  their  ties  of  relationship,  their  laws,  their
common  religion,  and  their  long  service  as  fellow  soldiers  in  so
many  wars.  He  conjured  them,  that,  "if  they  themselves
could  submit  patiently  to  the  yoke,  they  should  yet  take  pity
on  their  exiled  countrymen  ;"  he  urged  them  "  to  restore  him
to  his  country,  and  to  accept  hberty  for  themselves."  By
these  exhortations  such  an  effect  was  produced,  that  when  the
army  came  back  into  the  city,  they  ordered  the  thirty  tyrants
to  retire  to  Eleusis,  appointing  ten  commissioners  to  govern
in  their  room ;  who,  however,  not  at  all  deterred  ;by  the  fate
of  the  former  tyrants,  entered  on  a  similar  career  of  cruelty.
During  the  course  of  these  proceedings,  news  arrived  at
LacedsBmon  that  war  had  broken  out  at  Athens,  and, king
Pausanias  was  sent  to  suppress  it,  who,  touched  with  com-
passion for  the  exiled  people,  restored  the  unhappy  citizens  to
their  country,  and  ordered  the  ten  tyrants  to  leave  the  city,
and  go  to  the  rest  at  Eleusis.  Peace  was  restored  by  these
means;  but,  after  an  interval  of  some  days,  the  tyrants,
enraged  at  the  recal  of  the  exiles  not  less  than  at  their  own
expulsion  (as  if  liberty  to  others  was  slavery  to  themselves),
suddenly  resumed  hostilities  against  Athens.  As  they  were
proceeding  however  to  a  conference,*  apparently  with  the
expectation  of  recovering  their  power,  they  were  seized  by  an
ambuscade,  and  oflered  as  sacrifices  to  peace.  The  people,
whom  they  had  obliged  to  leave  the  city,  were  recalled ;  and
the  state,  which  had  been  divided  into  several  members,  was

*  The  origiaal  stands  thus :  heUum  AthevUensibtu  mferwU  ;  ted  ad
coiUoqumnif  vd/uti  dommationem  recepturi,  progreniy  &c  Justin  seems
here  to  have  abridged  his  author  a  little  too  much.


ftO  JUSTIN.  [B.V.  CH.XI.

at  length  re-uuited  into  one  body.  And  that  no  dissension
might  arise  in  consequence  of  anything  that  had  gone  before,
the  citizens  were  all  bound  by  an  oadi  that  former  discords
should  be  forgotten.

Meanwhile  the  Thebans  and  Corinthians  sent  ambassadors
to  the  Lacedaemonians,  to  demand  a  share  of  the  spoil  acquired
by  their  common  exertions  in  war,  and  at  their  common  risk.
Their  demand  being  refused,  they  did  not  indeed  openly
resolve  on  war  witli  the  Lacedaemonians,  but  tacitly  conceived
such  resentment  towards  them,  that  it  might  be  seen  that  war
was  likely  to  arise.

XI.  About  the  same  time  died  Darius,  king  of  Persia,
leaving  two  sons,  Artaxerxes  and  Cyrus.  He  bequeathed  the
kingdom  to  Artaxerxes,  and  to  Cyrus  the  cities  over  which  he
had  been  satrap.  But  Cyrus  thought  the  will  of  his  father  an
injustice,  and  secretly  made  preparations  for  war  with  his
brother.  News  of  his  intentions  being  brought  to  Artaxerxes,
he  sent  for  him,  and,  when  he  pretended  innocence,  and
denied  all  thoughts  of  war,  he  bound  him  with  golden  fetters;*
and  would  have  put  him  to  death,  had  not  his  mother
interposed.  Cyrus,  in  consequence  of  her  intercession,  being
allowed  to  depart,  began  to  prepare  for  war,  no  longer  secretly,
but  publicly,  not  with  dissimulation,  but  with  an  open  avowal
of  it,  and  assembled  auxiliary  troops  from  all  quarters.  The
Lacedaemonians,  remembering  that  they  had  been  vigorously
aided  by  him  in  the  war  with  Athens,  and  as  if  in  ignorance
against  whom  hostilities  were  intended,  resolved  that
"  assistance  should  be  sent  to  Cyrus  whenever  his  necessities
should  require ; "  hoping  tlius  to  secure  favour  with  Cyrus,  and
a  plea  for  pardon  with  Artaxerxes  if  he  should  have  the
a.d vantage,  because  they  had  decreed  nothing  openly  against
him.  But  when  they  came  to  an  encounter,  fortune  throwing
the  brothers  together  in  the  field,  Artaxerxes  was  first  wounded
by  Cyrus,  but  being  rescued  from  danger  by  the  speed  of  his
horse,  Cyrus  was  overpowered  by  the  king's  battalion,  and
slain.  Thus  Artaxerxes  being  victorious,  got  possession  both
of  the  spoil  from  the  war  with  his  brother,  and  of  his  brother  s

*  That  proper  respect  might  be  paid  to  him  as  one  of  the  royal
family.  So  Darius,  when  seized  by  Bessus,  was  bound  with  golden
chains,  as  is  stated  by  Q.  Curtius,  v.  12,  and  by  Justin,  xi.  15. — Ber-

7iecceru8,


B.C.  398] THE  SPABTANS  AT  WAR  WITH  PERSU. 61

army.  In  this  battle  there  were  ten  thousand  Greeks  on  the
side  of  Cyrus,  who  had  the  superiority  in  the  wing  on  which
they  had  been  posted,  and,  after  the  death  of  Cyras,  could
neither  be  reduced  forcibly  by  the  vast  army  of  their  ad-
versaries, nor  captured  by  stratagem,  but,  returning  through
so  many  mid  and  barbarous  nations,  and  over  such  vast  tracts
of  land,  defended  themselves  by  their  valour  till  they  gained
the  borders  of  their  country.


BOOK  VI.


The  Lacedsemonians  aspire  to  conquer  Asia;  the  command  of
the  Persian  fleet  given  to  Oonon,  I. — AgesUaas  is  general  of
the  Lacedaemonians ;  acts  of  Conon,  II. — Battle  between  Conon
and  Pisander ;  the  Lacedsemonians  defeated,  III. — Agesilaus  sup-
ports the  declining  fortune  of  the  Lacedsemonians,  IV. — Iphicrates
and  Conon;  the  Athenians  repair  their  city,y. — Peace  proclaimed
by  the  king  of  Persia  throughout  Greece;  the  Lacedsemonians
break  it,  VI. — The  Thebans  attack  the  Lacedsemonians ;  the
battle  of  Mantinea,  VII. — Epaminondas,  VIIL — State  of  Greece
after  his  death,  IX.

The  more  the  Lacedaemonians  got,  the  more,' accordihg  to
the  nature  of  mankind,  they  coveted,  and,  not  satisfied  at
their  strength  being  doubled  by  the  accession  of  the  Athenian
power,  they  began  to  aspire  to  the  dominion  of  all  Asia.  But
the  greater  part  of  it  was  imder  the  government  of  the
Persians ;  and  .Dercyllidas,  being  chosen  general  to  conduct
the  war  against' them,  and  seeing  that  he  would  be  opposed  to
two  satraps  of  Artaxerxes,  Phamabazus  and  Tissaphernes,
supported  by  the  strength  of  powerful  nations,  resolved  to
make  peace  with  one  of  them.  As  Tissaphernes  seemed  the
fitter  of  the  two  for  his  purpose,  being  more  attentive  to
business,  and  better  furnished  with  troops  (having  with  him
those  of  the  late  prince  Cyrus),  he  was  invited  to  a  conference,
and  induced  to  lay  down  his  arms  on  certain  conditions.  This
transaction  Phamabazus  made  matter  of  accusation  to  their
common  sovereign,  acquainting  him  that  **  Tissaphernes  had
not  taken  arms  to  repel  the  Lacedsemonians  on  their  invasion
of  Asia,  but  had  maintained  them  at  the  king's  charge,  and
bargained  with  them  as  to  what  they  should  put  off  doing  in


62  JUSTIN.  [B.Vl.  CH.II.

the  war,  and  what  they  should  carry  into  execution,  as  if  every
loss  did  not  affect  the  interest  of  the  one  empire  in  general,"
adding  that  "  it  was  disgraceful  that  war  should  not  he  decided
by  the  sword,  but  bought  off,  and  that  the  enemy  should  be
induced  to  retire,  not  by  arms,  but  by  money."  When  by
such  charges  he  had  irritated  the  king  against  Tissaphemes,
he  advised  him  to  appoint  in  his  place,  as  commander  by  sea,
Conon  the  Athenian,  who,  having  left  his  country  on  account
of  his  ill  success,  was  living  in  exile  in  Cyprus  ;  "  for  though
the  power  of  the  Athenians,"  he  said,  "was  reduced,  their
experience  at  sea  was  still  left  them,  and  that,  were  a  choice
to  be  made  from  them  all,  no  one  could  be  preferred  to
Conon."  Phamabazus  was  accordingly  furnished  with  five
hundred  talents,  and  directed  to  set  Conon  over  the  fleet.

II.  When  this  arrangement  was  pubHcly  known,  the  Lace-
dsemonians,  through  their  ambassadors,  requested  aid  for  their
efforts  by  sea  from  Hercynio,*  king  of  Egypt,  by  whom  a
hundred  triremes,  and  six  hundred  thousand  modii  f  of  com,
were  despatched  to  them,  while  from  their  other  allies  a  great
number  of  forces  were  also  assembled.  But  for  such  an  army,
and  against  such  a  leader,  an  efficient  commander  was  want-
ing ;  and  when  the  auxiliaries  desired  Agesilaus,  then  king  of
the  Lacedeemonians,  for  their  general,  the  Lacedaemonians,  in
consequence  of  an  answer  from  the  oracle  at  Delphi,  were
long  in  doubt  whether  they  should  appoint  him  to  the  chief
command,  as  it  was  signified  to  them  that  "  there  would  be  an
end  of  their  power  when  the  kingly  authority  should  be
lame ;"  and  Agesilaus  was  lame  of  one  foot.  At  last  they  de-
cided that  "  it  was  better  for  the  king  to  halt  in  his  gait  than
for  the  kingdom  to  halt  in  its  power  ;"  and  when  they  after-
wards sent  Agesilaus,  with  a  large  army  into  Asia,  I  cannot
easily  tell  what  other  two  generals  were  ever  so  well  matched  ;
for  the  age,  valour,  conduct,  and  wisdom  of  both  were  nearly
equal,  as  was  also  the  fame  of  their  achievements;  and
fortune,  who  had  given  them  equal  qualifications,  had  kept
the  one  from  being  conquered  by  the  other.  Great  prepara-
tions for  war,  therefore,  were  made  by  both,  and  great  deeds

♦  Called  Psammitichus  by  Diodorus  Siculus,  xiv.  35. — Wetzel.

*t*  The  modius  was  not  quite  half  a  peck.  Its  exact  content  was
1  gall.  7.8576  pints.  See  Fragments  of  the  Hist,  of  SaUust;  Bohn's
Glass.  Library,  SaUust  p.  234.


B.a  393.]  PROCJKEDINGS  OP  CONON.  63

were  performed.  But  a  rnudnj  among  his  soldiers  arose  to
trouble  Conon,  in  consequence  of  the  king's  ofiGicers  making  it
a  practice  to  defraud  them  of  their  pay ;  and  they  demanded
their  arrears  the  more  obstinately,  as  they  anticipated  that
service  under  so  great  a  general  would  be  very  severe.
Conon,  having  long  importuned  the  king  by  letters  to  no
purpose,  went  at  last  to  him  in  person,  but  was  debarred  from
any  interview  or  conference  with  him,  because  he  would  not
do  him  homage*  after  the  manner  of  the  Persians.  He,
however^  treated  with  him  through  his  ministers,  and  com-
plained, that  *'  the  wars  of  the  richest  king  in  the  world
ended  in  nothing  through  want  of  pay ;  and  that  he  who  had
an  army  equal  to  that  of  the  enemy,  was  defeated  by  means
of  money  in  which  he  was  their  superior,  and  found  inferior
to  them  in  that  article  of  power  in  which  he  had  far  the  ad-
vantage of  them."  He  also  desired  that  one  paymaster  might
be  appointed  for  his  troops,  as  it  was  evidently  detrimental  to
commit  that  office  to  several.  Money  for  his  soldiers  was
then  given  him,  and  he  returned  to  the  fleet.  Nor  did  he
delay  to  enter  on  action;  he  executed  many  undertakings
with  resolution,  many  with  success ;  he  laid  waste  the  enemy's
country,  stormed  their  towns,  and  bore  down  everything
before  him  like  a  hurricane.  The  Lacedaemonians  were  so
alarmed  at  his  progress,  that  they  resolved  on  recalling  Agesi-
laus  t  from  Asia  to  the  support  of  his  countiy.

III.  In  the  meantime  Pisander,  who  had  been  left  governor
of  his  country  by  Agesikus  at  his  departure,  fitted  out  a
powerful  fleet  mih  the  utmost  exertion,  determining  to  try
the  fortune  of  war.  Conon,  too,  on  the  other  hand,  being
then  to  encounter  the  enemy's  army  for  the  first  time,  put  his
troops  in  order  with  the  greatest  care.  The  emulation
between  the  generals  in  the  contest  was  not  greater  than  that
between  the  soldiers.  Conon  himself,  in  his  character  of
leader,  did  not  so  much  regard  the  intei'est  of  the  Persians  as
the  honour  of  his  own  country  ;  and  as,  when  the  strength  of
the  Athenians  was  reduced,  he  had  occasioned  the  utter  loss

♦  Adora/re.]  See  C.  Nepos,  Life  of  Conon,  c.  9.

f  Justin  is  here  in  error ;  for  it  was  not  the  proceedings  of  Conon
in  Asia,  but  the  war  raised  by  the  Corinthians,  Athenians,  and  Argives
in  Eiirope,  that  caused  the  recal  of  Agesilaus,  as  indeed  Justin  himself
says,  c.  4,  med.—  WetzeL


64  JUSTIN.  [b.vi.  Cfl.iy.

of  their  power,  so  he  had  a  desire  to  he  accounted  its  restorer,
as  well  as  to  reinstate  himself  in  his  country  hy  a  victory
from  which  he  had  heen  exiled  through  heing  defeated ;  and
tliis  the  more  remarkahly  as  he  was  not  to  fight  with  the  aid
of  the  Athenians  themselves,  hut  with  that  of  a  foreign  state  ;
he  was  going  to  contend  at  the  risk  of  the  king,  hut  to
conquer  to  the  advantage  of  his  country,  acquiring  glory  hy
means  dissimilar  from  those  hy  which  the  former  generals  of
Athens  had  obtained  it,  for  they  had  defended  their  country
by  defeating  the  Persians,  but  he  would  re-establish  his  coun-
try by  making  the  Persians  victorious.  Pisander  too,  from  his
relationship  to  AgesUaus,*  was  also  an  emulator  of  his  virtues,
and  endeavoured  not  to  fall  short  of  his  exploits  and  the  bril-
liancy of  his  renown,  and  not  to  overthrow,  by  the  misconduct
of  a  moment,  a  power  which  had  been  gained  by  so  many  wars
through  so  many  ages.  The  anxiety  of  all  the  soldiers  and
sailors  was  similar,  being  not  so  much  concerned t  that  they"
might  not  lose  the  power  which  they  had  got,  as  that  the
Athenians  might  not  recover  their  former  eminence.  But  the
more  spirited  was  the  struggle,  the  more  honoiuable  was  the
victory. of  Conon.  The  Laced«monians  were  routed  and  put
to  flight;  the  garrison  of  the  enemy  was  withdrawn  from
Athens;  the  people  were  restored  to  their  rights,  and  their
bondage  was  at  an  end ;  and  several  cities  were  reduced  to
their  former  state  of  obedience.

IV.  To  the  Athenians  this  event  was  the  beginning  of  their
restoration  to  power ;  to  the  Lacedaemonians  it  was  the  ter-
mination of  their  authority ;  for,  as  if  they  had  lost  their  spirit
with  their  pre-eminence,  they  began  to  be  regarded  with  con-
tempt by  tiieir  neighbours.  The  first  people  that  made  war
upon  them,  with  the  aid  of  the  Athenians,  were  the  Thebans ;
a  state  which,  by  the  abilities  of  its  general,  Epaminondas,
was  raised  from  the  most  humble  condition  to  the  hope  of
governing  Greece.  A  battle  was  fought  between  the  two
powers  by  laud,  with  the  same  fortune  on  the  part  of  the

*  Pro  eonjtmctione  Agmlai.]  He  was  Agesilaus's  wife's  brother.  See
Xen.  Hell.  ui.  4,  29.

t  The  text  stands  ihm  :  Qii9S  major  iollicitudo  crucicibatj  non  tarn,  ne
ipH  qucBsitas  opes  amtterentf  gudm  ne  priatiaMU  Athenienaes  reciperent.
Some  alteration  is  necessary,  as  Bemeecerus  remarks,  unless,  as
Yorstius  improbably  supposes,  major  may  be  taken  for  magna.


B.a  303.] WAR  BETWEEN  THEBES  AND  SPABTA.  65

LacedaemoDians  as  they  had  experienced  against  Conon  hv
sea.  In  this  encounter  Lysander,  under  whose  conduct  the
Athenians  had  been  defeated  by  the  Lacedaemonians,  was  killed.
Pausanias  also,  the  other  general  of  the  LacedaBmonians,
went  into  exile  in  consequence  of  being  accused  of  treachery.

The  Thebans,  on  gaining  the  victory,  led  their  whole  force
against  Lacedadmon,  expecting  that  it  would  be  easy  to  reduce
the  city,  as  the  Spartans  were  deserted  by  all  their  allies.
The  Lacedaemonians,  dreading  the  event,  sent  for  their  king
Agesilaus  out  of  Asia,  where  he  was  performing  great  exploits,
to  defend  his  country ;  for  since  Lysander  was  slain,  they  had
no  confidence  in  any  other  general ;  but,  as  he  was  tardy  in
coming,  they  raised  an  army,  and  proceeded  to  meet  the
enemy.  Having  been  once  conquered,  however,  they  had
neither  spirit  nor  strength  to  meet  those  who  had  recently
yanquished  them.  They  were  accordingly  routed  in  the  very
first  onset  But  Agesilaus  came  up  just  when  the  forces  of
his  countrymen  were  overthrown ;  and,  having  renewed  the
contest,  he,  with  his  fresh  troops,  invigorated  by  long  service,
snatched  the  victory  from  the  enemy  without  difficulty,  but
was  himself  severely  wounded.

V.  The  Athenians,  receiving  intelligence  of  this  event,
and  fearing  that  if  the  Lacedaemonians  obtained  another  vic-
tory, they  should  be  reduced  to  their  former  state  of  bondage,
assembled  an  army,  and  ordered  that  it  should  be  conducted
to  the  aid  of  the  Boeotiems  by  Iphicrates^  a  young  man
only  twenty  years  of  age,  but  of  great  abilities.  The  conduct
of  this  youth  was  above  his  years,  and  greatly  to  be  admired ;
nor  had  the  Athenians  ever  before  him,  among  so  many  and
80  great  leaders,  a  captain  of  greater  promise,  or  of  talents
that  sooner  came  to  maturity ;  and  he  had  not  only  the  qua-
lifications of  a  general,  but  also  those  o^  an  orator.

Conon,  having  heard  of  the  return  of  Agesilaus,  came  also
himself  from  Asia  to  ravage  the  country  of  the  Lacedae-
monians ;  who,  while  the  terrors  of  war  raged  around  them,
were  shut  up  within  their  walls,  and  reduced  to  the  depths  of
despair.  After  wasting  the  enemy's  territories,  Conon  pro-
ceeded to  Athens,  where  he  was  received  with  great  joy  on
the  part  of  his  countrymen ;  but  he  felt  more  sorrow  at  the
state  of  his  native  city,  which  had  been  burnt  and  laid  in
ruins  by  the  Lacedaemonians,  than  joy  at  his  return  to  it  after

F


66  JUSHN.  [b.  VI.  CH.  vn.

80  long  on  absence.  He  accordingly  repaired  what  had  been
burnt,  and  rebuilt  what  had  been  demolished,  from  the  price
of  the  spoil  which  he  had  taken,  and .  with  the  help  of  the
Persian  troops.  Such  was  the  fate  of  Athens,  that  having  been
first  burnt  by  the  Persians,  it  was  restored  by  their  labour ;
and  having  been  afterwards  wasted  by  the  Lacedssmonians,  it
was  re-adorned  from  their  spoils;  and,  the  state  of  things
being  reversed,  it  had  now  for  allies  those  whom  it  then  had
for  enemies^  and  those  for  enemies  with  whom  it  had  been
joined  in  the  closest  bonds  of  alliance.

VI.  During  the  course  of  these  proceedings,  Artaxerxes,
king  of  the  Persians,  sent  deputies  into  Greece,  with  injunc-
tions, **  that  they  should  all  lay  down  their  arms,"  and  as-
surances ''  that  he  would  treat  as  enemies  those  who  should
act  otherwise."  He  restored  to  the  cities  their  liberty  and
all  that  belonged  to  them ;  a  course  which  he  did  not  adopt
from  concern  for  the  troubles  of  the  Greeks,  and  for  their
incessant  and  deadly  enmities  displayed  in  the  field,  but  from
unwillingness  that,  while  he  was  engaged  in  a  war  with  Egypt
(which  he  had  undertaken  because  the  Egyptians  had  sent  aid
to  the  Spartans  against  his  satraps),  his  troops  should  be
obliged  to  stay  in  Greece.  The  Greeks,  exhausted  with  so
much  fighting,  eagerly  obeyed  his  mandate.

This  year  was  not  only  remarkable  for  a  peace  being  sud-
denly made  throughout  Greece,  but  for  the  taking  of  the  city
of  Home  at  the  same  time  by  the  Gauls.

But  the  Lacedaemonians,  watching  an  opportunity  of  sur-
prising the  unguarded,  and  observing  that  the  Arcadians  were
absent  from  their  country,  stormed  one  of  their  fortresses,
and,  having  taken  possession  of  it,  placed  a  garrison  in  it.
The  Arcadmns  in  consequence,  arming  and  equipping  a  body
of  troops,  and  calling  the  Thebans  to  their  assistance,  de-
manded in  open  war  the  restitution  of  what  they  had  lost.  In
the  battle  which  followed,  Archidamus,  general  of  the  Lacedae-
monians, was  wounded,  and,  seeing  his  men  cut  down  and
apparently  defeated,  sent  a  herald  to  ask  the  bodies  of  the
slain  for  burial ;  this  being  a  sign  among  the  Greeks  that  the
victory  is  yielded.  The  Thebans,  satisfied  with  this  acknow-
ledgment, made  the  signal  for  giving  quarter.

VII.  After  the  lapse  of  a  few  days,  while  neither  side  was
offering  any  hostility,  and  while,  as  the  Lacedaemonians  were


B  C.  362]  DEATH  OF  BPAMINONDAS.  67

engaged  in  other  contentions  with  their  neighbours,  a  truce
was  observed  as  it  were  by  tacit  consent,  the  Thebans,  under
the  leadership  of  Epaminondas,  conceived  hopes  of  seizing  the
city  of  Sparta.  They  accordingly  proceeded  thither .  secretly,
in  the  early  part  of  the  night,  but  failed  to  take  the  inhabitants
by  surprise ;  for  the  old  men,  and  others  of  an  age  unfit  for  war,
observing  the  approach  of  the  enemy,  met  them  in  arms  at  the
very  entrance  of  the  gates ;  and  not  more  than  a  hundred  men,
enfeebled  with  years,  offered  battle  to  fifteen  thousand.  So
much  spirit  and  vigour  does  the  sight  of  our  country  and  homes
inspire;  and  so  much  more  confidence  is  aiforded  by  the
presence,  than  by  the  remembrance  of  them;  for  when  they
considered  where  and  for  what  they  took  their  stand,  they
resolved  either  to  conquer  or  die.  A  few  old  men,  in
consequence,  held  out  against  an  army,  which,  shortly  before,
the  flower  of  their  troops  were  unable  to  withstand.  In  this
battle  two  generals  of  the  enemy  were  killed,  when,  on
intelligence  being  received  that  Agesilaus  was  approaching,  the
Thebans  retreated.  But  there  was  no  long  cessation  of
hostihties ;  for  the  Spartan  youth,  incited  by  the  heroism  and
glorious  deeds  of  the  old  men,  could  not  be  prevented  from
promptly  engaging  in  the  field.  Just  as  victory  inclined  to  the
Thebans,  Epaminondas,  while  he  was  discharging  the  duty,
not  only  of  a  general,  but  of  a  gallant  soldier,  was  severely
wounded.  When  this  was  known,  fear  fell  upon  one  side  from
deep  concern,  and  amaze  on  the  other  from  excess  of  joy ;  and
both  parties,  as  if  by  mutual  agreement,  retired  from  the  field.
VIII.  A  few  days  after,  Epaminondas  died,  and  with  him
fell  the  spirit  of  the  Theban  state.  For  as,  when  you  break
off  the  point  of  a  dart,  you  take  from  the  rest  of  the  steel  the
power  of  wounding,  so  when  that  general  of  the  Thebans  (who
was,  as  it  were,  the  point  of  their  weapon*)  was  taken  off,  the
strength  of  their  government  was  so  debilitated,  that  they
seemed  not  so  much  to  have  lost  him  as  to  have  all  died  with
him.  They  neither  carried  on  any  memorable  war  before  he
became  their  leader,  nor  were  they  afterwards  remarkable  for
their  successes,  but  for  their  defeats ;  so  that  it  is  certain  that
with  him  the  glory  of  his  country  both  rose  and  fell.
Whether  he  was  more  estimable  as  a  man  or  a  general  is
undecided ;  for  he  never  sought  power  for  himself,  but  for  his

*  Vebtt  mucrone  tdi.]  Faber  and  Lemaire  think  these  words  spurious.

F  2


68  JUSTIN.  [b.vi.  ch.ix.

country,  and  was  so  far  from  coveting  money,  that  he  did  not
leave  sufficient  to  pay  for  his  funeral.  Nor  was  he  more
desirous  of  distinction  than  of  wealth ;  for  all  the  appointments
that  he  held  were  conferred  on  him  against  his  will,  and  he
filled  his  posts  in  such  a  manner  that  he  seemed  to  add  lustre
to  his  honours  rather  than  to  receive  it  from  them.  His
application  to  learning,  and  his  knowledge  of  philosophy,  were
such,  that  it  seemed  wonderful  how  a  man  hred  up  in
literature  could  have  so  excellent  a  knowledge  of  war.  The
manner  of  his  death,  too,  was  not  at  variance  with  his  course  of
life ;  for  when  he  was  carried  hack  half  dead  into  the  camp,
and  had  recovered  his  breath  and  voice,  he  asked  only  this
question  of  those  that  stood  about  him,  "whether  the  enemy
had  taken  his  shield  from  him  when  he  fell  ?"  Hearing  that  it
was  saved,  he  kissed  it,  when  it  was  brought  to  him,  as  the
sharer  of  his  toils  and  glory.  He  afterwards  inquired  which
side  had  gained  the  victory,  and  hearing  that  the  Thebans  had
got  it,  observed,  "It  is  well,"  and  so,  as  it  were  congratulating
his  country,  expired.

IX.  With  his  death  the  spirit  of  the  Athenians  also  declined.
For  after  he  whom  they  were  wont  to  emulate  was  gone,  they
sank  into  sloth  and  effeminacy,  and  spent  the  public  income,
not,  as  formerly,  upon  fleets  and  armies,  but  upon  festivals,  and
the  celebration  of  games ;  frequenting  the  theatres  for  the  sake
of  eminent  cu^tors  and  poets,  visiting  the  stage  oftener  than  the
camp,  and  praising  men  rather  for  being  good  versifiers  than
good  generals.*  It  was  then  that  the  public  revenues,  from
which  soldiers  and  sailors  used  to  be  maintained,  were
distributed  f  among  the  people  of  the  city.  By  which  means
it  came  to  pads,  that  during  the  absence  of  exertion  on  the
part  of  the  Greeks,  the  name  of  the  Macedonians,  previously
mean  and  obscure,  rose  into  notice ;  and  Philip,  who  had  been
kept  three  years  as  a  hostage  at  Thebes,  and  had  been  imbued
with  the  virtues  of  Epaminondas  and  Pelopidas,  imposed  the
power  of  Macedonia,  like  a  yoke  of  bondage,  upon  the  necks  of
Greece  and  Asia.

*  Veriijtcatoresqiie  melioreSf  quam  duces  laudcmtea.']  An  obscure  mode
of  expression ;  but  it  seems  to  be  equivalent  to  lemdanteB  magis  bonoM
ver^ficatorea  qu^m  hams  ducet.

t  This  was  not  first  done  at  the  period  of  which  Justin  is  speak-
ing, but  had  previously  been  done  by  Pericles,  to  whom  Aristophanes
Attributes  it  in  more  than  one  passage. — WetuL


69


BOOK  VII.  '

Ancient  state  of  Macedonia,  L— Family  of  Perdiccas,  II. — Persian
ambassadors  punished  at  the  court  of  Amyntas;  Bubares  the
Persian,  III.— Family  of  Amyntas,  IV. — ^Youth  and  education  of
Philip ;  commencement  of  his  reign,  V.  YI.

I.  Macedonia,  was  formerly  called  Emathia,  from  the  name
of  king  Emathion,  of  whose  prowess  the  earliest  proofs  are
extant  in  those  parts.  As  the  origin  of  this  kingdom  was  but
humble,  so  its  Umits  were  at  first  extremely  narrow.  The
inhabitants  were  .called  Pelasgi,*  the  country  Pseonia.  But
in  process  of  time,  when,  through  the  ability  of  their  princes
and  the  exertions  of  their  subjects,  they  had  conquered,  first
of  all,  the  neighbouring  tribes,  and  afterwards  other  nations
and  peoples,  their  dominions  extended  to  the  utmost  bounda-
ries of  the  east.t  In  the  region  of  Pseonia,  which  is  now
a  portion  of  Macedonia,  is  said  to  have  reigned  Pelegonus,J
the  fether  of  ^Asteropaeus,  whose  name  we  find,  in  the  Trojan
war,  among  the  most  distinguished  defenders  of  the  city.  On
the  other  side  a  king  named  Europus  held  the  sovereignty  in
a  district  called  Europa.§

But  Caranus,||  accompanied  by  a  great  multitude  of  Greeks,
having  been  directed  by  an  oracle  to  seek  a  settlement  in
Macedonia,  and  having  come  into  Emathia,  and  followed
a  flock  of  goats  that  were  fleeing  from  a  tempest,  pos-
sessed himself  of  the  city  of  Edessa,  before  the  inhabitants,
on  account  of  the  thickness  of  the  rain  and  mist,  were  aware
of  his  approach ;  and  being  reminded  of  the  oracle,  by  which
he  had  been  ordered  **  to  seek  a  kingdom  with  goats  for  his
guides,"  he  made  this  city  the  seat  of  his  government,  and

*  See  Herod,  i  56 ;  KuUer^s  Dorians,  voL  L  Append.  L ;  Dr.  Smith's
Classical  Diet.;  Mannert,  vol.  vii. ;  Barker^s  Lempriere.

t  Viz.  by  Alexander  the  Great.

t  Hom.  IL  xxi.  141.

§  Europa  is  a  part  of  Thrace  by  Mount  Hsemus,  but  has  nothing  to
do  with  this  passage,  in  which  Justin  is  speaking  only  of  Macedonia.
In  my  opinion  we  should  read  Europia,  which  is  a  portion  of  Mace-
donia, in  which  stood  the  town  of  Europus,  and  where  it  said  that
Europus,  the  son  of  Macedo,  reigned. — h,  Votsius,  Tanaquil  Faber
agrees  with  him.

.  II  He  came  from  Argos. See  Veil.  Pat.  i  6 ;  Diod.  Sic.  vii.  17,
p.  318,  ed.  Didot.


70  JUSTIN.  [B.Vn.  CH.  II,

afterwards  *  religiously  took  care,  whithersoever  he  led  his
troops,  to  keep  the  same  goats  hefore  his  standards,  that  he
might  have  those  animals  as  leaders  in  his  enterprises
which  he  had  had  as  guides  to  the  site  of  his  kingdom.
He  changed  the  name  of  the  city,  in  commemoration  of  his
good  fortune,  from  Edessa  to  JBgese,*  and  called  the  inhabitants
-^geatae.  Having  subsequently  expelled  Midas  t  (for  he  also
occupied  a  part  of  Macedonia),  and  cUiven  other  kings  from  their
territories,  he  established  himself,  as  sole  monarch,  in  the  place
of  them  all,  and  was  the  first  that,  by  uniting  tribes  of  different
people,  formed  Macedonia  as  it  were  into  one  body,  and  laid  a
solid  foundation  for  the  extension  of  his  growing  kingdom.

II.  After  him  reigned  Perdiccas,  whose  life  was  distin-
guished, and  the  circumstances  of  whose  death,  as  if  ordered
by  an  oracle,  were  worthy  of  record  ;  for  when  he  was  old  and
at  the  point  of  death,  he  made  known  to  his  son  Argseus  a
place  in  which  he  wished  to  be  buried,  and  directed  that  not
only  his  own  bones,  but  those  of  the  kings  that  should  succeed
him,  should  be  deposited  in  the  same  spot ;  signifying  that,
"as  long. as  the  relics  of  his  posterity  should  be  buried  there,
the  crown  would  remain  in  his  family;'*  and  the  people
believe,  in  consequence  of  this  superstitious  notion,  that  the
line  came  to  be  extinct  in  Alexander,  because  he  changed  the
place  of  sepulture.  Argseus,  having  governed  the  kingdom
with  moderation,  and  gained  the  love  of  his  subjects,  left  his
son  Philip  his  successor,  who,  beipg  carried  off  by  an  untimely
death,  made  uEropus,  then  quite  a  boy,  his  heir.

The  Macedonians  had  perpetual  contests  with  the  Thracians
and  Illyrians,  and,  being  hardened  by  their  arms,  as  it  were
by  daily  exercise,  they  struck  terror  into  their  neighbours  by  the
splendour  of  their  reputation  for  war.  The  Illyrians,  however,
despising  the  boyhood  of  a  king  under  age,  attacked  the  Mace-
donians, who,  being  worsted  in  the  field,  brought  out  their  king
with  them  in  his  cradle,  and,  placing  him  behind  the  front
lines,  renewed  the  fight  with  greater  vigour,  as  if  they  had
been  defeated  before,  because  the  fortune of  their prince

*  Sometimes  written  MgBd,  or  in  the  singular  ^gea  or  iSgsea,
from  alKt  a  goat.

f  Justin  speaks  otherwise  of  him,  xL  7.  Photius,  in  an  extract
from  Conon,  (n.  1 86,  p.  423)  says,  that  he  wasinstructed  by  Orpheus  on
Mount  Pieria,  and  thence  crossed  over  into  Mysia.


B.C.  883.]  MACBDOKIA— AMTNTAS.  71

Yfaa  not  with  them  in  the  battle,  and  would  now  certainly
conquer,  because,  from  this  superstitious  fancy,  they  had  con^
ceived  a  confidence  of  victory ;  while  compassion  for  the  infant,
also,  moved  them,  as,  if  they  were  overcome,  they  seemed  likely
to  transform  him  from  a  king  into  a  captive.  Engaging  in  battle,
therefore,  they  routed  the  lUyrians  with  great  slaughter,  and
showed  their  enemies,  that,  in  the  -former  encounter,  it  was
a  king,  and  not  valour,  that  was  wanting  to  the  Macedonians.

To  j^ropus  succeeded  Amyntas,  a  prince  eminently  distin-
guished, both  for  his  own  personal  valour,  and  for  the  excellent
abilities  of  his  son  Alexander,  who  had  from  nature  such
remarkable  talents  of  every  kind,*  that  he  contended  for  the
prize  in  various  species  of  exercises  at  the  Olympic  games.

III.  About  this  time  Darius  king  of  Persia,  having  been
forced  to  quit  Scythia  in  dishonourable  flight,  but  not  wishing
to  be  thought  every  where  contemptible  from  losses  in  war,
despatched  Megabazus,  with  a  portion  of  his  army,  to  subdue
Thrace,  and  other  kingdoms  in  those  parts;  to  which
Macedonia,  he  thought,  would  fall  as  an  unimportant  addition.
Megabazus,  speedily  executing  the  king's  orders,  and  sending
deputies  to  Amyntas  king  of  Macedonia,  demanded  that
hostages  should  be  given  him  as  a  pledge  of  future  peace.
The  deputies,  being  liberally  entertained,  asked  Amyntas,  as
their  intoxication  increased  in  the  progress  of  a  banquet,
*'to  add  to  the  magnificence  of  his  board  the  privileges  of
friendship,  by  sending  for  his  and  his  sons'  wives  to  the
feast;  a  practice  which  is  deemed,  among  the  Persians,  a
pledge  and  bond  of  hospitality."  The  women  having  entered,
and  the  Persians  laying  hands  upon  them  too  freely,  Alexander,
the  son  of  Amyntas,  begged  his  father,  from  regard  to  his  age
and  dignity,  to  leave  the  banqueting-room,  engaging  that  he
himself  would  moderate  the  frolicsome  spirit  of  their  guests,
Amyntas  having  withdrawn,  Alexander  called  the  women
from  the  apartment  for  a  while,  under  pretext  of  having  them
dressed  in  better  style,  and  bringing  them  back  with  greater
attractions.  But  in  their  place  he  put  yoimg  men,  clad  in
the  habit  of  matrons,  and  ordered  them  to  chastise  the
insolence  of  the  deputies  with  swords  which  they  were  to
carry  under  their  garments.  All  of  them  being  thus  put  to
dea^,  Megabazus,  not  knowing  what  had  happened,  but  finding

*  TaiUa  otn/nivm  virtutum  omamenta.


72  JUSTIN.  [B.vn.  CH.V.

that  the  deputies  did  not  return,  sent  Bubares  to  Macedonia
with  a  detachment  of  his  forces,  as  to  an  easy  and  trifling
contest ;  disdaining  to  go  himself,  that  he  might  not  be  dis-
graced by  an  encounter  with  so  despicable  a  people.  But
Bubares,  before  he  came  to  an  engagement,  fell  in  love  with
the  daughter  of  Amyntas,  when,  breaking  off  hostilities,  he
celebrated  a  marriage,. and,  all  thoughts  of  war  being  aban-
doned, entered  into  bonds  of  affinity  with  the  king.

IV.  Soon  after  the  departure  of  Bubares  from  Macedonia,
king  Amyntas  died ;  but  his  relationship  with  Bubares  not  only
secured  to  his  son  and  successor,  Alexander,  peace  during  the
reign  of  Darius,  but  also  such  favour  with  Xerxes,  that,  when
that  monarch  overspread  Greece  like  a  tempest,  he  eonferred
upon  him  the  sovereignty  of  all  the  country  between  the
mountains  of  Oljrmpus  and  Hsemus.  But  Alexander  enlarged
his  dominions  not  less  by  his  own  valour  than  through  the
munificence  of  the  Persians.  The  throne  afterwards  descended,
by  the  order  of  succession,  to  Amyntas,  the  son  of  his  brother
Menelaus.  This  prince  was  remarkable  for  his  application  to
business,  and  was  endowed  with  all  the  accomplishments  of  a
great  general.  By  his  wife  Eurydice  he  had  three  sons,  Alex-
ander, Perdiccas,  and  Philip,  the  father  of  Alexander  the  Great,
and  one  daughter,  named  Eurynoe;  he  had  also  by  Gygsea
Archelaus,  Andseus,  and  Menelaus.  Subsequently  he  had  for-
midable contests  with  the  lUyrians  and  Olynthians.  He  would
have  been  cut  off  by  a  plot  of  his  wife  Eurydice,  who,  having
engaged  to  marry  her  son-in-law,  had  undertaken  to  kill  her
husband,  and  to  put  the  government  into  the  hands  of  her
paramour,  had  not  her  daughter  betrayed  the  intrigue  and
atrocious  intentions  of  her  mother.  Having  escaped  so  many
dangers,  he  died  at  an  advanced  age,  leaving  the  throne  to
Alexander,  the  eldest  of  his  sons.

V.  Alexander,  at  the  very  beginning  of  his  reign,  purchased
peace  from  the  Illyrians  with  a  sum  of  money,  giving  his
brother  Philip  to  them  as  a  hostage.  Some  time  after,  too,
he  made  peace  with  the  Thebans  by  giving  the  same  hostage ;
a  circumstance  which  afforded  Philip  fine  opportunities  of
improving  his  extraordinary  abilities ;  for,  being  kept  as  a
hostage  at  Thebes  three  years,  he  received  the  first  rudiments
of  education  *  in  a  city  distinguished  for  strictness  of  disci-

*  Prima  ptteritice  rudimenta  depoeuit.] He  went  through  of  (expe-


B.C.  369.]  PHILIP.  78

pline,  and  in  the  house  of  Epaminondas,  an  eminent  philoso-
pher, as  well  as  commander.  Not  long  afterwards  Alexander
fell  hy  a  plot  of  his  mother  Eurydice,  whom  Amyntas,  when
she  was  convicted  of  a  conspiracy  against  him,  had  spared  for
the  sake  of  their  children,  little  imagining  that  she  would  one
day  he  the  destroyer  of  them.  Perdiccas/  also,  the  brother  of
Alexander,  was  taken  off  by  similar  treachery.  Horrible,
indeed,  was  it,  that  children  shoald  have  been  deprived  of  life
by  a  mother,  to  gratify  her  lust,  whom  a  regard  for  those  very
children  had  saved  from  the  punishment  of  her  crimes.  The
murder  of  Perdiccas  seemed  the  more  atrocious  from  the  cir-
cumstance that  not  even  the  prayers  of  his  little  son  could
procure  him  pity  from  his  mother.  Philip,  for  a  long  time,
acted,  not  as  king,  but  as  guardian  to  this  infant ;  but,  when
dangerous  wars  threatened,  and  it  was  too  long  to  wait  for  the
co-operation  of  a  prince  who  was  yet  a  child,  he  was  forced  by
the  people  to  take  the  government  upon  himself.

YI.  When  he  •  took  possession  of  the  throne,  great  hopes
were  formed  of  him  by  all,  both  on  account  of  his  abilities,
which  promised  that  he  would  prove  a  great  man,  and  on
account  of  certain  old  oracles  respecting  Macedonia,^  which
had  foretold  that  "  when  one  of  the  sons  of  Amyntas  should
be  king,  the  state  of  the  country  would  be  extremely  flourish-
ing: "  to  fulfil  which  expectations  the  wickedness  of  his  mother
had  left  only  him.  At  the  commencement  of  his  reign,  when,
on  the  one  hand,  the  murder  of  his  brother,  so  atrociously  put
to  death,  and  the  dread  of  treachery ;  on  the  other,  a  multitude
of  enemies,  and  the  poverty  of  his  kingdom,  exhausted  by  a
series  of  wars,  bore  hard  upon  the  young  king's  immature  age,
thinking  it  proper  to  make  distinct  arrangements  as  to  the
wars,  which,  as  if  by  a  common  conspiracy  to  crush  Macedonia,
rose  around  him  from  different  nations  and  several  quarters  at
the  same  time,  to  all  of  which  he  could  not  at  once  make
resistance,  he  put  an  end  to  some  by  offers  of  peace,  and
bought  off  others,  but  attacked  such  of  his  enemies  as  seemed
easiest  to  be  subdued,  that,  by  a  victory  over  them,  he  might
confirm  the  wavering  minds  of  his  soldiers,  and  alter  any
feelings  of  contempt  with  which  his  adversaries  might  regard

rienced,  got  over)  the  earliest  iDstruction  of  his  boyhood."  Comp.
ix.  1.  tirocinii  rudimenta  deponeret,  Ponere  is  used  in  the  same  sense,
Liv.  xzxL  II.


74  JUSTIN.  [B.Vll.  CH.VI.

him.  His  first  conflict  was  with  the  Athenians,*  whom  he
surprised  by  a  stratagem,  but,  though  he  might  have  put  them
all  to  the  sword,  he  yet,  from  dread  of  a  more  formidable  war,
allowed  them  to  depart  uninjured  and  without  ransom.  After-
wards, leading  his  army  against  the  lUyrians,  he  killed  several
thousand  of  his  enemies,  and  took  the  fiainous  city  of  Larissa.
He  then  fell  suddenly  on  Thessaly  (when  it  apprehended  any
thing  rather  than  war),  not  from  desire  of  spoil,  but  because
he  wished  to  add  the  strength  of  the  Thessalian  cavalry  to  his
own  troops;  and  he  thus  incorporated  a  force  of  horse  and
foot  in  one  invincible  army.  His  undertakings  having  been
thus  far  successful,  he  married  Olympias,  daughter  of  Neop*
tolemus,  afterwards  king  of  the  Molossians,  her  cousin -german
Ajrrybas,  then  king  of  that  nation,  who  had  brought  up  the
young  princess,  and  had  married  her  sister  Troas,  promoting
the  union ;  a  proceeding  which  proved  the  cause  of  his  ruin^
and  the  beginning  of  all  the  evils  that  afterwards  befel  him ;
for  while  he  hoped  to  strengthen  his  kingdom  by  this  affinity
with  Philip,  he  was  by  that  monarch  deprived  of  his  crown,
and  spent  his  old  age  in  exile.

After  these  proceedings,  Philip,  no  longer  satisfied  with
acting  on  the  defensive,  boldly  attacked  even  those  who  gave
him  no  molestation.  While  he  was  besieging  Methone,  an
arrow,  shot  from  the  walls  at  him  as  he  was  passing  by,  struck
out  his  right  eye ;  but  by  this  wound  he  was  neither  rendered
less  active  in  the  siege,  nor  more  resentful  towards  the  enemy ;
so  that,  some  days  after,  he  granted  them  peace  on  their  appli-
cation for  it,  and  was  not  only  not  severe,  but  even  merciful,
to  the  conquered.

"^  Who  had  sent  a  fleet  to  Macedonia  under  Manteias,  with  the
intention  of  placing  on  the  throne  Argseus  the  rival  of  Philip.  Diod.
Sic.  xvi.  2


75


BOOK  VIII.

War  between  the  Thebans  and  Phocians,  I. — The  Thebans  bring
Philip  against  the  Phocians ;  the  Athenians  take  precautions
for  their  defence,  II. — Philip  harasses  Qre^ce,  takes  possession  of
Gappadocia,  destroys  Olynthus ;  his  acts  in  Thrace,  III. — He
deceives  the  Athenians,  Boeotians,  Thessalians,  and  Phocians,  lY.
— Oppresses  the  Phocians  and  other  Greeks,  V. — His  machinations
to  strengthen  his  power,  VL

I.  The  states  of  Greece,  while  each  sought  to  gain  the
sovereignty  of  the  country  for  itself,  lost  it  as  a  body.
Striving  intemperately  to  ruin  one  another,  they  did  not  per-
ceive, till  they  were  oppressed  by  another  power,  that  what
each  lost  was  a  common  loss  to  all ;  for  Philip,  king  of  Mace-
donia, looking,  as  from  a  watch-tower,  for  an  opportunity  to
attack  their  liberties,  and  fomenting  their  contentions  by
assisting  the  weaker,  obliged  victors  and  vanquished  alike  to
submit  to  his  royal  yoke.  The  Thebans  were  the  cause  and
origin  of  this  calamity,  who,  obtaining  power,  and  having  no
steadiness  of  mind  to  bear  prosperity,  insolently  accused  the
LacedsBmonians  and  Phocians,  when  they  had  conquered  them
in  the  field,  before  the  common  council  of  Greece,*  as  if  they
had  not  been  sufficiently  punished  by  the  slaughters  and
depredations  that  they  had  suJSered.  It  was  laid  to  tbe  charge
of  the  Lacedaemonians,  that  th^  had  seized  the  citadel  of
Thebes  during  a  time  of  truce,  and  to  that  of  the  Phocians,
that  they  had  laid  waste  Boeotia,  as  if  the  Thebans  themselves,
after  their  conduct  in  the  field,  had  left  themselves  any  ground
for  resorting  to  law.  But  as  the  cause  was  conducted  accord-
ing to  the  will  of  the  more  powerful,  the  Phocians  were  sen-
tenced to  pay  such  a  fine  as  it  was  impossible  for  them  to
ndse,  and  in  consequence,  despoiled  of  their  lands,  children,
and  wives,  and  reduced  to  desperation,  they  seized,  under  the
leadership  of  one  Philomelus,  on  the  temple  of  Apollo  at
Delphi,  as  if  they  were  enraged  at  the  god.  Being  hence
enriched  with  gold  and  treasure,  and  hiring  mercenary  troops,
they  made  war  upon  the  Thebans.  This  proceeding  of  the
Phocians,  though  all  expressed  detestation  at  the  sacrilege,
brought  more  odium  upon  the  Thebans,  by  whom  they  had
been  reduced  to  such  necessity,  than  on  the  Phocians  them-

*  The  Amphictyonic  connoiL


76  JUSTIN.  [B.VIII.  CH.1I.

selves ;  and  aid  was  in  consequence  despatched  to  them  both
bj  the  Athenians  and  Lacedaemonians.  In  the  first  engage-
ment, Philomelus  drove  the  Thebans  from  their  camp ;  but
in  the  next  he  was  killed,  fighting  in  front  among  the  thickest
of  the  enemy,  and  paid  the  penalty  of  his  sacrilege  by  the
effusion  of  his  impious  blood.  Onomarchus  was  made  general
in  his  stead.

II.  To  oppose  Onomarchus,  the  Thebans  and  Thessalians
chose  as  general,  not  one  of  their  own  people,  lest  they  should
not  be  able  to  endure  his  rule  if  he  should  conquer,  but
Philip,  king  of  Macedonia,  voluntarily  submitting  to  that  power
from  a  foreigner  which  they  dreaded  in  the  hands  of  their  own
countrymen.  Philip,  as  if  he  were  the  avenger  of  the  sacri-
lege, not  the  defender  of  the  Thebans,  ordered  all  his  soldiers
to  assume  crowns  of  laurel,  and  proceeded  to  battle  as  if  under
the  leadership  of  the  god.  The  Phociaus,  seeing  these  en-
signs of  the  deity,  and  frighted  with  the  consciousness  of
g^lt,  threw  down  their  arms  and  fled,  receiving  punishment
for  their  violation  of  religion  by  the  bloodshed  and  slaughter
that  they  suffered.  This  affair  brought  incredibly  great
glory  to  Philip  in  the  opinion  of  all  people,  who  called  him
'*  the  avenger  of  the  god,  and  the  defender  of  religion,"  and
said  that  "  he  alone  had  arisen  to  require  satisfaction  for  what
ought  to  hd.ve  been  punished  by  the  combined  force  of  the
world,  and  was  consequently  worthy  to  be  ranked  next  to  the
gods,  as  by  him  the  majesty  of  the  gods  had  been  vindicated."

The  Athenians,  hearing  the  result  of  the  conflict,  and
fearing  that  Philip  would  march  into  Greece,  took  possession
of  the  straits  of  Thermopylae,  as  they  had  done  on  the  invasion
of  the  Persians,  but  by  no  means  with  like  spirit,  or  in  a
similar  cause  ;  for  tlien  they  fought  in  behalf  of  the  liberty  of
Greece,  now,  in  behalf  of  public  sacrilege;*  then  to  defend  the
temples  of  the  gods  from  the  ravages  of  an  enemy,  now,  to
defend  the  plunderers  of  temples  against  the  avengers  of  their
guilt,  acting  as  advocates  of  a  crime  of  which  it  was  dishonour-
able to  them  that  others  should  have  been  the  punishers,  and
utterly  unmindful  that,  in  their  dangers,  they  had  often  had
recourse  to  this  deity  as  a  counsellor;  that,  under  his  guidance,

'  Pro  sacrUegio  pyhUeo."]  This  is  not  just.  The  Athenians  did  not
fight  in  defence  of  sacrilege,  but  merely  look  the  side  of  the  Phocians
to  stop  Philip's  progress  into  Greece.


B.C.  364.]  PHILIPS  CONQUESTS.  77

they  had  entered  on  sa  many  wars  with  success,  had  founded
80  many  cities  auspiciously,  and  had  acquired  so  extensive  a
dominion  by  sea  and  land  :  and  that  they  had  never  done  any
thing,  either  of  a  public  or  private  nature,  without  the  sanction
of  his  authority.  Strange  that  a  people  of  such  ability,  im-
proved by  every  kind  of  learning,  and  formed  by  the  most
excellent  laws  and  institutions,  should  have  brought  such  guilt
upon  themselves  as  to  leave  nothing  with  which  they  could
£^terwards  justly  upbraid  barbarians.

III.  Nor  did  Philip  distinguish  himself  by  more  honourable
conduct  towards  his  allies ;  for,  as  if  he  was  afraid  of  being
surpassed  by  his  opponents  in  the  guilt  of  sacrilege,  he  seized
and  plundered,  like  an  enemy,  cities  of  which  he  had  just
before  been  captain,  which  had  fought  under  his  auspices,  and
which  had  congratulated  him  and  themselves  on  their  victories ;
he  sold  the  wives  and  children  of  the  inhabitants  for  slaves ;
he  spared  neither  the  temples  of  the  gods,  nor  other  sacred  .
structures,  nor  the  tutelar  gods,  public  or  private,  before
whom  he  had  recently  presented  himself  as  a  guest ;  so  that
he  seemed  not  so  much  to  avenge  sacrilege  as  to  seek  a  license
for  committing  it.

In  the  next  place,  as  if  he  had  done  every  thing  well,  he
crossed  over  into  Chalcidice,*  where,  conducting  his  wars  with
equal  perfidy ,t  and  treacherously  capturing  or  killing  the
neighbouring  princes,  he  united  the  whole  of  the  province  to
the  kingdom  of  Macedonia.  Afterwards,  to  throw  a  veil
over  his  character  for  dishonesty,  for  which  he  was  now
deemed  remarkable  above  other  men,  he  sent  persons  through
the  kingdoms  and  the  richest  of  the  cities,  to  spread  a  report
that  king  Philip  was  ready  to  contract,  at  a  vast  sum,  for  the
re-building  of  the  walls,  temples,  and  sacred  edifices,  in  the
several  towns,  and  to  invite  contractors  by  public  criers ;  but
when  those  who  were  willing  to  undertake  these  works  went  to
Macedonia,  they  found  themselves  put  off  with  various  excuses,
and,  from  dread  of  the  king's  power,  returned  quietly  to  their

*  Wetzel  retains  Ca/ppadociamt  the  old  reading,  in  his  text,  though
he  oondemns  it  in  his  note,  observing  that  it  is  well  known  Philip
never  went  to  Cappadocia.  Qronovius  suggested  Chcdcidicef  and  Tana^
quiL  Faber  approved  it.

f  Pari  perjidid.]  Justin,  or  Trogus,  represents  Philip's  character,
through  all  this  account  of  his  wars,  in  far  too  unfavourable  a  light.


78'  JUSTIN.  [B.Vni.  CH.IV.

homes.  Soon  after  he  fell  upon  the  Olynthians,  because,  after
the  death  of  one  of  his  brothers,  they  had,  from  pity,  afforded
a  refuge  to  two  others,  whom,  being  the  sons  of  his  step-mother,
Philip  would  gladly  have  cut  off,  as  pretenders  to  a  share  in
the  throne.  For  this  reason  he  destroyed  an  ancient  and  noble
city,  consigning  his  brothers  to  the  death  long  before  destined
for  them,  and  delighting  himself  at  the  same  time  with  a  vast
quantity  of  booty,  and  the  gratification  of  his  fratricidal
inclinations.  Next,  as  if  every  thing  that  he  meditated  was
lawful  for  him  to  do,  he  seized  upon  the  gold  mines  in  Thes-
saly,  and  the  silver  ones  in  Thrace,  and,  to  leave  no  law  or
right  unviolated,  proceeded  to  engage  in  piracy.  While
such  was  his  conduct,  it  happened  that  two  brothers,  princes
of  Thrace,  chose  him  as  arbitrator  in  their  disputes,  not,  indeed,
from  respect  for  his  justice,  but  because  each  dreaded  that  he
would  unite  his  strength  to  that  of  the  other.  Philip,  in
accordance  with  his  practice  and  disposition,  came  unexpectedly
upon  the  brothers  with  an  army  in  full  array,  not  apparently
to  try  a  cause,  but  to  fight  a  battle,  and  spoiled  them  both  of
their  dominions,  not  like  a  judge,  but  with  the  perfidy  and
baseness  of  a  robber.

IV.  During  the  course  of  these  transactions,  ambassadors
came  to  him  from  the  Athenians  to  ask  for  peace.  Having
listened  to  their  request,  he  despatched  ambassadors  to  Athens
with  terms,  and  a  peace  was  concluded  there  to  the  advan-
tage of  both  parties.  Embassies  came  to  him  also  from  other
states  of  Greece,  not  from  inclination  for  peace,  but  for  fear  of
war ;  for  the  Thessalians  and  Boeotians,  with  reviving  wrath,
entreated  that  he  would  prove  himself  the  leader  of  Greece,  as
he  had  professed  to  be,  against  the  Phocians  ;  such  being  the
hatred  with  which  they  were  inflamed  towards  that  people,
that  they  chose  rather  to  perish  themselves,  than  not  to
destroy  them,  and  to  submit  to  the  known  cruelty  of  Philip,
rather  than  spare  their  enemies.  On  the  other  hand,  ambas-
sadors from  the  Phocians  (the  Lacedeemonians  and  Athenians
joining  with  them)  endeavoured  to  avert  the  war,  forbearance
from  which  they  had  thrice  before  purchased  from  Philip.  .  It
was  a  shameful  and  miserable  sight,  to  behold  Greece,  even
then  the  most  distinguished  country  in  the  world  for  power
and  dignity,  a  country  that  had  constantly  been  the  conqueror
of  kings  and  nations,  and  was  still  mistress  of  many  cities,


B.C.  345. "I  PHILIP  OPPRESSES  PHOCIS.  79

waiting  at  a  foreign  court  to  ask  or  deprecate  war ;  that  the
champions  of  the  world  should  place  all  their  hopes  on  assist-
ance from  another,  and  should  be  reduced,  by  their  discords
and  civil  feuds,  to  such  a  condition  as  to  flatter  a  power  which
had  lately  been  a  humble  portion  of  their  dependencies ;  and
that  the  Thebans  and  Lacedaemonians  should  especially  do
this,  who  were  formerly  rivals  for  sovereignty,  but  now  for  the
favour  of  a  sovereign.  Philip,  to  show  his  importance,
assumed  an  air  of  disdain  for  these  great  cities,  and  delibe-
rated to  which  of  the  two  he  should  vouchsafe  his  favour.
Having  heard  both  embassies  privately,  he  promised  to  the
one  security  from  war,  binding  them  by  an  oath  to  reveal  his
answer  to  nobody ;  to  the  other  he  engaged  himself  to.  come  and
bring  them  assistance.  He  charged  them  both  neither  to  pre-
pare for  war,  nor  to  fear  it.  Different  replies  being  thus  given
to  each,  he  seized,  while  they  were  all  free  from  apprehension,
on  the  pass  of  ThermopylcB.

V.  The  Phocians  in  consequence,  finding  themselves  over-
reached by  the  cunning  of  Philip,  were  the  first,  in  great
trepidation,  to  take  arms.  But  there  was  no  time  to  make  due
preparation  for  war,  or  to  collect  auxiliaries,  and  Philip,  unless
a  surrender  should  be  made,  threatened  their  destruction.
Overcome,  accordingly,  by  necessity,  they  submitted,  stipulat-
ing only  for  their  lives.  But  this  stipulation  was  just  as  fiEuth-
fully  observed  by  Philip  as  his  promises  had  been  respecting
the  war  which  they  had  deprecated.  They  were  every  where
pot  to  the  sword,  or  made  prisoners ;  children  were  not  left  to
their  parents,  nor  wives  to  their  husbands,  nor  the  statues  of
the  gods  in  the  temples.  The  sole  comfort  of  the  wretched
people  was,  that  as  Philip  had  defrauded  his  allies  of  their
share  of  the  spoil,  they  saw  none  of  their  property  in  the  hands
of  their  enemies.

On  his  return  to  his  kingdom,  ss  shepherds  drive  their
flocks  sometimes  into  winter,  sometimes  into  summer  pastiu*es,
80  he  transplanted  people  and  cities  hither  and  thither,  accord-
ing to  his  caprice,  as  places  appeared  to  him  proper  to  be
peopled  or  left  desolate.  The  aspect  of  things  was  every  where
wretched,  like  that  of  a  country  ravaged  by  an  enemy.  There
was  not,  indeed,  that  terror  of  a  foe,  or  hurrying  of  troops
throi:^h  the  cities,  or  seizure  of  property  and  prisoners,  which
are  seen  during  a  hostile  invasion;  but  there  prevailed  a  sorrow


80  JUSTIN.  [B.VUI.  CH.VI.

and  sadness  not  expressed  in  words,  the  people  fearing  that
even  their  very  tears  would  be  thought  signs  of  discontent.
Their  grief  was  augmented  by  the  very  concealment  of  it,  sink-
ing the  deeper  the  less  they  were  permitted  to  utter  it.  At  one
time  they  contemplated  the  sepulchres  of  their  ancestors,  at
another  their  old  household  gods,  at  another  the  homes
in  which  they  had  been  bom,  and  in  which  they  had  had  fami-
lies ;  lamenting  sometimes  their  own  fate,  that  they  had  lived
to  tJiat  day,  and  sometimes  that  of  their  children,  that  they
were  not  bom  after  it.

VI.  Some  people  he  planted  upon  the  frontiers  of  his  king-
dom to  oppose  his  enemies;  others  he  settled  at  the  extremities
of  it.  Some,  whom  he  had  taken  prisoners  in  war,  he  distri-
buted among  certain  cities  to  fill  up  the  number  of  inhabitants ;
and  thus,  out  of  various  tribes  and  nations,  he  formed  one
kingdom  and  people.  When  he  had  settled  and  put  in  order
the  afi^rs  of  Macedonia,  he  reduced  the  Dardanians  and  others
of  his  neighbours,  who  were  overreached  by  his  treacherous  deal-
ings. Nor  did  he  keep  his  hands  even  from  his  own  relations;
for  he  resolved  on  expelling  Arrybas,  king  of  Epirus,  who  was
nearly  related  to  his  wife  Olympian,  out  of  his  kingdom ;  and
he  invited  Alexander,  a  step-son  of  Arrybas,  and  brother  of  his
wife  Olympias  (a  youth  of  remarkable  beauty),  into  Macedonia,
in  his  sister's  name,  and  engaged  him,  after  earnestly  tempting
him  with  hopes  of  his  father's  throne,  and  pretending  violent
love  for  him,  in  a  criminal  intercourse,  thinking  to  find  greater
submission  from  him,  whether  through  shame  on  account  of  his
guilt,  or  through  obligation  for  a  kingdom  conferred  upon  him.
When  he  was  twenty  years  of  age,  accordingly,  he  took  the
kingdom  from  Arrybas,  and  gave  it  to  the  youth,  acting  a  base
part  towards  both,  for  he  disregarded  the  claims  of  consan-
guinity in  him  from  whom  he  took  the  kingdom,  and  cormpted
him  to  whom  he  gave  it  before  he  made  him  a  king.


81


BOOK  IX.

Philip  besieges  Byzantium,  I. — ^His  transactions  with  the  Scythi-
ans ;  he  defeats  them,  II. — ^Robbed  of  spoil  by  the  Triballi ;
Defeats  the  Thebans  and  Athenians,  IIL — His  treatment  of  them,
lY. — Settles  the  affiiirs  of  Greece,  in  order  to  an  invasion  of
Persia,  Y.— Is  killed  by  Pausanias,  with  the  knowledge,  as  is
supposed,  of  Olympias  and  Alexander,  YL  YIL — His  character,

Yin.

I.  When  Philip  had  once  come  into  Greece,  allured
by  the  plunder  of  a  few  cities,  and  had  formed  an  opinion,
from  the  spoil  of  such  towns  as  were  of  less  note,  how
great  must  be  the  riches  of  all  its  cities  put  together,  he
resolved  to  make  war  upon  the  whole  of  Greece.  Thinking
that  it  would  greatly  conduce  to  the  promotion  of  his  design,  if
he  could  get  possession  of  Byzantium,  a  noble  city  and  sea-
port, which  would  be  a  station  for  his  forces  by  land  and  sea,
he  proceeded,  as  it  shut  its  gates  against  him,  to  lay  close  siege
to  it.  This  city  had  been  founded  by  Pausanias,  king  of
Sparta,  and  held  by  him  for  seven  years,  but  afterwards,  as
the  fortune  of  war  varied,  it  was  regarded  as  at  one  time
belonging  to  the  Athenians,  and  at  another  to  the
Lacedsemonians ;  and  this  uncertainty  of  possession  was  the
cause  that,  while  neither  party  supported  it  as  its  own,  it
maintained  its  liberty  with  the  greater  determination.  Philip,
exhausted  by  the  length  of  the  siege,  had  recourse  to  piracy
for  a  supply  of  money,  and  having  captured  a  hundred  and
seventy  ships,  and  sold  off  the  cargoes,  he  was  enabled  for  a
while  to  relieve  his  craving  wants.  But  that  ^o  great  an  army
might  not  be  wasted  in  the  siege  of  a  single  city,  he  marched
away  with  his  best  troops,  and  stormed  some  towns  of  the
Chersonese.  He  also  sent  for  his  son  Alexander,  who  was  then
eighteen  years  of  age,  to  join  him,  and  learn  the  rudiments  of
war  in  the  camp  of  his  father.  He  made  an  expedition,  too,
into  Scythia,  to  get  plunder,  that,  after  the  practice  of  traders,
he  might  make  up  for  the  expenses  of  one  war  by  the  proi^ts  of
another.

II.  The  king  of  the  Scythians  at  that  time  was  Atheas,
who,  being  distressed  by  a  war  with  the  Istrians,  sought  aid
from  Philip  through  the  people  of  ApoUonia,  on  the  under-
standing that  he  would  adopt  him  for  his  successor  on  the  throne
of  Scythia. But  in  the  mean  time,  the  king  of  the  Istjriana

G


8a  JUSTIN.  [B.IX.  CH.n.

died,  and  relieved  the  Scythians  both  from  the  fear  of  war
and  the  want  of  assistance.  Atheas,  therefore,  sending  away
the  Macedonians,  ordered  a  message  to  be  sent  to  Philip,  that
**  he  had  neither  sought  his  aid,  nor  proposed  his  adoption ;  *
for  the  Scythians  needed  no  protection  &om  the  Macedonians,
to  whom  they  were  superior  in  the  field,  nor  did  he  himself
want  an  heir,  as  he  had  a  son  living."  When  Philip  heard
this,  he  sent  ambassadors  to  Atheas  to  ask  him  to  defray  at
least  a  portion  of  the  expense  of  the  siege,t  that  he  might  not
be  forced  to  raise  it  for  want  of  money ;  **  a  request,"  he  said,
«  with  which  he  ought  the  more  re4ly  £b  cLplj,  as,  when
he  sent  soldiers  to  his  assistance,  he  had  not  even  paid  their
expenses  on  the  march,  to  say  nothing  of  remuneration  foi*
their  service."  Atheas,  alluding  to  the  rigour  of  their
climate  and  the  barrenness  of  their  soil,  which,  far  front
enriching  the  Scythians  with  wealth,  scarcely  afforded  them
sustenance,  replied,  that  '^he  had  no  treasury  to  satisfy  so
great  a  king,  and  that  he  thought  it  less  honourable  to  do
little  than  to  refuse  altogether ;  but  that  the  Scythians  were  to
be  estimated  by  their  valour  and  hardiness  of  body,  not  by
their  possessions.''  Philip,  mocked  by  this  message,  broke  up
the  siege  of  Byzantium,  and  entered  upon  a  war  with  the
Scythians,  first  sending  ambassadors  to  lull  them  into  security,
by  telling  Atheas  that  "  while  he  was  besieging  Byzantium,  he
had  vowed  a  statue  to  Hercules,  which  he  was  going  to  erect
at  the  mouth  of  the  Ister,  requesting  an  unobstructed  passage
to  pay  his  vow  to  the  god,  since  he  was  coming  as  a  fiiend  to
the  Scythians.*'  Atheas  desired  him,  "  if  his  object  was
merely  to  fulfil  his  vow,  to  let  the  statue  be  sent  to  him,"  pro-
mising that  *'  it  should  not  only  be  erected,  but  should  remain
uninjured,"  but  refusing  "  to  allow  an  army  to  enter  his  ter-
ritories,'* and  adding  that,  "if  he  should  set  up  the  statue  in
spite  of  the  Scythians,  he  would  take  it  down  when  he  was
gone,  and  turn  the  brass  of  it  into  heads  for  arrows."  With
feelings  thus  irritated  on  both  sides,  a  battle  was  fought.
Though  the  Scythians  were  superior  in  courage  and  numbers,
they  were  defeated  by  the  subtlety  of  Philip. Twenty  thou-

>

*  Meaning  that  he  had  given  no  such  commiBsion  to  the  people  of
ApoUonia,  who  must  therefore  have  taken  it  upon  themselves  both  to
mention  the  adoption,  as  well  as  to  request  the  auxiliary  troops.

+  Of  Byzantium.


B.C.  337.  PHILIP  ATTACKS  THE  ATHENIANS.  83

sand  young  mein  and  women  were  taken,  and  a  vast  number  oi
cattle,  but  no  gold  or  silver.  This  was  the  first  proof  which
they  had  of  the  poverty  of  Scythia.  Twenty  thousand  fine
mares  were  sent  into  Macedonia  to  raise  a  breed.

III.  But  as  Philip  was  returning  from  Scythia,  the  Triballi
Hiet  him,  and  refused  to  allow  him  a  passage,  unless  the}
received  a  share  of  the  spoil.  Hence  arose  a  dispute,  ana
afterwards  a  battle,  in  which  Philip  received  so  severe  a  wound
through  the  thigh,  that  his  horse  was  killed  by  it ;  and  while
it  was  generally  supposed  that  he  was  dead,  the  booty  was  lost.
Thus  the  Scythian  spoil,  as  if  attended  with  a  curse,  had
almost  proved  fatal  to  the  Macedonians.

But  as  soon  as  he  recovered  from  ;his  woimd,  he  made  war
upon  the  Athenians,  of  which  he  bad  long  dissembled  his
intention.  The  Thebans  espoused  their  cause,  fearing  that  if
the  Athenians  were  conquered,  the  war,  like  a  &i:e  in  the
neighbourhood,  would  spread  to  them.  An  alliance  being
accordingly  made  between  the  two  cities,  which  were  just
before  *  at  violent  enmity  with  each  other,  they  wearied  Greece
with  embassies,  stating  that  "they  thought  the  common
enemy  should  be  repelled  by  their  common  strength,  for  that
Philip  would  not  rest,  if  his  first  attempts  succeeded,  until  he
had  subjugated  all  Greece.'*  Some  of  the  cities  were  moved
by  these  arguments,  and  joined  themselves  to  the  Athenians ;
but  the  dread  of  a  war  induced  some  to  go  over  to  Philip.  A
battle  being  brought  on,t  though  the  Athenians  were  far
superior  in  number  of  soldiers,  fiiey  were  conquered  by  the
valour  of  the  Macedonians,  which  was  invigorated  by  constant
service  in  the  field.  They  were  not,  however,  in  defeat,
unmindful  of  their  ancient  valour ;  for,  faUing  with  wounds  in
firont,  they  all  covered  the  places  which  they  had  been  charged
by  their  leaders  to  defend,  with  their  dead  bodies.  This  day
put  an  end  to  the  glorious  sovereignty  and  ancient  liberty  of
all  Greece.

IV.  Philip's  joy  for  this  victory  was  artfully  concealed.  He
abstained  from  ofifering  the  usual  sacrifices  |  on  that  day ;  he
did  not  smile  at  table,  or  mingle  any  diversions  with  the  enter-


*  PauUo  ante.]  In  the  Fhodan  war. See  viii.  1,  8. —  i
t  At  Chseronea  in  Boeotia,  the  leaders  opposed  to  Philip  being
Chares  and  Lysicles. See  Diodor.  xvi  85. — WetzeL
t  SdUa  sacra,]  For  having  obtained,  a  victory.

O  2


84  JUSTIN.  [B.IX.  CH*V:

tainraent ;  he  had  no  chaplets  or  perfumes ;  and,  as  far  as  was
in  his  power,  he  so  managed  his  conquest  that  none  might
tliink  of  him  as  a  conqueror.  He  desired  that  he  should  not
be  called  king,  hut  general  of  Greece ;  and  conducted  himself
with  such  prudence,  between  his  own  secret  joy  on  the  one
hand  and  the  grief  of  the  enemy  on  the  other,  that  he  neither
appeared  to  his  own  subjects  to  rejoice,  nor  to  the  vanquished
to  insult  them.  To  the  Athenians,  whom  he  had  found  to  be
his  bitterest  enemies,  he  both  sent  back  their  prisoners  without
ransom,  and  gave  up  the  bodies  of  the  slain  for  burial;
exhorting  them  to  convey  the  relics  of  their  dead  to  Ihe  sepul-
chres of  their  ancestors.  He  also  sent  Alexander  his  son
with  his  friend  Antipater  to  Athens,  to  establish  peace  and
friendship  with  them.  The  Thebans,  however,  he  compelled
to  purchase  their  prisoners,  as  well  as  the  liberty  of  burying
their  dead.  Some  of  the  chief  men  of  their  city,  too,  he  put
to  death ;  others  he  banished,  seizing  upon  the  property  of
them  all.  Afterwards,  he  reinstated  in  their  country  those
that  had  been  unjustly  banished,  of  whom  he  made  three  hun-
dred judges  and  governors  of  the  city,  before  whom  when  the
most  eminent  citizens  were  arraigned  on  this  very  charge,  that
of  having  banished  them  unjustly,  they  had  such  spirit  that
they  all  aclmowledged  their  participation  in  the  fact,  and
affirmed  that  it  was  better  with  the  state  when  they  were  con-
demned than  when  they  were  restored.  A  wonderful  instance
of  courage !  They  passed  sentence,  as  far  as  they  could,  on
those  who  had  the  disposal  of  them  for  life  or  death,  and  set
at  nought  the  pardon  which  their  enemies  could  give  them ;
and,  as  they  could  not  avenge  themselves  *  by  deeds,  they
manifested  their  boldness  of  spirit  by  words.

V.  War  being  at  an  end  in  Greece,  Philip  directed  depu-
ties from  all  the  states  to  be  summoned  to  Corinth,  to  settle
the  condition  of  affairs.  Here  he  fixed  terms  of  peace  for  the
whole  of  Greece,  according  to  the  merits  of  each  city ;  and
chose  from  them  all  a  council,  to  form  a  senate  as  it  were  for
the  country. But  the  Lacedaemonians,  standing  alone,  showed

*  Wetzel's  text  has,  et  gttam  rdms  nequeunt  vldscif  verbis  U8v/rpamt
ItbertcUem.  I  follow  Gronovius,  who  reads  quondam  instead  of  quam*
Faber  would  retain  quam  and  omit  idcisci,  Wetzel's  reading  cannot  be
right;  nor  does  he  himself  attempt  to  explain  or  justify  it,  but
remarks  only  how  it  may  be  corrected


fi.C.  335.  PHILIP  ASSASSINATED.  85

contempt  alike  for  the  terms  and  the  king ;  regarding  the
state  of  things,  which  had  not  heen  agreed  upon  hy  the  cities
themselves,  but  forced  upon  them  by  a  conqueror,  as  a  state,
not  of  peace,  but  of  slavery.  The  number  of  troops  to  be
furnished  by  each  state  was  then  determined,  whether  the  king,
in  case  of  being  attacked,  was  to  be  supported  by  their  united
force,  or  whether  war  was  to  be  made  on  any  other  power
under  him  as  their  general.  In  all  these  preparations  for  war
it  was  not  to  be  doubted  that  the  kingdom  of  Persia  was  the
object  in  view.  The  sum  of  the  force  was  two  hundred
thousand  infantry  and  fifteen  thousand  cavalry.  Exclusive  of
this  number  there  was  also  the  army  of  Macedonia,  and  the
ucyacent  barbarians  of  the  conquered  nations.

In  the  beginning  of  the  next  spring,  he  sent  forward  three
of  his  generals  into  that  part  of  Asia  which  was  under  the
power  of  the  Persians,»Parmenio,  Amyntas,  and  Attains,  whose
sister  he  had  recently  married,  having  divorced  Olympias,  the
mother  of  Alexander,  on  suspicion  of  adultery.
.  VI.  In  the  meantime,  while  the  troops  were  assembling
from  Greece,  he  celebrated  the  marriage  of  his  daughter  Cleo-
patra witih.  Alexander,  whom  he  had  made  king  of  Epirus.
•The  day  was  remarkable  for  the  pomp  displayed  on  it,  suitable
to  the  magnificence  of  the  two  princes,  him  that  gave  his
daughter  in  marriage,  and  him  that  married  her.  Magnificent
games  were  also  celebrated,  and  as  Philip  was  going  to  view
Siem,  unattended  by  his  guards,  walking  between  the  two
Alexanders,  his  son  and  son-in-law,  Pausanias,  a  noble  Mace-
donian youth,  without  being  suspected  by  any  one,  posting
himself  in  a  narrow  passage,  kUled  him  as  he  was  going
through  it,  and  caused  a  day  appointed  for  joy  to  be  over-
clouded with  mourning  for  a  death.  Pausanias,  in  the  early
part  of  his  youth,  had  suffered  gross  violence  at  the  hands  of
Attains,  to  the  indignity  of  which  was  added  this  further
a£&ont,  that  Attains  had  exposed  him,  after  bringing  him  to  a
banquet  and  making  hun  drunk,  not  only  to  insults  from  him-
self, but  also  to  those  of  the  '^company,  as  if  he  had  been  a
common  object  for  ill-treatment,  and  rendered  him  the
laughing-stock  of  those  of  his  own  a^e.  Being  impatient
under  ^s  ignominy,  Pausanias  had  often  made  complaints  to
Philip,  but  being  put  off  with  various  excuses,  not  unattended
with  ridicule,  and  seeing  his  adversary  also  honoured  with  a


86  JUSTIN.  [B.IX.  CH.Vn.

general's  commission,  he  tamed  his  rage  against  Philip  him-
self,  and  inflicted  on  him,  as  an  unjust  judge,  that  revenge
which  he  could  not  inflict  on  him  as  an  adversary.*
'  VII.  It  is  even  believed  that  he  was  instigated  to  the  act
by  Oljmpias,  Alexander's  mother,  and  that  Alexander  himself
was  not  ignorant  that  his  father  was  to  be  killed ;  as  Olympias
had  felt  no  less  resentment  at  her  divorce,  and  the  preferment
of  Cleopatra  to  herself,  than  Pausanias  had  felt  at  the  insults
which  he  had  received. As  for  Alexander,  it  is  said  that  he
feared  his  brother  by  his  step-mother  as  a  rival  for  the  throne ;
and  hence  it  happened  that  he  had  previously  quarrelled  at  a
banquet,  first  with  Attains,  and  afterwards  with  his  father  him-
self, insomuch  that  Philip  pursued  him  even  with  his  drawn
sword,  and  was  hardly  prevented  from  killing  him  by  the  entrea-
ties of  his  friends.  Alexander  had  ia  consequence  retired  with
his  mother  into  Epirus,  to  take  refuge  with  his  uncle,  and  from
thence  to  the  king  of  the  lUyrians,  and  was  with  difficulty
reconciled  to  his  father  when  he  recalled  him,  and  not  easily
induced  by  the  prayers  of  his  relations  to  return. Olympias,
too,  was  instigating  her  brother,  the  king  of  Epirus,  to  go  to
war  with  Philip,  and  would  have  prevailed  upon  him  to  do  so,
had  not  Philip,  by  giving  him  his  daughter  in  mamage.  dia-
armed  him  as  a  son-in-law. With .  these  provocations  to
resentment,  both  of  them  are thought  to  have  encouraged
Pausanias,  when  complaining  of  his  insults  being  left  unpun-
ished, to  so  atrocious  a  deed. Olympias,  it  is  certain,  had
horses  prepared  for  the  escape  of  the  assassin ;  and,  when  she
heard  that  the  king  was  dead,  hastening  to  the  funeral  under
the  appearance  of  respect,  she  put  a  crown  of  gold,  the  same
night  that  she  arrived,  on  the  head  of  Pausanias,t  as  he  was
hanging  on  a  cross ;  an  act  which  no  one  but  she  would  have  dared
to  do,  as  long  as  the  son  of  Philip  was  alive.  A  few  days  after,
she  burnt  the  body  of  the  assassin,  when  it  had  been  taken  down,
upon  the  remains  of  her  husband,  and  made  him  a  tomb  in  the
same  place ;  she  also  provided  that  yearly  sacrifrces  should  be  per-
formed to  his  manes,  possessing  the  people  with  a  superstitious
notion  for  the  purpose. Next  she  forced  Cleopatra,  for  whose
sake  she  had  been  divorced  from  Philip,  to  hang  herself,  hav-

*  He  could  not  call  Philip  to  account  in  single  combat.
+  He  had  been  apprehended,  as  he  was  making  his  escape,  by
Ferdiccas,  and  killed.. Diod.  Sic  zvi.  94


B.C.  835.  PHILIP'S  CHARACTER.  87

ing  first  killed  her  daughter  in  her  lap,  and  enjoyed  the  sight
of  her  suffering  this  vengeance,  to  which  she  had  hastened  by
procuring  the  death  of  her  husband.*  Last  of  all  she  conse-
crated the  sword,  with  which  the  king  had  been  killed,  to
Apollo,  under  the  name  of  Myrtale,t  which  was  Olympias's
own  name  when  a  child.  And  all  these  things  were  done  so
publicly,  that  she  seems  to  have  been  afraid  lest  it  should  not
be  evident  enough  that  the  deed  was  promoted  by  her.

VIII.  Philip  died  at  the  age  of  forty-seven,  after  having
reigned  twenty-five  years.  He  had,  by  a  dancing  girl  of
Lanssa,  a  son  named  Aridseus,  who  reigned  after  Alexander.
He  had  also  many  others  by  several  wives,:^  as  is  not  unusual
with  princes,  s6me  of  whom  died  a  natural  death,  and  others
by  the  sword.  As  a  king,  he  was  more  inclined  to  display  in
war,  than  in  entertainments;  and  his  greatest  riches  were
means  for  military  operations.  He  was  better  at  getting
wealth  than  keeping  it,  and,  in  consequence,  was  always  poor
amidst  his  daily  spoliations.  Clemency  and  perfidy  were
equally  valued  by  him ;  and  no  road  to  victory  was,  in  his
opinion,  dishonourable.  He  was  equally  pleasing  and  trea-
cherous in  his  address,  promising  more  than  he  could  perform.
He  was  well  qualified  either  for  serious  conversation  or  for
jesting.  He  maintained  Mendships  more  with  a  view  to
interest  than  good  faith.  It  was  a  common  practice  with  him
to  pretend  kindness  where  he  hated,  and  to  counterfeit  dislike
where  he  loved ;  to  sow  dissension  among  friends,  and  try  to
gain  favour  from  both  sides.  With  such  a  disposition,  his
eloquence  was  very  great,  his  language  full  of  point  and  studied
effect ;  so  that  neither  did  his  facility  Ml  short  of  his  art,  nor
his  invention  of  his  facility,  nor  his  art  of  his  invention.

To  Philip  succeeded  his  son  Alexander,  a  prince  greater
than  his  father,  both  in  his  virtues  and  his  vices.  Each  of  the
two  had  a  different  mode  of  conquering ;  the  one  prosecuted
his  wars  with  open  force,  the  other  with  subtlety ;  die  one  de-
lighted in  deceiving  his  enemies,  the  other  in  boldly  repulsing
them.  The  one  was  more  prudent  in  council,  the  other  more
noble  in  feeling. The  father  would  dissemble  his  resentment,

•  Parriddio.']  See  note  on  SalL  Cat'c.  14.

t  JSuh  nomine  Myrtcdes.']  Putting  an  inscription  on  it, "Myrtale
(dedicates  this)  to  Apollo/'
1  Ex  vdtriis  fnatrimonnt.


88  JUSTIN.  [b.x.  cH.r.

and  often  subdue  it;  wben  the  son  was  provoked,  there  was
neither  delay  nor  bounds  to  his  vengeance.  They  were  both
too  fond  of  wine,  but  the  ill  effects  of  their  intoxication  were
totally  different ;  the  father  would  rush  from  a  banquet  to  face
the  enemy,  cope  with  him,  and  rashly  expose  himself  to  dan-
gers ;  the  son  vented  his  rage,  not  upon  his  enemies,  but  his
friends.  A  battle  often  sent  away  Philip  wounded ;  Alexander
often  left  a  banquet*  stained  with  the  blood  of  his  companions.
The  one  wished  to  reign  with  his  friends,  the  other  to  reign
over  them.  The  one  preferred  to  be  loved,  the  other  to  be
feared.  To  literature  both  gave  equal  attention.  The  father
had  more  cunning,  the  son  more  honour.  Philip  was  more
staid  in  his  words,  Alexander  in  his  actions.  The  son  felt
readier  and  nobler  impulses  to  spare  the  conquered ;  the  father
showed  no  mercy  even  to  his  allies.  The  father  was  more
inclined  to  frugality,  the  son  to  luxury.  By  the  same  course  by
which  the  father  laid  the  foundations  of  the  empire  of  the  world,
the  son  consummated  the  glory  of  conquering  the  whole  world.


BOOK  X.

The  sons  of  Artaxerzes  conspire  against  Iiim,  and  are  put  to  death,  I. —
Causes  of  the  conspiracy,  II. — Darius  Ochus;  Darius  Codomannus;
end  of  the  Persian  monarchy,  III.

I.  ABTAXEiixES,t  king  of  Persia,  had  a  hundred  and  fifteen
sons  by  his  concubines,  but  only  three  begotten  in  lawful  wed-
lock, Darius,  Ariarathes,  and  Ochus.  Of  these  the  father,
from  paternal  fondness,  made  Darius  king  during  his  own  life-
time, contrary  to  the  usage  of  the  Persians,  among  whom  the
king  is  changed  only  by  death ;  for  he  thought  nothing  taken
from  himself  that  he  conferred  upon  his  son,  and  expected
greater  enjoyment  from  having  progeny,  if  he  saw  the  insignia
of  royalty  adorning  his  son  while  he  lived.  But  Darius,  after
such  an  extraordinary  proof  of  his  father's  affection,  conceived
the  design  of  killing  him.  He  would  have  been  bad  enough,
if  he  had  meditated  the  parricide  alone,  but  he  became  so

*  C<yfmmo  frequenter  exoessU,']  "As  in  the  cases  of  Clitus,  Parmenio,
Philotas.** —  WetzisL But  of  these  only  Clitus  wba  killed  at  a  banquet ;
frequeThier  is  an  absurd  exaggeration.
, f  Artaxerzes  Mnemon.


B.C.  365.  ABTAXEBXES  MNEMON.  89

much  the  worse,  by  enticing  fifty  of  his  brothers  to  a  participa-
tion in  his  crime,  and  making  them  parricides  in  intention  as
well  as  himself.  It  was  certainly  a  kind  of  prodigy,  that,
among  so  great  a  number,  the  assassination  should  not  only
have  been  plotted^  but  concealed,  and  that  of  fifty  children
there  should  not  have  been  found  one,  whom  either  respect  for
their  father's  dignity,  or  reverence  for  an  old  man,  or  gratitude
for  paternal  kindness,  could  deter  from  so  horrible  a  purpose.
Was  the  name  of  father  so  contemptible  among  so  many  sons,
that  he  who  should  have  been  secured  even  against  enemies  by
their  protection,  should  be  beset  by  their  treason,  and  find  it
easier  to  defend  himself  against  his  foes  than  his  children  ?

II.  The  caXLse  of  the  intended  parricide  was  even  more
atrocious  than  the  crime  itself;  for  after  Cyrus  was  killed  in
the  war  against  his  brother,  of  which  mention  has  been  pre-
viously* made,  Artaxerxes  had  married  Aspasia,t  the  concu-
bine of  Cyrus ;  and  Darius  had  req[uired  that  his  father  should
resign  her  to  him  as  he  had  resigned  the  kingdom.  Artax-
erxes, from  fondness  from  his  children,  said  at  first  that  he  would
do  €0,  but  afterwards,  from  a  change  of  mind,  and  in  order
plausibly  to  refuse  what  he  had  inconsiderately  promised,
made  her  a  priestess  of  the  sun,  an  ofiice  which  obliged  her
to  perpetual  chastity.  The  young  Darius,  being  incensed  at
this  proceeding,  broke  out  at  first  into  reproaches  against  his
father,  and  subsequently  entered  into  this  conspiracy  with  his
brothers.  But  while  he  was  meditating  destruction  for  his
father,  he  was  discovered  and  apprehended  with  his  associates,
and  paid  the  penalty  of  his  guilt  to  the  gods  who  avenge
paternal  authority.  The  wives  of  them  all,  too,  together  with
their  children,  were  put  to  death,  that  no  memorial  of  such
execrable  wickedness  might  be  left.  Soon  after  Artaxerxes  died
of  a  disease  contracted  by  grief,  having  been  happier  as  a  king
than  as  a  father.

III.  Possession  of  the  throne  was  given  to  Ochus,  who,
dreading  a  similar  conspiracy,  filled  the  palace  with  the  blood
and  dead  bodies  of  his  kinsmen  and  the  nobility,  being  touched
with  compassion  neither  for  consanguinity,  nor  sex,  nor  age,
lest,  apparently,  he  should  be  thought  less  wicked  than  hia
brothers  that  had  meditated  parricide.

♦  Book  v.  c.  11.

f  Concerning  whom  see  JSlian.  Yar.  Hist  zii.  1«


^0  JUSTIN.  [B.XI.  CH.r.

Having  thus,  as  it  were,  purified  his  kingdom,  he  made  war
upon  the  Cardusii;  in  the  course  of  which  one  Codomannus,*
followed  by  applause  from  all  the  Persians,  engaged  with
one  of  the  enemy  that  offered  himself  for  single  combat,  and,
having  killed  his  antagonist,  regained  the  victory  for  his
fellow  soldiers,  as  well  as  the  glory  which  they  had  almost
lost.  For  this  honourable  service  Codomannus  was  made
governor  of  Armenia.  Some  time  after,  on  the  death  of
Ochus,  he  was  chosen  king  by  the  people  from  regard  to  his
former  merits,  and,  that  nothing  might  be  wanting  to  his
royal  dignity,  honoured  with  the  name  of  Darius.  He  main-
tained a  long  war,  with  various  success,  but 'with  great  efforts,
against  Alexander  the  Great.  But  being  at  last  overcome  by
Alexander,  and  slain  t  by  his  relations,  he  terminated  his  life
and  the  kingdom  of  the  Persians  together.


BOOK  XI.


Commencement  of  Alexander's  reign ;  he  prepares  to  invade  Persia,  I.  II.
— Suppresses  the  seeds  of  revolt  in  Greece;  destroys  Thebes;
banishes  the  Athenian  orators,  IIL  lY. — Sets  out  for  Persia,  Y.^
Battle  of  the  Granicus,  VI. — The  Gordian  knot,  VII. — Alexander
and  his  physician  Philippus,  VIIL  Battle  of  Issue,  IX. — Alex-
ander becomes  luxurious ;  takes  Tyre,  X. — Visits  the  oracle  of
Jupiter  Ammon,  XI. — ^Refuses  peace  to  Darius,  XII. — ^Battle  of
Arbela  and  its  consequences,  XIIL  XIV. — Death  of  Darius  Codo-
mannus, XV.

I.  In  the  army  of  Philip  there  were  various  nations,  and
after  his  death  different  feelings  prevailed  among  them.  Some,
oppressed  with  an  unjust  yoke,  were  excited  with  hopes  of
recovering  their  liberty ;  others,  from  dislike  of  going  to  war
in  a  distant  country,  rejoiced  that  the  expedition  was  broken
off;  others  grieved  that  the  torch,  kindled  at  the  daughter's
nuptials,  should  have  been  applied  to  the  funeral  pile  of  the
father.  It  was  no  small  fear,  too,  that  possessed  his  friends
on  so  sudden  a  change,  contempla^ng  at  one  time  Asia  that

*  OodomcmMts  guidam,']  CodomaonuB  was  not  so  obscure,  that  it
was  necessary  to  speak  of  him  as  qmdamf  for  his  father  was  Arsamea^
and  his  mother  Sisygambis,  the  brother  and  sister  of  king  Ochus. —
Wazd.

t  See  Book  xi  c.  Id.


B.C.  385. ALEXANDER  SUOGKEDB  PHIUP.  01

had  been  provoked,  at  another  Europe*  that  was  not  yet  paci-
fied, at  another  the  lUyrians,  Thracians,  Dardanians,  and
other  barbarous  nations,  who  were  of  wavering  Mth  and  per-
fidious dispositions,  and  whom,  if  they  should  aJl  rebel  at  once,
it  would  be  utterly  impossible  to  resist.

To  all  these  apprehensions  the  succession  of  Alexander
was  a  relief,  who,  in  a  public  assembly,  so  effectually  soothed
and  encouraged  the  people,  as  to  remove  all  uneasiness  from
those  that  were  afraid,  and  to  fill  every  one  with  favourable
expectations.  He  was  now  twenty  years  old ;  at  which  age  he
gave  great  promise  of  |what  he  would  be,  but  with  such
modesty,  that  it  was  evident  he  reserved  the  further  proofs  of
his  ability  for  the  time  of  action.  He*granted  the  Macedonians
relief  from  all  burdens,  except  that  of  service  in  war ;  by
which  conduct  he  gained  such  popularity  with  his  subjects,
that  they  said  they  had  changed  only  die  person,  not  ^e
virtues,  of  their  king^

II.  His  first  care  was  about  his  father's  funeral,  when  he
caused  all  who  had  been  privy  to  his  murder  to  be  put  to  death  at
his  burial-place.  The  only  one  that  he  spared  was  Alexander
Lyncestest  his  brother,  preserving  in  him  the  man  who  had  first
acknowledged  his  royal  authority,  for  he  had  been  the  first  to
salute  him  king.  His  brother  Caranus,:|:  a  rival  for  the  throne,
as  being  the  son  of  his  step-mother,  he  ordered  to  be  slain.

In  the  beginning  of  his  reign  he  put  down  many  tribes  that
were  revolting,  and  quelled  some  seditions  in  their  birth.
Encouraged  by  his  success,  he  marched  with  haste  into
Greece,  where,  after  his  father's  example,  having  summoned
the  states  to  meet  at  Corinth,  he  was  appointed  general  in  his
room.  He  then  turned  his  attention  to  the  war  with  Persia,
of  which  a  commencement  had  been  made  by  Philip ;  but,  as
he  was  engaged  in  preparations  for  it,  he  received  intelligence
that  "  the  Thebaus  and  Athenians  had  gone  over  from  his
side  to  that  of  the  Persians^  and  that  the  author  of  the  de-
fection was  the  orator  Demosthenes,  who  had  been  bribed  by

♦  That  IB,  Qreeoe.

f  So  called  firom  Lyncestis,  a  region  bordering  on  Macedonia,  the
inhabitants  of  which  are  called  Avycncrrac  by  Thuoydidea.  Concerning
this  Alexander,  see  Quint.  Curt  vii.  1 ;  Diod.  Sic.  xviL  Z2, 80 ;  Arrian.
i  25;  Justin,  zL  7;  ziL  li,-^WetzeL

t  Oaramim  fratrem,  &c.]  Only  his  haHf-brother ;  he  was  the  son  of
Cleopatra,  iz.  5,  7. . . .


6i  JUSTIN.  [B.XI.  CH.in!

the  Persians  with  a  large  sum  of  money,  and  who  had  asserted
that  the  whole  army  of  the  Macedonians,  with  their  king,  had
been  cut  off  by  the  Triballi,  producing  the  author  of  the  infor-
mation before  an  assembly  of  the  people,  a  man  who  said. that
he  had  been  wounded  in  the  battle  in  which  the  king  had
fallen.  In  consequence  of  which  statement,"  it  was  added,
'*  the  feelings  of  almost  all  the  cities  were  changed,  and  the
garrisons  of  the  Macedonians  besieged."  To  repress  these
commotions,  he  marched  upon  Greece  with  an  army  in  full
array,  and  with  such  expedition,  that  they  could  scarcely  believe
they  saw  him  of  whose  approach  they  were  so  little  aware.

III.  In  the  course  of  his  ma^ch  he  had  exhorted  the
Thessalians  to  peace,  reminding  them  of  the  kindnesses*
shown  them  by  his  father  PhiHp,  and  of  his  mother's  con-
nexion with  them  by  the  family  of  the  -^acid8B.t  The  Thessa-
lians gladly  listening  to  such  an  address,  he  was  chosen,  like
his  father,  captain-general  of  the  whole  nation,  and  they
resigned  into  lus  hand  all  their  customs  and  public  reyenues.
The  Athenians,  as  they  had  been  the  first  to  rebel,  were  also
the  first  to  repent  of  their  rebellion,  turning  their  contempt
for  their  enemy  into  admiration  of  him,  and  extolling  the
youth  of  Alexander,  which  they  had  previously  despised,  above
the  merits  of  old  generals.  Sending  ambassadors,  therefore,
they  deprecated  war ;  and  Alexander,  listening  to  their  en-
treaties, and  severely  reproving  them  for  their  conduct,  laid
aside  hostilities  against  them.  He  then  directed  his  march
towards  Thebes,  intending  to  show  similar  indulgence,  if  he
found  similar  penitence.  But  the  Thebans  had  recourse,  not
to  prayers  or  intreaties,  but  to  arms,  and,  being  conquered,
suffered  the  severest  hardships  of  the  most  wretched  state  of
subjugation.  It  being  debated  in  a  council  of  war^  whether
the  city  should  be  destroyed,  the  Phocians,  Platseans,  Thes-
pians, and  Orchomenians,  who  were  the  allies  of  Alexander
and  sharers  in  his  victory,  dwelt  upon  the  destruction  of  their
own  cities  and  the  cruelty  of  the  Thebans,  urging  against

♦  See  vii  6.

i*  The  .£aoid»  were  the  descendants  of  ^acns,  the  father  of
Peleus,  and  grandfather  of  AcdiilleB,  whose  son  Pyrrhus  is  said  to
have  been  the  first  of  the  kings  of  Epirus,  from  whom  Olympias,
Alexander's  mother,  was  descended. — Wetzd.  She  was  the  daughter
of  Neoptolemus,  king  of  the  Molossi See  vil  6, . .  ,  *


B.C.  334.  THEBES  DESTROYED.  99

them  not  only  their  present,  but  former,  defection  to  the
Persians,  to  die  prejudice  of  the  common  liberty  of  Greece ;
"  on  which  account,"  they  said,  **  they  were  an  object  of  gene-^
ral  hatred,  as  was  manifest  from  the  fact  that  all  the  Greeks
had  bound  themselves  by  an  oath  to  demolish  Thebes  as  soon
as  they  had  conquered  the  Persians."  They  brought  forward
also  the  fabulous  accounts  of  their  old  crimes,  with  which  they
had  filled  every  theatre,  to  make  them  odious  not  only  for
their  recent  perfidy,  but  for  their  ancient  infamy.

lY.  Gleadas,  one  of  those  who  had  been  taken  prisoners^
being  permitted  to  speak  in  their  behalf,  said,  that  *'  they  had
not  revolted  from  the  king,  whom  they  understood  to  be  killed,
but  from  the  king's  heirs ;  that  what  had  been  done  in  the
matter  was  the  fault,  not  of  tresichery,  but  of  credulity ;  *  for
which,  however,  they  had  already  suffered  severely  by  the  loss
of  the  flower  of  their  soldiery ;  that  there  was  left  them  only
a  multitude  of  old  men  and  women,  equally  weak  and  harm-
less, but  who  had,  been  so  harassed  by  contumelies  and
insults,  that  they  had  never  endured  anything  more  grievous ;
and  that  he  did  not  now  intercede  for  his  countrymen,  of
whom  so  few  survived,  but  for  their  unoffending  natal  soil,
and  for  a  city  which  had  given  birtli,  not  only  to  men,  but  to
gods."f  He  endeavoured  to  work  upon  the  king,  too,  from
his  superstitious  regard  for  Hercules,  who  had  been  bom  at
Thebes,  and  from  whom  the  family  of  theMsucidsQ  was  descended,
and  from  the  reflection  that  the  youth  of  his  father  Philip  had
been  spent  at  Thebes ;  and  he  conjured  him  "  to  spare  a  city
which  adored  some  of  his  ancestors,  who  had  been  born  in  it,
as  gods,  and  saw  others  who  had  been  brought  up  in  it,
princes  of  the  highest  dignity."  But  resentment  was  more
powerful  than  entreaty.  The  city  was  in  consequence  de-
molished, the  lands  divided  among  the  conquerors, .  and  the
prisoners  publicly  sold,  their  price  being  settled  not  for  the
profit  of  those  who  bought  them,  but  according  to  the  hatred
of  their  enemies.;]: Their  fate  seemed  to  the  Athenians

*  CreckbUt<tH8.'\  Tauchxiitz's  edition  has  cruddUatis,  by  aix  error,
apparently  of  the  press.

t  That  is,  Hercules  and  Bacchus. — Wetzd»

X  Quorum  pretmm  non  ex  ementimti  commodOj  sed  ex  immicorum  odio
extendiiitr.]  '"The  greatness  of  the  price  asked  for  them,"  says
Bemeccerus,  **w9B  in  proportion  to  the  eagerness  with  which  they
were  bought  by  their  enemies." If  any  one  of  the  purchasers  wished


94  JUSTIN.  [b.xi.  ch.v.

dederving  of  pity ;  and  they  therefore,  thoi^h  contrary  to  the
king's  prohibition,  opened  tiieir  gates  for  the  reception  of  the
exiles.  At  this  proceeding  Alexander  was  so  displeased,  that
when  they  deprecated  war  by  a  second  embassy,  he  forbore
from  hostilities  only  on  condition  that  their  orators  and
leaders,  through  confidence  in  whom  they  had  so  often  re-
belled, should  be  delivered  up  to  him.  The  Athenians  prepar-
ing to  comply,  lest  they  should  be  compelled  to  abide  a  war,  the
matter  ended  in  this  arrangement,  that  the  orators  should
be  retained  and  the  generals  banished ;  when  the  latter  im-
mediately went  over  to  Darius,  and  formed  no  inconsiderable
addition  to  the  strength  of  the  Persians.

y.  When  he  set  out  to  the  Persian  war,  he  put  to  death  all
his  step-mother's  relations*  whom  Philip  haid  advanced  to
any  high  dignity,  or  appointed  to  any  command.  Nor  did
he  spare  such  of  his  own  kinsmen  as  seemed  qualified  to  fill
the  throne,  lest  any  occasion  for  rebellion  should  be  left  in
Macedonia  during  his  absence ;  and  of  the  tributary  princes
he  took  such  as  were  distinguished  fpr  ability  to  the  war  with
him,  leaving  the  less  able  at  home  for  the  defence  of  his
dominions.  Having  then  assembled  his  troops,  he  put  them
on  shipboard,  where,  excited  with  incredible  animation  at  the
sight  of  Asia,  he  erected  altars  to  the  twelve  gods  to  >  offer
prayers  for  success  in  the  war.  He  divided  all  his  private
property,  which  he  had  in  Macedonia  and  the  rest  of  Europe,
among  his  friends,  saying,  '*  that  for  himself  Asia  was  suf-
ficient." Before  any  ship  left -the  shore,  he  offered  sacrifices,
praying  for  **  victory  in  that  war,  in  which  he  had  been  chosen
the  avenger  of  Greece  so  often  assailed  by  the  Persians,
to  whom,"  he  said,  ''a  reign  sufficiently  long  had  been  granted,
a  reign  that  had  now  reached  maturity,  and  it  was  time  that
others,  who  would  conduct  themselves  better,  should  take  their
place."  Nor  were  the  anticipations  of  the  army  different  from
those  of  the  prince ;  for  all  the  soldiers,  unmindful  of  their
wives  and  children,  and  of  the  length  of  the  expedition  from
home,  contemplated  the  Persian  gold,  and  the  wealth  of  the
whole  east,  as  already  their  own  prey,  thinking  neither  of  the
war  nor  its  perils,  but  of  riches  only. When  they  arrived  at

to  get  an  old  enemy  into  his  power  to  torture  him  as  a  slave,  he  offered
a  high  price  for  him.
*  Among  whom  was  Attains. Compare  ch.  ii  imU, — WetsseL


B.O.  833.  ALEXANDER  INVADES  PERSIA.  95>

*

the  continent  of  Asia,  Alexander  first  of  all  threw  a  dart  into
the  enemy's  country,  and  leaped  on  the  shore  in  full  armour,
like  one  dancing  the  tripadium.*  He  then  proceeded  to  offer
sacrifices,  praying  that  *'  those  countries  might  not  unwillingly
receive  him  as  their  king."  He  also  sacrificed  at  Troy,  at  the
tombs  of  the  heroes  who  had  fallen  in  the  Trojan  war.;

VI.  Marching  forward  in  quest  of  the  enemy,  he  kept  the
soldiers  from  ravaging  Asia,  telling  them  that ''  they  ought  to
spare  their  own  property,  and  not  destroy  what  they  came  to
possess."  *His  army  consisted  of  thirty-two  thousand  infantry,
and  four  tiiousand  five  hundred  cavalry,  with  a  hundred  and
eighty-two  ships.  Whether,  witli  this  small  force,  it  is  more
wonderful  that  he  conquered  the  world,  or  that  he  dared  to
attempt  its  conquest,  is  •difficult  to  determine.  When  ke
selected  his  troops  for  so  hazardous  a  warfare,  he  did  not
choose  robust  young  men,  or  men  in  the  flower  of  their  age,
but  veterans,  most  of  whom  had  even  passed,  their  term  of
service,  and  who  had  fought  under  his  father  and  his  uncles ;  f
so  that  he  might  be  thought  to  have  chosen,  not  soldiers,  but
masters  in  war.  No  one  was  made  an  officer :|;  who  was  not
sixty  years  of  age ;  so  that  he  who  saw  the  captains  assembled
at  head-quarters,§  would  have  declared  that  he  saw  the  senate
ol  some  ancient  republic.  None,  on  the  field  of  battle,
thought  of  flight,  but  eveiy  one  of  victory;  none  trusted  in  his
feet,  but  every  one  in  his  arms.

King  Darius,  on  the  other  hand,  from  confidence  in  his
strength,  abstained  firom  aU  artifice  in  his  operations ;  observ-

*  Tri/pydiamti  svimlU.']  The  Pri/pvdivm  was  a  sort  of  dance  in  which
the  performers  beat  the  earth  with  their  feet  in  measured  tread.
Cicero,  de  Div.  ii  34,  supposes  the  derivation  to  be  from  terra  and
pa/oi/re:  terrvpavwm,  tempudkt/ni,  tripudiwm,  Cicero,  indeed,  is
here  speaking  of  the  com  that  fell  from  the  beaks  of  the  sacred
chickens  when  they  were  feeding;  and  Tumebus  and  others  accordingly
suppose  that  his  derivation  is  confined  to  that  signification  of  the
word,  and  that  the  dance  is  derived  from  ter  and  pea ;  agreeably  to
Horace's  Qmtdet  imnsam  pepulisse  fossor  ter  pede  terram,  Od.  iii  18,  15,
and  Ovid's  M  viridem  edieri  ter  pede  pvUsctt  hwMim,  Fast.  vL  329.
Compare  Lucret.  v.  1893,  aeqq.

f  Under  Alexander  and  Perdiccas  against  the  Blyrians. — Wetzd,

X  Ordmes  duxit.]  A  phrase  borrowed  from  the  military  a&irs  of
the  Bomans,  among  whom  ordmet  ducere  meant  "to  be  a  centurion."

§  Priaidpia  caOrwrvm^  See  note  on  Florus,  iii  10,  Bohn's  Classical
Library.


96  JUSTIN.  [B.XI.  CH.VIT.

ing  that  ''clandestine  measures  were  fit  only  for  a  stolen
victory ; "  he  did  not  attempt  to  repel  the  enemy  from  his
frontiers,  hut  admitted  them  into  the  heart  of  his  kingdom,
thinking  it  more  honourahle  to  drive  war  out  of  his  kingdom
than  not  to  give  it  entrance.  The  first  engagement,  in  conse-
quence, was  fought  on  the  plains  of  Adrastia.*  The  Persian
army  consisted  of  six  hundred  thousand  men,  who  were  con-
quered not  less  hy  the  valour  of  the  Macedonians  than  hy  the
conduct  of  Alexander,  and  took  to  flight.  The  slaughter
among  the  Persians  was  great.  Of  the  army  of  Alexander
there  fell  only  nine  foot-soldiers,  and  a  hundred  and  twenty
horse,  whom  the  king  huried  sumptuously  as  an  encourage-
ment to  the  rest,  honouring  them  also  with  equestrian  statues,
and  granting  privileges  to  their  relatives.  After  this  victory
the  greater  part  of  Asia  came  over  to  his  side.  He  had  also
several  encounters  with  Darius^s  lieutenants,  whom  he  con-
quered, not  so*  much  hy  his  arms,  as  hy  the  terror  of  his
name.

VII.  During  the  course  of  these  proceedings,  he  was
acquainted,  on  the  information  of  a  certain  prisoner,  that  a
conspiracy  was  forming  against  him  hy  Alexander  Lyncestes,
the  son-in-law  of  Antipater,  who  had  heen  made  governor  of
Macedonia.  Fearing,  therefore,  that,  if  he  were  put  to  death,
some  disturbance  might  arise  in  Macedonia,  he  only  kept  him
in  prison. t

He  soon  after  marched  to  a  city  called  Gordium,  which  is
situated  between  the  Greater  and  Lesser  Phrygia,  and  which
he  earnestly  desired  to  take,  not  so  much  for  the  sake  of
plunder,  as  because  he  had  heard  that  in  that  city,  in  the
temple  of  Jupiter,  was  deposited  the  yoke  of  Gordius's  car;
the  knot  of  which,  if  any  one  should  loose,  the  oracles  of  old
had  predicted  that  he  should  rule  all  Asia.  The  cause  and
origin  of  the  matter  was  as  foUows.  When  Gordius  was
ploughing  in  these  parts,  with  oxen  that  he  had  hired,J
birds  of  every  kind  began  to  fly  about  him.  Going  to  consult
the  augurs  of  the  next  town  on  the  occurrence,  he  met  at  the

*  Campis  AdrcuticB.']  Through  which  flows  the  river  Granicus,  from

which  the  battle  is  generally  named.

t  He  was,  however,  afterwards  put  to  death. See  xiL  14,  init,

t  Bvhu9  conductis.]  It  is  specified  that  they  were  hired,  to  denote

his  poverty.


B.a  332.] GOEDIUS. ALEXANDER'S  ILLNESS.  97

gate  a  virgin  of  remarkable  beaaty,  and  asked  her  ''  which  of
Sie  augurs  he  had  best  consult."  When  she,  having  heard  his
reason  for  consulting  them,  and  knowing  sometlung  of  the
art  from  the  instruction  of  her  parents,  replied,  that  **  a  king-
dom was  portended  to  him,'*  and  offered  to  become  his  wife
and  the  sharer  of  his  expectations.  So  fair  a  match  seemed
the  chief  felicity  of  a  throne.  After  his  marriage  a  civil  war
arose  among  the  Phrygians;  and  when  they  consulted  the
oracles  how  their  discord  might  be  terminated,  the  oracles
replied  that  "  a  king  was  required  to  settle  their  disputes.**
Inquiring  a  second  time  as  to  the  person  of  the  king,  they
were  directed  to  regard  him  as  their  king  whom  they  should
first  observe,  on  their  return,  going  to  the  temple  of  Jupiter
on  a  car.  The  person  who  presented  himself  to  them  was
Gordius,  and  they  at  once  saluted  him  king.  He  dedicated
the  car,  in  which  he  was  riding  when  the  throne  was  offered
him,  "  to  kingly  majesty,"  and  it  was  placed  in  the  temple  of
Jupiter.  After  him  reigned  his  son  Midas,  who,  having  been
instructed  by  Orpheus  in  sacred  rites,  filled  all  Phrygia  with
ceremonies  of  religion,  by  which  he  was  better  protected,
during  his  whole  life,  than  by  arms.  Alexander,  having  taken
the  city,  and  gone  to  the  temple  of  Jupiter,  requested  to  see
the  yoke  of  Gordius*s  car,  and,  when  it  was  shown  him,  not
being  able  to  find  the  ends  of  the  cords,  which  were  hidden
withm  the  knots,  he  put  a  forced  interpretation  on  the  oracle,
and  cut  the  cords  with  his  sword ;  and  thus,  when  the  invo-
lutions were  opened  out,  discovered  the  ends  concealed  in
them.

VIII.  While  hp  was  thus  engaged,  intelligence  was  brought
him  that  Darius  was  approaching  with  a  vast  army.  Fearing
the  defiles,  he  crossed  Mount  Taurus  with  the  utmost  expedition,
advancing,  in  one  of  his  forced  marches,  ^we  hundred  stadia.*
Arriving  at  Tarsus,  and  being  charmed  with  the  pleasant-
ness of  the  river  Cydnus,  which  flows  through  the  midst  of  the
city,  he  threw  off  his  armour,  and,  covered  as  he  was  with
dust  and  sweat,  plunged  himself  into  the  water,  which  was
then  excessively  cold ;  when,  on  a  sudden,  such  a  numbness
seized  his  nerves,  that  his  voice  was  lost,  and  not  only  was
there  no  hope  of  saving  his  life,  but  not  even  a  means  of

*  About  fifty-seven  miles  and  ft  half,  the  Qreek  stadium  being  equal
to  606  feet  9  inches. See  Dr.  Smith's  Classical  Diet,  tvb  voc.


98  JUSTIN,  Fb-xi.  cm.  IX.

delaying  death  could  be  fouud.  One  of  his  physicians,  named
Philippus,  was  the  only  person  that  promised  a  care ;  but  a
letter  from  Pannenio,  which  arrived  the  day  before  from
Gappadocia,  rendered  him  an  object  of  suspicion ;  for  Par-
menio,  knowing  nothing  of  Alexander's  illness,  had  written
to  caution  him  against  trusting  Phihppus,  as  he  had  been
bribed  by  Darius  with  a  large  sum  of  money.  Alexander,
however,  thought  it  better  to  trust  the  doubtful  faith  of  the
physician,  than  to  perish  of  certain  disease.  Taking  the  cup
from  Philippus,  therefore,  he  gave  him  Parmenio's  letter  to
read,  and,  as  he  drank,  fixed  his  eyes  upon  the  physician's
countenance  while  he  was  reading.  Seeing  him  unmoved,  he
became  more  cheerful,  and  recovered  his  health  on  the  fourth
day  after. /

IX.  Meantime  Darius  advanced  to  battle  with  four  hundred
thousand  foot  and  a  hundred  thousand  horse.  So  vast  a  mul-
titude of  enemies  caused  some  distrust  in  Alexander,  when  he
contemplated  the  smallness  of  his  own  army ;  but  he  called
to  mind,  at  the  same  time,  how  much  he  had  already  done,
and  how  powerful  people  he  had  overthrown,  with  that  very
moderate  force.  His  hopes,  therefore,  prevailing  over  his  ap-
prehensions, and  thinking  it  more  hazardous  to  defer  the
contest,  lest  dismay  should  fall  upon  his  men,  he  rode  round
among  his  troops,  and  addressed  those  of  each  nation  in  an
appropriate  speech.  He  excited  the  lUyrians  and  Thracians
by  describing  the  enemy's  wealth  and  treasures,  and  the
Greeks  by  putting  them  in  mind  of  their  wars  of  old,  and
their  deadly  hatred  towards  the  Persians.  He  reminded  the
Macedonians  at  one  time  of  their  conquests  in  Europe,  and  at
another  of  their  desire  to  subdue  Asia,  boasting  that  no  troops
in  the  world  had  been  found  a  match  for  them,  and  assuring
them  that  this  battle  would  put  an  end  to  their  labours  and
crown  their  gloiy.  In  the  course  of  these  proceedings  he
caused  the  army  occasionally  to  halt,  that  they  might,  by  such
stoppages,  accustom  themselves  to  endure  the  sight  of  so  great
a  multitude.  Nor  was  Darius  less  active  in  drawing  up  his
forces.  Eejecting  the  services  of  his  officers,  he  rode  himself
through  the  whole  army,  encouraged  the  several  divisions,  and
put  them  in  mind  of  the  ancient  glory  of  the  Persians,  and  the
perpetual  possession  of  empire  vouchsafed  them  by  the  im-
mortal gods. Soon  after  a  battle  was  fought  with  great  spirit.


RO.  332.]  BATTLE  OF  ISSUS.  99

Both  kings  were  wounded  in  it.  The  result  remained  doubt-
ful until  Darius  fled,  when  tiiere  ensued  a  great  slaughter  of
the  Persians,  of  whom  there  fell  sixty-one  thousand  in&ntry
and  ten  thousand  horse,  and  forty  thousand  were  taken
prisoners.  On  the  side  of  the  Ma(5edonians  were  killed  a
hundred  and  thirty  foot  and  a  hundred  and  fifty  horse.  In
the  camp  of  the  Persians  was  found  abundance  of  gold  and
other  treasures ;  and  among  the  captiyes  taken  in  it  were  the
mother  and  wife,  who  was  also  the  sister,  of  Darius,  and  two
of  his  daughters.  When  Alexander  came  to  see  and  console
them,  they  threw  themselves,  at  the  sight  of  his  armed  attend-
ants, into  one  another's  arms,  and  uttered  mournful  cries,  as
if  expecting  to  die  immediately.  Afterwards,  falling  at  the
feet  of  Alexander,  they  begged,  not  that  they  might  Hye,  but
that  their  death  might  be  delayed  till  they  should  bury  the
body  of  Darius.  Alexander,  touched  with  the  respectful  con-
cern of  the  princesses  for  Darius,  assured  them  that  the  king
was  still  alive,  and  removed  their  apprehensions  of  death ;
directing,  at  the  same  time,  that  they  should  be  treated  as
royal  personages^  and  giving  the  daughters  hopes  of  husbands
suitable  to  the  dignity  of  their  father.

X.  As  he  afterwards  contemplated  the  wealth  and  display
of  Darius,  he  was  seized  with  admiration  of  such  magnificence.
Hence  it  was  that  he  first  began  to  indulge  in  luxurious  and
splendid  banquets,  and  fell  in  love  with  his  captive  Barsine
for  her  beauty,  by  whom  he  had  afterwards  a  son  that  he
called  Hercules.  Not  forgetting,  however,  that  Darius  was
still  alive,  he  despatched  Parmenio  to  seize  the  Persian  fleet,
and  commissioned  some  others  of  his  Mends  to  secure  the
cities  of  Asia,  which,  on  hearing  the  report  of  the  victory,  had
immediately  submitted  to  the  conqueror,  the  satraps  of  Darius
surrendering  themselves  with  a  vast  quantity  of  treasure.  He
next  marched  into  Syria,  where  he  was  met  by  several  princes
of  the  east  with  fillets  on  their  heads.*  Of  these,  according
to  their  respective  deserts,  he  received  some  into  alliance;
others  he  deprived  of  their  thrones,  and  put  new  kings  in
their  places.  Above  the  rest  Abdolonymus,  appointed  by
Alexander  king  of  Sidon,  stood  pre-eminent ;  a  man  whom,
when  he  was  living  a  life  of  poverty,  being  accustomed  to
draw  water,  and  water  gardens  for  hire,  Alexander  made

*  Own  wrfulit.']  Denoting  that  they  were  suppliants.

H  ^


100  "  JUSTIN.  [B.XI.  CH.Xl.

a  king,  Betting  aside  the  nobles,  lest  they  should  regard  his
favour  as  shown  to  their  birth,  and  not  as  proceeding  from  the
kindness  of  the  giver.

The  city  of  Tyre  sending  Alexander,  by  the  hands  of  a
deputation,  a  golden  crown  of  great  value,  as  a  token  of  con-
gratulation, he  received  their  present  kindly,  and  told  them
that  "  he  intended  to  visit  Tyre  to  pay  his  vows  to  Hercules.**
The  deputies  replying  tliat  "  he  would  do  that  better  at  Old
Tyre,*  and  in  the  more  ancient  temple ;"  he  was  so  provoked
with  them,  because  they  evidently  deprecated  his  visit,  that  he
threatened  their  city  with  destruction.  Bringing  up  his  army,
soon  after,  to  the  island,  he  was  met  with  a  hostile  resistance,
the  Tyrians,  from  reliance  on  Carthage,  being  not  less  deter-
mined than  himself.  The  example  of  Dido  had  stimulated
the  Tyrians;  for  that  queen,  after  founding  Carthage,  had
secured  the  empire  over  the  third  part  of  the  world  ;f  and
they  thought  it  would  be  dishonourable  if  their  women  should
show  more  courage  in  acquiring  dominion  than  they  in  de-
fending their  liberty.  They  removed  to  Carthage,  tiierefore,
such  as  were  unfit  for  war,  and  sent  at  once  for  assistance,  but
were,  not  long  afterwards,  reduced  by  treachery.J

XI.  Alexander  next  got  possession  of  Rhodes  and  Cilicia§
without  an  effort.  He  then  went  to  the  temple  of  Jupiter
Ammon,  to  consult  the  oracle  about  the  event  of  his  future
proceedings,  and  his  own  parentage.  For  his  mother  Olym-
pisis  had  confessed  to  her  husband  Philip,  that  '*  she  had  con-
ceived Alexander,  not  by  him,  but  by  a  serpent  of  extraordinary
size."  Philip,  too,  towards  the  end  of  his  life,  had  publicly
declared  that  **  Alexander  was  not  his  son ; "  and  he  accord-
ingly divorced  Olympias,  as  having  been  guilty  of  adultery.
Alexander,  therefore,  anxious  to  obtain  the  honour  of  divine
paternity,  and  to  clear  his  mother  from  infamy,  instructed  the
priests,  by  messengers  whom  he  sent  before  him,  what  answers

•  T^o  vetere,]  Which  had  been  besieged  for  thirteen  years,  and  at
last  taken  by  Nebuchadnezzar,  ko.  690.  The  new  city  of  Tyre  had
been  built  on  an  island. — Wetzel*

t  Not  she  herself,  but  her  successors,  extended  their  dominion  over
a  great  part  of  Africa.

J  Or  rather,  after  being  besieged  seven  months,  they  were  forced  to
surrender.  See  Diod.  Sic.  xvii  40 — 47 ;  Q.  Curt.  iv.  2 — 4.  Compare
also  Justin,  xviii.  3,  aubfin. —  WetzeL

§  Isaac  Yossius  conjectures  Syria,  as  Cilicia  had  been  already  taken.


B.a  8a0.]  DARIUS  WRITES  TO  ALEXANDER.  101

he  mshed  to  receive.  The  priests,  as  soon  as  he  eutered  the
temple,  saluted  him  as  the  son  of  Ammon.  Alexander,  pleased
with  the  god's  adoption  of  him,  directed  that  he  should  he  re-
garded as  his  son.  He  then  inquired  '*  whether  he  had  taken
vengeance  on  all  that  had  heen  concerned  in  the  assassination
of  his  father.'*  He  was  answered  that  '*  his  father  could
neither  he  assassinated,  nor  could  die ;  hut  that  vengeance  for
Philip's  death  had  heen  fully  exacted."  On  putting  a  third
question,  he  was  told  that  '*  success  in  all  his  wars,  and  do*
minion  over  the  world,  was  granted  him.**  A  response  was
also  given  hy  the  oracle  to  his  attendants,  that  "  they  should
reverence  Alexander  as  a  god,  and  not  as  a  king."  Hence  it
was  that  his  haughtiness  was  so  much  increased,  and  a  strange
arrogance  arose  in  his  mind,  the  agreeableness  of  demeanour,
which  he  had  contracted  from  the  philosophy  of  the  Greeks  and
the  habits  of  the  Macedonians,  heing  entirely  laid  aside.  On
his  return  from  the  temple  of  Ammon  he  founded  Alexandria,
and  desired  that  that  colony  of  the  Macedonians  might  he
considered  the  metropolis  of  Egypt.

XII.  Darius,  having  filed  to  Babylon,  entreated  Alexander,
in  a  letter,  ''  to  give  him  permission  to  redeem  his  prisoners,"
offering  a  large  sum  for  their  ransom.  But  Alexander  demanded
his  whole  kingdom,  and  not  a  sum  of  money,  as  the  price  of
their  release.  Some  time  after,  another  letter  from  Darius
was  brought  to  Alexander,  in  which  one  of  his  daughters  was
offered  him  in  marriage,  and  a  portion  of  his  kingdom.
Alexander  replied  that  **  what  was  offered  was  his  own,**  and
desired  him  ''to  come  to  him  as  a  suppliant,  and  to  leave  the
disposal  of  his  kingdom  to  his  conqueror.'*  All  hopes  of  peace
being  thus  lost,  Darius  resumed  hostilities,  and  proceeded  to
meet  Alexander  with  four  hundred  thousand  infantry  and  a
hundred  thousand  cavalry.  On  his  march  he  was  informed
that  **  his  wife  had  died  of  a  miscarriage,  and  that  Alexander
had  mourned  for  her  death,  and  attended  her  funeral ;  acting,
in  that  respect,  not  from^ove,  but  merely  from  kindness  of
feeling  ;  as  Darius's  wife  had  been  visited  by  him  but  once,
though  he  had  often  gone  to  console  his  mother  and  her
little  daughters."

Darius  now  considered  himself  indeed  overcome,  since,  after
losing  so  many  battles,  he  was  surpassed  by  his  enemy  even
in  kmdnesses,  and  declared  that  it  was  a  consolation  to  him,


102  JUSTIN.  [B  XI.  GH.xm.

since  he  could  not  conquer,  to  be  conquered  by  such  an
enemy.  He  therefore  wrote  a  third  letter  to  Alexander,
thanking  him  for  not  having  acted  as  an  enemy  towards  his
family,  and  offering  him  a  larger  portion  of  his  Ungdom,  even
as  far  as  the  river  Euphrates,  another  of  his  daughters  in
marriage,  and  thirty  thousand  talents  for  the  other  prisoners.
To  this  Alexander  replied,  that  *'  thanks  were  needless  from
an  enemy;  that  nothing  had  been  done  by  him  to  flatter
Darius,  or  to  gain  the  means  of  mollifying  him,  with  a  view
either  to  the  doubtful  results^of  war,  or  to  conditions  of  peace ;
but  that  he  had  acted  from  a  certain  greatness  of  mind,  by
which  he  had  learned  to  flght  against  the  forces  of  his  ene-
mies, not  to  take  advantage  of  their  misfortunes;"  and  he
promised  at  the  same  time,  that  '*  he  would  comply  with  the
wishes  of  Darius,  if  he  would  be  content  to  be  second  to  him,
and  not  his  equal;  but  that  the  universe  could  not  (be
governed  by  two  suns,  nor  could  the  earth  with  safety  have
two  sovereigns;  and  that  he  must  consequently  either  prepare
to  surrender  on  that  day,  or  to  fight  on  the  next,  and  must
promise  himself  no  better  success  than  he  had  already
experienced.**

Xlll.  On  the  next  day  they  drew  up  their  armies ;  when,
on  a  sudden,  before  they  came  to  battle,  a  deep  sleep  fell  mi
Alexander,  who  was  wearied  with  making  arrangements.
Nothing  but  the  presence  of  the  king  being  wanting,  in  order
to  commence  the  ei^agement,  he  was  awakened,  though  with
difficulty,  by  Parmenio,  and  as  those  about  him  asked  the
reason  of  his  sleeping  in  the  midst  of  danger,  when  he  was
sparing  of  sleep  even  in  time  of  security,  he  answered  that
"  he  had  been  relieved  from  great  concern,  and  that  his  repose
was  occasioned  by  sudden  freedom  from  apprehension,  since
he  should  now  engage  with  the  forces  of  Darius  in  a  body;
whereas  he  had  dreaded,  if  the  Peisians  should  divide  their
army,  that  the  war  would  be  greatly  protracted.*'  Before  the
battle  commenced,  each  army  was  an  object  of  admiration  to
its  antagonists.  The  Macedonians  admired  the  host  of  men
opposed  to  them,  their  stature,  and  the  beauty  of  their
armour.  The  Persians  were  amazed  that  so  many  thousands
of  their  countrymen  had  been  defeated  by  so  small  a  fotee.
Nor  did  the  kings  forbear  to  ride  round  among  their  troops.
Darius  told  his  men,  that  '*  if  a  division  of  the  enemy  were


B.a  330.]  BATTLE  OF  ARBELA.  103

made,  scarcely  one  man  would  fall  to  ten*  of  his  own  armed
followers."  Alexander  exhorted  the  Macedonians  "  not  to  be
alarmed  at  the  numbers  of  the  enemy,  their  stature,  or  the
strangeness  of  their  complexion."  He  bade  them  remember
only  Qiat  "  they  were  now  fighting  for  the  third  time  with  the
same  adversaries;  and  not  to  imagine  that  they  had  been
rendered  braver  by  defeat,  as  they  would  bring  into  the  field
with  them  the  sad  recollection  of  former  disasters,  and  of  the
blood  shed  in  the  two  previous  engagements;*'  adding,  that
"Darius  had  the  greater  number  of  human  beings,  but  he
himself  the  greater  number  of  men."  He  admonished  them
"  to  despise  an  army  glittering  with  gold  and  silver,  in  which
they  would  find  more  spoil  than  danger,  since  victory  was  to
be  gained,  not  by  splendour  of  arms,  but  by  the  power  of  the
sword.**

XIV.  Soon  after,  the  battle  was  begun.  The  Mace-
donians rushed  upon  the  swords  presented  to  them,  with
contempt  for  an  enemy  whom  they  had  so  often  defeated.
The  Persians,  on  the  other  hand,  were  desirous  to  die  rather
than  be  conquered.  Seldom  has  there  been  so  much  blood
shed  in  a  battle.  Darius,  when  he  saw  his  army  repulsed,
wished  himself  to  die,  but  was  compelled  by  his  officers  to
flee.  Some  advising  that  the  bridge  over  the  Cydnus  should
be  broken  down,  in  order  to  stop  the  advance  of  the  enemy,
he  said  .that  "  he  would  not  provide  for  his  safety  in  such  a
way  as  to  expose  so  many  thousands  of  his  followers  to  the
foe  ;  and  that  the  road  which  was  open  to  himself,  ought  also
to  be  open  to  others.*  Alexander,  meanwhile,  made  the  most
hazardous  eflforts;  where  he  saw  the  enemy  thickest,  and
fighting  most  desperately,  there  he  always  threw  himself,
desiring  that  the  peril  should  be  his,  and  not  his  soldiers'.
By  this  battle  he  gained  the  dominion  over  Asia,  in  the  fiftl^
year  after  his  accession  to  the  throne.  His  victory  was  so
decisive,  that  after  it  none  ventured  to  rebel  against  him ;  and
the  Persians,  after  a  supremacy  of  so  many  years,  patiently

■  Very  similap  to  what  is  said  by  Agamemnon,  H.  ii,  of  the  com-
parative numbers  of  the  Greeks  and  Trojans  :

So  small  theu*  numbers,  that  if  wars  were  ceas'd,
And  Greece  triumphant  held  a  gen'ral  feast,
All  rank'd  by  tens ;  whole  decads,  when  they  dine,
Must  want  a  Trojan  slave  to  pour  the  wine^— Pope.


104  JUSTIN.  [B  XI.  CH.XV.

submitted  to  the  yoke  of  servitude.  After  rewarding  his
soldiers,  and  allowing  them  to  recruit  their  strength  for
thirty-four  days,  he  took  account  of  the  spoil.  He  afterwards
found  forty  thousand  talents  in  the  city  of  Susa.  Next  he
took  PersepoHs,  the  metropohs  of  the  kingdom  of  Persia,  a
city  which  had  been  eminent  for  many  years,  and  which  was
filled  with  the  spoils  of  the  world,  as  was  now  first  seen  at  its
destruction.  In  the  course  of  these  proceedings,  about  eight
hundred  Greeks  met  Alexander,  men  who  had  been  punished
in  captivity  by  mutilation  of  their  bodies,  and  who  entreated
that,  •*  as  he  had  delivered  Greece,  he  would  also  release  them
firom  the  cruelty  of  their  enemies."  Permission  was  given  to
them  to  go  home,  but  they  preferred  receiving  portions  of
land  in  Persia,  lest,  instead  of  causing  joy  to  their  parents  by
their  return,  they  should  merely  shock  them  by  the  horrid
spectacle  which  they  presented.

XV.  Meanwhile,  to  gain  the  favour  of  the  conqueror,  Darius
was  confined  in  golden  fetters  *  and  chains  in  a  village  of  the
Parthians  named  Thara;  the  immortal  gods,  I  suppose,
ordaining  that  the  empire  of  the  Persians  should  have  its
termination  in  the  country  of  those  who  were  to  succeed  them
in  dominion.t  Alexander,  hastening  his  march,  arrived  there
on  the  following  day,  when  he  found  Qiat  Darius  had  been  con-
veyed from  the  place  in  the  night,  in  a  covered  vehicle.
Directing  his  army  to  follow  him,  he  pursued  the  flying
prince  with  six  thousand  cavalry.  On  his  march  he  had  several
severe  encounters,  and  advanced  mapy  miles  without  finding
any  traces  of  Darius.  But  while  he  wsis  allowing  the  horses
time  to  rest,  one  of  the  soldiers,  going  to  a  neighbouring
spring,  found  Darius  in  the  vehicle,  wounded  in  several
places,  but  still  alive.  One  of  the  Persian  captives  being
brought  forward,  the  dying  prince,  knowing  from  his  voice
that  he  was  his  countryman,  said  that  "  he  had  at  least  this
comfort  in  his  present  sufferings,  that  he  should  speak  to  one
who  could  understand  him,  and  that  he  should  not  utter  his
last  words  in  vain."  He  then  desired  that  the  following
message  should  be  given  to  Alexander :  that  **  he  died  with-
out having  done  him  any  acts  of  kindness,  but  a  debtor  to  him

•  See  note  on  vi.  11.

t  The  Parthi^tns,  revolting  from  the  Syrians,  founded  a  new  empire,
B.C.  255. See  xli.  i,—Wetzd,


B.C.  329.]  DEATH  OP  DABIUS.  105

for  the  greatest,  since  he  had  found  his  feelings  towards  his
mother  and  children  to  be  those  of  a  prince,  not  of  a  foe ;  that
he  had  been  more  happy  in  his  enemy  than  in  his  relations,
for  by  his  enemy  life  had  been  granted  to  his  mother  and
children,  but  taken  from  himself  by  his  relatiyes,  to  whom  he
had  given  both  life  and  kingdoms  ;  and  that  such  a  requital
must  therefore  be  made  them  as  his  conqueror  should  please.
For  himself,  that  he  made  the  only  return  to  Alexander  which
he  could  at  the  point  of  death,  by  praying  to  the  gods  above
and  below,  and  the  powers  that  protected  kings,  that  the
empire  of  the  world  might  fall  to  his  lot.  That  he  desired
the  fsivour  of  a  decent  rather  than  a  magnificent  funeral ;  and,
as  to  avenging  his  death,  it  was  not  his  cause  alone  that  was
concerned,  but  precedent,  and  the  common  cause  of  all  kings,
which  it  would  be  both  dishonourable  and  dangerous  for  hun
to  neglect;  since,  in  regard  to  vengeance,  the  interests  of
justice  were  affected,  and,  in  regard  to  precedent,  thos^  of  the
general  safety.  To  this  effect  he  gave  him  his  right  hand,
as  the  only  pledge  of  a  king's  faith  to  be  conveyed  to  Alex-
ander." Then,  stretching  out  his  hand,  he  expired.

When  this  intelligence  was  communicated  to  Alexander,  he
went  to  see  the  body  of  the  dead  monarch,  and  contemplated
with  tears  a  death  so  unsuitable  to  his  dignity.  He  also
directed  his  corpse  to  be  buried  as  that  of  a  kmg,  and  his
relics  to  be  conveyed  to  the  sepulchres  of  his  ancestors.


BOOK  XII.


Greece  reeumes  hostilities  in  Alexander's  absence,  I — ^Expedition  of
Alexander,  king  of  Epirus,  into  Italy;  Scythia  invaded,  IL —
Alexander's  luxury ;  Thalestris ;  Alexander  assumes  the  Persian
dress,  IIL — Effects  of  his  conduct  on  his  troops ;  his  mode  of
conciliating  them,  lY. — Fktfmenio  and  Philotas  put  to  death;
further  conquests  of  Alexander ;  Bessns  delivered  up  to  justice,
y. — Death  of  Clitus ;  Alexander's  grief,  Y L — Alexander's  pride ;
his  march  to  the  east;  his  ardour  to  surpass  Bacchus  and
Hercules,  YIL— Overcomes  Poms,  YIIL— His  danger  among  the
Sygambri ;  reaches  the  mouth  of  the  Indus ;  marries  Statira,  IX.
X. — His  munificence ;-  he  suppresses  a  mutiny ;  death  of  Hephses-
tion,  XI.  XII. — ^Alexander  poisoned  by  the  contrivance  of  Anti-
pater,  Xm.  XIY.— His  death,  XY.— His  eulogy,  XYL

I.  Alexandeb  interred  the  soldiers,  whom  he  had  lost  in
the  pursuit  of  Darius,  at  great  expense,  and  distributed  thir-


106  JUSTIN.  Paxil.  CH.II.

teen  thousand  talents  among  the  rest  that  attended  him  in
that  expedition.  Of  the  horses,  the  greater  part  were  killed
hy  the  heat ;  and  those  that  sunrived  were  rendered  unfit  for
service.  All  the  treasure,  amounting  to  a  hundred  and  ninety
thousand  talents,  was  conteyed  to  Echatana,  and  Parmenio
was  entrusted  with  the  charge  of  it.  In  the  midst  of  these
proceedings,  letters  horn  Antipater  in  Macedonia  were  brought
to  Alexander,  in  which  the  war  of  Agis  king  of  Sparta  in
Greece,  that  of  Alexander  king  of  Epirus  in  Italy,  and  that  of
Zopytion  his  own  lieutenant-general  in  Scythia,  were  commu<^
nicated.  At  this  news  he  was  affected  with  various  emotions,
but  felt  more  joy  at  leiEUtiing  the  deaths  of  two  rival  kings,
than  sorrow  at  the  loss  of  Zopyrion  and  his  army.

After  the  departure  of  Alexander  &om  Macedonia,  almost
all  Greece,  as  if  to  take  advantage  of  the  opportunity  fot
recovering  their  liberty,  had  risen  in  arms,  yielding,  in  th&t
respect,  to  the  influence  of  the  Lacedsemonians,  who  alone
had  rejected  peace  £rom  Philip  and  Alexander,  and  had
scomed  the  terms  on  which  it  was  offered.  The  leader  in  this
insurrection  was  Agis,  king  of  the  Lacedaemonians,  but  Anti«
pater,  assembling  an  army,  suppressed  the  commotion  in  its
infancy.  The  slaughter,  however,  was  great  on  both  sides;
for  king  Agis,  when  he  saw  his  men  taking  to  flight,  dismissed
his  guards,  and,  that  he  might  seem  inferior  to  Alexander  in
fortune  only,  not  in  valour^  made  such  a  havoc  among  the
enemy,  that  he  sometimes  drove  whole  troops  before  him.  At
last,  overpowered  by  numbers,  he  fell  superior  to  all  in  glory.

II.  Alexander,  too,  the  king  of  Epirus,  having  been  invited
into  Italy  by  the  Torentines,  who  desired  his  assistance  against
the  Bruttians,  had  gone  thither  as  eagerly  as  if ,  in  a  division
of  the  world,  the  east  had  fiBillen  by  lot  to  Alexander,  the  son
of  his  sister  Olympias,  and  the  west  to  himself,  and  as  if  he
was  likely  to  have  not  less  to  do  in  Italy,  Africa,  and  Sicily,
than  Alexander  in  Asia  and  Persia.  To  this  was  added;  that
as  the  oracle  at  Delphi  had  forewatoed  Alexander  the  Great
against  treacheiy  in  Macedonia,  so  that  of  Jupiter  at  Dodona
had  admonished  the  other  Alexander  "  to  beware  of  the  city
Pandosia  and  the  river  Acheron ; "  and  as  both  these  were  in
Epirus,  and  he  was  ignorant  that  they  were  also  to  be  found
in  Italy,  he  had  the  more  eagerly  fixed  on  this  foreign  expe-
dition, in  hope  of  escaping  the  dangers  signified  in  €be  warn-


B.G.  830.] DEATH  OF  ALEXASDER  OF  EPIBUS.  107

ing.  On  his  arrival  in  Italy,  his  first  contest  was  with  the
Apulians ;  but  when  he  learned  the  destiny  appointed  to  their
4,  he  soon  concluded  a  p«««.and  aUiaLe'U  their  king.
The  chief  city  of  the  Apulians,  at  that  time,  was  Brundusium,
which  a  party  of  iEtolians  that  followed  Diomede,  a  leader
rendered  famous  and  honourable  by  his  achievements  at  Troy,
had  founded ;  but  being  expelled  by  the  Apulians,  and  having
recourse  to  some  oracle,  they  received  for  answer  that  "  they
would  possess  for  ever  the  place  which  they  had  sought  to  re-
cover," On  this  ground  they  demanded  of  the  Apidians  that
their  city  should  be  restored,  threatening  them  with  war  unless
the  demand  should  be  complied  with.  But  the  oracle  be*
coming  known  to  the  Apulians,  they  put  the  ambassadors  to
death,  and  buried  them  in  the  city,  that  they  might  have  a
perpetual  abode  there ;  and,  having  thus  given  the  oracle  a  ful-
filment, they  long  kept  possession  of  the  city.  Alexander,
hearing  of  this  occurrence,  and  having  great  respeist  for  th^
oracles  of  antiquity,  made  an  end  of  hostilities  with  the
Apulians.

He  engaged  also  in  war  with  the  Bruttians  and  Lucanians,
and  captured  several  cities ;  and  he  formed  treaties  and  alli-
ances with  the  Metapontines,  Fediculans,  and  Bomans.  But
the  Bruttians  and  Lucanians,  having  collected  reinforcements
fix)m  their  neighbours,  renewed  the  war  with  fresh  vigour;
when  the  king  was  slain  near  the  city  Pandosia  and  the  river
Acheron,  not  knowing  the  name  of  the  fatal  place  before  he
fell  in  it,  and  understanding,  as  he  was  expiring,  that  the
death,  for  fear  of  which  he  had  fled  from  his  countiy,  had  not
been  to  be  dreaded  in  his  country.  The  Thurians  ransomed
his  body  at  the  public  expense,  and  buried  it.

During  these  events  in  Italy,  Zopyrion,  who  had  been  left
governor  of  Pontus  by  Alexander  the  Great,  thinking  that,  if  he
did  not  attempt  something,  he  should  be  stigmatized  as  indo-
lent, collected  a  force  of  thirty  thousand  men,  and  made  war
upon  the  Scythians.  But  being  cut  off,  with  his  whole  army,
he  paid  the  penalty  for  a  rash  attack  upon  an  innocent  people.

III.  When  these  occurrences  were  reported  to  Alexander,
who  was  then  in  Parthia,  he  assumed  a  show  of  grief  on  ac-
count of  his  relationship  to  Alexander,  and  caused  the  army  to
mourn  for  three  days.  But  while  all  his  men  were  expecting^
as  if  the  war  had  been  ended,  to  return  to  their  country,  and


108  JUSTIN.  [B.Xn.  CH.IV.

were  embracing  in  ima^ation  their  wives  and  children,  he
called  a  general  assembly  of  the  troops ;  in  which  he  told
them  that  "  nothing  had  been  done  in  so  many  glorious  bat-
tles, if  the  barbarians  more  to  the  eastward  should  be  left
unmolested ;  that  he  had  not  sought  the  body,  but  the  throne,
of  Darius ;  and  that  those  who  had  revolted  from  his  govetn-
ment  must  be  punished."  Having,  by  this  speech,  revived  the
spirits  of  his  soldiers  for  new  exertions,  he  subdued  Hyrcania
and  the  Mardians.  Here  Thalestris,  or  Minithya,  queen  of
the  Amazons,  came  to  meet  him,  having  travelled  for  twenty-
five  days,  with  three  hundred  women  in  her  train,  and  through
extremely  populous  nations,  in  order  to  have  issue  by  him.
Her  appearance  and  arrival  was  a  cause  of  astonishment  to  all,
both  from  her  dress,  which  was  an  unusual  one  for  women,
and  from  the  object  of  her  visit.  To  gratify  her,  thirteen  days'
rest  was  allowed  by  the  king ;  and  when  she  thought  herself
pregnant,*  she  took  her  leave.

Soon  after,  Alexander  assumed  the  attire  of  the  Persian
monarchs,  as  well  as  the  diadem,  which  was  unknown  to  the
kings  of  Macedonia,  as  if  he  gave  himself  up  to  the  customs
of  tibose  whom  he  had  conquered.  And  lest  such  innovations
should  be  viewed  with  dislike,  if  adopted  by  himself  alone,
he  desired  his  friends  also  to  wear  the  long  robe  of  gold  and
purple.  That  he  might  imitate  the  luxury  too,  as  well  as
the  dress  of  the  Persians,  he  spent  his  nights  among  troops
of  the  king*s  concubines  of  eminent  beauty  and  birth.  To
these  extrav6igances  he  added  vast  magnificence  in  feasting ;
and  lest  his  entertainments  should  seem  jejune  and  parsi-
monious,* he  accompanied  his  banquets,  accor<Ung  to  the  osten-
tation of  the  eastern  monarchs,  with  games ;  being  utterly
unmindful  that  power  is  accustomed  to  be  lost^  not  gained,
by  such  practices.

IV.  During  the  course  of  these  proceedings,  there  arose
throughout  the  camp  a  general  indignation  tibat  he  had  so
degenerated  from  his  father  Philip  as  to  abjure  the  very  name
of  his  country,  and  to  adopt  the  manners  of  the  Persians,

*  Luxwria  dettructa.']  Grsevius,  not  knowing  what  to  make  of
destructa,  conjectures  restricta.  Wetzel  explains  the  words  thus :
''  Lest,  as  the  empire  of  the  Persians  was  destroyed,  the  luxury  of  the
Persians  should  seem  also  to  be  destroyed**  I  Incline  to  think  with
Grsevius  that  the  word  is  corrupt.


B.O.  327.] ALEXANDER'S  PMDE  AND  CRUELTY.  109

whom,  from  the  effect  of  such  manners,  he  had  overcome.
But  that  he  might  not  appear  to  be  the  only  person  who
yielded  to  the  vices  of  those  whom  he  had  conquered  in  the
field,  he  permitted  his  soldiers  also,  if  they  had  formed  a
connexion  with  any  of  the  female  captives,  to  marry  them ;
thinking  that  they  would  feel  less  desire  to  return  to  their
country,  when  they  had  some  appearance  of  a  house  and  home
in  the  camp,  and  that  the  fatigues  of  war  would  be  relieved
by  the  agreeable  society  of  their  wives. He  saw,  too,  that
Macedonia  would  be  less  drained  to  supply  the  army,  if  the
sons,  as  recruits,  should  succeed  their  veteran  fathers,  and
serve  within  the  ramparts  within  whick  they  were  bom,  and
would  be  likely  to  show  more  courage,  if  they  passed,  not  only
their  earliest  days  of  service,  but  also  their  infancy,  in  the
camp. This  custom  was  also  continued  under  Alexander's
successors. Maintenance  -was  provided  for  the  boys,  and
arms  and  horses  were  given,  them  when  they  grew  up ; and
rewards  were  assigned  to  the  fathers  in  proportion  to the
number  of  their  children. If  the  fathers  of  any  of  them  were
killed,  the orphans  notwithstanding  received  their  father's
pay  ; and  their  childhood  was  a  sort  of  military  service  in
various  expeditions. Inured  from  their  earliest  years  to  toils
and  dangers,  they  formed  an  invincible  army ; they  looked
upon  their  camp  as  their  country,  and  upon  a  battle  as  a
prelude  to  victory.

V.  Alexander,  meanwhile,  began  to  show  a  passionate
temper  towards  those  about  him,  not  with  a  princely  severity,
but  with  the  vindictiveness  of  an  enemy.  What  most  in-
censed him  was,  that  reflections  were  cast  upon  him  in  the
common  talk  of  the  soldiers,  for  having  cast  off  the
customs  of  his  father  Philip  and  of  his  country.  For  this
offence,  Parmenio,  an  old  man,  next  to  the  king  in  rank,  and
Ms  son  Philotas,  were  put  to  death ;  an  examination  by
torture  having  been  previously  held  on  both  of  them.  At
this  instance  of  cruelty,  all  the  soldiers,  throughout  the  camp,
began  to  express  their  displeasure,  being  concerned  for  the
fate  of  the  innocent  old  general  and  his  son,  and  saying,  at
times,  that  "  they  must  expect  nothing  better  for  themselves.**
These  murmurs  coming  to  the  knowledge  of  Alexander,  he,
fearing  that  such  reports  would  be  carried  to  Macedonia,  and
that  the  glory  of  his  victories  would  be  sullied  by  the  stain  of


110  JUSTIN.  [B.XI.  CH.Vl.

cruelty,  pretended  that  he  waB  going  to  send  home  some  of
his  fhends  to  give  an  account  of  his  successes.  He  ex-
horted his  soldiers  to  write  to  their  relatives,  as  they  would  now
have  fewer  opportunities  on  account  of  the  scene  of  warfare  he-
ing  further  from  home.  The  packets  of  letters,  as  they  were
given  in,  he  commanded  to  he  privately  hrought  to  him,  and:
having  learned  from  them  what  every  one  thought  of  him,  he  put
all  those,  who  had  given  un&vourahle  opinions  of  his  conduct,
into  one  regiment,  with  an  intention  either  to  destroy  them,  or  to
distribute  ihem  in  colonies  in  the  most  distant  parts  of  the  earth.
He  then  subdued  the  Drancse,  the  Evergetse,  the  ParymsBi,
the  Parapammeni,  the^daspii,  and  other  nations  that  dwelt  at
the  foot  of  Mount  Caucasus.

In  the  meantime  Bessus,  one  of  the  former  friends  of
Darius,  who  had  not  only  betrayed  his  sovereign,  but  put  him
to  death,  was  brought  to  Alexander  in  chains,  who,  that  he
might  be  punished  for  his  treachery,  delivered  him  to  the
brother  of  Darius  to  be  tortured,  considering  not  so  much  that
Darius  had  been  his  enemy,  as  that  he  had  been  the  friend  of
the  man  by  whom  he  had  been  killed.

That  he  might  leave  his  name  to  these  parts,  he  founded
the  city  of  Alexandria  on  the  river  Tanais,  completing  a  wall  six
miles  in  circuit  in  seventeen  days,  and  transplanting  into  it
the  inhabitants  of  three  cities  that  had  been  built  by  Cyrus.
He  also  built  twelve  cities  in  the  territories  of  the  Bactrians
and  Sogdians,  and  distributed  among  them  such  of  the
soldiers  as  he  had  found  mutinous.

YI.  After  these  proceedings,  he  invited  his  friends  on  some
particular  day,  to  a  banquet,  where  mention  being  made,  when
they  were  intoxicated,  of  the  great  things  achieved  by  Philip,
he  began  to  prefer  himself  to  his  father,  and  to  extol  the  vast-
ness  of  his  own  exploits  to  the  skies,  the  greater  part  of  the
company  agreeing  with  him;  and  when  Clitus,  one  of  the
older  guests,  trusting  to  his  hold  on  the  king's  friendship,  in
which  he  held  the  principal  place,  defended  the  memory  of
Philip,  and  praised  his  acts,  he  so  provoked  Alexander,  that
he  snatched  a  weapon  from  one  of  the  guards,  and  slew  him
with  it  in  the  midst  of  the  guests.  Exulting  at  the  murder,
too,  he  scoffed  at  the  dead  man  for  his  defence  of  Philip,  and
his  commendation  of  his  mode  of  warfare.  But  when  his
mind,  satiated  with  the  bloodshed,  grew  calm,  and  reflection


B.O.  3S7.]  ALEXANDER  KILI£  CLFTUS.  Ill

took  the  place  of  passion,  he  began,  as  he  contemplated  at
o;ne  time  ike  character  of  the  dead,  and  at  another  the  occasion
of  his  death,  to  feel  the  deepest  sorrow  for  the  deed ;  giieying
that  he  had  listened  to  his  father*s  praises  with  more  anger
than  he  ought  to  have  listened  to  insults  on  his  memory,  and
that  an  old  and  blameless  friend  had  been  slain  by  him  at  a
feast  and  carousal.  Driven,  therefore,  to  repentance,  with  the
same  vehemence  with  which  he  had  before  been  impelled  to
resentment,  he  determined  to  die.  Bursting  into  tears,  he  ^
embraced  the  dead  man,  laid  his  hand  on  hi^  wounds,  and
confessed  his  madness  to  him  as  if  he  could  hear;  then,
snatching  up  a  weapon,  he  pointed  it  against  his  breast,  and
would  have  committed  suicide,  had  not  his  friends  interposed.
His  resolution  to  die  continued  even  for  several  days  after ;
for  to  his  other  causes  of  sorrow  was  added  the  remembrance
of  his  nurse,  the  sister  of  Olitus,  on  whose  account,  though  she
was  far  away,  he  was  greatly  ashamed  of  his  conduct,  lament-
ing that  so  base  a  return  should  be  made  her  for  rearing  him ;
and  that,  in  the  maturity  of  life  and  conquest,  he  should  have
requited  her,  in  whose  arms  he  had  spent  his  infancy,  with
bloodshed  instead  of  kindness.  He  reflected,  too,  what  re-
marks and  odium  he  must  have  occasioned,  as  well  in  his  own
army  as  among  the  conquered  nations ;  what  fear  and  dislike
of  himself  among  his  other  friends ;  and  how  dismal  and  sad
he  had  rendered  his  entertainment,  appearing  not  less  to  be
dreaded  at  a  feast  than  when  armed  in  the  field  of  battle.
Parmenio  and  Philotas,  his  cousin  Amyntas,  his  murdered
stepmother  and  brothers,  with  Attains,  Euiylochus,  Pausanias,
and  other  slaughtered  nobles  of  Macedonia,  presented  them-
selves to  his  imagination.  He  in  consequence  persisted  in
abstaining  from  food  for  four  days,  until  he  was  drawn  from
his  purpose  by  the  prayers  of  the  whole  army,  who  conjured
him  **  not  to  lament  the  death  of  one,  so  far  as  to  ruin  them
all ;  since,  after  bringing  them  into  the  remotest  part  of  the
barbarians'  country,  he  would  leave  them  amidst  hostile
nations  exasperated  by  war.'*  The  entreaties  of  Oallisthenes
the  philosopher  had  great  effect  upon  him,  a  man  who  was
intimate  with  him  from  having  been  his  fellow-student
under  Aristotle,  and  who  had  been  subsequently  sent  for,
by  the  king  himself,  to  record  his  acts  for  the  perusal  of
posterity.


113  JUSttlN.  [B.XII CH.VII.

VII.  Soon  after,  he  gave  orders  that  he  should  not  be
approached  vnXh  mere  salutation,  but  with  adoration  ;*  a  point
of  Persian  pride  to  which  he  had  hesitated  to  advance  at  first,
lest  the  assumption  of  everything  at  once  should  excite  too
strong  a  feeling  against  him.  Among  those  who  refused  to
obey,  the  most  resolute  was  Gallisthenes ;  but  his  opposition
proved  fatal,  both  to  himself  and  to  several  other  eminent
Macedonians,  who  were  all  put  to  death  on  the  pretence  that
they  were  engaged  in  a  conspiracy.  The  custom  of  saluting
their  king  was  however  retained  by  the  Macedonians,  adora-
tion being  set  aside.f

He  then  marched  into  India,  that  he  might  have  his  empire
bounded  by  the  ocean,  and  the  extreme  parts  of  the  east.
That  the  equipments  of  his  army  might  be  suitable  to  the
glory  of  the  expedition,  he  mounted  the  trappings  of  the
horses,  and  the  arms  of  the  soldiers,  with  silver,  and  called  a
body  of  his  men,  from  having  silver  shields,  Argyraspides.J
On  arriving  at  the  city  Nysa,  he  ordered  the  inhabitants,  who,
from  their  confidence  in  being  protected  by  their  worship  of
Bacchus,  the  founder  of  their  city,  made  no  resistance,  to  be
spared ;  rejoicing  that  he  had  not  only  followed  the  god's  mili-
tary achievements,  but  also  his  footsteps.  He  then  led  his
army  to  view  the  sacred  mountain,  which  was  clad  with  the
adornments  of  nature,  the  vine  and  ivy,  as  beautifully  as  if  it
had  been  tilled  by  art,  and  decked  by  the  labour  of  liie  culti-
vator. But  the  troops,  as  they  approached  the  hill,  were
impelled,  by  a  sudden  commotion  in  their  minds,  to  utter
devout  cries  to  the  god,  and  ran  frantically  up  and  down,  to
the  amazement  of  tiie  king,  but  without  suffering  any  harm ;
whence  he  might  understand  that,  by  sparing  the  town,  he
had  not  so  much  secured  its  safety,  as  that  of  his  own  army.

He  next  proceeded  to  the  Daedalian  mountains,§  and  the
dominions  of  Queen  Cleophis;  who,  after  surrendering  to
Alexander,  recovered  her  throne  from  him  by  admitting  him

*  That  is,  with  a  kind  of  prostration.  See  Com.  Nep.  Con.  c.  3 ;
Justin,  vi.  2.  UpoaKvvUiv  rbv  PafrtXka  irpoairiirTovraQ,  Herod.  viL
136;  see  also  i  134.  On  the  question  about  paying  adoration  to
Alexander,  see  Arrian,  iv.  11.

f  Exjilo8d,'\  Scheffer  conjectures  expyhd,  which  Lemaire  approves.

Z  From  apyvpoc,  silver,  and  iLOTriq,  a  shield.

§  Monies  Dcedalos.]  Quintus  Curtius,  viii.  10,  has  Begio  qucB  JDcedcUa
vocatur  ;  but  there  is  no  allusion  to  the  name  Id  any  other  author.


B.€.  326.]  POBX>B  BBFEATED.  113

to  lier  bed ;  saving  by  her  eharms  what  she  had  been  uuable
to  secure  by  her  valour.  A  son  whom  she  had  by  him,  she
named  Alexander ;  and  he  afterwards  sat  upon  the  throne  of
the  Indians.  Queen  Cleophis,  for  allowing  her  chastity  to  be
violated,  was  thenceforward  called  by  the  Indians  the  royal
harlot.

Having  arrived,  in  his  course  through  India,  at  a  rock  of
extraordinary  ruggedness  and  altitude,  to  which  many  people
had  fled  for  refuge,  he  learned  that  Hercules  had  been  lun-
dered  from  taking  it  by  an  earthquake.  Seized  with  a  desire,
in  consequence,  to  go  beyond  die  exploits  of  Hercules,  he
made  himself  master  of  the  rock  with  the  utmost  exertion
and  peril,  and  received  submission  from  all  the  tribes  of  that
part  of  the  country.

YIII.  There  was  one  of  the  kings  of  India,  named  Poms,
equally  distinguished  for  strength  of  body  and  vigour  of  mind,
who,  hearing  of  the  &me  of  Alexander,  had  been  for  some
time  before  preparing  for  war  against  his  arrival.  Coming  to
battle  with  him,  accordingly,  he  directed  his  soldiers  to  attack
the  rest  of  the  Macedonians,  but  desired  that  their  king  should
be  reserved  as  an  antagonist  for  himseUl  Nor  did  Alexander
decline  the  contest ;  but  his  horse  being  wounded  in  the  first
shock,  he  fell  headlong  to  the  ground,  and  was  saved  by  his
guards  gathering  round  him.  Poms,  covered  with  a  number
of  wounds,  was  made  prisoner,  and  was  so  grieved  at  being
defeated,  that  when  his  life  was  granted  him  by  the  enemy,
he  would  neither  take  food  nor  suffer  his  wounds  to  be
Pressed,  and  was  scarcely  at  last  prevailed  upon  to  con-
iient  to  live.  Alexander,  from  respect  to  his  valour,  sent
him  back  in  safety  to  his  kingdom.  Here  he  founded  two
cities,  one  called  NicsBa,  and  the  other^  from  the  name  of  his
horse,  Bucephale.

He  then  overthrew  the  AdrestaB,  the  Gesteani,  the  Presidaa,
and  the  Gangaridte,  with  great  slaughter  among  their  troops.
When  he  had  reached  the  Guphites,  where  the  enemy  awaited
him  with  two  thousand  cavalry^  the  whole  army,  wearied  not
less  with  the  number  of  their  victories  than  with  their  toils  in
the  field,  besought  him  with  tears  that  "  he  would  at  length
make  an  end  of  war,  and  think  on  his  country  and  his  return;
considering  the  years  of  his  soldiers,  whose  remainder  of  life
would  acaicaly  suffice  for  their  journey  home.'* One  pointed

I


JU  jusmr.  [sixn.  OH.IZ.

to  his  hoary  hairs,  another  to  his  wounds,  another  to  his  bodj
worn  oat  with  an  age,  another  to  his  person  disfigured  with
scars,*  saying  "  that  they  were  the  only  m^i  who  had  endured
unintermitted  service  under  two  kings,  Philip  and  Alexander ;"
and  conjuring  him  in  conclusion  that  "  he  should  restore  theft
remains  at  least  to  the  sepulchres  of  their  fathers,  since  they
failed  not  in  zeal  hut  in  age ;  and  that,  if  he  would  not  spare
his  soldiers,  he  should  yet  spare  himself,  and  not  wear  out  his
good  fortune  hy  pressing  it  too  far."  Moved  with  these
reasonahle  supplications,  he  ordered  a  camp  to  be  formed,  as  if
to  mark  the  termination  of  his  conquests,  -of  greater  size  than
usual,  by  the  works  of  which  the  enemy  might  be  astonished,
and  an  admiration  of  himself  be  left  to  posterity.  No  task
did  the  soldiers  execute  with  more  alacrity.  After  great
slaughter  of  the  enemy,  they  returned  to  this  camp  with
mutual  congratulations.

IX.  From  hence  Alexander  proceeded  to  the  river  Acesines,
and  sailed  down  it  into  the  ocean.  In  his  way  he  received  the
submission  of  the  Hiacensanae  f  ^"^^  the  Silei,  whom  Hercules
settled ;  next  he  sailed  to  the  Ambri  and  Sigambri,{  who  met
him  with  eighty  thousand  foot  and  sixty  thousand  horse.
Gaining  the  victory  in  a  battle,  he  led  his  army  against  their
city ;  and  supposing,  as  he  looked  from  the  wall,  which  he  had
been  the  first  to  mount,  that  the  place  was  destitute  of
defenders,  he  leaped  down  into  the  area  of  the  city  without  a
single  attendant.  The  enemy,  seeing  him  alone,  gathered
round  upon  him  with  a  shout,  to  try  if  by  taking  one  life  they
could  put  an  end  to  war  in  the  world,  and  exact  vengeance  for
the  defeats  of  so  many  nations.  Alexander  vnthstood  them
with  equal  spirit,  fighting  alone  against  thousands.  It  is,
indeed,  incredible,  that  neither  the  multitude  of  enemies,  nor
the  thick  showers  of  javelins,  nor  the  loud  outcries  of  his
assailants,  could  in  the  least  alarm  him ;  and  that  he  alone
should  have  spread  havoc  and  terror  among  so  many  thousands.
But  seeing  that  he  was  likely  to  be  overpowered  by  numbers,

*  (Hcairicibua  exhomsta,']  ^slumita  cannot  surely  have  been  Justin'B
word. Faber  conjectures  dM/ncta.

f  Bongarsius  conjectures  AcemuBf  as  taking  their  name  from  the
neighbouring  river.

X  For  Ariitros  et  Siganibroe,  Fabricius,  from  Arrian,  and  Curtius,  ix.
4,  proposes  MaUoiet  Oxydraocu,  which  some  editors  have  adopted.


B.O.  824.] ALEXANDER  BETITBNS  TO  BABTLON,  ' 115

he  fixed  himself  against  the  trunk  of  a  tree  that  stood  by  the
wall,  by  the  help  of  which  he  long  resisted  a  host,  when,  his
danger  being  known,  his  friends  leaped  down  to  him,  many  of
whom  were  slain,  and  the  battle  continued  doubtful,  till  the
whole  army,  making  a  breach  in  the  wall,  came  to  his  aid.
Being  wounded  in  the  struggle  by  an  arrow,  and  likely  to
faint  through  loss  of  blood,  he  placed  his  knee  on  the  ground,
and  fought  till  he  had  killed  the  man  by  whom  he  had  been
wounded.  The  curing  of  the  wound  caused  him  more  suffer-
ing than  the  wound  itself.

X.  Being  at  length  restored  to  health,  after  there  had  been
great  despair  of  it,  he  sent  Polysperchon  with  the  army  to
Babylon,  while  he  himself,  with  a  select  band  of  followers,  went
on  board  the  fleet,  and  sailed  along  the  shore  of  the  ocean.
When  he  came  to  the  city  of  king  Ambiger,  the  inhabitants,
hearing  that  he  was  invincible  to  the  sword,  tipped  their  arrows
with  poison ;  and  thus  repulsing  the  enemy  from  their  walls
with  wounds  doubly  fatal,  they  killed  a  great  number  of  tbem,
Ptolemy,  with  many  others,  being  wounded,  and  seeming  to
be  at  the  point  of  death,  a  herb  was  shown  to  the  king  in  a
dream  as  a  cure  for  poison ;  this  being  taken  in  a  drmk,  he
was  freed  from  danger,  and  the  greater  part  of  the  army  were
saved  by  the  same  remedy.  Taking  ihe  city  afterwards  by
storm,  and  returning  to  the  fleet,  he  made  oblations  to  the
ocean,  praying  for  a  prosperous  return  to  his  country;  and
haying  thus,  as  it  were,  driven  his  chariot  round  the  goal,  and
fixed  the  boundaries  of  his  empire,  as  far  as  either  the  deserts
would  suffer  him  to  proceed  by  land,  or  the  sea  was  navigable,
he  sailed  up  the  mouth  of  the  river  Indus  with  the  tide.  There
he  built  the  city  Barce,  in  memory  of  the  exploits  achieved  by
him,  and  erected  altars,  leaving  one  of  his  friends  as  governor
of  the  Indians  on  the  coast.  As  he  intended  to  march  from
thence  by  land,  and  as  the  parts  in  the  middle  of  his  route^
were  said  to  be  dry,  he  ordered  wells  to  be  made  in  suitable
places,  from  which  he  got  abundance  of  fresh  water,  and  so
returned  to  Babylon.  Hither  many  of  the  conquered  people
sent  deputations  to  accuse  their  governors,  whom  Alexander,
without  any  regard  to  his  former  friendship  for  them,  com-
manded to  be  put  to  death  in  the  sight  of  the  deputies.

Soon  after  he  married  Statira,  the  daughter  of  king  Darius ;
but,  at  the  same  time,  he  gave  the  noblest  virgins,  chosen  from

I  d


116  JDSTiN. '  [B.x!n.  cH.xn.

all  the  conquered  natives,  as  wives  to  the  chiefs  of  the  Mace-
donians ;  in  order  that  the  impropriety  of  the  king's  conduct*
might  he  rendered  less  glaring  hj  the  practice  hecoming
general.

.  XI.  He  next  assembled  the  army,  and  promised  that  "  he
would  pay  all  their  debts  at  his  own  expense,"  so  that  they
might  cany  home  their  spoil  and  prizes  undiminished.  This
munificence  was  highly  prized,  not  only  for  the  sum  given,  hut
for  the  character  of  the  gift,  and  was  received  not  more  thank-
fully by  the  debtors  than  by  the  creditors,  exaction  being  as
troublesome  to  the  one  as  payment  to  the  other.  Twenty
thousand  talents  were  expended  in  this  largess.  Discharging
some  of  the  veterans,  he  recruited  the  army  with  younger
soldiers.  But  those  that  were  retained,  murmuring  at  the  dis-
charge of  the  older  men,  demanded  that  they  themselves  should
be  released  likewise ;  desiring  that  "  their  years,  not  of  life,
but  of  service,  should  be  counted,"  and  thiiJcing  it  reasonable
.that  "  those  who  had  been  enlisted  in  the  service  together,
should  together  be  set  free  from  the  service.*'  Nor  did  they
address  the  king  only  with  entreaties,  but  also  with  reproaches,
bidding  him  **  carry  on  his  wars  alone,  with  the  aid  of  his
father  Ammon,  since  he  looked  with  disdain  on  his  soldiers."
Alexander,  on  the  other  hand,  sometimes  upbraided  his  men,
and  sometimes  charged  them  in  gentle  terms,  **  not  to  tarnish
their  glorious  services  by  mutiny."  At  last,  when  he  could
produce  no  effect  by  words,  he  leaped  unarmed  from  his  tri-
bunal among  the  armed  multitude,  to  lay  hands  on  the  authors
of  the  mutiny ;  and  not  a  man  daring  to  oppose  him,  he  led
thirteen  of  them,  whom  he  had  seized  with  his  own  hand,  to
punishment.  Such  submission  to  death  did  the  fear  of  their
king  produce  in  the  men;  or  such  courage  in  inflicting
punishment  had  his  knowledge  of  military  discipline  given  the
king.

XII.  He  then  addressed  himself,  in  a  public  speech,  to  the
auxiliary  troops  of  the  Persians  apart  from  the  Macedonians.
He  extolled  their  constant  fidelity,  as  well  as  to  himself  as
to  their  former  kings ;  he  mentioned  the  kindnesses  which  he
had  shown  them,  saying  that  *^  he  had  never  treated  them  as

*  Crimen  regis."]  Crimen^  in  this  place,  has  not  the  ordinary  signifi-
cation of  crime,  \i\it  means  simply  opprohrvuM,  a  reproach,  dishonour*
.  *— JTofter.


aC.  324.]  DEATH  OF  HBPHiESTION.  117

a-  conquered  people,  but  always  as  sharers  in  his  successes ;
that  he  had  gone  over  to  the  usages  of  their  nation,  not  they
to  those  of  his  ;  and  that  he  had  mingled  the  conquerors  with
the  conquered  by  matrimonial  connexions.  And  now,"  he
added,  '^  he  would  entrust  the  guardianship  of  his  pcorson,  not
to  the  Macedonians  only,  bat  also  to  them.*'  Accordingly,  he
enrolled  a  thousand  of  their  young  men  among  his  body-
guard ;  and  at  the.  same  time  incorporated  into  his  army  a
portion  of  the  auxiliaries,  trained  after  the  discipline  of  the
M^edonians.  At  this  proceeding  the  Macedonians  were
mxKh  dissatisfied,  exclaiming  that  *'  their  enemies  were  put
into  their  places  by  their  king ;"  and  at  length  they  all  went
to  Alexander  in  a  body,  beseeching  him  with  tears  ''to  content
himself  rather  with  punishing  tlmn  ill-treating  them."  By
this  modest  forbearance  they  produced  such  an  effect  upon
him,  that  he  released  eleven  thousand  yeterans  more.  Of
his  own  friends,  too,  were  sent  away  the  old  men,  Polysperchon,
Clitus,  Gorgias,  ^olydamas,  Amadas,  and  Antigenes.  Of
those  that  were  sent  home  Graterus  was  appointed  leader,  and
commissioned  to  take  the  government  of  Macedonia  in  the
room  of  Antipater,  whom  he  sent  for,  with  a  body  of  recruits,
to  supply  the  place  of  Oraterus.  Pay  was  allowed  to  those
that  went  home,  as  if  they,  had  been  stiU  in  the  service.  In
the  course  of  those  proceedings,  Hepheestion,  one  of  his
friends,  died ;  a  man  who  was  a  great  fsivourite  with  Alex-
ander, at  first  on  account  of  his  personal  qualities  in  youth,
and  afterwards  from  his  servility.  Alexander  mourned
for  him  longer  than  became  bis  dignity  as  a  king,  built  a
monument  for  him  that  cost  twelve  thousand  talents,  and
gave  orders  that  he  should  be  worshipped  as  a  god.

XIII.  As  he  was  returning  to  Babylon,  from  the  distant
shores  of  the  ocean,  he  was  acquainted  that  embassies  from
the  Carthi^nians,  and  other  states  of  Africa,  as  well  as
from  the  Spsdns,  Sicily,  Gaul,  and  Sardinia,  and  some  also
from  Italy,  were  waiting  his  arrival  at  that  city.  So  power-
fully had  the  terror  of  his  name  diffused  itself  through  the
world,  that  all  nations  were  ready  to  bow  to  him  as  their
destined  monarch.  When  he  was  hastening  to  Babylon,
therefore,  to  hold  an  assembly,  as  it  were,  of  the  states  of  the
world,  one  of  the  Magi  warned  him  **  not  to  enter  the  city,"
for  that  the  "  place  would  be  ieital  to  him." He  accordingly


118  JUSTIN.  [RXII.  CH.XIV.

avoided  Babylon,  and  turned  aside  to  Borsippa,  a  city  on  the
other  side  of  the  Euphrates,  that  had  been  for  some  time
uninhabited.  Here  again  he  was  persuaded  by  Anaxarchus
the  philosopher,  to  slight  the  predictions  of  the  Magi  as
fallacious  and  uncertain  ;  observing  that,  *'if  things  were  fixed
by  &te,  they  were  unknown  to  mortals,  and,  if  they
were  dependent  on  the  course  of  nature,  were  unchangeable."
Eetuming,  therefore,  to  Babylon,  and  allowing  himself  several
days  for  rest,  he  renewed,  in  his  usual  manner,  the  entertain-
ments which  had  been  for  some  time  discontinued,  resigning
himself  wholly  to  mirth,  and  joining  in  his  cups  the  night  to  the
day.  As  he  was  returning,  on  one  occasion,  from  a  banquet,
Medius,  a  Thessalian,  proposing  to  renew  their  revelling,
invited  him  and  his  attendants  to  his  house.  Taking  up  a
cup,  he  suddenly  uttered  a  groan  while  he  was  drinking,  as  if
he  had  been  stabbed  with  a  dagger,  and  being  carried  half
dead  from  the  table,  he  was  excruciated  with  such  torture  that
he  called  for  a  sword  to  put  an  end  to  it,  and  felt  pain  at  the
touch  of  his  attendants  as  if  he  were  all  over  wounds.  His
fnends  reported  that  the  cause  of  his  disease  was  excess  in
drinking,  but  in  reality  it  was  a  conspiracy,  the  infamy  of
which  the 'power  of  his  successors  threw  into  tJie  shade.

XIV.  The  author  of  this  conspiracy  was  Antipater,  who,
seeing  that*  his  dearest  friends  were  put  to  death,  that
Alexander  Lyncestes,  his  son-in-law,  was  cut  off,  and  that  he
himself,  after  his  important  services  in  Greece,  was  not  so
much  liked  by  the  king  as  envied  by  him,  and  was  also
persecuted  with  various  charges  by  his  mother  Olympias;
reflecting,  too,  on  the  severe  penalties  inflicted,  a  few  days
before,  on  the  governors  of  the  conquered  nations,  and  hence
imagining  that  he  was  sent  for  from  Macedonia,  not  to  share
in  tiie  war,  but  to  suffer  punishment,  secretly,  in  order  to  be
beforehand  with  Alexander,  furnished  his  son  Oassander  with
poison,  who,  with  his  brothers  Philippus  and  lollas,  was
accustomed  to  attend  on  the  king  at  table.  The  strength  of
this  poison  was  so  great,  that  it  could  be  contained  neither  in
brass,  nor  iron,  nor  shell,  nor  could  be  conveyed  in  any  other
way  than  in  the  hoof  of  a  horse. Gassander  had  been  warned

*  In  the  original  there  is  no  grammatical  construction.  Either  the
text  has  been  mutilated,  or  Justin  commenced  his  sentence  in  one
way,  and  proceeded  with  it  in  another*


B.O.  323.] DEATH  OF  ALEXAllBEB.  119

to  trust  nobody  but  the  Thessalian  and  bis  brothers ;  alnd  hence
it  was  that  the  banquet  was  prepared  and  renewed  in  the  house
of  the  Thessalian.  Philippus  and  lollas,  who  used  to  taste  and
mix  the  king's  drink,  had  the  poison  ready  in  cold  water,
which  they  put  into  the  drink  after  it  had  been  tasted.

XY.  On  the  fourth  day,  Alexander,  findiag  that  death  was
inevitable,  observed  that  "  he  perceived  the  approach  of  the
fate  of  his  family,  for  the  most  of  the  ^acidao  had  died  under
thirty  years  of  age.'**'  He  then  pacified  the  soldiers,  who
were  making  a  tumult,  from  suspecting  that  the  king  was  the
victim  of  a  conspiracy,  and,  after  being  carried  to  the  highest
part  of  the  city,  admitted  them  to  his  presence,  and  gave
them  his  right  hand  to  kiss.  While  they  all  wept,  he  not  only
did  not  shed  a  tear,  but  showed  not  the  least  token  of  sorrow  ;
80  that  he  even  comforted  some  who  grieved  immoderately,
and  gave  others  messages  to  their  parents  ;  and  his  soul  was
as  undaunted  at  meeting  death,  as  it  had  formerly  been  at
meeting  an  enemy.  When  the  soldiers  were  gone,  he  asked
his  friends  that  stood  about  him,  *'  whether  they  thought  they
should  find  a  king  like  him?'*  AH  continuing  silent,  he  said
that,  "  although  he  did  not  know  that,  he  knew,  and  could
foretel,  and  almost  saw  with  his  eyes,  how  much  blood  Mace-
donia would  shed  in  the  disputes  that  would  follow  his  death,
and  with  what  slaughters,  and  what  quantities  of  gore,  she
would  perform  his  obsequies."  At  Isist  he  ordered  his  body  to
be  buried  in  the  temple  of  Jupiter  Ammon.  When  his
friends  saw  him  dying,  they  asked  him  "  whom  he  would  ap-
point as  the  successor  to  his  throne  ?"  He  replied,  "  The
most  worthy."  .  Such  was  his  nobleness  of  spirit,  that  though
he  left  a  son  named  Hercules,t  a  brother  called  Arid^us,;]:
and  his  wife  Roxane  §  with  child,  yet,  forgetting  his  relations,
he  named  only  '*  the  most  worthy "  as  his  successor ;  as
though  it  were  unlawful  for  any  but  a  brave  man  to  succeed  a
brave  man,  or  for  the  power  of  so  great  an  empire  to  be  left  to
any  but  approved  governors. But  as  if,  by  this  reply,  he  had

*  Intra  trigemmm  amttmL]  Yet  he  himself  had  passed  his  thirtieth
year. However  intra  will  not  bear  any  other  signification.

f  Son  of  Barsine. See  xL  10  ;  ziii  2 ;  ziv.  6.

X  See  ix.  8,  mit. ;  xiiL  2 ;  xiv.  5.

§  Daughter  of  Oxyartes,  king  of  the  Bactrians,  Diod.  Sic.  xviii.  3.
She  afterwards  gave  birth  to  Alexander  iEgus,  Comp.  Q.  Curt  x  8, 13;
JusUhi  xiiL  2^  6 ;  xv.  2.


ISO  JUSTIN.  [b.xii.  oh.xvl

sounded  the  signal  for  battle  among  his  friends,  or  had  thrown
the  apple  of  discord  amongst  them,  they  all  rose  in  emulation
against  each  other,  and  tried  to  gain  the  favour  of  the  army  by
secrotly  paying  court  to  the  common  soldiers.  On  the  sixth
day  from  the  commencement  of  his  illness,  being  unable  to
speak,  he  took  his  ring  from  his  finger,  and  gave  it  to  Perdieoas ;
an  act  which  tranquillized  the  growing  dissension  among  his
friends;  for  though  Perdiceas  was  not  expressly  named  his
successor,  he  seemed  intended  to  be  so  in  Alexander's
judgment.

XVI.  Alexander,  when  he  died,  was  thirty-three  years  and
one  month  old.  He  was  a  man  endowed  with  powers  of  mind
far  beyond  ordinary  human  capacity.  His  mother  Olympias,
the  night  in  which  she  conceived  him,  dreamed  that  she  was
entwined  with  a  huge  serpent ;  nor  was  she  deceived  by  her
dream;  for  she  certainly  bore  in  her  womb  a  conception
superior  to  mortality;  and  though  her  descent  from  the
^acidsB,  a  family  of  the  remotest  antiquity,  and  the  royaJ  dig-
nity of  her  father,  brother,  husband,  and  indeed  of  all  her
ancestors,  conferred  sufficient  splendour  upon  her,  yet  by  no
one's  influence  was  she  rendered  more  illustrious  than  that  of
her  son.  Some  omens  of  his  future  greatness  appeared  at  his
birth.  Two  eagles  sat  the  whole  of  the  day  on  which  he  was
bom  on  the  top  of  his  father's  palace,  giving  indication  of  his
double  empire  over  Europe  and  Asia.  The  very  same  day,
too,  his  father  received  the  news  of  two  victories,  one  in  the
war  with  the  lUyrians,  the  other  in  the  Olympic  games,  to
which  he  had  sent  some  four-horse  chariots ;  an  omen  which
portended  to  the  child  the  conquest  of  the  world.  As  a  boy,
he  was  ably  instructed  in  elementary  learning  ;  and,  when  his
boyhood  was  past,  he  improved  himself,  for  five  years,  under
his  famous  instructor  Aristotle.*  On  taking  possession  of
the  throne,  he  gave  orders  that  he  should  be  styled  '*  King  of
all  the  earth  and  of  the  world ;"  and  he  inspired  his  soldiers
with  such  confidence  in  him,  that,  when  he  was  present,  they

*  Sv^  Aristoide  doetore  indyto  [ornvwum  pkitotophorwn].  The  words
in  brackets,  condemned  by  Faber,  Scheffer,  and  Wetzel,  I  have
omitted  in  the  translation.  They  are  unsatisfactory,  both  as
regaMs  sense  and  construction  ;•  for  if  we  connect  them  with  doctore,
we  zqake  Ju&ti^  say  what  was  not  true ;  and  if  with  indyio,  we  give
that  adjective  a  government  to  which  it  has  no  right. , .


B.C.  323.]  MOURNING  FOB  ALEXANDER.  121

fibred  the  arms  of  no  enemy,  though  they  themselres  were
unarmed.  He,  in  consequence,  never  engaged  with  any  enemy
whom  he  did  not  conquer,  hesieged  no  city  that  he  did  not
take,  and  invaded  no  nation  that  he  did  not  suhjugate.  He
was  overcome  at  last,  not  by  the  prowess  of  any  enemy,  but
by  a  conspiracy  of  those  whom  he  trusted,  and  the  treachery
of  his  own  subjects.


BOOK  XIII.


Feetings  of  the  Maoedoniaiis  on  the  death  of  Alexander,  I.-  -
Opinions  of  the  generals  about  a  successor,  II. — Mutiny  among
the  infantry,  III. — Aridseus  chosen  king ;  the  generals  divide  the
provinoes  among  them,  lY. — The  uEtoHans  and  Athenians  fight
for  the  liberty  of  Greece ;  the  services  of  Demosthenes,  V. —
Perdiecas  defeats  the  Cappadocians ;  goes  to  war  with  Antigonus ;
conduct  of  Ptolemy,  VI. — ^Account  of  Cyrene,  VII. — ^Ptolemy
goes  to  war  with  Perdiccas ;  acts  of  Eumenes,  VIII.

I.  When  Alexander  was  thus  cut  off  in  the  flower  of  his'
age,  and  at  the  height  of  his  successes,  a  mournful  silence
prevailed  among  all  people  throughout  Babylon.  But  the
conquered  nations  could  not  give  credit  to  tiie  report  of  his
death,  because,  as  they  had  believed  him  to  be  invincible,
ihej  had  also  ccmoeived  that  he  was  immortal,  reflecting  how
frequently  he  had  been  snatched  from  imminent  destruction,
and  how  often,  when  he  was  given*  up  for  lost,  he  had  suddenly
presented  himself  to  his  soldiers,  not  only  safe,  but  victorious.
As  soon,  however,  as  the  report  of  his  death  was  confirmed,
all  the  barbarous  nations,  whom  he  had  shortly  before  subdued,
lamented  for  him,  not  as  an  enemy,  but  as  a  &ther.  The
mother,  too,  of  King  Darius,  who,  though  she  had  been
reduced,  after  the  death  of  her  son,  from  the  summit  of  royal
dignity  to  the  state  of  a  captive,  had,  till  that  day,  through  the
idndness  of  the  cmqueror,  neyer  felt  weary  "of  life,  com-
mitted  suicide  when  she  heard  of  the  death  of  Alexander ;
not  that  she  felt  more  for  an  enemy*  than  she  had  felt  for
her  son,  but  because  she  had  experienced  the  attention  of  a*
son  from  him  whom  she  had  feared  as  an  enemy.  The
Macedonians,  on  the  other  hand,  did  not  mourn  for  him  as  a,

. *  She  survived  the  .death  of  Darius,  and  killed  herself  on  that  of
Alexander.


123  JXJSTIK.  [B.Xin.  GH.II.

countryman,  and  a  prince  of  such  eminence,  but  rejoiced  at
his  death  as  at  that  of  an  enemy,  execrating  his  excessive
severity  and  the  perpetual  hardships  of  war  to  which  he
exposed them. The chiefs, moreover, were looking to
sovereignty  and  ofiBices  of  command ;  the  common  soldiers  to
the  treasury  and  heaps  of  gold,  as  a  prize  unexpectedly  pre-
sented to  ^eir  grasp ;  the  one  meditating  on  the  possibility
of  seizing  the  throne,  the  other  on  the  means  of  securing
wealth  and plenty; for  there  were  in. the  treasury  fifty
thousand  talents,  while  the  annual  tribute  produced  thirty
thousand. Nor  did  the  friends  of  Alexander  look  to  the
throne  without  reason ; for  they  were  men  of  such  ability  and
authority,  that  each  of  them  might  have  been  taken  for  a  king.
Such  was  the  personal  graceMness,  the  commanding  stature,
and  the  eminent  powers  of  body  and  mind^  apparent  in  all  of
them,  that  whoever  did  not  know  them,  woidd  have  thought
that  they  had  been  selected,  not  from  one  nation,  but  from
the  whole  earth. Never  before,  indeed,  did Macedonia,  or
any  other  country,  abound  with  such  a  multitude  of  distin-
guished men ;  whom  Philip  first,  and  afterwards  Alexander,
had  selected  with  such  skill,  that  they  seemed  to  have  been
chosen,  not  so  much  to  attend  them  to  war,  as  to  succeed
them  on  the  throne. Who  then  can  wonder,  that  the  world
was  conquered by such officers,  when  the  army  of the
Macedonians  appeared  to  be  commanded,  not  by  generals,  but
by  princes  ? — men  who  would  never  have  found  antagonists  to
cope  with  them,  if  they  had  not  quarrelled  with  one  another ;
while  Macedonia  would  have  had  many  Alexanders  instead  of
one,  had  not  Fortune  inspired  them  with  mutual  emulation  for
their  mutual  destruction.

II.  But,  when  Alexander  was  taken  ofP,  their  feelings  of
security  were  not  in  proportion  to  their  exultation ;  for  they
were  all  competitors  for  the  same  dignity ;  nor  did  they  fear
one  another  *  more  than  the  soldiery,  whose  licence  was  less
controllable,  and  whose  favour  was  more  uncertain.  Their
very  equality  inflamed  their  discord,  no  one  being  so  fer
superior  to  the  rest,  that  any  other  would  submit  to  him.

*  The  text  stands  thus  in  WetzeVs  and  Qronovius's  editions  :  nee
mimls  mUUes  iwvicem  ee  timehant.  Vorstius  and  Scheffer  advocate  the
other  reading,  guctm  invieetn  se,  which,  as  giving  mudi  better  sense,  I
have  followed!


B.€.  823.]  ABIDiEUS  PROCLAIMED  KING.  128

They  therefore  met  in  the  palace  under  arms  to  settle  the
present  state  of  afGurs.  Ferdiccas  gave  his  opinion  that
"  they  ought  to  wait  till  Eoxane  was  dehvered,  who  was  now
eight  months  gone  with  child  hy  Alexander ;  and  that,  if  she
brought  forth  a  boy,  he  should  be  appointed  his  father's  suc-
cessor. "  Meleager  argued  that "  their  proceedings  should  not  be
suspended  for  the  result  of  an  uncertain  birth ;  nor  ought  they
to  wait  till  kings  were  bom,  when  they  might  choose  from  such
as  were  already  bom ;  for  if  they  wished  for  a  boy,  there  was
a]t  Pergamus  a  son  of  Alexander  by  Barsine,  named  Hercules ;
or,  if  they  would  rather  have  a  man,  there  was  then  in  the
camp  AridsBus,  a  brother  of  Alexander,  a  person  of  courteous
manners^  and  acceptable  to  every  body,  not  only  on  his  own
account,  but  on  that  of  his  father  Philip.  But  that  Eoxane
was  of  Persian  origin,  and  that  it  was  unlawful  that  kings
should  be  chosen  for  the  Macedonians  from  the  blood  of  those
whose  kingdoms  they  had  overthrown;  a  choice  to  which
Alexander  himself  would  not  have  consented,  who,  indeed,
when  he  was  dying,  made  no  mention  of  Eoxane's  issue."
Ptolemy  objected  to  Aridseus  as  king,  "  not  only  on  account  of
the  meanness  of  his  mother  (he  being  the  son  of  a  courtezan
of  Larissa),  but  because  of  the  extraordinary  weakness  with
which  he  was  affected,,  lest,  while  he  had  the  name  of  king,
another  should  exercise  the  authority ; "  and  said  that  '*  it
would  be  better  for  them  to  choose  from  those  who  were  next
in  merit  to  the  king,  and  who  could  govern  the  provinces  and
be  entrusted  with  the  conduct  of  wars,  than  to  be  subjected  to
the  tyranny  of  unworthy  men  under  the  authority  of  a  king."
The  opinion  of  Perdiccas  was  adopted  with  the  consent  of  all ;
and  it  was  resolved  to  wait  for^  the  delivery  of  Eoxane ;  and,
if  a  boy  should  be  born,  they  appointed  Leonatus,  Perdiccas,
Cratems,  and  Antipater,  his  guardians,  to  whom  they  at  once
took  an  oath  of  obedience.

III.  When  the  cavaliy  had  also  taken  the  oath,  the
infantry,  indignant  that  no  share  in  the  deliberation  had
been  granted  to  them,  proclaimed  Aridseus,  the  brother  of
Alexander,  king,  chose  him  guards  from  their  own  body,  and
appointed  that  he  should  be  called  Philip,  after  the  name  of
his  father.  These  proceedings  being  reported  to  the  cavalry,
they  despatched  two  of  their  officers,  Attains  and  Meleager,
to  quell  the  excitement;  but  they,  hopiug  for  power  for  them-


1^4  JDOTDf.  [B.Xin.  OH.IV.

selves  by  flattering  the  multitude,  neglected  their  commission,
^  and  took  part  with  the  soldiers.  The  insurrection  soon
gathered  strength,  when  it  once  began  to  have  a  head  and
regular  management.  The  infantry  rushed  in  a  body,  under
arms,  to  the  palace,  with  a  resolution  to  cut  the  cavalry
to  pieces ;  but  the  cavalry,  hearing  of  their  approach,  retreated
in  haste  from  the  city,  and  after  pitching  their  camp,  began  to
threaten  the  infantiy  in  return.  Nor  did  the  animosity  of
the  chiefs,  meanwhile,  abate.  Attalus  despatched  some  of  his
men  to  assassinate  Perdiccas,  the  leader  of  the  opposite  party,
but,  as  he  was  armed,  the  assassins  durst  not  go  near  him,
though  he  freely  invited  them  to  approach;  and  such  was
the  resolution  of  Perdiccas,  that  he  went  of  his  own  ac-
cord to  the  infantry,  and,  summoning  them  to  an  assembly,
represented  to  them  the  atrocity  of  their  conduct' ;  admonish-
ing them  '*  to  consider  against  whom  they  had  taken  arms ;
that  they  were  not  Persians,  but  Macedonians  ;  not  enemies,
but  their  own  countrymen ;  most  of  them  their  kinsmen,  but
certainly  all  of  them  their  fellow  soldiers,  sharers  of  the  same
camp  and  of  the  same  dangers ;  that  they  would  present  a
striking  spectacle  to  their  enemies,  who  would  rejoice  at  the
mutual  slaughter  of  those  by  whose  arms  they  grieved  at
having  been  conquered ;  and  that  they  would  atone  with  their
own  blood  to  the  manes  of  their  slaughtered  adverearies."

IV.  Perdiccas  having  enforced  these  arguments  with  elo^
quence  peculiar  to  himself,  produced  such  an  effect  upon  the
infantry,  that  his  admonitions  were  obeyed,  and  he  was
unanimously  chosen  general.  The  cavalry,  soon  after,  being
reconciled  with  the  infantry,  agreed  to  have  Aridfleus  for
their  king.  A  portion  of  the  empire  was  reserved  for  Alexan-
der's son,  if  a  son  should  be  bom.  These  proceedings  they
conducted  with  the  body  of  Alexander  placed  in  the  midst  of
them,  that  his  majesty  might  be  witness  to  their  resolutions.
Such  an  arrangement  being  made,  Antipater  was  appointed
governor  of  Macedonia  and  Greece ;  the  charge  of  the  royal
treasure  was  given  to  Craterus ;  the  management  of  the  camp,
the  army,  and  the  war,  to  Meleager  and  Perdiccas  ;  and  king
AridflBus  was  commissioned  to  convey  the  body  of  Alexander  to
the  temple  of  Jupiter  Ammon.  Perdiccas,  who  was  still
enraged  at  the  authors  of  the  late  disturbance,  suddenly  gave
notice,  without  .the  knowledge  of  his<  colleague, that  there^


3.a  322.]  DIVISION  of  the  empire.  125

would  be  a  lustration  of  the  camp  on  tiie  foUowing  day  on
account  of  the  king's  death. Haying  drawn  up  the  th)ops
under  arms  in  the  field,  he,  with  the  general  consent,  gave
orders,  as  he  passed  along,  that  the  offenders,  selected  from
each  company,  should  be  secretly  given  up  to  pimishment.
'  On  his  return,  he  divided  the  provinces  among  the  chief  men,
in  order  both  to  remove  his  rivals  out  of  the  way,  and  to  make
the  gift  of  a  prefectship  appear  a  favour  from  himself. In  the
first  place  Egypt,  with  part  of  Afiica  and  Arabia,  fell  by  lot  to
Ptolemy,  whom  Alexander,  for  his  merit,  had  raisj^d-irom  the
'  condition  of  a  common  soldier ;  and  Cleomenes,  who  had  built
Alexandria,^  was  directed  to  put  the  province  into  his  hands.
Laomedon  of  Mitylene  was  allotted  Syria,  which  bordered  on
Ptolemy's  province;  Philotas, Gilicia ; and  Philo, Illyria.
Atropatus  was  set  over  the  Greater  Media ;  the  father-in-law  of
Perdiccas  over  the  Less. Susiana  was  assigned  to  Scynus,
and  the  Greater  Phrygia  to  Antigonus,  the  son  of  Philip.
Nearchus  received  Lycia  and  Pamphylia ;  Cassander,  Caria ;
and  Menander,  Lydia. The  Lesser  Phrygia  fell  to  Leonatus ;
Thrace,  and  the  coasts  of  the  Pontic  sea,  to  Lysimachus ;
Cappadocia  and  Paphlagonia  were  given  to  Eumenes. The
chief  command  of  ^e  camp  fell  to  Seleucus  the  son  of  Anti-
ochus. Cassander,  the  son  of  Antipater,  was  made  commander
of  the  king's  guards  and  attendants. In  Ulterior  Bactriana,
and  the  countries  of  India,  the  present  governors  were  allowed
to  retain  their  office. The  region  between  the  rivers  Hydas-
pes  and  Indus,  Taxiles  received. To  the  colonies  settled  in
India,  Python,  the  son  of  Agenor,  was  sent. Of  Paropa-
misia,  and  the  borders  of  mount  Caucasus,  Extarches  had  the
command. The  Arachosians  and  Gedrosians  were  assigned  to
Sibyrtius ;  the  Drances  and  Arci  to  Stasanor. Amyntas  was
allotted  the  Bactnans,  ScythaBus  the  Sogdians,  Nicanor  the
Parthians, Philippus the  Hyrcanians, Phrataphemes  the
Armenians,  Tloptolemus  the  Persians,  Peucestes  the  Baby-
lonians, Archon  the Pdasgians,  Arcesilaus,  Mesopotamia.
When  this  allotment,  likeagiftfrom  the  fates,  was  maxie  to

*  Oeomenes  had  indeed  authority  in  Africa  and  Europe,  but  it
.  was  only  over  the  revenues ;  and  it  was  not  he  that  built  Alexandria,

but  Dinocrates.  Hence  I  conjecture  that  there  is  some  deficiency
,  in  the  text.— iS^sft^er. See  YaL  Max.  i.  5;  Q.  Curt  iv.  8,  9;  Plin.

H.  N.  yiL  88.


126  JUSTIN.  [RXra.  CH.V.

each,  it  was  to  many  of  them  a  great  occasion  for  improving
their  fortunes ;  for  not  long  after,  as  if  they  had  divided  king-
doms, not  governments,  among  themselves,  they  became
princes  instead  of  prefects,  and  not  only  secured  great  power
to  themselves,  but  bequeathed  it  to  their  descendants.

y.  While  these  transactions  were  passing  in  the  east,  the
Athenians  and  iBtolians  proceeded  with  all  their  might  to
prosecute  the  war  which  they  had  begun  in  the  life  of  Alexander.
The  cause  of  the  war  was,  that  Alexander,  on  his  return  from
India,  had' written  certain  letters  to  Greece,  according  to  which
the  exiles  from  all  the  states,  except  such  as  had  been  convicted
of  murder,  were  to  be  recalled.  These  letters,  being  read
before  all  Greece,  assembled  at  the  Olympic  games,*  had
excited  a  great  commotion ;  because  many  had  been  banished,
not  by  legal  authority,  but  by  a  faction  of  the  leading  men,
who  were  a&aid  that,  if  they  were  recalled,  they  would  become
more  powerful  in  their  states  than,  themselves.  Many  states
therefore  at  once  expressed  open  discontent,  and  said  that
their  liberty  must  be  secured  by  force  of  arms.  The  leaders
among  them  all,  however,  were  the  Athenians  and  ^tolians.

This  being  reported  to  Alexander,  he  gave  orders  that  a
thousand  ships  of  war  should  be  raised  among  his  allies,  with
which  he  might  cany  on  war  in  the  west ;  and  he  intended  to
make  an  expedition,  with  a  powerful  force,  to  level  Athens  with
the  ground.  The  Athenians,  in  consequence,  collecting  an
army  of  thirty  thousand  men  and  two  hundred  ships,  went
to  war  with  Antipater,  to  whom  the  government  of  Greece  had
been  assigned ;  and  when  he  declined  to  come  to  battle,  and
sheltered  himself  within  the  walls  of  Heraclea,  they  besieged
him  there.  At  that  time  Demosthenes,  the  Athenian  orator,
who  had  been  banished  from  his  country  on  the  charge  of
taking  gold  from  Harpalus  (a  man  who  had  fled  from  Alex-
ander's severity),  bribing  him  to  prevail  on  the  cityf  to  go  to
war  with  Alexander,  happened  then  to  be  living  in  exile  at
Megara,  and  learning  that  Hyperides  was  sent  as  an  ambassa-
dor by  the  Athenians  to  persuade  the  Peloponnesians  to  join

*  In  mercatu  Olpmpiaco.]  "  For  at  those  games/'  says  Pythagoras  in
Cicero,  Tusc.  Qusest.  v.  3,  **  alu  corporibru  exerdtatis  gloriam  et  ndbUi'
totem  coroncB  petwnt ;  aUi  emendi  cmt  vendendi  gucBstu  et  lucro  d/wnunr
twr.'^—Wetzd,

f  We  must  read  quib  civUatem  impeHUTti,  with  Freinshemius,
Yorstius,  and  Lemaire.


B.a  322.]  ANTIPATBB— PBRDIOCAS.  127

in  the  war,  followed  him,  and,  by  his  eloquence,  brought  over
Sicjon,  Argos,  Corinth,  and  other  states,  to  the  Athenian
interest.  For  this  service  a  ship  was  sent  for  him  by  the
Athenians,  and  he  was  recalled  from  banishment.  Meanwhile
Leosthenes,  the  general  of  the  Athenians,  was  killed,  while  he
was  besieging  Antipater,  by  a  dart  hurled  at  him  from  the
wall  as  he  was  passing  by.  This  occurrence  gave  so  much
encouragement  to  Antipater,  that  he  ventured  to  break  down
the  Athenian  rampart.  He  then  sought  assistance  from
Leonatus,  who  was  soon  reported  to  be  approaching  with  his
army ;  but  the  Athenians  met  him  in  battle  array,  and  hef was
severely  wounded  in  an  action  of  the  cavalry,  and  died,
Antipater,  though  he  saw  -his  auxiliaries  defeated,  was  yet
rejoiced  at  the  death  of  Leonatus,  congratulating  himself  that
his  rival  was  taken  off,  and  his  force  added  to  his  own.  Taking
Leonatus*s  army  under  his  command,  therefore,  and  thinking
himself  a  match  for  the  enemy,  even  in  a  regular  battle,  he
immediately  released  himself  £rom  the  siege,  and  marched
away  to  Macedonia.  The  forces  of  the  Greeks,  too,  having
driven  the  enemy  *  from  the  territory  of  Greece,  went  ojff  to
their  several  cities.

yi.  Perdiccas,  in  the  meantime,  making  war  upon  Ariara-
thes,  king  of  the  Cappadocians,  defeated  him  in  a  pitched
battle,  but  got  no  other  reward  for  his  efforts  but  wounds  and
perils ;  for  the  enemy,  retreating  from  the  field  into  the  city,
killed  each  his  own  wife  and  children,  and  set  fire  to  his  house
and  all  that  he  possessed ;  throwing  their  slaves  too  into  the
flames,  and  afterwards  themselves,  that  the  victorious  enemy
might  enjoy  nothing  belonging  to  them  but  the  sight  of  the
conflagration  that  they  had  kindled.  Soon  after,  that  be
might  secure  royal  support  to  his  present  power,  he  turned
his  thoughts  to  a  marriage  with  Cleopatra,  sister  of  Alexander
the  Great,  and  formerly  wife  of  the  other  Alexander,t
her  mother  Olympias  showing  no  dislike  to  the  match.  But
he  wished  first  to  outwit  Antipater,  by  pretending  a  desire  for
an  alliance  with  him,  and  therefore  made  a  feint  of  asking  his
daughter  in  marriage,  the  more  easily  to  procure  from  him
young  recruits  from  Macedonia. Antipater,  however,  seeing

*  Pidso  KoBte^  The  word  fvho  is  inconsistent  with  what  is  said  jnst
above,  that  the  enemy  ''marched  away,"  coneestit,  of  their  own  accord.
•f  Alexander  of  Epirus. See  iz.  6.  ,


^lilS  JUSTIN.  [B.X![n.  GH.VL

through  his  deceit,  he  courted  two  wiyes  at  once,  but  obtained
neither.

Afterwards  a  war  arose  between  Antigonus  and  Perdiccas ;
Oraterus  and  Antipater  (who,  having  made  peace  with  the

'  Athenians,  had  appointed  Polysperchon  to  govern  Greece  and
Macedonia)  lent  their  aid  to  Antigonus. Perdiccas,  as  the

'  aspect  of  affairs  was  imfavourable,  called  AridsBus,  and  Alex-
ander the  Great's  son,*  then  in  Cappadocia  (the  charge  of
both  of  whom  had  been  committed  to  him),  to  a  consultation
concerning  the  management  of  the  war.  Some  were  of
opinion  that  it  should  be  transferred  to  Macedonia,  to  the  very
head  and  metropolis  of  the  kingdom,  where  Olympias,  the
mother  of  Alexander,  was,  who  would  be  no  small  support  to
their  party,  while  the  good  will  of  their  oountrymen  would  be
with  them,  from  respect  to  the  names  of  Alexander  and
Philip;  but  it  seemed  more  to  the  purpose  to  begin  with
Egypt,  lest,  while  they  were  gone  into  Macedonia,  Asia  should
be  seized  by  Ptolemy.  Paphlagonia,  Caria,  Lycia,  and
Phrygia  were  £issigned  to  Eumenes,  in  addition  to  the  provinces
which  he  had  already  received ;  and  he  was  directed  to  wait

'  in  those  parts  for  Graterus  and  Antipater,  Alcetas,  the  brother
of  Perdiccas,  and  Neoptolemus  being  appointed  to  support
him  with  their  forces.  The  command  of  the  fleet  was  given
to  Glitus.  Gilicia,  being  taken  from  Philotas,  was  given  to
Philoxenus.  Perdiccas  himself  set  out  for  Egypt  with  a  laige
army.  Thus  Macedonia,  while  its  commanders  separated  into
two  parties,  was  armed  against  its  own  vitals,  and  turned  the
sword  from  warring  against  the  enemy  to  the  effusion  of  civil
blood,  being  ready,  like  people  in  a  fit  of  madness,  to  hack  her
own  hands  and  limbs.  But  Ptolemy,  by  his  wise  exertions  in
Egypt,  was  acquiring  great  power ;  he  had  secured  the  favour
of  die  Egyptians  by  his  extraordinary  prudence;  he  had
attached  the  neighbouring  princes  by  acts  of  kindness  and
courtesy ;  he  had  extended  the  boundaries  of  his  kingdom  by
getting  possession  of  the  city  Gyrene,  and  was  grown  so  great
that  he  did  not  fear  his  enemies  so  much  as  he  was  feared  by
them.

VII.  Gyrene  was  founded  by  Aristceus,  who,  from  being
tongue-tied,  was  also  called  Battus. His  father  Grinus,  king  of

*  His  pogthumous  Bon  by  Boicuie,  oallAd  Alezaader  iBfliM. Seeadi.
15,  xuL  2.


B.C.  764.]  BATTUS  POUNDS  CYRBNE.  129

the  isle  of  Thera,  having  gone  to  the  oracle  at  Delphi,  to
implore  the  god  to  remove  flie  ignominy  of  his  son,  who  was
grown  up  but  could  not  speak,  received  an  answer  by  which  his
son  Battus  was  directed  *'  to  go  to  Africa,  and  found  the  city
of  Cyrene,  where  he  would  gain  the  use  of  his  tongue." This
response  appearing  but  a  jest,  by  reason  of  the  paucity  of  inha-
bitants in  the  island  of  Thera,  from  which  a  colony  was  desired
to  go  to  build  a  city  in  a  country  of  such  vast  extent  as  Alrioa,
the  matter  was  neglected. Some  time  after,  the  Therans,  as
being  guilty  of  disobedience,  were  forced  by  a  pestilence  to
comply  with  the  god's  directions. But  the  number  of  the
colonists  was  so  extremely  small  that  they  scarcely  filled  one
ship. Arriving  in  Africa,  they  dislodged  the  inhabitants  from
a  hill/named  Cyras,  and  took  possession  of  it  for  themselves,
on  account  both  of  the  pleasantness  of  the  situation  and  the
abundance  of  springs  in  it. Here  Battus,  their  leader,  the
strings  of  his  tongue  being  loosed,  began  to  speak;  which
circumstance,  as  one  part  of  the  god's  promises  was  fulfilled,
gave  them  encouragement  to  entertain  the  further  hope  of
building  a  city. Pitching  their  camp, accordingly, they
received  information  of  an  old  tradition,  that  Cyrene,  a  maiden
of  extraordinary  beauty,  was  carried  off  by  Apollo  from  Pelion,
a  mountain  in  Thessaly,  and  brought  to  that  very  mountain
on  which  they  had  seized  a  hill,  where,  becoming  pregnant  by
the god, she  brought  forth  four  sons,  Nomius, Aristseus,
Authocus,  and  Argaeus ;  and  that  a  party  being  sent  by  her
feither  Hypssus,  king  of  Thessaly,  to  seek  for  the  damsel.
were  so  attracted  by  the  charms  of  the  place,  that  they  settled
there  with  her. Of  her  four  sons,  it  was  said  that  three,
when  they  grew  up,  returned  to  Thessaly,  and  inherited  their
grandfather's  kingdom;  and  that  the  fourth,  Aristseus,  reigned
over  a  great  part  of Arcadia, and taught  mankind  the
management  of  bees  and  honey,  and  the  art  of  making  cheese,
and  was  the  first  that  observed  the  solstitial  risings  of  Sinus.*
On  hearing  this  account,  Battus  built  the  city  in  obedience

*  SoUtUi(Ue$  orius  mc2em.]  Aristseus  first  observed  the  risings  of
Sirins  or  the  dog-star,  and  taught  the  Ceans  to  watch  then^  and
sacrifice  to  it.  This  is  the  general  account,  and  that  Justin  may  agree
with  it,  I  think  that  we  should  read  sdstitiaUs  ortus  sideris.  By  aMi-
tiaU  ndut,  I  think  that  Sirius  is  meant,  because  it  rises  soon  after  tho
solstice. — Salmasius,

K


130  JUSTIN.  [B.xm.  cH.vm.

to  the  oracle,  calling  it  Cjrene,*  from  the  name  of  the
maiden.

VIII.  Ptolemy,  haying  increased  his  strength  from  the
forces  of  this  city,  made  preparations  for  war  against  the
coming  of  Perdicoas.  But  the  hatred  which  Perdiccas  had
incurred  by  his  arrogance  did  him  more  injury  than  the  power
of  the  enemy ;  for  his  allies,  detesting  Ms  overbearingness,
went  over  in  troops  to  Antipater.  Neoptolemus,  too,  who  had
been  left  to  support  Eumenes,  intended  not  only  to  desert
himself,  but  also  to  betray  the  force  of  his  party;  when
Eumenes,  understanding  his  design,  thought  it  a  matter  of
necessity  to  engage  the  traitor  in  the  field.  Neoptolemus,
being  worsted,  fled  to  Antipater  and  Polysperchon,  and  per-
suaded them  to  surprise  Eumenes,  by  marching  without  inter-
mission, while  he  was  full  of  joy  for  his  victory,  and  freed
from  apprehension  by  his  own  flight  But  this  project  did
not  escape  Eumenes;  the  plot  was  in  consequence  turned
upon  the  contrivers  of  it ;  and  they  who  expected  to  attack
him  unguarded,  were  attacked  themselves  when  they  were  on
their  march,  and  wearied  with  watching  through  the  previous
night.  In  this  battle,  Polysperchon  was  killed.t  Neoptolemus,
too,  engaging  hand  to  hand  with  Eumenes,  and  maintaining  a
long  struggle  with  him,  in  which  both  were  wounded  more  than
once,  was  at  last  overpowered  and  fell.  Eumenes,  therefore,
being  victorious  in  two  successive  battles,  supported  in  some
degree  the  spirits  of  his  party,  which  had  been  cast  down  by
the  desertion  of  their  allies.  At  last,  however,  Perdiccas
being  killed,J  Eumenes  was  declared  an  enemy  by  the  army,
togeSier  with  Pitho,  Illyrius,  and  Alcetas,  the  brodier  of  Per-
diccas ;  and  the  conduct  of  the  war  against  them  was  com-
mitted to  Antigonus.

*  The  word  agiiko,  which  Faber,  ;Seheff(Br9  and  Lemaire  imite  in
condemning,  I  have  not  translated.

t  This  is  a  mistake,  for  Justin,  xiv.  5,  speaks  of  him  as  being  alive.
Bongarsius  and  others  have  supposed  that  Justin  wrote  OrcOeTUB
instead  of  PoLytpercfvon,  but  it  seems  to  be  otherwise,  for  Orosius
(iii.  28),  who  follows  Justin,  has  the  same  account  of  Polysperchon's
daath.  That  it  was  Craterub  who  was  killed,  and  not  PolysperchoDp
appears  from  Com.  Nep.  Sum.  c.  4.  See  ako  Plut.  Bum.  c.  9 ;  Diod.
Sic.  xviii.  88.

X  By  his  own  cavalry,  when  he  wanted  to  cross  the  Kile ;  Biod.  Sio.
Kviu.  ZZ—Zl,—Wassd,


131


BOOK  XIV.

Conduct  of  Eumenei^  in  the  war  with  AntigonuB,  I. — Bemg  unsuccess-
ful, he  flees  to  the  Argyvaspides,  IL-^They,  being  defeated,  resolve
to  deliver  Eumenes  to  Antigonus,  III. — Eumenes  addresses  the
army;  he  and  the  Argyraspides  fall  into  the  power  of  Anti-
gonus,  IV.— Proceedings  of  Cassander  and  Olympias,  V. — ^Death
of  Olympias,  VI.

I.  When  Eumenes  found  that  Perdiccas  was  slain,  that  he
himself  was  declared  an  enemy  by  the  Macedonians,  and  that
the  conduct  of  the  war  against  him  was  committed  to  Anti-
gonus,  he  at  once  inade  known  the  state  of  affairs  to  his
troops,  lest  report  should  either  exaggerate  matters,  or  alarm
the  minds  of  the  men  with  the  unexpected  nature  of  the
events ;  designing  at  the  same  time  to  learn  how  they  were
affected  towards  him,  and  to  take  his  measures  according  to
the  feeling  expressed  by  them  as  a  body.  He  boldly  gave
notice,  however,  that  **  if  any  one  of  them  felt  dismayed  at
the  news,  he  had  full  liberty  to  depart/'  By  this  declaration
he  so  strongly  attached  them  to  his  side,  that  they  all  imme-
diately exhorted  him  to  prosecute  the  war,  and  protested  that
**  they  would  annul  the  decrees  of  the  Macedonians  with  their
swords."  Having  then  led  his  army  into  iEtolia,*  he  exacted
contributions  from  the  different  cities,  and  plundered,  like  an
enemy,  such  as  refused  to  pay.  Next  he  went  tQ  Sardis,  to
Cleopatra,  the  sister  of  Alexander  the  Great,  that  with  her
influence  he  flight  encourage  his  captains  and  chief  officers,
who  would  think  that  the  royal  authority  was  on  that  side  on
which  the  sister  of  Alexander  stood.  Such  veneration  was
there  for  the  greatness  of  Alexander,  that  the  influence  of  his
sacred  name  was  sought  even  by  means  of  women.

When  he  returned  to  his  camp,  letters  were  found  scattered
through  it,  in  which  great  rewards  were  offered  to  any  that
should  bring  the  head  of  Eumenes  to  Antigonus.  -This
coming  to  his  knowledge,  Eumenes,  asseiabling  his  men,  first
offered  them  his  congratulations  that  "  none  had  been  found

*  So  stands  the  name  in  WetzeVs  text,  and  in  most  others,  except
that  of  Tauchnitz,  which  has  .^olia,  the  conjecture  of  Glareanus.
But  Isaac  Vossius  conjectures  yCftt^one,  from  a  passage  of  Ptolemy,
who  gives  that  name  to  a  part  of  Armenia  Minor,  lying  to  the  north-east
^  Gapp«4p<}ii^  Vossiufik's  foggestion  is  approved  by  Voratius  and  Faber.

K  2


132  JUSTIN.  [B.xrv.  CH.n.

Among  them  who  preferred  the  expectation  of  a  reward  stained
with  blood  to  the  obligation  of  his  military  oath."  He  then
craftily  added  that  these  letters  had  been  forged  by  himself  to
sound  their  feelings ;  but  that  his  life  was  in  the  hands  of
them  all ;  and  that  neither  Antigonus  nor  any  other  general
would  be  willing  to  conquer  by  such  means  as  would  afford
the  worst  of  examples  against  himself."  By  acting  thus,  he
both  preserved  for  the  present  the  attachment  of  such  as  were
wavering,  and  made  it  likely  that  if  anything  similar  should
happen  in  future,  the  soldiers  would  think  that  they  were  not
tampered  with  by  the  enemy,  but  sounded  by  their  own  general.
All  of  them  in  consequence  zealously  offered  him  their  services
for  the  guard  of  his  person.

II.  In  the  meantime  Antigonus  came  up  with  his  army,
and  having  pitched  his  camp,  offered  battle  on  the  following
day.  Nor  did  Eumenes  delay  to  engage  with  him;  but,
being  defeated,  he  fled  to  a  fortress,  where,  when  he  saw  that
he  must  submit  to  the  hazard  of  a  siege,  he  dismissed  the
greater  part  of  his  army,  lest  he  should  either  be  delivered  to
the  enemy  by  consent  of  the  multitude,  or  the  sufferings  of  the
siege  should  be  aggravated  by  too  great  a  number.  He  then
sent  a  deputation  to  Antipater,  who  was  the  only  general  that
seemed  a  match  for  the  power  of  Antigonus,  to  entreat  his  aid ;
and  Antigonus,  hearing  that  succour  was  despatched  by  him  to
Eumenes,  gave  up  the  siege.  Eumenes  was  thus  for  a  time,
indeed,  relieved  from  fear  of  death ;  but,  as  so  great  a  portion
of  his  army  was  sent  away,  he  had  no  great  hope  of  ultimate
safety.  After  taking  eveiything  into  consideration,  therefore,
he  thought  it  best  to  apply  to  the  Argyraspides  of  Alexander
the  Great,  a  body  of  men  that  had  never  yet  been  conquered,  and
radiant  with  the  glory  of  so  many  victories.  But  the  Argyras-
pides disdained  all  leaders  in  comparison  with  Alexander,  and
thought  service  under  other  generals  dishonourable  to  the
memoiy  of  so  great  a  monarch.  Eumenes  had,  therefore,  to
address  them  with  flattery ;  he  spoke  to  each  of  them  in  the
language  of  a  suppliant,  calling  them  his  "  fellow-soldiers,**
his  '*  patrons,"  or  his  **  companions  in  the  dangers  and  exploits
of  the  east ; "  sometimes  styling  them  **  his  refuge  for  pro-
tection, and  his  only  security ; "  saying  that  "  they  were
the  only  troops  by  whose  valour  the  east  had  been  subdued  ;
the  only  troops  that  had  gone  beyond  the  achievements  of


B.C.  315.]  EUHEKES.  133

Bacchus  and  tlie  monuments  of  Hercules;  that  by  them
Alexander  had  become  great,  by  them  had  attained  divine
honours  and  immortal  glory;"  and  he  begged  them  "to
receive  him,  not  so  much  in  the  character  of  a  general,  as  in
that  of  a  fellow-soldier^  aSid  to  allow  him  to  be  one  of  their
body."  Being  received  on  these  terms,  he  gradually  suc-
ceeded, first  by  giving  them  hints  individually,  and  afterwards
by  gently  correcting  whatever  was  done  amiss,  in  gaining  the
sole  command.  Nothing  could  be  done  in  the  camp  without
him ;  nothing  managed  without  the  aid  of  his  judgment.

III.  At  length,  when  it  was  announced  that  Antigonus  was
approaching  with  his  army,  he  obliged  them  to  march  into  the
field ;  where,  slighting  the  orders  of  their  general,  they  were
defeated  by  the  bravery  of  the  enemy. In  this  battle  they
lost,  with  their  wives  and  children,  not  only  their  glory  from
80  many  wars,  but  also  the  booty  obtained  in  their  long  service.
But  Eumeaes,  who  was  the  cause  of  their  disaster,*  and  had
no  other  hope  of  safety  remaining,  encouraged  them  after  their
repulse,  assuring  them  that  *'  they  had  the  superiority  in  courage,
as  five  thousand  of  the  enemy  had  been  slain  by  them ;  and
that  if  they  persevered  in  the  war,  their  enemies  would  gladly
sue  for  peace;  "  adding,  that  "  the  losses,  by  which  they  esti-
mated their  defeat,  were  two  thousand  womdn,  and  a  few  chil-
dren and  slaves,  which  they  might  better  recover  by  conquering,
than  by  yielding  the  victory.*' The  Argyraspides,  on  the  other
hand,  declared  that  **  they  would  neither  attempt  a  retreat,
after  the  loss  of  their  property  and  wives,  u<Mr  would  they  war
against  their  own  children,"t  &i^d  pursued  him  vdth  reproaches
**  for  having  involved  them,  when  they  were  returning  home
after  so  many  years  of  completed  service,  and  with  the  fruits
of  so  many  enterprises,  and  when  on  the  point  of  being
disbanded,  in  fresh  efibrts  and  vast  struggles  in  the  field ;  for
having  deluded  them,  when  they  were  recalled,  as  it  were,
firom  their  own  hearths,  and  firom  the  very  threshold  of  their
country,  with  vain  promises;  and  for  not  allowing  them,  after
having  lost  all  the  gains  of  their  fortunate  service,  to  support
quietly  under  their  defeat  the  burden  of  a  poor  and  unhappy

*  AtKjtor  dadiB.]  Inasmuch  as  he  had  impelled  them  to  take  the
field.— ITrfzrf.

f  The  Argyraspides  were  veterans,  and  some  of  them,  doubtless,  had
sons  in  the  army  to  which  they  were  now  opposed.


1 34  JUSTIN.  [B.  XIV.  OH.  IV.

old  age."  Immediately  after,  without  the  knowledge  of  their
leaders,*  they  sent  deputies  to  Antigonus,  requesting  that  "  he
would  order  what  was  theirs  f  to  be  restored  to  them.'*  Anti-
gonus promised  that  "  he  would  restore  what  they  asked,  if
they  would  deliver  up  Eumenes  to' him."  Hearing  of  this
reply,  Eumenes,  with  a  few  others,  attempted  to  flee,  but
being  brought  back,  and  finding  his  condition  desperate,  he
requested,  as  a  great  crowd  gathered  around  him,  to  be  allowed
to  address  the  army  for  the  last  time.

lY.  Being  desired  by  them  all  to  speak,  and  silence  being
made,  and  his  chains  loosed,  he  held  out  his  hand,  fettered  as
he  was,  and  said,  **  Soldiers,  ye  behold  the  dress  and  equip-
ments of  your  general,  which  it  is  not  any  one  of  the  enemy
that  has  put  upon  me ;  for  that  would  be  even  a  consolation
to  me ;  but  it  ia  you  that  have  made  me  of  a  conqueror  con-
quered, and  of  a  general  a  prisoner.  Four  times  X  within  the
present  year  have  you  bound  yourselves  by  oath  to  obey  me ;
but  on  that  point  I  shall  say  xiothing,  for  reproaches  do  not
become  the  unfortunate.  One  fiEivour  only  I  entreat,  that,  if
the  performance  of  Antigonus's  promises  depends  on  my  life,
you  would  allow  me  to  die  among  yourselves ;  for  to  him  it
signifies  nothing  how  or  where  I  ^1,  and  I  shall  be  delivered
from  an  ignominious  end.  If  I  obtain  this  request,  I  release
you  from  the  oath  by  which  you  have  so  often  devoted  your-
selves to  me.  Or  if  you  are  ashamed  to  offer  violence  to  me
at  my  entreaty,  give  me  a  sword,  and  permit  your  genetal  to
do  for  you,§  without  the  obligation  of  an  oath,  that  which  you
have  taken  an  oath  to  do  for  your  general."  Not  being  able,
however,  to  obtain  his  request,  he  changed  his  tone  of  entreaty
to  that  of  anger,  and  exclaimed,  "  May  the  gods,  then,  the
avengers  of  perjury,  look  down  in  judgment  upon  you,  ye
accursed  wretches,  and  bring  upon  you  such  deaths  as  you  have
brought  upon  your  leaders.  It  was  you,  the  same  who  now
stand  before  me,  that  were  lately  sprinkled  wif^  the  blood  of

*  Eumenes,  and  thoae  who  adhered  to  him ;  those  fbw  with  whom
he  afterwards  attempted  to  esoape.

t  Their  wives,  children,  and  money.

:j:  Quater,]  Three  times,  says  Cornelius  Nepos  in  his  life  of  Eu-
menes.— Bonga/rsim*  Perhaps  we  should  here  read  quieter, — Ber-
neceerut*

§  Namely,  to  die.


B.O.  315.]  DEATH  OF  EUMENES.  IS5

Ferdiocas,  and  that  planned  a  similar  end  for  Antipater.  You
would  even  have  killed  Alexander  himself,  if  it  had  been  pos-
sible for  him  to  fall  by  a  mortal  hand :  *  what  was  next  to  it,t
you  harassed  him  with  your  mutinies.  I,  the  last  victim  of
your  perfidy,  now  pronounce  on  you  these  curses  and  impreca-
tions :  may  you  live  your  whole  Uves  in  poverty,  far  from  your
country,  in  this  camp  where  you  are  exiled ;  and  may  your  own.
arm^,  by  which  you  have  killed  more  generals  of  your  own  than
of  your  enemies,  sink  you  in  utter  destruction."  Then,  full  of
indignation,  he  began  to  walk  before  his  guards  towards  the
camp  of  Antigonus.  The  army  followed,  surrendering  their
general,  and  being  themselves  made  prisoners;  and,  leading  up
a  triumph  over  themselves  to  the  camp  of  their  conqueror,
resigned  to  him,  together  with  their  own  persons,  all  their
honour  gained  under  king  Alexander^  and  the  palms  and
laurels  of  so  long  a  warfare;  and,  that  nothing  might  be
wanting  to  the  procession,  the  elephants  and  auxiliaries  of  the
east§  brought  up  the  rear.  This  single  victory  was  so  far  more
glorious  to  Antigonus  than  so  many  other  victories  had  been  to
Alexander,  that  whereas  Alexander  subdued  the  east,  Anti-
gonus defeated  those  by  whom  the  east  had  been  subdued.
These  conquerors  of  the  world,  then,  Antigonus  distributed
among  his  army,  restoring  to  them  what  he  had  taken  in  the
victory;  and , directed  that  Eumenes,  whom,  from  regard  to
their  former  friendship,  he  did  not  allow  to  come  into  his  pre-
sence, should  be  committed  to  the  care  of  a  guard.

y.  In  the  meantime  Eurydice,  the  wife  of  king  Aridffius,
when  she  learned  that  Polysperchon  was  returning  f^m  Greece
into  Macedonia,  and  that  Olympias  was  sent  for  by  him,  being
prompted  by  a  womanish  emulation,  and  taking  advantc^e  of
her  husband's  weakness,  whose  duties  she  took  upon  herself,
wrote  in  the  king's  name  to  Polysperchon,  desiring  him  ''  to
deliver  up  the  army  to  Cassander,  on  whom  the  king  had  con-
ferred the  government  of  the  kingdom." She  made  a  similar

*  This  IB  quite  at  Tarianoe  with  Justin's  account  of  AJaacander's
death.

t  All  the  editions,  I  believe,  have  qwod  maxinmm  erat;  I  follow
the  conjecture  of  Freinshemius  (ad  Flor.  ii.  6,  8),  qtuxi  proximtim  ercU.

X  Omnia  cMupicia  regis  Alexandri]  C!ommoda  praeliis  felicibus,
duce  rege,  parta. — Wetzel,

{  AuxUia  OrientaUck]  The  Persian  soldiers  that  had  been  in  Alex-
ander's army.


136  JUSTIN.  [B.XIV.  CH.VI.

communication  to  Antigonus,  in  a  letter  which  she  wrote  to  him
in  Asia.  Cassander,  attached  to  her  hy  such  a  favour,  managed
everything  according  to  the  will  of  that  amhitious  woman.
Marching  into  Greece,  he  made  war  upon  several  cities ;  by
the  calamities  of  which,  as  by  a  fire  in  the  neighbourhood,  the
Spartans  were  alarmed,  and,  distrusting  their  power  in  arms,
enclosed  their  city  (which  they  had  always  defended,  not  with
walls,  but  with  their  swords)  with  works  of  defence,  in  disre-
gard both  of  the  predictions  of  the  oracles,  and  of  the  ancient
glory  of  their  forefiathers.  Strange,  that  they  should  have  so
far  degenerated  from  their  ancestors,  that,  when  the  valour  of
the  citizens  had  been  for  many  ages  a  wall  to  the  city,  the
citizens  could  not  now  think  themselves  secure  unless  they  had
yralla  to  shelter  them.  But  during  the  course  of  these  pro-
ceedings, the  disturbed  state  of  Macedonia  obliged  Cassander
to  return  home  from  Greece;  for  Olympias,  the  mother  of
Alexander  the  Great,  coming  from  Epirus  to  Macedonia,  with
-^Eacides,  king  of  the  Molossians,  attending  her,  and  being
forbidden  to  enter  the  country  by  Eurydice  and  king  Aridaeus,
the  Macedonians  being  moved,  either  by  respect  for  the
memory  of  her  husband,  or  the  greatness  of  her  son,  ,or  by  the
indignity  with  wTiich  she  was  treated,  went  over  to  Olympias,
by  whose  order  both  Eurydice  and  the  king  were  put  to  death,
he  having  held  the  kingdom  six  years  since  the  decease  of
Alexander.

VI.  But  neither  did  Olympias  reign  long ;  for  having  com-
mitted great  slaughter  among  the  nobility  throughout  the
country,  like  a  furious  woman  rather  than  a  queen,  she  turned
the  favour  with  which  she  was  regarded  into  hatred.  Hearing,
therefore,  of  the  approach  of  Cassander,  and  distrusting  the  Mace-
donians, she  retired,  with  her  daughter-in-law  Roxane,  and  her
grandson  Hercules,  to  the  city  of  Pydna.  Deidamia,  the  daugh-
ter of  king  -^acides,  and  Thessalonice,  her  step-daughter,  ren-
dered illustrious  by  the  name  of  Philip,  who  was  her  father,  and
many  others,  wives  of  the  leading  men,  a  retinue  showy  rather
than  serviceable,  attended  her  on  her  journey.  When  the
news  of  her  retreat  was  brought  to  Cassander,  he  marched
immediately,  with  the  utmost  expedition,  to  Pydna,  and  laid
siege  to  the  city.  Olympias,  distressed  with  famine  and
the  sword,  and  the  wearisomeness  of  a  long  siege,  surrendered
herself  to  the  conqueror,  stipulating  only  for  lil'e. But  Cas-


B.C.  315.]  OLYMPIAS  KILLED.  137

Sander,  on  summoning  the  people  to  an  assembly,  to  inquire
**  what  they  would  wish  to  be  done  with  Olympias,"  induced
the  parents  of  those  whom  she  had  killed  to  put  on  mourn-
ing apparel,  and  expose  her  cruelties;  when  the  Mace-
donians, exasperated  by  their  statements,  decreed,  without
regard  to  her  former  majesty,  that  she  should  be  put  to  death ;
utterly  unmindful  that,  by  liie  labours  of  her  son  and  her  hus-
band, they  had  not  only  lived  in  security  among  their  neigh-
bours, but  had  attained  to  vast  power,  and  even  to  the  conquest
of  the  world.  Olympias,  seeing  armed  men  advancing  towards
her,  bent  upon  her  destruction,  went  voluntarily  to  meet  them,
dressed  in  her  regal  apparel,  and  leaning  on  two  of  her  maids.
The  executioners,  on  beholding  her,  struck  with  the  recollection
of  her  former  royal  dignity,*  and  with  the  names  of  so  many  of
their  kings,  that  occurred  to  their  memory  in  connexion  with
her,  stood  still,  until  others  were  sent  by  Cassander  to  despatch
her ;  she,  at  the  same  time,  not  shrinking  from  the  sword  or
the  blow,  or  crying  out  like  a  woman,  but  submitting  to  death
like  the  bravest  of  men,  and  suitably  to  the  glory  of  her
ancient  race,  so  that  you  might  have  perceived  the  soul  of
Alexander  in  his  dying  mother.  As  she  was  expiring,  too,  she
is  said  to  have  settied  her  hair,t  and  to  have  covered  her  feet
with  her  robe,  that  nothing  unseemly  might  appear  about  her.
After  these  events,  Cassander  married  Thessalonice,  the
daughter  of  kin^  Aridseus,  and  sent  the  son  of  Alexander,  J
with  his  mother,  to  the  citadel  of  Amphipolis,  to  be  kept  under
giiard.

•  Forimn>A  majestcUis  prioris.

+  Wetzel's  text  has,  Insuper  expvrams  captUis  et  veste  crura  cotUexiase
fertur.  Some  manuscripts,  as  Grsevius  and  Scheffer  state,  have  comp'
gisae  vnsvper  eicpirans  captUos  et  veste  crwra,  &c.,  which  I  have  followed ;
for  as  Grsevius  and  others  ask,  how  could  she  cover  her  feet  with  her
hair  ?  Scheffer  conjectures  cooperuiBse  capiUia  oa ;  Grsevius,  papiUaa
veste  et  crura  corUexisse;  but  both  these  attempts  are  inferior  to  the
reading  compsisse.  &c.

X  Alexander  ^gus,  with  his  mother  Roxane.


138


BOOK  XV.

War  of  Antigonus  against  his  opponents ;  defeat  of  his  son  Demetrius,
L — Cruelty  of  Cassander  towards  the  family  of  Alexander  t^e
Great ;  successes  of  Antigonus,  II. — Acts  of  Lysimachus,  III. —
Account  of  Seleucus ;  of  Sandrocottus ;  death  of  Antigonus,  lY.

T.  Perdiccas  and  his  brother,  with  Eumenes  and
Polysperchon,  and  other  leaders  of  the  opposite  party,  being
killed,  the  contention  among  the  successors  of  Alexander
seemed  to  be  at  an  end ;  when,  on  a  sudden,  a  dispute  arose
among  the  conquerors  themselves;  for  Ptolemy,  Cassander,
and  Lysimachus,  demanding  that  *'  the  money  taken  amongst
the  spoil,  and  the  provinces,  should  be  divided,"  Antigonus
said  i3a&t  "  he  would  admit  no  partners  in  the  advantages  of  a
war  of  which  he  alone  had  undergone  the  perils."  And  that
he  might  seem  to  engage  in  an  honourable  contest  with  his
confederates,  he  gave  out  that  "  his  object  was  to  avenge  the
death  of  Olympias,  who  had  been  murdered  by  Cassander,  and
to  release  the  son  of  Alexander,  his  king,  with  his  mother,
from  their  confinement  at  Amphipolis."  On  hearing  this
news,  Ptolemy  and  Cassander,  forming  an  alliance  with
Lysimachus  and  Seleucus,  made  vigorous  preparations  for  war
by  land  and  sea.  Ptolemy  had  possession  of  Egypt,  with  the
greater  part  of  Africa,  Cyprus,  and  Phcenicia.  Macedonia  and
Greece  were  subject  to  Cassander.  Antigonus  had  taken
possession  of  Asia  and  the  eastern  countries.

Demetrius,  the  son  of  Antigonus,  was  defeated  in  the  first
engagement  by  Ptolemy,  at  Gamala.*  In  this  action,  the
renown  gained  by  Ptolemy  for  his  moderation  was  greater
than  that  which  he  obtained  from  the  victory  itself ;  for  he  let
the  friends  of  Demetrius  depart,  not  only  with  their  baggage,
but  with  presents  in  addition;  and  he  restored  Demetrius
himself  all  his  private  property,  together  v^th  his  family,
making,  at  the  same  time,  this  honourable  declaration,  that
"he  had  not  engaged  in  the  war  for  plunder,  but  for  the
maintenance  of  Ms  own  character,  being  indignant  that  when
the  leaders  of  the  opposite  faction  were  conquered,  Antigonus
claimed  the  fruits  of  their  common  victory  for  himself."

XL  During  these  transactions,  Cassander,  returning  from
♦  Near  Gaza. Diod.  Sic.  xix.  84.—  Wetzel.


B.C.  306.]  CASSANDEE— PTOLEMY.  189

Apolionia,  fell  in  with  the  AntariatsB,*  who,  having  abandoned
their  country  on  account  of  the  vast  number  of  frogs  and  mice
that  infested  it,  were  seeking  a  settlement.  Fearing  that
they  might  possess  themselves  of  Macedonia,  he  made  a
compact  with  them,  received  them  as  allies,  and  assigned
them  lands  at  the  extremity  of  the  country.  Afterwards,  lest
Hercules,  the  son  of  Alexander,  who  had  nearly  completed
his  fourteenth  year,  should  be  called  to  the  throne  of
Macedonia  tlurough  the  influence  of  his  father's  name,  he
sent  secret  orders  that  he  should  be  put  to  death,  together
with  his  mother  Barsine,  and  that  their  bodies  should  be
privately  buried  in  the  earth  lest  the  murder  should  be
betrayed  by  a  regular  funeral.f  As  if,  too,  he  had  previously
incurred  but  small  guilt,  first  in  the  case  of  the  king  himself,^
and  afterwards  in  diat  of  his  mother  Qlympias  and  her  son,
he  cut  off  his  other  son,  and  his  mother  Roxane,  with
fflmilar  treachery ;  as  though  he  could  zH>t  obtain  the  throne
of  Macedonia,  to  which  he  aspired,  otherwise  than  by  crime.

Ptolemy  meanwhile  engaged  a  second  time  with  Demetrius
at  sea ;  §  and,  having  lost  his  fleet,  and  left  the  victory  to  the
enemy,  fled  back  to  Egypt,  whither  Demetrius  sent
Leontiscus,  the  son  of  Ptolemy,  his  brother  Menelaus,  and
his  friends,  with  all  their  baggage,  being  induced  to  this  act  by
like  kindness  previously  shown ||  to  himself;  and  that  it
Blight  appear  that  they  were  stimukted,  not  by  hatred,  but  by
desire  of  glory  and  honour,  they  vied  with  one  another,  even
amidst  war  itself,  in  kindnesses  and  services. So  much  more

*  Wetzel,  in  bis  text^  has  the  old  reading  Ahderitas,  but  ^cpreBses
himself,  in  his  notes,  in  favour  of  Freinshemius's  conjecture,  Antarir
atcu,  from  Biodor.  Sic.  zx.  19,  and  Athen.  viii.  2 ;  which  Grsevius
adopted.  The  Antariatse  bordered  on  Dardania  and  Pseonia.  See
Strabo,  lib.  zix.  The  inhabitants  of  the  island  of  Gyarus  are  also
said  by  Pliny,  H.  N.  viii.  43,  to  have  been  driven  from  their  country
by  mice ;  also  those  of  Troas,  x.  85.

f  SepuUurd.]  That  is,  by  burning  the  bodies  on  a  funeral  pile. —

t  See  zii.  14.

§  Ckim  Ikmetrio  navaU  praiio  Ueratd  consfredUwr,]  **  There  was,**  says
Schefier,  "  no  previous  battle  by  sea,  as  is  apparent  from  Diod.  Sic.  lib.
zix. ;  and  the  adverb  iteratb  is,  therefore,  to  be  referred,  not  to  pralio,
but  to  conffreditm'.  He  had  engaged  with  Demetrius  previously  by
Umd ;  he  now  engages  him  a  second  time  hy  9Wl"

II  See  c.  1,  tub  fin.


140  JCJSTIN.  [B.XV.  CH.m.

honourably  were  wars  then  conducted  than  private  friend-
ships are  now  maintained !  *

Antigonus,  being  elated  with  this  victory,  gave  orders  that
he  himself,  as  well  as  his  son  Demetrius,  should  be  styled
king  by  the people. Ptolemy  also, that he might not
appear  of  less  authority  among  his  subjects,  was  called  king
by  his  army. Gassander  and  Lysimachus,  too,  when  they
heard  of  these  proceedings,  assumed  regal  dignity  themselves.
They  all  abstained,  however,  from  tcJsing  the  insignia  of
royalty,  as  long  as  any  sons  of  their  king  survived. Such
forbearance  was  there  in  them,  that,  though  they  had  the
power,  they  yet  contentedly  remained  without  the  distinction
of  kings,  wlule  Alexander  had  a  proper  heir. But  Ptolemy
and  Gassander,  and  the  other  leaders  of  the  opposite  faction,
perceiving  that  they  were  individually  weakened  by  Antigonus,
while  each  regarded  the  war,  not  as  the  common  concern  of  all,
but  as  merely  affecting  himself,  and  all  were  unwilling  to  give
assistance  to  one  another,  as  if  victory  would  be  only  for  one,
and  not  for  all  of  them,  appointed,  after  encouraging  each
other  by  letters,  a  time  and  place  for  an  interview,  and
prepared  for  the  contest  with  united  strength. Gassander,
being  unable  to  join  in  it,-  because  of  a  war  near  home,
despatched  Lysimachus  to  the  support  of  his  allies  with  a  large
force.

III.  Lysimachus  was  of  a  noble  family  in  Macedonia,  but
was  exalted  far  above  any  nobility  of  birth  by  the  proofs  which
he  had  given  of  personal  merit,  which  was  so  great,  that  he
excelled  all  those  by  whom  the  east  was  conquered,  in  great-
ness of  mind,  in  philosophy,  and  in  reputation  for  prowess.
For  when  Alexander  the  Great,  in  his  anger,  had  pretended
that  Gallisthenes  the  philosopher,  for  his  opposition  to  the
Persian  mode  of  doing  obeisance,  was  concerned  in  a  plot  that
had  been  formed  against  him,  and,  by  cruelly  mangling  all  his
limbs,  and  cutting  off  his  ears,  nose,  and  lips,  had  rendered
him  a  shocking  and  miserable  spectacle,  and  had  had  him  car-
ried about,  also,  shut  up  in  a  cage  with  a  dog,  for  a  terror  to
others,  Lysimachus,  who  was  accustomed  to.  listen  to  Gallis-
thenes, and  to  receive  precepts  of  virtue  from  him,  took  pity

*  A  foolish  observatioxL  Did  Justin  or  Trogus  suppose  that  friend*
ships  were  better  observed  in  the  days  of  Gassander  and  Demetrius
th^  in  his  own  ?


k


B.C.  306.]  LYSIMACHUS— SELBUCUS.  141

on  so  great  a  man,  undergoing  punishment,  not  for  any  crime,
but  for  freedom  of  speech,*  and  furnished  him  with  poison  to
relieve  him  from  his  misery. At  this  act  Alexander  was  oo
displeased,  that  he  ordered  Lysimachus  to  be  exposed  to  a
fierce  lion ;  but  when  the  beast,  furious  at  the  sight  of  him,
had  made  a  spring  towards  him,  Lysimachus  plunged  his
hand,  wrapped  in  his  cloak,  into  the  lion's  mouth,  and,  seizing
fast  hold  of  his  tongue,  kiUed  him. This  exploit  being  related
to  the  king, his  wonder  at  it  ended  in  pleasure,  and  he
regarded  Lysimachus  with  more  affection  than before, on
account  of  his  extraordinary  bravery. Lysimachus,  likewise,
endured  the  ill-treatment  of  the  king  with  magnanimity,  as
that  of  a  parent. At  lastj  when  all  recollection  of  this  affair
was  effaced  from  the  king's  mind,  Lysimachus  was  his  only
attendant  in  an  excursion  through  vast  heaps  of  sand,  when
he  was  in  pursuit  of  some  ffying  enemies,  and  had  left  his.
guards  behind  him  in  consequence  of  the  swiftness  of  his
horse. His  brother  Philip,t  having  previously  attempted  to
do  him  the  same  service,  had  expired  in  the  king's  arms.
Alexander,  however,  as  he  alighted  from  his  horse,  happened
to  wound  Lysimachus  in  the  forehead  with  the  point  of  his
spear,  so  severely  that  the  blood  could  not  by  any  means  be
stopped,  till  the  king,  taking  off  his  diadem,  placed  it  on  his
head  by  way  of  closing  the  wound ;  an  act  which  was  the  first
omen  of  royal  dignity  to  Lysimachus. And  after  the  death  of
Alexander,  when  the  provinces  were  divided  among  his  sue
cessors,  the  most  warlike  nations  were  assigned  to  Lysimachus
as  the  bravest  of  them  all ;  so  far,  by  general  consent,  had  he
the  pre-eminence  over  the  rest  in  military  merit.

IV.  Before  the  war  with  Antigonus  was  commenced  by
Ptolemy  and  his  allies,  Seleucus,  on  a  sudden,  leaving  the
Greater  Asia,J  came  forward  as  a  fresh  enemy  to  Antigonus.
The  merit  of  Seleucus  was  well  known,  and  his  birth  had
been  attended  with  extraordinary  circumstances.  His  mother
Laodice,  being  married  to  Antiochus,  a  man.  of  eminence
among  Philip's  generals,  seemed  to  herself,  in  a  dream,  to
have  conceived  from  a  union  with  Apollo,  and,  after  becoming

*  LibertcUia.']  LiberUu  pro  Ubertate  loquendi. Sic  ssepe  et  alii. —

t  The  brother  of  Lysimachus. See  Q.  Curt  viii.  2,  35.
X  In  opposition  to  Asia  Minor.


14Q  JUSTIN.  [B.XV  CH  IV.

pregnant,  to  have  received  from  him,  as  a  reward  for  her  com-
pliance, a  ring,  on  the  stone  of  which  was  engraved  an  anchor,

and  which  she  was  desired  to  give  to  the  child  that  she  shoald
bring  forth.  A  ring  similarly  engraved,  which  was  found  the
next  day  in  the  bed,  and  the  figure  of  an  anchor,  which  was
visible  on  the  thigh  of  Seleucus  when  he  was  bom,  made  this
•  dream  extremely  remarkable.  This  ring  Laodice  gave  to
Seleucus,  when  he  was  going  with  Alexander  to  the  Persian
war,  informing  him,  at  the  same  time,  of  his  pat^nity.  After
the  death  of  Alexander,  having  secured  dominion  in  the  east,
he  built  a  city,  where  he  established  a  memorial  of  bis  two-
fold origin ;  for  he  called  the  city  Antioch  from  the  name  of
his  father  Antiochus,  and  consecrated  the  plains  near  the  city
to  Apollo.  This  mark  of  his  paternity  continued  also  among
his  descendants;  for  his  sons  and  grandsons  had  an  anchor
on  their  thigh,  as  a  natural  proof  of  their  extraction.

After  the  division  of  the  Macedonian  empire  among  the
followers  of  Alexander,  he  carried  on  several  wars  in  the  east.
He  first  took  Babylon,  and  then,  his  strength  being  increased
by  this  success,  subdued  the  Bactrians. He  next  made  an
expedition  into  India,  which,  after  the  death  of  Alexander,  had
shaken,  as  it  were,  the  yoke  of  servitude  from  its  neck,  and
put  his  governors  to  death. The  author  of  this  liberation  was
Sandrocottus,  who  afterwards,  however,  turned  their  semblance
of  liberty  into  slavery ;  for,  making  himself  king,  he  oppressed
the  people  whom  he  had  delivered  from  a  foreign  power,  with
a  cruel  tyranny. This  man  was  of  mean  origin,  but  was
stimulated  to  aspire  to  regal  power  by  supernatural  encourage-
ment; for,  having  offended  Alexander  by  his  boldness  of
speech,  and  orders  being  given  to  kill  him,  he  saved  himself
by  swiftness  of  foot ;  and  while  he  was  lying  asleep,  after  his
fatigue,  a  lion  of  great  size  having  come  up  to  him,  licked  off
with  his  tongue  tibe  sweat  that  was  running  from  him,  and
after  gently  waking  him,  left  him. Being  first  prompted  by
this  prodigy  to  conceive  hopes  of  royal  dignity,  he  drew
together  a  band  of  robbers,  and  solicited  the  Indians  to  sup-
port his  new  sovereignty. Some  time  after,  as  he  was  going
to  war  with  the  generals  of  Alexander,  a  wild  elephant  of
great  bulk  presented  itself  before  him  of  its  own  accord,  and,
as  if  tamed  down  to  gentleness,''^  took  him  on  its  back,  and

*  VduAi  domUA  mansuetudine  stands  in  'Wetzd's  text,  imd  I  believe


BC.  300.]  DEATH  OP  ANTIGONUS.  143

became  his  guide  in  the  war,  and  conspicuous  in  fields  of  battle.
Sandrocottus,  having  thus  acquired  a  throne,  was  in  possession
of  India,  when  Seleucus  was  laying  the  foundations  of  his
future  greatness ;  who,  after  making  a  league  with  him,  and
settling  his  affairs  in  the  east,  proceeded  to  join  in  the  war
against  Antigonus.  As  soon  as  the  forces,  therefore,  of  all
the  confederates  were  united,  a  battle  was  fought,*  in  which
Antigonus  was  slain,  and  his  son  Demetrius  put  to  flight.

But  the  allied  generals,  after  thus  terminating  the  war  with
the  enemy,  turned  their  arms  again  upon  each  other,  and,  as
they  could  not  agree  about  the  spoil,  were  divided  into  two
parties.  Seleucus  joined  Demetrius,  and  Ptolemy  Lysimachus.
Cassander  dying,  Philip,  his  son,  succeeded  him.  Thus  new
wars  arose,  as  it  were,  from  a  fresh  source,  for  Macedonia.


BOOK  XVI.


Antipater,  son  of  Cassander,  puts  his  mother  to  death;  Demetrius
Poliorcetes  becomes  master  of  Macedonia,  I. — Demetrius  is  driven
from  Macedonia;  deaths  of  Antipater  and  Cassai^der,  II. — ^War
between  Pyrrhus  and  Lysimachus ;  account  of  the  dty  Heraclea,
in  Pontus,  III. — Tyranny  of  Clearchus  there,  IV. — ^Death  of
Olearchus ;  subsequent  condition  of  Heradea,  V.

I.  After  the  deaths,  in  rapid  succession,t  of  Cassander  and
PhiHp,  queen  Thessalonice,  the  wife  of  Cassander,  was  soon
killed  by  her  son  Antipater,  though  she  conjured  him  by  the
bosom  of  a  mother  to  spare  her  life.  The  cause  of  this
matricide  was  that,  in  the  division  of  the  kingdom  between  the
brothers,  she  seemed  to  have  favoured  Alexander.  This  deed
appeared  the  more  atrocious  to  every  one,  as  there  was  no  proof
(^  injustice  on  the  part  of  the  mother ;  although,  indeed,  in  a
case  of  matricide,  no  reason  can  be  alleged  sufficient  to  justify
the  crime. Alexander,  in  consequence,  resolving  to  go  to  war

in  all  others.  Scheffer  asks  whether  there  is  ma/nsvietudo  not  domita,
Diibner,  the  editor  of  a  small  edition  with  French  notes  (Par.  18mo.
1847),  says  that  Caper,  de  EkpTumtie,  p.  47,  proposes  to  read  domUut
dd  mantuetudvnem.

•  At  Jpsus  in  Phrygia.

f  Philip  died  in  the  same  year  with  Cassander,  BUX  Sf97.  Concern-
ing Thessalonice,  see  ziy.  6,  and  Diod.  Bic.  zzi.  Rragm.  10< — Wdgd,


144  JUSTIN.  [B.XVI.  CH.I.

with  his  brother,  to  avenge  his  mother's  death,  solicited  aid
from  Demetrius ;  and  Demetrius,  in  hopes  of  seizing  the  throne
of  Macedonia,  made  no  delay  in  complying  with  his  request.
Lysimachus,  alarmed  at  his  approach,  persuaded  Antipater,
his  son-in-law,  rather  to  be  reconciled  to  his  brother  than  to
allow  his  father's  enemy  to  enter  Macedonia.  Demetrius,
therefore,  finding  that  a  reconciliation  was  commenced  between
the  brothers,  removed  Alexander  by  treachery,  and,  having
seized  on  the  throne  of  Macedonia,  called  an  assembly  of  the
army,  to  defend  himself  before  them  for  the  murder.  He
alleged  that  **  his  life  had  been  first  attempted  by  Alexander,
and  that  he  had  not  contrived  treachery,  but  prevented  it ;  and
that  he  himself  was  the  more  rightful  king  of  Macedonia,  both
from  experience  attendant  on  greater  age,  and  from  other  con-
siderations ;  for  that  his  father  *  had  been  a  follower  of  king
Philip,  and  of  Alexander  the  Great,  in  the  whole  of  their  wars,
and  afterwards  an  attendant  on  the  children  of  Alexander,
and  a  leader  in  the  punishment  of  the  revolters.  That  Anti-
pater, on  the  other  hand,  the  grandfather  of  these  young  men,
had  always  been  more  cruel  as  the  governor  of  the  kingdom
than  the  kings  themselves ;  and  that  Cassander,  their  father,
had  been  the  extirpator  of  the  king's  family,  sparing  neither
women  nor  children,  and  not  resting  till  he  had  cut  off  the
whole  of  the  royal  house.  That  vengeance  for  these  crimes,
as  he  could  not  exact  it  from  Cassander  himself,  had  been
inflicted  on  his  children;  and  that  accordingly  Philip  and
Alexander,  if  the  dead  have  any  knowledge  of  human  afiairs,
would  not  wish  the  murderers  of  them  and  their  issue,  but
their  avengers,  to  fill  the  throne  of  Macedonia"  The  people
being  pacified  by  these  arguments,  he  was  saluted  king  of
Macedonia.  Lysimachus,  too,  being  pressed  with  a  war  with
Doricetes,  king  of  Thrace,  and  not  wishing  to  have  to  fight
with  Demetrius  at  the  same  time,  made  peace  with  him,
resigning  into  his  hands  the  other  half  of  Macedonia,  which
had  fallen  to  the  share  of  his  son-in-law  Antipater.

II.  When  Demetrius,  therefore,  supported  by  the  whole
strength  of  Macedonia,  was  preparing  to  invade  Asia,  Ptolemy,
Seleucus,  and  Lysimachus,  having  experienced  in  the  former
contest  how  great  the  power  of  unanimity  was,  formed  an
alliance  a  second  time,  and  having  joined  their  forces,  carried

*  Antigonua.


RC.  292.]  PYBEHUS— DBMBTRins.  145

the  war  against  Demetrius,  into  Europe.  With  these  leaders
Pyrrhus,  king  of  Epirus,  united  himself,  as  a  friend  and
sharer  in  .the  war,  hoping  that  Demetrius  might  lose  Mace-
donia not  less  easily  tiian  he  had  obtained  it.  Nor  were  his
expectations  vain;  for  he  himself,  having  corrupted  Deme-
trius's  army,  and  put  him  to  fii^t,  seized  on  the  throne  of
Macedonia.

During  the  course  of  these  transactions,  Lysimachus  put  to
death  his  son-in-law  Antipater,  who  complained  that  he  had
been  deprived  of  the  throne  of  Macedonia  by  the  treachejy-ef '
his  father-in-law,  and  put  his  daughter  Eurydice,  who  had
joined  with  him  in  his  complaints,  into  piison ;  and  thus  the
whole  house  of  Cassander  made  atonement  to  Alexander  the
Oreat,  whether  for  killing  himself  or  destroying  his  offspring,
partly  by  violent  deaths,  partly  by  other  sufferings,  and
partly  by  shedding  the  blood  of  one  anotjier.

Demetrius,  surrounded  by  so  many  armies,  preferred,  wihen
he  might  have  fallen  honourably,  to  make  an  ignominious
surrender  to  Seleucus.  At  the  termination  of  the  war  died
Ptolemy,  after  having  attained  great  glory  by  his  military
exploits.  Contrary  to  the  custom  among  nations,  he  had
resigned  his  kingdom,  before  his  illness,  to  the  youngest  of
his  sons,  and  had  stated  his  reasons  for  that  proceeding  to  the
people,  who  showed  themselves  no  less  indulgent  in  accepting
the  son  for  their  king  than  the  father  had  proved  himself  in
delivering  the  kingdom  to  him.  Among  other  instances  of
mutual  affection  between  the  father  and  the  son,  the  following
had  procured  the  young  man  favour  from  the  people,  that  the
father,  having  publicly  resigned  the  throne  to  him,  had  done
duty  as  a  private  soldier  among  his  guards,  thinking  it  more
honour  to  be  the  father  of  a  king  than  to  possess  any  kingdom
whatsoever.

III.  But  the  evil  of  discord,  constantly  arising  among
equals,  had  produced  a  war  between  Lysimachus  and  King
Pyrrhus,  who  had  just  before  been  allies  against  Demetrius.
Lysimachus,  gaining  the  advantage,  had  expelled  Pyrrhus,  and
made  himseK  master  of  Macedonia.  He  then  made  war  on
Thrace,  and  afterwards  on  Heraclea,  a  city  of  which  the
origin  and  the  subsequent  fortunes  were  objects  of  wonder ;
for  when  the  Boeotians  were  suffering  from  a  pestilence,  the
oracle  at  Delphi  had  told  them,  that  "  they  must  plant  a

L


146  JUOTIN.  [b.xvi.  oh.iv.

colony  in  the  country  of  Pontus,  dedicated  to  Hercules,
But  as,  through  dread  of  a  long  and  dangerous  yoyi^e,
and  all  the  people  preferring  death  in  their  own  cqunlry,  the
matter  was  neglected,  the  Fhocians  made  war  upon  them ;
and  after  suffering  from  unsuccessful  struggles  with  that
people,  they  had  recourse  to  the  oracle  a  second  time.  The
answer  which  they  received  was,  that  "  what  was  a  remedy
for  the  pestilence  would  also  he  a  remedy  for  the  war."
Raising  therefore  a  hody  of  colonists,  and  sailing  to  Pontus,
they  built  the  city  Heraclea ;  and  as  they  had  been  led  to  that
settlement  by  the  guidance  of  fate,  they  soon  acquired  great
power.  In  process  of  time  the  city  had  many  wars  with  its
neighbours,  and  many  dissensions'  among  its  own  people.
Among  other  noble  acts  that  they  performed,  the  following
is  one  of  the  most  remarkable.  When  the  Athenians  were  at
the  height  of  power,  and,  after  the  overthrow  of  the  Persians,
had  imposed  a  tax  on  Greece  and  Asia  for  the  support  of  a
fleet,  and  when  all  were  promptly  contributing  to  the  main-
tenance of  their  safety,  the  Heracleans  alone,  from  friendship
for  the  kings  of  Persia,  refused  to  pay.  Lamachus  was
accordingly  despatched  by  the  Athenians  with  an  army  to
exact  from  them  what  was  withheld  ;  but  leaving  his  ships  on
the  coast,  and  going  to  ravage  the  lands  of  the  Heracleans,  he
lost  his  fleet,  with  the  greater  part  of  his  army,  by  shipwreck,
in  a  tempest  that  came  on  suddenly.  As  he  was  not  able,
therefore,  to  return  by  sea,  from  having  lost  his  ships,  and
did  not  dare,  with  so  small  a  body  of  men,  to  return  by  land
through  so  many  warlike  nations,  the  Heracleans,  thinking
this  a  more  honourable  opportunity  for  kindness  than  for
revenge,  sent  the  invaders  away  with  a  supply  of  provisions
and  troops  to  protect  them  ;  deeming  the  devastation  of  their
lands  no  loss,  if  they  could  but  make  those  their  friends  who
had  formerly  been  their  enemies.

IV.  Among  many  other  evils  they  endured  also  that  of
tyranny ;  for  when,  on  the  populace  violently  clamouring  for
an  abolition  of  debts,  and  a  division  of  the  lands  of  the  rich,
the  subject  was  long  discussed  in  the  senate,  and  no  settle-
ment of  it  was  devised,  they  at  last  sought  assistance
against  the  commons,  who  were  grown  riotous  by  too  long
idleness,  from  Timotheus  general  of  the  Athenians,  and
afterwards  from  Epaminondas  general  of  the  Thebans. As


RC.  ABOUT  650.]  HERACLEA.  147

both,  however,  refused  their  request,  they  had  recourse  to
Cleaxchus,  whom  they  themselves  had  exiled  ;  such  being  the
urgency  of  their  distresses,  that  they  recalled  to  the  guardian-
ship of  his  country  him  whom  they  had  forbidden  to  enter
his  country.  But  Clearchus,  being  rendered  more  desperate
by  his  banishment,  and  regarding  the  dissension  among  the
people  as  a  means  of  securing  to  himself  the  government,  first
sought  a  secret  interview  with  Mithridates,*  the  enemy  of  his
countrymen,  and  made  a  league  with  him  on  the  understanding
that  when  he  was  re-established  in  his  country,  he  should,  on
betraying  the  city  into  his  hands,  be  made  lieutenant-governor
of  it.  But  the  treachery  which  he  had  conceived  against  his
countrymen,  he  afterwards  turned  against  Mithridates  himself;
for  on  returning  from  banishment,  to  be  as  it  were  the  arbiter
of  the  disputes  in  the  city,  he,  at  the  time  appointed  for
delivering  the  town  to  Mithridates,  made  Mithridates  himself
prisoner,  with  a  party  of  his  friends,  and  released  him  from
captivity  only  on  the  receipt  of  a  large  sum  of  money.
And  as,  in  this  case,  he  suddenly  changed  himself  from  a
friend  into  an  enemy,  so,  m  regard  to  his  countrymen^  he
soon,  from  a  supporter  of  the  senate's  cause,  became  a  patron
of  the  common  people,  and  not  only  Inflamed  the  populace
against  those  who  had  conferred  his  power  upon  him,  and  by
whom  he  had  been  recalled  into  his  country  and  established
in  the  citadel,  but  even  exercised  upon  his  benefactors  the
most  atrocious  inflictions  of  tyrannic  cruelty.  Summoning
the  people  to  an  assembly,  he  declared  that  "  he  would  no
longer  support  the  senate  in  their  proceedings  against  the
populace,  but  would  even  interpose  his  authority,  if  they
persisted  in  their  fonner  severities ;  and  that,  if  the  people
thought  themselves  able  to  check  the  tyranny  of  the  senate,
he  would  retire  with  his  soldiers,  and  take  no  further  part  in
their  dissensions  ;  but  that,  if  they  distrusted  their  ability  to
make  resistance,  he  would  not  be  wanting  to  aid  them  in
taking  revenge.  They  might  therefore,"  he  added,  "  deter-
mine among  themselves ;  they  might  bid  him  withdraw,  if
they  pleased,  or  might  request  him  to  stay  as  a  sharer  in  the
popular  cause."  The  people,  induced  by  these  fair  speeches,
conferred  on  him  the  supreme  authority,  and,  while  they
were  incensed  at  the  power  of  the  senate,  surrendered  them-

*  King  of  Pontus,  father  of  the  Great  Mithridates.

L 2


148  JUSTIN.  [b.xvi.  ch.v.

selves,  with  their  wives  and  children,  as  slaves  to  the  power  of
a  single  tyrant.  Clearchus  then  apprehended  sixty  senators
(the  rest  had  taken  flight),  and  threw  them  into  prison.
The  people  rejoiced  that  the  senate  was  overfhrown,  and
especially  that  it  had  fallen  hy  means  of  a  leader  among  the
senators,  and  that,  hy  a  reverse  of  fortune,  their  support  was
turned  to  tlieir  destruction.  Clearchus,  by  threatening  all  his
prisoners  with  death,  made  the  price  offefed  for  their  ransom
the  higher;  and,  after  receiving  from  them  large  sums  of
money,  as  if  he  would  secretly  withdraw  them  from  the
violence  threatened  by  the  people,  despoiled' those  of  their
lives  whom  he  had  previously  despoiled  of  their  fortunes.

V.  Learning,  soon  after,  that  war  was  prepared  against
him  by  those  who  had  made  their  escape  (several  cities  being
moved  by  pity  to  espouse  their  cause),  he  gave  freedom  to  liieir
slaves ;  and  that  no  affliction  might  be  wanting  to  distress  the
most  honourable  families,  he  obliged  their  wives  and  daughters
to  marry  their  slaves,  threatening  death  to  such  as  refused,
that  he  might  thus  render  the  slaves  more  attached  to  himself,
and  less  reconcileable  to  their  masters.  But  such  marriages
were  more  intolerable  to  the  women  than  immediate  deatii ;
and  many,  in  consequence,  killed  themselves  before  the  nuptial
rites  were  celebrated,  and  many  in  the  midst  of  them,  first
killing  their  new  husbands,  and  delivering  themselves  from
dishonourable  sufferiDgs  by  a  spirit  of  noble  virtue.  A  battle
was  then  fought,  in  which  the  tyrant,  being  victorious,  dragged
such  of  the  senators  as  he  took  prisoners  before  the  faces  of
their  countrymen  in  triumph.  Returning  into  the  city,  he
threw  some  into  prison,  stretched  others  on  the  rack,  and  put
others  to  death ;  and  not  a  place  in  the  city  was  unvisited
by  the  tyrants  cruelty.  Arrogance  was  added  to  severity,
insolence  to  inhumanity.  From  a  course  of  continued  good
fortune,  he  sometimes  forgot  that  he  was  a  man,  sometimes
called  himself  the  son  of  Jupiter.  When  he  appeared  in
public,  a  golden  eagle,  as  a  token  of  his  parentage,  was  carried
before  him ;  he  wore  a  purple  robe,  buskins  like  kings  in
tragedies,  and  a  crown  of  gold.  His  son  he  named  Ceraunos,*  to
mock  the  gods,  not  only  with  false  statements,  but  with  impious
names.  Two  noble  youths,  Chion  and  Leonides,  incensed
that  he  should  dare  to  commit  such  outrages,  and  desiring  to

*  JLtpavvSg,  thvohder.


HERACLEA— LY81MACHU.  149

deliver  their  country,  formed  a  conspiracy  to  put  him  to  death.
They  were  disciples  of  Plato  the  philosopher,  and  being
desirous  to  exhibit  to  their  country  the  virtue  in  which  they
were  daily  instructed  by  the  precepts  of  their  master,  placed
fifty  of  their  relations,  as  if  they  were  their  attendants,  in  am-
bush ;  while  they  themselves,  in  the  character  of  men  who  had
a  dispute  to  be  settled,  went  into  the  citadel  to  the  tyrant.*
Gaining  admission,  as  being  well  known,  the  tyrant,  while  he
was  listening  attentively  to  the  one  that  spoke  first,  was  killed
by  the  other.  But  as  their  accomplices  were  too  late  in
coming  to  their  support,  they  were  overpowered  by  the  guards;
and  hence  it  happened  that  though  the  tyrant  was  killed,  their
country  was  not  liberated.  Satyrus,  the  brother  of  Olearchus,
made  himself  tyrant  in  a  similar  way ;  and  for  many  years,
with  various  successive  changes,  the  Heracleans  continued
under  the  yoke  of  tyrants.


BOOK  XVIL


Fall  of  LysimachU;  Lysimachus  kills  his  son;  Seleucus  declares  war
against  him,  I. — Death  of  Lysimachus;  Seleucus  ]dlled  by  Ptolemy
Ceraunus;  Pyrrhus  prepares  to  invade  Italy,  II. — History  of
Epirus,  IIL

I.  About  the  same  time  there  was  an  earthquake  in  the
regions  round  the  Hellespont  and  the  Chersonese;!  but  the
chief  effect  of  it  was,  that  the  city  of  Lysimachia,  founded  two
and  twenty  years  before  by  king  Lysimachus,  was  sunk  in  ruins ;
a  prodigy  which  portended  disasters  to  Lysimachus  and  his
family,  destruction  to  his  kingdom,  and  calamity  to  the  disturbed
provinces.  Nor  was  fulfilment  wanting  to  these  omens  ;  for,
in  a  short  time  after,  conceiving  towarids  his  son  Agathocles
(whom  he  had  appointed  to  succeed  him  on  the  throne,  and
through  whose  exertions  he  had  managed  several  wars  with
success),  a  hatred  unnatural  in  him  not  only  as  a  father  but

*  Ad  tyramiMtm.']  The  words  vduH  ad  regem,  which  follow  tyranmnti,
and  which  Wetzel  condemns  as  a  gloss,  are  omitted  from  the  translation.
He  also  condemns  the  preceding  veUUi  dietUes ;  but  for  this  I  see  no
necessity.

t  The  Chersonesus  Taurica ;  now  the  CHmeo.


150  JUSTIN.  [B.XVII.  CH.II.

as  a  man,  he  took  him  off  by  poison,  using  as  his  agent  in  the
affair  his  step-mother  Arsinoe.  This  was  the  first  commence-
ment of  his  calamities,  the  prelude  to  approaching  ruin;
for  executions  of  several  great  men  were  added  to  the  murder
of  his  son,  who  were  put  to  death  for  expressing  concern  at
the  young  prince's  fate ;  and,  in  consequence,  both  those
about  the  court  who  escaped  this  cruelty,  and  those  who  were
in  command  of  the  troops,  began  at  once  to  desert  to  Seleucus,
and  incite  him  to  make  war  upon  Lysimachus ;  an  enterprise
to  which  he  was  already  inclined  from  a  desire  to  emulate  his
glory.  This  was  the  last  contest  between  the  fellow  soldiers
of  Alexander;  and  the  two  combatants  were  reserved,  as  it
were,  for  an  example  of  the  influence  of  fortune.  Lysimachus
was  seventy-four  years  old ;  Seleucus  seventy. seven.  But  at
this  age  they  both  had  the  fire  of  youth,  and  an  insatiable
desire  of  power ;  for  though  they  alone  possessed  the  whole
world,*  they  yet  thought  themselves  confined  within  narrow
limits,  and  measured  their  course  of  life,  not  by  their  length  of
years,  but  by  the  extent  to  which  they  carried  their  dominion.

II.  In  this  war,  Lysimachus  (who  had  previously  lost,  by
various  chances  of  fortune,  fifteen  children)  died,  with  no
small  bravery,  and  crowned  the  ruin  of  his  family.  Seleucus,
oveijoyed  at  such  a  triumph,  and  what  he  thought  greater
than  the  triumph,  that  he  alone  survived  of  all  Alexander's
staff.!  the  conqueror  of  conquerors,  boasted  that  "  this  was
not  the  work  of  man,  but  a  favour  from  the  gods,"  little  think-
ing that  he  himself  was  shortly  after  to  be  an  instance  of
human  instability ;  for  in  the  course  of  about  seven  months,
he  was  treacherously  surprised  by  Ptolemy,J  whose  sister
Lysimachus  had  married,  and  put  to  death,  losing  the  king-
dom of  Macedonia,  which  he  had  taken  from  Lysimachus,
together  with  his  Ufe.

Ptolemy,  being  ambitious  to  please  his  subjects,  both  for
the  honour  of  the  memory  of  the  great  Ptolemy  his  father,

*  Orbfm  terrarum  duo  8ol%  tenerent]  A  great  exaggeration.  Seleucus
had  (Jpper  Asia  and  Syria;  Lysimachiis  Thrace,  Greece,  Macedonia,
and  several  provinces  of  Asia  Minor.  The  dominions  of  Ptolemy
PhQadelphus  were  therefore  much  more  extensive. — Wetzd.

t  -De  cohorte  Alexandri,

t  Ptolemy  Ceraunus,  the  eldest  son  of  Ptolemy  Lagus,  and  brother
of  Ptolomy  Philadelphus ;  xvi.  2.  His  mother's  name  was  Eurydice ;
that  of  Philadelphus's  mother  Berenice,  Pausan.  i.  6,  8. —  Wetzd,


B.C.  282.]  PTOLEMY  CERACTNUS— PYRRHUS.  161

and  for  the  sake  of  palliating  the  revenge  which  he  had  taken
on  hehalf  of  Lysimachus,  resolved,  in  the  first  place,  to  con-
ciliate the  sons  of  Lysimachus,  and  sought  a  marriage  with  their
mother  Arsinoe,  his  sister,*  promising  to  adopt  the  young  men,
so  that,  when  he  should  succeed  to  the  throne  of  their  father,
they  might  not  venture,  through  respect  for  their  mother,  or
the  influence  of  the  name  of  father,  to  attempt  anything
against  him.  He  solicited,  too,  hy  letter,  the  friendship  of
his  brother  the  king  of  Egypt,  professing  that  "  he  laid  aside
all  feelings  of  resentment  at  being  deprived  of  his  father's
kingdom,  and  that  he  would  no  longer  ask  that  from  a  brother
which  he  had  more  honourably  obtained  from  his  father's
enemy." f  He  also  in  every  way  flattered  Nicomede3,J  that
as  he  was  about  to  have  a  war  with  Antigonus,  the  son  of  De-
metrius, and  Antiochus  the  son  of  Seleucus,  he  might  not
come  upon  him  as  a  third  enemy.  Nor  was  Pyrrhus  of  Epirus,
neglected  by  him,  a  king  who  would  be  of  great  assistance  to
whichsoever  side  he  attached  himself,  and  who,  while  he
desired  to  spoil  them  one  by  one,  sought  the  favour  of  all.
On  going  to  assist  the  Tarentines,  therefore,  against  the
Romans,  he  desired  of  Antigonus  the  loan  of  vessels  to  trans-
port his  army  into  Italy;  of  Antiochus,  who  was  better  provided
with  wealth  than  with  men,  a  sum  of  money ;  and  of  Ptolemy,
some  troops  of  Macedonian  soldiers.  Ptolemy,  who  had  no
excuse  for  holding  back  for  want  of  forces,  supplied  him  with
five  thousand  infantry,  four  thousand  cavalry,  and  fifty  ele-
phants, but  for  not  more  than  two  years*  service.  In  return
for  this  favour,  Pyrrhus,  after  marrying  the  daughter  of
Ptolemy,  appointed  him  guardian  of  his  kingdom  in  his
absence ;  lest,  on  carrying  the  flower  of  his  army  into  Italy,
he  should  leave  his  dominions  a  prey  to  his  enemies.

III. But  since  I  have  come  to  speak  of  Epirus,§  a  few

•  The  sister  of  Ptolemy. See  the  Index.

f  Seleucus,  the  enemy  of  Ptolemy  Lagus,  xv.  4.

t  Wetzel  retains  Eumeni  in  his  text,  though  Qronovius  had  seen
that  the  passage  must  be  thus  read :  Omnique  arte  advlatwr  Nicomedi,
ne  cil/m  ArUigono  Demetrii,  ArUiocho  SeUudfiliU  bdlum  hahitv^Oy  tertitu
gffn  hostis  accederet.  This  emendation  is  approved  by  Grsevius,  Vors-
tius,  Scheffer,  and  Faber.  The  Antigonus  here  mentioned  is  Antigomu
Gowaatas,  and  the  Antiochus  Antioehus  Soter,  the  successor  of  Se-
leucus.

§  He  had,  however,  mentioned  it  before,  as  Wetzel  obsenres,  xvi  2.


152  JUSTIN.  [B.XVU.  CH.III.

particulars  should  be  premised  concerning  the  rise  of  that
kingdom.  The  first  regal  power  in  this  country  was  that  of
the  Molossi.  Afterwards  Pyrrhus,  the  son  of  Achilles,  having
been  deprived  of  his  father's  dominions  *  during  his  absence  in
the  Trojan  war,  settled  in  these  parts;  the  inhabitants  of
which  were  first  called  PyrrhidsB,  and  afterwards  Epirots.
This  Pyrrhus,  going  to  the  temple  of  Jupiter  at  Dodona  to
consult  the  oracle,  seized  there  by  force  Lanassa,  the  grand-
daughter of  Hercules,  and  by  a  marriage  with  her  had  eight
children.  Of  his  daughters  he  gave  some  in  marriage  to  the
neighbouring  princes,  and  by  means  of  these  alliances
acquired  great  power.  He  gave  to  Helenus,t  the  son  of  King
Priam,  for  his  eminent  services,  the  kingdom  of  the  Chaonians,
and  Andromache  the  widow  of  Hector  in  marriage,  after  she
bad  been  his  own  wife,  he  having  received  her  at  the  division
of  the  Trojan  spoil.  Shortly  after  he  was  slain  at  Delphi,  at
the  very  altar  of  Apollo,  by  tiie  treachery  of  Orestes  the  son  of
Agamemnon.  His  successor  was  his  son  Pielus.  The  throne
afterwards  passed  in  regular  descent  to  Arrybas,  over  whom,  as
be  was  an  orphan,  and  the  oxily  survivor  of  a  noble  family,
guardians  Were  publicly  appointed,  the  concern  of  all  being  so
much  the  greater  to  preserve  and  educate  him.  He  was  also
sent  to  Athens  for  the  sake  of  instruction ;  and,  as  he  was  more
learned  than  his  predecessors,  so  he  became  more  popular  with
his  subjects.  He  was  the  first,  accordingly,  that  established
laws,  a  senate,  annual  magistrates,  and  a  regular  form  of
government ;  and  as  a  settlement  was  found  for  the  people  by
Pyrrhus,  so  a  more  civilized  way  of  life  was  introduced  by
Arrybas.  A  son  of  this  king  was  Neoptolemus,  the  father  of
Olympias  (mother  of  Alexander  the  great),  and  of  Alexander,
who  occupied  the  throne  of  Epirus  after  him,  and  died  in
Italy  in  a  war  with  the  Bruttii*  On  the  death  of  Alexander
his  brother  iEacides  became  king,  who,  by  wearying  his
people  with  constant  wars  against  th^  Macedonians,  incurred

*  Phthia  in  Thessaly.

i*  The  words  aiqibe  ita,  which  precede  Hdeno  in  the  text,  are  not
expressed  in  the  translation ;  for  the  giving  of  the  kingdom  and  the
wife  to  Helenus  could  hardly  have  been  consequent  on  the  marriages
of  Pyrrhus's  daughters  by  Lanassa ;  or  Andromache  must  have  been
very  old  when  Helenus  took  her.  On  this  subjecty  see  Virg.  Mn.
ill  294.


B.C.  280.]  PYRRHUS  INVADES  ITALY.  153

their  dislike,  and  was  in  consequence  driven  into  exile,  leaving
his  little  son  Pyrrhus,  about  two  years  old,  in  the  kingdom.
The  child,  too,  being  sought  for  by  the  populace  to  be  put  to
death,  through  their  hatred  to  the  father,  waB  concealed  and
carried  off  into  Illyricum,  and  delivered  to  Beroe,  who  was  the
wife  of  king  Glaucias,  and  of  the  family  of  the  ^acidae,  to  be
brought  up.  This  king,  moved  either  by  pity  for  the  boy's
misfortunes^  or  by  his  infantine  caresses,  protected  him  for  a
long  time  against  Cassander»  king  of  Macedonia,  (who
demanded  him  with  menaces  of  war,)  having  the  kindness  also
to  adopt  him  for  his  better  security.  The  Epirots,  being
moved  by  these  acts,  and  turning  their  hatred  into  pity,
brought  him  back,  when  he  was  eleven  years  old,  into  the
kingdom,  appointing  him  guardians  to  keep  the  throne  for  him
till  he  became  of  age.  When  he  grew  up  he  engaged  in
many  wars,  and,  by  a  train  of  success,  attained  such  eminence
as  a  leader,  that  he  was  the  only  man  who  was  thought  capable
of  defending  the  Tarentines  against  the  Romans.


BOOK  XVIII.


War  of  Pyrrhus  with  the  Romans,  I. — The  Romans  refuse  aid  from
Carthage;  make  peace  with  Pyrrhus;  send  an  embassy  to  Ptolemy
Philadelphus ;  Cineas ;  Pyrrhus  retires  to  Sicily,  II. — Account  of
Tyre;  rise  of  Strato,  III.— Dido  leaves  Tyre,  IV.— Founds  Car-
thage ;  its  prosperity,  V. — larbas ;  death  of  Dido ;  human  sacri-
fices at  Carthage,  YL — Disasters  of  the  Carthaginians  in  Sardinia;
mutiny  of  the  army ;  Halchus ;  Carthalo,  VII.

I.  Pybbhus,  king  of  Epirus,  therefore,  being  solicited  by  a
second  embassy  from  the  Tarentines,  to  which  were  added  the
entreaties  of  the  Samnites  and  Lucanians,  who  likewise  needed
assistance  against  the  Eomans,  was  induced  to  comply,  not  so
much  by  the  prayers  of  the  suitors,  as  by  the  hope  of  making
liimself  master  of  Italy,  and  promised  to  come  to  them  with
an  army.  When  his  thoughts,  indeed,  were  once  directed  to
that  enterprise,  the  examples  of  his  predecessors  began  to
impel  him  violently  towards  it,  in  order  that  he  might  not
appear  inferior  to  his  uncle  Alexander,  whom  the  Taren-
tines had  had  for  a  defender  against  the  Bruttii,  or  to  have  less
spirit  than  Alexander  the  Great,  who  had  subdued  the  east  in


154  JUSTIN.  [B.XVin.  CH.II.

80  distant  an  expedition  from  his  native  country.  Having  left
his  son  Ptolemy,  therefore,  who  was  but  fifteen  years  old,  as
guardian  of  his  kingdom,  he  landed  his  army  in  the  harbour
of  Tarentum,  taking  with  him  his  two  younger  sons,  Alexander
and  Helenus,  as  a  comfort  to  him  in  so  long  a  voyage.  The
Roman  consul,  Valerius  Laevinus,  hearing  of  his  arrival,  and
hastening  to  come  to  battle  with  him  before  the  forces  of  his
allies  were  assembled,  led  forth  his  army  into  the  field.  Nor
did  the  king,  although  he  was  inferior  in  number  of  forces,
hesitate  to  engage.  But  as  the  Bomans  were  getting  the
advantage,  the  appearance  of  the  elephants,  previously  unknown
to  them,  made  them  at  first  stand  amazed,  and  afterwards
quit  the  field ;  and  the  strange  monsters  of  the  Macedonians*
at  once  conquered  the  conquerors.  The  triumph  of  the  enemy,
however,  was  not  bloodless  ;  for  Pyrrhus  himself  was  severely
wounded,  and  a  great  number  of  his  soldiers  killed  ;  and  he
had  more  glory  from  his  victory  than  pleasure.  Many  cities
of  Italy,  moved  by  the  result  of  this  battle,  surrendered  to
Pyrrhus ;  among  others  also  Locri,  betraying  the  Roman
garrison,  revolted  to  him.  Of  the  prisoners,  Pyrrhus  sent
back  two  hundred  to  Rome  without  ransom,  that  the  Romans,
after  experiencing  his  vaJour,  might  experience  also  his
generosity.  Some  days  after,  when  the  forces  of  his  allies
had  come  up,  he  fought  a  second  battle  with  the  Romans,  of
which  the  event  was  similar  to  that  of  the  former.

II.  In  the  meantime,  Mago,  general  of  the  Carthaginians,
being  sent  to  the  aid  of  the  Romans  with  a  hundred  and
twenty  ships,  went  to  the  senate,  saying  that  "  the  Cartha-
ginians were  much  concerned  that  they  should  be  distressed
by  war  in  Italy  from  a  foreign  prince ;  and  that  for  this  reason
he  had  been  despatched  to  assist  them;  that,  as  they  were
attacked  by  a  foreign  enemy,  they  might  be  supported  by
foreign  aid."  The  thanks  of  the  senate  were  given  to  the
Carthaginians,  and  the  succours  sent  back.  But  Mago,  with
the  cunning  of  a  Carthaginian,  went  privately,  a  few  days
after,  to  Pyrrhus,  as  if  to  be  a  peace-maker  from  the  people
of  Carthage,  but  in  reality  to  discover  the  king's  views  with
regard  to  Sicily,  to  which  island  it  was  reported  that  he  was

*  As  having  been  sent  to  Pyrrlius  by  Ptolemy  Ceraunus,  king  of
Macedonia,  xvii.  2.


B.C.  274.]  PYBRHUS  QUITS  ITALY.  155

sent  for ;  since  the  Carthaginians  had  the  same  reason*  for
sending  assistance  to  the*  Romans,  namely  that  Pyrrhus  might
be  detained  by  a  war  with  that  people  in  Italy,  and  prevented
from  crossing  over  into  Sicily.  During  the  course  of  these
transactions,  Fabricius  Luscinus,  being  commissioned  by  the
senate  of  Rome,  had  made  peace  with  Pyrrhus.  To  ratify  the
treaty,  Cineas  was  sent  to  Rome  by  Pyrrhus  with  valuable
presents,  but  found  nobody's  house  open  for  their  reception.
To  this  instance  of  Roman  incorruptibility,  another,  vei^
similar,  happened  about  the  same  time.  Certain  ambassadors,
who  were  sent  by  the  senate  into  Egypt,  having  refused  some
costly  presents  offered  them  by  Ptolemy,  and  being  invited
to  supper  some  days  after,  golden  crowns  were  sent  to  them,
which,  from  respect  to  the  king,  they  accepted,  ,but  placed
them  the  next  day  on  the  king's  statues.  Cineas,  bringing
word  that  "  the  treaty  with  the  Romans  was  broken  off  by
Appius  Claudius,"  and  being  asked  by  Pyrrhus  "  what  sort
of  city  Rome  ^as,*'  replied  that  "  it  appeared  to  him  a  city
of  kings."  Soon  after,  ambassadors  from  the  Sicilians  arrived,
to  offer  Pyrrhus  the  dominion  of  the  whole  island,  which  was
harassed  by  constant  wars  with  the  Carthaginians.  Leaving
his  son  Alexander,  therefore,  at  Locri,  and  securing  the  cities
of  his  allies  with  strong  garrisons,  Pyrrhus  transported  his
army  into  Sicily.

III.  Since  I  come  to  speak  of  the  Carthaginians,  a  short
account  shall  be  given  of  their  origin,  tracing  back,  to  some
extent,  the  history  of  the  Tynans,  whose  misfortunes  were
much  to  be  pitied.  The  nation  of  the  Tyrians  was  founded
by  the  Phoenicians,  who,  suffering  from  an  earthquake,  and
abandoning  their  country,  settled  at  first  near  the  Syrian  lake,t
and  afterwards  on  the  coast  near  the  sea,  where  they  built  a
city,  which,  from  the  abundance  of  fish,  they  named  Sidon,
for  so  the  Phcenicians  call  a  fish  in  their  language.  Many
years after,  their  city  being  stormed  by  the king  of  the

*  Nam  Bomanis  eadem  causa  mUtendi  auxUii  Carthaffiniemibus  fvdty
&c.]  Bemeccerus  and  Yorstius  think  that  this  passage  requires  correc-
tion.  Scheffer  supposes  that  some  words  are  lost,  as  there  is  nothing
to  which  eadem  can  be  referred.

t  Assyrium  stagTium.]  Assyrivm  for  Syrvum. — Glareanus,  He  means
the  lake  of  Gennesaret. — B<mgarsiw:  with  whom  Bemeccerus  andt
Faber  agree.


156  JUSTIN.  [B.XVIIL  OH. III.

Ascalonians,*  sailing  away  to  tiie  place  where  Tyre  stands,
they  built  that  city  the  year  b^ore  the  fall  of  Troy.
Here,  harassed  for  a  long  time,  and  in  various  ways,  by
attacks  from  the  Persians,  they  resisted,  indeed,  successfully,
but,  as  their  strength  was  exhausted,  ihey  suffered  the  most
cruel  treatment  from  their  slaves,  who  were  then  extraordi-
narily numerous.  These  traitors,  having  entered  into  a
conspiracy,  killed  their  masters  and  all  the  free  people  of  the
city,  and  thus,  becoming  masters  of  the  place,  took  possession
of  the  houses  of  their  owners,  assumed  the  government,
appropriated  wives  to  themselves,  and  begot,  what  they  them-
selves were  not,  freemen.  Out  of  so  many  thousands  of
slaves,  there  was  one  who  was  moved  to  compassion  by  the
mild  disposition  of  his  aged  master  and  the  hard  fortune  of
his  little  son,  and  looked  upon  them,  not  with  savage  fierce-
ness, but  with  humanity,  affection,  and  pity.  He  put  them
out  of  the  way,  therefore,  as  if  they  had  been  killed;  and
when  the  slaves  came  to  deliberate  about  the  condition  of
their  government,  and  had  resolved  that  a  king  should  be
elected  from  their  own  body,  and  that  he  should  be  preferred,
as  most  acceptable  to  the  gods,  who  should  first  see  the  rising
sun,  he  mentioned  the  matter  to  Strato  (for  that  was  the
name  of  his  master),  who  was  then  in  concealment.  Being
instructed  by  him,  and  proceeding  with  the  rest,  about  the
middle  of  the  night,  to  a  certain  plain,  he  alone,  when  they
were  all  looking  towards  the  east,  kept  his  eye  directed
towards  the  west.  This  at  first  seemed  madness  to  the  others,
to  look  in  the  west  for  the  rising  sun ;  but  when  day  began
to  advance,  and  the  rising  luminary  to  shine  on  the  highest
eminences  of  the  city,  he,  while  all  the  rest  were  watching  to
see  the  sun  itself,  was  the  first  to  point  out  to  them  the  sun-
shine on  the  loftiest  pinnacle  of  the  town.  This  thought
seemed  above  the  wit  of  a  slave  ;  and  when  they  asked  him  who
had  put  it  into  his  head,  he  confessed  that  it  was  his  master.
It  was  then  seen  how  far  the  abilities  of  freemen  surpass
those  of  slaves,  who,  though  they  may  be  first  in  viciousness,
are  not  first  in  wisdom.  The  old  man  and.  his  son  were
therefore  spared  ;  and  the  slaves,  thinking  that  they  had  been
preserved  by  the  interposition  of  some  deity,  made  Strato
king.  After  his  death,  the  throne  descended  to  his  son,  and
*  AsccUoniorum.]  Inhabitants  of  Ascalon,  between  AzotuB  and  Qasa.


DIDO  LEAVES  TYRft.  157

subsequently  to  his  grandsons.  This  atrocity  of  these  slaves
was  much  noticed,  and  was  a  terrible  example  to  the  whole
world.  Alexander  the  Great,  when  he  was  prosecuting  his
wars,  some  time  after,  in  the  east,  having  taking  the  city,
crucified,  as  an  avenger  of  the  general  safety,  and  in  memory
of  the  former  massacre,  all  those  who  survived  the  siege;
preserving  from  injury  only  the  family  of  Strato,  and  restoring
the  throne*  to  his  descendants  ;  and  sending  to  the  island,  at
the  same  time,  inhabitants  that  were  free-bom  and  guiltless,
that,  as  the  race  of  slaves  was  extirpated,  an  entirely  new
generation  might  be  established  in  the  city.

IV.  The  Tyrians;  being  thus  settled  under  the  auspices  of
Alexander,  quickly  grew  powerful  by  frugality  and  industry.

Before  the  massacre  of  the  masters  by  the  slaves,  when  they
abounded  in  wealth  and  population,  they  sent  a  portion  of  their
youth  into  Africa,  and  founded  Utica.  Meanwhile  their  king
died  at  Tyre,  appointing  his  son  Pygmalion  and  his  daughter
Elissa,  a  maiden  of  extraordinary  beauty,  his  heirs.  But
the  people  gave  the  throne  to  Pygmalion,  who  was  quite  a  boy.
Elissa  married  Acerbas,t  her  uncle,  who  was  priest  of
Hercules,  a  dignity  next  to  that  of  the  king.  Acerbas  had
great  but  concealed  riches,  having  laid  up  his  gold,  for  fear
of  the  king,  not  in  his  house,  but  in  the  earth ;  a  fact  of  which,
though  people  had  no  certain  Iknowledge  of  it,  report  was  not
silent.  Pygmalion,  excited  by  the  account,  and  forgetful  of
the  laws  of  humaijity,  murdered  his  uncle,  who  was  also
his  brother-in-law,  without  the  least  regard  to  natural
affection.  Elissa  long  entertained  a  hatred  to  her  brother  for
his  crime,  but  at  last,  dissembling  her  detestation,  and
assuming  mild  looks  for  the  time,  she  secretly  contrived  a
mode  of  flight,  admitting  into  her  confidence  some  of  the
leading  men  of  the  city,  in  whom  she  saw  that  there  was  a
similar  hatred  of  the  king,  and  an  equal  desire  to  escape.
She  then  addressed  her  brother  in  such  a  way  as  to  deceive
him ;  pretending  that  "  she  had  a  desire  to  remove  to  his
house,  in  order  that  the  home  of  her  husband  might  no
longer  revive  in  her,  when  she  was  desirous  to  forget  him,  the
oppressive  recollection  of her  sorrows, and  that  the sad

*  It  does  not  appear  how  they  were  deprived  of  it.
f  Called  by  Yirgil  Sichceua, Servius  thinks  that  the  real  name  was
Skhofrhaty  which  Faber  would  insert  in  Justin's  text


158  JUSTIN.  [B.xvm.  CH.V.

remembrances  of  him  might  no  more  present  themselves  to
her  eyes."  To  these  words  of  his  sister,  Pygmalion  was  no
unwilling  listener,  thinking  that  with  her  the  gold  of  Acerbas
would  come  to  him.  But  Elissa  put  the  attendants,  who  were
sent  by  the  king  to  assist  in  her  removal,  on  board  some  vessels
in  the  early  part  of  the  evening,  and  sailing  out  into  the  deep,
made  them  Uirow  some  loads  of  sand,  put  up  in  sacks,  as  if  it
was  money,  into  the  sea.  Then,  with  tears  and  mournful
ejaculations,  she  invoked  Acerbas,  entreating  that  "  he  would
favourably  receive  his  wealth  which  he  had  left  behind  him,
and  accept  that  as  an  offering  to  his  shade,  which  he  had  found
to  be  the  cause  of  his  death."  Next  she  addressed  the  attend-
ants, and  said  that  '*  death  had  long  been  desired  by  her,  but
as  for  them,  cruel  torments  and  a  direful  end  awaited  them,
for  having  disappointed  the  tyrant's  avarice  of  those  treasures,
in  the  hopes  of  obtaining  which  he  had  committed  fratricide.*'
Having  thus  struck  terror  into  them  all,  she  took  them  with
her  as  companions  of  her  flight.  Some  bodies  of  senators,  too,
who  were  ready  against  that  night,  came  to  join  her,  and
having  offered  a  sacrifice  to  Hercules,  whose  priest  Acerbas
had  been,  proceeded  to  seek  a  settlement  in  exile.

V.  Their  first  landing  place  was  the  isle  of  Cyprus,  where
the  priest  of  Jupiter,  with  his  wife  and  children,  offered  him-
self to  Elissa,  at  the  instigation  of  the  gods,  as  her  com-
panion and  the  sharer  of  her  fortunes,  stipulating  for  the  per-
petual honour  of  the  priesthood  for  himself  and  his  descend-
ants. The  stipulation  was  received  as  a  manifest  omen  of
good  fortune.  It  was  a  custom  among  the  Cyprians  to  send
their  daughters,  on  stated  days  before  their  marriage,  to  the
sea-shore,  to  prostitute  themselves,  and  thus  procure  money  for
their  marriage  portions,  and  to  pay,  at  the  same  time,  offerings
to  Venus  for  the  preservation  of  their  chastity  in  time  to  come.
Of  these  Elissa  ordered  about  eighty  to  be  seized  and  taken
on  board,  that  her  men  might  have  wives,  and  her  city  a
population.  During  the  course  of  these  transactions,  Pygma-
lion, having  heard  of  his  sister's  flight,  and  preparing  to
pursue  her  with  unfeeling  hostility,  was  scarcely  induced  by
the  prayers  of  his  mother  and  the  menaces  of  the  gods  to
remain  quiet;  the  inspired  augurs  warning  him  that  "he
would  not  escape  with  impunity,  if  he  interrupted  the  founding
of  a  city  that  was  to  become  the  most  prosperous  in  the


B.C.  825.]  CARTHAGE  FOUNDED.  J  59

world."  By  this  means  some  respite  was  given  to  the  fugitives ;
and  Elissa,  arriving  in  a  gulf  of  Africa,  attached  the  inhabit-
ants of  the  coast,  who  rejoiced  at  the  arrival  of  foreigners,  and
the  opportunity  of  bartering  commodities  with  them,  to  her
interest.  Having  then  bargained  for  a  piece  of  ground,  as
much  as  could  be  covered  *  with  an  ox-hide,  where  she  might
refresh  her  companions,  wearied  with  their  long  voyage,  until
she  could  conveniently  resume  her  progress,  she  'directed  the
hide  to  be  cut  into  the  thinnest  possible  strips,  and  thus
acquired  a  greater  portion  of  ground  than  she  had  apparently
demanded ;  whence  the  place  had  afterwards  the  name  of
Byrsa.  The  people  of  the  neighbourhood  subsequently
gathering  about  her,  bringing,  in  hopes  of  gain,  many  articles
to  the  strangers  for  sale,  and  gradually  fixing  their  abodes
there,  some  resemblance  of  a  city  arose  from  the  concourse.
Ambassadors  from  the  people  of  Utica,  too,  brought  them
presents  as  relatives,  and  exhorted  them  *'  to  build  a  city  where
they  had  chanced  to  obtain  a  settlement."  An  inclination  to
detain  the  strangers  was  felt  also  by  the  Africans ;  and,
accordingly,  with  the  consent  of  all,  Carthage  was  founded,
an  annual  tribute  being  fiixed  for  the  ground  which  it  was  to
occupy.  At  the  commencement  of  digging  the  foundations  an
0X8  head  was  found,  which  was  an  omen  that  the  city  would
be  wealthy,  indeed,  but  laborious  and  always  enslaved.  It  was
therefore  removed  to  another  place,  where  the  head  of  a  horse
was  found,  which,  indicating  tiiat  the  people  would  be  warlike
and  powerful,  portended  an  auspicious  site.  In  a  short  time,
as  the  surrounding  people  came  together  at  the  report,  the
inhabitants  became  numerous,  and  the  city  itself  extensive.  .
VI.  When  the  power  of  the  Cartliaginians,  from  success  in
their  proceedings,  had  risen  to  some  height,  Hiarbas,  king  of
the  Maxitani,t  desiring  an  interview  with  ten  of  the  chief  men
of  Carthage,  demanded  Elissa  in  marriage,  denouncing  war  in
case  of  a  refusal. The  deputies,  fearing  to  report  this  message

to  the  queen,  acted  towards  her  with  Carthaginian  artifice,

•

*  Tegi  posset.]  Justin  misappliefb  this  word.  A  better  accoimt  is
given  by  Appian,  de  Bell.  Pun.  init :  "Ocrov  fivpoa  ravpov  trtpiXafiy  :
and  Livy  says,  QttmUwn  loci  bovis  tergo  amplectipotuerirU.  Virgil  also,
Mil  i  372 :  Taurivio  quaTUum  postent  circumdare  tergo. — JBemeceerus.
Soheffer  thinks  that  we  should  read  cingi.

+  Four  old  editions  have  Mauritani;  two  manuscripts  Mauri. —


160  * JUSTIN.  [B.xvm.  CH.Tni.

saying  that  *^  the  king  asked  for  some  person  to  teach  him  and
his  Africans  a  more  civilized  way  of  life,  but  who  could  be
found  that  would  leave  his  relations  and  go  to  barbarians,  and
people  that  were  living  like  wild  beasts?"  Being  then
reproached  by  the  queen,  "  in  case  they  refused  a  hard  life  for
the  benefit  of  their  country,  to  which,  should  circumstances
require,  their  life  itself  was  due,"  they  disclosed  the  king's
message,  saying  that  "  she  herself,  if  she  wished  her  city  to  be
secure,  must  do  what  she  required  of  others."  Being  caught
by  this  subtlety,  she  at  last  said  (after  calUng  for  a  long  time
with  many  t^ars  and  mournful  lamentations  on  the  name  of
her  husband  Acerbas),  that  "  she  would  go  whither  the  fate  of
her  city  called  her."  Taking  three  months  for  the  accomplish-
ment of  her  resolution,  and  having  raised  a  funeral  pile  at  the
extremity  of  the  city,  she  sacrificed  many  victims,  as  if  she
would  appease  the  shade  of  her  husband,  and  make  her
offerings  to  him  before  her  marriage ;  and  then,  taking  a  sword,
she  ascended  the  pile,  and,  looking  towards  the  people,  said,
that  ''she  would  go  to  her  husband  as  they  had  desired
her,"  and  put  an  end  to  her  Hfe  with  the  sword.  As  long
as  Carthage  remained  unconquered,  she  was  worshipped  as
a  goddess.  This  city  was  founded  seventy- two  years*  before
Home ;  but  while  the  bravery  of  its  inhabitants  made  it  famous
in  war,  it  was  internally  disturbed  with  various  troubles,
arising  from  civil  differences.  Being  aOQiicted,  among  other
calamities,  with  a  pestilence,  they  adopted  a  cruel  religious
ceremony,  an  execrable  abomination,  as  a  remedy  for  it ;  for
they  immolated  human  beings  as  victims,  and  brought  children
(whose  age  excites  pity  even  in  enemies)  to  the  altars,
entreating  favour  of  the  gods  by  shedding  the  blood  of  those  for
whose  life  the  gods  are  genendly  wont  to  be  entreated.

VII.  In  consequence  of  the  gods,  therefore,  being  rendered

*  There  is  a  strange  variety  of  opinions  among  authors  as  to  the
time  when  this  city  was  founded.  Some  make  it  thirty  years  prior  to
the  Trojan  war,  as  Phili^tas  in  Eusebius,  or  fifti/f  as  Appian,  both  of
whom  deny  that  Dido  was  the  founder  of  it ;  some  say  that  it  was
founded  after  Troy  was  taken,  but  before  the  building  of  Rome ;  but
do  not  agree  as  to  the  number  of  years.  VelL  Patereulus,  i.  6,  makes
it fiftyaix yeaxB  older  than  Bome;  Livy,  Epit  li.,  says  that  it  stood
seven  hundred  years,  and  was  destroyed  A.n.o.  607;  a  calculation
whi?h  makes  it  ninety-three  years  older  than  Bome. — LeTnaire.  See
also  Bonxgarsiia  and  Bemeccei'ua,


B.C.  ABOUT  450.] MALCHUS  THE  CARTHAGINIAN.  161

adverse  by  such  atrocities,  after  they  had  long  fought  unsuc-
cessfully in  Sicily,  and  had  transferred  the  war  into  Sardinia,
they  were  defeated  in  a  great  battle  with  the  loss  of  the  greater
psui;  of  their  army  ;  a  disaster  for  which  they  sentenced  their
general  Malchus,*  ,rnnder  whose  conduct  they  had  both  con-
quered a  part  of  Sicily  and  achieved  great  exploits  against  the
Africans,  to  remain  in  exile  with  the  portion  of  his  army  that
survived.  The  soldiers,  indignant  at  this  sentence,  sent  depu-
ties to  Carthage,  to  beg,  in  the  first  place,  permission  for  them
to  return,  and  pardon  for  their  ill  success  in  the  field  ;  and,  in
the  second  place,  to  announce  that  "  what  they  could  not  ob-
tain by  entreaty,  they  would  obtain  by  force  of  arms."  The
prayers  and  threats  of  the  deputies  being  alike  slighted,  the
troops,  after  some  days,  went  on  board  ship,  and  came  under
arms  to  the  city,  when  they  called  gods  and  men  to  witness
that  **  they  were  not  come  to  overthrow,  but  to  recover  their
country ;  and  that  they  would  show  their  countrymen  that  it
was  not  valour,  but  fortune,  that  had  failed  them  in  the  pre-
ceding war.*'  By  stopping  the  supplies,  and  besieging  the  city,
they  reduced  the  Carthaginians  to  the  greatest  despair.  At
this  time  Cartalo,  the  son  of  Malchus,  the  exiled  general,
returning  by  his  father's  camp  from  Tyre  (whither  he  had
been  sent  by  the  Carthaginians,  to  carry  the  tenth  of  the
plunder  of  Sicily,  which  his  father  had  taken,  to  Hercules),
and  being  desired  by  his  father  to  wait  on  him,  replied  that
"  he  would  discharge  his  religious  duties  to  the  public,!  before
those  of  merely  private  obligation."  His  father,  though  he
was  indignant  at  his  conduct,  was  nevertheless  afraid  to
obstruct  him  in  the  performance  of  his  religious  offices.  Some
days  after,  Cartalo,  having  obtained  leave  of  absence  from  the
people,  and  returning  to  his  father,  presented  himself  before
all  the  people,  dressed  in  the  purple  and  fillets  of  his  sacer-
dotal dignity,  when  his  father  took  him  aside,  and  said,
'*  Hast  thou  dared,  most  unnatural  wretch,  to  appear  before
80  many  of  thy  miserable  countrymen,  thus  arrayed  in  purple
and  gold,  and  to  enter,  with  all  the  marks  of  peaceful  pros-
perity about  thee,  and  exulting  as  it  were  in  triumph,  into

*  Wetzel  has  the  name  Maleus  in  his  text,  but  favours  Malchus^  a
conjecture  of  Is.  Vossius,  in  his  note.

f  PubliccB  religionis  oficia."]  The  public  payment  of  his  vows  for  his
safe  return. —  WetzeL

M


1  flS  juflmN.  [b.  xvm.  ch.  i.

this  sad  and  mouiiiful  camp  ?  Couldst  thou  display  thyself
nowhere  else  to  thy  fellow  creatures?  Was  no  place  fitter
for  it  than  where  the  misery  of  thy  father*  and  the  distress  of
his  unhappy  hanishment,  were  to  he  seen  ?  I  have  to  add,
too,  that  when  thou  wast  summoned  a  short  time  ago,  thou
proudly  despisedst,  I  do  not  say  thy  father,  hut  certainly  the
general  of  thy  countrymen.  And  what  else  dost  thou  exhihit
in  that  purple  and  those  crowns,  hut  the  titles  of  my  victo-
ries ?  Since  thou,  therefore,  acknowledgest  nothing  in  thy
father  hut  the  name  of  an  exile,  I  also  will  assume  the  charac-
ter, not  of  a  father,  hut  of  a  general,  and  will  make  such  an
example  of  thee,  that  no  one  may  hereafter  dare  to  sport  with
the  miseries  and  sorrows  of  a  parent.'*  He  accordingly  ordered
him  to  he  nailed,  in  all  his  finery,  on  a  high  cross  within  view
of  the  city.  A  few  days  after  he  took  Carthage,  and  assem-
,  hling  the  people,  complained  of  the  injustice  of  his  hani^-
ment,  pleaded  necessity  as  his  excuse  for  making  war  upon
them,  and  added  that  "heing  content  with  his  yictory,  and
the  punishment  of  the  authors  of  their  country *s  misery,*  he
granted  a  free  pardon  for  his  unjust  hanishment  to  all  the
rest/*  Having  accordingly  put  ten  senators  to  death,  he  left
the  city  to  the  government  of  its  laws.  But  heing  accused
himself,  shortly  after,  of  aspiring  to  he  king,  he  paid  the
penalty  of  his  twofold  cruelty  to  his  son  and  his  country.  He
was  succeeded,  as  commander-in-chief,  hy  Mago,  hy  whose
exertions  the  power  of  Carthage,  the  extent  of  its  territories,
and  its  military  glory,  was  much  increased.

*  Auctoribiu  miserorvm  dvivm  ja  the  reading  of  all  the  texts,  but
cannot  be  right.  Faber  conjectures  (mctori^ms  miteria/rv/m,  cwUium,
which  I  have  adopted.  Yorstius  proposed  miseriai  cwivm;  and
Vossius  observes  that  "  doctissimus  Peyraredus  "  read  mtsertvm  civvum^
which  Vossius  himself  approved,  but  which  certainly  cannot  be
adopted  unless  further  changes  are  made  in  the  context.


168


BOOK  XIX.

Hasdrubal  and  Hamilcar,  sons  of  Mago ;  Hftsdrubal  dies  in  Sardinia ;
war  of  tlie  Carthaginians  in  Sicily,  L — The  Carthaginians  defeated
in  Sicily ;  Himiloo  succeeds  Hamilcar ;  pestilence  in  the  army,  IL
— ^Return  of  Himilco  to  Carthage ;  his  speech,  and  death,  IIL

I.  Mago,  the  general  of  tlie  Cartihaginians,  after  having
been  the  first,  by  regulating  their  military  discipline,  to  lay
the  foundations  of  the  Punic  power,  and  after  establishing  the
strength  of  the  state,  not  less  by  his  skill  iu  the  art  of  war
than  by  his  personal  prowess,  died,  leaving  behind  him  two
sons,  Hasdrubal  and  Hamilcar,  who,  pursuing  the  honourable
course  of  their  father,  were  heirs  to  his  greatness  as  well  as  to
his  name.  Under  their  generalship  war  was  made  upon
Sardinia;  and  a  contest  was  also  maintained  against  the
Africans,  who  demanded  tribute  for  many  jdars  for  the  ground
on  which  the  city  stood.  But  as  the  cause  of  the  Africans
was  the  more  just,  their  fortune  was  likewise  superior,  and  the
struggle  with  them  was  ended — ^not  by  exertions  in  the  field — by
the  payment  of  a  sum  of  money.  In  Sardinia  Hasdrubal  was
severely  wounded,  and  died  there,  leaving  the  command  to  his
brother  Hamilcar ;  and  not  only  the  mourning  throughout  his
country,  but  the  fact  that  he  had  held  eleven  dictatorships  and
enjoyed  four  triumphs,*  rendered  his  death  an  object  of
general  notice.  The  courage  of  the  enemy,  too,  was  raised  by
it,  as  if  the  power  of  the  Carthaginians  had  expired  with  their
general.  The  people  of  Sicily,  therefore,  applying,  in  conse-
quence of  the  perpetual  depredations  of  the  Carthaginians,  to
Leonidas,  the  brother  of  the  king  of  Sparta,  for  aid,  a
grievous  war  broke  out,  which  continued,  with  various  success,
for  a  long  period.

During  the  course  of  these  transactions,  ambassadors  came
to  Carthage  from  Darius  king  of  Persia,  bringing  an  edict,  by
which  the  Carthaginians  were  forbidden  to  offer  human  sacri-
fices, and  to  eat  dog's  flesh,  and  were  commanded  to  bum  the

*  He  calls  a  Carthaginian  office  by  a  Roman  name.  Suffetea  was  the
Punic  word  for  their  two  chief  magistrates.  As  for  triumphal  pro-
cessions, the  Africans,  according  to  Servius,  Mn.  iv.  87,  were  the  first
people  l^t  had  them,  long  before  they  were  introduced  at  Rome*

H  '2


164  JUSTIN.  [B.XIX.  CH.II.

bodies  of  the  dead  rather  than  burv  them  in  the  earth ;  •  and
requesting,  at  the  same  time,  assistance  against  Greece,  on
which  Darius  was  about  to  make  war.t  The  Carthaginians
declined  giving  him  aid,  on  account  of  their  continual  wars
with  their  neighbours,  but,  that  they  might  not  appear  uncom-
pliant in  every  thing,  willingly  submitted  to  the  decree.

II.  Hamilcar,  meanwhile,  was  killed  in  battle  in  Sicily,
leaving  three  sons,  Himilco,  Hanno,  and  Gisco.  Hasdrubal
also  had  the  same  number  of  sons,  Hannibal,  Hasdrubal,  and
Sappho.  I  By  these  the  affairs  of  the  Carthaginians  were
managed  at  this  period.  *  War  was  made  upon  the  Moors,  a
co'ntest  was  maintained  with  the  Numidians,  and  the  Africans
were  compelled  to  remit  the  tribute  paid  for  the  building  of
the  city.  At  length,  however,  as  so  numerous  a  family  of
commanders  was  dangerous  to  the  liberty  of  the  state,  since
they  themselves  managed  and  decided  every  thing,  a  hundred
judges  were  chosen  out  of  the  senate,  who  were  to  demand  of
the  generals,  when  they  returned  from  war,  an  account  of
their  proceedings,  in  order  that,  under  this  control,  they
might  exercise  their  command  §  in  war  with  a  regard  to  the
judicature  and  laws  at  home.

•  Mortiborvmque  corpora  eremare  pothu  qttam  terr&  obrtiere,  d  rege
jtbbehantw.]  As  the  Persians  did  not  Jwrw,  but  bury,  the  bodies
of  the  dead,  thinking  that  fire  was  polluted  by  corpses,  Frein-
Bhemius,  on  Curt,  ii,  13,  16,  would  reject  the  words  d  rege  ju-
hd>antur,  and  make  the  infinitiyes  eremare  and  obruere  depend  on
prokibehaMvrf  which  precedes  ;  so  that  the  sense  may  be,  "  they  were
forbidden  to  bum  the  dead  rather  than  bury  them  in  the  earth  ;"  that
is,  they  were  commanded  to  bury  rather  than  burn  them.  Whoever
thinks  this  construction  harsh,  may  perhaps  be  better  pleased  with  the
correction  of  Gronovius,  mortuorumqtie  corpora  eremare  [prohibe-
bantur]  qtLce  potivs  terrd  obruere  a  rege  jubebantwr. — Lemaire.  But
Gronovius's  construction  is  not  less  harsh  than  that  of  Freinshemius.
Kirchmann,  de  Fun.  Bom.  i.  2,  would  make  eremare  and  obruere
change  places  ;  an  alteration  which  Bemeccerus  and  Yorstius  approve.
But  perhaps  Justin  or  Trogus  merely  made  &  mistake.

f  He  was  prevented  by  death. See  ii.  10.

X  A  name  that  does  not  occur  in  any  other  author.  It  is  perhaps
corrupt.  In  one  manuscript  it  was  written  Sapho.  Should  we  read
Paaphot  This  certainly  is  a  Punic  name.  See  the  "Proverbs"  of
ApostoliuB  and  the  "Apophthegms"  of  Arsenius. —  Vomua.  Vossius's
erne  idation  is  approved  by  Qreeviu?,  Scheffer,  Faber,  and  Wetzel.

§  Jmperia  agitarent]  I  read  agitarent  with  Bongarsius,  Bemeccerus,
Yorstius,  and  Faber,  not  cogifarent,  which  is  in  the  oldest  editions.
The  alteration,  says  Bongarsius,  was  made  by  G.  Major.


B.a  405.]  HiMiLCO.  165

In  Sicily,  Himilco  succeeded  as  general  in  the  room  of
Hamilcar,  but,  after  fighting  several  successful  battles,  both
by  land  and  sea,  and  taking  many  towns,  he  suddenly  lost  his
army  by  the  influence  of  a  pestilential  constellation.*  When
the  news  of  this  arrived  at  Carthage,  the  country  was  over-
whelmed with  grief,  and  all  places  rung  with  lamentations,  as
if  the  city  had  been  taken  by  an  enemy ;  private  houses  were
closed,  the  temples  of  the  gods  were  shut,  all  religious  cere-
monies were  intermitted,  and  all  private  business  suspended.
They  all  then  crowded  to  the  harbour,  and  inquired  of  the  few
that  came  out  of  their  ships,  survivors  of  the  calamity,
respecting  their  relatives.  But  when,  after  wavering  hope,
dread  attended  with  suspense,  and  uncertain  apprehensions  of
bereavement,  the  loss  of  their  relatives  became  known  to  .the
imhappy  inquirers,  the  groans  of  mourners,  and  the  cries  and
sorrowful  lamentations  of  unhappy  mothers,  were  heard  along
the  whole  shore.

III.  In  this  state  of  things^  the  bereaved  general  came  out
of  his  ship,  ungirt,  and  in  a  mean  dress  like  that  of  a  slave,  at
sight  of  whom  the  troops  of  mourners  gathered  into  one  body.
He,  lifting  up  his  hands  to  heaven,  sometimes  bewailed  his
own  lot,  sometimes  the  misfortune  of  the  state,  and  sometimes
complained  of  "  the  gods,  who  had  deprived  him  of  such
honours  obtained  in  the  field,  and  the  glory  of  so  many
victories,  who,  after  he  had  taken  so  many  cities,  and  had
defeated  the  enemy  by  land  and  sea,  had  destroyed  his
victorious  army,  not  by  war,  but  by  a  pestilence.  Yet  he
brought,"  he  said,  "  this  important  consolation  to  his  country-
men, that  though  the  enemy  might  rejoice  at  their  ill-success,
they  could  assume  no  glory  from  it,  as  they  could  neither  say
that  those  who  had  died  were  slain  by  them,  nor  that  those
who  had  returned  had  been  put  to  fiight.  That  the  plunder
which  they  had  taken  in  their  deserted  camp  was  not  what
they  could  exhibit  as  the  spoils  of  a  conquered  enemy,  but
what  they  had  seized,  as  falling  to  them  for  want  of  owners,
through  the  accidental  deaths  of  its  possessors.  That,  as  far
as  the  enemy  was  concerned,  they  had  come  off  conquerors ;  as

*  PestUentis  sideris."]  The  disease  was  thought  to  have  been  an
infliction  from  heaven  on  the  Carthaginians,  because  they  had
plundered  the  temples  of  Ceres  and  Proserpine.  See  Diod.  Sic.  xiv.
70—72.


166  JUSTIN.  [B.XX.  CH.I.

to  the  pestilence,  they  were  certainly  conquered ;  but  that,  for
himself,  he  took  nothing  more  to  heart  than  that  he  could  not
die  among  the  brave,  and  was  reserved,  not  to  enjoy  life,  but
to  be  the  sport  of  calamity.  However,  as  he  had  brought  the
wretched  remains  of  his  army  to  Carthage,  he  would  follow  his
fellow  soldiers,  and  prove  to  his  country  that  he  had  not
prolonged  his  life  to  ^at  day  because  he  was  desirous  to  live,
but  that  he  might  not  desert  by  his  death,  and  abandon  to  the
army  of  the  enemy,  those  whom  the  horrible  disease  had
spared."  When  he  had  walked,  with  such  lamentations,
throu^  the  city,  and  had  arrived  at  the  entrance  to  his  own
house,  he  dismissed  the  crowd  that  followed  him,  as  if  it  were
the  last  time  that  he  i^ould  speak  to  them,  and  then,  locking
his  door  and  admitting  no  one,  not  even  his  sons,  to  his
presence,  he  put  an  end  to  hiB  life.


BOOK  XX.


Blonysius,  tyrant  of  Syracuse,  makes  an  expedition  to  Magna  Grsecia ;
Greek  origin  of  many  people  of  Italy,  I. — Of  Metapontum ;  Crotona  ;
Locri,  XL — ^War  between  Crotona  and  Locri,  III. — Pythagoras  at
Crotona;  his  death,  IV. — Bicmysins  attacks  Crotona;  embassy  of
the  Gkkuls  to  him ;  settlements  of  the  Gauls  in  Italy ;  Dionysius
recalled  to  Sicily ;  his  death,  Y.

I.  DiONYSiTJs,  after  expelling  the  Carthaginians  from  Sicily,
and  making  himself  master  of  the  whole,  island,  thinking  that
peace  might  be  dangerous  to  his  power,  and  idleness  in  so
great  an  army  fatal  to  it,  transported  his  forces  into  Italy ;
with  a  wish,  at  the  same  time,  that  the  strength  of  his  soldiers
might  be  invigorated  by  constant  employment,  and  his
dominions  enlarged.  His  first  contest  was  with  the  Greeks,
who  occupied  the  nearest  parts  of  the  coast  on  the  Italian  sea ;
and,  having  conquered  l^m,  he  attacked  their  neighbours,
looking  upon  all  of  Grecian  origin  who  were  inhabitants  of
Italy,  as  his  enemies ;  and  these  settlers  had  then  spread,  not
merely  through  a  part  of  Italy,  but  through  almost  the  whole  of
it.  Many  Italian  cities,  indeed,  after  so  long  a  lapse  of  time,
still  exhibit  some  traces  of  Greek  manners ;  for  the  Etrurians,
who  occupy  the  shore  of  the  Tuscan  sea,  came  from  Lydia ;
and  Troy,  after  it  was  taken  and  overthrown,  sent  thither  the*
Veneti  (whom  we  see  on  the  coast  of  the  Adriatic),  under  the


GBEEK  SETTLEMENTS  IN  ITALY.  167

leadership  of  Antenor.  Adiia,  too,  which  is  near  the
lUyrian  sea,  and  which  gave  name  also  to  the  Adriatic,  is  a
Greek  city;  and  Diomede,  heing  driven  by  shipwreck,  after
the  destraction  of  Troy,  into  those  parts,  built  Arpi.  Pisae,
likewise^  in  Lignria,  had  Grecian  founders ;  and  Tarquinii,  in
Etruria,  as  well  as  Spina  in  Umbria,  has  its  origin  from  the
Thessalians ;  Pentsia  was  founded  by  the  Achseans.  Need  I
mention  Caere  ?*  Or  the  people  of  Lathim,  who  were  settled
by  iEneas  ?  Are  not  the  Falisci,  are  not  Nola  and  Abelia,
colonies  of  the  Chalcidians?  What  is  all  the  countiy  of
Campania  ?  What  axe  the  Bruttiif  and  Sabines  ?  What  are
the  Samnites?!  What  are  the  Tarentines,§  whom  we  under-
stand to  have  oome  from  Lacedasmon,  and  to  have  been  called
Spurii?  The  city  of  Thurii  they  say  that  Philoctetes  built;
and  his  monument  is  seen  there  to  this  day,  as  well  as  the
arrows  of  Hercules,  on  which  the  &;te  of  Tioy  depended,  laid
up  in  the  temple  of  Apollo.

11.  The  people  of  Metapontum,  too,  show  in  their  temple
€i  Minerva,  the  iron  tools  with  which  Epeus,  by  whom  their
city  was  founded,  buOt  the  Trojan  horse.  Hence  all  that  part
of  Italy  was  called  Greater  Greece  ||  But  soon  after  they
were  settled,  the  Metapontines,  joining  mih.  the  Sybarites
and  Crotonians,  formed  a  design  to  drive  the  rest  of  the
Greeks  from  Italy.  Capturing,  in  the  first  place,  the  city
Siris,  they  slew,  as  they  were  storming  it,  fifty  young  men
that  were  embraciog  the  statue  of  Minerva,  and  the  priest  of
the  goddess  dressed  in  his  robes,  between  the  very  altars.
Suffering,  on  this  account,  from  pestilence  and  civil  discord,
the  Crotonians,  first  of  all,  consHilted  the  oracle  at  Delphi,
and  answer  was  made  to  them,  that  '^  there  would  be  an  end
of  their  troubles,  if  they  appeased  the  o£Pended  deity  of
Minerva,  and  the  manes  of  the  slain.*'  After  they  had  begun,
accordingly,  to  make  statues  of  proper  size  for  the  young  men,
and  especially  for  Minerva,  the  Metapontines,  learning  what
the  oracle  was,  and  thinking  it  expedient  to  anticipate  them

*  It  is  said  by  Strabo  to  have  been  settled  by  the  PelasgL

t  They  are  said  to  have  sprung  from  the  Lucanians^  zxiii.  1,  and  on
the  coast  of  Lucania  were  many  Greek  towns.

X  I  know  not  why  he  intimates  that  either  of  these  peoples  were  of
Greek  origin. Strabo  regards  the  Sabines  as  autochthones  of  Italy.

§  See  iii.  4.

ii  Major  Oracia,  or  more  commonly  Magiia  CfreecM,  Great  Greece,


1«S  JUSTIN.  [B.XX.  CH.m.

m  pacifying  the  manes  of  the  goddess,  ereeted  to  the  yoiing
men  smaller  images  of  stone,  and  propitiated  the  goddess
with  offerings  of  bread.*  The  plague  was  thus  ended  in  both
places,  one  people  showing  their  zeal  by  their  magnificence,
and  the  other  by  their  expedition.  After  they  had  recovered
their  health,  the  Crotonians  were  not  long  disposed  to  be
quiet ;  and  being  indignant  that,  at  the  siege  of  Sins,  assist-
ance had  been  sent  c^ainst  them  by  the  Locrians,  they  made
war  on  that  people.  The  Locrians,  seized  with  alarm,  had
i*ecourse  to  the  Spartans,  begging  their  assistance  with  humble
entreaties.  But  the  Spartans,  disliking  so  distant  an  expedi-
tion, told  them  "to  ask  assistance  from  Castor  and  Pollux. "
This  answer,  from  a  city  in  alliance  with  them,  the  deputies
did  not  despise,  but  going  into  the  nearest  temple,  and
offering  sacrifice,  they  implored  aid  from  those  gods.  The
signs  from  the  victims  appearing  favourable,  and  their  request,
as  they  supposed,  being  granted,  they  were  no  less  rejoiced
than  if  they  were  to  carry  the  gods  with  them  ;  and,  spreading
couches  for  them  in  the  vessel,  and  setting  out  with  happy
omens,  they  brought  their  countrymen  comfort  though  not
assistance.

III.  This  affair  becoming  known,  the  Crotonians  themselves
also  sent  deputies  to  the  oracle  at  Delphi,  asking  the  way  to
victory  and  a  prosperous  termination  of  the.  war.  The  answer
given  was,  that  "  the  enemies  must  be  conquered  by  vows,
before  they  could  be  conquered  by  arms."  They  accordingly
vowed  the  tenth  of  the  spoil  to  Apollo,  but  the  Locrians,
getting  information  of  this  vow,  and  the  god's  answer,  vowed
a  ninth  part,  keeping  the  matter  however  secret,  that  thej
might  not  be  outdone  in  vows.  When  they  came  into  the
field,  therefore,  and  a  hundred  and  twenty  thousand  Croto-
nians stood  in  arms  against  them,  the  Locrians,  contemplating
the  smallness  of  their  own  force  (for  they  had  only  fifteen
thousand  men),  and  abandoning  all  hope  of  victory,  devoted
themselves  to  certain  death ;  and  such  courage,  arising  out  of
despair,  was  felt  by  each,  that  they  thought  they  would  be  as
conquerors,  if  they  did  not  fall  without  avenging  themselves.
But  while  they  sought  only  to  die  vdth  honour,  they  had  the
good  fortune  to  gain  the  victory ; nor  was  there  any  other

*  Paniflciis.]  We  might,  with  Ostertagius,  read  pa/nnificiis  (cloths  or
ganaenta),  which  were  more  appropriate  to-J^ixaexYd, —WetzeL


B.€.  540.]  PYTHAGORAS.  1 69

cause  of  their  success '  but  their  desperation.  While  the
Locrians  were  %htiDg,  an  eagle  constantly  attended  on
their  army,  and  continued  flying  about  them  till  they  were
conquerors.  On  the  wings,  also,  were  seen  two  young  men
fighting  in  armour  different  from  that  of  the  Lt,  of  an
extraordinary  stature,  on  white  horses  and  in  scarlet  cloaks  ;
nor  were  they  visible  longer  than  the  battle  lasted.  The
incredible  swiftness  of  the  report  of  the  battle  made  this
wonderful  appearance  more  remarkable ;  for  on  the  same
day  on  which  it  was  fought  in  Italy,  the  victory  was  published
at  Corinth,  Athens,  and  Lacedsemon.

IV,  After  this  event  the  Crotonians  ceased  to  exercise  their
valour,  or  to  care  for  distinction  in  the  field.  They  hated  the
arms  which  they  had  unsuccessfully  taken  up,  and  would  have
abandoned  their  former  way  of  life  for  on«  of  luxury,  had  not
Pythagoras  arisen  among  them.  This  philosopher  was  bom
at  Samos,  the  son  of  Demaratua,  a  rich  merchant,  and  after
being  greatly  advanced  in  wisdom,  went  first  to  Egypt,  and
afterwards  to  Babylon,  to  learn  the  motions  of  the  stars  and
study  the  origin  of  the  universe,  and  acquired  very  great
knowledge.  Returning  from  thence,  he  went  to  Crete  and
Lacedsemon,  to  instruct  himself  in  the  laws  of  Minos  and
Lycurgus,  which  at  that  time  were  in  high  repute.  Furnished
with  all  these  attainments,  he  came  to  Crotona,  and,  by  his
influence,  recalled  the  people,  when  they  were  giving  them-
selves up  to  luxury,  to  the  observance  of  frugality.  He  used
daily  to  recommend  virtue,  and  to  enumerate  the  ill  efiects
of  luxury,  and  the  misfortunes  of  states  that  had  been  ruined
by  its  pestilential  influence ;  and  he  thus  produced  in  the
people  such  a  love  of  temperance,  that  it  was  at  length  thought
incredible  that  any  of  them  should  be  extravagant.  He
frequently  gave  instruction  to  the  women  apart  from  the
men,  and  to  the  children  apart  from  their  parents.  He
impressed  on  the  female  sex  the  observance  of  chastity,  and
submission  to  their  husbands;  on  the  rising  generation,  modesty
and  devotion  to  learning.  Through  his  whole  course  of
instruction  he  exhorted  all  to  love  temperance,  as  the  mother
of  every  virtue ;  and  he  produced  such  an  effect  upon  them  by
the  constancy  of  his  lectures,  that  the  women  laid  aside  their
vestments  embroidered  with  gold,  and  other  ornaments  and
distinctions,  as  instruments  of  luxury,  and,  bringing  them


1 7  0  JUSTIN.  [B.  XX.  CH.  V.

into  the  temple  of  Juno,  consecrated  them  to  the  goddess,
declaring  that  modesty,  and  not  fine  apparel,  was  the  true
adornment  ]of  their  sex.  How  much  he  gained  upon  the
young  men,  his  victory  over  the  stubhom  minds  of  the
women  may  serve  to  indicate.  Three  hundred  of  the  young
men,  however,  being  united  by  an  oath  of  fraternity,  and
living  apart  from  the  other  citizens,  drew  the  attention  of  the
city  upon  them,  as  if  they  meyt  for  some  secret  conspiracy ;
and  the  people,  when  they  were  all  collected  in  one  building,
proceeded  to  bum  them  in  it.  In  the  tumult  about  sixty
lost  their  lives ;  the  rest  went  into  exile.

Pythagoras,  after  living  twenty  years  at  Crotona,  removed
to  Metapontum,  where  he  died ;  and  such  was  the  admiration
of  the  people  for  his  character,  that  they  made  a  temple  of  his
house,  and  worshipped  him  as  a  god.

v.  Dionysius  the  tyrant,  who,  we  have  said,  had  trans-
ported an  army  from  Sicily  into  Itetly,  and  made  war  upon  the
Greeks  there,  proceeded,  after  taking  Locri  by  storm,  to
attack  the  Crotonians,  who,  in  consequence  of  their  losses  in
the  former  war,  were  scarcely  recovering  their  strength  in  a
long  peace.  With  their  small  force,  however,  they  resisted
the  great  army  of  Dionysius  more  valiantly  than  they  had
before,  with  so  many  thousands,  resisted  the  smaller  number
of  the  Locrians.  So  much  spirit  has  weakness  in  withstand-
ing insolent  power ;  and  so  much  more  sure,  at  times,  is  an
unexpected  than  an  expected  victory.  But  as  Dionysius  was
prosecuting  the  war,  ambassadors  from  the  Gauls,  who  had
burned  Rome  some  months  before,*  came  to  him  to  desire  an
alliance  and  friendship  with  him ;  observing  that  **  their
country  lay  in  the  midst  of  his  enemies,  and  could  be  of  great
service  to  him,  either  by  supporting  him  in  the  field,  or  by
annoying  his  enemies  in  the  rear  when  they  were  engaged
with  him.**  The  embassy  was  well  received  by  Dionysius,
who,  having  made  an  alliance  with  them,  and  being  reinforced
with  assistance  from  Gaul,  renewed  the  war  as  it  were  afresh.

The  causes  of  the  Gauls'  coming  into  Italy,  in  quest  of  new
settlements,  were  civil  discords  and  perpetual  contentions  at
home ;  and  when,  from  impatience  of  those  feuds,  they  had

*  Ante  menses.]  As  a  number  seems  to  be  wanting,  Scheffer  would
read  ante  menses  sex,  taking  the  last  word  from  Moms,  i.  1 3.  Yossius
would  read  ctnte  mensem^  But  the  longer  period  seems  the  more  eligible.


B.C.  367.]  DIONYSIUS  THE  BLDBR  DIBS.  171

sought  refuge  in  Italy,  they  expelled  the  Tuscans  from  their
country,  and  founded  Milan,*  Como,  Brescia,  Verona,  Ber-
gamo, Trent,  and  Yicenza:  The  Tuscans,  too,  whmi  they
were  driven  from  their  old  settlements,  hetook  themselves,
under  a  captain  nSimed  Rhsetus,  towards  the  Alps,  where  they
founded  the  nation  of  KhsBtia,  so  named  from  their  leader.

An  invasion  of  Sicily  by  the  Carthaginians  obliged  Dio-
nysius  to  return  thither;  for  that  people,  having  reeruited
their  army,  had  resumed  the  war,  which  they  had  broken  off
in  oonsequence  of  the  plague,  with  increased  spirit.  The
leader  in  the  expedition  was  Hanno  the  Carthaginian,  whose
enemy  Juniatus,  the  most  powerful  of  the  Cardiaginians  at
that  time,  having,  from  hatred  to  him,  given  friendly  notice
to  Dionysius,  in  a  letter  written  in  Greek,  of  the  approach  of
the  army  and  the  inactivity  of  its  leader,  was  found,  through
the  letter  being  intercepted,  guilty  of  treason ;  and  a  decree  ^f
the  senate  was  made,  ^*  that  no  Carthaginian  should  thence-
forward study  the  Greek  literature  or  language,  so  that  no  one
might  be  able  to  speak  with  the  enemy,  or  write  to  him,  with-
out an  interpreter."  Not  long  after,  Dionysius,  whom  a  little
before  neither  Sicily  nor  Italy  could  hold,  being  reduced  and
weakened  by  continual  wars,  was  at  last  kiUed  by  a  conspiracy
among  his  own  subjects*


BOOK  XXI.


Dionysius  the  younger  becomes  tyrant  of  Syractise,  I. — His  cruelties  ;'
is  expelled  from  Syracuse,  and  receiyed  at  Loeri,  II. — His  conduct
there ;  is  driyen  from  the  place,  and  regains  the  goyermnent  at
Syracuse,  IIL — Usurpation  of  Hanno  at  Carthage ;  his  death,  IV.
— Dionysius  is  again  driyen  from  Syracuse,  and  leads  a  mean  life
at  Corinth,  Y. — The  Carthaginians  are  alarmed  at  the  conquests
of  Alexander  the  Great;  the  unjust  execution  of  Hamilcar,  Yl.

I.  Wh^n  Dionysius  the  tyrant  was  cut  off  in  Sicily,  the  army
elected  in  his  room  Dionysius  the  eldest  of  his  sons,  both  in
accordance  with  the  law  of  nature,  and  because  they  thought
the  power  would  be  more  secure,  if  it  continued  in  the
hands  of  one  son,  than  if  it  were  divided  among  several.

*  I  have  giyen  the  modem  names.  The  ancient  were  Me<fi(ylanum,
Comum,  Brixia,  Verona,  Bergomum,  Tridentum,  Yicentia.


172  .  JUSTIN.  [b.  XXI.  CH.  11.

Dionysiup,  at  the  commencement  of  his  reign,  was  eager  to
remove  the  uncles  of  his  brothers,*  as  being  his  rivals  in  the
government,  and  as  having  encouraged  the  young  men  to  ask
for  a  division  of  power.  But  concealing  his  inclinations  for  a
while,  he  applied  himself  first  to  gain  the  favour  of  his  sub-
jects, as  being  likely  to  cause  the  atrocity,  which  he  had
resolved  on  committing,  to  be  regarded  with  more  indulgence,
if  he  previously  made  himself  popular.  He  therefore  released
three  thousand  prisoners  from  the  gaols,  remitted  the  people
the  taxes  for  three  years,  and  sought  the  affection  of  all  by
whatever  blandishments  he  could  use.  Then,  proceeding  to
execute  his  determination,  he  put  to  death,  not  only  the  rela-
tives of  his  brothers,  but  his  brothers  themselves ;  so  that  he
left  to  those,  to  whom  he  owed  a  share  of  power,  not  even  a
share  of  life,  and  commenced  cruelty  upon  his  kindred  before
he  exercised  it  upon  strangers.

II.  When  his  rivals  were  removed,  he  fell  into  indolence,
and  contracted,  from  excessive  indulgence  at  table,  great  cor-
pulence of  body,  and  a  disease  in  his  eyes,  so  that  he  could
not  bear  the  sunshine,  or  dust,  or  even  the  brightness  of  ordi-
nary daylight.  Suspecting  that,  for  these  weaknesses,  he
was  despised  by  his  subjects,  he  proceeded  to  inflict  cruel-
ties upon  them;  not  filling  the  gaols,  like  his  father,  with
prisoners,  but  the  whole  city  with  dead  bodies.  Hence  he
became  not  more  contemptible  than  hateful  to  every  one.
The  Syracusans,  in  consequence,  resolving  to  rebel  against
him,  he  long  hesitated  whether  he  should  lay  down  the  govem-
.ment  or  oppose  them  in  arms ;  but  he  was  compelled  by  the
soldiery,  who  hoped  for  plunder  from  sacking  the  city,  to
march  into  the  field.  Being  defeated,  and  trying  his  fortune
again  with  no  better  success,  he  sent  deputies  to  the  people  of
Syracuse,  with  promises  that  "he  would  resign  the  govern-
ment, if  they  would  send  persons  to  him  with  whom  he  might
settle  terms  of  peace." Some  of  the  principal  citizens  being

•  Avtmcvloi  frcUrvm  9uorum.'\  Among  these  was  Dion,  who  was  not
the  uncle  of  Dionysius  himself,  but  of  his  brothers ;  for  Dionysius  the
elder  had  Hipparinus  and  Nysseus  by  Aristomache,  the  sister  of  Dion,
and  Dionysius  by  another  wife  named  Doris.  See  Com.  Nep.  Yit.
Dion.  c.  i. ;  Diod.  Sic.  xvi.  6 ;  Plutarch.  Dion.  c.  3.  Dion  had  wished
to  ask  Dionysius  the  elder,  when  he  was  on  his  death-bed,  to  bequeath
his  sister's  sons  a  share  of  the  kingdonL  Com.  Nep.  Dion.  o.  2. —
WOzeL


B.C.  367.]  DIONYSIUS  THE  YOUNGER.  173

accordingly  sent  for  that  purpose,  he  put  them  in  close  con-
finement, and  then,  when  all  were  off  their  guard,  having  no
fear  of  hostilities,  he  despatched  his  army  to  devastate  the
city.  A  contest,  in  consequence,  which  was  long  doubtful,
took  place  in  the  town  itself,  but  the  townsmen  overpowering
the  soldiery  by  their  numbers,  Dionysius  was  obliged  to  retire,
and  fearing  that  he  should  be  besieged  in  the  citadel,  fled
away  secretly,  with  all  his  king-like  paraphernalia,  to  Italy.
Being  received,  in  liis  exile,  by  his  allies  the  Locrians,  he  took
possession  of  the  citadel  as  if  he  were  their  rightful  sovereign,
and  exercised  his  usual  outrages  upon  them.  He  ordered  the
wives  of  the  principal  men  to  be  seized  and  violated  ;  he  took
away  maidens  on  the  point  o^  marriage,  polluted  them,  and
then  restored  them  to  their  betrothed  husbands ;  and  as  for
the  wealthiest  men,  he  either  banished  them  or  put  them  to
death,  and  confiscated  their  property.

III.  In  process  of  time,  when  a  pretext  for  plunder  was
wanting,  he  over-reached  the  whole  city  by  an  artful  stratagem.
The  Locrians,  being  harassed  in  war  by  Leophron  the  tyrant
of  Rhegium,  had  vowed,  if  they  were  victorious,  to  prostitute
their  maidens  on  the  festal  day  of  Venus ;  and  as,  on  neglect-
ing to  perform  the  vow,  they  were  unsuccessful  in  another  war
with  the  Lucanians,  Dionysius  called  them  to  an  assembly,
and  advised  them  **to  send  their  wives  and  daughters,  as
richly  dressed  as  possible,  to  the  temple  of  Venus ;  out  of
whom  a  hundred,  chosen  by  lot,  should  fulfil  the  public  vow,
and,  for  religion's  sake,  offer  themselves  for  prostitution  during
the  space  of  a  month,  the  men  previously  taking  an  oath  not
to  touch  any  one  of  them ;  and,  in  order  that  this  should
be  no  detriment  to  the  women  who  released  the  state  from
its  vow,  they  should  make  a  decree,  that  no  other  maidm
should  be  married  till  these  were  provided  with  htishandsy
This  proposal,  by  which  regard  was  shown  both  to  their  super-
stitious observances  and  to  the  honour  of  their  virgins,  being
received  with  approbation,  the  whole  of  the  women,  in  most
expensive  dresses,  assembled  in  the  temple  of  Venus,  when
Dionysius,  sending  in  his  soldiers,  took  off  their  finery,  and
made  the  ornaments  of  the  matrons  a  spoil  for  himself.  The
husbands  of  some  of  them  too,  who  were  of  the  richer  class,  he
put  to  death ;  others  he  tortured  to  make  them  discover  their
husbands'  wealth. After  reigning  in  this  manner  for  six  years.


174  JUSTIN. ■  [B.XXI.  CH.IV.

he  was  driven  from  Locri  by  a  conspiracy  of  the  people,  and
returned  to  Sicily ;  where,  while  all,  after  so  long  an  interval
of  peace,  were  free  £rom  apprehension,  he  possessed  himself  of
Syracuse  by  surprise.

IV.  While  this  affair  occurred  in 'Sicily,  Hanno,  a  leading
man  among  the  Carthaginians,  in  Africa,  employed  his  power,
which  surpassed  that  of  the  government,  to  secure  the  sove-
reignty for  himself,  and  endeavoured  to  establish  himself  as
king  by  killing  the  senate.  For  the  execution  of  this  atrocity
he  fixed  on  the  day  of  his  daughter's  marriage,  in  order  that
his  nefarious  plot  might  be  the  better  concealed  in  the  pomp
of  religious  ceremonies.  He  accordingly  prepared  a  banquet
for  the  common  people  in  the  jAiblic  porticoes,  and  another  for
the  senate  in  his  own  house,  so  that,  by  poisoning  the  cups,
he  might  take  off  the  senate  privately  and  without  witnesses,
and  then  more  easily  seize  the  government,  when  none  were
left  to  prevent  him.*  The  plot  being  disclosed  to  the  magis-
trates by  his  agents,  his  destructive  intentions  were  frustrated,
but  not  punished,  lest  the  matter,  if  publicly  known,  should
occasion  more  trouble,  in  the  case  of  so  powerful  a  man,  than
the  mere  design  of  it  had  caused.  Satisfied,  therefore,  with
putting  a  stop  to  it,  they  merely  set  bounds  by  a  decree  to  the
expenses  of  marriage  entertainments,  and  ordered  the  decree
to  be  obeyed,  not  by  him  alone,  but  universsJly,  that  nothing
personal  to  him,  but  the  general  correction  of  an  abuse,  might
seem  to  be  intended.  Prevented  by  this  measure,  he,  for  a
second  attempt,  raised  the  slaves,  and  appointing  another  day
for  the  massacre  of  the  senate,  but  finding  himself  again  be-
trayed, he  threw  himself,  for  fear  of  being  brought  to  trial,
into  a  strong  fortress  with  a  body  of  twenty  thousand  armed
slaves.  Here,  while  he  was  soliciting  the  Africans,  and  the
king  of  the  Moors,  to  join  him,  he  was  captured,  and  aft^
being  scourged,  having  his  eyes  put  out,  and  his  arms  and  legs
broken,  as  if  atonement  was  to  be  exacted  from  every  limb,  he
was  put  to  death  in  the  sight  of  the  people,  and  his  body,
mangled  with  stripes,  was  nailed  to  a  cross.  AH  his  children
and  relations,  too,  though  guiltless,  were  delivered  to  the  exe-
cutioner, that  no  member  of  so  nefarious  a  family  mi^t  sur-
vive either  to  imitate  his  villainy,  or  to  revenge  his  death.

♦  Orhamque  rempuhUcam — invaderetl  Orhanif  destitute  of  defenders
pr  supporters.


BC.  342.]  DIONYSIUS  AT  CORINTH.  175

y.  Dionysius,  in  the  meantime,  being  re-established  in
Syracuse,  and  becoming  every  day  more  oppressive  and  cruel
to  the  people,  was  assailed  by  a  new  band  of  conspirators.
Laying  down  the  government,  therefore,  he  delivered  up  the
city  and  army  to  the  Syracusans,  and,  being  allowed  to  take
his  private  property  with  him,  went  to  live  in  exile  at  Corinth  ;
where,  looking  on  the  lowest  station  as  the  safest,  he  humbled
himself  to  the  very  meanest  condition  of  life.  He  was  not
content  with  strolling  about  the  streets,  <but  would  even  stand
drinking  in  them ;  he  was  not  satisfied  with  being  seen  in
taverns  and  impure  houses,  but  would  sit  in  them  for  whole
days.  He  would  dispute  with  the  most  abandoned  fellows
about  the  merest  trifles,  walk  about  in  rags  and  dirt,  and
afford  laughter  to  others  more  readily  than  he  would  laugh  at
them.  He  would  stand  in  the  shambles,  deyouring  with  his
eyes  ^at  he  was  not  able  to  purchase ;  he  would  wrangle  with
the  dealers  before  the  sodiles,  and  do  everything  in  such  a
manner  *  as  to  appear  an  object  of  contempt  rather  than  of
fear.  At  last  he  assumed  the  profession  of  a  schoolmaster,
and  taught  children  in  the  open  streets,  either  that  he  might
continually  be  seen  in  public  f  by  those  who  feared  him,  or
might  be  more  readily  despised  by  those  who  did  not  fear  him;
for  though  he  had  still  plenty  of  the  vices  peculiar  to  tyrants,
yet  his  present  conduct  was  an  affectation  of  vices,;]:  and  not
the  effect  of  nature,  and  he  adopted  it  rather  from  cunning
than  from  having  lost  the  self-respect  becoming  a  sovereign,
having  experienced  how  odious  the  names  of  tyrants  are,  even
when  they  are  deprived  of  power.  He  strove,  therefore,  to
diminish  the  odium  incurred  from  his  past  by  the  contempti-
bleness  of  his  present  life,  not  looking  to  honourable  but  to
safe  practices.  Yet  amidst  all  these  arts  of  dissimulation,  he
was  accused  of  aspiring  to  the  sovereignty,  and  was  left  at
liberty  only  because  he  was  despised.

VI.  During  these  proceedings,  the  Carthaginians,  alarmed
at  the  rapid  successes  of  Alexander  the  Great,  and  fearing
that  he  might  resolve  to  annex  Africa  to  his  Persian  empire,

*  Onrnia  Uafaeere.'] Wetzel  inju^oiously  reads  Utcu

f  He  neyer  thought  that  he  made  himself  sufficiently  contemptible,

because  he  never  thought  himself  sufficiently  safe. — Sduffer.

X  SuiMUatio  vkwrtmi.]  Referring  to  his  general  conduct,  not  to  his

assumption  of  the  character  of  a  schoolmaster.


1 7 6  jroSTIN.  [b.  XXII.  CH.  I.

sent  Hamilcar,  sumamed  Ehodanus,  a  man  remarkable  for
wit  and  eloquence  beyond  others,  to  sound  his  intentions ;  for,
indeed,  the  capture  of  Tyre,  their  own  parent  city,  and  the
founding  of  Alexandria,  as  a  rival  to  Carthage,  on  the  confines
of  Africa  and  Egypt,  as  well  as  the  good  fortune  of  the  king,
whose  ambition  and  success  seemed  to  know  no  limit,  raised
their  apprehensions  to  an  extreme  height.  Hamilcar,  obtain-
ing access  to  the  king  through  the  favour  of  Parmenio,  repre-
sented himself  to  Alexander  as  having  been  banished  from  his
country,  and  as  having  fled  to  him  for  refuge,  offering,  at  the
same  time,  to  serve  as  a  soldier  in  the  expedition  against  Car-
thage. Having  thus  ascertained  his  views,  he  sent  a  full
account  of  them  to  his  countrymen,  inscribed  on  wooden
tablets,  with  blank  wax  spread  over  the  writing.  The  Cartha-
ginians, however,  when  he  returned  home  after  the  death  of
Alexander,  put  him  to  death,  not  only  ungratefully  but  cruelly,
on  pretence  that  he  had  offered  to  sell  their  city  to  the  king.


BOOK  XXII.


Rise  of  Agathocles  in  Sicily,  I. — Becomes  master  of  Syracuse  by  the
aid  of  Hamilcar,  II. — His  wars  in  Sicily,  III. — The  Cartha-ginians
besiege  Syracuse;  Agathocles  carries  the  war  against  them  Into
Africa^  IV. — His  speech  to  his  army,  promising  them  the  plunder
of  Carthage,  V.— Superstition  of  the  soldiers;  Agathocles  bums
his  ships,  defeats  the  Carthaginians,  and  lays  waste  the  country,
VI.  VII. — Returns  to  Sicily,  and  drives  the  Carthaginians  jfrom
it ;  his  farther  proceedings,  VIIL

I.  Agathocles,*  tyrant  of  Sicily,  who  attained  greatness
equal  to  that  of  the  elder  Dionysius,  rose  to  royal  dignity  from
the  lowest  and  meanest  origin.  He  was  bom  in  Sicily,  his
father  being  a  potter,  and  spent  a  youth  not  more  honourable
than  his  birth ;  for,  being  remarkable  for  beauty  and  graceful-
ness of  person,  he  supported  himself  a  considerable  time  by
submitting  to  the  infemous  lust  of  others. When  he  had

♦  All  that  took  place  in  Sicily  from  the  year  b.o.  842  to  B.C.  316,
is  omitted  by  Justin.  During  that  period  Timoleon,  whom  Justin
does  not  even  name,  expelled  the  Carthaginians  from  Sicily,  and  gave
liberty  to  the  whole  island  See  Plutarch,  Cornelius  Nepos,  and
Diodorus  Siculus,  lib.  xvi.


B.C.  316.]  AGATHOCLES.  177

v.

passed  the  years  of  puberty,  he  transferred  his  serrices  from
men  to  women.  Having  thus  become  infamous  with  both
sexes,  he  next  changed 'his  way  of  life  for  that  of  a  robber.
Some  time  after,  having  gone  to  Syracuse  and  been  received
as  a  citizen  among  the  other  inhabitants,  he  was  long  without
credit,  appearing  to  have  as  little  of  property  to  lose  as  he  had
of  character  to  blacken.  At  last,  enlisting  in  the  army  as  a
common  soldier,  he  showed  himself  ready  for  eveiy  land  of
audacity,  his  life  being  then  not  less  distinguished  by  restless-
ness than  it  had  previously  been  by  infamy.  He  was  noted
for  activity  in  the  field,  and  for  eloquence  in  making  harangues.
In  a  short  time,  accordingly,  he  became  a  centurion,  and  soon
after  a  tribune.  In  his  first  campaign  against  the  people  of
JKtna,*  he  gave  the  Syracusans  great  proofs  of  what  he  could
do ;  in  the  next,  against  the  Campanians,  he  excited  such  hopes
of  himself  throughout  the  army,  that  he  was  chosen  to  fill  the
place  of  the  deceased  general,  Damascon,  whose  wife,  after  the
death  of  her  husband,  he  married,  having  previously  had  a
criminal  connection  with  her.  And,  not  content  that  from
being  poor  he  was  suddenly  made  rich,  he  engaged  in  piracy
against  his  own  country.  He  was  saved  from  death  by  his
companions,  who,  when  apprehended  and  put  to  the  torture,
denied  his  guilt.  Twice:  he  attempted  to  make  himself
sovereign  of  Syracuse,  and  twice  he  was  driven  into  exile.

II.  By  the  Murgantines,  with  whom  he  took  refuge  in  his
banishment,  he  was  first,  from  hatred  to  the  Syracusans,  made
praetor,  and  afterwards  general-in-chief.  In  the  war  which  he
conducted  for  them,  he  both  took  the  city  of  the  Leontines,  and
proceeded  to  besiege  his  native  city,  Syracuse ;  when  Hamilcar,
general  of  the  Carthaginians,  being  entreated  to  aid  it,  laid
aside  his  hatred  as  an  enemy,  and  sent  a  body  of  troops
thither.  Thus,  at  one  and  the  same  time,  Syracuse  was  both
defended  by  an  enemy  with  the  love  of  a  citizen,  and  attacked
by  a  citizen  with  the  hatred  of  an  enemy.  But  Agathocles,
seeing*  that  the  city  was  defended  with  more  vigour  than  it  was
assailed,  entreated  Hamilcar,  through  his  deputies,  to  under-
take the  settlement  of  a  peace  between  him  and  the
Syracusans,  promising  him  particular  services  in  return  for
the  favour. Hamilcar,  induced  by  such  hopes,  and  by  dread  of

*  Adversus  jEtnasoi.]  Mtoa,  was  a  town  at  the  foot  of  Mount  JEtna.,
not  far  from  Catana.


A


178  JUSTIN.  [B.XXIL  CH.in.

his  power,  made  an  alliance  with  him,  on  condition  that  what-
ever assistance  he  furnished  Agathocles  against  the  Syracusans,
he  liimself  should  receive  as  much  for  the  augmentation  of  his
power  at  home.  Not  only  peace,  in  consequence,  was  procured
for  Agathocles,  hut  he  was  also  appointed  preetor  at  Syracuse ;
and  he  then  swore  to  Hamilcar  that  he  would  be  faithful  to  the
Carthaginians,  the  [sacred]  fires,  at  the  same  time,  being  set
forth,  and  touched  by  him.*  Some  time  after,  having  received
from  Hamilcar  five  thousand  African  troops,  he  put  to  death
the  most  powerful  of  the  leading  citizens;  and  then,  as  if
intending  to  re-model  the  constitution,  he  ordered  tlie  people
to  be  summoned  to  an  assembly  in  the  theatre,  convoking  the
senate,  in  the  meantime,  in  the  Gymnasium,  as  though  he
designed  to  make  some  previous  arrangements  with  them.
His  measures  being  thus  taken,  he  sent  his  troops  to  surround
the  people,  and  caused  the  senate  to  be  massacred,  and,  when
he  had  finished  the  slaughter  of  them,  cut  off  the  richest  and
boldest  of  the  commoners.

III.  These  thin^  being  done,  he  made  choice  of  troops,
and  embodied  a  regular  army;  with  which  he  suddenly
attacked  several  of  the  neighbouring  cities  when  they  were
under  no  apprehersion  of  hostilities.  He  also  disgracefully
harassed,  with  the  connivance  of  Hamilcar,  certain  allies  of
the  Carthaginians,  who,  in  consequence,  sent  complaints  to
Carthage,  not  so  much  against  Agathocles  as  against  Hamil-
car, accusing  ''  the  former,  indeed,  as  an  oppressor  and  tyrant,
but  the  latter  as  a  traitor,  by  whom  the  possessions  of  their
allies,  under  a  settled  compact,  were  betrayed  to  the  bitterest  of
enemies ;  for  as,  at  first,  Syracuse  (a  city  always  hostile  to  the
Carthaginians, and a competitor  with Carthage for the

*  The  jbeit  of  Wetzel,  with  the  older  editions,  has  expontis  ignifms
cereis  tactisquey  "  ignes  cerei"  being  interpreted  "lighted  waxen  tapers."
But  it  may  be  doubted  whether  those  two  words  will  fairly  bear  that
sense.  Haay  other  editions  have  ignilms  Cereris,  a  conjecture  of
Sebislus,  which  Bemeccerus,  Scheffer,  and  Faber  approve,  because
Ceres  was  worshipped  in  Sicily,  and  because  Juvenal,  Sat.  xiv.,  has
Vendet  perjvria  swnmd  Exigudy  Cereris  tcmgens  aramque  pedemqM.  I
am  better  pleased  with  a  conjecture  of  Peyraredus,  expositia  ^/nilms
sacris,  tactitquef  and  have  translated  the  passage  accordingly.  Nic.
Heinsius  would  read  T^tnc  HamUcari  oris  rex  jpositie  insigni  ceremonidj
tactiaquef  &c. ;  Graevius,  Tunc  HamUcari  aris  positiSf  et  ignibua  CereriSf
ta^tiaque,  &c.,  on  the  supposition  that  arit  might  have  been  absorbed,
as  it  were,  by  the  preceding  HamUcari.


B.C.  309.]  AGATHOCLES  INVADES  AFRICA.  179

dominion  of  Sicily)  was  delivered  to  Agathocles  as  a  bond  of
union  with  Hamilcar,  so,  at  the  present  time,  the  cities  of  the
allies  of  Carthage  were  given  up-  to  the  same  tyrant  under
pretence  of  making  peace.  They  warned  them,  therefore,
that  these  proceedings  would  shortly  come  h.o\fie  to  themselves,
and  that  they  would  feel  what  mischief  they  had  brought,*  not
more  upon  Sicily  than  upon  Africa  itself."  At  these  complaints
the  senate  was  incensed  against  Hamilcar,  but  as  he  was  in
command  of  the  army,  they  gave  their  votes  concerning  him
secretly,  and  caused  their  several  opinions,  before  they  were
openly  read,  to  be  put  in  an  urn,  and  sealed  up,  until  the
other  Hamilcar,  the  son  of  Gisco,  should  return  from
Sicily.  But  the  death  of  Hamilcar  prevented  all  effects  from
these  subtle  contrivances  and  suppressed  judgments,!  and
he,  whom  his  fellow  citizens  had  unjustly  condemned  unheard,
was  freed  from  danger  of  punishment  by  the  kindness  of
destiny.  The  proceeding  furnished  Agathocles  with  a  pretext
for  making  war  on  the  Carthaginians.  His  first  engagement
was  with  Hamilcar,  the  son  of  Gisco,  by  whom  he  was
defeated,  and  retired  to  Syracuse  to  prepare  himself  for  war
with  fresh  vigour.  But  the  result  of  his  second  encounter
was  the  same  as  that  of  the  first

IV.  The  victorious  Carthaginians,  in  consequence,  having
invested  Syracuse  with  a  close  siege,  Agathocles,  perceiving
that  he  was  neither  a  match  for  them  in  the  field,  nor  provided
for  enduring  a  blockade,  and  being '  deserted,  moreover,  by
his  allies,  who  were  disgusted  at  his  cruelties,  resolved  to
transfer  the  war  into  Africa ;  a  resolution  formed  with  wonder-
ful audacity,  that  he  should  make  war  on  the  city  of  a  people
for  whom  he  was  not  a  match  in  his  own  city ;  that  he  who  could
not  defend  his  own  country  should  invade  that  of  others ;  and
that  one  who  had  been  conquered  should  brave  his  conquerors.
Nor  was  the  secrecy  of  his  plan  less  striking  than  the  con-
trivance of  it.  Stating  merely  to  the  people,  that  "  he  had
found  out  a  way  to  victory,  and  that  they  had  only  to  prepare
their  minds  to  endure  a  short  siege,  or  that,  if  any  of
them  were  dissatisfied  with  their  present  circumstances,  he  gave
them  full  liberty  to  depart,"  he  proceeded,  after  one  thousand

*  Namely,  by  sending  out  Hamilcar.

+  SenteTUias  iwrnditas.]  Justin  means  the  secret  votes,  of  which  he
had  just  spoken,  and  which  were  sealed  up  in  an  urn. — VanHvs.

N  2


180  JUSTIN.  [B.XXII.  CH.V.

six  hundred  had  left  him,  to  furnish  the  rest  with  provisions
and  money  for  the  necessities  of  a  blockade,  taking  away  with
him  only  fifty  talents  for  present  use,  and  intending  to  get
further  supplies  rather  from  his  enemies  than  his  friends.  He
then  obliged  all  the  slaves  that  were  of  age  for  war,  after
receiving  their  freedom,  to  take  the  military  oath,  and  put
them  and  the  greater  part  of  the  soldiers,  on  ship-board,  sup-
posing that,  as  the  condition  of  both  was  made  equal,  there
would  be  a  mutual  emulation  in  bravery  between  them.

V.  In  the  seventh  year  of  his  reign,  therefore,  accompanied
by  his  two  grown-up  sons,  Archagathus  and  Heraclides,  he
directed  his  course  towards  Africa,  not  one  of  his  men  knowing
whither  he  was  sailing ;  but  while  they  all  supposed  that  they
were  going  to  Italy  or  Sardinia  for  plunder,  he  landed  his
army  on  the  coast  of  Africa,  and  then  for  the  first  time  made
known  his  intentions  to  them  all.  He  reminded  them  in
what  condition  Syracuse  was,  "  for  which  there  was  no  other
remedy  but  that  they  should  inflict  on  the  enemy  the  distresses
that  they  themselves  were  suffering.  Wars,"  he  said,  "  were
conducted  in  one  way  at  home  and  in  another  abroad;  at
home,  a  people's  only  support  was  what  the  resources  of  their
country  supplied  ;  but  abroad,  the  enemy  might  be  beaten  by
their  own  strength,  while  their  allies  fell  offi  and  from  hatred
of  their  long  tyranny,  looked  about  for  foreign  aid.  To  this
was  added,  that  the  cities  and  fortresses  of  Africa  were  not
secured  with  walls,  or  situate  on  eminences,  but  lay  in  level
plains  without  any  fortifications,  and  might  all  be  induced,
by  the  fear  of  destruction,  to  join  in  the  war  against  Carthage.
A  greater  war,  in  consequence,  would  blaze  forth  against  tiie
Carthaginians  from  Africa  itself  than  from  Sicily,  as  the
forces  of  the  whole  region  would  combine  against  a  city
greater  in  name  than  in  power,  and  he  himself  would  thus
gain  from  the  country  the  strength  which  he  had  not  brought
into  it.  Nor  would  victory  be  only  in  a  small  degree  pro-
moted by  the  sudden  terror  of  the  Carthaginians,  who,
astonished  at  such  dtiring  on  the  part  of  their  enemies,  would
be  in  utter  consternation.  Besides,  there  would  be  the
burning  of  country  houses,  the  plundering  of  fortresses  and
towns  that  offered  resistance,  and  siege  laid  to  Carthage
itself;  from  all  which  disasters  they  would  learn  that  wars
were  practicable  not  only  for  them  against  others,  but  for


B.C.  309.]  AGATHOCLBS  IN  AFRICA.  181

Others  against  them.  By  these  means  the  Carthaginians
might  not  only  he  conquered,  hut  Sicily  might  be  delivered
from  them ;  for  they  would  not  continue  to  besiege  Syracuse,
when  they  were  suffering  from  a  siege  of  their  own  city.
Nowhere  else,  therefore,  could  war  be  found  more  easy,  or
plunder  more  abundant,  for,  if  Carthage  were  taken,  all  Africa
and  Sicily  would  be  the  prize  of  the  victors.  The  glory,  too,
of  so  honourable  an  enterprise,  would  be  so  celebrated  through
all  ages,  that  it  could  never  be  buried  in  oblivion;  for  it
would  be  said  that  they  were  the  only  men  in  the  world  who
had  carried  abroad  against  their  enemies  a  war  which  they
could  not  withstand  at  home  :  who,  when  defeated,  had  pur-
sued their  conquerors,  and  besieged  the  besiegers  of  their  own
city.  They  ought  all  accordingly,  to  prosecute,  vrith  equal
courf^e  and  cheerfulness,  an  enterprise,  than  which  none
could  offer  them  a  more  noble  reward  if  they  were  victorious,
or  greater  honour  to  their  memory  if  they  were  conquered."

VI.  By  these  exhortations  the  courage  of  the  soldiers  was
excited ;  but  the  superstitious  influence  of  an  omen  had  spread
some  dismay  among  them ; for  the  sun  had  been  eclipsed*
during  their  voyage. But  with  regard  to  this  phaenomenon
Agathocles  was  at  no  less  pains  to  satisfy  them  than  he  had
been  with  regard  to  the  war  ;  alleging  that,  "  if  it  had  hap-
pened before  they  set  out,  he  should  have  thought  it  a  portent
unfavourable  to  their  departure,  but  since  it  had  occurred  after
they  had  set  sail,  its  signification  was  directed  against  those
to  whom  they  were  going. Besides,"  he  said,  "the  eclipses
of  the  heavenly  bodies  always  presaged  a  change  in  the  present
state  of  things,  and  it  was  therefore  certain  that  an  alteration
was  foretold  in  the  flourishing  condition  of  the  Carthaginians
and  in their  own  adverse circumstances." Having  thus
pacified  his  soldiers,  he  ordered  all  the  ships,  with  the  consent
of  the  army,  to  be  set  on  fire,  in  order  that,  the  means  of
flight  being  taken  away,  they  might  understand  that  they  must
either  conquer  or  die.

While  they  were  devastating  the  country  wherever  they  went,
and  laying  farm-houses  and  fortresses  in  ashes,  Hanno
advanced  to  meet  them  with  thirty  thousand  Carthaginians

*  In  the  third  year  of  the  117th  olympiad,  B.C.  309,  on  the
15th  of  August,  at  two  la  the  afternoon,  according  to  the  calculations
of  astronomers. — Wetzd.


1 82  JUSTIN.  [B.  xxn.  CH.  vu.

When  they  came  to  a  battle,  two  thousand  of  the  Sicilians,
and  three  thousand  of  the  Carthaginians,  with  their  general
himself,  were  left  on  the  field.  By  this  victory  the  spirits
of  the  Sicilians  were  elated,  and  those  of  the  Carthaginians
depressed.  Agathocles,  taking  advantage  of  his  success,
stormed  several  towns  and  forts,  took  a  vast  quantity  of
plunder,  and  killed  many  thousands  of  the  enemy.  He  then
pitched  his  camp  at  the  distance  of  five  miles  from  Carthage,
that  they  might  view  from  the  walls  of  the  city  the  destruc-
tion of  their  most  valuable  possessions,  the  devastation  of  their
lands,  and  the  burning  of  their  houses.  At  the  same  time  a
great  rumour  of  the  destruction  of  the  Carthaginian  army,
and  of  the  capture  of  their  cities,  was  spread  through  all
Africa,  and  astonishment  fell  upon  every  one,  wondering  how
80  sudden  a  war  could  have  surprised  so  great  an  empire,
especially  from  an  enemy  already  conquered.  This  wonder
was  gradually  changed  into  a  contempt  for  the  Carthaginians ;
and  not  long  after,  not  only  the  populace  of  Africa,  but
the  most  eminent  cities,  out  of  fondness  for  change,  revolted  to
Agathocles,  and  furnished  the  victorious  army  with  com  and
money.

YII.  To  these  disasters  of  the  Carthaginians,  and  as  if  to
crown  their  evil  fortune,  was  added  the  destruction  of  their
army  and  its  general  in  Sicily.  For  after  the  departure  of
Agathocles  from  the  island,  the  Carthaginians,  prosecuting  the
siege  of  Syracuse  with  less  vigour,  were  reported  to  have  been
utteiiy  cut  off  by  Antander,  the  brother  of  Agathocles.  The
fortune  of  the  Carthaginians,  therefore,  being  similar  at  home
and  abroad,  not  only  their  tributary  towns,  but  even  princes
that  were  in  alliance  with  them,  began  to  fall  off,  estimating
the  obligations  of  confederacy  not  by  the  standard  of  honour
but  by  that  of  fortune.  Among  these  was  Opheltas,  king  of
Cyrene,  who,  grasping,  with  extravagant  hopes,  at  the  do-
minion of  all  Africa,  made  an  alliance  with  Agathocles
through  ambassadors,  arranging  that,  when  the  Carthaginians
were  subdued,  the  government  of  Sicily  should  fall  to  Aga-
thocles, and  that  of  Africa  to  himself.  But  when  he  came,
accordingly,  with  a  numerous  army,  to  take  a  share  in  the  war,
Agathocles,  after  throwing  him  off  his  guard  by  the  affability
of  his  address  and  the  abjectness  of  his  flattery,  and  after  they
had  supped  together  several  times,  and  he  had  been  adopted


B.C.  309 — 300.] BOMILCAB— AGATH0CLB8.  183

by  Opheltas  as  a  son,  put  him  to  death,  and  taking  the  com-
mand of  his  forces,  defeated  the  Carthaginians,  who  were
renewing  the  war  with  all  their  might,  in  a  second  great
battle,  but  with  much  loss  to  both  armies.  At  this  resiUt  of
the  contest,  such  despair  was  felt  by  tlie  Carthaginians,  that,
had  not  a  mutiny  occurred  among  the  troops  of  Agatbocles^
Bomilcar,  the  Carthaginian  genertd,*  wonld  have  gone  over  to
him  with  his  army.  For  this  treachery  he  was  nailed  to  a
cross  by  the  Carthaginians  in  the  middle  of  the  forum,  that
the  place  which  had  formerly  been  the  diatinguished  scene  of
his  honours  might  also  bear  testimony  to  his  punishment.
Bomilcar,  however,  bore  the  cruelty  of  his  countrymen  with
such  fortitude,  that  from  his  cross,  as  if  he  had  been  on  a
judgment-seat,  he  inveighed  against  the  injustice  of  the  Car-
thaginians, upbraiding  them  sometimes  with  **  having  cut  off
Hanno,t  on  a  false  charge  of  aspiring  to  sovereignty ; "  some-
times with  **  having  banished  the  innocent  Gisco  ;"X  and
sometimes  with  "  having  secretly  condemned  his  uncle  Ha-
milcar,§  merely  because  he  wished  to  make  Agathocles  their
ally  rather  than  their  enemy."  After  uttering  tiiese  charges
with  a  loud  voice,  in  a  numerous  assembly  of  the  people,  he
expired.

VIII.  Agathocles,  meanwhile,  having  overcome  all  oppo-
sition in  Africa,  left  the  command  of  his  army  to  his  son
Archagathus,  and  went  back  to  Sicily,  thinking  that  all  he
had  done  in  Africa  was  as  nothing,  if  Syracuse  was  still  to  be
besieged ;  for  after  the  death  of  Hamilcar,  the  son  of  Gisco,  a
fresh  army  had  been  sent  thither  by  the  Carthaginians.
Immediately  on  his  arrival,  all  the  cities  of  Sicily,  having
previously  heard  of  his  achievements  in  AMca,  unanimously
submitted  to  him ;  and  being  thus  enabled  to  drive  the  Car^
tbaginians  from  Sicily,  he  made  himself  master  of  the  whole
island.  Returning  afterwards  to  Africa,  he  was  received  by
his  army  in  a  state  of  mutiny;  for  the  discharge  of  their
arrears  of  pay  had  been  deferred  by  the  son  till  the  arrival  of
his  feither. Summoning  them,  therefore,  to  a  general  assem-

*  BomUea/r,  rex  PcBnorum,]  He  was  one  of  the  mtfitet.  See  the  first
note  on  zix.  1.

*  t  See  xxi  4.

t  Concerning  his  banishment  nothing  has  been  said  before. —  Wetzel.

*  §  See  the  2nd  and  3rd  chapters  of  this  book.


164  JUSTIN.  [B.XXII.  CH.VUL

bly,  he  proceeded  to  pacify  them  with  soothing  words,  saying
that  **  pay  was  not  to  be  asked  of  him,  but  to  be  taken  from
the  enemy ;  that  they  must  gain  a  common  victory,  and  com-
mon spoil ;  and  that  they  must  continue  to  support  him,  for  a
short  time,  till  what  remained  of  the  war  was  finished,  as  they
were  certain  that  the  capture  of  Carthage  would  satisfy  all  their
desires."  The  mutiny  being  thus  allayed,  he  led  the  army,
after  an  interval  of  some  days,  against  the  camp  of  the  enemy,
but  commencing  an  engagement  too  rashly,  lost  the  greater
part  of  his  force.  Retreating  to  his  camp,  therefore,  and  find-
ing the  odium  of  his  rash  engagement  aJQfecting  his  character,
and  dreading,  at  the  same  time,  a  revival  of  l£e  former  mur-
murs at  his  failure  in  paying  the  arrears,  he  fled  from  his
camp  at  midnight,  attended  only  by  his  son  Archagathus.
When  the  soldiers  heard  of  his  departure,  they  were  in  no  less
consternation  than  if  they  had  been  captured  by  the  enemy,
exclaiming  that  *'  they  had  been  twice  deserted  by  their  leader
in  the  midst  of  the  enemy's  country,  and  that  the  care  of  their
lives  had  been  abandoned  by  him  by  whom  not  even  their
burial  should  have  been  neglected."  As  they  were  going  to
pursue  Agathocles,  they  were  met  by  some  Numidians,  and
returned  to  the  camp,  but  not  without  having  seized  and
brought  back  Archagathus,  who,  through  mistaking  his  way  in
the  night,  had  been  separated  from  his  father.  Agathocles,
with  the  ships  in  which  he  had  returned  from  Sicily,  and  the
men  that  he  had  left  to  guard  them,  arrived  safe  at  Syracuse ;
affording  a  signal  instance  of  dishonourable  conduct,  a  prince
deserting  his  army,  and  a  father  abandoning  his  children.

In  Africa,  meanwhile,  after  the  flight  of  Agathocles,  his
soldiers,  making  a  capitulation  with  the  enemy,  and  putting
to  deatli  the  sons  of  Agathocles,  surrendered  themselves  to  the
Carthaginians.  Archagathus,  when  he  was  going  to  be  killed
by  Arcesilaus,  a  former  friend  of  his  father,  asked  him  "  what
he  thought  Agathocles  would  do  to  the  children  of  him  by
whom  he  was  rendered  childless?"  Arcesilaus  replied,  that
"  he  felt  no  concern,  since  he  knew  that  his  children  would
certainly  survive  those  of  Agathocles."  Some  time  after,  the
Carthaginians  sent  new  commanders  into  Sicily,  to  terminate
what  remained  of  the  war  there,  and  Agathocles  made  peace
with  them  on  equal  terms.


185


BOOK  XXIII.

Agathocles  goes  to  war  with  the  Bruttii  in  Italy ;  some  account  of  that
people,  I. — Agathocles  returns  to  Sicily,  and  dies;  Sicily  again
occupied  by  the  Carthaginians,  II. — Acts  of  Pyrrhus,  king  of
EpiruB,  in  Sicily  and  Italy,  III. — History  and  character  of  Hiero,
IV.

I.  Agathocles,  sovereign  of  Sicily,  having  concluded  a  peace
with  the  Carthaginians,  reduced,  by  force  of  arms,  a  part  of
the  cities  which,  presuming  upon  their  strength,  had  thrown
off  their  allegiance  to  him.  Then,  as  if  he  were  confined
within  too  narrow  limits  in  an  island  (a  part  of  the  dominion
of  which,  even  when  he  first  began  to  rise,  he  could  scarcely
have  hoped  to  obtain),  he  proceeded,  after  the  example  of
Dionysius,*  who  had  subdued  many  cities  of  Italy,  to  cross
over  into  that  country.  His  first  enemies  there  were  the
Bruttii,  who,  at  that  period,  seem  to  have  been  the  bravest
and  most  powerful  people  of  the  country,  and  to  have  been
extremely  ready  to  attack  their  neighbours;  for  they  had
driven  the  inhabitants  of  many  of  the  Greek  cities  from  Italy,
and  had  conquered  in  war  the  Lucanians  their  founders,  and
made  peace  with  them  on  equal  terms ;  such  being  the  fierce-
ness of  their  nature,  that  they  had  no  respect  even  for  those
to  whom  they  owed  their  origin.

The  Lucanians  were  accustomed  to  breed  up  their  children
with  the  same  kind  of  education  as  the  Spartans ;  for,  from
their  earliest  boyhood,  they  were  kept  in  the  wilds  among  the
shepherds,  without  any  slaves  to  attend  them,  and  even  with-
out clothes  f  to  wear  or  to  sleep  upon,  that,  from  their  first
years,  they  might  be  accustomed  to  hardiness  and  spare  diet,
having  no  intercourse  with  the  city.  Their  food  was  what
they  took  in  hunting,  and  their  drink  milk  or  water.  Thus
were  they  prepared  for  the  toils  of  war.

Fifty  of  these  people,  who,  at  first,  used  to  plunder  the
lands  of  their  neighbours,  but  who,  as  numbers  flocked  to  join

*  See  XX.  1.

f  Sine  vegte.]  J.  G.  Qrsevius  thinks  it  possible  that  we  ought  to  read
Wbd  vette,  in  conformity  with  what  Justin,  iii  8,  says  of  the  Spartans :
Jv/oembtu  non  ampUtts  wnd  veste  wti  toto  aimo  pemUdt,  Or  nne  veste
may,  as  Schefifer  suggests,  be  taien  for  witkovi  cmy  oiUer  gwrmemty  as
he  was  called  nikd/u9  among  the  Romans  who  was  clad  only  with  the
twMca,


186  JUSTIN.  [B.  XXIII.  CH.  I.

them,  increased  in  strength,  and  were  tempted  by  hopes  of
greater  booty,  disturbed  the  whole  of  the  neighbouring  coun-
try ;  and  Dionysius,  the  tyrant  of  Sicily,  being  wearied  with
complaints  from  his  allies,  had  sent  six  hundred  Africans  to
put  a  stop  to  their  ravages.  But  the  marauders,  having  seized
a  fort  which  the  Africans  had  built,  and  which  was  betrayed
into  their  hands  by  a  woman  named  Bruttia,  proceeded  to
build  a  city  there  for  the  shepherds,  who,  at  the  report  of  a
new  settlement,  came  in  numbers  to  join  them ;  and,  from
the  name  of  the  woman,  they  called  themselves  Bruttii.

Their  first  war  was  with  the  Lucanians,  from  whom  thev
sprung.  Encouraged  by  a  victory  over  them,  and  making
peace  on  equal  terms,  they  subdued  the  rest  of  their  neigh-
bours by  force  of  arms,  and  acquired,  in  a  short  time,  such
extraordinary  strength,  that  they  were  thought  formidable
even  by  princes.  After  some  time,  Alexander,  king  of  Epi-
rus,*  coming  into  Italy  with  a  great  army  to  the  aid  of  the
Greek  cities,  was  cut  off  by  them  with  all  his  force ;  and  their
natural  fierceness,  increased  by  this  success,  was  for  a  long
time  terrible  to  all  around  them.  At  last  Agathocles,  being
importuned  to  come  over,  <8et  sail,  with  the  hope  of  enlarging
his  dominions,  from  Sicily  to  Italy.

II.  At  the  first  news  of  his  arrival,  the  Bruttii,  alarmed  at
his  name,  sent  ambassadors  to  solicit  alliance  and  friendship
with  him.  Agathocles,  inviting  them  to  an  entertainment,
that  they  might  not  see  his  army  shipped  over,  and  ap-
pointing the  next  day  for  giving  them^  audience,  went  off
immediately  after  the  banquet  in  a  vessel,  and  left  them  in  the
lurch.  But  what  followed  this  deceit  was  unhappy  for  him ;
for  the  violence  of  a  disease!  which  he  contracted  obliged  him
a  few  days  after  to  return  to  Sicily.  Being  affected  by  the
distemper  through  his  whole  body,  and  a  pestilential  humour
spreading  through  all  his  nerves  and  joints,  he  was  tormented,
as  it  were,  by  an  intestine  war  among  aU  his  members.  As
his  life  was  despaired  of,  a  contention  arose  between  his  son
and  grandson,  each  claiming  the  right  of  successicm  to  his

*  See  xii.  1,  2 ;  xviii.  1,  2.

f  Occasioned  by  poison  prepared  for  him  and  his  son  Agathocles  by
Msenon,  who  wished  to  secure  for  Arcliagathus  (son  of  that  Archaga-
thus  who  was  killed  in  Africa,  zxiL  8)  the  succession  to  his  grand-
father's throne. See  Diod.  Sic.  xxi.  fragm.  19. — Wetzel.


B.C.  293.1 DEATH  OP  AGATHOCLES.  187

power  as  if  he  were  already  dead ;  and  the  grandson,  after
killing  the  son,  got  possession  of  the  supreme  dignity.  Aga-
thocles,  therefore,  when  the  pain  of  his  disease  and  his  anxiety
of  mind  were  grown  intolerahle,  the  one  being  increased  by
the  severity  of  the  other,  resolved  on  embarking  his  wife
Texena,  and  two  infant  sons*  that  he  had  by  her,  with  all:  his
treasure,  and  servants,  and  regal  furniture  (in  which  no  king
at  that  time  was  richer),  and  sending  her  back  to  Egypt,  from
whence  he  had  received  her,  fearing  that  they  would  ind  the
usurper  of  his  power  their  enemy.  His  wifOr  however,  long
entreated  that  she  might  not  be  separated  fix>m  her  sick
husband,  that  the  affliction  of  her  departure  might  not  be
added  to  the  atrocities  of  his  grandson,  and  that  she  might  not
be  made  to  appear  as  csruel  in  forsaking  her  husband  as  he  in
attacking  his  grandfather ;  saying  that,  **  by  marrying  him,  she
not  only  engaged  to  share  his  good  fortane,  but  all  his  fortune ;
nor  would  she  unwillingly  purchase,  with  the  hazard  of  her  own
life,  the  privilege  of  receiving  her  husband's  last  breath,  and  of
performing,  with  all  the  care  of  conjugal  duty  and  affection,
the  last  offices  at  his  fimeral,  which,  when  she  was  gone,  no  one
would  take  upon  himself  to  dischai^e.'^  The  litUe  children,
at  parting,  embraced  and  dung  to  their  father  with  doleful
lamentations  ;  while  the  wife,  who  was  to  see  her  husband  no
more,  could  not  desist  from  kissing  him.  Nor  were  the  tears
of  the  old  man  less  moving ;  the  children  wept  for  their  dying
father,  the  father  for  his  banished  children.  They  bewailed
the  forlorn  condition  of  their  parent,  a  sick  old  man;  he
lamented  that  his  offspring,  bom  to  the  prospect  of  a  throne,
should  be  left  in  want.  At  the  same  time  the  whole  palace
resounded  with  the  cries  of  those  who  were  witnesses  to  so
cruel  a  separation.  The  necessity  for  departure,  however,  at
length  put  a  stop  to  their  weeping,  and  the  death  of  the  prince
followed  the  leave-taking  of  his  children.

During  these  occurrences,  the  Carthaginians,  learning  the
state  of  afi^rs  in  Sicily,  and  thinking  th^t  an  opportunity  was
afforded  them  of  securing  the  whole  island,  crossed  over  to  it
with  a  great  force,  and  reduced  several  cities.

III.  At  this  time,  too,  Pyrrhus  was  engaged  in  a  war  with  the
Romans,  and,  being  entreated  by  the  Sicilians,  as  has  been  said,

*  Lest  his  grandson  should  put  them  to  death.


188  JUSTIN.  [B.XXin.  CH.IV.

to  come  to  their  assistance,*  and  crossing,  in  consequence,  over  to
Syracuse,  and  taking  several  cities,  received  the  title  of  king  of
Sicily  as  well  as  of  Epirus.  Elated  by  'this  success,  he  destined
for  his  son  Helenas  the  kingdom  of  Sicily,  as  an  inheritance
from  his  grandfather  (for  he  was  the  son  of  Agathocles's
daughter),  and  to  Alexander  that  of  Italy.  He  then  fought
many  successful  battles  with  the  Carthaginians ;  but,  after  a
time,  ambassadors  came  to  him  from  his  Italian  allies,
announcing  that  **  they  could  no  longer  withstand  the  Bomaus,
and  that,  unless  he  gave  them  assistance,  they  must  submit."
Alarmed  at  this  danger  from  another 'quarter,  and  uncertain
what  to  do,  or  whither  first  to  direct  his  efforts,  he  took  time,
while  he  was  in  suspense  between  the  two,  for  consideration.
As  the  Carthaginians  threatened  him  on  one  side,  and  the
Eomans  on  the  other,  it  seemed  hazardous  not  to  transport  a
force  into  Italy,  and  more  hazardous  to  withdraw  troops  from
Sicily,  lest  the  one  should  be  lost  by  not  receiving  assistance,
or  the  other  by  being  deserted.  In  this  conflict  of  perils,
the  safer  determination  seemed  to  be,  to  bring  the  struggle  to
an  end,  by  exerting  his  utmost  strength  in  Sicily,  and  then,
after  having  subdued  the  Carthaginians,  to  carry  his  victorious
army  into  Italy.  He  therefore  fought  a  battle  ;  but,  though
he  had  the  advantage,  yet,  as  he  quitted  Sicily,  he  seemed
to  flee  as  one  defeated;  and  his  allies,  in  consequence,
revolted  from  him,  and  he  lost  his  dominion  in  Sicily  as
speedily  and  easily  as  he  had  obtained  it.

Experiencing  no  better  success  in  Italy,  he  returned  to
Epirus.  His  fortune,  indeed,  good  and  bad,  was  wonderful
for  the  examples  which  it  gave  of  both.  For  as,  at  first,  his
good  fortune,  when  his  attempts  succeeded  even  beyond  his
wishes,  had  procured  him  empire  in  Italy  and  Sicily,  and  so
many  victories  over  the  Eomans ;  so  now  his  adverse  fortune,
overthrowing  all  that  he  had  raised,  as  if  to  afford  an  illustra-
tion of  human  instability,  added  to  his  failure  in  Sicily  the
destruction  of  his  fleet  at  sea,  loss  of  honour  in  a  battle  with
the  Romans,  and  an  ignominious  retreat  out  of  Italy.

lY.  When  Pyrrhus  had  withdrawn  from  Sicily,  Hiero  was
made  governor  of  it ;  and  such  was  the  prudence  he  displayed
in  his  office,  that,  by  the  unanimous  consent  of  all  the  cities,

♦  See  xviii.  2.


B.C.  478 — 467.] HIERO— HIS  CHARACTER.  189

he  was  first  made  general  against  the  Carthaginians,  and  soon
after  king.  The  fortune  of  Hiero,  in  his  infancy,  had  been
as  it  were  a  presage  of  his  future  dignity.  He  was  the  son  of
Hierocles,  a  man  of  high  rank,  whose  descjBnt  was  traced  from
Gelo  an  ancient  prince  of  Sicily.  His  extraction  on  the
mother's  side,  however,  was  so  mean  as  to  he  even  dishonour-
able ;  for  he  was  the  child  of  a  female  slave,  and  was  in
consequence  exposed  by  his  father  as  a  disgrace  to  his  family.
But,  when  he  was  thus  left  destitute  of  human  aid,  bees  for
several  days  fed  him  with  honey,  which  was  heaped  round
him  as  he  lay.  Hence  his  father,  admonished  by  a  com-
munication from  the  soothsayers,  who  signified  that  sovereign
power  was  foreboded  to  the  infant,  took  him  home  again,  and
brought  him  up  most  carefully  with  the  hope  that  he  would
attain  the  promised  honour.  As  he  was  learning  his  lesson
at  school,  too,  among  his  equals  in  age,  a  wolf,  that  suddenly
appeared  in  the  midst  of  the  boys,  snatched  from  him  his
book.  And  when  he  was  grown  up,  and  commencing  his  first
campaign,  an  eagle  settled  on  his  shield,  and  an  owl  upon  his
spear ;  a  prodigy  which  indicated  that  he  would  be  prudent
in  counsel,  active  in  the  field,  and  a  king.  He  fought
frequently,  more'over,  with  persons  that  challenged  him,  and
always  gained  the  victory ;  and  he  was  presented  by  king
Pyrrhus  with  many  militfiiy  gifts.  The  handsomeness  of  his
person  was  remarkable,  and  his  bodily  strength  wonderful.
He  was  afiable  in  his  address,  just  in  his  dealings,  moderate
in  command  ;  so  that  nothing  kingly  seemed  wanting  to  him
but  a  kingdom.


190


BOOK  XXIV.

DUturbances  in  Greece  ;  war  between  Sparta  and  the  JStolians ;  end
of  disputes  between  the  pretenders  to  the  throne  of  Macedonia,
I. — Marriage  of  Ptolemy  and  Arsinoe,  and  its  consequences,  II.
IIL — ^Irruption  of  the  Giauls  into  Macedonia ;  incaution  of  Ptole-
my, IV.— Defeat  and  death  of  Ptolemy;  rise  of  Sosthenes,  V.
— The  Qauls  march  to  Delphi;  description  of  Delphi,  VL— The
Gauls  halt  in  sight  of  Delphi,  and  are  cut  off  by  the  Greeks,  YIL
VIIL

I.  During  the  course  of  these  proceedings  in  Sicily,  the
kings,  Ptolemy  Ceraunus*  and  Antigonus,  quarrelling  and
going  to  war  with  one  another  in  Greece,  almost  all  the  cities
of  that  country,  under  the  Spartans  as  leaders,  encouraged  as
it  were  by  the  opportunity  thus  offered  to  entertain  hopes  of
recovering  their  liberty,  and  sending  to  each  other  ambeissadors
by  whom  leagues  might  be  formed  to  unite  them,  broke  out
into  hostilities ;  and,  that  they  might  not  seem  to  commence
war  with  Antigonus,  under  whose  dominion  they  were,  they
attacked  his  allies  the  .^tolians,  making  it  a  pretext  for  war
with  them,  that  they  had  taken  possession  of  the  Girrhsean
plain,  which  by  the  unanimous  consent  of  Greece  had  been
dedicated  to  Apollo.  For  their  general  in  this  war  they
selected  Areus,  who,  drawing  together  an  army,  laid  waste  the
towns  and  corn-fields  lying  in  the  plain,  and  burnt  whatever
he  was  unable  to  carry  oE  When  the  shepherds  of  the
JStolians  beheld  this  destruction  from  their  mountains,  about
five  hundred  of  them  assembling  together,  attacked  the
enemy  as  they  were  dispersed,  and  knew  not  what  was  the  >
number  of  their  assailants  (for  the  sudden  alarm,  and  the
smoke  of  the  fires,  prevented  them  from  asceitaining),  and
having  killed  about  nine  thousand  f  of  the  depredators,  put
the  rest  to  Bight.  And  when  the  Spartans  afterwards  renewed
the  war,  many  of  the  states  refused  them  their  support,
thinking  that  they  sought  dominion  for  themselves,  and  not
liberty  for  Greece.

In  the  meantime  the  war  between  the  princes  that  contended

*  He  had  made  himself  king  of  Macedonia  after  l^e  death  of
Lysimachus,  xvii.  2 ;  and  hence  Antiochus  and  Antigonus  Gonnatas
became  his  enemies,  %b.

t  A  large  number  to  be  killed  by  five  hundred.  But  the  editions
do  not  vary.


I

U


B.C.-278.]  PTOLEMY  CBRAUNUS.  191

for  the  throne  of  Macedonia  was  concluded,  for  Ptolemy,
having  routed  Antigonus  and  made  himself  master  of  the
whole  countiy,  arranged  a  peace  with  Antiochus,  and  contracted
an  affinity  with  Pyrrhus  by  giving  him  his  daughter  in
marriage.

II.  Having  thus  freed  himself  from  the  fear  of  foreign
enemies,  he  turned  his  impious  and  unprincipled  mind  to  the
perpetration  of  wickedness  at  home,  and  contrived  a  plot
against  his  sister  Arsiuoe,*  to  deprive  her  sons  of  life,  and
herself  of  the  possession  of  the  city  of  Cassandrea.  His  first
stratagem  was  to  pretend  love  to  his  sister,  and  to  seek  her
hand  in  marriage,  for  he  was  unable  to  come  at  his  sister's  sons,
whose  throne  he  had  usurped,  otherwise  than  by  counterfeiting
affection  for  their  mother.  But -the  criminal  intentions  of
Ptolemy  were  understood  by  Kis  sister.  As  she  expressed
distrust  of  him,  therefore,  he  assured  her  that  *'  he  vrished  to
share  tlie  kingdom  with  her  children,  against  whom  he  had  not
taken  arms  because  he  wished  to  wrest  the  kingdom  from
them,  but  that  he  might  have  it  in  his  power  to  present  them
with  a  portion  of  it.  She  might  therefore  send  a  person  to
receive  an  oath  from  him,  in  whose  presence  he  would  bind
himself,  before  the  gods  of  their  country,  by  whatever
execrations  she  pleased/'  Arsinoe,  not  knowing  what  to  do,
was  afraid  that  if  she  sent  any  one,  she  would  be  deceived  by
a  false  oath,  and  that,  if  she  did  not  send,  she  would  provoke
her  brothei^s  fury  and  cruelty.  Fearing,  therefore,  less  for
herself  than  her  children,  whom  she  thought  she  might  protect
by  the  marriage,  she  sent  Dion,  one  of  her  friends,  to  him.
Ptolemy,  after  conducting  him  into  the  most  sacred  temple  of
Jupiter,  held  in  high  veneration  from  of  old  among  the  Mace-
donians, took  hold  of  the  altar,  and,  touching  the  images  and
couches  of  the  gods,  vowed,  with  unheard-of  and  most  solemn
imprecations,  that  "  he  sought  a  marriage  with  his  sister  in
true  sincerity,  and  that  he  would  give  her  the  title  of  Queen,
nor  would,  to  her  dishonour,  have  any  other  wife,  or  any  other
children  than  her  sons."  Arsinoe,  being  thus  filled  with  hope,
and  relieved  from  apprehensions,  held  a  conference  with  her
brother  in  person,  and  as  his  looks  and  flattering  glances
promised  no  less  sincerity  than  his  oath,  she  agreed  to  marry

*  The  widow  of  Lysimachus ;  see  xviL  2,  and  c.  3  of  this  book.


1 92  JUSTIN.  [b.  XXIV.  CH.  IV.

him,  though  her  son  Lysimachus*  exclaimed  that  **  there  was
treachery  at  the  bottom."

III.  The  nuptials  were  celebrated  with  great  magnificence
and  general  rejoicings.  Ptolemy,  before  the  assembled  army,
placed  a  diadem  on  his  sister^s  head,  and  saluted  her  with  the
title  of  Queen.  Arsinoe,  oveijoyed  at  the  name,  as  having
regained  what  she  had  lost  by  the  death  of  Lysimachus  her
former  husband,  invited  Ptolemy  to  her  city  Oassandrea ;  to
get  possession  of  which  city  the  plot  was  laid.  Going  thither
before  her  husband,  she  appointed  a  festival  in  the  city  s^nst
his  arrival,  ordering  the  houses;  temples,  and  all  other  places,
to  be  magnificently  decorated,  altars  and  victims  to  be  every-
where kept  in  readiness,  and  her  sons,  Lysimachus  who  was
sixteen  years  old,  and  Philip  three  years  younger,  both  remark-
able for  their  comeliness,  to  go  to  meet  him  with  crowns  on
their  heads.  Ptolemy,  to  conceal  his  treachery,  caressing
them  with  eagerness,  and  beyond  the  warmth  of  real  affection,
persisted  for  a  long  time  in  kissing  them.  But  as  soon  as  he
arrived  at  the  gate^  he  ordered  the  citadel  to  be  seized,  and
the  boys  to  be  slain.  They,  fleeing  to  their  mother,  were  slain
upon  her  lap,  as  she  was  embracing  them ;  while  Arsinoe  ex-
claimed, "  What  monstrous  crime  had  she  committed,!  either  in
marrying  or  since  her  marriage  ?*'  She  several  times  offered
herself  to  the  assassins  in  the  room  of  her  children,  and,  em-
bracing them,  covered  their  bodies  with  her  own,  endeavouring
to  receive  the  wounds  intended  for  them.  At  last,  deprived
even  of  the  dead  bodies  of  her  sons,  she  was  dragged  out  of
the  city,  with  her  garments  torn  and  her  hair  dishevelled,  and
with  only  two  attendants,  and  went  to  live  in  exile  in
Samothracia ;  sorrowing  the  more,  that  she  was  not  allowed  to
die  with  her  children.  But  the  crimes  of  Ptolemy  were  not
unpunished ;  for  soon  after  (the  immortal  gods  inflicting
vengeance  on  him  for  so  many  perjuries,  smd  such  cruel
murders),  he  was  driven  from  his  throne  and  taken  prisoner  by.
the  Gauls,  and  lost  his  life,  as  he  had  merited,  by  the  sword.

IV.  The  Gauls,  when  the  land  that  had  produced  them  was
unable,  from  their  excessive  increase  of  population,  to  contain
them,  sent  out  three  hundred  thousand  men,  as  a  sacred  spring, %

*  Most  other  editions  have  PtoUmoevM,

+  Sc.  To  deserve  such  punishment.

X  VdiU  ver  sacrvm.]  To  vow  a  sacred  spring  was  customary  among


RC.  Q78.]  PTOLEMY  CERAUNUS.  193

to  seek  new  settlements.  Of  these  adventurers  part  settled
in  Italy,  and  took  and  burnt  the  city  of  Rome ;  and  part
penetrated  into  the  remotest  parts  of  Illyricum  under  the
direction  of  a  flight  of  birds  (for  the  Gauls  are  skilled  in
augury  beyond  other  nations),  making  their  way  amidst  great
slaughter  of  the  barbarous  tribes,  and  fixed  their  abode  in
Pannonia.  They  were  a  savage,  bold,  and  warlike  nation,
and  were  the  flrst  after  Hercules  (to  whom  that  undertaking
procured  great  admiration  for  his  valour,  and  a  belief  in  his
immortality),  to  pass  the  unconquered  heights  of  the  Alps,
and  places  uninhabitable  from  excess  of  cold.  After
having  subdued  the  Pannonians,  they  carried  on  various  wars
with  their  neighbours  for. many  years.  Success  encouraging
them,  they  betook  themselves,  in  separate  bands,  some  to
Greece,  and  some  to  Macedonia,  laying  waste  all  before  them
with  the  sword.  Such  indeed  was  the  terror  of  the  Gallic
name,  that  even  kings,  before  they  were  attacked,  purchased
peace  from  them  with  large  sums  of  money.  Ptolemy  alone,
the  king  of  Macedonia,  heard  of  the  approach  of  the  Gauls
without  alarm,  and,  hurried  on  by  the  madness  that  distracted
him  for  his  unnatural  crimes,  went  out  to  meet  them  with  a
few  undisciplined  troops,  as  if  wars  could  be  despatched  with
as  little  difficulty  as  murders.  An  embassy  from  the  Dar-
danians,  offering  him  twenty  thousand  armed  men  for  his
assistance,  he  spurned,  adding  insulting  language,  and  saying
that  '^the  Macedonians  were  in  a  sad  condition,  if,  after
having  subdued  the  whole  east  without  assistance,  they  now
required  aid  from  the  Dardanians  to  defend  their  country ;
and  that  he  had  for  spldiers  the  sons  of  those  who  had  served
under  Alei^ander  the  Great,  and  had  been  victorious  throughout

the  Italians;  for  when  in  great  peril  they  used  to  vow  that  they  would
sacrifice  whatever  animals  should  be  bom  in  their  country  in  the
following  spring.  But  as  it  seemed  cruel  to  sacrifice  children,  they
allowed  them  to  grow  up,  and  then  threw  a  veil  over  them,  and  con-
ducted them  beyond  the  boundaries  of  the  country.  FestuSy  sub  "  ver
sacrum  ;"  see  also  w>b  *' Mamertius.''  This  custom  was  not  confined
to  the  Italians,  but  prevailed,  says  Dionys.  Halicar.  i  5,  *'  among  many
people,  Greek  and  barbarian.''  It  seems  to  have  been  not  uncommon
among  the  Romans;  Liv.  xxii.  9;  xzxiv.  44.  See  also  Plin.  H.  N.
iiL  13.  Ver  sacrum,  it  should  be  observed,  is  an  emendation  of
Pithoeus  (Adversar.  i.  6)  for  peregrinatvm,  concerning  the  justice  of
which  no  editor  has  doubted,  though  Wetzel  has  thought  proper  to
retain  peregrincUvm  m  his  text.  ,  ^

O


194  JUSTIN.  [B.xxnr.  ch.t.

the  world."  This  answer  being  repeated  to  the  Dardanian
prince,  he  observed  that  **  the  famous  kingdom  of  Macedonia
would  soon  fall  a  sacrifice  to  the  rashness  of  a  raw  youth."*

V.  The  Gauls,  under  the  command  of  Belgius,  sent  depu-
ties to  Ptolemy  to  sound  the  disposition  of  the  Macedonians,
offering  him  peace  if  he  liked  to  purchase  it ;  but  Ptolemy
boasted  to  his  courtiers  that  the  Gauls  sued  for  peace  from
fear  of  war.  Nor  was  his  manner  less  vaunting  before  the
ambassadors  than  before  his  own  adherents,  saying  that  ^*  he
would  grccnt  peace  only  on  condition  that  they  would  give  their
chiefs  as  hostages,  and  deliver  up  their  arms ;  for  he  would
put  no  trust  in  them  until  .they  were  disarmed."  The  de-
puties  bringing  back  this  answer,  the  Gauls  laughed,  and
exclaimed  ^roughout  their  camp,  that  *'  he  would  soon  see
whether  they  had  offered  peace  from  regard  for  themselves
or  for  him«"  Some  days  after  a  battle  was  fought,  and  the
Macedonians  were  defeated  and  cut  to  pieces.  Ptolemy,  after
receiving  several  wounds^  was  taken,  and  his  head,  cut  off  and
stuck  on  a  lance,  was  carried  round  the  whole  army  to  strike
terror  into  the  enemy.  Flight  saved  a  few  of  the  Macedo-
nians ;  the  rest  were  either  taken  or  slain «

When  the  news  of  this  event  was  spread  through  all  Mace-
donia, the  gates  of  the  city  were  shut,  and  all  places  filled  with
mourning.  Sometimes  they  lamented  their  bereavement,  fi'om
the  loss  of  their  children ;  sometimes  they  were  seized  with
dread,  lest  their  cities  should  be  destroyed ;  and  at  other  times
they  called  on  the  names  of  their  kings,  Alexander  and  Philip,
as  deities,  to  protect  them ;  saying  that  •*  under  them  they  were
not  only  secure,  but  conquerors  of  the  world ;"  and  begging
that  "  they  would  guard  their  country,  whose  fame  they  had
jraised  to  heaven  by  the  glory  of  their  exploits,  and  give
assistance  to  the  afflicted,  whom  the  insanity  and  rashness  of
Ptolemy  had  ruined.**  While  all  were  thus  in  despair,  Sosthenes,
one  of  the  Macedonian  chiefs,  thinking  that  nothing  would  be
effected  by  prayers,  assembled  such  as  were  of  age  for  war,
repulsed  ^e  Gauls  in  the  midst  of  their  exultation  at  their
victory,  and  saved  Macedonia  from  devastation. For  these

♦  Immatwri  jwoems.]  Althotigh  Ptolemy  was  ttwh,  he  could  not  be
called  imm<ttwru8f  for  he  was  the  eldeist  son  of  Ptolemy  Lagides,  who
died  at  a  great  age,  B.c.  2S3.  Died.  Sicultis,  however,  xii.  fragm.  8,
agrees  in  opinion  with  Justin  respecting  this  king. — WetzeL


B.C.  278.] BRENNU9  AT  PELPHI.  195

great  services,  he,  though  of  faumhle  extractioB,  wag  chosen
before  many  nobles  that  aspired  to  the  throne  of  Macedonia.
But  though  he  was  saluted  as  king  by  the  army,  he  made  the
soldiers  take  an  oath  to  him,  not  as  king,  but  as  general.

VI.  In  the  meantime  BrennuS)  under  whose  command  a
paft  of  the  Gauls  had  made  an  irruption  into  Greece^  having
heard  of  the  success  of  their  countrymen^  who»  under  the
leadership  of  Belgius^  had  defeated  the  Macedonians,  and
being  indignant  that  so  rich  a  booty^  consisting  of  the  spoils
of  the  east,  had  been  so  lightly  abandoned,  assembled  an  army
of  a  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  foot  and  fifteen  thousand
horse,  and  suddenly  invaded  Macedonia.  As  he  was  laying
waste  the  fields  and  villages,  Sosthenes  met  him  with  his
army  of  Macedonians  in  full  array,  but  being  few  in  number^
and  in  some  .consternation^  they  were  eaalj  overcome  by
the  more  numerous  and  powerful  Gauls;  and  the  defeated
Macedonians  retiring  within  the  walls  of  their  cities,  the
victorius  Brennus,  meeting  with  no  opposition,  ravaged  the
lands  throughout  the  whole  of  Macedonia.  Soon  afters  as  if
the  spoils  of  mortals  were  too  mean  for  him^  he  turned  his
thoughts  to  the  temples  of  the  immortal  gods,  sayings  vdth  a
pro&ne  jest^  that  **  the  gods^  being  rich,  ought  to  be  liberal  to
men."  He  suddenly,  therefore^  directed  his  march  towards
Delphi,  regarding  plunder  more  than  religion,  and  caring  for
gold  more  than  for  the  wrath  of  the  deities,  *'  who$"  he  said,
*'  stood  in  no  need  of  riches^  as  being  accustomed  rather  to
bestow  them  on  mortals*"

The  temple  of  Apollo  at  Delphi  is  situate^  on  Mount  Par-
nassus, on  a  rock  steep  on  all  sides.  A  concourse  of  people,
who,  collecting  from  the  parts  around^  through  veneratLonf  for
the  majesty  of  the  god,  settled  on  the  rock,  formed  a  city
there.  Thus,  not  wallsj  but  precipices,  not  defences  formed
by  the  hand,  but  by  nature,  protect  the  temple  and  the  city ;
80  that  it  is  utterly  uncertain  whether  the  strength  of  the

*  Concerning  the  temple  (tf  Apollo  at  Delphi,  see  Psusan.  z.  6;
Diod.  Sic.  ZTL  26,  the  former  of  whom  places  this  expedition  of  the
Qanls  into  Greece  in  Olymp.  125,  2,  or  B.O.  278.  See  also  the
"  Travels  of  Anacharsis,'*  voL  ill — WetzeL

f  Ad  affimuUionem  majestcUis  is  in  the  text  of  Wetzel,  but  he
observes  that  cuhnvrationet  the  reading  of  Aldus,  and  odf  admiroHonemf
thatfof  the  Juntie,  are  *^not  less  good."  I  have  adopted  the  latter,
which  is  saactioned  by  Yorstius  and  Scheffer.

02


196  JUSTIN.  [B.XXIV.  CH.VII.

place,  or  the  influence  of  the  deity  residing  in  it,  attracts
more  admiration.  The  central  part  of  the  rock  falls  hack  in
the  shape  of  an  amphitheatre ;  and,  in  consequence,  if  ever
shouts  are  raised,  or  if  the  noise  of  trumpets  is  mingled  with
them,  the  sound,  from  the  rocks  echoing  and  re-echoing  to  one
another,  is  heard  many  times  repeated,  and  louder  than  it  was
made  at  first.  This  effect,  on  those  who  are  ignorant  of  its
cause,  and  are  struck  with  wonder  at  it,  produces  a  greater  awe
of  the  power  of  the  god.  In  the  winding  of  the  rock,  ahout
half  way  up  the  hill,  there  is  a  small  plain,  and  in  it  a
deep  fissure  in  the  ground,  which  is  open  for  giving  oracles  ,*
for  a  cold  exhalation,  driven  upwards  by  some  force,  as  it  were
by  a  wind,  produces  in  the  minds  of  the  priestesses  a  certain
madness,  and  compels  them,  filled  vdth  the  influence  of  the
god,  to  give  answers  to  such  as  consult  them.  Hence  many
rich  presents  of  kings  and  nations  are  to  be  seen  there,  which,
by  their  magnificence,  testify  the  grateful  feelings  of  those
that  have  paid  their  vows,  and  their  belief  in  the  oracles  given
by  the  deity. -

VII.  Brennus,  when  he  came  within  sight  of  the  temple,
deliberated  for  some  time,  whether  he  should  at  once  make  an
attempt  upon  it,  or  should  allow  his  soldiers,  wearied  with  their
march,  a  night  to  refresh  themselves.  Two  of  the  captains,
Emanus  and  Thessalorus,  who  had  joined  him  for  a  share  in
the  booty,  advised  that  "  no  delay  should  be  made,*'  while  the
enemy  were  unprovided  for  defence,  and  the  alarm  at  their
coming  still  fresh ;  that  in  the  interval  of  a  night,  the  courage
of  the  enemy  would  perhaps  revive,  and  assistance  come  to
them ;  and  that  the  approaches,  which  were  now  open,  might
be  blocked  up."  But  the  common  soldiers,  when,  after  a  long
endurance  of  scarcity,  they  found  a  country  abounding  with
wine  and  other  provisions,  had  dispersed  themselves  over  the
fields,  rejoicing  as  much  at  the  plenty  as  if  they  had  gained
a  victory,  and  leaving  their  standards  deserted,  wandered  about
to  seize  on  everything  like  conquerors.  This  conduct  gave
some  respite  to  the  Delphians.  At  the  first  report  that  the
Gauls  were  approaching,  the  country  people  are  said  to  have
been  prohibited  by  the  oracle  from  carrying  away  their  com
and  wine  from  their  houses.  The  salutariness  of  this  prohibi-
tion was  not  understood,  until,  through  this  abund^mce  of  wine
and  other  provisions  being  thrown  in  the  way  of  the  Gauls,  as


B.C.  278.] BRENNUS  OVBRTHKOWN.  197

a  stop  to  their  progress,  reinforcements  from  their  neighbours
had  time  to  collect.  The  Delphians,  accordingly^  supported
by  the  strength  of  their  allies,  secured  their  city  before  the
Gauls,  who  clung  to  the  wine-skins,  on  which  they  had  seized,
could  be  recalled  to  their  standards.  Brennus  had  sixtv-five
thousand  infantry,  selected  from  his  whole  army  ;  of  the  Del-
phians  there  were  not  more  than  four  thousand ;  in  utter  6on'-
tempt  of  whom,  Brennus,  to  rouse  the  courage  of  his  men,
pointed  to  .the  vast  quantity  of  spoil  before  them,  declaring
that  the  statues,  and  four-horse  chariots,  of  which  a  great
number  were  visible  at  a  distance,  were  made  of  solid  gold,
and  would  prove  greater  prizes  when  they  came  to  be  weighed
than  they  were  in  appearance.

VIII.  The  Gauls,  animated  by  these  assertions,  and  dis-
ordered, at  the  same  time,  with  the  wine  which  they  had
drunk  the  day  before,  rushed  to  battle  without  any  fear  of
danger.  The  Delphians,  on  the  other  hand,  placing  more
confidence  in  the  god  than  in  their  own  strength,  resisted
the  enemy  with  contempt,  and,  from  the  top  of  the  hill,
repelled  the  Gauls  as  they  climbed  up,  partly  with  pieces  of
rock,  and  partly  with  their  weapons.  Amidst  this  contest
between  the  two,  the  priests  of  all  the  temples,*  as  well  as  the
priestesses  themselves,  with  their  hair  loose,  and  with  their
decorations  and  fillets,  rushed,  trembling  and  frantic,  into  the
front  ranks  of  the  combatants,  exclaiming  that  "  the  god  was
come ;  that  they  had  seen  him  leap  down  into  his  temple
through  the  opening  roof ;  that,  while  they  were  all  humbly
imploring  aid  of  the  deity,  a  youth  of  extraordinary  beauty,  far
above  that  of  mortals,  and  two  armed  virgins,  coming  from
the  neighbouring  temples  of  Diana  and  Minerva,  met  them ;
that  they  had  not  only  perceived  them  with  their  eyes,  but
had  heard  also  the  sound  of  a  bow  and  the  rattling  of  arms  ;*'
and  they  therefore  conjured  them  with  the  strongest  entreaties,
**  not  to  delay,  when  the  gods  were  leading  them  on,  to  spread
slaughter  among  the  enemy,  and  to  share  the  victory  with
the  powers  of  heaven.**  Incited  by  these  exhortations,  they
all  rushed  eagerly  to  the  field  of  battle,  where  they  themselves
also  soon  perceived  the  presence  of  the  divinity ;  for  a  part  of
the  mountain,  broken  off  by  an  earthquake,  overwhelmed  a

*  Universorum  temphrum.']  Those  of  Apollo,  Diana,  and  Minerva,
as  appears  from  what  follows.


J  98  JUSTIN.  [B.  xtr.  GH.  I.

host  of  the  Gauls,  and  some  of  the  densest  hodies  of  the
enemy  were  scattered  abroad,  not  mthout  wounds,  and  fell  tx>
the  earth.  A  tempest  then  followed,  which  destroyed,  with
hail  and  cold,  those  that  were  suffering  from  bodily  injuries.
The  geniamL  Brennus  himself,  unable  to  endure  the  pain  of
his  wojmds,  ended  his  life  with  his  dagger.  The  other  gene-
ral,^^ter  punishing  the  advisers  of  the  war,t  made  off  from
G-;reece  with  all  expedition,  accompanied  with  ten  thousand
y^ounded  men.  But  neither  was  fortune  more  favourable  to
those  who  fled ;  for  in  their  terror,  they  passed  no  night  under
shelter,  and  no  day  without  hardship  and  danger;  and  con-
tinual  rains,  snow  congealed  by  the  fn>0t,  famine,  fatigue,  and,
what  wa.s  the  greatest  evil,  the  constant  want  of  sleep,  con^
sumed  the  wretched  remains  of  the  unfortunate  army.  The
nations  ^and  people  too,  through  whom  they  marched,  pursued
their  eftragglers,  as  if  to  spoil  them.  Hence  it  happened  that,
of  so  great  an  army,  which  a  little! before,  presuming  on  its
strength,  contended  even  against  the  god8»  not  a  man  was  left  j:
to  be  a  memorial  of  its  destruction.


BOOK  XXV.


The  Gauls,  who  had  been  left  behind  by  Brenntis,  proceed  to  attack
Antigonus  Gknnatas,  I. — Massacre  of  the  Gkiils;  their  valour;
GbiUogrsecia,  II.— -PyrrhuF.  kipg  of  Epirus,  expels  Axitigonus  from
Macedonia,  III. — Pyrrhus  goes  to  war  with  the  Spartans,  lY. — Is
killed  at  ^gos ;  his  character,  V.

I.  Afteb  peace  was  made  between  the  two  kings,  Antigonus
and  Antiochus,  a  new  enemy  suddenly  started  up  against
Antigonus  as  he  was  returning  to  Macedonia.  The  Gauls,
who  had  been  left  behind  by  their  general  Brennus,  when  he
marched  into  Greece,  to  defend  the  borders  of  their  country,
armed  fifteen  thousand  foot  and  three  thousand  horse  (that
they  alone  might  not  seem  idle),  and  having  routed  the  forces
of  the  Get8B  and  Triballi,  and  preparing  to  invade  Macedonia,
sent  ambassadors  to  Antigonus  to  offer  him  peace  if  he  would  pay


^'


^  AUei^  ee  d^i/eibus^  That  is,  the  other  of  the  two  generals;  we  are
ot  told  his  name.

t  PwKfitis  bdU  atictoribvs.']  Those  who  had  persuaded  and  impelled
the  Gauls  to  this  attack  on  Delphi — WetzeL

X  This  is  contradicted  by  Justin  himself^  ssuii.  3.— Dft&jier.


B.C.  276.]  ANTIGONUS  GONNATAS.  199

for  it,  and  to  play  the  part  of  spies,  at  the  same  tinie,4n  his
camp.  Antigonus,  with  royal  munificence,  invited  them  to
a  hanquet,  and  entertained  them  mth  a  sumptuous  display
of  luxuries.  But  the  Gauls  were  so  struck  with  the  vast
quantity  of  gold  and  silver  set  before  them,,  and  so
tempted  with  the  richness  of  such  a  spoil,  that  they  re^
turned  more  inclined  to  war  than  they  had  come.  The  king
had  also  ordered  his  elephants  to  be  shown  them,  as  monsters
unknown  to  those  barbarians,  and  his  ships  laden  with  stores
to  be  displayed ;  litde  thinking  that  he  was  thus  exciting  the
cupidity  of  those  to  seize  his  treasures,  whom  he  sought  to
strike  with  terror  by  the  ostentation  of  his  strength.  The
ambassadors,  returning  to  their  countrymen,  and  exaggerating
every  thing  excessively,  set  forth  at  once  the  wealth  and  un-
suspiciousness  of  the  king;  saying  that  ^'his  camp  was  filled
with  gold  and  silver,  but  secured  neither  by  rampart  nor  trench,
and  that  the  Macedonians,  as  if  they  had  sufficient  protec-
tion in  their  wealth,  neglected  all  military  duties,  apparently
thinking  that,  as  they  had  plenty  of  gold,  they  had  no  use  for
steel."

II.  By  this  statement,  the  desires  of  a  covetous  people  were
sufficiently  stimulated  to  take  possession  of  such  spoil.  The
example  of  Belgius,  too,  had  its  influence  with  them,  who,  a
little  before,  had  cut  to  pieces  the  army  of  the  Macedonians
and  their  king.  Being  all  of  one  mind,  therefore,  they  attacked
the  king's  camp  by  night ;  but  he,  foreseeing  the  storm  that
threatened  him,  had  given  notice  to  his  soldiers  to  remove  all
their  baggage,  and  to  conceal  themselves  noiselessly  in  a  neigh-
bouring wood ;  and  the  camp  was  only  saved  because  it  was
deserted.  The  Gauls,  when  they  found  it  destitute  not  only  of  de-
fenders, but  of  sentinels,  suspecting  that  there  was  not  a  flight,
but  some  stratagem  on  the  part  of  the  enemy,  were  for  some
time  afraid  to  enter  the  gates.  At  last,  leaving  the  defences
entire  and  untouched,  and  more  like  men  come  to  explore  than
to  plunder,  they  took  possession  of  the  camp  ;  and  then,  carry"
ing  off  what  they  found,  they  directed  their  course  towards
the  coast.  Here,  as  they  were  incautiously  plundering  the
vessels,  and  fearing  no  attack,  they  were  cut  down  by  the
sailors,  and  a  part  of  the  army  that  had  fled  thither  with  their
wives  and  children ;  and  such  was  the  slaughter  among  them
that  the  report  of  this  victory  procured  Antigonus  peace,  not


200  jcrsTXN.  [B.XXV.  CH.ni.

only  from  the  Gauls,  but  from  his  other  barbarous  neigh-
bours.

The  nation  of  the  Gauls,  however,  was  at  that  time  so
prolific,  that  they  filled  all  Asia  as  with  one  swarm.  The
kings  of  the  east  then  carried  on  no  wars  without  a  mercenary
army  of  Gauls ;  nor,  if  they  were  driven  from  their  thrones,
did  they  seek  protection  with  any  other  people  than  the  Gauls.
Such  indeed  was  the  terror  of  the  Gallic  name,  and  the  unvaried
good  fortune  of  their  arms,  that  princes  thought  they  could
neither  maintain  their  power  in  security,  nor  recover  it  if
lost,  without  the  assistance  of  Gallic  valour.  Hence,  being
called  by  the  king  of  Bithynia  to  his  aid,  and  having  gained
him  the  victory  over  his  enemies,  they  shared  his  kingdom  with
him,  and  called  their  part  of  it  Galiogrsecia.

III.  During  these  transactions  in  Asia,  Pyrrhus,  having
been  defeated  by  the  Carthaginians  in  a  sea-fight  on  the  coast
of  Sicily,  sent  ambassadors  to  Antigonus  king  of  Macedonia,
to  ask  for  a  supply  of  troops>  saying  that,  "unless  he  sent  him
some,  he  should  be  obliged  to  return  to  his  kingdom,  and  to
seek  that  enlargement  of  his  dominions  from  him,*  which  he
had  wished  to  gain  from  the  Romans."  The  ambassadors
bringing  word  that  his  request  was  refused,  he  pretended  to
be  suddenly  obliged  to  depart,  but  concealed  his  reasons  for
doing  so.  Meanwhile  he  directed  his  allies  to  prepare  for  war,
and  committed  the  citadel  of  Tarentum  to  the  guardianship  of
his  son  Helenus  and  his  friend  Milo.  Returning  to  Epirus,
he  immediately  invaded  Macedonia ;  Antigonus  met  him  with
an  army,  but  was  defeated  in  battle,  and  put  to  flight.  Pjrrrhus
then  allowed  the  Macedonians  to  surrender  on  terms  ;  and  as
if,  by  the  acquisition  of  Macedonia,  he  had  made  up  for  his
loss  of  Sicily  and  Italy,  he  sent  for  his  son  and  his  friend,
whom  he  had  left  at  Tarentum.  Antigonus,  divesting  himself
at  once  of  all  the  marks  of  royalty,  repaired  with  a  few  horse-
men, that  attended  him  in  his  flight,  to  Thessalonica,  there  to
watch  what  would  follow  on  the  loss  of  his  throne,  and  to  renew
the  war  with  a  hired  army  of  Gauls.  But  being  utterly  de-
feated, a  second  time,  by  Ptolemy  the  son  of  Pyrrhus,  he  fled

*  De  ipso.'l  He  signified  that  if  Antigonus  did  not  send  him  succour
he  should  be  obliged  to  return  home,  and  that  he  would  then  make
war  on  Antigonus,  with  a  view  to  that  enlargement  of  his  dominions
which  he  had  wished  to  make  at  the  cost  of  the  Romans. — Zemaire,


B.C.  269.]  PYRRHUS  AT  ARGOS.  201

with  only  seven  followers,  and  no  longer  indulged  hopes  of
recovering  his  kingdom,  but  sought  only  hiding  places  for  safety
and  solitary  ways  for  flight.

IV.  Pyrrhus,  being  raised  to  such  a  height  of  royal  power,
and  not  content  with  what  had  once  been  the  object  of  his
wishes,  began  to  contemplate  the  subjugation  of  Greece  and
Asia.  He  had  no  greater  delight  in  ruling  than  in  warfare;  nor
was  any  power  able  to  withstand  him,  wheresoever  he  directed
his  attack.  But  irresistible  as  he  was  deemed  in  conquering
kingdoms,  he  also  easily  lost  those  which  he  subdued  and  ac-
quired, so  iauch.  better  did  he  manage  to  gain  dominion  than
to  keep  it.

Having  led  his  army  into  the  Peloponnesus,*  he  was  met  by.
embassies  from  the  Athenians,  Achaeans,  and  Messenians ;
and  all  Greece,  indeed,  struck  with  admiration  at  his  name,
and  at  the  glory  of  his  achievements  against  the  Rotnans  and
Carthaginians,  was  eagerly  looking  for  his  arrival.  His  first
contest  was  with  the  Spartans,  in  which,  being  resisted  with
greater  spirit  by  the  women  than  by  the  men^  he  lost  his  son
Ptolemy  and  the  flower  of  his  army  ;  for,  when  he  proceeded
to  attack  the  city,  such  a  number  of  women  assembled  to  de-
fend their  birth-place,  that  he  retreated,  overcome  not  more
by  bravery  on  their  part  than  by  shame  on  his  own.

As  for  his  son  Ptolemy,  he  is  said  to  have  been  so  brave  and
enterprising  that  he  took  the  city  of  Corcyraf  with  only  sixty
men.  In  a  naval  engagement,  too,  he  is  reported  to  have
leaped  from  a  boat,  with  seven  men,  into  a  fifty-oared  galley,
and  to  have  taken  and  kept  possession  of  it.  At  the  attack
on  Sparta  he  rode  into  the  very  middle  of  the  city,  and  was
there  slain  in  a  crowd  that  gathered  around  him.  When  his
body  was  carried  to  his  father,  he  exclaimed,  it  is  said,  "  that
he  had  not  been  killed  so  soon  as  he  had  feared,  or  his  own
rashness  deserved.'*

V.  Pyrrhus,  on  being  repulsed  by  the  Spartans,  mar(5hed  to
Argos,  where,  while  he  was  endeavouring  to  capture  Antigonus,

*  CherroneaonJ]  The  old  readitig  Was  CkerroneeOf  Which  was  con-
sidered as  a  dative,  and  is  still  retained  in  some  modem  editions.
J.  F.  Gronovius  altered  it  to  Cherroiiesonf  the  preposition  in  being
understood.

t  The  chief  town  of  the  island  of  Corcyra.  See  Pausanias  in  Att.
c.  ii.  6,  where  the  attack  on  this  island  is  mentioned.


20a  JUSTIN.  [B.XXVI.  CH.I.

who  was  shut  up  in  the  city,  and  was  fighting  furiously  among
the  thickest  of  the  asseulants,  he  was  struck  with  a  stone  frou),
the  walls,  and  killed.  His  head  was  csLrried  to  Antigonus,
who,  using  his  victory  with  moderation,  sent  back  his  son
Helenus,  who  surrendered  to  him  with  several  Epirots,  into
his  own  country,  and  gave  him  the  bones  of  his  father,  not
having  yet  received  the  rites  of  burial,  to  carry  home  with
him.

It  is  pretty  generally  stated  by  authors,  that  no  king,  either
of  that  or  the  former  age,  was  to  be  compared  to  Fyrrhus;
and  that  there  has  seldom  been  seen,  either  among  princes,  or
other  illustrious  men,  a  man  of  more  upright  life  or  of  stricter
justice ;  and  that  he  had  such  knowledge  of  the  military  art,
that  though  he  fought  against  such  great  princes  as  Lysi-
machus,  Demetrius,  and  Antigonus,  he  was  never  conquered.
In  his  wars  too  with  the  Illyrians,  Sicilians,  Romans,  and
Carthaginians,  he  never  came  off  inferior,  but  generally  vic-
torious ;  and  he  rendered  his  country,  which  was  before  but
mean  and  obscure^  renowned  throughout  the  world  by  the
fame  of  his  exploits  and  the  glory  of  his  name.


BOOK  XXVI.


The  Peloponnesus  given  up  to  Antigonus ;  Aristotimus,  tyrant  of  Elis,
killed  by  Hellanicus,  I. — ^Antigonus  defeats  the  Qauls ;  Alexander,
king  of  EpiniB,  drives  him  from  Macedonia ;  Demetrius,  the  son
of  Antigonus,  recovers  it>  and  expels  Alexander  from  Epirus,  IL
— ^Alexander  re-established  on  his  throne ;  death  of  Magas,  king  of
Cyrene ;  death  of  Demetrius,  III.

I.  After  the  death  of  Pyrrhus,  there  were  great  warlike
commotions,  not  only  in  Macedonia,  but  in  Asia  and  Greece ;
for  the  Feloponnesians  were  betrayed  into  the  power  of  Anti-
gonus ;  and  while  partly  concern,  partly  exultation,  prevailed
variously  among  the  inhabitants,  as  any  city  had  either  ex-
pected aid  from  Pyrrhus  or  •conceived  apprehensions  of  him,
they  either  entered  into  alliance  with  Antigonus,  or,  impelled
by  mutual  animosity,  plunged  into  hostilities  with  one  another^
Amidst  these  tumults  in  the  disturbed  provinces,  the  sove-
reignty over  the  city  of  the  Epeans*  was  usurped  by  an  emi-

*  Epiorum  whsJ]  Called  by  the  Greeks  'En-icoi,  from  Epeus,  a  king


B.C.  271.]  ARISTOTIMUS.  S08

nent  man  named  Aristotimus ;  and  when  many  of  the  leading
persons  had  been  slain  by  him,  and  more  driven  into  banish-
ment, and  the  ^toliaus  sent  ambassadors  to  ask  him  "  to
give  up  the  wives  and  children  of  the  exiles,"  he  at  first
refdsed,  but  afterwards,  as  if  relenting,  he  gave  all  the  married
women  leave  to  go  to  their  husbands,  and  fixed  a  day  for  their
departure.  They,  as  being  about  to  spend  their  lives  in
banishment  with  their  husbands,  were  going  to  carry  all  their
most  valuable  property  with  them ;  but,  when  they  assembled
at  one  of  the  gates  of  the  city,  intending  to  go  ioriii  in  a  body^
they  were  despoiled  of  all  that  they  had,  and  confined  in  the
public  prison,  the  infants  having  been  first  killed  in  the  arms
of  their  mothers,  and  the  young  women  carried  off  for  vio*
lation.  The  people  being  all  amazed  at  such  cruel  tyranny,
Hellanicus,  the  chief  of  them,  an  old  man  and  without  chil-
dren, and  consequently  having  no  fear  either  for  life  or
ofi&pring,  assembled  the  most  faithful  of  his  friends  in  his
house,  and  encoun^d  them  to  attempt  the  delivery  of  their
country.  But  as  Uiey  hesitated  to  remove  a  public  evil  at
their  own  private  risk,  and  demanded  time  for  deliberation,
Hellanicus,  calling  jCbr  his  attendants,  ordered  the  doors  to  be
locked,  and  a  message  to  be  carried  to  the  tyrant^  requesting
him  "  to  send  officers  to  seise  a  band  of  conspirators  in  Hel-
lanicus's  house;''  and  he  told  all  of  them,  ^rith  reproaches^
that  '*  since  he  could  not  be  the  deliverer  of  his  country,  he
would  at  least  take  revenge  for  the  abandonment  of  its  cause."
Being  thus  placed  between  two  perils,  they  chose  the  more
honourable  course,  and  conspired  to  kill  the  tyrant ;  and  thus
Aristotimus  was  cut  off  in  the  fifth  month  after  he  had  usurped
the  government.

II.  In  the  meantime  Antigonus,  being  harassed  with  wars,
of  varied  aspect,  from  the  Spartans  and  King  Ptolemy,  and  per-
ceiving that  a  new  enemy,  an  army  from  Gallograecia,  was
coming  upon  him,  left  a  few  troops  as  a  semblance  of  a  camp,
to  amuse  his  other  assailants,  and  proceeded  with  all  the  rest
of  his  force  against  the  Gauls ;  who,  becoming  aware  of  his
approach^  as  they  were  preparing  for  battle,  sacrificed  victims

of  Ella,  contemporary  with  Pelopa,  Horn.  Odyss.  ziii.  275 ;  xv.  297 ;  so
that  the  Epeans,  in  this  passage,  are  only  the  Eleans  under  their  old
name. — Wetzd.  Bongarsius  and  Gronovius  would  read  Eliorum,  refer-
ring  to  Pausaaiasy  E]^.  and  Plutarch,  de  Yirt.  MuL  c.  24.


204  JUSTIN.  [B.XXVI.  CH.III.

to  take  presages  for  the  event ;  and  as,  from  the  entrails,  great
slaughter  and  destruction  of  them  all  was  portended,  they  were
moved,  not  to  fear,  but  to  fury^  and  thinking  that  the  anger  of
the  gods  might  be  appeased  by  the  slaughter  of  their  kindred,
butchered  their  wives  and  children,  commencing  hostilities  with .
the  murder  of  their  own  people  ;  for  such  rage  had  possessed
their  savage  breasts,  that  they  did  not  spare  even  that  tender  age
which  an  enemy  would  have  spared,  but  made  deadly  war  on  their
own  children  and  their  chilc&en's  mothers,  in  defence  of  whom
wars  are  wont  to  be  undertaken.  As  if,  therefore^  they  had
purchased  life  and  victory  by  their  barbarity,  they  rushed,
stained  as  they  were  with  the  fresh  blood  of  their  relatives,  into
the  field  of  battle,  but  with  success  no  better  than  their
auspices  :  for,  as  they  were  fighting,  the  furies,  the  avengers
of  murder,  overwhelmed  them  sooner  than  the  enemy,  and
the  ghosts  of  the  slain  rising  up  before  their  eyes,  they  were
all  cut  oflF  with  utter  destruction.  Such  was  the  havoc
among  them,  that  the  gods  seemed  to  have  conspired  with
men  to  annihilate  an  army  of  murderers.

In  consequence  of  the  result  of  this  battle,Ptolemy  and  the
Spartans,  avoiding  the  victorious  army  of  the  enemy,  retreated
to  safer  ground ;  and  Antigonus,  when  he  heard  of  their
departure,  turned  his  arms  against  the  Athenians,  while  the
ardour  of  his  men  was  yet  fresh  from  their  recent  victory.
But  during  the  time  that  he  was  thus  engaged,  Alexander,  king
of  Epirus,  longing  to  avenge  the  death  of  his  father  Pyrrhus,
laid  waste  the  frontiers  of  Macedonia.  Antigonus  returned
from  Greece  to  give  him  battle,  but  being  deserted  by  his  men,
who  went  over  to  the  enemy,  he  lost  both  the  throne  of
Macedonia  and  his  army.  His  son  Demetrius,  however,
though  but  a  boy,  collecting  an  army  in  the  absence  of  his
father,  not  only  recovered  Macedonia^  which  had  been  lost,  but
drove  Alexander  from  the  throne  of  Epirus.  Such  was  the-
fickleness  of  the  soldiers,  or  the  mutability  of  fortune,  that
kings  were  seen  one  day  in  the  character  of  sovereigns,  and
the  next  in  that  of  exiles.

III.  Alexander,  after  fleeing,  on  his  expulsion,  to  the
Acamanians,  was  restored  to  his  throne,  with  not  less  eager-
ness on  the  part  of  the  Epirots  than  exertion  on  the  part  of
his  allies. About  the  same  time  died  Magas,*  king  of  Gyrene,

*  Wetzel  has  Ag<u  in  his  text,  but  says  in  his  note  that  "we  should


B.C.  245.]  SBLETJCUS  H.  '  206

who,  before  he  fell  sick,  had  betrothed  his  only  daughter
Berenice  to  his  brother  Ptolemy's  son,  in  order  to  end  all
disputes  with  him.  But  after  the  death  of  the  king,  Arsinoe,
the  mother  of  the  girl,  resolving  to  break  off  a  marriage  which
had  been  contracted  against  her  will,  sent  for  Ilemetrius,  the
brother  of  King  Antigonus,  from  Macedonia,  to  marry  the
damsel,  and  occupy  the  throne  of  Gyrene.  Nor  did  Demetrius
delay  to  comply  with  her  wishes.  But  having  speedily  arrived,
by  the  aid  of  a  favourable  wind,  at  Gyrene,  he  began,  from  the
very  first,  through  presuming  on  his  handsome  person  (with
which  he  had  already  made  too  much  impression  on  his
mother-in-law*) J  to  conduct  himself  haughtily  and  overbearingly
both  to  the  royal  family  and  the  army.  He  also  transferred
his  desire  to  please  from  the  daughter  to  the  mother;  a  fact
which  v^as  first  suspected  by  the  damsel,  and  at  last  drew
odium  upon  him  from  the  people  and  the  army.  The  affec-
tions of  all,  therefore,  being  set  on  the  son  of  Ptolemy,  a.
conspiracy  was  formed  against  Demetrius,  and  assassins  were
sent  to  kill  him,  when  he  was  gone  to  bed  with  his  mother-
in-law.  Arsinoe,  hearing  the  voice  of  her  daughter,  standing
at  the  door,  and  desiring  them  "  to  spare  her  mother,"  covered
her  paramour  a  while  with  her  own  person.  He  was  however
slain,  and  Berenice,  by  his  death,  both  took  revenge  for  the
licentiousness  of  her  mother,  without  violation  of  her  duty  to
her,  and,  in  choosing  a  husband,  followed  the  judgment  of  her
father.


BOOK  XXYII.


SelencuB  II.,  king  of  Syria,  puts  to  death  Berenice,  his  mother-in-law ;
Ptolemy  Eiiergetes  invades  Syria,  but  is  recalled  l^ome,  I. —
Seleucus  recovers  himself,  and  makes  war  on  Ptolemy  unsuccess-
fully ;  he  calls  to  his  aid  his  brother  Antiochus,  surnamed  Hieraz,
II. — Antiochus,  defeated  by  Bumenes  and  Seleucus,  takes  to
flight ;  deaths  of  Antiochus  and  Seleucus,  IIL

I.  On  the  death  of  Antiochus,  king  of  Syria,  his  son  Seleucus,
succeeding  in  his  stead,  commenced  his  reign  with  murder  in

rather  read  Magas^  as  the  nam^  is  written  by  Polyseftus^  Athenseus,  and
Pausanias,  i.  6,  8." Magas  is  also  approved  by  Yossius,  Yorstius,
Faber,  and  almost  all  the  other  commentators.
*  Arsinoe.


.a06  JUSTIN.  [B.xxvn.  CH.n.

his  own  family,  his  modier  Laodice,  who  ought  to  have  re-
strained  him,  encouraging  him  to  it.  He  put  to  death  his
step-mother  Berenice,  the  sister  of  Ptolemy,  king  of  Egypt,
together  with  his  little  brother,  her  son.  By  perpetrating
this  cruelty,  he  both  incurred  the  stain  of  infamy,  and  involved
himself  in  a  war  with  Ptolemy.  As  for  Berenice,  when  she
heard  that  aasassins  were  sent  to  despatch  her,  she  shut  her-
self up  in  Daphne ;  and  it  being  reported  throughout  the
cities  of  Asia,  that  she  and  her  little  son  were  besieged  there,
they  all,  commiserating  her  undeserved  misfortunes  from
their  recollection  of  the  high  character  of  her  father  and  her
ancestors,  sent  her  assistance*  Her  brother  Ptolemy,  too,
alarmed  at  the  danger  of  his  sister,  left  his  kingdom,  and
hastened  to  her  support  with  all  his  forces.  But  Berenice,
before  succour  could  arrive,  was  surprised  by  treachery,  as  she
could  not  be  taken  by  force,  and  killed.  The  deed  was  re-
garded by  every  one  as  an  atrocity;  and  all  the  cities,  in
consequence,  which  had  revolted  (after  having  equipped  a  vast
fleet),,  being  suddenly  alarmed  at  this  instance  of  cruelty,  and
wishing  to  take  revenge  for  her  whom  they  had  meant  to
defend,  gave  themselves  up  to  Ptolemyj  who,  if  he  had  not
been  recalled  to  Egypt  by  disturbances  at  home,  would  have
made  himself  master  of  all  SeleUciis's  dominions.  Such
hatred  did  an  unnatural  crime  bring  upon  Seleucus;  or  so
much  good  feeling  did  the  death  of  a  sister,  dishonourably
killed,^  excite  in  behalf  of  Ptolemy !

II.  After  the  departure  of  Ptolemy^  Seleucus,  having  pre-
pared a  great  fleet  against  the  cities  that  had  revolted,  lost  it
in  a  storm  that  suddenly  arose,  as  if  the  gods  themselves  had
taken  vengeance  on  him  for  his  murder ;  nor  did  fortune  leave
him  anything,  of  all  his  mighty  armament,  except  his  body
and  life,  and  a  few  cotnpanions  amid  the  wreck.  It  was
indeed  a  lamentable  occurrence,  and  yet  such  as  Seleucus
might  have  desired;  for  the  cities,  which  from  hatred  to
him  had  gone  over  to  Ptolemy,  being  moved,  hy  a  sudden
change  in  their  feelings,  to  compassionate  his  loss  at  sea  (as
if,  in  the  judgment  of  the  gods,  satisfaction  had  been  made
them),  put  themselves  again  under  his  government.  Rejoiced
at  his  misfortune,  therefore,  and  enriched  by  his  loss,  he  made
war  upon  Ptolemy,  as  being  now  a  match  for  him  in  strength ;
but  as  though  he  had  been  born  only  for  a  sport  to  fortune.


RO.  245— 2S-1.]  SELEUCUS  II.  207

and  had  received  the  power  of  a  king  only  to  lose  it,  he  was
defeated  in  a  battle,  and  fled  in  trepidation  to  Antioch,  not
much  better  attended  than  after  his  shipwreck.  From  this
place  he  despatched  a  letter  to  his  brother  Antiochus,  in
which  he  implored  his  aid,  and  offered  him  that  part  of  Asia
within  Mount  Taurus,  as  a  recompense  for  his  services.  But
Antiochus,  though  he  was  but  fourteen  years  old,  yet,  being
greedy  of  dominion  beyond  his  years,  caught  at  the  oppor->
tanity,  not  with  the  kindly  feeling  with  which  it  was  offered,
but,  like  a  robber,  desiring  to  take  the  whole  kingdom  from
his  brother,  assumed,  boy  as  he  was,  a  manly  and  unprin-
cipled audacity*  Hence  he  was  called  ffierax,*  because,  in
taking  away  the  possessions  of  others,  he  conducted  himself,
not  like  a  man,  but  like  a  bird  of  prey.

Ptolemy  Euergetes,  in  the  meantime,  learning  that  An-
tiochus was  coming  to  the  aid  of  Seleucus,  and  not  wishing  to
have  to  contend  with  two  enemies  a^  once,  made  peace  with
Seleucus  for  ten  years.  But  the  peace  that  was  granted
Seleucus  by  his  enemy,  was  broken  by  his  own  brother,  who,
having  hired  an  army  of  Gauls,  brought  hostilities  instead  of
succour,  and  showed  himself,  though  he  had  been  implored  for
aid,  an  enemy  instead  of  a  brother.  In  the  battle  that  followed
Antiochus  was  victor,  indeed,  through  the  prowess  of  the
Gauls ;  but  they,  thinking  that  Seleucus  had  fallen  on  the  field,
began  to  turn  their  arms  against  Antiochus  himself,  in  the
hope  of  ravaging  Asia  with  greater  freedom,  if  they  destroyed
the  whole  royal  family.  Antiochus,  seeing  their  design,  pur-
chased peace  from  them«  as  from  robbers,  with  a  sum  of
money,  and  formed  an  alliance  with  his  own  mercenaries.

III.  Meanwhile  Eumenes,  king  of  Bithynia^  when  the
brothers  were  divided  and  exhausted  by  civil  war,  attacked
both  the  victorious  Antiochus  and  the  Gauls,  as  if  he  intended
to  take  possession  of  Asia  while  it  was  left  without  a  master.
Nor  did  he  find  any  diflBculty  in  overthrowing  them,  as  they
were  weakened  by  their  previous  conflicts,  and  he  himself  was
fresh  and  vigorous*  At  that  period,  indeed,  every  war  was
intended  for  the  reduction  of  Asia ;  whoever  was  stronger  than
his  neighbours  was  ready  to  seize  on  Asia  for  his  prey.  The
brothers,  Seleucus  and  Antiochus,  went  to  war  for  the  sove-
reignty of  Asia;  Ptolemy,  king  of  Egypt,  under  pretext  of

*  *lipaXf  a  hawk  or  falcon.


208  JUSTIN.  [B.xxvn.  CH.m.

avenging  his  sister,  was  eager  to  secure  Asia.  On  the  one
side  Eumenes  of  Bithynia,  on  the  other  the  Gauls  (an  army
of  mercenaries  always  ready  to  support  the  weaker),  laid  waste
Asia,  while  no  one,  among  so  many  robbers,  was  found  to  be
its  protector.

When  Antiochus  was  overthrown,  and  Eumenes  had  pos-
sessed himself  of  the  greater  part  of  the  country,  the  two
brothers,  though  the  prize  for  which  they  had  fought  was  lost,
could  not  even  then  come  to  an  agreement,  but,  leaving  their
foreign  enemies  unmolested,  continued  the  war  for  the  destruc-
tion of  each  other.  Antiochus,  being  again  defeated,  and
exhausted  with  a  flight  of  many  days'  continuance,  arrived  at
last  at  the  palace  of  Artamenes,  his  father-in-law,  king  of
Cappadocia.  Being  kindly  received  by  him  at  first,  but
learning,  after  some  days,  that  treacherous  designs  were  form-
ing against  him,  he  sought  safety  by  again  taking  to  flight
When  he  was  thus  a  fugitive,  and  found  nowhere  a  place  of
security,  he  betook  himself  to  his  enemy  Ptolemy,  whose  faith
he  thought  more  to  be  trusted  than  that  of  his  brother,
whether  he  reflected  on  what  he  would  have  done  to  his
brother,  or  what  he  had  deserved  from  him.  But  Ptolemy,
not  more  friendly  to  him  when  he  came  to  surrender,  than
when  he  had  been  an  open  foe,  ordered  that  he  should  be  kept
in  the  closest  confinement.  From  hence  however  he  escaped,
eluding  his  keepers  by  the  aid  of  a  courtesan,  with  whom  he
liad  been  familiar,  and  was  slain  in  his  flight  by  some  robbers.
Seleucus  too,  about  the  same  time,  lost  his  kingdom,  and  was
killed  by  a  fall  from  his  horse.  Thus  these  two  brothers,  as
if  brothers  also  in  fate,  both  became  exiles ;  and  both,  after
losing  their  dominions,  died  a  d^ath  merited  by  their  crimes.


200


BOOK  XXVIII.

Frooeedings  in  Epirus ;  the  AcamaniAns  request  aid  from  the  Romami
against  the  ^tolians,  I. — Reply  of  the  iEtolians  to  the  Roman
ambassadors,  II. — Extinction  oi  the  royal  race  in  Epirus ;  death
of  Demetrius  in  Macedonia,  and  administration  of  Antigonus
Doson,  III. — ^War  of  Antigonus  with  Sparta ;  Cleomenes,  king  of
Sparta,  seeks  refuge  in  Bgypt,  and  is  killed  there ;  death  of  Anti-
gonus, IV.

I.  When  Olympias,  daughter  of  Pyrrhus  king  of  Epirus,  had
lost  her  husband  Alexander,  who  was  also  her  brother,*  she
took  upon  herself  the  guardianship  of  her  sons  Pyrrhus  and
Ptolemy,  whom  she  had  by  him,  and  the  administration  of  the
kingdom ;  and  finding  that  the  ^tolians  wanted  to  take  from
her  a  part  of  Acamania,  which  the  father  of  the  bdys  had
received  as  a  recompense  for  assisting  them  in  war.f  she  ad-
dressed herself  to  Demetrius  king  of  Macedonia,  and  gave  him
her  daughter  Phthia  in  marriage  (though  he  was  already
united  to  a  sister  of  Antiochus  king  of  Syria),  that  she  might
secure  by  right  of  relationship  the  assistance  which  she  could
not  obtain  from  his  compassion.  A  marriage  was  accordingly
solemnized,  by  which  Demetrius  gained  Uie  love  of  a  new
wife,  and  the  hatred  of  his  former  one ;  who,  as  if  divorced,
went  off  to  her  brother  Antiochus,  and  excited  him  to  make
war  upon  her  husband.

The  Acamanians  also,  fearing  to  trust  for  support  to  the
Epirots,  requested  of  the  Romans  assistance  against  the
^tolians,  and  prevailed  on  the  senate  to  send  ambassadors  to
order  the  ^toHans  "  to  withdraw  their  garrisons  from  tho
cities  of  Acamania,  and  allow  those  to  be  free,  who  alone,  of
all  the  people  of  Greece,  had  not  contributed  aid  to  the
Greeks  against  the  Trojans,  the  authors  of  the  Roman  race."

II.  But  the  JEtolians  listened  to  the  embassy  of  the  Bo-
mans  with  haughtiness,  upbraiding  them  with  their  fortune
against  the  Carthaginians  and  Gauls,  by  whom  they  had  been
fearfully  slaughtered  in  so  many  wars,  and  saying  that  *'  their
gates,  which  the  terror  of  the  Punic  war  had  closed,;]:  should

*  Compare  zviiL  1 ;  zxvi  2. His  death  is  not  mentioned  before,
t  In  portionem  bdli.]  He  had  become  an  ally  to  the  JEtoUans  when
they  were  carrying  on  some  war. — WetzeL

t  Quas  dauterit  metu8  Punici  beUL]  The  author  seems  to  have  been

P


210  JUSTIN.  [B.XXVUI.  CH.IL

be  opened  to  meet  the  Carthaginians,  before  their  arms  were
brought  into  Greece.*'  They  then  desired  them  to  remember
"  who  they  were  that  threatened,  and  whom  they  threatened.
That  the  Bomans  had  not  been  able  to  defend  their  city
against  the  Gauls ;  and,  when  it  was  taken,  had  recovered  it,*
not  by  the  sword,  but  with  gold ;  but  that  when  that  people
entered  Greece,  in  considerably  greater  numbers,  they  them-
selves had  utterly  destroyed  them,  not^only  without  the  assist-
ance of  any  foreign  power,  but  without  even  calling  into  action
the  whole  of  their  own  force,  and  had  made  that  a  place  for  their
graves  which  they  had  intended  for  the  seat  of  their  cities  and
empire;  while  Italy,  on  the  other  hand,  when  the  Eomans
were  still  trembling  at  the  recent  burning  of  their  city,  was
almost  entirely  occupied  by  the  Gauls.  That  they  should
therefore  have  expelled  the  Gauls  from  Italy  before  they
threatened  the  iEltolians,  and  have  defended  their  own  pos-
sessions before  they  sought  those  of  others.  And  what  sort  of
men  were  the  Romans  ?  mere  shepherds,  who  occupied  a  ter-
ritory wrested  from  its  lawful  owners  by  robbery ;  who,  when
they  were  unable  to  procure  wives,  from  the  baseness  of
their  origin,  seized  them  by  open  force ;  who,  moreover,  had
founded  their  very  city  in  fratricide,  and  sprinkled  the  foun-
dation of  their  walls  with  the  blood  of  their  king's  brother.
But  that  the  ^tolians  had  always  been  the  chief  people  of
Greece,  and,  as  they  surpassed  others  in  dignity,  excelled
them  also  in  bravery ;  that  they  were  the  only  nation  who  had
always  despised  the  Macedonians,  even  when  flourishing  in
possession  of  the  empire  of  the  world ;  who  had  felt  no  dread
of  king  Philip,  and  who  had  spumed  the  edicts  of  Alexander
the  Great,  after  he  had  conquered  the  Persians  and  Indians,
and  when  all  trembled  at  his  name.  That  they  therefore  ad-
vised the  Eomans  to  be  content  with  their  present  fortune,
and  not  provoke  the  arms  by  which  they  knew  that  the  Gauls
had  been  cut  to  pieces,  and  the  Macedonians  set  at  nought."

thinking  of  the  second  Punic  war,  which  Hannibal  commenced,  A.n.c.
534,  and  ended  in  551.  If  bo,  he  inadyertently  makes  the  Acar-
nanians,  before  a.u.c.  522,  speak  of  matters  which  did  not  take  place
till  more  than  twelve  years  afterwards. —  Wetzel,

*  The  text,  in  all  the  editions,  stands  thus :  Captamque  wm  ferro
drfendiaae,  aed  awro  redemuae.  As  cc^tam  wbem  drfendere  is  nonsense,
I  have,  in  accordance  with  the  judgment  of  S^effer,  omitted  the  word
drfendiste  in  the  translation.


B.G.  231.]  DEATH  OF  DE1IETBIU&  !Q11

Thej  thus  dismissed  the  Boman  embassy,  and,  that  they
might  not  seem  to  speak  more  boldly  thaa  they  acted,  laid
waste  the  borders  of  Epirus  and  Acamania.

III.  Olympias^  had  now  given  up  her  dominions  to  her
sons,  and  Ptolemy  had  succeeded  in  the  room  of  his  deceased
brother  Pyrrhus.  Ptolemy,  as  he  was  marching  to  meet  the
enemy  with  his  army  in  array,  was  seized  with  a  fit  of  sickness,
and  died  on  his  route.  Olyropias  too,  afflicted  with  her
double  bereavement  in  the  death  of  her  sons,  and  dragging  on
a  suffering  existence,  did  not  long  survive  her  of&pring.  The
young  princess  Nereis,  and  her  sister  Laodamia,  being  then
the  only  survivors  of  the  royal  family.  Nereis  married  Gelo,
the  son  of  the  king  of  Sicily;!  and  Laodamia,  fleeing  for  refuge
to  the  altar  of  Diana,  was  killed  in  a  tumult]:  of  the  populace ;
a  crime  which  the  immortal  gods  punished  by  a  series  of
disasters,  and  almost  the  total  destruction  of  the  people ;  for
after  suffering  from  banrenness  and  famine,  and  being  harassed
by  civil  discord,  they  were  at  length  nearly  cut  off  by
foreign  wars ;  and  Milo,  the  assassin  of  Laodamia,  becoming
mad,  and  lacerating  his  fle8h,§  sometimes  with  the  sword,  some-
times with  stones,  and  at  last  with  his  teeth,  died  the  twelfth
day  afterwards*

While  these  things  were  occurring  in  Epirus,  king  Deme-
trius in  Macedonia  died,  leaving  a  son  named  Philip,  quite  a
diild;  and  Antigonus,  being  appointed  his  guardian,  and
manying  his  mother,  did  his  utmost  ||  to  get  himself  made
king.  But  some  time  after,  being  besieged  in  the  palace  by
an  alarming  insurrection  of  the  Macedonians,  he  walked  forth
publicly  unattended  by  his  guards,  and  throwing  his  diadem
and  purple  robe  among  the  mob,  bade  them  '*  give  those  to
somebody  else,  who  either  knew  not  how  to  rule  them,^  or

*  See  note  at-the  oommenoement  of  thia  book.

i*  Hiero,  who  reigned  from  B.o.  263  to  214.  Gelo  died  three  years
before  his  father. Liv.  xxiii.  30. — Wetzel,

t  The  cause  of  this  disturbance  does  not  appear.

§  Visceribtu.']  "  Viscera"  signifies  all  that  is  under  the  skin.  "  Viscera
sunt  qoioquid  inter  ossa  et  cutem  est"  Servius  ad  Viig.  Mn,  viL  253 ;
Lucret.  L  836.

II  Lahorabai^  And  succeeded.

%  Qui.  cmt  invperare  UbU  neaciat,]  That  is,  whom  they  might  rule  (as
he  says  at  the  end  of  his  speech),  if  the  reading  be  correct.  But  some  of
the  old  editions  have  tckU,  which  Vorstius  adopted* Sohefifer  would

P  2


212  JUSTIN.  [RXXVin.  CH.IV.

whom  they  knew  how  to  obey ;  for  that  he  had  found  regal
authority  enviable,*  not  for  its  pleasures,  but  for  its  toils  and
dangers.*'  He  then  mentioned  his  own  services ;  "  how  he
had  punished  the  defection  of  their  allies ;  how  he  had  put
down  the  Dardanians  and  Thessalians,  when  they  were  in
exultation  at  the  death  of  king  Demetrius  ;  how  he  had  not  only
maintained  the  honour  of  the  Macedonians,  but  added  to  it.
Yet,  if  they  were  displeased  at  such  services,  he  was  ready  to
resign  the  government,  and  to  return  what  they  had  conferred
upon  him ;  and  they  themselves  might  look  out  for  a  prince
whom  they  could  govern."  The  people,  overcome  with  shame,
bade  him  resume  the  regal  authority ;  but  he  refused  to  do
so  till  the  leaders  of  the  insurrection  were  delivered  up  to
punishment.  . .

lY.  After  this  occurrence  he  made  war  upon  the  Spartans,
who  were  the  only  people  that,  during  the  wars  of  Philip  and
Alexander,  had  set  at  nought  the  power  of  the  Macedonians,
and  lliose  arms  which  were  dreaded  by  every  other  nation.
Between  these  two  most  remarkable  peoples  war  was  prose-
cuted with  the  greatest  vigour  on  both  sides,  the  one  fighting
to  support  the  old  glory  of  the  Macedonians,  and  the  other,
not  only  to  secure  their  hitherto  unviolated  liberty,  but  even
their  Hves.  The  Lacedsemonians  being  worsted,  not  only  the
men,  but  their  wives  and  children,  endured  their  adverse
fortune  with  magnanimity.  As  no  man  had  shrunk  from
exposing  his  life  in  the  field,  so  no  woman  wept  for  her  lost
husband  ;  the  old  men  extolled  the  honourable  deaths  of  their
sons,  and  the  sons  rejoiced  over  their  fathers  that  were  slain
in  battle ;  and  all  who  survived  lamented  their  lot,  in  not
havirig  died  for  the  liberty  of  their  country.  Ail  received  the
wounded  with  open  doors,  dressed  their  wounds,  and  Tecruited
them  in  their  exhaustion.  In  this  condition  of  affairs,  there
was  no  noise  or  hurry  in  the  city,  and  every  one  lamented  the.
public  suffering  more  than  his  own  private  troubles.  In
the  course  of  these  proceedings,  king  Oleomenes  returned,
with  his  whole  body  wet,  after  the  great  slaughter  that  he
had  made  among  the  enemy,  with  his  own  blood  and  that  of
his  adversaries,  and,  entering  the  city,  did  not  rest  himself  on

read  qui  atU  imperare  tSis,  oaU  cui  parere  ipei  tcicmt,  ''sciat"  being
undenrtood  after  "  imperare."

*  That  is,  if  it  were  to  be  envied  at  aU.


B.C.  2S0.]  PHILIP  BEGINS  TO  BEIGN.  213

the  ground,  or  call  for  meat  or  drink,  or  even  relieve  himself
from  the  weight  of  his  armour,  hut  leaning  against  a  wall,  and
finding  that  only  four ;  thousand  men  survived  the  hattle,
exhorted  them  "  to  reserve  themselves  for  the  hotter  times
that  would  come  to  their  country.'*  He  then  set  out  with  his
wife  and  children  to  Egypt  to  Ptolemy,  by  whom  he  was
honourably  received,  and  lived  a  long  time  in  the  highest
esteem  with  that  monarch.  After  the  decease  of  Ptolemy,  he
was  put  to  death,  with  all  his  family,  by  Ptolemy's  son.

Antigonus,  when  the  Spartans  were  thus  reduced,  pitying
the  distress  of  so  famous  a  city,  prohibited  his  soldiers  from
plundering  it,  and  granted  pardon  to  all  who  survived,  observ-
ing that  **  he  had  engaged  in  war,  not  with  the  Spartans,  but
with  Cleomenes,  with  whose  flight  all  his  resentment  was
terminated ;  nor  would  it  be  less  glory  to  him,  if  Sparta
should  be  recorded  to  have  been  saved  by  him  by  whom  alone
it  had  been  taken ;  and  that  he  accordingly  spared  the  ground
and  buildings  of  the  city,  scarcely  any  inhabitants  being  left
for  him  to  spare."  Not  long  afterwards  Antigonus  died,  and
left  the  Ibrone  to  his  ward  Philip,  who  was  then  fourteen
years  old.


BOOK  XXIX.


Changes  in  the  kingdoms  of  Syria,  Cappadocia,  Egypt ;  Lycurgus  at
Sparta;  Hannibal  at  Carthage;  conduct  of  Phuip  who  attacks
the  u£tolians,  I. — ^PhiHp,  persuaded  by  Demetrius,  kiiig  of  lllyria,
resolves  to  go  to  war  with  the  Romans,  and  makes  peace  with  the
j^Itolians,  II. — His  professed  motives,  IIL — He  commences  hos-
tilities and  is  ignominiously  compelled  to  make  peace,  lY.

I.  About  this  time  almost  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  world
underwent  alterations,  in  consequence  of  a  succession  of  new
princes.  In  Macedonia,  Philip,  on  the  death  of  Antigonus
his  guardian,  who  was  also  his  father-in-law,  assumed  the
government  at  the  age  of  fourteen.  In  Asia,  after  Seleucus
was  killed,*  Antiochus,  though  still  in  his  minority,  was  made
king.  In  Cappadocia,  the  fieither  of  Ariarathes,  yet  a  boy,  had
resigned  the  sovereignty  to  him.  Of  Egypt  Ptolemy  had
made  himself  master,  after  putting  to  death  his  father  and

*  Interfecto  Sdeuco,'\  See  the  end  of  book  xzviii  This  was  Seleucus
IL,  named  Callinious.


S14  JtJSTIN.  [a  XXIX.  CH.II.

mother ;  from  whioh  crime  he  had  afterwards  the  surname  of
Philopator.*  As  for  the  Spartans,  they  had  elected  Lycurgas
in  the  room  of  Cleomenes.  And  that  no  changes  might  be
wanting  at  that  period,  Hannibal,  at  a  very  early  age,  was  ap-
pointed general  of  the  Carthaginians,  not  for  want  of  older
men,  but  because  of  his  hatred  to  the  Romans,  with  which
they  knew  that  he  had  been  imbued  from  his  boyhood ;  the
mischief  that  he  did,  however,  was  not  so  pernicious  to  the
Romans  as  to  Africa  itself.  In  these  youthful  rulers,  aldioi^h
they  had  no  directors  of  maturer  years,  yet,  as  each  was
anxious  to  tread  in  the  steps  of  his  predecessors,  great  talent
and  ability  appeared.  Ptolemy  was  the  only  exception,  who,
reckless  as  he  had  been  in  the  attainment  of  power,  was
equally  remiss  in  the  administration  of  it.  As  to  Philip,  the
Dardanians,  and  all  the  neighbouring  people,  who  cherished,
as  it  were,  an  immortal  hatred  to  the  kings  of  the  Mace-
donians, were  perpetually  molesting  him  in  contempt  of  his
youth.  He,  on  the  other  hand,  after  repulsing  his  enemies,
was  not  content  with  having  defended  his  own  dominions,  but
manifested  the  greatest  et^erness  to  make  war  4^pon  the
jEtolians,

II.  While  he  was  meditating  this  enterprise,  Demetrius
king  of  the  lUyrians,  who  had  lately  been  conquered  by
iEmilius  Paulus,  the  Eoman  consul,  applied  to  him  with
earnest  entreaties  for  aid,  and  complaints  of  the  injustice  of
the  Romans,  "  who,"  he  said,  **  not  content  within  die  limits
of  Italy,  but  grasping,  with  presumptuous  hopes,  at  the  empire
of  the  whole  world,  made  war  upon  all  kings.  Thus,  aspiring
to  the  dominion  of  Sicily,  Sardinia,  and  Spain,  and  finally  to
that  of  all  Africa,  they  had  engaged  in  a  war  with  the  Cartha-
ginians and  Hannibal ;  and  that  hostilities  had  been  directed
i^ainst  himself  too,  for  no  other  reason  than  that  he  appeared  to
lie  near  Italy,  as  if  it  were  unlawful  for  any  king  to  be  on  the
borders  of  their  empire.  And  that  Philip  also  himself  must
take  warning  by  his  case,  since  the  nearer  f  and  more  valuable
his  kingdom,  the  more  determined  enemies  would  he  find  the
Romans  to  be."  In  addition,  he  said,  that  '*  he  would  give  up
his  kingdom,  which  the  Romans  had  seized,  to  Philip  himself,

•  Father-loving^  ironically.

f  Wetzel  has  promptiua  in  bis  text,  with  most  other  editors,  but  in
his  note,  prefers  propiua,  which  appears  in  some  editions.


B.C.  216.]  PHILIP  AND  THE  -fflTOLlANS.  316

as  he  should  be  better  pleased  to  see  his  ally,' rather  than  his
enemies,  in  possession  of  his  dominions."  With  sach  repre-
sentations as  these,  he  prevailed  upon  Philip  to  lay  aside  his
designs  on  the  ^tolians,  and  to  make  war  upon  the  Romans ;
Philip  supposing  that  there  would  be  the  less  difficulty  in  the
undertaking,  as  he  had  heard  that  they  had  already  been
beaten  by  Hannibal  at  the  lake  Trasimenus.  Not  to  be  dis-
tracted, therefore,  with  more  than  one  war  at  the  same  time,
he  concluded  a  peace  with  the  u^tolians,  not  as  if  intending  to
carry  war  elsewhere,  but  as  if  he  wished  to  promote  the  tran-
quillity of,  Greece,  **  which,"  he  asserted,  **  had  never  been
hi  grekter  danger,  as  the  new  empires  of  the  Carthaginians
and  Eomans  were  risii^  in  the  west,  who  forbore  from
attacking  Greece  and  Asia  only  till  they  should  decide  their
dispute  for  the  sovereignty  by  the  sword,  when  the  superior
power  of  the  two  would  immediately  invade  the  east.

III.  "  He  contemplated  therefore,"  he  said,  **  that  cloud  of
cruel  and  sanguinary  war  which  was  rising  in  Italy;  he
contemplated  the  storm  roaring  and  thundering  from  the
westj  which,  to  whatever  parts  of  the  world  the  tempest  of
victory  might  carry  it,  would  pollute  everything  with  a  vast
shower  of  blood.  That  Greece  had  frequently  felt  great
disturbances  at  one  time  from  the  wars  of  the  Persians,
at  another  from  those  of  the  Gauls,  at  another  from
those  of  the  Macedonians,  but  that  they  would  think  all
those  to  have  been  but  trifling,  if  the  force,  which  was  now
collecting  in  Italy,  should  once  pour  itself  forth  from  that
country.  He  saw  what  cruel  and  bloody  conflicts  those  two
powers  were  maintaining  with  each  other,  with  all  the  strength
of  their  forces,  and  all  the  abilities  of  their  generals ;  and  that
such  fuiy  could  not  end  with  the  destruction  of  one  party  only,
without  ruin  to  the  neighbouring  people.  That  the  cruel
resolutions  of  the  conquerors,  it  was  true,  were  less  to  be
dreaded  by  Macedonia  than  by  Gfreece ;  for  Macedonia  was
both  more  remote,  and  better  able  to  defend  itself ;  but  he
knew  that  those  who  contended  with  such  spirit  would  not  be
content  with  Greece  as  a  limit  to  their  conquests,  and  that  he
himself  should  have  to  fear  a  conflict  with  the  party  that
should  get  the  advantage."  Concluding,  on  this  pretext,  the
war  with  the  iEtolians,  and  thinking  of  nothing  else  but  the
contest  of  the  Carthaginians  and  Romans,  he  carefully  weighed


216  JUSTIN.  [B.xn.  CH.IV.

the  strength  of  each.  But  neither  did  the  Romans,  with  the
Carthaguiians  *  and  Hannibal  on  their  necks,  appear  free  from
apprehension  of  Macedonia;  indeed,  both  the  ancient  yalour
of  the  Macedonians,  their  glory  in  having  conquered  the  east,
and  the  character  of  Philip,  who  was  Sied  with  the  ambition
of  rivalling  Alexander,  and  whom  they  knew  to  be  active  and
eager  for  the  field,  gave  them  sujQ^cient  cause  for  alarm.

IV.  FhUip,  as  soon  as  he  heard  that  the  Romans  had  been
defeated  by  the  Carthaginians  in  a  second  battle,  openly  de-
clared himself  their  enemy,  and  began  to  build  ships  for
transporting  an  army  into  Italy.  He  then  sent  a  deputy  to
Hannibal  with  a  letter,  with  the  view  of  forming  an  alliance
with  him.  This  deputy  was  taken  prisoner,  and  brought
before  the  senate,  but  released  unharmed  ;  not  from  respect
to  the  king,  but  that  one  who  appeared  still  undetermined
might  not  be  rendered  a  decided  enemy.  But  afterwards,
when  news  was  brought  to  the  Romans  that  Philip  was
preparing  to  transport  troops  into  Italy,  they  despatched
the  praetor  Lsevinus,  with  a  well  appointed  fleet,  to  hinder  him
from  crossing.

LsBvinus,  sailing  over  to  Greece,  prevailed  on  the  ^tolians,
by  making  them  numerous  promises,  to  take  up  arms  i^ainst
Philip,  who,  on  his  side,  solicited  the  Achaeans  to  go  to  war
with  tbe  Romans.  Meanwhile  the  Dardanians  began  to  ra-
vage the  countiy  of  Macedonia,  and,  carrying  off  twenty  thou-
sand prisoners,  recalled  PhiUp  from  his  war  with  the  Romans
to  defend  his  own  territories.  At  the  same  time  the  praetor
Laevinus,  having  made  an  alliance  with  king  Attains,  proceeded
to  lay  waste  Greece ;  of  which  the  several  states,  dismayed  at
such  calamities,  importuned  PhiHp  with  embassies  for  succour ;
while  the  princes  of  the  lUyrians,  sticking  close  to  his  side,
demanded,  with  constant  solicitations,  the  performance  of  his
promises  to  them.  In  addition,  the  plundered  Macedonians
called  on  him  for  vengeance.  Beset  by  such  and  so  many  diffi-
culties, he  was  in  doubt  to  what  he  should  first  turn  his  attention ;
but  he  promised  them  all  to  send  them  assistance  shortly  ;  not
that  he  was  able  to  do  what  he  promised,  but  in  order  to  keep
them, by  feeding  them  with  hopes,  in  the  bond  of  alliance

*  All  the  editiona  have  Sed  nee  Jtomcmif  tametn  Pami  et  Hamtibal  in
cervidhus  erant,  &c.  But  tametti,  as  Wetzel  notices,  has  no  place  here.
Six  of  the  old  editions,  he  adds,  have  quibw  instead  of  it.


'B.C.  205.] PHILIP  MAKES  PEACE  WITH  ROME.  217

with  him.  His  first  expedition,  however,  was  against  the
Dardanians,  who,  watching  for  his  absence,  were  ready  to  fall
on  Macedonia  with  a  still  heavier  force.  He  made  peace,  too,
with  the  Eomans,  who  were  well  content  to  put  off  war  with
Macedonia  for  a  time.  He  laid  a  plot,  moreover,  for  the  life
of  Philopoemen,  strategus  of  the  Achseans,  who,  he  understood,
was  soliciting  some  of  his  allies  to  join  the  Eomans ;  but
Philopoemen,  having  discovered  and  escaped  the  plot,  induced
the  Achseans,  by  the  influence  which  he  had  with  them,  to
abandon  Philip*s  cause.


BOOK  XXX.


War  between  Antiochua  til.  and  Ptolemy  Philopator ;  treaty  of  peace  *
licentiousness  of  Ptolemy,  I. — His  bad  government ;  at  his  death
his  son  is  placed  tinder  the  guardianship  of  the  Romans,  II. —
Rupture  between  Philip  and  the  Romans,  III. — Philip  is  defeated
by  Flamininus,  and  makes  peace  on  humiliating  terms ;  the
iBtolians  stimulate  Antiochus  to  make  war  on  the  Romans,  lY.

I.  While  Philip  was  intent  on  great  exploits  in  Macedonia,
the  conduct  of  Ptolemy  in  Egypt  was  of  an  opposite  character ;
for  having  got  the  throne  by  parricide,  and  added  the  murder
of  his  brother  to  that  of  botii  his  parents,  he  resigned  himself,
as  if  all  had  gone  happily  with  him,  to  the  attractions  of
luxury ;  and  the  whole  court  had  followed  the  manners  of  their
king.  Not  only  his  personal  friends,  and  chief  officers,  but
the  whole  of  the  army  had  laid  aside  military  exercises,  and
grown  corrupt  and  enervated  in  idleness.

Antiochus,  king  of  Syria,  when  he  heard  of  this  state  of
things,  and  while  the  old  animosity  between  the  two  kingdoms
incited  him,  captured  many  cities  belonging  to  Ptolemy  by  a
sudden  attack,  and  carried  his  arms  into  Egypt  itself.  Pto-
lemy was  accordingly  in  consternation,  and  endeavoured  to
retard  Antiochus,  by  sending  embassies,  until  he  could  get
troops  in  readiness.  Having  then  hired  a  large  army  in
Greece,  he  fought  a  battle  witih  good  success,  and  would  have
driven  Antiochus  from  his  throne,  if  he  had  supported  his  for-
tune vnth  suitable  spirit.  But,  content  mth  recovering  the
cities  that  he  had  lost,  and  making  peace,  he  eagerly  seized
the  opportunity  of  sinking  again  into  sloth,  and,  returning  to


2 1 8  JUSTIN.  [B.  XXX.  CH.  II.

his  former  licentioas  habits,  he  put  to  death  his  wife  Eurydice,
who  was  also  his  sister,  and  gave  himself  up  to  the  caresses  of
a  mistress  named  Agathoclia ;  and  thus,  forgetful  of  all  the
greatness  of  his  name  and  dignity,  he  passed  his  nights  in
wantonness,  and  his  days  in  the  pleasures  of  the  table.  As
ministrations  to  his  luxury,  timbrels  and  tabors*  were  intro-
duced ;  and  the  king,  no  longer  a  mere  spectator,  but  a  leader
of  the  revels,  produced  music  from  stringed  instruments  him-
self. Such  were  at  first  the  secret  and  latent  pests  of  a
tottering  court

II.  Licentiousness  subsequently  increasing,  the  audacity  of
his  mistress  could  no  longer  be  confined  within  the  walls  of
the  palace ;  for  the  daily  debaucheries  of  the  king,  which  he
shared  with  her  brother  Agathocles,  a  corrupt  youth  of  cap-
tivating beauty,  rendered  her  still  more  shameless.  To  all
this  was  added,  too,  the  influence  of  their  mother  (Enanthe,
who,  by  the  charms  of  her  two  children,  kept  the  monarch
quite  enthralled.  Not  content  with  enslaving  the  king,  they
mcule  themselves  rulers  of  the  kingdom ;  they  showed  them-
selves in  public  places,  received  salutations,  and  were  followed
by  a  train  of  attendants.  Agathocles,  attaching  himself  closely
to  the  king's  side,  assumed  the  administration  of  the  state;
women  disposed  of  offices,  governments,  and  commissions;
nor  had  any  one  less  power  in  the  kingdom  than  the  king
himself.  In  the  midst  of  this  state  of  things  the  king  died,
leaving  a  son,  five  years  old,  by  his  sister  Eurydice ;  but  his
death,  while  the  women  were  seizing  on  the  royal  treasures,
and  endeavouring,  by  forming  a  confederacy  with  some  des-
perate cliaracters,  to  get  the  government  into  their  own  hands,
was  for  a  long  time  kept  secret.  But  the  truth  becoming
known,  Agathocles  was  killed  by  a  rising  of  the  people,  and
the  women  nailed  on  crosses  to  avenge  the  death  of  Eurydice.

After  the  king's  decease,  and  when  the  infamy  of  the  king-
dom was  expiated,  as  it  were,  by  the  punishment  of  the  cour>
tezans,  the  people  of  Alexandria  sent  ambassadors  to  the
Romans,  requesting  them  "  to  take  on  themselves  the  guard-
ianship of  the  orphan,  and  to  defend  the  kingdom  of  Egypt,


*  Tympcma  et  creptmdia,]  It  is  impossible  to  ascertain  exactly  what
musical  instruments  are  meant  by  creptmdia.  Lemaire  supposes  them
to  be  something  like  the  Egyptian  tiHra,  used  in  the  ceremonies  of  Isis.


B.C.  199.]  GREECE  AKMED  AGAINST  PHILIP.  21d

which,  they  said,  Philip  and  Antiochus  had  already  portioned
out  between  them  by  a  treaty  made  for  the  purpose."

IIL  This  embassy  was  acceptable  to  the  Bomans,  who  were
seeking  a  pretence  for  making  war  upon  Philip,  for  having
formed  designs  against  them  in  the  time  of  the  Punic  war.
To  this  feeling  was  added  the  circumstance,  that,  since  the  ^
Carthaginians  and  Hannibal  were  conquered,  there  was  no
one  of  whose  arms  they  had  a  greater  dread,  considering  what
a  commotion  Pyrrhus,  with  but  a  small  force,  had  excited  in
Italy,  and  what  exploits  the  Macedonians  had  achieved  in  the
east.  Ambassadors  were  accordingly  despatched  to  warn
Philip  and  Antiochus  "  txr  make  no  attempt  upon  Egypt.*'
Marcus  Lepidus  was  also  sent  into  Egypt,  to  govern  the
orphan's  kingdom  in  the  character  of  guardian.  During  the
course  of  these  proceedings,  embassies  from  king  Attains,  and
from  the  Ehodians,  arrived  at  Home,  to  complain  of  injuries
that  they  had  suffered  from  Philip.  These  representations
removed  from  the  minds  of  the  senate  all  hesitation  about
going  to  war  with  Macedonia ;  and  forthwith,  under  pretence
of  taking  the  part  of  their  allies,  war  was  declared  against
Philip,  and  some  legions,  with  one  of  the  consuls,  were  sent
ofiP  to  Macedonia.  Not  long  after,  too,  the  whole  of  Greece,
stimulated  by  confidence  in  the  Bomans,  and  the  hope  of
recovering  their  ancient  liberty,  to  rise  against  Philip,  made
war  upon  him ;  and  thus,  being  assailed  on  eveiy  side,  he  was
compelled  to  beg  for  peace.  But  when  the  terms  of  it  were
set  forth  by  the  Bomans,  both  Attains  and  the  Bhodians,  as
well  as  the  Achasans  and  ^tolians,  began  to  demand  that  the
places  belonging  to  them  should  be  restored.  Philip,  on  the
other  hand,  allowed  that  *'  he  might  be  induced  to  submit  to
the  Bomans,  but  that  it  was  intolerable  that  the  Greeks,  who
had  been  subdued  by  his  ancestors  Philip  and  Alexander,  and
brought  under  the  yoke  of  the  Macedonian  empire,  should  die
tate  articles* of  peace  to  him,  as  if  they  were  conquerors;  and
that  they  ought  to  give  an  account  of  their  conduct  in  their
state  of  slavery,  before  they  sought  to  recover  their  liberty."
At  last,  on  his  request,  a  truce  was  allowed  for  two  months,
that  the  peace,  on  wluch  they  could  not  come  to  terms  in
Macedonia,  might  be  obtained  from  the  senate  at  Borne.

lY.  In  the  same  year*  a  concussion  of  the  earth  happened
*  Ko ;  for  it  was  levenJ  years  before  that  this  oommotion  of  the


S20  JUSTIN.  [B.XXX.  CH.ni.

between  the  islands  Thera*  and  Therasia,  in  the  midst  of
the  sea  at  an  equal  distance  from  either  shore,  where,  to  the
astonishment  of  those  that  were  sailing  past,  an  island  rose
suddenly  from  the  deep,  the  water  being  at  the  same  time
hot.  In  Asia  too,  on  the  same  day,  the  same,  earthquake
shattered  Rhodes,t  and  many  other  cities,  with  a  terrible
ruin ;  some  it  swallowed  up  entire.  As  all  men  were  alarmed
at  this  prodigy,  the  soothsayers  predicted  that  '*the  rising
power  of  the  Romans  would  swallow  up  the  ancient  empire  of
the  Greeks  and  Macedonians*"

.  In  the  meantime,  Philip,  as  his  terms  of  peace  were  rejected
by  the  senate,  prevailed  on  the  tyrant  Nabis  J  to  join  him  in
prosecuting  the  war.  Having  then  led  out  his  army  into  the  '
field,  he  began  to  encourage  his  men,  while  the  enemy  stood
in  array  on  the  opposite  side,  by  saying  that  '*  the  Persians,
Bactrians,  and  Indians,  and  all  Asia  to  the  utmost  boundaries
of  the  east,  had  been  subdued  by  the  Macedonians ;  and  that
this  war  was  more  bravely  to  be  maintained  than  those  which
had  preceded  it,  in  proportion  as  liberty  was  more  precious
than  empire."  Flamininus,  too,  the  Roman  consul,  animated
his  men  to  battle  by  representing  what  had  lately  been
achieved  by  the  Romans,  observing  that  **  Carths^e  and  Sicily
on  one  side,  and  Italy  and  Spain  on  the  other,  had  been
thoroughly  reduced  by  Roman  valour ; and  that  Hannibal,

earth  took  place,  namely,  in  the  first  year  of  the  139th  Olympiad,  as  is
apparent  from  Polybiua,  v.  88,  and  the  Ohronicon  of  Eusebius.  But
Pliny,  H.  N.  ii  87,  says  that  Automata  or  Hiera,  the  island  here  signi-
fied, arose  between  Thera  and  Therasia  in  the  second  year  of  the  156th
Olympiad ;  how  this  can  be  correct,  I  do  not  understand. — Ib,  Vomwu.
Vossius,  however,  is  not  quite  right  in  his  computation.  Pliny  says
that  Thera  and  Therasia  sprung  from  the  sea  in  the  fourth  year  of  the
lS5th  Olympiad,  and  that  Automata  or  Hiera  arose  one  himdred  and
thirty  years  afterwards ;  this  would  be  in  the  third  year  of  the  167th
Olympiad.  Concerning  the  rise  of  this  island  from  the  deep,  see
Strabo,  i.  8 ;  Sen.  Nat.  Qusest.  vi.  21 ;  iL  26 ;  it  is  also  noticed  by
Livy,  zxziz.  56,  and  A  mm.  MarcelL  xvii.  6.  Other  islands  have  since
risen  in  these  parts.  See  Yirlet,  Bull,  de  la  Soc.  GeoL  de  France,
torn,  iii

*  The  largest  of  the  Sporades  in  the  ^gean  Sea,  now  called  Samr
torin,  Therasia  lies  near  it.  Hiera  is  not  exactly  between  the  two
islands,  as  Justin  represents.

t  Diodorus,  xviii.  8,  assigns  this  island  to  Europe.  The  epitome  of
the  78th  book  of  Livy,  however,  gives  it  to  Asia. — Bemeccerus.

X  Tyrant  of  Sparta. He  began  to  reign  B.O.  206.


B.C.  198.] PHILIP  DEFEATED  BY  FLAMININU8.  221

by  whose  expulsion  from  Italy  they  had  become  masters  of
Africa,  a  third  part  of  the  world,  was  not  to  be  thought  inferior
to  Alexander  the  Great. Nor  were  the  Macedonians  to  be
estimated  by  their  ancient  reputation,  but  by  their  present
power; for  that  the Eomans were not  waging  war  with
Alexander  the  Great,  whom  they  had  heard  called  invincible,
or  with  his  army,  which  had  conquered  all  the  east,  but  with
Philip,  a  youth  of  immature  years,*  who  could  scarcely  defend
the  frontiers  of  his  dominions  against  his  neighbours,  and  with
those  Macedonians  who  were  not  long  ago  a  prey  to  the  Dar-
danians. That  they  might  recount  the  achievements  of  their
forefathers,  but  that  he  could  relate  those  of  his  own  soldiers ;
since  Hannibal  and  the  Carthaginians,  and  almost  all  the
westj  had  not  been  conquered  by  any  other  army,  but  by
those  very  troops  which  he  had  with  him  in  the  field.*' The
soldiers  on  both  sides,  roused  by  these  exhortations,  rushed
to  the  encounter,  the  one  army  exulting  in  their  conquest  of
the  east,  the  other  in  that  of  the  west ;  the  one  carrying  to
the  battle  the  ancient  and  fading  glory  of  their  ancestors,
the  other  the  flower  of  valour  fresh  from  recent  exertions.
But  the  fortune  of  Rome  was  superior  to  that  of  the  Mace-
donians; and  Philip,  exhausted  by  his  efforts  in  war,  and
suing  for  peace  from  Flamininus,  the  consul,  was  allowed
to  retain  indeed  the  name  of  king ;  but,  being  deprived  of  all
the  cities  of  Greece,  as  being  parts  of  his  dominion  beyond
the  bounds  of  its  ancient  territory,  he  preserved  only  Mace-
donia. The ^tolians,  however,  were displeased, because
Macedonia  was  not  taken  from  the  king  at  their  suggestion,
and  given  to  themselves  as  a  reward  for  their  service  in  the
war,  and  sent  ambassadors  to  Antiochus,  to  induce  him,  by
flattering  his  greatness,  to  engage  in  a  war  with  the  Romans,
in  the  hope  of  securing  the  alliance  of  all  Greece,

♦  Puero  mmatwce  CBtatis.']  Why  does  he  call  him  puero,  a  youth,
when,  in  the  year  B.C.  220,  in  which  he  succeeded  Antigonus,  he  had
completed  his  fourteenth  year  ?  See  zzvii.  4.  In  this  year,  therefore,
&c.  198,  he  was  in  his  thirty-sizth  year. —  WetzeL  So  that  Philip
had  now  attained  a  greater  age  than  Alexander  the  Great  lived  to
attain.  Schefifer  would  strike  out  puero,  asking  whether  there  are  also
ptieri  maturce  cetatia  t


222


BOOK  XXXI.

Commencement  of  the  war  between  AntiocliYiB  and  the  Romans ;
Flamininus  is  commissioned  to  act  against  Nabis,  L — Hannibal
flees  from  Carthage,  and  takes  refuge  with  Antiochus,  II. — Nabis
ia  conquered ;  conduct  of  the  Achaean  league ;  Hannibal's  advice
to  AutiochuB,  IIL — Antiochus  incites  the  Carthaginians  to  go  to
War  with  the  Romans ;  the  Romans  make  Antiochus  suspicious  of
Hannibal,  IV. — Hannibal's  further  counsel  to  Antiochus,  V. —
Antiochus  defeated,  YI. — He  rejects  the  conditions  of  peace
offered  him  by  the  Romans,  YII. — Is  defeated  again,  and  accepts
them,  VlII.

I.  Ptolemy  Philopator,  king  of  Egypt,  being  dead,  and  the
youthful  age  of  his  son  (who,  left  with  the  prospect  of  wield-
ing the  sceptre,  was  a  prey  even  to  his  own  domestics),  being
held  in  contempt,  Antiochus,  king  of  Syria,  resolved  to  get
possession  of  Egypt.  As  he  attacked  Phoenice,  accordingly,
and  several  cities,  which,  though  situate  in  Syria,  belonged  of
right  to  Egypt,*  the  senate  despatched  ambassadors  to  him,  to
warn  him  "  not  to  molest  the  dominions  of  an  orphan,  who
had  been  recommended  to  their  protection  by  the  last  prayere
of  his  dying  father."  This  embassy  being  disregarded,  another
arrived  some  time  after,  which,  saying  nothing  on  behalf  of
the  orphan,  ordered  that  "  the  cities,  which  had  fallen  to  the
Roman  people  by  the  right  of  war,  should  be  restored  to  their
former  condition."  On  his  refusal  to  comply  with  this  man-
date, war  was  declared  against  him,  which  he,  after  lightly
imdertaking  it,  prosecuted  with  ill  success.

At  the  same  time,  the  tyrant  Nabis  had  taken  possession  of
several  cities  f  of  Greece.  The  senate,  in  consequence,  that
the  Roman  forces  might  not  be  distracted  by  two  wars  at
once,  sent  orders  to  Flamininus,  that  **  he  should,  if  he  thought
it  expedient,  deliver  Greece  from  Nabis,  as  he  had  delivered
Macedonia  from  Philip."  J  To  this  end,  his  term  of  command
was  prolonged.  The  name  of  Hannibal,  indeed,  rendered  a
war  with  Antiochus  an  object  of  dread ;  for  Hannibal's  ene-
mies, by  secret  communications  to  the  Romans,  accused  him

*  Phoemctfifhi  cceterasqw  Syria  qwdem,  &;c.]  By  Phoenice  is  meant  the
country  of  Phoenicia ;  by  &e  other  cities,  cities  in  Coelesyria,  whi<di
bordered  on  Phoenicia.

+  MuUaa  civitates.]  Argos  only  is  specified  in  the  accounts  of  Nabis.
See  Plutarch,  Lives  of  flamininus  and  Philopoemen ;  Liv.  zxxii.  40.

X  See  xxz.  4.


B.C.  197.]  HANNIBAL  FLEES  TO  ANTIOCHUS.  223

of  having  entered  into  a  league  with  Antiochus,  saying  that
*'  he,  who  was  accustomed  to  command,  and  to  extravagant
military  licentiousness,  was  unable  to  live  patiently  under  the
control  of  laws ;  and  that,  from  disgust  at  the  quiet  of  the
city,  he  was  always  looking  about  for  occasions  for  war.'*
These  charges,  though  Mse,  passed  for  true  with  such  as  were
timid.

II.  At  length  the  senate,  struck  with  alarm,  sent  Cnaeus
Servilius,  in  &e  character  of  ambassador,  into  Africa,  to  watch
the  proceedings  of  Hannibal,  giving  him  secret  instructions
"  to  compass  his  death,  if  he  could,  by  the  agency  of  his  ene-
mies, and  deliver  the  Roman  people  from  the  terror  of  his
hated  name."  But  this  circumstance  did 'not  long  escape  the
knowledge  of  Hannibal,  a  man  sagacious  in  foreseeing  and
guarding  against  dangers,  and  not  less  thoughtful  of  adversity
in  prosperity  than  of  prosperity  in  adversity.  Having  shown
himself  in  public,  therefore,  during  the  whole  day,  in  the
forum  of  Carthage,  before  the  face  of  the  chief  personages  and
the  Roman  ambassador,  he  mounted  his  horse,  on  the  ap-
proach of  evening,  and  galloped  off  to  a  farm  which  he  had  in
the  suburbs,  near  the  sea-coast,  his  attendants,  who  knew
nothing  of  his  intentions,  being  directed  to  wait  for  his  return
at  the  gate  of  the  city.  He  had  vessels,  with  rowers,  con-
cealed in  an  unfrequented  inlet  on  the  coast ;  and  he  had  also
a  large  sum  of  ready  money  at  his  farm,  so  that,  when  occasion
should  require,  neither  difficulty*  nor  want  of  resources
might  retard  his  escape.  Selecting  the  most  vigorous  of  his
slaves,  therefore,  the  number  of  whom  a  body  of  Italian
prisoners  augmented,  he  went  on  board  a  ship,  and  directed
bis  course  towards  the  dominions  of  Antiochus.  The  next
day  the  city  looked  for  their  chief,  who  was  then  consul,t  in
the  forum ;  and  when  intelligence  was  brought  that  he  was
gone,  they  were  all  in  as  much  trepidation  as  if  the  city  had
been  taken,  and  foreboded  that  his  flight  would  prove  fatal  to
them ;  while  the  Roman  ambassador,  as  if  war  was  already

*  All  tbe  texts  have  fcLOvHtoM,  Gnevitu  and  Yontitui  think  that  we
should  read  dificuUai,  Sche£fer  is  of  opinion  that  fcunUku  may  stand,
in  the  sense  of  want  of  opporitmUy,  but  this  does  not  suit  well  with
the  inopia  which  follows.

t  Consuiem,]  He  was  one  of  the  suffeteSf  the  two  chief  magistrates  of
Carthage. See  CorCL  Nep.  Life  of  Hannibal,  c.  7.


J


224  JUSTIN.  [B.XXXL  CH.1V.

commenced on Italy  by  Hannibal, returned  privately  to
Rome,  carrying  the  alarming  news  with  him.

III.  In  Greece,  meanwhile,  Flamininus,  having  formed  an
alliance  with  several  cities,  defeated  Nabis  the  tyrant  in  two
successive  battles,  and  left  him  sadly  humbled,  with  his  re-
sources apparently  exhausted,  in  his  own  dominions.  But
after  liberty  was  restored  to  Greece,  the  garrisons  withdrawn
from  the  cities,  and  the  Eomans  returned  to  Italy,  Nabis,
as  if  tempted  afresh  by  the  deserted  state  of  the  country*
possessed  himself  of  several  cities  by  sudden  attacks ;  when
the  Achseans,  alarmed  at  his  proceedings,  and  fearing  that  the
evils  in  their  neighbourhood  might  reach  themselves,  de-
termined upon  war  against  him,  and  appointed  to  the  com-
mand in  it  their  strategus  Philopoemen,  a  man  of  extraordinary
energy,  and  whose  merit  was  so  eminent  in  the  contest,  that
he  was  thought  equal,  in  public  opinion,  to  the  Bomai^  general
Flamininus.

Hannibal,  arriving  about  the  same  time  at  the  court  of
Antiochus,  was  received  by  him  as  a  gift  from  the  gods ;  and
such  ardour,  in  consequence  of  his  coming,  was  added  to  the
courage  of  the  king,  that  he  thought  less  of  the  mode  of  con-
ducting the  war,  than  of  the  prizes  of  victory.  But  Hannibal,
to  whom  the  spirit  of  Rome  was  well  known,  said  that  the
Romans  could  not  be  subdued  any  where  but  in  Italy.  To
accomplish  their  overthrow,  he  asked  for  himself  a  hundred
ships,  ten  thousand  foot,  and  a  thousand  cavalry,  promising
that  **  with  this  force  he  would  revive  in  Italy  no  less  a  war
than  he  had  formerly  carried  on  there,  and  would  secure  to
the  king,  remaining  quiet  in  Asia,  either  a  triumph  over  the
Romans,  or  equitable  conditions  of  peace.  To  the  Spaniards,"
he  added,  *  *  who  were  burning  with  ardour  for  war,  nothing
was.  wanting  but  a  leader ;  that  Italy  was  better  known  to  him
now  than  in'  past  times ;  and  that  Carthage  would  not  rest
in  peace,  but  join  him  as  an  ally  without  delay."

IV.  As  this  counsel  pleased  the  king,  one  of  the  attendant^
of  Hannibal  was  despatched  to  Carthage,  to  encourage  the
Carthaginians,  already  forward  enough  of  themselves,  to  take
up  arms,  acquainting  them  that  "  Hannibal  would  support
them  with  an  army,"  and  saying  that  "  nothing  was  wanting,
on  the  side  of  the  Carthaginians,  but  resolution,  as  Asia  would
supply  both  troops  and  money  for  the  enterprise.". When


B.C.  197—101.]  ANTIOCHUS  AT WAB  WITH  ROME.  226

this  announcement  amved  at  Carthage,  the  messenger  was
seized  by  Hannibars  enemies,  and  being  asked,  when  he
was  brought  before  the  senate,  '*  to  whom  he  was  sent,"  he
replied,  with  Punic  subtlety,  that  "  he  was  sent  to  the  whole
senate,  as  this  was  not  the  concern  of  a  few  individuals  only,
but  of  the  entire  people."  As  they  spent  several  days  in
deliberating,  whether  they  should  send  him  to  Home  to  clear
them  from  guilt  as  a  nation,  he,  in  the  meanwhile,  went
secretly  on  board  his  vessel,  and  returned  to  Hannibal.  As
soon  as  this  was  discovered,  the  Carthaginians  sent  intelligence
of  the  matter  to  Eome  by  an  ambassador.  The  Romans  also
sent  ambassadors  to  Antiochus,  who,  imder  colour  of  delivering
a  message,  were  to  watch  the  preparations  of  the  king,  and
either  to  soften  Hannibars  feelings  towards  the  Eomans,  or,
by  frequent  association  with  him,  to  render  him  suspected  and
unpopular  with  Antiochus.  The  ambassadors,  accordingly,
meeting  with  Antiochus  at  Ephesus,  made  their  communica-
tion from  the  senate,  and,  while  they  waited  for  an  answer,
were  every  day  constantly  visiting  Hannibal,  and  observing
that,  ''he  had  withdrawn  from  his  country  under  needless
apprehension,  as  the  Romans  would  with  the  greatest  honour
observe  a  peace  which  was  made  not  so  much  with  his  govern-
ment as  with  himself ;  and  that  they  knew  he  had  made  war
upon  the  Romans,  less  from  hatred  to  them,  than  from  love
to  his  country  (to  which  every  honourable  man  owed  life  itself) ,
since  the  reasons  for  going  to  war  were  public  ones  between
the  nations,  and  not  private  ones  between  the  generals."
They  then  extolled  his  exploits ;  and  he,  pleased  with  their
conversation,  talked  frequently  and  readily  with  them,  not
being  aware  that  by  his  familiarity  with  the  Romans,  he  was
incu^g  the  disliki  of  the  kmg;  for  Antiochus,  supposing
that  by  such  frequent  intercourse  a  good  understanding  had
been  effected  between  him  and  the  Romans,  communicated
nothing  to  him  as  he  had  been  used  to  do,  and  began  to  detest
him,  when  he  had  excluded  him  from  his  councils,  as  an
^nemy  and  a  traitor  to  him.  This  distrust  ruined  the  mighty
preparations  for  war,  the  skill  of  a  leader  being  wanting  to
conduct  it.  The  communication  from  the  senate  was,  that
**  Antiochus  should  confine  himself  within  the  limits  of  Asia,
lest  he  should  lay  on  them  the  necessity  of  invading  that

Q


236  JUSTW.  [b.xxxi.  ch.v.

countiy/' Slighting  this  message,  he  resolyed  not  to  wait  for
war,  hut  to  commence  it.

V.  It  is  said,  that  after  the  king  had  frequently  held  councils
concerning  the  war,  from  which  Hannibal  was  excluded,  he  at
length  desired  that  he  should  he  called  in,  not  that  he  might
act  in  anj  respect  according  to  his  advice,  but  that  he  might
not  appear  entirely  to  disregard  him  ;  and  that,  when  all  the
rest  had  been  asked  their  opinions,  he  in  conclusion  inquired
his.  Hannibal,  understanding  what  Antiochus*s  feelings
were,  observed  that  **  he  was  aware  he  was  asked  to  attend,
not  because  the  king  wished  for  his  advice,  but  to  make-
up  the  full  number  of  votes ;  yet,  from  his  hatred  towards
the  Romans/  and  regard  for  the  king,  with  whom  alone  a
secure  retreat  was  left  him  in  his  exile,  he  would  explain  the
method  in  which  the  war  should  be  conducted."  Then,  re-
questing indulgence  for  the  freedom  with  which  he  was  going  to
speak,  he  said,  that  <*  he  approved  none  of  the  present  sug-
gestions or  proceedings  ;  nor  did  he  like  Greece  as  a  seat  of
the  war,  when  Italy  was  a  far  more  advantt^eous  field  for  it ;
for  the  Romans  could  not  be  conquered  but  by  tbeir  own
arms,  nor  Italy  subdued  but  by  the  resources  of  Italy ;  since
that  people  differed  from  others,  and  their  mode  of  warfare
from  that  of  other  nations.  In  other  wars,  it  was  of  the
greatest  importance  to  have  been  the  first  to  take  advantage
of  any  ground  or  opportunity,  to  have  ravaged  the  lands,  or  to
have  captured  towns,  but  that,  with  the  Romans,  whether  you
took  their  cities,  or  defeated  them,  you  would  still  have  to
struggle  with  the  enemy  even  when  vanquished  and  faUen.
If  any  one  should  attack  them  in  Italy,  therefore,  he  might
conquer  them  with  their  own  strength,*  their  own  resources,
their  own  arms,  as  he  himself  had  done  ;  but  if  any  one  left
Italy  to  them,  which  was  the  fountain-head,  as  it  were,  of
their  power,  he  would  act  just  as  absurdly,  as  a  man  who
should  attempt,  not  to  exhaust  rivers  at  their  sources,  but  to
alter  their  channels  or  dry  them  up  when  great  floods  of  water
had  collected  in  tbem.  He  had  entertained  this,"  he  said,
"  as  his  private  opinion,  and  had  readily  offered  his  advice
to  that  effect ;  and  that  he  repeated  it  now,  in  the  presence  of

*  Sttis  opihtu.']  That  is,  with  the  strength  and  resources  of  the
country.


B.C.  197 — 191.]  ANTI0CHU8  AT  WAR  WITH  ROME.  227

Ida  friends,  that  they  m%ht  all  understancl  tlie  way  to  go  to
war  with  the  Romans,  who,  though  invincible  abroad,  might
be  reduced  at  home  ;  for  they  might  be  deprived  of  their  city
sooner  than  of  their  empire,  and  of  Italy  sooner  than  of  their
provinces ;  since  they  had  lost  their  city  to  the  Gauls,  and
been  almost  crushed  by  him ;  nor  was  he  ever  defeated  till  he  had
quitted  their  country,  but  that,  when  he  returned  to  Carthage,
the  fortune  of  the  war  was  immediately  changed  with  the  seat
of  iV*

VI.  The  king's  courtieis  were  all  opposed  to  this  advice,
not  regarding  Uie  advanti^es  of  the  plan,  but  fearing  that
Hannibal,  if  his  counsel  were  approved,  would  gain  the  first
place  in  the  king's  favour*  As  for  Antiochus,  he  did  not  so
much  dislike  the  scheme  as  the  proposer  of  it,  in  the  appre-
hension that  whatever  glory  resulted  from  its  success  would  be
given  to  Hannibal,  and  not  to  himself.  All  proceedings  were
^erefore  rendered  ineffectual  by  the  various  flatteries  of  those
who  sought  to  please  the  king ;  nothing  was  conducted  with
judgment  or  reason.  Antiochus  himself,  resigning  himself  to
luxury  during  the  winter,  was  every  day  engaged  in  celebrating
some  new  marriage.*  Acilius  the  Eoman  consul,  on  the  othet
hand,  who  had  been  appointed  to  command  in  this  war,  pro-
vided forces,  arms,  and  eveiy  thing  necessary  for  the  contest,
with  the  utmost  activity  :  he  animated  the  confederate  cities,
and  drew  to  his  interest  such  as  were  undecided.  Nor  was  the
result  of  the  conflict  at  variance  with  the  preparations  of  each
party  for  it;  for,  in  the  first  engi^ement,  when  the  king  saw  his
men  giving  ground,  he  did  not  support  those  who  were  in  distress,
but  put  himself  at  the  head  of  tiiose  that  fled,  and  left  his  rich
camp  a  prey  to  the  conquerors.  But  having  reached  Asia  in  his
flight,  while  the  Romans  were  busied  about  uie  spoil,  he  began  to
repent  of  having  neglected  Hannibal's  counsel,  and,  taking  that
general  again  into  his  friendship,  conducted  eveiy  thing  accord-
ing to  his  directions.  In  the  mean  time  intelligence  was  brought
that  ^milius,t  the  Roman  general,  was  approaching  with

*  Ncw&  guotidie  mipHit  dedUna  eroL]  An  ezaggeratloii.  He  had,
however,  manied  hia  daughter  Cleopatra  to  Ptolemy  Epiphanes,  Liy.
zxzv.  13 ;  he  gave  another  daughter  to  Ariarathea,  king  of  Cappadoda,
and  was  going  to  give  a  third  to  Eumenes,  king  of  Pergamus,  but  he
refused  her. See  fdod.  Sic.  xzix.  3. —  Wdzd,

t  Lucius  ^miliiiH  Begillus,  pnetor,  b.o.  191  (Liv.  zzxviL  26,  30 ;

Q  ^


228  JUSTIN.  [b.x;xxi.  CH.vn.

eighty  ships  of  war,  having  b^en  despatched  by  the  senate  to
carry  on  llie  war  by  sea.  This  news  gave  him  hopes  of  re-
trieving  his  fortune;  and  accordingly  he  resolved  to  fight
a  battle  by  sea  before  any  of  the  cities  in  alliance  with  him  could
revolt  to  the  enemy,  hoping  that  the  defeat  which  he  had
suffered  in  Greece  might  be  compensated  by  a  new  victory.
The  fleet  was  therefore  entrusted  to  Hannibal,  and  a  battle  was
fought ;  but  neither  were  the  Asiatic  soldiers  a  match  for  the
Eomans,  nor  their  vessels  equal  to  the  beaked  ships  of  the
enemy.  '  The  loss,  however,  was  rendered  less  than  it  would
otherwise  have  been,  by  the  able  management  of  the  general.
The  report  of  the  victory  had  not  yet  reached  Borne,*  and
therefore  the  city  was  in  suspense  about  the  consuls  to  be
chosen.

YII.  But  to  oppose  Hannibal,  what  fitter  leader  could  be
appointed  than  the  brother  of  A&icaniis,  since  it  was  the  busi-
ness of  the  Scipios  to  conquer  the  Carthaginians?  Lucius
Scipio  was  therefore  made  consul,  and  his  brother  Africanus
appointed  to  be  his  lieutenant-general,  to  let  Antiochus  see
that  he  had  not  more  confidence  in  the  conquered  Hannibal
than  the  Romans  in  the  victorious  Scipio.  As  the  Scipios
were  transporting  their  army  into  Asia,  news  reached  them  that
the  war,  both  by  land  and  sea,  was  almost  at  an  end  ;  as  An-
tiochus had  been  defeated  in  a  battle  by  land,  and  Hannibal
in  a  battle  by  sea.  As  soon  as  they  arrived,  Antiochus  sent
ambassadors  to  them,  desiring  peace,  and  having  with  them,
as  an  offering  to  Africanus  individually,  the  son  of  that  gene-
ral, whom  the  king  had  captured  as  he  was  crossing  in  a  small
boat.  But  Africanus  replied,  *'  that  private  favours  were  distinct
from  public  concerns ;  that  the  obligations  of  a  father,  and
the  claims  of  one's  country,  were  things  entirely  different ;
claims  which  were  to  be  preferred  not  only  to  cluldren,  but
even  to  life  itself.  That  he,  however,  thankfully^accepted  the
kindness,  and  would  make  a  return  to  the  king's  generosity  at

xzxvi  45) ;  the  battle  was  fought  between  Hyconnesus  and  the
promontory  of  CoryciiB,  and  JSmilhis  triumphed  for  the  victory  in
the  following  year ;  but  Antiochus  appointed  Polyxenides,  not  Huini-
bal,  to  command  against  him.  See  liv.  xxxviL  26 ;  florus,  ii.  8. —
Wetzel,  Livy  mentions  Polyxenides  only;  Floras  both  Polyxenides
and  Hannibal.
*  Justin  seems  here  to  have  abridged  his  author  too  much.


B.C.  197 — 191.]  ANTIOCHUS  AT  WAB  WITH  ROME. ' 229

his  own  individual  expense ;  but  as  to  what  related  to  war
and  peace,  nothing  could  be  allowed  to  private  favour,  or  cut
off  from  the  interests  of  his  country."  He  had  never,  indeed,
either  treated  about  the  ransom  of  his  son,  or  allowed  the
senate  to  treat  about  it,  bul,  as  became  his  dignity,  said  that
"  he  would  recover  his  son  by  force  of  arms."  The  terms  of
peace  were  then  specified 'to  the  ambassadors :  ''  that  the  king
should  give  up  Asia  to  the  Romans ;  that  he  should  confine
hinself  to  his  kingdom  of  Syria  ;  that  he  should  give  up  all
his  ships,  with  the  prisoners  and  deserters,  and  repay  the
Romans  all  the  expenses  of  the  war."  These  terms  being  re-
peated to  Antiochus,  he  said  that  **  he  was  not  yet  so  utterly
reduced,  as  that  he  should  suffer  himself  to  be  despoiled  of
his  dominions ;  and  that  such  proposals  were  provocations  to
war,  not  invitations  to  peace."

VIII.  Preparations  for  a  contest  were  in  consequence  made
on  both  sides  ;  and  when  the  Romans,  having  entered  Asia,
had  reached  Troy,  mutual  gratulations  took  place  between
the  Trojans  and  the  Romans;  the  Trojans  observing  that
"  j^neas,  and  the  other  leaders  that  accompanied  him,  had  gone
forth  from  them;"  the  Romans  telling  them  that  "  they  were
their  children ; "  and  such  joy  was  among  them  all  as  is  wont  to
be  between  parents  and  children  met  after  a  long  separation.
The  Trojans  were  delighted  that  their  descendants,  after
having  conquered  the  west  and  Africa,  were  now  laying  claim
to  Asia  as  their  hereditary  domain,  remarking  that  **  the  ruin
of  Troy  had  been  an  event  to  be  desired,  since  it  was  so
happily  to  revive  again.''  On  the  other  hand,  an  insatiable
longing  to  gaze  on  their  ancient  home,  the  birth-place  of  their
ancestors,  and  the  temples  and  images  of  the  gods,  had  taken
possession  of  the  Romans.

As  the  Romans  were  coming  from  Troy,  king  Eumenes
met  them  with  some  auxiliary  troops  ;  and  soon  ad^er  a  battle
was  fought  with  Antiochus;  in  which  one  of  the  Eloman
legions,  on  the  right  wing,  being  beaten  back,  and  fleeing  to
their  camp  with  more  disgrace  than  danger,  Marcus  ^miUus,
a  military  tribune,  who  had  been  left  to  defend  the  camp,
ordered  his  men  to  arm  themselves,  and  advance  without  the
rampart,  and  to  threaten  the  fugitives  with  their  swords  drawn,
saying  that  "  they  should  be  put  to  death  unless  they  returned
to  the  fieldj  and  should  find  their  own  camp  more  hostile  to


S80  JUSnN.  [B.  XXXII.  CH.L

them  than  that  of  the  enemy."  The  legion,  alarmed  at  such
peril  on  both  sides,  returned  to  the  battle,  their  fellow  soldiers,
who  had  stopped  their  flight,  accompanying  them,  and,  making
great  havoc  among  the  enemy,  were  the  first  cause  of  the
victory,  Fifty  thousand  of  the  enemy  were  slain,  and  eleven
thousand  taken  prisoners.  Antiochus  suing  for  peace,  nothing
was  added  to  the  former  articles,  jlfricanus  observing  that
**the  spirit  of  the  Bomans  was  never  broken  if  they  were
defeated,  and,  if  they  were  victorious,  they  were  not  rendered
tyrannical  by  success.*'  The  cities  that  were  taken  they
divided  among  their  allies,  deeming  that  gloiy  was  more  desir-
able for  the  Romans*  than  dominions  merely  for  pleasure ;  and
that  the  honour  of  victory  was  worthy  of  being  attached  to  the
Roman  name^  but  that  the  luxuries  of  wealth  might  be  left  to
their  adherents.


BOOK  XXXII.


Thd  ^tolians  are  deprived  of  their  liberty  by  the  Romans;  war
between  the  Messenians  and  Achaeans ;  death  of  Philopoemen ;
defeat  of  the  Messenians,  L — ^Death  of  Antiochus ;  Philip  op-

Eresses  Qreece ;  the  Bomans  pardon  him  for  the  sake  of  his  son
Demetrius ;  Demetrius  killed  through  the  artifices  of  his  brother
Perseus,  II. — Death  of  Philip;  Emigration  of  tiie  Gauls;  the
Tectosages,  Istrians,  Dacians,  IIL— Prusias,  assisted  by  Hannibal,
defeats  Eumenes ;  death  of  Hannibal,  IV.

I.  Thb  iEtolians,  who  had  persuaded  Antiochus  to  make
war  on  the  Romans,  were  left,  i^ter  he  was  defeated,  to  oppose
them  by  themselves,  unequal  in  force,  and  unsupported  by
assistance.  Being  soon  after,  in  consequence,  subdued,  they
lost  that  liberty  which  they  alone,  among  so  mcmy  states  of
Greece,  had  preserved  inviolate  against  the  power  of  the
Athenians  and  Spartans.  This  state  of  things  was  the  more
grievous  to  them,  as  it  was  later  in  befalling  them  ;  for  they
reflected  on  those  times  in  which  they  had  withstood  the
mighty  power  of  the  Persians  by  their  own  strength,  and  had

*  Weasel's  test  has  Romemi;  but  Rimmnu,  the  oonjeeiure  of  Orcevius,
iiB  much  more  to  the  purpose,


B.C.  186.] DEATH  OP  ANTIOCHUS.  281

humbled,  in  the  Delphic  war,  the  yiolent  Spirit  of  the  Gauls
that  was  dreaded  by  Asia  and  Italy;  and  these  glorious
recollections  increased  their  grief  at  the  loss  of  their  Hberty.

During  the  course  of  these  occurrences,  a  dispute  at  first,
and  afterwards  a  war,  arose  between  the  Messenians  and
Acbffians,  to  detennine  which  of  the  two  should  rule  the  other.
In  this  struggle  Philopoemen,  the  famous  general  of  the
Ach»ans,  was  taken  prisoner,  not  from  having  been  fearful  of
exposing  his  life  in  tiie  field,  but  from  having  £Eillen  from  his
horse  in  leaping  a  ditch,  aa  he  was  rallying  his  men  for  the
contest,  and  being  overpowered  by  a  host  of  enemies.  The
Messenians,  whether  from  fear  of  his  valour,  or  respect  for  his
dignity,  did  not  venture  to  kill  him  as  he  lay  on  the  ground  ;
but,  as  if  they  had  ended  the  war  by  capturing  him,  they  led
him  prisoner  through  their  whole  city  as  in  triumph,  while  the
people  poured  fortib  to  meet  him,  as  if  it  were  their  own
general,  and  not  that  of  the  enemy,  that  was  coming ;  nor
would  the  Achsdans  have  more  eagerly  beheld  him  victorious
than  the  enemy  saw  him  under  defeat.  They  ordered  him
accordingly  to  be  led  into  the  theatre,  tliat  ev^  one  might
see  him  whose  capture  seemed  incredible  to  every  one.  Being
then  conducted  to  prison,  they  gave  him,  from  respect  for  his
high  character,*  poison  to  drink,  which  he  received  with
pleasure,  just  as  if  he  had  been  conqueror,  first  asking  ''whether
Lycortas,"  a  general  of  the  Achseans,  whom  he  knew  to  be
next  to  himself  in  the  art  of  war,  "  had  got  off  safe  ?'*  Hear-
ing  that  he  had  escaped,  he  observed  that  *'  things  were  not
utterly  desperate  with  the  Achssans,"  and  expired.  The  war
being  renewed  shortly  after,  the  Messenians  were  conquered,
and  made  some  atonement  for  putting  Philoposmen  to  death.
II.  In  Syria,  meanwhile,  king  Antiochus,  being  burdened,
*  after  he  was  conquered  by  the  Bomans,  with  a  heavy  tribute
under  his  articles  of  peace,  and  being  impelled  by  want  of
money  or  stimulated  by  avarice,  brought  up  his  army  one
night,  and  made  an  assault  upon  the  temple  of  Jupiter  in
ElymaiSyt  hofang  that  he  might  more  excusably  commit  sacri-


*  VereeundiA  magtUtudimis  ^^.]  They  did  "not  make  him  die  the
death  of  a  alave  or  malefaotori  but  allowed  him  a  mode  of  dying
suitable  to  his  rank.

t  Mynud  Jom.]  Or  rather  Belua^  who  had  a  temple  in  Elymaia  full


232  JUSTIN.  [axxxiL  CH.n.

lege  under  plea  of  wanting  money  to  pay  his  tribute.  But
the  afi&ir  becoming  known,  he  was  killed  by  a  rising  of  the
people  who  dwelt  about  the  temple.*

At  Rome,  as  many  cities  of  Greece  had  sent  thither,  to
complain  of  injuries  received  from  Philip  king  of  Macedonia,
and  as  a  dispute  arose  in  the  senate-house  between  Deme-
trius, Philip's  son,  whom  his  father  had  sent  to  justify  him  to
the  senate,  and  the  deputies  of  the  cities,  the  young  prince,
confounded  at  the  number  of  accusations  brought  forward,
suddenly  became  speechless ;  when  the  senate,  moved  at  his
modesty,  which  had  been  admired  by  every  one  when  he  w&«r
a  hostage  at  Bome,  suffered  the  controversy  to  terminate  in
his  favour.  Thus  Demetrius,  by  his  modesty,  obtained  pardon
for  his  father,  which  was  granted,  not  to  the  justice  of  his
defence,  but  from  respect  for  his  bashfulness ;  and  this  was
particularly  signified  in  the  decree  of  the  senate,  that  it  might
be  known  that  it  was  not  so  much  the  king  that  was  acquitted,
as  the  father  that  was  excused  for  the  sake  of  the  son.  The
circumstance,  however,  procured  Demetrius  no  thanks  for  his
embassy  at  home,  but  rather  odium  and  detraction  ;  for  envy
drew  upon  him  hatred  from  his  brother  Perseus,  and  with  his
father,  the  cause  of  the  indulgence  shown  him^  as  soon  as  he
knew  it,  become  a  source  of  dislike  towards  him,  as  he  was
indignant  that  the  character  of  his  son  should  have  had  more
weight  with  the  senate  than  his  own  authority  as  a  father  or
his  dignity  as  a  king.  Perseus,  in  consequence,  observing  his
father's  chagrin,  Idd  before  him,  day  after  day,  accusations
against  Demetrius  in  his  absence,  and  rendered  him  first  an
object  of  hatred,  and  afterwards  of  suspicion,  charging  him  at
one  time  with  friendship  for  the  Romans,  and  at  anodier  with
treachery  to  his  father.  At  last  he  pretended  that  a  plot  was
laid  for  his  own  life  by  Demetrius,  and,  to  prove  the  charge,
brought  forward  informers,  suborned  witnesses,  and  committed
the  very  crime  f  of  which  he  accused  his  brother. Impelling

of  gold,  silver,  and  valuable  offerings,  as  is  said  by  Diod.  Sic.  xxiz.
fragm.  15.  A  different  account  of  this  king's  death  is  given  in  AiireL
Vict  liv.  5,  and  1  Maccab.  c.  vi. — WetzeL

*  Concwrau  vnsularmm.]  A  temple,  as  a  building  standing  by  itself,
might  be  called  msvla;  the  people  who  dwelt  in  and  about  it  irivularea.
Ijimlarmm  is  a  conjecture  of  Isaac  Y ossius ;  the  previous  reading  was
incol<lr^lm,

t  He  accused  his  brother  of  intending  to  be  a  fratricide;  he


aO.  177.]  PESEUS  BEGINS  TO  REIGN.  $233

his  father,  hy  these  artifices,  to  put  his  son  to  death,  he  filled
the  whole  palace  with  moumii^.

III.  After  Demetrius  was  killed,  and  his  rival  removed,
Perseus  grew  not  only  more  careless  in  his  behaviour  towards
his  father,  but  even  more  insolent,  conducting  himself,  not
as  heir  to  the  crown,  but  as  king.  Philip,  offended  at  his
manner,  became  every  day  more  concerned  for  the  death  of
Demetrius,  and  began  at  length  to  suspect  that  he  had  been
deceived  by  treachery,  and  put  to  the  torture  all  the  witnesses
and  informers.  Having,  by  this  means,  Jcome  to  the  know-
ledge of  the  deception,  he  was  not  less  afflicted  at  the
dishonesty  of  Perseus  than  at  the  execution  of  the  innocent
Demetrius,  whom  he  would  have  avenged,  had  he  not  been
prevented  by  death;  for  shortly  after  he  died  of  a  disease
contracted  by  mental  anxiety,  leaving  great  preparations  for
a  war  with  the  Romans,  of  which  Perseus  afterwards  made
use.  He  had  induced  the  Scordiscan  Gauls  to  join  him,  and
would  have  had  a  desperate  struggle  with  the  Eomans,  had
not  death  carried  him  off.

The  Gauls,  after  their  disastrous  attack  upon  Delphi,  in
which  they  had  felt  the  power  of  the  divinity  more  than  that
of  the  enemy,  and  had  lost  their  leader  Brennus,  had  fled;
like  exiles,  partly  into  Asia,  and  partly  into  Thrace,  and  then
returned,  by  the  same  way  by  which  they  had  come,  into
their  own  country.  Of  these,  a  certain  number  settled  at  the
conflux  of  the  Danube  and  Save,  and  took  the  name  of
Scordisci.  The  Tectosagi,  on  returning  to  their  old  settlements
about  Toulouse,  were  seized  with  a  pestilential  distemper,
and  did  not  recover  from^it,  until,  being  warned  by  the
admonitions  of  their  soothsayers,  they  threw  the  gold  and
silver,  which  they  had  got  in  war  and  sacrilege,  into  the  lake
of  Toulouse ;  all  which  treasure,  a  hundred  and  ten  thousand
pounds  of  silver,  and  fifteen  hundred  thousand  pounds  of  gold,
Oaepio,  the  Boman  consul,  a  loug  time  after,  carried  away  with
him.  But  this  sacrilegious  act  subsequently  proved  a  cause
of  ruin  to  Caepio  and  his  army.  The  rising  of  the  Gimbrian
war,  too,  seemed  to  pursue  ihe  Eomans  as  if  to  avenge  the
removal  of  that  devoted  treasure.  Of  these  Tectosagi,  no
small  number,  attracted  by  the  charms  of  plunder,  repaired

himaelf  became  a  fratricide  by  causing  his  father  to  put  his  brother  to
death.


^


234  JUSTIN.  [B.  XXXII.  CH.IV.

to  Illyricam,  aud»  after  spoiling  the Istnaxis,  settled in
Pannonia.

The  Istnans,  it  is  reported,  derive  their  origin  from  those
Golchians  who  were  sent  hy  king  iBetes  in  pursuit  of  the.
Argonauts,  that  had  carried  off  his  daughter,^  who,  after
they  had  sailed  from  the  Pontus  Euxinus  into  the  Ister,  and
had  proceeded  far  up  the  channel  of  the  river  Save,  pursuing
the  track  of  the  Argonauts,  conveyed  their  vessels  upon  their
shoulders  over  the  tops  of  the  mountains,  as  far  as  the  shores
of  the  Adriatic  sea,  knowing  that  the  Argonauts  must  have
done  the  same  before  them,  because  of  the  size  of  their  ship.t
These  Golchians,  not  overtaking  the  Argonauts,  who  had  sailed
off,  remained,  whether  from  fear  of  their  king  or  from
weariness  of  so  long  a  voyage,  near  Aquileia,  and  were  called
Istrians  from  the  name  of  the  river  up  which  they  sailed  out
of  the  sea.

The  Dacians  are  descendants  of  the  Getae.  This  people
having  fought  unsuccessfully,  under  their  king  Oroles,  against
the  Bastamaa,  were  compelled  by  his  order,  as  a  punishment
for  their  cowardice,  to  put  their  heads,  when  they  were  going
to  sleep,  in  the  place  of  their  feet,j;  and  to  perform  those
offices  for  their  wives  which  used  previously  to  be  done  for
themselves.  Nor  were  thejie  reguUtions  sdtered,  until  they
had  efiOiced,  by  new  exertions  in  Qie  field,  the  disgrace  which
they  had  incurred  in  the  previous  war.

IV.  Perseus,  having  succeeded  to  the  throne  of  his  fiither
Philip,  applied  to  all  these  nations  to  join  him  in  a  war  against
the  Romans.  In  the  meanwhile  a  war  broke  out  between  king
Prusias,  to  whom  Hannibal  had  fled  when  peace  was  granted

*  Argoncmtca  ra/ptoresgw  jUice,']  Four  of  the  old  editions  have
raptoremquty  i  e.  Jason. — Wetzd.

t  Propter  magwUudmem  ntms,"]  Bongarsius  thinks  that  fuwk  is  to
be  understood  in  the  sense  of  ncmgaiiondt ;  but  this  is  'absurd.  We
must  simply  understand  that  the  river  Saye  would  not  admit  a  ship  of
that  size,  and  that.they  were  consequently  obliged  to  take  it  on  llieir
shoulders  and'  carry  it  to  the  shores  of  the  Adriatic  The  story  is
well  known* — Voaavm,  As  to  the  carrying  of  the  Argo  on  the
shoulders  of  her  crew,  see  ApolL  Bhod.  iv.  1383,  teqq,  Soheffer  would
read  navigcUionis  instead  of  navis,

t  Similar  military  punishments,  rather  ignominious  than  painful,
are  noticed  in  Died.  Sic  zii.  16 ;  Plutarch.  Ages.  c.  51 ;  Liv.  xxviL  15;
Tacit.  ziiL  36 ;  Suet  Aug.  c  24  ;  Val.  Max.  zl  7,  9,  and  15 ;  Frontin.
iv.  1 ;  Plato,  Legg.  iz.  nib  inU, — Bemeccerw,


B.O.  184.]  DEATH  OF  HANNIBAL.  ,  ^36

Antiochus  by  the  Eomans,  and  Eumenes  ;  a  wax  which
Prasias  was  the  first  to  begin,  having  broken  his  treaty  with
Emenes  through  confidence  in  Hannibal.

Hannibal,  when  the  Romans,  among  other  articles  of  peaoe«
demanded  from  Antiochus  that  he  should  be  surrendered  to
them,  received  notice  of  this  demand  from  the  king,  and,  taking
to  flight,  went  off  to  Crete.  Here,  when  he  had  long  led  a
quiet  life,  but  foimd  himself  envied  for  his  great  wealth,  he
deposited  some  urns,  filled  with  lead,  in  the  temple  of  Diana,
as  if  thus  to  secure  his  treasure.  The  city,*  in  consequence,
being  no  longer  concerned  about  him,  as  they  supposed  that
they  had  his  wealth  in  pledge,  he  betook  himself  to  Prusias,
putting  his  gold  into  some  statues  which  he  carried  with  him,
lest  his  riches,  if  seen,  should  endanger  his  life,  Prusias  being
subsequently  defeated  in  a  battle  by  land,  and  transferring  the
war  to  the  sea,  Hannibal,  by  a  new  stratagem,  was  the  cause
of  procuring  him  a  victory ;  for  he  ordered  serpents  of  every
kind  to  be  enclosed  in  earthen  pots,  and  to  be  thrown,  in  the
hottest  of  the  engagement,  into  the  enemy^s  ships.  This
seemed  at  first  ridiculous  to  the  Pontic  soldiers,t  that  the
enemy  should  fight  with  earthen  pots,  as  if  they  could  not
fight  with  the  sword.^  But  when  the  ships  began  to  be  filled
with  serpents,  and  they  were  thus  involved  in  double  peril,
they  yielded  the  victory  to  the  enemy.

When  the  news  of  these  transactions  was  brought  to  Home,
ambassadors  were  despatched  by  the  senate  to  require  the  two
kings  to  make  peace,  and  demand  the  surrender  of  Hannibal.
But  Hannibal,  learning  their  object,  took  poison,  and  frustrated
their  embassy  by  hi&^kMth.

This  year  was  rendered  remarkable  by  the  deaths  of  the
three  greatest  generals  then  in  the  world,  Hannibal,  Philopoe-
men,  and  Scipio  Africanus.  Of  these  three  it  is  certain  that
Hanniba],  even  at  die  time  when  Italy  trembled  at  him,
thundering  in  the  war  with  Rome,  and  when,  after  his  return
to  Carthage,  he  held  the  chief  command  there,  never  reclined

*  OmtcOe,']  That  is,  the  city  of  Gortyn  in  which  he  resided*  See
Com.  Nep.  IMe  of  HaxmibaL

t  Powticia,']  Bather  PergcmenU,  says  Wetzel,  Eumenes  being  king  of
Pergamus.

t  Qidferro  nequeant  is  the  reading  of  all  the  editions,  but  it  should
surely  be  guasiferro  nequeant.


S36  JUSTIN.  [RXXXin.  CH.I.

at  hid  meals,  or  indulged  himself  with  more  than  one  pint*  of
wine  at  a  time ;  and  that  he  preserved  such  continence  among
so  many  female  captives,  that  one  would  be  disposed  to  deny
that  he  was  bom  in  Africa.  Such,  too,  was  his  prudence  in
command,  that  though  he  had  to  rule  armies  of  different
nations,  he  was  never  annoyed  by  any  conspiracy  among  his
troops,  or  betrayed  by  their  want  of  faith,  though  his  enemies
had  often  attempted  to  expose  him  to  both.


BOOK  XXXIII.


War  of  the  Bomans  with  Perseus,  I. — Perseus  defeated  and  made
prisoner ;  treatment  of  Macedonia  and  ^tolia  by  the  Romans,  XL

I.  The  Romans  carried  on  the  Macedonian  war  with  less
disturbance  to  their  country  than  the  Punic  war,  but  with
more  renown,  as  the  Macedonians  surpassed  the  Carthaginians
in  honour,  and  were  animated,  moreover,  by  their  glory  in
having  conquered  the  east,  and  supported  also  by  the  auxiliary
forces  of  all  the  neighbouring  princes.f  The  Romans,  accord-
ingly, both  raised  a  greater  number  of  legions,  and  called  for
assistance  from  Masinissa,  king  of  Numidm,  and  all  the  rest  of
their  allies ;  while  notice  was  also  given  to  Eumenes,  king  of
Bithynia,  to  aid  them  in  the  war  with  his  whole  force.  Per-
seus, besides  his  Macedonian  army,  which  had  had  the  repu-
tation of  being  invincible,  had  supplies  for  a  ten  years'  war,
collected  by  his  father,  in  his  treasures  and  magazines.  Ele-
vated by  these  resources,  and  forgetful  of  his  father's  fortune,
he  bade  his  soldiers  think  of  the  past  glojry  of  Alexander.

The  first  engagement  was  one  of  cavalry  only ;  and  Perseus,
being  victorious  in  it,  attracted  the  favourable  regard  of  all  who
had  previously  been  in  suspense.  Yet  he  sent  ambassadors
to  the  consul  to  ask  for  peace,  which  the  Romans  had  granted
to  his  father  even  when  conquered,  offering  to  defray  the
expenses  of  the  war,  as  if  he  had  been  defeated. But  the

*  Sextario.']  The  sextarvus  was  nearly  a  pint,  being  the  sixth  part  of
the  eoTigius,  which  was  equal  to  5*9471  pints.  '

t  Omnium  regum.]  A  hyperbolical  expression,  such  as  our  author
often  uses.  F^viously,  xxxiL  8,  he  mentions  only  the  Gauls  as
auxiliaries  of  Perseus ;  Livy,  xlii.  29,  adds  Cotys,  king  of  the  OdryssQ.
—Wetzd.


B.C.  169.]  PEBSEUS  MADE  PBISONEB.  ^  287

consul  Sulpicius  offered  him  terms  not  less  harsh  than  he
would  have  offered  to  a  vanquished  enemy.  In  the  mean-
time, the  Romans,  under  the  dread  of  so  formidahle  a  war,
created  uS^milius  Paulus  consul,  and  conferred  upon  him,  out
of  due  coiurse,*  the  command  in  the  Macedonian  war.

^milius,  when  he  had  reached  the  camp,  lost  no  time  in
coming  to  a  hattle.  The  night  hefore  it  was  fought,  the
moon  was  eclipsed ;  a  phsenomenon  which  all  interpreted  im-
favourably  for  Perseus,  and  presaged  that  the  downfal  of
the  Macedonian  empire  was  portended.

II.  In  this  engagement,  Marcus  Cato,  the  son  of  Cato  the
orator,  while  he  was  fighting,  with  extraordinary  bravery,  among
the  thickest  of  the  enemy,  fell  from  his  horse,  and  continued
his  efforts  on  foot.  A  number  of  the  enemy  gathered  about
him  when  he  fell,  with  loud  shouts,  as  if  they  would  kill  him  as
he  lay  on  the  ground,  but  he,  recovering  himself  sooner  than
they  expected,  made  great  slaughter  among  them.  The  enemy
flocking  round  him,  however,  to  overpower  him  with  their
numbers,  his  sword,  as  he  was  aiming  at  a  tall  fellow  among
them,  feU  from  his  hand  among  a  troop  of  his  opponents ;
when  he,  to  recover  it,  plunged  in  among  the  points  of  the
enemy's  weapons,  protecting  himself  with  his  shield,  while
both  armies  were  looking  on,  and,  having  regained  his  sword,
though  not  vdthout  receiving  many  wounds,  he  got  back  safe
to  his  friends,  amidst  a  loud  shout  from  the  enemy.f  The  rest
of  the  Eomans,  imitating  his  boldness,  secured  the  victoiy.
King  Perseus  fled,  and  arrived,  with  ten  thousand  talents,  at
Samothrace ;  and  Onseus  Octavius,  being  sent  by  the  consul
in  pursuit  of  him,  took  him  prisoner,  with  his  two  sons  Alex-
ander and  Philip,  and  brought  him  to  the  consul.

Macedonia,  from  the  time  of  Caranus,  who  was  the  first
that  reigned  in  it^  to  Perseus,  had  thirty  kings ;  under  whose
government  it  continued  for  nine  hundred  and  twenty-three
years,  but  possessed  supreme  power  for  only  a  hundred  and
ninety-two.  J When  it  fell  under  the  power  of  the  Romans,  it

*  Extra  ordmenh.']  He  had  his  province  by  lot  in  the  usual  way ;
Macedonia  fell  to  him,  and  Italy  to  his  colleague  Crassus. — Dv/rcmd,
See  Livy,  xliv.  17.

+  Ho8tvum.'\  Seven  of  the  old  editions  have  omnvum,  which  Scheffer
prefers,  as  it  was  a  shout  of  congratulation,  proceeding  from  the
Romans,  not  from  the  enemy. — Wetzd.

X  Sed  rerum  non  nisi  centum  nonagimta  dvohus  <mnU  jpo^a.]  Maoe-


288  JUSTIN.  [B.XXXIV.  CH.I.

was  left  free,  magistrates  being  appointed  in  every  city ;  and
it  received  laws  from  Paulus  ^mUius,  which  it  still  uses.

As  to  the  JStolians,  the  senators  of  every  city  in  the
oountiy,  whose  fidelity  had  been  suspected,  were  sent,  together
with  their  wives  and  children,  to  Eome ;  where,  to  prevent
them  from  raising  any  disturbance  in  their  country,  they  were
bng  detained ;  and  it  was  not  without  difficulty,  and  after  the
senate  had  been  wearied  with  embassies  from  the  cities  for
their  release,  that  they  were  allowed  to  return  to  their  own
country.


BOOK  XXXIV.


The  Romans  make  war  on  the  Achseans,  L—- Defeat  of  the  Achseami ;
Corintli  demolished ;  affairs  in  Egypt ;  Ptolemy  Philometor
requests ,  aid  from  Bomei  II. — Embassy  from  the  Romans  to
AntiochUB  Epipbaiies ;  his  death ;  he  is  succeeded  by  his  brother
Demetrius  Soter,  IIL — ^Prusias^  king  of  Bithynia,  killed  by  his  son
Nicomedes,  lY.

I.  The  Carthaginians  and  Macedonians  being  subdued,  and
the  power  of  the  ^tolians  weakened  by  the  captivity  of  their
leading  men,  the  Achseans  were  the  only  people  of  all  Greece
who  seemed  to  the  Romans,  bx.  that  time,  to  be  too  powerful ;
not,  indeed,  from  any  extraordinary  strength  existing  in  any
individual  city,  but  because  of  a  confederacy  maintained  among
all  the  cities.  Foi^  the  Achseans,  though  distributed  through
several  towns,  Hke  so  many  different  members,  yet  formed  but
one  body  and  had  but  one  government,  and  warded  off  danger
from  any  single  city  by  the  united  strength  of  all.  To  3ie
Eomans,  therefore,  as  they  were  seeking  a  pretext  for  war,
fortune  opportunely  presented  the  complaints  of  the  Spartans,
whose  Icmds  the  Achseans,  in  consequence  of  hatred  subsisting

donia  attained  its  height  when  Alexander  conquered  Darius,  B.c.  329,
in  which  year  Justin,  x.  8,  considers  that  the  Persian  empire  termi-
nated, and  the  Macedonian  began.  Between  that  year  and  the  defeat
of  Perseus  elapsed  only  160  years,  and  if  we  would  wish  to  make  up
our  author's  number  of  192,  we  must  take  in  thirty-two  from  the
preyiotts  period,  going  back  to  B.O.  361,  when  Philip  was  a  hostage  at
Thebes.  Hence  the  reading  of  Bongarsius's  codices,  152,  seems  prefer-
able ;  or,  to  take  a  round  number,  1 50,  the  reading  of  three  other
copies ;  and  this  is  the  number  given  by  Livy,  xlv.  9. — WetzeL


B.C.  146.]  COBINTH  DESTROYED.  23^

between  the  two  people,  had  laid  waste.  Answer  was  accord-
ingly made  by  the  senate  to  the  Spartans,  that  *^  they  would
send  commissioners  into  Greece,  to  examine  into  the  affairs
of  their  allies,  and  to  prevent  further  injuiy;"  but  secret
4irections  were  at  the  same  time  giyen  the  commissioners,
that "  they  should  dissolve  the  confederacy  among  the  Achseans,
and  make  each  city  independent  of  the  rest,  that  they  might
thus  the  more  easily  be  reduced  to  obedience,  while,  if  any
cities  were  obstinate,  they  might  be  humbled  by  force.'*  The
commissioners,  in  consequence,  having  summoned  the  chief
men  of  the  cities  to  meet  them  at  Corinth,  read  to  them  th0
decree  of  the  senate,  and  signified  what  their  intentions  were  ;
declaring  it  "  expedient  for  all,  that  each  city  should  have
its  own  independent  laws  and  government."  When  this
communication  was  known  throughout  the  city,  the  people
being  thrown  as  it  were  into  a  fury,  massacred  all  the
foreigners  that  were  there,  and  would  have  laid  violent  hands
on  the  Boman  commissioners  themselves,  had  they  not  fled
away  in  haste  as  soon  as  they  found  a  disturbance  rising.

II.  When  the  news  of  these  occurrences  reached  Home,  the
senate  at  once  decreed  war  against  the  Acheeans,  giving  the
conduct  of  it  to  the  consul  Mummius,  who,  conveying  over
his  army  with  the  utmost  expedition,  and  actively  providing
himself  with  all  necessaries,  proceeded  to  ofiPer  the  enemy
battle.  As  for  the  Achseans,  as  if  they  had  undertaken  a
matter  of  no  difficulty  in  going  to  war  with  the  Romans,  every
thing  was  neglected  and  out  of  order  amongst  them.  ThinkiDg
of  plunder,  too,  and  not  of  fighting,  they  brought  vehicles  to
carry  away  the  spoils  of  the  enemy,  and  stationed  their  wives  and
children  on  the  hills  to  view  the  engagement.  But  when  the
battle  commenced,  they  were  cut  to  pieces  before  the  eyes  of
their  kindred,  and  afforded  them  only  a  dismal  spectacle  and
sad  remembrances  of  grief.  Their  wives  and  children,  also,
were  changed  from  spectators  into  prisoners,  and  became  the
prey  of  the  enemy.  The  city  of  Corinth  itself  was  razed  to
the  ground,  and  the  inhabitants  sold  for  slaves,  that,  by  such
an  example,  a  dread  of  insurrection  might  be  thrown  on  other
cities.

During  these  transactions,  Antiochus,  king  of  Syria,  made
war  upon  Ptolemy*  king  of  Egypt,  his  elder  sister's  son,  a

*  Ptolemy  Philometor,  who  reigned  fram  B.C.  180  to  145  (see  Died;


Jk


A


240  JUSTIN.  [RXXXIV.  0H.I|I.

prince  natarally  inactive,  and  so  weakened  by  daily  luxurious
indulgence,  that  he  not  only  neglected  the  duties  of  his  royal
station,  but  even,  through  excessive  gluttony,  had  lost  all
human  feeling.  Being  expelled  from  his  throne,  he  fled  to
Alexandria  to  his  younger  brother  Ptolemy,*  and,  having
shared  the  kingdom  vdth  him,  they  jointly  sent  ambassadoiB
to  the  Roman  senate,  imploring  assistance,  and  the  protection
of  their  alliance;  and  ^eir  solicitations  prevailed  with  the
senate.

III.  Accordingly  Popilius  was  despatched,  in  the  character
of  ambassador,  to  Antiochus,  to  desire  him  "  to  refrain  from
invading  Egypt,  or,  if  he  had  already  entered  it,  to  quit  it
without  delay."  Having  found  him  in  Egypt,  and  the  king
having  offered  to  kiss  him  (for  Antiochus,  when  he  was  a
hostage  t  at  Home,  had  been  friendly  with  Popilius  among
others),  Popilius  said  that  *'  private  friendship  must  be  set
aside,  when  the  commands  of  his  country  stood  in  the  way,**
and  having  produced  and  delivered  to  him  the  decree  of  Uie
senate,  but  observing  that  he  hesitated,  and  referred  the
consideration  of  it  to  his  friends,  he  drew  a  circle  round  him
with  a  staff  which  he  carried  in  his  hand,  so  large  that  it  also
enclosed  his  friends,  and  desired  him  "  to  decide  on  the  spot,
and  not  to  go  out  of  that  ring,  till  he  had  given  an  answer  to
the  senate  whether  he  would  have  peace  or  war  vdth  Eome."
This  firmness  so  daunted  the  king's  spirit^  that  he  replied  that
"  he  would  obey  the  senate."

Antiochus,  on  returning  to  his  kingdom,  died,  leaving  a  son
quite  a  boy.  Guardians  being  assigned  him  by  the  people,
his  uncle  {  Demetrius,  who  was  a  hostage  at  Rome,  and  who
had  heard  of  the  death  of  his  brother,  went  to  the  senate,  and
said  that  '*he  had  come  to  Rome  as  a  hostage  while  his
brother  was  alive,  but  that  now  he  was  dead,  he  did  not  know

Sic.  zxx.  Id),  being  the  son  and  suocessor  of  Ptolemy  Epiphanes,  who
married  the  daughter  of  Antiochus  the  Greats  sister  to  the  Antiochus
mentioned  in  the  text.— TFefze2.

*  Ptolemy  Physcon,  who  became  master  of  Cyrene  and  Libya  in
the  year  B.C.  157,  Diod.  Sic.  xzxi  26.  He  succeeded  his  brother  at
his  death,  B.C.  185,  and  reigned  twenty-seven  years. —  Wetssd,

t  He  had  been  sent  to  Rome  as  a  hostage  by  his  father  Antiochus
the  Great,  and  afterwards  by  his  brother  Seleucus  IV. — Weled,

t  He  was  not  his  unde  but  his  cousin,  being  the  son  of  Seleucus
iy.i  the  brother  of  Antiochus  Epiphanes. — Bongarnui,


KC.  148,]  DEATH  OF  PRUSIAS.  241

for  whom  he  'was  a  hostage.  It  was  therefore  reasonable,"
he  added,  ''  that  he  should  be  released  to  claim  the  throne,
which,  as  he  had  conceded  it  to  his  elder  brother  by  the  law
of  nations,  now  of  right  belonged  to  himself,  as  he  was  su-
perior to  the  orphan  in  age."  But  finding  that  he  was  not
released  by  the  senate  (their  private  opinion  being  that  the
throne  would  be  better  in  the  hands  of  the  young  prince  than
in  his),  he  left  the  city  on  pretence  of  going  to  hunt,  and
secretly  took  ship  at  Ostia,*  with  such  as  attended  him  in  his
flight.  On  arriving  in  Syria,  he  was  favourably  received  by
the  whole  people,  and  the  orphan  being  put  to  death,  the
throne  was  resigned  to  him  by  the  guardians.

IV.  About  the  same  time,  Prusias,  king  of  Bithynia,  con-
ceived a  resolution  to  kill  his  son  Nicomedes,  with  a  desire  to
benefit  his  younger  children  by  a  second  marriage,  whom  he
had  sent  to  Home.  But  the  design  was  betrayed  to  the  young
prince  by  those  who  had  undertaken  the  execution  of  it,  and
who  exhorted  him,  since  he  had  become  an  object  of  his
father's  cruelty,  to  anticipate  his  schemes,  and  turn  the  villainy
on  the  head  of  its  contriver."  Nor  was  it  difficult  to  prevail
upon  him  ;  and  when,  being  sent  for,  he  had  come  f  into  his
father's  dominions,  he  was  immediately  selected  as  king.
Prusias,  deprived  of  his  throne  by  his  son,  and  reduced  to  a
private  station,  was  forsaken  even  by  his  slaves.  While  he
lived  in  retirement,  he  was  killed  by  his  son,  with  no  less
guilt  than  that  with  which  he  himself  had  ordered  his  son  to
be  put  to  death.


BOOK  XXXV.


Demetrius  Soter,  king  of  Syria,  dethroned  and  killed  by  Alexander
Bala,  I. — HiB  death  avenged  by  bis  son  Demetrius  Nicator,  II.

I.  Demetrius,  having  possessed  himself  of  the  throne  of
Syria,  and  thinking  that  peace  might  be  dangerous  in  the
unsettled  state  of  his  aflGairs,  resolved  to  enlarge  the  borders

*  Ostia  or  Hostia  at  the  mouth  of  the  Tiber.

+  From  the  expression  "he  had  come,**  venercttf  it  appears  that
he  had  previously  fled  out  of  the  kingdom,  though  Justin  does  not
mention  his  flight.

B


242  jtjsny.  [axxxv.  GH.n.

of  his  kingdom,  and  increase  his  power,  by  making  war  upon
his  neighbours* Accordingly,  being  incensed  with  Ariarathes,
king  of  Cappadocia,  for  having  disdained  to  marry  his sister,
he  kindly  received  his  brotlier  Orophemes,  who  had  been
unjustly  deprived  of  the  throne,  and  who  came  to  him  as  a
suiplia^t;  Ld.  rejoicing  that  a  plausible  pretext  for  w  ^
afforded  him,  determined  to  reinstate  him  in  his  dominions*
But  Orophemes,  with  extreme  ingratitude, having  entered
into  a  compact  with  the  people  of  Antioch,  at  that  time  en-
raged against  Antiochus,  formed  a  pbt  to  expel  him  from  his
throne  by  whom  he  was  to  have  been  restored  to  his  own.
The  conspiracy  being  discovered,  Demetrius  spared  indeed
the  life  of  Orophemes,  that  Ariarathes  might  not  be  freed
from  the  dread  of  war  on  the  part  of  his  brother,  but  caused
him  to  be  apprehended,  and  kept  a  close  prisoner  at  Seleucia.
Nor  were  the  people  of  Antioch  so  alarmed  at  this  discovery  as
to  desist  from  their  rebellion. Being  in  consequence  attacked
by  Demetrius,  but  receiving  aid  from  Ptolemy  king  of  Egypt,
Attains  kiug  of  Asia,*  and  Ariarathes  of  Cappadocia,  they
suborned  one  Bala,  a  young  man  of  mean  condition,  to  claim
the  throne  of  Syria,  on  pretence  that  it  had  been  his  fEither's,
by  force  of  arms  ,*  and  that  nothing  might  be  wanting  to  ren-
der him  insolent,  the  name  of  Alexander  was  given  him,  and
he  was  reported  to  be  the  son  of  King  Antiochus. And  such
was  the  detestation  of  Demetrius  among  all  classes,  that  not
only  royal  power,  but  also  nobility  of  birth,  was  unanimously
attributed  to  his  rival. Alexander,  in  consequence,  amidst
this  wonderful  change  of  fortune,  forgetful of  his  original
meanness,  and  supported  by  the  strength  of  almost  all  the
east,  made  war  .upon  Demetrius,  and,  having  defeated  him,
deprived  him  at  once  of  his  throne  and  his  life. Demetrius,
however,  did  not  want  courage  to  resist  him  in  the  field ;  for
he  both  routed  the  enemy  in  the  first  encounter,  and,  when
the  kings  renewed  the  contest,  he  killed  several  thousands  in
the  struggle. But  at  last  he  fell,  with  his  spirit  still  unsub-
dued, and  fighting  most  valiantly,  among  the  thickest  of  the
enemy.

11. At  the  commencement  of  the  war, Demetrius  had
entrusted  two  of  his  sons  to  a  friend  of  his  at  Cnidus,  with  a

*  Hegc  Atice.]  King  of  Pergamus,  where  he  reigned  twenty  years,
B.C.  157  to  m.—  Wetzd.


B.C.  139 — 129.] DEMETBIUB  NICATOlL  MB

large  quantify  of  treasnrei  that  they  might  be  retnoVed  from
the  penis  of  the  war^  and  might  be  preserredi  if  fortune
should  so  order  it,  to  ayenge  their  father*8  death.  The  elder
of  the  two,  Demetiius^  who  had  passed  the  age  of  boyhood,
hearing  of  the  luxurious  life  of  Alexander  (whom  his  unex^
pected  grandeur,  and  the  fiascination  of  enjoyments  to  which
he  was  a  stranger^  l^ld  captive  as  it  were  in  his  palace^
idling  away  his  days  among  troops  of  concubines),  fell  upon
him,  with  the  assistance  of  some  OretanSf  when  he  was  quite
at  his  ease,  and  free  from  all  apprehension  of  danger.  The
people  of  Antioch,  too,  to  atone  for  their  ii^uries  to  the  father
by  new  services^  doYoted  themselves  to  him ;  and  his  father's
soldiers,  fired  with  love  for  the  yotmg  prince^  and  preferring
the  obligation  of  their  former  oath  to  the  haughty  rule  of  the
new  king,  ranged  themselves  on  the  side  of  Demetrius ;  and
thus  Alexander,  cast  down  with  no  less  violent  a  freak  of  for-
tune than  that  with  which  he  had  been  raised,  was  defeated
and  killed  in  the  first  battle,  paying  the  penalty  of  his  conduct
both  to  Demetrius  whom  he  had  slain,  and  to  AntiochuSi  from
whom  he  had  pretended  to  derive  his  birth*


BOOK  XXXVI.


DemetriiiB  Kicator  made  priBoner  bj  the  Parfchlans ;  tiKe  and  fall  of
Trypho ;  Antiochua  Sidetes  subdues  the  Jews,  L-^Origin  of  the
Jews;  ihear  departure  from  Egypt,  IL-^Account  of  Palestbke;
oonquerors  of  the  Jews,  IlL-^Chantcter  of  Attalus  of  Pergamus ;
he  bequeaths  his  kingdom  to  the  Romans,  who  possess  themselves
of  it  in  spite  of  Aristonicus,  lY*

I.  Demetbius,  having  gained  possession  of  his  father's
throne,  and  being  spoiled  by  his  good  fortune,  fell,  from  the
effects  of  the  vices  of  youth,  into  habits  of  indolence,  and  in-
curred as  much  contempt  for  his  slothfulness,  as  his  fatlier  had
incurred  hatred  for  his  pride.  As  the  cities,  in  consequence,
began  every  iichere  to  revolt  from  his  government*  he  resolved,
in  order  to  wipe  off  the  stain  of  effeminacy  from  his  character,
to  make  war  upon  the  Parthians.  The  people  of  the  east
beheld  his  approach  with  pleasure,  both  on  account  of  the
cruelty  of  Arsacides,*  king  of  the  Parthians,  and  because,

^  *  He  that  Justin  calls  Al^sacides  Was  the  sixth  of  the  Arsacidse,  or

R  2


^44  JT3STIN.  [B.  XXXVI.  CH.II.

having  been  accustomed  to  the  old  government  of  the  Mace-
donians, they  viewed  the  pride  of  the  new  race  with  indigna-
tion. Being  assisted,  accordingly,  by  auxiliary  troops  from
the  Persians,  Elymseans,  and  Bactrians,  he  routed  the  Persians
in  several  pitched  battles.  At  length,  however,  being  deceived
by  a  pretended  offer  of  peace,  he  was  made  prisoner,  and
being  led  from  city  to  city,*  was  shown  as  a  spectacle  to  the
people  that  had  revolted,  in  mockery  of  the  favour  that  they
had  shown  him.  Being  afterwards  sent  into  Hyrcania,  he  was
treated  kindly,  and  suitably  to  the  dignity  of  his  former  con
dition.

During  the  course  of  these  proceedings,  Trypho,  in  Syria,
who  had  exerted  his  efforts  to  be  made  by  the  people  guardian
to ' Antiochus,  the  step-son  of  Demetrius,''killed  his  ward,  and
seized  upon  the  Syrian  throne.  When  he  had  enjoyed  it  for
some  time,  and  the  liking  of  the  people  for  his  new  govern-
ment began  at  length  to  wear  off,  he  was  defeated  in  a  battle
by  Antiochus,  the  brother  of  Demetrius,  who  was  then  quite  a
boy,  and  who  had  been  educated  in  Asia ;  and  the  throne  of
Syria  again  returned  to  the  family  of  Demetrius.

Antiochus,  remembering  that  his  father  had  been  hated  for
his  pride,  and  his  brother  despised  for  his  indolence,  was
anxious  not  to  fall  into  the  same  vices,  and  having  married
Cleopatra,  his  brother's  wife,  proceeded  to  make  war,  with  the
utmost  vigour,  on  the  provinces  that  had  revolted  thrpugh  the
badness  t  of  his  brother's  government,  and,  after  subduing
them,  re-united  them  to  his  dominions.  He  also  reduced  the
Jews,  who,  during  the  Macedbnian  rule  under  his  father
Demetrius,  had  recovered  their  liberty  by  force  of  arms ;  and
whose  strength  was  such,  that  they  would  submit  to  no  Mace-
donian king  after  him,  but,  electing  rulers  from  their  own
people,  harassed  Syria  with  fierce  wars.

II.  The  origin  of  the  Jewsj:  was  from  Damascus,  a  most

Mithridates  I,,  who  reigned  from  B.a  173  to  136. — WetzeL  Arsacidse
was  the  common  name  of  the  descendants  of  Arsaces,  the  founder  of
the  Parthian  power.

*  Per  ora  civifatv/m,

*f*  Ft^to,]  Some  editions  have  initio,

t  The  confused  account  which  our  author,  as  well  as  Tacitus,  v.
2 — li,  gives  concerning  the  Jews,  and  the  false  statements  contained  in
it,  must  he  corrected  from  the  books  of  the  Old  Testament  and  from
Josephus.— TTefee^.


THE  JEWS.  245

famous  city  of  Syria,  whence  abo  the  Assyrian  kings  and
queen  Semiramis  *  sprung.  The  name  of  the  city  was  given
it  from  King  Damascus,  in  honour  of  whom  the  Syrians  con-
secrated the  sepulchre  of  his  wife  Arathis  as  a  temple,  and
regard  her  as  a  goddess  worthy  of  the  most  sacred  worship.
After  Damascus,  Azelus,  and  then  Adores,  Abraham,  and
Israhel  were  their  kings.  But  a  prosperous  family  of  ten  sons
made  Israhel  more  famous  than  any  of  his  ancestors.  Having
divided  his  kingdom,  in  consequence,  into  ten  governments,  he
committed  them  to  his  sons,  and  called  the  whole  people  Jews
from  Judas,  who  died  soon  after  the  division,  and  ordered  his
memory  to  be  held  in  veneration  by  them  all,  as  his  portion
was  shared  among  them.  The  youngest  of  the  brothers  was
Joseph,  whom  the  others,  fearing  his  extraordinary  abilities^
secretly  made  prisoner,  and  sold  to  some  foreign  merchants.
Being  carried  by  them  into  Egypt,  and  having  there,  by
his  great  powers  of  mind,  made  himself  master  of  the
arts  of  magic,  he  found  in  a  short  time  great  feivour  with
the  king ;  for  he  was  eminently  skilled  in  prodigies,  and  was
the  first  to  establish  the  science  of  interpreting  dreams ;  and
nothing,  indeed,  of  divine  or  human  law  seems  to  have  been
unknown  to  him ;  so  that  he  foretold  a  dearth  in  the  land  some
years  before  it  happened,  and  all  Egypt  would  have  perished
by  famine,  had  not  the  king,  by  his  advice»  ordered  the  com
to  be  laid  up  for  several  years ;  such  being  the  proofs  of  his
knowledge,  that  his  admonitions  seemed  to  proceed,  not  from
a  mortal,  but  a  god.  His  son  was  Moses,  whom,  besides  the
inheritance  of  his  father's  knowledge,  the  comeliness  of
his  person  also  recommended.  But  the  Egyptians,  being
troubled  with  scabies  and  leprosy,  and  moVed  by  some  otacu-
lar  prediction,  expelled  him,  with  those  who  had  the  disease,
out  of  Egypt,  that  the  distemper  might  not  spread  among  a
greater  number.  Becoming  leader,  accordingly,  of  the  exiles,
he  carried  off  by  stealth  the  sacred  utensils  of  the  Egyptians,
who,  endeavouring  to  recover  them  by  force  of  aims,  were
obliged  by  tempests  to  return  home ;  and  Moses,  having
reached  Damascus,  the  birth-place  of  his  forefathers,  took
possession  of  mount  Sinai,  on  his  arrival  at  which,  after  having

♦  Wetzel's  text  has  ex  reginA  Semiramidef  but  I  have  thought  propet
to  .follow  the  reftding  of  the  Juntine  editioti,  et  tegiiUB  Semiramidi,
which  is  found  in  two  manuscripts,  and  which  Wetzel  himself  prefnrp^


J


MO  JUSTIN.  [B.XXXVL  CH.IU.

suffered,  together  with  his  followers,  from  a  seven  days'  fast
in  the  deserts  of  Arabia,  he  oonsecrated  every  seventh  day
(according  to  the  present  custom  of  the  nation)  for  a  fieist-day,
and  to  be  perpetually  called  a  sabbath,  because  that  day  had
ended  at  once  their  hunger  and  their  wanderings.  And  as  they
remembered  that  they  had  been  driven  fipom  Elgypt'  for  faur
of  spreading  infection,  they  took  care,  in  ord»  that  they  might
not  become  odious,  from  iba  same  cause,  to  the  inhabitants  of
the  countiy,  to  have  no  communication  with  strangers ;  a  rule
which,  from  having  been  adopted  on  that  particular  occasion,
gradually  became  a  custom  and  part  of  their  religion.  After
the  death  of  Moses,  his  son  Aruas*  was  made  priest  for  cele-
brating the  rites  which  they  brought  from  Egypt,  and  soon
after  created  king ;  and  ever  afterwards  it  was  a  custom  among
the  Jews  to  have  the  same  chiefs  both  for  kings  and  priests  ;
and,  by  uniting  religion  widi  the  administration  of  justice,  it
is  almost  incredible  how  powerful  they  became.

III.  The  wealth  of  the  nation  was  augmented  by  the
duties  on  balm,t  which  is  produced  only  in  that  country ;  for
there  is  a  valley,  encircled  with  an  unbroken  ridge  of  hills,  as
it  were  a  wall,  in  the  form  of  a  camp,  the  space  enclosed  being
about  two  hundred  acres,  and  called  by  the  name  of  Hierichus ;  X
in  which  valley  there  is  a  wood,  remarkable  both  for  its  fer-
tility and  pleasantness,  and  chequered  with  groves  of  palm
and  balm«treefl.  The  balm^trees  resemble  pitch-trees  in
shape,  except  that  they  are  not  so  tall,  and  are  dressed  after
the  manner  of  vines  ;  and  at  a  certain  season  of  the  year  they
exude  the  balm. But  the  place  is  not  less  admired  for  the

*  A  oorvuption  of  Amxoh,

t  Opobaltami,]  In  GexL  zzzvii  25;  zliiL  11^  we  find  that  Canaan
produced  bahn ;  it  is  now  found  only  in  Arabia  Petrsea.  "  The  balm-
tree  {haZsami  €whor)  grew/'  says  Origen,  "in  Judsea,  only  within  a
space  of  about  twenty  acres,  but  after  the  Romans  became  masters  of
the  oountxy  it  was  propagated  over  extensive  hills.  Ite  stem  is  similar
to  that  of  the  vine,  and  its  leaves  to  those  of  rue^  but  whiter  and
always  remaining  on  the  tree."  The  word  halmmum  properly  signifies
the  tree,  and  opcbaltamwn  (that  is,  tirbc  rov  paKtrdfioVf  as  ovoirdvali
is  diroc  rov  ir&vaKOQ,  juice  of  off-Aeo^  Dioso.  iiL  48)  the  juice ;  xyUbal'
HMMtm  means  the  wood  of  the  tree,  Justin,  howerer,  contrary  to  the
practice  of  other  writers,  uses  opohaltcm/vm,  for  the  tree,  and  haUamwrn,
for  ^e  juiocw — Lemaire.

t  That  is,  Jericho,  which  is  the  readmg  of  the  Cologne  edition. —


b:c.  137— -132.]  ATTALUS.  247

gentle  warmth  of  the  sun  in  it,  than  for  its  fertility ;  for  though
the  sun  in  that  climate  is  the  hottest  in  the  world,  there  is
constantly  in  this  valley  a  certain  natural  suhdued  tepidity  in
the  air*

In  this  country  also  is  the  lake  Asphahites,  which,  from  its
magnitude  and  the  stillness  of  its  waters  is  called  the  Dead
Sea;  for  it  is  neither  agitated  by  the  winds,  because  the
bituminous  matter,  with  which  all  its  water  is  clogged,  resists
even  hurricanes ;  nor  does  it  admit  of  navigation,  for  all
inanimate  substances  sink  to  the  bottom ;  and  it  will  support
no  wood,  except  such  as  is  smeared  with  alum.

The  first  +  that  conquered  the  Jews  was  Xerxes,  king  of
Persia.  Subsequently  they  fell,  with  the  Persians  themselves,
under  the  power  of  Alexander  the  Great ;  and  they  were  then
long  subject  to  the  kings  of  Syria,  under  its  Macedonian
dynasty.  On  revolting  from  Demetrius,  and  soliciting  the
favour  of  the  Romans,  J  they  were  the  first  of  all  the  eastern
people  that  regained  their  liberty,  the  Romans  readily  affecting
to  bestow  what  it  was  not  in  their  power  to  give.

IV.  During  the  same  period,  in  which  the  government  of
Syria  was  passing  from  hand  to  hand  among  its  new  sovereigns,
King  Attains  iu  Asia  polluted  a  most  fiourishing  kingdom,
which  he  inherited  from  his  uncle  Eumenes,  by  murders  of
his  friends  and  executions  of  his  relatives,  pretending  some-
times that  his  old  mother,  and  sometimes  his  wife  Berenice,
had  been  destroyed  by  their  wicked  contrivances. After  ti^

.  *  Tqaidi  clSHs  naturctlis  qucedam  et  perpetua  apricitcu  mest]  Such  is
the  reading  of  Qronovius  and  Weisel,  who  interpret  apricitas  to  signify
a  moderate  warmth  or  tepidity.  Some  of  the  older  editions  have
opacUas,  which  Tauchnita  and  Dubner  have  adopted.  "  Salmasius,  on
SoUnus,  p.  990,  says  that  not  every  place  exposed  to  the  sun  is
properly  called  aprictis,  but  one  which  lies  open  to  a  gentle  and
moderate  influence  of  his  beams.  Hence  aprici  coUeti  Virg  EcL  iz«
49,  are  hills  turned  towards  the  rising  sun,  which,  not  being  excessively
hot,  is  well  suited  for  ripening  grapes." — JBenieccenu.

t  Primum  Xerxes — dmnuU,]  This  is  an  error.  The  kingdom  of
Israel  was  overthrown  by  Shalmaneser,  b.c.  722,  and  that  of  Judah  by
Nebuchadnezzar,  B.C.  588.  The  return  from  captivity,  under  Cyrus,
was  B.C.  536.  The  Jews  continued  subject  to  the  Persians  till  tibe
time  of  Alexander,  after  whom  they  were  under  the  rule,  sometimes
of  the  Ptolemies,  and  sometimes  of  the  Seleucidse,  till  b.o.  167.-—
Dlibner.

X  AnUeitid  Bomafiiorwn  petUd.']  Judas  Maocabeeus,  B.a  166,  formed
an  alliance  with  the  Romans;  Joseph.  Ant.  xii.  10.


248  JUSHN.  [B.XXXVL  CH.IV.

atrocious  outburst  of  rage,  he  assumed  a  mean  dress,  let  bis
beard  and  hair  grow  like  those  of  persons  under  legal  prosecu-
tion, never  went  abroad  or  showed  himself  to  the  people,  held
no  feasts  in  his  palace,  and  behaved  ia  no  respect,  indeed,  like
a  man  in  his  senses ;  so  that  he  seemed  to  be  paying  penalty
for  his  crimes  to  the  manes  of  those  whom  he  had  murdered.
Abandoning  the  government  of  his  kingdom,  too,  he  employed
himself  in  digging  and  sowing  in  his  garden,  mixing  noxious
herbs  with  harmless  ones,  and  sending  them  all  indiscrimi-
nately, moistened  with  poisonous  juices,  as  special  presents
to  his  friends.  From  this  employment  he  turned  to  that  of
working  in  brass,  and  amused  himself  with  modelling  in  wax,
and  casting  and  hammering  out  brazen  figures.  He  then
proceeded  to  make  a  monument  for  his  mother,  but  while
he  was  busy  about  the  work,  he  contracted  a  disorder  from
the  heat  of  the  sun,  and  died  on  the  seventh  day  afterwards.
By  his  will  the  Eoman  people  was  appointed  his  heir.*

There  was  however  a  son  of  Eumenes,  named  Aristonicus,
not  bom  in  wedlock,  but  of  an  Ephesian  mistress,  the  daughter
of  a  player  on  the  harp  ;  and  this  young  man,  after  the  death
of  Attains,  laid  claim  to  the  throne  of  Asia  as  having  been  his
father's.  When  he  had  fought  several  successful  battles
against  the  provinces,  which,  from  fear  of  the  Romans,  refused
to  submit  to  him,  and  seemed  to  be  established  as  king,
Asia  was  assigned  by  the  senate  to  the  command  of  Licinius
Crassus,  who,  being  more  eager  to  plunder  the  treasures  of
Attalus  than  to  distinguish  himself  in  the  field,  and  fighting
a  battle,  at  the  end  of  the  year,  with  his  army  in  disorder,
was  defeated,  and  paid  the  penalty  for  his  blind  avarice  by  the
loss  of  his  life.  The  consul  Perpema  being  sent  in  his  place,
reduced  Aristonicus,  who  was  defeated  in  the  first  engagement,
under  his  power,  and  carried  off  the  treasures  of  Attalus,
bequeathed  to  the  Roman  people,  on  ship-board  to  Rome.
Marcus  Aquilius,  Perpema's  successor,  envying  his  good  for-
tune, hastened,  with  the  utmost  expedition,  to  snatch  Aristonicus
from  Perpema's  hands,  as  if  be  ought  rather  to  grace  his  own
triumph.  But  the  death  of  Perpema  put  an  end  to  the  rivalry
between  the  consuls.

*  See  liv.  Epit.  Iviii. ;  Veil.  Pat.  ii.  4;  August.  Civ.  D.  xiii.  2;
Orosius,  v.  8 ;  Flonis,  ii.  20 ;  Sallusfs  Hist.  Fragm.  lib.  iv. ;  Bohn's  CL
Library,  p.  242.  ^


B.C.  124.]  MITHRIDATES  BEGINS  TO  REIGN.  249

Asia,  thus  becoming  a  province  of  the  Romans,  brought  to
Home  its  Tices  together  yrith  its  wealth.


BOOK  XXXVII.


The  people  of  Marseilles  entreat  tlie  Romans  in  behalf  of  Pliocaea ;
affairs  in  Asia^.Cappadocia,  and  Pontus,  I. — Of  Mithridates,  XL —
His  conquests,  III. — His  invasion  of  Paphlagonia;  his  rupture
with  the  Bomans,  lY.

I.  After  Aristonicus  was  taken  prisoner,  the  people  of  Mar-
seilles sent  ambassadors  to  Rome  to  intercede  for  the  Phocaeans
their  friends,  whose  city  and  even  name  the  senate  had  ordered
to  be  destroyed,  because,  both  at  that  time,  and  previously  in
the  war  against  Antiochus,  they  had  taken  up  arms  against  the
Roman  people.  The  embassy  obtained  from  the  senate  a
pardon  for  them.  Rewards  were  then  bestowed  on  the  princes
who  had  given  aid  against  Aristonicus ;  to  Mithridates  *  of
Pontus  was  allotted  Greater  Phrygia ;  to  the  sons  of  Ariara-
thes,  king  of  Cappadocia,  who  had  fallen  in  that  war,  wer^
assigned  Lycaonia  and  Cilicia ;  and  the  Roman  people  were
more  faithful  to  the  sons  of  their  ally,  than  their  mother  was
to  her  children,  since  by  the  one  the  kingdom  of  the  young
princes  was  increased,  by  the  other  they  were  deprived  of  life.
For  Laodice,  out  of  six  children,  all  boys,  whom  she  had  by
king  Ariarathes  (fearing  that,  when  some  of  them  were  grown
up,  she  would  not  long  enjoy  the  administration  of  the  king-
dom), killed  five  by  poison ;  but  the  care  of  their  relatives
rescued  from  the  barbarous  hands  of  their  mother  one  infant,
who,  after  the  death  of  Laodice  (for  the  people  killed  her  for
her  cruelty),  became  sole  king.

Mithridates  also,  being  cut  off  by  sudden  death,  left  a  son^
who  was  likewise  named  Mithridates,  and  whose  greatness  was
afterwards  such  that  he  surpassed  all  kings,t  not  only  of  his
own  but  of  preceding  ages,  in  gloiy,  and  carried  on  war  against
the  Romans,  with  various  success,  for  forty-six  years,  during
which,  though  the  most  eminent  generals,  Sylla,  Lucullus,  and
others,  and  at  last,  Gnasus  Pompey,  overcame  him,  yet  it  was

*  Mithridates  sumamed  Euergetes,  father  of  Mithridates  the  Great,
f  Justin,  or  Trogus,  seems  to  prefer  him  to  Alexander  the  Great*


S50  JUSTIN.  [axxxvL  ch.il

only  80  that  he  rose  greater  and  more  glorious  to  renew  the
contest,  ancl  was  rendered  even  more  formidable  by  his  defeats.
And  he  died  at  last,  not  from  being  overpowered  by  his  ene-
mies,* but  by  a  voluntary  death,  full  of  years  and  on  the
throne  of  his  ancestors,  and  leaving  his  son  his  heir.

II.  The  future  greatness  of  this  prince  even  signs  from  heaven
had  foretold ;  for  in  the  year  in  which  he  was  bom,  as  well  as
in  that  in  which  he  began  to  reign,  a  comet  blazed  forth  with
such  splendour,  for  seventy  successive  days  on  each  occasion,
that  the  whole  sky  seemed  to  be  on  fire.  It  covered  a  fourth
part  of  the  firmament  t  with  its  train,  and  obscured  the  light
of  the  sun  with  its  effulgence ;  and  in  rising  and  setting  it
took  up  the  space  of  four  hours.j  During  his  boyhood  his  life
was  attempted  by  plots  on  the  part  of  his  guardians,  who,
mounting  him  on  a  restive  horse,  forced  him  to  ride  and  hurl
the  javelin ;  but  when  these  attempts  failed,  as  his  manage-
ment of  the  horse  was  superior  to  his  years,  they  tried  to  cut
him  off  by  poison.  He,  however,  being  on  his  guard  against
such  treachery,  frequently  took  antidotes,  and  so  fortified  him-
self,;!; by  exquisite  preventives,  against  their  malice,  that  when
he  was  an  old  man,  and  wished  to  die  by  poison,  he  was  unable.
But  dreading  lest  his  enemies  should  effect  that  by  the  sword
which  they  could  not  accomplish  by  drugs,  he  pretended  a  fancy
for  hunting,  in  the  indulgence  of  which  he  never  went  under  a
roof,  for  seven  years,  either  in  the  city  or  the  country,  but
rambled  through  the  forests,  and'passed  his  nights  in  various
places  among  the  mountains,  none  knowing  where  he  was.  He
accustomed  himself  to  escape  from  the  wild  beasts,  or  pursue
them,  by  speed  of  foot,  and  by  this  means,  while  he  avoided

*  iVbtir  vi  hoitiU.]  Some  copies  hav9  vidtu  affcw  hotUU;  Wetsel
omits  it.

f  Quartam  codi  partem.']  That  is,  forty-fiye  degrees.  There  was  a
similiur  comet,  B.a  372,  which  Aristotle,  Meteor,  i.  6,  calls  a  great
comet,  and  which  spread  its  tail  over  a  third  part  of  the  sky,  i.e.  oyer
sixty  degrees.  Diod.  Siculus  also,  zv.  50,  says  that  its  light  was  like
that  of  &e  moon. — Wetzd,

X  Quum  oriretw  owtmberetque,  qwttitor  horanim  M>aHum  conmt-
mebcU.]  That  is,  after  it  touched  the  horizon,  at  its  rismg  or  setting,
four  hours  elapsed  before  it  wholly  appeared  or  disappeared

§  8e — iUtfffumt,]  Oronovius  and  Gnevius  would  read  gtannofvit ;  bat
gtagnare  is  used  by  Yegetius  in  the  sense  of  securing  or  fortifying,  and
Justin  has  the  passive  ttagnwr,  zzxtl  8.


B.C.  117.]  MITHBIDATES.  251

the  plots  laid  for  him,  he  inured  himself  to  endure  all  manner
of  bodily  exertion.

III.  When  he  assumed  the  government  of  the  kingdom,  he
turned  his  thoughts,  not  so  much  to  the  regulation  of  his
dominions,  as  to  the  enlargement  of  them.  He  in  conse-
quence  subdued,  with  extraordinary  success,  the  Scythians,
who  had  previously  been  invincible,  who  had  cut  off  Zopyrion,
the  general  of  Alexander  the  Great,  with  an  army  of  thirty
thousand  men,  who  had  massacred  Cyrus,  king  of  the  Persians,
with  two  hundred  thousand,  and  who  had  routed  Philip,  king
of  Macedonia.  Having  thus  increased  his  forces,  he  made
himself  master  of  Pontus,*  and  afterwards  of  Gappadocia,
Fixing  his  thoughts  on  the  conquest  of  Asia,t  he  went
privately,  with  some  of  his  friends,  out  of  his  kingdom,  and
travelled  through  the  whole  of  it  without  the  knowledge  of
any  one,  making  himself  acqudnted  with  the  situations  of  the
towns  and  the  nature  of  the  country.  He  next  went  into
Bithynia,  and,  as  if  he  were  already  master  of  Asia,  took  note
of  whatever  might  aid  him  in  attempting  the  conquest  of  it*
He  then  returned  into  his  country,  when  they  had  begun  to
suppose  that  be  was  dead,  and  found  an  infant  son  bom  to
him,  of  whom  his  wife  Laodice,  who  was  also  his  sister,  had
been  delivered  in  his  absence.  But  amidst  the  congratu-
lations that  he  received  on  his  arrival,  and  on  the  birth  of  his
son,  he  was  in  danger  of  being  poisoned ;  for  his  sister  and
wife  Laodice,  believing  him  dead,  had  yielded  herself  to  the
embraces  of  his  friends,  and,  as  if  she  could  conceal  the  crime,
of  which  she  had  been  guilty,  by  a  greater,  prepared  poison  for
him  on  his  return.  Mithridates,  however,  having  notice  of  her
intention  from  a  female  servant,  avenged  the  plot  upon  the
heads  of  its  contrivers.

IV.  When  winter  came  on,  he  did  not  spend  his  time  in
feasts,  but  in  the  field,  not  in  idleness,  but  in  exercise,  not
among  companions  in  licentiousness,  but  contending  among  his
equals  in  age,  either  in  riding,  running,  or  trials  of  strength.
He  inured  his  army  also,  by  daily  exercise,  to  endure  fatigue
equally  with  himself;  and  thus,  while  he  was  himself  uncon-

*  PoTUvm  occupavU.']  How  Pontua,  of  which  he  was  already  master  ?
— Wetzd.  But  from  the  words  beUa  Pontica^  in  xzxviii.  7,  it  may  be
oonjectured  that  he  had  to  fight  before  he  secured  his  throne.

f  Asia  Minor.


25Q  JUSTIN.  [B.xxxvnj.  ch.i.

querable,  he  rendered  his  army  unconquerable  likewise.  En-
tering then  into  an  alliance  with  Nicomedes,  he  invaded
Faphla^onia,  and  divided  it,  after  it  was  conquered,  among  his
allies.  But  when  information  reached  the  senate  that  it  was
in  possession  of  the  two  kings,  they  sent  ambassadors  to  both,
desiring  that  "  the  country  should  be  restored  to  its  former
condition."  Mithridates,  thinking  himself  now  a  match  for
the  power  of  the  Romans,  haughtily  replied,  thfitt  "  the  king-
dom had  belonged  to  his  father  by  inheritance,  and  that  he
wondered  that  a  dispute,  which  had  never  been  raised  against
his  father,  should  be  raised  against  himself;"  and,  not  at  all
alarmed  by  threats,  he  seized  also  on  Galatia.  As  for  Nico-
medes,  he  replied  that  "  as  he  could  not  maintain  that  he  had
any  right  to  the  countiy,  he  would  restore  it  to  its  legitimate
sovereign;"  and,  altering  his  son's  name  to  PylsBmenes,  the
common  name  of  the  Paphlagonian  kings,  he  assigned  it  to
him ;  and  thus,  as  if  he  had  restored  the  throne  to  the  royal
line,  he  continued  to  occupy  the  country  on  this  frivolous  pre-
text. The  ambassadors,  when  they  found  themselves  thus  set
at  nought,  returned  to  Rome.


BOOK  XXXVIII.


Mithridates  takes  possession  of  Cappadocia,  I. — Disputes  between  him
and  Nicomedes;  the  senate  take  from  them  Cappadocia  and
Paphlagonia,  II. — Mithridates  forms  an  alliance  with  Tigranes ;
invades  Asia,  and  defeats  the  Romans  and.  Nicomedes,  III. —
Speech  of  Mithridates  to  his  army,  IV.  V.  VI.  VII. — Cruelties
and  excesses  of  Ptolemy  Physcon ;  he  is  expelled  from  Egypt  by
his  subjects,  VIII. — Demetrius  Nicator,  king  of  Syria,  made
prisoner  by  the  Parthians,  IX. — ^Antiochus  Sidetea,  brother  of
Demetrius,  falls  in  war  against  the  Parthians ;  Demetrius  regains
his  throne,  X.

II.  MiTHBiDATES  having  commenced  his  cruelties  by  killing
his  wife,  resolved  also  on  removing  the  sons  of  his  other  sister
Laodice,  (whose  husband  Ariarathes,  king  of  Cappadocia,  he
had  treacherously  cut  off  by  the  agency  of  a  certain  Gordius,*)
thinking  that  nothing  was  gained  by  the  death  of  the  father,
if  the  young  princes  should  possess  themselves  of  his  throne,
with  a  desire  of  which  he  himself  was  strongly  inflamed. J^s

*  He  had  been  banished ;  see  below. .


B.C.  117 — 88.]  MITHBroATES.  253

he  was  meditating  on  this  scheme,  Nicomedes,  king  of
Bithynia,  proceeded  to  occupy  Cappadocia,  whilei  it  was  left
defenceless  hy  the  death  of  its  sovereign ;  and  Mithridates,
on  receiving  intelligence  of  his  movements,  sent  assistance
to  his  sister,  on  pretence  of  affection  for  her,  to  enahle  her  to
drive  Nicomedes  out  of  Cappadocia.  But  Laodice  had  already
made  a  compact  to  marry  Nicomedes  ;  and  Mithridates,  being
indignant  at  this  arrangement,  expelled  the  garrisons  of
Nicomedes  from  Cappadocia,  and  restored  the  t&'one  to  his
sister's  son ;  an  act  of  the  highest  merit,  had  no  treachery
followed  it.  But  some  montlis  after,  he  pretended  that  he
wished  to  restore  Gordius,  whom  he  had  used  as  his  agent
in  the  assassination  of  Ariarathes,  to  his  countzy ;  hoping
that,  if  the  young  man  opposed  his  recal,  he  should  have  a
pretext  for  war,  or,  that  if  he  consented  to  it,  the  son  might
be  taken  off  by  the  same  instrument  by  which  he  had  procured
the  death  of  the  father.  When  the  young  Ariarthes  under-
stood his  intention,  he  expressed  great  indignation  that  the
murderer  of  his  father  should  be  recalled  from  banishment,
especially  by  his  uncle,  and  assembled  a  great  army.  Mithri-
dates,  after  bringing  into  the  field  eighty  thousand  foot,  ten
thousand  horse,  and  six  hundred  chariots  armed  with  scythes,
(while  Ariarathes,  by  the  aid  of  the  neighbouring  princes,  had  no
less  a  force),  fearing  the  uncertain  event  of  a  battle,  turned  his
thoughts  to  treachery,  and,  inviting  the  young  prince  to  a
conference,  and  having,  at  the  same  time,  a  weapon  concealed
in  his  lower  garments,  he  said  to  the  searcher,  who  was  sent
by  Ariarathes,  after  the  manner  of  princes  on  such  occasions,
to  examine  his  person,  and  who  was  feeling  very  carefully
about  his  groin,  that  ''  he  had  better  take  care,  lest  he  should
find  another  sort  of  weapon  than  he  was  seeking.*'  Having
thus  covered  his  treachery  with  a  joke,  he  killed  his  nephew,
(after  drawing  him  aside  from  his  friends  as  if  to  confer  with
him  secretly),  in  the  sight  of  both  armies,  and  bestowed  the
kingdom  of  Cappadocia  on  his  own  son,  a  child  eight  years
old,  giving  him  the  name  of  Ariarathes,  and  appointing
Gordius  his  guardian.

II.  The  Cappadocians,  however,  being  harassed  by  the
cruelty  and  licentiousness  of  their  rulers,  revolted  from
Mithndates,  and  sent  for  the  brother  of  their  king,  who  was
also  called  Ariarathes,  from  Asia  where  he  was  being  educated.


354  JCTBTm.  [B.XXXYm.  CH.in.

upon  tliis  prince  Mithridates  again  made  war,  defeated  him,
and  drove  lum  from  Cappadocia ;  and  not  long  after  the  young
man  died  of  a  disease  hrought  on  by  anxiety.  After  his  death,
Nicomedes,  fearing  lest  Mithridates,  from  having  added  Cappa-
docia to  his  dominions,  should  also  seize  upon  Bithynia  which
was  near  it,  instructed  a  youth,  of  extraordinary  beauty,  to
apply  for  the  throne  of  Bithynia  from  the  [senate,  as  having
been  his  father's,  pretending  that  Ariarathes  had  not  had  two
sons  only,  but  a  third.  He  sent  his  wife  Laodice,  also,  to
Eome,  to  testify  that  her  husband  had  three  children  bom  to
him.  Mithridates,  when  he  heard  of  this  contrivance,  de-
spatched Gordius,  with  equal  effrontery,  to  Rome,  to  assure
the  senate  that  ''  the  young  prince,  to  whom  he  had  assigned
the  throne  of  Cappadocia,  was  the  son  of  that  Ariarathes  who
had  Mien  in  the  war  against  Aristonicus  when  giving  assistance
to  the  Romans."  But  the  senate*  perceiving  the  ambitious
designs  of  the  two  kings,  who  were  seizing  the  dominions  of
others  on  false  pretences,  took  away  Cappadocia  from  Mithri-
dates, and,  !to  console  him,  Paphlagonia  from  Nicomedes ;
and  that  it  might  not  prove  an  offence  to  the  kings,  that  any
thing  should j  be  taken  from  them  and  given  to  others,  both
people  were  offered  their  liberty.  But  the  Cappadocians
declined  the  favour,  saying  that  '*  their  nation  could  not
subsist  without  a  king."  Ariobarzanes  was  in  consequence
appointed  their  king  hj  the  senate*

III.  The  king  of  Armenia,  at  this  time,  was  Tigraues,  who
had  long  before  been  committed  as  a  hostage  to  the  Parthians,
but  had  subsequently  been  sent  back  to  take  possession  of  his
father's  throne.  This  prince  Mithridates  was  extremely
desirous  to  engage  as  an  ally  in  the  war,  which  he  had  long
meditated,  against  the  Romans.  By  the  agency  of  Gordius^
accordingly,  he  prevailed  upon  him  to  make  war,  having  not
the  least  thought  of  offending  the  Romans  by  the  act,  on
Ariobarzanes,  a  prince  of  inactive  disposition;  and,  that  no
deceit  might  seem  to  be  intended,  gave  him  his  daughter
Cleopatra  in  marriage.  On  the  first  approach  of  Tigranes,
Ariobarzanes  packed  up  his  baggage  and  went  off  to  Rome.
Thus,  through  the  instrumentality  of  Tigranes,  Cappadocia
was  destined  to  fall  again  under  the  power  of  Mithridates.
Nicomedes,  too,  dying  at  the  same  time,  his  son,  who  was  also
named  Nicomedes,  was  driven  from  his  dominions  by  Mithri-


H.C.  101.]  MXTHBIDATES,  ^55

datQS,  and,  having  gone  as  a  sappliant^to  Eome,  it  was  decreed
by  the  senate  that  **  both  the  kings  should  be  restored  to  their
thrones;*'  and  Aquilius  and  Manlius  Maltinus*  were  com-
missioned to  see  the  decree  executed.  On  being  informed  of
this  proceeding,  Mithridates  formed  an  alliance  with  Tigranes,
with  a  resolution  at  once  to  go  to  war  with  the  Romans ;  and
they  agreed  that  the  cities  and  territory  that  should  be  taken
from  the  enemy  should  be  the  share  of  Mithridates,  and  that
the  prisoners,  and  all  booty  that  could  be  carried  off,  should
belong  to  Ti^^nes.  In  the  next  place,  well  understanding
what  a  war  he  was  provoking,  he  sent  ambassadors  to  the
Gimbri,  the  Ga]logrsecians,t  the  Sarmatians,  and  the  Bastar-
mans,  to  request  aid;  for  all  tbe  time  that  he  had  been
meditating  war  with  the  Eomans,  he  had  been  gaining  over  all
these  nations  by  acts  of  kindness  and  liberaHty.  He  sent
also  for  an  army  from  Scythia,  and  armed  the  whole  eastern
world  against  the  Eomans*  Accordingly,  without  much
difficulty,  he  defeated  AquiUus  and  Maltinus,  who  had  an
army  wholly  composed  of  Asiatic  troops,  and  having  put  them
to  flight,  as  well  as  Nicomedes,  he  was  received  with  great
joy  by  the  various  cities,  in  which  he  found  a  great  quantity  of
gold  and  silver,  and  vast  warlike  stores,  laid  up  by  the  care
of  former  princes.  Taking  possession  of  these,  he  remitted
the  cities  all  sorts  of  debts,  pubUc  and  private,  and  granted
them  an  immunity  from  tribute  |  for  five  years.

He  then  assembled  his  troops,  and  animated  them,  by
various  exhortations,  to  pursue  the  war  with  the  Romans,  or
in.  Asia.  His  speech,  on  this  occasion,  I  have  thought  of
such  importance  that  I  insert  a  copy  of  it  in  this  brief  work.
Trogus  Pompeius  has  given  it  in  the  oblique  form,  as  he  finds
&iult  with  Livy  and  Sallust  for  having  exceeded  the  proper

*  The  commentators  are  dirided  respecting  these  names.  Bongar-
sins  and  Vorstius,  from  Appian,  and  Livy,  Epit.  Izxvii.  think  that  the
first  name  should  be  Manwiia  Aquilius,  The  Juntine  edition  has
AquQmi  Mamlmi  et  Ma/nms  Attilvus ;  Becharins  and  Major  read
Aqmlivs  MaUma  et  McUtinue,  But  conjecture  is  useless;  the  same
names  are  repeated,  without  any  prsenomina,  in  c.  4  of  this  book.-
Thfi  name  Mcdthiima  occurs  in  Horace.

+  See  XXV.  2.

i  Vdcationent.']  That  this  is  the  sense  of  vcicatio,  though  trtfnUorum
is  not  expressed,  is  generally  agreed.  For  instances  of  similar  im-
munity, Bemeccerus  refers  to  Tacit.  Ann.  IL  56,  and  Liv.  xlv.  18.


Q56  JUSTIN.  [B.xxxvni.  ch.iv.

limits  of  history,  by  inserting  direct  *  speeches  in  their  works
only  to  display  their  own  eloquence.

IV.  "  It  were  to  be  wished,"  he  said,  "  that  it  were  still  in
his  power  to  deliberate  whether  he  should  choose  peace  or  war
with  the  Romans ;  but  that  resistance  should  be  offered  against
aggressors,  not  even  those  doubted  who  were  without  hope
of  victory ;  for  all  men  draw  the  sword  against  robbers,  if  not
to  save  their  lives,  at  least  to  take  revenge. But  since  it  was
not  now  a  question,  when  they  had  come  to  hostilities  (not
merely  in  intention  but  in  the  field  of  battle),  they  must  con-
sider in  what  manner, and  with  what  hopes,  they  could
continue  the  contest  which  they  had  commenced. That  he
felt  certain  of  victory,  if  they  had  but  courage  ;  and  that  the
Eomans  might  be  conquered,  was  known,  not  more  to  himself
than  to  his  soldiers,  who  had  routed  both  Aquilius  in  Bithynia
and  Maltinus  in  Cappadocia. And  if  examples  Irom  other
nations  would  weigh  more  with  them  than  their  own ex-
perience, he  had  heard  that  the  Romans  had  been  overthrown
in  three  battles  by  Pyrrhus,  when  he  had  with  him  not  more
than  five  thousand  Macedonians }  he  had  heard  that  Hannibal
continued  victorious  in  Italy  for  sixteen  years,  and  that  it  was
not  the  strength  of  the  Romans,  but  the  violence  of  his  own
countrymen's  envy  and  jealousy,  that  prevented  him  from
taking  the  city  of  Rome  itself;  he  had  heard  that  the  people
of  Transalpine  Gaul  had  invaded  Italy,  and  founded  many
great  cities  in  it,  and  that  the  same  Gauls  had  possessed
themselves  of  a  larger  territory  there  than  in  Asia,  though
Asia  was  considered  by  no  means  a  warlike  country ;  he  had
been  informed  that  Rome  was  not  only  taken  but  conquered
by  the  Gauls,  the  top  of  one  hill  only  being  left  in  possession
of.the  inhabitants,  and  that  the  enemy  was  not  made  to  retire
by  the  sword,  but  by  gold. But  that  the  power  of  the  Gauls,
tvhich  had  always  so  much  alarmed  the  Romans,  he  himself
numbered  among  his  own  forces ;  for  that  these  Gauls,  who
inhabited  Asia,  differed  only  in  situation  from  the  Gauls  who
had  settled  themselves  in  Italy ;  that  they  had  the  same  ex-
traction,  courage, and  mode of  fighting; and  that, as  to
sagacity,  the  Asiatic  Gauls  must  have  more  than  the  others,
inasmuch  as  they  had  pursued  a  longer  and  more  difficult

*  Justin  has  given  two  examples  of  direct  speeches,  ziv.  4 ;  xviiL  7.


B.a  JOl.]  MITHKIDATBS,  257

march  through  lUyricura  and  Thrace,  having  traversed  those
territories  with  almost  more  labour  than  it  had  cost  th^m  to
acquire  those  in  which  they  settled.  That  he  had  heard  that
Italy  itself,  since  the  time  that  Eome  was  built,  had  nevel*
been  fairly  brought  under  subjection  to  her,  but  that  con-
stantly, year  after  year,  some  of  its  people  persisted  in  con-
tending for  liberty,  and  others  for  a  share  in  the  government  ;*
and  that,  by  many  states  of  Italy,  armies  of  the  Romans  had
been  cut  off  by  the  sword,  and  by  others,  with  a  new  species
of  insult,  sent  under  the  yoke  ?t  But  that,  not  to  dwell  on
past  instances,  all  Italy,  at  the  present  time,  was  in  arms  in
the  Marsian  war,  demanding,  not  liberty,  but  a  participation  in
the  government  and  the  rights  of  citizenship.  Nor  was  the
city  more  grievously  harassed  by  war  from  its  neighbours  in
Italy,  than  by  intestine  broils  among  its  leading  men ;  and
that  a  civil  war,  indeed,  was  much  more  dangerous  to  it  than
an  Italian  one.  At  the  same  time,  too,  the  Cimbri  from  Ger-
many, many  thousands  of  wild  and  savage  people,  had  rushed
upon  Italy  like  a  tempest ;  and  that  in  wars  with  such  enemies,
though  the  Eomans  might  be  able  to  resist  them  singly,  yet
by  them  all  they  must  be  overpowered ;  so  that  he  thought
they  would  even  be  too  much  occupied  to  make  head  against
his  attack.

V.  "  That  they  ought  therefore  to  take  advantage  of  the
present  circumstances,  and  seize  the  opportunity  of  increasing
their  power,  lest,  if  they  remained  inactive  while  the  Romans
were  occupied,  they  should  hereafter  find  greater  difficulty  in
contending  with  them,  when  they  were  quiet  and  unmolested.
For  it  was  not  a  question  whether  tiiey  should  take  up
arms  or  not,  but  whether  they  should  do  so  at  a  time  favou^ble
to  themselves  or  to  their  enemies.  That  wsu*,  indeed,  had
been  commenced  against  him  by  the  Romans,  when  they  took
from  him,  in  his  minority,  the  Greater  Phrygia,  a  country
which  they  had  granted  to  his  father  as  a  recompence  for  the
succours  which  he  had  afforded  them  in  the  war  against  Ari-
stonicus,  and  which  Seleucus  Callinicus  had  given  to  his  great-
grandfather Mithridates,  as  a  dowry  with  his  daughter. When

*  Wetzel  has  pro  Jure  imperii  in  bis  text,  but  seems  to  prefer,  in  his
note  on  the  passage,  J.  F.  Gronovius's  reading,  pro  vice  imperii,  which
is  found  in  some  MSS.

t  By  the  Samnites;  Liv.  ix.  5;  VeU.  Pat  I  14.

S


ii58  JUSTIN,  [B.xxxvni.  CH.iy*

they  i^uired  him  to  quit  Paphlagonia,  too,  was  not  that
a  renewal  of  hostility,  a  possession  which  had  fallen  to  his
father,  not  by  conquest  or  force  of  arms,  but  by  adoption  in  a
will,*  and  as  an  inheritance  on  the  death  of  its  own  sovereigns  ?
That,  under  the  severity  of  such  decrees,  he  had  not  been  able
to  soften  them  by  compUauce-,  or  to  prevent  them  from  assum-
ing harsher  measures  towards  him  every  day.  For  in  what
particular  had  he  not  submitted  to  their  requisition?  Had
not  Phiygia  aod  Paphlagonia  been  given  up  ?  Had  not  his
son  been  removed  from  Cappadocia,  which  he  had  gained,  as  a
conqueror,  by  the  common  law  of  nations  ?  Yet  his  conquest
had  been  forced  from  him  by  those  who  had  nothing  them*
selves  but  what  they  had  got  in  war.  Was  not  Christos,t  king
of  Bithynia,  on  whom  the  senate  had  decreed  that  war  should
be  made,  killed  by  him  for  their  gratification?  Yet  that
whatever  Gt)rdius  or  Tigranes  did,  was  imputed  to  him  ;  that
liberty  was  readily  granted  by  the  senate  to  Cappadocia
(liberty  of  which  they  deprived  other  nations),  on  purpose  to
a£&ont  him  ;  and  that  when  the  people  of  Cappadocia,  instead
of  the  liberty  oJBfered  them,  begged  to  have  Gordius  for  their
king,  they  did  not  obtain  their  request  merely  because'Gordius
was  his  Mend.  That  Nicomedes  had  made  war  upon  him  by
their  direction ;  that  when  he  was  going  to  avenge  himself,  he
was  obstructed  by  them ;  and  that  their  pretence  for  making
war  on  him  at  present  would  be,  that  he  had  not  given  up  his
dominions  to  Nicomedes,  the  son  of  a  public  dancer,  to  be
ravaged  with  impunity.

VI.  "  That  it  was  not  the  offences  of  kings,  but  their
power  and  majesty,  for  which  they  attacked  them ;  and  that
they  had  not  acted  thus  against  himself  alone,  but  against  all
other  princes  at  all  times.  That  they  had  treated  his  grand-
father Phamaces  in  the  same  manner,  who,  by  tlie  arbitration
of  his  relatives,  was  made  successor  to  Eumenes  king  of  Per-
gamus ;  that  Eumenes  himself,  again,  in  whose  fleet  they  had
^r  the  first  time  been  transported  into  Asia,  and  by  whose

*  All  the  editions  have  adoptione  teitamentij  et  regwn,  domegUcorum
interitu,  Scheffer  asks,  "  What  ifl  adoptione  testamenti  f  Perhaps,"  he
adds,  **  adoption  made  per  teitamentwn.  But  no  one  has  explained  this
form  of  adoption ;  and  if  it  were  explained,  whence  does  it  appear  that
any  adoption  was  made  in  this  case  per  testamewtvm  t**  He  concludes
by  proposmg  to  read  adoptione,  testamento,  &c.

t  This  Christos  is  nowhere  else  mentioned.


B.O.  101;]  MITHBIDATES.  tM

anny,  ratber  than  their  own,  they  had  subdued  both  Antiochud
the  Great  and  the  Gauls  in  Asia,  and  soon  after  king  Perses
in  Macedonia,  had  been  treated  by  them  as  an  enemy,  and  had
been  forbidden  to  come  into  Italy,  though  they  made  wari
which  they  thought  it  would  be  disgraceful  to  make  upon  him«
self,  upon  his  son  Aristonicus.^  No  king's  services  were
thought  more  important  by  them  than  those  of  Masinissa^
king  of  Numidia ;  to  him  it  was  ascribed  that  Hannibal  was
conquered  ;  to  him,  that  SyphajE  was  made  prisoner ;  to  him,
that  Carthage  was  destroyed ;  he  was  ranked  with  the  two
Africani,  as  a  third  saviour  of  the  city ;  yet  a  war  had  lately
been  carried  on  with  his  grandson  in  Africa,  so  implacably,
that  they  would  not  save  the  vanquished  prince,  for  the  sake
of  his  grandfather  s  memory,  from  being  cast  into  gaol,  and  led
in  triumph  as  a  public  spectacle.  That  they  had  made  it  a
law  to  themselves  to  hate  all  kings,  because  they  themselves
had  had  such  kings  at  whose  names  they  might  well  blush,
being  either  shepherds  of  the  Aborigines,  or  soothsayers  of  the
Sabines,  or  exiles  from  the  Corinthians,  or  servants  and  slaves
of  the  Tuscans,  or^  what  was  the  most  honourable  name
amongst  them,  the  ^(yvd ;  and  as  their  founders,  according  to
their  report,  were  suckled  by  the  teats  of  a  wolf,  so  the  whole
race  had  the  disposition  of  wolves,  being  insatiable  of  blood
and  tyranny,  and  eager  and  hungiy  after  riches.t

YII.  "  But  as  for  himself  if  he  were  compared  with  them
as  to  respectabiUty  of  descent,  he  was  of  more  honourable
origin  than  that  mi^ed  mass  of  settlers,  counting  his  aticestors,
on  his  father's  side,  from  Cyrus  and  Darius,  the  founders  of
the  Persian  empire,  and  those  on  his  mother's  side  from
Alexander  the  Great  and  Seleucus  Nicator,  who  established
the  Macedonian  empire  $  or,  if  their  people  were  compared
with  his  own,  he  was  at  the  head  of  nations,  ;|;  which  were  not
merely  a  match  for  the  power  of  Bome,  but  had  withstood
even  that  of  Macedonia.  That  none  of  the  people  under  his
command  had  ever  endured  a  foreign  yoke,  or  obeyed  any
rulers  but  their  own  native  princes  \  for  whether  they  looked
on  Cappadocia  or  Paphlagonla,  Pontus  or  Bithynia,  or  the

♦  See  zxzvL  4.

f  JHvkia^'wiyque  avidoi  ac^'efimot.]  A  coiifusidb  of  man  and  wolf.
X  Earum  #e  genHwai  eaeJ]  Faber  observes  that  tegem  is  wanting  in
the  text)  and  mutt  be  supplied.

S  S


860  JUSTIN.  [B.xxxvnL'CH.vn.

Greater  "and  Lesser  Armenia,  thej  woiild  find  that  neidier
Alexander,  who  subdued  all  Asia,*  nor  any  of  his  successors
or  posterity,  had  meddled  with  any  one  of  those  nations.  That
^  to  Scythia,  only  two  kings  before  him,  Darius  and  Philip,
had  ventured,  not  indeed  to  reduce  it,  but  merely  to  enter  it,
and  had  with  difficulty  secured  a  retreat  from  it;  yet  that
from  that  country  he  had  procured  a  great  part  of  his  force  to
oppose  the  Eomans.  That  he  had  entered  on  the  Pontic
warst  with  much  more  timidity  and  diffidence,  as  he  was  then
young  and  inexperienced.  That  the  Scythians,  in  addition  to
their  arms  and  courage,  were  defended  by  deserts  and  cold,  by
which  was  shown  the  great  labour  and  danger  of  making  war
there,  while,  amidst  such  hardships,  there  was  not  even  hope
of  spoil  from  a  wandering  enemy,  destitute,  not  only  of  money,
but  of  settled  habitations.  But  that  he  was  now  entering  upon
a-  different  sort  of  war ;  for  there  was  no  climate  more  tem-
perate than  that  of  Asia,  nor  any  country  more  fertile  or  more
attractive  from  the  number  of  its  cities ;  and  that  they  would
spend  a  great  part  of  their  time,  not  as  in  military  service,  but
as  at  a  festival,  in  a  war  of  which  it  was  hard  to  say  whether
it  would  be  more  easy  or  more  gainful,  as  they  themselves
might  feel  assured,  if  they  had  but  heard  of  the.  late  riches  of
the  kingdom  of  Attains,  or  the  ancient  opulence  of  Lydia  and
Ionia,  which  they  were  not  going  to  acquire  by  conquest,  but
to  take  possession  of;  while  Asia  so  eagerly  expected,  him,;]:
that  it  even  invited  him  in  words,  so  much  had  the  rapacity
of  the  proconsuls,  the  sales  of  the  tax-gatherers,  and  the  dis-
graceful mode  of  conducting  law-suits,  possessed  the  people
with  a  hatred  of  the  Romans.  That  they  had  only  to  follow
him  bravely,  and  learn  what  so  great  an  army  might  do  under
his  conduct^  whom  they  had  seen  seizing  Cappadocia,  after
killing  its  king,  not  with  the  aid  of  any  troops,  but  by  his  own
personal  effort,  and  who,  alone,  of  all  mankind,  had  subdued
all  Pontus  and  Scythia,  which  no  one  Itefore  him  could  safely
penetrate  or  approach.  As  to  his  justice  and  generosity,  he
was  willing  to  take  the  soldiers  themselves,  who  had  expe-

*  That  is,  all  Greater  Asia ;  all  the  eastern  part  of  Asia.

t  Bella  Pontica,]  See  xxxvii.  3.

t  Twntvmqw  se  avida  expectet  Agio,  ftc]  Faber  reads  tamque  se,  &c.,
but  even  then,  as  Vorstius  observes,  the  words  do  not  ami  the  oratio
oUiquc^^  which  requires  avidam  expectare  J  nam,  ^«


B.a  145—118.]  PTOLEMY  PHTSOON.  S61

lienced  them,  as  witnesses  to  what  they  were;  and  he  had
those  proofs  to  bring  of  the  latter,  that  he  alone,  of  all  kings,
•possessed  not  only  his  father's  dominions,  but  foreign  king^
'doms,  acquired  by  inheritance  through  his  liberality^  namely^
Colchis,  Paphlagonia,  and  the  Bosporus/*
'  VIII.  Having  thus  encouraged  his  troops,  he  entered  upon
the' war  with  the  Eomans,*  twenty-three  years  after  his  access
sion  to  the  throne.

In  Egypt,  meanwhile,  on  the  death  of  Ptolemy,t  the  throne>
with  the  queen  Cleopatra  his  sister  in  marriage,  was  offered  by
an  embassy  to  the  Ptolemy  J  who  was  reigning  at  Cyrene.
Ptolemy,  rejoiced  at  having  recovered  his  brother's  throne  with-
out, a  struggle  (for  which  he  knew  that  his  brother's  don  was
intended,  both  by  his  mother  Cleopatra  and  the  inclination  of
the  nobles),  but  being  incensed  at  all  that  had  opposed  his
interests,  ordered,  as  soon  as  he  entered  Ale^ndriaj  the
partisans  of  the  young  prince  to  be  put  to  death. He  also
killed  the  youth  himself  on  the  day  of  his  nuptials  (when  he
took  his  mother  to  wife),  amidst  the  splendour  of  feasts,  thd
ceremonies  of  religion^  and  in  the  very  embraces  of  his  parent^
and  thus  went  to  the  couch  of  his  sister  stained  with  the  blood
of  her  child. Nor  was  he  afterwards  more  merciful  to  those
of  his  subjects  who  had  invited  him  to  the  throne,  for  license
to  use  the  sword  being  given  to  the  foreign  soldiers,  all  places
daily  ran  with  blood. He  divorced  his  sister,  too,  offering
violence  to  her  daughter,  a  young  maiden,  and  then  taking
her  in  marriage. The  people,  terrified  at  these  proceedings,
fled  to  other  countries,  and  became  exiles  from  their  native
soil  throi]^h  fear  of  death. Ptolemy,  in  consequence,  being
left  alone  with  his  soldiers  in  so  large  a  city,  and  finding
himself  a  king,  not  of  men^  but  of  empty  houses,  invited,  by  a
proclamation,  foreigners  to  become  residents  in  it. While
people  were  flocking  thither,  he  went  out  to  meet  some
Roman  commissioners,  Scipio  Africanus,  Spurius  Mummius,
,and  Lucius  Metellus,  who  had  come  to  inspect  the  dominions  of
their  allies. But  he  appeared  as  ridiculous  to  the  Bomans  as

*  JSomana  hdla,]  Of  which  Justin  gives  no  regular  accouht.  He
touches  on  the  subject^  zzxvii.  1,  and  zzviii.  8 ;  but  what  he  relates
of  Aquilius  and  MaltinuB  in  the  latter  passage  occurred  twenty-three
years  after  Mithridates  commenced  the  war.

+  Philometor. See  zzxiv.  2.

X  Fhyscon. Bee  zzxiv.  2. , .


W2  JUSTIN.  [B.xxxvm..dfl.ix.

be 'wad  cruel  to  his  own  subjects  ;  for  be  was  disagreeiable  in
countenance,  sbort  in  stature,  and,  from  bis  obesity,  more  like
a  beast  than  a  man.  This  deformitj  the  extraordinary  thin-
ness of  his  apparel,  which  was  even  transparent,  made  more
remarkable,  just  as  if  that  was  affectedly  obtruded  on  the  sight
which  by  a  modest  man  would  have  been  most  carefully  con-
cealed. After  the  depuliure  of  the  commissioners,  (of  whom
AMcanus,  as  he  surveyed  the  city,  was  an  object  of  Interest
to  the  Alexandrians),  finding  that  he  had  become  hateful  even
to  the  fdreigners  whom  he  had  invited,  he  withdrew  secretly,
for  fear  of  plots  against  his  life,  into  voluntary  exile,  accom-
panied by  a  son  that  he  had  by  his  sister,  and  by  his  wife,  her
mother's  rival,  and,  having  collected  an  army  of  mercenaries,
made  war  at  once  upon  his  sister  and  his  country.  He
^ext  sent  for  his  eldest  son  from  Gyrene,  and  put  him
to  death,  when  the  people  began  to  pull  down  his  statues
and  images,  and  he,  imagining  that  this  was  done  to  please
his  sister,  killed  the  son  that  he  had  by  her,  and  contrived
to  have  the  body,  divided  into  portions  and  arranged  in  a  chest,
.presented  to  the  mother  at  a  feast  on  his  bir&-day«  This
deed  occasioned  grief  and  sorrow,  not  only  to  the  queen,  but
also  to  the  whole  city,  and  threw  such  a  gloom  over  a  banquet
intended  to  be  most  joyous,  that  the  whole  palace  was  suddenly
filled  with  mourning.  The  attention  of  the  nobility,  in
consequence,  being  turned  from  feasting  to  a  funeral,  they
exhibited  the  mangled  limbs  to  the  people,  and  let  them  see,  by
the  murder  of  his  son,  what  they  were  to  expect  &om  their  king.
IX.  Cleopatra,  when  the  mourning  for  the  loss  of  her  son
was  over,  finding  herself  pressed  by  war  on  the  part  of  her
brother,  sent  ambassadors  to  request  aid  from  Demetrius  king  of
Syria^  a  prince  whose  changes  of  fortune  had  been  numerous  and
remarkable.  After  making  war,  as  has  been  said  above,*  upon
the  Parthians,  and  gaining  the  viotoiy  in  several  battles,  he
was  suddenly  surprised  by  an  ambuscade,  and,  having  lost  his
amiy,  was  taken  prisoner.  Arsacides,t  king  of  the  Parthians,
having  sent  him  into  Hyrcania,  not  only  paid  him,  with  royal
magnanimity,  the  respect  due  to  a  prince,  but  gave  him  his
daughter  also  in  marriage,  and  promised  to  recover  for  hiih
the  throne  of  Syria,  which  Trypho  had  usurped  in  his  absence.
After  the  death  of  this  king,  Demetrius,  despairing  of  being

♦  xxxyi  1,

t  See  note  on  zxxvL  I.


B.C.  138 — 129.] CAPTIVITY  OP  DEMETRIUS.  263

allowed  to  return,  being  unable  to  endure  captivity,  and
weary  of  a  private,  though  splendid,  life,  secretly  planned  &
mode  of  escaping  to  his  own  country.  His  counsellor  and
companion  in  the  scheme  was  his  Mend  Gallimander,  who«
after  Demetrius  was  taken  prisoner,  had  come  in  a  Parthian
dress  from  Syria,  with  some  guides  that  he  had  hired,
through  the'deserts  of  Arabia  to  Babylon.  But  Phraates,  who
had  succeeded  Arsacides,  brought  him  back,  for  he  was  OYer"
taken  in  his  flight  by  the  speed  of  a  party  of  horse  sent  after
him  by  a  shorter  road.  When  he  was  brought  to  the  king,
not  only 'pardon,  but  a  testimony  of  esteem  for  his  fidelity,
was  given  to  Gallimander,  but  as  for  Demetrius,  he  sent  him
back,  after  having  severely  reproached  him,  into  Hyrcania  to
bis  wife,  and  directed  that  he  should  be  kept  in  stricter  con*
flnement  than  before.  Some  time  after,  when  children  that
were  bom  to  him  had  caused  him  to  be  more  trusted,*  he
again  attempted  flight,  with  the  same  friend  as  his  attendant,
but  was  overtaken,  with  equal  ill-fortune,  near  the  borders  of
his  dominions,  and  being  again  brought  to  the  king,  was
ordered  out  of  his  sight,  as  a  person  whom  he  coifld  not
endure  to  see.  But  being  then  abo  spared,  for  the  sake  of
his  wife  and  children,  he  was  remanded  into  Hyrcania,  the
countiy  of  his  ptuiishment.  and  presented  mth  ^Iden  dice,
as  a  reproach  for  his  childish  'levity.  But  it  was  not  com-
passion, or  respect  for  ties  of  blood,  that  was  the  cause  of  this
extraordinaiy  clemency  f  of  the  Parthians  tow6u*d  Demetrius ;
the  reason  was,  that  they  had  some  designs  on  the  kingdom
of  Sjrria,  and  intended  to  make  use  of  Demetrius  against  his
broliier  Antiochus,  as  circumstances,  the  course  of  time,  or
the  fortune  of  war,  might  require.

X.  Antiochus,  having  heard  of  their  designs,  and  thinking
it  proper  to  be  first  in  the  field,  led  forth  an  army,  which  he
had  inured  to  service  by  many  war8|  with  his  neighbours,
against  the  Parthians.  But  his  preparations  for  luxury  were
not  less  than  those  for  war,  for  three  hundred  thousand§  camp

*  Because  Phraates  thought  that  such  a  tie  was  likely  to  attach
Demetrius  to  Hyvcania. — Laivaire.

t  Wetzel's  text,  and,  I  believe,  all  others,  have  wxtem  dementiamf
but  as  mitem  is  a  useless  epithet^  I  have  followed  Scheflfoi^s  conjecture,
mdram  dementiaatu

X  See  xxxvi.  1.

§  Trecenta  nUUiaJ]  TrigimUt  wMUa,  which  appears  in  the  Yen.  Ald^
and  CoL  editions,  is  a  more  probable  number^ —  WetzeU  •  ^


364  JUSTIN.  [R3CXXVI1I.  CH.X.

followers,  of  whom  the  greater  number  were  cooks,  bakers^
and  stage-players,  attended  on  eighty  thousand  armed  men.
Of  silver  and  gold,  it  is  certain,  there  was  such  an  abundance^
that  the  common  soldiers  fastened  their  buskins  with  gold,
and  trod  upon  the  metal  for  the  love  of  which  nations  contend
yfith  the  sword.  Their  cooking  instruments,  too,  were  of
9il?er,  as  if  they  were  going  to  a  banquet,  not  to  a  field  of
battle.  Many  kings  of  the  east  met  Antiochus  on  his  march,
offering  him  themselves  and  their  kingdoms,  and  expressing
the  greatest  detestation  of  Parthian  pride.  Nor  was  there
any  delay  in  coming  to  an  engagement.  Antiochus,  being
yictorious  in  three  battles,  and  having  got  possession  of  Babylon,
began  to  be  thought  a  great  man.  AH  the  neighbouring
people,  in  consequence,  joining  him,  nothing  was  left  to  the
Parthians  but  their  own  country.  It  was  then  that  Phraates
sent  Demetrius  into  Syria,  with  a  body  of  Parthians,  to  seize
the  throne,  so  that  Antiochus  might  be  recalled  fron  Parthia
to  secure  his  own  dominions.  In  the  meantime,  since  he  could
liot  overthrow  Antiochus  by  open  force,  he  made  attempts
upon  him  everywhere  by  stratagem.  On  account  of  the
number  of  his  forces,'^Antiochus  had  distributed  his  army,  in
winter  quarters,  through  several  cities;  and  this  dispersion
was  the  cause  of  his  ruin ;  for  the  cities,  finding  themselves
harassed  by  having  to  furnish  supplies,  and  by  the  depredation&i
of  the  soldiers,  revolted  to  the  Parthians,  and,  on  an  appointed
day,  conspired  to  fall  upon  the  army  divided  among  them,
so  that  the  several  divisions  might  not  be  able  to  assist  each
other.  News  of  the  attack  being  brought  to  Antiochus,  he
hastened  with  that  body  of  troops  which  he  had  in  winter-
quarters  with  him,  to  succour  the  others  that  lay  nearest.  On
his  way  he  was  met  by  the  king  of  the  Parthians,  with  whom
he  himself  fought  more  bravely  than  his  troops  ;  but  at  last,
as  the  enemy  had  the  superiority  in  valour,  he  was  deserted,
through  fear  on  the  part  of  his  men,  and  killed.  Phraates  had
funeral  rites  performed  for  him  as  a  king,  and  married  the
daughter  of  Demetrius,  whom  Antiochus  had  brought  with  him,
and  of  whom  he  had  become  enamoured.  He  l£en  began  to
regret  having  sent  away  Demetrius,  and  hastily  despatched
some  troops  of  horse  to  fetch  him  back ;  but  they  found  lliat
prince,  who  had  been  in  fear  of  pursuit,  already  seated  on  his
throne,  and,  after  doing  all  they  could  to  no  purpose,  returned
to  their  king. ,


S65


BOOK  XXXIX.

Demetrius  dethroned  by  a  pretender  named  Zabinas ;  his  death ;  state
of  his  family,  I. — Zabinas  killed  by  Antiochus  Grypus ;  a  new
pretender,  Antiochus  of  Cyzicus,  IL — Death  of  Ptolemy  Physcon;
state  of  Egypt  and  Syria ;  Antiochus  of  Cyzicus  dethrones  his
brother  Grypus,  III. — Cleopatra  drives  Ptolemy  Iiathyrus  from
Egypt)  and  places  on  the  throne  Ptolemy  Alexander,  by  whom
she  is  killed,  lY. — Ptolemy  Alexander  driven  from  Egypt ;
Lathyrus  recalled;  Ptolemy  Apion,  king  of  Cyrene,  bequeaths
his  dominions  to  the  Romans ;  desolation  of  Egypt  and  Syria,  Y.

I.  After  Antiochus  and  his  army  were  cut  off  in  Persia,  his
brother  Demetrius,  being  delivered  from  confinement*  among
the  Parthians,  and  restored  to  bis  throne,  resolved,  while  all
JSyria  was  mourning  for  the  loss  of  the  army,  to  make  war  upon
Egypt,  (just  as  if  his  and  his  brother's  wars  with  the  Parthians,
in  which  one  was  taken  prisoner  and  the  other  killed,  had  had
a  fortunate  termination),  Cleopatra  his  mother-in-law  promis-
ing him  the  kingdom  of  Egypt,  as  a  recompence  for  the
assistance  that  he  should  afford  her  against  her  brother.  But^
as  is  often  the  case,  while  he  was  grasping  at  what  belonged  to
others,  he  lost  his  own  by  a  rebellion  in  Syria ;  for  the  people
of  Antioch,  in  the  first  place,  under  the  leadership  of  Tiypho^
and  from  detestation  of  the  pride  of  their  king  (which,  from
his  intercourse  with  the  unfeeling  Parthians,  had  become  in:
tolerable),  and  afterwards  the  Apameniansf  and  other  people,
following  their  example,  revolted  from  Demetrius  in  his  absence.
Ptolemy,  king  of  Egypt,  too,  who  was  threatened  with  a  war
by  him,  having  learned  that  his  sister  Cleopatra  had  put  much
of  the  wealth  of  Egypt  on  ship-board,  and  fled  into  Syria  to
her  daughter  and  son-in-law  Demetrius,  sent  an  Egyptian
youth,:^  the  son  of  a  merchant  named  Protarchus,  to  claim  the
throne  of  Syria  by  force  of  arms,  having  forged  a  story,  that
he  had  been  admitted  into  the  feimily  of  King  Antiochus  by

*  Ohsidume.']  Obndio  for  ca/ptwUaa, —  Voratitia,  An  odd  word.  But
'^e  sense  is  evident. See  xxxvi.  1 ;  xxxviiL  10.

f  Apamene  was  a  district  of  Syria»  in  which  stood  the  city  of
Ajpamia.

X  Ptolemy  spread  a  report  that  this  youth,  to  whom  he  gave  the
name  of  Alexander,  and  who  is  called  Zebennas  by  Josephus,  xiii.  17,
and  Zabinas  by  Diod.  Sic.  xxxiv.  fragm.  20,  22^  was  the  son  of  the
Antioohus  killed  by  the  Parthians,  xxxviiL  8,  or  rather  of  Alexander
Bala. See  xxxv.  1,  ^.—WetzeL


266  jvimtf,  [b.  XXXIX.  CH.n.

adoption,  and  the  Syrians,  at  the  same  time,  refusing  no  man
for  their  king,  if  they  might  but  be  freed  from  the  insolence  of
Demetrius.  The  name  of  Alexander  was  given  to  the  youth/
and  great  succours  were  sent  him  from  Egypt.  Meanwhile
the  body  of  Antiochus,  who  had  been  killed  by  the  king  of  the
Parthians,  arrived  in  Syria,  being  sent  back  in  a  silver  coffin
for  burial,  and  was  received  with  great  respect  by  the  different
cities,  as  well  as  by  the  new  king,  Alexander,  in  order  to  se-
cure credit  to  the  fiction.  This  show  of  affection  procured  him
extraordinary  regard  from  the  people,  every  one  supposing  his
tears  not  counterfeit  but  real,  Demetrius,  being  defeated  by
Alexander,  and  overwhelmed  by  misfortunes  surrounding  him
on  every  side,  was  at  last  forsaken  even  by  his  wife  and  child-
ren. Being  left,  accordingly,  with  only  a  few  slaves,  and
setting  sail  for  Tyre,  to  shelter  himself  in  the  sanctuary  of  a
temple  there,  he  was  killed,  as  he  was  leaving  the  ship,  by
order  of  the  governor  of  the  city.  One  of  his  sons,  Seleucus,
for  having  assumed  tho  diadem  without  his  mother's  consent/
was  put  to  death  by  her ;  the  other,  who,  from  the  size  of  his
nose  was  named  Grypus,*  was  made  king  by  his  mother,  so
far  at  least  that  the  regal  name  should  belong  to  him,  while  all
the  power  of  sovereignty  was  to  remain  with  herself.

II.  But  Alexander,  having  secured  the  throne  of  Syria,  and
being  puffed  up  with  success,  began,  with  insolent  haughti-
ness, to  show  disrespect  even  to  Ptolemy  himself,  by  whom  he
had  been  artfully  advanced  to  royal  dignity.  Ptolemy,  in
consequence,  effecting  a  reconciliation  with  his  sister,  pre-
pared, with  his  utmost  efforts,  to  overthrow  that  power,  which,
from  hatred  to  Demetrius,  he  had  procured  for  Alexander  by
supplying  him  with  troops.  He  therefore  sent  a  large  force
to  the  aid  of  Grypus,  and  his  daughter  Tryphsena  to  marry
him,  that  he  might  induce  the  people  to  support  his  nephew,
not  only  by  sharing  in  the  war  with  him,  but  by  contracting
with  him  this  affinity.  Nor  were  his  endeavours  without
effect ;  for  when  the  people  saw  Grypus  upheld  by  the
strength  of  Egypt,  they  began  by  degrees  to  fall  away  from
Alexander.  A  battle  then  took  place  between  the  kings,  in
which  Alexander  was  defeated,  and  fled  to  Antioch. Here,

*  Propter  nasi  magnUvdinem  cognomen  Chrypo  fmtJ\  Bnt  the  adjective
ypvir^^,  as  Faber  observes,  means  hooked,  aqudme ;  and  he  therefore
proposes  to  read  propter  nasi  aUUudmemf  &o.


KC.  118.]  DEATH  OP  PTOLEMY  PHYSCON.  267

beiilg  without  money,  and  pay  being  wanted  for  his  soldiers^
he  ordered  a  statue  of  Victory  of  solid  gold,  which  was  in  the
temple  of  Jupiter,  to  be  removed,  palliating  the  sacrilege
with  jests,  and  saying  that  ** Victory  was  lent  him  by  Jupiter.'*
Some  days  after,  having  ordered  a  golden  statue  of  Jupiter
himself,  of  great  weight,  to  be  taken  away  secretly,  and  being
caught  in  the  sacrilegious  act,  he  was  forced  to  fiiee  by  a  rising
of  &e  people,  and  being  overtaken  by^  a  violent  storm,  and
deserted  by  his  men,  he  feU  into  the  hands  of  robbers,  and
being  brought  before  Grypus,  was  put  to  death.

Grypus,  having  thus  recovered  his  father's  throne,  and  being
freed  from  foreign  penis,  found  his  life  endangered  by  a  plot
of  his  own  mother ;  who,  after  betraying,  from  desire  of  power,
her  husband  Demetrius,  and  putting  to  death  her  other  son,
was  discontented  at  her  dignity  being  eclipsed  by  the  victory
of  Grypus,  and  presented  him  with  a  cup  of  poison  as  he  was
returning  home  from  taking  exercise.  But  Grypus,  having
received  notice  of  her  treacherous  intention,  desired  her  (as  S
to  show  as  much  respect  for  his  mother  as  she  showed  for  him)
to  drink  herself  jirst,  and,  when  she  refused,  pressed  her
earnestly,  and  at  last,  producing  his  informant,  charged  her
with  the  fact,  telling  her,  **  that  the  only  way  left  to  clear  herself
from  guilt,  was,  that  she  should  drink  what  she  had  offered  to
her  son."  The  queen,  being  thus  disconcerted,  and  her
wickedness  turned  upon  herself,  was  killed  with  the  poison
which  she  had  prepared  for  another.  Grypus,  accordingly^
having  securely  established  his  throne,  had  peace  himself,  and
secured  it  for  bis  people,  for  eight  years«  At  the  end  of  that
time  a  rival  for  the  throne  arose,  named  Cyzicenus,  a  brother
of  his  own  by  the  same  mother,  and  son  of  his  uncle  Antiochus.
Grypus  having  tried  to  take  him  off  by  poison,  provoked  him
the  sooner  to  contend  for  the  throne  with  him  by  force  of
arms.

III.  During  these  unnatural  contentions  in  the  kingdom  of
Syna,  Ptolemy ,"*  king  of  Egypt,  died,  leaving  the  kingdom  of
Egypt  to  his  wife,  and  one  of  her  two  sons,  whichsoever  she
herself  should  choose  ;  as  if  the  condition  of  Egypt  would  be
more  quiet  than  that  of  Syria  had  been,  when  the  mother,  by
electing  one  of  her  sons,  would  make  the  other  her  enemy.
Though  she  was  more  inclined  to  fix  on  the  younger  of  her

*  Ptolemy  Fhyscon. See  xzxviii.  8.


116S  JUSTIN.  [B.xxxix.  CH.m.

sons,  the  people  obliged  her  to  nominate  the  elder,  from
whom,  however,  before  she  gave  him  the  throne,  she  took  away
his  wife,  compelling  him  to  divorce  his  sister  Cleopatra,  whom  he
very  much  loved,  and  requiring  him  to  marry  his  younger
sister  Selene ;  a  determination  as  to  her  daughters  not  at  all
becoming  a  mother,  as  she  took  a  husband  from  one,  and  gave
him  to  the  other.  But  Cleopatra  being  not  so  much  divorced
by  her  husband,  as  torn  from  her  husband  by  her  mother,
inarried  Cyzicenus  in  Syria,  and  that  she  might  not  bring  him
the  mere  name  of  a  wife,  carried  over  to  him,  as  a  dowry,  the
army  of  Grypus,  which  she  had  induced  to  desert.  Cyzicenus,
thinking  himself  thus  a  match  for  the  power  of  his  brother,
gave  him  battle,  but  was  defeated  and  put  to  flight,  and
sought  refuge  in  Antioch.  Grypus  then  proceeded  to  be-
siege Antioch,  in  which  Cleopatra,  the  wife  of  Cyzicenus,  was;
and,  when  he  had  taken  it,  Tryphaena,  the  wife  of  Grypus,
desired  that  nothing  should  be  searched  for  before  his  sister
Cleopatra,  not  that  she  might  relieve  her  in  her  captivity,
but  that  she  might  not  escape  the  sufferings  of  captivity ;
since  she  had  invaded  the  kingdom  chiefly  from  envy  towards
her,  and  by  marrying  the  enemy  of  her  sister  had  made  her-
self her  enemy.*  She  also  charged  her  with  bringing  a  foreign
army  to  decide  the  disputes  between  the  brothers,  and  with
having  married  out  of  Egypt,  when  she  was  divorced  from  her
brother,  contrary  to  the  will  of  her  mother.  Grypus,  on  the
other  hand,  besought  her,  that  **he  might  not  be  driven  to
commit  so  heinous  a  crime ;  *'  saying,  that  "  by  none  of  his
forefathers,  in  the  course  of  so  many  civil  and  foreign  wars,
had  cruelties  after  victory  been  inflicted  upon  women,  whom
their  sex  itself  protected  from  the  perils  of  war  and  from  ill-
treatment  on  the  part  of  the  conquerors ;  and  that  in  her
case,  besides  the  common  practice  of  people  at  war,  there
was  added  the  closest  tie  of  blood,  for  she  was  the  full
sister  of  her  who  would  treat  her  so  cruelly,  his  own  cousin,
and  aunt  to  their  children.'*  In  addition  to  these  obligations
of  relationship,  he  mentioned  also  the  superstitious  r^rd  paid
to  the  temple  in  which  she  had  taken  refuge,  observing  that
**  the  gods  were  so  much  the  more  religiously  to  be  revered  by
him,  as  he  had  been  the  better  enabled  to  conquer  by  their

*  Cleopatra,  by  marrying  Cyzicenus the enemy of Tryphsena,
Ibecame  herself  Tryphsna'a  enemy.


RtJ.  110— 84.]  "; ANTIOCHUS  CTZICENUS.  M9

favour  and  protection  ;  and  that  neither  by  killing  her  would
he  diminish  the  strength  of  Cyzicenus,  nor  increase  it  by  re-
storing her  to  him.'*  But  the  more  Grypus  held  back,  the
more  was  Tryphsena  excited  with  a  womanish  pertinacity,
fancying  that  her  husband's  observations  proceeded  not  from
pity  but  from  love.  Summoning  some  soldiers  herself,  there-
fore, she  despatched  a  party  to  kill  her  sister.  They,  going
into  the  temple,  and  not  being  able  to  drag  her  away,  cut  off
her  hands  while  she  was  embracing  the  statue  of  the  goddess.
Soon  after  Cleopatra  expired,  uttering  imprecations  on  her
unnatural  murderers,  and  commending  the  avenging  of  her
fate  to  the  outraged  deities.  And  not  long  after,  another
battle  being  fought,  Cyzicenus,  being  victorious,  took  Try-
pha3na,  the  wife  of  Grypus,  who  had  just  before  killed  her
sister,  prisoner,  and  by  putting  her  to  death  made  atonement
to  the  manes  of  his  wife.

IV.  In  Egypt, '  Cleopatra,  being  dissatisfied  at  having  her
son  Ptolemy  to  share  her  throne,  excited  the  people  against
him,  and  taking  from  him  his  wife  Selene  (the  more  ignomini-
ously,  as  he  had  now  two  children  by  her),  obliged  him  to  go
into  exile,  sending,  at  the  same  time,  for  her  younger  son
Alexander,  and  making  him  king  in  his  brother's  room.  Nor
was  she  content  with  driving  her  son  from  the  throne,  but
pursued  him  with  her  arms  while  he  was  living  in  exile  in
Cyprus.  After  forcing  him  from  thence,  she  put  to  death  the
general  of  her  troops,  because  he  had  let  him  escape  from  his
hands  alive  ;  though  Ptolemy,  indeed,  had  left  the  island  from
being  ashamed  to  maintain  a  war  against  his  mother,  and  not
as  being  inferior  to  her  in  forces.

Alexander,  alarmed  at  such  cruelty  on  the  part  of  his
mother,  deserted  her  also  himself,  preferring  a  life  of  quiet
and  security  to  royal  dignity  surrounded  with  danger ;  while
Cleopatra,  fearing  lest  her  elder  son  Ptolemy  should  be
assisted  by  Cyzicenus  to  re-establish  himself  in  Egypt,  sent
powerful  succours  to  Grypus,  and  with  them  Selene,  Ptolemy's
wife,  to  marry  the  enemy  of  her  former  husband.  To  her  son,
Alexander  she  sent  messengers  to  recall  him  to  his  country  ;
but  while,  by  secret  treachery,  she  was  plotting  his  destruction,
she  wfts  anticipated  by  him  and  put  to  death,  perishing,  not
by  the  course  of  nature,  but  by  the  hand  of  her  sou,  and
'  having,  indeed,  well  deserved  so  infamous  an  ejad,  since  she


ft7§  JUSTIN.  [b.  XXXIX.  OH^VT

had  driven  her  mother*  from  the  bed  of  her  father,  had  made
her  two  daughters  f  widows  by  alternate  marriages  ¥dth  their
brothers,  had  made  war  upon  one  of  her  sons  after  sending  him
into  exile4  and  plotted  against  the  life  of  the  other  §  after
depriving  him  of  his  throne*

y.  Neither  did  so  unnatural  a  murder,  on  the  part  of
Alexander,  go  unpunished  ;  for  as  soon  as  it  was  known  that
the  mother  had  been  killed  by  the  vnckedness  of  her  son,  he
was  driven,  by  an  insumjctlon  of  the  people,  into  banishment,
and  the  crown  was  restored  to  Ptolemy,  who  was  recalled,
because  he  had  refused  to  make  war  against  his  mother,  and
to  take  from  his  brother  by  force  of  arms  what  he  himself  had
previously  possessed.  During  the  course  of  these  proceedings,
his  natural  brother,  ||  to  whom  his  father  had  left  ihe  kingdom
of  Gyrense  by  will,  died,  appointing  the  Boman  people  his
heir ;  for  the  fortune  of  Eome,  not  content  with  the  limits  of
Italy,  had  now  begun  to  extend  itself  to  the  kingdoms  of  the
east.  Thus  that  part  of  Africa  became  a  province  of  the
Eoman  empire  ;  and  soon  afterwards  Crete  and  Gilicia,  being
subdued  in  the  war  against  the  pirates,  were  likewise  made
provinces.  In  consequence,  the  kingdoms  of  Syria  and  Egypt,
which  had  been  accustomed  to  aggrandize  themselves  by  wars
with  their  neighbours,  being  now  confined  by  the  vicinity  of
the  Romans,  and  deprived  of  all  opportunity  of  extending  their
frontiers,  employed  their  strength  to  the  injury  of  one  another,
so  that,  being  exhausted  by  continual  battles,  they  fell  into
contempt  with  their  neighbours,  and  became  a  prey  to  the
people  of  Arabia,  a  nation  previously  regarded  as  unwarlike.
Their  king  Erotimus>  relying  on  his  seven  hundred  sons,
whom  he  had  had  by  his  concubines,  and  dividing  his  forces,
infested  at  one  time  Egypt^  and  another  Syria,  and  procured
a  great  name  for  the  Arabians,  by  exhausting  the  strength
of  their  neighbours.

*  Her  mother  Cleopatra. See  xxxViii.  8,  tvjpra  med.

t  Cleopatra  and  Selene.  See  c.  3,  mii.  and  the  beginning  of  this
chapter.

4:  As  is  told  in  this  chapter.

§  As  is  told  in  this  chapter.

II  Apion,  the  son  of  Ptolemy  Philometor,  or,  as  Justin  will  have  it,
of  Physcon. — Wetzel.


871  '
BOOK  XL.

The  Syrians  choose  Tigranea,  king  of  Armenia,  to  be  their  king^  L-^
A  great  earthquake  in  Syria ;  Syria  made  a  Roman  province,  II.

I.  Aft£B  the  kings  aud  kingdom  of  Syria  had  been  exhaust-
ed by  unintermitting  wars,  occasioned  by  the  mutual  animosi-
ties of  brothers,  and  by  sons  succeeding  to  the  quarrels  of  their
fathers,  the  people  began  to  look  for  relief  from  foreign  parts,
and  to  think  of  choosing  a  king  from  among  the  sovereigns  of
other  nations.  Some  therefore  advised  that  they  should  take
Mithridates  of  Pontus,  others  Ptolemy  of  Egypt,  but  it  being
considered  V  that  Mithridates  was  engaged  in  war  with  the
Eomans,  and  that  Ptolemy  had  always  been  an  enemy  to  Syria,
the  thoughts  of  all  were  directed  to  Tigranes  king  of  Armenia,
who,  in  addition  to  the  strength  of  his  oim  kingdom,  was
supported  by  an  alliance  with  Parthia,  and  by  a  matrimonial
connection  with  Mithridates.  Tiglranes,  accordingly,  being
invited  to  the  throne  6f  Syria,  enjoyed  a  most  tranquil  reign
over  it  for  eighteen  years,  without  having  occasion  to  go  to  war
either  to  attack  others  or  to  defend  himself.

II.  But  Syria,  though  unmolested  by  enemies,  was  laid
waste  by  an  earthquake,  in  which  a  hundred  and  seventy  thou-
sand people,  and  several  cities,  irere  destroyed ;  a  portent  which
the  soothsayers  declared  "to  presage  a  change  in  things.*'

After  Tigranes  was  conquered  by  LucuUus,  Antiochus,  the
son  of  OyzicenuS)  was  made  king  of  Syria  by  his  authority.
But  what  Lucullus  gave,  Pompey  soon  after  took  away;  telling
him,  when  he  made  application  for  the  crown,  that  *'he  wouldnot
give  Syria^  even  if  willing  to  accept  him«  and  much  less  if
unwilling,  a  king,  who  for  eighteen  years,  during  which  Tigra-
nes had  governed  Syria,  had  lain  hid  in  a  comer  of  Oilicia,
and  now,  when  Tigranes  was  conquered  by  the  Romans,  asked
for  the  reward  of  other  men*s  labours.  Accordingly,  as  he  had
not  taken  the  throne  from  Tigranes  while  he  held  it^  so  he
would  not  give  Antiochus  what  he  himself  had  yielded  to
Tigranes,  and  what  he  would  not  know  how  to  defend,  lest
he  should  again  expose  Syria  to  the  depredations  of  the  Jews
and  Arabians.*^  He  in  consequence  reduced  Syria  to  the  con*
dition  of  a  province,  and  the  whole  east,  through  the  dissensions
of  kings  of  the  same  blood,  fell  by  degrees  under  the  power
of  the  Eomans.


ftra


BOOK  XLT.

Ori^  and  growth  of  the  power  of  the  Parthians,  I. — Their  mAimers,

'  mode  of  fighting,  and  religion,  II.,  III.— Their  history  to  the

death  of  Alexander  the  Greal^  lY. — Nature  of  their  country;

reign  of  Arsaces ;  his  BuccesBors,  Y. — State  of  the  Bactrians  under

Eucratides ;  victories  of  the  Parthians,  YI.

I.  The  Parthians,  in  whose  hands  the  empire  of  the  east
now  is,  having  divided  the  world,  as  it  were,  with  the  Eomans,
were  originally  exiles  from  Scythia.  This  is  apparent  from
their  very  name ;  for  in  the  Scythian  language  exOes  are
called  Partki,  During  the  time  of  the  Assyrians  and  Medes,
they  were  the  most  obscure  of  all  the  people  of  the  east.
Subsequently,  too,  when  the  empire  of  the  east  was  transferred
from  the  Medes  to  the  Persians,  they  were  but  as  a  herd
without  a  name,  and  fell  under  the  power  of  the  stronger.  At
last  they  became  subject  to  the  Macedonians^  when  they
conquered  the  east ;  so  that  it  must  seem  wonderful  to  every
one,  that  they  should  have  reached  such  a  height  of  good
fortune  as  to  rule  over  those  nations  under  whose  sway  they
had  been  merely  slaves.  Being  assailed  by  the  Eomans,  also,
in  three  wars,  under  the  conduct  of  the  greatest  generals,  and
at  the  most  flourishing  period  of  the  republic,  they  alone,  of
all  nations,  were  not  only  a  match  for  them,  but  came  off
victorious  ;  though  it  may  have  been  a  greater  gloiy  to  them,
indeed,  to  have  been  able  to  rise  amidst  Uie  Assyrian,  Median,
and  Persian  empires,  so  celebrated  of  old,  and  the  most
powerful  dominion  of  Bactria,  peopled  with  a  thousand  cities,
than  to  have  been  victorious  in  war  against  a  people  that
came  from  a  distance  ;  especially  when  they  were  continually
harassed  by  severe  wars  with  the  Scythians  and  other  neigh-
bouring nations,  and  pressed  with  various  other  formidable
contests.

The  Parthians,  being  forced  to  quit  Scythia  by  discord  at
home,  gradually  settled  in  the  deserts  betwixt  Hyrcania,  the
Dahse,  the  Arei,  the  Sparni*  and  Marsiani.  They  then
advanced  their  borders,  though  their  neighbours,  who  at  first
made  no  opposition,  at  length  endeavoured  to  prevent  them,

*  Wetzel  has  Sparta/no8  in  his  text,  but  observes  in  his  note,  that
the  right  reading  is  unquestionably  Spamoe,  the  Spami  being  men-
tioned by  Strabo  in  conjunction  with  the  Dahss.


THE  PABTHUNS.  273

to  such  an  extent,  that  they  not  only  got  possession  of  the
vast  level  plains,  but  also  of  steep  hills,  and  heights  of  the
mountains;  and  hence  it  is  that  an  excess  of. heat  or  cold
prevails  in  most  parts  of  the  Parthian  territories ;  since  the
snow  is  troublesome  on  the  higher  grounds,  and  the  heat  in
the  plains.

11.  The  government  of  the  nation,  after  their  revolt  from
the  Macedonian  power^  was  in  the  hands  of  kings.  Next  to
the  royal  authority  is  the  order  of  the  people,*  from  which
they  take  generals  in  war  and  magistrates  in  peace.  Their
language  is  something  between  those  of  the  Scythians  and
Modes,  being  a  compound  of  both.  Their  dress  was  formerly
of  a  fashion  peculiar  to  themselves ;  afterwards,  when  their
power  had  increased,  it  was  like  that  of  the  Modes,  hght  and
full  flowing,  The  fashion  of  their  arms  is  that  of  their  own
country  and  of  Scythia.t  They  have  an  army,  not  like  other
nations,  of  free  men,  but  chiefly  consisting  of  slaves,  the
numbers  of  whom  daily  increase,  the  power  of  manumission
being  allowed  to  none,  and  all  their  oflspring,  in  consequence,
being  born  slaves.  These  bondmen  they  bring  up  as  carefully
as  their  own  children,  and  teach  them,  with  great  pains,  the
arts  of  riding  and  shooting  with  the  bow.  As  any  one  is
eminent  in  wealth,  so  he  furnishes  the  king  with  a  propor-
tionate number  of  horsemen  for  war.  Indeed  when  fifty
thousand  cavalry  encountered  Antony,  as  he  was  making  war
upon  Parthia,  only  four  hundred  of  them  were  free  men.

Of  engaging  with  the  enemy  in  close  fight,  and  of  taking
cities  by  siege,  they  know  nothing.  They  fight  on  horseback,
either  galloping  forward  or  turning  their  backs.  Often,  too,
they  counterfeit  flight,  that  they  may  throw  their  pursuers  off
their  guard  against  beiug  wounded  by  their  arrows.  The
Signal  for  battle  among  them  is  given,  not  by  trumpet,  but
by  drum.  Nor  are  they  able  to  fight  long ;  but  they  would  be
irresistible,  if  their  vigour  and  perseverance  were  equal  to  the
fury  of  their  onset.  In  general  they  retire  before  the  enemy
in  the  very  heat  of  the  engagement,  and,  soon  after  their

*  Popuhrvm.]  This  word  is  undoubtedlj  ocrrrupt.  J.  F  Gronovios
wotdd  alter  it  to  optimattvin. Procerum.  would  perhaps  be  better.

t  PcvtrUu  et  Scythicua  mot.]  He  seems  to  mean  that  their  arms  were
partlj  of  their  own  contrivance,  and  partly  adopted  from  the  Scy-
thians.


374  JUSTIN.  [B.XLI.  CH.IV.

retreat,  return  to  the  battle  afresh ;  so  that,  when  you  feel  most
certain  that  you  have  conquered  them,  you  have  still  to  meet
the  greatest  danger  from  them.  Their  armour,  and  that  of
their  horses,  is  formed  of  plates,  lapping  over  one  another  like
the  feathers  of  a  bird,  and  covers  both  man  and  horse  entirely.*
Of  gold  and  silver,  except  for  adorning  their  arms,  they  make
no  use.

III.  Each  man  has  several  wives,  for  the  sake  of  gratifying
desire  vdth  different  objects.  They  punish  no  crime  more
severely  than  adultery,  and  accordingly  they  not  only  exclude
their  women  from  entertainments,  but  forbid  them  the  very
sight  of  men.  They  eat  no  flesh  but  that  which  they  take  in
hunting.  They  ride  on  horseback  on  all  occasions  ;  on  horses
they  go  to  war,  and  to  feasts ;  on  horses  they  discharge  public
and  private  duties ;  on  horses  they  go  abroad,  meet  together,
traffic,  and  converse.  .  Indeed  the  difference  between  slaves
and  freemen  is,  that  slaves  go  on  foot,  but  freemen  only  on
horseback.  Their  general  mode  of  sepulture  is  dilaniation  by
birds  or  dogs;  the  bare  bones  they  at  last  bury  in  the  ground. t
In  their  superstitions  and  worship  of  the  gods,  the  principal
veneration  is  paid  to  rivers.  The  disposition  of  the  people
is  proud,  quarrelsome,  faithless,  and  insolent ;  for  a  certain
roughness  of  behaviour  they  think  becoming  to  men,  and
gentleness  only  to  women.  They  are  always  restiess,  and
ready  for  any  commotion,  at  home  or  abroad ;  taciturn  by
nature;  more  ready  to  act  than  speak,  and  consequently
shrouding  both  their  successes  and  miscarriages  in  silence.
They  obey  their  princes,  not  from  humility,  but  from  fear.
They  are  libidinous,  but  frugal  in  diet.  To  their  word  or
promise  they  have  no  regard,  except  as  far  as  suits  their
interest

IV.  After  the  death  of  Alexander  the  Great,  when  the
kingdoms  of  the  east  were  divided  among  his  successors,  the
government  of  Parthia  was  committed  to  Stasanor,  a  foreign

*  Credas  Bimulacra  moveri

Ferrea,  cognatoque  viros  spirare  metallo ;
Far  vestitus  equis.^-CZotM&em,  In  Ruf.  ii.  859.

t  I  think  that  this  custom  is  erroneously  attributed  to  the  Par*
thians  by  Justin,  being  rather  that  of  the  Hyrcanians.  Herodotus
also,  as  I  am  aware,  attributes  it  to  the  Persians,  i  ,U0. — Is,  Vossiwi,
See  Cic.  Tusc.  i  44,  45.


B.G.  255.]  THEODOTUS — ^AfiSACES.  275

ally,  because  none  of  the  Macedonians  would  deign  to  accept
it.  Subsequently,  when  the  Macedonians  were  divided  into
parties  by  civil  discord,  the  Parthians,  with  the  other  people
of  Upper  Asia,  followed  Eumenes,  and,  when  he  was  defeated,
went  over  to  Antigonus.  After  his  death  they  were  under  the
rule  of  Seleuciis  Nicator,  and  then  under  Antiochus  and  his
successors,  from  whose  great-grandson  Seleucus  they  first
revolted,  in  the  first  Punic  war,  when  Lucius  Msmlius  Vulso
and  Marcus  AttiHus  Regulus  were  consuls.  For  their  revolt,
the  dispute  between  the  two  brothers,  Seleucus  and  Antiochus,
procured  them  impunity ;  for  while  they  sought  to  wrest  the
throne  from  one  another,  they  neglected  to  pursue  the  revolters.

At  the  same  period,  also,  Theodotus,  governor  of  the  thou-
sand cities  of  Bactria,  revolted,  and  assumed  the  title  of  king ;
and  £dl  the  other  people  of  the  east,  influenced  by  his  example,
fell  away  from  the  Macedonians.  One  Arsaces,  a  man  of
uncertain  origin,  but  of  undisputed  bravery,  happened  to  arise
at  this  time ;  and  he,  who  was  accustomed  to  live  by  plunder
and  depredations,  hearing  a  report  that  Seleucus  was  overcome
by  the  Gauls  in  Asia,  and  being  consequently  freed  from  dread
of  that  prince,  invaded  Parthia  with  a  band  of  marauders,
overthrew  Andragoras  his  lieutenant,  and,  after  putting  him
to  death,  took  upon  himseK  the  government  of  the  country.
Not  long  alter,  too,  he  made  himself  master  of  Hyrcania,  and
thus,  invested  with  authority  over  two  nations,  raised  a  large
army,  through  fear  of  Seleucus  and  Theodotus,  king  of  the
Bactrians.  But  being  soon  relieved  of  his  fears  by  the  death
of  Theodotus,  he  made  peace  and  an  alliance  with  his  son,
who  was  also  neuned  Theodotus ;  and  not  long  after,  engaging
with  king  Seleucus,  who  came  to  take  vengeance  on  die  re-
volters, he  obtained  a  victory;  and  the  Parthlans  observe
the  day  on  which  it  was  gained  with  great  solemnity,  as  the
date  of  the  commencement  of  their  liberty.

V.  Seleucus  being  then  recalled  into  Asia  by  new  disturb-
ances, and  respite  being  thus  given  to  Arsaces,  he  settled  the
Parthian  government,  levied  soldiers,  built  fortresses,  and
strengthened  his  towns.  He  founded  a  city  also,  called  Dara,
on  Mount  Zapaortenon,  of  which  the  situation  is  such,  that
no  place  can  be  more  secure  or  more  pleasant ;  for  it  is  so
encircled  with  steep  rocks,  that  the  strength  of  its  position
needs  no  defenders ;  and  such  is  the  fertility  of  the  adjacent

T  2


276  JUSTIN.  [B.XLI.  CH.VI.

soil,  that  it  is  stored  with  its  own  produce.  Such  too  is  the
plenty  of  springs  and  wood,  that  it  is  amply  supplied  with
streams  of  water,  and  abounds  with  all  the  pleasures  of  the
chace.  Thus  Arsaces,  having  at  once  acquired  and  established
a  kingdom,  and  having  become  no  less  memorable  among  the
Partluans  than  Cyrus  among  the  Persians,  Alexander  among
the  Macedonians,  or  Romulus  among  the  Komans,  died  at  a
mature  old  age ;  and  the  Parthians  paid  this  honour  to  his
memory,  that  they  called  all  their  kings  thenceforward  by  the
name  of  Arsaces.  His  son  and  successor  on  the  throne,  whose
name  was  ako  Arsaces,  fought  with  the  greatest  bravery
against  Antiochus,  the  son  of  Seleucus,  who  was  at  the  head  of
a  hundred  thousand  foot  and  twenty  thousand  horse,  and  was
at  last  taken  into  alliance  with  him.  The  third  king  of  the
Parthians  was  Priapatius ;  but  he  was  also  called  Arsaces,  for,
as  has  just  been  observed,  they  distinguished  all  their  kings
by  that  name,  as  the  Eomans  use  the  titles  of  Ctesar  and  Au-
gustus. He,  after  reigning  fifteen  years,  died,  leaving  two
sons,  Mithridates  and  Phraates,  of  whom  the  elder,  Phraates,
being,  according  to  the  custom  of  the  nation,  heir  to  the  crown,
subdued  the  Mardi,  a  strong  people,  by  force  of  arms,  and  died
not  long  after,  leaving  severd  sons,  whom  he  set  aside,  and
left  the  throne,  in  preference,  to  his  brother  Mithridates,  a  man
of  extraordinary  ability,  thinking  that  more  was  due  to  the
name  of  king  than  to  that  of  father,  and  that  he  ought  to  con-
sult the  interests  of  his  country  rather  than  those  of  his
children.

YI.  Almost  at  the  same  time  that  Mithridates  ascended  the
throne  among  the  Parthians,  Eucratides  began  to  reign  among
the  Bactrians ;  both  of  them  being  great  men.  But  the  for-
tune of  the  Parthians,  being  the  more  successful,  raised  them,
under  this  prince,  to  the  h^hest  degree  of  power ;  while  the
Bactrians,  harassed  with  various  wars,  lost  not  only  their
dominions,  but  their  liberty ;  for  having  suffered  from  conten-
tions with  the  Sogdians,  the  Drangians,  and  the  Indians,  they
were  at  last  overcome,  as  if  exhausted,  by  the  weaker*  Par-
thians. Eucratides,  however,  carried  on  several  wars  with
^eat  spirit,  and  though  much  reduced  by  his  losses  in  them,

*  Kot  weaker  with  respect  to  the  particular  time  at  which  the
Bactrians  were  exhausted  by  wars,  but  to  other  times,  when  the
Bactrians  had  been  their  superiors  in  strength.— iSScA^er.


B.C.  136.]  PHRAATBS.  277

yet,  when  he  was  besieged  by  Demetrius  king  of  the  Indians,
with  a  garrison  of  only  three  hundred  soldiers,  he  repulsed,  by
continual  sallies,  a  force  of  sixty  thousand  enemies.*  Having
accordingly  escaped,  after  a  five  months'  siege,  he  reduced
India  under  his  power.  But  as  he  was  returning  from  the
country,  he  was  killed  on  his  march  by  his  son,  with  whom  he
had  shared  his  throne,  and  who  was  so  far  from  concealing  the
murder,  that,  as  if  he  had  killed  an  enemy,  and  not  his  father,
he  drove  his  chariot  through  his  blood,  and  ordered  his  body
to  be  cast  out  unburied.

During  the  course  of  these  proceedings  among  the  Bac-
trians,  a  war  arose  between  the  Parthians  and  Modes,  and
after  fortune  on  each  side  had  been  some  time  fluctuating,
victory  at  length  fell  to  the  Parthians;  when  Mithridates,
enforced  with  this  addition  to  his  power,  appointed  Bacasis
over  Media,  while  he  himself  marched  into  Hvrcania.  On  his
return  from  thence,  he  went  to  war  with  the  king  of  the
Elymseans,  and  having  conquered  him,  added  tliis  nation  also
to 'his  dominions,  and  extended  the  Parthian  empire,  by
reducing  many  other  tribes  under  his  yoke,  from  Mount
Caucasus  to  the  river  Euphrates.  Being  then  taken  ill,  he
died  in  an  honourable  old  age,  and  not  inferior  in  merit  to  his.
great-grandfather  Arsaces.


BOOK  XLIL


Phraates,  king  of  the  Parthians,  is  killed  by  the'  Greeks  in  his  army,
L — The  Parthians  make  war  on  Armenia;  early  history  of
Armenia,  II. — Jason  ;  Armenius ;  source  of  the  Tigris,  III. — <3on-
tinuation  of  the  history  of  Parthia;  reign  of  Orodes,  IV. —
Phraates ;  Tiridates ;  relics  of  the  armies  of  Crassus  and  Antony
given  up  to  Augustus,  Y.

I.  After  the  death  of  Mithridates,  king  of  the  Parthians,
Phraates  his  son  was  made  king,  who,  having  proceeded  to
make  war  upon  Syria,  in  revenge  for  the  attempts  of  Antiochus
on  the  Parfiiian  dominions,  was  recalled,  by  hostilities  on  the
part  of  the  Scythians,  to  defend  his  own  country.  For  the
Scythians,  having  been  induced,  by  the  offer  of  pay,  to  assist
the  Parthians  against,Antiochus  king  of  Syria,  and  not  having

♦  Very  improbable. .


278  JUSTIN.  [B.XLn.  OH.II.

arrived  till  the  war  was  ended,  were  disappointed  of  the  ex-
pected remuneration,  and  reproached  with  having  brought  their
aid  too  late ;  and  when,  in  discontent  at  having  made  so  long  a
march  in  vain,  they  demanded  that  "either  some  recompence  for
their  trouble,  or  another  enemy  to  attack,  should  be  assigned
them,"  being  offended  at  the  haughty  reply  which  they  received,
they  began  to  ravage  the  countiy  of  the  Parthians.  Phraates,  in
consequence,  marching  against  them,  left  a  certain  Himerus,
who  had  gained  his  favours  in  the  bloom  of  youth,  to  take  care
of  his  kingdom.  But  Himerus,  unmindful  both  of  his  past
life,  and  of  the  duty  with  which  he  was  entrusted,  miserably
harassed  the  people  of  Babylon,  and  many  other  cities,  with
tyrannical  cruelties.  Phraates  himself,  meanwhile,  took  with
him  to  the  war  a  body  of  Greeks,  who  had  been  made  prison-
ers in  the  war  against  Antiochus,  and  whom  he  had  treated
with  great  pride  and  severity,  not  reflecting  that  captivity  had
not  lessened  their  hostile  feelings,  and  that  the  indignity  of  the
outrages  which  they  had  suffered  must  have  exasperated  them.
As  soon  therefore  as  they  saw  the  Persians  giving  ground,  they
went  over  to  the  enemy,  and  executed  that  revenge  for  their
captivity,  which  they  had  long  desired,  by  a  sanguinary  destruc-
tion of  the  Parthian  army  and  of  king  Phraates  himself.

II.  In  his  stead  Artabanus,  his  uncle,  was  made  king.  The
Scythians,  content  with  their  victory,  and  with  having  laid
waste  Parthia,  retiuned  home.  Artabanus,  making  war  upon
the  Thogarii,  received  a  wound  in  the  arm,  of  which  he  imme-
diately died.  He  was  succeeded  by  his  son  Mithridates,  to
whom  his  achievements  procured  the  surname  of  Great ;  for,
being  fired  with  a  desire  to  emulate  the  merit  of  his  ancestors,
he  was  enabled  by  the  vast  powers  of  his  mind  to  surpass  their
renown.  He  carried  on  many  wars,  with  great  bravery,  agsdnst
his  neighbours,  and  added  many  provinces  to  the  Parthian
kingdom.  He  fought  successfully,  too,  several  times,  against
the  Scythians,  and  avenged  the  injuries  received  irom  them  by
his  forefathers.  At  last  he  turned  his  arms  against  Ortoadistes,*
king  of  Armenia.

But  since  we  here  make  a  transition  to  Armenia,  we  must
look  a  little  farther  back  into  its  origin ;  for  it  is  not  right  that  so
great  a  kingdom  should  be  passed  in  silence,  since  its  territory,

*  Or  rather  Artoadistes,  as  the  name  is  written  in  six  of  the  old
editions. He  is  called  Artavasdes  by  Strabo  and  Plutarch. — Wetzel.


B.C.  1283.]  THE  ARGONAUTS.  279

next  to  that  of  Partbia,  is  of  greater  extent  than  any  other
kingdom.  Armenia,  from  Cappadocia  to  the  Caspian  Sea,
stretches  over  a  space  of  eleven  hundred  miles,  and  is  seven
hundred  miles  in  breadth.  It  was  founded  by  Armenius,  the
companion  of  Jason  of  Thessaly,  whom  King  Pelias,  wishing
to  procure  his  death  from  dread  of  his  extraordinary  ability,
wMch  was  dangerous  to  his  throne,  despatched  on  a  prescribed
expedition  to  Colchis,  to  bring  home  the  fleece  of  the  ram  so
celebrated  throughout  the  world ;  hoping  that  the  man  would
lose  his  life,  either  in  the  perils  of  so  long  a  voyage,  or  in  war
with  barbarians  so  remote.  But  Jason,  having  spread  abroad
the  report  of  so  glorious  an  enterprise,  at  which  the  chief  of
the  youth  from  almost  all  the  world  *  came  flocking  to  him,
collected  a  band  of  heroes,  who  were  called  Argonauts.  Having
brought. his  troop  back  safe,  and  being  again  driven  from
Thessaly  by  the  sons  of  Pehas,  he  set  out  on  a  second  voyage
for  Colchis,  accompanied  by  a  numerous  train^of  followers  (who,
at  the  fame  of  his  valour,  came  daily  from  all  parts  to  join
him),  by  his  wife  Medea,  whom,  having  previously  divorced  her,
he  had  now  received  again  from  compassion  for  her  exile,  and
by  his  step-son  Medus,  whom  she  had  by  ^geus  king  of  the
Athenians  ;  and  he  re-established  his  father-in-law  iEetesf  who
had  been  driven  from  his  throne.

III.  He  then  carried  on  great  wars  with  the  neiighbouring
nations ;  and  of  the  cities  which  he  took,  he  added  part  to  the
kingdom  of  his  father-in-law,  to  make  amends  for  the  injury
that  he  had  done  him  in  his  former  expedition,  in  which  he  had
carried  off  his  daughter  Medea  and  put  to  death  his  son  ^gia-
leus,;|:  and  part  he  assigned  to  the  people  thathe  had  brought  with
him  ;  and  he  is  said  to  have  been  the  first  of  mankind,  after
Hercules  and  Bacchus  (whom  tradition  declares  to  have  been
kings  of  the  east),  that  subdued  that  quarter  of  the  world.
Over  some  of  these  nations  he  appointed  Eecas  and  Amphi-
stratus,  the  charioteers  of  Castor  and  Pollux,  to  be  their  rulers.
With  the  Albanians  he  formed  an  alliance,  a  people  who  are
said  to  have  followed  Hercules  out  of  Italy,  from  the  Alban

*  A  hyperbole ;  for  there'were  none  but  Greeks. — Wetzd,  Faber,  for
toti/ns  orbtSf  would  read  totms  QrcBcice,

f  ^etea  ia  a  conjecture  of  Faber  for  etiam,  which  is  useless.  There
is  no  account  of  Jason's  second  voyage  to  Colchis  in  any  other  author.

X  Whom  most  authors  call  Absyrtus.


280  JUSTIN.  [B.XLII.  CH.IV.

mount,  when,  after  having  killed  Geryon,  he  was  driving  his
herds  through  Italy,  and  who,  remembering  their  Italian
descent,  saluted  the  soldiers  of  Pompey  in  the  Mithridatic
war  as  their  brothers.  Hence  almost  the  whole  east  appointed
divine  honours,  and  erected  temples,  to  Jason,  as  their  founder;
temples  which  Paxmenio,  one  of  the  generals  of  Alexander  the
Great,  caused  many  years  after  to  be  pulled  down,  that  no  name
might  be  more  venerated  in  the  east  than  that  of  Alexander.
After  the  death  of  Jason,  Medus,  emulous  of  his  virtues,  built
a  city  named  Medea  in  honour  of  his  mother,  and  established
the  kingdom  of  the  Modes  after  his  own  name,  under  whose  do-
minion the  empire  of  the  east  afterwards  fell.  On  the  Albanians
border  the  Amazons,  whose  queen  Thalestris,  as  many  authors
relate,  sought  the  couch  of  Alexander.  Armenius,  too,  who
was  himself  a  Thessalian,  and  one  of  the  captains  of  Jason,
having  re-assembled  a  body  of  men,  who,  after  the  death  of  Jason
were  wandering  about,  founded  Armenia,  from  the  mountains
of  which  the  river  Tigris  issues,  at  first  with  a  very  small  stream,
but  after  running  some  distance,  is  lost  in  the  earth,  and  then,
flowing  five  and  twenty  miles  underground,*  rises  up  a  great
river  in  the  province  of  Sophene ;  and  thus  it  is  received  into
the  marshes  of  the  Euphrates.

IV.  Mithridates  king  of  the  Parthians,  after  his  war  with
Armenia,  was  banished  from  his  kingdom  for  his  cruelty  by
the  Parthian  senate.  His  brother  Orodes,  who  took  possession
of  the  vacant  throne,  besieged  Babylon,  whither  Mithridates
had  fled,  for  some  time,  and  reduced  the  people,  under  the  in-
fluence of  famine,  to  surrender.  Mithridates,  from  confidence
in  his  relationship  to  Orodes,  voluntarily  put  himself  into  his
hands ;  but  Orodes,  contemplating  him  rather  as  an  enemy
than  a  brother,  ordered  him  to  be  put  to  death  before  his  face.
After  this,  he  carried  on  a  war  vrith  the  Romans,  and  overthrew
their  general  Grassus,  together  vrith  his  son  and  all  the  Eoman
army.  His  son  Pacorus,  who  was  sent  to  pursue  what  re-
mained of  the  Eoman  forces,  after  achieving  great  actions  in
Syria,  incurred  some  jealousy  on  the  part  of  his  father,  and
was  recalled  into  Parthia;  and  during  his  absence  the  Parthian
army  left  in  Syria  was  cut  off,  vrith  all  its  commanders,  by

*  Similar  instances  of  rivers  entering  the  ground,  and  emerging  at
some  distance,  are  noticed  by  Pliny,  H.  N.  ii  103 ;  iii  16;  Strabo,  lib.
VL ;  Q.  Cnrtius,  vi  4,  Q.^Bemeccerua,


B.C.  38.]  DEATH  OP  PACOEUS.  281

Cassius  the  quaestor  of  Crassus.  Not  long  after  these  occnrrences
the  civil  war  among  the  Romans,  hetween  Caesar  and  Pompey,
hroke  out,  in  which  the  Parthians  took  the  side  of  Pompey,  both
from  the  friendship  that  they  had  formed  with  him  in  the  Mithri-
datic  war,  and  because  of  the  death  of  Crassus,  whose  son  they
understood  to  be  of  Caesar's  party,  and  supposed  that,  if  Caesar
were  victorious,  he  would  avenge  his  father's  fate.  When  Pom-
pey's  party  was  worsted,  they  sent  assistance  to  Cassius  and  Bru-
tus against  Augustus  and  Antony ;  and,  after  the  war  was  ended,
they  made  an  alliance  with  Labienus,  and,  under  the  leadership
of  Pacorus,  again  laid  waste  Syria  and  Asia,  and  assailed,  with  a
vast  force,  the  camp  of  Ventidius,  who,  like  Cassius  before  him,
had  routed  the  Parthian  army  in  the  absence  of  Pacorus.  '  Venti-
dius, pretending  to  be  afraid,  kept  himself  a  long  time  in  his  camp,
and  suflfered  the  Parthians  to  insult  him.  At  last,  however,
when  they  were  full  of  security  and  exultation,  he  sent  out
part  of  his  legions  upon  them,  and  the  Parthian^,  put  to  flight
by  their  onset,  went  off  in  several  directions;  when  Pacorus,
supposing  that  his  fugitive  troops  had  drawn  off  all  the  Eoman
forces  in  pursuit  of  them,  attacked  Ventidius's  camp,  as  if  it
had  been  left  without  defenders.  Upon  this,  Ventidius,  pouring
forth  the  rest  of  his  troops,  put  tiie  whole  force  of  the  Par-
thians, with  their  king  Pacorus,  to  the  sword ;  nor  did  the
Parthians,  in  any  war,  ever  suffer  a  greater  slaughter.

When  the  news  of  this  discomfiture  reached  Parthia,  Orodes^
the  father  of  Pacorus,  who  had  just  before  heard  that  Syria
had  been  ravaged,  and  Asia  occupied  by  his  Parthians,  and
was  boasting  of  his  son  Pacorus  as  the  conqueror  of  the  Romans,
was  affected,  on  hearing  of  the  death  of  his  son  and  the  de-
struction of  his  army,  at  first  with  grief,  and  afterwards  with
disorder  of  the  intellect.  For  several  days  he  neither  spoke  to
any  one,  nor  took  food,  nor  uttered  a  sound,  so  that  he  seemed  to
have  become  dumb.  Some  time  after,  when  his  sorrow  found
vent  in  words,  he  did  nothing  but  call  upon  Pacorus  ;  Pacorus
seemed  to  be  seen  and  heard  by  him ;  Pacorus  appeared  to  talk
with  him,  and  stand  by  him ;  though  at  other  times  he  mourned
and  wept  for  him  as  lost  After  long  indulgence  in  grief,  another
cause  of  concern  troubled  the  unhappy  old  man,  as  he  had  to  de-
termine wbich  of  his  thirty  sons  he  should  choose  for  his  succes-
sor in  the  room  of  Pacorus.  His  numerous  concubines,  from
whom  so  large  a  progeny  had  sprung,  were  pepetually  working


282  JUSTIN.  [B.XLIt.  CH.V-

on  the  old  man's  feelings,  each  anxious  for  her  own  offspring.
But  the  fate  of  Parthia,  in  which  it  is  now,  as  it  were,  cus-
tomary that  the  princes  should  be  assassins  of  their  kindred,
ordained  that  the  most  cruel  of  them  all,  Fhraates  by  name,
should  be  fixed  upon  for  their  king.

V.  Phraates  immediately  proceeded  to  kill  his  father,  as
if  he  would  not  die,  and  put  to  death,  also,  all  his  thirty*
brothers,  But  his  murders  did  not  end  with  his  father's  sons ;
for  finding  that  the  nobility  began  to  detest  him  for  his  con-
stant barbarities,  he  caused  his  own  son,  who  was  grown  up,
to  be  killed,  that  there  might  be  no  one  to  be  nominated  king.
On  this  prince  Antony  made  war,  with  sixteen  effective
legions,  for  having  sent  troops  against  him  and  CsBsar ;  but
being  severely  harassed  in  several  engagements,  he  was  forced
to  retreat  from  Parthia.  Phraates,  upon  this  success,  becom-
ing still  more  insolent,  and  being  guilty  of  many  fresh  acts  of
cruelty,  was  driven  into  exile  by  his  subjects.  Having  then,
for  a  long  time,  wearied  the  neighbouring  people,  and  at  last
the  Scythians,  with  entreaties  for  aid,  he  was  at  last  restored
to  his  throne  by  a  powerful  Scythian  force.  During  his
absence,  the  Parthians  had  made  one  Tiridates  king,  who,  when
he  heard  of  the  approach  of  the  Scythians,  fled  with  a  great
body  of  his  partisans  to  CsBsar.t  who  was  then  carrying  on
war  in  Spain,}  taking  with  him,  as  a  hostage  for  Cassar,  the
youngest  ^n  of  Phraates,  whom,  being  but  negligently  guarded,
he  had  secretly  carried  off.  Phraates,  on  hearing  of  Im  flight,
immediately  sent  ambassadors  to  Caesar,  requesting  that  "  his
slave  Tiridates,  and  his  son,  should  be  restored  to  him."
CsBsar,  after  listening  to  the  embassy  of  Phraates,  and  de-
liberating'on  the  application  of  Tiridates  (for  he  also  had  asked
to  be  restored  to  his  throne,  saying  that  "  Parthia  would  be
wholly  in  the  power  of  the  Eomans,  if  he  should  hold  the
kingdom  as  a  gift  fix)m  them"),  replied,  that  **  he  would
neither  give  up  Tiridates  to  the  Parthians,  nor  give  assistance
to  Tiridates  against  the  Parthians."  That  it  might  not  appear,
however,  that  nothing  had  been  obtained  from  Caesar  by  all

*  Either  lie  killed  only  tweaty-nine,  or  there  were  thixty-ona
survivors  of  Pacorus.

t  Augustus. Comp.  c.  4.

t  AH  the  texts,  except  that  of  Dubner's  little  edition,  have  m  His'
pcmiam,  but  the  sense,  as  Faber  observes  and  Wetzel  admits,  evidently
req.uii'es  m  ffispamd.


B.C.  20.]  ROMAN  STANDARDS  RESTORED.  288

their  applications,  he  sent  back  to  Phraates  his  son  without
ransom,  and  ordered  a  handsome  maintenance  to  be  furnished
to  Tiridates,  as  long  as  he  chose  to  continue  among  the
Eomans.  Some  time  after,  when  Caesar  had  finished  the
Spanish  war,  and  had  proceeded  to  Syria  to  settle  the  affairs
of  the  east,  he  caused  some  alarm  to  Phraates,  who  was  afraid
that  he  might  contemplate  an  invasion  of  Parthia.  Whatever
prisoners,  accordingly,  remained  of  the  army  of  Crassus  or
Antony  throughout!  Parthia,  were  collected  together,  and
sent,  with  the  military  standards  that  had  been  taken,  to
Augustus.  In  addition  to  this,  the  sons  and  grandsons  of
Phraates  were  delivered  to  Augustus  as  hostages ;  and  thus
Caesar  effected  more  by  the  power  of  his  name,  than  any  other
general  could  have  done  by  his  arms.


BOOK  XLIII.


Early  age  of  Italy,  L-^Birth  and  youth  of  Romiilus  and  Remus,  II. —
Foundation  of  Rome;  of  Marseilles,  III. — History  of  Marseilles,
IV. — ^Wars  and  successes  of  the  MassUians ;  friendship  between
them  and  the  Romans ;  family  of  Trogus  Pompeius,  Y .

I.  Having  narrated  the  liistory  of  the  Parthians  and  other
eastern  nations,  and  of  almost  the  whole  world,  T;rogus  re-
turns home,  as  if  after  a  long  journey  in  foreign  parts,  to
relate  the  rise  of  the  city  of  Rome,  thinking  it  would  be  the
mark  of  an  ungrateful  citizen,  if,  after  he  had  set  forth  the
acts  of  other  nations,  he  should  be  silent  concerning  his  native
country  alone.  He  therefore  briefly  touches  on  tie  origin  of
the  Eoman  empire,  so  as  neither  to  exceed  the  bounds  of  the
work  that  he  had  proposed,  nor  to  pass  unnoticed  the  origin
of  a  city  which  is  now  the  mistress  of  the  world.

The  first  inhabitants  of  Italy  were  the  Aborigines,  whose
king,  Saturn,  is  said  to  have  been  a  man  of  such  extraordinary
justice,  that  no  one  was  a  slave  in  his  reign,  or  had  any  private
property,  but  all  things  were  common  to  all,  and  undivided,  as
one  estate  for  the  use  of  every  one  ;  in  memory  of  which  way
of  life,  it  has  been  ordered  that  at  the  Saturnalia  slaves  should
everywhere  sit  down  with  their  masters  at  the  entertainments,
the  rank  of  all  being  made  equal. Italy  was  accordingly


284  JUSTIN.  [B.  XJpIl.  CH.  I.

called,  from  the  name  of  that  king,  Saturnia ;  and  the  hill  on
which  he  dwelt  Saturnius,  on  which  now  stands  the  Capitol,
as  if  Saturn  had  been  dislodged  from  his  seat  by  Jupiter.
After  him,  third  in  descent,  they  say  that  Faunus  was  king,  in
whose  time  Evander  came  into  Italy  from  Pallanteum,  a  city
of  Arcadia,  accompanied  with  a  small  band  of  his  countiymen,
to  whom  Faunus  kindly  gave  land,  and  the  mountain  which  he
afterwards  called  PaUtium.  At  the  foot  of  this  mountain
he  built  a  temple  to  the  Lycsean  god,  whom  the  Greeks  call
Pan,  and  the  Romans  Lupercus,*  the  naked  statue  of  the
deity  being  covered  with  a  goat-skin,  in  which  dress  the  priests
now  run  up  and  down  during  the  Lupercalia  at  Rome.  This
Faunus  had  a  wife  named  Fatua,  who,  being  constantly  filled
with  a  spirit  of  divination,  gave  notice,  in  fits  of  frenzy  as  it
were,  of  things  to  come  ;  and  hence,  to  this  day,  those  who  are
accustomed  to  be  thus  inspired,  are  said  fattLari.f  Of  an
ilhcit  connection  between  a  daughter  of  Faunus  and  Hercules,
(who,  having  killed  Geryon  about  that  time,  was  driving  his
herds,  the  prize  of  his  victory,  through  Italy),  was  bom
Latinus,  in  whose  reign  JEneas  came  from  Ihum  J  into  Italy,
after  the  destruction  of  Troy  by  the  Greeks,  and  being
immediately  received  with  hostile  demonstrations,  led  out  his
troops  into  the  field,  but  being  first  invited  to  a  conference,
raised  such  admiration  of  himself  in  Latinus,  that  he  was  both
admitted  to  a  share  of  his  throne,  and  became  his  son-in-law
by  a  marriage  with  his  daughter  Lavinia.  After  this  event,
they  had  to  carry  on  war  in  concert  against  Tumus,  king  of
the  Rutulians,  because  he  had  been  disappointed  of  marrying
Lavinia ;  and  in  the  war  both  Tumus  and  Latinus  were  killed,
-^neas,  in  consequence,  becoming  by  right  of  victory  master
of  both  nations,  built  a  city  which  he  called  Lavinium,  from
the  name  of  his  wife.  Some  time  afterwards,  he  went  to  war
with  Mezentius,  king  of  the  Etrarians,  and  being  killed  in  it,
Ascanius  his  son  succeeded  him,  who,  removing  from  Lavi-

•  LuperouB,  whose  priests  were  called  Luperci,  was  an  ancient  rural
deity  of  Italy ;  in  after  times  he  was  considered  identical  with  Pan.
See  Dr.  Smith's  Diet,  of  Gr.  and  Rom.  Ant.

f  There  is  scarcely  any  other  instance  of  the  word  in  this  sense.'
Its  general  signification  is  to  be  foolish  or  My.

X  By  Rium  Justin  seems  to  mean  the  region  of  which  Troy  was  the
capital,  generally  called  Troas.


B.C.  764—753.] NUMITOR  KING  OF  ALBA.  285

nium,  built  Alba  Longa,  which  for  three  hundred  years  was
the  metropolis  of  his  kingdom.

II.  At  length,  after  many  kings  had  reigned  in  this  city,
Numitor  and  Amulius  became  joint  sovereigns.  But  Amulius,
having  deprived  Numitor,  who  was  the  elder,  of  his  share  of
the  throne,  condemned  his  daughter  Ehea  to  perpetual  vir-
ginity, that  no  male  ofi&pring  of  Numitor's  family  might  arise
to  claim  the  crown,  palliating  th^  injury  by  an  appearance  of
honour,  so  that  she  might  not  seem  to  have  been  compelled,
but  to  have  been  chosen  one  of  the  vestal  virgins.  Being  shut
up,  accordingly,  in  a  grove  sacred  to  Mars,  she  gave  birth  to
two  boys,  whether  the  offspring  of  an  illicit  connexion  with  a
mortal,  or  of  the  god  Mars,  is  uncertain.  This  affair  becoming
known,  Amulius,  whose  fears  were  increased  by  the  birth  of
twins,  ordered  the  children  to  be  exposed,  and  threw  his
niece  into  prison,  of  which  ill-treatment  she  died.  Fortune,
however,  having  a  care  for  the  raising  of  Home,  threw  the
children  in  the  way  of  a  she-wolf  to  be  suckled,  which,
having  lost  her  cubs,  and  longing  to  empty  her  overcharged
teats,  offered  herself  as  a  nurse  to  the  infants.  As  she  made
frequent  returns  to  the  children,  as  if  they  had  been  her  own
offspring,  Faustulus,  a  shepherd,  observed  her  proceedings,
and,  withdrawing  them  from  the  beast,  brought  them  up  in  a
rude  way  of  life  among  his  cattle.  That  they  were  the  sons
of  Mars,  was  believed,  as  on  'plain  proof,  either  because  they
were  bom  in  the  grove  of  Mars,  or  because  they  were  nursed
by  a  wolf,  which  is  under  the  protection  of  Mars.  The  names  of
the  boys  were  Remus  and  Eomulus.  As  they  grew  up  among
the  shepherds,  daily  contests  in  strength  increased  their
vigour  and  agility.  While  they  were  frequently  engaged,  with
great  activity,  in  preventing  robbers  from  seizing  the  cattle,
it  happened  that  Eemus,  having  been  taken  by  the  robbers,
was  brought  before  the  king,*  as  if  he  had  himself  been
guilty  of  that  which  he  was  endeavouring  to  prevent  in  others,
and  had  been  accustomed  to  make  depredations  on  Numitor's
flocks.  He  was  consequently  given  up  to  Numitor  for
punishment But  Numitor,t  who  was  touched  with  compaa-

*  He  was  first  carried  off  by  the  robbers,  and  then  taken  prisoner
by  the  kingf s  officers  among  the  robbers.

^  Sed  Ntmitor,  &c.]  The  commentators  have  not  observed  that  this
sentence  is  corrupt ;  Numitor  has  no  verb.


286  JUSTIN.  [B.XLin.  CH.IU.

sion  for  the  stripling's  youth,  was  led  to  suspect  that  he  might
be  one  of  his  exposed  grandchildren,  and  while  the  resemblance
of  his  featiires  to  those  of  his  daughter,  and  his  age  corre-
sponding with  the  time  of  the  exposure,  kept  him  in  suspense,
Faustulus  unexpectedly  came  in  with  Eomulus,  and  the  origin
of  the  youths  being  ascertained  from  him,  a  conspiracy  was
formed,  the  young  men  taking  up  arms  to  revenge  the  death
of  their  mother,  and  Numitor  to  recover  the  throne  of  which
he  had  been  deprived.

III.  Amulius  being  killed,  the  throne  was  restored  to
Numitor,  and  the  city  of  Rome  was  founded  by  the  two  young
men.  A  senate  was  next  appointed,  consisting  of  a  hundred  old
men  who  were  called  Fathers.  Soon  after,  as  the  neighbouring
people  disdained  to  intermarry  with  shepherds,  the  Sabine
virgins  were  seized  by  force ;  and  the  surrounding  tribes
being  brought  under  their  sway,  the  sovereignty  of  Italy,  and
afterwards  that  of  the  world,  was  acquired.  In  those  times
kings,  instead  of  diadems,  had  spears,  which  the  Greeks  called
sceptres ;  for  the  ancients,  from  the  earliest  period,  worshipped
spears  as  gods,*  and  in  memory  of  this  superstition  spears
are  still  given  to  the  statues  of  the  gods.

In  the  time  of  King  Tarquin,  a  company  of  Phocaeans
from  Asia,  sailing  up  the  Tiber,  formed  an  alliance  with
the  Romans,  and  proceeding  from  thence  to  the  inmost
part  of  the  gulf  of  Gaul,t  built  the  city  of  Marseilles  amidst
the  Ligurians  and  the  savage  Gallic  tribes,  and  performed
great  exploits  there,  both  in  defending  themselves  against
the  fierce  Gauls,  and  in  attacking,  of  themselves,  those  by
whom  they  had  previously  been  molested.

The  Phocaeans,  compelled  by  the  smallness  and  infertility
of  their  territory,  had  applied  themselves  more  to  the  sea  than
to  the  culture  of  the  ground,  supporting  themselves  by  fishing,
merchandise,  and  above  all  by  piracy,  which  in  those  days  was

*  Spears  were  never  worshipped  as  gods,  or  certainly  not  by  the
Greeks ;  they  were,  indeed,  an  insigne  of  the  gods,  as  being  kings,  a
name  by  which  they  are  frequently  mentioned  among  the  poets.  But
this  observation  of  Justin  is  abrupt  and  out  of  place ;  nor  is  the  case
different  with  what  .follows,  for  what  a  leap  is  it  from  Romulus  to  the
Phocaeans,  who  did  not  become  friends  to  the  Romans  till  two  hundred
years  after  his  time  ! —  Wetzel.

f  CfalUas  mma.']  The  gulf  of  Lyons.


B.C.  599.]  MARSEILLES  FOUNDED.  287

thought  an  honourahle  occupation.*  Venturing  accordingly
to  visit  the  remotest  shores  of  the  ocean,  they  came  into  Sie
gulf  of  Gaul  and  to  the  mouth  of  the  river  Rhone ;  •  and,
charmed^ with  the  pleasantness  of  the  country,  and  relating,  on
their  return  home,  what  they  had  seen,  they  tempted  others
to  go  to  the  same  parts.  Of  the  fleet  Simos  and  Protis  were
the  captains,  who  appUed  to  the  king  of  the  Segobrigii,  named
Nannus,  in  whose  territory  they  were  anxious  to  build  a  city,
desiring  his  friendship.  On  that  day,  as  it  happened,  the
king  was  engaged  in  preparing  for  the  nuptials  of  his  daughter
Gyptis,  whom,  after  the  custom  of  that  people,  he  intended  to
give  in  marriage  to  a  son-in-law  to  be  chosen  at  the  feast.
The  suitors  having  been  all  invited  to  the  wedding,  the  Grecian
strangers  were  also  requested  to  join  the  festival.  The  maiden
was  then  introduced,  and  being  desired  by  her  father  to  give
water  to  him  whom  she  chose  for  her  husband,  she  overlooked
all  the  rest,  and  turning  to  the  Greeks,  held  out  water  to
Protis,  who,  from  the  king's  guest  becoming  his  son-in-law,
was  presented  by  his  father-in-law  with  the  ground  for  building
a  city.  Marseilles  was  accordingly  built  near  the  mouth  of
the  river  Rhone,  in  a  retired  bay,  and  as  it  were  in  a  corner
of  the  sea.  The  Ligurians,  jealous  of  the  growing  greatness
of  the  city,  harassed  the  Greeks  with  continual  war ;  but  they,
repelling  their  attacks,  rose  to  such  a  degree  of  strength,  that
they  conquered  their  enemies  and  planted  several  colonies  in
the  lands  which  they  captured.

IV.  From  the  people  of  Marseilles,  therefore,  the  Gauls
learned  a  more  civilized  way  of  life,  their  former  barbarity
being  laid  aside  or  softened ;  and  by  them  they  were  taught  to
cultivate  their  lands  and  to  enclose  their  towns  with  walls.  Then
too,  they  grew  accustomed  to  live  according  to  laws,  and  not
by  violence ;  then  they  learned  to  prune  the  vine  and  plant
the  olive ;  and  such  a  radiance  was  shed  over  both  men  and
things,  that  it  was  not  Greece  which  seemed  to  have  immi-
grated into  Gaid,  but  Graul  that  seemed  to  have  been  trans-
planted iuto  Greece.

After  Nannus,  king  of  the  Segobrigii,  from  whom  the
ground  for  building  the  city  had  been  received,  was  dead,  and
his  son  Comanus  had  succeeded to  the  throne,  a  certain

*  Gloria  hahebatwr,]  See  Thucyd.  i.  5 ;  Horn.  Od.  ill.  78.


288  JUSTIN.  [b  xliil  ch- v.

Ligurian  told  him  that  "  Marseilles  would  one  day  be  the
ruin  of  the  neighbouring  people,  and  that  he  ought  to  suppress
it  in  its  rise,  lest,  when  it  grew  stronger,  it  should  overpower
him.'*  To  this  prediction  he  added  the  following  fable:  "A  bitch
once  asked  a  shepherd,  when  she  was  big  with  young,  for  a
place  to  bring  forth  her  puppies  ;  having  obtained  it,  she  re-
quested again  that  she  might  be  allowed  to  bring  them  up  in
due  same  place  ;  and  at  last,  when  her  young  were  grown  up,
and  she  could  depend  upon  their  support,  she  claimed  posses-
sion of  the  place  as  her  own.  In  like  manner,"  he  continued,
'*the  people  of  Marseilles,  who  are  now  regarded  as  your
tenants,  will  one  day  become  masters  of  yoiu:  territory."  Moved
by  these  persuasions,  the  king  formed  a  plan  to  overthrow
Marseilles ;  in  pursuance  of  which,  on  the  day  appointed  for
the  feast  of  Flora,  he  sent  into  the  city  seversJ  stout  and  able
men,  who  were  admitted  as  friends ;  an  additional  number  he
ordered  to  be  conveyed  concealed  in  wagons,  covered  over
with  baskets  and  boughs  of  trees ;  while  he  himself  lay  hid
among  the  neighbouring  hills,  that  after  the  gates  had  been
opened  in  the  night  by  the  men  before  mentioned,  he  might
come  up  in  time  to  execute  the  plot,  and  might  fall  upon  the
city  overcome  with  sleep  and  the  fumes  of  wine.  But  a
certain  woman,  a  relative  of  the  king,  who  had  an  intrigue
with  a  Greek  youth,  revealed  the  plot  to  him,  through  compas-
sion for  his  youth  and  beauty,  during  their  intercourse,  and  bade
him  escape  from  the  danger.  He  however  reported  the  matter
to  the  magistrates,  and  the  treachery  being  thus  made  public,
all  the  Ligurians  were  seized,  those  concealed  being  dragged
from  among  their  baskets ;  and  when  they  were  all  put  to  death,
a  plot  was  formed  to  surprise  the  plotter,  and  seven  thousand
of  the  enemy,  with  the  king  himself,  were  slain.  Since  that
time  the  Massilians,  on  festal  days,  have  been  accustomed  to
shut  their  gates,  to  keep  watch,  to  place  sentinels  on  the  walls,
to  examine  strangers,  to  take  all  kinds  of  precaution,  and  to
guard  the  city  as  carefully  in  time  of  peace  as  if  they  were  at
war.  Thus  what  was  wisely  instituted,  is  still  observed,  not
from  the  necessity  of  circumstances,  but  from  the  habit  of
acting  prudently.

y.  Subsequently  they  had  great  wars  with  the  Ligurians
and  Gauls,  which  increased  the  fame  of  their  city,  and  ren-
dered the  valour  of  the  Greeks,  by  their  manifold  victories,


B.a  386.] -^ MABSEILLE3  ASSETS  BOMB.  389

reno\yned  among  their  neighbours.  The  forces  of  the  Carthagi-;
nians,*  too,  in  a  war  which  rose  between  them  about  the  capture
of  some  fishing  boats,  they  often  routed,  and  granted  them  peace
under  defeat ;  with  the  Spaniards  they  made  an  alliance ;  with
the  Romans  they  faithfully  observed  the  league  concluded  al-
most at  the  foundation  of  the  city,  And  effectively  supported
their  allies,  in  all  their  wars,  with  auxDiary  troops.  Such  con-
duct both  increased  their  confidence  in  their  own  strength,  and
secured  them  peace  fi:pm  their  enemies.  But  after  a  time,
when  Marseilles  "was  at  the  height  of  distinction,  aa  well  for
the  fame  of  its  exploits  as  for  the  abundance  of  its  wealth  and  its
reputation  for  strength,  the  neighbouring'people,  on  a  sudden,
conspired  to  destroy  the  very  name  of  Marseilles,  as  they  would
have  united  to  put  out  a  fire  that  threatened  them  all.  Catu-
mandus,  one  of  their  petty  princes,  was  unanimously  chosen^
general,  who,  when  he  was  besieging  the  enemy's  city  with  a
vast  army  of  select  troops,  was  frightened  in  his  sleep  by  the
vision  of  a  stern-looking  woman,  who  told  him  that  she  was  a
goddess',,  and  of  his  own  accord  made  peace  with  the  Massilians.
Having  then  asked  permission  to  enter  their  city  and  pay
sidoration  to  their  gods,  and  having  gone  into  the  temple  of
Minerva,  and  observed  in  the  portico  the  statue  of  the  goddess
whom  he  had  seen  in  his  sleep,  he  suddenly  exclaimed  "that
it  was  she  who  had  frightened  him  in  the  night ;  that  it  was
she  who  had  ordered  him  to  raise  the  siege  ;"  then,  congratu-
lating the  Massilians  that  they  were  under  the  care,  as  he
perceived,  of  the  immortal  gods,  and  offering  a  neck-lace  of
gold  to  the  goddess,  he  made  a  league  with  them  for  ever.
,  .  After  peace  was  thus  obtained,  and  security  established^
some  deputies  from  Marseilles,  as  they  were  returning  from
Delphi,  whither  they  had  been  sent  to  carry  presents  to
Apollo,  heard  that  die  city  of  Home  had  been  taken  and
burned  by  the  Gauls.  This  calamity,  when  the  news  of  it
was  brought  home  to  them,  the  Massilians  lamented  with  a
pubHc  mourning,  and  contributed  gold  and  silver,  both  publici
and  private,  to  make  up  the  sum  to  be  given  to  the  Gauls,,
from  whom  they  knew  that  peace  was  bought.  For  this-
service  an  exemption  from  taxes  was  decreed  tihem,  a  place  in

♦  Tl^uoyA  1.13:  "The  Phocoans,  who  founded  Manwilles,  con-
quered the  Carthaginians  in^ a  sea-fight" S^ealso  Herod.  i.-166.  ■-  j


390  JUSHK.  [B.XLiy.  CB.I.

the  theatre  assigned  tliem  among  the  senators,  and  a  leagae
made  with  them  upon  equal  terms.

At  the  end  of  this  book  Trogus  relates  that  his  ancestors
had  their  origin  from  the  Yocontii;  that  his  grandfather,
Trogus  Pompeius,  received  the  right  of  citizenship  from  Cnssus
Fompey  in  the  Sertorian  war;  that  his  uncle  led  a  troop
of  cavaJry  under  the  same  Pompey  in  the  war  with  Mithri-
dates ;  and  that  his  father  served  under  Caius  Cassar,  and  had
the  charge  of  his  correspondence,  of  receiving  embassies,*  and
of  his  ring.f


BOOK  XLIV.


Geographical  description  of  Spain,  I. — Manners  and  onstoms  of  the
Spaniards;  Viriatus,  II.  —  Of  Lusitania  and  GaUaociay  IIL —
Habis;  Qeryon,  IV. — The  Carthaginians  in  Spain;  the  countcy
reduced  by  Augustus  into  a  Roman  province,  Y.  «

I.  Spain,  as  it  forms  the  boundary  of  Europe,  vnll  also  form
the  conclusion  of  the  present  work.  This  country  the  ancients
first  called  Iberia,  from  the  river  Iberus,  and  afterwards
Hispania,  from  some  person  named  Hispanus.  It  lies  be-
tween Africa  and  Gaul,  and  is  bounded  by  the  Ocean  Strait  $
and  the  Pyrenees.  It  is  less  than  either  of  these  countries,
but  more  fruitful  than  either ;  for  it  is  neither  scorched,  like
Africa,  by  a  burning  sun,  nor  disturbed,  like  6aul,§  by
incessant  winds,  but,  being  situate  betwixt  both,  it  is  rendered,
by  moderate  heat  on  the  one  hand,  and  genial  and  seasonable
showers  on  the  other,  fertile  in  all  kinds  of  fruits  of  the  earth,

*  LegalwMuak — (ncrfltm.]  To  receive  embassies,  and  introduce  them*  to
the  emperor,  was  the  duty,  under  the  later  emperors,  sometimes  of  the
fMtgislitT  oficiorum,  or  master  of  cersmonies,  sometimes  of  the  magitier
epittolarum,  or  secretary,  as  the  author  of  the  NotUia  fdriusque  Impeni
has  observed.  Among  the  Persians  this  duty  devolved  upon  a  ohiluuroh
or  military  officer,  who  was  next  in  rank  to  the  king,  as  appears  firom
Com.  Kep.  Vit.  Conon.,  and  i£lian.  V.  H.  i.  21.  In  Egypt  Josephus
speaks  of  Nictmor  having  been  appointed  by  Ptolemy  to  receive
ambassadors,  Antiq.  xiL  2. — Btrneocenu^

1*  AnnuU.]  The  same  office  which  Maecenas  and  Agrippa  held  under
Augustus,  and  Mucianus  under  Vespasian,  as  appears  from  Dion.  Cass,
and  his  epitomiser. See  Kirchmann  de  Annulis,  c.  6. — Bemecoerta*

X  Oeeamfreto.]  The  Fretvm  GcuUtanumf  Strait  of  Gibraltar.

i  Not  all  Gaulf.but  only  the  ooasto  of  it—  WiM*.


DESCRIPTION  OP  SPAIN.  fl9l

60  that  it  supplies  abundance  of  everything,  not  only  for  its  own
inhabitants,  but  for  Italy  and  the  city  of  Rome.  From  hence,
indeed,  comes  not  only  great  plenty  of  com,  but  of  wine,  honey,
and  oil.  Its  iron  is  excellent,  and  its  breed  of  horses  swift.
Not  only  is  the  produce  of  the  surface  to  be  admired,  but  the
abundant  riches  of  the  metals  hidden  beneath  it.  There  is
great  plenty,  too,  of  flax  and  hemp,  and  certainly  no  country  is
more  productive  of  vermilion.  The  courses  of  the  rivers  are
not  violent  and  rapid,  so  as  to  be  hurtful,  but  gentle,  watering
the  vineyards  and  the  plains ;  they  are  also  well  stocked  with
fish  from  the  estuaries  of  the  sea,  and  most  of  them  are  rich  iii
gold,  which  they  carry  down  with  their  waters.*  It  is  joined
to  Gaul  by  one  unbroken  ridge  of  the  Pyrenees ;  on  :every
other  side  it  is  surrounded  by  sea.  The  shape  of  the  countty  is
almost  square,  except  that  it  grows  narrower  towards  the
Pyrenees,  the  shores  contracting  in  that  quarter.  The  length
of  the  Pyrenees  is  six  hundred  miles.  The  salubrity  of  the
air  is  the  same  through  the  whole  of  Spain,  for  its  atmosphere
is  infected  with  no  unwholesome  mists  from  fens.  Besides,
there  are  constant  breezes  from  the  sea  on  every  side,  by  which,
as  they  penetrate  the  whole  country,  the  exhalations  from  the
earth  are  dispersed,  and  the  greatest  health  is  secured  to  the
inhabitants.

II.  The  bodies  of  the  inhabitants  are  well  adapted  to  endure
privation  and  fatigue ;  their  minds  are  inured  to  contempt  of
death.  A  strict  and  parsimonious  abstinence  prevails  among
them  all.  They  prefer  war  to  peace ;  and,  if  no  foreign  enemy
offers  himself,  they  seek  one  at  home.  Many  have  died  under
torture,  to  conceal  what  has  been  entrusted  to  them ;  so  much
stronger  is  their  love  of  honour  than  of  life.  The  patience  of
a  slave,  too,  is greatly  praised,,  who,  having  avenged  his

*  In  palttdibiu.']  Bemeccenus,  VorBthis,  Orsevius,  and  Faber,  are
unaniuious  in  preferring  in  balueilmst  which  is  a  correction  of  Sal-
masius  ad  Solin.  p.  277.  Hitpani  quod  mdmUwn  est  (ottrum),  balucen
vacant.  Plin.  H.  N.  xzziii.  21.  But  Wetzel  retains  the  old  reading
paludibut^  and  I  cannot  but  think  him  right ;  for  the  preposition  in
seems  to  require  that  word  rather  than  the  other.  It  may  be  doubted,
indeed,  whether  in  bahbcibut  vekvmt  can  be  regarded  as  Latin.  For  in
htdudbut  substitute  in  minvitii  particuUs :  would  Justiuj  or  any  other
Latin  author,  have  said  amnes  awnum  in  miimtit  particulii  vehttnt  f  I
think  not.  In  mintUtu  particuUu  friaJtmn^  disrvpttim,  diteerptum,
would  be  more  likely  forms  of  expression.

U  2


29^  JUfimN.  [B.XLIV.  CH.in.

master  in  the  war  with  the  Carthaginians,  exalted  with  smiles
in  the  midst  of  tortur^,  and  defied,  with  serenity  and  cheer-
fulness, the  utmost  cruelty  of  his  tormentors.  The  activity  of
the  people  is  extraordinary ;  their  minds  restless.  To  many,
jtheir  war-horses  and  arms  are  dearer  than  their  blood.  There
is  no  sumptuoUjS  preparation  among  them  for  festival  days ;  noc
was  it  till  [after  the  second  Punic  war  that  they  learned  from
the  Romans  to  use  warm  baths.

During  so .  long  a  course  of  years  they  have  had  no  great
general  besides  Yiriatus,*  who  maintained  a  struggle  against
the  Komajis  for  ten  years  with  variovis  success ;  so  much  mor^
similar  are  their  dispositions  to  those  of  wild  beasts  than  of
men;  and  this  very  leader  they  followed,  not  as  having  been
chosen  by  the  judgment  of  the  people,  but  as  being  well
qualified  to-  take  precautions  against  the  enemy,  and  artful  ii)
^voiding  danger.  His  temperance  and  moderation  were  such,
that  though  he  often  defeated  armies  commanded  by  consuls,
yet,  after  such  achievements,  he  made  no  change  in  the  fashioQ
of  his  dress  or  arms,  or  in  his  diet,  but  adhered  to  the  same
way  of  life  with  which  he  commenced  his  military  career ;  so
that  any  one  of  the  common  soldiers  seemed  better  off  than  th^
general  himself.;

ill.  In  Lusitania,  near  the  river  Tagus,  many  authors  haT<$
said  that  the  mares  conceive  from  the  effect  of  the  wind ;  but
'  such  stories  h^ve  had  their  origin  in  the  fecundity  of  the  mares/
and  the  vast  number  of  herds  of  horses,  which  are  so  numerous,
and  of  such  swiftness,  in  Gallsecia  and  Lusitania,  that  they
may  be  thought,  not  without  reason,  to  have  been  the  offspring
of  the  wind.  As  for  th^  Gallaecians,  they  claim  for  themselves
a  Greek  origin ;  for  they  say  that  Teueer,  after  the  end  of  the.
Trojan  war,  having  ii^curred  the  hatred  of  his  father.  on»
account  of  the  death  of  his  brother  Ajax,  and  not  being
ctdmitted  into.his  kingdom,  retired  to  Cyprus,  where  he  built  a
city  called  Salamis,  from  the  name  of  his  native  land ;  that,
some  time  after,  on  hearing  a  report  of  his  father's  death,  he
returned  again  to  his  country,  but,  being  hindered  from
landing  by  Eurysaces  the  son  of  Ajax,  he  sailed  to  the  coast  of
Spain,  and  took  possession  of  those  parts  where  New  Carthage
now stands, and, passing from thence  to Gallsecia, and

'  ♦  See  Blor.  il  17;  Veil..  Pat.  il  1,  SK) ;  Au^el.  Vict.  71 ;  Diod.  Sic- .
xxxni.  fragin.  8,  11,  i22; ^


\^ DESCEIPTtOK  OS'  SPAIN.  iftSt

fixing  liis  abode  there,  gave  name  to  the  nation. A  part  of

the  Gallsecians  are  called  Amphilochi.  The^^  country  produces
abundance  of  brass  and  lead,  as  well  as  of  vermilion,*  which
has  given  name  to  a  rivfer  near  the  part  in  which  it  is  found.
It;  is  also  very  rich  in  gold,  so  that  they  sometimes  turn  up
clods  of  goldt  with  the  plough.  In  the  territory  of  thk
people  there  is  a  sacred  mountain,  which  it  is  thought  impious
to  open  with  any  tool  of  iron,  but  whenever  the  earth  is  rent^
with  lightning,  an  occurrence  common  in  these  parts,  it  is
allowable  to  pick  up  the  gold  that  may  be  laid  open;  as  a  gift
from  the  deity  of  the  place.  The  women  manage  housdhdd'
afiairs,  and  the  culture  of  the  ground ;  the  men  attend  only  to
arms,  and  the  pursuit  of  spoil.  Their  iron  is  of  an  extra-
ordinary quality,  but  their  water  is  more  powerful  than  the
iron  itself;  for  the  iron,  by  being  tempered  ih  it,  becomes
keener ;  nor  is  any  weapon  held  in  esteem  among  them  which
has  not  been  dipped  either  in  the  Bilbilis  or  the  Chalybs.  J  From
the  latter  river  those  who  dwell  on  its  banks  are  called
Chalybes,  and  are  said  to  surpass  the  rest  of  the  people  in  the
manufacture  of  steel.

IV.  The  forests  of  the  Tartesians,  in  which  it  is  said  that
the  Titans  §  waged  war  against  the  gods,  the  Cunetes||
inhabited,  whose  most  ancient  king  Gargoris^  was  the  first  to
collect  honey.  This  prince,  having  a  grandson  bom  to  him,
the  offspring  of  an  intrigue  on  the  part  of  his  daughter,  tried
various  means,  through  shame  for  her  unchastity,  to  have  the
child  put  to  death ;  out  he,  being  preserved'  by  some  good
fortune,  through  all  calamities,  came  at  last  to  the  throne,  from
a  compassionate  feeling  for  the  many  perils. that  he  had  under-
gone. First  of  all  he  ordered  him  to  be  exposed,  that  he
might  be  starved,  and,  when  he  sent  some  days  after  to  look
for  his  body,  he  was  found  nuraed  by  the  milk  of  various  wild
beasts. When  he  was  brought  home,  he  caused  him  to  be

*  Minio."]  Hence  the  name  of  the  river  Miriho,

+  Qlehcu  amrecu.]  Pliny  makes  the  same  statement,  H.  N.  xzxiiL  21.

t  Isaac  Ybssius  in  his  notes  to  Catullus  says  that  the  Chalybs  is  a
river  between  the  Ana  and  the  Tagus,  which  is  called  by  Ptolemy  and  -
MartiaHus  KdXi'rrovg  or  K6Xiiroc» 1  think  hini<  right. — Grceimia.

§  Tradition  places  the  Titans  in  Thessaly,  not  in  Spain. —  Wetzel,
'  II  They  dwelt  about  Cap6  Cun6us,  now  C.  St.  Vincent»  in  Portugal
The'word  is  a  correction  of  Isaac  Vossius's,  for  the  old  reading  Our^tai
who  were  a  people  of  Crete.


SM  jusnK.  [rxlit.  ch.it.

thnywn  down  in  a  narrow  road,  along  which  herds  of  cattle  nsed
to  pass  ;  being  so  cruel  that  he  would  rather  have  his  grand-
child trampled  to  pieces,  than  despatched  by  an  easy  death.
As  he  was  unhurt  also  in  this  case,  and  required  no  food,  he
threw  him  to  hungry  dogs,  that  had  been  exasperated  by  want
of  food  for  seyeral  days,  and  afterwards  to  swine,  but  as  he  was
not  only  uninjured,  but  even  fed  with  the  teats  of  some  of  the
swine,  he  ordered  him  at  last  to  be  cast  into  the  sea.  On  this
occasion,  as  if,  by  the  manifest  interposition  of  some  deity,  he
bad  been  carried,  amidst  the  raging  tide,  and  flux  and  reflux  of
the  waters,  not  on  the  billows  but  in  a  vessel,  he  was  put  on
shore  by  the  subsiding  ocean ;  and,  not  long  after,  a  hind  came
up,  and  offered  the  child  her  teats.  By  constantly  following
this  nurse,  the  boy  acquired  extraordinary  swiftness  of  foot,  and
long  ranged  the  mountains  and  woods  among  herds  of  deer,
with  fleetness  not  inferior  to  theirs.  At  last,  being  caught  in
a  snare,  he  was  presented  to  the  king;  and  then,  from  thcf
similitude  of  his  features,  and  certain  marks  which  had  been
burnt  on  his  body  in  his  infetncy,  he  was  recognized  as  his
grandson.  Afterwards,  from  admiration  at  his  escapes  from  so
many  mischances  and  perils,  he  was  appointed  by  his  grand-
father to  succeed  him  on  the  throne.  The  name  given  him
was  Habis;  and,  as  soon  as  he  became  king,  he  gave  such
proofs  of  greatness,  that  he  seemed  not  to  have  been  delivered
in  vain,  through  the  power  of  the  gods,  from  so  many  exposures
to  death.  He  united  the  barbarous  people  by  laws ;  he  was  the
first  that  taught  them  to  break  oxen  for  the  plough,  and  to
raise  com  from  tillage ;  and  he  obliged  them,  instead  of  food
procured  from  the  wilds,  to  adopt  a  better  diet,  perhaps  through
dislike  of  what  he  had  eaten  in  his  childhood.  The  adventures
of  this  prince  might  seem  fabulous,  were  not'  the  founders  of
Borne  said  to  have  been  suckled  by  a  wolf,  and  Cyrus,  king  of
the  Persians,  to  have  been  brought  up  by  a  dog.  By  him  the
people  were  interdicted  from  servile  duties,  and  the  commonalty
were  divided  among  seven  cities.  After  Habis  was  dead,  the
sovereignty  was  retained  for  many  generations  by  his  suc-
cessors.

In  another  part  of  Spain,  which  consists  of  islands,*  the

*  QucB  ex  intvUs  conttctt]  Wetzel  thinks  that  Justin  supposed
Qerjon  to  hare  lived  in  the  Balearic  isles.  How  then  did  Hercules
drive  off  hia  herds  ? The  whole  story  of  Gkryon  is  in  a  great  degree


BJD.  237*-2dO. CABTHAOINIAKS  IN  8PAIK.  996

supreme  power  was  in  the  hands  of  Geryon.  Here  there  is
such  abundance  of  food  for  cattle,  that  unless  the  feeding  of
the  animals  were  occasionally  interrupted,  they  would  burst.
Hence  the  herds  of  Geryon,  which' in  those  days  were  accounted
the  only  species  of  wealth,  were  so  renowned,  that  they
tempted  Hercules  out  of  Asia  by  the  greatness  of  such  a  prize.
Geiyon  himself,  too,  they  say,  was  not  a  man  with  three
bodies,  as  is  told  in  fables,  but  that  there  were  'three  brothers
living  in  such  unanimity,  that  they  seemed  all  actuated  by  one
soul ;  and  that  they  did  not  attack  Hercules  of  their  own
accord,  but,  seeing  their  herds  driven  off, ,  endeavoured  to
recover  what  they  had  lost  by  force  of  arms.

y .  After  the  rule  of  kings  was  at  an  end,  the  Carthaginians
were  the  first  that  made  themselves  masters  of  the  country ;
for  when  the  Gaditani,  according  to  directions  which  they  re-
ceived in  a  dream,  had  removed  the  sacred  things  of  Hercules
from  Tyre,  whence  also  the  Carthaginians  had  their  origin,
into  Spain,  and  had  built  a  city  there,  the  neighbouring  people
of  the  country,  being  jealous  of  the  rise  of  this  new  city,  and
in  consequence  attacking  the  Gaditani  in  war,  the  Cartha-
ginians sent  them  succour  as  being  their  kindred. The  expe-
dition being  successful,  they  both  secured  the  Gaditani  from
injury,  and  added  the  greatest  part  of  the  province  to  their
own  dominions. Subsequently,  too,  the  success  of  their  first
attempt  eucouraging  them,,  they  sent  their  general  Hamilcar,
with  a  large  army,  to  take  possession  of  the  whole  country,
who,  having  performed  great  exploits,  but  pursuing  his  fortune
too  rashly,  was  drawn  into  an  ambush  and  killed. In  his
stead  was  sent  his  son-in-law  Hasdrubal,  who  was  also  killed
by  the  slave  of  a  certain  Spaniard,  to  avenge  the  unjust  death
of  his  master. Hannibal,  the  son  of  Hamilcar,  succeeded
him,  a  greater  general  than  either  of  them ;  for,  surpassing  the
achievements  of  both,  he  subdued  the  whole  of  Spain,  and
then,  making  war  upon  the  Ebmans,  he  harassed  Italy  for
sixteen  years with various calamities, during which  the
Romans,  sending  the  Scipios  into  Spain,  first  drove  the  Car-
thaginians  out  of  the  province,  and  siterwards  carried  on
terrible wars with  the  Spaniards themselves. Nor  would
the  Spaniards  submit  to  the  yoke,  even  after  their  country  was

fabulous,  and  Justin  was  wrong  in  imaginmg  that  any  part  of  Spain
consisted  of  islands.


296^


.r.


JUSTIN.


[B.XI1IV.  CH*v:


over-run,  until  Caesar  Augustus,  having  subdued  the  rest  of
the  world,  turned  his  victorious  armGi  against  them,  and  re-
duced this  barbarous  and  savage  people,  brought  by  the
influence  of  laws  to  a  more  civilized  way  of  life,  into  the  form
of  a  province.


J


•»97


< .'


•  * *


CHEONOLOGT  OF  JUSTIN'S  HISTOET.


In  the  following  table,  the  dates  given  by  Wetzel,  who  has  ^towed
much  pains  on  Justin's  Chronology,  have  been  chiefly  adopted.  For
the  birth  of  Christ  we  take  the  usual  date,  a.h.  4004.
.  The.  history  .of  Justin  reaches  from  the  time  of  Ninus,'th!e  most
ancient  king  of  Assyria,  to  Augustus's  recovery  of  the  Roman  stan-
dards from  thfeiParthians,  that  is,  from  B.C.  2196  to  B.C.  20.

'  6BCT.  I.— THE  BMFIRE  OF  THE  ASSYRIANS.

Note. — ^According  to  Justin,  l  1,  Sesostris,  king  of  Egypt,  and
Tanaus,  king  of  Syria,  were  long  anterior  to  Ninus ;  indeed,  what  he
says  of  Sesostris,  iL  3,  makes  him  1500  years  older  than  Ninus;  but
this  account,  as  Tanaquil  Faber  observes,  rests  on  no  authority.

B.C. The  Assyrians  rule  over  the  eastern  part  of  Asia  for  1300
years,  i  2,  that  is,  from  B.C.  21 96' to  abdtil  875.
2196 — 2144.  Ninus  reigns  52  years,  i  1.

Zoroaster,  king  of  the  Bactrians,  conquered  and  put  to
death,  i  1.
2144 — 2102.  Semiramis  reigns  42  years,  i  2.
2102 — 2034.  Ninyas,  son  of  Ninus,  reigns  38  years,  i  2.
1996.  Abrahami  bom.
1838.  Jacob,  or  Israel,  zxxvi.  2.
1745.  Joseph,  son  of  Jacob,  zxxvi  2 .
1578—1528.  Cecrops  king  of  Athens,  ii  6.

■ 1571.  Moses  bom^  xxxvi.  2.
1528 — 1519.  Cranaus  king  o(  Athens,  ii.  6. .
1519 — 1503.  Amphictyon  king  of  Athens,  ii.  6.

1491.  Exodus  of  the  Israelites  from  Egypt,  xxxvL  2.
1451.  The  Israelites,  imder  Joshua,  enter  Palestine,  xxxvi.  2.
1419—1369.  Erechtheus  khig  of  Athens,  ii.  6.

Triptolemus  commences  the  sowing  of  com,  ii.  6.'
1384.  Janus  and  Saturn  reign  in  Latium,  xlui.  1.
1334.  Picus,  son  and  successor  of  Janus,  xliii.  1.
1304.  Faunus,  son  and  successor  of  Picus,  xliii.  1.
1304—1253.  MgeuB  king  of  Athens,  ii.  6.
1283.  The  Argonauts,  xlii.  2.

Orpheus  invents  mysteries,  in  which  he  initiates  Midas,
.'  king  of  Phrygia,  xi  7.
1256—1226.  Theseus  king  of  Athens,  ii.  6.

1254.  Hercules  and  Theseus  make  war  on  the. Amazons,  ii.  4.
1244.  Xtatinus,  grandson  of  Faunus,  xliii.  1.
Cocalus  king  of  Sicily,  iv.  2.


4


298  JUBxm.

B.C.

1205.  Tyre  bmlt,  xviii.  8.
UM— 1184.  The  Trojan  war,  ii.  4,  6 ;  vill.

Diomede,  driyen  from  his  country,  buIs  to  Italy,  xii.  2  ;

builds  Arpi,  zx.  1.
Pvrrhus,  son  of  Achilles,  settles  in  Epirus,  zriL  3.
Pniloctetes  goes  into  Italy,  zx.  1.  ^

Antenor  setQes  the  Yeneti  in  Italy,  xx.  1.
^neas  becomes  king  of  the  Latins,  xx.  1 ;  xliii.  1.
Teueer  settles  in  Gallsecia,  xliv.  8.
1182.  Demophoon  king  of  Athens,  iL  6.
1 174.  Ascanius  succeeds  JSneas,  and  reigns  88  years,  xliii.  1. '
1172.  XJtica  founded  by  the  Tynans,  xviii  4.
1144.  Alba  Longa  founded  by  Ascanius,  xliii.  1,  in  the  thirtieth

year  of  his  reign.
1070.  Death  of  Codrus,  the  last  king  of  Athens,  ii.  6.

Archons  continued  at  Athens  for  814  years,  that  is,  from
B.C.  1070—766.
885.  Dido  founds  Carthage,  xyiii  4  ;  xii.  10.
883.  Lycurgus,  legislator  of  Sparta,  iii.  2.
875.  Death  of  Sardanapalus,  the  last  king  of  the  Assyrians,  i.  8.

SECT.  IL— THE  EHFIRS  OF  THE  MEDES.

The  Modes  rule  over  Eastern  Asia  for  350^ears,  L  6,  that

is,  from  B.C.  876 — 625,  or  rather  660,  q.v.  infra.  .

818.  CaranuB,  an  Argiye,  settles  at  Edessa,  in  Macedonia,  viL  1^  *1

806 — 764.  Amulius  reigns  at  Alba  Longa  for  42  years,  xliii  2.

782.  Romulus  and  Remus  boru,  ^iii.  2.  \

764.  Battus  founds  Cyrene,  xiii.  7.
764 — 753.  Numitor  king  of  Alba  Longa,  xliii  8.

756.  Decennial  Ajfchons  at  Athens  till  B.c.  686 ;  ii-7.

753.  Rome  built,  xliii  3.
753—716.  Romulus  reigns,  xxxviii  6 ;  xlii  8.
742 — 722.  First  war  of  the  Spartans  with  the  Messenians,  iii.  4.
723—675.  Perdiccas  kii)g  of  Macedonia,  vii  2.
716—678.  Gyges  king  of  Lydia,  i  7.
715 — 672.  Numa  Pompilius  second  king  of  Rome,  xxxviii  6.

703.  Phalantus  founds  Tarentum,  iii.  4.

686.  Annual  Archons  at  Athens.
684 — 667.  Second  war  of  the  Spartans  with  the  Messenians,  iii  6.
675 — 643.  Argseus  king  of  Macedonia,  vii.  2.
' 643—608.  Philip  king  of  Macedonia,  vii.  2.

616—578.  Tarquinius  Priscus  king  of  Rome,  xxxviii  6 ;  xHii  4.
608 — 566.  Aeropus  king  of  Macedonia,  vii  2.

599.  Marseilles  founded  by  the  Phocseans,  xliii.  8.

592.  Solon  gives  laws  at  Athens,  ii  7.
587 — 562.  Astyages,  the  last  king  of  the  Medes,  i  4,  6.
578 — 534.  Servius  Tullius  king  of  Rome,  xxxviii  6.

571.  Cyrus  bom  and  exposed,  i.  4.

561.  Cyrus  acknowledged  by  his  grandfather,  i.  5.
558 — 523.  I^istratus,  tyrant  of  Athens,  ii  8.  '


CHRONOLOGY.  299

B.C.
557—538.  CrcesTB  king  of  Lydia,  i.  7.

550.  Cyras  dethrones  Astyages,  and  becomes  kmg  of  the  Medes,
16. '

SECT.  in.-^THE  XBHFIBl!  OF  THE  FBB8IA1IS.

The  Persians  rule  over  Asia  from  B.c.  660 — 330.
538.  Cyrus  takes  Croesus  prisoner,  i.  7.
534 — 509.  Tarquinius  Superbus,  seventh and last king of Rome,
xzxviii.  6. In  his  reign  Pythagoras  Nourishes,  xx.  4.
530.  Cyrus  takes  Babylon,  i.  7.
528.  Cyrus  killed  by  the  Massagetse,  i.  8.

Cambyses  succeeds  him,  i  9.
526.  Pisistratus  dies,  %nd  is  succeeded  by  his  son  Hipparchus,  ii  9.
521.  Cambyses  perishes,  i.  9. Pseudo-Smerdis  reigns  %  months,

L  9. Darius,  son  of  Hystaspes,  succeeds,  L  10.
512.  Darius  makes  war  on  the  Scythians,  i  10. Hipparchus

killed,  ii.  9.
511.  Dariiis  makes  himself  master  of  Macedonia,  iL  6  ;  vii.  3.
508.  Hippias  expelled  from  Athens,  ii.  9.
507 — ^478.  Amyntas  reigns  la  Macedonia,  vii  2.

489.  Battle  of  Marathon.
485—472.  Reign  of  Xerxes,  U.  10.
484 — 478.  Gelo,  tyrant  of  Syracuse,  xxiii.  4.

479.  Battle  of  Thermopylse,  ii.  11 ;  of  Salamis,  iL  12. Hamilcar

killed  in  Sicily,  xix.  2.
478.  Battles  of  Platsese  and  Myoale,  ii.  14.
478—467.  Hiero,  tyrant  of  Sicily,  xxiii.  4.

478—435.  Alexander,  successor  of  Amyntas,  reigns  in  Macedonia,  vii.  4.
477.  City  and  harbour  of  Athens  repaired,  iL  15.
475.  Pausanians and Aristides lay  waste the territories

Persia,  iL  16.
474.  AnaxUaus,  tyrant  of  Sicily,  iv.  2.
472 — 424.  Artaxerxes  Longimanus,  iii.  1.

469.  Cimon  puts  to  flight  the  Persian  fleet,  ii.  1 6.
468.  Third  war  of  the  Spartans  with  the  Messenians,  iiL  6.
462.  The  Athenians  send  aid  to  Inarus,  king  of  Egypt,  iii.  6.
456.  The  Spartans  league  with  the  Thebans  against  the  Athe-
nians, iii.  6. A  war  ensues,  protracted  for  eleven  years.
436.  Sophocles  joined  in  command  with  Pericles,  iii.  6.
430 — ^403.  The  Peloponnesian  war,  iii.  7.

425.  Expedition  of  the  Athenians  to  Sicily  in  aid  of  the  Leon-
tines,  iv.  3  ;  iiL  7.
I 423.  Darius  Nothus  becomes  king  of  Persia,  v.  L

421.  A  peace  for  50  years  made  between  the  Athenians  and  Lace-
daemonians, which  is  kept  only  for  6 years  and 10
months,  iii.  7.
414—412.  The  fatal  expedition  of  the  Athenians  to  Sicily,  iv.  4.
413.  Alcibiades  exiled,  v.  1.

412. goes  to  Sparta,  v.  1.

410.  flees  from  Sparta  to  the  Persians,  v.  2.


tCiO  . JUSTIN.

B.a  :  "

410—407.  Alcibiades,  beii^g  recalled  by  the  army,  conducts  the  war
/.  '  with*  great  succciBa,  y.  8,  4.

409.  The  Spartans  and  Persians  conquered  by  the  Athenians  at
Sestos,  Y.  4.
The  Carthaginians  enter  Sicily,  y.  4.
407.  Alcibiades  again  in  exile ;  Conon  succeeds  him  in  command,  ^

V.  5,  6.
405.  Victory  of  Lysander  at  ^gospotamos,  in  December,  v.  6.
Conon  flees  to  Cyprus,  iiL  6.

Himilco  and  his  army  perish  by  a  pestilence  in  Sicily,  zix.  2.
405 — 367.  Dionysius,  tyrant  of  Syracuse,  xx.  1.

404.  Athens  taken  by  Lysander,  v.  8.
404—365.  Artaxerxes  Mnemon,  v.  8 ;  xi  1.

403.  End  of  the  Peloponnesian  war,  v.  8.
*  The  thirty  tyrants  at  Athens,  v.  8.
Death  of  Alcibiades,  ib,
402.  Thrasybulus  delivers  Athens  from  the  tyrants,  v.  9.
404 — 399.  Expedition of Cyrus the Younger  against  Artaxerxes;
retreat  of  the  ten  thousand,  v.  11.
398.  The  LacedsBmonians  send  Dercyllidas  to  Asia,  vi  1.
395 — 393.  Agesilaus  at  war  with  the  Persians  in  Asia,  tL  2.
393.  Lysander  killed  at  HaUartus,  vi  4.

Victory  of  Conon  over  Pisander  at  Cnidus,  in  Augast,  vi  3.
t  Agesilaus  returns  from  Asia  and  defeats  the  Boeotians  at

Coronea,  vi.  4.  <

392.  Conon  rebuilds  the  walls  of  Athens,  vi.  5.
390 — 379.  Amyntas  II.  king  of  Macedonia,  vii.  4.
386.  The  peace  of  AntsJcidas,  vi  6.

Rome  taken  and  burnt  by  the  Gkuls,  vi  6.
385.  Wi^  between  the  Lacedaemonians  and  Arcadians,  vi.  6.
381.  The  Lacedaemonians  seize  the  Cadmea  at  Thebes,  vi  6.
370.  The  battle  of  Leuctra,  vi  6.
369,  368.  Alexander  II.  king  of  Macedonia,  vii  4,  5.
Philip  a  hostage  at  Thebes,  vii  5.
368.  Epaminondas  besieges  Sparta,  vi.  7.
367.  Dionysius,  tyrant  of  Syracuse,  dies,  xx.  5.
387—342.  Dionysius  the  younger,  xxi  1.
365 — 339.  Artaxerxes  Ochus,  x.  3.
364 — 359.  Perdiccas  III.  king  of  Macedonia,  vii.  5.  i

363.  Clearchus,  tyrant  of'Heraclea,  xvi.  4.  !

362.  Battle  of  Mantinea ;  death  of  Epaminondas,  vi.  7.
359.  Philip  escapes  from  Thebes  and  possesses  himself  of  the  '

throne,  vii.  5. .  ^

358 — 335.  Reign  of  Philip,  vii.  6.
355.  Alexander  bom.

Dionysius  expelled  from  Sicily,  xxi  2.
354—345.  The  Sacred  War,  viii  1. .

345.  Dionysius  returns  from  IteJy  to  Syracuse,  xxi.  8,

342.  again  driyen  from  Sicily,  and  retires  to  Corinth,

xxi.  5.  I


J


CHIiONOEOjaY.  30t

B.C.

34  U  Alexander^  brother  cy£  Olympias,  becomes  king  of  Epirus,

vm.  6.
337.  Philip  defeats  the  Athenians  at  Chaeronea,  ix.  ^. '

336. calls  a  council  of  the  Greeks  at  Corinth,  ix.  5.

335. killed ;  Alexander  succeeds  him,  ix.  6,  8.

Darius  Codomannus  becomes  king  of  Persia,  x.  3.
333.  Alexander  defeats  the  Persians  at  the  Granicus,  xi»  6.

332. at  Issus,  xL  9.

331.  takes  Tyre,  xi.  10.

330.  founds  Alexandria,  xi.  11.

— : defeats  the  Persians  at  Arbela,  xi  14.

Death  of  Alexander,  king  of  Epirus,  xii  2.
329.. Darius,  and  end  of  the  Persian  empire,  x.  3 ;  xi.  14.


SECT.  IV.-r-THE  EMPIRE  OF  THE  MACEDONIANS.


«r


Agis  king  of  Sparta  falls  in  battle  against  Antipater,  xii.  1.
.  ,  327.  Alexander  subdues  the  people  about  Mount  Caucasus,  xiL  5.,

326.  r invades  India ;  conquers  Porus,  xii.  8.

324.  — ' returns  to  Babylon,  xii.  18.

323.  —• ^  dies  at  Babylon,  xii.  13,  aged  33.

322.  Alexandei'^s  empire  divided  among  his  generals,  xiii  4 ;  war.

of  the  Greeks  against  Antipater,  xiii  5.
321.  Neoptolemus,  Perdiccas,  and  Craterus  killed,  xiii  8.
319.  The  Romans  sent  under  the  yoke  by  the  Samnites,  xviii.  4. .
318.  Antipater  dies,  xiv.  5.
316.  AridsBus  and  Eurydice  killed  by  Olympias,  xiv.  5.

Agathocles,  tyrant  of  Syracuse,  xxii  1.
315.  Eumenes  taken  prisoner  by  Antigonus  and  put  to  death,  xiv.  4 .

Olympias  killed  by  Cassander,  xiv.  6.
309.  Agathocles  makes  war  upon  the  Carthaginians  in  Africa^

xxii.  4.
306.  The  generals  of  Alexander  assume  the  title  of  kings,,  xv.  2.
300.  Antigonus  falls  in  battle  at  Ipsus,  xv.  4.

Agathocles  makes  war  on  the  Bruttii,  xxiii  1.
293.  Demetrius  becomes  king  of  Macedonia,  xvi.  1.

Death  of  Agathocles,  xxiii.  2.
292-.  Death  of  Demetrius,  xvi.  2.
283—246.  Ptolemy  Philadelphus  king  of  Egypt^  xvi  2.
281.  Death  of  Lysimachus,  xvii  2.
280.  Pyrrhus  defeats  the  Romans,  xviii  1 ;  xxxviii  4.
Seleucus  killed  by  Ptolemy  Ceraunus,  xvii  2.
280 — ^260.  Antiochus  Soter  king  of  Syria,  xvii  2.

278.  Ptolemy  Ceraunus  killed  by  the  Gauls  imder  Belgins,  xxiv.
3. Bremius,  with  most  of  his  Army,  perishes  at  Delphi,
xxiv.  6i
275.  The  Gauls  settle  in  GaUo-grsBcia,  xxv.  2.  ^
269.  Pyrrhus  killed  at  Argos,  xxv.  5.
264.  Mrst  Punic  war  begins,  xii  4 ;  continues  23  yean*
260—245.  Antiochus,  surnamed  Deus,  reigns  over  Syria,  zxvii  1.
255.  The  Parthians  revolt  fr<nn  the  Syrians,  xn.  4.


80ji  JUSTIN.

B.O.  , -  .t-

254.  Theodotus,  prefect  of  the Bactrians, revoltB  from the

Syrians,  idL  4.

253—216.  Teridates,  second  king  of  the  Partbians,  xli.  5.

246—220.  Ptolemy  EtMcgetes, successor  of Ptolemy  Philadelphus,

xxrii  1.

245—224.  Seleucos  II.  successor  of  Antioohus  Dens,  xxvii.  1.

242.  Theodotus  11.  succeeds  his  father  m  Bactria,  xli.  4.

241 — ^231.  Demetrius  II.  king  of  Macedonia;  successor  of  Antigonus

Gonnatas,  xxvi  *2.

237—228.  Hamilcar  in  Spain,  xliv.  6.

231—220.  Antigonus  II.  king  of  Macedonia,  successor  of  Demetrius,

xxvm.  o.

228—220.  Hafldrubal,  successor  to  HttmUcar,  in  Spain,  xliti  5.

225—222.  Seleucus  III.,  xxvii  3.

222 — 186.  Antiochus  the  Great,  xxix.  1.

221.  Cleomenes,  king  of  Spaxta,  defeated  by  Antigonus,  flees

into  Egypt,  xxviii.  4.

220—177.  Philip  king  of  Macedonia,  successor  to  Antigonus  II.,  xxviii  4.

220 — 203.  Ptolemy  Philopator  successor  to  E^uergetes,  xxix.  1.

220.  Hannibal  succeeds  Uasdrubal  in  Spain,,  xxix.  1 ;  xliy.  5.  ^

219.  Lycurgus  king  of  Sparta,  xxIk.  1.

218 — 203.  Hannibal  in  Italy,  xxxviii.  4  ;  xliv.  5.

217.  defeats  Flaminius,  xxix.  2.

216.  Philip  of  Macedonia  sends  ambassadors  to  Hannibal,  xxix.  4.

216 — 208.  Artabanus,  successor  of  Teridates,  in  Parthia,  xlL  5.

215.  Lsevinus  goes  into  Greece,  xxix.  4.

214.  Hieronymus,  grandson  of  Hiero,  succeeds  him.

207.  Priapatius,  successor  of  Artabanus,  in  Parthia,  xli.  5.

205.  Philip  makes  peace  with  the  Romans,  xxix.  4.

203.  Scipio  defeats  Hannibal  at  Zama,  xxxviii  6.

203 — 180.  Ptolemy  Epiphanes  successor  of  Philopator,  xxx.  2  ;  xxxL  1.

202.  End  of  the  second  Punic  war,  xxxiv.  1.

199.  The  Achseans  revolt  from  Philip  to  the  Romans,,  xxix.  4.

198.  Philip  defeated  by  Flamininus  at  Cynoscephalse,  xxx.  3.

197.  Hannibal  flees  to  Antiochus  the  Great,  xxxi  2.

193 — 173.  Phraates,  successor  of  Priapatius,  in  Parthia,  xlL  5.

191.  Scipio  Asiaticus  overcomes  Antioohus,  xxxviii  6 ;  xxxi  8.

190.  The  ^tolians  subdued  by  the  Romans,  xxxii  1.

Hannibal  with  Prusias  in  Bithynia,  xxxii  4.

188.  Manlius  triumphs  over  the  Gauls,  xxxviii  6.

186 — 175.  Seleucus  lY.  successor  to  Antiochus  the  Great^  xxxii  2. j

184.  Death  of  Philopcemen,  xxxii  1.

Death  of  Hannibal,  xxxii  4.

Death  of  Scipio  Africanus,  xxxii  4.

182.  Philip  of  Macedonia  puts  to  death  his  son  Demetrius,  xxxii  2.

180^145.  Ptolemy  Philometor  successor  of  Epiphanes,  xxxiv.  2.

180r-l^^*  Eucratidas  king  of  the  Bactrians,  sli  6.

177 — 169.  Perseus  successor  of  Philip  in  Macedonia,  xxxii  3.

175 — 163.  Antiochus  Epiphanes  successor  to  Seleucus,  xxxiv.  2.

173 — 136.  Mithridates  successor  of  Phraates,  xli.  5,  6.


CHBOKOLOGT.  803

RC.  ,

169.  PerseuB,  the  last  king  of  Macedonia,  taken  prisoner  by  the
RomaoB,  zzziii.  2.
163 — 161.  Antiochua  Eupator  successor  of  Epiphanes,  xxziv.  3.
161~-rl49.  Demetrius  II.  successor  of  AntiocEus  Eupator,  zzxiy.  8.
14d — 148.  Demetrius  killed ;  the  throne  occupied  by  Alexander  Bala,
xxzv.  1.
148.  Prusias,  king  of  Bi^ynia,  killed  by  his  son,  xzxiv.  4.
146.  Carthage  destroyed*  zxxviiL  6  ;  Corintii  destroyed,  xxziv.  2.
146—140.  Yiriatus  in  Spain,  xliv.  2.

145 — 125.  Alexander  Bala  Idlled ;  Demetrius  Nicator  reigos,  xxxv.  2.
145 — 118.  Ptolemy  Physcon  successor  of  Philometor,  xxxyiiL  8.
138 — 129.  Demetrius  of Syria  in  captivity  among the Parthians,

xxxviiL  9,  10 ;  xzzvi.  1.
137<>— 132.  Attains  III.  last  king  of  Pergamus,  zzzvL  4.
138—129.  Antiochua  VIL  brother  of  Demetrius,  zzzviii.  9.
136 — 127.  Phraates  successor  of  Mithridates,  king  of  Parthia,  zlii  1.
129.  Pergamus taken  from  Axistonicus, and  made  a  Roman
province,  zxzvi.  4.
Antiochua  VIL killed  by  the  Parthians;  restoration  of
Demetrius,  xxxvii.  10.
128 — 121.  Alexander  Zabinas  pretended  heir  to  the  throne  of  Syria»

xxxix  1.
127 — 123.  Artabanns  successor  of  Phraates,  xlii.  2.

125.  Death  of  Demetrius  in  Syria ;  Seleucus  Y.  succeeds,  xxxix.  1.
124— -62.  Mithridates  the  Great  king  of  Pontus,  xxxvii.  I.

124.  Seleucus  Y.  killed  by  his  mother,  xxxix.  1.
124 — 95.  Antiochus  YIII.,  sumamed  Grypus,  king  of  Syria,  xxxix.  1.
123—86.  Mithridates  II  king  of  Parthia.  xlii  2.

121.  Alexander  Zabinas  killed.by  Antiochus  YIII.,  -y-g-riT-  2.
118.  Antiochus  YIII.  kills  his  mother,  xxxix.  2.
118 — 91.  Ptolemy  Lathyrus  successor  of  Ptolemy  Physcon,  xxxix.  8.'
110 — 84.  Antiochus  IX.  (Cyzicenus)  rival  of  Antiochus  YIIL,  xxxix  2.
105.  Jugurtha  led  in  triumph  by  Marius.
Csepio  killed  by  the  Cimbri,  xxxii  2.
104 — 101.  The  Cimbri  and  Teutones  lay  waste  Helvetia,  Spain,  and
Gaul,  and  are  defeated  by  Marius,  xxxviiL  4.
95.  Cyrene  bequeathed  to  the  Romans,  xxziz.  5.
90 — 88.  The  Marsic  war,  zzzviii  4.

88.  Mithridates  defeats  Aquilius,  zzzviii  8.
88~82.  Civil  war  between  Marius  and  Sylla,  zzzviii.  4.

82.  Tigranes,  king  of  Armenia,  chosen  king  of  Syria,  zl.  1.
78—72.  The  war  with  Sertorius,  zliii.  5.

67.  Crete  and  Cilicia  made  Roman  provinces,  tttit,  5.

Tigranes  deprived  of  the  throne  of  Syria  by  Lucullus  zL  2.
66—61.  The  war  with  Mithridates  conducted  by  Pompey,  zliii  5.
62.  Death  of  Mithridates,  zzzvii.  1.

Syria  made  a  Roman  province  by  Pompey,  zl.  2.
58 — 48.  Julius  Caesar  proconsul  of  Gaul,  zliii  5.
53 — 36.  Orodes  king  of  Parthia,  zlii.  2.

53.  Crassus  killed  by  the  Parthians,  zlii.  4.


304  .' JUSTIN. )

RO  ^  .• . :'

4t^.  Civil  war  between  CaBsar  and  Pompey,  xlii  4.
48.  Battle  of  Pharsalia,  xlii.  4.

43.  Brutus  and  Cassius  at  war  with  the  Triumviri,  xlii.  4.
.38.  Yentidius  kills  Pacorus,  son  of  the  king  of  Parthia,  xlii.  4.
38.  Phraates  IV.,  successor  of  Orodes,  king  of  Parthia,. reigns  AO

years,  xliL  4,  5.
35.  Antony  put  to  flight  by  the  Parthians,  xlii.  5.
30—26.  Phraates  driven  from  his  throne  by  Tiridates,  and  restored  by
tlie  Scythians,  xlii.  5.
24.  Augustus  returns  from  Spain,  which  had  been  subdued  three

years. before,  xliv.  5.
20.  The  zParthians  restore  the  Roman  standards  and  prisoners,
xliL  5.


305


CORNELIUS  NEPOS.


LIVES  OF  EMINENT  COMMANDERS.


PREFACK

I  DO  not  doubt  that  there  will  be  many,*  Atticus,  who  will
think  this  kind  of  writing  f  trifling  in  its  nature,  and  not
sufficiently  adapted  to  the  characters  of  eminent  men,  when
they  shall  find  it  related  who  taught  Epaminondas  music,  or
see  it  numbered  among  his  accomplishments,  that  he  danced
gracefully,  and  played  skilfully  on  the  flutes  J.  But  these  will
be  such,  for  the  most  part,  as,  being  unacquainted  with  Greek
literature,  will  think  nothing  right  but  what  agrees  with  their
own  customs.

If  these  readers  will  but  understand  that  the  same  things
a;re  not  becoming  or  unbecoming  among  all  people,  but  that
every  thing  is  judged  by  the  usages  of  men's  forefathers,  they
will  not  wonder  that  we,  in  setting  forth  the  excellencies  of  the
Greeks,  have  had  regard  to  their  manners.  For  to  Cimon,  an
eminent  man  among  the  Athenians,  it  was  thought  no  disgrace
to  have  his  half-sister,  §  by  the  father's  side,  in  marriage,  as
his  countrymen  followed  the  same  practice ;  but  such  a  union,
according  to  the  order  of  things  among  us,  is  deemed  unlawful.

*  Plerosque.']  For  plurimos.  So,  a  little  below,  pleraque—stmt  decway
for  'plv/rima.

i*  Hoc  genus  scriptttrcB.]  These  brief  memoirs  of  eminent  men,  inter-
spersed with  allusions  to  national  habits  and  peculiarities.

X.  Tibiia  cantdsse.^  The  plural,  fltUes,  is  used,  because  the  Greeks,  and
the  Romans,  who  adopted  the  practice  from  them,  played  on  different
kinds  of  flutes  or  pipes,  equal  and  uneqiudj  right  and  hft-hamdedf  and
often  on  two  at  once.  See  Colman's  preface  to  his  translation  of
Terence  ;  Smith's  Classical  Diet.  art.  Tihia  ;  Life  of  Epaminondas,  c.  2.

§  Sororem  germcmwmJ]  A  half-sister  by  the  mother's  side  was  called
soror  tUerina, Her  name  was  Elpinice. See  the  Life  of  Cimon.

X


306  CORNELIUS  NEPOS.

In  Greece  it  is  considered  an  honour  to  young  men  to  have  as
many  lovers  *  as  possible.  At  Lacedsemon  there  is  no  widow  t  so
noble  that  will  not  go  upon  the  stage,  if  engaged  for  a  certain
sum.  Through  the  whole  of  Greece  it  was  accounted  a  great
glory  to  be  proclaimed  a  conqueror  at  Olympia;  while  to
appear  upon  the  stage,  and  become  a  spectacle  to  the  public,J

*  Amatorea.']  See  the  Life  of  Alcibiades,  c.  2.  Apud  OrcBcos,  says
Oic.  de  Rep.  fragm.  lib.  iv.,  opprobrio  fuit  adoUacentibtiSj  si  etmatores
wm  haberent.  See  Maxim  ua  Tyiius,  Dissert,  viii. — xL  ;  Potter's  Antiq.
of  Greece,  b.  iv.  c.  9.

+  Nulla — vidtui—qtbce  non  ad  scenam  eai  mercede  conducta.]  This  is
not  said  with  reference  to  that  period  in  the  history  of  Sparta  when  it
adhered  to  the  laws  of  Lycui^us,  under  which  it  was  not  allowed  to
witness  either  comedy  or  tragedy,  as  Plutarch  in  his  Instituta  LacorUca
shows,  but  to  the  time  when  the  ancient  discipline  and  austerity  were
trodden  under  foot,  and  the  state  sunk  into  luxury  and  effeminacy ;  a
condition  of  things  which  took  place  under  Leonidas  and  Agis,  and
chiefly,  indeed,  through  the  licentiousness  of  the  woinen,  if  we  may
credit  what  Plutarch  says  in  his  life  of  Agis.  From  the  earliest  times,
however,  according  to  Aristotle,  PoHt.  ii..  9,  the  Spartan  women  were
inclined  to  live  very  intemperately  and  luxuriously,  and  Lycurgus
endeavoured  to  subject  them  to  laws,  but  was  obliged  to  desist,  through
the  opposition  which  they  made.  Hence  Plato,  also,  de  Legg.  lib.  ii.,
alludes  to  the  Jvemc,  laxity,  of  the  Spartan  women.  —Buchner.  But
with  aU  such  explanations  the  passage  is  still  difficult  and  unsatis-
factory. Why  is  a  widow  particularly  specified  ?  No  passage  in  any
ancient  author  has  been  found  to  support  this  observation  of  Nepos,  if
it  be  his.  What  Aristotle  says  in  disparagement  of  the  Lacedsemonian
women  is  pretty  well  refuted,  as  Van  Staveren  observes,  by  Plutarch
in  his  life  of  Lycurgus,  c.  14.  Besides,  there  were  no  female  actors
among  the  Greeks.  For  ad  tcenam  Freinshemius  (apud  Boeder,  ad
h.  1.)  proposes  to  read  ad  ccenam,  which  Gesner  approves ;  Heusinger
conjectures  ad  lenam.  The  conjecture  of  Withof,  ad  eneamiOf  compared
with  Hor.  A.  P.  232,  FestU  matrona  moveri  juasa  diehus,  might  appear
in  some  degree  plausible,  were  not  lyKaivia  a  word  resting  on  scarcely
any  other  authority  than  that  of  the  Septuc^int  and  ecclesiastical
writers;  for  though  it  occurs  in  Quintilian,  vii.  2,  the  passage  is
scarcely  intelligible,  and  the  reading  has  generally  been  thought
unsound.  Goerenz,  ad  Cic.  de  Fin.  iL  20,  would  read  quas  non  ad
ccenami  eat  mercede  condictamj  i.  e.  to  a  supper  or  banquet  furnished  by
a  general  contribution  of  the  guests.  But  none  of  these  critics  cite
any  auihority  in  support  of  their  emendations.  As  to  the  last,  it
would  be  casting  no  dishonour  upon  a  noble  widow  to  say  that  she
went  to  a  ccena  condictay  for  such  ccBna  might  be  among  those  of  her
own  class.  Nor  is  the  applicability  of  mercede  in  such  a  phrase  quite
certain.

$  In  acenam  prodire  et  populo  eaae  spectaciUOf  &c.]  Actors  are  here
confounded  with  the  rhapsodists,  or  reciters  of  poetiy. Demosthenes,


N


PREFACE.  307

was  a  dishonour  to  no  one  in  that  nation ;  but  all  these  prac-
tices are,  with  us,  deemed  partly  infamous,  partly  mean,  and
at  variance  with  respectability.  On  the  other  hand,  many
things  in  our  habits  are  decorous,  which  are  by  them  con-
sidered unbecoming ;  for  what  Roman  is  ashamed  to  bring  his
wife  to.  a  feast,  or  whose  consort  does  not  occupy  the  best
room  in  the  house,  and  live  in  the  midst  of  company  ?  But
in  Greece  the  case  is  far  otherwise;  for  a  wife  is  neither
admitted  to  a  feast,  except  among  relations,  nor  does  she  sit
anywhere  but  in  the  innermost  apartment  of  the  house,*
which  is  called  the  gyruBconitis^  and  into  which  nobody  goes  who
is  not  connected  with  her  by  near  relationship.

But  both  the  size  of  my  intended  volume,  and  my  haste  to
relate  what  I  have  undertaken,  prevent  me  from  saying  more
on  this  point.  We  will  therefore  proceed  to  our  subject,  and
relate  in  this  book  the  lives  of  eminent  commanders.

de  Corondf  upbraids  ^schines  as  being  an  actor. — lUndni  Prolegom.  in
j£m.  Proh.  p.  xlii.

*  This  is  not  true  of  the  Spartan  women,  for  they,  who  boasted
that  they  alone  were  the  mothers  of  men,  led  a  life  of  less  restraint.
Besides,  by  the  laws  of  Lycurgus,  the  young  women  took  part  in  the
public  exercises. — Rinck.  Prolegom,  ibid.


X  2


308


I.  MILTIADES.

Miltiades  leads  'out  a  colony  to  the  ChersoneBe ;  is  mocked  by  the
people  of  Lemnos,  I. — Makes  himself  master  of  the  Chersonese ;
takes  Lemnos  and  the  Cyclades,  II. — Is  appointed  by  Darius,
when  he  was  making  war  on  Scythia,  to  guard  the  bridge  over  the
Ister ;  suggests  a  plan  for  delivering  Greece  from  the  Persians ;  is
opposed  by  Histiseus,  III. — Exhorts  his  countrymen  to  meet
Darius  in  the  field,  IV. — Defeats  Darius  before  the  arrival  of  the
allies,  V. — How  he  is  rewarded,  VL — ^Breaks  off  the  siege  of
Paros,  is  condemned,  and  dies  in  prison,  YII. — True  cause  of  his
condenmation,  VIII.

I.  At  the  time  when  Miltiades,  the  son  of  Cimon,  an  Athe-
nian, was  eminent  above  all  his  countrymen,  both  for  the
antiquity  of  his  family,  the  glory  of  his  forefathers,  and  his
own  good  conduct,*  and  was  of  such  an  age  that  his  fellow  citi-
zens might  not  only  hope  well  of  him,  but  assure  themselves  that
he  would  bo  such  as  they  found  him  when  he  became  known,
it  chanced  that  the  Athenians  wished  to  send  colonists  to  the
Chersonese.f  The  number  of  the  party  being  great,  and  many
applying  for  a  share  in  the  expedition,  some  chosen  from  among
them  were  sent  to  Delphi,  J  to  consult  Apollo  what  leader  they
should  take  in  preference  to  any  other ;  for  the  Thracians  at
the  time  had  possession  of  those  parts,  with  whom  they  would
be  obliged  to  contend  in  war.  The  Pythia  expressly  directed
them,  when  they  put  the  question,  to  take  Miltiades  as  their

*  Modestia,']  "  Good  conduct,"  or  "  prudence,"  or  "  knowledge  how
to  act,"  seems  to  be  the  true  sense  of  the  word.  "  Itaque,  ut  eandem
[ivratlav]  nos  modestiam  appellemus,  sic  definitur  a  Stoicis,  ut
modestia  sit  scientia  earum  rerum,  quae  agentur  aut  dicentur,  suo  loco
coUocandarum :  .  .  .  scientia — opportimitatis  idoneorum  ad  agen-
dum temporum.  Sed  potest  esse  eadem  prtideTUice  definitio." — Cic.  de
Off.  i.  40.

t  The  Thracian  Chersonese.  But  it  is  to  be  observed  that  the
author,  in  this  biography,  confounds  Miltiades,  the  son  of  Cimon,  with
Miltiades  the  elder,  the  son  of  Cypaelus.  It  was  the  latter  who  settled
the  colony  in  the  Thracian  Chersonese,  and  left  the  sovereignty  of  it
at  his  death  to  Stesagoras,  the  son  of  his  half-brother  Cimon,  and
brother  to  Miltiades  the  younger,  who  became  governor  of  it  on  the
death  of  Stesagorad,  being  sent  out  by  Pisistratus  for  that  purpose.

:|:  £x  his  delecti  Deljphos  ddiberatum  missi  sunt,  qui  consulerent  ApoUir
nem^  &c.]  Either  deliberatu/m,  or  qui  consulerent  ApoUin^mf  might  be
omitted  as  superfluous.  Bos  retains  both  in  his  text,  but  suspects  the
latter.


MILTIADBS.  309

commander,  as,  if  they  did  so,  their  undertakings  would  be
successful.  Upon  this  answer  from  the  oracle,  Miltiades  set  out
for  the  Chersonese  with  a  fleet,  accompanied  by  a  chosen  body
of  men,f  and  touched  at  Lemnos,  when,  wishing  to  reduce
the  people  of  the  island  under  the  power  of  the  Athenians,  and
requesting  the  Lemnians  to  surrender  of  their  own  accord,
they,  in  mockery,  replied  that  **  they  would  do  so,  whenever
he,  leaving  home  with  a  fleet,  should  reach  Lemnos  by  the  aid
of  the  wind  Aquilo ;  "  for  this  wind,  rising  from  the  north,  is
contrary  to  those  setting  out  from  Athens.  Miltiades,  having
no  time  for  delay,  directed  his  course  to  the  quarter  to  which
he  was  bound,  and  arrived  at  the  Chersonese.

II.  Having  there,  in  a  short  time,  scattered  the  forces  of
the  barbarians,  and  made  himself  master  of  all  the  territory
that  he  had  desired,  he  strengthened  suitable  places  with
fortresses,  *  settled  the  multitude,  which  he  had  brought  with
him,  in  the  country,  and  enriched  them  by  frequent  excursions.
Nor  was  he  less  aided,  in  this  proceeding,  by  good  conduct
than  by  good  fortune,  for  after  he  had,  by  the  valour  of  his
men,  routed  the  troops  of  the  enemy,  he  settled  affairs  with
the  greatest  equity,  and  resolved  upon  residing  in  the  country
himself.  He  held,  indeed,  among  the  inhabitants,  the  authority
of  a  king,  though  he  wanted  the  name  ;  and  he  did  not
attain  this  influence  more  by  his  power  than  by  his  justice.
Nor  did  he  the  less,  on  this  account,  perform  his  duty  to  the
Athenians,  from  whom  he  had  come.  From  these  circum-
stances it  happened  that  he  held  his  office  in  perpetuity,  not
less  with  the  consent  of  those  who  had  sent  him,  than  of  those
with  whom  he  had  gone  thither.  ,

Having  settled  the  affairs  of  the  Chersonese  in  this  man-
ner, he  returned  to  Lemnos,  and  called  on  the  people  to  deliver
up  their  city  to  him  according  to  their  promise  ;  for  they  had
said  that  when  he,  starting  from  home,  should  reach  their
country  by  the  aid  of  the  north  wind,  they  would  surrender
themselves  ;  **  and  he  had  now  a  home,  "  he'  told  them,  **  in
the  Chersonese." The  Carians,  who  then  inhabited  Lemnos,

*  Cvm  ddectd  marm.^  A  body  indt^pendent  of  those  who  were  going
io  settle  in  the  colony.

t  Loca  casteUis  idoriea  communiit.]  A  late  editor  absurdly  takes
ecutellis  for  a  dative.  Tacit.  Ann.  ill  74  :  Ccutdla  et  munitumes  idoneit
locis  imponens.


810  CORNELIUS  NEPOS.

though  the  event  had  fallen  out  contrary  to  their  expectation,
yet  being  influenced,  not  by  the  words,  but  by  the  good  fortune
of  their  adversaries,  did  not  venture  to  resist,  but  withdrew  out
of  the  island.  With  like  success  he  reduced  some  other  islands,
which  are  called  the  Gyclades,  under  the  power  of  the
Athenians.

III.  About  the  same  period,  Darius,  king  of  Persia,
resolved  upon  transporting  his  army  from  Asia  into  Europe,
and  making  war  upon  the  Scythians.  He  constructed  a  bridge
over  the  river  Ister,  by  which  he  might  lead  across  his  forces.
Of  this  bridge  he  left  as  guardians,  during  his  absence,*  the
chiefsf  whom  he  had  brought  with  him  from  louia  and  ^olia,
and  to  whom  he  had  given  the  sovereignty  of  their  respective
cities ;  for  he  thought  that  he  should  most  easily  keep  under
his  power  such  of  the  inhabitants  of  Asia  as  spoke  Greek,  if  he
gave  their  towns  to  be  held  by  his  friends,  to  whom,  if  he  should
be  crushed,  J  no  hope  of  safety  would  be  left.  Among  the
number  of  those,  to  whom  the  care  of  the  bridge  was  then  en-
trusted, was  Miltiades.

As  several  messengers  brought  word  that  Darius  was
unsuccessful  in  his  enterprise,  and  was  hard  pressed  by  the
Scythians,  Miltiades,  in  consequence,  exhorted  the  guardians
of  the  bridge  not  to  lose  an  opportunity,  presented  them  by
by  fortune,  of  securing  the  liberty  of  Greece ;  for  if  Darius
should  be  destroyed,  together  with  the  army  that  he  had  taken
with  him,  not  only  Europe  would  be  safe,  but  also  those  who,
being  Greeks  by  birth,  inhabited  Asia,  would  be  freed  from  the
dominion  of  the  Persians,  and  from  all  danger.  **  This,"  he  said,
"  might  easily  be  accomplished,  for,  if  the  bridge  were  broken
down,  the  kin^  would  perish  in  a  few  days,  either  by  the  sword  of
the  enemy,  or  by  famine."  After  most  of  them  had  assented
to  this  proposal,  Histiaeus  of  Miletus,  prevented  the  design  from
being  executed;  saying  that  "the  same  course  would  not  be  ex-
pedient for  those  who  held  sovereign  command,  as  for  the  multi-
tude, since  their  authority  depended  on  the  power  of  Darius,  and,

*  J>um  vp9e  cibesHt.'l  He  fixed,  accordiBg  to  Herodotus,  a  tenn  of
sixty  days  for  his  absence,  on  the  expiration  of  which  the  guardians  of
the  bridge  might  depart

t  Principea.]  The  tyrants  or  soyereigns  of  the  Greek  cities,  who
held  their  power  under  the  protection  of  Darius.

t  Se  oppresao.]  If  he  should  be  crushed,  and  the  Persian  empire
consequently  overthrown,  they  would  be  left  without  a  protector.


MILTIADES.  311

if  he  were  cut  ofiF,  they  would  be  deprived  of  their  governments,
and  suffer  punishment  at  the  hands  of  their  subjects  ;*  and  that
he  himself,  therefore,  was  so  far  from  agreeing  in  opinion  with
the  rest,  that  he  thought  nothing  more  advantageous  for  them
than  that  the  kingdom  of  the  Persians  should  be  upheld.''
As  most  went  over  to  this  opinion,  Miltiades,  not  doubting  that
his  proposal,  since  so  many  were  acquainted  with  it,  would
come  to  the  ears  of  the  king,  quitted  the  Chersonese,  and  went
again  to  reside  at  Athens.  His  suggestion,  though  it  did  not
take  effect,  is  yet  highly  to  be  commended,  as  he  showed  him-
self a  greater  friend  to  the  general  liberty  than  to  his  own
power.

IV.  Darius,  when  he  had  returned  from  Asia  into  Europe,
prepared,  at  the  exhortation  of  his  friends,  in  order  to  reduce
Greece  under  his  dominion,  a  fleet  of  five  hundred  ships,  and
appointed  Datis  and  Artaphernes  to  the  command  of  it,  to
whom  he  assigned  two  hundred  thousand  infantry  and  ten
thousand  cavalry ;  alleging  as  a  reason  for  his  enterprise,
that  he  was  an  enemy  to  th«  Athenians,  because,  with  their
aid,  the  lonians  had  stormed  Sardisf  and  put  his  garri-
son to  death.  These  generals  of  the  king,  having  brought  up
their  fleet  to  Eubcea,  soon  took  Eretria,  carried  off  all  the
citizens  of  the  place,]:  and  sent  them  into  Asia  to  the  kiqg.
They  then  went  to  Attica,  and  drew  up  their  forces  in  the
plain  of  Marathon,  which  is  distant  from  the  city  of  Athens
about  ten  miles.  The  Athenians,  though  alarmed  at  this
sudden  descent,  so  near  and  so  menacing,  sought  assistance
nowhere  but  from  the  Spartans,  and  despatched  Fhidippides,
a  courier  of  the  class  called  hemerodromoi,^  to  Lacedsemon,  to
acquaint  them  how  speedy  assistance  they  needed. At  home,

*  Owibiu  suit  pceruu  datwros,']  They  would  be  called  to  account  for
having  made  themselves  tyrants.

f  The  lonians  had  rebelled  against  Persia,  to  which  they  had  been
subject,  and,  with  some  Athenians  and  Eretrians,  had  burned  Sardis.
This  is  alleged  among  the  frivolous  reasons  for  the  Persian  war.  See
Herod,  v.  101—105;  Perizon.  ad  JElian.  V.  H.  xii.  53;  Fabric,  ad
Oros.  ii.  8 ;  and  Pint.  Vit.  Aristid. —  Van  Staveren,

X  Omnes  tQus  gentis  cives.]  That  is,  all  the  people  of  Eretria  in
Euboea.  They  were  carried  to  Susa,  and  treated  kindly  by  Darius.
See  Herod  vi.  119.

§  'H/icpo^po/tot,  "  day  couriers,"  who  could  run  a  great  distance  in  a
day. Ingens  die  uno  cursu  emetientet  tpaJtmn. Liv.  zxzi  24.


31f2  COBNELinS  NEPOS.

meanwhile,  they  appointed  ten  captains  to  command  the  army,
and  among  them  Miltiades.

Among  these  captains  there  was  a  great  discussion,  whether
thev  should  defend  themselves  within  the  walls,  or  march  out
to  meet  the  enemy,  and  decide  the  contest  in  the  field.  Mil-
tiades was  the  only  one  extremely  urgent  that  a  camp  should
he  formed  as  soon  as  possible;  "for,"  he  said,  "if  that  were
done,  not  only  would  courage  be  added  to  their  countrymen,
when  they  saw  that  there  was  no  distrust  of  their  valour,  but
the  enemy,  from  the  same  cause,  would  be  less  bold,  if  they
saw  that  the  Athenians  would  venture  to  oppose  them  with  so
small  a  force."

V.  In  this  crisis  no  state  gave  assistance  to  the  Athenians,
except  that  of  Plataea,  which  sent  them  a  thousand  men.  On
the  arrival  of  these,  the  number  of  ten  thousand  armed  men
was  made  up  ;  a  band  which  was  ani^mated  with  an  extraor-
dinary ardour  to  fight.  Hence  it  happened  that  Miltiades  had
more  influence  than  his  colleagues,  for  the  Athenians,  incited
by  his  authority,  led  out  their  forces  from  the  city,  and  pitched
their  camp  in  an  eligible  place.  The  next  day,  having  set
themselves  in  array  at  the  foot  of  the  hills  opposite  the  enemy,
they  engaged  in  battle  with  a  novel  stratagem,  and  with  the
utmost  impetuosity.  For  trees  had  been  strewed  in  many
directions,  with  this  intention,  that,  while  they  themselves
were  covered  by  the  high  hills,*  the  enemy's  cavalry  might  be
impeded  by  the  spread  of  trees,  so  that  they  might  not  be  sur-
rounded by  numbers.  Datis,  though  he  saw  that  the  ground
was  unfavourable  for  his  men,  yet,  depending  on  the  number
of  his  force,  was  desirous  to  engage,  and  the  rather,  because
he  thought  it  of  advantage  to  fi«ht  before  the  Spartans  came
to  the  enemy's  assistance.  He  led  into  the  field,  therefore,  a
hundred  thousand  foot  and  ten  thousand  horse,  and  proceeded
to  battle.  In  the  encounter  the  Athenians,  through  their
valour,  had  so  much  the  advantage,  that  they  routed  ten  times
the  number  of  the  enemy,  and  threw  them  into  such  a  conster-
nation, that  the  Persians  betook  themselves,  not  to  their  camp,
but  to  their  ships.  Than  this  battle  theie  has  hitherto  been
none  more  glorious ;  for  never  did  so  small  a  band  overthrow
so  numerous  a  host.

*  The  text  is  here  in  an  unsatisfactory  state,  as  all  the  critics
remark,  but  I  have  given  what  is  evidently  the  sense  of  the  passage.


MILTUBES.  313

VI.  For  this  victory  it  does  not  seem  improper  to  state
what  reward  was  conferred  "on  Miltiades,  that  it  may  be  the
more  easily  understood  that  the  nature  of  all  states  is  the
same ;  for  as  honours  among  our  own  people  were  once  few
and  inexpensive,  and  for  th«t  reason  highly  prized,  but  are
now  costly  and  common,  so  we  find  that  it  formerly  was
among  the  Athenians.  For  to  this  very  Miltiades,  who  had
saved  Athens  and  the  whole  of  Greece,  such  honour  only
was  granted,  that  when  the  battle  of  Marathon  was  painted  in
the  portico  called  Poecile*  his  figure  was  placed  first  in  the
number  of  the  ten  commanders,  and  he  was  represented  as  en-
couraging his  men,  and  commencing  the  battle.  The  same
people,  after  they  acquired  greater  power,  and  were  cornipted
by  the  largesses  of  their  rulers,  decreed  three  hundred  statues
to  Demetrius  Phalereus.

VII.  After  this  battle  the  Athenians  gave  Miltiades  a  fleet
of  seventy  ships,  that  he  might  make  war  on  the  islands  that
had  assisted  the  barbarians.  In  the  discharge  of  this  com-
mission he  obliged  most  of  them  to  return  to  their  duty;t
some  he  took  by  assault.  Being  unable  to  gain  over  by  per-
suasion one  of  their  number,  the  island  of  Pares,  which  was
vain  of  its  strength,  he  drew  his  troops  out  of  his  ships,
invested  the  town, J  and  cut  off  all  their  supplies ;  soon  after,
he  erected  his  vinea^  and  tortoises,  and  came  close  up  to  the
walls.  When  he  was  on  the  point  of  taking  the  town,  a  grove
on  the  main  land,  which  was  some  distance  off,  but  visible
from  the  island,  was  set  on  fire,  by  I  know  not  what  accident,
in  the  night ;  and  when  the  flame  of  it  was  seen  by  the  towns-
men and  besiegers,  it  was  imagined  by  both  that  it  was  a
signal  given  by  the  men  of  the  king's  fleet ;  whence  it  hap-
pened that  both  the  Parians  were  deterred  ||  from  surrendering,
and  Miltiades,  fearing  that  the  royal  fleet  was  approaching,

*  TIoiKiXrf 2roa,  "the  painted  portico,"  as  being  adorned  with
pictures  on  subjects  from  Athenian  history.

i  Ad  ojfficium  redire.]  To  submit  again  to  the  power  of  the  Athe-
nians.

:{:  Urhem.']  The  chief  town  of  the  island, bearing  the  same  name
with  it.

§  See  on  Sail.  Jug.  c.  37. The  testudineavfere  similar  in  construction
and  use  to  the  viihece.

II  Betet'TererUttr.]  They  feared  the  vengeance  of  the  Persians  if  they
submitted  to  Miltiades.


dJ4  COBNEUUS  NEPOS.

set  fire  to  the  vorks  which  he  had  erected,  and  returned  to
Athens  with  the  same  number  of  ships  with  which  he  had  set
out,  to  the  great  displeasure  of  his  countrymen.  He  was  in
consequence  accused  of  treason,  on  the  allegation,  that  "  when
he  might  have  taken  Pares,  •he  desisted  from  the  siege,
without  effecting  anything,  through  being  bribed  by  the  king
of  Persia."  He  was  at  this  time  ill  of  the  wounds  which  he
had  received  in  besieging  the  town,  and,  as  he  could  not  plead
for  himself,  his  brother  Tisagoras  spoke  for  him.  The  cause
being  heard,  he  was  not  condemned  to  death,  but  sentenced
to  pay  a  fine,  which  was  fixed  at  fifty  talents,  a  sum  equivalent
to  that  which  had  been  spent  on  the  fleet.  As  he  could  not
pay  this  money,  he  was  thrown  into  prison,  and  there  ended
his  life.

VIII.  Although  he  was  brought  to  trial,  on  the  charge
relating  to  Paros,  yet  there  was  another  cause  for  his  con-
demnation ;  for  the  Athenians,  in  consequence  of  the  tyranny  of
Pisistratus,  which  had  occurred  a  few  years  before,  looked  with
dread  on  the  aggrandizement  of  any  one  of  their  citizens.
Miltiades  having  been  much  engaged  in  military  and  civil  of-
fices, was  not  thought  likely  to  be  contented  in  a  private  station,
especially  as  he  might  seem  to  be  drawn  by  the  force  of  habit
to  long  for  power ;  for  he  had  held  uninterrupted  sovereignty
in  the  Chersonesus  during  all  the  years  tliat  he  had  dwelt
there,  and  had  been  called  a  tyrant,  Uiough  a  just  one ;  for  he
had  not  acquired  his  power  by  violence,  but  by  the  consent  of
his  countrymen,  and  had  maintained  his  authority  by  the
uprightness  of  his  conduct.  But  all  are  esteemed  and  called
tyrants,  who  become  possessed  of  permanent  power  in  any
state  which  had  previously  enjoyed  liberty.  In  Miltiades,
however,  there  was  both  the  greatest  philanthropy  and  a  won-
derful affability,  so  that  there  was  no  person  so  humble  as  not
to  have  free  access  to  him ;  he  had  also  the  greatest  influence
among  all  the  states  of  Greece,  with  a  noble  name,  and  repu-
tation for  military  achievements.  The  people,  looking  to  these
circumstances,  chose  rather  that  he  should  suffer,  though  inno-
cent, than  that  they  should  continue  longer  in  fear  of  him.


315


11.  THEMISTOCLES.

Youth  of  Themistocles ;  he  is  disinherited  by  his  father,  L — His
eminence  in  the  Corcyrsean  and  Persian  wars,  II. — Battle  of
Artemisiuni)  III. — His  stratagem  against  Xerxes  at  Salamis,  IV. —
Causes  Xerxes  to  quit  Greece,  V. — ^Builds  the  walls  of  Athens,
deceiving  the  Lacedaemonians,  YI.  VII. — Is  ostracised,  and  oeeks
refuge  in  various  places,  VIII. — His  letter  to  Artaxerxes,  and
reception  by  him ;  dies  at  Magnesia,  IX.

I.  Themistocles  was  the  son  of  Neocles,  an  Athenian.
The  vices  of  his  early  youth  were  compensated  by  great  vir-
tues, so  that  no  one  is  thought  superior,  and  few  are  considered
equal  to  him.

But  we  must  begin  from  the  beginning.  His  father
Neocles  was  of  a  good  family,  and  married  a  native  of
Achamae,*  of  whom  Themistocles  was  the  son.  Falling  under
the  displeasure  of  his  parents,  because  he  lived  too  freely,  and
took  no  care  of  his  property,  he  was  disinherited  by  his  father.
This  disgrace,  however,  did  not  dishearten  him,  but  incited
him  to  exertion,  for  being  aware  that  it  could  not  be  ob-
literated without  the  utmost  efforts  6n  his  part,  he  devoted
himself  wholly  to  affairs  of  state,  studying  diligently  to  benefit
his  friends  as  well  as  his  own  reputation.  He  was  much
engaged  in  private  causes,  and  appeared  often  before  the
assembly  of  the  people ;  no  matter  of  importance  was  managed
vnthout  him ;  he  quickly  discovered  what  was  necessary  to  be
done,  and  readily  explained  it  in  his  speeclies.  Nor  was  he
less  ready  in  managing  business  than  in  devising  plans  for  it,
for,  as  Thucydides  says,  he  formed  a  most  accurate  judgment
of  present  affairs,  and  the  shrewdest  conjectures  as  to  the
future.  Hence  it  happened  that  he  soon  became  distinguished.

*  AehcmMjmam  civem.']  This  is  the  reading  of  most>  if  not  all,  of  the
MSS.,  and  Bob  retains  it.  "  Aldus,"  says  Bos, ''  was  the  £rst,  I  think,
to  change  Achamanam  into  Halicarnassiam,  from  having  read  in
Plutarch  that  Neanthes  said  Halicamassus  in  Caria  was  the  birth-place
of  Themistocles's  mother.  For  my  part,  I  am  unwilling  to  give  up
the  old  reading,  especially  as  there  is  so  much  uncertainty  on  the
point  among  writers?'  Some  make  Themistocles  the  son  of  a  Thracian
woman,  and  called  her  Abrotonus,  some  of  a  Carian,  and  called  her
Suterpe.  See  Plutarch.  Themist.  itiU,  and  Athenseus,  xiii.  5.  Achamse
was  a  borough  of  Attica.  Plutarch,  however,  asserts  that  Themistocles
was  not  of  pure  Attic  blood  on  the  mother's  side.  Nor  is  there  any-
thing either  in  him  or  Athenseus  to  support  the  reading  Achoflmamam,


316  CORNELIUS  NEPOS.

II.  His  first  step  in  the  management  of  public  affairs  was
in  the  CorcyraBan  war/*^  Being  chosen  commander  by  the
people  to  conduct  it,  he  increased  the  confidence  of  the
citizens,  not  only  as  to  the  struggle  in  which  they  were  en-
gaged, but  for  time  to  come.  As  the  public  money,  which
came  in  from  the  mines,  was  annually  wasted  by  the  pro-
fusion t  of  the  magistrates,  he  prevailed  on  the  people  that  a
fleet  of  a  hundred  ships  should  be  built  ^ith  that  money.
This  being  soon  constructed,  he  first  reduced  the  Corcyrseans,
and  then,  by  vigorously  pursuing  the  pirates,  rendered  the
sea  secure.  In  acting  thus,  he  both  supplied  the  Athenians
with  wealth,  and  made  them  extremely  skilful  in  naval  war-
fare. How  much  this  contributed  to  the  safety  of  Greece  in
general,  was  discovered  in  the  Persian  war,  when  Xerxes
assailed  the  whole  of  Europe  by  sea  and  land,  with  such  a
force  as  no  man  ever  had,  before  or  since ;  for  his  fleet  con-
sisted of  two  hundred  ships  of  war,  on  which  two  thousand
transport  vessels  attended,  and  his  land  force  was  seven
hundred  thousand  foot,  and  four  hundred  thousand  horse.

When  the  news  of  his  approach  was  spread  through  Greece,
and  the  Athenians,  on  account  of  the  battle  of  Marathon,  were
said  to  be  the  chief  objects  of  his  attack,  they  sent  to  Delphi  to
ask  what  they  should  do  in  their  present  circumstances.  As
soon  as  they  put  the  question,  the  Pythian  priestess  repHed  that
'*  they  must  defend'  themselves  with  wooden  walls."  As  no
one  understood  to  what  this  answer  tended,  Themistocles
suggested  that  it  was  Apollo's  recommendation  that  they
should  put  themselves  and  their  property  on  board  their  ships,
for  that  such  were  the  wooden  walls  intended  by  the  god. This

*  BeUo  C(}rcyrceo.']  Rather  MgineticOy  in  the  war  with  -^Egina,  as
Lambinus  and  other  commentators  have  observed;  for  that  war
happened  about  the  time  to  which  allusion  is  here  made.  See  Herod,
vii.  144,  and  Plutarch.  Them.  c.  4.  But  of  a  war  with  Corcyra  neither
Herodotus  nor  Thucydides  makes  any  mention ;  a  dispute  between  the
Corcyraeans  and  Corinthians  is  noticed  by  Plutarch,  Them.  c.  24,  which
Themistocles,  as  arbiter,  is  said  to  have  settled.  The  passage  is  there-
fore corrupt,  perhaps  from  an  error  of  jEmilius  Probus,  or  perhaps
Nepos  himself  made  a  mistake  as  to  the  name  of  the  war. — Fischer.

+  Larrfitione.']  The  money  was  divided,  if  we  listen  to  Herodotus,
vi.  46,  47;  vii.  144,  among  the  whole  people,  ten  drachmae  to  every
person  of  full-grown  age. — Bos. But  the  division  of  it  was  the  act  af
the  people  themselves,  though  it  might  be  promoted  by  the  influence -
of  some  of  the  leading  men.


THEMIbTOCLES.  317

plan  being  approved,  they  added  to  their  former  vessels  as
many  more  with  three  banks  of  oars,  and  carried  off  all  their
goods  that  could  be  moved,  partly  to  Salamis  and  partly  to
Trcezen.  The  citadel,  and  sacred  things,  they  committed  to
the  priests,  and  a  few  old  men,  to  be  taken  care  of;  the  rest
of  the  town  they  abandoned.

III.  This  measure  of  Themistocles  was  unsatisfactory  to
most  of  the  states,  and  they  preferred  to  fight  on  land.  A
select  force  was  accordingly  sent  with  Leonidas,  king  of  the
Lacedaemonians,  to  secure  the  pass  of  Thermopylae,  and  pre-
vent the  barbarians  from  advancing  further.  This  body  could
not  withstand  the  force  of  the  enemy,  and  were  all  slain  on
the  spot.  But  the  combined  fleet  of  Greece,  consisting  of
three  hundred  ships,  of  which  two  hundred  belonged  to  the
Athenians,  engaged  the  kings  fleet  for  the  first  time  at
Artemisium,  between  Euboea  and  the  main  land;  for  Themis-
tocles had  betaken  himself  to  the  straits,  that  he  might  not  be
surrounded  by  numbers.  Though  they  came  off  here  with
success  equally  balanced,  yet  they  did  not  dare  to  remain
in  the  same  place,  because  there  was  apprehension,  lest,  if
part  of  tlie  enemy's  fleet  should  get  round  Euboea,  they  should
be  assailed  by  danger  on  both  sides.  Hence  it  came  to  pass
that  they  left  Artemisium,  and  drew  up  their  fleet  on  the  coast
of  Salamis,  over  against  Athens.

IV.  Xerxes,  having  forced  a  passage  through  Thennopylse,
marched  at  once  to  the  city,  and  as  none  defended  it,  destroyed
it  by  fire,  putting  to  death  the  priests  that  he  found  in  the
citadel.  As  those  on  board  the  fleet,  alarmed  at  the  report  of
tliis  catastrophe,  did  not  dare  to  remain  where  they  were,  and
most  of  them  gave  their  opinion  that  they  should  return  to
their  respective  homes,  and  defend  themselves  within  their
walls,  Themistocles  alone  opposed  it,  saying  that  united  they
would  be  a  match  for  the  enemy,  but  declaring  that  if
they  separated  they  would  be  destroyed.  That  this  would  be
the  case  he  assured  Eurybiades,  king  of  the  Lacedaemonians,
who  then  held  the  chief  command,  but  making  less  impression
on  him  than  he  wished,  he  sent  one  of  his  slaves^  the  most
trustworthy  that  he  had,  to  Xerxes  in  the  night,  to  tell  him
in  his  own  precise  words,  that  *'  his  enemies  were  retreating,  and
that,  if  they  should  make  off,  he  would  require  more  labour
and  longer  time  to  finish  the  war,  as  he  would  have  to  pursue.


318  '  CORNELIUS  NBPOS.

th68e  singly,  whom,  if  he  attacked  them  immediately,  he  might
destroy  in  a  body  and  at  once."  The  object  of  this  communi-
cation was,  that  all  the  Greeks  should  be  forced  to  fight  even
against  their  will.  The  barbarian,  receiving  this  intimation,
and  not  suspecting  any  guile  to  be  hidden  under  it,  engaged,
the  day  after,  in  a  place  most  unfavourable  for  himself,  and
most  advantageous  for  the  enemy,  the  strait  being  so  confined*
that  the  body  of  his  fleet  could  not  be  brought  into  action.
He  was  defeated  in  consequence  rather  by  the  stratagem  of
Themistocles  than  by  the  arras  of  Greece.

y.  Though  Xerxes  had  thus  mismanaged  his  af&irs,  he  had
yet  so  vast  a  force  left,  that  even  with  this  he  might  have
overpowered  his  enemies.  But  in  the  meanwhile  f  he  was
driven  from  his  position  by  the  same  leader.  For  Themis-
tocles, fearing  that  he  would  persist  in  protracting  the  contest,
sent  him  notice  that  it  was  in  contemplation  that  the  bridge,
which  he  had  made  over  the  Hellespont,  should  be  broken  up,
and  that  he  should  thus  be  prevented  from  returning  into
Asia ;  and  he  convinced  him  that  such  was  the  fact  In
consequence  Xerxes  returned  into  Asia  in  less  than  thirty  days,
by  the  same  way  by  which  he  had  spent  six  months  in  coming,
and  considered  himself  not  conquered,^but  saved,  by  Themis-
tocles. Thus  Greece  was  delivered  by  the  policy  of  one  man,
and  Asia  succumbed  to  Europe.  This  is  a  second  victory
that  may  be  compared  with  the  triumph  at  Marathon ;  for  the
greatest  fleet  in  the  memory  of  man  was  conquered  in  like
manner  J  at  Salamis  by  a  small  number  of  ships.

VI.  Themistocles  was  great  in  this  war,  and  was  not  less
distinguished  in  peace ;  for  as  the  Athenians  used  the  har-
bour of  Phalerum,  which  was  neither  large  nor  convenient,
the  triple  port  of  the  Pir8eeu8§  was  constructed  by  his  advice,
and  enclosed  with  walls,  so  that  it  equalled  the  city  in  mag-
nificence, and  excelled  it  in  utility. He  also  rebuilt  the  walls

*  Aded  angu8to  mart]  It  was  in  the  strait  between  the  island  of
Salamis  and  the  temple  of  Hercules,  on  the  coast  of  Attica. — Bos.

t  InterinL]  The  MSS.  and  editions  are  divided  between  interim  and
iierum. Bos  prefers  the  former ;  Van  Staveren  the  latter.

i  Pari  modo.]  Under  the  same  circumstances  as  at  Marathon ;  a
greater  force  being  defeated  by  a  smaller.

§  Triplex  Pirceei  porttts.]  It  is  acutely  shown  by  Bos  that  the
Pineeus  was  called  triple  from  its  containing  three  stations  or  basins,
Cantharos,  Aphrodision,  and  Zea.


THEMISTOCLES.  319

I

of  Athens  at  his  own  individual  risk  ;  for  the  Lacedaemonians,
having  found  a  fair  pretext,  in  consequence  of  the  inroads  of
the  barbarians,  for  saying  that  no  walled  town  should  be  kept
up  without  the  Peloponnesus,  in  order  that  there  might  be
no  fortified  places  of  which  the  enemy  might  take  possession,
attempted  to  prevent  the  Athenians  from  building  them.
This  attempt  had  a  far  different  object  from  that  which  they
wished  to  be  apparent  y  for  the  Athenians,  by  their  two
victories  at  Marathon  and  Sal  amis,  had  gained  so  much
renown  among  all  people,  that  the  Lacedaemonians  became
aware  that  they  should  have  a  struggle  with  them  for  the
supremacy.  They  therefore  wished  the  Athenians  to  be  as
weak  as  possible.

After  they  heard,  however,  that  the  erection  of  the  wall  was
begun,  they  sent  ambassadors  to  Athens  to  prevent  it  from
being  continued.  While  the  ambassadors  were  present,  they
desisted,  and  said  that  they  would  send  an  embassy  to  them
respecting  the  matter.  This  embassy  Themistocles  undertook,
and  set  out  first  by  himself,  desiring  that  the  rest  of  the
ambassadors  should  follow  when  the  height  of  the  wall  should
seem  sufficiently  advanced ;  and  that,  in  the  meantime,  all
the  people,  slaves  as  well  as  freemen,  should  carry  on  the  work,
sparing  no  place,  whether  sacred  or  profane,  public  or  private,
but  collecting  from  all  quarters  whatever  they  thought  suitable
for  building.  Hence  it  happened  that  the  walls  of  the
Athenians  were  constructed  of  materials  from  temples  and
tombs.

VII.  Themistocles,  when  he  arrived  at  Lacedaemon,  would
not  go  to  the  authorities  at  once,  but  endeavoured  to  make  as
much  delay  as  possible,  alleging,  as  a  reason,  that  he  was
waiting  for  his  colleagues.  While  the  Lacedaemonians  were
complaining  that  the  work  was  nevertheless  continued,  and
that  he  was  trying  to  deceive  them  in  the  matter,  the  rest  of
the  ambassadors  in  the  meantime  arrived ;  and,  as  he  learned
from  them  that  but  little  of  the  wall  remained  to  be  done,  he
proceeded  to  the  Lacedaemonian  Ephori,  in  whom  the  supreme
power  was  vested,  and  assured  them  positively  that  "false
accounts  had  been  given  them,"  adding  "that  it  would  be  proper
for  them  to  send  persons  of  chai'acter  and  respectability,  in
whom  trust  might  be  placed,  to  inquire  into  the  affair ;  and
that  in  the  meantime  they  might  detain  himself  as  a  hostage."


8*20  CORNELIUS  NEPOS.

His  suggestion  was  complied  with,  and  three  deputies,  men
who  had  filled  the  highest  offices,  were  despatched  to  Athens.

When  Themistocles  thought  that  thej  had  i-eached  the  city,
he  went  to  the  Ephori  and  senate  of  the  Lacedaemonians,  and
holdly  stated  that ''  the  Athenians,  hy  his  advice,  had  enclosed
their  public  gods,  and  their  national  and  household  gods,*  with
walls,  that  they  might  more  easily  defend  them  from  the  enemy,
a  step  which  they  were  at  liberty  to  take  by  the  common  law  of
rations ;  nor  had  they,  in  acting  thus,  done  what  was  useless  to
Greece ;  for  their  city  stood  as  a  bulwark  against  the  barbarians,
at  which  the  king's  fleets  had  already  twice  suffered  shipwreck ;
and  that  the  Lacedaemonians  acted  unreasonably  and  unjustly,
in  regarding  rather  what  was  conducive  to  their  own  dominion,
than  what  would  be  of  advantage  to  the  whole  of  Greece.
If,  therefore,  they  wished  to  receive  back  the  deputies  whom
they  had  sent  to  Athens,  they  must  permit  him  to  return ;
otherwise  they  would  never  receive  them  into  their  country
again.*'

VIII.  Yet  he  did  not  escape  jealousy  on  the  part  of  his  own
countrymen  ;  for  being  expelled  from  the  city  by  the  ostracism,
through  the  same  apprehension  from  which  Miltiades  had
been  condemned,  he  went  to  dwell  at  Argos.  While  he  was
living  there  in  great  honour,  on  account  of  his  many  excellent
qualities,  the  Lacedaemonians  sent  ambassadors  to  Athens  to
accuse  him  in  his  absence  of  having  made  a  league  with  the
king  of  Persia  to  subjugate  Greece.  On  this  charge  he  was
condemned,  while  absent,  of  treason  to  his  country.  As  soon
as  he  heai-d  of  this  sentence,  he  removed,  as  he  did  not  think
himself  safe  at  Argos,  to  Corcyra.  But  perceiving  that  the
leading  men  of  that  state  were  afraid  lest  the  Lacedaemo-
nians and  Athenians  should  declare  war  against  them  on  his
account,  he  fled  to  Admetus,  king  of  the  Molossi,  with  whom
he  had  had  a  great  friendship. t  Having  arrived  here,  and
the  king  being  absent  at  the  time,  he,  in  order  that  he  might
secure  himself,  if  received,  with  the  stronger  safeguard  of

•  By  public  gods,  deoa  pMicoSf  are  meant  the  deities  worshipped
throughout  all  the  states  of  Greece,  as  Jupiter,  Mercury,  &c. ;  by
national  gods,  patrios,  such  as  were  peculiar  to  Attica  itself.

+  Hospitivm.]  A  mutual  agreement  to  receive  one  another  as  guests.
But  according  to  Thucydides,  i.  136,  there  was  no  such  relation
existing  between  them,  for  he  speaks  of  Admetus  as  ovra  aitTtf  ov


THEMISTOCLBS.*  321

religion,  took  up  the  king  s  little  daughter,  and  ran  with  her
into  a  certain  temple,  which  was  regarded  with  the  utmost
veneration,  and  from  which  he  did  not  come  out  till  the  king,
having  given  him  liis  right  hand,  took  him  under  his  protec-
tion ;  an  engagement  which  he  strictly  observed.  For  when  his
surrender  was  publicly  demanded  by  the  Athenians  and  Lace-
daemonians, he  did  not  betray  his  dependant,  but  warned  him
to  consult  for  his  safety,  as  it  would  be  difficult  for  him  to  live
in  security  in  a  place  so  near  to  Greece.  He  in  consequence
caused  him  to  be  conducted  to  Pydna,  appointing  him  a
sufficient  guard.  Here  he  went  on  board  a  ship,  to  all  the
sailors  in  which  he  was  personally  unknown.  The  vessel
being  driven  by  a  violent  storm  towards  Naxos,  where  the
army  of  the  Athenians  then  lay,  Themistocles  felt  assured
that,  if  he  put  in  there,  he  must  lose  his  life.  Being  thus
compelled  by  necessity,  he  disclosed  to  the  captain  of  the  ship
who  he  was,  promising  him  a  large  reward  if  he  would  save
him.  The  captain,  moved  with  concern  for  so  illustrious  a
man,  kept  the  ship  at  anchor  in  the  open  sea,  at  some  dis-
tance from  the  island,  for  a  day  and  a  night,  allowing  no
person  to  quit  it.  Thence  he  went  to  Ephesus,  where  he
set  Themistocles  on  shore,  who  afterwards  liberally  rewarded
him  for  his  services.

IX.  I  know  most  historians  have  related  that  Themistocles
went  over  into  Asia  in  the  reign  of  Xerxes,  but  I  give  credence
to  Thucydides  in  preference  to  others,  because  he,  of  all  who
have  left  records  of  that  period,  was  nearest  in  point  of  time
to  Themistocles,  and  was  of  the  same  city.  Thucydides  says
that  he  went  to  Artaxerxes,  and  sent  him  a  letter  in  these
words :  '*  I,  Themistocles,  am  come  to  you,  a  man,  who,  of
all  the  Greeks,  brought  most  evil  upon  your  house,  when
I  was  obliged  to  war  against  your  father,  and  to  defend  my
own  country.  I  also  did  your  father  still  greater  service,
after  I  myself  was  in  safety,  and  he  began  to  be  in  danger  ;
for  when  he  wished,  after  the  battle  fought  at  Salamis,  to
return  into  Asia,  I  informed  him  by  letter  that  it  was  in  con-
templation that  the  bridge,  which  he  had  constructed  over  the
Hellespont,  should  be  broken  up,  and  that  he  should  be  sur-
rounded by  enemies  ;  by  which  information  he  was  rescued
from  danger.  But  now,  pursued  by  all  Greece,  I  have  fled  to
you,  soliciting  your  fjavour,  and  if  I  shall  obtain  it,  you  will

Y


322  CORNELIUS  NEPOS.

find  me  no  less  deserving  as  a  friend  than  your  father  found
me  resolute  as  an  enemy.  I  make  this  request,  however,  that
with  regard  to  the  subjects  on  which  I  wish  to  discourse  with
you,  you  would  grant  me  a  year's  delay,  and  when  that  time
is  past,  permit  me  to  approach  you."

X.  The  king,  admiring  his  greatness  of  mind,  and  wishing
to  have  such  a  man  attached  to  him,  granted  his  request.
Themistocles  devoted  all  that  time  to  the  writings  and  lan-
guage of  the  Persians,  in  which  he  acquired  such  knowledge,
that  he  is  said  to  have  spoken  before  the  king  with  much  more
propriety*  than  those  could  who  were  born  in  Persia.  After  he
had  made  the  king  many  promises,  and  what  was  most  agree-
able of  them  all,  that  if  he  would  follow  his  advice,  he  might
conquer  Greece  in  war,  he  was  honoured  with  rich  presents  by
Art-axerxes,  and  returning  into  Asia  Minor,  fixed  his  habita-
tion at  Magnesia.  For  the  king  had  bestowed  upon  him  this
city,  expressing  himself  in  these  words,  that  *'it  was  to
supply  him  with  bread ; "  (from  the  land  about  this  place  fifty
talents  came  into  him  annually ;)  and  he  had  also  given  him
Lampsacus,  **  whence  he  might  get  his  wine,"  and  Myus,
" from  which  he  might  have  meats  for  his  table.*'!

Two  memorials  of  Themistocles  have  remained  to  our  times;
his  sepulchre  near  the  city, J  in  which  he  was  buried,  and  his
statues  in  the  forum  of  Magnesia.  Concerning  his  death
various  accounts  have  been  given  by  several  writers;  we
prefer,  to  all  others,  the  authority  of  Thucydides,  who  says
that  he  died  of  some  disease  at  Magnesia,  though  he  admits
that  there  was  a  report  that  he  voluntarily  took  poison,  because
he  despaired  of  being  able  to  perform  what  he  had  promised
the  king  about  subjugating  Greece.  Thucydides  has  also
recorded  that  his  bones  were  buried  by  his  friends  in  Attica
privately,  it  not  being  permitted  by  law  to  bury  them,  as  he
had  been  pronounced  guilty  of  treason.

•  MuUo  c(ymmodiu8.'\  This  seems  impossible.  He  might  have  better
matter  to  produce,  but  surely  not  better  language.

t  Opsonium.]  The  word  signifies  all  that  was  eaten  with  bread ;  all
kuids  of  food  besides  bread.

J  Prope  oppidum.]  That  is,  near  the  city  of  Athens,  where  we  learn
from  Pausanias  that  the  tomb  of  Themistocles  was  to  be  seen  in  his
time,  in  the  reign  of  Marcus  Antoninus. — Bos,


323


III.  ARISTIDES.

Aristides  the  contemporary  and  rival  of  Themistocles ;  is'  banished,  I.
— After  his  recal,  commands  against  Mardonius ;  increases  the
popularity  of  the  Athenians,  II. — Has  the  care  of  the  treasury ;
dies  poor,  III.

I.  Aristides,  the  son  of  Lysimachus,  a  native  of  Athens,
was  almost  of  the  same  age  with  Themistocles,  and  contended
with  him,  in  consequence,  for  pre-eminence,  as  they  were
determined  rivals  one  to  the  other  ;*  and  it  was  seen  in  their
case  how  much  eloquence  could  prevail  over  integrity ;  for
though  Aristides  was  so  distinguished  for  uprightness  of  con-
duct,t  that  he  was  the  only  person  in  the  memory  of  man  (as
far  at  least  as  I  have  heard)  who  was  called  by  the  surname  of
Just,  yet  being  overborne  by  Themistocles  with  the  ostracism,
he  was  condemned  to  be  banished  for  ten  years.

Aristides,  finding  that  the  excited  multitude  could  not  be
appeased,  and  noticing,  as  he  yielded  to  their  violence,  a  person
writing  that  he  ought  to  be  banished,  is  said  to  have  asked  him
"why  he  did  so,  or  what  Aristides  had  done,  that  he  should  be
thought  deserving  of  such  a  punishment?  "  The  person  writing
replied,  that  "  he  did  not  know  Aristides,  but  that  he  was  not
pleased  that  he  had  laboured  to  be  called  Just  beyond  other
men."

He  did  not  suffer  the  full  sentence  of  ten  years  appointed
by  law,  for  when  Xerxes  made  a  descent  upon  Greece,  he  was
recalled  into  his  country  by  a  decree  of  the  people,  about  six
years  after  he  had  been  exiled.

II.  He  was  present,  however,  in  the  sea-fight  at  Salamis,
which  was  fought  before  he  was  allowed  to  return. J He  was

*  OhtrectdrufU  inter  se.]  ^miroXiTEiKravTo :  they  supported  opposite
parties  in  the  state.  So  in  the  Life  of  Epaminondas,  c.  5,  it  is  said
that  he  had  Meneclides  for  an  obtrectcUor.  Such  obtrectcUiones  are
called  by  Veil.  Pat.  ii  43,  civUes  cotUenliones,  and  by  Val.  Max.  iii.  8,
(Merrimi  studii  in  administratione  BeipttMiccB  disaidia. — Qehhard.  Plu-
tarch says,  thai-  according  to  some  there  were  dissensions  between
Aristides  nnd  Themistocles  from  their  earliest  years,  so  that  in  all  their
oommunications,  whether  on  graver  or  lighter  topics,  the  one  always
opposed  the  other. — Buch7i>er.

t  Abstinentid.]  That  is,  abstaining  from  the  property  of  others;
moderation;  disinterestedness.

t  Priusquam  pcend  liberai'etur.]  Before  he  was  freed  from  the
punishment  (of  exile).

Y 2


3^^4  CORNELIUS  NEPOS.

also  commander  of  the  Athenians  at  fPlatSBse,  in  the  hattle  in
^hich  Mardonius  ^as  routed,  and  the  army  of  the  barbarians
was  cut  off.  Nor  is  there  any  other  celebrated  act  of  his  in
military  affairs  recorded,  besides  the  account  of  this  command  ;
but  of  his  justice,  equity,  and  self-control,  there  are  many  in-
stances. Above  all,  it  was  through  his  integrity,  when  he  was
joined  in  command  of  the  common  fleet  of  Greece  with
Pausanias,  under  whose  leadership  Mardonius  had  been  put  to
flight,  that  the  supreme  authority  at  sea  was  transferred  from ,
the  LacedaBmonians  to  the  Athenians ;  for  before  that  time
the  LacedsBmoniaus  had  the  command  both  by  sea  and  land.
But  at  this  period  it  happened,  through  the  indiscreet  conduct
of  Pausanias,  and  the  equity  of  Aristides,  that  all  the  states
of  Greece  attached  themselves  as  allies  to  the  Athenians,  and
chose  them  as  their  leaders  against  the  barbarians.

III.  *In  order  that  they  might  repel  the  barbarians  more
easily,  if  perchance  they  should  try  to  renew  the  war,  Aristides
was  chosen  to  settle  what  sum  of  money  each  state  should  con-
tribute for  building  fleets  and  equipping  troops.  By  his  ap-
pointment four  hundred  and  sixty  talents  were  deposited
annually  at  Delos,  which  they  fixed  upon  to  be  the  common
treasury;  but  all  this  money  was  afterwards  removed  to
Athens.

How  great  was  his  integrity,  there  is  no  more  certain  proof,
than  that,  tbough  he  had  been  at  the  head  of  such  important
affairs,  he  died  in  such  poverty  that  he  scarcely  left  money  to
defray  the  charges  of  his  funeral.  Hence  it  was  that  his
daughters  were  brought  up  at  the  expense  of  the  country,  and
were  married  with  dowries  given  them  from  the  public  treasury.
He  died  about  four  years  after  Themistocles  was  banished  from
Athens.

♦  At  the  commencement  of  this  chapter  I  have  departed  from  Bos's
text,  and  followed  that  of  Freund  and  others,  who  miebke  it  begin  with
Quo8  quo  facUiui  repeUerent,  &c.


325


IV.  PAUSANIAS.

Pausanias  at  Platseee,  I. — He  takes  Byzantium,  and  makes  advances  to
Xerxes,  II. — His  conduct  abroad;  his  imprisonment,  III. — He
betrays  his  guilt,  IV. — His  death  at  the  temple  of  Minerva,  V.

I.  Pausanias  the  Lacedaemonian  was  a  great  man,  but  of
varied  character  in  all  the  relations  of  life;  for  as  he  was
ennobled  by  virtues,  he  was  also  obscured  by  vices.  His  most
famous  battle  was  that  at  Platsece,  for,  under  his  command
Mardonius,  a  royal  satrap,  by  birth  a  Mede,  and  son-in-law  to
the  king  (a  man,  among  the  chief  of  all  the  Persians,  brave
in  action  and  foil  of  sagacity),  at  the  head  of  two  hundred
thousand  infantry,  whom  he  had  chosen  man  by  man,  and
twenty  thousand  cavalry,  was  routed  by  no  very  large  army  of
Greeks ;  and  the  general  himself  was  slain  in  the  struggle.

Elated  by  this  victory,  he  began  to  indulge  in  irregular
proceedings,*  and  to  covet  greater  power.  But  he  first  in-
curred blame  on  this  account,  that  he  offered  at  Delphi,  out  of
the  spoil,  a  golden  tripod  with  an  inscription  written  upon  it,
in  which  was  this  statement,  that  **  the  barbarians  had  been
cut  off  at  Plateeae  by  his  management,  and  that,  on  account  of
that  victory,  he  had  presented  this  offering  to  Apollo."  These
lines  the  Lacedaemonians  erased,  and  wrote  nothing  but  the
names  of  the  states  by  whose  aid  the  Persians  had  been
conquered.

II.  After  this  battle  they  sent  Pausanias  with  the  confede-
rate fleet  to  Cyprus  and  the  Hellespont,  to  expel  the  garrisons
of  the  barbarians  from  those  parts.  Experiencing  equal  good
fortune  in  this  enterprise,  he  began  to  conduct  himself  still
more  haughtily,  and  to  aim  at  still  higher  matters ;  for  having,
at  the  taking  of  Byzantium,  captured  several  Persian  noble-
men, and  among  them  some  relations  of  the  king,  he  sent
them  secretly  back  to  Xerxes,  and  pretended  that  they  had
escaped  out  of  prison.  He  sent  with  them,  also,  Gongylus  of
Eretria,  to  carry  a  letter  to  the  king,  in  which  Thucydides  f
has  recorded  that  the  following  words  were  written  :  "  Pausa-
nias, the  general  of  Sparta,  having  discovered  that  those  whom

•  Pltmma  mUcere]  To  mingle,  or  throw  into  confusion,  very  many
things.

t  Book  L  c  128.


A


326  CORNELIUS NEPOS.

he  took  at  Byzantium  are  your  relatioDS,  has  sent  them  hack  as
a  gift,  and  desires  to  he  joined  in  affinity  with  you.  If  there-
fore it  seem  good  to  you,  give  him  your  daughter  in  marriage.
Should  you  do  so,  he  engages,  with  your  aid,  to  hring  hoth
Sparta  and  the  rest  of  Greece  under  your  sway.  If  you  wish
anything  to  be  done  with  regard  to  these  proposals,  be  careful
to  send  a  trustworthy  pei'son  to  him,  with  whom  he  may
confer."

The  king,  extremely  delighted  at  the  restoration  of  so  many
persons  so  nearly  related  to  him,  immediately  despatched
Artabazus  with  a  letter  to  Fausanias,  in  which  he  commended
him,  and  begged  that  he  would  spare  no  pains  to  accomplish
what  he  promised;  if  he  effected  it,  he  should  never  meet
with  a  refusal  of  anything  from  him.  Pausanias,  learning
what  the  king's  pleasure  was,  and  growing  more  eager  for
the  accomplishment  of  his  designs,  fell  under  the  suspicion  of
the  Lacedaemonians.  In  the  midst  of  his  proceedings,  accord-
ingly, he  was  recalled  home,  and  being  brought  to  trial  on  a
capital  charge,  was  acquitted  on  it,  but  sentenced  to  pay  a
fine ;  for  which  reason  he  was  not  sent  back  to  the  fleet.

III.  Not  long  after,  however,  he  returned  to  the  army  of
his  own  accord,  and  there,  not  in  a  sensible,  but  in  an  insane
manner,  let  his  views  become  known ;  for  he  laid  aside,  not
only  the  manners  of  his  country,  but  its  fashions  and  dress.
He  adopted  regal  splendour  and  Median  attire ;  Median  and
Egyptian  guards  attended  him ;  he  had  his  table  served,  after
the  Persian  manner,  more  luxuriously  than  those  who  were
with  him  could  endure ;  he  refused  permission  to  approach
him  to  those  who  sought  it;  he  gave  haughty  replies  and
severe  commands.  To  Sparta  he  would  not  return,  but  with-
drew to  Colonee,  a  place  in  the  countiy  of  Troas,  where  he
formed  designs  pernicious  both  to  his  country  and  himself.
When  the  Lacedaemonians  knew  of  his  proceedings,  they  sent
deputies  to  him  with  a  scytala*  on  which  it  was  written,  after
their  fashion,t  that  **  if  he  did  not  return  home,  they  would

*  Cum  scytcUd.]  The  acytala  was  a  staff,  round  which  a  slip  of  parch-
ment being  rolled  obliquely,  the  orders  of  the  Ephori  were  written  on
it  longitudinally,  so  that,  when  unrolled,  they  could  not  be  read  until
the  parchment  was  again  rolled  round  a  staff  of  the  same  thickness,
which  the  general  had  with  him.

+  More  iUorum.]  That  is,  with  extreme  brevity.


PAUSANIAS.  3?J7

condemn  him  to  death."  Being  alarmed  at  this  communication,
but  hoping  that  he  should  be  able,  by  his  money  and  his
influence,  to  ward  off  the  danger  that  threatened  him,  he
returned  home.  As  soon  as  he  arrived  there,  he  was  thrown
into  the  public  prison  by  the  Ephori,  for  it  ,is  allowable,  by
their  laws,  for  any  one  of  the  Ephori  to  do  this  to  a  king.*
He  however  got  himself  freed  from  confinement,  but  was  not
cleared  from  suspicion,  for  the  belief  still  prevailed,  that  he
had  made  a  compact  with  the  king  of  Persia.

There  is  a  certain  class  of  men  called  Helots,  of  whom  a
great  number  till  the  lands  of  the  LacedsBmonians,  and  per-
form the  duties  of  slaves.  These  men  he  was  thought  to  have
solicited,  by  holding  out  to  them  hopes  of  liberty,  to  join  him.
But  as  there  was  no  visible  ground  for  a  charge  against  him
on  these  points,  on  which  he  might  be  convicted,  they  did  not
think  that  they  ought  to  pronounce,  concerning  so  eminent
and^famous  a  man,  on  suspicion  only,  but  that  they  must  wait
till  the  affair  should  disclose  itself.

IV.  In  the  meantime  a  certain  Argilian,f  a  young  man
whom,  in  his  boyhood,  Pausanias  had  loved  with  an  ardent
affection,!  having  received  a  letter  from  him  for  Artabazus,
and  conceiving  a  suspicion  that  there  was  something  written  in
it  about  himself,  because  no  one  of  those  who  had  been  sent
to  the  same  place  on  such  an  errand,  had  returned,  loosed  the
string  of  the  letter,  §  and  taking  off  the  seal,  discovered  that  if
he  deUvered  it  he  would  lose  his  life.  In  the  letter  were  also
some  particulars  respecting  matters  that  had  been  arranged
between  the  king  and  Pausanias.  This  letter  he  dehvered  to
the  Ephori.  The  cautious  prudence  of  the  Lacedsdmonians,
on  this  occasion,  is  not  to  be  passed  without  notice ;  for  they
were  not  induced,  even  by  this  man  s  information,  to  seize
Pausanias,  nor  did  they  think  that  violent  measures  should  be
adopted,  until  he  gave  proof  of  his  own  guilt.

•  Begi.]  Pausanias  was  not  actually  a  king,  but  guardian  to  the
young  prince  Pleistarchus,  the  son  of  Leonidas. Thucyd.  i.  132.

+  ArffiUus,]  A  native  of  Argilus,  a  town  of  Thrace  on  the  Strymonic
Gulf.

J  Amove  venereo.]  See  the  note  on  amcUorea  in  the  preface.

§  Vinctda  epistolce  Icucavit.']  Letters  were  tied  round  with  a  string,
which  was  sealed,  probably,  over  the  knot.  The  Argilian,  according
to  Kepos,  contrived  to  take  off  the  string  without  breaking  the  seal,  so
that  he  might  readily  replace  it.


828  CORNELIUS  NEP08.

They  accordingly  directed  the  informer  what  they  wished
to  have  done.  At  Tsenarus  there  is  a  temple  of  Neptune,
which  the  Greeks  account  it  a  heinous  crime  to  profane.  To
this  temple  the  informer  fled,  and  sat  down  on  the  steps  of
the  altar.  Close  to  the  building,  they  made  a  recess  under-
ground, from  which,  >if  any  one  held  communication  with  the
Argilian,  he  might  be  overheard ;  and  into  this  place  some  of
the  Ephori  went  down.  Pausanias,  when  he  heard  that  the
Argilian  had  fled  to  the  altar,  came  thither  in  great  trepida-
tion, and  seeing  him  sitting  as  a  suppliant  at  the  altar  of  the
divinity,  he  inquired  of  him  what  was  the  cause  of  so  sudden  a
proceeding.  The  Argilian  then  informed  him  what  he  had
learned  from  the  letter,  and  Pausanias,  being  so  much  the  more
agitated,  began  to  entreat  him  **  not  to  make  any  discovery,  or
to  betray  him  who  deserved  great  good  at  his  hands ; "  adding
that,  "if  he  would  but  grant  him  this  favour,  and  assist  him
when  involved  in  such  perplexities,  it  should  be  of  great
advantage  to  him."

V.  The  Ephori,  hearing  these  particulars,  thought  it  better
that  he  should  be  apprehended  in  the  city.  After  they  had
set  out  thither,  and  Pausanias,  having,  as  he  thought,  pacified
tlie  Argilian,  was  also  returning  to  Lacedsemon,  he  understood
(just  as  he  was  on  the  point  of  being  made  prisoner)  by  a
look  from  one  of  the  Ephori  who  wished  to  warn  him,  that
some  secret  mischief  was  intended  against  him.  He  accord-
ingly fled  for  refuge,  a  few  steps  before  those  who  pursued
him,  into  the  temple  of  Minerva,  which  is  called  Chalcioecos.*
That  he  might  not  escape  from  thence,  the  Ephori  immediately
blocked  up  the  folding-doors  of  the  temple,  and  pulled  off"  the
roof,  that  he  might  more  readily  die  in  the  open  air.  It  is
said  that  the  mother  of  Pausanias  was  then  living,  and  that,
though  very  aged,  she  was  among  the  first  to  bring  a  stone,
when  she  heard  of  her  son's  guilt,  to  the  door  of  the  temple,
in  order  to  shut  him  in.  Thus  Pausanias  tarnished  his  great
glory  in  war  by  a  dishonourable  death.

As  soon  as  he  was  carried,  half-dead,  out  of  the  temple,  he
gave  up  the  ghost When  some  said  that  his  body  ought  to

*  Qucg  Chalciceco8  voctUur.]  Whether  the  quas  refers  to  csdem  or
MinervcBf  the  critics  are  not  agreed.  Thucydides,  i.  134,  ro  Upbv  rriq
XaXrtotcot;,  makes  it  apparent  that  it  should  be  referred  to  Minerva^
But  Bos  and  Bremi  concur  in  referring  it  to  CBde»,


ciMON.  359

be  carried  to  the  placewhere  those  given  up  to  capital  punish-
ment were  buried,  the  proposal  was  displeasing  to  the  ma-
jority, and  they  interred  him  at  some  distance  from  the  spot  in
which  he  died.  He  was  afterwards  removed  from  thence,  in
consequence  of  an  admonition  from  the  Delphic  god,  and
buried  in  the  same  place  where  he  had  ended  his  life.


V.  CIMON.


Cimon  is  compelled  to  go  to  prison  on  the  death  of  his  father ;  is
liberated  by  his  wife,  I. — His  character  and  actions ;  he  defeats
the  Persians  by  land  and  sea  on  the  same  day,  II. — Is  ostracised
and  recalled,  and  makes  peace  with  the  Lacedaemonians ;  his
death,  III. — His  praises,  IV.

I.  CiMON,  the  son  of  Miltiades,  an  Athenian,  experienced  a
very  unhappy  entrance  on  manhood ;  for  as  his  father  had  been
unable  to  pay  to  the  people  the  fine  imposed  upon  him,  and  had
consequently  died  in  the  public  gaol,  Cimon  was  kept  in  prison,
nor  could  he,  by  the  Athenian  laws,*  be  set  at  liberty,
unless  he  paid  the  sum  of  money  that  his  father  had  been
fined.  He  had  married,  however,  his  sister  by  the  father's
side,!  named  Elpinice,  induced  not  more  by  love  than  by
custom  ;  for  the  Athenians  are  allowed  to  marry  their  sisters
by  the  same  father  ;  and  a  certain  Callias,  a  man  whose  birth
was  not  equal  to  his  wealth,  and  who  had  made  a  great  fortune
from  the  mines,  being  desirous  of  having  her  for  a  wife,  tried
to  prevail  on  Cimon  to  resign  her  to  him,  saying  that  if  he
obtained  his  desire,  he  would  pay  the  fine  for  him.  Though
Cimon  received  such  a  proposal  with  scorn,  Elpinice  said  that
she  would  not  allow  a  son  of  Miltiades  to  die  in  the  public
prison,  when  she  could  prevent  it ;  and  that  she  would  marry
Callias  if  he  would  perform  what  he  promised.

II.  Cimon,  being  thus  set  free  from  confinement,  soon
attained  great  eminence ;  for  he  had  considerable  eloquence,

*  Neqw  legibtu  Athenientibus  emttti  potercU.']  Yet  by  Justin,  ii.  15,
Val.  Mazimus,  v.  3  ext.  8,  and  y.  4  ext.  2,  Seneca,  Controvers.  24,  and
others,  it  has  been  said  that  Cimon*s  submission  to  go  to  prison  was
voluntary. Bod  collects  ample  testimony  to  the  contrary.

f  See  note  on  the  preface.


330  CORNELIUS  NEPOS.

the  utmost  generosity,  and  great  skill,  not  only  in  civil  law,
but  in  military  affairs,  as  he  had  been  employed  from  his  boy-
hood with  his  father  iu  the  army.  He  in  consequence  held
the  people  of  the  city  under  his  control,  and  had  great  influ-
ence over  the  troops.  In  his  fii'st  term  of  service,  on  the  river
Strymon,  he  put  to  flight  great  forces  of  the  Thracians,
founded  the  city  of  Amphipolis,  and  sent  thither  ten  thousand
Athenian  citizens  as  a  colony.  He  also,  in  a  second  expe-
dition, conquered  'and  took  at  Mycale  a  fleet  of  two  hundred
ships  belonging  to  the  Cyprians  and  Phoenicians,  and  ex-
perienced like  good  fortune  by  land  on  the  same  day ;  for
after  (capturing  the  enemy's  vessels,  he  immediately  led  out  his
troops  from  the  fleet,  and  overthrew  at  the  first  onset  a  vast
force  of  the  barbarians.  By  this  victory  he  obtained  a  great
quantity  of  spoil  ;  and,  as  some  of  the  islands,  through  the
rigour  of  the  Athenian  government,  had  revolted  from  them,
he  secured  the  attachment,  in  the  course  of  his  return  home,
of  such  as  were  well  disposed,  and  obliged  the  disaffected  to
return  to  their  allegiance.  Scyros,  which  the  Dolopes  at  tliat
time  inhabited,  he  depopulated,  because  it  had  behaved  itself
insolently,  ejecting  the  old  settlers  from  the  city  and  island,
and  dividing  the  lands  among  his  own  countrymen.  The
Thasians,  who  relied  upon  their  wealth,  he  reduced  as  soon
as  he  attacked  them.  With  these  spoils  the  citadel  of  Athens
was  adorned  on  the  side  which  looks  to  the  south.

III.  When,  by  these  acts,  he  had  attained  greater  honour
in  the  state  than  any  other  man,  he  fell  under  the  same  public
odium  as  his  father,  and  others  eminent  among  the  Athenians  ;
for  by  the  votes  of  the  shells,  which  they  call  the  ostracism,
he  was  condemned  to  ten  years'  exile.  Of  this  proceeding  the
Athenians  repented  sooner  tlian  himself;  for  after  he  had  sub-
mitted, with  great  fortitude,  to  the  ill-feeling  of  his  ungrateful
countrymen,  and  the  Lacedaemonians  had  declared  war  against
the  Athenians,  a  desire  for  his  well-known  bravery  im-
mediately ensued.  In  consequence,  he  was  summoned  back
to  his  country  five  years  after  he  had  been  banished  from  it.
But  as  he  enjoyed  the  guest-friendship*  of  the  Lacedaemonians,
he  thought  it  better  to  hasten  to  Sparta,  and  accordingly  pro-

*  Hoapitio.']  See  note  on  Themistocles,  c,  8.  Sospitium  might  exiat
between  two  states,  or  between  a  state  and  a  private  individual,  as  well
as  between  two  individuals.


LYSANDER.  331

ceeded  thither  af  his  own  accord,  and  settled  a  peace  between
those  two  most  powerful  states.

Being  sent  as  commander,  not  long  after,  "to  Cyprus,  witJi  a
fleet  of  two  hundred  ships,  he  fell  sick,  after  he  had  conquered
the  greater  part  of  the  island,  and  died  in  the  town  of  Citium.

IV.  The  Athenians  long  felt  regret  for  him,  not  only  in
war,  but  in  time  of  peace ;  for  he  was  a  man  of  such  liberality,
that  though  he  had  farms  and  gardens  in  several  parts,  he
never  set  a  guard  over  them  for  the  sake  of  presenting
the  fruit,  so  that  none  might  be  hindered  from  enjoying  his
property  as  he  pleased.  Attendants  always  followed  him  with
money,  that,  if  any  one  asked  his  assistance,  he  might  have
something  to  give  him  immediately,  lest,  by  putting  him  off,
he  should  appear  to  refuse.  Frequently,  when  he  saw  a  man
thrown  in  his  way  by  chance*  in  a  shabby  dress,  he  gave
him  his  own  cloak.  A  dinner  was  dressed  for  him  daily  in  such
abundance,  that  he  could  invite  all  whom  he  saw  in  the  forum
uninvited  ;  a  ceremony  which  he  did  not  fail  to  observe  every
day.  His  protection,  his  assistance,  his  pecuniary  means,
were  withheld  from  none.  He  enriched  many ;  and  he  buried
at  his  own  cost  many  poor  persons,  who  at  their  death  had
not  left  sufficient  for  their  interment.  In  consequence  of
such  conduct,  it  is  not  at  all  surprising  that  his  life  was  free
from  trouble,  and  his  death  severely  felt.


VI.  LYSANDER.


Lysander  conquers  the  Athenians,  and  establishes  a  decemvirate  in  the
several  states  of  Greece,  I  — His  cruelty  to  the  Thracians,  11. — He
endeavours  to  dethrone  the  kings  of  Sparta,  and  corrupt  the
various  oracles ;  is  brought  to  trial  and  acquitted ;  is  killed  by  the
Thebans,  IIL — Was  his  own  accuser,  IV.

I.  Lysandeb,  the  Lacedaemonian,  left  a  high  character  of
himself,  which  was  gained,  however,  more  by  good  fortune

*  Offensvm  fortunA."]  That  is,  casu  ohvvum,  fortuUd  ohlatwn,  "thrown
in  his  way  by  chance,"  as  Heusinger  explains  it  in  his  note  on  the
passage. — Fischer,  This  explanation  is  also  approved  by  Boeclerus  and
Freinshemius.  Lambinus  erroneously  interpreted  it  cui  fortima  esset
imqua,  and  several  others  have  trodden  in  his  steps.


33Q  CORNELIUS  NEPOS.

than  by  merit.  That  he  subdued  the  Athenians,  when  they
were  at  war  with  the  Lacedaemonians,  in  the  twenty-sixth
year  of  the  contest,  is  certain  ;  but  how  he  obtained  that  con-
quest is  but  little  known ;  for  it  was  not  effected  by  the  valour
of  his  own  troops,  but  by  the  want  of  discipline  among  the
enemy,  who,  from  not  being  obedient  to  the  commands  of  their
leaders,  but  straggling  about  in  the  fields,  and  abandoning  their
vessels,  fell  into  the  power  of  their  adversaries  ;  in  conse-
quence of  which  disaster  the  Athenians  submitted  to  the
Lacedaemonians.

Lysander,  elated  with  this  victory,  and  having  always  before
been  a  factious  and  bold  man,  allowed  himself  such  liberty,
that  the  Lacedaemonians,  through  his  conduct,  incurred  the
greatest  unpopularity  throughout  Greece ;  for  they  having  said
that  their  object  in  going  to  war  was  to  humble  the  overbear-
ing tyranny  of  the  Athenians,  Lysander,  after  he  had  captured
the  enemy's  fleet  at  uEgospotamos,  endeavoured  after  nothing
so  much  as  to  keep  all  the  states  of  Greece  under  his  autho-
rity, while  he  pretended  that  he  acted  thus  for  the  sake  of
the  Lacedaemonians.  Having  every  where  ejected  those  who
favoured  the  party  of  the  Athenians,  he  made  choice  of  ten  men
in  each  city,  on  whom  he  conferred  supreme  authority,  and  the
control  of  all  proceedings.  Into  the  number  of  these  no
one  was  admitted  who  was  not  attached  to  him  by  friendship,
or  who  had  not  assured  him,  by  pledging  his  faith,  that  he
would  be  entirely  at  his  disposal.

II.  The  decemviral  government  being  thus  established  in
every  city,  everything  was  done  according  to  his  pleasure.  Of
his  cruelty  and  perfidy  it  is  suflBcient  to  give  one  instance,  by
way  of  example,  that  we  may  not  weary  our  readers  by  enu-
merating many  acts  of  the  same  individual.  As  he*  was
returning  in  triumph  from  Asia,  and  had  turned  aside  towards
Thasos,  he  endeavoured,  as  the  people  had  been  eminent  for
fidelity  to  the  Athenians,  to  corrupt  them,*  as  if  those  were
wont  to  be  the  firmest  friends  who  had  been  steady  enemies.
But  he  saw  that  unless  he  concealed  his  intention  in  the  affair,  •

•  Pervertere.']  "Corrupt'*  ifl  evidently  the  sense  of  pervertere  in  this
passage,  not  "destroy,"  as  some  would  make  it.  Lysander  first
endeavoured  to  corrupt  the  fidelity  of  the  Thasians  to  the  Athenians,
and  afterwards,  when  he  found  his  endeavours  unsuccessful,  proceeded
to  use  treachery  and  cruelty  towards  them.


LYSANDER.  333

the  Thasians  would  elude  him,  and  take  measures  for  their
own  interests. Accordingly  *  .  .  .  .

III.  The  decemvirol  government,  which  had  heen  ap-
pointed by  him,  his  countrymen  abolished.  Incensed  at  this
affront,  he  entered  upon  measures  to  remove  the  kings  of
the  Lacedaemonians ;  but  he  found  that  he  could  not  effect
his  object  without  support  from  the  gods,  because  the  Lace-
daemonians were  accustomed  to  refer  everything  to  the  oracles.
In  the  first  place,  therefore,  he  endeavoured  to  corrupt  Delphi,
and,  when  he  could  not  succeed  in  doing  so,  he  made  an
attempt  upon  Dodona.  Being  disappointed  there  also,  he  gave
out  that  he  had  made  vows  which  he  must  pay  to  Jupiter
Ammon,  thinking  tbat  he  would  bribe  the  Africans  with  greater
ease.  When  he  had  gone,  accordingly,  with  this  expectation
into  Africa,  the  priests  of  Jupiter  greatly  disappointed  him,
for  they  not  only  would  not  be  bribed,  but  even  sent  deputies
to  Lacedaemon  to  accuse  Lysander  of  "  having  endeavoured  to
corrupt  the  ministers  of  the  temple."  After  being  brought  to
trial  on  this  charge,  and  being  acquitted  by  the  votes  of  his
judges,  he  was  sent  with  some  auxiliary  troops  to  the  Orcho-
menians,  and  killed  by  the  Thebans  at  Haliartus.  How  just
was  the  decision  regarding  him,t  the  speech  W6is  a  proof,
which  was  found  in  his  house  after  his  death,  and  in  which  he
recommended  to  the  Lacedaemonians,  that,  after  they  had
abolished  the  regal  government,  a  leader  should  be  chosen
from  among  the  whole  people  to  conduct  the  war  ;  but  it  was
written  in  such  a  manner,  that  it  might  seem  to  be  in  accord-

*  The  account  of  Lysander's  treachery  to  the  Thasians  is  wanting
in  the  manuscripts,  but  may  be  supplied  from  Polysenus,  i.  45.  Those
of  the  Thasians  who  had  the  greatest  reason  to  fear  Lysander,  had  fled
to  a  temple  of  Hercules,  which  was  held  in  the  greatest  veneration.
At  this  temple  Lysander  called  them  all  together  to  hear  him  address
them,  when  he  made  them  a  speech  full  of  the  fairest  promises  of
mercy  and  clemency.  He  said  that  he  would  think  nothing  of  what
was  past ;  that  no  one  had  cause  for  fear  or  concealment ;  that  they
might  all  appear  before  him  with  full  confidence  in  his  good  feelings
towards  them;  and  that  he  called  Hercules,  in  whose  temple  they
w^re,  to  witness  that  he  spoke  only  what  he  meant.  Having  thus
drawn  them  forth  from  their  sanctuary,  he,  a  few  days  after,  when
they  were  free  from  apprehension,  fell  upon  them  and  put  them  to
death.  "  He  was  guilty  of  a  similar  instance  of  perfidy  at  Miletus,"
says  Bos,  "  as  is  also  related  by  Polyaenus,  and  by  Plutarch."

t  Qiiflm  verd  de  eo  foret  jvdicatimi.]  That  is,  how  little  he  deserved
acquittal


334  CORNEUUS  NEPOS.

ance  with  the  advice  of  the  gods,  which  he,  relying  on  his
money,  did  not  doubt  that  he  should  procure.  This  speech
Cleon  of  Halicaniassus  is  said  to  have  written  for  him.

IV.  In  this  place  a  transaction  of  Phamabazus,  the  king's
satrap,  must  not  be  omitted.  When  Lysander,  as  commander
of  the  fleet,  had  done  many  cruel  and  avaricious  acts  in  the
course  of  the  war,  and  suspected  that  reports  of  these  proceed-
ings had  been  made  to  his  countrymen,  he  asked  Pharnabazus
to  give  him  a  testimonial  to  present  to  the  Ephori,  showing
with  what  (jonscientiousnes  he  had  carried  on  the  war  and
treated  the  allies,  begging  him  to  write  fully  concerning  the
matter,  as  his  authority  on  that  head  would  be  great.  Phar-
nabazus promised  him  fairly,  and  wrote  a  long  and  full  letter,*
in  which  he  extolled  him  with  the  greatest  praises.  But  when
Lysander  had  read  and  approved  of  it,  Phamabazus  substi-
tuted, while  it  was  being  sealed,  another  of  the  same  size  in  its
place,  so  like  it  that  it  could  not  be  distinguished  from  it,  in
which  he  had  most  circumstantially  accused  him  of  avarice  and
perfidy.  Lysander,  accordingly,  when  he  had  returned  home,
and  had  said  what  he  wished  before  the  chief  magistrates,
handed  them,  as  a  testimonial,  the  letter  which  he  had  received
from  Pharnabazus.  The  Ephori,  after  having  perused  it  when
Lysander  was  vdthdrawn,  gave  it  to  him  to  read.  Thus  he
became  unawares  his  own  accuser.


VIL  ALCIBIADES.


Alciblades  eminent  both  in  his  virtues  and  vices,  I. — His  education,
II. — He  commands  in  the  expedition  against  Syracuse ;  is  suspected
of  profaning  the  mysteries,  and  of  conspiring  against  the  govern-
ment, III. — Is  recalled  home,  but  flees,  and  attaches  himself  to
the  Lacedaemonians,  IV.— Falling  under  suspicion  among  them,
he  flees  to  the  Persians,  and  is  afterwards  reconciled  to  his
countrymen,  V. — His  enthusiastic  reception  at  Athens,  VI.— He
again  becomes  unpopular  there;  his  successes  in  Thrace,  VII. —
He  tries  to  promote  the  good  of  his  country,  VIII. — He  crosses
over  into  Asia,  IX. — Is  kiiQed  in  Phrygia,  X. — His  character,  XL

I.  Alctbiades,  the  son  of  Clinias,  was  a  native  of  Athens.
In  him  nature  seems  to  have  tried  what  she  could  do ;  for  it  is
agreed  among  all  who  have  written  concerning  him,  that  no

*  Librum  gravem  mvUis  verbis.]  "  A  heavy  letter  in  many  words."


ALCIBIADES.  335

one  was  ever  more  remarkable  than  he,  either  for  vices  or  vir-
tues. Bom  in  a  most  distinguished  city,  of  a  very  high
family,  and  by  far  the  most  handsome  of  all  the  men  of  his
age,  he  was  qualified  for  any  occupation,  and  abounded  in
practical  intelligence.  He  was  eminent  as  a  commander  by
sea  and  land ;  he  was  eloquent,  so  as  to  produce  the  greatest
effect  by  his  speeches ;  for  such  indeed  was  the  persuasiveness
of  his  looks  and  language,  that  in  oratory  no  one  was  a  match
for  him.  He  was  rich,*  and,  when  occasion  required,  labo-
rious, patient,  liberal,  and  splendid,  no  less  in  his  public  than  in
his  private  life;t  he  was  also  affable  and  courteous,  conform-
ing dexterously  to  circumstances ;  but,  when  he  had  unbent
himself,  and  no  reason  offered  why  he  should  endure  the
labour  of  thought,  was  seen  to  be  luxurious,  dissolute,  volup-
tuous, and  self-indulgent,  so  that  all  wondered  there  should
be  such  dissimilitude,  and  so  contradictory  a  nature,  in  the
same  man.

II.  He  was  brought  up  in  'the  house  of  Pericles  (for  he  is
said  to  have  been  his  step-son),J  and  was  taught  by  Socrates.
For  his  father-in-law  he  had  Hipponicus,  the  richest  man  of
all  that  spoke  the  Greek  language ;  so  that,  even  if  he  had
contrived  for  himself,  he  could  neither  have  thought  of  more
advantages,  nor  have  secured  greater,  than  those  which  fortune
or  nature  had  bestowed  upon  him.  At  his  entrance  on  man-
hood he  was  beloved  by  many,  after  the  manner  of  the
Greeks,  and  among  them  by  Socrates,  whom  Plato  mentions
in  his  Symposium ;  for  he  introduces  Alcibiades,  saying  that
"  he  had  passed  the  night  with  Socrates,  and  had  not  risen  up
from  him  otherwise  than  a  son  should  rise  from  a  father."
When  he  was  of  maturer  age,  he  had  himself  no  fewer  objects

*  Dives ;  quum  temptis  posceret,  &c.]  This  is  Bos's  reading.  Many
editions  have  Idem  quum  temptiSf  &c.

t  Non  minus  in  vitd  qudm  victu.]  Bos  and  Boeder  distinguish  vita
and  victus  in  this  manner;  vita,  they  say,  means  a  man's  mode  of
living  in  public  and  among  other  men ;  victus  his  way  of  life  at  home,
and  diet  at  his  own  table.  Cicero  de  Legg.  iii.  14 :  NobUivm  vitd
victuque  mutato.

X  rrivignus.']  If  we  believe  Diodorus  Siculus,  lib.  xii.,  and  Suidas,
Alcibiades  was  the  son  of  Pericles's  sister.  Hence  Pericles  is  called
his  uncle  by  Val.  Max,  iii.  1,  and  Aul.  Gell.  xv.  17.  Pericles  appears,
however,  to  have  been  the  step-father  of  Alcibiades's  wife,  as  Magiua
observes ;  for  Alcibiades  married  Hipparete,  the  daughter  of  Hipponi-
cus, whose  wife  Pericles  afterwards  espoused. — Bos,


336  CORNELIUS  NEPOS.

of  a£fection»  his  intercourse  with  whom,  as  far  as  was  possible,
he  did  many  acts  of  an  objectionable  character,  in  a  delicate
and  agreeable  manner;  which  acts  we  would  relate,  had  w^
not  other  things  to  tell  of  a  higher  and  better  nature.

III.  In  the  Peloponnesian  war,  the  Athenians,  by  his  ad-
vice and  persuasion,  declared  war  against  the  Syracusans,  to
conduct  which  he  himself  was  chosen  general.  Two  colleagues
were  besides  assigned  him,  Nicias  and  Lamachus.  While  the
expedition  was  in  preparation,  and  before  the  fleet  sailed,  it
happened  one  night  that  all  the  statues  of  Mercury*  that  were
in  the  city  of  Athens  were  thrown  down,  except  one,  which
was  before  the  gate  of  Andocides,  and  which,  in  consequence,
was  afterwards  generally  called  the  Mercury  of  Andocides.t
As  it  appeared  that  this  could  not  have  been  done  without  a
strong  confederacy  of  many  persons,  since  it  had  respect  not
to  a  private  but  to  a  public  matter,J  great  dread  was  excited
among  the  multitude,  lest  some  sudden  tumult  should  arise  iu
the  city  to  destroy  the  people's  liberty.  The  suspicion  of  this
seemed  chiefly  to  attach  to  Alcibiades,  because  he  was  con-
sidered both  more  influential,  and  of  higher  standing,  than
any  private  person ;  for  he  had  secured  many  adherents  by  his
generosity,  and  had  made  still  more  his  friends  by  assisting
them  in  legal  proceedings.  Hence  it  happened,  that  as  often
as  he  appeared  in  public,  he  drew  the  eyes  of  all  people  upon
him;  nor  was  any  man  in  the  whole  city  thought  equal  to
him.  They  accordingly  had  not  only  the  greatest  hope  of
him,  but  also  the  greatest  fear,  because  he  was  able  to  do
much  harm  as  well  as  much  good.  He  was  sullied  also  by  ill
report,  for  it  was  said  that  he  celebrated  the  mysteries  §  in  his

*  Omnes  Hermce.]  Mercury  was  reckoned  the  god  of  thieveB,  and
therefore  they  used  to  erect  his  statues  before  their  doors  by  way  of
prevention  against  the  attempts  of  robbers  and  house-breakers. — Clarke.

f  Itaque  ille  poatea  Mercurvus  AndoddU  vocitattu  tst.^  This  is  the
reading  of  Bos_and  Van  Staveren.  Many  other  editions  have,  instead
of  these  words,  Andocidisque  Hermes  voccUus  est.

X  Q^od  non  ad  privaiam,  sed  ad  pviblicam  rem  pertineret."]  A  manu-
script of  Boeder's  has  qucBy  but,  as  I  suppose,  from  a  fancy  of  the
transcriber,  who  thought  that  the  word  must  be  a  pronoun,  referring
to  coTisensione,  whereas  it  is  a  conjunction,  showing  the  reason  why
"great  dread  was  excited*'  by  this  occurrence  "among  the  multitude,"
nainely,  because  a  union  of  many  in  the  affair  indicated  a  conspiracy^
and  must  have  respect  to  something  of  a  public  nature. — Bos.

§  Mysteria.']  The  mysteries  of  Ceres ;  the  Eleusinian  mysteries.


AMAJIBIADBB.  337

own  bou8e»  a  praotioe  whkh,  accordii^  to  public  opifiion
among  the  Atbenkna,  was  regarded  as  impious;  and  this
matter  was  thought  to  have  reference,  not  to  religion,  but  to
a  conspiracy.*

IV.  Of  this  crime  he  was  accused  by  his  enemies  in  a
pubhc  assembly  of  tlie  people.  But  the  time  for  him  to  set
out  to  the  war  was  drawing  near;  and  he  considering  this,
and  being  aware  of  the  habitt  of  his  countrymen,  requested
that,  if  they  wished  anything  to  be  done  concerning  him,  an
examination  should  rather  be  held  upon  him  while  he  was  pre-
sent, than  that  he  should  be  accused  in  his  absence  of  a  crime
against  which  there  was  a  strong  public  feeling*;];  But  his
enemies  resolved  to  continue  quiet  for  the  present,  because
they  were  aware  that  no  hurt  could  then  be  done  him,  and  to
wait  for  the  time  when  he  should  have  gone  abroad,  that  they
might  thus  attack  him  while  he  was  absent.  They  accordingly
did  so ;  for  after  they  supposed  that  he  had  reached  Sicily,
they  impeached  him,  during,  his  absence,  of  having  profaned
the  sacred  rites.  In  consequence  of  this  affair,  a  messenger,
ta  desire  him  to  return  home  to  plead  his  cause,  being  de-
spatched into  Sicily  to  him  by  the  government,  at  a  time
when  be  had  great  hopes  of  managing  his  province  success-
folly,  he  yet  did  not  refuse  to  obey,  but  went  on  bo£u*d  a
trireme  which  had  been  sent  to  convey  him.  Arriving  in  this
vessel  at  Thurli  in  Italy,  and  reflecting  much  with  himself  on
the  ungovernable  license  §  of  his  countrymen,  and  their  violent
feelings  towards  the  aristocracy,  and  deeming  it  most  advan-
tageous to  avoid  the  impending  storm,  he  secretly  vdthdrew
from  bis  guards,  and  went  from  thence  first  to  Elis,  and  after-
wards to  Thebes.  But  when  he  heard  that  he  was  condemned
to  death,  his  property  having  been  confiscated,  and  as  had
been  usual,  that  the  priests  called  Eumolpidas  had  been
obliged  by  the  people  to  curse  him,  and  that  a  copy  of  the
curse,  engraven  on  a  stone  pillar,  had  been  set  up  in  a  public
place,  in  order  that  the  memory  of  it  might  be  better  attested,

*  They  thought  that  there  was  aome  conspiracy  trader  the  cloak  of
it

t  Oonittetudinem.']  Knowing  the  fickle  character  of  the  Athenians.

i  Crimine  invidt(B.1  This  is  evidently  the  sense.  Crimine  vMndias
for  crimi/ne  iwvidioio.

§  LiceniidJ]  The  license  of  the  populace^  which  could  scarcely  be
controlled.

Z


888  CORNELIUS  NEPOS.

he  removed  to  LacecUemon.  There,  as  he  was  accustomed  to
declare,  he  carried  on  a  war,  not  against  his  country,  but
against  his  enemies,  because  the  same  persons  were  enemies
to  their  own  city ;  for  though  they  knew  that  he  could  be  of
the  greatest  service  to  the  repubUc,  they  had  expelled  him
from  it,  and  consulted  their  own  animosity  more  than  the
common  advantage.  By  his  advice,  in  consequence,  the  Lace-
dsemonians  made  an  alliance  with  the  king  of  Persia,  and
afterwards  fortified  Deceleia  in  Attica,  and  having  placed  a
constant  garrison  there,  kept  Athens  in  a  state  of  blockade.
By  his  means,  also,  they  detached  Ionia  from  its  alliance  vidth
the  Athenians,  and  after  this  was  done,  they  began  to  have
greatly  the  advantage  in  the  contest.

V.  Yet  by  these  proceedings  they  were  not  so  much  ren-
dered friends  to  Alcibiades,  as  alienated  from  him  by  fear;
for  when  they  saw  the  singular  intelligence  of  this  most  active-
minded  man  in  every  way,  they  were  afraid  that,  being  moved
by  love  for  his  country,  he  might  at  some  time  revolt  from
them,  and  return  into  favour  with  his  countrymen.  They
therefore  determined  to  seek  an  opportunity  for  killing  him.
But  this  determination  could  not  long  be  concealed  from
Alcibiades ;  for  he  was  a  man  of  such  sagacity  that  he  could
not  be  deceived,  especially  when  he  turned  his  attention  to
putting  himself  on  his  guard.  He  in  consequence  betook  him-
self to  Tissaphernes,  a  satrap  of  King  Darius ;  and  having
gained  a  way  to  an  intimate  friendship  with  him,  and  seeing
that  the  power  of  the  Athenians,  from  the  ill  success  of  their
attempts  in  Sicily,  was  on  the  decline,  while  that  of  the  Lace-
dsBmonians,  on  the  other  hand,  was  increasing,  he  first  of  all
conferred,  through  messengers,  with  Pisander  the  Athenian
commander,  who  had  a  force  at  Samos,  and  made  some  men-
tion concerning  his  return ;  for  Pisander,  with  the  same
feelings  as  Alcibiades,  was  no  Mend  to  the  power  of  the
people,  but  a  favourer  of  the  aristocracy.  Though  deserted
by  him,*  he  was  received  at  first,  through  the  agency  of
Thrasybulus  the  son  of  Lycus,  by  the  army,  and  made  com-
mander at  Samos ;  and  afterwards,  from  Theramenes  making
interest  for  him,  he  was  recalled  by  a  decree  of  the  people,
and,  while  still  absent,  was  appointed  to  equal  command  with

*  il6  hoc  destitvitus']  On  the  contrary,  he  was,  according  to  Thucy-
dides,  viii.  49,  53,  supported  by  Pisander.— jBo*.


ALCIBIADES.  339

Thrasybulus  and  Theramenes.  Under  the  influence  of  these
leaders,  so  great  a  change  in  affairs  took  place,  that  the  Lace-
daemonians, who  had  just  before  flourished  as  conquerors,  were
struck  with  fear  and  sued  for  peace ;  for  they  had  been  de-
feated in  five  battles  by  land,  and  three  by  sea,  in  which  they
had  lost  two  hundred  triremes,  that  had  been  captured  and
had  fallen  into  the  possession  of  their  enemies.  Alcibiades,
with  his  colleagues,  had  recovered  Ionia,  the  Hellespont,  and
many  Greek  cities  besides,  situated  on  the  coast  of  Asia,  of
which  they  had  taken  several  by  storm,  and  among  them
Byzantium.  Nor  had  they  attached  fewer  to  their  interest  by
policy,  as  they  had  exercised  clemency  towards  those  who
were  taken  prisoners ;  and  then,  laden  with  spoil,  and  having
enriched  the  troops  and  achieved  very  great  exploits,  they
returned  to  Athens.

VI.  The  whole  city  having  gone  down  to  the  Pirseeus  to
meet  them,  there  was  such  a  longing  among  them  all  to  see
Alcibiades,  that  the  multitude  flocked  to  his  galley  as  if  he
had  come  alone ;  for  the  people  were  fully  persuaded  of  this,
that  both  their  former  ill  success,  and  their  present  good
fortune,  had  happened  through  his  means.  They  therefore
attributed  the  loss  of  Sicily,  and  the  victories  of  the  Lace-
daemonians, to  their  own  fault,  in  having  banished  such  a  man
from  the  country.  Nor  did  they  seem  to  entertain  this  opinion
without  reason ;  for  after  Alcibiades  had  begun  to  command
the  army,  the  enemies  could  withstand  them  neither  by  land
nor  by  sea.  As  soon  as  he  came  out  of  his  ship,  tiiough
Theramenes  and  Thrasybulus  had  commanded  in  the  same
enterprises,  and  came  into  the  Pirseeus  at  the  same  time  with
him,  yet  the  people  all  followed  him  alone,  and  (what  had
never  happened  before,  except  in  the  case  of  conquerdrs  at
Olympia)  be  was  publicly  presented  with  golden  and  brazen
crowns.  Such  kindness  from  his  countrymen  he  received  with
tears,  remembering  their  severity  in  past  times.  When  he
arrived  at  the  city,  and  an  assembly  of  the  people  had  been
called,  he  addressed  them  in  such  a  manner,  that  no  one  was
so  unfeeling  as  not  to  lament  his  ill-treatment,  and  declare
himself  an  enemy  to  those  by  whose  agency  he  had  been
driven  from  his  country,  just  as  if  some  other  people,  and  not
the  same  people  that  was  then  weeping,  had  sentenced  him  to


840  OQENSaUS  NEPOS.

guffsF  for  sftcrilege.  Hi«  property  was  in  eonsequenoe  made
good  to  faim  at  the  public  eost,  and  the  same  priests,  the
Eumolpidie,  who  had  cursed  him,  were 'obliged  to  recal  their
curses ;  and  the  pillars,  on  which  the  curse  had  been  wrUt^n,
n&re  thrown  into  the  sea*

VII.  This  happiness  of  Akibiades  proved  by  no  means
busting;  for  after  all  manner  of  honours  had  been  decreed
him«  and  the  whole  management  of  the  state,  both  at  home
and  in  the  field,  had  been  committed  to  him,  to  be  regulated
at  his  sole  pleasure,  and  he  had  requested  that  two  ooUeagueB,
Thrasybulus  and  Adimantus,  should  be  assigned  him  (a  re-
quest yahicb.  was  not  refosed),  proceeding  with  the  ^eet  to
Aoa,  he  fell  again  und^^  the  displeasure  of  his  countrymen,
because  he  did  not  manage  affairs  at  Cyme  *  to  their  wi£ih ;
for  they  thought  that  he  could  do  eveiy  thing.  Hence  it
happened  that  they  imputed  whatever  was  done  unsuccessfully
to  his  misconduct,  saying  that  be  acted  either  carelessly  or
treacherously,  as  it  fell  out  on  this  occasion,  for  they  alleged
that  he  would  not  take  Cyme,  because ;  he  had  been  bribed  by
the  king.  We  consider,  therefore,  that  their  extravagant
opinion  of  his  abilities  and  valour  was  his  chief  misfortune. ;
since  he  was  dreaded  no  less  than  he  was  loved,  lest,  elated  by
good  fortune  and  great  power,  he  should  conceive  a  desire  to
become  a  tyrant.  From  these  feelings  it  resulted,  that  they
took  his  commission  from  him  in  his  absence,  and  put  another
oommander  in  his  place.  When. he  heard  of  this  proceeding,
hjd  would  not  return  home,  but  betook  himself  to  Pactye,t
and  there  established  three  fortresses,  Bomi,  Bisanthe,  and
Neontichos,  and  having  collected  a  body  of  troops,  was  the
first  man  of  any  Grecian  state  |  that  penetrated  into  Thrace,
thinking  it  more  glorious  to  enrich  lumself  with  spoils  from
barbarians  than  fi^om  Greeks. In  consequence  his  fame  in-

*  A  considerable  town  of  MoIja,  But  it  was  at  Notiiun,  near
Ephesus,  not  at  Cyme^  that  the  affair  that  caused  the  unpopularity  of
Alcibiades  took  place,  through  the  folly  of  his  lieutenant-general
Antiochufi,  who,  during  his  absence,  brought  on  an  engagement  with
Lysander,  contrary  to  the  express  orders  of  Alcibiades.

f  A  city  on  the  isthmus  of  the  Thraciaa  Chersonese.  Most  editioDS,
previous  to  that  of  Bos,  had  Perinthus,  from  a  conjecture  of  Longolius.

X  Primus  GrcBcice  dvitatit]  He  was  the  first  man  of  Greece  that
penetrated  into  that  part  of  Thrace  which  was  free,  and  where  no
colonies  of  Qreeka  had  been  establifihed. — Fucker,


creased  with  his  power,  and  fie  secured  to  himBelf  a  strong
aliiance  ^tb  some  of  the  kings  of  Thrace.

VIII.  Yet  he  could  not  give  up  his  affection  for  his  country ;
for  when  Philocles,  the  commander  of  th^  Athenians,  had
stationed  his  fleet  at  JEgospotamos,  and  Lysander,  the  captain
of  the  LacedaBmonians  (who  was  intent  upon  protracting  the
war  as  long  as  possible,  because  money  was  supplied  to  the
Lacedaemonians  by  the  king,  while  to  the  exhausted  Athenians,
on  the  other  hand,  nothing  was  left  but  their  arms  and  their
ships)  was  not  far  distant,  Aleibiades  came  to  the  army  of  the
Athenians,  and  there,  in  the  presence  of  the  common  soldiers*
began  to  assert,*  that  "if  they  pleased,  he  would  force
Lysander  either  to  fight  or  beg  peace ;  that  the  Lacedaemo-
nians were  unwilling  to  engage  by  sea,  because  they  were
stronger  in  land-forces  than  in  ships ;  but  that  it  would  be  easy
for  him  to  bring  down  Seuthes,  king  of  the  Thracians,  to  driven
them  from  the  land,  and  that,  when  this  was  done,  they  would
of  necessity  either  come  to  an  engagement  with  their  Eeet,  or
put  an  end  to  the  war."  FhUocles,  though  he  saw  that  this
statement  was  true,  would  not  yet  do  what  was  desired^  for  he
knew  that  he  himself,  if  Alcibiades  were  restored  to  the  com-
mand, would  be  of  no  account  with  the  army ;  and  that,  if  any
success  resulted,  his  share  in  the  matter  would  amount  to
nothing,  while,  on  the  other  hand,  if  any  ill-fortune  occurred,
he  alone  would  be  called  to  account  for  the  miscarriage.
Alcibiades,  on  taking  leave  of  him,  said,  **  As  you  hinder  yonr
country's  success,  I  advise  you  to  keep  your  sailors*  camp
near  the  enemy ;  for  there  is  danger  that,  through  the  insuh-
otdination  of  our  men,  an  opportunity  may  be  afforded  to
Ljrsander  of  cutting  off  our  army.'*  Nor  did  his  apprehension
deceive  him ;  for  Lysander^  having  learned  from  his  scouts
that  the  body  of  the  Athenian  force  was  gone  on  shore  to  seek
for  plunder,  and  that  the  ships  were  left  aJmost  empty»  did  not
neglect  the  opportunity  of  making  an  attack,  and  by  that
single  effort  put  an  end  to  the  whole  waCr.

IX.  Alcibiades,  after  the  Athenians  were  defeated,  not
thinking  those  parts  sufficiently  safe  for  him)  concealed
himself  in  the  inland  parts  of  Thrace  above  the  Propontis,
trusting  that  his  wealth  would  most  easily  escape  notice
there. But  he  was  disappointed ;  for  the  Thracians,  when

*  Agere.]  In  its  rhetorioal  seniie,  to  Btat«,  pleftd,  deolare;


344  CORNELIUS  KEPOS.

they  learned  that  he  had  come  with  a  great  sum  of  money,
formed  a  plot  against  him,  and  robbed  him  of  what  he  had
brought,  but  "were  unable  to  secure  his  person.  Perceiving
that  no  place  was  safe  for  him  in  Greece,  on  account  of  the
power  of  the  Lacedaemonians,  he  went  over  into  Asia  to  Phar-
nabazus,  whom  he  so  charmed,  indeed,  by  his  courtesy,  that
no  man  had  a  higher  place  in  his  favour ;  for  he  gave  him
Grunium,  a  strong-hold  in  Phrygia,  from  which  he  annually
received  fifty  talents'  revenue.

But  with  this  good  fortune  Alcibiades  was  not  content,  nor
could  endure  that  Athens,  conquered  as  she  was,  should  con-
tinue subject  to  the  Lacedaemonians.  He  was  accordingly  bent,
with  his  whole  force  of  thought,  on  delivering  his  country,  but
saw  that  that  object  could  not  be  effected  without  the  aid  of
the  king  of  Persia,  and  therefore  desired  that  he  should  be
attached  to  him  as  a  friend ;  nor  did  he  doubt  that  he  should
easily  accomplish  his  wish,  if  he  had  but  an  opportunity  for  an
interview  with  him  ;  for  he  knew  that  his  brother  Cyrus  was
secretly  preparing  war  against  him,  with  the  aid  of  the  Lace-
dsemonians,  and  foresaw^that,  if  he  gave  him  information  of
this  design,  he  would  find  great  favour  at  his  hands.

X.  While  he  was  trying  to  effect  this  object,  and  entreating
Phamabazus  that  he  might  be  sent  to  the  king,  Oritias,  and
the  other  tyrants  of  the  Athenians,  despatched  at  the  same
time  persons  in  their  confidence  into  Asia  to  Lysander,  to
acquaint  him,  that,  *'  unless  he  cut  off  Alcibiades,  none  of
those  arrangements  which  he  had  made  at  Athens  would
stand ;  and  therefore,  if  he  wished  his  acts  to  remain  unaltered,
he  must  pursue  him  to  death."  The  Lacedaemonian,'  roused
by  this  message,  concluded  that  he  must  act  in  a  more  decided
manner  with  Pharnabazus.  He  therefore  announced  to  him,
that  **the  relations  which  the  king  had  formed  with  the
Lacedaemonians  would  be  of  no  effect,  unless  he  delivered  up
Alcibiades  alive  or  dead."  The  satrap  could  not  withstand  this
menace,  and  chose  rather  to  ^iolate  the  claims  of  humanity
than  that  the  king's  interest  should  suffer.  He  accordingly
sent  8ysamithres  and  Bagaeus  to  kill  Alcibiades,  while  he  was
still  in  Phrygia,  and  preparing  for  his  journey  to  the  king.
The  persons  sent  gave  secret  orders  to  the  neighbourhood,  in
which  Alcibiades  then  was,  to  put  him  to  'deaUi.  They,  not
daring  to  attack  him  with  the  sword,  collected  wood  during


ALCIBIADES.  343

the  night  round  the  cottage  in  which  he  was  sleeping,  and  set
light  to  it,  that  they  might  despatch  by  fire  him  whom  they
despaired  of  conquering  hand  to  hand.*  Alcibiades,  having
been  awaltened  by  the  crackling  of  the  flames,  snatched  up  (as
his  sword  had  been  secretly  taken  away  from  him)  the  side-
weapon  of  a  friend  of  his ;  for  there  was  with  him  a  certain
associate  from  Arcadia,  who  would  never  leave  him.  This
man  he  desired  to  follow  him,  and  caught  up  whatever  gar-
ments he  had  at  hand,  and  throwing  them  out  upon  the  fire,
passed  through  the  violence  of  the  flames.  When  the  barba-
rians saw  that  he  had  escaped  the  conflagration,  they  killed
him  by  discharging  darts  at  him  from  a  distance, t  and  carried
liis  head  to  Phamabazus.

A  woman,  who  had  been  accustomed  to  live  with  him,
burned  his  dead  body,  covered  v^dth  her  o^-n  female  garments,
in  the  fire  of  the  house  which  had  been  prepared  to  bum  him
fllive.  Thus  Alcibiades,  at  the  age  of  about  forty,  came  to
his  end.

XI.  This  man,  defamed  by  most  writers,  three  historians  of
very  high  authority  have  extolled  with  the  greatest  praises ;
Thucydides,  who  was  of  the  same  age  with  him ;  Theopompus,
who  w£is  bom  some  time  after ;  and  Timaeus ;  the  two  latter,
though  much  addicted  tO'censure,  have,  I  know  not  how,  con-
curred in  praising  him  only ;  for  they  have  related  of  him
what  we  have  stated  above,  and  this  besides,  that  though  he  was
bom  in  Athens,  the  most  splendid  of  cities,  he  surpassed  ail
the  Athenians  in  grandeur  and  magnificence  of  living ;  that
when,  on  being  banished  from  thence,  he  went  to  Thebes,  he
80  devoted  himself  to  the  pursuits  of  the  Thebans,  that  no
man  could  match  him  in  laborious  exercises  and  vigour  of
body,  for  all  the  Boeotians  cultivate  corporeal  strength  more
than  mental  power ;  that  when  he  was  among  the  Lacedaemo-
nians, in  whose  estimation  the  highest  virtue  is  placed  in
endurance,  he  so  resigned  himself  to  a  hardy  way  of  life,  that
he  surpassed  all  the  Lacedaemonians  in  the  frugality  of  his  diet
and  living  ;  that  when  he  was  among  the  Thracians,  who  are
hard  drinkers  and  given  to  lewdness,  he  surpassed  them  also  in

*  Quern  mama  tuperaH  poue  di^deibant.'\  **  Whom  they  despaired
would  be  able  (Le.  whom  they  expected  or  thought  would  be  unable)
to  be  overcome  by  the  hand."

t  Bndnus.]  Boa  would  omit  this  word,  as  wanting  authority.


344  OOBNSUUS  NSPO&

these  practices  ;  that  when  he  came  among  the  Persians,  with
whom  it  was  the  chief  praise  to  hunt  hard  and  live  high,  he
so  imitated  their  mode  of  life,  that  thej  themselves  greatly
admired  him  in  these  respects ;  and  that  hj  such  conduct,  he
occasioned  that,  with  whatever  people  he  was,  he  was  regarded
a»  a  leading  man,  and  held  in  the  utmost  esteem.  But  we
have  said  enough  of  him ;  let  us  proceed  to  speak  of  others.


VIII. THRASYBULUS.

Obvaoter  of  ThrasybolixB ;  he  proceeds  to  deliyer  lus  country  from
the  Thirty  Tyrants,  I.— His  success  an^  conduct  in  the  enterprise,
II. -~  His  act  of  oblivion,  IIL — He  is  honoured  with  an  olive
< crown ;.  m  killed  on  the  coast  of  Sidly,  lY.

I,  Tbrastbulus,  the  son  of  Lycus,  was  a  native  of  Athens.
If  merit  is  to  be  valued  by  itself,  without  regard  to  fortune,  I
doubt  whether  I  ought  not  to  place  him  first  of  all  the  Greek
commanders.  This  I  can  say  without  hesitation,  that  I  set  no
man  above  him  in  integrity,  firmness,  greatness  of  mind,  and
love  for  his  country ;  for  while  many  have  wished,  and  few
have  been  able,  to  deliver  their  country  from  one  tyrant,  it
was  his  lot  to  restore  his  country,  oppressed  by  thirty  tyrants,
from  slavery  to  freedom.  But  though  no  man  excelled
him  in  these  virtues,  many,  I  know  not  how,  surpassed  him
in  fame.

First  of  all,  in  the  Peloponnesian  war,  he  accomplished
many  undertakings  without  Alcibiades,  while  Alcibiades  did
nothing  without  him  ;  oi  all  which  successes  Alcibiades,  from
certain  natm:al<  advantages,  got  the  credit.  All  such  actions,
however,  are  common  to  commanders  with  their  soldiers  and
with  fortmie ;  for,  in  the  shock  of  battle,  the  issue  is  trans-
ferred from  generalship  to  the  strength  and  fury  of  the
eombatants.  The  soldier,  therefore,  of  his  own  right,  takes
something  from  the  general,  and  fortune  a  great  deal,  and  may
trufy  say  that  she  has  had  more  influence  on  the  event  than
th&  skill  of  the  commander.  This  most  noble  action,  then,  is
entirely  Thrasybulus's  ;  for  when  the  Thirty  Tyrants,  ap-
pointed by  the  Laceds&monians,  kept  Athens  oppressed  in  a
state  of  slavery,  and  had  partly  banished  from  their  country,
and  partly  put  to  death,  a  great  number  of  the  citizens  whom


ffiRASTBULtS.  3X5

fortnne  had  spared  in  the  tvar,  and  hetd  divided  their  confis-
cated property  among  themselves,  he  v^as  not  onlj  the  first,  hut
the  onlj  man  at  the  commencement,  to  declare  war  against
them.

II.  Wh«i  he  fled  to  Phyle,  vfhich  is  a  very  strong  fortress
in  Atticc^  he  had  not  more  than  thirty  of  his  countrymen  vnth
him ;  such  was  the  origin  of  the  deliverance  of  the  Athenians,
such  the  dependence  of  the  liberty  of  that  most  famous  city.
He  was  at  first,  indeed,  despised  by  the  tyrants,  as  well  as  the
small  number  of  his  followers;  which  circumstance  proved
both  the  ruin  of  those  that  despised  him,  and  the  security  of
him  that  was  despised,  for  it  rendered  the  one  party  slow  to
attack,  and  the  other  stronger  by  giving  them  time  for  prepa-
ration. The  maxim,  therefore,  that  *'  nothing  should  be
despised  in  war,**  ought  the  more  deeply  to  be  fixed  in  the
minds  of  all;  and  we  should  remember  that  it  is  not  said
vrithout  reason,  that  **  the  mother  of  a  cautions  person*  is  not
accustomed  to  weep."  The  force  of  Thrasybulus,  however,
was  not  increased  in  proportion  to  his  expectations ;  for  even
in  those  times  good  men  spoke  for  liberty  with  more  spirit
than  they  fought  for  it.

Hence  he  went  to  the  Pineeus,  and  fortified  the  Munychia,t
which  the  tyrants  twice  attempted  to  storm,  but  being  dis-
gracefully repulsed,  and  having  lost  their  arms  and  baggage,
they  immediately  fled  back  to  l^e  city.  Thrasybulus,  on  this
occasion,  exercised  not  less  prudence  than  valour ;  for  he  for-
bade those  that  fled  to  be  injured,  thinking  it  just  that
^^oonntrymen  should  spare  countrymen;"  nor  was  any  one
wounded  except  such  as  would  attack  him  first.  He  spoiled
no  one,  as  he  lay,  of  his  clothes ;  he  laid  hands  on  nothing  but
arms,  of  which  he  was  in  want,  and  provisions. ;(  In  the
second  battle  Critias,  the  leader  of  the  tyrants,  was  killed,

*  Matrem  iimidi  fere  wm  Klkre^  I  have  translated  this  according
to  the  notion  of  Bremi,  who  aays  that  thMm  here  means  a  eautioua
person,  one  who  takes  care  of  himself,  and  is  on  his  guard  against
oontingeaoiefli.  Most  translators  have  rendered  it  ''the  moiher  of  a
ooward,**  fto.,  in  whioh  sense  it  would  seem  that  the  proverb  was  gen*^
ralljnsed.

t  One  of  the  minor  harbours  of  Athens.

X  Qutt  «bd  vidum  j9<r<4n«6a»<.]  ^  Things  which  pertaiiied  to  aust^-
nance,"  ie.  provisiona.


346  CORNELIUS  KEPOa

after  having,  indeed,  fought  mih  great  hravery  i^ainst  Thra>
Bjbulus.

III.  Critias  being  overthrown,  Pausanias,  king  of  the  Lace-
daemonians, came  to  the  support  of  the  Athenians.  He  made
peace  between  Thrasybulus  and  those  who  held  the  town,  on
these  conditions  :  "•  That  none  should  be  banished  except  the
Thirty  Tyrants,  and  the  Ten,  who,  having  been  afterwards  made
governors,  had.  followed  the  example  of  their  predecessors  in
cruelty;*  that  no  property  should  be  confiscated;  and  that
the  government  of  the  republic  should  be  restored  to  the
hands  of  the  people."  It  was  an  honourable  act  of  Thrasy-
bulus, that,  when  peace  was  settled,  and  he  had-  become  the
most  powerful  person  in  the  state,  he  made  a  law,  "  that  no
one  should  .be  brought  to  trial,  or  punished,  for  things  done
previously ; "  and  this  they  called  **  the  act  of  oblivion."  Nor
did  he  only  cause  this  law  to  be  passed,  but  also  took  care  that
it  should  be  of  effect;  for  when  some  of  them  who  had
been  with  him  in  exile,  wished  to  put  to  death  those  vdth
whom  they  had  returned  to  a  good  understanding,  he  openly
prevented  it,  and  adhered  to  what  he  had  promised.

IV.  For  such  merits  a  crown  of  honour  was  presented  him
by  the  people,  made  of  two  sprigs  of  olive,  which,  as  the  love
of  his  countrymen,  and  not  force,  had  procured  it  him,  excited
no  envy,  but  was  a  great  glory  to  him.  The  celebrated
Pittacus,  therefore,  who  was  reckoned  in  the  number  of  the
seven  wise  men,  said  well,  when  the  Mitylenseans  offered  to
give  him  several  thousand  acres  f  of  land,  **  Do  not,  I  be-
seech you,  give  me  what  many  may  envy  and  more  may
covet ;  for  which  reason  I  had  rather  take,  out  of  that  num-
ber, not  more  than  a  hundred  acres,  which  will  prove  both  the
moderation  of  my  desires  and  your  good  will."  For  small
gifts  are  lasting;  but  valuable  presents  are  not  wont  to  be
permanent.  J Thrasybulus,  accordingly,  being  content  with

*  Superioris  more  crvddUatU  erarU  usu]  "  Had  used  the  manner  of
the  former  cruelty."

•jr  Jugffrwm,.^  Though  the  juger  or  jugervm  is  generally  rendered  an
acre,  it  in  reality  contained  little  more  than  half  an  acre.  The  juger
was  240  feet  long  and  120  broad,  containmg  therefore  28,800  square
feet ;  the  content  of  an  'English  acre  is  48,566  square  feet.

^  t  Non  propria  efse  constieverumt.]  By  propria  is  meant "  peculiarly
one's  own,  and  likely  to  continue  so;  appropriated  to  one's  self." I


CONON.  847

that  crown,  neither  sought  for  anything  more,  nor  considered
that  any  one  had  sui'passed  him  in  honour.

Some  time  after,  when,  being  in  command,  he  had  brought
up  his  fleet  on  the  coast  of  Cihcia,  and  the  watch  in  his  camp
was  not  kept  with  sufficient  care,  he  was  killed  in  his  tent  by
the  barbarians,  in  a  sally  made  from  the  town*  during  the
night.


IX.  CONON.


Gonon's  services  in  the  Peloponnesian  war,  I. — In  his  exile  he  supports
Phamabazus  against  the  Spartans,  II. — He  goes  to  Artazerxes  to
accuse  Tissaphemes,  and  treats  with  him  by  letter,  III. — He
defeats  the  Lacedaemonians  at  Cnidus ;  Greece  is  set  free,  and  the
walls  of  Athens  rebuilt,  IV. — Conon  made  prisoner  by  Tiribazus,  V.

I.  CoNON  the  Athenian  entered  upon  public  life  in  the
Peloponnesian  war,  and  his  service  in  it  was  of  great  value ;
for  he  was  both  general  of  the  forces  by  land,  and,  as  com-
mander of  the  fleet,  performed  great  exploits  by  sea ;  for  these
reasons  particular  honour  was  conferred  upon  him,  for  he  had
the  sole  authority  over  all  the  islands ;  in  which  office  he  took
PhersB,  a  colony  of  the  Lacedaemonians.  He  was  also  com-
mander towards  the  end  of  the  Peloponnesian  war,  when  the
forces  of  the  Athenians  were  defeated  by  Lysander  at  ^Egos-
potamos ;  but  he  was  then  absent ;  and  hence  the  aflair  was
worse  managed ;  for  he  was  both  skilled  in  military  matters,
and  a  careful  general.  It  was  doubted  by  nobody,  therefore,
in  those  days,  that  the  Athenians,  if  he  had  been  present,
would  not  have  met  with  that  disaster.

II.  But  when  the  aflairs  of  the  Athenians  were  in  a  ca-
lamitous condition,  and  he  heard  that  his  native  city  was
besieged,  he  did  not  seek  a  place  where  he  might  himself  live
in  security,  but  one  from  which  he  might  render  assistance  to
his  countrymen.  He  in  consequence  betook  himself  to  Phar-
nabazus,  the  satrap  of  Ionia  and  Lydia,  and  also  a  son-inlaw

have  rendered  it  by  "  permanent ;"  most  other  translators  have  given
something  similar.  Bos  gives  this  remark  about  gifts  to  Nepos ;  other
editors  give  it  to  Pittacusl

-  *  Ex  oppidoJ]  The  town  was  Anpendus,  as  appears  from  Xen.  Hell,
iy.  8,  30 ;  Diod.  Sic.  ziv.  99.


348  qoRNSuus  kbpos.

and  relative  of  the  king,  with  irhom,  hy  much  exertion  and  at
great  hazard,  he  contrired  to  procure  himself  strong  personal
influence ;  *  for  when  the  LacedsBmonians,  after  the  Athenians
were  suhdued,  did  not  adhere  to  the  alliance  which  thej  had
made  with  Artaxerxes^  hut  sent  Agesilaus  into  Asia  to  make
war  (being  chiefly  induced  to  that  course  by  Tissaphemes.f
who,  from  being  one  of  the  king's  confidants,  had  renounced
his  attachment  to  him,  and  entered  into  an  alliance  with  the
Lacediemonians),  Phamabazus  was  regarded  as  general  against
Agesilaus,  but  Oonon  in  reality  led  the  army,  and  everything
was  done  according  to  his  direction.  He  greatly  obstructed
that  eminent  commander  Agesilaus,  and  ofben  thwarted  his
plans.  It  was  indeed  {^parent,  that,  if  Gonon  had  not  been
there,  Agesilaus  would  have  taken  all  Asia,  as  far  as  Mount
Taurus,  from  the  king.  And  after  Agesilaus  was  recalled
home  by  his  countrymen,  in  consequence  of  the  Boeotians  and
Athenians  having  declared  war  sgainst  the  LaCedsBmonians,
Gonon  nevertheless  remained  with  the  king's  officers,  and  was
of  the  greatest  service  to  all  of  them.

III.  Tissaphemes  had  revolted  fW>m  the  king ;  yet  his
defection  was  not  so  evideiit  to  Artaxerxes  as  to  others  ;  fot
he  had  great  influence  with  the  king,  by  reason  of  his  nume-
rous and  important  services,  even  when  he  did  not  strictly
adhere  to  his  duty ;  nor  is  it  to  be  wondered  at,  if  he  was  not
easily  induced  to  credit  it,  remembering  that  by  his  means  he
had  overcome  his  brother  Cyrus.  Gonon,  being  sent  by  f  har-
nabazus  to  the  king  to  assure  him  of  his  guilt,  went  in  the
first  place,  on  his  arrival  (after  the  manner  of  the  Persians),
to  Tithraustes,  the  captain  of  the  guard, I  who  held  the  second
place  in  the  empire,  and  signified  that  he  wished  to  speak  to

*  Apttd  qutem  ut  m/ultilm  gratid  valeret — efecit.']  With  whom  he
brought  it  to  pass  that  he  prevailed  much  by  personal  influence.

t  What  Nepos  says  here,  as  to  the  LaoedBemonians  being  persuaded
hj  Tissaphemes  to  go  to  war  with  Persia,  is  scarcely  reconcileaHe  with
fact,  as  Fischer  observes,  or  with  what  is  stated  in  the  second  chapter
of  the  life  of  Agesilaus.  Yet  Schlegel  and  Wetzel,  he  adds,  have  inade
strong  efforts  to  justify  or  excuse  his  statement.  Thirlwall,  however,
seems  to  come  neurer  to  the  truth  in  his  History  of  Greeooy  a  zxxv«
The  reader  may  also  consult  Smith's  Biog.  Dictionary,  art.  Tissaphemes.

X  ChUiarchttmJ]  "  Captain  of  a  thousand." He  is  generally  con- .
sidered  to  have  been  chief  of  the  life-guards,  and  to  have  been  re^on*
sible,  consequently,  for  the  safety  of  the  king's  person.


OONON.  849

the  king ;  for  no  one  is  admitted  withoat  this  ceremony.'*
Tithraustes  answered  him,  **  There  is  no  objection  on  mj  part,
but  consider,  for  yourself,  whether  you  had  rather  speak  with
Mm,  or  treat  by  letter,  as  to  the  objects  which  you  have  in
view.  For,  if  you  come  into  the  royal  presence,  it  will
be  necessary  for  you  to  pay  adoration  to  the  king  *'  (which
the  Greeks  call  v^offxwsflf):  *'  if  this  is  disagreeable  to  you,  you
may  nevertheless  effect  what  you  desire  by  stating  your  com-
mission through  me."  Conon  then  replied,  **  To  myself
indeed,  it  is  not  disagreeable  to  pay  any  honour  you  please  to
the  king,  but  I  am  ai'raid  lest  it  should  be  derogatory  to  my
country,  if,  coming  from  a  city  which  has  been  accustomed  to
rule  over  other  nations,  I  should  observe  the  usages  of
foreigners  rather  than  its  own."  He  therefore  delivered  to
him  in  writing  what  he  wished  to  communicate.

IV.  The  king,  liaving  read  his  statement,  was  so  mudi
influenced  by  his  authority,  that  he  declared  Tissaphemes  an
enemy,  desired  Gonon  to  harass  the  LacedsBmoniaus  with  war,
and  gave  him  leave  to  choose  whom  be  pleased  to  disburse  the
money  for  his  army.  Conon  said  that  such  a  choice  was  not  a
matter  for  liis  consideration,  but  for  the  king's  own,  who  ought
to  know  his  own  subjects  best ;  but  that  he  recommended  him
to  give  that  commission  to  Pharuabazus.  He  was  then  de-
spatched, after  being  honoured  with  valuable  presents,  to  the
sea,  to  require  the  Cyprians,  Phoenicians,  and  other  maritime
people,  to  furnish  ships  of  war,  and  to  prepare  a  fleet  to  secure
the  sea  in  the  following  summer,  Pharnabazus,  as  he  had
requested,  being  appointed  his  colleague.  When  this  arrange-
ment was  made  known  to  the  Lacedsemonians,  they  took  their
measures  with  great  care,  for  they  thought  that  a  greater  war
threatened  them  than  if  they  had  to  contend  with  the  Persians
only.  They  saw  that  a  brave  and  skilful  general  was  going  to
lead  the  king's  forces,  and  to  take  the  field  against  them,] a
man  whom  they  could  overmatch  neither  by  stratagem  nor  by
strength.  With  these  considerations  they  collected  a  great
fleet,  and  set  sail  under  the  leadership  of  Pisander.  Conon,
attacking  them  near  Cnidus,  routed  them  in  a  great  battle,  took
several  of  their  ships,  and  sunk  several  more,  a  victory  by
which  not  only  Athens,  but  also  all  Greece,  which  had  been

*  Sine  hoc']  Some  consider  Jioc  masculine,  referring  to  the  chUi-
archua.


350  00RNEUU8  NEPOS.

under  the  power  of  the  LacedsBmonians,  was  set  free.  Conon
proceeded  with  part  of  his  fleet  to  his  native  citj,  and  caused
the  walls  of  the  Piraeeus  and  of  Athens,  both  of  which  had
been  pulled  down,  to  be  rebuilt,  and  presented  to  his  country-
men fifty  talents  in  money,  which  he  had  received  from
Phamabazus.

V.  What  happens  to  other  men  happened  to  him,  that
he  was  more  inconsiderate  in  good  than  in  bad  fortune ;  for
when  he  had  defeated  the  fleet  of  the  Peloponnesians,  and
thought  that  he  had  avenged  the  injuries  done  to  his  country,
he  aimed  at  more  objects  than  he  was  in  a  condition  to  accom-
plish. Not  that  these  aims,  however,  were  not  patriotic  and
deserving  of  praise,  since  he  preferred  that  the  power  of  his
country  should  be  increased,  rather  than  that  of  the  king :  for,
after  he  had  secured  himself  great  influence  by  the  battle
which  he  fought  at  Cnidus,  not  only  among  foreigners  but  in
all  the  states  of  Greece,  he  began  to  endeavour  secretly  *  to
restore  Ionia  and  u^olia  to  the  Athenians.  But  as  this  pro-
ject was  not  concealed  vnth  sufl&cient  care,  Tiribazus,  who  was
governor  of  Sardis,  sent  for  Conon,  on  pretence  that  he  wished
to  send  him  in  great  haste  to  the  king  ;  when  he  had  gone,  in
compliance  with  this  message,  he  was  placed  in  confinement,
in  which  he  was  kept  for  some  time.  Some  have  left  on
record  that  he  was  conveyed  to  the  king,  and  there  died.  On
the  other  hand  rioont  the  historian,  whom  we  chiefly  credit
concerning  Persian  affairs,  has  related  that  he  made  liis  escape,
but  is  in  doubt  whether  it  was  effected  with  or  without  the
knowledge  of  Tiribazus.

*  If  this  statement  respecting  Conon  be  true,  his  conduct  in  the
matter  is  not  to  be  reckoned  among  pia  et  probanda,  "  patriotic  and
deserving  of  praise."  But  it  would  appear  from  Diod.  Sic.  xiv.  85,  and
Xen.  Hell.  iv.  8,  that  the  charge  against  him  arose  from  envy  on  the
part  of  Tithraustes  and  the  other  Persians. '

t  He  was  the  father  of  Cleitarchus,  who  wrote  a  history  of  Alex-
ander the  Great's  expedition.  See  Plin.  H.  N.  x.  70.  !FVom  what
Pliny  says  of  him,  he  seems  to  have  been  extremely  credulous.


851


X.  DION.

Dion's  family ;  is  connected  with  the  two  Dionysii,  I. — Brings  Plato
into  Sicily;  death  of  the  elder  Dionysius,  II — Disagreement
between  Dion  and  Dionysius  the  Younger,  III.  —  Is  sent  to
Corinth ;  ill-treatment  of  his  wife ;  fate  of  his  son,  IV. — G^ets
possession  of  Syracuse,  and  forces  Dionysius  to  make  terms  with
him,  V. — Alienates  the  people  by  putting  Heraclides  to  death,  VI.
— His  great  unpopularity,  VII. — Is  deceived  by  a  stratagem  of
Callicrates,  VIII. — Is  assassinated  in  his  own  house  on  a  feast-
day,  IX. — Change  of  feeling  towards  him  after  his  death,  X.

I.  Dion,  the  son  of  Hipparinus,  a  native  of  Syracuse,  was
of  a  noble  family,  and  allied  to  both  the  Dionysii,  the  tyrants*
of  Sicily ;  for  the  elder  married  Aristomache,  Dion's  sister,  by
whom  he  had  two  sons,  Hipparinus  and  Nysaeus,  and  also  two
daughters  named  Sophrosyne  and  Arete,  the  elder  of  whom  he
gave  in  maniage  to  his  son  Dionysius,t  to  whom  he  also  left
his  dominions,  and  the  other.  Arete,  to  Dion.  J

But  Dion,  besides  this  noble  connexion,  and  the  honourable
character  of  his  ancestors,  inherited  many  other  advantages
from  nature  ;  among  them,  a  disposition  docile,  courteous,  and
adapted  for  acquiring  the  most  important  branches  of  know-
ledge, and  extreme  grace  of  person,  which  is  no  small
recommendation  ;§  he  had  also  great  wealth  bequeathed  him
by  his  father,  which  he  himself  had  augmented  by  the  presents
he  received  from  the  tyrant.  He  was  familiar  with  the
elder  Dionysius,  not  less  on  account  of  his  character  than  his
relationship ;  for  though  the  cruelty  of  Dionysius  offended
him,  yet  he  was  desirous  that  he  should  be  secure  because  of
his  family  connexion  with  himself,  and  stiU  more  for  the  sake

•  Utrdque  impUcattu  tyrwfmide  Dionytiorwm.']  "Involved  in,"  or
"  connected  with,  each  tyranny  of  the  Dionysii."  For  utroque  Dionysio
tyrwMio.

f  Dionysius  married  two  wives  in  the  same  day,  Doris,  a  native  of
Locris,  and  Aristomache,  the  sister  of  Dion.  But  Dionysius  the
Younger  was  the  son  of  Doris ;  so  that,  if  Nepos  is  correct  in  saying
that  Sophrosyne  was  the  daughter  of  Aristomache,  he  married  his
half-tister. See  Plut.  Vit.  Dion,  c  3.

X  Dion,  therefore,  as  Emstius  observes,  married  his  own  niece.

§  Quoi  non  minvmUm  commendatur.]  "Which  is  not  in  the  lowest
degree  (ie.  which  is  in  the  highest  degree)  commended."  Lambinus,
from  conjecture,  read  commendcU,  sc.  hominem,  which  is  more  elegant
^as  Bos  admits),  and  has  been  generally  adopted  by  editors.


852  CORNELIUS  NEPOS.

I

of  his  own  relatives.*  He  aided  him  in  important  matters,
and  the  tyrant  was  greatly  influenced  by  his  advice,  unless,  in
any  case,  some  violent  humour  of  his  own  interposed.  But
embassies,t  such  at  least  as  were  of  a  more  distinguished
kind,  were  all  conducted  by  Dion ;  and  by  discharging  them
assiduously,  and  managing  faithfully,  he  palliated  the  most
cruel  name  of  tyrant  with  his  own  benevolence.  The  Cartha-
ginians so  much  respected  him,  when  he  was  sent  thither  by
Dionysius,  that  they  never  regarded  any  man  tliat  spoke  the
Greek  tongue  with  more  admiration*

II.  Nor  did  these  circumstances  escape  the  notice  of
Dionysius,  for  he  was  sensible  how  great  an  honour  he  was  to
him ;  hence  it  happened  that  he  showed  him  more  favour  than
any  other  person,  j:  and  loved  him  not  less  than  a  son.  When
a  report  reached  Sicily,  too,  that  Plato  was  come  to  Tarentum,
Dionysius  could  not  refuse  the  young  man  leave  to  send  for
him,  as  Dion  was  inflamed  with  a  desire  of  hearing  him.  He
accordingly  granted  him  that  permission,  and  brought  Plato
with  great  pomp§  to  Syracuse  ;  whom  Dion  so  greatly  admired
and  loved,  that  he  devoted  himself  wholly  to  his  society  ;  nor
was  Plato  less  delighted  with  Dion.  Although,  therefore,
Plato  was  cruelly  insulted  by  Dionysius  (for  he  ordered  him
to  be  sold[|),  yet  he  paid  a  second  visit  to  the  city,  induced
again  by  the  entreaties  of  Dion.

In  the  meantime  Dionysius  fell  ill  of  some  disease,  and
when  he  was  labouring  under  the  severity  of  it,  Dion  inquired
of  the  physicians  *'how  he  was,"  and  begged  them,  at  the  same
time,  "  it  he  should  happen  to  bein  extreme  danger,  to  acquaint
him  of  it ;  for  he  wished  to  speak  to  him  about  a  division  of  the

*  Suorum  cauad.]  For  the  sake  of  ^ristomache  and  her  children.
f  L^ctUones.}  Most  editions  have  omne$  after  legcsUonet. Bos  and
Van  Staveren  omit  it.

X  Um  huie  maxima  mdulgereL]  "  He  indulged  him  alone  most  **
§  Ambitioite.']  Exquirito  apparatu  et  cunbUioso  comitaitu — Q^bhard.
It  was  not,  however,  the  ^der,  but  the  young*^  Dionysius,  that  receiTed
Plato  with  such  oeremony. See  Plato's  Epist.  3  and  7 ;  Plutaroh,  Yit.
Dion.,  and  ^lian,  Yar.  Histw  iv.  18. Plato  visited  Sicily  three  times ;
I  the  ostentatious  reception  occurred  on  the  second  occasion.

I  li  QtttPP^  quem  vemtneUiri  jusntset]  Bremi  conjectures  qtUppe  qui

j  .  ewf»,  &c ,  wMoh  the  sense  indeed  requires. Consult  Plutarch,  Yit.

I  Dion.,  who,  however,  relates  the  matter  a  little  differently. Lucian

says  that  Plato  was  sent  to  a  parasite,  because  he  was  ignorant  of  the
parasite's  arl See  Diod.  Sic.  xv.  7 ;  Diog.  Laeii.  iii.  IS,  21. — Bo§,


DION.  853

realm,  as  he  thought  that  the  sons  of  his  sister  hy  him  ought
to  have  a  share  in  the  dominions."  This  request  the  physicians
did  not  keep  secret,  but  reported  the  words  to  Dionysius  the
younger,  who,  taking  alarm  at  it,  compelled  the  physicians  to
give  his  father  a  sleeping  potion,  that  Dion  might  have  no
opportunity  of  addressing  him.  The  sick  man,  having  taken
the  draught,  ended  his  l5e  like  one  buried  in  deep  sleep.

III.  Such  was  the  commencement  of  the  dissension  between
Dion  and  Dionysius ;  and  it  was  increased  by  many  circum-
stances ;  yet  in  tlie  beginning  of  his  reign  there  subsisted  for
a  time  an  assumed  friendship  between  them ;  and  as  Dion
persisted  in  soliciting  Dionysius  to  send  for  Plato  from  Athens,
and  follow  his  counsels,  he,  who  was  willing  to  imitate  his
father  in  something,  complied  with  his  wishes.  At  the  same
time,  also,  he  brought  back  Philistus  the  historian  to  Syracuse,
a  man  not  more  friendly  to  the  tyrant  than  to  tyranny  itself.
But  of  this  author  more  has  been  said  in  the  work  of  mine
which  is  written  "  On  Historians."  Plato,  however,  had  so
much  influence  over  Dionysius  by  his  authority,  and  produced
such  an  effect  on  him  by  his  eloquence,  that  he  persuaded  him
to  put  an  end  to  his  tyranny,  and  to  restore  liberty  to  the
Syracusans  ;  but  being  dissuaded  from  his  intention  by  the
representations  of  Philistus,  he  began  to  grow  somewhat  more
cruel.

IV.  Being  conscious  that  he  was  surpassed  by  Dion  in
ability,  influence,  and  in  the  affection  of  the  people,  and  fear-
ing that,  if  he  kept  Dion  with  him,  he  might  give  him  some
opportunity  of  overthrowing  him,  he  gave  him  a  trireme  to
sail  to  Corinth,  declaring  that  he  did  so  for  both  their  sakes,
lest,  as  they  were  afraid  of  each  other,  one  of  them  might
take  the  other  by  surprise.  As  many  people  were  indignant
at  this  proceeding,  and  as  it  was  the  cause  of  great  hatred  to
the  tyrant,  Dionysius  put  on  board  some  vessels  all  the  pro-
perty of  Dion  that  could  be  removed,  and  sent  it  after  him  ;
for  he  wished  it  to  be  thought  that  he  had  adopted  that  course,
not  from  hatred  of  the  man,  but  for  the  sake  of  his  own  safety.
But  when  he  heard  that  Dion  was  levying  troops  in  the  Pelo-
ponnesus, and  endeavouring  to  raise  a  war  against  him,  he
gave  Arete,  Dion's  wife,  in  marriage  to  another  man,  and  caused
his  son  to  be  brought  up  in  such  a  manner,  that  he  might,
through  indulgence,  be  imbued  with the most  disgraceful

A  A


354  CORNELIUS  NEPOS.

propensities ;  for  mistresses  ivere  brought  him  when  but  a  boy,
before  he  was  full  grown ;  he  was  overwhelmed  with  wine  and
luxuries,  nor  was  any  time  allowed  him  to  be  sober.  He  was
so  little  able  to  bear  such  a  change  in  his  way  of  life,  which  was
altered  after  his  father  returned  to  his  country  (for  keepers
were  set  over  him  to  draw  him  from  his  former  mode
of  living),  that  he  threw  himself  from  the  top  of  a  house,
and  so  perished.  But  I  return  to  the  point  from  whence  I
digressed.

V.  When  Dion  had  arrived  at  Corinth,  and  Heraclides,
who  had  been  commander  of  the  cavalry,  had  also  come
thither  (having  been  likewise  banished  by  Dionysius),  they
began  to  prepare  for  war  in  every  possible  way ;  but  they  made
but  little  progress ;  for  a  tyranny  of  many  years'  standing
was  thought  to  be  of  great  strength,  and  for  that  reason  few
were  induced  to  join  in  so  perilous  an  undertaking.  But
Dion,  who  trusted  not  so  much  to  his  troops  as  to  the  general
hatred  towards  the  tyrant,  setting  out,  with  the  greatest
courage,  in  two  transport  vessels,  to  attack  a  power  of  fifty
years'  growth,  defended  by  five  hundred  ships  of  war,  ten
thousand  cavalry,  and  a  hundred  thousand  infantry,  so  easily
made  an  impression  upon  it  (what  seemed  wonderful  to  all
people),  tJmt  he  entered  Syracuse  the  third  day  after  he
touched  the  coast  of  Sicily.  Hence  it  may  be  understood  that
no  government  is  safe,  unless  guarded  by  the  love  of  its  sub-
jects. Dionysius  at  that  time  was  absent,  and  waiting  for  his
fleet  in  Italy,  supposing  that  none  of  his  enemies  would  come
against  him  without  a  great  force ;  a  supposition  which  de-
ceived him;  for  Dion  curbed  the  tyrant's  pride  with  those
very  men  that  had  been  under  the  rule  of  his  adversary,  and
gained  possession  of  all  that  part  of  Sicily  which  had  been
under  the  government  of  Dionysius ;  and  with  like  success  he
secured  the  city  of  Syracuse,  except  the  citadel  and  the  island
adjoining  the  town,  and  brought  matters  to  such  a  state,  that
the  tyrant  consented  to  make  peace  on  such  terms  as  these :  that
Dion  should  have  Sicily,  Dionysius  Italy,*  and  ApoUocrates,
in  whom  alone  Dionysius  f  had  great  confidence,  Syracuse.

*  That  is,  the  portion  of  Italy,  or  Great  Greece,  which  had  been
under  the  power  of  the  elder  Dionysius,  part  of  which  was  still
retained  hy  his  son.

t  Lambinus  first  saw  that  we  ought  to  read  ZHonyHuB^  not  JHon,


DION.  355

VI.  A  sudden  change  followed  close  upon  such  eminent
and  unexpected  success,  for  fortune,  through  her  fickleness,
endeavoured  to  sink  him  whom  she  had  just  before  exalted.
In  the  first  place  she  exercised  her  power  over  his  son,  of
whom  I  have  previously  made  mention ;  for  after  he  had
taken  back  his  wife,  who  had  been  given  to  another,  and
wished  to  recal  his  son,  from  his  abandoned  course  of  sen-
suality, to  habits  of  virtue,  he  received,  as  a  father,  a  most
severe  affliction  in  the  death  of  that  son.  A  dissigreement
next  arose  between  him  and  Heraclides,  who,  refusing  to  yield
the  supremacy  to  Dion,  organized  a  party  against  him ;  nor
had  he  indeed  less  influence  than  Dion  among  the  aristocracy,
with  whose  sanction  he  commanded  the  fleet,  while  Dion  had
the  direction  of  the  land  forces.  Dion  could  not  endure  this
opposition  patiently,  but  retorted  with  that  verse  of  Homer  in
the  second  book  of  the  Iliad,*  in  which  is  this  sentiment,
"  That  a  state  cannot  be  managed  well  by  the  government  of
many."  Much  ill  feeling,  on  the  part  of  the  people,  followed
this  remark ;  for  he  appeared  to  have  let  it  escape  him  that
he  wished  everything,  to  be  under  his  own  authority.  This
feeling  he  did  not  try  to  soften  by  conciliation,  but  to  over-
come by  severity,  and  caused  Heraclides,  when  he  came  to
Syracuse,  to  be  put  to  death.

VII.  This  act  struck  extreme  terror  into  every  one ;  for
nobody,  after  Heraclides  was  killed,  considered  himself  safe.
Dion,  when  his  adversary  was  removed,  distributed  among  his
soldiers,  with  greater  freedom,  the  property  of  those  whom  he
knew  to  have  been  unfavourable  to  him.  But  after  this
division  had  taken  place,  money,  as  his  daily  expenses  grew
very  great,  began  to  fail  him;  nor  was  there  anything  on
which  he  could  lay  his  hands  but  the  property  of  his  friends ;
a  circumstance  which  was  attended  with  this  efiect,  that  while
he  gained  the  soldiery,  he  lost  the  aristocracy.  At  this  state
of  things  he  was  overcome  with  anxiety,  and,  being  unac-
customed to  be  ill  spoken  of,  he  could  not  patiently  endure
that  a  bad  opinion  of  him  should  be  entertained  by  those  by
whose  praises  he  had  just  before  been  extolled  to  the  skies.

Bos,  Mosche,  and  most  other  editors,  approve  Lambinus's  suggestion.
Van  Stavereu  omits  the  name  altogether,  the  sense  being  sufficiently
clear  without  it.
♦  Ver.  204,

A  A  2


B56  COBNEUUS  NEPOS.

The  common  people,  however,  when  the  feelings  of  the
soldiers  were  rendered  unfavourable  towards  him,*  spoke  with
less  restraint,  and  said  that  ''  he  was  a  tyrant  not  to  he
endured."

VIII.  While  he  knew  not,  as  he  contemplated  this  state  of
things,  how  he  should  put  a  stop  to  it,  and  was  apprehensive
as  to  what  it  might  end  in,  a  certain  Callicrates,  a  citizen  of
Athens,  who  had  accompanied  him  from  the  Peloponnesus  to
Sicily,  a  man  of  address,  subtle  enough  for  any  artifice,  and
without  any  regard  for  religion  or  honour,  went  to  him,  and
told  him  that  **  he  was  in  great  danger  on  account  of  the  dis-
aflfection  of  the  people  and  the  hostile  feelings  of  the  soldiers  ;
which  danger  he  could  by  no  means  escape,  unless  he  com-
missiojied  some  one  of  his  friends  to  pretend  that  he  was  an
enemv  to  him ;  and  that,  if  he  found  him  fit  for  the  under-
taking,  he  would  learn  the  feelings  of  every  one,  and  cut  off
his  enemies,  as  his  opponents  would  readily  disclose  their
thoughts  to  any  one  disaffected  towards  him."  This  sug-
gestion being  approved,  Callicrates  himself  undertook  this
part,  and  armed  himself  through  the  unsuspiciousness  of
Dion ;  he  sought  for  accomplices  to  join  in  killing  him ;  he
held  meetings  with  his  enemies,  and  formed  an  actual  con-
spiracy against  him.  But  these  proceedings,  as  many  were
privy  to  what  was  going  on,  became  known,  and  were  com-
municated to  Aristomache,  Dion's  sister,  and  his  wife  Arete ;
who,  being  struck  with  alarm,  sought  an  interview  with  him
for  whose  danger  they  were  concerned.  Dion  assured  them
that  no  plot  was  concerted  against  him  by  Callicrates,  but  that
what  was  done,  was  done  by  his  own  directions.  The  women,
notwithstanding,  took  Callicrates  into  the  temple  of  Proser-
pine, and  obliged  him  to  swear  that  "  there  should  be  no
danger  to  Dion  from  him."  But  Callicrates,  by  this  oath,  was
not  only  not  deterred  from  his  design,  but  was  stimulated  to
hasten  the  execution  of  it,  fearing  that  his  plot  might  be  laid
open  before  he  had  effected  his  purpose.

IX.  With  this  resolution,  on  the  next  festival  day,  while
Dion  was  keeping  himself  at  home,  secluded  from  the  assembly


*  Ojf&M^  in  eum  mUitum  voluntate.']  Yet  Nepos  says  above,  in  this
same  chapter,  that  Dion  "had  gained  the  soldiery."  Qaum  milites
reconcUidgsetf  amUteret  estimates.


DION.  85T

of  the  people,  and  was  reposing  in  an  tipper  room,*  he  com-
mitted to  his  accomplices  the  stronger  parts  of  the  city,  sur-
rounded Dion's  house  with  guards,  and  stationed  trusty  persons
at  the  door,  who  were  not  to  leave  it ;  he  also  manned  a
trireme  with  an  armed  force,  entrusted  it  to  his  brother
Philocrates,  and  gave  directions  that  it  should  be  rowed  about
in  the  harbour,  as  if  he  wished  to  exercise  the  rowers,  with  a
view,  if  fortune  should  baffle  his  attempts,  to  have  a  vessel  in
which  he  might  flee  to  a  place  of  safety.  He  then  chose  from
among  his  followers  some  young  men  of  Zacynthus,  of  great
courage  and  extraordinary  strength,  whom  he  ordered  to  go  to
Dion*8  house  unarmed,  so  that  Qiey  might  seem  to  have  come
for  the  sake  of  speaking  with  him.  These  youths,  as  being
well  known,  were  admitted,  but  as  soon  as  they  had  crossed
the  threshold,  they  bolted  the  door,  seized  him  as  he  lay
on  his  couch,  and  bound  him.  A  great  noise  ensued,  so  that
it  was  distinctly  heard  out  of  doors.  And  here  it  was  easy  to
be  understood,  as  has  often  been  said  before,  how  unpopular
absolute  power  is,  and  how  unhappy  the  life  of  tliose  who  had
rather  be  feared  than  loved ;  for  those  very  guards,!  if  they
had  been  favourably  inclined  towards  him,  might  have  saved
him  by  breaking  open  the  door,  as  the  Zacynthians,  who  were
unarmed,  were  holding  him  still  alive,  calling  to  those  without
for  a  weapon.  Nobody  coming  to  his  rescue,  one  Lyco,  a
Syracusan,  gave  them  a  sword  through  the  window,  with  which
Dion  was  slain.

X.  When  the  murder  was  consummated,  and  the  people
came  in  to  view  the  scene,  some  were  killed  as  guilty  by  those
who  were  ignorant  of  the  real  actors  ;  for  a  report  being  soon
spread  abroad  that  violence  had  been  offered  to  Dion,  many,
to  whom  such  a  deed  was  detestable,  ran  together  to  the  spot ;
and  these  persons,  prompted  by  a  false  suspicion,  killed  the

*  The  ancients  were  accuBtomed,  when  they  wished  to  devote  them-
selves  to  prayer,  or  to  do  anything  in  private,  to  go  up  into  the  higher
part  of  the  house,  or  to  keep  a  chamber  in  that  pe^rt  for  that  particular
purpose.  So  Suetonius  says  of  Augustus,  c.  72,  Si  quando  quid  aecretd
atU  iine  interpeUatione  agere  proposuissetf  erat  iUi  locus  in  edito  ain-
gularia.  So  Tacitus  of  Tiberius,  Ann.  vL  21,  Quoties  super  negotio
c(mtuU<iretf  editd  donms  pcuie  utdxUur, — Bot,  He  idso  refers  to  Judith,
c.  8,  and  to  Acts  x.  9.

f  Illi  ipsi  cuttodet.]  The  guards  that  had  been  stationed  by  Calli-,
crates  round  Dion's  house.


358  CORNELIUS  NEPOS.

innocent  as  if  they  had  been  the  delinquents.  But  as  soon
as  his  death  became  publicly  known,  the  feeling  of  the  popu-
lace was  wonderfully  altered,  for  those  who  had  called  lum  a
tyrant  while  he  was  alive,  called  him  now  the  deliverer  of  his
country  and  the  expeUer  of  a  tyrant.  So  suddenly  had  pity
succeeded  to  hatred,  that  they  wished  to  redeem  him  from
Acheron,  if  they  could,  with  their  own  blood.  He  was  there-
fore honoured  with  a  sepulchral  monument  in  the  city,  in  the
most  frequented  part  of  it,  after  having  been  interred  at  the
public  expense.  He  died  at  the  age  of  about  fifty-five  years,
four  years  after  he  had  returned  from  the  Peloponnesus  into
Sicily.


XL  IPHICRATES.


Iphicrates  eminent  for  skill  in  militaiy  discipline,  I. — His  acts  in
Thrace,  at  Corinth,  against  the  Lacedaemonians,  in  E^gypt,  and
against  Epaminondas,  IL — His  abilities  and  character,  III.

I.  Iphicrates  of  Athens  has  become  renowned,  not  so  much
for  the  greatness  of  his  exploits,  as  for  his  knowledge  of  mili-
tary tactics ;  for  he  was  such  a  leader,  that  he  was  not  only
comparable  to  the  first  commanders  of  his  own  time,  but  no
one  even  of  the  older  generals  could  be  set  above  him.  He
was  much  engaged  in  the  field  ;  he  often  had  the  command  of
armies ;  he  never  miscarried  in  an  undertaking  by  his  own
£Eiult ;  he  was  always  eminent  for  invention,  and  such  was  his
excellence  in  it,  that  he  not  only  introduced  much  that  w£is
new  into  the  military  art,  but  made  many  improvements  in
what  existed  before.  He  altered  the  arms  of  the  infantry ;
for  whereas,  before  he  became  a  commander,  they  used  very
large  shields,  short  spears,  and  small  swords,  he,  on  the  con-
trary, introduced  the  pelta  instead  of  the  parma*  (from  which
the  infantry  were  afterwards  called  peltastcd),  that  they  might
be  more  active  in  movements  and  encounters ;  he  doubled  the
length  of  the  spear,  and  made  the  swords  also  longer.  He
likewise  changed  the  character  of  their  cuirasses,  and  gave
them  linen  ones  instead  of  those  of  chain-mail  and  brass  ;  a
change  by  which  he  rendered  the  soldiers  more  active ;  for,

*  PtUam  pro  pcurmd  fecit^  The  pelia  was  smaller  than  the  parma,
out  both  were  smaller  than  the  dypeut, — Bo9»


IPHICBATES.  d5d

dininishing  the  weight,  he  provided  what  would  equally  pro-
tect the  body,  and  be  light.

II.  He  made  war  upon  the  Thracians,  and  restored  Seuthes,
the  ally  of  the  Athenians,  to  his  throne.  *  At  Corinth  *  he
commanded  the  army  with  so  much  strictness,  that  no  troops
in  Greece  were  ever  better  disciplined,  or  more  obedient  to  the
orders  of  their  leader ;  and  he  brought  them  to  such  a  habit,
that  when  the  signal  for  battle  was  given  them  by  their
general,  they  would  stand  so  regularly  drawn  up,  without  any
trouble  on  the  part  of  the  commander,  that  they  seemed  to
have  been  severally  posted  by  the  most  skilful  captain.  With
this  army  he  cut  off  a  mora  t  of  the  Lacedaemonians ;  an
exploit  which  was  highly  celebrated  through  all  Greece.  In
this  war,  too,  he  defeated  all  their  forces  a  second  time,  by
which  success  he  obtained  great  glory.

Artaxerxes,  when  he  had  resolved  to  make  war  upon  the
king  of  Egypt,  J  asked  the  Athenians  to  allow  Iphicrates  to  be
his  general,  that  he  might  place  him  at  the  head  of  his  army
of  mercenaries,  the  number  of  whom  was  twelve  thousani
This  force  he  so  instructed  in  all  military  discipline,  that  as
certaiu  Roman  soldiers  were  formerly  called  Eabians,§  so  the
Iphicrateans  were  in  the  highest  repute  among  the  Greeks.

Going  afterwards  to  the  relief  of  the  Lacedaemonians,  he

*  Apud  CorirUhwm,,']  In  the  war  generally  called  the  CorintMan  war,
carried  on  by  the  Athenians,  Thebana,  and  Argives,  against  the  Laoe-
dsemonians. See  Diod.  Sic.  xiv.  86 ;  Xen.  HelL  iv.  4.

f  From  Xenophon,  de  Rep.  Lacedsem.,  we  learn  that  the  mora  con-
sisted of  400  men ;  for  it  had  four  lochagi  and  eight  pentecosterts. —
Fischer,  This  seems  to  have  been  the  regular  and  original  number
appointed  by  Lycurgus,  but  it  varied  afterwards  according  to  times
and  circumstances.  In  the  time  of  Xenophon  (HelL  iv.  5)  it  i^pears
to  have  consisted  usually  of  600.  At  other  times  it  contained  five,
seven,  or  nine  hundred.  See  Plutarch.  Pelop.  c.  17 ;  Thucyd.  v.  68,
ibique  SchoL Smith's  Diet,  of  G.  and  R.  Ant.  art.  Army,  Greek.

t  His  name  was  Acoris ;  he  had  assisted  Evagoras  of  Cyprus  against
Artaxerxes  Mnemon.  See  Diod.  Sic.  xv.  29.  He  appears  to  have  been
the  immediate  predecessor  of  Nectanebia

§  Fabiani.']  If  the  Roman  soldiers  were  used  to  be  called  FahianSf
which  is  an  account  given  by  none  but  our  author,  that  I  know  of,  it
was  occasioned  by  the  gallantry  of  the  Fabian  family,  that  undertook
to  manage  the  war  against  the  Yejentes  by  themselves,  and  were
cut  off,  300  of  them  in  one  battla — Clarke.  Others  think  that  the
name  must  have  been  derived  from  Fabius  Cunctator.  Kone  of  the
better  commentators  say  anything  on  the  point


S60  CORN£LIUS  NEPOS.

«

checked  the  efforts  of  Epaminondas;  for,  had  not  he  been  draw-
ing near,*  the  Thebans  would  not  have  retreated  from  Sparta
until  they  had  taken  and  destroyed  it  by  fire.

III.  He  was  a  man  of  large  mind  and  large  body,  and  of
an  appearance  indicating  the  commander,  so  that  by  his  very
look  he  inspired  every  one  with  admiration  of  him.  But  in
action  he  was  too  remiss,  and  too  impatient  of  continued  exer-
tion, as  Theopompus  has  recorded.  Yet  he  was  a  good  citizen,
and  a  person  of  very  honourable  feelings,  as  he  showed,  not
only  in  other  transactions,  but  also  in  protecting  the  children
of  Amyntas  t  the  Macedonian ;  for  Eurydice,  the  mother  of
Perdiccas  and  Philip,  fled  with  these  two  boys,  after  the  death
of  Amyntas,  to  Iplucrates,  and  was  secure  under  his  power.
He  lived  to  a  good  old  age,  with  the  feehngs  of  his  countrymen
well  affected  towards  him.

He  was  once  brought  to  trial  for  his  life,  at  the  time  of  the
Social  war,  J  together  with  Timotheus,  and  was  acquitted.

He  left  a  son  named  Menestheus,  whom  he  had  by  a  Thra-
cian  woman,  the  daughter  of  King  Cotys.  When  this  son
was  asked  whether  he  had  more  regard  for  his  father  or  his
mother,  he  replied,  "  For  his  mother.'*  As  this  answer
appeared  strange  to  all  who  heard  it,  he  added,  "  I  do  so  with
justice  ;  for  my  father,  as  far  as  was  in  his  power,  made  me  a
Thracian,  but  my  mother,  as  fau:  as  she  could,  made  me  an
Athenian."

*  Nisi  ejus  adveriCus  appropinquasset.l  ^'UnleBS  his  approach  had
been  drawing  near."

t  The  father  of  Philip,  and  grandfather  of  Alexander  the  Great.
^This  subject  is  more  fully  noticed  by  ^schines  de  Fals.  Leg.  haud
longl  d  prmcipio." — Bos. See  Justin,  vii  4.

X  Bello  Sociali.]  A  war  in  which  Byzantium,  Rhodes,  Chios,  and
Cos  leagued  themselves  against  the  Athenians,  from  their  alliance  with
whom  they  had  revolted.  See  Diod.  Sic.  xv.  78 ;  xvL  7 ;  Perizon.  ad
iElian.  Yar.  Hist,  ii  10. Comp.  Life  of  Chabrias,  c.  4.


361


XII.  CHABRIAS.

Chabrias  becomes  celebrated  for  a  new  mode  of  fighting,  I. — His  acts
in  Egypt  and  Cyprus ;  his  command  of  the  Egyptian  fleet,  II. —
His  recal;  he  lived  but  little  at  home  in  consequence  of  the

* envious  feelings  of  his  cotintrymen,  IIL — He  is  killed  in  the

^ Social  war,  IV.

•

I.  Cha-BRias  the  Athenian  was  also  numbered  among  the
most  eminent  generals,  and  performed  many  acts  worthy  of
record.  But  of  these  the  most  famous  is  his  manoeuvre  in
the  battle  which  he  fought  near  Thebes,  when  he  had  gone  to
the  rehef  of  the  Boeotians ;  for  in  that  engagement,  when  the
great  general  Agesilaus  felt  sure  of  victory,  and  the  mercenary-
troops  had  been  put  to  flight  by  him,  Chabrias  forbade  the  rest
of  Ins  phalanx*  to  quit  their  ground,  and  instructed  them  to
receive  the  attack  of  the  enemy  with  the  knee  placed  firmly
against  the  shield,  and  the  spear  stretched  out.  Agesilaus,
observing  this  new  plan,  did  not  dare  to  advance,  and  called
off  his  men,  as  they  were  rushing  forward,  with  sound  of
trumpet.  This  device  was  so  extolled  by  fame  throughout
Greece,  that  Chabrias  chose  to  have  the  statue,  which  was
erected  to  him  at  the  pubhc  charge  hy  the  Athenians  in  the
forum,  made  in  that  posture.  Hence  it  happened  that  wrestlers,
and  other  candidates  for  public  applause,t  adopted,  in  the
erection  of  their  statues,  those  postures  in  which  they  had
gained  a  victory.

II.  Chabrias  also,  when  he  was  general  of  the  Athenians,
carried  on  many  wars  in  Europe  ;  and  he  engaged  in  one  in
Egypt  of  his  own  accord ;  for  setting  out  to  assist  Nectanabis,  J
he  secured  him  the  throne.  He  performed  a  similar  exploit  in
Cyprus,  but  he  was  then  publicly  sent  to  support  Evagoras ;
nor  did  he  return  from  thence  till  he  had  conquered  the  whole
island ;  from  which  achievement  the  Athenians  obtained  great
glory.

In  the  meantime  a  war  broke  out  between  the  Egyptians
and  Persians,  when  the  Athenians  formed  an  alliance  with

*  PhjaJUmx  is  here  used  as  a  general  term  for  a  body  of  troops  in
close  array.

f  Artifices."]  This  word  is  here  used  in  a  very  comprehensive  sense,
including  actors,  musicians,  and  every  other  kind  of  publio  exhibitors.

t  Often  written  Neckmebia.  "Diodorus  Siculus  has  it  either
NarrcyaScuc  or  }^iKTavituiQ" — Bo9,


363  CORNELIUS  NEPOS.

Artaxerxes,  and  the  Lacedaemonians  with  the  Egyptians,  from
■whom  their  king  Agesilaus  received  a  large  share  of  spoil.*
Chabrias,  seeing  Agesilaus  s  good  fortune,  and  thinking  himself
in  no  respect  inferior  to  him,  set  out  to  assist  them  of  his  own
accord,  and  took  the  command  of  the  Egyptian  fleet,  while
Agesilaus  held  that  of  the  land  forces.

III.  In  consequence,  the  ofl&cers  of  the  king  of  Persia  sent
deputies  to  Athens,  to  complain  that  Chabrias  was  warring
against  their  king  on  the  side  of  the  Egyptians.  The
Athenians  then  prescribed  a  certain  day  to  Chabrias,  before
which  if  he  did  not  return  home,  they  declared  that  they
would  condemn  him  to  die.  On  receiving  this  communication
he  returned  to  Athens ;  but  did  not  stay  there  longer  than
was  necessary ;  for  he  did  not  willingly  continue  under  the
eyes  of  his  countrymen,  as  he  was  accustomed  to  live  splen-
didly, and  to  indulge  himself  too  freely  to  be  able  to  escape
the  envy  of  the  populace.  For  this  is  a  common  fault  in
great  and  free  states,  that  envy  is  the  attendant  on  glory,  and
that  the  people  willingly  detract  from  those  whom  they  see
raised  above  others ;  nor  do  the  poor  contemplate  with
patience  the  lot  of  others  who  are  grown  rich.  Chabrias,
therefore,  when  he  could,  wa^  generally  away  from  home.  Nor
was  he  the  only  one  that  willingly  absented  himself  from
Athens,  but  almost  all  their  great  men  did  the  same,  for  they
thought  that  they  should  be  as  far  removed  from  envy  as  they
were  distant  from  their  native  country.  Conon,  in  conse-
quence, lived  very  much  in  Cyprus,  Iphicrates  in  Thrace,
Timotheus  in  Lesbos,  Chares  at  Sigeum.  Chares,  indeed,
differed  from  the  others  in  conduct  and  character,  but  was
nevertheless  both  distinguished  and  powerful  at  Athens.

*  A  qmbu8  mctgnas  prcsdaa  AgMaua  rex  eorwm,  fadebat.']  Attempts  to
interpret  this  passage  have  much  exercised  the  ingenuity  of  the
learned.  Heusinger  would  have  d  qutbtLS  to  signify  "  on  whose  side,'*
or  the  same  as  pro  quibtis,  but  this  Van  Staveren  justly  rejects,  and  I,
as  well  as  he  and  Schmieder,  doubt  whether  pro  cdiquo  prcedam  fcbcere
can  be  regarded  as  good  Latin.  .  .  .  For  myself,  I  know  not  what  to
make  of  the  passage,  imless  we  receive  the  cautious  interpretation  of
Harles,  Ithius,  and  Bremi,  who  understand  prcedam  in  a  lai^e  or  meta-
phorical sense  for  gamj  presents,  or  a  large  sum  of  money,  which
Agesilaus  either  received  from  the  Egyptians  by  agreement,  or  exacted
from  them,  so  that  It  might  not  improperly  be  regarded  as  prceda.
Concerning  the  signification  of  this  word,  see  Heyne  ad  Tibull.  ii.  3,
ZS,— Fischer.


TIMOTHEUS.  363

IV.  Chabrias  lost  his  life  in  the  Social  war,*  in  the  following
manner.  The  Athenians  were  besieging  Chios  ;  Chabrias  was
on  board  the  fleet  as  a  private  man,  but  had  more  influence
than  all  who  were  in  command ;  and  the  soldiers  looked  up
to  him  more  than  to  those  who  were  over  them.  This  cir-
cumstance hastened  his  death ;  for  while  he  was  anxious  to
be  the  first  to  enter  the  harbour,  and  ordered  the  captain  to
steer  the  vessel  towards  it,  he  was  the  occasion  of  his  own
death,  since,  after  he  had  made  his  way  into  it,  the  other
ships  did  not  follow.  Upon  which,  being  surrounded  by  a
body  of  the  enemy,  his  ship,  while  he  was  fighting  with  the
utmost  bravery,  was  struck  with  the  beak  of  one  of  the  enemy's
vessels,  and  began  to  sink.  Though  he  might  have  escaped
from  the  danger,  if  he  had  cast  himself  into  the  sea,  for  tlie
fleet  of  the  Athenians  was  at  hand  to  take  him  up  as  he
swam,  he  chose  rather  to  die,  than  to  throw  away  his  arms
and  abandon  the  vessel  in  which  he  had  sailed.  The  others
would  not  act  in  a  similar  manner,  but  gained  a  place  of
safety  by  swimming.  He,  on  the  other  hand,  thinking  an
honourable  death  preferable  to  a  dishonourable  life,  was  killed
with  the  weapons  of  the  enemy,  while  he  was  fighting  hand  to
hand  with  them.


XIIL  TIMOTHEUS.


The  merits  and  acts  of  Timotheus,  I. — ^A  statue  erected  to  him  on  his
victory  over  the  LacedsBmonians,  II. — Is  appointed,  at  an  advanced
age,  as  an  adviser  to  Menestheus ;  is  accused  by  Chares,  and  con-
demned, III. — His  son  Conon  obliged  to  repair  the  walls  of
Athens ;  attachment  of  Jason  to  Timotheus,  XY.

I.  Timotheus,  the  son  of  Conon,  a  native  of  Athens,  in-
creased the  glory  which  he  inherited  from  his  father  by  many
excellent  qualities  of  his  own;  for  he  was  eloquent,  active,
persevering,  skilled  in  military  affairs,  and  not  less  so  in
managing  those  of  the  state.  Many  honourable  actions  of  his
are  recorded,  the  following  are  the  most  famous.  He  subdued
the  Olynthians  and  Byzantians  by  force  of  arms ;  he  took
Samos,  on  the  siege  of  which,  in  a  previous  war,  the  Athenians

*  See  Life  of  Iphicrates,  c.  3.


364  CORNELIUS  NEPOS.

had  spent  twelve  hundred  talents.  This  sum  he  restored  •
to  the  people  without  any  expense  to  them  ;  for  he  carried  on
a  war  against  Cotys,f  and  thence  brought  twelve  hundred
talents'  worth  of  spoil  into  the  public  treasury.  He  relieved
Cyzicus  X  froDi  a  siege ;  he  went  with  Agesilaus  to  the  assistance
of  Ariobarzanes ;  §  but  while  the  Lacedsemonians  received
ready  money  from  him  in  requital,  he  chose  rather  to  have
his  countrymen  enriched  with  lands  and  towns,  than  to  take
that  of  which  he  himself  might  carry  a  share  to  his  own  home;
and  he  accordingly  received  from  him  Crithote  ||  and  Sestos.

II.  Being  made  commander  of  the  fleet,  and  sailing  roimd
the  Peloponnesus,  he  laid  waste  Laconia,  and  defeated  its
naval  force.  He  also  reduced  Corcyra  under  the  power  of
the  Athenians,  and  attached  to  them,  as  allies,  the  Epirots,
the  Athamanians,  the  Chaonians,  and  all  those  nations  which
lie  on  the  sea.^  After  this  occurrence,  the  Lacedaemonians
desisted  from  the  protracted  struggle,  and  yielded,  of  their
own  accord,  the  sovereignty  at  sea  to  the  Athenians,  making
peace  upon  these  terms,  "that  the  Athenians  should  be
commanders  by  sea."  This  victory  gave  so  much  delight  to
the  Athenians,  that  altars  were  then  first  publicly  erected  to
Peace,  and  a.  pulvinar**  decreed  to  that  goddess.  And  that
the  remembrance  of  this  glorious  action  might  be  preserved,
they  raised  a  statue  to  Timotheus  in  the  forum  at  the  public

*  Id — restituU.']  Many  editions,  for  id,  have  hanCf  sc.  pecwniamf  but
"  idf*  says  Bos,  "  for  a/rgentum  or  argenti  pondiis,  ia  perfectly  correct."

+  A  prince  of  Thrace. Comp.  Iphic.  c.  3.

i  A  strong  city  of  the  Propontis,  on  an  island  of  the  same  name.
It  was  besieged  on  this  occasion,  as  Mitford  supposes,  by  a  force  sent
thither  by  Epaminondas,  who  was  endeayouring  to  make  Thebes  a
naval  power  to  rival  Athens.

§  Satrap  of  Phrygia,  who  had  revolted  from  Artaxerxes.  "This
war  is  mentioned  by  Demosthenes  de  Rhodior.  Libertate." — Fischer,

li  A  city  on  the  Hellespont,  in  the  Thracian  Chersonese,  mentioned
by  Scylax,  Stephanus  de  Urb.,  Strabo,  and  Pliny.  The  introduction
of  the  name  of  this  city  into  the  text  is  due  to  Gebhard.  Previously
the  common  reading  was  Ericthonem,  of  which  nobody  knew  what  to
make.

^  The  Ionian  Sea.

**  A  pvlvirms  or  pvlvmar  was  a  cushion,  pillow,  or  bolster,  and  to
support  the  arm  or  side  of  those  who  reclined  on  couches,  like  the
bolsters  on  sofas  in  the  present  day.  Puhinar  was  afterwards  used
for  the  entire  couch,  on  which  the  statues  of  the  gods  were  placed  on
solemn  occasions,  as  in  the  Boman  lectistemia.


TIMOTHEUS.  365

expense.  Such  an  honour,  that,  after  the  people  had  erected
a  statue  to  the  father,  they  should  also  present  one  to  the  son,
happened,  down  to  that  period,  to  him  alone.  Thus  the  new
statue  of  the  son,  placed  close  hy  the  other,  revived  old
recollections  of  the  father.

III.  When  he  was  at  an  advanced  age,  and  had  ceased  to
hold  any  oflBice,  the  Athenians  began  to  be  pressed  with  war  on
every  side.  Samos  had  revolted;  the  Hellespont*  had
deserted  them;  Philip  of  Macedon,  then  very  powerful,  was
making  many  eiForts ;  and  in  Chares,t  who  had  been  opposed
to  him,  there  was  not  thought  to  be  sufficient  defence.
Menestheus,  the  son  of  Iphicrates,  and  son-in-law  of  Timotheus,
was  in  consequence  made  commander,  and  a  decree  was  passed
that  he  should  proceed  to  take  the  management  of  the  war.
These  two  persons,  his  father  and  father-in-law,  men  eminent
in  experience  and  wisdom,  were  appointed  to  give  him  advice,  J
for  there  was  such  force  of  character  in  them,  that  great  hopes
were  entertained  that  what  had  been  lost  might  be  recovered  by
their  means.  When  they  had  set  out  for  Samos ;  and  Chares,
having  heard  of  their  approach,  [was  also  proceeding  thither
with  his  force,  lest  anything  should  appear  to  be  done  in  his
absence,  it  happened  that,  as  they  drew  near  the  island,  a  great
storm  arose,  which  the  two  veteran  commanders,  thinking  it
expedient  to  avoid,  checked  the  progress  of  their  fleet.  §  But
Chares,  taking  a  rash  course,  would  not  submit  to  the  advice  of
his  elders,  but,  as  if  success  depended  on  his  own  vessel,
pushed  his  way  for  the  point  to  which  he  had  been  steering,  and
sent  orders  to  Timotheus  and  Iphicrates  to  follow  him  thither.
But  having  subsequently  mis-managed  the  affair,  and  lost
several  ships,  he  returned  to  the  same  place ||  from  which  he
had  come,  and  despatched  a  letter  to  the  government  at  Athens,
saying  that  it  would  have  been  easy  for  hiin  to  take  Samos,  if

*  That  is,  the  cities  on  the  Hellespont.

+  Qui  opposUus  Chares  qnwrn  esset,  non  satis  in  eo  prcesidii  ptUahcUtMr.']
"  To  whom,  when  Chares  had  been  opposed,  there  was  not  thought  to
be  sufficient  defence  in  him.*'  Chares  was  a  vain  and  ignorant  braggart.
See  Diod.  Sic.  xvi.  86.

t  In  c(msiUum.']  The  words  qtuyrvm  consiUo  rUeretur,  which  occur  a
little  below,  are  not  translated,  as  they  appear,  in  the  judgment  of
Bos  and  others,  to  be  a  mere  interpolation.

§  Classem  suppresserunt.}  Probably  that  they  might  not  be  driven
on  shore.

]|  It  does  not  appear  what  place  this  was. ' '


I.


366  CORNELIUS  NEPOS.

he  had  not  been  left  unsupported  by  Timotheus  and  Iphicrates.
On  this  charge  they  were  impeached.  The  people,  violent,
suspicious,  fickle,  and  unfavourable  to  them,  recalled  them
home  ;  and  they  were  brought  to  trial  for  treason.  On  this
charge  Timotheus  was  found  guilty,  and  his  fine  was  fixed  at  a
hundred  talents;  when,  compelled  by  the  hatred  of  an
ungrateful  people,  he  sought  a  refuge  at  Chalcis.

IV.  After  his  death,  when  the  people  had  repented  of  the
sentence  passed  upon  him,  they  took  off  nine-tenths  of  the  fine,
and  ordered  that  his  son  Con  on  should  give  ten  talents  to
repair  a  certain  portion  of  the  wall.  In  this  occurrence  was
seen  the  changeableness  of  fortune;  for  the  grandson  was
obliged,  to  the  great  scandal  of  his  family,  to  repair,  out  of  his
own  estate,  the  same  walls  which  his  grandfather  Conon  had
rebuilt  with  the  spoil  taken  from  the  enemy.

Of  the  temperate  and  judicious  life  of  Timotheus,  though  we
could  produce  a  great  many  proofs,  we  will  be  content  with  one,
from,  which  it  may  be  easily  conjectured  how  dear  he  was  to  his
friends.  When  he  was  brought  to  trial,  while  quite  a  young
man,  at  Athens,  not  only  his  friends,  and  others  connected
with  him  by  ties  of  private  hospitaHty,  came  to  give  him  their
support,  but  among  them  also  the  tyrant  Jason,*  who  at  that
time  was  the  most  powerful  of  all  men.  Jason,  though  he  did
not  think  himself  safe  in  his  own  country  without  guards,  came
to  Athens  unattended,  having  such  value  for  his  guest-friend,
that  he  chose  to  hazard  his  life  rather  than  not  stand  by
Timotheus  when  he  was*  contending  for  his  honour. f  Yet
Timotheus,  under  an  order  from  the  people,  carried  on  a  war
against  him  afterwards,  for  he  considered  the  lights  of  his
country  more  sacred  than  those  of  hospitality.

This  was  the  last  age  of  Athenian  commanders ;  the  age  of
Iphicrates,  Chabrias,  and  Timotheus;  nor,  after  their  death,
was  there  any  leader  J  worthy  of  remembrance  in  that  city.

*  Jaaon  tyrannua.']  He  was  tyrant  of  Pherse  in  Thessaly,  and  was,  as
it  were,  from  his  great  power,  king  of  the  whole  country.  By  calling
him  the  "  most  powerful  of  all  men/'  omniv/m,  potentissimuSf  Nepos
seems  to  mean  that  he  was  more  powerful  than  any  single  individual
that  had  at  that  time  to  do  with  Greece.

+  De  famd.^  For  his  honour  as  a  citizen.  Conviction,  on  this
occasion,  would  have  subjected  him,  it  appears,  to  loss  of  civil  rights,
or  cLTifiia,

$  Unless  we  except  Phocion,  whose  military  character,  however,  was
not  very  high.


367


XIV.  DATAMES.

Datames,  an  eminent  barbarian  leader;  his  war  with  the  Cardnsii,
I.— He  takes  prisoner  Thyus  of  Paphlagonia,  II.— Presents  Thyus
to  the  king  of  Persia ;  is  appointed  to  command  in  Egypt,  IIL —
Is  directed  to  attack  Aspis  of  Cappadocia,  IV. — Finds  that  the
courtiers  are  plotting  against  him,  and  takes  possession  of  Cappa-
docia and  Paphlagonia,  V. — Loses  his  son  in  a  war  with  the
Pisidians;  defeats  the  Pisidians,  VI. — Is  betrayed  by  his  eldest
son,  VII.— Defeats  the  general  of  the  Persians  who  is  sent
against  him,  VIII. — Escapes  a  plot  formed  against  him  by  the
king,  IX. — Is  deceived  by  Mithridates,  X. — Is  killed  by  him,  XI.

I.  I  NOW  come  to  the  bravest  and  wisest  man  of  all  the
barbarians,  except  the  two  Carthaginians,  Hamilcar  and
Hannibal.

I  shall  say  the  more  concerning  this  general,  because  most
of  his  acts  are  but  little  known,  and  because  the  undertakings
that  were  attended  with  success  to  him,  were  accomplished,
not  by  vastness  of  force,  but  by  sagacity,  in  which  he  sur-
passed all  of  that  age;  and  unless  the  manner  of  his  proceedings
be  set  forth,  his  merits  cannot  be  fully  understood.

Datames,  son  of  a  father  named  Camissares,  a  Carian  by
nation,  and  of  a  mother  a  native  of  Scythia,  served  first  of  all
among  the  soldiers  who  were  guards  of  the  palace  to  Artax-
erxes.  His  father  Camissares,  having  been  found  undaunted
in  fight,  active  in  command,  and  faithful  on  many  occasions  to
the  king,  was  granted  as  a  province  that  portion  of  Cilicia
which  borders  on  Cappadocia,  and  which  the  Leucosyrians
inhabit

Datames  first  showed  what  sort  of  man  he  was,  when
engaged  in  military  service,  in  the  war  which  the  king  carried
on  against  the  Cardusii ;  for  in  this  enterprise,  after  several
thousands  of  the  king's  troops  were  killed,  his  exertions  proved
of  great  value.  Hence  it  happened  that,  as  Camissares  lost
his  life  in  the  war,  his  father  s  province  was  conferred  upon
him.

II.  He  distinguished  himself  by  equal  valour  when  Auto-
phradates,  by  the  king's  order,  made  war  upon  those  who  had
revolted ;  for  the  enemy,  even  after  they  had  entered  the
camp,  were  put  to  flight  by  his  efforts,  and  the  rest  of  the
king's  army  was  saved.  In  consequence  of  this  success,  he
began  to  be  appointed  over  more  important  affairs. At  that


368  CORNELIUS  NEPOS.

time  Thyus  was  prince  of  Paphlagonia,  a  man  of  ancient
family,  descended  from  that  Pylaemenes  whom  Homer  states
to  have  been  killed  by  Patroclus*  in  the  Trojan  war.  This
prince  paid  no  respect  to  the  king's  commands.  The  king,  in
consequence,  determined  to  make  war  upon  him,  and  gave
the  command  of  the  enterprise  to  Datames,  who  was  a  near
relative  of  the  Paphlagonian,  for  they  were  sons  of  a  brother
and  a  sister.  Datames,  on  this  account,  was  desirous,  in  the
first  place,  to  try  every  means  to  bring  back  his  kinsman  to
his  duty  without  having  recourse  to  arms.  But  going  to
confer  with  him  without  a  guard,  as  he  apprehended  no
treachery  from  a  friend,  he  almost  lost  his  life,  for  Thyus  had
resolved  to  assassinate  him  secretly.  Datames  was  however
accompanied  by  his  mother,  the  aunt  of  the  Paphlagonian,  who
discovered  what  was  going 'on,  and  gave  her  son  warning  of  it.
Datames  escaped  the  danger  by  flight,  and  declared  open  war
against  Thyus,  in  which,  though  he  was  deserted  by  Ario-
barzanes,  the  satrap  of  Lydia,  Ionia,  and  all  Phrygia,  he
nevertheless  vigorously  persevered,  and  succeeded  in  taking
Thyus  alive  with  his  wife  and  children.

III.  He  then  used  his  utmost  efforts  that  the  news  of  Ids
success  might  not  reach  the  king  before  him,  and  thus,  while
all  were  still  ignorant  of  it,  he  arrived  at  the  place  where  the
king  was  encamped,  and  the  day  after  arrayed  Thyus,  a  man
of  huge  stature,  and  frightful  aspect,  being  of  a  black  com-
plexion, and  having  long  hair  and  a  long  beard,  in  a  splendid
robe  such  as  the  king's  satraps  used  to  wear.  He  adorned
him  also  with  a  chain  and  bracelets  of  gold,  and  other  royal
ornaments,  while  he  himself  was  dressed  in  a  coarse  thick
cloak,t  and  rough  coat,  having  a  hunter's  cap  upon  his  head,
a  club  in  his  right  hand,  and  in  his  left  a  chain,  with  which
he  drove  Thyus  secured  before  him,  as  if  he  were  bringing
along  a  wild  beast  that  he  had  taken.  While  the  people  were
all  gazing  at  him,  on  account  of  the  strangeness  of  his  attire,
and  his  person  being  unknown  to  them,  and  a  great  crowd

•  Pylsemenea  was  not  killed  by  Patroclus,  but  by  Menelaus ;  Horn,
n.  V.  576.

t  Agresti  dupUcl  amictilo.]  Called  duplex  because  it  was  thick  and
stout,  woven  of  thread  of  a  double  thickness ;  or  because  it  was  made
of  cloth  doubled.  The  Greeks  called  it  xXalva  diwXrj. — Fischer.  A
modem  annotator  thinks  that  duplici  refers  to  the  "  folding"  of  the
cloak  as  it  was  worn,  not  to  the  "  texture  1 "


BATAMBS.  369

was  in  consequence  gathered  roand  him,  it  happened  that
there  was  somebody  in  it  who  knew  Thyus,  and  went  off  to
tell  the  king,  The  king  at  first  did  not  believe  the  account,
and  therefore  sent  Phamabazus  to  make  inquiry.  Learning
from  him  what  had  been  done,  he  ordered  Datames  to  be
instantly  admitted,  being  extremely  delighted  both  with  his
success  and  the  dress  of  his  captive,  rejoicing  especially  that
that  eminent  prince  had  fallen  into  his  hands  when  he  scarcely
expected  it.  He  therefore  sent  Datames,  after  bestowing
magnificent  presents  upon  him,  to  the  army  which  was  then
assembling,  under  the  command  of  Phamabazus  and  Tithraus-
tes,  to  make  war  upon  Egypt,  and  directed  that  he  should
have  equal  authority  with  them.  But  as  the  king  afterwards
recalled  Phamabazus,  the  chief  direction  of  the  war  was  com-
mitted to  Datames.

IV.  As  he  was  raising  an  army  with  the  utmost  diligence,
and  preparing  to  set  out  for  Egypt,  a  letter  was  unexpectedly
sent  him  by  the  king,  desiring  him  to  attack  Aspis,  who  then
held  Cataonia,  a  country  which  lies  above  Cilicia,  and  borders
on  Cappadocia-  Aspis,  occupying  a  woody  country,  defended
with  fortresses,  not  only  refused  to  obey  the  king's  orders,  but
ravaged  the  neighbouring  provinces,  and  intercepted  what-
ever was  being  conveyed  to  the  king.  Datames,  though  he
was  far  distant  from  those  parts,  and  was  drawn  off  from  a
greater  matter,  yet  thought  it  necessary  to  yield  to  the  king's
wish.  He  therefore  went  on  board  a  ship  with  a  few  brave
followers,  thinking  (what  really  happened)  that  he  would
more  easily  overcome  him,  when  unaware  of  his  approach
and  unprepared,  than  when  ready  to  meet  him,  though  with
ever  so  great  an  army.  Sailing  in  this  vessel  to  the  coast  of
Cilicia,  landing  there,  and  marching  day  and  night,  he  passed
Moimt  Taurus,  and  arrived  at  the  part  to  which  he  had
directed  his  course.  He  inquired  where  Aspis  was,  and
learned  that  he  was  not  far  off,  and  was  gone  to  hunt.
While  he  was  watching  for  his  return,  the  cause  of  his
coming  became  known,  and  Aspis  prepared  the  Pisidians,  and
the  attendants  that  he  had  vrith  him,  to  offer  resistance.
When  Datames  heard  this,  he  took  up  his  arms,  and  ordered
his  men  to  follow  him  ;  he  himself,  setting  spurs  to  his  horse,
rode  on  to  meet  the  enemy,  Aspis,  seeing  him,  from  a
distance,  advancing  upon  him,  was  struck  with  fear,  and,  being

BB


870  COBNEUUS  KEPOS.

deterred  from  his  resolution  to  resist,  delivered  himself  up.
Datames  consigned  him  in  chains  to  Mithridates,  to  be  con-
ducted to  the  king.

V.  While  these  occurrences  were  passing,  Artaxerxes,  re-
flecting from  how  important  a  war,  and  to  how  inconsiderable
an  enterprize,  he  had  sent  the  best  of  his  generals,  blamed
himself  for  what  he  had  done,  and  sent  a  messenger  to  the
troops  at  Ace  (not  supposing  that  Datames  had  yet  set  out),  to
tell  him  not  to  quit  the  army.  But  before  this  messenger
arrived  at  the  place  to  which  he  was  sent,  he  met  upon  the  loaud
the  party  that  were  leading  Aspis.

Though  Datames,  by  t\us  celerity,  gained  great  favour  frora
the  king,  he  incurred  no  less  dislike  on  the  part  of  the  courtiers,
because  they  saw  that  he  alone  was  more  valued  than  all  of
them;  and  on  this  account  they  all  conspired  to  ruin  him.
Pandates,  the  keeper  of  the  king's  treasury,  a  friend  to
Datames,  sent  him  an  account  of  this  state  of  things  in  writing,
in  which  he  told  him  that  "  he  would  be  in  great  peril  if  any
ill-success  should  fall  out  while  he  commanded  in  Egypt,  for
such  was  the  practice  of  kings,  that  they  attributed  adverse
occurrences  to  other  men,  but  prosperous  ones  to  their  own
good  fortune;  and  hence  it  happened  that  they  were  easily
inclined  to  the  ruin  of  those  under  whose  conduct  affairs  were
said  to  have  been  ill-managed ;  and  that  he  would  be  in  so  much
the  greater  danger  as  he  had  those  for  his  bitterest  enemies  to
whom  the  king  chiefly  gave  ear."  Datames,  having  read  this
letter,  after  he  had  arrived  at  the  army  at  Ace,  resolved,  as  he
was  aware  that  what  was  written  was  true,  to  leave  the  king's
service.  He  did  nothing,  however,  that  was  unworthy  of  his
honour ;  for  he  appointed  Mandrocles  of  Magnesia  to  command
the  army,  while  he  himself  went  off  with  his  adherents'  into
Cappadocia,  and  took  possession  of  Paphlagonia,  that  bordered
upon  it,  concealing  what  his  feelings  were  towards  the  king.
He  then  privately  made  a  league  with  Ariobarzanes,  raised  a
force,  and  assigned  the  fortified  towns  to  be  defended  by  his  own
troops.

VI.  But  these  proceedings,  from  its  being  winter,  went  on
with  but  little  success.  He  heard  that  the  Pisidians  were
raising  some  forces  to  oppose  him,  and  sent  his  son  Aridaeus
with  a  detachment  against  them.  The  young  man  fell  in  battle,
and  the  fiEither  marched  away  to  the  scene  of  his  death  with  but


BATAMES.  87)

a  small  number  of  followers,  concealing  how  great  a  loss  lie  bad
sustained,  for  he  wished  to  reach  the  enemy  before  the  report
of  his  ill-success  should  become  known  to  his  men,  lest  the
spirits  of  the  soldiers  should  be  depressed  by  hearing  of  the
death  of  his  son.  He  arrived  at  the  spot  to  which  he  had
directed  his  course,  and  pitched  his  camp  in  such  a  position
that  he  could  neither  be  surrounded  by  the  superior  number  of
the  enemy,  nor  be  hindered  from  keeping  his  forces  always  '
ready  to  engage.  There  was  with  him  Mithrobarzanes,  his
father-in-law,  commander  of  the  cavalry,  who,  despairing  of  the
state  of  his  son-in-law's  affairs,  went  over  to  the  enemy.  When
Datames  heard  this,  he  was  sensible  that  if  it  should  go  abroad
among  the  multitude  that  he  was  deserted  by  a  man  so
intimately  connected  with  him,  it  would  happen  that  others
would  follow  his  example.  He  therefore  spread  a  report
throughout  the  camp  that  '*  Mithrobarzanes  had  gone  off  as  a
deserter  by  his  direction,  in  order  that,  being  received  as  such,
he  might  the  more  easily  spread  destruction  among  the  enemy.
It  was  not  right  therefore,"  he  added,  "  that  he  should  be  left
unsupported,  but  that  they  ought  all  to  follow  without  delay,
and,  if  they  did  so  with  spirit,  the  consequence  would  be  that
their  foes  would  be  unable  to  resist,  as  they  would  be  cut  to
pieces  within  their  ramparts  and  without."  This  exhortation
being  well  received,  he  led  forth  his  troops,  pursued  Mithro-
barzanes, and,  almost  at  the  moment  that  the  latter  was  joining
the  enemy,*  gave  orders,  for  an  attack.  The  Pisidians,  sur-
prised by  this  new  movement,  were  led  to  believe  that  the
deserters  were  acting  with  bad  faith,  and  by  arrangement  with
Datames,  in  order  that,  when  received  into  tlie  camp,  they
might  do  them  the  greater  mischief ;  they  therefore  attacked
them  first.  The  deserters,  as  they  knew  not  what  was  in
agitation,  or  why  it  took  place,  were  compelled  to  fight  with
those  to  whom  they  had  deserted,  and  to  act  on  the  side  of
those  whom  they  had  quitted ;  and,  as  neither  party  spared

*  Qui  tamtum  quod  ad  hoates  perveneratJ]  This  reading  is  an  emenda-
tion of  Lambinus,  and  it  is  extremely  doubtful  whether  it  ought  to
have  been  so  favourably  regarded  by  Van  Steveren  and  Bos,  who  have
admittecl  It  into  their  texts.  Some  of  the  manuscripts  have  qui  dum
ad  hostes  pervenerat.  Heusinger  thinks  we  might  read  tcmtvm  qui  dum,
or  qui  tantum  dum,  tantum  dum  being  a  form  of  expression  similar  to
vixdum,  nondum.  The  Ed.  Ultraject.  has  qui  tantum  nan  ad,  &c.  Host
of  the  older  common  editionB  have  qui  nondum  ad,  &c.

BBS


37^  OORNBLIUS  NEFOS.

them,  thej  were  quickly  cut  to  pieces.  Datames  tben  set  upon
the  rest  of  the  PiiBidians  who  offered  resistance,  repelled  them
at  the  first  onset,  pursued  them  as  thej  fled,  killed  a  great
numher  of  them,  and  captured  their  camp.  By  this  stratagena.
he  at  once  hoth  cut  off  the  traitors,  and  overthrew  the  enemy,
and  turned  to  his  preservation  what  had  heen  contrived  for  his
destruction.  We  have  nowhere  read,  on  the  part  of  any
commander,  any  device  more  ingeniously  conceived  than  this,
or  more  promptly  executed.

VII.  Yet  from  such  a  man  as  this  his  eldest  son  Scismas
deserted,  and  went  over  to  the  king,  carrying  intelligence  of
his  father  s  defection.  Artaxerxes,  being  startled  at  Uiis  news
(for  he  was  aware  that  he  should  have  to  do  with  a  brave  and
active  man,  who,  when  he  had  conceived  a  project,  had  courage
to  execute  it,  and  was  accustomed  to  think  before  he  attempted
to  act),  despatched  Autophradates  into  Cappadocia.  To  pre-
vent this  general  from  entering  the  country,  Datames  endea-
voured to  be  the  first  to  secure  a  forest,  in  which  the  Gate  of
Cilicia*  is  situate.  But  he  was  unable  to  collect  his  troops
with  sufficient  expedition,  and  being  obliged  to  desist  from  his
attempt,  he  took  up,  with  the  force  which  he  had  got  together,
a  position  of  such  a  nature,  that  he  could  neither  be  sur-
rounded by  the  enemy,  nor  could  the  enemy  pass  beyond  him
without  being  incommoded  by  difficulties  on  both  sides ;  while,
if  he  wished  to  engage  with  them,  the  numbers  of  his  oppo-
nent^could  not  greatly  damage  his  own  smaller  force.

Yxll.  Autophradates,  though  he  was  aware  of  these  circum-
stances, yet  thought  it  better  to  fight  than  to  retreat  with  so
large .  an  army,  or  to  continue  inactive  so  long  in  one  place.
He  had  twenty  thousand  barbarian  cavalry,  a  hundred  thou-
sand infantry,  whom  they  call  Cardaces,t  and  three  thousand
slingers  of  ihe  same  class.  He  had  besides  eight  thousand
Gappadocians,  ten  thousand  Armenians,  five  thousand  Paphla-
gonians,  ten  thousand  Phrygians,  five  thousand  Lydians,
about  three  thousand  Aspendians  and  Pisidians,  two  thousand
Gilicians,  as  many  Captianians,:(  three  thousand  hired  men

*  CilincB  portcB,]  A  pass  so  called.  ^

+  A  body  of  soldiery  among  the  Persians,  mentioned  by  Strabo,

Plutarch,  Arrian,  Pausanias,  and  others. Hesychius  thinks^  that  they

had  their  name  from  some  place  or  tribe.
t  Captiawn'vm,}  A  people  unknown  to  geogn^hers. Schottus  Bug<


DATAHES.  878

from  Greece,  and  a  very  large  number  of  light-armed  troops.
Against  this  force  all  Datames's  hopes  rested  on  himself  and  the
nature  of  his  ground,  for  he  had  not  the  twentieth  part  of  his
enemy's  numbers.  Trusting  to  himself  and  his  position,*
therefore,  he  brought  on  a  battle,  and  cut  off  many  thousands
of  the  enemy,  while  there  fell  of  his  own  army  not  more  than
a  thousand  men ;  on  which  account  he  erected  a  trophy  the
next  day  on  the  spot  where  they  had  fought  the  day  before.
When  he  had  moved  his  camp  from  thence,  and  always,
though  inferior  in  forces,  came  off  victorious  in  every  battle
{for  he  never  engaged  but  when  he  had  confined  his  adver-
saries in  some  defile,  an  advantage  which  oft«n  happened  to
one  acquainted  with  the  ground  and  taking  his  measures  with
skill),  Autophradates,  seeing  that  the  war  was  protracted  with
more  loss  to  the  king  than  to  the  enemy,  exhorted  Datames  to
peace  and  friendship,t  so  that  he  might  again  be  received  into
favour  with  the  king.  Datames,  though  he  saw  that  peace
would  not  be  faithfully  kept,  nevertheless  accepted  the  offer  of
it,  and  said  that  "he  would  send  deputies  to  Artaxerxes."
Thus  the  war,  which  the  king  had  undertaken  against  Data-
mes, was  ended ;  and  Autophradates  retired  into  Phrygia.

IX.  But  the  king,  as  he  had  conceived  an  implacable  hatred
to  Datames,  endeavoured,  when  he  found  that  he  could  not  be
overcome  in  the  field,  to  cut  him  off  by  underhand  artifices ;
but  most  of  these  he  eluded.  For  instance,  when  it  was
told  him  that  some,  who  were  reckoned  in  the  number  of  his
friends,  were  laying  a  plot  for  him  (concerning  whom,  as
their  enemies  were  the  informers,  he  thought  that  the  inti-
mation was  neither  entirely  to  be  believed  nor  utterly  disre-
garded), he  resolved  to  make  trial  whether  what  had  been  told
him  was  true  or  false.  He  accordingly  went  forward  on  the
road  on  which  they  had  stated  that  an  ambush  would  be  laid
for  him ;  but  he  selected  a  man  closely  resembling  himself  in

gested  that  we  should  read,  with  a  slight  alteration,  Caapianorumy
people  from  the  borders  of  the  Caspian  sea. — Bo8.  Bos,"on  the  whole,
approves  this  suggestion.

*  Quifms  fretus.l  I  have  given  the  guihus  that  sense  which  it  evi-
dently requires.

t  Peace  and  friendship  with  himself,  preparatory  to  his  being
received  into  favour  by  the  king.  This  is  Nipperdey*s  explanation.
Other  editors  have  merely  complained  of  the  apparent  tautology  in
the  passage.


374  OOBNBLIUS  NEPOS.

person  and  stature,  gave  him  his  own  attire,  and  ordered  him
to  ride  on  in  that  part  of  the  line  'where  he  himself  had
heen  accustomed  to  go,  -while  Datames  himself,  in  the  equip-
ments and  dress  of  a  common  soldier,  prepared  to  march
among  his  own  body-guard.  The  men  in  ambuscade,  as  soon
as  the  party  reached  die  spot  where  they  were  stationed,  being
deceived  by  the  place  and  dress,  made  an  assault  upon  liim
who  had  been  substituted  for  Datames.  But  Datames  had
previously  directed  those  among  whom  he  was  marching,  to
be  ready  to  do  what  they  should  see  him  do.  He,  as  soon  as
he  saw  the  conspirators  collecting  in  a  body,  hurled  his  darts
amon^  them,  and,  as  all  the  rest  did  the  same,  they  fell  down
dead  before  they  could  reach  him  whom  they  meant  to  attac)^.

X.  Yet  this  man,  crafty  as  he  was,  was  at  last  ensnared  by
a  device  of  Mitbridates,  the  son  of  Ariobarzanes  ;  for  Mithri-
dates  promised  the  king  that  he  would  kill  Datames,  if  the
king  would  allow  him  to  do  with  impunity  whatever  he  wished,
and  would  give  him  a  pledge  to  that  eflfect  with  his  right  hand
after  the  manner  of  the  Persians.  When  he  received  this
pledge  sent  him  by  the  king,*  he  prepared  a  force,  and  though
at  a  distance,  made  a  league  with  Datames,  ravaged  the  king  s
provinces,  stormed  his  fortresses,  and  carried  oflf  a  great  quan-
tity of  spoil,  part  of  which  he  divided  among  his  men,  and
part  he  sent  to  Datames,  putting  into  his  hands,  in  like  manner,
many  strong-holds.  By  pursuing  this  course  for  a  long  time,
he  made  Datames  believe  that  he  had  undertaken  an  everlast-
ing war  against  the  king,  while  notwithstanding  (lest  he  should
raise  in  him  any  suspicion  of  treachery),  he  neither  sought  a
conference  with  him,  nor  showed  any  desire  to  come  into  his
sight.  Thus,  though  keeping  at  a  distance,  he  maintained
friendship  with  him ;  but  so  that  they  seemed  to  be  bound  to
one  another,  not  by  mutual  kindnesses,  but  by  the  common
hatred  which  they  had  conceived  towards  the  king.

XI.  When  he  thought  that  he  had  sufi&ciently  established
this  notion,  he  gave  intimation  to  Datames  that  it  was  time  for
greater  armies  to  be  raised,  and  an  attack  to  be  made  on
the  king  himself;  and  that,  with  reference  to  this  sub-
ject, he  might,  if  he  pleased,  come  to  a  conference  with  him

*  A  rege  miesam.']  These  words  are  wanting  in  some  editions.  The
king  presented  his  right  hand  to  some  person,  in  order  that  that
person  might  present  his  own  to  Mithridates  in  the  king's  name.


EPAMINONBAS.  375

in  any  place  that  he  might  choose. The  proposal  being
accepted,  a  time  was  fixed  for  the  conference,  and  a  place  in
which  they  were  to  meet. To  this  spot  Mithridates  came  some
days  previously,  in  company  with  a  peiBon  in  whom  be  had
the  greatest  confidence,  and  buried  swords  in  several  different
places,  carefully  marking  each  spot. On  the  day  of  the  con-
ference, each  of  them  brought  people  to  examine  the  place,
and  to  search  Datames  and  Mithridates  themselves. They
then  met,  and  after  they  had  spent  some  time  in  conference,
and  parted  in  different  directions,  and  Datames  was  some
distance  off,  Mithridates,  before  he  went  back  to  his  attendants
(lest  he  should  excite  any  suspicion),  returned  to  the  same
place,  and  sat  down,  as  if  he  wished  to  rest  from  weariness,
on  one  of  the  spots  in  which  a  sword  had  been  concealed,
and,  at  the  same  time,  called  back  Datames,  pretending  that
he  had  forgotten  something  at  their  conference. In  the  mean
time  he  drew  out  the  sword  that  was  hid,  and  concealed  it,  un-
sheathed, under  his  garment,  and  observed  to  Datames,  as  he
was  returning,  that  he  had  noticed,  when  going  off,  that  a
certain  place,  which  was  in  sight,  was  suitable  for  pitching  a
camp.  While  he  was  pointing  this  out  with  his  finger,  and  the
other  was  looking  towards  it,  he  ran  him  through,  as  his  back
was  turned,  with  the  sword,  and  put  an  end  to  his  life  before
any  one  could  come  to  his  assistance. Thus  a  man  who  had
gained  the  mastery  over  many  by  pinidence,  over  none  by
treachery,  was  ensnared  by  pretended  friendship.


XV.  EPAMINONDAS.


Remarks  on  the  manners  of  the  Greeks,  I.~  Youth  and  manhood  of
Epaminondas,  II. — Excellencies  of  his  character,  III. — An  in-
stance of  his  freedom  [from  covetousness,  IV. — His  ability  in
speaking,  Y. — ^An  instance  of  his  power  of  persuasion ;  the  battle

^  of  Leuctra,  YI. — His  patriotism;  his  care  for  the  army  and  its
success,  YII. — Is  brought  to  tidal  for  retaining  his  command
longer  than  the  law  allowed;  his  defence  and  acquittal,  YIII. —

^  His  death  at  Mantinea,  IX. — His  apology  for  not  maiTying ;  his
horror  of  civil  bloodshed ;  the  glory  of  Thebes,  X.

I.  Epaminondas  was  the  son  of  Polymnis,  and  was  bom  at
Thebes.  Before  we  proceed  to  write  of  him,  the  following
caution  seems  necessary  to  be  given  to  our  readers ;  that  they


376  CORNELIUS  NEFOa

should  not  confound  the  customs  of  other  nations  with  theii^
own,  or  think  that  those  things  which  appear  unimportant  to
themselves  must  be  equally  so  to  others.  We  know  that  skill
in  music,  according  to  our  habits,  is  foreign  to  the  character  of
any  eminent  personage  ;  and  that  to  dance  is  accounted  dispa-
raging to  the  character;*  while  all  such  accomplishments
among  the  Greeks,  are  regarded  both  as  pleasing  and  as
worthy  of  admiration.

But  as  we  wish  to  draw  a  correct  picture  of  the  habits
and  life  of  Epaminondas,  we  seem  called  upon  to  omit  nothing
that  may  tend  to  illustrate  it.  We  shall  therefore  speak  in
the  first  place  of  his  birth ;  we  shall  then  show  in  what  accom-
plishments, and  by  whom,  he  was  instructed ;  next  we  shall
touch  upon  his  manners  and  intellectual  endowments,  and
whatever  other  points  in  his  character  may  deserve  notice ;
and  lastly  on  his  great  actions,  which  are  more  regarded  by
many  than  all  the  best  qualities  of  the  mind.f

II.  He  was  the  son,  then,  of  the  father  whom  we  named,
and  was  of  an  honourable  family,  though  left  poor  by  his  an-
cestors ;  but  he  was  so  well  educated  that  no  Theban  was
more  so ;  for  he  was  taught  to  play  upon  the  harp,  and  to  sing
to  the  sound  of  its  strings,  by  Dionysius,  who  was  held  in  no
less  honour  among  musicians  than  Damon  or  Lamprus,J  whose
names  are  well  known  ;  to  play  on  the  flutes  §  by  Olympiodo-
rus ;  and  to  dance  by  Calliphron.  For  his  instructor  in
philosophy  he  had  Lysis  |  of  Tarentum,  a  Pythagorean,  to
whom  he  was  so  devoted  that,  young  as  he  was,  he  preferred

*  In  vUiiaponi  ]  "Is  aooounted  among  disparagements,  disgraces,  or
vices.'*

+  A  plimmia  omnium  cmtqpon/antur  virttUibtu.']  "  Are  by  many  pre-
ferred to  the  best  qualities  of  all."  Many  would  rather  hear  of  the
actions  than  of  the  virtues  of  eminent  men.

t  Damon  was  an  Athenian,  mentioned  by  Plutarch  de  Mttsicd,
Plato,  de  Refp,^  lib.  iv.,  and  Athenaeus,  xiv.  11.  Lamprus  is  also  noticed
by  Plutarch  in  the  same  treatise,  by  Plato  in  his  Menexenus,  and  by
Athenseus,  i.  16,  ii  2.  Damon  is  said  to  have  taught  Pericles,  and
Lamprus  Sophocles.

§  TibiU."]  See  the  note  on  this  word  in  the  preface.

II  See  Cic.  de  Orat.  iii.  34 ;  OflF.  i.  4 ;  Diod.  Sic.  lib.  vi.  in  Exc.
Peiresc.  p.  247 ;  Pausanias,  ix.  13  ;  ^lian,  V.  H.  iii.  17 ;  Porphyr.  Vit.
Pythag.  extr. ;  Jamblich.  Vit.  Pythag.  c.  35.  ...  A  letter  of  his  to  a
certain  Hipparchus  is  among  the  Epistles  of  the  Greeks  published  by
Aldus,  and  also  among  the  fragments  of  the  Pythagoreans  added  by
CaMubon  to  Diogenes  Laertiu8.~>J?o«.


\


EPAMINONDAS.  377

the  society  of  a  grave  and  austere  old  man  *  before  that  of  all
those  of  his  own  age ;  nor  did  he  part  with  him  until  he
so  far  excelled  his  fellow  students  in  learning,  that  it  'might
easily  be  perceived  he  would  in  like  manner  excel  them  all
in  other  pursuits.  These  acquirements,  according  to  our
habits,  are  trifling,  and  rather  to  be  despised  ;  f  but  in  Greece,
at  least  in  former  times,  they  were  a  great  subject  for  praise.
After  he  grew  up,  and  began  to  apply  himself  to  gymnastic
exercises,  he  studied  not  so  much  to  increase  the  strength,  as
the  agility,  of  his  body;  for  he  thought  that  strength  *
suited  the  purposes  of  wrestlers,  but  that  agility  con-
duced to  excellence  in  war.  He  used  to  exercise  himself
very  much,  therefore,  in  running  and  wrestling,  as  long  as  J
he  could  grapple,  and  contend  standing,  with  his  adversary.
But  he  spent  most  of  his  labour  on  martial  exercises.

III.  To  the  strength  of  body  thus  acquired  were  added
many  good  qualities  of  the  mind  ;  for  he  was  modest,  prudent,
grave,  wisely  availing  himself  of  opportunities,  skilled  in  war,
brave  in  action,  and  possessed  of  remarkable  courage  ;  he  was
so  great  a  lover  of  truth,  that  he  would  not  tell  a  falsehood
even  in  jest ;  he  was  also  master  of  his  passions,  gentle  in
disposition,  and  patient  to  a  wonderful  degree,  submitting  to
wrong,  not  only  from  the'  people,  but  from  his  own  friends  ;
he  was  a  remarkable  keeper  of  secrets,  a  quality  which  is  some-
times not  less  serviceable  than  to  speak  eloquently ;  and  he  was
an  attentive  listener  to  others,  because  he  thought  that  by  this
means  knowledge  was  most  easily  acquired.  Whenever  he  came
into  a  company,  therefore,  in  which  a  discussion  was  going  on
concerning  government,  or  a  conversation  was  being  held  on  any
point  of  philosophy,  he  never  went  away  till  the  discourse  was
brought  to  its  conclusion.  He  bore  poverty  so  easily,  that  he
received  nothing  from  the  state  but  gloiy.  He  did  not  avail
himself  of  the  means  of  his  fiiends  to  maintain  himself ;  but
he  often  used  his  credit  to  relieve  others,  to  such  a  degree  that

*  Trittem  et  aeverum  aenem  in  fcrniUiarUate  anteposstierit.]  ''He
preferred  a  grave  and  austere  old  man  in  familiarity,"  i.  e.  as  an
associate.

i*  Levia  et  potku  eontenmenda,]  The  study  of  philosophy,  at  least  in
the  time  of  Nepos,  was  not  numbered  by  the  Romans  among  despica-
ble pursuits.

t  Ad  eumjlnem  quoad,  &c.]  Ad  eum  finem,  as  Bos  observes,  is  the
same  as  tuque  ed.


378  CORNELIUS  NEPOS.

it  might  be  thought  all  things  were  in  common  between  him
and  his  friends  ;  for  when  any  one  of  his  countrymen  had  been
taken  by  the  enemy,  or  when  the  marriageable  daughter]  of
a  friend  could  not  be  married  for  want  of  fortune,  he  used  to
call  a  council  of  his  friends,  and  to  prescribe  how  much  each
should  give  according  to  his  means  ;  and  when  he  had  made
up  the  sum  required,  he  brought  the  man  who  wanted  it  to
those  who  contributed,  and  made  them  pay  it  to  the  person
himself,  in  order  that  he,  into  whose  hands  the  sum  passed,
might  know  to  whom  he  was  indebted,  and  how  much  to  each.
IV.  His  indifference  to  money  was  put  to  the  proof  by
Diomedon  of  Cyzicus ;  for  he,  at  the  request  of  Artaxerxes,
had  undertaken  to  bribe  Epaminondas. He  accordingly  came
to  Thebes  with  a  large  sum  in  gold,  and,  by  a  present  of  five
talents, brought over Micythus, a  young  man  for  whom
Epaminondas  had  then  a  great  affection,  to  further  his  views.
Micythus  went  to  Epaminondas,  and  told  him  the  cause  of
Diomedon's  coming. But  Epaminondas,  in  the  presence  of
Diomedon,  said  to  him,  **  There  is  no.  need  of  money  in  the
matter ;  for  if  what  the  king  desires  is  for  the  good  of  the
Thebans,  I  am  ready  to  do  it  for  nothing  ;  but  if  otherwise,  he
has  not  gold  and  silver  enough  to  move  me,  for  I  would  not
accept  the  riches  of  the  whole  world  in  exchange  for  my  love
for  my  country. At  you,  who  have  made  trial  of  me  without
knowing  my  character,  and  have  thought  me  like  yourself,  I  do
not  wonder ;  and  I  forgive  you  ;  but  quit  the  city  at  once,
lest  you  should  corrupt  others  though  you  have  been  unable  to
corrupt  me. You,  Mycithus,  give  Diomedon  his  money  back;
or,  unless  you  do  so  immediately,  I  shall  give  you  up  to  the
magistrates." Diomedon  entreating  that  he  might  be  allowed
to  depart  in  safety,  and  carry  away  with  him  what  he  had
brought, "  That,"  he  replied,  "  I  will  grant  you,  and  not  for
your  sake,  but  for  my  own,  lest  any  one,  if  your  money  should
be  taken  from  you,  should  say  that  what  I  would  not  receive
when  offered  me,  had  come  into  my  possession  after  being
taken  out  of  yours.** Epaminondas  then  asking  Diomedon
"whither  he  wished  to  be  conducted,"  and  Diomedon  having
answered,  **  To  Athens,"  he  gave  him  a  guard  in  order  that  he
might  reach  that  city  in  safety. Nor  did  he,  indeed,  think
that  precaution  sufficient,  but  also  arranged,  with  the  aid  of
Chabrias  the  Athenian,  of  whom  we  have  spoken  above,  that


EPAMINONDAS.  879

he  should  embark  without  molestation.  Of  his  freedom  from
covetousness  this  will  be  a  sufficient  proof.  We  might  indeed
produce  a  great  number ;  but  brevity  must  be  studied,  as  we
have  resolved  to  comprise,  in  this  single  volume,  the  lives  of
several  eminent  men,  whose  biographies  many  writers  before
us  have  related  at  great  length.*

V.  He  was  also  an  able  speaker,  so  that  no  Theban  was  a
match  for  him  in  eloquence  ;  nor  was  his  language  less  pointed
in  biief  replies  than  elegant  in  a  continued  speech.  He  had
f<^  a  traducer,  and  opponent  in  managing  the  government,  a
certain  Meneclidas,  also  a  native  of  Thebes  ,t  a  man  well
skilled  in  speaking,  at  least  for  a  Theban,  for  in  that  people  is
found  more  vigour  of  body  than  of  mind.  He,  seeing  that
Epaminondas  was  distinguished  in  military  afifairs,  used  to
advise  the  Thebans  to  prefer  peace  to  war,  in  order  that  his
services  as  a  general  might  not  be  required.  Epaminondas  in
consequence  said  to  him,  "  You  deceive  your  countrymen  with
words,  in  dissuading  them  from  war,  since  under  the  name  of
peace  you  are  bringing  upon  them  slavery ;  for  peace  is  pro-
cured by  war,  and  they,  accordingly,  who  would  enjoy  it  long,
ought  to  be  trained  to  war.  If  therefore,  my  countrymen,  you
wish  to  be  leaders  of  Greece,  you  must  devote  yourselves  to
the  camp,  not  to  the  palaestra.  "J  When  this  Meneclidas  also
upbraided  him  with  having  no  children,  and  with  not  having
taken  a  wife,  and,  above  aH,  with  presumption  in  thinking
that  he  had  acquired  the  glory  of  Agamemnon  in  war,
"  Forbear,"  he  rejoined,  "  Meneclidas,  to  reproach  me  with  re-
gard to  a  wife,  for  I  would  take  nobody's  advice  on  that  subject
less  willingly  than  yours ;  *'  (for  Meneclidas  lay  under  a  suspi-
cion of  making  too  free  with  other  men's  wives  ;)  *'  and  as  to
supposing  that  I  am  emulous  of  Agamemnon,  you  are  mis-
taken ;  for  he,  with  the  support  of  all  Greece,  hardly  took  one
city  in  ten  years  ;  I,  on  the  contrary,  with  the  force  of  this


*  MuUis  mUlibiM  versuum.]  '*  In  many  thousands  of  verses."  Vertus
was  used  by  the  Roman  as  well  for  a  line  in  prose  as  for  a  line  in
poetry.

f  Indidem  ThehiiJl  That  is,  '^  from  the  same  place,  Thebes."

X  Castris  est  vobia  utendum,  non  palcesird.]  That  is,  you  must  give

your  serious  attention  to  the  one  more  than  to  the  other. You  may

in  the  pcdcestra  inure  yourselves  to  exercise ;  but  you  must  remember

that  your  thoughts  are  to  be  directed  beyond  the  paUuitra  to  the  camp.


380  CORKBLIITS  NEPOS.

one  city  of  ours,  and  in  one  day,  delivered  all  Greece  by
defeating  the  Lacedaemonians."

VI.  When  Epaminondas  went  to  the  public  assembly  of
the  Arcadians,  to  request  them  to  join  in  alliance  with  the
Thebans  and  Argives,  and  Callistratus,  the  ambassador  from
the  Athenians,  who  excelled  all  men  of  that  day  in  eloquence,
begged  of  them,  on  the  other  hand,  rather  to  unite  in  alliance
with  Athens,  and  uttered  many  invectives  against  the  Thebans
and  Argives,  and  among  them  made  this  remark,  "that  the
Arcadians  ought  to  observe  what  sort  of  citizens  each  city  had
produced,  from  whom  they  might  form  a  judgment  of  the  rest ;
for  that  Orestes  and  Alcmaeon,  murderers  of  their  mothers,
were  Argives,  and  that  CEdipus,  who,  when  he  had  killed  his
father,  had  children  by  his  mother,  was  bom  at  Thebes. "
Upon  this,*  Epaminondas,  in  his  reply,  when  he  had  done
speaking  as  to  other  points,  and  had  come  to  those  two  grounds
of  reproach,  said  that  "  he  wondered  at  the  simplicity  of  the
Athenian  rhetorician,  who  did  not  consider  that  those  persons,
to  whom  he  had  alluded,  were  born  innocent,  and  that,  after
having  been  guilty  of  crimes  at  home,  and  having  in  conse-
quence been  banished  from  their  country,  they  had  been
received  by  the  Athenians."  t

But  his  eloquence  shone  most  at  Sparta  (when  he  was
ambassador  before  the  battle  of  Leuctra),  J  where,  when  the
ambassadors  from  all  the  allies  had  met,  Epaminondas,  in  a  full
assembly  of  the  ^embassies,  so  clearly  exposed  the  tyranny  of
the  Lacedaemonians,  that  he  shook  their  power  by  that  speech
not  less  than  by  the  battle  of  Leuctra ;  for  he  was  at  that


*  fftcJ]  Some  read  huic,  "  to  him.*'

i*  The  argument  of  Epaminondas,  in  these  observations,  is  this,  re-
ferring properly  only  to  Orestes  and  CEdipus :  that  they  were  bom,  it
must  be  granted,  the  one  at  Argos,  and  the  other  at  Thebes,  but  that,
aa  they  were  bom  innocent,  neither  of  those  cities  can  be  blamed
merely  for  having  been  their  birth-place ;  after  they  were  polluted  with
crimes,^however,  and  were  in  consequence  expelled  from  their  native
cities,  they  were  received  by  the  Athenians,  who,  by  sheltering  them,
might  be  considered  to  have  become  partakers  in  their  guilt.

X  LegaJti  ante  puffnam  Leiictricam.'\  These  words  are  rejected  by
Longolius,  MagiuiJ,  Lambinus,  and  Schottus,  as  a  gloss  that  has  intruded
itself  from  the  margin  into  the  text.  But  as  they  are  found  in  thd
best  copies,  Bos,  who  cannot  but  suspect  theni|  is  content  with  indud-
ing  them  in  brackets.


EPAMmONBAS  381

time  the  cause  (as  it  afterwards  appeared)  that  they  were  de-
prived of  the  support  of  their  allies.

VII.  That  he  was  of  a  patient  disposition,  and  ready  to
endure  wrongs  from  his  countrymen,  because  he  thought  it  a
species  of  impiety  to  show  resentment  towards  his  country,
there  are  the  following  proofs.  When  the  Thebans,  from
some  feeling  of  displeasure  towards  him,  refused  to  place  him
at  the  -head  of  the  army,*  and  a  leader  was  chosen  that
was  ignorant  of  war,  by  whose  mismanagement  that  great
multitude  of  soldiers  was  brought  to  such  a  condition  that  all
were  alarmed  for  their  safety,  as  they  were  confined  within  a
narrow  space  and  blocked  up  by  the  enemy,  the  energy  of
Epaminondas  began  to  be  in  request  (for  he  was  there  as  a
priyatet  among  the  soldiers),  and  when  they  desired  aid  from
him,  he  showed  no  recollection  of  the  afi&ont  that  had  been
put  upon  him,  but  brought  the  army,  after  releasing  it  from
the  blockade,  safely  home.  Nor  did  he  act  in  this  manner
once  only,  but  often ;  ^  but  the  most  remarkable  instance  was,
when  he  had  led  an  army  into  the  Peloponnesus  against  the
Lacedaemonians,  and  had  two  joined  in  command  with  him,
of  whom  one  was  Pelopidas,  a  man  of  valour  and  activity  ; —
on  this  occasion,  when,  through  the  accusations  of  their
enemies,  they  had  all  fallen  under  the  displeasure  of  their
countrymen,  and  their  commission  was  in  consequence  taken
from  them,  and  other  commanders  came  to  take  their  place,
Epaminondas  did  not  obey  the  order  of  the  people,  and
persuaded  his  colleagues  to  follow  his  example,  continuing  to
prosecute  the  war  which  he  had  undertaken,  for  he  saw  that,
unless  he  did  so,  the  whole  army  would  be  lost; through  the
incautious ness  and^  ignorance  of  its  leaders.  But  there' was
a  law  at  Thebes,  which  punished  any  one  with  death  who
retained  his  command  longer  than  was  legally  appointed.
Epaminondas,  however,  as  he  saw  that  this  law  had  been
made  for  the  pui^pose  of  preserving  the  state,  was  unwilling  to

*  This  was  the  army  that  was  sent  into  Thessalyto  rescue  Pelopidas
firom  Alexander  of  Phere. See  Diod.  Sic.  xv.  71,  72.

i*  He  had  been  accused  of  treachery,  and  the  people  in  consequence
had  taken  from  him  his  Boi«urapx*<<>  ^^^  reduced  him  to  a  private
station. Diod.  Sic.  ibid.

X  Soepim.]  Nepoa  mentions,  however,  only  two  occadioBS ;  and  no
more  are  discoverable  from  other  authors.


382  COBNEUUS  NEPOS.

make  it  contribute  to  its  ruin,  and  continued  to  exercise  his
command  four  month?  longer  than  the  people  had  prescribed.
VIII.  When  they  returned  home,  his  colleagues*  were
impeached  for  this  offence,  and  he  gave  them  leave  to  lay  all
the  blame  upon  him,  and  to  maintain  that  it  was  through  his
means  that  they  did  not  obey  the  law.  They  being  freed
from  danger  by  this  defence,  nobody  thought  that  Epaminondas
would  make  any  reply,  because,  as  was  supposed,  he  would
have  nothing  to  say.  But  he  stood  forward  on  the  trial,
denied  nothing  of  what  his  adversaries  laid  to  his  charge,  and
admitted  the  truth  of  all  that  his  colleagues  had  stated ;  nor
did  he  refuse  to  submit  to  the  penalty  of  the  law ;  but  he  re-
quested of  his  countrymen  one  favour,  namely,  that  they  would
inscribe  in  their  judicial  record  of  the  sentence  passed  upon
him,t  "  Epaminondas  was  punished  by  the  Thebans  with  death,
because  he  obliged  them  to  overthrow  the  Lacedsemonians  at
Leuctra,  whom,  before  he  was  general,  none  of  the  Boeotians
durst  look  upon  in  the  field,  and  because  he  not  only,  by  one
battle,  rescued  Thebes  from  destruction,  but  also  secui'ed  liberty
for  all  Greece,  and  brought  the  power  of  both  people  to  such  a
condition,  that  the  Thebans  attacked  Sparta,  and  the  Lacedae-
monians were  content  if  they  could  save  their  lives  ;  nor  did
he  cease  to  prosecute  the  war,  till,  after  settling  Messene,  J  he
shut  up  Sparta  with  a  close  siege."  When  he  had  said
this,  there  burst  forth  a  laugh  from  aU  present,  with  much
merriment,  and  no  one  of  the  judges  ventured  to  pass  sentence

*  CoHegce  c/iw.]  His  colleagues  and  himself.

+  In  pericvio  «z*o.]  The  word  pei'iculum,  in  this  passage,  greatly  per-
plexed the  old  commentators  ;  no  one  could  ^d  any  satisfactoiy  sense
for  it ;  and  various  conjectures  were  offered  as  to  a  substitute  for  it.
At  last  Gebhard  suggested  that  the  passage  might  be  interpreted
"  Epaminondam  petiisse,  ut  in  actis  illis,  in  quibus  suum  periculum  ad
memoriam  notetur,  talia  inscriberent,"  so  that  periaUuni,  in  his
opinion,  would  be  the  same  as  "  adnotatio  sive  commemoratio  periculi
illius  in  tabulis  publicis,"  the  record  of  his  periculum  in  the  public
registers.  Schoppius,  Verisim.  iv.  18,  went  farther,  and  said  that
pericvltMn  signified  "  libellum  sive  annalem  publicum."  This  interpre-
tation was  adopted  by  Bos  and  Fischer,  and  subsequently  by  Bremi
and  others,  and  is  approved  by  Qesner  in  his  Thesaurus  8vb  voce.
Tzschucke  interprets  it  elogtum  damnoHonis,  or  8cripta  judicii  serUenUcL.

X  Measene  constitutaj]  He  settled  or  built  {(KTict)  Messene,  and
brought  many  colonists  to  it,  says  Diod.  Sic.  xv.  66.  See  Fausan.  ix.
14,  atqiie  (dibu


BPAMINONDAS.  88^

Upon  him. Thus  he  came  off  from  this  trial  for  life  with  the
greatest  glory.

IX.  When,  towards  the  close  of  his  career,  he  was  com-
mander at  Man  tinea,  and,  pressing  very  boldly  upon  the
enemy  with  his  army  in  full  array,  was  recognized  by  the
Lacedaemonians,  they  directed  their  efforts  in  a  body  against
him  alone,  because  they  thought  the  salvation  of  their  country
depended  upon  his  destruction,  nor  did  they  fall  back,  until,
after  shedding  much  blood,  and  killing  many  of  the  enemy,
they  saw  Epaminondas  himself,  while  fighting  most  valiantly,
fall  wounded  with  a  spear  hurled  from  a  distance.  By  his  fall
the  Boeotians  were  somewhat  disheartened ;  yet  they  did  not
quit  the  field,  till  they  had  put  to  flight  those  opposed  to , them.
As  for  Epaminondas  himself,  when  he  found  tliat  he  had
received  a  mortal  wound,  and  also  that  if  he  drew  out  the  iron
head  of  the  dart,  which  had  stuck  in  his  body,  he  would
instantly  die,  he  kept  it  in  until  it  was  told  him  that  "  the
Boeotians  were  victorious."  When  he  heard  these  words,  he
said  "I  have  lived  long  enough;  for  I  die  unconquered."
The  iron  head  being  then  extracted,  he  immediately  died.

X.  He  was  never  manied;  and  when  he  was  blamed  on
this  account  (as  he  would  leave  no  children*)  by  Pelopidas,
who  had  a  son  of  bad  character,  and  who  said  that  he,  in  this
respect,  but  ill  consulted  the  interest  of  his  country,  "  Beware,"
he  replied,  "  lest  you  should  consult  it  worse,  in  being  about
to  leave  behind  you  a  son  of  such  a  reputation.  But  neither
can  I,"  he  added,  "  want  issue ;  for  I  leave  behind  me  a
daughter,  the  battle  of  Leuctra,  that  must  of  necessity  not
only  survive  me,  but  must  be  immortal."

At  the  time  when  the  Theban  exiles,  under  the  leadership
of  Pelopidas,  possessed  themselves  of  Thebes,  and.  expelled
the  garrison  of  the  Lacedaemonians  from  the  citadel,  Epami-
nondas, as  long  as  the  slaughter  of  the  citizens  continued,
confined  himself  to  his  own  house,  for  he  would  neither  defend
the  unworthy,  nor  attack  them,  that  he  might  not  stain  his
hands  with  the  blood  of  his  own  countrymen. But  when  the

*  Qudd  liberos  non  reUnqueret]  These  words,  in  most  editions,  are
placed  lower  down,  after  consvlere  diceret,  where  Lambinus  was  the
first  to  put  them. Bos  suspects  that  they  may  be  altogether  spuriousr


384  OOBNEUUS  KEPOS.

struggle  began  at  the  Cadmea*  mth  the  LacedsBmoniaiis,  he
took  his  stand  among  the  foremost

Of  his  merits  and  his  life  enough  will  have  been  said,  if  I
add  but  this  one  remark,  of  which  none  can  deny  the  truth ;
that  Thebes>  as  well  before  Epaminondas  was  bom,  as  after
his  death,  was  always  subject  to  some  foreign  power, t  but
that,  as  long  as  he  held  the  reigns  of  government,  it  was  the
head  of  all  Greece.  Hence  it  may  be  understood,  that  one
man  was  of  more  efficacy  than  the  whole  people.


XVI.  TELOPIDAS.


Phosbidas  seizes  on  tlie  citadel  of  Thebes;  Pelopidas  banisbed,  I. —
Pelopidas,  with  twelve  followers,  effects  a  return  to  Thebes,  II. —
He  delivers  his  country  from  the  Lacedaemonians,  expelling  their
garrison,  III. — His  acts  in  conjunction  with  Epaminondas,  lY. —
His  contest  with  Alexander  of  Pherse ;  his  death,  Y.

I.  Pelopidas,  of  Thebes,  is  better  known  to  those  acquainted
with  history  than  to  the  multitude.  As  to  his  merits,  I  am  in
doubt  how  I  shall  speak  of  them ;  for  I  fear  that,  if  I  begin  to
give  a  full  account  of  his  actions,  I  may  seem,  not  to  be
relating  his  life,  but  to  be  writing  a  history,  or  that,  if  I  touch
only  on  his  principal  exploits,  it  may  not  clearly  appear  to
those  ignorant  of  Grecian  literature  how  great  a  man  he  was.
I  will  therefore,  as  far  as  I  can,  meet  both  difficulties,  and
provide  against  the  satiety,  as  well  as  for  the  imperfect  know-
ledge, of  my  readers.

Phoebidas,  the  Lacedaemonian,  when  he  was  leading  an  army
(to  01ynthus,J  and  marching  through  the  territory  of  Thebes,§
possessed  himself  (at  the  instigation  of  a  few  of  the  Thebans,

*  Apud  CadmcBam.']  The  citadel  of  Thebes,  said  to  have  been
founded  by  Cadmus.

t  Alieno  paruisae  imperio.]  By  these  words  it  is  not  signified  that
Thebes  was  actually  subject  to  any  other  power,  but  that  it  always
held  a  secondary  place.

t  Phoebidas  was  sent  to  assist  Amyntas,  king  of  Macedonia,  who  was
going  to  besiege  Olynthus  with  the  aid  of  his  allies  the  Lacedaemonians,
because  its  inhabitants  had  refused  to  make  satisfaction  to  him.  See
"Diod.  Sic.  XV.  19. — FUdier.

§  Per  Thebas]  This  is  evidently  the  sense.


FELOPIDAS.  385

who,  the  better  to  withstand  the  opposite  faction,  favoured  the
interest  of  the  Lacedaemonians,)  of  the  citadel  of  Thebes,
which  is  called  the  Cadmea,*  and  this  he  did  of  his  own
private  determination,  not  from  any  public  resolution  of  his
tsountrymen.  For  this  act  the  Lacedaemonians  removed  him
from  his  command  of  the  army,  and  fined  him  a  sum  of  money,
but  did  not  show  the  more  inclination,  on  that  account,  to
restore  the  citadel  to  the  Thebans,  because,  as  enmity  had
arisen  between  them,  they  thought  it  better  that  they
should  be  under  a  check  than  left  at  Hberty;  for,  after  the
Peloponnesian  war  was  ended,  and  Athens  subdued,  they
supposed  that  the  contest  must  be  between  them  and  the
Thebans,  and  that  they  were  the  only  people  who  would
venture  to  make  head  against  them.  With  this  belief  they
committed  the  chief  posts  to  their  own  friends,  while  they
partly  put  to  death,  and  partly  banished,  the  leading  men  of  the
opposite  party ;  and  amongst  them  Pelopidas,  of  whom  we  have
begun  to  write,  was  expelled  from  his  country.

11.  Almost  all  these  exiles  had  betaken  themselves  to
Athens,  not  that  they  might  live  in  idleness,  but  that,  whatever
opportunity  chance  should  first  offer,  they  might  avail  them-
selves of  it  to  regain  their  country. f  As  soon,  therefore,  as  it
seemed  time  for  action,  they,  in  concert  with  those  who  held
similar  views  at  Thebes,  fixed  on  a  day  for  cutting  off  their
enemies  and  delivering  their  country,  and  made  choice  of  that
very  day  on  which  the  chief  magistrates  were  accustomed  to
meet  at  a  banquet  together.  Great  exploits  have  been  often
achieved  with  no  very  numerous  forces,  but  assuredly  never
before  was  so  great  a  power  overthrown  from  so  small  a
beginning.  For,  out  of  those  who  had  been  banished,  twelve
yomig  men  (there  not  being  in  all  more  than  a  hundred  who
were  willing  to  encounter  so  great  a  danger,)  agreed  to  attempt
the  enterprise;  and  by  this  small  number  the  power  of  the
Lacedaemonians  was  overcome ;  for  these  youths  made  war  on
that  occasion,  not  more  upon  the  faction  of  their  adversaries  than
upon  the  Spartans,  who  were  lords  of  Greece,  and  whose

*  See  Epaminondas,  c.  10.

+  Ut  quemque  ex  proximo  locum  fors  ohtvlisset,  eo  pcUriam  recuperare
niterenitir.]  "Opportunity"  seems  to  be  the  sense  of  locvs  in  this
passage,  as  in  Hamilc.  c.  1,  locus  nocendi.  Quem^p/te  is  for  qibemfcumquey
as  Van  Staveren  remarks.

C  C


386  COBNELIUS  NEP03.

imperious  domination,  shaken  by  this  commencement,  was
humbled  not  long  after  in  the  battle  of  Leuctra.

These  twelve,  then,  whose  leader  was  Pelopidas,  quitting
Athens  in  the  day-time,  with  a  view  to  reach  Thebes  when  the
sky  was  obscured  by  evening,  set  out  with  hunting  dogs,  carrying
nets  in  their  hands,  and  in  the  dress  of  countiymen,  in  order
that  they  might  accomplish  their  journey  with  less  suspicion.
Having  arrived  at  the  very  time  that  they  had  desired,  they
proceeded  to  the  house  of  Charon,  by  whom  the  hour  and  day*
had  been  fixed.

III.  Here  I  would  observe  in  passing,  although  the  remark
be  unconnected  with  the  subject  before  us,t  how  great  mischief
excessive  confidence  is  wont  to  produce ;  for  it  soon  came  to  the
ears  of  the  Theban  magistrates  that  some  of  the  exiles  had
entered  the  city,  but  this  intelligence,  being  intent  upon  their
wine  and  luxuries,  they  so  utterly  disregarded,  that  they  did  not
take  the  trouble  even  to  inquire  about  so  important  a  matter.
Another  circumstance  was  added,  too,  which  may  show  their
folly  in  a  more  remarkable  light.  A  letter  was  brought  from
Athens  by  Archias  the  hierophant,  J  to  Archias,  who  then  held
the  chief  post  at  Thebes,  in  which  a  full  account  had  been
written  concerning  the  expedition  of  the  exiles.  This  letter
being  delivered  to  Archias  as  he  was  reclining  at  the  banquet,
he,  thrusting  it  under  the  bolster,  sealed  as  it  was,  said,  "  I  put
off  serious  matters  till  to-morrow."  But  those  revellers,  when
the  night  was  far  advanced,  and  they  were  overeome  ydth  wine,
were  all  put  to  death  by  the  exiles  under  the  command  of
Pelopidas.  Their  object  being  thus  effected,  and  the  common
people  being  summoned  to  take  arms  and  secure  their  liberty,
not  only  those  who  were  in  the  city,  but  also  others  from  all
parts  out  of  the  country,  flocked  together  to  join  them ;  they
then  expelled  the  garrison  of  the  Laced SBmonians  from  the
citadel,  and  delivered  their  country  from  thraldom. The

*  Tempvs  et  dies.]  Charon  had  not  only  settled  the  day,  but  the
time  of  the  day. — Boi.

+  Sfjimctum  ab  re  pontdj]  By  res,  "  the  subject,"  we  must  under-
stand the  life  of  Pelopidas.  Yet  no  apology  was  necessary  for  intro-
ducing the  remark,  as  it  is  extremely  applicable  to  the  enterprise
which  Nepos  is  relating.

$  Hierophante.l  A  hierophantes  was  one  who  understood  and  could
interpret  religious  mysteries.  Archias  was  high-priest  of  the  £leu-
sinian  rites  of  Ceres.


PELOFEDAS.  887"

r

promoters  of  the  seizure  of  the  Cadmea  they  partly  put  to
death,  and  partly  sent  into  exile.

IV.  During  this  period  of  turbulence,  Epaminondas,  as  we
have  already  observed,  remained  quiet,  so  long  as  the  struggle
was  between  fellow-citizens,  in  his  own  house.  The  glory  of
delivering  Thebes,  therefore,  belongs  wholly  to  Felopidas;
almost  all  his  other  honours  were  gained  in  conjunction  with
Epaminondas.  In  the  battle  of  Leuctra,  where  Epaminondas
was  commander-in-chief,  Felopidas  was  leader  of  a  select
body  of  troops,  which  were  the  first  to  bear  down  the  phalanx
of'^e  Spartans.  He  was  present  with  him,  too,  in  all  his
dangers.  When  he  attacked  Sparta,  he  commanded  one  wing
of  the  army;  and,  in  order  that  Messene  might  be  sooner
restored,*  he  went  ambassador  to  Persia.  He  was,  indeed,
the  second  of  the  two  great  personages  at  Thebes,  but  second
only  in  such  a  way  that  he  approached  very  near  to  Epami-
nondas.

v.  Yet  he  had  to  struggle  with  adverse  fortune.  He  lived
in  exile,  as  we  have  shown,  in  the  early  part  of  his  life ;  and,
when  he  sought  to  bring  Thessaly  under  the  power  of  the
Thebans,  and  thought  that  he  was  sufficiently  protected  by  the
law  of  embassies,  which  used  to  be  held  sacred  by  all  nations,
he  was  seized,  together  with  Ismenias,  by  Alexander,  tyrant  of
PhersB,  and  thrown  into  prison.  Epaminondas,  making  war
upon  Alexander,  restored  him  to  liberty.  But  after  this
occurrence,  he  could  never  be  reconciled  in  feeling  to  him  by
whom  he  had  been  unjustly  treated.  He  therefore  persuaded
the  Thebans  to  go  to  the  relief  of  Thessaly,  and  to  expel  its
tyrants.  The  cluef  command  in  the  expedition  being  given  to
him,  and  he  having  gone  thither  with  an  army,  he  did  not
hesitate  to  come  to  a  battle  the  moment  he  saw  the  enemy.
In  the  encounter,  as  soon  as  he  perceived  Alexander,  he
spurred  on  his  horse,  in  a  fever  of  rage,  to  attack  him,  and,
separating  too  iai  from  his  men,  was  killed  by  a  shower  of
darts.  This  happened  when  victory  was  in  his  favour,  for  the
troops  of  the  tyrant  had  already  given  way.  Such  being  the
event,  all  the  cities  of  Thessaly  honoured  PelopidaSi  after  his
death,  with  golden  crowns  and  brazen  statues,  and  presented
his  children  with  a  large  portion  of  land.

*  See  Epaminondas,  o«  8.
C  C  2


388  '


XVII.  ^  AGESILAUS.

Agesilaus  eiectea  Ajng  of  Sparta,  his  brother's  son  being  set  aside,  I. —
His  expedition  to  Asia;  his  strict  observance  of  his  truce  with
Tissaphemes,  IL — He  lays  waste  Phrygia ;  winters  at  Ephesus ;
deceives  Tissaphemes,  III. — Is  recalled  to  defend  his  country ;
defeats  the  Thebans  at  Coronea ;  his  clemency,  IV. — His  success
in  the  Corinthian  war ;  spares  Corinth,  V. — Refuses  to  go  to  the
battle  at  Leuctra ;  saves  Sparta  by  a  stratagem,  YL— Replenishes
the  treasury  of  his  count^,  VII. — His  personal  appearance^  and
mode  of  life ;  his  death  at  the  harbour  of  Menelaus,  YIIL

I.  Agesilaus  the  Lacedaemonian  has  been  praised  not  only
by  other  writers,  but,  above  all,  by  Xenophon,  the  disciple  of
Socrates,  for  he  treated  Xenophon  as  an  intimate  friend.

In  his  early  days  he  had  a  dispute  with  Leotychides,  his
brother's  son,  about  the  throne ;  for  it  was  a  custom  handed
down  among  the  Lacedaemonians  from  their  ancestors,  that  they
should  always  have  two  kings,  in  name  rather  than  power,  of
the  two  families  of  Procles  and  Eurysthenes,  who  were  the
first  kings  of  Sparta,  of  the  progeny  of  Hercules.  It  was  not
lawful  for  a  king  to  be  made  out  of  one  of  these  families
instead  of  the  other ;  each  of  the  two,  therefore,  maintained
its  order 'of  succession.  Eegard  was  had,  in  the  first  place,
to  the  eldest  of  the  sons  of  him  who  died  while  on  the  throne ;
but  if  he  had  left  no  male  issue,  the  choice  then  fell  on  him
who  was  next  of  kin.  King  Agis,  the  brother  of  Agesilaus,
had  recently  died,  and  had  left  a  son  named  Leotychides,
whom,  during  his  life,  he  had  not  acknowledged,  but,  at  his
death,  had  declared  to  be  his.  Leotychides  contended  for  the
royal  dignity  with  his  uncle  Agesilaus,  but  did  not  obtain  what
he  sought,  for  Agesilaus  was  preferred  through  the  interest  of
Lysander,  a  man,  as  we  have  already  stated,  of  a  factious
character,  and  at  that  time  of  great  influence.

II.  Agesilaus,  as  soon  as  he  got  possession  of  the  throne,
solicited  the  Lacedaemonians  to  send  an  army  into  Asia,  and
make  war  upon  the  king  of  Persia,  assuring  them  that  it  was
better  to  fight  in  Asia  £han  in  Europe ;  for  a  rumour  had  gone
abroad  that  Artaxerxes  was  equipping  a  fleet,  and  raising  land
forces,  to  send  into  Greece.  Permission  being  granted  him,
he  exerted  so  much  expedition,  that  he  arrived  in  Asia  with
his  troops  before  the  king's  satraps  knew  that  he  had  set  out ;
hence  it  happened  that  he  surprised  them  all  unprepared,  and


^


AOESILAUS.  889

expecting  nothing  of  the  kind.  But  as  soon  as  Tissaphemes,
who  had  the  chief  authority  among  the  royal  satraps,  heard  of
his  arrival,  he  begged  a  truce  of  the  Spartan,  on  pretence  that
he  would  try  to  effect  an  agreement  between  the  Lacedae-
monians and  the  king,  but  in  reality  to  gain  time  for  collecting
troops ;  and  he  obtained  a  truce  for  three  months.  Each  of
them,  however,  took  an '  oath  to  observe  the  truce  without
fraud;  to  which  engagement  Agesilaus  adhered  with  the
greatest  honour;  but  Tissaphemes,  on  the  other  hand,  did
nothing  but  make  preparations  for  war.  Though  Agesilaus
became  aware  of  his  proceedings,  he  still  kept  his  oath,  and
said  that  "  he  was  a  great  gainer  by  doing  so,  for  Tissaphemes,
by  his  perjury,  both  alienated  men  from  his  interest,  and  made
the  gods  angry  with  him ;  while  he,  by  being  faithful  to  his
obligation,  produced  confidence  among  his  troops,  as  they  felt
that  the  power  of  the  gods  was  on  their  side,  and  that  men
were  rendered  greater  friends  to  them,  because  they  were
accustomed  to  favour  those  whom  they  saw  keeping  faith."

Ill .  When  the  period  of  the  truce  was  expired,  the  bar-
barian, not  doubting  that  as  he  had  many  residences  in  Caria,
and  as  that  province  was  then  thought  by  far  the  richest  in
Asia,  the  enemy  would  direct  their  attacks  on  that  quarter
especially,  assembled  his  whole  force  on  that  side.  But
Agesilaus  turned  into  Phrygia,  and  laid  waste  the  country
before  Tissaphemes  could  make  a  movement  in  any  direction.
After  enriching  his  men  with  abundtmce  of  plunder,  he  led
back  his  army  to  Ephesus  to  winter,  and  erecting  forges  for  arms
there,  made  preparations  for  war  with  great  industry.  That
his  soldiers  might  be  armed  with  greater  care,  too,  and
equipped  with  more  display,  he  proposed  rewards,  with  which
those  were  to  be  presented  whose  efforts  to  that  end  should
be  remarkably  distinguished.  He  pursued  the  same  course
with  regard  to  different  kinds  of  exercises,  so  as  to  honour
with  valuable  gifts  those  who  excelled  others  'in  them.  By
this  means  he  succeeded  in  getting  an  army  most  admirably
accoutred  and  trained.

When  he  thought  it  time  to  draw  his  troops  out  of  winter
quarters,  he  saw  that  if  he  openly  declared  in  what  direction
he  was  going  to  march,  the  enemy  would  not  give  credit  to  his
statement,  but  would  occupy  other  parts  with  their  forces,
not  doubting  that  he  would  do  something  quite  different  from


SQO  COBNELIT78  NEPOS.

what  he  said.  Agesilaua,  accordingly,  giving  out  that  he
would  march  for  Sardis,  Tissaphemes  felt  convinced  that
(jojia.  must  again  he  defended.  When  his.  expectation  deceived
him  in  the  matter,  and  he  found  himself  outwitted  hy  his
adversary's  shrewdness,  he  hastened  to  protect  his  dependants,
hut  too  late,  for,  when  he  arrived^  Agesilaus  had  taken  many
places,  and  secured  abundance  of  spoil.

The  Lacedsemonian  king,  seeing  that  the  enemy  were
superior  to  him  in  cavalry,  never  gave  them  an  opportunity  of
attacking  him  in  the  plains,  but  engaged  them  in  those  parts
in  which  infantry  would  be  of  greater  service.  As  often  as
he  came  to  a  battle,  therefore,  he  routed  forces  of  the  enemy
lar  more  numerous  than  his  own ;  and  he  so  conducted
himself  in  Asia  that  he  was  in  the  judgment  of  every  one
accounted  superior  to  his  opponent.

IV.  While  he  was  thinking  of  marching  into  Persia,  and
attacking  the  king  himself,  a  messenger  came  to  him  from
home,  by  order  of  the  Ephori,  to  acquaint  him  that  the
Athenians  and  Boeotians  had  declared  war  against  the  Lace-
daemonians, and  that  he  should  therefore  not  delay  to  return.
In  this  juncture  his  dutifulness  to  his  country  is  not  less  to
be  admired  than  his  merit  in  war,  for  though  he  was  at  the
head  of  a  victorious  army,  and  felt  assured,  to  the  utmost,  of
becoming  master  of  the  kingdom  of  Persia,  he  obeyed  the
<Hrders  of  the  absent  magistrates  with  as  much  respect  as  if  he
had  been  a  private  person  in  the  cmnitium*  at  Sparta.
Would  that  our  generals  had  followed  his  example !  But  let
us  proceed  with  our  subject.  Agesilaus  preferred  an  honour-
able name  to  the  most  powerful  empire,  and  thought  it  much
more  ^orious  to  obey  the  laws  of  lus  country  than  to  subdue
Asia  in  war.  With  these  feelings,  therefore,  he  led  his  forces
over  the  Hellespont,  and  employed  such  expedition,  that  he
accomplished  in  thirty  days  a  journey  which  Xerxes  had  taken
a  year  to  perform.t  When  he  was  not  very  far  from  the
Peloponnesus,  the  Athenians  and  Boeotians,  and  others  in

*  In  comdUo,]  A  Latin  word  used  by  the  author  for  the  Qreek,  which
would  be  i^opHoVf  the  court  of  the  Ephori.

i*  Quod  iter  Xerxes  amno  vertente  eonfecerai.'}  Anno  vertente,  bc.  se,
"a  year  turning  itself  or  revolving,**  i.e.  in  the  course  of  a  year,  in  a
fuU  year.  In  the  Life  of  Themistocles,  however,  c.  5,  Xerxes  is  said
to  have  made  the  jouniey  in  ax  months.


AGESILAUS.  391

alliance  with  them,  endeavoured  to  make  a  stand  against  him
at  Coronea,  all  of  whom  he  defeated  in  a  great  battle.  It  was
an  eminent  merit  in  his  victory,  that  when  a  numerous  body
of  the  enemy  had  taken  refuge  in  a  temple  of  Minerva  after
the  defeat,  and  the  question  was  put  to  him,  **  what  he  would
wish  to  be  done  with  them,"  he,  though  he  had  received  some
wounds  in  the  battle,  and  seemed  angry  with  all  who  had
borne  arms  against  him,  preferred,  nevertheless,  respect  for
religion  to  the  gratification  of  his  resentment,  and  gave  orders
that  they  should  suffer  no  injury.  Nor  did  he  act  thus  in
Greece  only, — so  as  to  save  the  temples  of  the  gods  from
profanation, — ^but  even  among  the  barbarians  also,  he  preserved
every  image  and  altar  with  'fiie  utmost  scrupulosity.  He  used
publicly  to  observe,  therefore,  that  "  he  [wondered  those  were
not  counted  in  the  number  of  the  sacrilegious  who  injured
the  suppliants  of  the  gods,*  or  that  those  who  lessened  respect
for  religion  were  not  visited  with  severer  punishments  than
those  who  robbed  temples."

V.  After  this  battle  all  the  war  was  concentrated  about
Corinth,  and  was  accordingly  called  the  Corinthian  war.
During  this  contest,  when,  in  one  battle,  in  which  Agesilaus
was  general,t  there  had  fallen  ten  thousand  of  the  enemy,
and  the  strength  of  his  opponents  seemed  broken  by  that
catastrophe,  he  was  so  far  from  presumptuous  boasting,;];
that  he  expressed  commiseration  for  the  fortune  of  Greece,
since  it  was  through  the  fault  of  his  enemies  that  so  many
had  been  defeated  and  killed  by  him,  for  with  that  number,
if  the  mind  of  his  adversaries  had  been  but  right,  the  Persians
might  have  been  forced  to  make  atonement  to  Greece.
When  he  had  driven  the  enemy,  too,  within  their  walls,  and

*  Bitpplicihua  eorvm.']  Whether  eorwn  refers  to  harharoSf  which  is
nearer  to  it,  or  to  deorvm,  which  is  farther  from  it,  has  been  a  question
among  the  commentators.  Bos  refers  it  to  deorum,  and  I  think  him
right.  A  recent  editor  imagines  that  it  is  to  be  referred  to  simtilacra
arasque.  Magius  would  read  deorum  instead  of  eorvm,  and  his  sugges-
tion is  approved  by  Bremi  and  Btlchling.

f  This  appears  to  be  an  error;  for  Xenophon,  Ages.  7,  5.  and
Plutarch,  Yit  Ages,  speak  of  Agedlaus  as  having  heard  about  the
battle ;  and  it  is  therefore  to  be  concluded,  as  Magius  and  Lambinus
observe,  that  he  was  not  present  in  it,  but  that  it  took  place  while  he
was  on  his  march  homeward.

t  Ah  msolewtia glorice]  ''From  the  presumptuousneas  of  boasting."


392  CORNELIUS  NEPOS.

monj  exhorted  him  to  attack  Corinth,  he  said,  ''  that  it  would
not  be  consistent  with  his  character  in  war  to  do  so ;  since  he
was  one,"  he  said,  **  who  would  oblige  offenders  to  return  to
their  duty,  not  one  who  would  destroy  the  noblest  cities  of
Greece ;  for  if  we  should  proceed,"  he  added,  *•  to  extirpate
those  who  have  supported  us  against  the  barbarians,. we  should
weaken  ourselves  while  the  barbarians  remain  at  their  ease';
iBud,  when  this  has  taken  place,  they  will  easily  bring  us
under  their  power  whenever  they  please."

VI.  In  the  mean  time  the  disaster  at  Leuctra  befel  the
the  Lacedaemonians ;  and  that  he  might  not  march  thither,*
though  he  was  urged  by  many  to  go  to  the  field,  he  refused
to  go,  as  if  he  had  a  presentiment  concerning  the  event.  But
when  Epaminondas  attacked  Sparta,  and  the  city  was  without
walls,  he  proved  himself  such  a  commander,  that  it  was
apparent  to  all  on  that  occasion,  that  if  it  had  not  been  for
him,  Sparta  would  have  ceased  to  existf  In  this  time  of
danger,  indeed,  the  celerity  of  his  proceedings  was  the  pre-
servation of  the  whole  people;  for  when  a  number  of  the  young
men,  alarmed  at  the  approach  of  the  enemy,  had  determined
on  going  over  to  the  Thebans,  and  had  taken  a  position  on  an
eminence  without  the  city,  Agesilaus,  who  saw  that  it  would
have  a  most  pernicious  effect,  if  it  were  noticed  that  any
were  trying  to  desert  to  the  enemy,  went  thither  with  some
of  his  men,  and,  as  if  they  had  been  acting  with  a  good
intention,  commended  their  procedure  in  having  taken  posses-
sion of  that  spot,  and  said  that  he  himself  had  also  observed
that  this  ought  to  be  done.  Thus,  by  his  pretended  com-
mendation, he  prevented  the  young  men  from  deserting,  and,
after  joining  some  of  his  followers  with  them,  left  the  place
quite  safe  ;  for  when  the  number  of  those  was  increased  who
were  unacquainted  with  the  project, J  the  conspirators  were

*  Qud  ne  proficisceretttr — exire  noluU."]  The  conclusion  of  the  sentence
does  not  suit  the  commencement  of  it.  It  is  a  decided  aJuicoliUhxm,  as
Harles,.Bremi,i^and  Bardilis  observe.

t  Nifd  ille  fuisset,  Spartam  futiiram  non  fuisse.]  "  Unless  he  had
been,  Sparta  would  not  have  been.''

X  Aucto  wumero  eorvm  qui  expertes  ercmt  consUii.']  Bos  suggests  this
explanation  of  the  passage  :  that  only  a  part  of  those  who  occupied
the  height  intended  to  go  over  to  the  enemy,  and  designed,  by  force  or
persuasion,  to  bring  over  the  others  qui  expertea  erant  comilii;  but
were  deterred  from  doing  so  when  the  number  of  the  true  men  was


AOESILAUS.  393

afraid  to  move,  and  retained  their  ground  the  more  willingly
as  they  thought  that  what  they  had  meditated  was  still
unknown.

VII.  After  the  hattle  of  Leuctra,  it  is  certain,  the  Lacedae-
monians never  recovered  themselves,  or  regained  their  former
power,  though,  at  that  period,  Agesilaus  did  not  cease  to  assist
his  country  by  whatever  means  he  could  use.  When  the
Liacedaemonians  were  greatly  in  want  of  money,  he  gave  his
support  to  all  those  *  who  had  revolted  from  the  king,  and
being  presented  by  them  with  a  large  sum,  he  relieved  his
country  with  it.  In  his  character,  indeed,  this  point  was  par-
ticularly worthy  of  admiration,  that,  though  great  presents
were  given  him  by  kings,  princes,  and  states,  he  never  took  any
portion  of  them  into  his  own  house,  and  never  departed  in  the
least  from  the  usual  diet  and  dress  of  the  Spartans;  he
remained  content  with  the  same  house  which  Eurysthenes,  the
progenitor  of  his  family,  had  inhabited ;  and  whoever  entered
it  could  see  no  indication  of  luxury  or  extravagance,  but,  on
the  contrary,  many  proofs  of  temperance  and  frugality,  for  it
was  furnished  in  such  a  manner  tiaat  it  differed  in  no  respect
from  that  of  any  poor  or  private  person.

VIII.  As  this  great  man  had  found  nature  favourable  in
giving  him  excellent  qualities  of  mind,  so  he  found  her  unpro-
pitious  with  regard  to  the  formation  of  his  body ;  for  he  was
of  low  stature,  small  in  person,  and  lame  of  one  foot.
These  circumstances  rendered  his  appearance  the  reverse  of
attractive,  and  strangers,  when  they  looked  at  his  person,  felt
only  contempt  for  him,  while  those  who  knew  his  merits  could
not  sufl&cientiy  admire  him.  Such  fortune  attended  him,
when,  at  the  age  of  eighty,  he  went  into  Egypt  to  the  aid
of  Tachos,  and  lay  down  with  his  men  on  the  shore  without
any  shelter,  having  merely  such  a  couch  that  the  ground  was
but  covered  with  straw,  and  nothing  more  than  a  skin  thrown
upon  it,t  while  all  his  attendants  lay  in  the  same  manner,'^in
plain  and  well-worn  attire,  so  that  their  equipments  not  only

strengthened  by  the  followers  of  Agesilaus.  Bos,  however,  suggests  at
the  same  time,  that  we  might  read  aucti  nwmero  eorvm,  which  Bremi  is
inclined  to  adopt.

*  Among  whom  were  Tachos  of  Egypt,  and  Mausolus,  king  of  Caria,
from  both  of  whom  he  received  large  presents ;  as  he  did  also,  pro-
bably, from  Cotys  and  Autophradates. See  Xen.  Ages.  2,  26,  27.
^  f  Buc.]  That  is,  on  the  straw.


394  COBNELIUS  NEPOS.

did  not  indicate  that  there  was  a  king  among  them,  but  even
raised  a  suspicion  that  he  must  be  a  man  not  very  rich.  The
news  of  his  arrival  having  reached  the  king's  officers,  presents
of  every  kind  were  soon  brought  him ;  but  when  the  officers
inquired  for.Agesilaus,  they  could  scarcely  be  made  to  believe
that  he  was  one  of  those  who  were  sitting  before  them.  When
they  presented  him  what  they  had  brought,  with  a  message
from  the  king,  he  accepted  nothing  but  some  veal,  and  such
sorts  of  meat  as  his  present  circumstances  required;  the  oint-
ments, chaplets,  and  sweetmeats  he  distributed  among  the
slaves,  and  the  other  things  he  directed  to  be  carried  back,
l^pon  this,  the  barbarians  looked  upon  him  still  more  con-
temptuously, thinking  that  he  had  made  choice  of  what  he  had
taken  from  ignorance  of  what  was  valuable.

As  he  was  returning  from  Egypt,  after  having  been  pre-
sented by  King  Nectanabis  *  with  two  hundred  and  twenty
talents,  in  order  that  he  might  bestow  them  upon  his  country-
men, and  had  arrived  at  what  is  called  the  harbour  of  Mene-
laus,t  lying  between  CyrenaeJ  and  Egypt,  he  feU  ill  and  died.
His  Mends,  in  order  the  more  conveniently  to  convey  him  to
Sparta,  enveloped  his  body,  as  they  h«ui  no  honey,  in  wax,  and
so  carried  it  home.

*  Nectanabis  II.,  nepkew  of  TachoB,  whom  he  dethroned  with  the
aid  of  Agesilaus.

+  Portum  qui  Menelai  voeattM;']  On  the  coast  of  Marmorica.

t  Cyrence,  ctrum,  or  CyrenCj  e8j  but  the  latter  is  the  far  more  common
form.


k


895


XVIII.  EUMENES.

Eumenes  is  secretary  to  Philip  and  Alexander,  and  afterwards  com-
mander in  the  cavalry,  I. — After  the  death  of  Alexander  he  is
allotted  the  province  of  Cappadocia,  and  is  a  steady  friend  to
Perdiccas,  IL — His  proceedings  on  behalf  of  Perdiccas,  III. — He
defeats  Craterus  and  Neoptolemus,  lY. — Is  pursued  by  Antigonus ;
his  stratagems  and  escape,  Y. — His  kindness  to  Olympias  and
Alexander's  children,  YI. — His  continuance  of  hostilities  against
Antigonus ;  his  device  in  his  camp,  YIL — ^He  defeats  Antigonus  ;
is  controlled  by  Alexander's  veterans,  YIII. — ^He  eludes  Antigonus
by  a  stratagem,  IX. — ^After  again  defeating  Antigonus,  he  Is
betrayed  by  his  own  men,  X. — ni  his  confinement  he  longs  to  die,
XI. — His  death,  XII. — After  his  death  the  officers  of  Alexander
assume  the  title  of  kings ;  his  funeral,  XIIL

I.  Eumenes  was  a  native  of  Cardia,*  If  success  equal  to
his  abilities  had  been  granted  him,  he  would  not,  indeed,  have
been  a  greater  man  (for  we  estimate  great  men  by  merit,  not
by  fortune),  but  he  would  have  been  much  more  renowned,
and  more  honoured.  As  he  happened  to  live,  however,  in  the
days  in  which  the  Macedonians  flourished,  it  was  a  great  disad-
vantage to  him  residing  among  them,  that  he  was  of  a  foreign
country.  Nor  was  anything  wanting  to  him  but  a  noble
descent ;  for,  though  he  was  of  a  family  of  distinction  in  his
native  city,  the  Macedonians  were  nevertheless  dissatisfied  that
he  should  ever  be  preferred  to  them.  They  were  obliged  to
submit,  however,  for  he  excelled  them  all  in  caution,  vigilance,
endurance,  and  acuteness  and  activity  of  intellect

"When  he  was  but  a  youth,  he  was  received  into  favour  by
Philip,  the  son  of  Amyntas,  and  after  a  short  time  was  admitted
into  intimate  friendship  with  him ;  for,  even  then,  when  he  was
80  young,  there  appeared  to  be  great  natural  talent  in  him.  He
therefore  kept  him  near  himself  in  the  ofl&ce  of  secretary,  which
is  much  more  honourable  t  among  the  Greeks  than  among  the

*  Oardianw.']  Cardia  was  a  town  in  the  Thradan  Chersonese^  on
the  gulf  of  Melas.

t  MviUo  honorificentiuB.I  Because  freedmen  and  slaves,  for  the  moet
part,  purchased  the  office  of  scribe  or  secretary  among  the  Bomans
with  money,  as  is  observed  by  Casaubon  in  Capitolin.  Vit  Macrini»
c.  7,  and  by  Lipsius,  Elect,  i  32. — Locceniw.  At  Athens,  however,
Samuel  Petit,  Comm.  in  Leges  Atticas,  1.  iii.  tit.  2,  shows  that  the
office  of  scribe  was  as  little  honourable  as  it  was  at  Rome. — Boa.
Such  was  doubtless  the  case  throughout  Greece ;  a  few  of  the  more


396  CORNELIUS  NEPO&

Bomans ;  for  with  us,  secretaries  are  regarded  as  hirelings,  as
in  reality  they  are ;  but  with  them,  on  the  contrary,  no  one  is
admitted  to  that  office  who  is  not  of  good  family  and  of  known
integrity  and  ability,  because  he  must  of  necessity  be  the  con-
fidant of  all  their  political  measures.  This  post  of  confidence
he  held  for  seven  years  under  PhiUp,  and  after  Philip  was
assassinated,  he  was  in  the  same  office  for  thirteen  years
under  Alexander.  During  the  latter  portion  of  this  time,  also,
he  commanded  one  of  the  two  divisions  of  the  cavalry  called
Hetarice*  With  both  these  princes  he  always  had  a  place
in  the  council,  and  was  admitted  to  a  knowledge  of  all  their
proceedings.

II.  After  the  death  of  Alexander  at  Babylon,  when  king-
doms were  allotted  to  each  of  his  friends,  and  the  superin-
tendence of  affairs  was  committed  to  the  handst  of  Perdiccas,
to  whom  Alexander,  when  dying,  had  given  his  ring  (a  circum^
stance  from  which  every  one  conjectured  that  Alexander  had
entrusted  his  kingdom  to  him,  until  his  children  should  come
of  age  to  take  the  government  upon  themselves ;  J  for  Craterus
and  Antipater,  who  seemed  to  have  the  precedence  of  him,  were
absent,  and  Hephaestion,  for  whom  Alexander,  as  might  easily
be  perceived,  had  had  the  highest  esteem,  was  dead),  at  that
time  Cappadocia  was  given  to  Eumenes,  or  rather  appointed
for  him,  for  it  was  then  in  the  power  of  the  enemy.  Perdiccas
had  sought  with  great  eagerness  to  attach  Eumenes  to  him,
for  he  saw  in  him  great  honour  and  ability,§  and  did  not  doubt
that,  if  he  could  gain  him  over  to  his  side,  he  would  be  of
great  assistance  to  him  in  the  projects  which  Jie  was  meditating,
since  he  purposed  (what  all  in  great  power  generally  covet)  to
seize^and  secure  for  himself  the  shares  of  all  the  rest.  Nor
did  he  alone,  indeed,  entertain  such  designs,  but  all  the  others,

eminent  secretaries  might  be  held  in  esteem  and  respect^  but  the
majority  would  be  of  just  the  same  standmg  as  at  Rome.

*  '£ra(pcKi)  'irrrroCf  about  a  thousand  or  twelve  hundred  of  the
flower  of  the  Macedonian  cavalry.  The  name  is  from  'iraipost  a  friend
or  companion,  either  because  they  were  united  with  one  another  as
friends,  or  because  they  were  associates  or  companions  of  the  king.

+  Tradita  esaet  tuenda  eidem — Perdiccas]  "Was  committed,  to  be
taken  care  of,  to  the  same  Perdiccas."

X  In  stbam  tutdam  pervenisaerU.]  Should  come  "  to  their  own  guard-
ianship,'* should  be  out  of  their  minority,  and  no  longer  under  the
guardianship  of  others.

§  Indiistriam.


EUMENES. '  307

who  had  been  friends  of  Alexander,  formed  similar  intentions.
Leonnatus,*  in  the  first  place,  had  resolved  to  seize  upon
Macedonia,  and  had  endeavoured,  by  liberal  promises,  to  pre-
vail upon  Eumenes  to  desert  Perdiccas,  and  form  an  alliance
with  himself.  Being  unable  to  make  any  impression  upon
him,  he  attempted  to  take  his  life,  and  would  have'effected  his
purpose,  had  he  not  secretly  escaped  from  his  guards  by  night.
III.  In  the  meantime  those  wars  broke  out,  which,  cJter
the  death  of  Alexander,  were  carried  on  to  desperation  ;t  and
all  combined  to  ruin  Perdiccas.  Eumenes,  though  he  saw
that  he  was  but  weak,  as  he  was  obliged  to  stand  alone  against
them  all,  yet  did  not  forsake  a  friend,  or  show  himself  more
desirous  of  safety  than  of  honour.  Perdiccas  had  set  him  over
that  part'  of  Asia  which  lies  between  Mount  Taurus  and  the
Hellespont,  and  had  opposed  him  alone  to  his  European
adversaries.  J  Perdiccas  himself  had  marched  against  Ptolemy,
to  make  an  attack  upon  Egypt.  Eumenes,  as  he  had  an  army
neither  numerous  nor  strong,  for  it  wanted  exercise,  and  had
not  long  been  assembled,  while  Antipater  and  Craterus  were
said  to  be  fast  approaching,  and  to  have  passed  the  Hellespont,
men  who  stood  high  in  reputation  and  experience  in  war  (and
the  Macedonian  soldiers  were  then  held  in  the  same  esteem
in  which  the  Romans  are  now  held,  for  those  have  always  been
accounted  the  bravest  who  have  attained  the  greatest  power),
Eumenes,  I  say,  was  aware,  that  if  his  troops  should  learn
against  whom  they  were  being  led,  they  woiild  not  only  not
proceed,  but  would  disperse  at  the  intelligence;  and  it  wJas
therefore  a  very  clever  stratagem  of  his,  to  lead  his  men
through  bye-roads,  in  which  they  could  not  hear  the  truth,
and  to  make  them  believe  that  he  was  marching  against
some  of  the  barbarians.  In  this  artifice  he  successfully
persevered,  and  drew  out  his  army  into  the  field,  and  joined
battle,  before  the  men  were  aware  with  whom  they  were
engaged.  He  succeeded,  also,  by  an  advantageous  choice  of
ground,  in  fighting  more  with  his  cavalry,  in  which  he  had

*  A  distinguislied  officer  in  the  army  of  Alexander,  after  whose
death  he  had  the  government  of  Phrygia  on  the  Hellespont.

f  Ad  irUemecumem.]  Properly,  "  to  the  utter  destruction"  of  one  of
the  two  contending  parties.

±  Antipater,  Craterus,  and  their  supporters.


808  00BI7ELIUS  KEPOS.

the  Buperiority,  than  with  his  in&ntry,  in  which  he  was  hut
weak.

IV.  After  they  had  continued  the  contest,  with  desperate
efforts,  through  the  greater  part  of  the  day,  Graterus,  the  com-
mander-in-chief, was  killed,  as  well  as  Neoptolemus  who  held
the  second  place  in  authority.  With  Eumenes  Neoptolemus
himself  encountered,  and  as  they  grappled  with  one  another,
and  fell  from  their  horses  to  the  ground  (so  that  it  might  easily
be  seen  that  they  fought  with  feelings  of  enmity,  and  warred
more  with  their  minds  than  with  their  bodies),  they  could  not
be  separated  till  life  left  one  of  the  two.  Eumenes  received
some  wounds  from  Neoptolemus,  yet  did  not,  on.  that  account,
retire  from  the  field,  but  pressed  more  vigorously  upon  the
enemy.  The  horse  being  routed,  Graterus  the  general  slain,  and
many,  chiefly  of  high  rank,  being  made  prisoners,  the  infantry,  as
they  were  forced  into  a  position  from  which  they  could  not  escape
without  the  permission  of  Eumenes,  begged  peace  of  him.  But
when  they  had  obtained  it.  they  did  not  adhere  to  their  word,
but  went  off,  as  soon  as  they  could,  to  Antipater.  Eumenes
endeavoured  to  save  the  life  of  Graterus,  who  was  carried  half
dead  from  the  field ;  but,  not  being  able  to  succeed,  he  interred
him,  suitably  to  his  digrdty  and  their  former  friendship  (for  he
had  been  intimate  with  him  in  Alexander's  life-time),  with  a
magnificent  funeral,  and  sent  his  bones  into  Macedonia  to  bis
wife  and  children.

V.  During  the  course  of  these  proceedings  on  the  Helles-
pont, Perdiccas  was  killed  by  Seleucus  and  Antigonus*  on  the
river  Nile,  and  the  chief  command  was  conferred  upon  Anti-
pater. Upon  this,  those  who  had  deserted  him  were  con-
demned to  death  in  their  absence,  the  army  giving  their
suffrage  to  that  effect;  and  among  those  condemned  was
Eumenes,  who,  though  he  was  affected  at  this  blow.f  did  not
sink  under  it,  or  conduct  the  war  with  the  less  vigour.

*  A  Sdeuco  et  ArUigono.]  For  Antigono  it  is  now  generally  supposed
that  we  should  read  AntigenCf  Antigenes  being  mentioned  by  Diod.  Sic
xyiii  59,  as  one  of  the  leaders  of  the  Argyraspides ;  another  being
Teutamus.  Antigenes  was  the  first  to  attack  Perdiocas,  as  Yazi
Staveren  observes,  referring  to  Arrian  apud  Photium,  p.  224.  The
same  critic  suggests  that  we  might  even,  with  some  probability,  alter
Sdeuco  into  Teutamo,  but  does  not  wish  to  press  this  conjecture.

t  PlagA,]  Meaning  the  death  of  Perdiccas. _


EUHENES.  899

But  a  coarse  of  necessitous  circumstances,  though  they
could  not  subdue  the  energy  of  his  spirit,  had  yet  some
effect  in  diminishing  it.  Antigonus,  however,  who  pursued
him,  was  often,  though  he  had  plenty  of  all  kinds  of  troops,
severely  harassed  by  him  on  the  march,  nor  could  he  ever
come  to  an  engagement  with  him  except  in  places  in  which
a  few  could  resist  many.  But  at  last,  when  he  could  not  be
taken  by  manoeuvring,  he  was  hemmed  in  by  numbers ;  still
he  extricated  himself,  though  with  the  loss  of  several  men,
and  took  refuge  in  a  fortress  of  Phrygia,  called  Nora ;  where,
being  besieged,  and  fearing  that,  by  remaining  in  one  place,
he  should  lose  his  war-horses,  as  there  was  no  room  for  exer-
cising them,  he  adopted  an  ingenious  expedient,*  by  which
the  animal  might  be  warmed  and  exercised  standing,  so  that
it  might  take  its  food  more  freely,  and  not  be  deprived  of  the
benefit  of  bodily  motion.  He  tied  up  its  headf  so  high  with
a  halter,  that  it  could  not  quite  touch  the  ground  with  its
fore-  feet ;  he  then  forced  it,  by  lashing  it  behind,  to  leap  up
and  throw  back  its  heels ;  which  motions  excited  perspiration
no  less  than  if  the  animal  had  run  in  an  open  course.  Hence
it  happened  (what  was  a  matter  of  astonishment  to  all),  that
he  led  out  h^  horses  from  the  fortress,  though  he  had  been
several  months  under  siege,  equally  as  sleek  as  if  he  had  been
keeping  them  in  open  fields.  During  that  siege,  as  often  as
he  desired,  he  either  set  on  fire  or  demolished  the  works  and
defences  of  Antigonus.  He,  however,  kept  himself  in'^jthat  one
place  as  long  as  the  winter  lasted ;  but,  as  the  fortress  could
have  no  relief  fi:om  without,  and  the  spring  was  coming  on,  he
pretended  to  be  desirous  of  surrendering,  and,  while  he  was
treating  about  the  terms,  eluded  the  officers  of  Antigonus,  and
brought  himself  and  all  his  men  off  safe.

VT.  When  Olympias,  who  was  the  mother  of  Alexander,
sent  letters  and  messengers  into  Asia  to  Eumenes,  to  consult
him  whether  she  should  proceed  to  re-possess  herself  of
Macedonia  (for  she  was  then  living  in  Epirus),  and  take  upon
herself  the  government  there,  he  advised  her,  "above  all

*  CaUidvm  fwU  ejus  mventum,  quemadmodvm,  &c.]  ''It  was  an
ingenious  contrivance  of  bis,  how  the  animal  might  be  warmed,"  &c

t  CaptU.]  Not  only  the  head,  however,  but  all  the  fore-part  of  the
body  must  have  been  tied  up,  the  strap  being  passed  round^the  body
behind  the  fore-legs.


400  CORNELIUS  NEPOS.

things,  not  to  stir,  but  to  wait  till  Alexander's  son  should  get
the  throne ;  yet,  if  she  should  be  hurried  into  Macedonia  by
any  irresistible  longing,  he  recommended  her  to  forget  aJl
injuries,  and  not  to  exercise  too  severe  an  authority  over  any-
one." But  with  neither  of  these  suggestions  did  she  comply ;
for  she  both  went  to  Macedonia,  and  acted  there  with  the
greatest  cruelty.  She  then  entreated  Eumenes,  while  he  was
still  at  a  distance,  **not  to  allow  the  bitterest  enemies  of
Philip's  house  and  family  to  extirpate  his  very  race,  but  to
give  his  support  to  the  children  of  Alexander ;  '*  adding  that,
"  if  he  would  do  her  such  a  favour,  he  might  raise  troops  as  soon
as  possible,  and  bring  them  to  her  aid ;  and,  in  order  that  he
might  do  so  more  easily,  she  had  written  to  all  the  governors
of  the  provinces  that  preserved  their  allegiance,  to  obey  him,
and  follow  his  counsels."  Eumenes,  moved  with  this  com-
munication, thought  it  better,  if  fortune  should  so  order  it,
to  perish  in  showing  his  gratitude  to  those  who  had  deserved
well  of  him,  than  to  live  ungrateful.

VII.  He  therefore  assembled  troops,  and  prepared  for  war
against  Antigonus.  But  as  there  were  with  him  several  noble
Macedonians,  amongst  whom  were  Peucestes,  who  had  been
one  of  Alexander's  body-guard,  and  was  then  governor  of
Persia,  and  Antigenes,  under  whose  command  the  Macedonian
phalanx  was,  dreading  envy  (which,  nevertheless,  he  could  not
escape),  if  he,  being  a  foreigner,  should  have  the  chief
authcqiBKatber  than  others  of  the  Macedonians,  of  whom  there
was  a  great  number  there,  he  erected  a  pavilion  at  head
quarters,*  in  the  name  of  Alexander,  and  caused  a  gold  chair,
with  a  sceptre  "and  diadem,  to  be  placed  in  it,  directing  that  all
should  meet  at  it  daily,  that  counsel  might  be  taken  there
concerning  matters  of  importance ;  for  he  thought  that  he
should  incur  less  envy  if  he  appeared  to  manage  the  war  under
show  of  the  authority,  and  with  assumption  of  the  name,  of
Alexander;  and  in  this  point  he  succeeded;  for,  as  the
meetings  were  held,  not  at  the  tent  of  Eumenes,  but  at  that
of  the  king,  and  measures  concerted  there,  his  superiority  was

♦  In  principiis.']  See  note  on  Florua,  iii.  10,  Bohn*s  CI.  Library.
Eumenes,  to  give  effect  to  this  device,  pretended,  as  Polyaenus  tells  us,
to  have  received  directions  from  the  spirit  of  Alexander,  which  had
appeared  to  him  in  a  dream.  It  is  strange  that  the  Macedonian  offi-
cers should  have  allowed  themselves  to  be  so  deluded.


BUMENES.  401

in  sorae  degree  concealed,  though  all  was  done  by  his  agency
alone.

VIII.  He  engaged  with  Antigonus  in  the  country  of  the
ParsBtaci,  not  with  his  army  in  full  array,  but  on  the  march,
and  forced  him,  after  being  severely  handled,  to  return  into
Media  to  winter.  He  himself  distributed  his  troops  in  winter-
quarters  through  the  neighbouring  country  of  Persia,  not  as
he  chose,  but  as  the  will  of  his  soldiers  obliged  him ;  for  the
phalanx  of  Alexander  the  Great,  which  had  over-run  Asia,  and
subdued  the  Persians,  desired,  in  consequence  of  their
established  renown,  and  also  through  long-continued  license,
not  to  obey  their  officers  but  to  command  them,  as  our  veterans
now  do.  There  is  danger,  therefore,  lest  ours  should  do  what
those  did,  and,  by  their  insubordination  and  excessive
licentiousness,  ruin  all,  not  less  those  whom  they  have
supported  than  those  whom  they  have  opposed.  And  if  any
one  reads  the  acts  of  those  veterans,  he  will  find  the
proceedings  of  ours  like  theirs,  and  be  of  opinion  that  tliere  is
no  other  difference  between  them  but  that  of  time.  But  I
return  to  those  of  Macedonia.  They  had  fixed  upon  their
winter-quarters,  not  from  regard  to  convenience  for  warfare,
but  for  luxurious  indulgence ;  and  had  separated  into  parties
at  a  great  distance  from  one  another.  Antigonus,  hearing  of
their  dispersion,  and  being  aware  that  he  was  not  a  match  for
bis  enemies  when  prepared  to  receive  him,  resolved  that  some
new  plan  must  be  adopted.  There  were  two  ways  by  which  he
might  march  from  the  country  of  the  Medes,  where  be  was
wintering,  to  the  winter-quarters  of  his  adversaries,  of  which
the  shorter  lay  through  desert  tracts,  which  nobody  inhabited
by  reason  of  the  scarcity  of  water,  but  was  only  about  ten  days'
march.  The  other,  by  which  everybody  travelled,  presented  a
circuitous  route  of  twice  the  length,  but  was  well-supplied,  and
abounded  with  all  necessaries.  If  he  went  by  the  latter,  he  felt
sure  that  the  enemy  would  know  of  his  approach  before  he  had
accomplished  the  third  part  of  the  distance ;  but  if  he  hurried
through  the  deserts,  he  hoped  that  he  might  surprise  his
adversaries  unawares.  To  effect  his  object,  he  ordered  as
many  skins  and  sacks  as  possible  to  be  got  in  readiness ;  and
then  forage  and  dressed  provisions  for  ten  days ;  desiring  that
as  little  fire  as  possible  should  be  made  in  the  camp.  The
route  which  he  had  in  view  he  concealed  from  every  one*

D  D  !


40^  OOIINELIUS  NEPOB.

Being  thus  provided,  be  set  forward  in  the  direction  on  which
he  had  determined.

IX.  He  had  accomplished  about  half  the  distance,  when,
from  the  smoke  of  his  camp,  a  suspicion  was  hinted  to
Eumenes  that  an  enemy  weus  approaching.  His  officers  held
a  meeting ;  and  it  was  considered  what  ought  to  be  done.
They  were  all  aware  that  their  troops  could  not  be  assembled
80  soon  as  Antigonus  seemed  likely  to  be  upon  them ;  and
while  they  were  all  consequently  in  perplexity,  and  despair-
ing of  their  safety,*  Eumenes  said  that  "  If  they  would  but  use
activity,  and  execute  his  orders  (which  they  had  not  done
before),  he  would  put  an  end  to  their  difficulties  ;  for,  though
the  enemy  might  now  finish  his  journey  in  ^ve  days,  he  would
take  care  that  they  should  be  delayed  not  less  than  as  many
days  more.f  They  must  therefore  go  about,  and  each  collect
his  troops."

To  retard  the  progress  of  Antigonus  he  adopted  the  follow-
ing stratagem.  He  sent  trustworthy  men  to  fhe  foot  of  the
mountains,  which  lay  over  against  the  enemy's  route,  and
ordered  them,  as  soon  as  night  came  on,  to  make  as  large  fires
and  as  far  dispersed,  as  they  could ;  to  reduce  them  at  the
second  watch,  and  to  make  them  very  small  at  the  third;  and,  by
imitating  the  usages  of  a  camp,  to  rciise  a  suspicion  in  the
enemy  that  there  was  actually  a  camp  in  those  parts,  and  that
intelhgence  had  been  given  of  their  approach ;  and  he  told
them  to  act  in  the  same  way  on  the  following  night.  The
men  to  whom  this  commission  was  given  carefully  observed  their
instructions.  Antigonus,  when  dfirkness  came  on,  saw  the
fires,  and  supposed  that  something  had  been  heard  of  his
coming,  and  that  his  enemies  had  assembled  their  force*  on
that  quarter.  He  therefore  changed  his  intention,  and,
thinking  that  he  could  not  surprise  them  unawares,  altered
his  route,  and  took  the  longer  circuit  of  the  well-supplied  road,
on  which  he  halted  for  one  day,  to  refresh  his  weary  men  and
recruit  his  horses,  that  he  might  come  to  battle  with  his
anny  in  better  condition.

X.  On  this  occasion  Eumenes  overreached  a  crafty  general
by  stratagem,  and  obviated  the  suddenness  of  his  attack ;  yet

*  De  r^u8  tummis.']  "  Of  their  chief  concerns.**  '

f  Non  minva  totickm  dierum tpatio.']  ''Not  less  than  the  space  of
just  as  many  days.


.  BUMENES.  40S

he  gained  but  little  by  bis  success ;  for  tbrougb  tbe  envy
of  tJie  officers  witb  wbom  he  had  to  act,  and  the  treachery  of
the  Macedonian  Teterans,  he  was  delivered  .up,  after  he  had
come  off  superior  in  the  field,  to  Antigonus,  though  they  had
previously  sworn,  at  three  several  times,  that  they  would
defend  him  and  never  forsake  him.  But  such  was  the  eager-
ness of  some  to  detract  from  his  merit,  that  they  chose  rather
to  break  their  faith  than  jiot  betray  l^m.  Antigonus,  however,
though  he  had  been  a  violent  enemy  to  him,  would  have
spared  his  life,  if  he  bad  but  been  allowed  to  do  so  by  his
Mends,  because  he  was  certain  that  he  could  not  be  better
assisted  by  any  one  in  those  difficulties  which,  as  was  apparent
to  all,  were  likely  to  fall  upon  him.  For  Lysimachus,  Seleucus,
and  Ptolemy,  now  powerful  in  resources,  were  assuming  a
threatening  attitude,  and  he  would  be  obliged  to  contend  with
them  for  supremacy.  But  those  who  were  about  him  would
not  allow  of  such  clemency ;  for  they  saw  that  if  Eumenes
were  admitted  to  his  councils,  they  themselves  would  be  of
small  account  in  comparison  with  hin;L.  As  for  Antigonus
himself,  he  had  been  so  incensed  against  him,  that  he  could
never  have  been  induced  to  relent,  except  by  a  strong  expecta-
tion of  eminent  services  from  him.

XI.  When  he  had  copimitted  him  to  custody,  therefore,
and  the  commander  of  the  guard  inquired  how  he  would  have
him  kept,  be  replied,  **  As  the  most  furious  lion,  or  the  most
savage  elephant  ;'*  for  he  had  not  then  determined^  whether
he  should  spare  his  life  or  not.  Meanwhile  two  classes  of
people  crowded  to  gaze  upon  Eumenes,  those  who,  from
hatred  of  him,  wished  to  feast  their  eyes^  on  his  degradation,
and  those  who,  from  old  friendship,  desired  to  speak  with  him
and  console  him.  Many  also  can^e  with  them  who]  were
anxious  to  look  at  his  person,  and  to  se^  what  sort  of  man  he
was  whom  they  had  feared  so  long  and  so  much,  and  in  whose
destruction  they  had  placed  their  hopes  of  victory.  But  Eu-
menes, when  he  had  been  some  time  under  confinement,  said  to
Onomarchus,  in  whose  hands  the  chief  command  of  the  guard
was,  that  "  he  wondered  why  he  w;as  thus  kept  a  third  day ;
for  that  it  was  not  consistent  with  prudence  on  the  part  of
Antigonus  to  treatf  one  whom  he  had  conquered  in  such  a

*  Fruetum  oculit  capere.]  "  To  gain  gratification  for  their  eyes."
f  Ut  deuteretur.']  The  word  d&iUor  is  not  found  elsewhere. It  aeema

DD  2


404  COHNELIUS  KEFOB.

manner,  but  that  he  should  order  him  either  to  be  put  to  death
or  released."  As  he  seemed  to  Onomarchus  to  express  himself
somewhat  arrogantly,  he  replied,  **  Why,  if  you  were  of  such  a
spirit,  did  you  not  rather  die  on  the  field  of  battle,  than  fall
into  the  hands  of  your  enemy?"  "Would  indeed  that  that
had  befallen  me,"  rejoined  Eumenes,  "  but  it  did  not  happen
because  I  never  engaged  with  a  stouter  than  myself ;  for  I
have  never  crossed  swords  with  any  one  who  did  not  yield  to
me ;  and  1  have  not  fallen  by  the  prowess  of  my  enemies,  Uut
by  the  perfidy  of  my  Mends/'  Nor  was  this  assertion  fake ;
for  he  was  a  man  not  only  of  a  graceful  •  and  dignified  bearing,
but  of  strength  sufficient  for  enduring  fatigue ;  yet  he  was  not
so  much  distinguished  for  talines  of  person  as  for  handsome-
ness of  shape.

XII.  As  Antigonus  would  not  venture  alone  to  determine
concerning  him,  he  referred  the  decision  to  a  council ;  where,
when  almost  all  the  oflScers,  in  great  excitement,  expressed
their  surprise  that  death  had  not  been  already  inflicted  on  a
man  by  whom  they  had  been  harassed  so  many  years,  so
severely  that  they  were  often  reduced  to  despair;  a  man  who  had
cut  off  leaders  of  the  greatest  eminence;  and  in  whom,  though
but  a  single  individual,  there  was  so  much  to  be  dreaded,  tlmt
as  long  as  he  lived  they  could  not  think  themselves  safe,  while,
if  he  were  put  to  death,  they  would  have  no  further  anxiety  ;
and  in  conclusion  they  asked  Antigonus,  "  if  he  gave  Eumenes
his  life,  what  friends  he  would  employ  ?  for  that  they  would  not
act  under  him  with  Eumenes."  After  thus  learning  the
sentiments  of  the  council,  he  nevertheless  took  time  for  con*
sideration  till  the  seventh  day  foUowing ;  when,  being  afraid
that  a  mutiny  might  break  out  in  the  army,  he  gave  orders
that  no  one  should  be  admitted  to  Eumenes,  and  that  his  daily
food  should  be  withheld ;  for  he  said  that  "  he  would  offer  no
personal  violence  to  a  man  who  had  once  been  his  friend.**
Eumenes,  however,  after  suffering  from  hunger  not  more  than
three  days,  was  killed  by  his  guards  on  the  removal  of  the
camp,  without  Antigonus*s  knowledge.

not  to  be  the  same  with  alutor,  as  some  suppose,  but  to  have'much  the
same  sense  as  the  simple  verb.  But  most  editions  have  «e  uteretwr,  an
alteration  of  Lambinus.

*  This  is  BO  little  of  a  reason  for  Eumenes'  success  against  his  oppo-
nents in  the  field,  that  Buchner,  Bos,  and  others,  suppose  that  some
words  have  been  lost  out  of  the  text.


'  PHOCION.  405

XIII.  Thus  Eumenes,  at  the  age  of  five-and-forty  years,
after  having  attended  on  Philip,  as  we  have  shown  above,  for
seven  years  from  the  age  of  twenty,  and  having  held  the  same
office  under  Alexander  for  thirteen  years,  during  one  of  which
he  had  commanded  a  troop  of  cavalry;  and  after  having,
subsequently  to  Alexander's  death,  conducted  armies  as
commander  in-chief,  and  having  sometimes  repelled  and  some-
times cut  off  the  most  eminent  generals,  being  made  prisoner^
not  by  the  sJjility  of  Antigonus,  but  by  the  perjury  of  the
Macedonians,  ended  his  life  in  this  manner.*  How  great
awe  was  entertained  of  him  by  all  those  who  were  styled
kings  after  the  death  of  Alexander  the  Great,  may  be  easily
judged  from  the  following  feet,  that  no  one  of  them,  while
Eumenes  lived,  was  called  a  king,  but  only  a  governor ;  but
that,  after  his  death,  they  at  once  assumed  the  regal  dress
and  title;  nor  did  they  care  to  perform  what  they  had
originally  promised,  namely,  to  guard  the  throne  for  Alexan-
der's children;  but,  as  soon  as  the  only  defender  of  the
children  was  removed,  they  disclosed  what  their  real  views
were.  In  this  iniquity  the  leaders  were  Antigonus,  Ptolemy,
Seleucus,  Lysimachus,  and  Cassander.

Antigonus  gave  the  dead  body  of  Eumenes  to  his  relations
for  buna] ;  and  they  interred  him  with  a  military  and  mag-
nificent funeral,  and  took  care  that  his  bones  should  be
conveyed  to  Gappadocia  to  his  mother,  wife,  and  children.


XIX.  PHOCION.


Phocion  better  known  for  his  virtues  than  hiB  military  achievements,
I. — In  his  old  age  he  incurred  the  displeasure  of  his  countrymen
on  various  accounts,  II. — Is  exiled ;  his  pleading  before  Philip ;  is
sent  back  to  Athens,  IIL — ^Is  condemned  at  Athens,  and  put  to
death  there,  IV.

I.  Though  Phocion  the  Athenian  was  often  at  the  head  of
armies,  and  held  the  most  important  commands,  yet  tlie  blame-
lessuess  of  his  life  is  much  better  known  than  his  exertions
in  war. Of  the  one,  accordingly,  there  is  no  recollection,t

*  The  sentence  begins  with  Sic  £umene8f  and  ends  with  talem  hdbuit
exitvm  vitcBf  a  fault  similar  to  that  which  has  been  noticed  in  Ages.  c.  6.

+  Memoria  est  nulla.]  That  is,  no  one  thinks  of  praising  his  military
exploits  equally  with  bis  moral  virtues.


406  cofiNEuns  nepos.

but  of  the  other  the  fame  is  great ;  and  hence  he  was  snr-
named  The  Good.  He  was  always  poor,  though  he  might
have  been  extremely  rich,  by  reason  of  the  numerous  offices
conferred  upon  him,  and  the  high  commissions  given  him  by
the  people.  When  he  refused  the  present]  of  a  large  sum  of
money  from  King  Philip,  and  Philip's  ambassadors  urged  him
to  receive  it,'  and  at  the  same  time  reminded  him,  that  if  he
himself  could  easily  do  without  it,  he  should  nevertheless  have
some  regard  for  his  children,  for  whom  it  would  be  difficult,
in  the  depth  of  poverty,  to  act  tip  to  the  high  character  of  their
father,  he  gave  them  this  anerwer :  "If  my  children  be  like
me,  this  same  little  farm,  which  has  enabled  me  to  reach  my
present  eminence,  will  maintain  them ;  but  if  they  prove
unlike  me,  I  should  not  wish  their  luxury  to  be  supported
atnd  increased  at  my  eipense."

II.  After  fortune  had  continued  favourable  to  him  almost
to  his  eightieth  year,  he  fell,  towards  the  close  of  his  life,  into
great  unpopularity  with  his  countrymen.  In  the  first  place,
be"  had  acted  in  concert  with  Demades  in  delivering  up  the
city  to  Antipater ;  and,  by  his  suggestions,  Demosthenes  and
others,  who  were  thought  to  deserve  well  of  their  country,
had  been  sent  into  banishment  by  a  decree  of  the  people.
Nor  had  he  given  offence  only  in  this  respect,  that  he  had
ill  con  stilted  the  interest  of  his  country,  but  also  in  not
having  observed  the  obligations  of  friendship ;  for  though  he
had  risen  to  the  eminence  which  he  then  held  through  being
supported  and  aided  by  Demosthenes,  when  he  furnished  him
with  means  of  defence  against  Chares,*  and  though  he  had
several  times  come  off  with  acquittal  on  trials,  when  he  had  to
plead  for  his  life,  through  having  been  defended  by  Demos-
thenes,  he  not  only  did  not  take  the  part  of  Demosthenes
when  he  was  in  peril,  but  even  betrayed  him.  But  his  fate
was  decided  chiefly  on  one  charge,  that,  when  the  supreme
government  of  the  state  was  in  his  hands,  and  he  was  warned
by  Dercyllus  that  Nicanor,  the  prefect  of  Cassander,  was

*  Qmim  adfferma  Chareten^  enm  tvhonMret.]  I  have  given  to  niboma-
ret  the  sense  to  which  Bos  thinks  it  entitled.  To  what  part  of
Phocion's  life  this  passage  relates  is  uncertain.  Bos  refers  to  Plutarch,
Phocion,  c.  14,  where  it  is  stated  that  Phocion  was  sent  to  Byzantium
with  a  force  to  accomplish  what  Chares  had  failed  in  doing.  But  no
mention  is  made  there  of  any  support  given  to  Phocion  by  Demos-
thenes.


PHOCION.  407

fonning  designs  upon  the  Pirseeus,  and  Dercyllus  begged  him,
at  the  same  time,  to  take  care  that  the  city  should  not  want
provisions,  Phocion  told  him  in  the  hearing  of  the  people,
that  there  was  no  danger,  and  engaged  to  be  security  for  the
truth  of  his  statement ;  whereas  Nicanor,  not  long  after,
became  master  of  the  Pir»eus ;  and  when  the  people  assembled
under  arms  to  defend  that  harbour,  without  which  Athens
could  not  at  all  subsist,  Phocion  not  only  did  not  call  any  body
to  arms,  but  would  not  even  take  the  command  of  those  who
were  armed.

III.  There  were  at  ^tkfit  period  in  Athens  two  parties,  one
of  which  espoused  the  causi^'*^  the  people,  and  the  other  that
of  the  aristocracy ;  to  the  latter  Phocion  and  Demetrius
Phalereus  were  attached.  Each  of  them  relied  on  the  sup-
port of  the  Macedonians ;  for  the  popular  party  favoured
Polysperchon,  and  the  aristocracy  took  the  side  of  Cassander.
After  a  time  Cassander  was  driven  from  Macedonia  by  Poly-
sperchon; and  the  people,  in  consequence,  getting  the
superiority,  immediately  expelled  from  their  country  the
leaders  of  the  opposite  faction,  after  they  had  been  capitally
convicted;*  and  among  them  Phocion  and  Demetrius  Pha-
lereus; and  they  then  sent  a  deputation  on  the  subject  to
Polysperchon,  to  request  him  to  confirm  their  decrees.  Pho-
cion went  to  him  at  the  same  time,  and  as  soon  as  he  arrived
he  was  summoned  to  plead  his  cause,  nominally  before  King
Philip,t  but  in  reality  before  Polysperchon;  for  he  at  that
time  held  the  direction  of  the  king  s  affairs.  Being  accused
by  Agnonides  J  of  having  betrayed  the  Pirseeus  to  Nicanor,  and
being  thrown,  by  order  of  the  council,  into  confinement,  he
was  then  conveyed  to  Athens,  that  a  trial  might  there  be  held
upon  him  according  to  law.

IV.  On  his  arrival,  as  he  was  weak  in  his  feet  through  age,
and  was  brought  to  the  city  in  a  carriage,  great  crowds  of.
people  gathered  about  him,  of  whom  some,  calling  to  mind
his  former  reputation,  expressed  commiseration  for  his  declining

*  Cdpitis  daanmcUosJ]  Tkat  is,  made  aiimouSf  or  infamous,  deprived
of  civil  rights,  and  condemned,  perhaps,  in  addition,  to  exile  or  death.

t  Philip  Aridffius,  the  half-brother  and  nominal  successor  of  Alex-
ander the  Great.

X  An  Athenian  demagogue,  who  was  put  to  death  by  tha  people  of
Athens  soon  after  the  death  of  Phocion.


«i08  COBNEUnS  NEPOS.

years,  but  the  greater  number  were  violently  exasperatecf
against  him,  from  the  suspicion  that  he  had  betrayed  the
Hrseeus,  but  especially  because  he  had  opposed  the  interest  of
the  people  in  his  old  age.  Hence  not  even  the  liberty  of  mak-
ing a  speech,  and  of  pleading  his  cause,  was  granted  him,  but
being  forthwith  sentenced  to  death,  after  some  formalities  of
law  had  been  despatched,  he  was  delivered  over  to  the  eleven,*
to  whom  public  criminals,  by  the  custom  of  the  Athenians,
are  wont  to  be  consigned.  As  he  was  being  led  to  execution.
Emphyletus,  a  man  with  whom  he  had  been  very  intimate,
met  him,  and  having  exclaimed,  with  tears,  "O  what  unworthy
treatment  you  suffer,  Phocion !  "  Phocion  rejoined,  "  But  not
unexpected,  for  most  of  the  famous  men  of  Athens  have  come
to  this  end."  So  violent  was  the  hatred  of  the  multitude
towards  him,  that  no  £ree  person  dared  to  bury  him ;  and  he
was  accordingly  interred  by  slaves.


XX.  TIMOLEON.


Timoleon  delivers  Corinth  from  the  tyranny  of  liis  brother,  and  causes
him  to  be  put  to  death,  L — He  expels  Lionysius  the  younger  from
Sicily ;  defeats  Hicetas ;  overcomes  the  Carthaginians,  11. — After
settling  a&irs  in  Sicily,  he  lays  down  the  government,  III. — He
loses  his  sight  from  old  age,  but  still  attends  to  the  interests  of
his  country ;  builds  a  temple  to  Foitune,  lY. — Instances  of  his
patience ;  his  death,  Y.

I.  Timoleon  of  Corinth  was  doubtless  a  great  man  in  the
opinion  of  everybody,  since  it  happened  to  him  alone  (for  I
know  not  that  it  happened  to  any  one  else),t  to  deliver  his
country,  in  which  he  was  born,  from  the  oppression  of  a
tyrant,  to  banish  a  long  established  slavery  from  Syracuse  (to
the  assistance  of  which  he  had  been  sent),  and,  on  his  arrival,

' *  Undecim  virig.']  Eleven  petty  officers,  whose  duty  was  to  see  the
sentences  of  the  law  put  in  execution.

t  Namque  huic  uni  contigit,  qmd  neacio  an  nvUi.]  1  have  endeavoured
to  give  a  satisfactory  turn  in  the  English  to  that  which  is  not  very
satisfactory  in  the  Latin.  **  For  (that)  happened  to  (him)  alone,  (of)
which  I  know  not  whether  (it  happened)  to  any  one  (else)."  If  it
happened  to  him  alone,  it  of  course  happened  to  no  one  else.  Some
editors  read  vlU :  but  nidU  appears  to  be  the  right  reading,  netcio  an
being  taken  in  the  sense  of  ''perhape."


TIMOLEOK.  409

to  restore  Sicily,  which  had  been  disturbed  by  war  for  many
years,  and  harassed  by  barbarians,*  to  its  former  condition.
But  in  these  undertakings  he  struggled  not  with  one  kind  of
fortune  only,  and,  what  is  thought  the  more  difficult,  he  bore
good  much  more  discreetly  than  evil  fortune;  for  when  his
brother  Timophanes,  on  being  chosen  general  by  the
Corinthians,  had  made  himself  absolute  by  the  aid  of  his
mercenary  troops,  and  Timoleon  himself  might  have  shared
the  sovereignty  with  him,  he  was  so  far  from  taking  part  in  his
guilt,  that  he  preferred  the  liberty  of  his  countrymen  to  the  life
of  his  brother,  and  thought  it  better  to  obey  the  laws  of  his
country  than  to  rule  over  his  country.  With  this  feeling,  he
contrived  to  have  his  brother  the  tyrant  put  to  death  by  a
certain  augur,  a  man  connected  with  them  both,  as  their  sister
by  the  same  parents f  was  married  to  him.  He  himself  not
only  did  not  put  his  hand  to  the  work,  but  would  not  even  look
upon  his  [brother's  blood ;  for,  until  the  deed  was  done,  he
kept  himself  at  a  distance  on  the  watch,  lest  any  of  his  brother's
guards  should  come  to  his  aid.  This  most  noble  act  of  his  was
not  equally  approved  by  all;  for  some  thought  that  natural
affection  had  been  violated  by  him,  and  endeavoured,  from
envy,  to  lessen  the  praise  of  his  virtue.  His  mother,  indeed,
after  this  proceeding,  would  neither  admit  her  son  into  her
house,  nor  look  upon  him,  but,  uttering  imprecations  against
him,  called  him  a  fratricide,  and  destitute  of  natural  feeling.
With  this  treatment  he  was  so  much  affected,  that  he  was
sometimes  inclined  to  put  an  end  •to  his  life,  and  withdraw
himself  by  death  from  the  sight  of  his  ungrateful  fellow-
creatures.

II.  In  the  meantime,  after  Dion  was  assassinated  at
Syracuse,  Dionysius  again  became  master  of  that  city,  and  his
enemies  solicited  assistance  from  the  Corinthians,  desiring  a
genera]  whose  services  th^y  might  employ  in  war.  Timoleon,
being  in  consequence  despatched  thither,  expelled  Dionysius,
vdth  wonderful  success,  quite  out  of  Sicily.  Though  he  might
have  put  him  to  death,  he  refused  to  do  so,  and  secured  him  a
safe  passage  to  Corinth,  because  the  Corinthians  had  often

*  A  barharis.']  The  Carthaginians,  when  they  were  at  war  with  the
elder  DionysiuB.

t  Soror  ex  mdem  parenttbus  nataJ]  She  was  uihoiU  aiskr  to  him  and
Timophanes.


410  OORNELIirS  KEFOS.

been  supported  by  the  aid  of  both  the  Dionysii,  and  he  wished
the  memory  of  that  kindness  to  be  preserved,  esteeming  that
victory  noble  in  which  there  was  more  clemency  than  craelty ;
and,  finally,  he  wished  it  not  only  to  be  heard,  but  seen,  what
a  personage  he  had  reduced  from  such  a  height  of  power  to  so
low  a  condition.  After  the  departure  of  Dionysius,  he  had
to  go  to  war  with  Icetas,  who  had  been  the  opponent  of
Dionysius ;  but  that  he  did  not  disagree  with  him  from  hatred
of  tyranny,  but  from  a  desire  for  it,  this  was  a  sufficient  proof*
that  after  the  expulsion  of  Dionysius  he  was  unwilling  to  lay
down  his  command.  Timoleon,  after  defeating  Hicetas,  put  to
flight  a  vast  army  of  the  Carthaginians  on  the  river  Orimessus^
and  obliged  those  who  had  now  for  several  years  maintained
their  ground  in  Sicily,  to  be  satisfied  if  they  were  allowed  to
retain  Africa.  He  took  prisoner  also  Mamercus^  an  Italian,
general,  a  man  of  great  valour  and  influence,  who  had  come
into  Italy  to  support  the  tyrants.

Ill*  Having  achieved  these  objects,  and  seeing  not  only  the
lands,  but  also  the  cities,  deserted  through  the  long  continuance
of  the  war,  he  assembled,  in  the  first  place,  as  many  Sicilisms
as  he  could,  and  then  sent  for  settlers  also  from  Corinth,
because  it  was  by  the  Corinthians  that  Syracuse  had  been
originally  founded.  He  gave  back  to  the  old  inhabitants  their
own  lands,  and  divided  such  estates  as  had  lost  their  owners  in
the  war,  among  the  new  colonists ;  he  repaired  the  dilapidated
walls  of  the  cities,  and  the  neglected  temples;*  he  restored
their  laws  and  liberties  to  (he  several  communities,  and,  after  a
most  destructive  war,  established  such  tranquillity  through  the
whole  island,  that  he,  and  not  those  who  had  brought  colonists
thither  at  first,  might  have  been  thought  the  founder  of  those
cities.  The  citadel  of  Syracuse,  which  Dionysius  had  built  to
overawe  the  city,  he  demolished  to  its  foundations;  other
bulwarks  of  tyranny  he  removed,  and  exerted  his  eflbrts  that
as  few  traces  as  possible  of  servitude  might  be  left.

Though  he  was  possessed  of  so  much  influence  that  he

*  Fa/Mh  deserta."]  Bos  retains  deserta  in  bis  text,  but  shows  an  incli>
nation,  in  his  note,  to  adopt  the  emendation  of  Lambinus,  deleta;
deaertOf  however,  which  is  found,  I  believe,  in  all  the  manuscripts,  is
susceptible  of  a  very  good  interpretation;  for  temples  that  were
deserted  or  neglected  might  have  fsJlen  into  decay^  and  require  to  be
repaired  or  rebuilt.


TIMOLEON.  411

might  have  ruled  the  Syracusans  even  against  their  will,  and
though  he  had  so  strongly  gained  the  affection  of  all  the
Sicilians  that  he  might  have  assumed  supreme  power  without
opposition  from  any  one,  he  chose  rather  to  be  loved  than  to  be
feared. He  therefore  laid  down  his  authority  as  soon  as  he
could,  and  lived  as  a  private  person  at  Syracuse  during  the
remainder  of  his  life. Nor  did  he  act  in  this  respect  in-
judiciously; for,  what  other  rulers  could  scarcely  effect  by
absolute  power,  he  attained  by  the  good  will  of  the  people.
No  honour  was  withheld  from  him;  nor,  when  any  public
business  was  afterwards  transacted  at  Syracuse,  was  a  decision
made  upon it  before Timoleon's opinion  was  ascertained.
Not  only  was  no  man's  advice  ever  preferred  to  his,  but  no
man's  was  even  compared  to  it ;  nor  was  this  occasioned  more
by  the  good  will  of  others  towards  him,  than  by  his  own
prudence.

IV.  When  he  was  advanced  in  age  he  lost  the  sight  of  his
eyes,  without  any  apparent  disease  in  them;  a  misfortune
which  he  bore  with  so  much  patience,  that  neither  did  any  one
ever  hear  him  complain,  nor  did  he  take  a  less  part  in  private
and  public  business.  He  used  to  come  to  the  theatre,"^  when
any  assembly  of  the  people  was  held  there,  riding  in  a
carriage  by  reason  of  his  infirmity,  and  used  to  state  from  the
vehicle  what  he  thought  proper.  Nor  did  any  one  impute  this
to  pride  ;  for  nothing  arrogant  or  boastful  ever  came  out  of  his
mouth.  Indeed  when  he  heard  his  praises  repeated,  he  never
made  any  other  observation  than  that  "  he  paid  and  felt  the
utmost  gratitude  to  the  immortal  gods  for  this  favour,  that
when  they  had  resolved  on  regenerating  Sicily,  they  had
appointed  him,  above  all  others,  to  be  the  leader  to  execute
their  will."  For  he  thought  that  nothing  in  human  affairs  was
done  without  the  directing  power  of  the  gods ;  and  he  therefore
erected  a  temple  to  Fortune f  in  his  own  house,  and  used  to
worship  at  it  most  religiously.

V.  To  this  eminent  virtue  in  his  character  were  added
certain  wonderful  incidenls  in  his  life ;  for  he  fought  all  his
most  remarkable battles  on  his birth-day; and  hence it

*  In  theatrum.']  Public  assemblies  were  often  held  in  theatres.

f  SctcdLvm  Avro/xarcac.]  A  word  compounded  of  avroc,  idfi  and
H&ia,  to  desire  or  will,  and  applied  to  Fortune  as  acting  from  her  own
will  or  impulse.


413  CORNELIUS  NEPOS.

Imppened  that  all  Sicily  kept  his  birth-day  as  a  festival.
When  one  Lamestius,  an  impudent  and  ungrateful  feUow,
wanted  to  compel  him  to  give  bail  for  his  appearance,  as  he
said  that  he  was  merely  dealing  with  him  according  to  law,  and
several  persons,  flocking  about  him,  would  have  curbed  the
insolence  of  the  man  by  laying  hands  upon  him,  Timoleou
entreated  them  all  "  not  to  do  so,  for  that  he  had  encountered
extreme  labours  and  dangers  in  order  that  Lamestius  and
others  might  enjoy  such  privileges;  since  this  was  the  true
form  of  liberty,  if  it  were  permitted  to  every  one  to  try  at
law  what  he  pleased.'*  When  a  person,  too,  something  like
Lamestius,  by  name  Demsenetus,  had  proceeded  to  detract
from  his  actions  before  an  assembly  of  the  people,  and  uttered
some  invectives  against  Timoleon  himself,  he  observed,  that
**  he  now  enjoyed  the  fulfilment  of  his  prayers,*  for  that  he  had
always  made  this  his  request  to  the  immortal  gods,  that  they
would  re-establish  that  degree  of  liberty  among  the  Syracusans,
in  which  it  would  be  lawful  for  every  man  to  say  what  he
wished  of  any  one  with  impunity."  When  he  died,  he  was
buried  at  the  public  expense  by  the  Syracusans,  in  the
Gymnasium,  which  is  called  the  Timoleontean  Gymna8ium,t
all  Sicily  attending  his  funeral.


XXL OF  KINGS.


The  Spartan  kings,  kings  only  in  name ;  the  most  eminent  kings  of
Persia,  I. — The  greatest  kings  of  Macedonia;  the  only  great
sovereign  of  Sicily,  II. — The  kings  that  arose  after  the  death  of
Alexander  the  Great,  III,

I.  These  were  almost  all  the  generals  of  Greece  J  .that
seemed  worthy  of  record,  except  kings,  for  we  would  not  treat
of  them,  because  the  actions  of  them  all  are  narrated
separately  ;§ nor  are  they  indeed  very  numerous. As  for

*  Se  voti  ease  damimPum.]  The  meaning  is,  that  he  was  now  obliged
to  the  fulfilment  of  that  which  he  had  vowed  when  he  prayed  for  such
a  degree  of  freedom.

f  Timoleontevm.']  Sc.  Gymnasium.

t  Orcecas  geniis.]  All  the  preceding  biographies  are  those  of  Greeks,
except  that  of  Datames.

§  Separatm  stmt  rdata.']  In  another  book  written  by  Nepos,  which


OF  KINGS.  413

Agesilaus  the  Lacedsemonian,  he  was  a  king  in  name,  not  in
power,  just  like  the  other  Spartan  kings.  But  of  those  who
were  sovereigns  with  absolute  authority,  the  most  eminent
were,  as  we  think,  Cyrus,  king  of  the  Persians,  and  Darius,  the
son  of  Hystaspes,  both  of  whom,  originally  in  a  private
station,  obtcdned  thrones  by  merit.  The  first  of  these  was
killed  in  battle  among  the  Massagetae ;  Darius  died  a  natural
death  at  an  advanced  age.  There  are  also  three  others  of  the
same  nation  ;  Xerxes  and  the  two  Artaxerxes,  Macrochir  and
Mnemon.*  The  most  remarkable  act  of  Xerxes  was,  that  he
made  war  upon  Greece,  by  land  and  sea,  with  the  greatest
armies  in  the  memory  of  man.  Macrochir  is  greatly  celebrated
for  a  most  noble  and  handsome  person,  which  he  rendered  still
more  remarkable  by  extraordinary  bravery  in  the  field ;  for  no
one  of  the  Persians  was  more  valorous  in  action  than  he.
Mnemon  was  renowned  for  his  justice ;  for,  when  he  lost  his
wife  through  the  wickedness  of  his  mother,  he  indulged  his
resentment  so  far  only,  that  filial  duty  overcame  it.t  Of  these,
the  two  of  the  same  name  died  a  natural  death  ;^  the  third
was  killed  with  the  sword  by  Artabanus,  one  of  his  satraps.

II.  Of  the  nation  of  the  Macedonians,  two  kings  far  excelled
the  rest  in  renown  for  their  achievements ;  Philip,  the  son
of  Amyhtas,  and  Alexander  the  Great.  One  of  these  was  cut
off  by  a  disease  at  Babylon ;  Philip  was  killed  by  Pausanias,
near  the  tlieatre  at  ^gee,  when  he  was  going  to  see  the  games.
Of  Epirus,  the  only  great  king  was  Pyrrhus,  who  made  war
upon  the  people  of  Home ;  he  was  killed  by  a  blow  from  a  stone,
when  he  was  besieging  the  city  of  Argos  in  the  Peloponnesus.
There  was  also  one  great  sovereign  of  Sicily,  Dionysius  the

contained  the  lives  of  kings,  as  Lambinus  thinks ;  and  Vossius  de  Hist.
Lot.  i.  14,  is  of  the  same  opinion.  I  rather  imagine  that  the  writings
of  other  authors,  who  have  spoken  of  the  acts  of  kings,  are  intended  ;
for  if  Nepos  had  meant  a  composition  of  bis  own,  he  would  have  said
d  me  simt  rdata,  as  in  the  life  of  Cato,  c.  3,  he  says  in  eo  libro  quern
separatim  de  eo  fecvmvs, — Bos.

*  Macrochir,  LongimanuSt  or  "  long-handed.^  Mnemon,  fivrifnaVf  tig-
nifying  one  that  has  a  good  memory.

f  There  was  no  remarkable  proof  of  his  justice  given  on  this
occasion.  His  mother  Parysatis  poisoned  his  wife  Statira;  but  he
spared  Parysatis,  and  put  to  death  Gingis,  who  had  merely  been  her
tool. See  Plutarch,  Life  of  Aitazerzes,  c  19.

X  Morho  natwce  ddntvm  reddidenmt.]  <'  Paid  (their)  debt  to  nature
bj  disease.''


414  GOBNELIUS  NEPOS.

elder ;  for  he  was  both  brave  in  action  and  skilful  in  military
operations,  and,  what  is  not  commonly  found  in  a  tyrant,  was
far  from  being  sensual,  or  luxurious,  or  avaricious,  and  was
covetous  indeed  of  nothing  but  absolute  and  firmly-established
sovereignty ;  and  to  attain  that  object  he  was  cruel ;  for  in  his
eagerness  to  secure  it  he  spared  the  life  of  no  one  that  he
thought  to  be  plotting  against  it.  After  having  gained
absolute  power  for  himself  by  his  abilities,  he  preserved  it  with
remarkable  good  fortune,  and  died  at  the  age  of  more  than
sixty,  with  his  dominions  in  a  flourishing  condition.  Nor  in
the  course  of  so  many  years  did  he  see  the  funeral  of  any  one  of
his  offspring,  though  he  had  children  by  three  wives,  and
several  grand-children  had  been  born  to  him.

III.  There  arose  also  some  great  kings  from  among  the
followers  of  Alexander  the  Great,  who  assumed  regal  authority
after  his  death.  Among  these  were  Antigonus,  and  his  son
Demetrius,  Lysimachus,  Seleucus,  and  Ptolemy;  of  whom
Antigonus  was  killed  in  battle,  when  he  was  fighting  against
Seleucus  and  Lysimachus ;  and  Lysimachus  was  cut  off  in  a
similar  way  by  Seleucus,  for  the  alliance  between  the  two  being
broken,  they  went  to  war  with  one  another.  Demetrius,  after
he  had  given  his  daughter  to  Seleucus  in  marriage,  and  yet  the
alliance  between  them  could  not  be  maintained  the  more
faithfully  on  that  account,  was  taken  prisoner  in  battle,  and
died  of  some  disease,  the  father-in-law  in  the  custody  of  his  son-
in-law.  Not  long  after,  Seleucus  was  treacherously  killed  by
Ptolemy  Ceraunus,  whom  he  had  entertained,  when  he  was
expelled  by  his  father  from  Alexandria,  and  stood  in  need  of
assistance  from  others.  As  for  Ptolemy  himself,  he  is  said,
after  having  resigned  his  throne  to  his  son  during  his  life,  to
have  been  deprived  of  life  by  that  same  son.

But,  as  we  think  that  sufficient  has  been  said  concerning
these,  it  seems  proper  not  to  omit  Hamilcar  and  Hannibal,  who,
as  is  agreed,  surpassed  all  the  natives  of  Africa  in  power  and
subtilty  of  intellect


415


XXIL  HAMILCAR

Hamilcays  success  in  Sicily;  his  defence  of  Eryz,  and  honourable
capitulation,  I. — His  suppression  of  the  rebellion  raised  by  the
Carthaginian  mercenaries,  II. — He  takes  his  son  Hannibal  'with
him  into  Spain,  and  his  son-in-law  Hasdrubal,  III. — ^Is  killed  in

^ battle  in  Spain,  lY .

I.  Hamilcab  the  Carthaginian,  the  son  of  Hannibal,  and
sumamed  Barcas,  began  in  the  first  Punic  war,  but  towards
the  end  of  it,  to  hold  the  command  of  the  army  in  Sicily ;
and  though,  before  his  coming,  the  efforts  of  the  Carthaginians
were  unsuccessful  both  by  sea  and  land,  he,  after  he  arrived,
never  gave  way  to  the  enemy,*  or  afforded  them  any  oppor-
tunity of  doing  him  harm,  but,  on  the  contrary,  often  attacked
the  foe  when  occasion  presented  itself,  and  always  came  off
with  the  advantage.  Afterwards,  though  the  Carthaginians
had  lost  almost  every  place  in  Sicily,  he  so  ably  defended
Eryx.t  that  there  seemed  to  be  no  war  going  on  there.  In
the  meantime,  the  Carthaginians,  having  been  defeated  at
sea,  near  the  islands  called  Agates,:];  by  Caius  Lutatius,  the
Roman  consul,  resolved  on  putting  an  end  to  the  war,  and  left
the  settlement  of  the  matter  to  the  judgment  of  Hamilcar,
who,  though  he  ardently  desired  to  continue  in  arms,  thought
it,  nevertheless,  necessary  to  submit  to  make  peace,  because  he
saw  that  his  country,  exhausted  by  the  expenses  of  the  war,
was  no  longer  in  a  condition  to  bear  the  pressure  of  it ;  but
such  was  his  feeling  on  the  occasion,  that  he  soon  meditated,
if  the  affBurs  of  his  country  should  be  but  in  a  small  degree
improved,  to  resume  the  war,  and  to  pursue  the  Romans  with
hostilities,  until  they  should  indisputably  obtain  the  mastery,
or,  being  conquered,  should  make  submission.  With  this
resolution  he  concluded  a  peace,  but  showed  such  a  spirit  in
the  transaction,  that  when  Catulus  refused  to  desist  from  hos-
tilities unless  Hamilcar,  with  such  of  his  men  as  were  in

*  Nwiiquajni  hosti  cetnt."]  Not  exactly  true ;  but  he  doubtless  resisted
the  enemy  vigorously.

f  Eryoem.]  Not  the  mountain,  as  Bos  observes,  but  the  town
situated  between  the  top  and  the  foot  of  the  mountain,  of  both  of
which  the  Romans  had  possession.  See  Polyb.  i  58 ;  ii  7 ;  Diod.  Sic.
xxiv.  2 ;  Cluverius,  SiciL  Antiq.  ii.  1.

X  Three  islands  on  the  western  coast  of  Sicily.  _  This  battle  brought
the  first  Punic  war  to  an  end.


416  CORNELIUS  KEPOS.

possession  of  Eryx,  should  lay  down  their  arms  and  quit
Sicily,  Hamilcar  replied,  that,  though  his  country  submitted,
he  himself  would  rather  perish  on  the  spot  than  return  home
under  such  disgrace,  for  that  it  was  not  consistent  with  his
spirit  to  resign  to  his  enemies  arms  which  he  had  received
from  his  country  as  a  defence  against  enemies.

II.  Catulus  yielded  to  his  resolution.  But  Hamilcar,  when
he  arrived  at  Carthage,  found  the  republic  in  a  far  different
condition  than  he  had  expected ;  for,  through  the  long  con-
tinuance of  foreign  troubles,  so  violent  a  rebellion  had  broken
put  at  home,  that  Carthage  was  never  in  such  danger,  except
when  it  was  actually  destroyed.  In  the  first  place,  the  mer-
cenary troops,  who  had  served  against  the  Romans,  and  the
number  of  whom  amounted  to  twenty  thousand,  revolted ;  and
these  drew  the  whole  of  Africa  over  to  their  side,  and  laid
siege  to  Carthage  itself.  With  these  disasters  the  Cartha-
ginians were  so  much  alarmed,  that  they  requested  aid  even
from  the  Romans,  and  obtained  it.  But  at  last,  when  they
were  almost  sunk  into,  despair,  they  made  Hamilcar  general,
who  not  only  repulsed  the  enemy  from  the  walls  of  Carthage,
though  they  amounted  to  a  hundred  thousand  men  in  arms,  but
reduced  them  to  such  a  condition,  that  being  shut  up  in  a
confined  space,  they  perished  in  greater  numbers  by  famine
than  by  the  sword.  All  the  towns  that  had  revolted,  and
among  them  Utica  and  Hippo,  the  strongest  cities  of  all  Africa,
he  brought  back  to  their  allegiance  to  his  country.  Nor  was
'he  satisfied  with  these  successes,  but  extended  even  the  bounds
of  the  Carthaginian  empire,  and  re-established  such  tranquillity
through  all  Africa,  that  there  seemed  to  have  been  no  war  in
it  for  many  years.

III.  These  objects  being  executed  according  to  his  desire,
he  then,  by  dint  of  a  spirit  confident  and  incensed  against  the
Romans,  contrived,  in  order  more  easily  to  find  a  pretext  for
going  to  war  with  them,  to  be  sent  as  commander-in-chief  with
an  army  into  Spain,  and  took  with  him  thither  his  son  Hanni-
bal, then  nine  years  old.  There  also  accompanied  him  a
young  man  named  Hasdrubal,  a  person  of  high  birth  and
great  beauty,  who,  as  some  said,  was  beloved  by  Hamilcar  with
less  regard  to  his  character  than  was  becoming ;  for  so  great  a
man  could  not  fail  to  have  slanderers.  Hence  it  happened
that  Hasdrubal  was  forbidden  by  the  censor  of  public  piorals


HANNIBAL.  417

to  associate  with  him ;  but  Hamilcar  then  gave  him'  his
daughter  in  marriage,  because,  according  to  their  usages,  a
son-in-law  could  not  be  interdicted  the  society  of  his  father-in-
law.  We  have  inserted  this  notice  of  Hasdrubal,  because,
after  Hamilcar  was  killed,  he  took  the  command  of  the  army,
and  achieved  great  exploits ;  and  he  was  also  the  first  that
corrupted  the  ancient  manners  of  the  Carthaginians  by
bribery.  After  his  death  Hannibal  received  the  command
from  ihe  army.

IV.  Hamilcar,  however,  after  he  had  crossed  the  sea,  and
arrived  in  Spain,  executed  some  great  undertakings  with  excel-
lent success;  he  subdued  some  very  powerful  and  warlike
nations,  and  supphed  all  Africa  with  horses,  arms,  men,  and
money.  But  as  he  was  meditating  to  carry  the  war  into
Italy,  in  the  ninth  year  after  his  arrival  in  Spain,  he  was
killed  in  a  battle  with  the  Vettones.

His  constant  hatred  to  the  Eomans  seems  to  have  been  the
chief  cause  of  producing  the  second  Punic  war ;  for  Hannibal,
his  son,  was  so  wrought  upon  by  the  continual  instigations  of
his  father,  that  he  would  have  chosen  to  die  rather  than  not
make  trial  of  the  Komans.


XXIII.  HANNIBAL.


Hannibal,  tbe  greatest  of  generals,  suffers  from  the  envy  of  his
countrymen,  I. — ^Was  the  ideadly  enemy  of  the  Romans,  II. — He
reduces  Spain;  besieges  Saguntum;  crosses  the  Alps,  III. — His
successful  battles  in  Italy,  IV.— His  further  proceedings  in  that
country,  V. — Is  recalled  to  the  defence  of  his  country,  and
defeated  by  Scipio,  VI. — Quits  his  country,  and  seeks  refuge  with
Antiochus,  VII. — Endeavours  in  vain  to  excite  his  countrymen  to
war;  defeats  the  Rhodians,  VIII^— Eludes  the  avarice  of  the
Cretans,  IX. — Stirs  up  Prusias  agaifist  the  Romans,  X. — His  stra-
tagem in  contending  with  Eumenes,  XL— Commits  suicide  to
escape  being  delivered  to  the  Romans,  XII. — His  attachment  to
literature,  XIIL

I.  Hannibal  was  the  son  of  Hamilcar,  and  a  native  of
Carthage.  If  it  be  true,  as  no  one  doubts,  that  the  Homan
people  excelled  all  other  nations  in  warlike  merit,  it  is  not  to
be  disputed  that  Hannibal  surpassed  other  commanders  in
ability  as  much  as  the  Eomans  surpassed  all  other  people  in

E  s


418  COBNSUUS  NEPOS.

valour ;  for  as  often  as  he  engaged  with  the  Homans  in  Italy,  he
always  came  off  with  the  advantage ;  and,  had  not  his  efforts
been  paralyzed  by  the  envy  of  his  countrymen  at  home,  he
would  appear  to  have  been  capable  of  getting  the  mastery  over
the  Romans.  But  the  jealous  opposition  of  many  prevailed
against  the  ability  of  one.  He,  however,  so  cherished  in  his
mind  the  hatred  which  his  father  had  borne  the  Romans,  and
which  was  left  him,  as  it  were,  by  bequest,  that  he  laid  down
his  life  before  he  would  abate  it ;  for  even  when  he  was  exiled
from  his  country,  and  stood  in  need  of  support  from  others,
he  never  ceased  in  thought  to  make  war  with  the  Romans.

IT.  To  say  nothing  of  Philip,*  whom  he  rendered  an  enemy
to  the  Romans,  though  at  a  distance  from  him,  Antiochus  was
the  most  powerful  of  all  kings  at  that  period ;  and  him  he  so
inflamed  with  a  desire  for  war,  that  he  endeavoured  to  bring
troops  against  Italy  even  from  the  Red  Sea.t  As  some
ambassadors  from  Rome  were  sent  to  that  prince,  in  order  to
gain  information  respecting  his  intentions,  and  to  endeavour,
by  underhand  contrivances,  to  render  Hannibal  an  object  of
suspicion  to  the  king  (as  if,  being  bribed  by  them,  he
entertained  other  sentiments  than  before)  ;  and  as  they  were
not  unsuccessful  in  their  attempts,  and  Hannibal  became
aware  of  that  fact,  and  found  himself  excluded  from  the  privy
council,  he  went  at  a  time  appointed  to  the  king  himself,  and,
after  having  said  much  concerning^  his  attachment' to  him  and
his  hatred  to  the  Romans,  he  added  the  following  statement :
"  My*  father  Hamilcar,"  said  he,  "  when  I  was  a  very  little  boy,
being  not  more  than  nine  years  old,  offered  sacrifices  at  Car-
thage, when  he  was  going  as  commander  into  Spain,  to  Jupiter,
the  best  and  greatest  of  the  gods ;  and  while  this  religious
ceremony  was  being  performed^  he  asked  me  whether  I  should
like  to  go  with  him  to  the  camp.  As  I  willingly  expressed  my
consent,  and  proceeded  to  beg  him  not  to  hesitate  to  take  me,
he  replied,  *  /  will  do  fo,  if  you  will  give  me  the  promise  which
I  ash  of  you'  At  tne  same  time  he  led  me  to  the  altar  at
which  he  had  begun  to  sacrifice,  and,  sending  the  rest  of  the
company  away,  required  me,  taking  hold  of  the  altar,  to  swear

•  Son  of  Demetrius,  and  last  king  but  one  of  Macedonia.  See
Justin,  xxviiL  4  ;  Ixix.  1 — 4  ;  xzz.  8 ;  zxxii.  2.

f  A  JRtbbro  MarL]  It  is  the  Mare  Erythrceum  that  is  meant,  lying
between  Acabia  and  India,


HANNIBAL.  419

that  J  would  never  be  in  friendship  with  the  "Romans.  This
oath,  thus  takeu  before  my  father,  I  have  so  strictly  kept  even
to  this  day,  that  no  man  ought  to  doubt  but  that  I  shall  be  of
the  same  mind  for  the  rest  of  my  life.  If,  therefore,  you
eaitertain  any  friendly  thoughts  towards  the  Romans,  you  will
not  act  imprudently  if  you  conceal  them  from  me  ;  but  when-
ever you  prepare  war,  you  will  disappoint  yourself  unless  you
constitute  me  leader  in  it."

III.  At  this  age,  accordingly,  he  accompanied  his  father
into  Spain. After  his  fathers  death,  when  Hasdrubal  was
made  general-in-chief,  he  had  the  command  of  all  the  cavalry.
When  Hasdrubal  also  was  killed,  the  army  conferred  upon'
him  the  supreme  command,  and  this  act,  when  reporteiJLaL--
Carthage,  received  public  approbation.

Hannibal  being  thus  made  commander-in-chief,  at  the  age  of
five-and-twenty,  subdued  in  war,  during  the  next  three  years,
all  the  nations  of  Spain,  took  Saguntum,  a  city  in  alliance
with  the  Romans,  by  storm,  and  collected  three  vast  armies,
of  which  he  sent  one  into  Africa,  left  another  with  his  brother
Hasdrubal  in  Spain,  and  took  the  third  with  him  into  Italy.
He  made  his  way  through  the  forests  of  the  Pyrenees,*  he
engaged,  wherever  he  directed  his  course,  with  all  the  inhabit-
ants of  the  country,  and  let  none  go  unconquered.  \  On
arriving  at  the  Alps,  which  separate  Italy  from  Gaul,  and
which  no  one  had  ever  crossed  with  an  army  before  him,
(except  Hercules  the  Greek,  from  which  achievement  the  forest
there  is  now  called  the  Grecian  forest),  he  cut  to  pieces  the
people  of  the  Alps  who  endeavoured  to  prevent  his  passage,
laid  open  those  parts,  made  roads,  and  put  things  in  such  a
state,  that  an  elephant  fully  equipped  could  walk  where  pre-
viously one  unarmed  man  could  scarcely  crawl.  Along  this
tract  he  led  his  army,  and  arrived  in  Italy.

IV.  On  the  banks  of  the  Rhone  he  engaged  with  the  consul
Publius  Cornelius  Scipio,  and  put  him  to  flight.  At  the
Po  he  fought  with  the  same  consul  for  the  possession  of
Clastidium,t  and  expelled  him  from  that  place  wounded  and

*  Saltum  Pyrenceum.'\  The  forest,  Le.  the  woody  chain  or  range  of
the  Pyreneea.

f  ClMtidio,']  Clatttdio,  thus  given  by  Bos,  without  a  preposition  or
any  word  to  govern  it,  cannot  be  right.  It  seems  necessary  either  to
read  Claatidii,  or,  with  Lambinus,  de  Clattidio, 1  have  adopted  tho

£  E  2


420  CORNELIUS  NEPOS.

defeated.  The  same  Scipio,  with  his  colleague  Tiberias
Longus,  came  against  him  a  third  time  at  the  Trebia ;  he
came  to  battle  with  them,  and  put  both  of  them  to  flight.
He  then^  passed  through  the  country  of  the  Ligurians  over
the  chain  of  the  Apennnines,  directing  his  course  towards
Etruria.  During  this  march  he  was  afflicted  with  so  violent
a  distemper  in  his  eyes,  that  he  never  had  the  use  of  his  right
eye  so  well  afterwards.  But  even  when  he  was  troubled  with
this  malady,  and  carried  in  a  litter,  he  cut  ofif  Caius  Flaminius
the  consul  at  the  lake  Trasi menus,  being  caught  with  his
army  in  an  ambush  ;  and  not  long  after  he  killed  the  praetor
Caius  Centenius,  who  was  occupying  the  forest  with  a  choice
body  of  troops.  He  then  proceeded  into  Apulia,  where  the
two  consuls,  Caius  Terentius  Varro,  and  Paulus  JEmilius,
met  him,  both  of  whose  armies  he  routed  in  one  battle  ;  the
consul  Paulus  he  killed,  with  several  others  of  consular
dignity,  and  among  them  Cneeus  Servilius  Geminus,  who  had
been  consul  the  year  before.

V.  After  fighting  this  battle,  he  marched  towards  Rome,
nobody  opposing  him,  and  halted  on  the  hills  near  the  city.
When  he  had  lain  encamped  there  some  days,  and  was
turning  back  towards  Capua,  Quintus  Fabius  Maximus,  the
Boman  dictator,  threw  himself  in  his  way  in  the  Falemian
territory.  Here,  though  enclosed  in  a  confined  space,  be
extricated  himself  without  any  loss  to  his  army.  He  deceived
Fabius,  a  most  skilful  commander;  for,  when  night  had  come
on,  he  set  fire  to  some  bundles  of  twigs,  tied  upon  the  horns
of  oxen,  and  drove  forward  a  vast  number  of  those  cattle,
scattering  themsdves  hither  and  thither.  By  presenting
this  object  suddenly  to  their  view,*  he  struck  such  terror
into  the  army  of  the  Eomans,  that  nobody  ventured  to  stir
beyond  the  rampart.  Not  many  days  after  this  success,  he
put  to  flight  Marcus  Minucius  Eufus,  master  of  the  horse,
who  was  equal  in  power  with  the  dictator,  and  who  had  been
drawn  into  an  engagement  by  a  stratagem. While  he  was  at

Utter,  ag  the  termination  in  o  is  found  in  all  the  manuscripts.  But  no
account  of  a  battle  between  Hannibal  and  Scipio  at  Clastidium  (a
town  of  GkJlia  Cispadana,  at  no  great  distance  from  the  Po),  is  found
in  any  other  author.  Ithe  has  therefore  ventured,  somewhat  boldly,
to  eject  Clastidio  from  his  text  altogether,

*  Qao  repentino  objectu  vUo]  "Which  sudden  appearance  being  seen"
hj  the  Romans.


BAKKIfiAL.  421

a  distance,  too,  be  cut  off*  Tiberius  Sempronius  Graccbus,
consul  for  tbe  second  time,  in  tbe  country  of  tbe  Lucanians,  after
be  bad  been  inveigled  into  an  ambusb.  In  like  manner  be
caused  tbe  deatb  of  Marcus  Claudius  Marcellus,  consul  for
tbe  fifbb  time,  at  Veuusia.  To  enumerate  bis  battles  would
occupy  too  mucb  time ;  and  ibis  one  observation,  accordingly,
(from  wbicb  it  will  be  understood  bow  great  a  general  be  was),
will  be  sufficient,  tbat,  as  lon^  as  be  continued  in  Italy,  none
made  a  stand  against  bim  m  a  regular  engagement,  none,
after  tbe  battle  of  Cannte,  pitcbed  a  camp  against  bim  in  tbe
field.

VI.  Being  recalled,  witbout  baving  suffered  any  defeat,  to
defend  bis  country,  be  maintained  a  war  witb  tbe  son  of  tbat
Publius  Scipio  wbom  be  bad  routed  first  on  tbe  Ebone,  again
on  tbe  Fo,  and  a  tbird  time  on  tbe  Trebia.  As  tbe  resources
of  bis  country  were  now  exbausted,  be  wisbed,  by  a  treaty
witb  bim,  to  put  a  stop  to  tbe  war  for  a  time,  in  order  tbat  be
migbt  engage  in  it  afterwards  witb  greater  vigour.  He  came
to  a  conference  witb  bim,  but  tbe  conditions  were  not  agreed
upon.  A  few  days  after  tbis  meeting,  be  came  to  battle  witb
Scipio  at  Zama;  and  being  defeated  (incredible  to  relate!)
be  made  bis  way  to  Adrumetum,  wbicb  is  about  tbree
bundred  miles  f  from  Zama,  in  two  days  and  two  nigbts.
In  tbe  course  of  bis  retreat,  some  Numidians,  wbo  bad  left
tbe  field  in  bis  company,  formed  a  conspiracy  against  bim ;
however  be  not  only  escaped  tbem,  but  deprived  ^em  of  life.
At  Adrumetum  be  assembled  tbose  wbo  bad  survived  tbe
defeat,  and,  witb  tbe  aid  of  new  levies,  drew  together,  in  a
few  days,  a  numerous  force.

VII.  While  be  was  most  vigorously  engaged  in  preparing
for  action,  tbe  Carthaginians  made  an  end  of  tbe  war  by  a
treaty  witb  tbe  Romans.  He  bad  nevertheless  afterwards  tbe
command  of  tbe  army,  and  continued  to  act,  as  well  as  bia
brother  Mago,  in  Africa,  until  tbe  time  when  Publius  Sulpicius
and  Caius  Aurelius  became  consuls ;  for,  during  their  term
of  office,  ambassadors  from  Carthage  went  to  Home,  to  thank
the  Boman  senate  and  people  for  baving  made  peace  with

*  Aliens — nuttdit,]  Tbe  battle  being  fought  by  one  of  Hftnnibal*t
generals  in  his  absence.

t  Cireiter  millia  patmum  trecentntJ]  One  hundred  and  fifty  miles  it
supposed  to  be  nearer  the  truth«


432  CORNELIUS  XEPO&

them,  and  to  present  tliem,  on  that  account,  with  a  crown  of
gold,  requesting,  at  the  same  time,  that  their  hostages  might
reside  at  Fregellse,*  and  that  their  prisoners  might  be  re-
stored. An  answer  was  made  them,  by  a  resolution  of  the
senate,  that  "  their  present  was  acceptable  and  welcome,  and
that  their  hostages  should  live  in  the  place  which  they
desired,  but  that  they  would  not  restore  the  prisoners,  because
the  Carthaginians  retained  Hannibal,  by  whose  acts  the  war
had  been  occasioned,  and  who  was  the  bitterest  of  enemies  to  the
name  of  Eome,  in  command  of  the  army,  as  also  his  brother
Mago."  The  Carthaginians,  on  hearing  this  answer,  recalled
Hannibal  and  Mago  home.  When  he  returned,  he  was  made
pr8etor,t  in  the  two-and-twentieth  year  after  he  had  been
appointed  king ;  J  for,  as  consuls  are  elected  at  Eome,  so,  at
Carthage,  two  kings  are  annually  chosen,  retaining  their  ofl&ce
for  a  year.  In  that  post  Hannibal  conducted  himself  with
the  same  activity  as  he  had  exhibited  in  war;  for  he  took  care,
not  only  that  there  should  be  money  raised  from  new  taxes,
to  be  paid  to  the  Romans  according  to  the  treaty,  but  that
there  should  be  a  surplus  to  be  deposited  in  the  treasury.

In  the  year  after  his  prsetorship,  when  Marcus  Claudius
and  Lucius  Furius  were  consuls,  ambassadors  from  Rome  came
again  to  Carthage ;  and  Hannibal,  supposing  that  they  were
sent  to  demand  that  he  should  be  delivered  to  the  Romans,
went  secretly,  before  an  audience  of  the  senate  was  given  them,
on  board  a  vessel,  and  fled  into  Syria  to  Antiochus.  His
departure  being  made  public,  the  Carthaginians  sent  two
ships  to  seize  him,  if  they  could  overtake  him.  His  property
they  confiscated ;  his  house  they  razed  to  its  foundations ;
and  himself  they  declared  an  outlaw.

VIII.  In  the  third  year,  however,  after  he  had  fled  from  home,
and  in  the  consulship  of  Lubius  Cornelius  and  Quintus  Minu-
cius,  Hannibal  landed  with  five  ships  in  Africa,  on  the  coast
of  the  Cyrenaeans,  to  try  if  he  could  move  the  Carthaginians
to  war,  by  giving  them  hope  and  confidence  in  Antiochus,

*  A  town  on  the  Liris,  in  the  Volscian  territory.

+  Prcetor.]  This  office  seems,  from  what  follows,  to  have  been  in  a
great  degree  financial;  but  judicial  duties  were  probably  combined
in  it.

t  Rex,"]  The  two  annual  magistrates  at  Carthage  were  called
tuffetes  in  the  Punic  tongue;  the  Greeks  and  Bomans  called  them
kings.


, HANNIBAL.  423

Tyhom  he  had  now  persuaded  to  proceed  with  his  forces  to
Italy.  Thither  he  summoned  his  brother  Mago  ;  and,  when
the  Carthaginians  knew  of  the  circumstance,  they  inflicted
on  Mago  the  same  penalties  as  they  had  laid  on  his  absent
brother.  When  they  had  let  loose  tbeir  vessels,  and  sailed
off,  in  despair  of  success,  Hannibal  went  to  join  Antiochus.  Of
Mago's  end  two  accounts  have  been  given ;  for  some  have
left  on  record  that  he  perished  by  shipwreck,  others  that  he
was  killed  by  his  own  slaves.

Antiochus,  if  he  had  been  as  ready  to  obey  Hannibal's
advice  in  conducting  the  war  as  he  had  resolved  to  be  when
he  undertook  it,  might  have  fought  for  the  empire  of  the
world  nearer  the  Tiber  than  Thermopylae.*  Hannibal ,  however,
though  he  saw  him  attempt  many  things  imprudently,  left  him
in  nothing  unsupported.  He  took  the  command  of  a  few  ships,
which  he  had  been  directed  to  bring  from  Syria  into  Asia,
and  with  these  he  engaged  the  fleet  of  the  Rhodians  in  the
Pamphylian  sea.t  and  though  his  men  were  overpowered  in
the  struggle  by  the  number  of  the  enemy,  he  had  the  advan-
tage himself  in  the  wing  in  which  he  acted.

IX.  After  Antiochus  was  put  to  flight,:]:  Hannibal,  fearing
that  he  should  be  delivered  to  the  Romans  (an  event  which
would  doubtless  have  come  to  pass,  if  he  had  given  the  king
an  opportunity  of  securing  him),  went  off  to  the  people  of
Gortjm,  in  Crete,  that  he  might  there  consider  in  what  place
he  should  settle  himself.  But,  as  he  was  the  most  perspica-
cious of  all  men,  he  saw  that  unless  he  took  some  precautions,
he  should  be  in  great  danger  from  the  covetousness  of  the
Cretans  ;  for  he  carried  with  him  a  large  sum  of  money,  of
which  he  knew  that  a  report  had  gone  abroad.  He  therefore
adopted  the  following  contrivance  ;  he  filled  several  pots  with
lead,  covering  the  upper  part  with  gold  and  silver,  and  de-
posited them,  in  the  presence  of  the  leading  men§,  in  the
temple  of  Diana,  pretending  that  he  trusted  his  fortune  to

*  Antiochus  here  suffered  a  defeat  from  the  Romans.

t  In  Pamphylio  mari.]  The  sea  on  the  coast  of  Pamphylia  in  Asia
Minor.

X  Antiocko  fugato."]  Viz.,  in  the  battle  near  Magnesia,  at  the  bottom
of  Mount  Sipylus  in  Lydia.

§  PrinciptSus  prcaentibtu.']  Many  of  the  old  editions  have  Oortynits
prcBsentibvSy  a  manifest  error,  as  Bos  observes.  Principibus  occurs  in
three  manuscripts.


4^  '  CORNELIUS  NEPOS.

their  honesty.  Having  thus  deceived  them,  'he  filled  the
whole  of  some  hrazen  statues,  which  he  carried  with  him,  with
his  money,  and  threw  them  down  in  an  open  place  at  his  own
residence.  The  Gortynians,  meanwhile,  guarded  the  temple
with  extreme  care,  not  so  much  against  others  as  against
Hannibal  himself,  lest  he  should  remove  any  thing  without
their  knowledge,  and  cariy  it  off  with  him.

X.  The'  Carthaginian,  having  thus  saved  his  property,  and
deceived  all  the  Cretans,  went  into  Pontus  to  Prusias,  vdth
whom  he  showed  himself  of  the  same  mind  as  to  Italy ;
for  he  did  nothing  hut  excite  the  king  to  arms,  and  animate
him  against  the  Romans,  and  seeing  that  he  was  not  at  all
strong  in  domestic  resources,  he  induced  other  princes  to  join
Um,  and  united  waif'like  nations  on  his  side.  Eumenes,  king
of  Pergamus,  was  at  variance  with  Prusias,  and  war  was  main-
tained between  them  by  sea  and  land,  for  which  reason
Hannibal  was  the  more  desirous  that  he  should  be  crushed.
Eumenes  had  the  superiority  on  both  elements,  and  Hannibal
thought  that,  if  he  could  but  cut  him  off,  his  other  projects
would  be  easier  of  execution.  To  put  an  end  to  his  life,
therefore,  he  adopted  the  folio wing^'stratagem.  They  were  to
engage  by  sea  in  a  few  days ;  Hannibal  was  inferior  in  number
of  vessels,  and  had  to  use  art  in  the  contest,  as  he  was  no
match  for  his  enemy  in  force.  He  accordingly  ordered  aa
many  poisonous  serpents  as  possible  to  be  brought  together
alive,  and  to  be  put  into  earthen  vessels,  of  which  when  he  had
collected  a  large  number,  he  called  the  officers  of  his  ships
together,  on  the  day  on  which  he  was  going  to  ffght  at  sea,
and  directed  them  all  to  make  an  attack  upon  the  single  ship
of  King  Eumenes,  and  to  be  content  with  simply  defending
themselves  against  others,  as  they  might  easily  do  with  the
aid  of  the  vast  number  of  serpents;  adding  that  he  would
take  care  they  should  know  in  what  ship  Eumenes  sailed,
and  promising  that,  if  they  took  or  killed  him,  it  should  be  of
great  advantage  to  them.

XI.  After  this  exhortation  was  given  to  the  soldiers,  the
fleets  were  brought  out  for  action  by  both  parties.  When  the
line  of  each  was  formed,  aud  before  the  signal  was  given  for
battle,  Hannibal,  in  order  to  show  his  men  where  Eumenes
was,  despatched  to  him  ^a  letter-carrier  ^in  a  boat  with  a
herald's  staff;  who,  when  he  reached  the  enemy's  line  of


&ANN1BAL.  425

Vessels,  held  out  a  letter,  and  signified  that  he  was  looking  for
the  king ;  he  was  therefore  immediately  taken  to  Eumenes,
because  nobody  doubted  that  there  was  something  written  in
the  letter  relating  to  peace.  The  messenger,  having  thus
made  the  kings  ship  known  to  his  party,  returned  to  the
same  place  from  which  he  had  come.  Eumenes,  on  opening
*  the  letter,  found  nothing  in  it  but  what  was  meant  to  ridicule
him ;  and  though  he  wondered  as  to  the  motive  of  it,  and
none  could  be  discovered,  yet  he  did  not  hesitate  to  come  at
once  to  battle.  In  the  conflict,  the  Bithynians,  according  to
the  direction  of  Hannibal,  fell  all  at  once  upon  the  ship  of
Eumenes.  That  prince,  as  he  was  unable  to  withstand  their
onset,  sought  safety  in  flight,  but  would  not  have  found  it,
had  he  not  taken  [refuge  behind  his  guards,  which  had  been
posted  on  the  neighbouring  shore.  As  the  rest  of  the  Per-
gamenian  ships  bore  hard  upon  the  enemy,  the  earthen  pots,
of  which  we  have  previously  spoken,  began  suddenly  to  be
hurled  into  them.  These,  when  tiirown,  at  first  excited
laughter  among  the  combatants,  nor  could  it  be  conceived  why
such  a  thing  was  done ;  but  when  they  saw  their  ships  filled
with  serpents,  and,  startled  at  the  strangeness  of  the  oc-
currence, knew  not  what  to  avoid  first,  they  put  about  their
ships,  and  retreated  to  their  camp  upon  ^e  coast.  Thus
Hannibal,  by  his  stratagem,  prevailed  over  the  force  of  the
Pergamenians.  Nor  was  this  the  only  occasion ;  but  often,  at
other  times,  he  defeated  the  enemy  with  his  troops  on
land,  and  with  equally  skilful  management.

XII.  While  these  transactions  were  taking  place  in  Asia,
it  happened  accidentally  at  Home  that  certain  ambassadors
from  Prusias  took  supper  at  the  house  of  Lucius  Quintius
Flamininus,  one  of  the  consuls ;  and  there,  as  mention  was
made  of  Hannibal,  one  of  them  observed  that  he  was  in  the
dominions  of  Prusias.  This  information  Flamininus  commu-
nicated the  next  day  to  the  senate.  The  conscript  fathers,
who  thought  that  they  would  never  be  free  from  plots  as  long
as  Hannibal  was  alive,  sent  ambassadors  to  Bithynia,  and
among  them  Flamininus,  to  request  the  king  not  to  keep
their  bitterest  enemy  with  him,  but  to  deliver  him  up  to  them.
To  this  embassy  Prusias  did  not  dare  to  give  a  refusal ;  he
made  some  opposition,  however,  to  one  point,  begging  them


426  CORNELIUS  NSPOa

not  to  require  of  him*  wliat  was  contrary  to  the  rights  of
hospitality,  saying  that  they  themselves  might  make  Hannibal
prisoner,  if  they  could,  as  they  would  easily  find  out  the  plaee
where  he  was.  Hannibal  indeed  confined  himself  to  one
place,  Uving  in  a  fortress  which  had  been  given  him  by  the
king ;  and  this  he  had  so  constructed  that  it  had  outlets  on
every  side  of  the  building,  always  fearing  lest  that  should
happen  which  eventually  came  to  pass.  When  the  Roman
ambassadors  had  gone  thither,  and  had  surrounded  his  house
with  a  number  of  men,  a  slave,  looking  out  at  a  gate,  told
Hannibal  that  several  armed  men  were  to  be  seen,  contrary  to
what  was  usual.  Hannibal  desired  him  to  go  round  to  all  the
gates  of  the  castle,  and  bring  him  word  immediately  whether
it  was  beset  in  the  same  way  on  all  sides.  The  slave  having
soon  reported  how  it  was,  and  informed  him,  that  all  the  passages
were  secured,  he  felt  certain  that  it  was  no  accidental  occur-
rence, but  that  his  person  was  menaced,  and  that  his  life  was
no  longer  to  be  preserved.  That  he  might  not  part  with  'it,
however,  at  the  pleasure  of  another,  and  dwelling  on  the
remembrance  of  his  past  honours,  he  took  poison,  which  he
had  been  accustomed  always  to  carry  with  him.

XIII.  Thus  this  bravest  of  men,  after  having  gone  through
many  and  various  labours,  found  repose  in  the  seventieth  year
of  his  age.  Under  what  consuls  he  died,  is  not  agreed ;  for
Atticus  has  left  it  recorded  in  his  chronicle  that  he  ended  his
life  in  the  consulship  of  Marcus  Claudius  Marcellus  and
Quintus  Fabius  Labeo  ;  but  Polybius  says  in  that  of  Lucius
-ffimilius  Paullus  and  Cnaeus  BsBbius  Tamphilus  ;  and  Sulpi-
cius  in  that  of  Publius  Cornelius  Oethegus  and  Marcus  Bsebius
Tamphilus.

I  This  great  man,  though  occupied  in  such  vast  military
operations,  devoted  some  portion  of  his  time  to  literature;
for  there  are  some  books  of  his  written  in  the  Greek  language,
and  amongst  them  one  addressed  to  the  Ehodians  on  the  acts
of  Cnaeus  Manlius  Yulso  in  Asia.

Of  the  wars  which  he  conducted  many  have  given  the
history ;  and  two  of  them  were  persons  that  were  with  him
in  the  camp,  and  lived  with  him  as  long  as  fortune  allowed,

*  JUud  recuacmt,  neid  a  ae  fieri  postula/rent,']  "  He  refused  this,  (re-
questing) that  they  would  not  require  that  to^be  done  by  him."


MARCUS  PORCIUS  CATO.  427

Silenus  and Sosilus  the  Lacedsemonian ; and  this Sosilus
Hannibal  had  as  his  instructor  in  the  Greek  language.

But  it  is  now  time  to  make  an  end  of  this  book,  and  to
give  an  account  of  commanders  among  the  Romans,  that,
when  the  actions  of  both  are  compared,  it  may  be  thft  better
determined  which  generals  deserve  the  preference.


XXIV.  MARCUS  PORCIUS  CATO.

PROM  THE  SECOND BOOK  OF  CORNELIUS  NEPOS.

Cato's  birth,  youth,  and  the  offices  that  he  held,  I. — ^^Hia  consulship
in  Hither  Spain;  his  severity  as  censor,  II.— His  eulogy;  his
studies  and  writings,  III.

I.  Cato,*  born  in  the  municipal  town  of  Tusculum,t  resided,
when  a  very  young  man,  and  before  he  turned  his  attention  to
the  attainment  of  office,  in  the  territory  of  the  Sabines,'because
he  had  an  estate  there  which  had  been  left  him  by  liis  father.
It  was  at  the  persuasion  of  Lucius  Valerius  Flaccus,  whom  he
had  for  a  colleague  in  his  consulate  and  censorship,  that  he
removed,  as  Marcus  Perpema  Censorius  was  accustomed  to
relate,  to  Rome,  and  proceeded  to  employ  himself  in  the  forum.
He  served  his  first  campaign  at  the  age  of  seventeen,  in  the
consulship  of  Quintus  Fabius  Maximus  and  Marcus  Claudius
Marcellus.  He  was  military  tribune  in  Sicily.  When  he
returned  from  thence,  he  attached  himself  to  the  staff  of  Caius
Claudius  Nero,  and  his  service  was  thought  of  great  value  in  the
battle  near  Sena,  in  which  Hasdrubal,  the  brother  of  Hannibal,
fell.  As  quaestor,  he  happened  to  be  under  the  consul,  Publius
Cornelius  Scipio  Africanus,  with  whom  he  did  not  live
according  to  the  intimate  connexion  of  his  office ;  for  he  was
at  variance  with  him  during  his  whole  life.  He  was  made
SBdile  of  the  commons  J  with  Caius  Helvius.  As  praetor  he  had
the  pro\dnce  of  Sardinia,  from  which,  when  he  was  returning

*  Cato  the  censor,  the  great  grandfather  of  the  Cato  that  killed
himself  at  Utica.

t  Situate  about  ten  miles  south-east  of  Rome,  not  far  from  the
modem  Frascati.

Z  JEdiUs  plehis.]  There  were  two  sorts  of  eediles,  plebeian  and
curule.


42S  CORNELIUS  KEPOS.

from  Africa  some  time  before  ia  the  character  of  quaestor,  he
had  brought  Quintus  Ennius,  the  poet,  an  act  which  we  value
not  less  than  the  noblest  triumphjthat  Sardinia  could  have
afforded.

II.  He  held  the  consulship  with  Lucius  Valerius  Flaccus,
and  had  by  lot  Hither  Spain  for  his  province,  from  which  be
gained  a  triumph.  As  he  stayed  there  a  long  time,  Publius
Scipio  Africanus,  when  consul  for  the  second  time,  wanted  to
remove  him  from  his  province,  and  to  succeed  him  himself,  but
was  unable,  through  the  senate,  to  effect  that  object,  even
though  he  then  possessed  the  greatest  authority  in  the  state ;
for  the  government  was  then  conducted,  not  with  regard  for
personal  influence,  but  according  to  justice.  Being  displeased
with  the  senate  on  this  account,  Scipio,  after  his  consulship
was  ended,  remained  in  the  city  as  a  private  person.*

Cato,  being  made  censor  with  the  Flaccus  above  mentioned,
Oxercised  that  office  with  severity ;  for  he  inflicted  penalties  on
paany  noblemen,  and  introduced  many  new  regulations  into
his  edict,t  by  means  of  which  luxury,  which  was  even  then
beginning  to  germinate,  might  be  repressed.  For  about  eighty
years,}  from  his  youth  to  the  end  of  his  life,  he  never  ceased  to
incur  enmity  in  behalf  of  the  commonwealth.  Though
attaicked  by  many,§  he  not  only  suffered  no  loss  of  character,
but  increased  in  reputation  for  virtue  as  long  as  he  lived.

III.  In  all  his  pursuits  he  gave  proofs  of  singular  in-
telligence and  industry;  for  he  was  a  skilful  agriculturist,
well-informed  in  political  affairs,  experienced  in  the  law,  an

*  Privatu8  in  urhe  mansit.']  That  is,  he  did  not  take  any  other
foreign  province.  Plutarch,  however,  in  his  life  of  Cato,  says  that
Scipio  was  appointed  to  succeed  Cato  in  Spain,  but  that,  being  unable
to  procure  from  the  senate  a  vote  of  censure  on  Cato's  administration,
he  passed  his  term  of  office  in  inactivity.

t  JEdicttm,.]  The  code  of  regulations  which  a  magistrate  published
on  entering  upon  his  office,  adopting  what  he  chose  from  the  edicts  of
his  predecessors,  and  adding  what  he  thought  proper  of  his  own.  See
Adam's  Rom.  Ant.  p.  Ill,  8vo.  ed.

X  Circiter  awaos  octogirUa.']  This  passage  is  in^  some  way  faulty.  Bos
thinks  that  the  number  is  corrupt,  or  that  the  three  words  have  been
intruded  from  the  margin  into  the  text.  Pighius  would  read  VioeU
dreiter  aimos  octogirUa^  et,  &c.

§  A  imdtis  tentatut.']  Plutarch,  in  his  life  of  Cato,  c.  15,  says  that
Cato  was  attacked  or  accused  about  fifty  times  in  the  course  of  his
political  life. — Bo8.


MARCUS  PORCIUS  CATO.  429

eminent  commander,  a  respectable  oraton  He  was  also  much
devoted  to  literature,  and  though  he  had  entered  on  the 'study
of  it  at  an  advanced  age,  yet  he  made  such  progress  in  it,  that
you  could  not  easily  discover  anything,  either  in  Grecian  or
Italian  history,  that  was  unknown  to  him.  From  his  youth  ho
composed  speeches.  In  his  old  age  he  began  to  write  his
Histories,  of  which  there  are  ten  books.  The  first  contains  the
acts  of  the  kings  of  Home ;  the  second  and  third  show  from
whence  each  Italian  state  had  its  rise,  for  which  reason  he
seems  to  have  called  the  whole  body  of  them  Origines ;  in  the
fourth  is  related  the  first  Carthaginian  war ;  in  the  fifth  the
second ;  and  all  these  subjects  are  treated  in  a  summary  way.
Other  wars  he  has  narrated  in  a  similar  manner,  down  to  the
prsetorship  of  Lucius  Galba,  who  spoiled  the  Lusitanians.
The  leaders  in  these  wars,  however,  he  has  not  named,  but  has
stated  the  facts  without  the  names.  In  the  same  books  he  has
given  an  account  of  whatever  seemed  remarkable  in  Italy  and
Spain  ;  and  there  are  shown  in  tbem  much  labour  and  industry,
and  much  learning.

Of  his  life  and  manners  we  have  spoken  more  at  large  in  the
book  which  we  wrote  expressly  concerning  him  at  the  request
of  Titus  Pomponius  Atticus ;  and  we  therefore  refer  those  who
would  know  Cato  to  that  volume.


430


XXV.  TITUS  POMPONIUS  ATTICUS.

Birfch,  talents,  and  education  of  Atticus,  I. — He  goes  to  Athens;  assists
the  Athenians  with  money;  his  popularity  there,  II.  III. — Is
favourably  regarded  by  Sylla;  returns  to  Home,  IV.— Inherits
property  from  Quintus  Csecilius ;  his  friendship  with  Cicero  and
Hortensius,  V. — He  abstains  from  seeking  offices  or  honours,  but
maintains  his  dignity  of  character,  VI. — In  the  civU  war  he
ofiPends  neither  Pompey  nor  Caesar,  VII. — After  Csesar  is  killed,
he  supplies  Brutus  with  money,  VIII. — Is  not  even  an  enemy  to
Antony,  whose  wife  and  children  he  relieves,  IX.  —  Antony's
regard  for  the  services  of  Atticus,  X. — He  aids  many  of  the  pro-
scribed, XI. — He  uses  his  interest  only  to  avert  dangers  and
troubles  from  his  friends,  XIL — Of  his  private  life ;  is  a  good
father  and  citizen,  XIII.— His  meals  ;  his  prudence  in  pecuniary
matters,  XIV. — His  love  of  truth  and  diligence,  XV. — Agreeable
to  the  old  in  his  youth,  and  to  the  young  in  his  old  age,  XVL —
His  dutifulness  to  his  mother,  XVII. — His  love  of  antiqtiity,
and  literature  in  genei'al,  XVIII. — His  connexion  with  Caesar
Octavianus,  XIX. — His  friendship  with  Caesar  and  Antony,  XX. —
His  last  illness,  XXL—  He  starves  himself  to  death ;  his  funeral,
XXIL

I.  TiTus  PoMPONTUs  AxTJcus,  descended  from  a  most
ancient  Roman  family,*  held  the  equestrian  rank  received  in
uninterrupted  succession  from  his  ancestors.  He  had  a  father
who  was  active,  indulgent,  and,  as  times  then  were,  wealthy,
as  well  as  eminently  devoted  to  literature;  and,  as  he  loved
learning  himself,  he  instructed  his  son  in  all  branches  of
knowledge  with  which  youth  ought  to  be  made  acquainted.  In
the  boy,  too,  besides  dociHty  of  disposition,  there  was  great
sweetness  of  voice,  so  that  he  not  only  imbibed  rapidly  what
was  taught  him,  but  repeated  it  extremely  well.  He  was  in
consequence  distinguished  among  his  companions  in  his  boy-
hood, and  shone  forth  with  more  lustre  than  his  noble
fellow-students  could  patiently  bear ;  hence  he  stirred  them  all
to  new  exertions  by  his  application.  In  the  number  of  them
were  Lucius  Torquatus,  Caius  Marius  the  younger,  and
Marcus  Cicero,  whom  he  so  aluiclied  to  himself  by  his  inter-
course with  them,  that  no  one  was  ever  more  dear  to  them.

II.  His  father  died  at  an  early  age.  He  himself,  in  his
youth,  on  account  of  his  connexion  with  Publius  Sulpicius,  who

*  Ah  origi/M  uUimd  stirpis  Romance.']  "  From  the  most  remote  origin
of  the  Roman  race."  His  family  was  so  old  that  it  reached  back  to
the  earliest  age  of  Home.


TITUS  POMPONIUS  ATTICUS.  431

was  killed  when  tribune  of  the  people,  was  not  unapprehensive
of  sharing,  in  his  danger ;  for  Anicia,  Pomponius's  cousin,  was
married  to  Marcus  Servius,  the  brother  of  Sulpicius.  When
he  saw  thai  the  state,  thei:efore,  after  the  death  of  Sulpicius,
was  throv^i  into  confusion  by  the  disturbances  of  Cinna,  and
•  that  no  facility  was  allowed  him  of  living  suitably  to  his
dignity  without  offending  one  side  or  the  other  (the  feelings  of
the  citizens  being  divided,  as  some  favoured  the  party  of  Sylla
and  others  that  of  Cinna)  he  thought  it  a  propey  time  for
devoting  himself  to  his  studies,  and  betook  himself  to  Athens.
He  nevertheless,  however,  assisted  young  Marius,  when
declared  an  enemy,  by  such  means  as  he  could,  and  relieved
him  in  his  exile  with  money.  And,  lest  his  sojourn  in  a
foreign  country  should  cause  any  detriment  to  his  estate,  he
transported  thither  a  great  portion  of  his  fortune.  Here  he
lived  in  such  a  manner,  tjiat  he  was  deservedly  much  beloved
by  all  the  Athenians ;  for,  in  addition  to  his  interest,  which
was  great  for  so  young  a  man,  he  relieved  their  public
exigencies  from  his  own  property ;  since,  when  the  government
was  obliged  to  borrow  money,*  and  had  no  fair  offer  of  it,  he
always  came-  to  their  aid,  and  in  such  a  way,  that  he  never
received  any  interest  of  them,  and  never  allowed  them  to  l)e
indebted  to  him  longer  than  had  been  agreed  upon ;  both  which
modes  of  acting  were  for  their  advantage,  for  he  neither
suffered  their  debt  to  grow  old  upon  them,  nor  to  be  increased
by  an  accumulation  of  interest.  He  enhanced  this  kindness
also  by  other  instances  of  liberality;  for  he  presented  the
whole  of  the  people  with  such  a  supply  of  corn,  that  seven
modiif  of  wheat  (a  kind  of  measure  which  is  called  a
inedlmnus  at  Athens)  were  allotted  to  each  person.

*  Versuram  facere.]  Vermrat  according  to  Festus  9ub  voce,  properly
signifies  borrowing  from  one  to  pay  another.  Our  language  has  no
word  corresponding  to  it.

f  Septem  rnodii.]  This  is  the  reading  of  the  old  editions,  and  of  the
manuscripts  of  Manutius,  Gifanius,  Schottus,  Leid.  and  Medic.  2.  But
since  it  appears  from  Cicero  in  Verr.  iii.  45,  46,  49,  as  well  as  from
Ausonius,  Suidas,  and  other  ancient  writers,  that  the  medimn/us  con-
tained six  modiif  Manutius,  Faemus,  and  Ursinus,  following  Georg.
Agricola  de  Mens,  et  Pond.  Gr.  et  Roul  lib.  ii.,  substituted  sex  for
»eptem  in  this  passage,  and  Lambinus,  with  all  the  subsequent  editors
of,  Nepos,  adopted  it.  There  seem,  however,  to  have  been  variations
in  the  content  of  the  medimni  and  modii.  According  to  the  old
author  on  measures,  published  by  Bigaltius among  the AvK:t(yr€8


43S  COBKELIUS  KEPOa

III.  He  also  conducted  himself  in  such  a-waj,  that  he
appeared  familiar  vfith  the  lowest,  though  on  a  level  with  the
highest.  Hence  it  happened  that  they  publicly  bestowed  upon
him  all  the  honours  that  they  could^  and  offered  to  make  him  a
citizen  of  Athens ;  an  offer  which  he  would  not  accept,  because
some  are  of  opinion  that  the  citizenship  of  Eome  is  forfeited  by
taking  that  of  another  city.  As  long  as  he  was  among  them,
he  prevented  any  statue  from  being  erected  to  him ;  but  when
absent,  he  could  not  hinder  it;  and  they  accordingly  raised
several  statues  both  to  him  and  Phidias,*  in  the  most  sacred
places,  for,  in  their  whole  management  of  the  state,  they  took
him  for  their  agent  and  adviser.  It  was  the  gift  of  fortune,
then,  in  the  first  place,  that  he  was  bom  in  that  city,  above  all
others,  in  which  was  the  seat  of  the  empire  of  the  world,  and
had  it  not  only  for  his  native  place  but  for  his  home ;  and,  in
the  next,  it  was  a  proof  of  his  wisdom,  that  when  he  betook
himself  to  a  city  which  excelled  all  others  in  antiquity,  polite-
ness, and  learning,  he  became  individually  dear  to  it  beyond
other  men.

IV.  When  Sylla  arrived  at  Athens  in  his  journey  from  Asia,
he  kept  Pomponius  in  his  company  as  long  as  he  remained
there,  being  charmed  with  the  young  man's  politeness  and
knowledge ;  for  he  spoke  Greek  so  well  that  he  might  have
been  thought  to  have  been  bom  at  Athens ;  while  there  was
such  agreeableness  in  his  Latin  style,  as  to  make  it  evident
that  the  graces  of  it  were  natural,  not  acquired.  He  also
recited  verses,  both  in  Greek  and  Latin,  in  so  pleasing  a
manner  that  nothing  could  have  been  added  to  its  attractions*
It  was  in  consequence  of  these  accomplishments  that  Sylla
would  never  suffer  him  to  be  out  of  his  company,  and  wanted
to  take  him  away  with  him  to  Home.  But  when  he
endeavoured  to  persuade  him  to  go,  **  Do  not  desire,- 1  entreat
you,"  replied  Pomponius,  "  to  lead  me  with  you  against  those,
with  whom,  that  I  might  not  bear  arms  against  you,  1  quitted

Finvum  Begvmdorumy  p.  835,  five  modii  made  a  medimmu;  and  Isidore,

Orig.  zvi.  25,  makes  the  same  statement. Phavorinus,  again,

says  tkat  the  medim/mis  was  fxoStoi  iirra, — Bos.  On  the  whole,  there-
fore. Bos  prefers  that  s^tem  should  stand.  The  modius  was  1  gaL
7*8576  pints  English.

*  Phidice.]  Some  editions  have  PUice,  "This  was  some  Phidias,
who,  though  unmentioned  by  any  other  writer,  was  known  to  Nepos
through  Atticus  with  whom  he  was  intimate."  See  c.  13. — Van  Sttxwren,


TITUS  POMPONIUS  ATTICUS.  433

Italy."  Sylla,  commending  the  good  feeling  of  the  young  man,
directed)  at  his  departure,  that  dl  the  presents  which  he  had
received  at  Athens  should  he  carried  to  his  house.

Though  he  resided  at  Athens  many  years,  paying  such,
attention  to  his  property  as  a  not  unthrifty  father  of  a  family
ought  to  pay,  and  devoting  all  the  rest  of  his  time  either  to
literature  or  to  the  puhlic  affairs  of  the  Athenians,  he  never-
theless afforded  his  services  to  his  friends  at  Rome ;  for  he
used  to  come  to  their  elections,  and  whatever  important  busi-
ness of  theirs  was  brought  forward,  he  was  never  found  wanting
on  the  occasion.  Thus  he  showed  a  singular  fidelity  to  Cicero
in  all  his  perils ;  and  presented  him,  when  he  was  banished
from  his  country,  with  the  sum  of  two  hundred  and  fifty
sestertia.*  And  when  the  afi^Edrs  of  the  Romans  became
tranquil,  he  returned  to  Rome,  in  the  consulship,  as  I  believe,
of  Lucius  Cotta  and  Lucius  Torquatus ;  and  the  whole  city  of
Athens  observed  the  day  of  his  departure  in  such  a  manner,
that  they  testified  by  their  tears  the  regret  which  they  would
afterwards  feel  for  him.

v.  He  had  an  uncle,  Quintus  CaBcilius,  a  Roman  knight,  an
intimate  friend  of  Lucius. Lucullus,  a  rich  man,  but  of  a  very
morose  temper,  whose  peevishness  he  bore  so  meekly,  that  he
retained  without  interruption,  to  the  extremity  of  old  age,  the
good  will  of  a  person  whom  no  one  else  could  endure.  In
consequence,  he  reaped  the  fruit  of  his  respectful  conduct ;  for
Csecilius,  at  his  death,  adopted  him  by  his  will,  and  made  him
heir  to  three-fourths  of  his  estate,  from  which  bequest  he
received  about  ten  thousand  sestertia.t

A  sister  of  Atticus  was  married  to  Quintus  Tullius  Cicero  ;
and  Marcus  Cicero  had  been  the  means  of  forming  the  con-
nexion, a  man  with  whom  Atticus  had  lived  in  the  closest
intimacy  from  the  time  that  they  were  fellow-students,  in
much  greater  intimacy,  indeed,  than  mih  Quintus ;  whence  it
may  be  concluded  that,  in  establishing  friendship,  similarity  of
manners  has  more  influence  than  affinity.  He  was  likewise
so  intimate  vdth  Quintus  Hortensius,  who,  in  those  times,  had
the  highest  reputation  for  eloquence,  that  it  could  not  be
decided  which  of  the  two  had  the  greater  love  for  him,  Cicero
or  Hortensius ;  and  he  succeeded  in  effecting  what  was  most

*  About  £1600  of  our  money,
t  About  £80,729  U  id.
F  P


434  CORNEUUS  NEPOS.

difficult,  namely,  that  no  enmity  should  occur  between  those
between  whom  there  was  emulation  for  such  eminence,  and
that  he  himself  should  be  the  bond  of  union  between  such
.  great  men.

VI.  He  conducted  himself  in  such  a  manner  in  political
afiBEunB,  that  he  always  was,  and  always  was  thought  to  be,  on
the  best  side ;  *  yet  he  did  not  mingle  in  civil  tumults,  because
be  thought  that  those  who  had  plunged  into  them  were  not
more  under  their  own  control  than  those  who  were  tossed  by
the  waves  of  the  sea.  He  aimed  at  no  offices  (though  they
were  open  to  him  as  well  through  bis  influence  as  through  his
high  standing),  since  they  could  neither  be  sought  in  the
ancient  method,  nor  be  gained  without  violating  the  laws  in
the  midst  of  such  unrestrained  extravagance  of  bribery,  nor  be
exercised  for  the  good  of  the  country  without  danger  in  so
corrupt  a  state  of  the  public  morals.  He  never  went  to  a  public
Bale,t  nor  ever  became  surety  or  farmer  in  any  department  of
the  public  leyenne.;  He  ^ceased  no  one,  AetZ  his  own
name  or  as  a  subscriber  to  an  accusation.§  He  never  went  to
law  about  property  of  his  own,  nor  was  ever  concerned  in  a
trial.  Offers  of  places,  under  several  consuls  and  prsetors,  he
received  in  such  a  way  as  never  to  follow  any  one  into  his
province,  being  content  with  the  honour,  and  not  solicitous  to
make  any  addition  to  his  property ;  for  he  would  not  even  go
into  Asia  with  Quintus  Cicero,  when  he  might  have  held-  the
office  of  legate  under  him ;  for  he  did  not  tmnk  it  became  him,
after  he  had  declined  to  take  the  pr8Btorship,||  to  become  the
attendant  on  a  prsBtor. In  such  conduct  he  consulted  not  only

*  Optimarvm  partinm,']  Ursmus  and  Schottus  conjecture  optimatwm
por^ium.— Heufiinger  tbinkB  optimarvan  right.

f  Ad  hattam  j^ilieam  wmquani  aeceiaitJ]  That  is,  to  a  sale  of  the
property  confiscated  in  the  proscriptions.  A  hatUif  or  spear,  set  up,
Was  the  signal  of  an  auction ;  a  custom  derived  from  the  sale  of  spoils
taken  in  war.

X  NtiUimt  rei  neqwe  frcet,  ne^  manceps  faeha  eBt."]  The  ftamen,
maneipeif  of  the  revenues  were  chiefly  eqtuitet,  but  Atticus,  though  of
that  order,  neither  became  a  farmer  himself,  nor  a  surety,  prcBB,  for  any
farmer.

§  Neque  suo  nomine  neque  sulscribeins.]  He  neither  brought  accusations
against  people  himself,  nor  supported  the  accusations  of  others  by
setting  his  hand  to  them.  This  is  said  with  reference  to  the  time  of
the  proscriptions.

II  That  he  declined  offices  generally  is  stated  above  in  this  chapter ;
there  is  no  particular  mention  that  he  declined  the  prsstorsbip.


TITUS  P0MP0NIU8  ATTICUS.  435

his  dignity  but  his  quiet;  since  he  avoided  even  the  suspicion
of  evil  practices.  Hence  it  happened  that  attentions  received
from  him  *  were  more  valued  by  all,  as  they  saw  that  they  were
attributable  to  kindness,  not  to  fear  or  hope.

VII.  When  he  was  about  sixty  years  old,  the  civil  war  with
CfiBsar  broke  out ;  but  he  availed  himself  of  the  privilege  of
his  age,  and  went  nowhere  out  of  the  city.  Whatever  was
needful  for  his  Mends  when  going  to  Pompey,  he  supplied  for
them  out  of  his  own  property.  To  Pompey  himself,  who  was
his  intimate  friend,  he  gave  no  offence ;  for  he  had  accepted  no
distinction  from  him  like  others,  who  had  gained  honours  or
wealth  by  his  means,  and  of  whom]  some  followed  his  camp
most  anwillingly,  and  some  remained  at  home  to  his  great
disgust.  But  to  Caesar  the  neutrality  of  Atticus  was  so
pleasing,  that  when  he  became  conqueror,  and  desired  money
from  several  private  persons  by  letter,  he  not  only  forebore  to
trouble  Atticus,  but  even  released,  at  his  request,  his  sister's
son  and  Quintus  Cicero  from  Pompey's  camp.  Thus,  by
adhering  to  his  old  course  of  life,  he  avoided  new  dangers.

VIII.  Then  followed  the  time,t  when,  on  the  assassination
of  CfiBsar,  the  commonwealth  seemed  to  be  in  the  hands  of  the
Bruti  J  and  Cassius,  and  the  whole  state  turned  towards  them.
Atticus,  at  that  period,  conducted  himself  towards  Brutus  in
such  a  way,  that  that  young  man  was  not  in  more  familiar
intercourse  with  any  one  of  his  own  age,  than  with  him  who
was  so  advanced  in  years,  and  not  only  paid  him  the  highest
honour  at  the  council,  \>\xt  also  at  his  table.  It  wsks  projected
by  some  that  a  private  fund  should  be  formed  by  the  Roman
knights  for  the  assassins  of  Csesar ;  a  scheme  which  they
thought  might  easily  be  accomplished  if  even  only  the  leading
men  of  that  order  would  furnish  contributions.  Atticus  was
accordingly  solicited  by  Caius  Flavins,  an  intimate  friend  of
Brutus,  to  consent  to  become  a  promoter  of  the  plan. Bui

*  Ejus  ohservcnUia.]  Ob$ervantiaj  as  Bos  and  Flsclier  observe,  is
evidently  to  be  understood  actively.

t  SectUum  ett  iHud,  occUo  CcBsare,  &c.]  The  commenoement  of  this
chapter  is  extremely  bald.  Whether  temp>M,  which  Bos  understands
with  iUvd,  has  dropped  out  of  the  text^  ar  whether  the  author
purposely  omitted  it,  must  remain  doubtful.  Perhaps  more  words
than  one  are  lost.

X  Penes  Brutos.]  Some  editions  have  Brutwm,  I  prefer  the  plura],
-flays  Bos,  Idorcus  and  Decimus  being  meant.

F  F  2


436  CORNELIUS  KEPOS.

Atticus,  'who  thought  that  services  were  to  he  done  to  friends
without  regard  to  party,  and  had  always  kept  himself  aloof
from  such  schemes,  replied  that,  "  If  Brutus  wished  to  make
use  of  any  of  his  property,  he  might  avail  himself  of  it  as  feur
as  it  would  allow ;  hut  that  ahout  that  project  he  would  never
confer  or  join  with  any  man."  Thus  that  combination  of  a  party
was  broken  by  his  dissent  alone.  Not  long  after,  Antony
began  to  get  the  advantage;  so  that  Brutus  and  Cassius,
despairing  of  their  fortune,  went  into  exile,  into  the  provinces
which  had  been  given  them  for  form's  sake  *  by  the  consuls.
Atticus,  who  had  refused  to  contribute  with  others  to  that
party  when  it  was  prosperous,  sent  to  |Brutus,  when  he  was
cast  down  and  retiring  from  Italy,  a  hundred  sestertia  f  as  a
present ;  and,  when  he  was  parted  from  him,  he  ordered  three
hundred  j:  to  be  sent  to  him  in  Epirus.  Thus  he  neitW  paid
greater  court  to  Antony  when  in  power,  nor  deserted  those
that  were  in  desperate  circumstances.

IX.  Next  followed  the  war  that  was  carried  on  at  Mutina,§
in  which,  if  I  were  only  to  say  that  he  was  toisey  1  should  say
less  of  him  than  I  ought ;  for  he  rather  proved  himself  divine,  k
a  constant  goodness  of  nature,  which  is  neither  increased  nor
diminished  by  the  events  of  fortune,  may  be  called  divinity.  ||
Antony,  being  declared  an  enemy,  had  quitted  Italy,  nor  was

•

*  Dicts-^catied,']  Bob's  text,  and  many  others,  with  all  the  manu-
scripts, have  nects  ccuusd.  JHcis  ccmsd  is  a  conjecture  of  Cujacius.
NecU  is  defended  by  Savaro,  who  says  that  the  provinces  were  given
to  Brutus  and  Cassius  for  killing  Csesar.  C^bhard  supports  Savaro,
referring  to  Veil.  Pat.  iL  62  :  Brvio  Ceasiogue  provincicB,  quas  jam  ipgi
sine  uUo  aencUua  conmiUo  occupavercmt,  decretCB.  Bos,  too,  quotes  from
Appian,  *H  /3ovXi)  ycpa  roig  AviKovaiv  u>c  TvpavvoKrSvoi^  ^^vi^c^cro.
But,  as  Emstius  observes,  the  provinces  could  not  have  been  given  to
Brutus  and  Cassius  particularly  for  killing  Csesar,  for  they  were  not
the  only  ones  concerned  in  his  death ;  and  he  therefore  prefers  dicis
cauadt  supposing  that  the  provinces  were  given  to  them  merely  to
afford  them  an  honourable  pretext  for  leaving  the  city  to  avoid  the
fury  of  the  lower  orders.  Heusinger  not  unhappily  conjectures  necessi-
tatis causA,

+  £807  5s.l0d.

t  £2421  17«.  6d

§  A  war  that  arose  between  Mark  Antony  and  Octavius  (see  Florua,
iv.  4),  through  a  dispute  about  the  will  of  Caesar,  in  which  Octavius
had  been  set  before  Antony,  who,  in  displeasure,  had  recourse  to  arms^
and  besieged  Decimus  Brutus,  who  took  the  side  of  Octavius,  in
Hutina,  now  Modena, — Fischer,

II  Divinatio.]  We  should  rather  read  divinitas,  as  Buchner  first
observed. Divinatio  occurs  below,  c  16,  but  in  its  proper  sense.


TITUS  POMPONIUS  ATTICUS.  437

there  any  hope  of  hringing  him  back.  Not  only  his  open
enemies,  who  were  then  very  powerful  and  numerous,  but  also
such  as  had  lent  themselves  to  the  party  opposed  to  him,  and
hoped  to  gain  some  share  of  praise*  by  doing  him  injury,
persecuted  his  friends,  sought  to  spoil  his  wife  Fulvia  of  «dl
her  property,  and  endeavoured  even  to  get  his  children  put  to
death.  Atticus,  though  he  lived  in  intimate  friendship  ydth
Cicero,  and  was  very  warmly  attached  to  Brutus,  yet  would  not
only  never  give  them  his  consent  to  act  against  Antony,  but,
on  the  contrary,  protected,  as  much  as  he  could,  such  of  his
friends  as  fled  from  the  city,  and  supplied  them  with  whatever
they  wanted.  On  Publius  Volumnius,  indeed,  he  conferred
such  obligations,  that  more  could  not  have  proceeded  from  a
fether.  To  Fulvia  herself,  too,  when  she  was  distracted  with  law-
suits, and  troubled  with  great  alarms,  he  gave  his  services  with
such  constancy,  that  she  never  appeared  to  answer  to  bail  f  with-
out the  attendance  of  Atticus.  He  was  her  surety  in  all  cases ;
and  even  when  she  had  bought  an  estate,  in  her  prosperous
circumstances,  to  be  paid  for  by  a  certain  day,  and  was  imable
after  her  reverse  of  fortune  to  borrow  money  to  discharge  the
debt,J  he  came  to  her  aid,  and  lent  her  the  money  without
interest,  and  without  requiring  any  security  for  the  repayment,
thinking  it  the  greatest  gain  to  be  found  grateful  and  obliging,
and  to  show,  at  the  same  time,  that  it  was  his  practice  to  be  a
friend,  not  to  fortune  but  to  men ;  and  when  he  acted  in  such
a  manner,  no  one  could  imagine  that  he  acted  for  the  sake  of
time-serving,  for  it  entered  into  nobody's  thoughts  that  Antony
could  regain  his  authority.  But  he  gradually  incurred  blame
from  some  of  the  nobles,  because  he  did  not  seem  to  have
sufficient  hatred  towards  bad  citizens.

X.  Being  under  the  guidance  of  his  ovm  judgment,  however,
he  considered  §  rather  what  it  was  right  for  him  to  do,  than

*  CommendcUionemA  Manuscripts  and  editions  are  divided  between
tMs  word  and  b(m9moaiUUem.

i*  SHterit  vadimonium,^  PromiUere  vadimoniwm  is  to  give  bail  for
one's  appearance  in  court  on  a  certain  day ;  tistere  or  ohire  vadimonium
is  to  appear  according  to  the  obligation  entered  into  when  the  bail  was
given.

X  Versuram  fiicere,']  See  note  on  c.  2.

§  lUe  autem  suijtLdicU — mtvi^atur^  &c.]  The  words  aid  judicii  must
be  taken  as  a  genitive  of  the  quality,  fUe  autem,  cum  vir  esset  aui
judicii,  &C. But  they  are,  as  they  stand,  by  no  means  satisfactory ;


488  GOBNELIUS  NEPOS.

what  others  would  commend*  On  a  sudden  'fortune  was
changed.  When  Antony  returned  into  Italy,  every  one  thought
that  Atticus  would  be  in  great  peril,  on  account  of  his  close
intercourse  with  Cicero  and  Brutus.  He  accordingly  withdrew
from  the  forum  on  the  approach  of  the  leaders,*  from  dread  of
the  proscription,  and  lived  in  retirement  at  the  house  of  Pub-
lius  Volumnius,  to  whom,  as  we  have  said,  he  had  not  long
before  given  assistance ;  (such  were  the  vicissitudes  of  fortune
in  those  days,  that  sometimes  one  party,  and  sometimes  the
other,  was  in  the  greatest  exaltation  or  in  the  greatest  peril ;)
and  he  had  with  him  Quintus  Gellius  Canus,  a  man  of  the
same  age,  and  of  a  character  very  similar  to  his  own ;  and  this
also  may  be  given  as  an  instance  of  the>  goodness  of  Atticus*s
disposition,  that  he  lived  in  such  close  intimacy  with  him
whom  he  had  known  when  a  boy  at  school,  that  their  friend-
ship  increased  even  to  the  end  of  their  lives.  But  Antony,
though  he  was  moved  with  such  hatred  towards  Cicero,  that  he
showed  his  enmity,  not  only  to  him,  but  to  all  his  friends,  and
resolved  to  proscribe  them,  yet,  at  the  instance  of  many,  was
mindful  of  the  obliging  conduct  of  Atticus ;  and,  after  ascer-
taining where  he  was,  wrote  to  him  with  his  own  hand,  that
he  need  be  under  no  apprehension,  but  might  come  to  him  imme-
diately ;  as  he  had  excepted  him  and  Gellius  Canus,  for  his
sake,  from  the  number  of  the  proscribed ;  and  that  he  might
not  fall  into  any  danger,  as  the  message  was  sent  at  night,  he
appointed  him  a  guard.  Thus  Atticus,  in  a  time  of  the  greatest
alarm,  was  able  to  save,  not  only  himself,  but  him  whom  he
held  most  dear ;  for  he  did  not  seek  aid  from  any  one  for  the
sake  of  his  own  security  only,  but  in  conjunction  with  his
friend ;  so  that  it  might  appear  that  he  wished  to  endure-  no
kind  of  fortune  apart  from  him.  But  if  a  pilot  is  extolled
with  the  greatest  praise,  who  saves  a  ship  from  a  tempest  in
the  midst  of  a  rocky  sea,  why  should  not  his  prudence  be
thought  of  the  highest  character,  who  arrives  at  safety  through
1^0  many  and  so  violent  civil  tumults  ?

XI.  When  he  had  delivered  himself  from  these  troubles,  he
had  no  other  care  than  to  assist  as  many  persons  as  possible,

something  seems  to  be  wanting  in  fche  text. Schottufl,  however,  thinks
them  an  intruded  gloss.

*  Impercntorvm.']  The  triumvirs,  Caesar,  Antony,  and  Lepidus. At
their  approach  he  retired  from  the  forum,  i.e.,  from  all  public  business.


TITUS  POMPONIUS  ATTICUS.  439

by  whatever  means  he  could.  When  the  common  people,  -in
consequence  of  the  rewards  offered  by  the  triumvirs,  were
searching  for  the  proscribed,  no  one  went  into  Epirus*  with-
out finding  a  supply  of  everything;  andr  to  every  one  was
given  permission  to  reside  there  constantly.  After  the  battle
of  Philippi,  too,  and  the  dieath  of  Caius  Gassius  and  Marcus
Brutus,  he  resolved  on  protecting  Lucius  Julius  Mocilla,  a
man  of  praetorian  rank,  and  his  son,  as  well  as  Aulus  Tor-
quatus,  and  others  involved  in  the  same  ill  fortune,  and
caused  supplies  of  everything  to  be  sent  them  from  Epirus  to
Samothrace.

To  enumerate  all  such  acts  of  his  would  be  difficult;  nor
are  they  necessary  to  be  particularized.  One  point  we  would
wish  to  be  understood^  that  his  generosity  was  not  time-
serving or  artful,  as  may  be  judged  from  the  circumstances
and  period  in  which  it  was  shown ;  for  he  did  not  make  his
court  to  the  prosperous,  but  was  always  ready  to  succour  the
distressed.  Servilia,  for  instance,  the  mother  of  Brutus,  he
treated  with  no  less  consideration  after  Brutus's  death  than
when  she  was  in  the  height  of  good  fortune.  Indulging  his
liberality  in  such  a  manner,  he  incurred  no  enmities,  since  he
neither  injured  any  one,  nor  was  he,  if  he  received  any  injury,
more  willing  to  resent  than  to  forget  it.  Kindnesses  that  he
received  he  kept  in  perpetual  remembrance ;  but  such  as  he
himself  conferred,  he  remembered  only  so  loii^  as  he  who  had
received  them  was  gmteful.  He  accordingly  made  it  appear
to  have  been  truly  said,  that  "  Every  man's  manners  make
his  fortune."  Yet  he  did  nojt  study  his  fortune t  before  he
formed  himself,  taking  care  that  he  might  not  justly  suffer  for
any  part  of  his  conduct.

XII.  By  such  conduct,  liierefore,  he  brought  it  to  pass,
that  Marcus  Yipsanius  Agrippa,  who  was  united  in  the  closest
intimacy  with  young  Caesar,  tiiough,  through  his  own  interest
and  Caesar's  influence,  he  had  power  to  choose  a  wife  from
any  rank  whatever,  fixed  on  a  connexion  with  him  rather  than

*  Where  Atticus  had  estates. See  c.  14.

+  Neque  tamen  priUs  iUe  fortxmam,  qudm  ae  ipse,  finocit.']  A  very
inapplicable  observation.  Nepos  first  says  that  a  man's  manners
fashion  his  fortune,  and  then  speaks  of  Atticus  forming  himself  and
his  fortime.  The  word  tamen  would  intimate  some  opposition ;  but
there  is  none.  Atticus,  having  formed  his  manners,  might  leave  his
manners  to  form  his  fortune.


440  COBNETJUS  NEFOS.

with  any  other,  and  preferred  a  marriage  with  the  daughter  of
a  Roman  knight  to  an  alliance  with  the  most  noble  of  women.
The  promoter  of  this  match  (for  it  is  not  to  be  concealed)  was
Mark  Antony,  when  triumvir  for  settling  the  state ;  but
though  Atticus  might  have  increased  his  property  by  the
interest  of  Antony,  he  was  so  far  from  coveting  money,  that
he  never  made  use  of  that  interest  except  to  save  his  friends
from  danger  or  trouble  ;*  a  fact  which  was  eminently  remark-
able at  the  time  of  the  proscription ;  for  when  the  triumviri,
according  to  the  way  in  which  things  were  then  managed,  had
sold  the  property  of  Lucius  Saufeius,  a  Roman  knight,  who
was  of  the  same  age  as  Atticus,  and  who,  induced  by  a  love
for  the  study  of  philosophy,  had  lived  with  him  several  years
at  Athens,  and  had  valuable  estates  in  Italy,  it  was  effected
by  the  efforts  and  perseverance  of  Atticus,  that  Saufeius  was
made  acquainted  by  the  same  messenger,  that  "  he  had  lost
his  property  and  had  recovered  it."  He  also  brought  off
Lucius  Julius  Calidus,  whom  I  think  I  may  truly  assert  to
have  been  the  most  elegant  poet  that  our  age  has  produced
since  the  death  of  Lucretius  and  Catullus,  as  well  as  a  man  of
high  character,  and  distinguished  by  the  best  intellectual  ac-
complishments, who,  in  his  absence,  after  the  proscription  of
the  knights,  had  been  enrolled  in  the  number  of  the  proscribed
by  PubUus  Volumnius,  the  captain  of  Antony's  engineers,  on
account  of  his  great  possessions  in  Africa ;  an  act  on  the  part
of  Atticus,  of  which  it  was  hard  to  judge  at  the  time,  whether
it  were  more  onerous  or  honourable.  But  it  was  well  known
that  the  friends  of  Atticus,  in  times  of  danger,  were  not  less
his  care  in  their  absence  than  when  they  were  present.

XIII.  Nor  was  he  considered  less  deserving  as  a  master
of  a  fapily  than  as  a  member  of  the  state ;  for  though  he  was
very  rich,  no  man  was  less  addicted  to  buying  or  building
than  he.  Yet  he  lived  in  very  good  style,  and  had  everything
of  the  best ;  for  he  occupied  the  house  that  had  belonged  to
Tamphilust  on  the  Quirinal  hill,  which  was  bequeathed  to  him
by  his  uncle,  and  the  attractions  of  which  consisted,  not  in

*  Niii  in  depreccmdU  amicorum  aut  perictUis  attt  ineomfnodis.']
"  UnleBS  in  deprecating  either  the  dangers  or  troubles  of  his  friends."

f  Domvm  Tamphilanam.']  To  what  Tamphilus  the  house  had
belonged  is  not  known.  There  were  two  consuls  with  that  surname,
A.u.G.  570,  571.


TITUS  POMPONIUS  ATTICUS.  441

tbe  building  itself,  but  in  the  wood  by  whicb  it  was  sur-
rounded ;  for  the  edifice,  constructed  after  the  ancient  fashion,
showed  more  regard  to  convenience*  than  expense,  and  At-
ticus  made  no  alteration  in  it  except  such  as  he  was  obliged  to
make  by  the  eiSects  of  time.  He  kept  an  establishment  of
slaves  of  the  best  kind,  if  we  were  to  judge  of  it  by  its  utility,
but  if  by  its  external  show,  scarcely  coming  up  to  mediocrity ;
for  there  were  in  it  well-taught  youths,  excellent  readers,  and
numerous  transcribers  of  books,  insomuch  that  there  was  not'
even  a  footmanf  that  could  not  act  in  either  of  those  capacities
extremely  well.  Other  kinds  of  artificers,^  also,  such  as  do-
mestic necessities  require,  were  very  good  there,  yet  he  had
no  one  among  them  that  was  not  bom  and  instructed  in  his
house ;  all  which  particulars  are  proofs,  not  only  of  his  self-
restraint,  but  of  his  attention  to  his  affairs ;  for  not  to  desire
inordinately  what  he  sees  desired  by  many,  gives  proof  of  a
man's  moderation ;  and  to  procure  what  he  requires  by  labour
rather  than  by  purchase,  manifests  no  small  exertion.  Atticus
was  elegant,  not  magnificent;  polished,  not  extravagant;  he
studied,  with  all  possible  care,  neatness,  and  not  profusion.
His  household  furniture  was  moderate,  not  superabundant,
but  so  that  it  could  not  be  considered  as  remarkable  in  either
respect.  Nor  will  I  omit  the  following  particular,  though  I
may  suppose  that  it  will  be  unimportant  to  some :  that  though
he  was  a  hospitable  Eoman  knight,  and  invited,  with  no  want
of  liberality,  men  of  all  ranks  to  his  house,  we  know  that  he
was  accustomed  to  reckon  from  his  day-book,  as  laid  out  in
current  expenses,  not  more  than  three  thousand  asses  §  a

*  Phis  saUs.']  llie  word  wlis  does  not  admit  of  a  very  satiBfactory
explanation  in  this  passage.  Most  interpreters,  says  Bodcler,  take  it
for  ffraiia,  venustaSf  ars,  degantia.

f  Pedisieqwis.']  The  word  signifies  any  slave  or  servant  who  follows
or  attends  on  his  master ;  a  footman,  lacquey,  or  page.  Many  of  the
better  sort  of  slaves,  among  the  Romans,  were  so  well  educated  that,
while  they  still  contixmed  pediasequi,  they  were  able  to  act  as  (magnotta
or  librariif  readers  or  transcribers.

X  Artificea  cceteri,']  Workmen  of  all  kinds.

§  Tema  mUHa  ceris.]  Such  is  the  reading  of  all  the  manuscripts  and
editions,  but  no  commentator  has  thought  it  a  sufficient  sum.  It
amounts  only  to  £2i  4«.  Hd,  Hotomannus,  Tract. «de  Re  Nummarid,
p.  87,  would  read  tricenoy  thirty,  but  even  £240  a  month  would  be  a
very  small  expenditure  for  a  man  of  such  income  as  Atticus.  Conjec-
ture, however,  in  such  a  case,  is  useless.


442  CORNELIUS  NEPOS.

month,  one  month  'with  another ;  and  we  relate  this,  not  as
hearsay,  but  as  what  we  know,  for  we  were  often  present,  by
reason  of  the  intimacy  between  us,  at  his  domestic  arrange-
ments.

XIV.  At  his  banquets  no  one  ever  heard  any  other  enter-
tainment for  the  ears*  than  a  reader;  an  entertainment
which  we,  for  our  parts,  think  in  the  highest  degree  pleasing ;
nor  was  there  ever  a  supper  at  his  house  without  reading  of
some  kind,  that  the  guests  might  find  their  intellect  gratified
no  less  than  their  appetite,  for  he  used  to  invite  people  whose
tastes  were  not  at  variance  with  his]  own.  After  a  large
addition,  too,  was  made  to  his  property,  he  made  no  change  in
his  daily  arrangements,  or  usual  way  of  life,  and  exhibited  such
moderation,  that  he  neither  lived  unhandsomely,  with  a  for-
tune of  two  thousand  sestertia,t  which  he  had  inherited  from
his  father,  nor  did  he,  when  he  had  a  fortune  of  a  hundred
thousand  sestertia,  J  adopt  a  more  splendid  mode  of  living  than
that  with  which  he  had  commenced,  but  kept  himself  at  an
equal  elevation  in  both  states.  He  had  no  gardens,  no  expen-
sive suburban  or  maritime  villa,  nor  any  farm  except  those  at
Ardea  and  Nomentum ;  and  his  whole  revenue  arose  from  his
property  in  Epirus  and  at  Rome.  Hence  it  may  be  seen  that
he  was  accustomed  to  estimate  the  worth  of  money,  not  by  the
quantity  of  it,  but  by  the  mode  in  which  it  was  used.

XV.  He  would  neither  utter  a  falsehood  himself,  nor
could  he  endure  it  in  others.  His  courtesies,  accordingly,
were  paid  with  a  strict  regard  to  veracity,  just  as  his  gravity
was  mingled  with  afiability ;  so  that  it  is  hard  to  determine
whether  his  friends'  reverence  or  love  for  him  were  the  greater.
Whatever  he  was  aaked  to  do,  he  did  not  promise  without
8olemnity,§  for  he  thought  it  the  part,  not  of  a  liberal,  but  of
a  light-minded  man,  to  promise  what  he  would  be  unable  to
perform.  But  in  striving  to  effect  what  he  had  once  engaged
to  do,  he  used  to  take  so  much  pains,  that  he  seemed  to  be

*  AUud  acroama,']  Acroama,  a3  Fischer  observes,  generally  signified
among  the  Latins,  not  a  thing,  but  a  person ;  and  it  may  be  so  inter-
preted in  this  passage.

t  In  sestertio  vicies.]  £16,145  16s,  Sd.
: J  In  sestertio  cerUies.]  £80,729  3«.  4d

§  BeUgiosi  promiUebat.]  He  made  no  promise  lightly,  but  as  if  he
were  religiou^y  determined  to  fulfil  it


TITUS  POMPONIUS  ATTICUS.  448

engaged,  not  in  an  afiTair  entrusted  to  him,  but  in  his  own.
Of  a  matter  which  he  had  once  taken  in  hand,  he  was  never
weary;  for  he  thought  his  reputation,  than  which  he  held
nothing  more  dear,  concerned  in  the  accomplishment  of  it
Hence  it  happened  that  he  managed  all  the  commissions*  of
the  Ciceros,  Cato,  Marius,  Quintus  Hortensius,  Aulus  Tor-
quatus,  and  of  many  Eoman  knights  besides.  It  may  therefore
be  thought  certain  that  he  declined  business  of  state,  not  from
indolence,  but  from  judgment.

XVI.  Of  his  kindness  of  disposition,  I  can  give  no  greater
proof  than  that,  when  he  was  young,  he  was  greatly  liked  by
Sylla,  who  was  then  old,  and  when  he  was  old,  he  was  much
beloved  by  Marcus  Brutus,  then  but  young;  and  that  with  those
friends  of  the  same  age  as  himself,  Quintus  Hortensius  and
Marcus  Cicero,  he  lived  in  such  a  manner  that  it  is  hard  to
determine  to  which  age  his  disposition  was  best  adapted,
though  Marcus  Cicero  loved  him  above  all  men,  so  that  not
even  his  brother  Quintus  was  dearer  or  more  closely  united  to
him.  In  testimony  of  this  fSeust  (besides  the  books  in  which
Cicero  mentions  him,  and  which  have  been  published  to  the
wojld),  there  are  sixteen  books  of  letters,  written  to  Atticus,
which  extend  from  his  consulship  to  his  latter  days,  and  which
he  that  reads  will  not  much  require  a  regular  history  of  those
times ;  for  all  particulars  concerning  the  inclinations  of  leading
men,  the  faults  of  the  generals,  cmd  the  revolutions  in  the
government,  are  so  fully  stated  in  them  that  every  thing  is  made
dear;  and  it  may  be  easily  concluded  that  wisdom  is  in  some
degree  divination,  as  Cicero  not  only  predicted  that  those
things  would  happen  which  took  place  during  his  life,  but
foretold,  like  a  prophet,  the  things  which  are  coming  to  pass
at  present

XVII.  Of  the  affectionate  disposition  of  Atticus  towards  his
relatives,  why  should  I  say  much,  since  I  myself  heard  him
proudly  assert,  and  with  truth,  at  the  funeral  of  his  mother,
whom  he  buried  at  the  age  of  ninety,  that  '*  he  had  never  had  oc-
casion to  be  reconciled  to  his  mother,''t  ai^d  that  **  he  had  never
been  at  all  at  variance  with  his  sister/*  who  was  nearly  of  the

*  Om/nia  negotiaj]  This  must  be  taken  with  much  limitation;  he
might  do  all  the  business  with  which  they  troubled  him.

t  Nunquam  cum  matre  in  graMam  rediiase,]  Never  having  had  any
disagreement  with  her.


444  OORNEUUS  NEPOS.

same  age  with  himself ;  a  proof  that  either  no  cause  of  com-
plaint had  happened  between  them,  or  that  he  was  a  person  of
snch  kind  feelings  towards  his  relatives,  as  to  think  it  an  im-
piety to  be  offended  with  those  whom  he  ought  to  love.  Nor
did  he  act  thusr  from  nature  alone,  though  we  all  obey  her,  but
from  knowledge ;  for  he  had  fixed  in  his  mind  the  precepts  of
the  greatest  philosophers,  so  as  to  use  them  for  the  direction
of  his  life,  and  not  merely  for  ostentation.

XVIII.  He  was  also  a  strict  imitator  of  the  customs  of  our
ancestors,  and  a  lover  of  antiquity,  of  which  he  had  so  exact  a
knowledge,  that  he  has  illustrated  it  throughout  in  the  book  in
which  he  has  characterized*  the  Roman  magistrates ;  for  there
is  no  law,  or  peace,  or  war,  or  illustrious  action  of  the  Roman
people,  which  is  not  recorded  in  it  at  its  proper  period,  and,
what  was  extremely  difficult,  he  has  so  interwoven  in  it  the
origin  of  families,  that  we  may  ascertain  from  it  the  pedigrees
of  eminent  men.  He  has  given  similar  accounts  too,  sepa-
rately, in  other  books ;  as,  at  the  request  of  Marcus  Brutus,
he  specified  in  order  the  members  of  the  Junian  family,  from
its  origin  to  the  present  age,  stating  who  each  was,  from  whom
sprung,  what  offices  he  held,  and  at  what  time.  In  like  manner,
at  the  request  of  Marcellus  Claudius,  he  gave  an  account  of
the  feunily  of  the  Marcelli ;  at  the  request  of  Scipio  Cornelius
and  Fabius  Maximus,  of  that  of  the  Fabii  and  ^miHi ;  than
which  books  nothing  can  be  more  agreeable  to  those  who  have
any  desire  for  a  knowledge  of  the  actions  of  illustrious  men.

He  attempted  also  poetry,  in  order,  we  suppose,  that  he
might  not  be  without  experience  of  the  pleasure  of  writing  it ;
for  he  has  characterized  in  verse  such  men  as  excelled  the  rest
of  the  Roman  people  in  honour  and  the  greatness  of  their
achievements,  so  that  he  has  narrated,  under  each  of  their  effi-
gies, their  actions  and  offices,  in  not  more  than  four  or  five
lines ;  and  it  is  almost  inconceivable  that  such  important  mat-
ters could  have  been  told  in  so  small  a  space.  There  is  also  a
book  of  his,  written  in  Greek,  on  the  consulship  of  Cicero.

These  particulars,  so  far,  were  published  by  me  whilst
Atticus  was  alive.


*  Omcmt.]  Bos,  Voasiufl,  and  others,  prefer  ordinavU.  But  Heu-
mnger  thinks  orncmt  may  very  well  be  taken  in  the  sense  in  which  I
have  rendered  it.


TITUS  POMPONIUS  ATTICUS.  446

XIX.  Since  fortune  has  chosen  that  we  should  outlive  him,
we  wiirnow  proceed  with  the  sequel,  and  will  show  our  readers
hy  example,  as  &r  as  we  can,  that  (as  we  have  intimated
above)  **  it  is  in  general  a  man's  manners  that  bring  him  his
fortune.*'*  For  Atticus,  though  content  in  the  equestrian
rank  in  which  he  was  bom,  became  united  by  marriage  with
the  emperor  Julius's  son,  whose  friendship  he  had  previously
obtained  by  nothing  else  but  his  elegant  mode  of  living,  by
which  he  had  charmed  also  other  eminent  men  in  the  state,  of
equal  birth,t  but  of  lower^fortune ;  for  such  prosperity  attended
CsBsar,  that  fortune  gave  him  everything  that  she  had  previously
bestowed  upon  any  one,  and  secured  for  him  what  no  citizen
of  Bome  had  ever  been  able  to  attain.  Atticus  had  a  grand-
daughter, the  daughter  of  Agrippa,  to  whom  he  had  married
his  daughter  in  her  maidenhood ;  and  Gsesar  betrothed  her,
when  she  was  scarcely  a  year  old,  to  Tiberius  Claudius  Nero,
son  of  Drusilla,  and  step-son  to  himself;  an  alliance  which
established  their  friendship,  and  ^rendered  their  intercourse
more  frequent.

XX.  Even  before  this  comiexion,  however,  Caesar  not  only,
when  he  was  absent  from  the  city,  never  despatched  letters  to  any
one  of  his  friends  without  writing  to  Atticus  what  he  was
doing,  what,  above  all,  he  was  reading,  in  what  place  he  was,
and  how  long  he  was  going  to  stay  in  it,  but  even  when  he  was
in  Rome,  and  through  his  numberless  occupations  enjoyed  the
society  of  Atticus  less  frequently  than  he  wished,  scarcely  any
day  passed  in  which  he  did  not  write  to  him,  sometimes  ask-
ing him  something  relating  to  antiquity,  sometimes  proposing
to  him  some  poetical  question,  and  sometimes,  by  a  jest,
drawing  from  him  a  longer  letter  than  ordinaiy.  Hence  it
was,  that  when  the  temple  of  Jupiter  Feretrius,  built  in  the
Capitol  by  Romulus,  was  unroofed  and  falling  down  through
age  and  neglect,  Caesar,  on  the  suggestion  of  Atticus,  took
care  that  it  should  be  repaired.

Nor  was  he  less  frequently,  when  absent,  addressed  in  let-
ters by  Mark  Antony ;  so  that,  from  the  remotest  parts  of
the  earth,  he  gave  Atticus  precise  information  what  he  was
doing,  and  what  cares  he  had  upon  him. How  strong  such

*  ConcUiare  fortwnam.]  "  Procure  him  his  fortune,"  make  his
fortune. As  the  mores  are,  so  the  fortune  will  be.

t  JHgnUcUe  pari]  It  is  evidently  dignity  of  birth  that  is  intended.


446  CORNELIUS  NEPOS.

attachment  is,  he  'will  be  easily  able  to  judge,  who  can  under-
stand how  much  prudence  is  required  to  preserve  the  friendship
and  favour  of  those  between  whom  there  existed  not  only
emulation  in  the  highest  matters,  but  such  a  mutual  struggle
to  lessen  one  another  as  was  sure  to  happen  between  Csesar  and
Antony,  when  each  of  them  desired  to  be  chief,  not  merely  of
the  city  of  Eome,  but  of  the  whole  world.

XXI.  After  he  had  completed,  ^n  such  a  course  of  life,
Berenly-Beyen  years,  and  had  advanced,  not  less  in  dignity,  than
in  favour  and  fortune  (for  he  obtained  many  legacies  on  no  other
account  than  his  goodness  of  disposition),  and  had  also  beea
in  the  enjoyment  of  so  happy  a  state  of  health,  that  he  had
wanted  no  medicine  for  thirty  years,  he  contracted  a  disorder
of  which  at  first  both  himself  and  the  physicians  thought
lightly,  for  they  supposed  it  to  be  a  tenesmus,  and  speedy
and  easy  remedies  were  proposed  for  it ;  but  after  he  had  passed
three  months  under  it  without  any  pain,  except  what  he
suffered  from  the  means  adopted  for  his  cure,  such  force  of  the
disease  fell  into  the  one  intestine,*  that  at  last  a  putrid  ulcer
broke  out  through  his  loins.  Before  this  took  place,  and
when  he  found  that  the  pain  was  daily  increasing,  and  that
fever  was  stiperadded,  he  caused  his  son-in-law  Agrippa  to  be
called  to  him,  and  vnth  him  Lucius  Cornelius  Balbus  and
Sextus  Peducaeus.  When  he  saw  that  they  were  come,  he
said,  as  he  supported  {himself  on  his  elbow,  **  How  much  care
and  diligence  I  have  employed  to  restore  my  health  on  this
occasion,  there  is  no  necessity  for  -me  to  state  at  large,  since  I
have  yourselves  as  witneses ;  and  since  I  have,  as  I  hope,  satis-
fied you,  that  I  have  left  nothing  undone  that  seemed  likely  to
cure  me,  it  remains  that^  I  consult  for  myself.  Of  this  feeling
on  my  part  I  had  no  wish  that  you  should  be  ignorant ;  for  I
have  determined  on  ceasing  to  feed  the  disease ;  as,  by  the  food
and  drink  that  I  have  taken  during  the  last  few  days,  I  have
prolonged  life  only  so  as  to  increase  my  pains  vnthout  hope  of
recovery.  I  therefore  entreat  you,  in  the  first  place,  to  give  your
approbation  to  my  resolution,  and  in  the  next,  not  to  labour  in
vain  by  endeavouring  to  dissuade  me  from  executing  it."

•  In  WMim  inteitimim.']  Barthius  wished  to  alter  it  to  imwn  intesti-
•wum,  because,  I  suppose,  he  knew  that  there  was  the  seat  of  the
disease.  .  .  .  But  there  is  no  need  of  change ;  unwn  is  the  same  as
iolwn. — jBo9.


TITUS  POMPONIUS  ATTICUS.  447

XXII.  Having  delivered  this  address  with  so 'much  steadi-
ness of  voice  and  countenance,  that  he  seemed  to  be  removing,
not  out  of  life,  but  out  of  one  house  into  another, — when
Agrippa,  weeping  over  him  and  kissing  him,  entreated  and  con-
jured him  "  not  to  accelerate  that  which  nature  herself  would
bring,  and,  since  he  might  live  some  time  longer,*  to  preserve
his  life  for  himself  and  his  friends," — he  put  a  stop  to  his
prayers,  by  an  obstinate  silence.  After  he  had  accordingly  ab-
stained from  food  for  two  days,  the  fever  suddenly  left  him,
and  the  disease  began  to  be  less  oppressive.  He  persisted,
nevertheless,  in  executing  his  purpose;  and  in  consequence,
on  the  fifth  day  after  he  had  fixed  his  resolution,  and  on  the
last  day  of  February,  in  the  consulship  of  Onseus  Domilius
and  Caius  Sosius,  he  died.f  His  body  was  carried  out  of  his
house  on  a  small  couch,  as  [he  himself  had  directed,  without
any  funereal  pomp,  all  the  respectable  portion  of  the  people  at-
tending,J  and  a  vast  crowd  of  the  populace.  He  was  buried
close  by  the  Appian  way,  at  the  fifth  milestone  from  the  city,  in
the  sepulchre  of  his  imcle  Quintus  CsBcilius.

*  Tem^porihus  tfwperesse.']  The  commentators  Are  not  agreed  about
the  exact  sense  of  these  words. I  follow  Heusinger,  who  imderstands
them  in  the  sense  of  "  getting  over^  and  surviving,  the  troubles  and
danger  of  the  present  time.*'
i  +  A.U.O.  720 ;  B.C.  34.  "^

X  Comitamtibus  omnibus  bonis.']  This  Omnibuif  like  the  omnia  in  c.  15^
must  be  understood  in  a  limited  sense.


448


CHEONOLOGICAL  STJMMAET  OF  EVENTS  MEN-
TIONED  BY  COENELIUS  NEPOS.


In  this  Chronological  Summary  Buch  events  only  are  noticed  as  mora
immediately  concern  Cornelius  Nepos.  Facts  that  are  not  found  here
may  be  sought  in  the  Chronology  appended  to  Justin  in  this  volume,
or  in  general  Chronological  Tables.  The  dates  are  taken  from
Tzschucke.

B.O.

512.  Miltiades  sent  to  the  Chersones.  Milt.  1.

607.  returns  to  Athens.  Milt.  8.

489.  dies.  Milt  7.

483.  Aristides  banished.  Arist.  1.

Themistodes  begins  to  construct  the  harbour  of  the  Pirseeus.

479.  — — ^-^  prevails  on  the  Athenians  to  rebuild  the  walls  of

their  city.  Them.  6.

477. completes  the  Pirseeus.  Them.  6.

—-  Pausanias  sails  to  Cyprus  with  the  combined  fleet  of  Greece.
Pans.  2.

Aristides  establishes  the  treasury  of  Greece  at  Delos.  Arist.  3.

471.  Themistodes  flees  to  Artazerzes.  Them.  8. .

467.  Death  of  Aristides.  Arist.  3.

466.  Themistodes.  Them.  10.

463.  Cimon  subdues  the  Thasians.  Cim  2.

460.  banished.  Cim.  3.

456.  recalled.  lb.

450. defeats  the  Persians  in  Cyprus.  lb,

449.  dies  in  Cyprus.  lb.

413.  Alcibiades,  with  Nicias  and  Lamachus,  sails  against  Syracuse.

Alcib.  3.
415.  ,  accused  of  treachery  to  his  country,  flees  to  Sparta.

Alcib.  4.

414. prevails  on  the  Lacedaemonians  to  fortify  Decelia.  lb.

411.  joins  the  Athenian  army;  is  united  in  command  with

Thrasybulus  and  Theramenes;  defeats  the  Lacedsdmonians.

Alcib.  5.

408.  — is  imsuccessful,  and  banished.  Alcib.  6,  7.

403.  Dionysius  the  elder  becomes  tyrant  of  Syracuse.  Dion.  1  •  De

Beg.  2.


CHRONOLOGT.  440

B.a

405.  Lysander  terminates  the  Peloponneaian  war.  Lys.  1 ;  Aldb.  8 ;

Conon  1.
404.  Alcibiades  killed.  Alcib.  10.
403.  Lysander  tried  for  attempting  to  bribe  the  oracle  of  Jupiter

Ammon.  Lys.  8.
401.  ThrasybuluB  overthrows  the  Thirty  Tyrants.  Thras.  1.
400.  Agesilaus  becomes  king  of  Sparta.  Ages.  1.
396.  Plato  goes  to  Syracuse.  Dion  2.

396.  Lysander  falls  in  battle  against  the  Thebans  at  Haliartus.  Lys.  3.
395.  Conon  defeats  Pisander  at  Cnidus.  Con.  4.
394.  ,  with  the  aid  of  the  Thebans,  rebuilds  the  walls  of  Athens.

Con.  4,  5.

is  made  prisoner  by  Tiribazus  at  Sardis.  lb.

393.  Iphicrates  defeats  the  Spartans  at  Corinth.  Iph.  2.
390.  Thrasybulus  killed  at  Aspendus.  Thras.  4.

387.  Chabrias  subdues  Cyprus.  Chab.  2.

355.  Datames  made  governor  of  Cilicia  by  Artazerxes.  Dat.  1.
382.  Pkoebidas  seizes  on  the  citadel  of  Thebes. Pelop.  1.  ^
378.  The  Theban  exiles  retake  it.  Pelop.  3.

377.  Agesilaus  invades  Boeotia ;  is  withstood  by  Chabrias.  Chab.  1.

Chabrias  assists  Acoris  king  of  Egypt.  Chab.  3.

- — Iphicrates  goes  to  the  assistance  of  Artaxerxes.  Iph.  2.

376.  Timotheus  defeats  the  Lacedaemonians  at  Leucate.  Tim.  2.

374.  Iphicrates  returns  to  Athens.  Iph.  2.

371.  Epaminondas  defeats  the  Spartans  at  Leuctra.  Epam.  8.

370.  Iphicrates  protects  Eurydice  of  Macedonia.  Iph.  3.

369.  Epaminondas  invades  Laconia,  advances  on  Sparta,  and  restores

Messene.  Epam.  7,  8.
and  Pelopidas  support  the Arcadians in their

struggle  with  the  Spartans.  Pelop.  4.

Iphicrates  assists  the  Lacedaemonians.  Iph.  2.

368.  Pelopidas  imprisoned  by  Alexander  of  Pherse.  Pelop.  5.

rescued  by  Epaminondas.  lb.

366.  Epaminondas  at  war  in  the  Peloponnesus.  Epam.  7.

364.  Pelopidas  killed  in  a  battle  with  Alexander  of  Pherso.  Pelop.  5.

Timotheus  at  war  with  the  Olynthians.  Tim.  1.

363.  Epaminondas  falls  victorious  at  Mantinea.  Epam.  9.

362.  Death  of  Agesilaus.  Ages.  8.

Datames  revolts  from  Artaxerxes.  Dat.  5.

358.  Death  of  Chabrias.  Chab.  4.

Dion  flees  from  Dionysius,  and  prepares  to  go  to  war  with  him.

Dion.  4.
357.  takes  possession  of  Syracuse.  Dion.  5.

356.  The  Athenians,  under  Chares,  Iphicrates,  and  Timotheus,  at  war

with  their  allies.  TinL  3.

Timotheus  fined  by  the  Athenians.  .  Tim.  3.

355.  Dion  assassinated  at  Syracuse.  Dion  9 ;  Timol.  2.

345.  Expedition  of  Timoleon  to  Syracuse ;  he  gives  liberty  to  the  Sy-

racusans.  76.
844.  Timoleon  expels  Dionysius,  who  goes  to  Corinth.  76.

O  G


450  COBMELIUS  MSPOS.

B.a

342.  Timoleon  re-establisbefl  a  republican  form  of  gOTemment  at  Syra-
cuse ;  Becures  peace  to  all  Sicily.  Jb.

337.  dies.  TimoL  4.

322.  Phocion  procures  for  Athens  tbe  protection  of  Antipater.  Fhoc  2.
321.  Eumenes  defeats  Craterus  and  Neoptolemus.  Eum.  8,  4.

besieged  by  Antigonus  at  Nora.  Eum.  5.

318.  Kicanor,  at  the  command  of  Cassander,  takes  possession  of  the
PirsBers.  Phoc.  2.

Death  of  Phocion.  Phoo.  4.

317.  Eumenes  commences  hostilities  against  Antigonus.  Eum.  7.

316. taken  and  put  to  death  by  AntigcHius.  Eum.  10—12.

301.  Antigonus  killed  at  Ipsus.  De  R^.  8.

272.  Pyrrhus  killed  at  Argos.  De  Reg.  2.

248.  Hamilcar  made  commander  of  tiie  Punic  fleet  HamiL  1.

238.  sent  as  commander-in-chief  into  Spain.*  Hamil.  3 ;  Hann.  2L

229.  1 — ^'s  death.  Ham.  3.

221.  Hannibal  becomes  commander-in-duef  in  Spain.  HamiL  3;  Hann.  3.
214.  Cato  military  tribuna  Cat.  1.

205.  quaestor  to  Publius  Scipio.  Tb.

198.  praetor,  with  Sardinia  for  his  province.  Cat.  1.

196.  made  consul  with  Lucius  Valerius  Flaccus.  Cat.  1,  2.

194.  obtains  a  triumph  for  his  successes  in  Spain. Cat  2.

184.  Censor  with  L.  Flaccus. Cat.  2.

149.  dies  at  the  age  of  85. Cat  2.

109.  Birth  of  Pomponius  Atticus.

88,  Publius  Sulpicius,  tribime  of  the  people,  killed  by  Sylla.  Att.  2.
\  87.  Atticus  retires  to  Athens.  lb,

84.  Sylla  visits  Athens  in  his  return  from  Asia.  Att  4.

65.  Atticus  returns  to  Rome.  lb,

32.  Death  of  Atticus.  Att  22.


451


EUTROPIUS'S

ABRIDGMENT  OP  ROMAN  HISTORY.


TO  THE EMPEROR  VALENS,  MAXIMUS,  PERPETUUS,

AUGUSTUS.*

AccoRi^NG  to  the  pleasure  of  your  Clemeiicy,+  I  have
arranged  in  a  brief  narrative,  in  the  order  of  time,  such  par-
ticulars in  the  history  of  Home  as  seemed  most  worthy  of
notice,  in  transactions  either  of  war  or  peace,  from  the
foundation  of  the  city  to  our  own  days;  adding  concisely,
also,  such  matters  as  were  remarkable  in  the  lives  of  the
emperors ;  that  your  Serenity's  divine  mind  may  rejoice  to
learn  that  it  has  followed  the  actions  of  illustrious  men  in
governing  the  empire,  before  it  became  acquainted  with  them
by  reading.:]:

*  The  title  stands  thus:  DoviNO  Valenti  Maziho  Pebfbtuo
AuausTO.  On  the  last  two  words  Tzschucke  has  this  note :  "  For
Perpetuo  Augtuto  Seztus  R'ofiis"  (who  wrote  ABreviarum  de  Victorm  et
ProvincUa  PopvU  Eomanif  dedicated  to  Valens),  "  has  in  his  dedication
Semper  Augusto.  The  Germans  would  say  AUzeit  Mefwer  des  JReicht,
See  Piitman  I>e  TUvlo  Semper  Augustus,  p.  60."  Tzschucke,  apparently,
XooY  perpetw)  as  an  adverb,  equivalent  to  wmper.  But  Cellarius  and
others  consider  it  as  an  adjective.  Cellarius  cites,  in  comparison  with
it^  from  Qnzter.  Inscript.  p.  285,  n.  8,  2>.  N,  VcUeiuimcmo  Perpetuo  ac
Pdici  Semper  Augusto,  and  p.  279,  n.  4,  ^temo  Imperatori  NoHro  '
Mcucimo  Optim/oque  Principi  Awrelio  Valeriimo  Diocletiano  ;  adding,  also,
that  Theodosius  is  called  perermie  prwusepe  in  Reines.  Class.  Inscr.  iii.
62.  I  have  accordingly  given  Perpetuo  as  an  adjective.  Sextos
Rufus's  dedication,  too,  as  edited  by  Cellarius,  Yerheyk,  and  othras,
has  Perpettto  Semper  Augutto,

+  ManswetudifMi  tiuB.j  Similarly,  a  few  lines  below,  he  says  Tran-
quiUUatis  tuce  m^ns  divma,  **  your  Serenity's  divine  mind."  The  use  of
such  titles  gradually  became  common  in  the  lower  age  of  Roman
literature,  commencing  soon  after  the  reign  of  Tiberius.  They  were
the  parents  of  our  highness,  majesty,  excellency,  &c.

i  However  Eutropius  meant  to  flatter  Valens,  he  could  not  as-

O  G  3


45a  EUTROPIUS.  [b.  I.


BOOK/ 1.

Origin  of  Rome,  I. — Characters  and  acts  of  the  seven  kings  of  Rome,
II. — VIII. — Appointment  of  consuls  on  the  expulsion  of  Tarquin
the  Proud,  IX. — War  raised  by  Tarquin;  he  is  supported  by
Porsena,  X.  XL — First  dictator,  XII.— Sedition  of  the  people,  and
origin  of  the  tribunitial  power,  XIII. — A  victory  over  the  Volsci,
XIV.  —  Coriolanus,  being  banished,  makes  war  on  his  country
with  the  aid  of  the  Volsci ;  is  softened  by  the  entreaties  of  his
wife  and  mother,  XV. — War  of  the  Fabii  with  the  Vejentes ;  the
census,  XVL — Dictatorship  of  Cincinnatus,  XVII.  The  Decem-
viri, XVIII. — ^War  with  the  Fidenates,  Vejentes,  and  Volsci,  XIX.
— Destruction  of  Rome  by  the  Qauls,  XX.

I.  The  Roman  empire,  than  which  the  memory  of  man  can
recal  scarcely  any  one  smaller  in  its  commencement,  or  greater  in
its  progress  throughout  the  world,  had  its  origin  from  Komulus;
who,  being  the  son  of  a  vestal  virgin,  and,  as  was  supposed,  of
Mars,  was  brought  forth  at  one  birth  with  his  brother  Remus.
While  leading  a  predatory  life  among  the  shepherds,  he
founded,  when  he  was  eighteen  years  of  age,  a  small  city  on  the
Palatine  Hill,  on  the  Qlst  day  of  April,  in  the  third  year  of
the  sixth  Olympiad,  and  the  three  hundred  and  ninety-fourth
after  the  destruction  of  Troy.*

suredly  have  shown  him  better,  than  by  addressing  him  thus,  to  be
such  as  he  is  ^described  by  Ammianus  Marcellinus,  lib.  xxix.,  avh-
Tusticus  homo,  and  xxxi.  41,  Svbagrestis  vngeniiy  nee  liheraZihiLS  studtis
eruditus. —  Vinetut,  Some  have  doubted  the  genuineness  of  this  dedi-
cation to  Valens,  because  the  Greek  translator  has  not  included  it  in  his
version ;  but  the  authority  of  manuscripts,  and  the  resemblance  of  its
style  to  that  of  Eutropius,  have  induced  Cellarius,  Verheyk,  Tzschucke,
and  most  other  commentators,  to  believe  it  genuine.

*  The  words  uf,  qwi  plwrirmim,  minimumque,  tradimt,  which  occur  in
all  editions  before  the  date,  are  not  translated ;  for  nothing  satisfactory
has  yet  been  said  as  to  their  grammatical  .construction.  Madame
Dacier  suggested  that  we  should  supply  tU  eoa  prceteream  qui.  But
prceteream  is  not  to  the  purpose.  Hausius's  explanation  is  ut  ego  inter
eos  tradam  qui  phtrimum  minimttmqtte  tradtmt.  The  Berlin  edition  of
1791  interprets  better :  %t  medmm  imter  eos  qtd — tradtmt,  ego  tradam.
There  is  no  doubt  that  Eutropius  meant  that  he  would  take  a  middle
point  between  those  who  give  the  highest  and  those  who  give  the
lowest  date ;  but  the  words  to  be  supplied  for  the  construction  seem
not  to  have  been  yet  discovered.  Perhaps  the  sense  is  **  as  those  say
who  give  the  highest  and  lowest  dates,  and  take  a  middle  'point  betvjeen
them"  something  equivalent  to  the  words  in  italics  beisg  intended  to
be  understood.  The  same  words  occur  in  b.  x.  a  18,  with  the  con-
struction equally  uncertain.


C.  VI.]  ABRIDGMENT  OF  ROMAN  HISTORY.  . 453

II.  After  founding  the  city,  which  he  called  Rome,  from  his
own  name,  he  proceeded  principally  as  follows.  He  took  a
great  number  of  the  neighbouring  inhabitants  into  the  city ;  he
chose  a  hundred  of  the  older  men,  by  whose  advice  he  might
manage  all  his  affairs,  and  whom,  from  their  age,  he  named
senators.  Next,  as  both  himself  and  his  people  were  in  want
of  wives,'  he  invited  the  tribes  contiguous  to  the  city  to  an
exhibition  of  games,  and  seized  upon  their  young  women.
Wars  having  arisen  in  consequence  of  this  outrage  in  cap-
turing the  females,  he  conquered  the  CaBninenses,  tide  Antem-
nates,  the  Crustumini,  the  Sabines,  the  Fidenates,  and  the
Vejentes ;  all  whose  towns  lay  around  the  city.  And  since,
after  a  tempest  that  suddenly  arose,  in  the  thirty-seventh  year
of  his  reign,  he  was  no  longer  to  be  seen,  he  was  believed  to
have  been  translated  to  the  gods,  and  was  accordingly  deified.
The  senators  then  ruled  at  Rome  by  periods  of  five  days ;  and
under  their  government  a  year  yfaa  passed.

III.  Afterwards  Numa  Pompilius  was  elected  king,  who
engaged  indeed  in  no  wars,  but  was  of  no  less  service  to  the
state  than  Romulus ;  for  he  estabhshed  both  laws  and  customs
among  the  Romans,  who,  by  the  frequency  of  their  wars,  were
now  regarded  as  robbers  and  semi-barbarians.  He  divided  the
year,  before  unregulated  by  any  computation,  into  ten  months;
and  founded  numerous  sacred  rites  and  temples  at  Rome.  He
died  a  natural  death  in  the  forty-third  year  of  his  reign.

IV.  To  him  succeeded  TuUus  Hostilius,  who  re-commenced
war.  He  conquered  the  Albans,  wha  lay  twelve  miles  distant
from  Rome.  He  overca^me  also  in  battle  the  Vejentes  and
Fidenates,  the  one  six,  the  other  eighteen  miles  from  Rome ;
and  increased  the  dimensions  of  the  city  by  the  addition  of
the  Coelian  hill.  After  reigning  thirty-two  years,  he  was  struck
by  lightning,  and  consumed  together  with  his  house.

V.  After  him,  Ancus  Martins,  the  grandson  of  Numa  by  a
daughter,  succeeded  to  the  government.  He  fought  against
the  Latins,  added  the  Aventine  and  Janiculan  hills  to  the  city,
and  founded  Ostia,  a  city  on  the  sea-coast,  sixteen  miles  from
Rome.  He  died  a  natural  death  in  the  twenty-fourth  year  of
his  reign.

VI.  Prisons  Tarquinius  was  next  invested  with  the  govern-
ment. 'He  doubled  the  number  of  the  senators,  built. a  Circus
at  Rome,  and  instituted  the  Roman  games,  which  continue


454  EX7TR0PIUS.  [b.I.

eren  to  our  time.  He  also  conquered  the  Sabines,  and  added
a  considerable  extent  of  territory,  which  he  took  from  that
people,  to  the  lands  of  Home ;  he  was  also  the  first  that  entered
the  city  in  triumph.  He  built  the  walls  and  sewers,  and
commenced  the  Capitol.  He  was  killed  in  the  thirty-eighth
year  of  his  reign,  by  the  sons  of  Ancus,  the  king  whom  he  had
succeeded.

VII.  After  him  Servius  Tullius  was  placed  on  the  throne,
the  son  of  a  woman  of  noble  origin,  but  who  was,  neyertho;-
less,  a  captive  and  a  slaye.  He  also  defeated  the  Sabines  j
annexed  three  hills,  the  Quirinal,  Viminal,  and  Esquiline,  to
the  city ;  and  formed  trenches  round  the  city  walls.  He  was
the  first  to  institute  the  census,  which  till  that  time  was  unknown
throughout  the  world.  The  people  being  all  subjected  to  a
census  during  his  reign,  Home  was  found  to  contain  eighty-four
thousand  citizens,  including  those  in  the  country.  He  was
cut  off  in  the  forty-fifth  yeaar  of  his  reign,  by  the  criminal
machinations  of  his  son-in-law  Tarquin  the  Proud,  the  son  of
the  king  to  whom  he  had  succeeded,  and  of  his  own  daughter,
whom  Tarquin  had  married/.

VI  n.  Lucius  Tarquinius  Superbus,  the  seventh  and  last  of
the  kings,  overcame  the  Volsci,  a  nation  not  far  from  Rome,
on  the  road  to  Campania ;  reduced  the  towns  of  Gabii  and
Suessa  Pometia ;  made  peace  with  the  Tuscans ;  and  built  a
temple  to  Jupiter  in  the  Capitol.  Afterwards,  while  he  was
besieging  Ardea,  a  town  that  lay  about  eighteen  miles  from  the
city,  he  was  deprived  of  his  throne ;  for,  as  his  younger  son,
who  was  also  named  Tarquin,  offered  violence  to  Lucretia,  the
wife  of  Collatinus,  a  most  noble  and  chaste  woman ;  and  as
she,  after  complaining  to  her  husband,  her  father,  and  her
friends,  of  the  injury  that  she  had  suffered,  slew  herself  in  the
sight  of  them  all ;  Brutus,  in  consequence,  who  was  a
kinsman  of  Tarquinius^*  excited  an  insurrection  among  the
people,  and  deprived  Tarquin  of  his  regal  aut*hority.  The
army,  also,  which  was  engaged  with  the  king  in  besieging

*  Pa/reTis  et  ipse  Tarqtmm.']  This  passage  perplexed  the  commen-
tetors,  until  it  was  discovered  that  parens  was  used  by  writers  of  the
lower  ages  for  cognatus  ;  for  which  sense  of  the  word  Tzschucke  refers
to  Lampridius  in  Alex.  c.  67,  and  to  Casaubon  on  Capitolinus  in
M.  Philosoph.  c.  6.  The  Greek  translator  has  Bpovrog  yivii  vpotri^Kwv
T(^  TapKvviift. See  Scheller^s  Lexicon,  s.  v.  Parens,


ex.]  ABRIDGMENT  OP  ROMAN  HISTORY.  465

Ardea,  soon  after  deserted  him;  and  the  king  himself,  on
goirig  to  the  city,  found  the  gates  closed  against  him ;  and,
after  having  reigned  five-and-twenty  years,  was  forced  to  take
flight  with  his  wife  and  children.

Thus  a  regal  form  of  government  continued  at  Rome,  under
seven  kings,  for  the  space  of  two  hundred  and  forty-three
years,  while  as  yet  the  dominion  of  the  city,  where  its  extent'
was  greatest,  hardly  reached  fifteen  miles.

IX.  Henceforth,  instead  of  one  king,  two  consuls  were
diosen,  with  this  view,  that,  if  one  should  he  disposed  to  act
unjustly,  the  other,  having  equal  authority,  might  exercise  a
control  over  him.  It  was  ^determined  also  that  they  should
not  hold  their  office  longer  than  a  year ;  in  order  that  they^
might  not,  by  continued  possession  of  power,  grow  too  over-
bearing; but,  knowing  that  in  a  year  they  would  return  ta
the  level  of  private  persons,  might  constantly  conduct  them-
selves with  moderation.

In  the  first  year,  then,  after  the  expulsion  of  ihe  king  and
hjis  family,  the  consuls  were  Lucius  Junius  Brutus,  who  had
been  l^e  chief  agent  in  the  banishment  of  Tarquin,  and  Tar-
quinius  Collatinus,  the  husband  of  Lucretia.  But  that  dignity
was  soon  taken  from  Tarquinius  Collatinus ;  for  it  was  enacted
that  no  one  who  bore  the  name  of  Tarquin  should  remain  in
the  city.  Having  collected,  therefore,  all  his  private  property,
he  removed  from  the  city,  and  Valerius  Publicola  was  made
consul  in  his  stead.  King  Tarquin,  however,  after  his  expul-
sion, stirred  up  war  against  Bome,  and,  having  collected  a
large  force  from  all  quarters,  in  order  that  he  might  be  rein-
stated on  the  throne,  took  the  field.

X.  In  the  first  encounter,Bnitus  and  Aruns,  Tarquin's  son,
killed  each  other ;  but  the  Romans  left  the  field  conquerors.
The  Eoman  matrons  mourned  for  Brutus,  the  guardian  of
their  honour,  as  if  he  had  been  their  common  father,  for  the
space  of  a  year.  Valerius  Publicola  fixed  upon  Spurius
Lucretius  Tricipitinus,  the  father  of  Lucretia,  for  his  colleague;
and  he  dying  of  some  disease,  he  next  chose  Horatius
Pulvillus  for  his  fellow  consul.

Thus  the  first  year  had  five  consuls ;  Tarquinius  Collatinus
having  left  the  city  on  account  of  his  name,  Brutus  having
fallen  in  battle,  and  Spurius  Lucretius  having  died  a  natural
death.


456  BUTROPIUS.  [b.l

XI.  In  the  second  year  also,  Tarqnin,  with  a  view  to  being
re-established  on  the  throne,  again  made  war  on  the  Romans,
and,  as  Porsena,  king  of  Tuscany,  afforded  him  aid,  almost
took  Home. But  he  was  also  defeated  on  that  occasion.

In  the  third  year  after  tlie  expulsion  of  the  royal  family,
Tarquin,  as  he  could  not  get  himself  re-admitted  into  the  king-
dom, and  as  Porsena,  who  had  made  peace  with  the  Romans,
gave  him  no  support,  retired  to  Tusculum,  a  town  which  is  not
far  from  Home ;  where  he  and  his  wife  lived  for  fourteen  years
in  a  private  station,  and  reached  an  advanced  age.

In  the  fourth  year  after  the  abolition  of  the  kingly  power,
the  Sabines,  having  made  war  on  the  Romans,  were  conquered;
and  a  triumph  was  celebrated  over  them.

In  the  fifth  year,  Lucius  Valerius,  the  colleague  of  Brutus,
and  consul  for  the  fourth  time,  died  a  natural  death,  and  in
such  extreme  poverty,  that  the  expenses*  of  his  funeral  were
defrayed  by  a  public  subscription.*  The  matrons  mourned  for
him,  as  for  Brutus,  during  a  year.

XII.  In  the  ninth  year  after  the  overthrow  of  the  kingly
power,  the  son-in-law  of  Tarquin,  having  assembled  a  vast
army,  in  order  to  avenge  the  wrongs  of  his  father-in-law,  a  new
office  was  introduced  at  Rome,  which  was  called  the  dictator-
ship, and  which  was  more  absolute  than  the  consulate.  In  the
same  year  also  a  master  of  the  horse  was  appointed  to  be  an
officer  under  the  dictator.  Nor  can  anything  be  named  more
like  to  the  imperial  authority,  which  your  Serenity  t  now
enjoys,  than  the  ancient  dictatorship,  especially  since  Caesar
Octavianus,  also,  of  whom  we  shall  speak  heresdTter,  and  Caius
CaBsar  before  him,  ruled  with  the  title  and  rank  of  dictator.
The  first  dictator  at  Rome  was  Lartius ;  the  first  master  of
the  horse,  Spurius  Cassius.

XIII.  In  the  sixteenth  year  after  the  termination  of  the
regal  power,  the  people  at  Rome,  thinking  themselves  oppressed
by  the  senate  and  consuls,  broke  out  into  a  sedition.  On  this
occasion  they  created  for  themselves  tribunes  of  the  people,  as
their  own  peculiar  judges  and  defenders,  by  whom  they  might
be  protected  against  the  senate  aud  the  consuls.

XIV.  In  the  following  year  the  Volsci  recommenced  hos-

•  Ut  collatis  h  popvlo  nvmmis,  sumptum  hahuerU  septdtvrce.']  "He
liad  the  expense  of  his  funeral  from  money  contributed  by  the  people,"
t  TranquUlUas  veMCra.]  See  note  on  the  dedication.


C.XV1II.]  ABRIDGMENT  OF  BOMAN  HISTORY.  457

tilities  against  the  Eomans ;  and  being  overcome  in  the  field,
lost  also  Corioli,  the  best  city  that  they  had.

XV.  In  the  eighteenth  year  after  the  banishment  of  the
royal  family,  Quintius  Marcius,  the  Roman  general  who  had
taken  Corioli,  the  city  of  the  Volsci,  being  compelled  to  flee
from  Eome,  directed  his  course,  in  resentment,  to  the  Volsci
themselves,  and  received  from  them  support  against  the
Romans.  He  obtained  several  victories  over  the  Romans ;  he
made  his  way  even  to  the  fifth  mile-stone  from  the  city ;  and,
refusing  to  hear  a  deputation  that  came  to  sue  for  peace,  would
have  laid  siege  even  to  the  place  of  his  birth,  had  not  his
mother  Veturia  and  his  wife  Volumnia'gone  out  from  the  city
to  meet  him,  by  whose  tears  and  supplications  he  was  pre-
vailed on  to  withdraw  his  army.  He  was  the  next  after
Tarquin  that  acted  as  general  against  his  country.

XVI.  In  the  consiUate  of  Caeso  Fabius  and  Titus  Vir-
ginius,  three  hundred  noblemen,  members  of  the  Fabian
family,  undertook  alone  a  war  against  the  Vejentes,  assuring
the  senate  and  the  people  that  the  whole  contest  should
be  ]  brought  to  an  end  by  themselves.  These  illustrious
men,  therefore,  each  of  whom  was  capable  of  commanding  a
large  army,  setting  out  on  their  expedition,  all  fell  in  battle.
One  only  remained  out  of  so  numerous  a  family,  who,  from  his
extreme  youth,  could  not  be  taken  with  them  to  the  field.
After  these  events  a  census  was  held  in  the  city,  in  which  the
number  of  the  citizens  was  found  to  be  a  hundred  and  nine-
teen thousand  three  hundred  and  nineteen.

XVII.  In  the  following  year,  in  consequence  of  the
blockade  of  a  Roman  army  on  Mount  Algidus,  about  twelve
miles  from  the  city,  Lucius  Quintius  Gincinnatus  was  appointed
dictator ;  a  man  who,  possessing  only  four  acres  of  land,  culti-
vated it  with  his  own  hands.  He,  being  found  at  his  work,
and  engaged  in  ploughing,  assumed,  after  wiping  the  sweat
from  his  brow,' the  toga  prcetexta;  and  set  free  the  army  with
great  slaughter  among  the  enemy.

^  XVIII.  In  the  three  hundred  and  second*  year  from  the
founding  of  the  city,  the  consular  government  ceased ;  and,
instead  of  two  consuls,  ten  magistrates  were  appointed  to  hold
the  supreme  authority,  under  the  title  of  decemviri.  These
during  the  first  year  conducted  themselves  with  honour ;  but

*  See  note  on  iv.  10.


458  EUTROFIUS.  [a  I.

in  the  second,  one  of  them,  Appias  Claudius,  proceeded  to
offer  violence  to  the  maiden  daughter  of  a  certain  Virginius,
who  was  at  that  time  filling  an  honourable  post  on  military
service  against  the  Latins  on  Mount  Algidus ;  but'l  the  father
slew  her  with  his  own  hand,  that  she  might  not  suffer  violation
from  the  decemvir,  and,  returning  to  the  army,  raised  an
insurrection  among  the  soldiers.  Their  power  was  in  conse-
quence taken  from  the  decemviri,  and  they  themselves  received
sentences  of  condemnation.*  ^ ^

XIX.  In  the  three  hundred  and  fifteenth  year  from  the
founding  of  the  city,  the  Fidenates  rebelled  against  the
Romans.  The  Yejentes  and  their  king  Tolumnius  gave  them
assistance.  These  two  states  are  so  near  to  Rome,  that
Fidenss  is  only  seven,  Yeii  only  eighteen  miles  distant.  The
Volsci  also  joined  them ;  but  they  were  defeated  by  Marcus
^milius  the  dictator,  and  Lucius  Quintius  Oincinnatus  the
master  of  the  horse,  and  lost  also  their  king.  Fidense  was
taken,  and  utterly  destroyed.

XX.  Twenty  years  afterwards,  the  people  of  Veii  resumed
hostilities.  Furius  Camillus  was  sent  as  dictator  against
them,  who  first  defeated  them  in  battle,  and  then,  after  a  long
siege,  took  their  city,  the  oldest  and  richest  in  Italy.  He  next
took  Falisci,  a  city  of  no  less  note.  But  popular  odium  was
excited  against  him,  on  the  ground  that  he  had  made  an
unfair  division  of  the  booty^  and  he  was  condemned  on  that
charge  and  banished.

Soon  after  the  Galli  Senones  marched  towards  Eome ;  and,
pursuing  the  Romans,  whom  they  defeated  at  the  river  Allia,
eleven  miles  from  the  city,  possessed  themselves  of  the  city
itself,  no  part  of  which  could  be  defended  against  them,
ex6ept  the  Capitol.  After  they  had  besieged  it  a  long  time,  and
the  Romans  were  suffering  from  famine,  Camillus,  who  was  in
exile  in  a  neighbouring  city,  attacked  the  Gauls  unexpeqtedly,
and  gave  them  a  severe  defeat.  Afterwards, t  on  receiving  a  sum

•  Damnati  stmt]  Appiua  and  Oppius,  before  the  day  for  their  trial
came,  committed  suicide.  Their  colleagues  went  into  banishment
voluntarily,  as  appears  from  Liry.  Claudius  was  sentenced  to  death,
but  allowed  to  go  into  exile  through  the  intercession  of  Yii^gimus.
See  Liv.  iii.  58.

+  Pottea  tamen.]  The  word  tomen,  which  disturbs  the  drift  of  the
passage,  is  not  translated.  The  text  seems  hardly  sound.  Livy  tells
the  story  differently.


cm.]  ABRIDGMENT  OP  ROMAN  HISTORY  459

in  gold,  to  desist  from  the  siege  of  the  Capitol/  they
retreated ;  Camillus,  however,  pursued  them,  and  routed  them
with  Biicha  slaughter,  that  he  recovered  both  the  gold  which
had  been  given  to  them,  and  all  the  military  standards  which
they  had  taken.  Thus  he  entered  the  city  for  the  third  time
in  triumph,  and  received  the  appellation  of  a  second  Bomulus,
as  if  he  also  had  been  a  founder  of  the  city.


BOOK  11.


Military  tribunes  created  instead  of  consuls ;  Camillas  overcomes  the
Volsd,  iEqui,  and  Sutrini,  Cincianatus  the  Praenestini,  L  II  —
Constdar  government  restored,  III. — Death  and  eulogy  of  Ca-
millus, IV.— Flight  of  the  Gauls,  V.— The  census,  VI.— Combat
of  Valerius  Corvus  with  a  Gaul,  VII. — The  Latin  war,  VIII.—
Various  defeats  of  the  Samnites,  IX. — ^The  Gauls,  Etrurians,  and
Samnites  defeated,  X. — The  war  with  Pyrrhus,  XL — XIV. —
Ptolemy,  king  of  Egypt,  sends  ambassadors  to  Rome,  XV. — The
Picenians  and  Sallentines  subdued,  XVI.  XVIL— Another  census;
the  first  Punic  war,  XVIII.— XXVIIL

I.  In  the  three  hundred  and  sixty-fifth  year  after  the'  foun-
dation of  the  city,  and  the  first  after  its  capture  by  the  Gauls,
the  form  of  government  was  changed;  and,  instead  of  two
consuls,  military  tribunes,  invested  with  consular  power,  were
created.  From  this  time  the  power  of  Home  began  to  increase ;
for  that  very  year  Camillus  jeduced  the  state  of  the  Volsci,
which  had  persisted  to  make  war  for  seventy  years ;  also  the
cities  of  the  JEqui  and  Sutrini ;  and,  overthrowing  their  armies,
took  possession  of  them  all ;  and  thus  enjoyed  three  triumphs
at  the  same  time.

II.  Titus  Quintius  Ciucinnatus,  also,  having  "pursued  the
Frsenestiui,  who  had  advanced  in  a  hostile  manner  to  the  very
gates  of  Home,  defeated  them  on  the  river  AUia,  annexing
eight  cities  that  werej  under  their  dominion  to  the  Roman
empire ;  and,  attacking  Praeneste  itself,  forced  it  to  surrender;
all  which  acts  were  accomplished  by  him  in  the  space  of  twenty
days  ;  and  a  triumph  was  decreed  him.

III.  But  the  oflSce  of  military  tribunes  did  not  last  long;
for,  after  a  short  time,  it  was  enacted  that  no  more  should  be
created ;  and  four  years  passed  in  the  state  in  such  a  manner,


460  EUTROPIUS.  [B.n.

that 'none  of  the  superior  magistrates  were  appointed.  The
military  tribunes,  however,  were  re-instated  in  &eir  office  with
consular  authority,  and  continued  for  three  years,  when  consuls
were  again  elected.

IV.  In  the  consulship  of  Lucius  Genucius  and  Quintus
Servilius,  Camillus  died,  and  honour  next  to  that  of  Eomulus
was  paid  him.

y.  Titus  Quintius  was  sent  out  as  dictator  against  'the
Gauls,  who  had  marched  into  Italy ;  and  had  encamped  about
four  miles  from  the  city,  on  the  other  side  of  the  river  Anio.
Titus  Manlius,  one  of  the  noblest  of  the  senators,  encountering
a  Gaul  who  had  challenged  him  to  single  combat,  slew  him ;
and,  having  taken  from  his  neck  a  chain  of  gold,  and  put  it  on
Ids  own,  secured  the  appellation  of  Torquatus  to  himself  and
his  posterity  for  [  ever.  The  Gauls  were  repulsed,  and  soon
afterwards  entirely  defeated  by  Caius  Sulpicius  the  dictator.
Shortly  after,  the  Tuscans  were  defeated  by  Caius  Marcius,
and  eight  thousand  of  them  were  taken  prisoners  and  led  in
triumph.

VI.  A  census  was  again  taken  ;  and  as  the  Latins,  who
had  been  subdued  by  the  Komans,  refused  to  furnish  troops,
recruits  were  levied  from  among  the  Komans  only,  and  ten
legions  were  raised,  making  sixty  thousand  fighting  men,  or
upwards ;  so  great  was  the  power  of  the  Romans  in  war,  while
their  territory  was  as  yet  but  small. These  troops  having
marched  out  against  the  Gauls,  under  the  conduct  of  Lucius
Furius  Camillus,  one  of  the  Gauls  challenged  the  most  valiant
among  the  Romans  to  single  combat ;  when  Marcus  Valerius,
a  tribune  of  the  soldiers,  came  forward  to  accept  the  challenge;
and,  as  he  advanced  in  full  armour,  a  crow  settled  upon  his*
right  shoulder. Afterwards,  too,  when  he  commenced  the.
encounter  with  the  Gaul,  the  same  crow,  with  his  wings  and-
talons,  furiously  assailed  the  Gaul's  eyes,  so  that  he  was  not
able  to  see  before  him,  and  thus,  being  slain  by  the  tribune
Valerius,  he  gave  him  not  only  a  victory,  but  a  name ;  for  he
was  afterwards  called  Corvus. For  the  same  service  also,  at.
the  age  of  three  and  twenty,  he  was  made  consul.

VII.  The  Latins,  who  had  refused  to  furnish  troops,
proceeded  also  to  demand  of  the  Romans,  that  one  of  the
consuls  should  be  elected  from  their  own  people,  the  other
from  the  Romans ;  this  demand  having  been  rejected,  war  was


C.  xT]  ABRIDGMENT  OP  ROMAN  HISTORY.  461

commenced  against  them,  and  they  were  overcome  [in  a  great
battle;  and  a  triumph  was  celebrated  on  account  of  their
defeat.  Statues  were  erected  td  the  consuls  in  the  Rostra,  for
their  service  in  gaining  this  victory.

VIII.  The  Romans  had  now  begun  to  be  powerful ;  for  a
war  was  carried  on  by  them  against  the  Samnites,  who  hold  a
middle  situation  between  PicenUm,  Campania,  and  Apulia,  at
the  distance  of  nearly  a  hundred  and  thirty  miles  from  the
city,  Lucius  Papirius  Cursor  went  to  conduct  that  war  with
the  rank  of  dictator,  and,  on  returning  to  Rome,  gave  orders
to  Quintus  Fabius  Maximjis,  his^  master  of  the  horse,  whom
he*^left  in  charge  of  the  army,  not  to  fight  during  his  absence.
He,  however,  seeing  a  faVourable  opportunity,  commenced  an
engagement  with  great  success,  and  utterly  defeated  the  Sam-
nites ;  lie  was  accordingly  condemned  to  deQ,th  by  the  dictator,
for  fighting  contrary  to  his  orders,  but  was  saved  by  the  power-
ful interposition  of  the  soldiers  and  people,  so  great  a  tumult
having  been  excited  against  Papirius,  that  he  was  almost
slain.  V

IX.  The  Samnites  subsequently,  in  the  consulate  of  Titus
Veturius  and  Spurius  Posthumius,  defeated  the  Romans  with
signal  ignominy,  and  compelled  them  to  pass  under  the  yoke.
The  peace,  however,  which  had  been  concluded  with  them
through  mere  necessity,  was  broken  by  the  senate  and  people.
After  this  the  Samnites  were  defeated  by  Lucius  Papirius  the
consul,  and  seven  thousand  of  them  made  to  pass  under  the
yoke.  Papirius  was  granted  a  triumph  over  the  Samnites.
About  the  sanfe  time  Appius  Claudius  the  censor  brought  the
Claudian  water  into  the  city,  and  made  the  Appian  way.

The  Samnites,  renewing  the  war,  defeated  Quintus  Fabius
Maximus,  with  the  slaughter  of  three  thousand  of  his  troops ;
but  afterwards,  his  father,  Fabius  Maximus,  being  appointed
his  lieutenant,  he  both  defeated  the  Samnites,  and  took  several
of  their  towns.  Subsequently,  Publius  Cornelius  Rufinus  and
Manius  Curius  Dentatus,  the  two  consuls,  being  sent  against
the  Samnites,  reduced  their  strength  in  some  considerable
battles.  Thus  they  brought  the  war  with  the  Samnites  to  an
end ;  a  war  which  had  lasted  for  forty-nine  years.  Nor  was
there  any  enemy  in  Italy  that  put  the  valour  of  the  Romans
more  to  the  test.

X.  After  an  interval  of  a  few  years,  the  forces  of  the  Gauls


462  EUTBOPIUS.  [Rn.

united  with  the  Tuscans  and  Samnites  against  the  RomaBs ;
but,  as  they  were  marching  to  Borne,  were  cut  off  by  the
consul  CnsBus  Cornelius  Dolabella.

XI.  War  was  at  the  same  time  proclaimed  against  the
Tarentines  (who  are  still  a  people  at  the  extremity  of  Italy),
because  tliey  hstd  offered  violence  to  some  Roman  ambassadors.
These  people  asked  aid  against  the  Romans  of  Pyrrhua,
king  of  Epirus,  who  derived  his  origin  fr9;^  (he  family  of
Achilles.  He  soon  after  passed  over  into  "Italy,  and  it  was
then  that  the  Romans  fought  for  the  first  time  with  an  enemy
from  beyond  ,sea.  The  consul  Publius  Valerius  LsBvinus  was
sent  against  him ;  who,  having  seized  some  spies  of  Pyrrhus,
ordered  them  to  be  led  through  the  camp,  aiid  the  whole  army
to  be  exhibited  to  them,  and  then  to  be  dismissed,  that  they
might  tell  Pyrrhua  whatever  was  going  on  among  the  Romans.
An  engagemetit  taking  place  soon  after,  Pyrrhus,  when  on-  the
point  of  fleeing,  got  the  victory  by  means  of  his  elephants,  at
the  sight  of  which  the  Romans,  to  whom  they  were  sCfange,  were
greatly  terrified ;  but  night  put  an  end  to  the  battle.  Laevinus
however  fled  during  the  night.  Pyrrhus  took  a  thousand
eight  hundred  Romans  prisoners,  and  treated  them  with  the
greatest  honour;  the  slain  he  buried.  On  observing  those
lying  dead,  with  their  wounds  in  front,  and  with  stem  coun-
tenances, he  is  said  to'  have  lifted  up  his  hands  to  heaven,
exclaiming  that  '^  he  might  himself  have  been  master  of  the
whole  world,  if  such  soldiers  had  fallen  to  his  lot.^* '

XII.  Pyrrhus  afterwards,  having  united  to  him  the  Sam-
nites, the  Lucanians,  and  the  Bruttii,  proceeded  towards  Rome.
He  laid  all  waste  with  fire  and  sword,  depopulated  Campania,
and  advanced  to  Prseneste^  eighteen  miles  from  Rome.  Soon
after,  through  fear  of  an  afrmy  which  was  pursuing  him  with  a
consul  at  its  head,  he  fell  back  upon  Campania.  Ambassadors,
who  were  sent  to  treat  with  Pyrrhus  respecting  the  ransom  of
the  captives,  were  honourably  entertained  by  him;  and  he
sent  the  captives  back  to  Rome  without  payment.  JFabricius,
one  of  the  Roman  ambassadors,  he  admired  so  much,  that,
finding  he  was  poor,  he  endeavoured  to  draw  him  over  to  his
side  with  the  promise  of  a  fourth  part  of  his  kingdom,  but  he
was  repulsed  with  disdain  by  Fabricius.  Pyrrhus,  therefore,
being  struck  with  admiration  at  the  character  of  the  Romans,
sent  an  eminent  man,  Cineas  by  name,  as  ambassador,  to  ask


CXIV.]  ABRIDGMENT  OP  BOMAN  HISTORY.  463

for  peace  on  reasonable  terms,  provided  that  he  might  retain
^ssession  of  that  part  of  Italy,  of  which  he  had  already
become  master  in  the  war.

XIII.  Such  terms  of  peace  were  not  satisfactory,  and  an
answer  was  returned  by  the  senate  to  Pyrrhus,  that  **  he  could
have  no  peace  with  the  Romans,  unless  he  retired  from  Italy.**
The  Romans  then  ordered  that  all  the  prisoners  whom  Pyrrhiis
had  sent  back  should  be  considered  infamaiia,*  because  they
had  su£fered  themselves  to  be  taken  with  arms  in  their  hands ;
and  not  to  be  restored  to  their  former  rank,  until  they  had
each  produced  the  spoils  of  two  slain  enemies.  Thus  the
ambassador  of  Pyrrhus  returned ;  and,  when  Pyrrhus  asked
him  *'  what  kind  of  a  place  he  had  found  Rome  to  be,'*  Gineas
replied,  that  "  he  had  seen  a  country  of  kings,  for  that  all
there  were  such,  as  Pyrrhus  alone  was  thought  to  be  in  Epirus
and  the  rest  of  Greece."

The  consuls  Publius  Sulpicius  and  Decius  Mus  were  sent
out  as  generals  against  Pyrrhus.  A  battle  being  commenced,
Pyrrhus  was  wounded,  his  elephants  killed,  twenty  thousand  of
the  enemy  slain,  and  of  the  Romans  only  five  thousand.
Pyrrhus  was  forced  to  retire  to  Tarentum.

XIV.  After  the  lapse  of  a  year,  Fabricius  was  sent  out
against  Pyrrhus,  the  same  who,  when  he  was  before  among
the  ambassadors,  could  not  be  won  with  a  promise  of
the  fourth  part  of  his  kingdom.  As  Fabricius  and  the  king
had  their  camps  near  to  each  other,  the  physician  of  Pyrrhus
came  to  Fabricius  by  night,  offering  to  despatch  Pyrrhus  by
poison,  if  he  would  promise  him  some  remuneration;  upon
which  Fabricius  ordered  that  he  should  be  taken  back  in
chains  to  his  master,  and  that  information  should  be  given  to
Pyrrhus  of  the  proposals  which  the  physician  had  made  against
his  life.  The  king,  struck  with  admiration  of  his  conduct,  is
reported  to  have  exclaimed  on  the  occasion,  '<  That  excellent
Fabricius^  is  a  man  who  can  less  easily  be  diverted  from  the
path  of  honour,  than  the  sun  from  its  course. "*  Pyrrhus  then
departed  for  Sicily.  Fabricius,'after  defeating  the  Samnites
and  Lucanians,  obtained  a  triumph.

*  Infamet^  They  all  suffered  some  sort  of  degradation.  Those  who
had  been  in  the  cavaliy.  were  made  to  serve  in  the  infantry,  and  thoae
who  had  been  in  the  infantry  were  sent  among  the  slingers.  See  Val.
Max.  iL  7, 15.


464  EDTROPirs.  [B.n.

The  consuls  Manias  Ourius  Dentatus  and  Comelias  Lentulus
were  next  sent  against  Pyrrhus ;  and  Curius  came  to  an  engage-
ment with  him,  cut  off  his  army,  drove  him  back  to  Tarentum,
and  took  his  camp.  On  that  day  were  slam  twenty-three
thousand  of  the  enemy.  Curius  Dentatus  triumphed  in  his
consulate.  He  was  the  first  that  brought  elephants  to  Home,
in  number,  four.  Pyrrhus  also  soon  after  quitted  Tarentum,
and  was  killed  at  Argos,  a  city  of  Greece.

XV.  In  the  consulship  of  Caius  Fabricius  Licinus  and
Caius  Claudius  Canina,  in  the  four  hundred  and  sixty-first
year  from  the  foundation  of  the  city,  ambassadors,  from
Alexandria,  despatched  by  Ptolemy,  arrived  at  Eome,  and
obtained  from  the  Eomans  the  friendship  which  they  solicited.

XYI.  In  the  consulate  of  Quintus  Ogulnius  and  Caius
Fabius  Pictor,  the  Picenians  commenced  a  war,  and  were  con-
quered by  the  succeeding  consuls  Publius  Sempronius  and
Appius  Claudius,  and  a  triumph  was  celebrated  over  them.
Two  cities  were  founded  by  the  Eomans,  Ariminum  in  Gau],
and  Beueventum  in  Samnium.

XVII.  When  Marcus  Attilius  Hegulus  and  Lucius  Junius
Libo  were  consuls,  war  was  declared  against  the  Sallentines  in
Apulia ;  and  the  Brundusians  and  their  city  were  taken,
and  a  triumph  granted  on  their  subjugation.

XVIII.  In  the  four  hundred  and  seventy-seventh  year  of
the  city,  although  the  Roman  name  had  now  become  famous,
yet  their  arms  had  not  been  carried  out  of  Italy.  That  it
might  be  ascertained,  therefore,  what  the  forces  of  the  Eomans
were,  a  census  was  taken.  On  this  occasion  the  number  of
citizens  was  found  to  be  two  hundred  and  ninety-two  thousand,
three  hundred  and  thirty-four,  although  from  ihe  founding  of
the  city  wars  had  never  ceased.  It  was  then  that  the  first  war
was  undertaken  against  the  Africans,  in  the  consulate  of  Appius
Claudius  and  Quintus  Fulvius.  A  battle  was  fought  with
them  in  Sicily ;  and  Appius  Claudius  obtained  a  triumph  for
a  victory  over  the  Africans  and  Hiero  king  of  Sicily.

XIX.  In  the  year  following,  Valerius  Marcus  and  Otacilius
being  consuls,  great  deeds  were  achieved  by  the  Eomans  in
Sicily.  The  Tauromenitani,  Catanians,  and  fifty  cities  more,
were  received  into  alliance.  In  the  third  year  the  war  against
Hiero  in  Sicily  was  brought  to  an  end.  He,  with  all  the  Syra-
cusan  nobility,  prevailed  upon  the  Eomans  to  grant  them


C.XXI.]  ABRIDGMENT  OF  ROMAN  HISTORY.  466

peace,  paying  down  two  hundred  talents  of  silver.  The  Afri-
cans were  defeated  in  Sicily,  and  a  triumph  over  them  granted
at  Rome  a  second  time.

XX.  In  the  fifth  year  of  the  Punic  war,  which  was  carried
on  against  the  Africans,  the  Bomans  first  fought  by  sea,  in  the
consulate  of  Caius  Duilius  and  Onseus  Cornelius  Asina,
having  provided  themselves  with  vessels  armed  with  beaks,
which  they  term  Liburnian  galleys.  The  consul  Cornelius  fell
a  victim  to  treachery.*  Duilius,  joining  battle,  defeated  the
commander  of  the  Carthaginians,  took  thirty-one  of  their
ships,  sunk  fourteen,  took  seven  thousand  of  the  enemy
prisoners,  and  slew  three  thousand ;  nor  was  there  ever  a
victory  more  gratifying  to  the  Romans,  for  they  were  now  not
only  invincible  by  land,  but  eminently  powerful  at  sea.

In  the  consulship  of  Caius  Aquilius  Florus  and  Lucius
Scipio,  Scipio  laid  waste  Corsica  and  Sardinia,  carried  away
several  thousand  captives  from  thence,  and  obtained  a
triumph.

XXI.  When  Lucius  Manlius  Vulso  and  Marcus  Attilius
Begulus  were  consuls,  war  was  carried  over  into  Africa  against
Hamilcar  the  general  of  the  Carthaginians.  A  naval  engage-
ment was  fought,  and  the  Carthaginian  utterly  defeated,  for
he  retired  with  the  loss  of  sixty  four  of  his  ships.  The  Romans
lost  only  twenty-two;  and,  having  then  crossed  over  into
Africa,  they  compelled  Clypea,  the  first  city  at  which  they
arrived  in  Africa,  to  surrender.  The  consuls  then  advanced  as
flEu:  as  Carthage ;  and,  having  laid  waste  many  places,  Manlius
returned  victorious  to  Rome,  and  brought  with  him  twenty-
seven  thousand  prisoners.  Attilius  Regains  remained  in
Africa.  He  drew  up  his  army  against  the  Africans;  and,
fighting  at  the  same  time  against  three  Carthaginian  generals,
came  off  victorious,  killed  eighteen  thousand  of  the  enemy,
took  five  thousand  prisoners,  with  eighteen  elephants,  and
received  seventy-four  cities  into  alliance.  The  vanquished
Carthaginians  then  sued  to  the  Romans  for  peace,  which
Regulus  refusing  to  grant,  except  upon  the  hardest  conditions,
the  Africans  sought  aid  from  the  Lacedaemonians,  and,  under  a
leader  named  Xantippus,  who  had  been  sent  them  by  the
Lacedsemonians,  Regulus,  the  Roman  general,  was  overthrown

*  He  was  deceived  and  made  prisoner  by  one  of  Hannibal's  officers.
jPolyb.  L  23 ;  Oros.  iv.  7;  Polysen.  vi.  16,  5.

H  H


466  EUTROPn7&  [B.II.

with  a  desperate  slaughter ;  for  two  thousand  men  only  escaped
of  all  the  Roman  army ;  five  hundred,  with  their  commander
Eegulus,  were  taken  prisoners,  thirty  thousand  slain,  and
Begttlus  himself  thrown  into  prison.

XXII.  In  the  consulship  of  Marcus  JSmilius  Paulus  and
Servius  Fulvius  Nohilior,  both  the  Eoman  consuls  set  sail  for
Africa,  with  a  fleet  of  three  hundred  ships.  They  first  over-
came the  Africans  in  a  sea-flght ;  ^milius  the  consul  sunk  a
hundred  and  four  of  the  enemy's  ships,  took  thirty,  with  the
soldiers  in  them,  killed  or  took  prisoners  fifteen  thousand  of
the  enemy,  and  enriched  his  own  army  with  much  plunder ;
and  Africa  would  then  have  been  subdued,  but  that  so  great  a
famine  took  place  that  the  army  could  not  continue  there  any
longer.  The  consuls,  as  they  were  returning  with  'their  victo-
rious fleet,  Buflered  shipwreck  on  the  coast  of  Sicily,  and  so
violent  was  the  storm,  that  out  of  four  hundred  and  sixty-four
ships,  eighty  could  scarcely  be  saved ;  nor  was  so  great  a  tem-
pest at  sea  ever  heard  of  at  any  period.  The  Romans,
notwithstanding,  soon  refitted  two  hundred  ships,  nor  was  their
spirit  at  all  broken  by  their  loss.

XXIII.  Cnseus  Servilius  CsBpio  and  Caius  Sempronius
Blaesus,  wheh  consuls,  set  out  for  Africa  with  two  hundred  and
sixty  ships,  and  took  several  cities.  As  they  were  returning
with  a  great  booty,  they  suffered  shipwreck;  and,  as  these
successive  calamities  annoyed  the  Romans,  the  senate  in
consequence  decreed  that  wars  by  sea  should  be  given  up,
BxA  that  only  sixty  ships  should  be  kept  for  the  defence  of
Italy.

XXIV.'  In  the  consulship  of  Lucius  Caecilius  Metellus  and
Caius  Furius  Pacilus,  Metellus  defeated  a  general  of  the
Africans  in  Sicily,  whcT  came  against  him  with,  a  hundred  and
thirty  elephants  and  a  numerous  army,  slew  twenty  thousand
of  the  enemy,  took^six  and  twenty  elephants,  collected  the
rest,  which  were  dispersed,  with  the  aid  of  the  Numidians
whom  he  had  to  assist  him,  and  brought  them  to  Rome  in  a
vast  procession,  filling  all  the  roads  with  elephants,  to  the.
number  of  a  hundred  and  thirty;.

After  these  misfortunes,  the  Oarthaginians  entreated
Regulus,  the  Roman  general  whom  tliey  had  taken,  to  go  to
Rome,  procure  them  peace  from  the  Romans,  and  effect  an
exchange  of  prisoners.


r"


CXXVn.]  ABRIDGMENT  OP  BOMAN  HISTORY.  467

XXV.  Regulus,  on  arriving  at  Eome,  and  being  conducted
into  the  senate,  >vould  do  nothing  in  the  character  of  a  Roman,
declaiing  that,  "from  the  day  when  he  fell  into  the  hands  of
the  Africans,  he  had  ceased  to  be  a  Roman."  For  this  reason
he  both  repelled  his  wife  from  embracing  him,  and  gave  his
advice  to  die  Romans,  that  **  peace  should  not  be  made  with
the  Carthaginians ;  for  that  they,  dispirited  by  so  many  losses,
had  no  hope  left ;  and  that,  witii  rei^ect  to  himself,  he  was
not  of  such  importance,  that  so  many  thousand  captives  should
be  restored  on  his  account  alone,  old  as  he  was,  and  for  the
sake  of  the  few  Romans  who  had  been  taken  prisoners."  He
accordingly  carried  his  point,  for  no  one  would  listen  to  the
Carthaginians,  when  they  applied  for  peace.  He  himself
returned  to  Carthagd,  telling  the  Roinans,  when  th^y  offered
to  detain  him  at  Rome,  that  he  would  not  stay  in  a  city,  in
which,  after  living  in  captivity  among  the  Africans,  it  was
impossible  for  him  to  retain  the  dignity  of  an  honourable
citizen.  Returning  therefore  to  Africa,  he  was  put  to  death
with  torture  of  every  description.

XXVI.  When  Publius  Claudius  Pulcher  and  Caius  Junius
were  consuls,  Claudius  fought  in  opposition  to  the  auspices,
and  was  defeated  by  the  Carthaginians ;  for,  out  of  two  hundred
and  twenty  ships,  he  escaped  with  only  thirty;  ninety,  together
with  their  men,  were  taken,  the  rest  sunk,  and  twenty  thou-
sand men  made  prisoners.  The  other  consul  also  lost  his
fleet  by  shipwreck,  but  was  able  to  save  his  troops,  as  the  shore
was  close  at  hand.

XXVII.  In  the  consulate  of  Caius  Lutatius  Catulus  and
Aulus  Posthumius  Albinus,  in  the  twenty'third  year  of  the
Punic  war,  the  conduct  of  the  war  against  the  Africans  was
committed  to  Catulus.  He  set  sail  for  Sicily  with  three  hun-
dred ships.  The  Africans  fitted  out  four  hundred  against  him.
Lutatius  Catulus  embarked  in  an  iii£brm  state  of  health,  having
been  wounded  in  a  previous  little.  An  encounter  took  place
opposite  Lilybaeum,  a  city  of  Sicily,  with  the  greatest  valour
on  the  part  of  the  Romans,  £or  seventy-three  of  the  Cartha-
ginian ships  were  taken,  and  a  hundred  and  twenty-five  sunk ;
Siirty-two  thousfuad  of  the  enemy  were  m«Uie  prisoners,  and
thirteen  thousand  slain ;  and  a  vast  sum  in  gold  and  silver  fell
into  the  hands  of  the  Romans.  Of  the  Roman  fleet  twelve
ships  were  sunk. The  battle  was  fought  on  the  10th  of

H  H  2


468  EUTBOPIUS.  [b.iii.

of  March.  The  Carthagmians  immediately  sued  for  peace,
and  peace  was  granted  them.  The  Eoman  prisoners  who  were
in  the  hands  of  the  Carthaginians  were  restored ;  the  Cartha-
ginians also  requested  permission  to  redeem  such  of  the
Africans  as  the  Romans  kept  in  captiTity.  The  senate
decided  that  those  who  were  state  prisoners  should  he  restored
without  ransom;  hut  that  those  who  were  in  the  hands  of
private  persons  should  return  to  Carthage  on  the  payment  of
a  sum  to  their  owners;  and  that  such  payment  should  he
made  from  the  puhlic  treasury,  rather  than  hy  the  Cartha-  ,
ginians.

XXVIII.  Quintus  Lutatius  and  Aulius  Manlius,  heing
created  consuls,  made  war  upon  the  FaHsci,  formerly  a  powerful
people  of  Italy,  which  war  the  consuls  in  conjunction  brought
to  a  termination  within  six  days  after  they  took  the  field ;  fifteen
thousand  of  the  enemy  were  slain,  and  peace  was  granted
to  the  rest,  hut  half  their  land  was  taken  from  them.


BOOK  III.


Ptolemy,  king  of  Egypt,  declines  the  aid  offered  him  by  the  Romans
against  Antiochus;  Hiero,  king  of  Sicily,  comes  to  see  the  games
at  Rome,  I. — War  with  the  Ligurians ;  the  Carthaginians  think  of
*  resuming  hostilities,  but  are  pacified,  II. — ^Peace  throughout  the
dominions  of  Rome,  III. — The  Illyrian  war,  IV. — Disasters  of
the  Gauls  that  invaded  Italy,  V.  VI. — The  second  Punic  war,
VII.-XXIII.

I.  The  Punic  war  being  now  ended,  after  having  been  pro-
tracted though  three  and  twenty  years,  the  Romans,  who  were
now  distinguished  by  transcendent  glory,  sent  ambassadors  to
Ptolemy,  king  of  Egypt,  with  offers  of  assistance ;  for  Antio-
chus, king  of  Syria,  had  made  war  upon  him.  He  returned
thanks  to  the  Romans,  hut  declined  their  aid,  the  struggle
being  now  over.  About  the  same  time,  Hiero,  the  most
powerful  king  of  Sicily,  visited  Rome  to  witness  the  games,
and  distributed  two  hundred  thousand  modii  ♦  of  wheat  among
the  people.

II.  In  the  consulship  of  Lucius  Cornelius  Lentulus  and
Fulvius  Flaccus,  in  whose  time  Hiero  came  to  Rome,  war  was
carried  on,  within  the  limits  of  Italy,  against  the  Ligurians,

♦  See  note  on  Com.  Nep.  life  of  Atticus,  c.  2.


C.VII.  ABRIDGMENT  OF  ROMAN  HISTORY.  469-

and  a  triumph  obtained  over  them. The  Carthaginians,  too,
at  the  same  time,  attempted  to, renew  the  war,  soliciting  the^
Sardinians,  who,  by  an  article  of  the  peace,  were  bomid  to
submit  to  the  Romans,  to  rebel. A  deputation,  however,  of
the  Carthaginians  came  to  Rome,  and  obtained  peace.

III.  Under  the  consulate  of  Titus  Manlius  Torquatus  and
Caius  Attilius  Bulbus,  a  triumph,  was  obtained  over  the  Sar-
dinians ;  and,  peace  being  concluded  on  all  sides,  the  Romans
had  now  no  war  on  their  hands,  a  circumstance  which  had
happened  to  them  but  once  before  since  the  building  of  the
city,  in  the  reign  of  Numa  Pompilius.

IV.  Lucius  Posthumius  Albinus  and  Cnseus  Fulvius  Centu-
malus,  when  consuls,  conducted  a  war  against  the  lUyrians ;
and,  having  taken  many  of  their  towns,  reduced  their
kings  to  a  surrender,  and  it  was  then  for  the  first  time  that  a
triumph  was  celebrated  over  the  Illyrians.

V.  When  Lucius  -^milius  was  consul,  a  vast  force  of  the
Gauls  crossed  the  Alps  ;  but  all  Italy  united  in  favour  of  the
Romans ;  and  it  is  recorded  by  Fabius  the  historian,  who  was
present  in  that  war,  that  there  were  eight  hundred  thousand
men  ready  for  the  contest.  Affairs,  however,  were  brought  to
a  successful  termination  by  the  consul  alone ;  forty  thousand
of  the  enemy  were  killed,  and  a  triumph  decreed  to  ^milius.

VI.  A  few  years  after,  a  battle  was  fought  with  the  Gauls
within  the  borders  of  Italy,  and  ian  end  put  to  the  war,  in  the
consulship  of  Marcus  Claudius  Marcellus  and  Cnaeus  Cor-
nelius Scipio.  Marcellus  took  the  field  with  a  small  body  of
horse,  and  slew  the  king  of  the  Gauls,  Viridomarus,  with  his
own  hand.  Afterwards,  in  conjunction  with  his  colleague,  he
cut  to  pieces  a  numerous  army  of  the  Gauls,  stormed  Milan,
and  carried  off  a  vast  booty  to  Rome.  Marcellus,  at  his
triumph,  bore  the  spoils  of  the  Gaul,  fixed  upon  a  pole  on  his
shoulders.

VII.  In  the  consulate  of  Marcus  Minucius  Rufus  and
Publius  Cornelius,  war  was  made  upon  the  Istrians,  because
they  had  plundered  some  ships  of  the  Romans,  which  were
bringing  a  supply  of  com,  and  they  were  entirely  subdued.

In  the  same  year  the  second  Punic  war  was  commenced
against  the  Romans  by  Hannibal,  general  of  the  Cartha-
ginians, who,  in  the  twentieth  year  of  his  age,  proceeded  to
besiege  Saguntum,  a  city  of Spain,  in  alliance  with the


470  . BUTROPITJS.  [B.in.

Bomans,  bavicg  assembled  for  that  purpose  sin  army  of  fifty
thousand  foot  and  twenty  thousand  horse.  The  Eomans
warned  him,  by  deputies  sent  for  the  purpose,  to  desist  from
hostilities,  but  he  refused  them  audience*  The  Eomans  sent
also  to  Carthage,  requiring  that  orders  should  be  sent  to
Hannibal,  not  to  make  war  on^the  allies  of  the  Eoman  people;
bat  the  reply  made  by  the  Carthaginians  promised  no  com-
pliance. The  Saguntines  in  the  meantime,  worn  out  with
famine,  were  taken  by  Hannibal,  and  put  to  death  with,  the
utiAost  cruelty.

VIII.  Publius  Cornelius  Scipio  then  went  with  an  army
into  Spain,  and  Tiberius  Sempronius  into  Sicily.  War  was
declared  against  the  Carthaginians.  Hannibal,  leaving  his
brother  Hasdrubal  in  Spain,  passed  the  Pyrenees,  and  'made
a  way  over  the  Alps,  which,  in  that  part,  were  previously
impassable.  He  is  said  to  have  brought  into  Italy  eighty
thousand  foot,  twenty  thousand  horse,,  and  thirty-seven  ele-
phants. Numbers  of  the  Ligurians  and  Gauls  joined  him  on
his  march.  Sempronius  Gracchus,  hearing  of  Hannibal's  arri-
val in  Italy,  conveyed  over  his  army  from  Sicily  to  Ariminum.

IX.  The  first  to  meet  Hannibal  was  Publius  Cornelius
Scipio  ;  a  battle  being  commenced,  and  his  troops  put  to  flight,
he  retired  wounded  into  his  camp.  Sempronius  Gracchus  also
came  to  an  engagement  with  him  near  the  river  Trebia,  and  he
too  was  defeated.  Numbers  in  Italy  submitted  to  Hannibal ;
who,  marching  from  thence  into  Tuscany,  encountered  the
consul  Flaminius.  Flaminius  himself  he  cut  off;  and  twenty-
five  thousand  of  the  Romans  were  slain;  the  restvSaved  them-
selves by  flight.  Quintus  Fabius  Maumus  was  afterwards
sent  by  the  Bomans  to  oppose  Hannibal.  This  general,  by
avoiding  an  engagement,  checked  his  impetuosity ;  and  soon
after,  finding  a  favourable  opportunity,  defeated  him.

X.  In  the  five  hundred  and  fortieth  year  from  the  founda-
tion of  the  city,  Lucius  ^milius  and  Publius  Terentius  Varro
were  sent  against  Hannibal,  and  took  the  place  of  Fabius,  who
forewarned  both  the  consuls,  that  they  could  conquer  Hannibal,
who  was  a.  bold  and  energetic  leader,  only  by  deeliaing  a
pitched  battle  with  him.  But  an  engagement  being  brought
on,  through  the  impetuosity  of  the  consul  Varro,  in  opposition
to  his  ^colleague,  near  a  village  called  Cannse,  in  Apulia,  both
the  consuls  were  defeated  by  Hannibal. In  this  battle  three


C.Xn.]  ABRIDGMENT  OP  EOMAN  HISTORY.  471

thousand  of  the  Africans  fell,  and  a  great  part  of  Hannibal's
armj  were  wounded.  The  Romans,  however,  never  received
so  severe  a  blow  at  "any  period  of  the  Punic  wars ;  for  the
consul  -^milius  Paulus  was  killed ;  twenty  officers  of  consular
and  praetorian  rank,  thirty  senators,  and  three  hundred  others
of  noble  descent,  were  taken  or  slain,  as  well  as  forty  thousand
foot-soldiers,  and  three  thousand  five  hundred  horse.  During
all  these  calamities,  however,  not  one  of  the  Romans  deigned
to  speak  of  peace.  A  number  of  slaves  were  set  free  and
made  soldiers,  a  measure  never  before  adopted.

XI.  After  this  battle,  several  cities  of  Italy,  which  had  been
subject  to  the  Romans,  went  over  to  Hannibal.  Hannibal
made  proposals  to  the  Romans  concerning  the  redemption  of
the  prisoners,  but  the  senate  replied,  that  "  such  citizens  as
would  suffer  themselves  to  be  taken  with  arms  m  their  hands
were  of  no  value  to  them."  Hannibal  then  put  them  all  to
death  vrith  various  tortures,  and  sent  three  modii  *  of  gold
rings  to  Carthage,  which  he  had  taken  from  the  fingers  of
Roman  knights,  senators,  and  soldiers.  In  the  meantime,
Hasdrubal,  the  brother  of  Hannibal,  who  had  remained  in
Spain  with  a  numerous  army,  in  order  to  reduce  all  that
country  under  the  dominion  of  the  Africans,  was  defeated  there
by  the  two  Scipios,  the  Roman  generals,  and  lost  thirty-five
thousand  men  in  the  battle ;  of  these  ten  thousand  were 'made
prisoners,  and  twenty-five  thousand  slain.  Upon  this,  twelve
thousand  foot,  four  thousand  horse,  and  twenty  elephants  were
sent  to  him  hj  the  Carthaginians  to  reinforce  his  army.

XII.  In  the  fourth  year  after  Hannibal's  arrival  in  Italy,
Marcus  Claudius  Maroellus,  one  of  the  consuls,  engaged  him
with  success  at  Nola,  a  city  of  Campania.  But  Hannibal
possessed  himseK  of  several  of  the  Roman  cities  in  Apulia,
Calabria*  and  the  country  of  the  Bruttii.  About  this  time  also
Philip,  king  of  Macedonia,  sent  ambassadors  to  him,  ofiering
him  assistance  against  the  Romans,  on  condition  that,  when  he
had  subdued  them,  he,  in  turn,  should  receive  assistance  from
Hannibal  against  the  Greeks.  But  Philip's  ambassadors  being
taken,  and  the  afiEair  thus  discovered,  the  Romans  ordered
Marcus  Valerius  LsBvinus  to  proceed  to  Macedonia,  and  Titus
Manlius,  as  proconsul,  into  Sardinia ;  for  that  island  also,  at
the  solicitation  of  Hannibal,  had  revolted  from  the  Romans.

*  See  note  on  C.  Nep.  life  of  Atticus,  c.  2.


47a  BUTROPIUS.  [B.IV.

XIII.  Thus  war  was  carried  on  at  the  same  time  in  four
different  places  ;  in  Italy,  against  Hannibal ;  in  Spain,  against
Hasdrubal  his  brother;  in  Macedonia,  against  Philip;  in
Sardinia,  against  the  Sardinians  and  another  Hasdrubal,  also
a  Carthaginian.  Hasdrubal  was  taken  alive  by  Titus  Manlius
the  proconsul,  who  had  been  sent  into  Sardinia ;  twelve  thou-
sand of  his  men  were  slain,  fifteen  hundred  made  prisoners,
and  Sardinia  brought  under  subjection  to  the  Bomans.  Man-
lius, being  thus  successful,  brought  Hasdrubal  and  his  other
prisoners  to  Rome.  In  the  meantime,  PhiUp  also  was  defeated
by  Lsevinus  in  Macedonia,  and  Hasdrubal  and  Mago,  a  third
brother  of  Hannibal,  by  the  Scipios  in  Spain.

XIV.  In  the  tenth  year  after  Hannibal's  arrival  in  Italy,  in
the  consulship  of  Publius  Sulpicius  and  Cuaeus  Fulvius,
Hannibal  advanced  within  four  miles  of  Rome,  and  his  cavalry
rode  up  to  the  very  gates ;  but  soon  after,  through  fear  of  the
consuls,  who  were  coming  upon  him  with  an  army,  he  with-
drew into  Campania.  In  Spain,  the  two  Scipios,  who  had
been  victorious  for  many  years,  were  killed  by  his  brother
Hasdrubal ;  the  array  however  remained  in  full  strength,  for
the  generals  had  been  ensnared  rather  by  accident  than  the
valour  of  the  enemy.  About  this  time,  also,  a  great  part  of
Sicily,  which  the  Africans  had  begun  to  appropriate,  was
recovered  by  the  consul  Marcellus,  and  vast  spoil  brought  to
Rome  from  the  celebrated  city  of  Syracuse.  In  Macedonia,
Laevinus  made  an  alliance  with  Philip,  and  several  of  the
Grecian  states,  as  well  as  with  Attains,  king  of  Asia ;  and,
proceeding  afterwards  to  Sicily,  took  Hanno,  a  general  of  the
Carthaginians,  at  the  city  of  Agrigentum,  together  with  the
town  itself,  and  sent  him  with  other  noble  prisoners  to  Rome.
Forty  cities  he  obliged  to  surrender ;  twenty-six  he  carried  by
storm.  Thus  all  Sicily  being  recovered,  and  Macedonia
humbled,  he  returned  with  great  glory  to  Rome.  In  Italy,
Hannibal,  attacking  Cnaeus  Fulvius,  one  of  the  consuls,  by
surprise,  cut  him  off,  together  with  eight  thousand  of  his
men.

XV.  In  the  meantime,  Publius  Cornelius  Scipio,  a  man
almost  the  very  first  of  all  the  Romans,  both  in  his  own  and
succeeding  ages,  son  of  that  Publius  Scipio  who  had  carried
on  the  war  there  before,  was  despatched,  at  the  age  of  twenty-
four,  into  Spain,  where,  after  the  death  of  the  two  Scipios,  no


C.XVIII.]  ABRIDGMENT  OF  ROMAN  HISTORY.  473

Eoman  general  was  now  left.  He  took  Carthage,  in  Spain,  in
which  the  Africans  kept  all  their  gold,  and  silver,  and  warlike
stores ;  he  took  also  a  number  of  hostages,  whom  the  Cartha-
ginians had  received  from  the  Spaniards,  as  well  as  Mago,  the
brother  of  Hannibal,  whom  he  sent  with  others  to  Rome.
The  rejoicing  at  Rome  on  this  intelligence  was  very  great.
Scipio  restored  the  Spanish  hostages  to  their  parents ;  and  in
consequence  almost  all  the  Spaniards  unanimously  joined  him.
Soon  after,  he  put  to  flight  Hasdrubal,  the  brother  of  Hanni-
bal, and  took  a  great  quantity  of  spoil.

XVI.  In  Italy,  meanwhile,  Quintus  Fabius  Maximus,  one
of  the  consuls,  recovered  Tarentum,  where  a  great  body  of
Hannibal's  troops  were  quartered,  and  cut  off  there  also
Carthalo,  one  of  Hannibal's  generals;  twenty-five  thousand
of  the  prisoners  he  sold  for  slaves ;  the  spoil  he  divided  among
the  soldiers;  and  the  money  arising  from  the  sale  of  the
prisoners,  he  paid  into  the  public  treasury.  At  this  time,
several  of  the  Roman  cities,  which  had  gone  over  to  Hannibal,
submitted  themselves  again  to  Fabius  Maximus.

In  the  following  year  Scipio  performed  extraordinary  exploits
in  Spain,  and,  by  his  own  exertions  and  those  of  his  brother,
Lucius  Scipio,  recovered  seventy  cities.  In  Italy,  however,
the  war  went  on  unsuccessfully,  for  Claudius  Marcellus  the
consul  was  cut  off  by  Hannibal.

XVIT.  In  the  third  year  after  Scipio's  departure  for  Spain,
he  again  greatly  distinguished  himself.  A  king  of  Spain,
whom  he  had  conquered  in  a  great  battle,  he  received  into
alliance;  and  was  the  first  that  refrained  from  demanding
hostages  of  a  vanquished  enemy.

XVIII.  Hannibal,  having  no  hope  that  Spain  could  be  held
longer  against  Scipio,  summoned  from  it  Hasdrubal  his
brother,  with  all  his  troops,  to  join  him  in  Italy.  Hasdrubal,
pursuing  the  same  route  by  which  Hannibal  had  gone,  fell  into
an  ambush  laid  for  him  by  the  consuls  Appius  Claudius  Nero
and  Marcus  Livius  Salinator,  near  Sena,  a  city  of  Picenum,
but  fell  fighting  valiantly;  his  numerous  forces  were  either
taken  or  put  to  the  sword ;  and  a  great  quantity  of  gold  and
silver  carried  off  to  Rome.  Hannibal  now  began  to  despair  of
the^issue  of  the  war,  and  an  accession  of  courage  was  felt  by
the  Romans.  They,  therefore,  also  recalled  Publius  Cornelius
Scipio  out  of  Spain ;  who  arrived  at  Rome  with  great  glory.


474  KUTBOPIUS.  [B.in;

XIX.  In  the  consulate  of  Quintus  Csdcilius  and  Lucius
Valerius,  all  the  cities  in  the  territory  of  the  Bruttii,  which
were  in  the  possession  of  HannibaX  surrendered  to  the
Bomans.

XX.  In  the  fourteenth  year  after  Hannibal's  invasion  of
Italy,  Scipio,  who  had  achieved  such  successes  in  Spain.,  was
created  consul,  and  sent  into  Africa;  a  man  in  whom  there
was  thought  to  be  something  divine,  so  that  he  was  even
imagined  to  hold  converse  with  the  gods.  He  encountered
Hanno,  the  general  of  the  Carthaginians  in  Africa,  and
destroyed  his  army.  In  a  second  battle  he  took  his  camp,
with  four  thousand  five  hundred  of  his  soldiers,  eleven  thou-
sand being  killed.  Syphax,  king  of  Numidia,  who  had  joined
the  Africans,  he  took  prisoner,  and  became  master  of  his
camp.  Syphax  himself,  with  the  noblest  of  the  Numidians,
and  a  vast  quantity  of  spoil,  was  sent  by  Scipio  to  Home ;  on  the
news  of  which  event,  almost  all  Italy  forsook  Hannibal,  who
was  desired  by  the  Carthaginians  to  return  to  Africa,  which
Scipio  was  now  laying  waste.

XXI.  Thus,  in  the  seventeenth  year  after  his  arrival,  Italy
was  delivered  from  Hannibal,  and  he  is  said  to  have  quitted  it
with  tears.  Ambassadors  from  the  Carthaginians  applied  to
Scipio  for  peace,  by  whom  they  were  sent  to  the  senate,  a
truce  of  forty-five  days  being  allowed  for  their  journey  to  and
from  Rome ;  thirty  thousand  pounds  of  silver  were  accepted
from  them.  The  senate  directed  that  a  peace  should  be  con-
cluded with  the  Carthaginians  at  the  discretion  of  Scipio.
Scipio  granted  it  on  these  conditions  :  **  that  they  should  retain
no  more  than  thirty  ships,  that  they  should  pay  to  the  Bomans
five  hundred  thousand  pounds  of  silver,  and  restore  all  the
prisoners  and  deserters."

XXII.  Hannibal  in  the  meantime  landing  in  Africa,  the
treaty  was  interrupted.  Many  hostilities  were  committed  by
the  Carthaginians ;  yet  when  their  ambassadors,  as  they  were
returning  from  Rome,  were  made  prisoners  by  some  Eoman
troops,  they  were  by  Scipio 's  orders  set  at  liberty.  Hannibal
too,  being  defeated  by  Scipio  in  several  battles,*  expressed  also
himself  a  desire  for  peace. A  conference  being  held,  peace

'  *  Frequentihua  prcBliis.']  Livy  does  not  seem  to  think  that  any  battle
took  place  before  the  conference ;  he,  however,  mentions  that  Valerius
Antias  speaks  of  one  having  occurred  before  it,  b.  zxx.  29.


CXXin.]  ABRIDGMENT  OP  ROMAN  HISTORY.  476

was  offered  on  the  same  terms  as  before,  only  a  hundred  thou-
sand pounds  of  silver  were  added  to  the  former  five  hundred
thousand^  on  account  of  their  lat«  perfidy.*  The  terms  were
unsatisfactory  to  the  Carthaginians,  and  they  ordered  Han-
nibal to  continue  the  war.

The  war  was  carried  by  Scipio,  and  Masinissa,  another
king  of  the  Numidians,  who  had  made  an  alliance  with  Scipio,
to  the  veiy  walls  of  Carthage,  Hannibal  sent  three  spies
into  Scipio's  camp,  who  were  captured,  and  Scipio  ordered
them  to  be  led  round  the  camp,  the  whole  army  to  be  shown
them,  and  themselves  to  be  entertained  and  dismissed,  that
they  might  report  to  Hannibal  all  that  they  had  seen  among
the  Romans.

XXIII.  In  the  meantime  preparations  were  made  by  both
generals  for  a  battle,  such  as  scarce  ever  occurred  in  any  age,
since  they  were  the  ablest  commanders  that  ever  led  forces
into  the  field.  Scipio  came  off  victorious,  having  almost
captured  Hannibal  himself,  who  escaped  at  first  with  several
horse,  then  with  twenty,  and  at  last  with  only  four.  There
were  found  in  Hannibal's  camp  twenty  thousand  pounds  of
silver/and  eight  hundred  of  gold,  with  plenty  of  stores.  After
this  battle,  peace  was  concluded  with  the  Carthaginians.
Scipio  returned  to  Rome,  and  triumphed  with  the  greatest
glory,  receiving  from  that  period  the  appellation  of  Africanus.
Thus  the  second  Funic  war  was  brought  to  an  end  in  the
nineteenth  year  after  it  began.

*  Propter  novam  perfidiam.']  Eutropius,  at  tbe  beginning  of  the
chapter,  speaks  of  "many  hostilities"  having  been  committed  by  the
GarthaginianB.  ''Before  the  arrival  of  Hannibal,  and  while  their
ambassadors  were  on  their  way  from  Rome,  the  Carthaginians  had
plundered  a  convoy  of  Scipio's  driven  into  their  harboar  by  stress  of
weather,  and  had  ill-treated  some  deputies  whom  Scipio  had  sent  to
Carthage  to  complain  of  their  conduct.  See  Polyb.  zv.  Ij  Liv
24. ;  Appian.  de  Reb.  Pun.  c.  84." — Tzsehucke,


476


BOOK  IV.

War  with  Philip,  king  of  Macedonia,  I.  IL — ^War  with  Antiochus,  king
of  Syria,  IIL  IV.— Triumph  of  Pulvius  over  the  ^tolians ;  death
of  Hannibal,  V. — War  with  Perseus,  king  of  Macedonia,  and  with
Gentius,  king  of  lUyria,  VL — VIII. — Successes  of  Mummius  in
Spain,  IX. — Third  Punic  war,  and  destruction  of  Carthage,  X.
— XII. — War  in  Macedonia  with  Pseudo- Philip,  XIII. — The
Achaean  war,  and  destruction  of  Corinth,  XIV. — War  in  Mace-
donia with  Pseudo-Perseus,  XV. — War  in  Spain  with  Viriatus,
XVL — Numantine  war  ended  by  Scipio,  XVIL — Attains  bequeaths
his  kingdom  to  the  Roman  people,  XVIIL — Triumphs  of  Junius
Brutus  and  Scipio,  XIX. — ^War  in  Asia  with  Aristonicus,  XX. —
Carthage  becomes  a  Roman  colony,  XX  I. — ^War  with  the  Transal-
pine Gauls,  and  Bituitus,  king  of  the  Arvemi,  XXII. — A  colony
settled  at  Narbonne ;  a  triumph  over  Dahnatia,  XXIII. — Unsuc-
cessful war  with  the  Scordisci,  XXIV. — Triumphs  over  Sardinia
and  Thrace,  XXV.— War  with  Jugurtha,  XXVL  XXVIL

I.  After  the  Punic  w£is  terminated,  the  Macedonian  war,
against  King  Philip,  succeeded,

II.  In  the  five  hundred  and  fifty-first  year  from  the  build-
ing of  the  city,  Titus  Quintius  Flamininus  was  sent  against
King  Philip.  He  was  successful  in  his  undertaking ;  and
peace  was  granted  to  Philip  on  these  conditions,  that  "he
should  not  make  war  on  those  states  of  Greece  which  the
Eomans  had  defended  against  him ;  that  he  should  restore
the  prisoners  and  deserters  ;  that  he  should  retain  only  fifty
vessels,  and  deliver  up  the  rest  to  the  Romans ;  that  he  should
pay,  for  ten  years,  a  tribute  of  four  thousand  pounds  weight
of  silver ;  and  give  his  own  son  Demetrius  as  a  hostage."
Titus  Quintius  made  war  also  on  the  Lacedaemonians ;  de-
feated their  general  Nahis,  and  admitted  them  into  alliance
on  such  terms  as  he  thought  proper.  He  led  with  great  pride
before  his  chariot  hostages  of  most  noble  rank,  Demetrius  the
son  of  Philip,  and  Armenes  the  son  of  Nabis.

III.  The  Macedonian  war  being  thus  terminated,  the
Syrian  war,  against  King  Antiochus,  succeeded,  in  the  consul-
ship of  Pufclius  Cornelius  Scipio  and  Manius  Acilius  Glabrio.
To  this  Antiochus  Hannibal  had  joined  himself,  abandoning
his  native  country,  Carthage,  to  escape  being  delivered  up  to
the  Eomans.  Manius  Acilius  Glabrio  fought  successfully  in
Aohaia.  The  camp  of  King  Antiochus  was  taken  by  an  attack
in  the  night,  and  he  himself  obliged  to  flee. To  Philip  his


c.vl]  abrtdgmbnt  of  boman  history.  477

son  Demetrius  was  restored,  for  having  assisted  the  Romans  in
their  contest  with  Antiochus.

IV.  In  the  consulate  of  Lucius  Cornelius  Scipio  and  Caius
Lselius,  Scipio  Africanus  went  out  as  lieutenant  to  his  brother
Lucius  Cornelius  Scipio,  the  consul,  against  Antiochus.
Hannibal,  who  was  with  Antiochus,  was  defeated  in  a  battle
by  sea.  Antiochus  himself  was  afterwards  routed  by  Cornelius
Scipio,  the  consul,  in  a  great  battle  at  Magnesia,  a  city  of
Asia,  near  mount  Sipylus.  Eumenes,  who  founded  the  city
of  Eumenia  in  Fhrygia,  the  brother  of  king  Attains^  assisted
the  Bomans  in  that  engagement.  Fifty  thousand  foot,  and
three  thousand  horse  were  killed  in  that  battle  on  the  side  of
the  king.  In  consequence.  King  Antiochus  sued  for  peace,
which  was  granted  to  him,  though  vanquished,  by  the  senate,
on  the  same  conditions  as  it  had  been  otfered  before  :  "  that  he
should  withdraw  from  Europe  and  Asia,  and  confine  himself
within  mount  Taurus;  that  he  should  pay  ten  thousand
talents,  and  give  twenty  hostages,  and  surrender  Hannibal,
the  author  of  the  war."  All  the  cities  of  Asia,  which  Antio-
chus had  lost  in  this  war,  were  given  to  Eumenes ;  many
cities  also  were  granted  to  the  Ehodians,  who  had  assisted  the
Eomans  against  Antiochus.  Scipio  returned  to  Home,
and  celebrated  his  triumph  with  great  pomp;  and  he  also,
after  the  example  of  his  brother,  received  the  name  of
Asiaticus,  from  his  conquest  of  Asia;  as  his  brother,  from
the  subjugation  of  Africa,  had  been  sumamed  Africanus.

V.  Under  the  consuls  Spurius  Posthumius  Albinus  and
Quintus  Marcius  Philippus,  Marcus  Fulvius  triumphed  for
conquering  the  JEtolians.  Hannibal,  who,  on  the  defeat  of
Antiochus,  had  fled  to  Prusias,  king  of  Bithynia,  that  he
might  not  be  surrendered  to  the  Eomans,  was  demanded  also
at  his  hands  by  Titus  Quindus  Flamininus;  and,  as  he
seemed  likely  to  be  surrendered,  he  drank  poison,  and  was
buried  at  Libyssa,  in  the  territory  of  the  Nicomedians.

VI.  On  the  death  of  Philip,  king  of  Macedonia,  who  had
both  waged  war  with  the  Eomans,  and  afterwards  given  aid
to  the  Eomans  against  Antiochus,  his  son  Perseus  took  up
arms  again  in  Macedonia,  having  levied  great  forces  for  the
war,  and  having  as  allies  Cotys,  lung  of  Thrace,  and  the  king
of  lUyricum,  whose  name  was  Gentius.  On  the  side  of  the
Eomans  were  Eumenes,  king  of  Asia,  Ariarathes  of  Cappa-


478  EUTROPIUS.  [B.IV.

docia,  Antiocbus  of  Syria,  Ptolemy  of  Egypt,  Masinissa  of
Numidia.  Prusias,  the  king  of  Bithynia,  although  he  had
married  the  sister  of  Perseus,  remained  neutral.  The  general
of  the  Eomans,  the  consul  Publius  Licinius,  was  defeated  by
Perseus  in  a  severe  engagement;  yet  the  Romans,  although
vanquished,  refused  peace  to  the  king  when  he  solicited  it,
except  on  condition  that  he  should  surrender  himself  and  his
people  to  the  senate  and  the  people  of  Rome.  The  consul
Lucius  ^milius  Paulus  was  afterwards  sent  against  him,
and  the  praetor  Gains  Anicius  into  Illyricum  against  Gen-
tius :  but  Gentius,  being  defeated  with  ease  in  a  single  battle,
soon  surrendered ;  and  his  mother,  his  wife,  his  two  sons,
and  his  brother,  fell  at  the  same  time  into  the  power  of  the^
Romans.  Thus  the  war  was  terminated  within  thirty  days,
and  the  news  of  Gentius's  defeat  arrived  before  it  was  an-
nounced that  the  war  had  been  begun.

VII.  The  consul  ^Emilius  Paulus  came  to  a  battle  with
Perseus  on  the  3rd  of  September,  and  defeated  him,  killing
twenty  thousand  of  his  infantry ;  the  cavalry  which  remained
with  the  king  was  unbroken ;  on  the  side  of  the  Romans  only
a  hundred  men  were  missing.  All  the  cities  of  Macedonia,
that  Perseus  had  under  his  sway,  submitted  to  the  Romans.
The  king  himself,  deserted  by  his  friends,  fell  into  the  hands
of  Paulus  ;  but  Paulus  treated  him  with  respect,  and  not  as
a  vanquished  enemy,  for,  when  he  desired  to  prostrate  himself
at  his  feet,  he  would  not  permit  him,  but  placed  him  in  a
seat  by  his  side.  .The  terms  granted  to  the  Macedonians  and
Illyrians  were  these,  "  that  they  might  remain  free,  on  paying
half  the  tribute  which  they  had  been  accustomed  to  pay  to
their  kings ; "  that  it  might  be  seen  that  the  Roman  pec^le
contended  with  a  view  to  equity  and  not  to  covetousness :
and  these  terms  Paulus  proclaimed  in  an  assembly  of  a  vast
concourse  of  people,  entertaining  the  ambassadors  of  several
states,  who  had  come  to  pay  their  respects  to  him,  with  a  most
sumptuous  feast ;  saying  that  "  it  ought  to  be  possible  for  the
same  individual  to  be  victorious  in  war  and  elegant  in  his
entertainments."

VIII.  Shortly  after  he  took  seventy  cities  of  Epirus,  which
had  resumed  hostilities ;  the  booty  he  distributed  among  his
soldiers.  He  then  returned  to  Rome  with  great  display,  in  a
vessel  belonging  to  Perseus,  which  is  recorded  to  have  been  of


CXI.]  ABRIDGMENT  OF  BOMAK  HISTOBT.  479

such  extraordinary  magnitude,  that  it  contained  sixteen  banks
of  oars.  He  celebrated  his  triumph  most  magnificently  in  a
golden  car,  iivith  his  two  sons  standing  on  each  side  of  him ;
the  two  sous  of  Perseus,  and  Perseus  himself,  then  forty-fiv^
years  of  age,  were  led  in  procession  before  the  car.  After
^milius.  Gains  Anicius  also  celebrated  a  triumph  on  account
of  the  lUyrians ;  in  which  Gentius,  with  his  brother  and  sons,
were  led  before  his  car.  To  witness  this  spectacle  the  kings  of
several  nations  came  to  Rome;  among  others,  even  Attalus
and  Eumenes,  kings  of  Asia,  and  Prusias,  king  of  Bithynia ;
who  were  entertained  with  great  consideration,  and,  by  per-
mission  of  the  senate,  deposited  the  presents  which  they  had
brought  in  the  Capitol.  Prusias  also  entrusted  his  son  Nico-
medes  to  the  senate.

IX.  In  the  year  following  Lucius  Memmius  was  successful
in  the  war  in  Spain.  Marcellus  the  consul  afterwards  met
with  success  in  the  same  country.

X.  A  third  war  was  then  undertaken  against  Carthage,  in
the  six  hundred  and  second*  year  from  the  building  of  the
city,  in  the  consulship  of  Lucius  Manlius  Censorinus  and
Marcus  Manilius,  and  in  the  fifty-first  year  after  the  termina-
tion of  the  second  Punic  war.  The  consuls  in  consequence
proceeded  to  attack  Carthage.  Hasdrubal,  the  Carthaginian
general,  engaged  them;  Phamea,  another  general,  had  the
command  of  the  Carthaginian  cavalry.  At  tiiat  time,  Scipio,
the  grandson  of  Scipio  AMcanus,  served  in  the  army  in  the
capacity  of  tribune,  for  whom  great  fear  and  respect  w^as  felt
by  all ;  for  he  was  regarded  as  etminently  brave  and  skilful  in
the  field.  Many  enterprises  were  accordingly  conducted  with
success  by  his  [agency ;  nor  did  Hasdrubal  or  Phamea  shrink
from  anything  more  than  engaging  with  that  part  of  the  army
in  which  Scipio  commanded.

XI.  About  the  same  time,  Masinissa,  king  of  Numidia,  who
had  been  an  ally  of  the  Roman  people  for  nearly  sixty  years,
died  in  the  ninety-seventh  year  of  his  age,  leaving  behind  him

*  Altero.']  The  Greek  translator  gives  hi,  in  which  signification  he
seems  to  have  taken  aUero  ;  as  also  in  i.  18.  On  this  point  the  learned
are  constantly  disputing,  and  especially  on  the  49th  epitome  of  Livy,
where  Duker  does  not  decide  whether  alter  signifies  first  or  second. —
3}sgckucke.  I  consider  that  altera  used  as  in  this  passage,  and  as  in  i.  18,
always  signifies  second.  In  such  phrases  as  alter  ab  undecmo,  Yirg.
EcL  viil  39,  it  of  course  has  a  different  signification.


430  EUTEOPIUS.  [B.rv.

fortj-four  sons. He  appointed  Scipio  to  divide  his  kingdom
amongst  his  sons.

XII.  As  the  name  of  Scipio  had  already  become  famous,  he
was  created  consul,  although  but  a  young  man,  and  sent
against  Carthage.  He  took  it  and  demolished  it :  the  spoils
found  there,  which  had  been  amassed  by  Carthage  from  the
ruins  of  various  cities,  and  the  ornaments  of  towns,  he  restored
to  such  cities  of  Sicily,  Italy,  and  Africa,  as  recognized  their
own.  Thus  Carthage,  in  the  seven  hundredth  year  afi^r  its
foimdation,  was  destroyed.  Scipio  earned  the  same  title  which
his  grandfather  had  gained,  being,  on  account  of  his  valour,
called  Africanus  Junior.

XIII,  In  the  meantime  a  certain  Pseudo-Philip  took  up
arms  in  Macedonia,  and  defeated  Publius  Juvencius,  a  Boman
prffitor,  who  had  been  sent  out  against  him,  with  a  terrible
slaughter.  After  him  Quintus  Caecilius  Metellus  was  sent  by
the  Romans  as  general  against  this  pretended  Philip,  and,
having  slain  twenty-five  thousand  of  his  soldiers,  recovered
Macedonia,  and  took  the  impostor  himself  prisoner.

XIY.  War  was  also  declared  against  Corinth,  the  noblest
city  of  Greece,  on  account  of  an  affront  offered  to  a  Koman
embassy.  That  city  Miunmius  the  consul  took  and  demolished.
Three  most  remarkable  triumphs  therefore  were  celebrated  at
Home  at.the  same  time,  that  of  Scipio  for  Africa,  before  whose
chariot  Hasdrubal  was  led  ;  that  of  Metellus  for  Macedonia,
before  whose  chariot  walked  Andriscus,  also  called  Pseudo-
Philip  ;  and  that  of  Mummius  for  Corinth,  before  whom  brazen
statues,  pictures,  and  other  ornaments  of  that  celebrated  city,
were  cairied.

XV.  In  Macedonia,  meanwhile,  a  Pseudo-Perseus,  who
called  himself  the  son  of  Perseus,  collecting  the  slaves,  took
up  arms,  and,  when  he  was  at  the  head  of  a  force  of  seven-
teen thousand  fighting  men,  was  defeated  by  Tremellius  the
quffistor.  [At  this  time  a  hermaphrodite  was  discovered  at
Home,  and  drowned  in  the  sea  by  order  of  the  soothsayers.]*

XVI.  About  the  same  time  Metellus  had  singular  success

*  The  Bentence  in  brackets  is  not  found  in  all  manuscripts";  nor  is
it  acknowledged  by  the  Greek  translator.  Verheyk,  Cellarius,  and
Tzschucke  omit  it.  **  Some  say  that  this  hermaphrodite  was  bom  in
the  following  year,  and  that  a  great  pestilence  ensued." — McidafM
Dader. See  Ldvyi  zxvii  lli'ST;  xxw.  12.


a  XX.]  ABRIDGMENT  OF  ROMAN HISTORY.  481

against  the  Spaniards  in  Celtiberia.  Quintus  Fompeius  suc-
ceeded him.  Not  long  after  Quintus  Csepio  was  also  sent  to
the  same  war,  which  a  leader  named  Viriathus  was  still  keep-
ing up  against  the  Eomans  in  Lusitania ;  through  fear  of
whom  Viriathus  was  killed  bj  his  own  men,  after  he  had  kept
Spain  in  a  state  of  excitement  against  the  Romans  for  fourteen
years.  He  was  at  first  a  shepherd,  then  captain  of  a  band  of
robbers,  and  at  last  he  stirred  up  so  many  powerful  nations  to
war,  that  he  was  considered  as  the  protector  of  Spain  against
the  Romans.  When  his  assassins  asked  a  reward  of  the
consul  Caepio,  they  received  for  answer,  that  *'it  was  never
pleasing  to  the  Romans,  that  a  general  should  be  killed  by  his
own  soldiers.*'

XVII.  The  consul  Quintus  Pompeius  being  afterwards  de-
feated by  the  Numantines,  the  most  powerful  nation  of  Spain,
made  an  ignominious  peace  with  them.  After  him,  the  consul
Caius  Hostilius  Mancinus  again  concluded  a  dishonourable
peace  with  the  Numantines,  which  the  people  and  senate
ordered  to  be  annulled,  and  Mancinus  himself  to  be  given  up
to  the  enemy,  that  they  might  avenge  themselves  for  the
dissolution  of  the  treaty  on  him  with  whom  they  had  made  it.*
After  such  signal  disgrace,  therefore,  with  which  the  Roman
armies  had  been  twice  defeated  by  the  Numantines,  Publius
Scipio  Africanus  was  made  consul  a  second  time,  and  sent  to
Numantia.  He  reformed,  in  the  first  place,  the  dissolute  and
idle  soldiery,  rather  by  inuring  them  to  labour  than  by  punish-
ment, and  without  any  great  severity.  He  then  took  several
cities  of  Spain,  some  by  force,  and  allowing  others  to  surren-
der. At  last  he  reduced  Numantia  itself  by  famine,  after  it
had  been  long  besieged,  and  razed  it  to  the  ground,  and
received  the  rest  of  the  province  into  alliance.

XVIII.  About  this  time  Attains,  king  of  Asia,  the  brother
of  Eumenes,  died,  and  left  the  Roman  people  his  heir.  Thus
Asia  was  added  to  the  Roman  empire  by  will.

XIX.  Shortly  after,  also,  Decimus  Junius  Brutus  triumphed
with  great  glory  over  the  Gall»cians  aud  Lusitanians ;  and
Publias  Scipio  Africanus  had  a  second  triumph  over  the  Nu-
mantines, in  the  fourteenth  year  after  his  first  triumph  for  his
exploits  in  Africa.

XX.  A  war  in  the  meantime  was  kindled  in  Asia  by  Aris-

•  See  FloruB,  ii.  18 ;  Yell.  Pat.  u.  1,  90,  Bohn's  CI.  Library.

II


iS^  EUTBOPiuSw  [B.nr*

tonicus,  the  son  of  Eumenes  by  a  concubiue :  this  Eumenes
was  the  brother  of  Attalus.  Against  him  was  sent  out  Publius
Licinius  Crassus,  who  had  ample  assistance  from  several  kings,
for  not  only  Nicomedes,  the  king  of  Bithynia,  supported  the
Romans,  but  also  Mithridates  king  of  Pontus,  with  whom  they
had  afterwards  a  very  great  war,  as  well  as  Ariarathes,  king  of
Cappadocia,  and  Pyleemenes  of  Paphlagonia.  Crassus  not-
withstanding was  defeated,  and  killed  in  battle ;  his  head  was
carried  to  Aristonicus,  and  his  body  buried  at  Smyrna.  Soon
after  Perpema,  the  Roman  consul,  who  was  appointed  suc-
cessor to  Crassus,  hearing  of  the  event  of  the  war,  hastened  to
Asia ;  and  defeating  Aristonicus  in  battle,  near  the  city  Strato-
nice  to  which  he  had  fled,  reduced  him  by  famine  to  surrender.
Aristonicus,  by  command  of  the  senate,  was  strangled  iu
prison  at  Rome  ;  for  a  triumph  could  not  be  celebrated  on  his
account,  because  Perpema  had  died  at  Pergamus  on  his
return.

XXI.  In  the  consulate  of  Lucius  Csecilius  Metellus  and
Titus  Quintius  Flamininus,  Carthage  in  Africa,  which  still
exists,  was  rebuilt  by  order  of  the  senate,  two  and  twenty  years
after  it  had  been  destroyed  by  Scipio.  A  colony  of  Roman
citizens  was  sent  out  thither.

XXII.  In  the  six  hundred  and  twenty-seventh  year  from
the  founding  of  the  city,  Caius  Cassius  Longinus  and  Sextus
Domitius  Calvinus,  the  consuls,  made  war  upon  the  Trans-
alpine Gauls,  and  the  city  of  the  Arvemi,  at  that  time  very
distinguished,  and  their  king,  Bituitus;  and  slew  a  vast
number  of  men  near  the  river  Rhone.  A  great  booty,  consist-
ing of  the  golden  collars  of  the  Gauls,  was  brought  to  Rome.
Bituitus  surrendered  himself  to  Domitius,  and  was  conveyed
by  him  to  Rome ;  and  both  consuls  triumphed  with  great
glory.

XXIII.  In  the  consulship  of  Marcus  Porcius  Cato  and
Quintus  Marcius  Rex,  in  the  six  hundred  and  thirty-third  year
from  the  building  of  the  city,  a  colony  was  led  out  to  Narbonne
in  Gaul.  Afterwards  a  triumph  was  obtained  over  Dalmatia
by  the  consuls  Lucius  Metellus  and  Quintus  Mucins  Scsevola.

XXIV.  In  the  six  hundred  and  thirty-fifth  year  from  the
building  of  the  city,  the  consul  Caius  Cato  made  war  upon  the
Scordisoi,  and  fought  with  them  to  his  dishonour.

XXV.  When  Caius  Csecilius  Metellus  and  Cnaeus  Carbo


C.  XXVII.] ABRIDGMENT  OP  ROMAN  HISTORY.  483

were  consuls,  the  Metelli,  two  brothers,  had  triumphs  on  the
same  day,  one  for  Sardinia,  the  other  for  Thrace ;  and  news
was  brought  to  Borne,  that  the  Cimbri  had  crossed  from  Gaul
into  Italy.

XXVI.  In  the  consulship  of  Publius  Scipio  Nasica  and
Lucius  Calpurnius  Bestia,  war  was  made  upon  Jugurtha,  king
of  Numidia,  because  he  had  murdered  Adherbal  and  Hiempsal,
the  sons  of  Micipsa,  his  cousins,  princes,  and  allies  of- the
Roman  people.  The  consul  Calpurnius  Bestia  being  sent
against  him,  was  corrupted  by  the  kings  money,  and  con-
cluded a  most  ignominious  treaty  of  peace  with  him,  which
was  afterwards  repudiated  by  the  senate.  Spurius  Albinos
Postumius  proceeded  against  him  in  the  following  year :  he
also,  through  the  agency  of  his  brother,  fought  against  the
Numidians  to  his  disgrace.

XXVII.  In  the  third  place,  the  consul  Quintus  Caecilius
Metellus  being  sent  out  against  him,  brought  back  the  army,
which  he  reformed  with  great  severity  and  judgment,  without
exercising  cruelty  on  any  one,  to  the  ancient  Boman  discipline.
He  defeated  Jugurtha  in  various  battles,  killed  or  captured  his
elephants,  and  obliged  many  of  his  towns  to  surrender ;  and,
when  on  the  point  of  putting  an  end  to  the  war,  was  succeeded
by  Caius  Marius.  Marius  overthrew  both  Jugurtha  and  Boc-
chus,  the  king  of  Mauritania,  who  had  undertaken  to  afford
assistance  to  Jugurtha ;  he  also  took  several  towns  in  Numidia,
and  put  an  end  to  the  war,  having,  through  the  instrumentality
of  his  qusBStor  Cornelius  Sylla,  a  distinguished  man,  taken
Jugurtha  prisoner,  whom  Bocchus,  who  had  before  fought  for
him,  betrayed.

In  Gaul,  the  Cimbri  were  defeated  bv  Marcus  Junius
Silanus,  the  colleague  of  Quintus  Metellus,  the  Scordisci  and
Triballi  in  Macedonia  by  Minutius  Rufus,  £ind  the  Lusitani  in
Spain  by  Servilius  Caepio ;  and  two  triumphs  were  celebrated
on  account  of  Jugurtha,  the  first  by  Metellus,  the  secjond  by
Marius.  It  was  before  the  chariot  of  Marius,  however,  that
Jugurtha,  with  his  two  sons,  was  led  in  chains ;  and'  he  was
soon  after,  by  order  of  the  consul,  strangled  in  prison.


I  I  2


484


BOOK  V.

The  war  with  the  Cimbri,  Teutones,  and  their  allies,  I.  11. — The  Social
war,  III. — The  Civil  war  between  Marius  and  Sylla^  IV. — Thd
Mithridatic  war;  the  Thracian;  continuation  and  conclusion  of
theCivUwar,  V.-IX.

I.  While  the  war  was  going  on  in  Numidia  against  Jugurtba,
the  Roman  consuls,  Marcus  Manlius  and  Quintus  CcBpio,  were
defeated  by  the  Cimbri,  Teutones,  Tigurini,  and  Ambrones,
nations  of  Germany  and  Gaul,  near  the  river  Rhone;  and,
being  reduced  by  a  terrible  slaughter,  lost  their  very  camp,  as
well  as  the  greater  part  of  their  army.  Great  was  the  con-
sternation at  Rome,  such  as  was  scarcely  experienced  during
the  Punic  wars  in  the  time  of  Hannibal,  from  dread  that  the
Gauls  might  again  march  to  the  city.  Marius,  in  consequence,
after  his  victory  over  Jugurtha,  was  created  consul  the  second
time,  and  the  war  against  the  Cimbri  and  Teutones  was  com-
mitted to  his  management.  The  consulship  was  also  conferred
on  him  a  third  and  fourth  time,  in  consequence  of  the  war
with  the  Cimbri  being  protracted ;  but  in  his  fourth  consul-
ship he  had  for  his  colleague  Quintus  Lutatius  Catulus.  He
came  to  battle,  accordingly,*  with  the  Cimbri,  and  in  two
engagements  killed  two  hundred  thousand  of  the  enemy,  and
took  eighty  thousand  prisoners,  with  their  general  Teutobo-
dus  ;  for  which  service  he  was  elected  consul  a  fifth  time
during  his  absence.

II.  In  the  meantime  the  Cimbri  and  Teutones,  whose
force  was  still  innumerable,  passed  over  into  Italy.  Another
battle  was  fought  with  them,  by  Caius  Marius  and  Quintus
Catulus,  though  with  greater  success  on  the  part  of  Catulus  ;
for  in  that  battle,  in  which  they  both  commanded,  a  hundred
and  forty  thousand  were  either  slain  in  the  field  or  in  the  pur-
suit, and  sixty  thousand  taken  prisoners.  Of  the  Roman
soldiers  in  the  two  armies  three  hundred  fell.  Thirty-three
standards  were  taken  from  the  Cimbri ;  of  w^hich  the  army
of  Marius  captured  two,  that  of  Catulus  thirty-one.  This
was  the  end  of  the  war :  a  triumph  was  decreed  to  both  the
consuls.

III.  In  the  consulship  of  Sextus  Julius  Csesar  and  Lucius

*  ftaqit€.'\  Eutropius  seems  to  intimate  that  it  was  because  Marius
had  Catulus  for  his  colleague  that  he  proceeded  to  engage  the  Cimbri


C.  V]  ABRIDGMENT  OP  ROMAN  HISTORY.  485

Marcius  Philippus,  in  the  six  hundred  and  fifty-ninth  year
from  the  building  of  the  city,  when  almost  all  other  wars  were
at  an  end,  the  Piceni,  Marsi,  and  Peligni,  excited  a  most
dangerous  war  in  Italy ;  for  after  they  had  lived  for  many
years  in  subjection  to  the  Roman  people,  they  now  began  to
assert  their  claim  to  equal  privileges.  This  was  a  very  de-
structive'war.  Publius  Rutilius,  one  of  the  consuls,  Csepio,  a
nobleman  in  the  flower  of  his  age,  and  Porcius  Oato,  another
consul,  were  killed  in  it.  The  generals  against  the  Romans
on  the  part  of  the  Piceni  and  Marsi  were  Titus  Vettius,
Hierius  Asinius,  Titus  Herennius,  and  Aulus  Cluentius.
The  Romans  fought  against  them  successfully  under  the  con-
duct of  Gai^s  Marius,  who  had  now  been  made  consul  for  the
sixth  time,  also  under  Cnasus  Pompey,  but  particularly  under
Lucius  Cornelius  Sylla,  who,  among  other  signal  exploits,
80  completely  routed  Cluentius,  one  of  the  enemy^s  generals,
with  his  numerous  forces,  that  he  lost  only  one  man  of  his  OAvn
army.  The  war,  however,  was  protracted  for  four  years,  with
great  havoc ;  at  length,  in  the  fifth,  it  was  terminated  by
Lucius  Cornelius  Sylla  when  consul,  who  bad  greatly  dis-
tinguished himself  on  many  occasions  when  praetor  in  the
same  war.

IV.  In  the  six  hundred  and  sixty  second  year  from  the
foundation  of  the  city,  the  first  civil  war  beganjit  Rome  ;  and
in  the  same  year  s^so  the  Mithridatic  war.  (Marias,-  when  in
his  sixth  consulship,  gave  lise  to  the  Civil  war ;  for  when
Sylla,  the  consul,  was  sent  to  conduct  the  war  against  Mithri*
dates,  who  had  possessed  himself  of  Asia  and  Achaia,  and
delayed  his  army  for  a  short  time  in  Campania,  in  order  that
the  remains  of  the  Social  wcu*,  of  which  we  have  just  spoken,
and  which  had.  been  carried  on  within  the  limits  of  Italy,
might  be  extinguished,  Marius  showed  himself  ambitious  to
be  appointed  to  the  Mithridatic  war.  Sylla,  being  incensed  at
this  conduct,  marched  to  Rome  with  his  army.  There  he
fought  with  Marius  and  Sulpicius :  he  was  the  first  to  enter
the  city  in  arms ;  Sulpicius  he  killed  ;  Marius  he  put  to  flight;
and  then,  having  appointed  CnsBus  Octavius  and  Lucius  Cor-
nelius Cinna  the  consuls  for  the  year  ensuing,  set  out  for
Asia.

V.  For  Mithridates,  who  was  king  of  Pontus,  and  possessed
Armenia  Minor  and  the  entire  circuit  of  the  Pontic  sea  with


480  EUTROPIUS.  [B.V.

the  Bosphorus,  first  attempted  to  expel  Nicomedes,  an  ally  of
the  KomaDS,  from  Bithynia ;  sendiDg  word  to  the  senate,  that
he  was  going  to  make  war  upon  him  on  account  of  the  injuries
which  he  had  received.  Answer  was  returned  by  the  senate  to  '
Mithridates,  that  if  he  did  so  he  himself  should  feel  the
weight  of  a  war  from  the  Romans.  Incensed  at  this  reply,  he
immediately  invaded  Cappadocia,  and  expelled  from  thence
Ariobarzanes  the  king,  an  ally  of  the  Roman  people.  He  next
marched  into  Bithynia  and  Paphlagonia,  driving  out  the  kings,
Pylsemenes  and  Nicomedes,  who  were  also  in  alliance  with  the
Romans.  He  then  hastened  to  Ephesus,  and  sent  letters  into
all  parts  of  Asia,  with  directions  that  wherever  any  Roman
citizens  should  be  found,  they  should  all  be  put  to  death  the
same  day.

VI.  In  the  meantime  Athens  also,  a  city  of  Achaia,  was
delivered  up  to  Mithridates  by  Aristion  an  Athenian.  For
Mithridates  had  previously  sent  Archelaus,  his  general,  into
Achaia,  with  a  hundred  and  twenty  thousand  horse  and  foot,  by
whom  the  rest  of  Greece  was  also  occupied.  Sylla  hesieged
Archelaus  at  the  Pirseeus  near  Athens,  and  took  the  city  itself.
Engaging  afterwards  in  battle  with  Archelaus,  he  gave  him
such  a  defeat,  that  out  of  a  hundred  and  twenty  thousand  of
the  army  of  Archelaus  scarce  ten  remained ;  while  of  that  of
Sylla  only  fourteen  were  killed.  Mithridates,  on  receiving
intelligence  of  this  battle,  sent  seventy  thousand  chosen  troops
out  of  Asia  to  Archelaus,  with  whom  Sylla  came  again  to  an
engagement.  In  the  first  battle  twenty  thousand  of  the  enemy
were  slain,  and  Diogenes,  the  son  of  Archelaus  ;  in  the  second
the  entire  forces  of  Mithridates  were  cut  off.  Archelaus
himself  lay  hid  for  three  days,  stript  of  his  armour,  in  the
marshes.  On  the  news  of  this  state  of  things,  Mithridates
sent  orders  to  treat  with  Sylla  concerning  peace.

VII.  In  the  meantime  Sylla  also  reduced  part  of  the  Dar-
danians,  Scordisci,  Dalmatians,  and  Moedians,  and  granted
terms  of  alliance  to  the  rest.  But  when  ambassadors  arrived
from  King  Mithridates  to  treat  about  Fpeace,  Sylla  replied
that  he  would  grant  it  on  no  other  condition  than  that  he
should  quit  the  countries  on  which  he  had  seized,  and  with-
draw into  his  own  dominions.  Afterwards,  however,  the  two
came  to  a  conference,  and  peace  was  settled  between  them,  in
order  that  Sylla,  who  was  in  haste  to  proceed  to  the  Civil  war.


C.  IX.]  ABRIDGMENT  OF  KOMAN  HISTORY.  487

might  leave  no  danger  in  his  rear  ;  for  while  Sj'lla  was  victo-
rious over  Mithridates  in  Achaia  and  Asia,  Marius,  who  had
been  driven  from  the  city,  and  Cornelius  Cinna,  one  of  the
consuls,  had  recommenced  hostilities  in  Italy,  and  entering
Rome,  put  to  death  the  noblest  of  the  senators  and  others  of
consular  rank,  proscribed  many,  and  pulling  down  the  house  of
Sylla  himself,  forced  his  sons  and  wife  to  seek  safety  by  flight ;
while  all  the  rest  of  the  senate,  hastily  quitting  the  city,  fled
to  Sylla  in  Greece,  entreating  him  to  come  to  the  support  of
his  country.  He  accordingly  crossed  over  into  Italy,  to  con-
duct the  Civil  war  against  the  consuls  Norbanus  and  Scipio.
In  the  first  battle  he  engaged  with  Norbanus  not  far  from  Capua,
when  he  killed  seven  thousand  of  his  men,  and  took  six  thou-
sand prisoners,  losing  only  a  hundred  and  twenty  four  of  his
own  army.  From  thence  he  directed  his  efforts  against
Scipio,  and  before  a  battle  was  fought,  or  any  blood  shed,  he
received  the  surrender  of  his  whole  army.

VIII.  But  on  a  change  of  consuls  at  Rome,  and  the  election
of  Marius,  the  son  of  Marius,  and  Papirius  Carbo  to  the  con-
sulate, Sylla  again  came  to  battle  with  Marius  the  younger,
and  killed  fifteen  thousand  men,  with  the  loss  of  only  four
hundred.  Immediately  afterwards  also  he  entered  the  city.
He  then  pursued  Marius,  the  younger,  to  PrsBneste,  be-
sieged him  there,  and  drove  him  even  to  self-destruction.  He
afterwards  fought  a  terrible  battle  with  Lamponiua  and  Cari-
nas, the  leaders  of  the  Marian  faction,  near  the  Col  line  gate.
The  number  of  the  enemy  in  that  battle  against  Sylla  is  said
to  have  been  seventy  thousand  ;  twelve  thousand  surrendered
themselves  to  Sylla :  the  rest  were  cut  off  in  the  field,  in  the
camp,  or  in  the  pursuit,  by  the  insatiable  resentment  of  the
conqueror.  Cnaeus  Carbo  also,  the  other  consul,  fled,  fmm
Ariminum  into  Sicily,  and  was  there  slain  by  Cnaeus  Pompey;
to  whom,  although  but  a  young  jnan,  being  only  one-and -twenty
years  of  age,  Sylla,  perceiving  his  activity,  had  committed  the
management  of  his  troops,  so  that  he  was  accounted  second
only  to  Svlla  himself.

IX.  Carbo,  then,  being  killed,  Pompey  recovered  Sicily.
Crossing  next  over  into  Africa,  he  put  to  death  Domitius,  a
leader  on  the  side  of  Marius,  and  Hiarbas  the  king  of  Mauri-
tania, who  had  given  assistance  to  Domitius.  After  these
events,  Sylla  celebrated  a  triumph  with  great  pomp  for  his


488  EUTROPIUS.  [B.VI.

SUC06SS  against  Mithridates.  CnsBus  Pompey  also,  while  only
in  his  twenty-fourth  year,  was  allowed  a  triamph  for  his  victo-
ries in  Africa,  a  privilege  which  had  heen  granted  to  no  Roman
before  him.  Such  was  the  termination  of  two  most  lament-
able wars^  the  Italian,  also  called  the  Social,  and  the  Civil,
which  lasted  for  ten  years,  and  occasioned  the  destruction  of
more  than  a  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  men  ;  twenty-four  of
consular  rank,  seven  of  praetorian,  sixty  of  that  of  sedile,  and
nearly  three  hundred  senators.


BOOK  VI.


War  with  Sertoritia  in  Spain ;  wars  in  Macedonia,  Pamphylia,  Ciliciay
and  Balmatia,  L — IV- — Nicomedes,  king  of  Bithynia,  makes  the
Romans  his  heirs ;  continuation  of  the  war  with  Mithridates ;
wars  with  the  slaves,  pirates,  and  Macedonians,  V. — XII. — Actd
of  Pompey  against  Tigranes,  and  in  other  parts  of  Asia,  XIII.
XIV. — Conspiracy  of  Catiline,  XV. — Triumphs  of  Pompey  and
Metellus,  XVI. — Wars  of  Cesar  in  Gaul,  XVIL — Proceedings  of
Crassus  in  Parthia,  XVIII. — Civil  war  between  Csesar  and  Pompey,
XIX— XXV.

I.  In  the  consulate  of  Marcus  ^'Emilius  Lepidus  and
Qointus  Catulus,  after  Sylla  had  composed  the  troubles  of  the
state,  new  wars  broke  out ;  one  in  Spain,  another  in  Pamphylia
and  Cilicia,  a  third  in  Macedonia,  a  fourth  in  Dalmatia.  Ser-
torius,  who  had  taken  the  side  of  Marius,  dreading  the  feite  of
others  who  had  been  cut  off,  excited  the  Spaniards  to  a  war.
The  generals  sent  against  him  were  Quintus  Gsecilius  Metellus,
the  sou  of  that  Metellus  who  had  subdued  Jugurtha,  and  the
prsetor  Lucius  Domitius.  Domitius  was  killed  by  Hirtuleius,
Sertorius*s  general.  Metellus  contended  against  Sertorius
with  various  success.  At  length,  as  Metellus  was  thought
singly  unequal  to  the  war,  Onseus  Pompey  was  sent  into  Spain.
Thus,  two  generals  being  opposed  to  him,  Sertorius  often
fought  with  very  uncertain  fortune.  At  last,  in  the  eighth
year  of  the  war,  he  was  put  to  death  by  his  own  soldiers,  and
an  end  made  of  the  war  by  Onseus  Pompey,  at  that  time  but  a
young  man,  and  Quintus  Metellus  Pius ;  and  nearly  the  whole
of  Spain  was  brought  under  the  dominion  of  the  Eomam
people.


C.  VI.]  ABBIDGMENT  OP  ROMAN HISTORY.  489

II.  Appius  Claudius,  on  the  expiration  of  his  consulate,
was  sent  into  Macedonia.  He  had  some  skirmishes  with
different  tribes  that  inhabited  the  province  of  Khodopa,*  and
there  fell  ill  and  died.  Cnaeus  Scribonius  Curio,  on  the
termination  of  his  consulship,  was  sent  to  succeed  him.  He
conquered  the  Dardanians,  penetrated  as  far  as  the  Danube,
and  obtained  the  honour  of  a  triumph,  putting  an  end  to  the
war  within  three  years.

III.  Publius  Servilius,  an  energetic  man,  was  sent,  after  his
consulate,  into  Cilicia  and  Pamphylia.  He  reduced  Cilicia,
besieged  and  took  the  most  eminent  cities  of  Lycia,  amongst
them  Phafielis,  Olympus,  and  Corycus.  The  Isauri  he  also
attacked,  and  compelled  to  surrender,  and,  within  three  years,
put  an  end  to  the  war.  He  was  the  first  of  the  Romans  that
marched  over  Mount  Taurus.  On  his  return,  he  was  granted
a  triumph,  and  acquired  the  surname  of  Isauricus.

IV.  Cnaeus  Cosconius  was  sent  into  lUyricum  as  proconsul.
He  reduced  a  great  part  of  Dalmatia,  took  Salonae,  and,  having
made  an  end  of  the  war,  returned  to  Rome  after  an  absence
of  two  years.

V.  About  the  same  time,  the  consul  Marcus  ^milius
Lepidus,  the  colleague  of  Catulus,  attempted  to  kindle  a  civil
war;  but  in  one  summer  that  commotion  was  suppressed.
Thus  there  were  several  triumphs  at  the  same  time,  that  of
Metellus  for  Spain,  a  second  for  Spain  obtained  by  Pompey,
one  of  Curio  for  Macedonia,  and«one  of  Servilius  for  Isauria.

VI.  In  the  six  hundred  and  seventy-sixth  year  from  the
building  of  the  city,  in  the  consulate  of  Lucius  Licinius
LucuUus  and  Marcus  Aurelius  Cotta,  Nicomedes,  king  of
Bithynia,  died,  appointing  by  his  will  the  Roman  people  his
heir.

Mithridates,  breaking  the  peace,  again  proceeded  to  invade
Bithynia  and  Asia.  Botb  the  consuls  being  sent  out  against
him,  met  with  various  success.  Cotta,  being  defeated  by  him
in  a  battle  near  Chalcedon,  was  even  forced  into  the  town,  and
besieged  there.  But  Mithridates,  hating  marched  from  thence
to  CyziqjQs,  that,  after  capturing  that  city,  he  might  overrun  all
Asia,  LucuUus,  the  other  consul,  met  him ;  and,  whilst  Mithri-
dates was  detained  at  the  siege  of  Cyzicus,  besieged  him  in

*  Lying  on  the  river  Melas,  above  the  Hellespont, near  the  Pro-
pontis. — Madame  Dacier.


490  EUTR0PIU8.  [b.'VI.

the  rear,  exhausted  him  with  famine,  defeated  him  in  several
battles,  and  at  last  pursued  him  to  Byzantium,  now  called
Constantinople.  Lucullus  also  vanquished  his  commanders  in
a  sea-fight.  Thus,  in  a  single  winter  and  summer,  almost  a
hundred  thousand  men  on  the  kings  side  were  cut  ofif  by
Lucullus.

VII.  In  the  six  hundred  and  seventy-eighth  year  of  Rome,
Marcus  Licinius  Lucullus,  the  cousin  of  that  Lucullus  who
had  carried  on  the  war  against  Mithridates,  obtained  the
province  of  Macedonia.  A  new  war,  too,  suddenly  sprung  up  in
Italy ;  for  eighty-four  gladiators,  led  by  Spartacus,  Crixus,  and
(Enomaus,  having  broken  out  of  a  school  at  Capua,  made
their  escape ;  and,  wandering  over  Italy,  kindled  a  war  in  it,
not  much  less  serious  than  tiiat  which  Hannibal  had  raised ;
for,  after  defeating  several  generals  and  two  consuls  of  the
Romans,  th^y  collected  an  army  of  nearly  sixty  thousand  men.
They  were,  however,  defeated  in  Apulia  by  the  proconsul
Marcus  Licinius  Crassus ;  and,  afteY  much  calamity  to  Italy,
the  war  was  terminated  in  its  third  year.

VIIJ.  In  the  six  hundred  and  eighty-first  year  from  the
founding  of  the  city,  in  the  consulate  of  Publius  Cornelius
Lentulus  and  Cneeus  Aufidius  Orestes,  there  were  but  two
wars  of  any  importance  throughout  the  Roman  empire,  the
Mithridatic  and  the  Macedonian.  Of  these  the  two  Luculli,
Lucius  and  Marcus,  had  the  direction.  Lucius  Lucullus,  after
the  battle  at  Cyzicus,  in  whi(;h  he  had  conquered  Mithridates,
and  the  sea-fight,  in  which  he  had  overcome  his  generals,
pursued  him;  and,  recovering  Paphlagonia  and  Bithynia,
invaded  his  very  kingdom.  He  took  Sinope  and  Amisus,  two
most  eminent  cities  of  Pontus.  In  a  second  battle,  near  the
city  Cabira,  where  Mithridates  had  assembled  a  vast  army
firom  all  parts  of  his  kingdom,  thirty  thousand  of  the  king's
chosen  troops  were  cut  in  pieces*  by  five  thousand  of  tie
Romans,  and  Mithridates  [was  put  to  flight  and  his  camp
plundered.  Armenia  Minor,  also,  of  which  he  had  taken
possession,  was  wrested  from  him.  Mithridates  was,  however,
received  after  his  flight  by  Tigranes,  the  king  of  Armenia,
who  at  that  time  reigned  in  great  glory  ;  for  he  had  frequently
defeated  the  Persians,  and  had  made  himself  master  of  Meso-
potamia, Syria,  and  part  of  Phoenicia.

IX.  Lucullus,  therefore,  still  pursuing  his  routed  enemy,


CXI.]  ABRIDGMENT  OF  ROMAN  HISTORY.  491

entered  even  the  kingdom  of  Tigranes,  who  ruled  over  both
the  Armenias.  Tigranocerta,  the  most  noble  city  of  Armenia,
he  succeeded  in  taking;  the  king  himself,  who  advanced
against  him  with  six  hundred  thousand  cuirassiers,  and  a  hun-
dred thousand  archers  and  other  troops,  he  so  completely
defeated  with  a  force  of  only  eighteen  thousand,  that  he  anni-
hilated a  great  part  of  the  Armenians.  Marching  from  thence
to  Nisibis,  he  took  that  city  also,  and  made  the  king's  brother
prisoner.  But  as  those  whom  LucuUus  had  left  in  Pontus
with  part  of  the  army  in  order  to  defend  the  conquered
countries  belonging  to  the  Romans,  grew  negligent  and
avaricious  in  their  conduct,  they  gave  Mithridates  an  oppor-
tunity of  again  making  an  irruption  into  Pontus,  and  thus  the
war  was  renewed.  While  LucuUus,  after  the  reduction  of
Nisibis,  was  preparing  for  an  expedition  against  the  Persians,
a  successor  was  sent  out  to  take  his  place.

X.  The  other  LucuUus,  who  had  the  management  of  affairs
in  Macedonia,  was  the  first  of  the  Romans  that  made  war  upon
the  Bessi,  defeating  them  in  a  great  battle  on  Mount  Hsemus ;
he  reduced  the  town  of  Uscudama,  which  the  Bessi  inhabited,
on  the  same  day  in  which  he  attacked  it ;  he  also  took  Cabyle,
and  penetrated  as  far  as  the  river  Danube.  He  then  besieged
several  cities  lying  above  Pontus,  where  he  destroyed  Apol-
lonia,  Calatis,  Parthenopolis,  Tomi,  Histros,  and  Burziaone,*
and,  putting  an  end  to  the  war,  retuftied  to  Rome.  Both  the
Luculli  however  triumphed,  but  the  LucuUus,  who  had  fought
against  Mithridates,  with  the  greater  glory,  because  he  had
returned  victorious  over  such  powerful  nations.

XI.  After  the  Macedonian  war  was  ended,  but  while  that
with  Mithridates  still  continued  (which,  on  the  departure  of
LucuUus,  that  king  had  renewed,  collecting  all  his  forces  for
the  purpose),  the  Cretan  war  arose,  and  Csecilius  Metellus
being  sent  to  conduct  it,  secured  the  whole  province,  by  a  suc-
cession of  great  battles,  within  three  years,  and  received  the
appellation  of  Creticus,  and  a  triumph  on  account  of  the
island. About  this  time  Libya  also,  by  the  will  of  Apion,  the

*  Burziaanem.]  Thus  stands  the  word  in  the  editions  of  Havercamp,
Verheyk,  and  Tzschucke ;  but  none  of  them  think  it  right.  Cellarius
conjectured  Bizonen,  BiZ^vri  being  mentioned  by  Strabo,  lib.  vii.  as  a
city  between  ApoUonia  and  Calatis;  and  no  other  critic  has  found
anything  better  to  offer.


492  BUTEOPirS.  [b.vi.

king  of  the  coantiy,  was  added  to  the  Eoman  empire ;  in  it
were  the  celebrated  cities,  Berenice,  Ptolemais,  and  Gyrene.

XII.  During  these  transactions,  pirates  infested  all  the
seas,  so  that  navigation,  and  that  alone,  was  unsafe  to  the
Romans,  who  were  now  victorious  throughout  the  world.  The
war  agaiust  these  pirates,  therefore,  was  committed  to  CnsBus
Pompey,  who,  with  surprising  success  and  celerity,  finished  it
in  the  course  of  a  few  months.  Soon  after,  the  war  against
Mithridates  and  Tigranes  was  entrusted  to  him ;  in  the  con-
duct of  which,  he  overcame  Mithridates  in  Armenia  Minor  in
a  battle  by  night,  and  plundered  his  camp,  killing  at  the  same
time  forty  thousand  of  his  troops,  while  he  lost  only  twenty  of
his  own  men,  and  two  centurions.  Mithridates  tied  with  his
wife  and  two  attendants ;  and  not  long  after,  in  consequence
of  his  cruelty  to  his  own  family,  he  was  reduced,  through  a
sedition  excited  among  his  soldiers  by  his  son  Phamaces,  to
the  necessity  of  putting  an  end  to  his  existence,  and  swallowed
poison.  Such  was  the  end  of  Mithridates,  a  man  of  singular
energy  and  ability;  his  death  happened  near  the  Bosporus.
He  reigned  sixty  years,  lived  seventy-two,  and  maintained  a
war  against  the  Eomans  for  forty.

XIII.  Pompey  next  made  war  upon  Tigranes,  who  sur-
rendered himself,  coming  to  Pompey's  camp  at  sixteen  miles
distance  from  Artaxata;  and,  throwing  himself  at  his  feet,
placed  in  his  hands  his  diadem,  which  Pompey  returned  to
him,  and  treated  him  with  great  respect,  but  obliged  him  to
give  up  part  of  his  dominions  and  to  pay  a  large  sum  of
money :  Syria,  Phoenicia,  and  Sophene,  were  taken  from  him,
and  six  thousand  talents  of  silver,  which  he  had  to  pay  to  the
Roman  people  because  he  had  raised  a  war  against  them
without  cause.

XIV.  Pompey  soon  after  made  war  also  upon  the  Albani ;  •
and  defeated  their  king  Orodes  three  times ;  at  length,  being
prevailed  upon  by  letters  and  presents,  he  granted  him  par-
don and  peace.  He  also  defeated  Artoces,  king  of  Iberia, t  iu
battle,  and  reduced  him  to  surrender.  Armenia  Minor  he
conferred  upon  Deiotarus,  the  king  of  Galatia,  because  he  had
acted  as  his  ally  in  the  Mithridatic  war. To  Attains  and

*  See  Justin,  xlii.  3.

t  The  Iberians  are  mentioned  as  a  people  bordering  on  the  Albani
by  Plutarch,  Lucull.  o.  26,  and  by  Florus,  ill.  5.


CXVII.]  ABRIDGMENT  OP  ROMAN  HISTORY.  493

Pylaemenes  he  restored  Paphlagonia;  and  appointed  Ari-
starchus  king  of  the  Colchians.  Shortly  after  he  subdued  the
Itureans  and  Arabians;  and,  on  entering  Syria,  rewarded
Seleucia,  a  city  near  Antioch,  with  independence,  because  it
had  not  admitted  King  Tigranes.  To  the  inhabitants  of  An-
tioch he  restored  their  hostages.  On  those  of  Daphne,  being
charmed  with  the  beauty  of  the  spot  and  the  abundance  of
water,  he  bestowed  a  portion  of  land,  in  order  that  their  grove
might  be  enlarged.  Marching  from  thence  to  Judea,  he  took
Jerusalem,  the  capital,  in  the  third  month ;  twelve  thousand
of  the  Jews  being  slain,  and  the  rest  allowed  to  surrender  on
terms.  After  these  achievements,  he  returned  into  Asia,
and  put  an  end  to  this  most  tedious  war.

XV.  In  the  consulate  of  Marcus  TuUius  Cicero,  the  orator,
and  Caius  Antonius,  in  the  six  hundred  and  eighty-ninth  year
from  the  foundation  of  the  city,  Lucius  Sergius  Catiline,  a
man  of  very  noble  family,  but  of  a  most  corrupt  disposition,
conspired  to  destroy  his  country,  in  conjunction  with  some
other  eminent  but  desperate  characters.  He  was  expelled
from  the  city  by  Cicero;  his  accomplices  were  apprehended
and  strangled  in  prison ;  and  he  himself  was  defeated  and
killed  in  battle  by  Antonius,  the  other  consul.

XVI.  In  the  six  hundred  and  ninetieth  year  from  the
building  of  the  city,  in  the  consulate  of  Decimus  Junius
Silanus  and  Lucius  MursBua,  Metellus  triumphed  on  account
of  Crete,  Pompey  for  the  Piratic  and  Mithridatic  wars.  No
triumphal  procession  was  ever  equal  to  this;  the  sons  of
Mithridates,  the  son  of  Tigranes,  and  Aristobulus,  king  of  the
Jews,  were  led  before  his  car ;  a  vast  sum  of  money,  an  im-
mense mass  of  gold  and  silver,  was  carried  in  front.  At  this
time  there  was  no  war  of  any  importance  throughout  the
world.

XVII.  In  the  six  hundred  and  ninety-third  year  from  the
founding  of  the  city,  Caius  Julius  Caesar,  who  was  afterwards
emperor,  was  made  consul  with  Lucius  Bibulus;  and  Gaul
and  lUyricum,  with  ten  legions,  were  decreed  to  him.  He
first  subdued  the  Helvetii,  who  are  now  called  Sequani  ;*  and

*  Qui  nunc  Sequani  appeUantur.]  Between  the  Sequani  and  Helvetii
was  the  lofty  mount  Jura,  according  to  the  description  given  of  their
position  by  Caesar,  R  G.  i  2.  If  what  Eutropius  says  is  true,  the
change  of  name  must  have  arisen  from  the  intercourse  of  the  two
people. See  Cellarius  Geog.  Ant.  ii.  3,  50. — Tzachucke,


494  BUTROPIUS.  [rvl

afterwards,  by  conquering  in  most  formidable  wars,  pro-
ceeded as  far  as  the  British  ocean.  In  about  nine  years  he
subdued  all  that  part  of  Gaul  which  lies  between  the  Alps,
the  river  Rhone,  the  Rhine,  and  the  Ocean,  and  extends  in
ciK5umference  nearly  three  thousand  two  hundred  miles.  He
next  made  war  upon  the  Britons,  to  whom  not  even  the  name
of  the  Romans  was  known  before  his  time  ;  and  having  subdued
them,  and  received  hostages,  sentenced  them  to  pay  a  tribute.
On  Gaul,  under  the  name  of  tribute,  he  imposed  the  yearly
sum  of  forty  thousand  sestertia ;  *  and  invading  the  Germans  '
on  the  other  side  of  the  Rhine,  defeated  them  in  several  most
sanguinary  engagements.  Among  so  many  successes,  he  met
with  three  defeats,  once  in  person  among  the  Arvemi,  and
twice  in  Germany  during  his  absence;  for  two  of  his  lieu-
tenant-generals, Titurius  and  Aurunculeius,  were  cut  off  by
ambuscades.

XVIII.  About  the  same  time,  in  the  six  hundred  and
ninety-seventh  year  from  the  foundation  of  the  city,  Marcus
Licinius  Crassus,  the  colleague  of  Cnaius  Pompey  the  Great
in  his  second  consulship,  was  sent  against  the  Parthiaus ;  and
having  engaged  the  enemy  near  Carrae,  contrary  to  the  omens
and  auspices,  was  defeated  by  Surena,  the  general  of  king
Orodes,  and  at  last  killed,  tx)gether  with  his  son,  a  most  noble
and  excellent  young  man.  The  remains  of  the  army  were
saved  by  Cains  Cassius  the  quaestor,  who,  with  singular
courage,  so  ably  retrieved  the  ruined  fortune  of  the  Romans,
that,  in  his  retreat  over  the  Euphrates,  he  defeated  the
Persians  in  several  battles.

XIX.  Soon  after  followed  the  Civil  war,  a  wax  truly  exe-
crable and  deplorable,  in  which,  besides  the  havoc  that  occurred
in  the  several  battles,  the  fortune  of  the  Roman  people  was
changed.f  For  Caesar,  on  returning  victorious  from  Gaul,  pro-
ceeded to  demand  another  consulship,  and  in  such  a  manner,
that  it  was  granted  him  without  hesitation ;  yet  opposition  was
made  to  it  by  Marcellus  the  consul,  Bibulus,  Pompey,  and
Cato,  and  he  was  in  consequence  ordered  to  disband  his  army

*  Something  more  than  £320,000.

f  Romani  populi  fortuna  mrttata  est"]  The  fortune  of  the  Roman
people  is  their  condition  and  state.  The  phrase  fortuna  mtUari,  or
immutari,  is  used  chiefly  when  the  state  of  things  is  changed  for  the
worse. See  Call.  Cat.  c.  2;  Jug.  c.  17;  Veil.  Pat.  ii.  67,  US.—Grunrrvs,


C.XXI.]  ABRIDGMENT  OF  ROMAN  HISTORY.  495

and  return  to  Rome ;  in  revenge  for  which  insult,  he  marched
with  his  anny  from  Ariminum,  where  he  kept  his  forces
assembled,  against  his  country.  The  consuls,  together  with
Pompey,  the  whole  senate,  and  all  the  nobility,  fled  from  the
city,  and  crossed  over  into  Greece ;  and  in  Epirus,  Macedonia,
and  Achaia,  the  senate,  under  Pompey  as  their  general,  pre-
pared war  against  CsBsar.

XX.  Csesar,  having  marched  into  the  deserted  city,  made
himself  dictator.  Soon  after  he  set  out  for  Spain,  where  he
defeated  the  armies  of  Pompey,  which  were  very  powerful  and
brave,  with  their  three  generals,  Lucius  Afranius,  Marcus
Petreius,  and  Marcus  Varro.  Returning  from  thence,  he  went
over  into  Greece.  He  took  the  field  against  Pompey,  but  in
the  first  battle  was  defeated  and  put  to  flight ;  he  escaped,
however,  because  Pompey  declined  to  pursue  him,  as  the  night
was  coming  on ;  when  Csesar  remarked,  that  Pompey  knew
not  how  to  conquer,  and  that  that  was  the  only  day  on  which
he  himself  might  have  been  vanquished.  They  next  fought
at  PalsBopharsdus,*  in  Thessaly,  leading  great  forces  into  the
field  on  both  sides.  The  army  of  Pompey  consisted  of  forty
thousand  foot,  six  hundred  horse  on  the  left  wing,  and  five
hundred  on  the  right,  besides  auxiliary  troops  from  the  whole
east,  and  all  the  nobility,  senators  without  number,  men  of
praetorian  and  consular  rank,  and  some  who  had  already
been  conquerors  of  powerful  nations.  Caesar  had  not  quite
thirty  thousand  infantry  in  his  army,  and  but  one  thousand
horse.

XXI.  Never  before  had  a  greater  number  of  Roman  forces
assembled  in  one  place,  or  under  better  generals,  forces  which
would  easily  have  subdued  the  whole  world,  had  they  been  led
against  barbarians.  They  fought  with  great  eagerness,  but
Pompey  was  at  last  overcome,  and  his  camp  plundered.
Pompey  himself,  when  put  to  flight,  sought  refuge  at  Alex-
andria, with  the  hope  of  receiving  aid  from  the  king  of  Egypt,
to  whom,  on  account  of  his  youth,  he  had  been  appointed
guardian  by  the  senate ;  he,  however,  regarding  fortune  rather
than  friendship,  caused  Pompey  to  be  killed,  and  sent  his  head
and  ring  to  Caesar ;  at  sight  of  which  even  Caesar  is  said  to

4

*  Generally  called  Pbarsalus ;  but  the  name  Palseopbarsalus,  that  w.
Old  Pbarsalus,  is  used  by  Orosius,  vi.  15,  by  Strabo,  lib.  xvii,  and  by
the  Greek  translator  of  Eutropius.


496  EUTBOPTOS.  [a  YI.

have  shed  tears,  as  he  viewed  the  head  of  so  great  a  mau,
once  his  own  son -in  law.

XXII.  Cflesar  soon  after  went  to  Alexandria.  Ptolemy
attempted  to  form  a  plot  against  his  life  also ;  for  which  reason
war  was  made  upon  him,  and,  heing  defeated,  he  perished  in
the  Nile,  and  his  hody  was  found  covered  with  a  golden  coat
of  mail.  OsBsar,  having  made  himself  master  of  Alexandria,
conferred  the  kingdom  on  Cleopatra,  the  sister  of  Ptolemy,
with  whom  he  himself  had  an  illicit  connexion.  On  his  return
from  thence,  CsBsar  defeated  in  battle  Phamaces,  the  son  of
Mithridates  the  Great,  who  had  assisted  Pompej  in  Thessaly,
taken  up  arms  in  Pontus,  and  seized  upon  several  provinces
of  the  Roman  people  ;  and  at  last  drove  him  to  self-destruc-
tion.

XXIII.  Returning  from  thence  to  Rome,  he  created  him-
self a  third  time  consul  with  Marcus  ^milius  Lepidus,  who
had  been  his  master  of  the  horse  when  dictator  the  year  before.
Next  he  went  into  Africa,  where  a  great  number  of  the  nobility,
in  coDJ unction  with  Juba,  king  of  Mauritania,  had  resumed
hostilities.  The  Roman  leaders  were  Publius  Cornelius  Scipio,
of  the  most  ancient  family  of  Scipio  Africanus  (who  had  also
been  the  father-in-law  of  the  great  Pompey)  ''arcus  Petreius,
Quintus  Varus,  Marcus  Porcius  Cato,  and  Lucius  Cornelius
Faustus,  the  son  of  Sylla  the  dictator.  In  a  pitched  battle
fought  against  them,  CsBsar,  after  many  struggles,  was  victorious.
Cato,  Scipio,  Petreius,  Juba,  killed  themselves  ;  Faustus,  Pom-
pey's  son-in-law,  was  slain  by  Caesar.

XXIV.  On  his  return  to  Rome  the  year  after,  Csesar  made
himself  a  fourth  time  consul,  and  immediately  proceeded  to
Spain,  where  the  sons  of  Pompey,  Cneeus,  and  Sextus,  had
again  raised  a  formidable  war.  Many  engagements  took  place,
the  last  near  the  city  of  Munda,  in  which  Caesar  was  so  nearly
defeated,  that,  upon  his  forces  giving  way,  he  felt  inclined  to
kill  himself,  lest,  after  such  great  glory  in  war,  he  -should  fall,
at  the  age  of  fifty-six,  into  the  hands  of  young  men.  At
length,  having  rallied  his  troops,  he  gained  the  victory ;  the
elder  son  of  Pompey  was  slain,  the  younger  fled.

XXV.  The  civil  wars  throughout  the  world  being  now
terminated,  Caesar  returned  to  Rome,  aud  began  to  conduct
himself  with  too  great  arrogance,  contrary  to  the  usages  of
Roman  liberty.  As  he  disposed,  therefore,  at  his  own  pleasure,


C  I.]  ABRIDGMENT  OF  ROMAN  HISTORY.  497

of  those  honours,  which  were  hefore  conferred  by  the  people,
and  did  not  even  rise  up  when  the  senate  approached  him,  and
exercised  regal,  or  almost  tyrannical  power,  in  other  respects,
a  conspiracy  was  formed  against  him  by  sixty  or  more  Roman
senators  and  knights.  The  chief  among  the  conspirators  were  the
two  Bruti,  (of  the  family  of  that  Brutus  who  had  been  made  first
consul  of  Rome,  and  who  had  expelled  the  kings)  Caius  Cassius,
and  Servilius  Casca.  Caesar,  in  consequence,  having  entered
the  senate  house  with  the  rest,  on  a  certain  day  appointed  for
a  meeting  of  the  senate,  was  stabbed  with  three  and  twenty
wounds.


BOOK  VII.


Wars  that  followed  on  the  death  of  Julius  Csesar,  L — Antony  flees  to
Lepidus,  and  is  reconciled  to  Octavianus ;  their  triumvirate,  II. —
Proceedings  ^d  deaths  of  Brutus  and  Cassius ;  division  of  the
empire  between  Antony  and  Octavianus,  III. — War  with  Sextus
Pompey,  IV. — Successes  of  Agrippa  in  Aquitania;  Ventidius
Bassus  conquers  the  Parthians,  V. — ^Death  of  Sextus  Pompey;
marriage  of  Antony  and  Cleopatra;  unsuccessful  expedition  of
Antony  into  Parthia,  VI. — War  between  Octavianus  and  Antony ;
deaths  of  Antony  and  Cleopatra ;  Egypt  added  to  the  Roman
empire,  VII. — Octavianus  becomes  sole  ruler  under  the  name  of
Augustus,  VIII. — His  wars  and  victories,  IX.  X. — Character  and
acts  of  Tiberius,  XL — Of  Caligula,  XII. — Of  Claudius,  who  sub-
jugates Britain,  XIIL— Of  Nero,  under  whom  two  new  provinces
are  made,  Pontus  Polemoniacus  and  Alpes  Cottise,  XIV.  XV. — Of
Galba,  XVI.— Of  Otho,  XVII.— Of  Vitellius,  XVIII.- Of  Ves-
pasian, under  whom  Judsea  was  add«d  to  the  Roman  dominions,
with  the  provinces  Achaia,  Lycia,  Rhodes,  Samos,  Thracia,  Cilicia,
Comagena,  XIX.  XX.— Of  Titus,  XXL  XXIL— -Of  Domitian,
XXIII.

I.  After  the  assassination  of  'Caesar,  in  about  the  seven
hundred  and  ninth  year  of  the  city,  the  civil  wars  were  re-
newed ;  for  the  senate  favoured  the  assassins  of  Caesar  ;  and
Antony,  the  consul,  being  of  Caesar's  party,  endeavoured  to
crush  them  in  a  civil  war.  The  state  therefore  being  thrown
into  confusion,  Antony,  perpetrating  many  acts  of  violence,
was  declared  an  enemy  by  the  senate.  The  two  consuls,
Pansa  and  Hirtius,  were  sent  in  pursuit  of  him,  together  with
Octavianus,  a  youth  of  eighteen  years  of  age,  the  nephew  of

K  K


498  BUTROPIUS.  [B.  VII.

Ceesar  *  whom  by  his  Tvill  he  had  appointed  his  heir,  directing
him  to  bear  his  name ;  this  is  the  same  who  was  afterwards
called  Augustus,  and  obtained  the  imperial  dignity.  These
three  generals  therefore  marching  against  Antony,  defeated  him.
It  happened,  however,  that  the  two  victorious  consuls  lost
their  lives ;  and  the  three  armies  in  consequence  became
subject  to  Caesar  only. ^

II.  Antony,  being  routed,  and  having  lost  his  army,  fled
to  Lepidus,  who  had  been  master  of  the  horse 'to  Caesar,  and
was  at  that  time  in  possession  of  a  strong  body  of  forces,  by  whom
he  was  well  received.  By  the  mediation  of  Lepidus,  Caesar
shortly  after  made  peace  with  Antony,  and,  as  if  with  intent
to  avenge  the  death  of  his  father,  by  whom  he  had  been  adopted
in  his  will,  marched  to  Eome  at  the  head  of  an  army,  and
forcibly  procured  his  appointment  to  the  consulship  in  his
twentieth  year.  In  conjunction  with  Antony  and  Lepidus  he
proscribed  the  senate,  and  proceeded  to  make  himseff  master
of  the  state  by  arms.  By  their  acts,  Cicero  the  orator,  and
many  others  of  the  nobility,  were  put  to  death.

III.  In  the  meantime  Brutus  and  Cassius,  the  assassins
of  Caesar,  raised  a  great  war ;  for  there  were  several  armies
in  Macedonia  and  the  East,  of  which  they  took  the  command.
Caesar  Octavianus  Augustus,  therefore,  and  Mark  Antony,
proceeding  against  them  (for  Lepidus  remained  for  the
defence  of  Italy),  came  to  an  engagement  at  Philippi,  a  city
of  Macedonia.  In  the  first  battle  Antony  and  Caesar  were
defe&ted,  but  Cassius,  the  leader  of  the  nobility,  fell ;  in  the
second  they  defeated  and  killed  Brutus,  and  very  many  of  the
nobility  who  had  joined  them  in  the  war ;  and  the  republic
was  divided  among  ^he*  conquerors,  so  that  Augustus  had
Spain,  the  Gauls,  and  Italy ;  Antony,  Asia,  Pontus,  and  the
East.  But  the  consul  Lucius  Antonius,  the  brother  of  him  who
had  fought  with  Caesar  against  Brutus  and  Cassius,  kindled
a  civil  war  in  Italy ;  and  being  defeated  near  Perusia,  a  city
of  Tuscany,  was  taken  prisoner,  but  not  put  to  death.

IV.  In  the  meantime  a  war  of  a  serious  nature  was  excited  in
Sicily  by  Sextus  Pompey,  the  son  of  Cnaeus  Pompey  the  Great,
those  that  survived  of  the  party  of  Brutus  and  Cassius  flocking

•  Ccssaris  nepos."}  Grand  nephew.  Attia,  the  mother  of  Octavianus,
was  the  daughter  of  Julia,  Julius  Cassar's  sister.  Thus  Julius  Caesar
was  great-uncle  .to  Octayianus. — Glareanw*


CVm.]  ABREDGMENT  OP  ROMAN  HISTORY.  499

to  join  him  &om  all  parts.  'The  war  against  Sextus  Pompey
was  carried  on  by  OsBsar  Augustus  Octavianus  and  Mark  Antony.
A  peace  was  at  length  concluded.

Y.  About  that  time  Marcus  Agrippa  met  with  great  success
in  Aquitania ;  also  Lucius  Yentidius  Bassus  defeated  the
Persians,  who  were  making  incursions  into  Syria,  in  three
engagements.  He  killed  Pacorus,  the  son  of  king  Orodes,  on
that  very  day  on  which  Orodes,  the  king  of  the  Persians,  had
before  put  Orassus  to  death  by  the  hands  of  his  general
Surena.  He  was  the  first  who  celebrated  a  most  legitimate
triumph  at  Home  over  the  Parthians.

YI.  In  the  meantime  Sextus  Pompey  violated  the  peace,
and,  being  defeated  in  a  sea-fight,  fled  to  Asia,  and  was  there
put  to  death.

Antony,  who  was  master  of  Asia  and  the  East,  having  di-
vorced the  sister  of  Csesar  Augustus  Octavianus,  married
Cleopatra,  queen  of  Egypt.  He  also  fought  in  person  against
the  Persians,  and  defeated  them  in  the  first  encounters  ;  but
on  his  return  suffered  greatly  from  famine  and  pestilence;
and  as  the  Parthians  pressed  on  him  in  his  retreat,  he
retired  from  before  them  just  as  if  he  had  been  defeated.

YII.  He  also  excited  a  great  civil  war,  at  the  instigation  of
his  wife  Cleopatra,  the  queen  of  Egypt,  who  aspired  with  a
womanish  ambition  to  reign  at  Borne.  He  was  defeated
by  Augustus  in  the  remarkable  and  celebrated  sea-fight  at
Actium,  a  place  in  Epirus ;  whence  he  fled  into  Egypt,  and
there,  as  his  circumstances  grew  desperate,  since  all  went  over
to  Augustus,  committed  suicide.  Cleopatra  applied  to  her-
self an  asp,  and  perished  by  its  venom.  Egypt  was  added  to
the  Eoman  empire  by  Octavianus  Augustus,  and  Cnaeus
Cornelius  Callus  appointed  governor  of  it ;  he  was  the  first
Eoman  judge  that  Egypt  had.

YIII.  Having  thus  brought  wars  to  an  end  throughout  the
world,  Octavianus  Augustus  returned  to  Rome  in  the  twelfth
year  after  he  had  been  elected  consul.  From  that  period  he
held  the  government  as  sole  ruler  for  forty-four  years,  for  dur-
ing the  twelve  previous  years  he  had  held  it  in  conjunction  with
Antony  and  Lepidus.  Thus  from  the  beginning  of  his  reign
to  the  end  were  fifty-six  years.  He  died  a  natural  death  in
his  eighty-sixth  year,  at  the  town  of  Atella  in  Campania;
and  his  remains  are  interred  at  Rome  in  the  Campos  Martiaa.

K  K  2


1^00  EDTROPIUS.  1;B.VII.^

He  was  a  man  who  was  considered  in  most  respects,  and  not
without  reason,  to  resemhle  a  divinity,  for  scarcely  ever  was
there  any  one  more  successful  than  he  in  war,  or  more
prudent  in  peace.  During  the  forty-four  years  that  he
held  the  government  alone,  he  conducted  himself  with  the
greatest  courtesy,  being  most  Hberal  to  all,  and  most  faithful
to  his  friends,  whom  he  raised  to  such  honours,  that  he  pkced
them  almost  on  a  level  with  his  own  dignity.  •^ «

IX.  At  no  period  was  the  Roman  state  more  flourishing  ;
for,  to  say  nothing  of  the  civil  wars,  in  which  he  was  uncon-
quered,  he  added  to  the  Boman  empire  Egypt,  Cantabria,
Dalmatia,  often  before  conquered  but  only  then  entirely  sub-
dued, Pannonia,  Aquitania,  lllyricum,  Ebestia,  the  Viudelid
and  Salassi  on  the  Alps,  and  all  the  maritime  cities  of  Pontus,
among  which  the  two  most  noble  were  Bosporus  and  Pantica-
pseon.  He  also  conquered  the  Dacians  in  battle ;  put  to  the
sword  numerous  forces  of  the  Germans ;  and  drove  them
beyond  the  river  Elbe,  which  is  in  the  country  of  the
barbarians  far  beyond  the  Ehine.  This  war  however  he
carried  on  by  the  agency  of  his  step-son  Drusus,  as  he  had
conducted  the  Pannonian  war  by  that  of  his  other  step-son
Tiberius,  ia  which  he  transplanted  forty  thousand  prisoners
from  Germany,  and  settled  them  in  Gaul  on  the  bank  of  the
Rhine.  He  recovered  Armenia  from  the  Parthians;  the
Persians  gave  him  hostages,  which  they  had  given  to  no  one
before  ;  and  also  restored  the  Roman  standards,  which  they
had  taken  from  Crassus  when  he  was  defeated.

X.  The  Scythians  and  Indians,  to  whom  the  Roman  name
was  before  unknown,  sent  him  presents  and  ambassadors.
Galatia  also  was  made  a  province  under  his  reign,  having
before  been  an  independent  kingdom,  and  Marcus  Lollius  was
the  first  that  governed  it,  in  quality  of  praetor.  So  much
was  he  beloved  even  by  the  barbarians,  that  kings,  allies  of
the  Roman  people,  founded  cities  hi  his  honour,  to  which  they
gave  the  name  of  Cadsarea,  as  one  in  Mauritania,  built  by
King  Juba,  and  another  in  Palestine,  which  is  now  a  very
celebrated  city.  Many  kings,  moreover,  left  their  own  domi-
nions, and,  assuming  the  Roman  dress,  that  is,  the  toga,  ran
by  the  side  of  his  carriage  or  bis  horse.  At  his  death  he  was
styled  a  divinity.  He  left  the  state  in  a  most  prosperous
condition  to  his  successor  Tiberius,  who  had  been  h^  step-son^
afterwards  his  son-in-law,  and  lastly  his  son  by  adoption.


C.Xm.]  ABRroGMBNT  OP  ROMAN HISTORY.  601

'  XI.  Tiberius  distinguished  his  reign  by  great  indolence,
excessive  cruelty,  unprincipled  avarice,  and  abandoned  licen^
tiousness.  He  fought  on  no  occasion  in  person ;  the  wars  were
carried  on  by  his  generals.  Some  kings,  whom  he  induced  to
visit  him  by  seducing  allurements,  he  never  sent  back ;  among
them  was  Archelaus  of  Cappadocia,  whose  kingdom  also  he
reduced  to  the  form  of  a  province,  and  directed  that  its  princi-
pal city  should  be  called  after  his  own  name ;  and,  having  been
before  called  Mazaca,  it  is  now  termed  Csesarea.  He  died  in
Campania,  in  the  three  and  twentieth  year  of  his  reign,  and
the  eighty-third  of  his  age,  to  the  great  joy  of  all  men.

XII.  To  him  succeeded  Caius  CiESAR,  surnamed  Caligula,
the  grandson  of  Drusus,  the  step-son  of  Augustus,  and  grand-
nephew  *  of  Tiberius  himself,  a  most  wicked  and  cruel  prince,
who  effaced  even  the  memory  of  Tiberius's  enormities.  He
undertook  a  war  against  the  Germans;  but,  after  entering
Suevia,  made  no  effort  to  do  anything.  He  committed  incest
with  his  sisters,  and  acknowledged  a  daughter  that  he  had  by
one  of  them.  While  tyrannizing  over  all  with  the  utmost
avarice,  hcentiousness,  and  cruelty,  he  was  assassinated  in  the
palace,  in  the  twenty-ninth  year  of  his  age,  in  the  third  year,
tenth  month,  and  eighth  day  of  his  reign.

XIII.  After  him  reigned  Claudius,  the  uncle  of  Caligula,
and  son  of  that  Drusus  who  has  a  monument  at  Moguntiacum,
whose  grandson  Caligula  also  was.  His  reign  was  of  no
striking  character ;  he  acted,  in  many  respects,  with  gentleness
and  moderation,  in  some  with  cruelty  and  folly.  He  made
war  upon  Britain,  which  no  Roman  since  Julius  Caesar  had
visited ;  and,  having  reduced  it  through  the  agency  of  Cnaeus
Sentius  and  Aulus  Plautius,  illustrious  and  noble  men,  he
celebrated  a  magnificent  triumph.  Certain  islands  also,  called
the  Orcades,  situated  in  the  ocean,  beyond  Britain,  he  added
to  the  Eoman  empire,  and  gave  his  son  the  name  of  Britan-
nicus.  So  condescending,  too,  was  he  towards  some  of  his
friends,  that  he  even  attended  Plautius,  a  man  of  noble  birth,
who  had  obtained  many  signal  successes  |in  the  expedition
to  Britain,  in  his  triumph,  and  walked  at  his  left  hand  when

*  Drud  privigni  Attguttif  et  ipsms  TiberU  nepos.']  Either  something
is  wanting  in  the  text,  as  Madame  Dacier  observes,  or  nepos  is  used  in
a  double  sense,  for  a  grandson  and  grand-nephew;  for  Drusus,  the
grandfather  of  Caligula,  was  the  brother  of  Tiberius.  I  have  translated
nepo8  in  this  double  sensa


602  BUTROPIUS.  [B.Vir.

be  went  up  to  the  Capitol.  He  lived  to  the  age  of  sixty-four,
and  reigned  fourteen  years ;  and  after  his  death  was  conse-
crated* and  deified.

To  him  succeeded  Nebo,  who  greatly  resembled  his  uncle
Caligula,  and  both  disgraced  and  weakened  the  Eoman  empire ;
he  indulged  in  such  extraordinary  luxury  and  extravagance,
that,  after  the  example  of  Caius  Caligula,  he  even  bathed  in  hot
and  cold  perfumes,  and  fished  with  golden  nets,  which  he  drew
up  with  cords  of  purple  silk.  He  put  to  death  a  very  great
number  of  the  senate.  To  all  good  men  he  was  an  enemy.
At  lEist  he  exposed  himself  in  so  disgraceful  a  manner,  that  he
danced  and  sung  upon  the  stage  in  the  dress  of  a  harp-player
and  tragedian.  He  was  guilty  of  many  murders,  his  brother,
wife,  and  mother,  being  put  to  death  by  him.  He  set  on  fire
the  city  of  Rome,  that  he  might  enjoy  the  sight  of  a  spectacle
such  as  Troy  formerly  presented  when  taken  and  burned.

In  military  affairs  he  attempted  nothing.  Britain  he
almost  lost ;  for  two  of  its  most  noble  towns  t  were  taken  and
levelled  to  the  ground  under  his  reign.  The  Parthian s  took
from  him  Armenia,  and  compelled  the  Eoman  legions  to  pass
under  the  yoke.  Two  provinces  however  were  formed  under
him ;  Pontus  Polemoniacus,  by  the  concession  of  King  Pole-
mon';  and  the  Cottian  Alps,  on  the  death  of  King  Cottius.

XV«  When,  having  become  detestable  by  such  conduct  to
the  city  of  Rome,  and  being  deserted  at  the  same  time  by
every  one,  and  declared  an  enemy  by  the  senate,  he  was
sought  for  to  be  led  to  punishment  (the  punishment  being,
that  he  should  be  dragged  naked  through  the  streets,  with  a
fork  placed  under  his  head,f  be  beaten  to  death  with  rods,  and

*  Consecratus  est.]  This  word  seems  properly  to  signify  "  was  made
an  object  of  worship."

f  ihw  nohilissima  opptda."]  Three  are  named,  as  Grunerus  observes,
by  Tacitus,  Annal.  XIV.  Camdodmvum,f  c.  31,  and  Londinium  and  Feru-
lamiv/ni>,  c.  83.  Suetonius,  however,  Nero,  a  39,  and  Orosius,  vii.  7,  say
two.  Camelodunum  is  said  by  Camden  to  be  Maiden  in  Essex ;  Yeru-
lamium  was  near  St.  Alban's.

X  Furcd  capiti  ^jua  inaertd.']  Thus  these  words  are  uniformly  written
in  all  the  manuscripts  and  editions  that  I  have  seen.  But  what  furcam
capiti  ingerere  means,  I  confess  that  I  do  not  understand,  unless  that  it
be  possible  to  explain  it  by  hypaUage,  Barthius  flid  Briton.  (Philipp.
6,  672)  p,  458,  judiciously  proposes  to  read  furccB  capite  inserto,  a
correction  also  made  by  Oudendorpius  in  the  margin  of  his  copy.
Suetonius,  Nero^  c.  49,  has  eervicem  insert  furcte.—  Verheyh Tzschucke


C.XVII.] ^  ABBIDGMENT  OF  ROMAN  HISTORY.  603

then  hurled  from  the  Tarpeian  rock),  he  fled  from  the  palace,
and  killed  himself  iu  a  suburban  villa  of  one  of  his  freed-men,
between  the  Salarian  and  Nomentane  roads,  at  the  fourth  mile-
stone from  the  city.  He  built  those  hot  baths  at  Rome,  which
were  formerly  called  the  Neronian,  but  now  the  Alexandrian.
He  died  in  the  thirty-second  year  of  his  age,  and  the  fourteenth
year  of  his  reign ;  .and  in  him  all  the  family  of  Augustus
became  extinct.

XVI.  To  Nero  succeeded  Sebvius  Galba,  a  senator  of  a  very
ancient  and  noble  family,  elected  emperor  when  in  his  seventy-
third  year  by  the  Spaniards  and  Gauls,  and  soon  after  readily
acknowledged  by  the  whole  army ;  for  his  life,  though  but  that
of  a  private  person,*  had  been  distinguished  by  many  military
and  civil  exploits,  having  been  often  consul,  often  proconsul,
and  frequency  general  in  most  important  wars.  His  reign  was
short,  but  had  a  promising  commencement,  except  that  he
seemed  to  incline  too  much  to  severity.  He  was  killed  how-
ever by  the  treachery  of  Otho,  in  the  seventh  month  of  his
reign,  in  the  forum  at  Rome,  and  buried  in  his  gardens,  which
are  situated  in  the  Aurelian  way,  not  far  from  the  city.

XVII.  Otho,  after  Galba  was  killed,  took  possession  of  the
government,  a  man  of  a  nobler  descent  on  the  mother's  than  the
father's  side,  but  obscure  on  neither.  In  private  life  he  was
effeminate,  and  an  intimate  of  Nero;  in  his  government  he
could  give  no  evidence  of  his  disposition  ;  for  Vitellius,  about
the  same  time  that  Otho  had  slain  Galba,  having  been  also
chosen  emperor  by  the  German  armies,  Otho,  having
commenced  a  war  against  him,  and  having  sustained  a  defeat
in  a  slight  skirmish  near  Bebriacum  in  Italy,  voluntarily,
though  he  had  still  powerful  forces  remaining,  put  an  end  to  his
life,  in  spite  of  the  entreaties  of  his  soldiers  that  he  would  not
so  soon  despair  of  the  issue  of  the  war ;  saying,  "  that  he  was
not  of  sufficient  importance  that  a  civil  war  should  be  raised  on


fancies  tbat  it  may  be  explained  by  hypallage,  for  capUe  furccB  inserto,
and  therefore  makes  no  alteration.  I  have  given  what  is  evidently  the
sense.

♦  PrivcUa  ejiLS  vita.]  Privata  vita  is  opposed  to  imperium,  as  in  c.  19 ;
for  under  the  emperors,  even  from  the  time  of  Augustus,  it  had
become  customary  to  call  all  privaii  except  the  emperor  himself,  even
such  as  held  the  highest  offices  of  state.  See  Jani  ad  Hor.  Od.  iii.  8,
26. So  UidtTtiQ  is  opposed  to  fiaviXi^Q  in  Zosimus,  u.  7. — Tztchucke,


504  BUTROPius.  [avii.

his  account." He  perished  thus  voluntarily  in  the  thirfgr-
oighth  year  of  his  age,  and  on  the  ninety-fifth  day  of  his  reigu.

XVIII.  ViTELLius  next  obtained  the  imperial  dignity,  of  a
family  rather  honourable  than  noble,  for  his  fiGither  was  not  of
very  high  birth,  though  he  had  filled  three  regular  consulships.
He  reigned  most  disgracefully,  being  distinguished  by  liie
greatest  cruelty,  but  especially  by  gluttony  and  voraciousness,
since  he  is  reported  to  have  often  feasted  four  or  five  times  a
day.  A  most  remarkable  supper  at  least  has  been  recorded,
which  his  brother  Vitellius  set  before  him,  and  in  which,
besides  other  expensive  dainties,  two  thousand  fishes  and  seven
thousand  birds  are  said  to  have  been  placed  on  the  table.

Being  anxious  to  resemble  Nero,  and  aiming  so  openly  &t
this  that  he  even  paid  respect  to  his  remains,  which  had  been
meanly  buried,  he  was  slain  by  the  generals  of  the  emperor
Vespasian,  Vitellius  having  previously  put  to  death  Sabinus,
Vespasian's  brother,  and  burned  his  corpse  at  the  same  time
with  the  Capitol.  When  killed,  he  was  dragged  naked,  with
great  ignominy,  through  the  public  streets  of  the  city,  with  his
hair  erect,  and  his  head  raised  by  means  of  a  sword  placed
under  his  chin,  and- pelted  with  dung  on  the  face  and  breast  by
all  that  came  in  the  way ;  at  last  his  throat  was  cut,  and  ha
was  thrown  into  the  Tiber,  and  had  not  even  the  common
rites  of  burial.  He  perished  in  the  fifty-seventh  year  of  hia.
age,  in  the  eighth  month  and  first  day  of  his  reign.

XIX.  To  him  succeeded  Vespasian,  who  had  beeu  chosen
emperor  in  Palestine,  a  prince  indeed  of  obscure  birth,  but
worthy  to  be  compared  with  the  best  emperors,  and  in  private
life*  greatly  distinguished,  as  he  had  been  sent  by  Claudius
into  Germany,  and  afterwards  into  Britain,  and  had  contended
two  and  thirty  times  with  the  enemy ;  he  had  also  added  to
the  Koman  empire  tw^o  very  powerful  nations,t  twenty  towns,
and  the  Isle  of  Wight  on  the  coast  of  Britain.  At  Rome  he
acted  with  the  greatest  forbearance  during  his  government;
though  he  was  rather  too  eager  after  money ;  not  however  that
he  deprived  any  one  of  it  unjustly,  and  even  when  he  had

*  Privaia  vitct.]  See  note  on  c.  16.

+  Duas  validissimaa  gentea.]  The  Greek  translator  thinks  that  the
Britains  and  Germans  are  meant.  Vespasian  is  said  to  have  recovered
Britain,  by  Tacitus,  Agrio.  c.  17.  What  other  nation  is  intended  is  not
clear.


CXX.]  ABRIDGMENT  OF  ROMAN  HISTORY.  605

collected  it  with  the  greatest  diligence  and  anxiety,  he  was  in
the  habit  of  distributing  it  most  readily,  especially  to  the
indigent;  nor  was  the  liberality  of  any  prince  before  him
greater  or  more  judicious:  he  was  also  of  a  most  mild  and
amiable  disposition,  insomuch  that  he  never  willingly  inflicted
a  severer  penalty  than  banishment,  even  on  persons  convicted
of  treason  against  himself.

Under  this  prince  Judaea  was  added  to  the  Roman  empire,
and  Jerusalem,  tbe  most  celebrated  city  of  Palestine.  He  also
reduced  to  the  form  of  provinces  Achaia,  Lycia,  Rhodes,
Byzantium,  Samos,  which  had  been  free  till  this  period ;
together  with  Thrace,  Cilicia,  and  Comagena,  which  had  been
governed  by  their  respective  kings  in  alliance  with  the
Romans.

XX.  Offences  and  animosities  he  never  bore  in  mind;
reproaches  uttered  against  himself  by  lawyers  and  philosophers
he  bore  with  indulgence,  but  was  a  strenuous  enforcer  of
military  discipline.  He  triumphed,  together  with  his  son
Titus,  on  account  of  the  taking  of  Jerusalem.

After  having  thus  become  an  object  of  love  and  favour  with
the  senate  and  the' people,  and  indeed  with  all  men,  he  died  of
a  diarrhoea,  in  his  own  villa  in  the  Sabine  country,  in  the  sixty-
ninth  year  of  his  age,  the  ninth  year  and  seventh  day  of  his
reign ;  and  was  enrolled  among  the  gods.

To  him  succeeded  his  son  Titus,  who  was  also  called
Vespasian,  a  man  remarkable  for  every  species  of  virtue,  so
that  he  was  styled  the  favourite  and  delight  of  mankind.  He
was  extremely  eloquent,  warlike,  and  temperate ;  he  pleaded
causes  in  Latin,  and  composed  poems  and  tragedies  in  Greek.
At  the  siege  of  Jerusalem,  while  serving  under  his  father,  he
killed  twelve  of  the  besieged  with  wounds  from  as  many
arrows.  During  his  government  at  Rome,  such  was  his  lenity
towards  the  citizens,  that  he  did  not  punish  a  single  person ;
and  even  some  that  were  convicted  of  a  conspiracy  against
himself  he  released,  and  treated  them  on  the  same  terms  of
intimacy  as  before.  Such  was  his  good-nature  and  generosity,
that  he  never  refused  any  thing  to  any  one,  and  being  blamed
by  his  friends  on  this  account,  replied,  that  no  one  ought  to
leave  an  emperor  in  discontent.  Hence,  having  recollected
once  at  supper,  that  he  had  conferred  no  obligation  on  any  one
that  day,  he  exclaimed :  "  0,  my  friends !  I  have  lost  this  day ! "


606  EUTROPTua  [B.vn.

He  built  an  amphitheatre  at Rome,  and  slaughtered  five
thousand  ^Id  beasts  at  the  dedication  of  it

XXII.  While  beloved  for  such  conduct,  with  extraordinary
affection,  he  fell  ill  aud  died  in  the  same  villa  as  his  father,  two
years,  eight  months,  and  twenty  days  aft^r  he  became  emperor,
and  in  the  forty-second  year  of  his  age.  So  great  was  the
public  lamentation  on  his  death,  that  all  mourned  as  for  a  loss
in  their  own  families.  The  senate,  having  received  intelligence
of  his  death  about  the  evening,  hurried  into  the  senate-house  in
the  night,  and  heaped  upon  him  after  his  death  even  more
expressions  of  good  will  and  commendation^  than  tliey  had
uttered  when  he  was  alive  and  present  among  ^em.  -  He  was
enrolled  among  the  gods.

XXIII.  DoMiTiAN  next  received  the  imperial  dignity,  the
younger  brother  of  Titus,  but  more  like  Nero,  or  Caligula,  or
Tiberius,  than  his  father  or  brother.  In  the  commencement
however  of  his  reign  he  used  his  power  with  moderation ;  but,
soon  proceeding  to  the  greatest  excesses  of  licentiousness,  rage,
cruelty,  and  avarice,  he  provoked  such  universal  detestation,
that  he  effaced  the  remembrance  of  his  father's  and  his
brother's  merits.  He  put  to  death  the  most  distinguished  of
the  senate.  He  was  the  first  that  required  to  be  addressed  as
Lord  and  God ;  and  he  suffered  no  statue  to  be  erected  to  him
in  the  Capitol  except  of  gold  or  silver.  He  put  his  own
cousins  to  death. His  pride  also  was  execrable.

He  made  four  expeditions,  one  against  the  Sarmatians,
another  against  the  Catti,  and  two  against  the  Dacians.
On  account  of  the  Dacians  and  the  Catti  he  celebrated  a
double  triumph;  for  the  Sarmatians,  he  assumed  only  the
laurel.  He  suffered  many  disasters  however  in  these  wars,  for
in  Sarmatia  one  of  his  legions  was  cut  off  together  with  its
captain,  and  by  the  Dacians  Oppius  Sabinus,  a  person  of
consular  dignity,  and  Cornelius  Fuscus,  the  prefect  of  the
prsBtorian  cohort,  were  slain,  with  numerous  armies.  At  Home
he  also  erected  several  public  buildings,  among  which  were  the
Capitol,  the  Forum  Transitorium,  the  Odeum,  the  Porticus
Divorum,  the  temples  of  Isis  and  Serapis,  and  the  Stadium.

But,  becoming  universally  odious  on  account  of  his  crimes,
he  was  put  to  death  by  a  conspiracy  of  his  own  servants  within
the  palace,  in  the  forty-fifth  year  of  his  age,  and  the  fifteenth  of
his  reign.  His  corpse  was  carried  out  with  extreme  insult  by
common  bearers,  and  buried  ignominiously.


507


BOOK VIII.

Justice  and  mildness  of  Nerva,  I. — ^Merits  of  Trajan ;  he  extends  the
limits  of  the  Roman  empire,  II. -V. — ^Adrian,  envying  the  glory  of
Trajan,  contracts  the  bounds  of  the  empire,  and  promotes  the  arts
and  occupations  of  peace,  VI.  VIL — Virtues  of  Antoninus  Pius,
VIII. — ^After  his  reign  the  commonwealth  had  two  emperors  with
equal  power,  Marcus  and  Lucius  Antoninus  Verus ;  the  studies
and  character  of  Marcus ;  his  wars  in  Parthia,  Germany,  and  with
the  Marcomanni,  which  he  conducted  alone  or  in  conjunction  with
Lucius,  IX. -XIV. — Antoninus  Commodus,  who  resembles  his
father  only  in  fighting  successfully  against  the  Germans,  XV. — Hel-
vius  Pertinax,  XVI. — Salvius  Julianus,  XVII. — Septimius  Severue,
an  African,  overthrows  his  rival»for  the  throne,  and  conquers  the
Parthians,  Arabians,  and  Adiabeni,  XVIII. — ^His  learning;  his
war  and  death  in  Britain,  XIX. — ^Antoninus  Caracalla,  XX. —
Opilius  Macrinus  and  Diadumenus,  XXI. — Heliogabalus,  XXII. —
Alexander  Severus;  his  victory  over  the  Persians;  his  enforce-
ment of  military  discipline ;  in  his  reign  lived  Ulpian,  XXIII.

I.  In  the  eight  hundred  and  fiftieth  year  from  the  foundation
of  the  city,  in  Qie  consulship  of  Vetus  and  Valens,  the  empire
was  restored  to  a  most  prosperous  condition,  being  committed,
with  great  good  fortune,  to  the  rule  of  meritorious  princes.
To  Domitian,  a  most  murderous  tyrant,  succeeded  Nebva,  a
man  of  moderation  and  activity  in  private  life,  and  of  noble
descent,  though  not  of  the  very  highest  rank.  He  was  made
emperor  at  an  advanced  age,  Petronius  Secundus,  the  praefect
of  the  prsBtorian  guards,  and  Farthenius,  one  of  the  assassins  of
Domitian,  giving  him  their  support,  and  conducted  himself
with  great  justice  and  public  spirit.*  He  provided  for  the
good  jl  of  the  state  by  a  divine  foresight,  in  his  adoption  of
Trajan.  He  died  at  Rome,  after  a  reign  of  one  year,  four
months,  and  eight  days,  in  the  seventy-second  year  of  his  age,
and  was  enrolled  among  the  gods.

II.  To  him  succeeded  Ulpius  Crinitus  Trajanus,  bom  at

*  Se  ewUissirnvm  prcelmU.]  Civilis,  applied  to  a  person,  properly  sig-
nifies that  he  "  behaves  as  a  citizen  ought  to  behave  towu^s  his  fellow
citizens,"  and  may  often  be  rendered  "polite,  affable,  courteous.*'
Cfvvilitas  has  two  senses ;  one  derived  from  this  sense  of  civilis,  and  the
other  'Hhe  art  of  governing,  or  directing  affairs  in  a  civUaSf  or  free
state."  Both  these  words  occur  frequently  in  Eutropius;  I  have
endeavoured  always  to  give  them  that  sense  which  the  rassages
where  they  are  found  seemed  to  require.


508  EUTROPIUS.  [B.  vin.

Italica  *  in  Spain,  of  a  family  rather  ancient  than  eminent ;
for  his  father  was  the  first  consul  in  it.  He  was  chosen
emperor  at  Agrippina,  a  city  of  Gaul.  He  exercised  the
government  in  such  a  manner,  that  he  is  deservedly  preferred
to  all  the  other  emperors.  He  was  a  man  of  extraordinary
skill  in  managing  affairs  of  state,  and  of  remarkahle
courage.  The  limits  of  the  Roman  empire,  which,  since  the
reign  of  Augustus,  had  heen  rather  defended  than  honourahlj
enlarged,  he  extended  far  and  wide.  He  rehuilt  some  cities
in  Germany ;  he  subdued  Dacia  by  the  overthrow  of  Decebalus,
and  formed  a  province  beyond  the  Danube,  in  that  territory
which  the  Thaiphali,  Victoali,  and  Theruingi  now  occupy.
This  province  was  a  thousand  miles  in  circumference.

III.  He  recovered  Armenia,  which  the  Parthians  had  seized,
putting  to  death  Farthamasires  who  held  the  government  of  it.
He  gave  a  king  to  the  Albani.  He  received  into  alliance  the
king  of  the  Iberians,  Sarmatians,  Bosporani,  Arabians,  Os-
droeni,  and  Colchians.  He  obtained  the  mastery  over  the
Cordueni  and  Marcomedi,  as  well  as  over  Anthemusia,  an
extensive  region  of  Persia,  He  conquered  and  kept  possession
of  Seleucia,  Ctesiphon,  Babylon,  and  the  country  of  the  Mes-
senii.  He  advanced  as  far  as  the  boundaries  of  India,  and
the  Red  Sea,  where  he  formed  three  provinces,  Armenia,
Assyria,  and  Mesopotamia,  including  the  tribes  which  border  on
Madena.f  He  afterwards,  too,  reduced  Arabia  into  the  form
of  a  province.  He  also  fitted  out  a  fleet  for  the  Red  Sea,  that
he  might  use  it  to  lay  waste  the  coasts  of  India.

IV.  Yet  he  went  beyond  his  glory  in  war,  in  ability  and
judgment  as  a  ruler,  conducting  himself  as  an  equal  towards
all,  going  often  to  his  friends  as  a  visitor, J  either  when  they  were
ill,  or  when  they  were  celebrating  feast  days,  and  entertaining
them  in  his  turn  at  banquets  where  there  was  no  distinction  of
rank,  and  sitting  frequently  with  them  in  their  chariots ;  doing
nothing  unjust  towards  any  of  the  senators,  nor  being  guilty  of

•  A  town  on  the  Bsetis  or  Guadalquivir,  not  far  from  Seville.  It
was  also  the  birth-place  of  Hadrian.

f  So  Tzschucke  writes  the  word.  As  it  was  a  later  name  of  Media,
it  should  rather,  it  would  appear,  be  written  Medena,  a»  Cellarius  gives
it  in  his  edition  of  Sextus  Bufus,  c.  1 6.

X  Gratia  aalutandi]  "  For  the  sake  of  saluting  or  paying  his  inspects
to  them."


CYI.]  ABRIDGMENT  OF  ROMAN  HISTORY.  509'

axxy  dishonesty  to  fill  his  treasury;  exercising  liberality  to  all,
enriching  with  offices  of  trust,  publicly  and  privately,  every
body  whom  he  had  known  even  with  the  least  familiarity ;
building  towns  throughout  the  world,  granting  many  immu-
nities to  states,  and  doing  every  thing  with  gentleness  and
kindness ;  so  that  during  his  whole  reign,  there  was  but  one
senator  condemned,  and  he  was  sentenced  by  the  senate
without  Trajan's  knowledge.  Hence,  being  regarded  through-
out the  world  as  next  to  a  god,  he  deservedly  obtained  the
highest  veneration  both  living  and  dead.

V.  Among  other  sayings  of  his,  the  following  remarkable
one  is  mentioned.  When  his  friends  found  fault  with  him,
for  being  too  courteous  to  every  body,  he  replied,  that  *'he
was  such  an  emperor  to  his  subjects,  as  he  had  wished^  when  a
subject,  that  emperors  should  be  to  him.**

After  having  gained  the  greatest  glory  both  in  the  field  and
at  home,  he  was  cut  off,  as  he  was  returning  from  Persia,  by  a
diarrhoea,  at  Seleucia  in  Isauria.  He  died  in  the|j^sixty-third
year,  ninth  month,  and  fourth  day  of  his  age,  and  in  the
nineteenth  year,  sixth  month,  and  fifteenth  day  of  his
reign.  He  was  enrolled  among  the  gods,  and  was  the  only  one
of  dl  the  emperors  that  was  buried  within  the  city.  His  bones,
contained  in  a  golden  urn,  lie  in  the  forum  which  he  himself
built,  under  a  pillar  whose  height  is  a  hundred  and  forty-four
feet.  So  much  respect  has  been  paid  to  his  memory,  that,
even  to  our  own  times,  they  shout  in  acclamations  to  the  em-
perors, **  More  fortunate  than  Augustus,  better  than  Trajan !  "
So  much  has  the  fame  of  his  goodness  prevailed,  that  it  affords
ground  for  most  noble  illustration  in  the  hands  either  of  such
as  flatter,  or  of  such  as  praise  with  sincerity.

VI.  After  the  death  of  Trajan,  iELius  Hadrian  was
made  emperor,  not  from  any  wish  to  that  effect  having  been
expressed  by  Trajan  himself,  but  through  the  influence  of
Plotina,  Trajan's  wife ;  for  Trajan  in  his  life-time  had  refused
to  adopt  him,  though  he  was  the  son  of  his  cousin.*  He  also
was  bom  at  Italica  in  Spain.  Envying  Trajan's  glory,  he  im-
mediately gave  up  three  of  the  provinces  which  Trajan  had
added  to  the  empire,  withdrawing  the  armies  from  Assyria,
Mesopotamia,  and  Armenia,  and  deciding  that  the  Euphrates
should  be  the  boundary  of  the  empire. When  he  was  pro-

*  Domitia  Paullina. — Glareamu.

i

r


610  EUTBOPIUS.  [B.vni.

cedding  to  act  similarly  with  regard  to  Dacia,  his  friends
dissuaded  him,  lest  many  Roman  citizens  should  be  left  in
the  hands  of  the  barbarians,  because  Trajan,  after  he  had  sub-
dued Dacia,  had  transplanted  thither  an  infinite  number  of
men  from  the  whole  Roman  world,  to  people  the  country  and
the  cities ;  as  the  land  had  been  exhausted  of  inhabitants  in
the  long  war  maintained  by  Decebalus.

VII.  He  enjoyed  peace,  however,  through  the  whole  course
of  his  reign ;  the  only  war  that  he  had,  he  committed  to  the
conduct  of  a  governor  of  a  province.  He  went  about  through
the  Roman  empire,  and  founded  many  edifices.  He  spoke
with  great  eloquence  in  the  Latin  language,  and  was  very
learned  in  the  Greek.  He  had  no  great  reputation  for  cle-
mency, but  was  very  attentive  to  the  state  of  the  treasury  and
the  discipline  of  the  soldiers.  He  died  in  Campania,  more
than  sixty  years  old,  in  the  twenty-first  year,  tenth  month,
and  twenty-ninth  day  of  his  reign.  The  senate  was  imwilling
to  allow  him  divine  honours ;  but  his  successor  Titus  Aurelius
Fulvius  Antonius,  earnestly  insisting  on  it,  carried  his  point,
though  all  the  senators  were  openly  opposed  to  him.

VIII.  To  Hadrian,  then,  succeeded  Titus  Antoninus  Ful-
vius BoiONius,*  who  was  also  named  Pius,  sprung  from  an
eminent,  though  not  very  ancient,  family :  a  man  of  high  cha-
.racter,  who  may  justly  be  compared  to  Numa  Pompilius,  as
Trajan  may  be  paralleled  with  Romulus.  He  lived,  before  he
came  to  the  throne,  in  great  honour,  but  in  greater  still
during  his  reign.  He  was  cruel  to  none,  but  indulgent  to  all.
His  reputation  in  military  affairs  was  but  moderate;  he
studied  rather  to  defend  the  provinces  than  to  enlarge  them.
He  sought  out  the  most  jugt  men  to  fill  political  offices.  He
paid  respect  to  the  good;  for  the  bad  he  showed  dislike,
without  treating  them  with  harshness.  By  kings  in  alliance
with  Rome  he  was  not  less  venerated  than  feared,  *  so  that
many  nations  among  the  barbarians,  laying  aside  their  arms,
referred  their  controversies  and  disputes  to  him,  and  sub-
mitted to  his  decision.  He  was  very  rich  before  he  began  to
reign,  but  diminished  his  wealth  by  pay  to  the  soldiers  and

♦  Boionitu!.]  This  name  is  supposed  by  Casaubon  ad  Capitolin.  Vit.
T.  Anton,  c.  1,  and  by  Mad.  Dacier  ad  Aurel.  Vict,  de  Caes.  c.  16,  to  be
derived  from  Boionia  Pro  ilia,  Titus  Antoninus's  grandmother,  who
had  made  him  her  heir.


ex.]  ' ABRIDGMENT  OP  ROMAN  HISTORY.  611

bounties  to  his  friends ;  he  left  the  treasuiy,  however,  well
stored.  It  was  for  his  clemency  that  he  was  surnamed  Pius.
He  died  at  his  country  seat  called  Lorium,  twelve  miles  from
the  city,  in  the  seventy-third  year  of  his  age,  and  the  twenty-
third  of  his  reign.  He  was  enrolled  among  the  gods,  and
was  deservedly  an  object  of  veneration.*

IX.  After  him  reigned  Marcus  Antoninus  Verus,  a  man
indisputably  of  noble  birth ;  for  his  descent,  on  the  father's
side,  was  from  Numa  Pompilius,  and  on  the  mother's  from  a
kii^  of  the  Sallentines,f  and  jointly  with  him  reigned  Lucius
Antoninus  Verus.  Then  it  was  that  the  commonwealth  of
Home  was  first  subject  to  two  sovereigns,  ruling  with  equal
power,  when,  till  their  days,  it  had  always  had  but  one
emperor  at  a  time.

X.  These  two  were  connected  both  by  relationship  J  and
affinity;  for  Verus  Antoninus  had  married  the  daughter  of
Marcus  Antoninus ;  and  Marcus  Antoninus  was  the  son-in-
law  of  Antoninus  Pius,  having  married  Galeria  Faustina  the
younger,  his  own  cousin.  They  carried  on  a  war  against  the
Parthians,  who  then  rebelled  for  the  first  time  since  their  sub-
jugation by  Trajan.  Verus  Antoninus  went  out  to  conduct
that  war,  and,  remaining  at  Antioch  and  about  Armenia,
effected  many  important  achievements  by  the  agency  of  his
generals :  he  took  Seleucia,  the  most  eminent  city  of  Assyria,
with  forty  thousand  prisoners  ;  he  brought  off  materials  for  a
triumph  over  the  Parthians,  and  celebrated  it  in  conjunction
with  his  brother,  who  was  also  his  father-in-law.  He  died  in
Venetia,§  as  he  was  going  from  the  city  of  Concordia  to  Alti-
num.  While  he  was  sitting  in  his  chariot  with  his  brother,
he  was  suddenly  struck  with  a  rush  of  blood,  a  disease  ||  which

*  CoMecraUu.']  See  note  on  viL  13.

t  The  Sallentmes  were  a  people  of  Calabria  in  Italy;  the  name  of
this  king  was  Malennius,  according  to  Capitolinus,  Yit.  M.  Anton,  c.  1.

X  Oeiiere.']  Both  having  been  adopted  by  Antoninus  Pius ;  see  Capi<
lolinus,  Yit.  Ant.  P.  c.  4.  Hence  Yerus  is  called  the  brother  of
Marcus  by  Aurelius  Yictor  de  Csbs.  c.  1 6 ;  by  Jamblichus  ap.  Photium,
p.  242 ;  by  Capitolinus  Yit.  Yeri,  c.  4  and  11 ;  and  by  Orosius,  yiL  15.
— Tzschucke.

§  The  territoiy  inhabited  by  the  Yeneti,  in  which  both  Concordia
and  Altinum  were  situate,  distant  from  each  other  about  thirty-one
mUes.

II  Ctuu  morii]  Qlareanus  interprets  catu  by  eventu, Ca»u»  morhi


5ia  EUTROPius.  [B.:vm.

the  Greeks  call  apoplexis.  He  was  a  man  who  had  little  con-
trol over  his  passions,  but  who  never  ventured  to  do  anything
outrageous,  from  respect  for  his  brother.  After  his  death,
which  took  place  in  the  eleventh  year  of  his  reign,  he  was
enrolled  among  the  gods.

XI.  After  him  Marcus  Antoninus  held  the  government
alone,  a  man  whom  any  one  may  mote  easily  admire  than
sufficiently  commend.  He  was,  from  his  earliest  years,  of  a
most  tranquil  disposition;  so  that  even  in  his  infancy  he
changed  countenance  neither  for  joy  nor  for  sorrow.  He  was
devoted  to  the  Stoic  philosophy,  and  was  himself  a  philosopher,
not  only  in  his  way  of  life,  but  in  learning.  He  was  the
object  of  so  much  admiration,  while  yet  a  youth,  that  Hadrian
intended  to  make  him  his  successor ;  but  having  adopted  Titus
Antoninus  Pius,  he  wished  Marcus  to  become  Titus's  son-in-
law,  that  he  might  by  that  means  come  id  the  throne.

XII.  He  was  trained  in  philosophy  by  ApoUonius  of  Chal-
cedon ;  in  the  study  of  the  Greek  language  by  Sextus  of
Chaeronea,  the  grandson  of  Plutarch ;  while  the  eminent
orator  Fronto  instructed  him  in  Latin  literature.  He  con-
ducted himself  towards  all  men  at  Rome  as  if  he  had  been
their  equal,  being  moved  to  no  arrogance  by  his  elevation  to
empire.  He  exercised  the  most  prompt  liberality,  and
managed  the  provinces  with  the  utmost  kindness  and  indul-
gence. Under  his  rule  affairs  were  successfully  conducted
against  the  Germans.  He  himself  carried  on  one  war  with
the  Marcomanni,  but  this  was  greater  than  any  in  the
memory  of  man,*  so  that  it  is  compared  to  the  Punic  wars ;
for  it  became  so  much  the  more  formidable,  as  whole  armies
had  been  lost :  since,  under  the  emperor,  after  the  victory
over  the  Parthians,t  there  occurred  so  destructive  a  pestilence,
that  at  Rome,  and  throughout  Italy  and  the  provinces,  the
greater  part  of  the  inhabitants,  and  almost  all  the  troops,  simk
under  the  disease.

XIII.  Having persevered, therefore, with the greatest

eeems  to  be  much  the  same  as  the  simple  morhu8,  or  morbus  sttbitus.
In  p.  12  occurs  casiis  pestUentice.

*  Quantum  nuUd  memorid  fuit!]  The  game  words  are  used  by  Capito-
linuB,  c.  17. The  meaning  seems  to  be,  that  there  had  been  no  wu*
with  the  Germans  equally  formidable.
^  t  Seeo.  10.


CXV.]  ABRIDGMENT  OP  ROMAN  HISTORY.  613

labour  and  patience,  for  three  whole  years  at  Camuntum,*  he
brought  the  Marcomannic  war  to  an  end ;  a  war  which  the
Quadi,  Vandals,  Sarmatians,  Suevi,  and  all  the  barbarians  in
that  quarter,  had  joined  with  the  Marcomanni  in  raising;
he  killed  several  tiiousand  men,  and,  having  delivered  the
Pannonians  from  slavery,  triumphed  a  second  time  at  Rome
with  his  son  Commodus  Antoninus,  whom  he  had  previously
made  Caesar,  f  As  he  had  no  money  to  give  his  soldiers,  in
•consequence  of  the  treasury  having  been  exhausted  for  the
support  of  the  war,  and  as  he  was  unwilling  to  lay  any  tax  on
the  provinces  or  the  senate,  he  sold  off  all  his  imperial  furniture
and  decorations,  by  an  auction  held  in  the  forum  of  the  em-
peror Trajan,  consisting  of  vessels  of  gold,  cups  of  crystal  and
murrha.X  silk  garments  belonging  to  his  wife  and  himself,
embroidered  with  gold,  and  numbers  of  jewelled  ornaments.
This  sale  was  continued  through  two  successive  months,  and  a
great  quantity  of  money  was  raised  from  it.  After  his  victory,
however,  he  gave  back  the  money  to  such  of  the  purchasers  as
were  willing  to  restore  what  they  had  bought,  but  was  by  no
means  troublesome  to  any  one  who  preferred  to  keep  their
purchases.

XIV.  He  allowed  the  more  eminent  men  to  give  entertain-
ments with  the  same  magnificence,  and  the  same  number  of
attendants,  as  himself.  In  the  display  of  games  after  his
victory,  he  was  so  mimificent,^that  he  is  said  to  have  exhibited
a  hundred  lions  at  once.  Having,  then,  rendered  the  state
happy,  both  by  his  excellent  management  and  gentleness  of
disposition,  he  died  in  the  eighteenth  year  of  his  reign  and
the  sixty-first  of  his  life,  and  was  enrolled  among  the  gods,  all
tinanimously  voting  that  such  honour  should  be  paid  him.

XV.  His  successor,  Lucius  Antoninus  Commodus,  had  no
resemblance  to  his  father,  except  that  he  fought  successfully
against  the  Germans. He  endeavoured  to  alter  the  name  of

*  A  town  in  Upper  Pannonia,  on  the  Danube,  where  Haimbuig  or
Petronel  now  stands.  See  (Mannert,  T.  iii.  p.  740 ;  also  Cluverius  and
Cellarius.

t  The  title  of  Caesar  was  now  given  to  the  person  next  in  dignity  to
the  emperor,  and  who  was  intended  to  succeed  him.

X  Murrkincu]  What  substance  mibrrha  was  is  unknown.  It  has
been  thought  to  be  porcelain,  but  is  now  generally  supposed  to  have
been  some  kind  of  stone.

L  L


614  Buniopius.  [r  viii.

the  month  of  Septeinher*  to  his  o\vii,  so  that  it  should  be
called  Commodus.  But  he  was  corrupted  with  luxury  and
licentiousness.  He  often  fought,  with  gladiator's  arms,  in  the
fencing  school,  and  afterwards  with  men  of  that  class  in  the
amphitheatre.  He  died  so  sudden  a  death,  that  he  -was
thought  to  have  heen  strangled  or  despatched  hy  poison,  after
he  had  reigned  twelve  years  and  eight  months  after  his  father,
and  in  the  midst  of  such  execration  from  all  men,  that  even
after  his  death  he  was  styled  "  the  enemy  of  the  human  race."

XVI.  To  him  succeeded  Pertinax,  at  a  very  advanced  age,
having  reached  his  seventieth  year ;  he  was  appointed  to  be
emperor  by  a  decree  of  the  senate,  when  he  was  holding  the
office  of  prefect  of  the  city.  He  was  killed  in  a  mutiny
of  the  praetorian  soldiers,  by  the  villany  of  Julianus,  on  the
eightieth  day  of  his  reign.

XVII.  After  his  death  Salvius  Julianus  seized  the  govern-
ment, a  man  of  noble  birth,  and  eminently  skilled  in  the  law ;
he  was  the  grandson  of  that  Salvius  Julianus  who  composed
the  perpetual  edict*  in  the  reign  of  the  emperor  Adrian,  He
was  defeated  l»y  Severus  at  the  Milvian  bridge,  and  killed  in
the  palace. He  lived  only  eight  months  after  he  began  to  reign.

XVni.  Septimius  Severus  then  assumed  the  government
of  the  Roman  empire ;  a  native  of  Africa,  bom  in  the  province
of  TripoUs,  and  town  of  Leptis.  He  was  the  only  African,  in
all  the  time  before  or  after  him,  that  became  emperor.  He
was  first  prsefect  of  the  treasury,  afterwards  military  tribune,
and  then  rose,  through  several  offices  and  posts  of  honour,  to
the  government  of  the  whole  state.  He  had  an  inclination  to
be  called  Pertinax,  in  honour  of  that  Pertinax  who  had  been
killed  by  Julian.  He  was  very  parsimonious,  and  naturally
cruel.  He  conducted  many  wars,  and  with  success.  He
killed  Pescennius  Niger,  who  had  raised  a  rebellion  in  Egypt
and  Syria,  at  Cyzicus.  He  overcame  the  Parthians,  the  in-
terior Arabians,  and  the Adiabeni. The Arabians he so

*  He  wished,  as  Tzschucke  observes,  to  have  the  month  of  Augnat
called  Commodus,  and  that  of  September,  Hercolius.  See  Lamprid.
Vit  Comm.  c.  11.

t  The  prsetors  had  heen  accustomed  to  publish  each  his  own  edict,
as  to  the  method  in  which  he  intended  to  administer  justice  for  his
year.  The  edicts  were  of  course  often  very  different ;  hut  by  this
perpetttal  edict  a  uniform  course  of  proceeding  was  laid  down.  See
note  on  C.  Nep.  Life  of  Cato,  c.  2.


C.XXI.]  ACRIDGMENT  OF  ROMAN  HISlORY.  515

effeotaally  reduced,  that  he  made  them  a  province ;  hence  he
was  called  Farthicus,  Arabicus,  and  Adiabenicus.  He  rebuilt
many  edifices  throughout  the  whole  Koman  world.  In  his
reign,  too,  Clodius  Albinus,  who  had  been  an  accomplice  of
Julianus  in  killing  Pertinax,  set  himself  up  for  Caesar  in  Gaul,
and  was  overthrown  and  killed  at  Lyons.

XIX.  Severus,  in  addition  to  his  glory  in  war,  was  also  dis-
tinguished in  the  pursuits  of  peace,  being  not  only  accomplished
in  literature,  but  having  acquired  a  complete  knowledge  of
philosophy.  The  last  war  that  he  had  was  in  Britain ;  and
that  he  might  preserve,  with  all  possible  security,  the  provinces
which  he  had  acquired,  he  built  a  rampart  of  thirty-two  miles
long  from  one  sea  to  the  other.  He  died  at  an  advanced  age
at  York,  in  the  eighteenth  year  and  fourth  month  of  his  reign,
and  was  honoured  with  the  title  of  god.  He  left  his  two  sons,
Bassianus  and  Geta,  to  be  .his  successors,  but  desired  that  the
name  of  Antoninus  should  be  given  by  the  senate  to  Bassi^
anus  only,  who,  accordingly,  was  named  Marcus  Aurelius  An-
toninus Bassianus,  and  was  his  father's  successor.  As  for
Geta,  he  was  declared  a  public  enemy,  and  soon  after  put  to
death.

XX.  Mabcus  Aureuus  Antonikus  Bassianus,  then,  who
was  also  called  Caracalla,  was  a  man  very  much  of  his
father's  disposition,  but  somewhat  more  rough  and  vindictive.
He  erected  a  bath  of  excellent  construction  at  Eome,  which  is
called  the  bath  of  Antoninus,*  but  did  nothing  else  worthy  of
record.  He  wanted  ability  to  control  his  passions ;  for  he
married  his  own  step-mother  Julia.  He  died  in  Osdroene,t
near  Edessa,  while  he  was  planning  an  expedition  against  the
Parthians,  in  the  sixth  year  and  second  month  of  his  reign,
having  scarcely  passed  the  forty^second  year  of  his  age.  He
was  buried  with  a  public  funeral.

XXI.  Opilius  Macbinus,  who  was  captain  of  the  prsBtorian
guards,  and  his  son  Diadumenus,  were  then  made  emperors,
but  did  nothing  memorable,  in  consequence  of  the  shortness
of  their  reign ;  for  it  lasted  but  a  year  and  two  months.  They
were  both  killed  together  in  a  mutiny  of  the  soldiers.

*  Opui  lavacri,  qwz  Antonmicmat  appeUarUur.']  The  change  of
gender  and  number,  as  Tzschucke  observes,  makes  the  reader  suspect
that  something  must  be  wrong. Cellarius  supplies  tkermoB.

f  More  frequently  written  Osrhoene.

LL2


616  SUTBOPIUa.  [B.Ym.

xxiL  After  these,  Mabcus  Aukeijus  Aktoninus  was
made  emperor,  who  was  thought  to  be  the  son  of  Antoninus
Caracalla.  He  was  however  priest  of  the  temple^  of  Helio-
gabalos.*  Having  come  to  Rome  with  h^h  expectations  on
the  part  of  the  army  and  the  senate,  he  poUuted  himself  with
every  kind  of  imparity.  He  led  a  life  of  the  utmost  shame-
lessness  and  obscenity,  and  was  killed  at  the  end  of  two  years
and  eight  months  in  a  tumult  of  the  soldiers.  His  mother
Soemia,  a  native  of  Syria,  perished  with  him.

xxTTT.  To  him  succeeded  Aukeijus  Alexander,  a  very
young  man,  who  was  named  Caesar  by  the  army,  and  Augustus
by  the  senate.  Having  undertaken  a  war  with  the  Persians,
he  defeated  their  king  Xerxes  with  great  glory.  He  enforced
miUtaty  discipline  with  much  severity,  and  disbanded  whole
legions  that  raised  a  disturbance.  He  had  for  his  adviser,  or
secretary  of  state,  Ulpian,  the  compiler  of  the  law.  He  was
also  in  great  £ftvour  at  Borne.  He  lost  his  life  in  Gaul,  in  a
tumult  of  the  soldiery,  in  the  thirteenth  year  and  eighth  day  of
his  reign. He  testified  great  affection  for  his  mother  MammsBa.

*  A  Syrophoenician  deity  at  Emeaa;  hence  he  himself  was  called
Heliogabalus.  He  was  made  emperor  through  the  artifices  of  his
grandmother,  Jnlia  Moesa^  who  pretended  that  he  was  the  son  of
Caracalla.


517


BOOK  IX.

Maximin  Buccessful  in  his  wars  in  Germany,  L — Three  emperors  at
once,  Pupienus,  Balbinus,  and  Gk)rdian;  Gordian  becomes  sole
emperor,  and  goes  to  war  with  Persia,  IL — ^The  two  Philips,  father
and  son ;  the  thousandth  year  of  Bome,  III. — ^Decius  suppresses
an  insurrection  in  Gaul,  IV. — ^GhJlus  Hostilianus  and  his  son
Volusianus,  Y. — Short  reign  of  ^milianus,  YI. — Disadvantageous
reign  of  Yalerian  and  Gallienus;  several  aspirants  assume  the
purple,  'YII.-X. — Claudius  defeats  the  Goths ;  his  honours,-XL —
Quintillus,  XIL — Aurelian  defeats  the  Goths,  Tetricus,  Zenobia ;
suppresses  a  rebellion  at  Bome;  his  character,  XIII.-ZY. —
Tacitus,  Florianus,  XYI. — Probus ;  his  acts  in  Gaul  and  Pannoniai
XYIII. — Cams ;  his  successes  in  Persia ;  death  of  him  and  Nume-
rianus,  XYIIL  XIX. — Diocletian  made  emperor;  overthrows
Carinus ;  suppresses  an  insurrection  in  Gaul,  XX. — Makes  Hercu-
lius  emperor,  and  Constantius  and  Maximian  Caesars ;  proceedings
in  Britain,  Egypt,  Africa,  and  among  the  Alemanni,  XXI.~XXIII.
— Varied  fortime  of  Maximian  in  Persia ;-  subjugation  of  the
Carpi,  Bastarnse,  and  Sarmatians,  XXIY.  XXY. — Character  of
Diocletian  and  Maximian ;  their  abdication  of  the  imperial  power,
XXYI.-XXVIIL

I.  After  him  Maximin  came  to  the  throne,  the  first  empe-
ror that  was  elected  from  the  army  by  the  will  of  the  soldiers,
no  approbation  of  the  senate  being  given,  and  he  himself  not
being  a  senator*  After  conducting  a  successful  war  against
the  Germans,  and  being  on  that  account  saluted  Imperator*
by  his  troops,  he  was  slain  by  Pupienus  at  Aquileia,f  together
with  his  son  who  was  then  but  a  boy,  his  soldiers  forsaking
him.  He  had  reigned,  with  his  son,  three  years  and  a  few
days.

II.  There  were  then  three  emperors  at  the  same  time,
Pupienus,  Balbinus,  and  Gobdian,  the  two  former  of  very
obscure  origin,  the  last  of  noble  birth ;  for  the  elder  Gfordiau,
his  father,  had  been  chosen  prince  by  the  consent  of  the  sol-
diery in  the  reign  of  Maximin,  when  he  held  the  proconsulship
of  Africa.  When  Balbinus  and  Pupienus  came  to  Rome,  they
were  killed  in  the  palace;  and  the  empire  was  given  to
Gordian  alone.

After  Gordian,  when  quite  a  boy,  had  married  Tranquillina  at
Rome,  he  opened  the  temple  of  Janus,  and,  setting  out  for  the

*  Iq  the  old  sense  of  the  word,  as  Tzschucke  thinks,  on  account  of
his  victory.  He  had  been  made  emperor  before,  as  appears  from
Herodian,  vii  2.

t  A  city  of  Gallia  Transpadana,  at  the  top  of  the  Adriatic


618  EUTBOPIUS.  [B.IX.

east,  made  war  upon  the  Parthians,  who  were  then  proceeding
to  make  an  irruption.  This  war  he  soon  conducted  with  suc-
cess, and  made  havoc  of  the  Persians  in  great  hattles.
As  he  was  returning,  he  was  killed,  not  far  from  the
Boman  houndaries,  hy  the  treachery  of  Philip  who  reigned
after  him.  The  Eoman  soldiers  raised  a  monument  for  him,
twenty  miles  from  Circessus,  which  is  now  a  fortress  of  the
Romans,  overlooking  the  Euphrates.  His  relics  they  brought
to  Eome,  and  gave  him  the  title  of  god.

III.  When  Gordian  was  killed,  the  two  Philips,  father  and
son,  seized  on  the  government,  and,  having  brought  off  the
army  safe,  set  out  from  Syria  for  Italy.  In  their  reign  the
thousandth  year  of  the  city  of  Rome  was  celebrated  with  games
and  spectacles  of  vast  magnificence.  Soon  after,  both  of  them
were  put  to  death  by  the  soldiery ;  the  elder  Philip  at  Verona,
the  younger  at  Rome,  They  reigned  but  five  years.  They
were  however  ranked  among  the  gods.

IV.  After  these,  Decius,  a  native  of  Lower  Pannonia,  bom
at  Budalia,  assumed  the  government.  He  suppressed  a  civil
war  which  had  been  raised  in  Gaul.  He  created  his  son  Caesar.
He  built  a  bath  at  Rome.  When  he  and  his  son  had  reigned  two
years,  they  were  both  killed  in  the  country  of  the  Barbarians,

^nd  enrolled  among  the  gods.

V.  Immediately  after,  Gallus,  Hostilianus,  and  Volusi-
ANUS  the  son  of  Gallus,  were  created  emperors.  In  their  reign
JEmilianus  attempted  an  insurrection  in  Moesia ;  and  both*  of
them,  setting  out  to  stop  his  progress,  were  slain  at  Interamna,
when  they  had  not  quite  completed  a  reign  of  two  years.
They  did  nothing  of  any  account.  Their  reign  was  re-
markable only  for  a  pestilence,  and  for  other  diseases  and
afflictions.

VI.  ^MiLiANUS  was  little  distinguished  by  birth,  and  less
distinguished  by  his  reign,  in  the  third  month  of  which  he
was  cut  off.f

VII.  LiciNius  Valerian,  who  was  then  employed  in  RhaB-
tia  and  Noricum,  was  next  made  general  by  the  army,  and  soon
after  emperor.  Galliends  also  received  the  title  of  Caesar
from  the  senate  at  Rome. The  reign  of  these  princes  was  in-

*  Amho.]  Both  Gallus  and  Volusiantis. — Tzichticke.
t  Extinctua  est.]  He  was  killed  by  the  soldiery,  according  to  Zosimus,
I  29,  and  Zonaras,  xii.  22.


C.IX.]  ABRIDGMENT OF  ROMAN HISTORY.  519

jurious,  and  almost  fatal,  to  the  Boman  name,  eitker  through
their  ill-fortune  or  want  of  energy.  The  Germans  advanced
as  far  as  Ravenna.  Valerian,  while  he  was  occupied  in  a  war  in
Mesopotamia,  was  overthrown  by  Sapor  king  of  Persia,  and
being  soon  after  made  prisoner,  grew  old  in  ignominious  slavery
among  the  Parthians.

VIII.  Gallienus,  who  was  made  emperor  when  quite  a
young  man,  exercised  his  power  at  first  happily,  afterwards
fairly,  and  at  last  mischievously.  In  his  youth  he  performed
many  gallant  acts  in  Gaul  and  lUyricum,  killing  Ingenuus,
who  had  assumed  the  purple,  at  Mursa,*  and  Regalianus.  He
was  then  for  a  long  time  quiet  and  gentle ;  afterwards,
abandoning  himself  to  all  manner  of  licentiousness,  he  re-
laxed the  reins  of  government  with  disgraceful  inactivity  and
carelesness.  The  Alemanni,  having  laid  waste  Gaul,  pene-
trated into  Italy.  Dacia,  which  had  been  added  to  the
empire  beyond  the  Danube,  was  lost.  Greece,  Macedonia,
Pontus,  Asia,  were  devastated  by  the  Goths.  Pannonia  was
depopulated  by  the  Sarmatians  and  Quadi.  The  Germans
made  their  way  as  far  as  Spain,  and  took  the  noble
city  of  Tarraco.  The  Parthians,  after  taking  possession  of
Mesopotamia,  began  to  bring  Syria  under  their  power.

IX.  When  affairs  were  in  this  desperate  condition,  and  the
Roman  empire  almost  ruined,  Postumus,  a  man  of  very
obscure  birth,  assumed  the  purple  in  Gaul,  and  held  the
government  with  such  ability  for  ten  years,  that  he  recruited
the  provinces,  which  had  been  almost  ruined,  by  his  great
energy  and  judgment;  but  he  was  killed  in  a  mutiny  of  the
army,  because  he  would  not  deliver  up  Moguntiacum,  which
had  rebelled  against  him,  to  be  plundered  by  the  soldiers,  at
the  time  when  Lucius  ^lianus  was  endeavouring  to  effect  a
change  of  government.

After  him  Marius,  a  contemptible  mechanic,t  assumed  the
purple,  and  was  killed  two  days  after.  Victorinus  then  took
on  himself  the  government  of  Gaul ;  a  man  of  great  energy ;
but,  as  he  was  abandoned  to  excessive  licentiousness,  and
corrupted  other  men's  wives,  he  was  assassinated  at  Agrip-

*  A  town  of  Lower  Pannonia,  on  the  river  Drave.  Cellar.  Geog.
Ant  ii.  8,  27.

+  VUissimus  ojfdfex.]  Victor  de  C»s.  33,  9,  calls  him  ferri  opifex,  a
worker  in  iron.


620  EUTBOPIUS.  [B.nL

pina,*  in  the  second  year  of  his  reign,  one  of  his  secretaries
having  contrived  a  plot  against  him.

X.  To  him  succeeded  Tetricus,  a  senator,  who,  when  he
was  governing  Aquitania  with  the  tiUe  of  prsefect,  was  chosen
emperor  in  his  absence,  and  assumed  the  purple  at  Bourdeaux.
He  had  to  endure  many  insurrections  among  the  soldiery.
But  while  these  transactions  were  passing  in  Gaul,  the  Per-
sians, in  the  east,  were  overthrown  by  Odenathus,  who,  having
defended  Syria  and  recovered  Mesopotamia,  penetrated  into
the  country  as  far  as  Ctesiphon.

XI.  Thus,  while  Gallienus  abandoned  the  government,  the
Koman  empire  was  saved  in  the  west  by  Posthumus,  and  in
the  east  by  Odenathus.  Meanwhile  Gallienus  was  killed  at
Milan,  together  with  his  brother,  in  the  ninth  year  of  his
reign,  and  Claudius  succeeded  him,  being  chosen  by  the
soldiers,  and  declared  emperor  by  the  senate.  Claudius
defeated  the  Goths,  who  were  laying  waste  lUyricum  and
Macedonia,  in  a  great  battle.  He  was  a  frugal  and  modest
man,  strictly  observant  of  justice,  and  well  qufidified  for
governing  the  empire.  He  was  however  carried  off  by  disease
within  two  years  after  he  began  to  reign,  and  had  the  title  of
a  god.  The  -senate  honoured  him  with  extraordinary  distinc-
tions, insomuch  that  a  golden  shield  was  hung  up  to  him  in
the  senate  house,  and  a  golden  statue  erected  to  him  in  the
Capitol.

XII.  After  him  Quintiixus,  the  brother  of  Claudius,  was
elected  emperor  by  agreement  among  the  soldiers,  a  man
of  singular  moderation  and  aptitude  for  governing,  comparable,
or  perhaps  superior,  to  his  brother.  He  received  the  title  of
emperor  with  the  consent  of  the  senate,  and  was  killed  on  the
seventeenth  day  of  his  reign.

XIII.  After  his  death  Aubelian  succeeded  to  the  throne.
He  was  bom  in  Dacia  Bipensis,  and  was  a  man  of  ability  in
war,  but  of  an  ungovernable  temper,  and  too  much  inclined
to  cruelty.  He  defeated  the  Goths  with  great  vigour,  and
extended  the  Roman  empire,  by  various  successes  in  the  field,
to  its  former  limits. He  overthrew  Tetricus  at  Catalaunif

*  A  town  of  the  Ubii,  so  called  because  Agrippina  was  born  there.  It
is  now  Cologne,

t  In  Gallia  Belgica,  Amm.  MarcelU  xv.  11,  now,  as  Tzschuoke  thinks,
C^UUona  tur  Marne.


C.XV.]  ABRIDGMBNT  OP  ROMAN  HISTORY.  621

in  Gaul,  Tetricus  himself,  indeed,  betraying  bis  own  army,
whose  constant  mutinies  he  was  unable  to  bear ;  and  he  had
even  by  secret  letters  entreated  Aurelian  to  march  towards
him,  using,  among  other  solicitations,  the  verse  of  Virgil : —

JEripe  me  his,  mvicte,  malii.
Unconquer'd  hero,  free  me  from  these  ills.

He  also  took  prisoner  Zenobia,  who,  having  killed  her  hus-
band Odenathus,  was  mistress  of  the  east,  in  a  battle  of  no
great  importance  near  Antioch,'and,  entering  Rome,  celebrated
a  magnificent  triumph,  as  recoverer  of  the  east  and  the  west,
Tetricus*  and  Zenobia  going  before  his  chariot.  This  Tetri-
cus was  afterwards  governor  of  Lucania,  and  lived  long  after
he  was  divested  of  the  purple.  Zenobia  left  descendants,  who
still  live  at  Rome.

XIV.  In  his  reign,  the  people  of  the  mint  raised  a  rebellion
in  the  city,  after  having  adulterated  the  money,  and  put  to
death  Felicissimus  the  commissioner  of  the  treasury.  Aure-
lian suppressed  them  with  the  utmost  severity ;  several  noble-
men he  condemned  to  death.  He  was  indeed  cruel  and
sanguinary,  and  rather  an  emperor  necessary  for  the  times  in
some  respects  than  an  amiable  one  in  any.  He  was  always
severe,  and  put  to  death  even  the  son  of  his  own  sister.  He  was
however  a  reformer,  in  a  great  degree,  of  military  discipline
and  dissoluteness  of  manners.

XV.  He  surrounded  the  city  of  Rome  with  stronger  walls..
He  built  a  temple  to  the  Sun,  in  which  he  put  a  vast  quantity
of  gold  and  precious  stones.  The  province  of  Dacia,  which
Trajan  had  formed  beyond  the  Danube,  he  gave  up,  despair-
ing, after  all  lllyricum  and  Moesia  had  been  depopulated,  of
being  able  to  retain  it.  The  Roman  citizens,  removed  from
the  town  and  lands  of  Dacia,  he  settled  in  the  interior  of  Moesia,
calling  that  Dacia  which  now  divides  the  two  Moesise,  and
which  is  on  the  right  hand  of  the  Danube  as  it  runs  to  the  sea,
whereas  Dacia  was  previously  on  the  left.  He  was  killed
through  the  treachery  of  one  of  his  oym  slaves,  who  carried  to
certain  military  men,  the  friends  of  Aurelian,  their  own  names
entered  upon  a  list,  having  counterfeited  the  hand  of  Aurelian,
and  making  it  appear  that  he  intended  to  put  them  to  death.
That  he  might  be  prevented  from  doing  so,  he  was  assassinated

•  See  c.  10.


5-^2  BUTROPIUS.  . [B.IX.

by  them  in  the  middle  of  the  road,  the  old  paved  way,  which
is  between  Constantinople  and  Heraclea.  The  place  is  called
Osenophrurium.  But  his  death  was  not  unavenged.*  He
also  gained  the  honour  of  being  enrolled  among  the  gods.  He
reigned  five  years  and  six  months.

XVI.  After  him  Tacitus  succeeded  to  the  throne ;  a  man
of  excellent  morals,  and  well  qualified  to  govern  the  empire.
He  was  unable,  however,  to  show  the  world  anything  remark-
able, being  cut  off  by  death  iu  the  sixth  month  of  his  reign.
Florianus,  who  succeeded  Tacitus,  was  on  the  throne  only  two
months  and  twenty  days,  and  did  nothing  worthy  of  mention.

XVn.  Probus  then  succeeded  to  the  government,  a  naan
rendered  illustrious  by  the  distinction  which  he  obtained
in  war.  He  recovered  Gaul,  which  had  been  seized  by  the
Barbarians,  by  remarkable  successes  in  the  field.  He  also
suppressed,  in  several  battles,  some  persons  that  attempted  to
seize  the  throne,  as  Satuminus  in  the  east,  and  Proculus  and
Bonosus  at  Agrippina.  He  allowed  the  Gauls  and  Cannonians
to  have  vineyards.  By  obliging  his  soldiers  to  work,  too,  he
planted  vineyards  on  Mount  Alma  in  Sirmium,  and  on  Mount
Aureus  in  Upper  Moesia,  and  Jeft  them  to  the  people  of  the
provinces  to  cultivate.  After  he  had  gone  through  a  great
number  of  wars,  and  had  at  last  obtained  peace,  he  observed,
that  '*  in  ashor|;  time  soldiers  would  not  be  wanted."  He  was
a  m£in  of  spirit,  activitv*  and  iustice,  equalling  Aurelian  iu
miUtaiy  glo^,  and  sur^sing  him  in  .Ability  of  manners.
He  was  killed,  however,  at  Sirmium,  in  an  iron  turret,  during
an  insurrection  of  the  soldiery.  He  *reigned  six  years  and
four  months.

XVin.  After  the  death  of  Probus,  Carus  was  created
emperor,  a  native  of  Narbo  in  Gaul,  who  immediately  made
his  sons,  Carinus  and  Numerianus,  Caesars,  and  reigned,  in
conjunction  with  them,  two  years.  News  being  brought,  while
he  was  engaged  in  a  war  with  the  Sarmatians,  of  an  insurrec-
tion among  the  Persians,  he  set  out  for  the  east,  and  achieved
some  noble  exploits  against  that  people ;  he  routed  them  in  the
field,  and  took  Seleucia  and  Otesiphon,  their  noblest  cities,
but,  while  he  was  encamped  on  the  Tigris,  he  was  killed  by
lightning. His  son  Numerianus,  too,  whom  he  had  taken

*  Tacitus  made  it  his  care  to  put  the  assaseius  to  death.  Vopisc.
Vit  Tacit  c.  13;  AureL  Vict.  Epit  c.  36.


C.XX.]  ABRIDGMENT  OF  ROMAN  HISTORY.  523

with  him  to  Persia,  a  young  man  of  very  great  ability,  while,
from  being  affected  with  a  disease  in  his  eyes,  he  was  carried  in
a  litter,  was  cut  off  by  a  plot  of  which  Aper,  his  father-in-law,
was  the  promoter ;  and  his  death,  though  attempted  craftily  to
be  concealed  until  Aper  could  seize  the  throne,  was  made  known
by  the  odour  of  his  dead  body ;  for  the  soldiers,  who  attended
him,  being  struck  by  the  smell,  and  opening  the  curtains  of  his
litter,  discovered  his  death  some  days  aft^r  it  had  taken  place.

XIX.  In  |the  meantime  Carinds,  whom  Cams,  when  he
set  out  to  the  war  with  Parthia,  had  left,  with  the  authority  of
CflBsar,  to  command  in  lUyricum,  Gaul,  and  Italy,  disgraced
himself  by  all  manner  of  crimes ;  he  put  to  death  many  inno-
cent persons  on  false  accusations,  formed  illicit  connexions  with
the  wives  of  noblemen,  and  wrought  the  ruin  of  several  of  his
school-fellows,  who  happened  to  have  offended  hjm  at  school
by  some  slight  provocation.  Incurring  the  hatred  of  all  men
by  such  proceedings,  he  not  long  after  met  with  deserved
punishment.

The  victorious  army,  on  returning  from  Persia,  as  they  had
lost  their  emperor  Cams  by  lightning,  and  the  Caesar  Numeri-
anus  by  a  plot,  conferred  the  imperial  dignity  on  Diocletian,
a  native  of  Dalmatia,  of  such  extremely  obscure  birth,  that  he
is  said  by  most  writers  to  have  been  the  son  of  a  clerk,  but
by  some  to  have  been  a  freedman  of  a  senator  named  Anulinus.

XX,  Diocletian,  in  the  first  assembly  of  the  army  that  was
held,  took  an  oath  that  Numerian  was  not  killed  by  any  treachery
on  his  part ;  and  while  Aper,  who  had  laid  the  plot  for  Nume-
rian's  life,  was  standing  by,  he  was  killed,  in  the  sight  of  the
army,  with  a  sword  by  the  hand  fof  Diocletian.  He  soon  after
overthrew  Carinus,  who  was  living  under  the  utmost  hatred
and  detestation,  in  a  great  battle  at  Margum,*  Carinus  being
betrayed  by  his  own  troops,  for  though  he  had  a  greater  num-
ber of  men  than  the  enemy,  he  was  altogether  abandoned  by
them  between  Yiminacium  and  mount  Aureus.  He  thus
became  master  of  the  Eoman  empire ;  and  when  the  peasants
in  Gaul  made  an  insurrection,  giving  their  faction  the  name
of  Bagaud2e,t  and  having  for  leaders  Amandus  and  ^lianus,

*  A  town  in  Upper  Moesia,  between  the  Danube  and  the  Margus  or
Morava.

t  A  name  of  uncertain  signification,  but  supposed,  says  Tzschucke,
to  mean  rebels  or  robbers.


624  EUTROPITJS.  [B.IX.

he  despatched  Maximian  Herculius,  with  the  authority  of
Osesar,  to  suppress  them.  Maximian,  iu  a  few  battles  of
little  importance,  subdued  the  rustic  multitude,  and  restored
peace  to  Gaul.

XXI,  During  this  period,  Carausius,  who,  though  of  very  A
mean  birth,  had  gained  extraordinary  reputation  by  a  course  of
active  service  in  war,  having  received  a  commission  in  his
post  at  Bononia,  to  clear  the  sea,  which  the  Franks  and  Saxons
infested,  along  the  coast  of  Belgica  and  Armorica,  and  having
captured  'numbers  of  the  barbarians  on  several  occasions,  but
having  never  given  back  the  entire  booty  to  the  people  of  the
province  or  sent  it  to  the  emperors,  and  there  being  a  suspi-
cion, in  consequence,  that  the  barbarians  were  intentionally
allowed  by  him  to  congregate  there,  that  he  might  seize  them
and  their  booty  as  they  passed,  and  by  that  means  enrich  him-
self, assumed,  on  being  sentenced  by  Maximian  to  be  put
to  death/^the  imperial  purple,  and  took  on  him  the  government
of  Britain.

XXII.  While  disorder  thus  prevailed  throughout  the  world,
while  Carausius  was  taking  arms  in  Britain  and  Achilleus  in
Egypt*  while  the  Quinquegentiani  *  were  harassing  Africa,
and  Narseust  was  making  war  upon  the  east,  Diocletian  pro-
moted Maximian  Herculius  from  the  dignity  of  C»sar  to
that  of  emperor,  and  created  Constantius  and  Maximian
Galerius  Caesars,  of  whom  Constantius  is  said  to  have  been  the
grand-nephew  of  Claudius  J  by  a  daughter,  and  Maximian
Galerius  to  have  been  bom  in  Dacia  not  far  from  Sardica.§
That  he  might  also  unite  them  by  affinity,  Constantius  married
Theodora  the  step-daughter  of  Herculius,  by  whom  he  had
afterwards  six  children,  brothers  to  Constantine ;  while  Gale-
rius married  Valeria,  the  daughter  of  Diocletian ;  both  being
obliged  to  divorce  the  wives  that  they  had  before.  With
Carausius,  however,  as  hostilities  were  found  vain  against  a
man  eminently  skilled  in  war,  a  peace  was  at  last  arranged.

*  Cellarius  thinks  that  they  may  be  the  same  as  the  Pentapolitani,
that  is,  the  Cyrenseans,  Cyrenaica  comprising  five  cities,  Berenice,
Arsinoe,  Ptolemais,  Apollonia,  and  Gyrene.

t  King  of  Persia ;  more  frequently  written  Narses.

t  The  emperor  mentioned  in  c.  11.  Constantius  was  the  grandson
of  Crispus,  Claudius's  brother.

§  The  metropolis  of  Dacia  Mediterranea ;  thought  to  be  the  same
as  the  present  Sojia  in  Bulgaria.


C.XXV.]  ABRIDGMENT  OF  ROMAN  HISTORY.  526

At  the  end  of  seven  years,  Allectus,  one  of  his  supporters,  put
him  to  death,  and  held  Britain  himself  for  three  years  subse-
quently, but  was  cut  off  by  the  efforts  of  Asclepiodotus,  prsefect
of  the  prsetorian  guard.

XXIII.  At  the  same  period  a  battle  was  fought  by  Gon-
stantius  Caesar  in  Gaul,  at  Lingonae,*  where  he  experienced
both  good  and  bad  fortune  in  one  day ;  for  though  he  was
driven  into  the  city  by  a  sudden  onset  of  the  barbarians,  with
such  baste  and  precipitation  that  after  the  gates  were  shut  he
was  drawn  up  the  w^l  by  ropes,  yet,  when  his  army  came  up,
after  the  lapse  of  scarcely  six  hours,  he  cut  to  pieces  about
sixty  thousand  of  the  Alemanni.  Maximian  the  emperor,
too,  brought  the  war  to  an  end  in  Africa,  by  subduing  the
Quinquegentiani,  and  compelling  them  to  make  peace.
Diocletian,  meanwhile,  besieging  Achilleus  in  Alexandria,
obliged  him  to  surrender  about  eight  months  after,  and  put
him  to  death.  He  used  his  victory,  indeed,  cruelly,  and
distressed  all  Egypt  with  severe  proscriptions  and  massacres.
Yet  at  the  same  time  he  made  many  judicious  arrangements
and  regulations,  which  continue  to  our  own  days.

XXIV.  Galerius  Maximian,  in  acting  against  Narseus,
fought,  on  the  first  occasion,  a  battle  far  from  successful,
meeting  him  between  Callinicus  and  Carrae,  and  engaging  in
the  combat  rather  with  rashness  than  want  of  courage ;  for  he
contended  with  a  small  army  against  a  very  numerous  enemy.
Being  in  consequence  defeated,  and  going  to  join  Diocletian,
he  was  received  by  him,  when  he  met  him  on  the  road,  with
such  extreme  haughtiness,  that  he  is  said  to  have  run  by  his
chariot  for  several  miles  in  his  scarlet  robes.

XXV.  But  having  soon  after  collected  forces  in  Illyricum
and  Moesia,  he  fought  a  second  time  with  Narseus  (the  grand-
father of  Hormisdas  and  Sapor),  in  Greater  Armenia,  with
extraordinary  success,  and  with  no  less  caution  and  spirit,  for
be  undertook,  with  one  or  two  of  the  cavalry,  the  office  of  a
speculator. f After  putting  Narseus  to  flight,  he  captured  his

*  Apvtd  Lmgofuu.']  Lingonee,  or  Lingones,  the  chief  town  of  the
Lingones  in  Gktul,  previously  called  Andomatunum ;  now  Langrei.

i*  The  ipeculatoret,  under  the  emperors,  were  a  body  of  troops
attached  to  the  praetorian  cohorts,  or  perhaps  forming  pcurt  of  them,
and  having  the  care  of  the  emperor's  person.  Ipsum  OtfKmem  comita-
hcmtur  apecuUUorum  lecta  corpora,  cum  cceterit  prastorm  cohortibut,  Tac.
Hist  it.  11.


526  EUTR0PIU8.  [B.IX.

^ives,  sisters,  and  children,  with  a  vast  number  of  the
Persian  nobility  besides,  and  a  great  quantity  of  treasure ;  the
king  himself  he  forced  to  take  refuge  in  the  remotest  deserts
in  his  dominions.  Returning  therefore  in  triumph  to
Diocletian,  who  was  then  encamped  with  some  troops  in
Mesopotamia,  he  was  welcomed  by  him  with  great  honour.
Subsequently,  they  conducted  several  wars  both  in  conjunction
and  separately,  subduing  the  Carpi  and  Bastamse,  and
defeating  the  Sarmatians,  from  which  nations  he  settled  a
great  number  of  captives  in  the  Roman  territories.

XXVI.  Diocletian  was  of  a  crafty  disposition,  with  much
sagacity,  and  keen  penetration.  He  was  willing  to  gratify  his
own  disposition  to  cruelty  in  such  a  way  as  to  throw  the  odium
upon  otiiers ;  he  was  however  a  very  active  and  able  prince.
He  was  the  first  that  introduced  into  the  Roman  empire  a
ceremony  suited  rkther  to  royal  usages  than  to  Roman  Hberty,
giving  orders  that  he  should  be  adored,*  whereas  all  emperors
before  him  were  only  saluted.  He  put  ornaments  of  precious
stones  on  his  dress  and  shoes,  when  the  imperial  distinction
had  previously  been  only  in  the  purple  robe,  the  rest  of  the
habit  being  the  same  as  that  of  other  men.

XXVII.  But  Herculius  was  undisguisedly  cruel,  and  of  a
violent  temper,  and  showed  his  severity  of  disposition  in  the
sternness  of  his  looks.  Gratifying  his  own  inclination,  he
joined  with  Diocletian  in  even  the  most  cruel  of  his  proceed-
ings. But  when  Diocletian,  as  age  bore  heavily  upon  him,
felt  himself  unable  to  sustain  the  government  of  the  empire,  he
suggested  to  Herculius  that  they  should  both  retire  into
private  life,  and  commit  the  duty  of  upholding  the  state  to
more  vigorous  and  youthful  hands.  With  this  suggestion  his
colleague  reluctantly  complied.  Both  of  them,  in  the  same
day,  exchanged  the  robe  of  empire  for  an  ordinary  dress,
Diocletian  at  Nicomedia,  Herculius  at  Milan,  soon  after  a
magnificent  triumph  which  they  celebrated  at  Rome  over
several  nations,  with  a  noble  succession  of  pictures.f  and  in

*  Adorari]  See  C.  Nep.  life  of  Conon,  c.  3.

t  Pompd  ferciUorvm  iUustri.]  Fercula  are  representations  of  cities,
rivers,  and  other  objects  in  the  conquered  countries,  carried  in  pro-
cession at  a  triumph,  in  imitation  of  Romulus,  who  carried  the  spoils
of  a  slain  enemy  nupcTisa  ferculo,  Liv.  i.  10. — Tztckucke.  Ferculfim,
was  a  kind  of  frame  in  which  anything  might  be  carried  or  suspended.


C. XXVIII.] ABRIDGMENT  OP  ROMAN  HISTORY.  627

which  the  wives,  sisters,  and  children  of  Narseus  were  led
before  their  chariots.  The  one  then  retired  to  Salonae,  and  the
other  into  Lucania.

XXVIII.  Diocletian  lived  to  an  old  age  in  a  private
station,  at  a  villa  which  is  not  far  from  SalonsB,  in  honourable
retirement,  exercising  extraordinary  philosophy,  inasmuch  as
he  alone  of  all  men,  since  the  foundation  of  the  Eoman
empire,  voluntarily  returned  from  so  high  a  dignity  to  the
condition  of  private  life,  and  to  an  equality  with  the  other
citizens.  That  happened  to  him,  therefore,  which  had
happened  to  no  one  since  men  were  created,  that,  though  he
died  in  a  private  condition,  he  was  enrolled  among  the  gods.


BOOK  X.

Division  of  the  empire  between  ConBtantios  and  GktleriuB,  Maximin
and  Severus  being  CeesarB,  I. — Constantine  made  emperor  in
Britain,  and  Mazentius,  son  of  Maximian,  at  Rome ;  Mazimian
attempts  to  regain  the  throne;  failure  of  Severus  against  Maz-
entius, II.— Subsequent  efforts  of  Mazimian;  his  death  and
character,  III. — Four  emperbrs  at  once,  Constantine,  Mazentius,
Licinius,  and  Maximin ;  Mazentius  overthrown  by  Constantine ;
death  of  Mazimin,  IV. — Licinius  defeated  by  Constantine,  who
becomes  sole  emperor,  and  makes  three  Csesars,  V.  VI. — Character
and  death  of  Constantine,  VII.  VIIL — He  is  succeeded  by  three
sons  and  a  nephew,  Constantine,  Constantius,  Constans,  and  Dal-
matius ;  Constantius  survives  them  all,  and  becomes  sole  emperor,
suppressing  Yeteranio  and  Nepotian,  IX.-XI. — Overthrow  and
death  of  Magnentius ;  Gkllus  made  Csesar,  XIL  —Deaths  of  GkJlus
and  Sylvanus,  XIIL---Julian  sent  to  Gaul  by  Constantius  with  the
authority  of  Caesar ;  his  successes,  XIV. — Julian  made  emperor ;
death  and  character  of  Constantius,  XY.— Julian's  ezpedition  to
the  east ;  his  death  and  character,  XYI. — Jovian  made  emperor  in
the  east ;  his  ill-fortune ;  he  cedes  a  portion  of  the  Roman  territory
ta.Sapor ;  his  death,  and  the  supposed  causes  of  it,  XVIL  XYIIL

I.  These  emperors,  then,  having  retired  from  the  govern-
ment of  the  state,  Constantius  and  Galerius  were  made
emperors ;  and  the  Eoman  world  was  divided  between  them
in  such  a  manner,  that  Constantius  had  Gaul,  Italy,  and
Africa ;  Galerius  lUyricum,  Asia,  and  the  East ;  two  Caesars
being  joined  with  them.  Constantius,  however,  content  with
the  dignity  of  emperor,  declined  the  care  of  governing  Africa


528  EUTEOPIUS.  [B.X.

He  was  an  excelleut  man,  of  extrenie  benevolence,  who  studied
to  increase  the  resources  of  the  provinces  and  of  private
persons,  cared  but  little  for  the  improvement  of  the  public
treasury,  and  used  to  say  that  *'  it  was  better  for  the  national
wealth  to  be  in  the  hands  of  individuals  than  to  be  laid  up  in
one  place  of  confinement.'*  So  moderate  was  the  furniture  of
his  house,  too,  that  if,  on  holidays,  he  had  to  entertain  a
greater  number  of  friends  than  ordinary,  his  dining-rooms  were
set  out  with  the  plate  of  private  persons,  borrowed  from  their
several  houses.  By  the  Gauls*  he  was  not  only  beloved
but  venerated,  especially  because,  under  his  government,  they
had  escaped  the  suspicious  prudence  of  Diocletian,  and  the
sanguinary  rashness  of  Maximian.  He  died  in  Britain,  at
York,  in  the  thirteenth  year  of  his  reign,  and  was  enrolled
among  the  gods.

II.  Galerius,  a  man  of  excellent  moral  character,  and  skil-
ful in  military  affairs,  finding  that  Italy,  by  Constantius  s
permission,  was  put  under  his  government,  created  two
Caesars,  Maximin,  whom  he  appointed  over  the  east,  and
Severus,  to  whom  he  committed  Italy.  He  himself  resided
in  lUyricum,  But  after  the  death  of  Constantius,  Constan-
TiNE,  his  son  by  a  wife  of  obscure  birth,  was  made  emperor  in
Britain,  and  succeeded  his  father  as  a  most  desirable  ruler.
In  the  meantime  the  praetorian  guards  at  Rome,  having  risen
in  insurrection,  declared  Maxentius,  the  son  of  Maximian
Herculius,  who  lived  in  the  VUla  Puhlica'f  not  far  from  the
city,  emperor.  At  the  news  of  this  proceeding,  Maximian,
filled  with  hopes  of  regaining  the  imperial  dignity,  which  he
had  not  willingly  resigned,  hurried  to  Rome  from  Lucania,
(wliich,  on  retiring  into  private  life,  he  had  chosen  for  his
place  of  residence,  spending  his  old  age  in  a  most  delightful
country),  and  stimulated  Diocletian  by  letters  to  resume  the
authority  that  he  had  laid  down,  letters  which  Diocletian
utterly  disregarded,  Severus  Caesar,  being  despatched  to
Home  by  Galerius  to  suppress  the  rising  of  the  guards  and
Maxentius,  arrived  there  with  his  army,  but,  as  he  was  laying
siege  to  the  city,  was  deserted  through  the  treachery  of  his
soldiers.

*  He  had  reserved  Qaul  for  his  own  peculiar  province. — Tz8(^tu:ke, »
t  A  building  in  the  Campus  Martius,  intended  chiefly  as  a  lodging-
house  or  hotel  for  ambassadors  from  foreign  nations.


OH.iU.]  ABRIDGMENT  OF  BOICAN  HISTORY.  529

III.  The  power  of  Maxentius  was  thus  increased,  and  his
government  established.  Severos,  taking  to  flight,  was  killed
at  Ravenna.  Maximian  Herculius,  attempting  afterwards,  in
an  assembly  of  the  army,  to  divest  his  son  Maxentius  of  his
power,  met  with  nothing  but  mutiny  and  reproaches  from  the
soldiery.  He  then  set  out  for  Gaul,  on  a  planned  stratagem,
as  if  he  had  been  driven  away  by  his  son,  that  he  might  join
his  son-in-law  Constantine,*  designing,  however,  if  he  could
find  an  opportunity,  to  cut  ofiT  Constantine,  who  was  ruling  in
Graui  with  great  approbation  both  of  the  soldiers  and  the
people  of  the  province,  having  overthrown  the  Franks  and
Alemanni  with  great  slaughter,  and  captured  their  kings,
Tdiom,  on  exhibiting  a  magnificent  show  of  games,  he  exposed
to  wild  beasts.  But  the  plot  being  made  known  by  Maxi-
mian's  daughter  Fausta,  who  communicated  the  design  to  her
husband,  Maximian  was  cut  off  at  Marseilles,  whence  he  was
preparing  to  sail  to  join  his  son,  and  died  a  well-deserved
death ;  for  he  was  a  man  inclined  to  every  kind  of  cruelty  and
severity,  faithless,  perverse,  and  utterly  void  of  consideration
for  others.

lY.  At  this  time  Liginius,  a  native  of  Dacia,  was  made
emperor  by  Galerius,  to  whom  he  was  known  by  old  compa-
nionship, and  recommended  by  his  vigorous  efforts  and  services
in  the  war  which  he  had  conducted  against  Narseus.  The  death
of  Gralerius  followed  immediately  afterwards.  The  empire  was
then  held  by  the  four  new  emperors,  Constantine  and  Maxen-
tius, sons  of  emperors,  Licinius  and  Maximian,  sons  of  undistin-
guished men.  Constantine,  however,  in  the  fifth  year  of  his
reign,  commenced  a  civil  war  with  Maxentius,  routed  his
forces  in  several  battles,  and  at  last  overthrew  Maxentius
himself  (when  he  was  spreading  death  among  the  nobility  by
every  possible  kind  of  cruelty, t)  at  the  Milvian  bridge,  and
made  himself  master  of  Italy.  Not  long  after,  too,  Maximin,
after  commencing  hostilities  against  Licinius  in  the  east,^anti-
cipated  the  destruction  that  was  falling  upon  him  by  an
accidental  death  at  Tarsus.

V.  Constantine,  being  a  man  of  great  energy,  bent  upon
effecting  whatever  he  had  settled  in  his  mind,  and  aspiring  to

*  Who  was  married  to  Maximian's  daughter  Fausta.
f  Adversus  nobiles  omnibus  exitiU  soBvientem,]  ''Raging  against  the
nobles  with  every  kind  of  destruction."

M  H


530  BT7T&OPI0S.  [book  X.

tbe  sovereignty  of  the  ^bole  world,  proceeded  to  make  war  on
Licinius,  although  he  had  formed  a  connexion  with  him  by
marriage,*  for  his  sister  Constantia  was  married  to  Lidnius.
And  first  of  all  he  overthrew  him,  by  a  sudden  attack,  at
Oibals  in  Pannonia,  where  he  was  making  vast  preparations
for  war ;  and  after  becoming  master  of  Dardania,  Msesia,  and
Macedonia,  took  possession  also  of  several  other  provinces.

VI.  There  were  then  various  contests  between  them,  and
peace  made  and  broken.  At  last  Licinius,  defeated  in  a  battle
at  Nicomedia  by  sea  and  land,  surrendered  himself,  and,  in
violation  of  an  oath  taken  by  Oonstantine,  was  put  to  death,
after  being  divested  of  the  purple,  at  Thessalonica.

'  At  this  time  the  Roman  empire  fell  under  tbe  sway  of  one
emperor  and  three  Caesars,  a  state  of  things  which  had  never
existed  before ;  the  sons  of  Oonstantine  ruling  over  Gaul,  the
east,  and  Italy.  But  the  pride  of  prosperity  caused  Oonstantine
greatly  to  depart  from  his  former  agreeable  mildness  of  temper.
Falling  first  upon  his  own  relatives,  he  put  to  death  his  son,
an  excellent  man ;  his  sister's  son,  a  youth  of  amiable  disposi-
tion ;  soon  afterwards  his  wife,  and  subsequently  many  of  his
friends.

VII.  He  was  a  man,  who,  in  the  beginning  of  his  reign,
might  have  been  compared  to  the  best  princes ;  in  the  latter
part  of  it,  only  to  those  of  a  middling  character.  Innumerable
good  qualities  of  mind  and  body  were  apparent  in  him ;  he
was  exceedingly  ambitious  of  military  glory,  and  had  great
success  in  his  wars ;  a  success,  however,  not  more  than  pro-
portioned to  his  exertions-  After  he  had  terminated  the  Civil
war,  he  also  overthrew  the  Goths  on  various  occasions,  granting
them  at  last  peace,  and  leaving  on  the  minds  of  the  barbarians
a  strong  remembrance  of  his  kindness.  He  was  attached  to
the  arts  of  peace  and  to  liberal  studies,  and  was  ambitious  of
honourable  popularity,  which  he,  indeed,  sought  by  every  kind
of  liberality  and  obligingness.  Though  he  was  slow,  from
suspicion,  to  serve  some  of  his  friendsjf  yet  he  was  exceedingly

*  Neceaaitudo  iUi  et  affinitas  cum  eo  esset."]  He  had  a  necessUvdo  or
relationship  with  him,  which  relationship  was  an  affinitas^  or  alliance
by  marriage.  Affinitaa  is  added,  as  Tzschucke  obsei-ves,  to  explun
necessiiudOf  which,  consequently,  might  very  well  be  omitted.

t  In  nonmUltbS  amicos  dtiMtis.]  I  have  translated  this  phrase  in
conformity  with  the  explanation  of  the  old  interpreter  in  lo.  Anti-
(?chemiB,  cited  by  Tzschucke  :  Trpog  Tivag  tCjv  yvwpifiuv  VTrovXutQ  re
K(ii  ovK  vyiutc  e^x**


CS.  Vni.]  ABRTDGMBNT  OF  ROMAN  HISTORY.  531

generous  towards  others,  neglecting  no  opportunity  to  add  to
their  riches  and  honours.

VIII.  He  enacted  many  laws,  some  good  and  equitable,
but  most  of  them  superfluous,  and  some  severe.  He  was  the
first  that  endeavoured  to  raise  the  city  named  after  him  *  to
such  a  height  as  to  m£ike  it  a  rival  to  Home.  As  he  was  pre-
paring for  war  against  the  Parthians,  who  were  then  disturbing
Mesopotamia,  he  died  in  the  VUla  Ptihlica.f  at  Nicomedia,  in
the  thirty-first  year  of  his  reign,  and  the  sixty -sixth  of  his
age.  His  death  was  foretold  by  a  star  with  a  tail,  which
shone  for  a  long  time,  of  extraordinary  size,  and  which  the
Greeks  call  a  xo/LTjrrjg.  He  was  deservedly  enrolled  among
the  gods.

IX.  He  left  for  his  successors  three  sons  and  one  nephew,
the  son  of  his  brother.  But  Dalmatius  C-esar,  a  man  of
happy  genius,  and  not  unlike  his  brother,  was  soon  after  cut
off  by  a  mutiny  among  the  soldiers,  Constantius,  his  cousin,
sanctioning  the  act,  rather  than  commanding  it.  The  ofiicers
of  Constans  also  put  to  death  Constantine,  when  he  was
making  war  upon  his  brother,  and  had  rashly  commenced  an
engagement  at  Aquileia.  Thus  the  government  was  left  in
the  hands  of  two  emperors.  The  rule  of  Constans  was  for
some  time  energetic  and  just,  but  afterwards,  falling  into  ill-
health,  and  being  swayed  by  ill-designing  friends,  he  indulged
in  great  vices ;  and,  becoming  intolerable  to  the  people  of  the
provinces,  and  unpopular  with  the  soldiery,  was  killed  by  a
party  headed  by  Magnentius.  He  died  not  far  from  the  borders
of  Spain,  in  a  fortress  named  Helena,  in  the  seventeenth  year
of  his  reign,  and  the  thirtieth  of  his  age ;  yet  not  till  he  had
performed  many  gallant  actions  in  the  field,  and  had  made
himself  feared  by  the  aimy  through  the  whole  course  of  his
life,  though  without  exercising  any  extraordinary  severity.

X.  The  fortune  of  Constantius  was  different;  for,  he  suf-
fered many  grievous  calamities  at  the  hands  of  the  Persians,
his  towns  being  often  taken,  his  walled  cities  besieged,  and
his  troops  cut  off.  Nor  had  he  a  single  successful  engagement
with  Sapor,  except  that,  at  Singara,  when  victoiy  might
certainly  have  been  his,  he  lost  it,  through  the  irrepressible
eagerness  of  his  men,  who,  contrary  to  the  practice  of  war,

*  Constantinople.

t  A  building  similar  to  the  one  at  Rome  mentioned  in  c.  2.

M  M  2


632  EUTEOPIUS.  [book  X.

mutinously  and  foolishly  called  for  battle  when  the  day  was
declining.  After  the  death  of  Constans,  when  Magnentius
held  the  government  of  Italy,  Africa,  and  Gaul,  lUyricum
also  felt  some  new  commotions,  Vetranio  being  elected  to
the  throne  by  a  combination  of  the  soldiery,  whom  they  made
emperor  when  he  was  very  old  and  universally  popular  from
the  length  and  success  of  his  service  in  the  field ;  an  upright
man,  of  morality  severe  as  that  of  the  ancients,  and  of  an  agree-
able unassumingness  of  manner,  but  so  ignorant  of  all  polite
learning,  that  he  did  not  even  acquire  the  first  rudiments  of
literature  until  be  was  old  and  had  become  emperor.

XI.  Bat  the  imperial  authority  was  snatched  from  Vetranio
by  Constantius,  who  stirred  up  a  civil  war  to  avenge  his
brother's  death ;  Vetranio  being  compelled,  with  the  consent
of  the  soldiers,  and,  by  a  new  and  extraordinaiy  proceeding,  to
divest  himself  of  the  purple.  There  was  at  the  same  time  an
insurrection  at  Rome,  Nepotianus,  a  son  of  Constantino's
sister,  endeavouring  to  secure  the  throne  with  the  aid  of  a
body  of  gladiators ;  but  he  met  with  an  end  such  as  his  savage
attempts  merited,  for  he  was  cut  off  on  the  twenty-eighth
day  of  his  usurpation  by  the  officers  of  Magnentius,  and  paid
the  penalty  of  his  rashness.  His  head  was  carried  through
the  city  on  a  lance ;  and  dreadful  proscriptions  and  massacres
of  the  nobility  ensued.

XII.  Not  long  afterwards  Magnentius  was  overthrown  in  a
battle  at  Mursa,*  and  nearly  taken  prisoner.  Vast  forces  of
the  Roman  empire  were  cut  off  in  that  struggle,  sufficient  for
any  foreign  ware,  and  for  procuring  many  triumphs,  and  a
lasting  peace.  Soon  after,  Gallus,  his  uncle's  son,  was
appointed  by  Constantius,  as  Caesar,  over  the  east;  and
Magnentius,  being  defeated  in  several  battles,  put  an  end  to  his
life  at  Lyons,  in  the  third  year  and  seventh  month  of  his  reign,
as  did  also  his  brother  at  Sens,t  whom  he  had  sent  as  Caesar
to  defend  Gaul.

XIII.  About  this  time  the  Caesar  Gallus,  after  committing
many  tyrannical  acts,  was  put  to  death  by  Constantius.
Gallus  was  a  man  naturally  cruel,  and  too  much  inclined  to
tyranny,  if  he  could but  have  reigned in  his  own  right.

•  See  ix.  8.

f  Senonis.]  The  ablative  case  of  Senoni,  orumf  pi'eviously  called
Agendicum,  now  Sens,


CH.  XVL]  abridgment  of  ROMAN  HISTORY.  533

Silvanus  also,  who  attempted  an  insurrectioii  in  Graul,  was  cut
off  before  the  end  of  thirty  days;  and  Constantius  then
remained  sole  ruler  and  emperor  over  the  Boman  dominions.

XIV.  He  then  sent  into  Gaul,  with  the  authority  of  Caesar,
his  cousin  Julian,  the  brother  of  Gallus,  giving  him  his  sister
in  marriage,  at  a  time  when  the  barbarians  had  stormed  many
towns  and  were  besieging  others,  when  there  was  every  where
direful  devastation,  and  when  the  Boman  empire  was  tottering
in  evident  distress.  But  by  Julian,  with  but  a  moderate  force,
vast  numbers  of  the  Alemanni  were  cut  off  at  Strasburg,  a  city
of  Gaul;  their  distinguished  king  was  taken  prisoner,  and
Gaul  recovered.  Many  other  honourable  achievements,  too,
were  afterwards  performed  by  Julian  against  the  barbarians,
the  Germans  being  driven  beyond  the  Bhine,  and  the  Boman
empire  extended  to  its  former  limits.

XV.  Not  long  after,  when  the  German  armies  were  with-
drawing from  the  defence  of  Gaul,  Julian  was  made  emperor  by
the  unanimous  consent  of  the  army,  and,  after  the  lapse  of  a
year,  went  to  take  the  government  of  lUyricum,  while  Con-
stantius was  engaged  in  the  war  with  Parthia.  Constantius,
hearing  what  had  occurred,  and  returning  to  the  civil  strife,
died  on  his  march  between  Cilicia  and  Cappadocia,  in  the
thirty-eighth  year  of  his  reign,  and  the  forty-fifth  of  his  age,
and  was  deservedly  enrolled  among  the  gods.  He  was  a  man
of  a  remarkably  tranquil  disposition,  good-natured,  trusting  too
much  to  his  friends  and  courtiers,  and  at  last  too  much  in  the
power  of  his  wives.  He  conducted  himself  with  great  mode-
ration in  the  commencement  of  his  reign;  he  enriched  his
friends,  and  suffered  none,  whose  active  services  he  had
experienced,  to  go  unrewarded.  He  was  however  somewhat
inclined  to  severity,  whenever  any  suspicion  of  an  attempt  on
the  government  was  excited  in  him  ;  otherwise  he  was  gentle.
His  fortune  is  more  to  be  praised  in  civil  than  in  foreign
wars.

XVI.  Julian  then  became  sole  emperor,  and  made  war,
with  a  vast  force,  upon  the  Parthians ;  in  which  expedition  I  was
also  present.  Several  towns  and  fortresses  of  the  Persians  he
induced  to  surrender,  or  took  them  by  storm ;  and,  having  laid
waste  Assyria,  fixed  his  camp  for  some  time  at  Ctesiphon.
As  he  was  returning  victorious,  and  mingling  rashly  in  the
thick  of  a  battle,  he  was  killed  by  the  hand  of  an  enemy,  on


534  EUTBOPIUS.  [book  X.

the  Q6th  of  Jiine,  in  the  seventh  year  of  his  reign,  and
the  thirty-second  of  his  age,  and  was  enrolled  among  the  gods.
He  was  a  remarkahle  man,  and  one  that  would  have  governed
the  empire  with  honour,  if  he  had  but  been  permitted  by  the
fates.  He  was  eminently  accomplished  in  liberal  branches  of
knowledge,  but  better  read  in  the  literature  of  the  Greeks,  so
much  so  indeed  that  his  Latin  was  by  no  means  comparable  to
his  Greek  learning.  He  was  possessed  of  great  and  ready
eloquence,  and  of  a  most  tenacious  memory.  In  some  respects
he  was  more  like  a  philosopher  than  a  prince.  Towards  his
friends  he  was  liberal,  yet  less  discriminating  as  to  the  objects
of  his  generosity  than  became  so  great  an  emperor ;  for  .there
were  some  of  them  that  cast  a  stain  on  his  gloiy.  To  the
people  of  the  provinces  he  was  most  just,  and  remitted  the
taxes  on  them  as  far  as  was  possible.  He  was  indulgent
towards  all  men ;  he  felt  no  great  anxiety  about  the  public
treasury ;  but  of  glory  he  was  a  great  lover,  and  manifested
even  an  intemperate  desire  for  the  attainment  of  it.  He  was
a  persecutor  of  the  Christian  religion,  yet  so  that  he  abstained
from  shedding  blood.  He  was  not  unlike  Marcus  Antoninus,
whom  he  even  studied  to  rival.

XVII.  After  him  Jovian,  who  attended  him  in  the  expe-
dition as  one  of  his  body-guard,  was  chosen  by  the  suffrages
of  the  soldiers  to  fill  the  throne  ;  a  man  better  known  to  the
army  by  the  fame  of  his  father  than  by  his  own.  As  affairs
were  now  in  confusion,  and  the  army  distressed  for  want  of
provisions,  Jovian,  after  being  defeated  in  one  or  two  battles
by  the  Persians,  made  peace  with  Sapor,  a  peace  which  was
necessary  indeed,  but  ignominious,  for  he  was  obliged  to  contract
his  boundaries,  a  portion  of  the  Eoman  dominions  being
ceded  to  the  enemy ;  a'  disgrace  which  had  never  occurred,
before  his  time,  since  the  Koman  empire  had  been  founded,
during  a  space  of  one  thousand  one  hundred  and  eighteen
years.  And  though  our  legions  were  made  to  pass  under  the
yoke,  both  at  Caudium  by  Pontus  Telesinus,*  at  Numantia
m  Spain,  and  in  Numidia,  yet  no  part  of  the  Roman  territory
was  given  up  on  any  of  those  occasions.  Such  terms  would
not  have been altogether reprehensible, if he  had been

*  This  Pontius  is  not  generally  called  Telesinus ;  the  other  Pontius,
who  was  distinguished  as  leader  of  the  Samnites  in  the  Social  war,  had
that  name. See  Florus,  iii  18.


CH.  XVIII.] ABRIDGMENT  OP  ROMAN  HISTORY.  635

resolved,  when  it  should  be  in  his  power,  to  throw  off  the
obligation  of  the  treaty,  as  was  done  by  the  Romans  in  all  the
wars  that  I  have  mentioned ;  for  war  was  immediately  after
made  upon  the  Samnites,  Numantines,  and  Numidians,  and  the
peace  was  never  ratified.  But  being  in  dread,  as  long  as  he
remained  in  the  east,  of  a  rival  for  the  imperial  dignity,  he
thought  too  little  of  his  glory.  After  marching  from  thence,
accordingly,  and  directing  his  course  towards  Illyricum,  he
died  suddenly  on  the  borders  of  Galatia.  Be  >yas  a  man,  in
other  parts  of  his  conduct,  deficient  neither  in  energy  nor
understanding,

XVIII.  Many  think  that  he  was  carried  off  by  a  violent  fit
of  indigestion,  for  he  had  indulged  in  delicacies  at  supper ;
others  suppose  that  he  died  of  the  odour  of  his  chamber,  which,
from  a  recent  plastering  of  lime,  was  dangerous  to  such  as
slept  in  it ;  others  imagine  that  he  fell  a  victim  to  the  over-
powering effects  of  charcoal,  which  he  had  ordered  to  be  burnt
in  great  abundance  on  account  of  the  extreme  cold.  He  died
in  the  seventh  month  of  his  reign,  on  the  18th  of  April,
in  the  thirty-third  year  of  his  age,*  and,  by  the  kindness  of
the  emperors  that  succeeded  him,  was  enrolled  among  the
gods ;  for  he  was  inclined  to  equity,  and  liberal  by  nature.

Such  was  the  state  of  the  Roman  empire  in  the  consulship  of
the  Emperor  Jovian  and  Varronianus,  in  the  year  one  thousand
one  hundred  and  nineteen  from  the  foundation  of  the  city.
But  as  we  have  now  come  to  illustrious  and  venerable  princes,
we  stiall  here  fix  a  limit  to  the  present  part  of  our  work  ;  for
the  things  that  remain  must  be  told  in  a  more  elevated  style  ;
and  we  do  not,  for  the  present,  so  m^ch  omit  them,  as
reserve  them  for  higher  efforts  in  writing.

*  The  words  wt  gui  ^hmm/um  mmimumque  trad/wnt,  which  occur
here,  are  not  translated. See  note  on  1.  1.
