Tibet's Great Yogi Milarepa (W.Y. Evans-Wentz, 1928)
==========================================================
Evans-Wentz's 1928 life of Milarepa — the beloved Tibetan yogi-saint's biography, the book that introduced Tibetan Buddhism's saints to the West. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

TIBETS GREAT YOU


i
A. Biography from the Tibetan -


Edited by WY. Evans-Wentz oe


TIBET’s GREAT Yoci, MILAREPA


A Biography from the Tibetan


EDITED BY W. Y. EVANS-WENTZ
Second Edition


With the reissue of this unusual biog-
raphy of a great Tibetan religious leader
who lived more than 800 years ago, all
four volumes of the late Dr. Evans-
Wentz’s noted Tibetan series become
available.


Despite the many sectarian differences
between the numerous sects of Tibetan
Buddhism, they all unite in holding the
Great Yogi Milarepa in the highest rever-
ence and esteem, and consider him the
prototype of everything that a great saint
should be. In Milarepa’s life, the teach-
ings of all the great yogis of India, includ-
ing the greatest of them known to history,
Gautama the Buddha, are exemplified.
Remarkable parallels, too,may be drawn
between Milarepa’s teachings and those
given the world by another Great Master
of Life in the Sermon on the Mount. And
in his preface to the second edition of
this work, which appeared in 1958, the
editor points also to similarities between
the life and teachings of Milarepa and
the greatest of modern India’s spiritual
leaders, Mahatma Gandhi. In making
this translation from the original Tibetan,
the late Lama Kazi Dawa-Samdup, who
was Dr. Evans-Wentz’s Tibetan guru for
many years, wished to show to cultured
Western eyes “one of our great teachers,
as he actually lived, in a biography of
him, much of which is couched in the
words of his own mouth, and the re-


DATE DUE


ear be hs Ft y sf

(BSS. 3 ee rea
— RT 5 !

es | ET. : iv


BLL473
M54R313


RIVERSIDE CITY COLLEGE
LIBRARY


Riverside, California


TIBET’S GREAT YoG/
MILAREPA


THE GREAT KARGYUTPA GURUS


Described on pages xxiii-xxvi


TIBET’S GREAT YOGI
MILAREPA


A BIOGRAPHY FROM THE TIBETAN
being the


FETS UN-KAHBUM
OR BIOGRAPHICAL HISTORY OF JETSUN-
MILAREPA, ACCORDING TO THE LATE
LAMA KAZI DAWA-SAMDUP’S ENGLISH
RENDERING


Edited with Introduction and Annotations
by
W. Y. EVANS-WENTZ
M.A., D.LITT., B.SC.
Jesus College, Oxford ; Author of
The Fairy-Faith in Celtic Countries


The Tibetan Book of the Dead
&e.


SECOND EDITION


OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
New York


Riverside Community College
Library


17958.M557 G13 1971
itsan-smyon He-ru-ka,
452-1507.

fTibet’s great yogi Milarepa
: a biography from the
Tibetan, being the
Jetsun-Kahbum or


First published by Oxford University Press, London, 1928
Second edition, 1951


Printed in the United States of America
This reprint, 1971


The Editor here gratefully acknowledges indebtedness to Mr. E. T. Sturdy, trans-
lator of The Narada Sutra, for having encouraged and supported the publication
of this, the second, edition of Tibet’s Great Yogi Milarepa.


I DEDICATE THIS BIOGRAPHY OF MILAREPA
TO THOSE WHO CLING NOT TO BELIEF
BASED UPON BOOKS AND TRADITION
BUT WHO SEEK KNOWLEDGE
BY REALIZATION


THE YOG/'S CAR OF VICTORY


‘Whoso the Faith and Wisdom hath attained—
His state of mind, well-harnessed, Jeads him on ;
Conscience the pole, and Mind the yoke thereof,
And Heedfulness the watchful charioteer :

The furnishments of Righteousness, the Car;
Rapture the axle, Energy the wheels;

And Calm, yoke-fellow of the Balanced Mind;
Desirelessness the drapery thereof.

Goodwill and Harmlessness his weapons are,
Together with Detachment of the mind.
Endurance is the armour of the Norm,

And to attain the Peace that Car rolls on.

Tis built by self, by one’s own self becometh—

This Chariot, incomparable, supreme ;

Seated therein the Sages leave the world,
And verily they win the Victory.’
The Buddha, from the Samyuita Nikaya, v, p. 6.


(F. L. Woodward's Translation.)


PREDACE.[O tHE SECOND EDITION


THE PATH TO SIMPLICITY AND FREEDOM


‘To have but few desires and satisfaction with simple things is the
sign of a superior man.’—Precepts of the Gurus.


IT is the same oft-repeated and age-old call from the Super-
men, throughout the millenniums, heard by Thoreau and
Emerson and Whitman in America, to simple living and high
endeavour, which this book transmits, from Tibet, the Land of
the Snowy Ranges, to the peoples of the Occident, who have
extolled and much preferred, but, of late, not without many
disconcerting misgivings, their complex, industrialized way of
life.

Whilst The Tibetan Book of the Dead, the first volume of our
Oxford Tibetan Series, sets forth the art of knowing how
rightly to die and to choose a womb wherefrom to be reborn,
this, the second volume of the Series, sets forth the art of
mastering life and directing it to the all-transcendent goal of
liberation from conditioned existence.

Inasmuch as living and dying and being reborn are held to
be inseparable parts of a universal life-process by the followers
of the Buddha, and by the devotees of many other Faiths, the
first volumeof the Series is complementary tothe second volume,
although a separate and distinct yogzc treatise in itself.

The first edition of this Biography of Milarepa, the illustri-
ous Buddhist saint of Tibet, led to the writing of many letters
of appreciation to the Editor, not only by laymen and mem-
bers of the Sangha, of both Northern and Southern Buddhism,
but also by Hindus and Christians, Catholic and Protestant
alike. And now the Editor hereby thanks each of the writers
of the letters for their words of appreciation and encourage-
ment. Each of these correspondents recognized in Milarepa
those universal characteristics of saintliness to which no religion


1Cf. W. Y. Evans-Wentz, 7tbetan Yoga and Secret Doctrines (Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 1935), p- 80.


viii PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION


can, rightly, make exclusive claim, but which are common to
the saints of all religions. Accordingly, Milarepa may be re-
garded as being one more light-bearer helping to disperse that
darkness of Ignorance of which the Enlightened One spoke as
enshrouding the world; and, as has been said of Abraham
Lincoln, that he no longer belongs to his native land alone but
to all lands, so it may be said of Jetsiin Milarepa.

In Milarepa’s Biography it is shown that the yogzc path to
Supramundaneness is transcendent over intellectually shaped
formulas appertaining to salvation, and that it is ever open to
all of human kind, irrespective of religious affiliation. In Mila-
repa’s view, none of the world’s methods of intellectual deve-
lopment are essential to the attainment of Wisdom; Right
Knowledge was, for him, not to be won by study of books, nor
by making professions of faith. Many of the most learned and
cultured saints of Tibet and India have been illiterate, as will
be seen by reference to the forthcoming and fourth volume of
the Oxford Tibetan Series, to be entitled The Tibetan Book of
the Great Liberation. Of these things Milarepa bore witness as
follows :—

* Accustomed long to meditating on the Whispered Chosen Truths,
I have forgot all that is said in written and in printed books.


‘Accustomed long to application of each new experience to mine
own growth spiritual,
I have forgot all creeds and dogmas.


‘Accustomed long to know the meaning of the Wordless,
I have forgot the way to trace the roots of verbs, and source of
words and phrases.’!


It is by self-disciplining of the mind, after the manner of
disciplining a wild horse, and making the mind immune to the
obsessing and yogically undesirable influences emanating from
the illusory phantasmagoria of the world, that Milarepa would
have us seek release from our present state of bondage to the
world. And hereof he sings, in his song about the Horse of
Mind, how the undisciplined mind is to be caught with the Lasso
of Singleness of Purpose, tied to the Pole of Meditation, fed


1 Cf. pages 246-7 of this volume.


PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION ix


with the Guru's Teachings, and watered from the Stream of
Consciousness. The Horse of Mind is ridden by the Youth of
Intellect, along the widespread Plain of Happiness, and carried
on to Buddhahood.

As the chemist experiments with the elements of matter,
Milarepa experimented with the elements of consciousness ; and
no other disciple has put to the test of practical application
more efficiently than Milarepa did the precepts of his Great
Teacher, the Buddha. Because of the successful outcome of
Milarepa’s practice of Buddhism, Milarepa is venerated not
only by Buddhists of all Schools in his native Tibet and in
countries of Asia adjacent to Tibet, who consider him to be a
Fully Enlightened One, but, more especially since the publica-
tion of his Biography in the Occident, by an ever-increasing
number of truth-seekers throughout all the continents.

Buddhists themselves, even of Milarepa’s School, recognize,
as we must, that Milarepa’s path, being a short-cut to transcen-
dence over the limitations of human existence, will be trodden
only by the very exceptional devotee, whose evolutionary
growth is adequate to the mighty effort to reach the goal far
in advance of slowly evolving humanity as a whole. Though
very few may have the spiritual fitness and physical hardihood,
and the willingness, to emulate Milarepa, his discovery that the
goal is not a mirage, but is attainable, is of paramount impor-
tance to the least of mankind; for, in the view of Milarepa’s de-
votees, there will be found in Milarepa’s Biography the necessary
courage to prepare for the first steps upon the path, no matter
how long and arduous the path may prove to be, nor how many
lifetimes may be required to attain the goal, which Milarepa
attained in one lifetime because of his superior preparedness.

However Milarepa, the Saint, be viewed, in this age of tech-
nology and utilitarianism, whether with veneration by the few,
or with critical indifference by the many, it is anthropologically
requisite to recognize, as our eminent Oxford historian, Professor
Arnold J. Toynbee, does, that those of our human kind who
have done the most to ameliorate the life of man on Earth
have not been the scientists, with all their wonderful and
laudable discoveries, nor the inventors or technicians, nor the


x PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION


leaders of industrialism, nor the captains and the kings and the
statesmen, but the prophets and saints :—


‘Now who are the individuals who are the greatest benefactors of
the living generation of mankind? I should say: Confucius and
Lao-tse; the Buddha ; the Prophets of Israel and Judah; Zoroaster ;
Jesus, and Muhammad ; and Socrates.’ *


These were the rare fruitage of civilizations extending from
the Pacific to the Mediterranean. In these very few individuals,
the wisdom of all the known civilizations of the past culminates.
In them is the crowning and glorious summation of the manifold
evolutionary strivings of the innumerable generations of man-
kind who have lived upon our planet throughout the millen-
niums of the great cultures of China, of India, of Persia, of Syria
and Egypt, of Arabia, and of Europe as represented by Greece.
Truly it is that


‘The works of artists and men of letters outlive the deeds of
business men, soldiers and statesmen. The poets and philosophers
outrange the historians ; while the prophets and saints overtop and
outlast them all.’ ?

Much more to the Occident than to the Orient (where
simplicity, and the self-sufficiency of the village community
still largely prevail), the Biography of Milarepa will reveal,
perhaps rather startlingly, a method of living other than that
of attachment to the things that pass away. To Milarepa, as
to many other of the Sages of Asia, self-conquest is better
than world-conquest, and renunciation of the world better
than accumulation of all the riches of the world.

The worldly possessions which Mahatma Gandhi left behind
him are quite comparable in kind and intrinsic value to those
left behind by Milarepa. They consisted chiefly of a wooden
staff,two pair of sandals, an old-style watch, a small low writing-
stand, used while one is sitting on the floor, with an inkpot,
a pen and some writing paper thereon, a pair of old-fashioned
spectacles, a mat to sit upon in prayer or meditation, a few
religious books, including the Bhagavad- Gita, two food-bowls,

' Cf. Arnold J. Toynbee, Civilization on Trial (Oxford University Press,


New York, 1948), p. 156.
2 Cf. tbed., p.5.


PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION xi


two spoons, and a few pieces of homespun cotton cloth, used
to cover his nakedness. Milarepa’s chief worldly goods were
a bamboo staff, a robe and a mantle, also of homespun cotton
cloth, a wooden bowl, a cup made of a human skull from a
place of the dead, a flint and steel for producing fire, and a
bone spoon.

Though frail physically, as a result of age and self-sacrifice,
Gandhi, the Saint, moved, as no armies and armadas of the sea
and air could have moved, the mighty and materially supreme
world-encircling British Empire. In similar manner, when a
delegation of high officials of government waited upon Mila-
repa to invite him to the presence of a Nepalese king, Mila-
repa, in refusing the royal summons, challenged the assumed
supremacy of the monarch, and boldly asserted that he himselt
was a mighty king, abounding in riches, and unsurpassed in
greatness and power in all the kingdoms of the world.

When Gandhi had atidience with the King-Emperor, in
Buckingham Palace, it was not in the formal dress, decreed,
as Milarepa teaches, by ‘ignorant conventionalities’, but in
the simple homespun loin-cloth garb of white cotton, such as
is worn by the Hindu peasant, that Gandhi presented himself
before his Sovereign in the resplendent palace. When Gandhi
was asked if his scanty attire had proved to be sufficient for
the occasion, he replied: ‘The King had enough on for both
of us.’

To one endowed with yogic powers such as those attained
by Milarepa, which included the yogic power of bodily flight
through the air, no need is there of motor-cars or aeroplanes
or any other of the mechanical means of human transportation ;
and, correlatively, no need would there be for an industrialized
society which fetters men to toil in coal-mines and iron-
foundries and mass-production factories. Gandhi, too, strug-
gled against industrialization, although more or less unsuccess-
fully, in his own India, and considered industrialization to be
an avoidable and unnecessary evil, not because, as Milarepa’s
life suggests, that by means of yoga industrialism can be made
obsolete, but because industrialism destroys the arts and crafts
normally afflorescent in the simple and comparatively happy


xii PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION


life of a peasant village community, and, thereby, impedes the
manifestation of the Beautiful, which is innate in each one of
mankind. For Gandhi, the peasant village communities, which
in India, as in China, have been, during thousands of years, the
centres of indigenous culture, flourishing independently of
mass-production methods, represent the most satisfactory and
economically stable form of human society. And this natur-
ally simple and materially efficient form of social organization,
being contributory and conducive to the Higher Culture, is
more in keeping with Milarepa’s teachings than is industrialism.

Milarepa was enabled to sustain life, although not without
suffering, to which he was yogically indifferent, amidst the
arctic-like climate of the high Himalayas, on simple and meagre
food, in virtue of indomitable control of his physical body,
and, not infrequently, with no other bodily sustenance than that
derived, by an osmosis-like process, from air and water and sun-
shine, similar to the process whereby a plant produces chloro-
phyll.In his cave there was no central or other heating save that
born of the yogic practice of Zummo within his own fleshly
dwelling-house. The many and incessantly increasing products
of a technological industrialism, which occidental man believes —
to be unquestionably necessary, and for which he willingly
barters his bodily energy, and, commonly, his health and length
of days, and the greater part of his brief time on Earth, would
be, for Milarepa, as for the Buddha, merely so many impedi-
ments to Right Living. For the purpose of life in a human
body is, as Milarepa teaches, not to wallow in the mire of ease
and comfortableness, which create attachment to the world,
but to evolve beyond worldly existence, however luxurious
and comfortable and mundanely happy worldly existence may
be made by the discoveries of Western science.

In his own day, Milarepa looked forth from his Himalayan
cave with pity and compassion upon the manner of living of
men enamoured of the luxuries and comforts which, in full
measure, the world can give. And he saw, as in the song about
the Five Comforts he teaches, that when desire for comfort,
common to man and beast, has been transcended, and Freedom
has been won, ‘Nought is there uncomfortable; everything is


PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION xiii


comfortable’. And he requests that those uninspired by the
ascetic life spare him their misplaced pity. Of comfortableness
in monasteries, he sang:—


‘ Accustomed long to regard my fleshly body as my hermitage,
I have forgot the ease and comfort of retreats in monasteries.’ !


With still greater pity and compassion would Milarepa be-
hold the manner in which mankind now live amidst the multi-
tudinous contrivances which in Europe and the Americas are
considered to be indispensable, even by many monks who teach
of the good life. For him, it is not exploitation and physical
conquest of the world by science which really matters, but the
conquest of the self and the breaking of every fetter that binds
men to the treadmill of incarnate existence. To Milarepa, as
to all saints of every religion, in all civilizations and epochs of
human history, wantlessness and complete renunciation of the
worldly way of living rather than all-consuming desire for, and
acquisition of, the perishable things of the world, lead to the
attainment of a standard of living which is the highest realiz-
able on this planet.

Milarepa perceived early in life, as most men do when too
late, that


‘All worldly pursuits have but the one unavoidable and inevitable
end, which is sorrow: acquisitions end in dispersion ; buildings, in
destruction ; meetings, in separation ; births, in death. Knowing this,
one should, from the very first, renounce acquisition and heaping-up,
and building, and meeting ; and, faithful to the commands of <n
eminent guru, set about realizing the Truth [which hath no birth or
death]. That alone is the best science.’?


And, when approaching his Vzrvana, Milarepa further coun-
selled his disciples, thus:—


‘Life is short, and the time of death is uncertain; so apply
yourselves to meditation, Avoid doing evil, and acquire merit, to
the best of your ability, even at the cost of life itself. In short, the
whole purport may be stated thus: Act so that ye have no cause to
be ashamed of yourselves ; and hold fast to this rule. If ye do thus,
ye can be sure of never disobeying the commands of the Supreme


1,2 Cf, pages 247 and 259 of this volume.


xiv PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION


Buddhas, notwithstanding any conflicting rules which may be found
set down in writing.’?


Milarepa’s rules for Right Living are, therefore, in essentials,
the same as those enunciated by saints of all epochs, in ancient
China, or India, or Babylonia, or Egypt, or Rome, or in our
own epoch. It is only those very few individuals in any age
or nation who, in virtue of having had the evolutionary fitness,
and the willingness, to apply the rules and become in at-one-
ness with the Brotherhood of Compassion and Peace, have
aided in the transmission of the Torch of Wisdom from one
generation to another.

So may it come to pass, in accordance with the words which
Rechung, the faithful disciple of Milarepa, inscribed in the
colophon of the original Tibetan version of Milarepa’s Bzo-
graphy, that by the mere hearing, or thinking, or touching of
Milarepa’s Biography the devotee shall be spiritually aided,
and that


‘Through one’s study and practice of this Biography, the Dynasty of
Gurus will be fully satisfied.’ ?


The Tibetan Guru Phadampa Sangay, who seems to have
flourished contemporaneously with Milarepa, and whose testa-
mentary teachings will be published in the forthcoming fourth
volume of this Series, The Tibetan Book of the Great Liberation,
admonished his disciples and the people of the village of Tingri,
Tibet, in the following words, which, being personally applic-
able by each reader of this volume, are here presented as a
fitting ending of this Preface:—

‘ Like the sunshine from a clear space twixt the clouds the Dharma
is:
Know that now there is such sunshine ; wisely use it, Tingri folk.’


1,2 Cf. pages 262 and 309 of this volume.
W. Y. E.-W.


San DiEGo, CALIFORNIA
All Saints Day, 1950


PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION


IN my Introduction and Annotations to the present work,
asin those to The Tibetan Book of the Dead, 1 am attempting
to convey to the Western World, and so place on record, certain
aspects of Higher or Transcendental Mahayanic Teachings,
which have been handed on to me for that purpose by the
Translator, the late Lama Kazi Dawa-Samdup, my Tibetan
Guru. For such defects as critics may discover in my trans-
mission—and I cannot hope to have escaped all error—I alone
assume full responsibility.

Apart from the greater debt which I as the pupil owe to him
who was my preceptor, I acknowledge indebtedness to those
Himalayan and Indian Yogis (who prefer that their names be
left unmentioned) from whom I had the good fortune, during
my wanderings as a research student in India, to gather, at
first hand, authoritative information concerning the same
ancient ideals of Asceticism and World Renunciation which
Milarepa, faithful to his Chief Guru, Gautama the Buddha,
has so eloquently expounded in this his Biography. These,
happily, still find numerous adherents among Hindus, Bud-
dhists, Jains, Taoists, Islamic Sufis, and even native Christians
throughout Asia.

Among my teachers in the Occident, I am also greatly
indebted to Dr. R. R. Marett, Reader in Social Anthropology
in the University of Oxford, and Fellow of Exeter College,
particularly for the inspiring encouragement with which he
has favoured me in my rather unusual field of anthropological
research, ever since I first came up to Oxford in the year 1907.

To Major W. L. Campbell, C.IE., I.A. (retired), late
Political Officer representing the British Government in Tibet,


Xvi PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION


Bhutan, and Sikkim, who assisted the Translator in perfecting
the translation of the Biography, all readers of this book, as
well as the Editor, are much indebted. To Monsieur Jacques
Bacot I am under a special obligation for assistance with
the transliterations and renderings of Tibetan proper names
contained herein, and for the guidance afforded by his
interesting and well-illustrated French translation of the
Fetsiin-Kahbum, entitled Le Poete Tibétain Milarépa (Paris,
1925). Iam also his debtor for information contained in two
lengthy letters from him, concerning versions and variants
of the text.

To Dr. F. W. Thomas, Boden Professor of Sanskrit in the
University of Oxford, I am indebted for some suggestions as
to spellings and transliterations of Oriental words; and to
Mr. E. T. Sturdy, translator of the Wavada Sitra, who read
the final proofs of the Bzography, I acknowledge a like debt.

To my friend in Oxford, Mr. E. S. Bouchier, M.A. (Oxon.),
F.R.Hist.S., author of Syria as a Roman Province, A Short
History of Antioch, &c., 1 am exceedingly grateful for aid
which he has rendered in reading through and criticizing
my version of the translation both when in manuscript and in
proof, and for thus facilitating its publication at a time when I
found it necessary to leave England and return to my duties
in India.

I am, likewise, indebted to Sj. Atal Bihari Ghosh, of Cal-
cutta, Joint Honorary Secretary with Sir John Woodroffe of
the Agamanusandhana Samiti, for having critically examined
the book in the light of Indian thought, especially Brahmanism
and Tantricism, as also to Mr. Sri Nissanka, of Colombo,
Ceylon, for similar assistance, chiefly with respect to Southern
Buddhism ; and for the annotations which each has added.

It is the Editor’s ardent hope that this book, too, will serve
in its own small way to help the peoples of Europe and


PREFACE. TO THE FIRST ‘EDITION XVii


America to realize that the peoples of the Orient are moved
by impulses common to all humanity, and hold fast to
religious ideals, in essence, the same as their own; that, anthro-
pologically, the human race is One Family, that external dif-
ferences due to hereditary racial characteristics, pigmentation,
and physical environment are, in fact, purely superficial. Too
long has the old barrier-wall, set up in Dark Ages, and built
of prejudice and misunderstanding arising from lack of
scientific knowledge, been allowed to stand. When, at last,
Science shall have demolished it, then will the hour come for
the leaders of the races and nations to work not merely for the
Federation of the World, but for the Federation of the Truth
that exists in all Religions.

I can end this Preface in no more fitting manner than by
quoting the Translator’s own words:

‘ That this translation of the life-history of Milarepa might
contribute a little to help to make him as well known and
esteemed in other lands as he is already in his own was the
one wish which impelled me as I worked at my task, and
remains my ardent prayer as I lay down my pen.’

W. Y. E.-W.


Jesus CotLece, Oxrorp,
June at, 1928.


MILAREPA


‘I am Milarepa, great in fame,
The direct offspring of Memory and Wisdom;
Yet an old man am I, forlorn and naked.
From my lips springeth forth a little song,
For all Nature, at which I look,
Serveth me for a book.
The iron staff, that my hands hold,
Guideth me over the Ocean of Changing Life.
Master am I of Mind and Light ;
And, in showing feats and miracles,
Depend not on earthly deities.’

Milarepa, from the Gur-Bum

(after G. Sandberg’s Translation).


TABLE*TOr CONTENTS


PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION . Pee Vil
PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION . 2) gue ve EV
DESCRIPTION. OF ILLUSTRATIONS wc gar sopg ye es KEI
INTRODUCTION 3 “gibi: gem ewincs Bah, ihe nam 4
I. The Importance of the Josde Raton I
II. Historical Value of the Narrative 2
III. Tibetan Schools of Buddhist Philosophy eAtig
IV. The Kargyitpa Apostolic Succession. . . . . 6
V. The Modern Successors of Milarepa : : “68
VI. Kargyitpas Compared with Christian Gnostics. .qymedti |I0
VII. Dissenting Sects . 5 ‘i : : a aa, yi2
VIII. Genealogical Tree of Pee Beas : itn ntl eM 14
IX. The Defence of the Hermit Ideal oy) sn'dinun eae Kaela OES
X. The Arhant Problem . : : ; ; : : go a)
XI. The Text and its Translation ; 24
XII. The Place of the Jetstin-Kahbum in the Puetatare of Tiber 27
XIII. Milarepa as one of Humanity’s Heroes... uy 1 8
RECHUNG’S TIBETAN INTRODUCTION .. . ~.”"™. 31
PART I


THE PATH OF DARKNESS


CHAPTER I: THE LINEAGE AND BIRTH ~~
Telling of Rechung’s Dreams, which led to the Writing of
this Biography; and of Milarepa’s Ancestry and Birth mae 4t


CHAPTER II: THE TASTING OF SORROW
Telling of the Death and Last Will of Milarepa’s Father ;
the Misappropriation of the Estate by the Paternal Uncle
and Aunt; and the Resulting Sorrows which Milarepa and
his Mother and Sisterendured . . ». .. « «6 54


CHAPTER III: THE PRACTISING OF THE BLACK ART
Telling of Jetsiin’s Guru and Mastery of the Black Art; and
of how Jetsiin destroyed Thirty-Five of his Enemies and
the Rich Barley Harvest of the Others, by Magic aye Ol


XX TABLE OF CONTENTS


PART II


THE PATH OF LIGHT


INTRODUCTION .


CHAPTER IV: THE SEEKING OF THE HOLY DHARMA
Telling of how Jetstin departed from his Guru of the Black
Art; and of how Jetsiin found his Guru of the True Doctrine,
Marpa the Translator


CHAPTER V: THE PROBATION AND PENANCE
Telling of how Jetsin Obeyed the Commands of his Guru
Marpa, thereby Suffering Strange Trials and Great Tribula-
tions; and of how, in Despondency, he Thrice Deserted
Marpa and Sought another Guru, and then returned to
Marpa


CHAPTER VI: THE INITIATION
Telling of the Completion of Jetstin’s Probation ; of Jetsiin’s
Initiation; and of Marpa’s Predictions concerning Jetsiin


CHAPTER VII: THE PERSONAL GUIDANCE BY THE
GURU |
Telling of the Fruits of Jetsiin’s Meditation and Study ; of
Marpa’s Last Journey to India; of Jetsiin’s Prophetic Dream
and its Interpretation by Marpa; and of Marpa’s special
charge to each of his Four Chief Disciples


CHAPTER VIII: THE PARTING FROM THE GURU
Telling of how Jetsiin, led by a Dream, left his Hermitage,
and, going to his Guru, secured permission to visit Tsa,
Jetsiin’s Birthplace; of the Guru’s Final Instructions and
Admonitions ; of the Sorrowful Parting; and of how Jetsiin
reached Tsa


CHAPTER IX: THE RENUNCIATION
Telling of the Disillusionment which Jetsin met when he
had reached his Home; and of his Vows to Live the Ascetic
Life and Practise Meditation in Solitude


CHAPTER X: THE MEDITATION IN SOLITUDE
Telling of how Jetsiin entered into Solitary Meditation in
the Mountain Solitudes; of the Outer Experiences, and of
the Psycho-Physical Results which mia ee and of his
Songs Recording each Event . :


83


84


93


129


136


158


173


182


TABLE OF CONTENTS Xx1


CHAPTER XI: THE HERMITAGES AND SERVICE REN-
DERED TO SENTIENT BEINGS


Telling of Jetsiin’s Disciples and Places of Meditation; and
of the Recorded Writings concerning Jetsiin ae: + 235


CHAPTER XII: THE NIRVANA
Telling of how Jetsiin came to take Poisoned Curds from
Tsaphuwa's Concubine ; of the Last Assembly of Jetsiin’s
Followers, and the Attendant Marvels; of Jetsiin’s Discourse
on Illness and Death; of His Final Testamentary Teachings;
of the Conversion of Tsaphuwa; of the Last Will; of the
Passing Away in Samadhi, and the Resultant Super-normal
Phenomena; of Rechung's Late Arrival and Prayer to
Jetsiin, and the Answer; of the Marvellous Events Connected
with the Cremation and the Reliques; of the Execution of


Jetsiin’s Last Will; and concerning his Disciples ; . 244
APPENDIX J ‘ he oe TR Re ere + 305
COLOPHON . wa 6G see Bian wes as os oy: ice Se NaS


INDEX . eT ee: En any el ire


KARMA


‘The Buddhas and the Arhants alone have discovered my true
nature, in its very essence, and have triumphed over me. All other
beings but live under my despotic rule: I put them to death and
I make them to live; I am the deity who giveth them the prosperity
they enjoy, and I bring about the doing of good deeds and of evil
deeds among mankind. Gods, emperors, kings, rich and poor,
strong and weak, noble and ignoble, brute creatures, and the happy
and the unhappy spirits existing in this world and in the upper and
in the lower worlds—all these I elevate or cast down to their respec-
tive states. I humble the high and I exalt the low, according to
their several works. Therefore am I, indeed, the God who ruleth
this [phenomenal] Universe.’

From Karma’s Proclamation of His Ommtpotence.}
(Lama Kazi Dawa-Samdup’s Translation.)


‘On what we practise now dependeth our future ;
As the shadow followeth the body, Karma followeth us.
Each hath perforce to taste what he himself hath done.’


From The Golden Rosary of the History of Padma
[Sambhava),? Chapter ix.
(Lama Kazi Dawa-Samdup’s Translation.)


1 The Editor found among the late Lama Kazi Dawa-Samdup’s
papers an English translation consisting of three pages bearing this
title (but without the Tibetan title of the original text) from which
the quotation has been taken. At the end of the translation there
is the following note: ‘Translated by Dawa-Samdup in accordance
with explanations given by the Rev. Prajiia Sathi. 28, 5. 1917.’

® Tib. Padma-Thangyig-Serteng.


DESCRIPTION OF ILLUSTRATIONS


I. FRONTISPIECE: THE GREAT KARGYUTPA GURUS
facing title-page.

A photographic reproduction (about one-half of the original size) of
a water-colour, painted by the late Lama Kazi Dawa-Samdup, in
Gangtok, Sikkim, during the year 1920, in strict accord with the tradi-
tions of Tibetan monastic art, showing the Chief Gurus, or Great
Teachers, of the Kargyiitpa (Tib. Bhah-rgyud-pa) School of Northern
Buddhism. It was a parting gift from the Lama to the Editor.

The uppermost figure represents the Divine Guru, the Celestial
Buddha Dorje-Chang (Skt. Vajra-Dhara), the ‘ Holder of the Dorje’ (the
Spiritual Thunderbolt or Sceptre of the Gods), in Whom the Esoteric
Lore of the Kargyiitpas has its origin. The Established Church not
only regards Him as an Emanation of the Buddha Shakya Muni, but
venerates Him, as the Kargyiitpas do, as the Chief of the Celestial
Buddhas, analogous to the Adi, or Primordial, Buddha of the Old School
of Padma Sambhava. He is robed in the rich princely robes tradition-
ally ascribed to the Dhyani Buddhas (or Buddhas of Meditation) ot
the Sambhoga-Kaya Order to which He belongs. His being robed as
a Prince indicates that He has direct dominion over sentient beings
and their moral feelings. He shows a passive mien, and has a beauti-
ful countenance, because He is naturally of a passive (or unimpulsive)
nature, and the Source of Goodness, Truth, and Justice. He sits in
the Buddha Posture (Skt. Vayra-Asana), because His mind is ever in
the unperturbed (or quiescent) state of Samadhi. The bell which he
holds in His left hand symbolizes the Voidness (Skt. Shunyata) as
Intellect; the dorje in His right hand symbolizes Divine Method and
Spiritual Power. He is enthroned on a lion-throne, to indicate that
He is beyond all fear of Change, the two lions at the base of the throne
symbolizing Fearlessness. His blue colour symbolizes His immuta-
bility and the eternity of His existence, for it is like the blue of the
eternal heavenly sky. Being the prototype of the Heruka Hierarchy
of Bodhic Deities,! He wears a necklace of bone-beads, symbolic ot


1 As shown by certain of the deities of the Bardo Thédol (see The Tibetan
Book of the Dead), the Heruka Buddha, often depicted as being male-female
(Tib. yab-yum), either in peaceful (Tib. Z’s-wa) or wrathful (Tib. Z’o-wo) aspect,
is, esoterically, a Tantric personification of the Saving Power which alone makes
possible the attainment of Enlightenment or Buddhahood, Herein this Power is
expressed through the Divine Person of Dorje-Chang and thence through His
Initiates incarnate on Earth, more especially those of them who are Great Yogis ;
for these, having renounced the world, are, in an esoteric sense, the Herukapas,


XxiV DESCRIPTION OF ILLUSTRATIONS


renunciation and conquest of the Sangsara (the Round of Death and
Birth). Thus He combines in Himself the yogic qualities both of the
Heruka and Dhyani Buddha.

On the right of the Divine Guru is shown the first of the human
Gurus, the Indian Yogi (or Saint) Tilopa, who received from the
Divine Guru direct guidance and teaching. The golden fish which
Tilopa holds aloft in his right hand symbolizes sentient beings im-
mersed in the Ocean of Sangsaric (or Worldly) Existence, and indi-
cates Tilopa’s power to emancipate and save them.’ The blood-filled
skull which Tilopa holds in his left hand symbolizes his ability to
confer lokic siddhi (occult powers pertaining to the world) in his
character as a Heruka, his Heruka nature being indicated by the tiara
of human skulls and the bone ornaments adorning him. The lotus-
throne upon which he sits shows that he belongs to the Lotus Order
of Gurus. The red colour of the lotus petals is symbolical of Sukha-
vati (the Western Paradise) wherein reigns the Buddha Amitabha,
He of Boundless Light, the Illuminator or Enlightener, whose symbol
is the red, all-consuming and purifying and mystical Element Fire ;
for Tilopa is believed to have been an incarnation of Amitabha. The
green of Tilopa’s aura, and of other auras jin the painting, represents
yogic equal-mindedness, or harmony, and spiritual power.

Opposite Tilopa, on a similar lotus-throne, is shown the second of
the human Gurus, the Indian Yog7 (or Saint) Naropa, blowing a
trumpet made of a ram’s horn,? proclaiming the glory of his Order


‘The Unclad,’ being ‘naked’ as regards all things of the Sangsara of which
they have divested themselves.

1 The fish-symbol adopted by the early Christians, especially in the catacomb
period, very probably from Oriental sources, bore a similar significance with
reference to the Christos as the Saviour of Mankind.

2 Upon the outbreak of a serious cattle epidemic in India, whence Naropa
originated, it is not unusual for the chief priest or astrologer of a village to take
a trumpet made of a ram's horn and circumambulate the cattle and the village,
blowing the trumpet in order to ward off or else to exorcize the epidemic.
Similarly, seven Jewish priests each blowing a ram’s-horn trumpet, followed by
the ark of the covenant, circumambulated Jericho daily for six successive days
and then on the seventh day made a sevenfold circumambulation, whereupon,
after a long blast had been blown on the seven rams’-horn trumpets and the people
had shouted with a great shout, as commanded by the Lord, the walls of the city
fell down flat and the city was taken (Joshua vi. 4-20).

Thus among the ancient Jews, as among modern Hindus, the sound emitted by
the ram’s-horn trumpet is employed magically, as mantric sound is in Mantra
Yoga (cf. The Tibetan Book of the Dead, section on ‘ Mantras, or Words of Power’,
Pp. 220). But among initiates into Tantricism there is an esoteric significance.
This seems to be that the ram’s-horn trumpet symbolizes, as it does in the hands
of Naropa, the exorcizing of the Demons of Worldliness, Egoism, and Ignorance
(Skt. Avidya), so that the Illusion (Skt. Maya) of Sangsdaric Existence is dissipated
and the Nirva@ntc Way to the Full Deliverance called Buddhahood is revealed.


DESCRIPTION OF ILLUSTRATIONS XXV


and in honour of his Guru Tilopa. Naropa’s, like Tilopa’s, tiara of
human skulls and bone ornaments worn on the body, in addition to
indicating the Heruka estate of their wearer, esoterically symbolize
the fundamental principle or foundation of the Universe, the Dharma-
Kaya (or ‘ Body of Truth’), which is the Norm of Being, the Uncreated,
Beyond-Nature Mirvana, because they signify the Victory over Birth
and Death—over all Becoming or Change. The yogic ornaments,
such as Tilopa and Naropa wear, are commonly classified as being six
in number: (1) the skull-tiara, (2) the armlets, (3) the bracelets,
(4) the anklets, shown only on Naropa, (5) the bone-bead apron and
waist-band combined, which are not visible in our painting, and (6) the
double line of bone-beads extending over the shoulders to the breast,
where they hold in place the breast-plate Mirror of Karma, wherein, as
described in The Tibetan Book of the Dead (pp. xxi, 36, 166), are reflected
every good and bad action. These six ornaments (usually of human
bone) denote the Six Paramita (‘Boundless Virtues’), which are:
(1) Dana-Paramita (‘ Boundless Charity ’),(2) Shila-Paramita (‘ Bound-
less Morality’), (3) Kshant- Paramiia (‘Boundless Patience’), (4) Virya-
Paramita (‘ Boundless Industry’), (5) DAyasa-Paramita (‘ Boundless
Meditation’), and (6) Prajfia-Paramita (‘Boundless Wisdom’). To
attain to Buddhahood, and as a Bodhisattva to assist in the salvation
of all living creatures, the Six Paramita must be assiduously practised.
Naropa, like the two preceding Gurus, is seated in one of the numerous
yogic postures (or adsanas). His throne, too, is a red lotus, but less red
than that of Tilopa; it, also, is symbolical of Sukhavati, and of Naropa’s
membership in the Lotus Order of Gurus.

The Guru Marpa, popularly known as Marpa the Translator, on
account of the many works, chiefly on Tantric Yoga, which he collected
in manuscript form in India, whither he made a number of journeys
from Tibet, and translated into Tibetan, is represented by the central
figure at the bottom of the painting. He is dressed in the semi-lay
dress (i.e. a dress partly /amaic and partly laic) of a native Tibetan
of good family; for he, although a very famous Guru of the Line, never
renounced, as the other Gurus of the Line did, family life. He, too,
holds a human skull filled with blood (represented in /amaic ritual by
holy-water coloured red) to show. that he, also, has obtained the right
and power to confer lokic siddht. He is seated on a white lotus-throne,
symbolical of his membership of the Vajra (Tib. Dorje) Order, other-
wise known as the Order of the East, white being the colour assigned
to the eastern quarter of the heavens.

Milarepa, more commonly called in Tibetan Jetsiin Milarepa, is
shown on the right of Marpa, who was his Guru, sitting in a cave on
an antelope-skin such as yogis place under them when practising
Yoga. He is clad in a single cotton cloth, the dress of the Kargyitpa
ascetic, which indicates that without any other covering for his body


XXVi DESCRIPTION OF ILLUSTRATIONS


he can withstand intense cold, equal to that of the Arctic regions, such
as prevails in the high snow-clad regions of Tibet. Like Tilopa and
Marpa, Milarepa holds a blood-filled skull, in sign of his own power
to confer lokic siddhi. He is singing a hymn; and, therefore, holds
his right hand to his ear. The red band across his breast, comparable
to a Brahmanical sacred-thread, is a yogic meditation-band such as
Tibetan yogis employ to keep their legs in the posture (or @sana) of
deep meditation when in the trance-state of Samadhi (cf. p. 201’).
Similar meditation-bands are worn by Tilopa and Naropa. The lion
symbol over the entrance to his cave signifies that the cave is in
a high, isolated Himalayan wilderness such as the solitude-loving
mountain-lion frequents; and Milarepa is himself ‘The Fearless Lion
of the Dharma (or Truth)’—cf. p. 35°—and the cave ‘The Den of the
Lion’.

Gampopa, to the left of Marpa, is represented in the garb of a /ama
of the Kargyiitpa Brotherhood, sitting on a richly embroidered cushion
in a preaching-booth. He is proclaiming, with the aid of the Tibetan
Sacred Book which he holds, the Doctrine of the Enlightened One—
the Ending of Sorrow and the Way to Final Deliverance. Gampopa
is the fifth of the Great Gurus who took upon themselves the human
form for the good of the many, and the sixth in the Succession which
begins with the Celestial Guru Dorje-Chang, Who, so the modern
Kargyiitpas believe, still confers upon the Brotherhood on Earth
spiritual benediction, telepathically transmitted in ‘waves of grace’,
direct from the Heaven-World wherein He reigns. From Gampopa,
who was Milarepa’s most spiritually-gifted disciple, onwards to our


own day the Kargyiitpa Dynasty of Teachers has continued without
break.


Il. MILAREPA THE TIBETAN YOGI (Tib. Nal-jor-pa) or Saint
Jacing p. 31
Herein Milarepa (the central figure round about whom are a number
of devotees, human and celestial, making offerings and obeisance to
him) is pictured after the popular tradition, his right hand held to his
ear to indicate that he is singing a hymn, surrounded by numerous
miniature pictures interwoven together, each illustrating some episode
described in the Biography (or Jetstin-Kahbum), of which our English
text is a faithful rendering. In the central foreground, for example,
just below Milarepa and extending to the bottom border of the picture,
there are shown the buildings of various shapes which Milarepa
constructed when undergoing severe penance under his Guru Marpa
(cf. pp. 96 ff, 134); and to the right of Milarepa, at the edge of the
picture, we see the four columns surmounted by the different symbolic
animals, and the great mountain around which they are placed, as
described in Milarepa’s dream concerning the Kargytitpa Hierarchy


DESCRIPTION OF ILLUSTRATIONS xxvii


(cf. pp. 149-51). Asin the painting described above, Milarepa is seated
in a yogic posture on an antelope-skin and clad ina single cotton cloth
(which is here richly embroidered) with the meditation-band across
his breast.

This illustration is a photographic copy of a picture to be met with
in the homes of the laity throughout Tibet, as popular among Tibetan
Buddhists as pictures of Christian Saints are among Christians. As
such it suggests the veneration and respect which all classes of Tibetans
continue to pay to Milarepa nearly nine centuries after the era in
which he flourished.

With the kind permission given by Dr. L. A. Waddell to the Editor,
this illustration has been reproduced from the plate facing p. 64 in
Dr. Waddell’s well-known work (of which we have made much use),
The Buddhism of Tibet, or Lamaism (London, 1895).


III. THE DHYANI BUDDHA AKSHOBHYA.__.._ facing p. 42

As described in our text and annotation on p. 42, Akshobhya (the
‘Unagitated’ or ‘Unshakable’) is one of the Five Dhyani Buddhas
peculiar to Northern Buddhism. He is second in the Order, Vairo-
chana being first, Ratna-Sambhava third, Amitabha fourth, and
Amogha-Siddhi fifth ; see The Tibetan Book of the Dead, pp. 105-18,
for detailed description of each.

Akshobhya is herein shown seated with legs locked and soles of the
feet uppermost, this being the yogic posture commonly assigned to all
Buddhas of Meditation and their reflexes. His left hand lies on his
lap in the mudra of meditation. His right hand touches the Earth
with the tips of the outstretched fingers, the palm turned inwards; it
isin the bhumisparsha or ‘ witness’ mudra, which the Gandhara School
of Buddhism assigned to the Buddha Gautama when representing His
invoking the Earth to bear witness that He had resisted the temptation
of Mara, the Evil One. The third eye (Skt. #rva) on the forehead of
Akshobhya, near the junction of the eyebrows, indicates His spiritual
insight and foreknowledge; and the Bodhic protuberance (Skt. ushnisha)
on the crown of His head indicates His Buddhahood.

This and the illustration number IV, following, are facsimile repro-
ductions of photographs of bronze images as shown in The Gods of
Northern Buddhism (Plate II, 6 and d), by Miss Alice Getty, to whom
the Editor is indebted for permission to use them,


IV. THE SUPREME GURU: THE ADI-BUDDHA VAJRA-
DHARA . 5 ‘ F ; .  . facing p. 138
Herein, as in the F entiaiees, vaieennara is ew in the yogic
posture of meditation, like a Dhyani Buddha. His arms are crossed
on his breast in the posture of the Supreme and Eternal Buddha
(Skt. vajra-hum-kara-mudra). His right hand holds the vajra, also


xxviii DESCRIPTION OF ILLUSTRATIONS


symbolical of the Mystic Truth (which like the vajra, the thunderbolt
of the gods, cannot be destroyed), or the Divine Wisdom that annihi-
lates all passions and thus leads to dominion over saxgsdaric (or
worldly) existence. His left hand holds the bell with the vayra handle,
known in Sanskrit as the ghanta. Like Akshobhya, He possesses the
uirna and the ushnisha, symbols of His Enlightenment.


V. MILAREPA MANIFESTING OCCULT POWERS
facing p. 268

Herein Milarepa, transfigured and enhaloed, is seen in the midst of
his chief disciples, seated in yogic posture, in the Cave of Brilche, in
Chibar, just before his Part-Nirvana (cf. pp. 268-9, 275, 281). He is
manifesting the signs and symbols of his mastership of the Occult
Sciences, as he bestows upon these disciples his final benediction.
A glorified figurative mandala is above him, and in the small adjoining
cave are shown the symbolic Wheel of the Law (as depicted on the
back of this volume and described below) and Flames of Wisdom, all
magically produced. (Cf. Marpa’s similar manifestations, p. 163.)

This illustration is a photographic copy of a reproduction of a
Tibetan painting (‘The Chief Disciples at Chibar Asking for Bene-
diction’), from p. 165 of Le Poéte Tibétain Milarépa (Paris, 1925) by
M. Jacques Bacot, who kindly allowed the Editor to reproduce the
picture here.


DESCRIPTION OF EMBLEMS


THE BANNEROF VICTORY. . . . . facing p. 30
(See p. 33°)
THE-TIBETAN CHIORTEN® sc 5. ‘ é . facing p. 269


(See facing p. 269)


INTRODUCTION


‘Even as one desirous of reaching a longed-for city requireth the eyes for
seeing [the way] and the feet for traversing the distance, so, also, whosoever
desireth to reach the City of Nirvaéza requireth the Eyes of Wisdom and the
Feet of Method.’—Prajta-Paramita.


I. THE IMPORTANCE OF THE JETSUN-KAHBUM


THis Biography of one of the Great Religious Geniuses of
our human race presents to us a vivid record of the social
conditions which prevailed in the Tibet of the eleventh and
twelfth century of the Christian Era. We of the West are too
apt to forget that India, like China, was highly civilized at
a time when Europe was still in an age of comparative bar-
barism; and that Tibet, from the seventh century onwards,
favoured by the influx of culture from China on the east and
India on the south, was, at the time Milarepa flourished, not
inferior in its medieval limitations and was probably superior
in its remarkable philosophical and religious development to
the Western World at the same epoch. In Europe, the glory
of Athens and of Alexandria had long been extinguished by
the darkness of the Dark Ages; scientific and philosophical
speculations were, by ecclesiastical authority, limited to the
narrow confines of a pedantic Scholasticism ; the Arab philo-
sophers of Cordova and of Bagdad guarded the Learning of
the Ancients until Europe should be re-born to a New Day at
the Renaissance; but throughout the Orient the Promethean
Fire was never allowed to die out. Even till now, China and
India have preserved unbroken a culture whose origin is lost in
the past.’ The civilizations of Babylonia, Egypt, Greece, Rome,
have all bloomed and faded, but those of China and India,
despite social disturbances arising from contact with the utili-


1 «The East, even in the days of her material prosperity, never forgot the
supremacy of things spiritual. Kings renounced their kingdoms to end their
days in meditation, in jungle or mountain solitudes. ‘‘To die in harness’? was
then, as it still is, an evil to be avoided. Herein lies the secret of the imperish-
able vitality of the Orient.’—Sj. Atal Bihari Ghosh.


2 INTRODUCTION


tarianism of the West, have lived on; and, if they continue
to retain their marvellous spiritual virility, may well survive
the materialistic civilization of the Occident, and continue to
lead humanity nearer that Higher Ideal of world-conquest by
the might of the divine in man rather than by his animal might
expended in the savagery of warfare. At least this is the ideal
upon which the teachings of Milarepa as applied to the prob-
lems of society on Earth are founded; and, in this way, they
are in agreement with the teachings of the Buddha, of the
Christ, and of all the Great Leaders of Asia, who by Love and
Compassion have done immeasurably more to raise the status
of mankind than have the innumerable hosts of armed troops
and their captains throughout the ages.

At the time when Milarepa was meditating amid the snowy
fastnesses of the Tibetan Himalayas, the culture of Islam was
flowing in over every part of Hindustan. It is owing to him, as
well as to his teacher Marpa, who made a number of journeys
to India to collect manuscripts of Indian and Buddhistic lore,
that much of India’s spiritual inheritance, which was then
threatened with destruction, has been applied to the needs of
Tibetan society and preserved until to-day. And, at the same
epoch, England was experiencing the effects of the Norman
Conquest. Thus, to the student of religion, as to the historian,
the Fetsiin-Kahbum, or Biographical History of Fetsiin-Mila-
repa, should be of more than ordinary importance.


II. HISTORICAL VALUE OF THE NARRATIVE

On the whole, the biographical narrative, as it has come
down to us, may be accepted as a faithful account of the sayings
and doings of Jetsiin, with due allowance for a certain amount of
folk-lore and popular mythology which has been incorporated in
it. Asa Gospel of the Kargyitpa Sect, it is one of the many
Sacred Books of the East ; and, as such, perhaps as historically
accurate as parts of the Mew Testament, if not more so.

To Oriental students interested in the complex problem of
the evolution of Tibetan and Mongolian religions it should be

1 Kah-bum = ‘100,000 Words’; Nam-thar, the usual Tibetan term for


Biography, literally meaning ‘The Full Deliverance’, is more commonly applied
to this work.


THE BIOGRAPHY’S VALUE 3


of rare interest. To all who appreciate Buddhistic Philosophy,
more especially in its Mahayanic form, this book should bring
fresh insight. To mystics the world over it should prove to be,
as Rechung, its author, would call it, a most precious jewel,
a treasure-house which can never be exhausted by the human
mentality, and a nosegay of precepts which can be understood
only by putting them to the test of practice.

In the first part of the Bzography, we see Jetsiin dominated
in his youth, like many a great saint of other Faiths, by the
lower nature. Urged on, as he was, by his vengeful mother, he
became, for a time, a professional doer of evil, a black magician,
treading the Path of Darkness. Then, in the second part, he
repents, and is converted to the White Faith, which is Buddhism.
Thenceforth, after having undergone very severe trials and
penances imposed by his Guru Marpa, he enters upon The
Path of Light; and eventually reaches, in the words of the
narrative, ‘the greatest of all great successes that can ever fall
to the lot of mortal man’.

Perhaps, to some readers, much of the matter contained in
the last chapter may appear to be redundant. Account must,
however, be taken of the fact that it is through this chapter
alone that Rechung speaks to us as an eye-witness of events ;
in all the previous chapters he is merely telling us what the
Teacher has narrated, for Rechung did not become a disciple
until Jetsiin was an old man nearing the end of his days. For
the Kargyiitpas, this last chapter, concerning the passing away
of their Master, is, no doubt, almost the most important of all.
Contained in it there is not only the account of the marvellous
phenomena attendant upon the cremation, and of how Jetsiin
reanimated his corpse in order to give answer to the fervent
prayer of Rechung (who, having been far away at the time of
Jetsiin’s Virvana, was late in arriving at the place of the funeral
ceremonies) ; but there is also the quintessence of the Teacher’s
precepts, which are enjoined upon all the skzskyas (or disciples)
by the living guru (or spiritual preceptor). Moreover, it is a
summary of the most essential teachings of Northern Buddhism,
as therein chanted by the Dakinis (or Angels); and is replete
with interest for the lover of the marvellous.


4 INTRODUCTION


To Jetsiin’s followers, these strange events, centring round their
Guru's passing away and his funeral pyre, are no more incredible
than is the story of the Transfiguration and Ascension of Jesus
to Christians. As to what historical value is to be attached to
them, each reader must decide for himself,after having made due
allowance foraccretions derived from traditionand popular belief.


III. TIBETAN SCHOOLS OF BUDDHIST PHILOSOPHY?


Throughout Tibet, and extending into Nepal, Bhutan, Sik-
kim, Kashmir, and parts of Mongolia, there are three chief
Schools of Buddhist Philosophy: (1) the Madhyamika, or
‘Middle Way’, known to Tibetans as the Uma-pa (Dbus-
ma-pa), which originated in India under Nagarjuna during the
second century A.D.; (2) the Mahamudra, or ‘Great Symbol’
(Tib. Phyag-Ch'en) ; and (3) the Adi-Yoga, otherwise known
as the ‘Great Perfection’ (Tib. Dzogs-Ch’en).

The adherents of the first are the Ge-lug-pas, the ‘ Followers
of the Virtuous Order’, popularly known as the Yellow Caps.
This School, founded in Tibet at the beginning of the fifteenth
century A.D., by the Reformer Tsong-khapa (‘ Native of the
Onion Country’), of the Province of Amdo, North-East Tibet,
on the frontiers of China, who was born in A. D. 1358 and died
in 1417, grew out of the Sect of the Kah-dam-pas (‘ Those
Bound by the Ordinances’), and is now the Established Church
of Northern Buddhism, wielding through its spiritual Head,
the Dalai-Lama, the God-King of Tibet, both temporal and
spiritual power.

The adherents of the Mahamudra School are the Kargyiit-
pas, the ‘ Followers of the Apostolic Succession’ (or ‘ Followers
of the Successive Orders’), of which Milarepa is the greatest of
the Tibetan Apostles. The history of this sect is contained in
the account given below of the Apostolic Succession.

The followers of the ‘Great Perfection’, or Adi-Yoga School,
are the Ning-ma-pas, the ‘ Old-style Ones’, popularly known
as the Red Caps, the adherents of the Unreformed Church,
founded by the Indian philosopher, Padma Sambhava, in the


1 Asa general reference, and for more details, the student is here referred to
L. A, Waddell, The Buddhism of Tibet (London, 1895), pp. 54-75:


SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 5


year 749 A.D.) He, better known to the Tibetans as Guru
Rinpoch’e (‘ The Precious Guru’), or as Padma Jungne (Skt.
Padma-Fanma, ‘The Lotus-Born’), was a very famous pro-
fessor of the Occult Sciences in the great Buddhist University
of Nalanda, then the Oxford of India. The King of Tibet,
Ti-song De-tsen, hearing of the Gurw’s fame, invited him to
Tibet. The Guru accepted the King’s call; and arriving in the
year 747, at Sam-yé, about fifty miles south-east of Lhasa,”


1 Sj. Atal Bihari Ghosh comments as follows : ‘ Madhavacharya, in the Sarva-
darshana-Samgraha, mentions four schools of Buddhistic thought, namely, the
Madhyamika, the Yogachara, the Sautrantika, and the Vaibhashika. The
Madhyamika School teaches that everything is void or unreal (Skt. Sarva-
Shiunyatva) ; the Yogachara, that the outer or material universe is unreal (Skt,
Vahya-Shunyatva) ; the Sautrantika, that the outer or material universe is a
matter of inference (Skt. Vahyanumeyatva); and the Vaibhashika, that the
outer or material universe is real so far as it can be experienced or be the
object of the senses (Skt. Vahyartha-Pratyakshatva), As to the Tibetan Bud-
dhists, they, as a whole, follow the Madhyamika doctrine of the Shinya (o:
Void), which is like the monistic conception of the Brahman in its Nishkala (or
attributeless) aspect.

‘ The three chief Tibetan Schools, to my mind, mark three stages on the Path
of IJlumination or spiritual progress. In the first, the s@dhaka (or devotee) is
subject to injunctions and prohibitions (Skt. Vidht and Nishedha), i.e. ‘‘ bound by
the ordinances”. In the second, he adheres to traditional ways (Skt. Param-
parya-Krama), wherein the ordinary restrictions are to a certain extent relaxed,
although the sa@dhaka is not yet altogether free. In the third, the Adi-Yoga,
when through yoga practices the Light is seen, there are no longer any restric-
tions; for the state of the Buddha or Siddha has been attained. These three
stages correspond, roughly speaking, with what the Zantras mean by Pashu-
bhava (State of the Animal-Man), Virabhdva (State of the Hero), and Divyabhava
(State of the Divine or Enlightened).

‘ Padma Sambhava’s teachings are ‘‘old” in the sense that the truth contained
in them preceded all things, has ever existed, and was conveyed in the “ old-
style” manner. So his School was the Adi (or “ First’’), also known as the
Sanatana. Teachers whosucceeded Padma Sambhava did not ‘‘ reform” the sub-
stance of his teachings ; they merely adapted the ‘‘ form ” of their own instruction
to the limited capacity of their disciples and trained them to acquire the ability
(Skt. Adhikdra) to understand the Adi-Yoga doctrines. The Pashu (Animal-
Man) becomes a Vira (Hero) and then a Divya (Divine or Enlightened Being) ;
this is ever the process.’

The Editor adds: Nowadays the Yellow Caps oppose the old unreformed
Red Cap School and its illustrious Guru and Founder, Padma Sambhava, very
much as Protestant Christians oppose Roman Catholicism and the Papacy.
The Kargyiitpas, however, being a semi-reformed body, wisely avoid either
extreme; and,in this respect, are among Northern Buddhists like moderate
Anglicans among Christians.

2 Cf. Sir Charles Bell, Tibet Past and Present (Oxford, 1924), p. 26.


6 INTRODUCTION


where he subsequently founded a monastery, introduced among
the Tibetans the Tantric and Mantrayanic aspects of Maha-
yanic Buddhism.

A fourth School, the Sa-kya-pa (derived from Sa-skya, mean-
ing ‘Tawny Earth’, with reference to the colour of the soil at
the site of its first monastery in Western Tibet), beginning as
a reformed sect, was originally of considerable importance; but
nowadays it differs but little from the old-style Red Cap Sect.

In addition to these three chief Schools, and a number of
sects detached from them, there are surviving monastic orders
of the primitive pre-Buddhistic religion of Tibet called Bon,
(or P6n), which, with its doctrine of rebirth, furnished a favour-
able soil for the sowing of the seed of Buddhism. The Bizo-
graphy records that Milarepa once performed a Bon rite (cf.
p. 243), thus indicating his familiarity with the older Faith.
On another occasion he made his Magic prevail over the Magic
of a famous B6n sorcerer (cf. p. 240). The followers of the
Bon, in contradistinction to the Yellow Caps and the Red
Caps, are called the Black Caps, each of the three bodies
wearing caps and dress of these respective colours.


IV. THE KARGYUTPA APOSTOLIC SUCCESSION!

A century before the time of Guru Padma Sambhava, during
the reign of the first Buddhist King of Tibet, King Song-tsen
Gam-po (who died about A.D. 650),? the mystical Vajra-Yana
(‘ Thunderbolt’ or ‘ Adamantine [i.e. Immutable] Path’) form
of Buddhism, which the Kargyiitpas afterward adopted, entered
Tibet from two sources: (1) from Nepal, the native land of the
Buddha, through the Tibetan King’s marriage in the year 639
with Bhrikuti, a Nepalese royal princess; and (2) from China,
through the King’s marriage with Wencheng, a daughter of the
Chinese Royal House, in 641. Thereafter, the King, having
been converted to Buddhism by his two wives, sent Sam-bhota
to India to collect Buddhist books. Sam-bhota, like Marpa

1 Cf. L. A. Waddell, op. cit., pp. 18 ff., 63-7.

2 Song-tsen Gam-po was the Ashoka of Tibet. Under him Tibet was at the
zenith of its power. Turkestan and Nepal seem to have been subject to him;
and his conquests were so extensive in Western China that the Chinese


Government was obliged to pay tribute to him to retain its own sovereignty.
Cf. Sir Charles Bell, op. cit., p. 28.


INDIAN AND TIBETAN GURUS 7


four centuries later, returned to Tibet with a rich library, and
so saved for the world much of the learning of India which
afterwards was lost in the land of its origin. Tibet is also in-
debted to Sam-bhota for its alphabet, which he formulated on
the model of the Sanskrit alphabet then prevalent in Kashmir
and North India. Furthermore, he gave to Tibet its first
systematic and written grammar.

It was not, however, until the time of Padma Sambhava,
under King Ti-song De-tsen, that Buddhism took firm root in
Tibet, for the B6npas had until then successfully opposed it,
in order to maintain their own religious authority. But Padma
Sambhava, like St. Patrick in Ireland when opposed by the
Druids, caused the New Magic to prevail over the Old Magic.

Then, in A.D. 1038, Atisha, the first of the Reformers of
Lamaism, arrived in Tibet from India, and introduced celibacy
and a higher morality among the priesthood. He, too, like
Padma Sambhava, was a Professor of Philosophy, having been
attached to the Vikramashila Monastery in Magadha; and was
born of the royal family of Gaur, Bengal, in the year 980. The
cave wherein Atisha lived, sixteen miles east of Lhasa, is still
reverently preserved, embowered in wild rose and creepers.

Marpa, Jetsiin’s own Guru, who, because of his scholarship
and translations, came to be called the Translator, as he is
throughout the Bzography, is said to have studied under no less
than ten famous Gurus. Part of Marpa’s life is contempora-
neous with that of Atisha, who was one of his Teachers; but
his chief work came a few years after the time of Atisha’s
reformation. Thus Atisha is not only the Chief Human Guru
for the Gelugpas, whose origin lay in the Kahdampa Sect which
Atisha founded, but he is, in a not unimportant way, one of the
Gurus of the rival Kargyiitpa Sect which Marpa founded.
Atisha is not, however, recognized as of the Kargyiitpa Apos-
tolic Succession.

Most of Marpa’s Teachers were of the ancient Indian Sect of
Kusulipas, or those who seek to gain Enlightenment by medita-
tion, in contradistinction to those called Panditas, who aim at
the attainment of the Supreme Truth, as contained in the

1 Cf. Sir Charles Bell, op. cit., p. 31,


8 INTRODUCTION


Doctrine of the Shényatd, or Voidness, by intellectual means
alone.!. Atisha not having emphasized the practical applica-
tions of Buddhism by means of the yogic ideal which the
Kusulipas insisted upon, it fell to the lot of one of their Great
Gurus, named Tilopa (or Telo), to become the first of the
Apostles of the Kargyiitpa Hierarchy.

According to tradition, Tilopa, who flourished about the
middle of the tenth century, had the Mahamudra Philosophy,
upon which the Kargytitpa School is chiefly based, imparted
to him by the Celestial Buddha Dorje-Chang (Tib. Rdo-rje-
Hch ang : Skt. Vajra-Dhara). Tilopa, in turn, handed it down
orally, as an esoteric doctrine—as it still is in its practical
application—to his disciple Naropa; Naropa transmitted it to
Marpa, and Marpa to Milarepa.

As being their Divine Guru, the Kargyiitpas have come to
regard Dorje-Chang (Vajra-Dhara) as equal to the Adi, or
Primordial, Buddha, so that for them He is the Manifester of
the Grace of the Adi-Buddha and inseparable from Him.

Thus the second in the Succession on Earth is Naropa; the
third, Marpa; and the fourth, Milarepa. Milarepa’s successor
in the Line was not Rechung, the author of this Bzography, but
the first of Milarepa’s disciples, Dvag-po-Lharje, a native of
Eastern Tibet, otherwise known as Je-Gampo-pa. This second
name, meaning ‘the Lord Gampopa’, was given to him because
he was believed to have been the reincarnation of King Song-
tsen Gam-po, the first Buddhist ruler of Tibet, who had died
five centuries previously. Je-Gampo-pa himself died in the
year 1152, two years after he had founded the Monastery of
Ts’ur-lka, the chief seat of the Kargyiitpas, and ever since then
the Kargyitpa Line of Gurus has remained unbroken.


V. THE MODERN SUCCESSORS OF MILAREPA


At this very moment there are hundreds of the Kargyiitpa
ascetics living in the bleak solitudes of the Tibetan Himalayas,
some of them in caves at the base and on the sides of Mount

1 ¢This is illustrated in various ways in the Brahmanik Tantras, which teach
that knowledge of the Brahman is derived either through knowing words or


through inner realization. The first method, being merely intellectual, cannot
dispel the darkness within; the second method alone leads to true wisdom.


KARGYUTPA HERMITS 9


Everest, wherein are still to be found, as places of special sanc-
tity and pilgrimage, the hermitages of Jetsiin. There nature
remains as it has been since Earth’s early ages, and the Karg-
yitpa hermits dwell undisturbed by the restlessness of the
world beyond, wherein the ancient ideals which they uphold
no longer govern men, but where there rules, instead, the opinion
that success means the acquisition of worldly riches, fame, and
power.

Their system of mystical insight, called in Tibetan 7a-wa,
as taught by the various treatises on the Mahamudra Doctrine
and practised in grottoes in mountain or jungle solitudes, dis-
tinguishes the Kargyiitpas from all other Tibetan Sects. And
in virtue of their vows of unqualified asceticism and renunciation
of the worldly life and their actual application of them, they are
not surpassed, in the soundness of their Buddhism, by any
other body of followers of the Great Yogz, Gautama the En-
lightened One.

Each little community of these Himalayan mystics has its
own Guru, subordinate to the Apostolic Guru, the Head of the
Sect, who, in turn, is subject to the Celestial Line of Gurus,
and these, in order of hierarchical rank, are subject to the
Supreme Guru, the Buddha Dorje-Chang (Vajra-Dhara).' As
electricity may be passed on from one receiving station to
another, so, the Kargyiitpas maintain, is the Divine Grace,
vouchsafed by the Buddhas, transmitted through the Buddha
Dorje-Chang (Vajra-Dhara) to the Line of Celestial Gurus
and thence to the Apostolic Guru on Earth, and, from him, to
each of the subordinate gurus, and, by them, through the
Mystic Initiation, to each of the neophytes.

As will be observed in Milarepa’s hymns, the Apostolic
Guru on Earth is frequently addressed as being the very em-


Again, it is said that JAana (Knowledge) is of two kinds: (1) that which arises
from the study of the 4gamas (Tantric Scriptures), and (2) that which is born
of Viveka (Inner Discrimination). It is likewise taught that by argumentation
one cannot reach realization, certain truths being beyond the scope of discussion :
‘‘ Apply not argument to what is beyond thought.’ ’—Sj. Atal Bihari Ghosh.

1 «Brahmanik Tantras refer to three Lines (Skt. Ogha, Panghti) of Gurus:
(1) Divya (Celestial), (2) Siddha (Adept), and (3) Manava (Human). Cf. the
Tantra-vaja, ch.i, in Tantrik Texts, vol. viii, ed. by A. Avalon,.’—Sj. Atal Bihari
Ghosh.


10 INTRODUCTION


bodiment of the Buddha Dorje-Chang (Vajra-Dhara) Himself;
for each living Apostle of the Succession is the Holder of
Mystic Power, or, literally, the Holder of the Vajra (the Spiri-
tual Thunderbolt of the Gods, symbolized by the /amazc
sceptre depicted on the cover of this book)—the meaning of
the name Dorje-Chang (Vajra-Dhara). By this appellation we
are to understand that the Guru, so addressed, is the Grand
Master of the Esoteric Ceremonies ; and, as the Great Initiator
on Earth, is the Conferrer of Spiritual Power, which Pro-
metheus-like he brings from the Divine Realms of the Spiritual
Thunderbolt to the Race of Men.


VI. KARGYUTPAS COMPARED WITH CHRISTIAN GNOSTICS


As basis for comparative explanation of this Kargyiitpa
system of mystical insight, we may take, for instance, that of
the Christian Gnostics (‘The Knowing Ones’), probably the
most similar to it among systems known to European thought,
wherein we meet with many remarkable parallels.

Thus, each of the numerous Gnostic communities—although
these were not welded into an organic whole like the Kargyitpa
communities—appears to have had its own Chief Guru (such
as Valentinus, Marcion, and Basilides) and its subordinate guras
and Apostolic Succession on Earth, and its Supreme Spiritual
Head, in the Christos, from Whom, through the Saints and the
Aeons of Super-Human Intelligences, was transmitted to His
human followers the Divine Grace of the Father. Saturninus
of Antioch, another of the great Christian Gnostic Gurus (who
flourished about A. D. 120), taught that abstention from flesh-
food, and observance of strict asceticism—such as the Kargyiit-
pas practise—lead to the Supreme through the Son, the
Christos Aeon (or Emanation of the Father). According to
some of the many Gnostic Schools, God the Father was
mystically the Primordial Man, the Azthropos (or ’Addayas}),
comparable to the Adi (or ‘ First’) Buddha of the Kargyiitpas
and other Sects of Northern Buddhism.


1 Cf. the Aeon Iad (or Jea) of the Pistis Sophia, one of the chief Gnostic
Christian Gospels of the Valentinians. See G. R. S. Mead’s translation (London,
1g2r), and his Fragments of a Faith Forgotten (London, 1900), pp. 535-7:


GNOSTICISM AND BUDDHISM TE


In accord with Buddhists generally, the Christian Gnostics
know no doctrine of Vicarious Atonement such as the Church
Councils elaborated and made a dogma; for, to both Faiths
alike, Deliverance depends entirely upon one’s own efforts, the
Buddha and the Christ being regarded as Guides and not
Saviours. There is, too, similarity between the ceremony of
Initiation of Christian Gnostics and that among Mahayanists,
and in the use of Mantras by both. The Gnostic Sophia
(‘ Wisdom’) and the Prajza (‘ Wisdom’) of the Prajid-Para-
mita are equally personified as the Female Principle of Nature,
or Shakti (Tib. Yum). The Un-Created, Non-Being, or Body
of All-Intelligence, the Impersonal Deity of Christian Gnosti-
cism, may be compared with the Voidness of the Mahayanic
Schools. And the Supreme Pleroma of Light Ineffable, of the
Pistis Sophia, is not unlike the Beyond-Nature Mirvana.

In drawing all such parallels, it is necessary to differentiate
the Gnostic Christian ideal of asceticism and renunciation from
that of the non-Gnostic Christian hermits who dwelt in the
deserts of Egypt and elsewhere in the Near East! and of their
successors in the different monastic orders of the Christian
Church as now organized.

The Gnostic Christian, like the Buddhist, but unlike the
later Church-Council Christian, held as fundamental the doc-
trine of rebirth ;? so that his highest ideal was to acquire such
degree of positive and direct spiritual insight while on Earth
as, after many pious lifetimes, would ultimately produce in
him the Enlightenment of Christhood. And the Gnostic
Christian prayed that upon his own attainment of Christhood
he might be empowered to assist all mankind to reach the same
Goal. On the other hand, the Church-Council Christian, being
forbidden, by the Second Council of Constantinople of A.D.
553, to believe in the doctrine of rebirth,’ was unable to hold


1 Cf. The Paradise of the Holy Fathers, as translated out of the Syriac by
E. A, Wallis-Budge (London, 1907).

2 Cf.G. R. S. Mead, The Pistis Sophia (London, 1g2r), p. xlv; and Fragments
of a Fatth Forgotten (London, 1go0).

8 The decree is as follows: ‘Whosoever shall support the mythical doctrine
of the pre-existence of the soul, and the consequent wonderful opinion of its
return, let him be anathema.’ Thus not until a.p. 553 did the rebirth doctrine


12 INTRODUCTION


the altruistic ideal of his Gnostic brother, and so came to adopt
the lesser ideal of salvation for self alone, by faith in the in-
fallibility of the Church’s decrees and teachings. The effect on
human society of the Gnostic hermit’s altruistic ideal is positive,
and creative, and unlimited, while that of the Church-Council
Christian hermit’s is, by contrast, negative, non-creative, and
selfish.

The Christian Gnostic seeks Realization; and, like the
Kargyiitpas, and the Vogts among the Hindus, and the Sz/fts
among the Moslems, rejects that peculiar form of Occidental
intellectualism favoured by Church Councils which leads to the
formulation of creeds beginning with ‘I believe’ and of decrees
of anathema for not believing, and holds fast only to Realized
or Realizable Knowledge.

From this point of view, the followers of Milarepa are the
Gnostics (‘ Knowing Ones’) among Buddhists, as the followers
of Valentinus and Marcion were among Christians; and, like
all the Christian Gnostics, they are the ‘heretical’ opponents
of every dogma or creed intellectually based wholly upon
Scriptures and Traditions, as Milarepa’s teachings contained
herein show unmistakably.


VII. DISSENTING SECTS


Marpa the Translator, a native-born Tibetan, is, as has been
seen, the Apostle of the period of transition in the Kargyiitpa
history. Preceding him are the two Indian Apostles, Tilopa
and Naropa, and after him Milarepa. In other words, Marpa
was the scholar-transmitter, Milarepa the book-renouncing
Gnostic-Buddhist saint, in whom the Kargyiitpa Teachings
were put to the test of scientific experimentation, so that their
gold was extracted from their base metal. Whereas Tsong-
khapa’s reform was chiefly external and ecclesiastical, and led
to the alliance of Buddhism and temporal power centred in
a highly organized Church, Milarepa’s reform was internal and
far more conducive to a purification of the Faith.
become to official Christianity a ‘heresy’. Before that date it was, presumably,


tolerated among Church-Council Christians, especially among those of them who
were friendly to the Gnostic form of Christianity.


ERRORS CONCERNING RED CAPS 13


The austerity of Milarepa’s rules was, as was but to be ex-
pected, unpopular with those of Marpa’s followers who loved
the household life, which Marpa himself never renounced, and
perhaps also loved the pomp of ecclesiasticism. Others, more
given to Black than to White Magic, seceded from Milarepa.
Hence there arose four chief dissenting sub-sects of the Karg-
yiitpas : (1) The Karma-pa, named after its founder, Karma-pa
Rangchung-Dorje, a pupil of Dvag-po-Lharje, Milarepa’s chief
disciple and apostolic successor, is the most important. Since
its rise, in the latter half of the twelfth century, it has lived on
in Tibet and in Sikkim. (2) The Dug-pa (from Dug, ‘ Thunder
Dragon’, and so referring to those who are of the Thunder-
Dragon School), is second in importance. It consists of three
branches: the Lower Dug-pa; the Middle and Southern Dug-
pa (now the Established Church of Bhutan); and the Upper
Dug-pa. (3) The Di-Kung-pa, named after the Di-kung Monas-
tery, and (4) the Ta-lung-pa, named after the Ta-lung Monas-
tery, are the other two of the surviving dissenting bodies.
These dissenting sects differ from one another ‘merely in
having adopted a different revelation from the Ningma Sect
as a code of demoniacal worship, and so relaxing the purity of
the former Kargyiitpa practice’.

As Dr. Waddell has very wisely emphasized, ‘much con-
fusion has been caused in European books by misusing the
name Dug-pa, employing it as a synonym for the Red Cap
Sect, which properly is the Ningma’.? Furthermore, to assume,
as certain non-Tibetan critics of Padma Sambhava seem to
assume, that all Red Caps are Dug-pas, is equally erroneous.
There appears, too, to be need to emphasize that despite the
traditional antagonism existing between the ‘Reformed’ Yellow
Cap Sects and the ‘Old-Style’ Red Cap Sects of Padma
Sambhava, ‘the Lamas who belong to the Yellow Cap Sects
acknowledge the superiority of their brethren in the various
Red Cap Sects in all questions more or Jess connected with
magic and occult sciences’.


1,2 L. A, Waddell, The Buddhism of Tibet (London, 1895), pp. 67-9.
3 A, David-Neel, My Journey to Lhasa (London, 1927), p. 181.


14 INTRODUCTION


The following genealogical tree of La@mazst Sects (based on
that published by Dr. Waddell in his Buddhism of Tibet,
p- 55) will help to correct such errors. In addition, it indicates
very concisely the origin and interdependence of all the chief
sects of Tibetan Buddhism and the important place which the
Kargyiitpa Sect occupies amongst them.


VIII. GENEALOGICAL TREE OF ZAMATIST SECTS
Old pe Unreformed Semi-reformed School


chooL

By

so ink? m

35

1900 3
1850
S00
1750
1700
1650

1

1

t

t

1

1


1600
1550
1500
1450
1400
135°
1300
1250

1200

150


oo Ni a Tertoins
logo 1062 N Donnas


Ee

1000 g

z

y -

900 Persecution by .,
850 d


founded


Tsong-kha
Gander’ menlastery 1409A.D,


haand his pupil Brom-ton, circa 1050A.D.


a a ae 8g9 A.D"


4


800
750 Tadma Sambhava
Tibetan

Bon lantric Buddhism \


1, 2,8 See page opposite.


HIMALAYAN VoG/s 15


IX. THE DEFENCE OF THE HERMIT IDEAL

To the ordinary European and American, accustomed, per-
haps too much, to modern comforts and luxuries, the life lived
by the Kargyiitpa hermits, and by others like them, amid the
climatic rigours of the snowy Himalayas, clad only in a thin
cotton garment, subsisting on a daily handful of parched barley,
supplemented by roots and herbs, and now and then a little
yak’s milk brought by pious laymen, and freed from all worldly
possessions and untroubled by worldly quests, may, possibly,
seem an outcome of unreasoning religious zeal.

It should not be forgotten, however, that the hermit, in his
turn, views with deep compassion his brethren immersed in the
world; and, while they struggle for the world’s baubles, he is
offering up prayer for them, that their Ignorance (Avidyd)
may be dissipated and their feet set upon the Path of the Great
Deliverance. Full of pity, he looks out over the human race
with eyes of spiritual insight, as the Buddha Gautama did, and
beholds mankind fettered like chained slaves by their own
conventionalities—many of which are, in fact, indefensible.
He sees his fellow-men being held by their karma, the results
of their previous actions, to the tread-mill of the Twelve
Nidanas, the mutually interdependent causes of sangsaric
existence,! and being reborn interminably, but to fall, each
time, victims to sorrow, old age, illness, and death. And he
contemplates the coming of the time when he shall be em-
powered to go forth and lead them to Freedom.

1 The Twelve Nidanas are described on p. 138?, following.
1 The Terténs, i.e. ‘Takers-out of Terma (Hidden Revelations)’, play an important


part in the development of Lamaism. The Bardo Thodol is itself such a Terma;
see The Tibetan Book of the Dead, pp. 73-7.

2 Lang-Dar-ma, having become an apostate from Lamaism, appears to have insti-
gated the murder of his brother Ti-song De-tsen, the famous Buddhist King, in
A.p. 899. Thus gaining the throne, he persecuted Lamaism for about three years,
his reign ending with his assassination by Lama Pal-dorje (Cf. L.A. Waddell, op.
cit., p. 34)- 3

3 Taranatha is one of the great personalities of Tibetan history. Born in Tsang,
Tibet, in A.p. 1573, he died in Mongolia, where he had founded several monasteries
under the auspices of the Chinese Emperor and was canonized, his reincarnated suc-
cessors becoming the Grand Lamas of Urgya (in the Khalka province of Mongolia,
east of Lob-Nor). (Cf. L.A. Waddell, op. cit., pp. 70-71.)


16 INTRODUCTION


Thus, to the yog?, human life is a Net of Maya (Illusion),
in which, like trapped creatures, human beings struggle ;
desirable only when directed to the one aim, of reaching, by
right use of it, the Beyond-Nature, freed from all conditioned
states of transitory and phenomenal being, as by a boat one
crosses an ocean to the farther shore.

As one of the Hindu yogis once asked the writer, when, on
pilgrimage to Badrinath, the latter met him at his hermitage
near the wild frontiers of Garhwal and Tibet, ‘ Can aircraft and
wireless telegraphy and all your modern comforts bring true
happiness to the Race? Or can blind faith in the infallibility of
Holy Books bring Emancipation without Knowledge won by
practice of religion?’

We, too, ought seriously to consider whether the ideal which
Milarepa offers to us is not, after all, more truly cultural than
the ideal of the financier in Wall Street or that of the pleasure-
seeker in Paris.

Apart from their comparative value to society, the yogi
teaches that all states of human activity, being karmic, are in
themselves justified ; for to him the world is a vast School of
many gradations, some pupils being in the kindergarten, the
majority in the middle forms, and a few ready to pass on to
the University, wherein matriculation comes by successful
world-renunciation. Those who have evolved beyond the desires
of the worldly life are to him of greater value to society than
those who are still enamoured of the world.

In Milarepa’s Gur-Bum, or ‘One Hundred Thousand Songs’,
it is recorded that when the King of Khokhom and Yerang,
in Nepal, invited Milarepa to the royal presence and he refused
to leave the hermitage, the one who delivered the invitation
asked, ‘When a yogi, who is a mere man, is summoned by a
mighty king is it not seemly that he should set out and go to
do homage at the king’s feet?’ Milarepa replied, ‘I am like-
wise a mighty king, of the Wheel that Revolveth; and a king
who aboundeth in riches is in no wise happier or mightier than
I.’ Then when the spokesman asked where Milarepa’s king-
dom was, Milarepa answered: ‘Ye circle of officials of the
Kingdoms of the World, if ye but served such a Kingdom as


HIMALAYAN YOG/S AND GODS 17


is mine, ye would be transformed into the mightiest of monarchs ;
and the power and wealth of all things would spring forth [for
you].’?

Human beings immersed in the Illusion sprung from Ignor-
ance, that Platonic Cave of Shadows, and not striving to know
themselves, have been compared by the yogi to fish in a pond,
which, satisfied with the pond and the fish existence, have no
desire to quit the water-world and live in the air; or to deer
in a forest who prefer to continue to be deer though there be
offered to them the chance of becoming human.

It must equally be kept in mind, in judging the yogi, that he
claims to have proved, at least to himself, by methods as care-
ful and scientific in their own realm as those known in the
laboratories of the West in the realm of physical science, that
the ideals of the worldly are merely the ideals of an immature
social order, of races still in the lower and middle grades of the
World-School. Whether he be believed or not does not affect
his conviction. When, as he may point out, five centuries ago
Europeans believed the world to be flat it was really spherical ;
and now, likewise, the acceptance or rejection of his view of
human life cannot possibly change whatever is.

It has been said, although usually not accepted, that the
saints of Europe were in the past a lightning conductor to draw
away from the West the wrath of God. This, in a manner, is
not unlike the belief, current among Hindus and Buddhists,
that the Great Risks have been and are the Guardians of the
Human Race. Even to-day, in Ceylon, the Buddhist prays
that his next birth may be among the Gods on the Himalayas.
A Bengali hermit who had renounced a vast worldly estate in
Calcutta at the age of twenty-five and who, since then, had
been practising yoga for seventy-five years, in the high Hima-
layas where I met him, pointed out to me some of the snowy
ranges, in the direction of Mount Kailasa, whence the Gods keep
watch over and direct the spiritual growth of our Race. Though
invisible to the eyes of normal men, these Beings are, he added,
visible to Seers and can be communicated with by the pure in
heart ; and, as Silent Sentinels, They look out with divine com-

1 Cf. G. Sandberg, Tibet and the Tibetans (London, 1906), pp. 262-3.


18 INTRODUCTION


passion from the Himalayan Ramparts of the Earth, till the
Kali-Yuga Night shall have run its still long course and the
Day of Awakening dawns over all the nations.

Milarepa, too, as one who had won admission into the Society
of the Enlightened Ones, tells us in one of his hymns (see page
216) how he—Great Yogi that he was—shoots out, like arrows
over the world, good thoughts, bearing grace and spiritual
power, and how these, upon striking those who are receptive,
implant his blessings in the hearts of men.

As from mighty broadcasting stations, dynamically charged
with thought-forces, the Great Ones broadcast over the Earth
that Vital Spirituality which alone makes human evolution
possible; as the Sun sustains the physical man, They sustain
the psychic man, and make possible mankind’s escape from
the Net of Sangsaric Existence. Linked, as They are, in the
Chain of Being, with Humanity on Earth and the Enlightened
Ones beyond Nature, they fulfil a function far more important
than that of all the Kings and Rulers among men. This, in
short, is the conviction to which the developed yogz eventually
attains. The Translator himself supported it; for he, when
a young man in Bhutan, renounced the worldly life and went
into hermitage with his Guru, the late Hermit Guru Norbu,
near Buxuadar, and would never have returned to the world
had not his father, then an old man needing his support, called
him home and requested him to marry and continue the family.

The worldly, in their foolish wisdom, regard the Great Yogi,
sitting in silent meditation and Samadhi on the Himalayan
Heights, as a useless member of society, as one who has
deserted his duties in the world in order to win for himself a
selfish salvation. If this were, perhaps, a criticism applicable to
some of the hermits of the Egyptian deserts, it is not applicable
to the Kargytitpa hermits, nor to such sincere Indian yogis as
the writer has met.

Nowhere, in the course of his researches among the living
saints of the Himalayas and of Hindustan, has the writer en-
countered a genuine yog7 whose ideal was not unselfish prepara-
tion for service to the Race. One of them, although by birth
a Brahmana, had left behind him all distinctions of caste


THE YOG?’S VOW 19


and creed and, regarding all mankind as his brethren, was
looking forward—though it may be that many incarnations
were yet to be his lot—to the time when he would be able to
return to the world and'proclaim Truth Realizable. For him,
Renunciation must precede Conquest of Life, as Jesus, too,
proclaimed to the rich young man of the world who asked Him
the way to Salvation; and Truth Realized must precede the
task of teaching and guiding an unenlightened humanity. If
the Teacher has not himself seen the Light how can he proclaim
it to others?

Thus it is that the highest aim of every sincere yog7, be he
Hindu, Buddhist, Jain, Taoist, Sufi, or Gnostic Christian, is
first to fit himself to become a World-Teacher and then to
return to human society and carry out his Vow.! To him, one
lifetime is but as a day; and though many thousand lifetimes
in the fleshly form should be necessary to reach Enlightenment,
all the while, through the centuries, he must unwaveringly hold
fast to the life which he has voluntarily chosen. And he has
so chosen, because, in past lives, he has lived the worldly life,
marrying and giving in marriage, tasting pleasure, filled with
insatiable ambitions ; and, learning the lessons taught by such
lives, has risen to a place among the higher species of his race.”


1 The Vow to attain the state of the Bodhisattva, or Great Teacher, leading
to the treading of the Higher Path, as in the Mahayana School, is fourfold :
(1) to bring about the salvation of all sentient beings, (2) to bring about the
destruction of all sangsa@ric passions in oneself, (3) to realize and then to teach
others the Truth, and (4) to set others on the Path leading to Buddhahood. The
Vow implies that Mirvd@na will not be entered into, by the one taking the Vow,
until all creatures, from the lowest in sub-human kingdoms on this and every
other planet to the highest of unenlightened gods in the heaven-worlds and the
most fallen of dwellers in hell-worlds, are guided safely across the Ocean of
the Sangsdra to the Other Shore of Eternal Deliverance. The doctrine of Never-
Ending Damnation finds no place in this universal altruism, being held to be—
as Origen, the great Christian, also maintained—incompatible with the All-
Embracing Love of the Good Law. (See p. 151%.)

The Vow to attain the state of the Pratyeka (or Non-Teaching) Buddha
belongs to the Lesser Path, the Hinayana. But even on this Path direct benefit
to humanity is conferred in other ways, as, for instance, by silent and invisible
broadcasting of spiritual influences over all the nations, thereby invigorating
and helping to maintain in activity the higher nature of man, as the sun’s rays
do the physical man.

2 This, however, does not imply that the yogi’s asceticism precludes his


20 INTRODUCTION


Having realized that the worldly life is not the highest state
on Earth, he has relinquished it; and, like one come out of
a cave into the light of day, no longer has he any desire to
return to the Shadows. The Path he has chosen leads to the
Higher Evolution, to the Beyond-Nature; its Goal is the
deliverance from the limited personality in the All-Enlighten-
ment, the transmutation, by the alchemy of Right Knowledge,
of the mundane into the Supra-Mundane—the Uncognizable,
the Unknowable, the Unborn, Unmade, WVirvdua.


X. THE ARHANT PROBLEM


All of this leads us to a problem which has, of late, been
discussed even among European thinkers. ‘Are there’, is a
question which has been addressed to the writer, ‘members of
the human race who have reached, as Milarepa is believed to
have done, the height of such spiritual and physical evolution
as this planet admits; and who being, as it were, a species
apart from other human beings, are possessed of mastery over
natural forces as yet undiscovered, but probably suspected, by
Western Science?’ This, it seems to us, is the most important
anthropological question which Milarepa’s Biography raises.

That men so highly developed now exist, and that there
have been others of the same species in every age, is the claim
of all the Great Rishis who have made India illustrious. The
Buddhists hold that the Buddha Gautama, Himself One of the
Great Rishis, is but One of many Buddhas, the beginning of
Whose Dynasty is lost in remote antiquity. The Hindus make
the same claim concerning their Hindu Azskzs ; and the modern
followers of the Great Rishzs, who are the yogis, some of one
Faith, some of another, a few Indian Christians being numbered
among them, hold firmly to it.

The Arkant Problem obviously being of very great impor-


helping to continue the ordinary human species; for one part of the ideal
of asceticism in the Orient is indomitable control and right use of the whole of
the physical organism rather than that common misuse of it which results in
licentiousness. Many Great Yogts. as was the case with Gautama the Buddha,
have first entered the married state, and then, having passed out of it, have
altruistically dedicated the larger portion of their life to working for social
betterment. To work only for family or nation is for them selfish, there being
but the One Family and the One Nation, Humanity.


THE PATH TO ARHANTSHIP at


tance in itself, and in relation to Milarepa, some consideration
of it may fittingly be included in this Introduction.

An Arhant being defined as a Perfected Saint on Earth,}
One who has reached the Goal of Enlightenment, it will, at the
outset, be seen that a saintly hermit, Kargyiitpa or other, is not
necessarily an Arhant, and may, in fact, be no nearer Arhant-
ship than an ordinary householder.? The following postulates
may, however, be made: (1) That hermits exist in Tibet and
in the adjacent Himalayan States, as in India, can easily be
proved. (2) That most of them are practising Buddhist ascetics
and Hindu yogis, making serious efforts to tread the path to
Arhantship, is equally true. (3) That reliable evidence suggests
that among so many aspirants there are, as might perhaps
reasonably be expected, a few, exceedingly few, probably not
one per ten thousand, in advanced stages of sainthood, who do
reach or at least nearly reach the Goal, as Milarepa is represented
as doing.

The Tibetans, on their part, maintain that it is quite as
feasible to traverse the path to Arhantship to its very end in
this age as it has been in any past age; and, in justification,
assert that there are men now living among them who have
done so, as Milarepa, their National Saint, did during the
eleventh century A.D.* Although the assertion may not be
demonstrable to a person who is not an Arhant, or who dis-
believes in Arhanis, and therefore needs to be accepted, if at


1 Following the Mahayana School, an Arhant (or Arhat) is one who has
attained to the first stage of Bodhisattvic perfections. Following the Tantric
School (as apart from the Mahayana, with which in Milarepa’s yogic practices
it is amalgamated), an Arhant is one who has attained to such a high degree of
spiritual development as to have won initiation into the fourth order of Tantric
Initiates,

2 “An Arhant being one who, having eradicated Lust, Anger, and Ignorance,
is freed from the thraldom of the Twelve Nidanas and from every sangsanic
fetter, the state of the bAtkshu, or ascetic who has renounced the worldly life,
affords the most natural approach to Arhantship. It is said that if a householder
attains to Arhantship he either renounces the world within seven days there-
after and becomes a monk, or else enters into his Pari-Nirvana.’—Sri Nissanka.

5 « Although many of our scholars in the Southern School may not accept this
view of the Northern School, they are, however, unable to find anywhere in
the Pali Canon teachings of the Buddha to the contrary. The Satipatthdna Sutta
is emphatic on the possibility of the attainment of Arhantship.’—Sri Nissanka.


22 INTRODUCTION


all, on faith, it may be literally true. How many of us know
by personal realization that the sun is 93,000,000 miles or so
distant, or that any other generally accepted fact of natural
science is true? We believe such facts by force of our social
psychology and of recently acquired mental predisposition. To
have faith about Arhants appears to be, though it ought
not to be, much more difficult. Perhaps this is due to our
having unconsciously become so dominated by scientific faith,
i.e. faith in physical facts, that we have become unfitted to
retain our old ancestral faith in facts which are super-physical.

Nevertheless, the more the writer has examined the Tibetan’s
claim to Arhants, the more convinced he has become that it
ought not to be lightly set aside as it is apt to be by Christians,
and even by Southern Buddhists, who, probably seeing no
evidence of actual Arhkants among themselves, are inclined
to conclude that there can be no Arhants anywhere else, more
especially among ‘heretical’ Northern Buddhists and Hindus.

If the application of the Sermon on the Mount, or the treading
of the Noble Eightfold Path, were no longer practicable, then
there would be—so our yogi friends contend—sound reason to
sustain this sceptical attitude of the European or of the
Southern Buddhist.

The writer, in venturing herein to put on record some results
of his Tibetan and Indian researches, extending over more
than five years, can, of course, only speak for himself and let
his conclusions be taken for what they are worth. He, as a
result of his inquiries, has good reason to think that among
the Himalayan hermits (a few of whom he has conversed with
in their own environments) there are possibly some—if per-
chance there be but two or three-—who, having gone forth into
homelessness, as did the Great Arhant, the Truly Enlight-
ened One, have reached the Goal. In other words, the path to
Arhantship appears still to be open.

These Awakened Ones have reached Deliverance from
Ignorance, from Craving for Sangsaric Existence, from further
karmic need of birth and death. Of Milarepa, after he had
reached Enlightenment, it is written, in Rechung’s Introduction,
‘{He was] one who, having had the advantage of holy and


THE PATH TO ARHANTSHIP 23


sacred teachers, stored up the life-giving elixir that fell from
their lips, and tasted it for himself in the delightful solitude of
mountain retreats, thereby obtaining emancipation from the
toils of Ignorance, [so that] the seeds of Experience and Inspira-
tion sprouted up in him and attained to full growth... . [He
was] one who reached Those dwelling in the City of the Great
Emancipation, wherein every one existeth in indescribable


bliss...’
To the mystic of the Orient, an Arhant is one who reaches


perfection on Earth only after many lives dedicated to the
greatest of all great adventures; he is the quintessence of all
human enlightenment and progress throughout the ages, the
rare efflorescence of society, the link uniting mankind to the
Higher Culture.

Given the beliefs of the Oriental mystic, it is not unreason-
able, and certainly not unscientific, to believe that the ordinary
man is far from the top of the ladder of spiritual achievement ;
and, therefore, it is not only probable, but necessary, that there
should be, as there are said to have been, and as it is believed
there will be in the future, from among this world’s millions of
human beings at least a few in every generation who keep
open, as Plato would say, the Sacred Way from the Plains
of Earth to the Heights of Olympus. If there be no such
Guardians of the Sacred Way of the Greater Evolution, then,
indeed, would the path to Arhantship be impassable and the
Goal unrealizable for mankind ; all escape from the Sangsara
would be cut off.

If this view of the Indian Seers be right, then all of the
Supreme World-Teachers—Who were Arhants, and more than
Arhants—become understandable to us who yet dwell in the
Sangsara through which They passed to Freedom; and we
see Them as truly our own Brethren, as Guides Who have ex-
plored and marked out and still guard for us the Way, and bid
us follow Them.

As the followers of Milarepa contend, in Truth-seeking,
Truth can be found only through Realization of Truth, in the
Gnostic sense, and not by intellectual speculation; so, in
deciding whether or not there are Arhants now, in Tibet or


24 INTRODUCTION


elsewhere in the world, the only valid and scientific procedure
is to explore for oneself the path leading to Arhantship, as
Milarepa herein bids us do.

Even the sceptic need only have faith enough to believe in
the possibility of such a path in order to find and examine it.
If this faith be lacking, then, inevitably, the quest would be
utterly hopeless and the sceptic would continue to be as
Milarepa’s School teaches that he is—the slave of Time and
Change. Without faith that a certain experiment may lead to
a certain result, no chemist or physicist could possibly discover
fresh scientific truths ; and no man can ever expect to discover
that New World, of which Milarepa sings in his ecstatic joy of
triumph, unless he first sets up a postulate that there is a New
World awaiting his discovery.

Among human beings, fortunately, a vast majority still do
possess such faith, because they believe that Evolution does
not come to an end in man, who is, biologically considered,
merely the highest of the animal beings. The Hindu and the
Jain, the Taoist and the Christian, and the Moslem Sufi, no
less than the Buddhists of all Schools, have their own Gurus
to point out the Way.


XI. THE TEXT AND ITS TRANSLATION


The late Lama Kazi Dawa-Samdup, of whom the Editor
has given a brief biographical account in the Introduction to
The Tibetan Book of the Dead, began the English translation
of the ¥etstin-Kahbum, upon which our version is based, on
the twenty-second day of June, 1902; and, working on it
periodically when he could spare time—he being the sole
support of an aged father and mother and a wife and three
children—completed it on the twenty-ninth day of January,
1917.

Then, during the year 1920, whilst he was Headmaster
of the Maharaja’s Bhutia Boarding School, near Gangtok,
Sikkim (formerly a part of Tibet), he began preparing the trans-
lation for publication, aided by Major W. L. Campbell, who
was then the Political Officer representing the British Govern-
ment in Tibet, Bhutan, and Sikkim, and himself a Tibetan


TRANSLATION OF THE B/JOGRAPHY 25


scholar. The Editor, too, was then in Gangtok, working with
the Lama on the translation of The Tibetan Book of the Dead
and other Tibetan religious treatises, and saw something of the
progress made with the ¥etsiin-Kahbum. Upon the premature
death of the Lama, in March 1922, shortly after his appoint-
ment to the Tibetan Professorship in the University of Cal-
cutta, the work in preparation for the publishing of Jetsiin’s
Biography was \eft unfinished.

Thereafter, the Editor, while on a visit to the late Lama’s
home at Kalimpong, beyond Darjeeling, in the year 1924,
secured from the late Lama’s surviving son the original manu-
script translation ; and in the autumn of the following year at
Oxford began the adaptation of the translation which is here
presented.

It had always been the hope of the Translator to supervise
the publication of the translation ; and had he lived to do so,
all errors which may possibly have crept into our version would,
no doubt, have been eliminated. But rather than postpone
publication indefinitely, the Editor has thought it wiser to offer
to the world the translation in the form which now has been
given to it, while faithfully following the Translator’s manuscript.

In his English rendering, the Translator kept as close to the
literal sense of the Tibetan text as the idioms of the two lan-
guages permit, or as is compatible with literary English, except
in a comparatively few instances, where, as he said, it was pre-
ferable to bring out, in a somewhat freer manner, the real
meaning intended rather than translate literally abstruse meta-
physical terms and phrases which—even if they could be
Englished—would fail to convey the meaning an initiated
lama would gather from them in the original.

Extracts and parts, both from the Biography and from the
Songs (or Hymns), have, of late, now and then appeared in
translation in various European languages. The Government
of India, for example, published in the year 1914 the late
Lama Kazi Dawa-Samdup’s first English rendering of the
chapter of the Biography recording Jetstn’s Meditation in
Solitude, which, according to our editing, is Chapter X, for use
in connexion with the high proficiency examination in Tibetan.


26 INTRODUCTION


During the summer of 1925 there appeared an abridged transla-
tion of the Biography, in French, by M. Jacques Bacot. There
is a Mongolian version of the Biography and probably another
in Chinese. Our English version is the first complete transla-
tion to be published in an Occidental tongue.!

As M. Bacot in his letters to me has stated, there seems to
be one generally accepted and more or less standardized
Tibetan text; but in different editions, according to the
monastery in which the printing is done, there are minor differ-
encesin orthography. The Colophons, too, may differ according
to the scribe who prepared the text for publication. M. Bacot
adds that in the last two chapters of the late Lama Dawa-
Samdup’s English rendering, copies of which were lent to him
by Major W. L. Campbell, the folio numbers given of the
corresponding Tibetan text do not agree with those from
which he made his French translation. Evidently, then, our
version and his are based upon different Tibetan editions.

The Appendix of our edition (see page 306) records that
Gampopa also wrote a Biography of Jetstin. Of this, how-
ever, we have no knowledge. Nor can we determine whether
or not there is more than one version attributed to Rechung.
In his own valuable Introduction, M. Bacot has discussed these
and kindred technical problems; and to his Mzlarepa the
student is referred for further information.

The Editor’s interest being anthropological rather than philo-
logical, he has not aimed at the production of a standardized
version ; nor would he have been fitted to produce one had all
the necessary data and material been available. This important
task remains for scholars of the future, who, it is hoped, will

! Apart from our own and M, Bacot’s version of the Biography, the chiet
matter so far published in Europe and America concerning Milarepa is, in order
of publication, as follows: H. A. Jaschke, Proben aus dem tibetischen Legenden-
buche ; die hundert-tausend Gesange des Milaraspa, in the Zeitschrift der Deutschen
Morgenlandischen Gesellschaft (Leipzig, 1869), xxiii, 543-58; W. W. Rockhill,
The Tibetan Hundred Thousand Songs’ of Milaraspa, in the Journal of the
American Oriental Society (New Haven, 1884), xi, Proc. 207-11; L. A. Waddell,
The Buddhism of Tibet (London, 1895), pp. 64-7; Berthold Laufer, Zwei Legenden
des Milavaspa (Wien, 1901), Aus den Geschichten und Liedern des Milaraspa


(Wien, 1902); G. Sandberg, Tibet and the Tibetans (London, 1906), ch. xiii}
Berthold Laufer, Milaraspa (1922).


THE BIOGRAPHY AS LITERATURE 27


eventually produce a scientifically accurate Tibetan text and
so facilitate the eliminating from our own English version of
any inaccuracies which may have crept into it.


XII. THE PLACE OF THE JETSUN-KAHBUM IN THE
LITERATURE OF TIBET

In Tibet itself, the Yetstin-Kahbum possesses the rare dis-
tinction of being prized by the literary and learned classes
as by the common unlearned folk. Of it the Translator has
left behind him this scholarly judgement, which he recorded
in manuscript to serve as part of an Introduction such as
ours :—

‘ Although written more than eight hundred years ago, it is
from beginning to end set down in such a plain and simple
style of language that any ordinary Tibetan of to-day who can
read at all can read it with ease and enjoyment. When we
add to this that it tells the life-story of one who is looked up
to and admired by all Tibetans, of every sect and school, as
the Ideal Ascetic, or Yog7, and that he is no less esteemed as
a poet and song-writer, whose songs are in everybody’s mouth
among the common people, somewhat like the songs of Burns
in Scotland, we see how it is that this life of Milarepa is one
of the most famous and favourite books of Tibet. For it is well
admired by those who know how to write books as by those
who only know how to read them when written.

‘But in modern Tibetan works, the authors seem to be
aiming more at dazzling and also puzzling the reader by their
display of skill in framing cryptic, yet at the same time im-
peccably correct and grammatical sentences, with a view to
arousing the reader’s awe and admiration at their learning, than
in setting down a plain tale in plain words that shall reach the
reader’s mind in the simplest and most direct manner.

‘Notwithstanding the Biography’s simplicity and perfect free-
dom from needlessly complicated language, it possesses many
beauties due to the way in which it is written, which can be
appreciated, and are appreciated, by those who understand
such things, even though they themselves do not feel inclined
to imitate its simplicity and directness. What the author says


28 INTRODUCTION


in his versified note at the end of his work is no vain boast,
but the simple truth:


“This Biography [or History| hath been made beautiful at
the beginning and end with ornate language ;


May it thus be a feast of delight to all scholars and lovers
of literature.”


And such a feast of delight it truly is, in the original.

‘Being thus both simple and yet studded with literary
beauties, it is, in the original, about the best possible book
that a foreign student of Tibetan can take up with a view to
improving and extending his knowledge of the language.
Alexander Csoma-de-Ko6ros, the great Hungarian Tibetan
scholar who made the first Tibetan Dictionary and Grammar,
and Jaschke, and Sarat Chandra Das, have all taken this book
as one of the standard works on Tibetan in compiling their
Dictionaries. Yet, at the same time, such a student will also
find, to his pleasure, that he is doing himself a benefit of another
and as excellent a kind; for he will discover that he is making
the acquaintance of one who is numbered among the Great
Saints of Tibet, as Sri Krishna is among those of India, or as
Saint Francis is among those of Europe. And, perhaps, as he
goes on with his reading and study, he may learn to love and
admire Milarepa. Perhaps, too, as he follows the life of the
Saint, he may come to pass a kindlier judgement upon Tibetan
life and religion and custom than his reading of books by
foreigners about our country may have led him to form.

‘ At any rate, something of this kind is what I (the present
Translator) had in view in making this translation. I wished
to show to cultured Western eyes one of our Great Teachers,
as he actually lived, in a biography of him, much of which is
couched in the words of his own mouth, and the remainder in
the words of his disciple Rechung, who knew him in the flesh.’


XIII. MILAREPA AS ONE OF HUMANITY’S HEROES


Despite the many sectarian differences between the numerous
sects of Tibetan Buddhism, all Tibetans alike unite in holding
Jetsin Milarepa in the highest reverence and esteem ; and they


THIS BOOK’S MISSION 29


consider him the very prototype of everything that a Great
Saint should be. In this way, then, Milarepa may be said to
belong to no one Sect or School.

Milarepa, the Socrates of Asia, counted the world’s intellec-
tualisms, its prizes, and it pleasures as naught; his supreme
quest was for that personal discovery of Truth, which, as he
teaches us, can be won only by introspection and self-analysis,
through weighing life’s values in the scale of the Bodfz-IIlu-
minated mind. In him, the teachings of all the Great Yogis
of India, including the Greatest of them known to history,
Gautama the Buddha, when put to the test of scientific experi-
mentation, failed not. How many parallels, too, may be drawn
between Jetsiin’s precepts recorded in this Biography and those
of another Great Master of Life, will be seen by making com-
parison with the Sermon on the Mount.

As a member of the Mongolian Race, Milarepa, like Con-
fucius, is but one more instance of the fact that genius recog-
nizes no barriers in racial stock, or nationality, or creed, being
as universally human as humanity itself.

May this Book help to spread understanding of this natural
law of Universal Brotherhood. May it be one more humble
memorial to its Great Hero. And may it go down to the
generations yet unborn as a legacy from him who made possible
its transmission to the European Races, its learned Translator,
the late Lama Kazi Dawa-Samdup.


THE TRANQUIL


‘Tranquil in body, speech, and mind, O mendicants,
Whoso in every way is well restrained,
Who all this world’s desires hath thrown aside,

He is ‘‘the tranquil’ called.


‘That mendicant, with utter joy and gladness filled,
Firm in the teaching of the Awakened One,
Reacheth the bliss where all conditions cease,
Reacheth the State of Peace.’
The Buddha, from the Dhammapada, vv. 377, 380.
(F. L. Woodward's Translation.)


THE BANNER OF VICTORY


Described on pages 334, 87-8, 261


RY 5
Laing lies


"i gl
-j!) Ka) Sse


MILAREPA THE TIBETAN yoG7


Described on pages xxvi-xxvii


INTRODUCTION


(from the Tibetan)
by
RECHUNG, DISCIPLE OF MILAREPA


Obeisance to the Guru!


[HEREIN] I wish to narrate the history of a Great Yogz, who
lived in this high snow-clad table-land of Tibet. [He was]
one who had been profoundly impressed from his early youth
by the transient and impermanent nature of all conditions of
worldly existence, and by the sufferings and wretchedness in
which he saw all beings immersed. To him existence seemed
like some huge furnace wherein all living creatures were roast-
ing. With such piercing sorrow did this fill his heart that he
was unable to feel any envy even of the celestial felicity en-
joyed by Brahma and Indra in their Heavens, much less of
the earthly joys and delights afforded by a life of worldly
greatness.

On the other hand, he was so captivated by the Vision of
Immaculate Purity, by the Chaste Beauty found in the de-
scription of the State of Perfect Freedom and Omniscience
associated with the attainment of Vixvdamua, that he cared not
even though he should lose his very life in the search on
which he had set out, endowed as he was with faith, firm and
full, a keen intellect, and a heart overflowing with all-pervad-
ing love and sympathy.

[He was] one who, having had the advantage of holy and
sacred teachers, stored up the life-giving elixir that fell from
their lips, and tasted it for himself in the delightful solitude of
mountain retreats, thereby obtaining emancipation from the
toils of Ignorance, [so that] the seeds of Experience and In-
spiration sprouted up in him and attained to full growth.

[He was] one who, having thrown aside all concern for


32 INTRODUCTION BY RECHUNG


worldly prospects, ease, name, and fame, resolutely devoted
himself to the single object of raising the banner of spiritual
development to such a height that it might serve as a guide
for future followers on the Path, as a signal sufficient to save
them from worldliness and dilatoriness, and to urge them on-
ward on the Upward Way.'

[He was] one who, having been favoured by gods and
angels, triumphed over the difficulties of the Path, obtaining
transcendent pre-eminence in spiritual truths and such depth
of knowledge and experience therein that religious devotion
became second nature to him.

[He was] one who, by his profound reverence for and sincere
belief in the Lineal Gurus,’ obtained their grace and spiritual
support, and nomination as their adopted spiritual successor in
the promulgation of the Spiritual Truths, thereby manifesting
super-normal powers and signs of an incomparable nature and
unmistakable significance.

[He was] one who, by the power of the greatness of his
fervent, sincere, and altruistic love and compassion, was en-
dowed with the power and gift of inspiring even unrighteous,
worldly, sin-hardened, sceptical scoffers and unbelievers with
involuntary emotion of soul-stirring faith, causing each hair on
their body to stand on end in thrilling ecstasy, and making the
tears to flow copiously from their eyes, thereby sowing in them
the seed of future redemption and enlightenment, and causing
it to sprout up in their heart by the mere hearing of his history
and name. Thus was he enabled to reclaim, redeem, and
protect them from the pains and terror of this low, worldly
existence.

[He was] one who, having mastered the mystic and occult

' The Upward Way is the Path of Renunciation (Skt. Muyitti-Marga) leading
to Mrvana, the Noble Eightfold Path, the Via Sacra of the Buddhas; whereas
attachment to worldliness is the Path of Enjoyment (Skt. Pravyitti-Marga).

? The Lineal Gurus are those of any School who are in apostolic succession,
Milarepa himself being the fourth in the Kargyitpa Line, as explained in our
Introduction. The importance of the spiritual succession is likewise recognized
in Brahmanism with its three lines of Gurus, the Divya, Siddha, and Manava,
the essential esoteric teachings being handed down not in books, but from guru


(teacher) to shtshya (disciple). This process of transmission is known in Sanskrit
as Paramparya-kramia.


MILAREPA’S OCCULT POWERS 33


sciences, had communicated to him by the Dakinis} con-
tinuously the four blissful states of ecstatic communion,? thus
furthering his spiritual growth.

[He was] one who eventually rid himself of the Twofold
Shadow [of Illusion and Karma®*] and soared into Spiritual
Space, till he attained the Goal wherein all doctrines merge in
at-one-ment.

[He was] one who, having attained to omniscience, all-per-
vading goodwill, and glowing love, together with the acquisi-
tion of transcendental powers and virtues, became a self-de-
veloped Buddha, who towered above all conflicting opinions
and arguments of the various sects and creeds, like the topmost
gem that adorns the Banner of Victory.*

[He was] one who, having adopted the peerless Vajra Path,°
gave himself to assiduous endeavour, and attained the utmost
height of spiritual experience and knowledge.


1 The Dakini[s] (Tib. Mkah-gro-ma-—pron. Kah-’gvo-ma) are fairy-like god-
desses of various orders, possessed of peculiar occult powers. Many of them are
the chief deities invoked in the rituals of Tantricism, both Hindu and Buddhist.
In other contexts herein, Dakinis has been translated as ‘angels’.

2 These, the four stages of Dhyana (Tib. Bsant-gtan), have been given by the
Translator as follows: (1) Analysis (Skt. Vitarka) ; (2) Reflection (Skt. Vichara) ;
(3) Fondness (Skt. Prit?); and (4) Bliss (Skt. Sukha). These are the four pro-
gressive mental states leading to the complete concentration of mind producing
ecstzzic Illumination.

3 Iilusion (Skt. Maya: Tib. Sgy#ma—pron. Gyiima), or the universally human
animistic belief that phenomena in worlds, hells, and heavens are real, and that
the ego (itself a karmic conglomerate of characteristics acquired during in-
calculable aeons through experiences in the Sangsara of phenomena) is real,
is the Twofold Shadow hiding Reality, which, being non-sangsaric, cannot
be realized either while one is immersed in existence on Earth or in any
after-death paradise—not even in the Heaven of the Semitic Faiths (Judaism,
Christianity, Islam), which is within the realm of phenomena, of appearances,
of personality, of sensation, of things. Mirvana is beyond Nature, beyond
phenomena. It is the ‘Unbecome, Unborn, Unmade, Unformed’—the One
Reality.

4 This is one of the eight symbols of Northern Buddhism, called the Eight
Glorious Emblems, which are: (1) the Golden Fish, (2) the Royal Umbrella,
(3) the Conch-shell Trumpet of Victory, (4) the Lucky Diagram, (5) the
Banner of Victory, (6) the Vase, (7) the Lotus, and (8) the Wheel of the Law.
The Banner of Victory (Tib. Rgyal-mts’an: Skt. Dhvaja) symbolizes Victory
over the Sangsara, or the attainment of Perfect Enlightenment—Mirvana.

5 The Vajra (or ‘ Immutable’) Path (Skt. Vajra-yana) is the Path of Mysticism
as known to the Kargyiitpa Sect, in which Milarepa is one of the Great Dynasty,
or Line, of Gurus.


34 INTRODUCTION BY RECHUNG


[He was] one whose fame of surpassing merit, being hymned
by gods and angels, hath filled all the ten divisions of the uni-
verse! with the waving of the Banner of Fame, and with the
reverberating tones of the Melody of Praise.

[He was] one whose physical body was pervaded by the
descending bliss down to his very toes, and by the ascending
bliss up to the crown of his head, where both merge in the
moon-fluid bliss, thence rebounding and coursing down the
three principal nerves, uncoiling the coils of the nerve-centres,
and then finally enlarging the minutest nerves and changing
them all into so many actual median-nerves.?

[He was] one who thus was able to expound fluently the
meanings and ideas contained in the twelve collections of
Sitras and the Four Scriptures, and to render them into


metrical stanzas to be sung in the rites and ritual of the Vayra
Path.


1 These are the four cardinal points, the four mid-way points, and the nadir
and zenith. 7

2 This paragraph refers to the yogic process, as in Kuzdalini Yoga, of develop-
ing the psychic nerves (Skt. w@¢f) and psychic nerve-centres (Skt. chakra) of
the human body. The psychic nerve situated in the hollow of the spinal column
(Skt. Brahma-danda) is the chief, or median nerve (Skt. sushumnda-na@di), and
interconnected by it are the psychic nerve-centres, wherein are stored, like
electricity in dynamos, the vital force (Skt. prada), upon which all psycho-
physical processes ultimately depend. Once the psychic nerve-centres have
been awakened or uncoiled, beginning with the first, known as the Root-Support
(Skt. Muladhdra) of the median-nerve, situated in the perineum, wherein the
mighty occult power personified as the Goddess Kundalini lies coiled like
a serpent asleep, the yogt experiences Illumination. The Kundalini, or Serpent,
Power, having risen through the median-nerve and uncoiled the Root-Support,
continues its upward course, penetrating and setting into psychic activity the
second nerve-centre, called in Sanskrit the Svdadishthana, which is the centre
of the sex-organs, then the third, or navel nerve-centre, the Mavtpirva-chakra,
then the fourth, or heart nerve-centre, the Andhata-chakra, then the fifth,
or throat nerve-centre, the Vishuddha-chakra, then the sixth, the 4j#a-chakra,
situated between the eyebrows like a third eye, until, like mercury in a magic
tube, it reaches the brain psychic nerve-centre, called the Thousand-Petalled
Lotus (Skt. Sahasrdra-Padma), which is the Supreme, or Seventh, of the
centres. Therein a subtle transformation is effected, in which the moon-
fluid, or transmuted sex forces, are psycho-physically all-powerful. The divine
bliss, arising from the Illumination, descends as heavenly ambrosia to feed all
parts of the psychic body, even to the very toes. All the psychic nerve-centres
are uncoiled, or set into functioning activity, and the smallest of the psyciic
nerves, compared to their undeveloped condition, are like median-nerves in the
ecstatic condition of body such as Milarepa commonly enjoyed.


MILAREPA’S OCCULT POWERS 35


[He was] one who, having all his ideas and concepts merged
with the Primal Cause, had eliminated the Illusion of Duality.

[He was] one who, being well versed in the science of mind
and intellect, read external phenomena like a book.

[He was] a being boundlessly endowed with grace, omni-
science, and power, and able to develop and emancipate even
dumb beasts by preaching to them.

[He was] a being who had passed beyond the need of ob-
serving worldly rules, artificial conventions, and flattery, re-
verently worshipped by all rational beings [gods and men]
with profound obeisance, while he remained tranquil, dignified,
and attentive.

[He was] a being most diligent and persevering in medita-
tion upon the Rare Path, not excelled by, but rather excelling
all other Great Yogzs and Bodhisattvas? of his own day who
were similarly blest, becoming an object of worship even to
them.

With the deep, thundering roar of a lion * he proclaimed the
Truth of the realizable fact of the illusoriness of the Ego,* in
the full assurance of its realization, awing and subduing beings
and creatures of evil and selfish disposition, and revelled in
freedom in the limitless and centreless sphere of the heavens,
like an unbridled lion roaming free among the mountain
ranges.

Having acquired full power over the mental states and
faculties within, he overcame all dangers from the elements
without, and directed them to his own profit and use.

Having obtained transcendental knowledge in the control


1 The Primal Cause is Primordial Mind, the One Unity. All pairs of
opposites being but concepts of the mundane mind, even the ultimate pair of
opposites—Sangsdra and Nirvad);a—when viewed by the supra-mundaneness
of Enlightenment merge in at-one-ment, and Duality is realized to be Illusion.

2 A Great Yogi (or Saint) is one who has attained mastery of the Occult
Sciences ; a Bodhisattva is one who, having progressed far on the Bodhi Path
leading to Buddhahood, is destined to become a Buddha, or ‘Enlightened One’,
and to teach the Way of Enlightenment to beings who are unenlightened.

3 The proclamation of the Truth by one who has attained to Bodhic Enlighten-
ment is figuratively known among Buddhists as the ‘ Lion’s Roar’ (Skt. Singha-
Nada).

4 See p. 38', following.


36 INTRODUCTION BY RECHUNG


of the ethereal and spiritual nature of the mind, he was enabled
to furnish demonstration thereof by flying through the sky, by
walking, resting, and sleeping [upheld by levitation] in the air.

Likewise he was able to produee flames of fire and springs
of water from his body, and to transform his body at will into
any object desired, thereby convincing unbelievers and turning
them towards religious pursuits.

[He was] a being perfect in the practice of the four stages
of meditation,! and thus able to project his subtle body so as
to be present as the Presiding Yogi in all the Twenty-Four
Holy Places where gods and angels assemble, like clouds, for
spiritual communion.”

Being fearless in the knowledge of the indestructible nature
of mind,’ he was able to dominate gods and elementals of the
eight different kinds, and make them carry out his commands
instantaneously, in the fulfilment of the four classes of duties.*

[He was] a master architect, well versed in the exposition
of the Science of the Clear Void of Mind,® wherein all forms
and substances have their cause and origin.


1 These are the four stages of Dhyana, already given above, on page 337.

2 These are the Twenty-Four Places of Pilgrimage (cf. p. 164), known also
to Hinduism. With them are sometimes included the Eight Great Places of
Cremation in India, where, if the cremation takes place, there results a more
spiritual liberation and a consequent better rebirth than from cremation else-
where. Taken together, they constitute the Thirty-Two Places of Pilgrimage
(ef. p. 133), whence there are believed to emanate magnetic-like forces which
aid psychic development and make devotion more meritorious and communion,
of a telepathic sort, with such spiritual beings as naturally assemble there, very
real. To Great Yopts—as was the case with Milarepa—is commonly attributed
the power of visiting these Sacred Centres of the Earth (comparable to the
Psychic Nerve-Centres of the human organism) with an invisible or subtle body,
in order to preside over, or take part in, the divine conclaves.

8 This refers to the Mahayana doctrine that the state of mind as realized in
the ecstatic illumination of Buddhahood is the only Reality. It is beyond the
state of mundane and illusory or impermanent mind, which man, immersed in
the maya of sangsaric phenomena, alone knows. Being supra-mundane, it is
beyond Nature (which is the Child of Maya), beyond the Sangsdra (the pheno-
menal Universe) ; and so, subject neither to modification nor destruction, it is
the Immutable, the Indestructible.

* These are: Love (Skt. Mattreya’, Compassion (Skt. Karuzd@), Rejoicing
(Skt. Mudita@), and Almsgiving (Skt. Upeksha@i\—the four duties of a Bodhisattva,

° Here Mind is viewed as the Void (Tib. Tong-pa-nyid: Skt. Shiinyata),
which, however, is not the void of nothingness, but the primordial Uncreated,


MILAREPA’S OCCULT POWERS 37


[He was] a deeply skilled physician, well practised in the
art of curing the chronic diseases of the [unenlightened] mind
by applying the medicine of the Five Divine Wisdoms.!

[He was] an accomplished interpreter of the good or evil
significations of the sounds inherent in all external and internal
elements, while knowing each of them to be Audible Space.?


Unformed, incapable of being described in terms of phenomenal or sangsaric
experience. In so far as it is the Uncreated, no attributes known to the finite
world or mind can be given to it. As the Dharma-Dhatu, or ‘Seed of Truth’,
it is the Source of the Sangsara, or universe of phenomena. As the Dharma-
Kaya, or ‘Body of Truth’, it is the Qualityless. It is the Thatness, the Norm
of being, the Cause and Origin of all that constitutes finiteness.

1 The Five Divine Wisdoms are: (1) the All-Pervading Wisdom of the
Dharma-Dhatu; or the Wisdom born of the Voidness, which is all-pervading,
symbolized in the first of the Five Dhyani Buddhas, Vairochana, the Manifester,
‘He who in Shapes Makes Visible’ [the universe of matter]; (2) the Mirror-
like Wisdom, symbolized by Akshobhya, the ‘Unagitated One’, or by his
reflex Vajra-Sattva, the ‘ Triumphant One of Divine Heroic Mind’, the second
of the Dhyani Buddhas; (3) the Wisdom of Equality, symbolized by the third
of the Dhyani Buddhas, Ratna-Sambhava, the ‘Gem-born One’, the Beautifier ;
(4) the Discriminating Wisdom, which enables the devotee to know each thing
separately, yet all things as one, personified in the fourth Dhyani Buddha,
Amitabha, ‘He of Boundless Light’, the Illuminator or Enlightener; and
(5) the All-Performing Wisdom, which gives perseverance and unerring action
in things spiritual, symbolized in the fifth Dhyani Buddha, Amogha-Siddhi, the
‘Almighty Conqueror’, the Giver of Divine Power. Through the Five Dhyani
Buddhas lies the Path leading to at-one-ment in the Dharma-Kaya, to the
Perfect Enlightenment of Buddahood, to MWirv@na—which is spiritual emancipa-
tion from the round of births and deaths through the annihilation of the Flame
of Desire.

2 This paragraph refers to Milarepa’s mastery of the occult science of Mantras,
or Words of Power, based upon the physics of the law of vibration. According
to the Mantrayana (‘Path of the Mantra’) School, there is associated with each
object and element of nature and with each organic creature, sub-human, human,
and super-human, including the highest orders of deities—since all alike, being
sangsa@ric, are subject to natural law—a particular rate of vibration. If this be
known and formulated as sound in a Mantra and used expertly by a perfected
Yogi, such as Milarepa was, it is held to be capable of disintegrating the object
or element of which it is the key-note, or in vibratory accord; or, in the case of
spiritual beings, of impelling the lesser deities and elementals to appear, and the
superior deities to emit telepathically their divine influence in rays of grace. In
The Tibetan Book of the Dead (p. 149) there occurs the following passage, referring
to the six syllabic sounds—Om Ma-nt Pad-me Hiim (pron. Om Ma-ni Pay-mé
Hing)—of the Mantra of Chenrazee (Skt. Avalokiteshvara), the National Divine
Protector of Tibet, by means of which he is supplicated :—

‘When the natural sound of Reality is reverberating [like] a thousand
thunders,
May they be transmuted into the sounds of the Six Syllables,’


38 INTRODUCTION BY RECHUNG


[He was] a well-grounded mathematician who had attuned
his own mental state to the unchanging level of Non-Ego,
while most clearly knowing all the inmost secrets and the
deepest recesses of the minds of others.

[He was] a most learned professor in the Science of the
Mind, having proved the Mind to be, beyond dispute, the
Beginning and End of all visible phenomena, both material
and spiritual, the Rays whereof, being allowed to shine un-
obstructedly, develop themselves, as he knew, into the three-
fold manifestation of the Universal Divine Being through their
own free, inherent power.

[He was] a perfected adept in super-normal knowledge and
powers, able to traverse and visit all the innumerable sacred
Paradises and Heavens of the Buddhas, where, by the virtue
of his all-absolving acts [of unsurpassed devotion], the Buddhas
and Bodhisattvas presiding therein favoured him with dis-


‘


1 In the Buddhist view, the theory that there is a permanent, unchanging,
eternal personal self, or ego, is erroneous. Reality implies supra-mundane
consciousness undifferentiated, incompatible with individualized ego-conscious-
ness. The supra-mundane consciousness is the All-Consciousness, to which,
in comparison, the limited consciousness such as the soul hypothesis inculcates
is incalculably and obviously inferior. Herein lies the fundamental difference
between animistic Church-Council Christianity and metaphysical Buddhism.

2 Supra-mundane Mind, being the One Reality, is the Source of Nature (or the
Sangsara), which, being wholly phenomenal, is in itself non-real. If the Rays,
or the Inner Light, are allowed to dominate man, the mundane mind becomes
transmuted into the Supra-mundane Mind, which has three aspects or manifesta-
tions: (1) Dharma-Kaya, ‘ Divine Body of Truth,’ the Body of Complete
Enlightenment; (2) Sambhoga-Kaya, ‘Divine Body of Perfect Endowment,’
the primary reflex of the Dharma-Kaya ; and (3) Nirmana-Kaya, ‘ Divine Body
of Incarnation,’ the secondary reflex of the Dharma-Kaya. The first is the
Body of all Buddhas in Mirvaa; the second, of all Bodhisattvas in Heaven-
Worlds; the third, of all Great Teachers on Earth.

In this context, ‘ Universal Divine Being’ is not to be regarded as like the
Personal Supreme God of the Semitic Faiths, but rather as a figurative personi-
fication of all supra-mundane forces, powers, or influences, that emanate from
the Void, the Qualityless, the Unmade, Unformed, and make escape from the
Sangsadra, from Nature, possible for mankind. Within It are contained, in
indescribable unity, all the Great Ones of All the Ages, the Fully Enlightened
Ones, the Buddhas, the Saviours of Mankind. Noconcepts of the limited human
mind can be applied to It, only through Realization of It can It be understoed.
This is the teaching of the School of Milarepa, and of all the Esoteric Buddhism
of the Higher Lamaism, of which the uninitiated European knows very little,
tut about which he dogmatizes very much.


MILAREPA’S OCCULT POWERS 39


courses on the Dharma, and listened to his in return, so that
he sanctified the Heaven-Worlds themselves by his visits and
sojourns there.

Appearing to the creatures of the Six Lokas' in suitable and
specially adapted forms and guises, on various occasions, in
accordance with their karmic deserts, he taught them spiritual
truths in a manner suited to the intellectual capacity and mood
of his hearers, wrapping these truths in parables and metaphors
which were in perfect accord with the Wisdom of the Victorious
Ones,’ thus by his Teachings procuring their emancipation,

In short, [he was] a being who within the space of one life-
time obtained the Fourfold Personality,’ and the Fivefold Per-
fections * which constitute the Omnipresent State of the Great
Vajra-Dhara.°

[He was] one whose ceaseless grace and mercy were be-
stowed on the immeasurably countless multitude of sentient
beings, for whose sake he continued setting the peerless Wheel
of the Truth in motion, thereby redeeming them from the un-
utterable anguish and woe of the Sangsara.®

[He was] one who reached Those dwelling in the City of the
Great Emancipation,’ where every one existeth in indescribable


1 The Six Loka{s} (or ‘ Planes’) of Sangsdric Existence are: (1) the World of
the Gods (or Devas); (2) the World of the Titans (cr Asuras); (3) the World
of Mankind; (4) the World of Brutes; (5) the World of Unhappy Ghosts (or
Pretas); and (6) the various Hells.

2 That is, the Buddhas, Who are victorious over the Sangsara, or the round
of death and birth.

3 The fourfold personality (or principle) consists of (1) Inhibiting evil
thoughts, (2) Cutting off (or Annihilating) evil thoughts, (3) Encouraging good
thoughts, and (4) Developing (or Perfecting) good thoughts.

4 The fivefold perfections are those which flow from the Five Divine Wisdoms
of the Dhy4ni Buddhas. as outlined above on page 37}.

5 Tib. Rdo-rje-ch'ang (pron. Dorje-Chang): Skt. Vajra-Dhara, meaning ‘ The
Indestructible (or Steadfast) Holder [of Mystic Power]’, is one of the two
Bodhisat reflexes of the Dhyani Buddha Akshobhya, the other being Vajra-
Sattva (‘The Indestructible-minded One’, or ‘The Adamantine’), Both are
esoteric deities. Vajra-Dhara is also the name of the Adi (or Primordial) Buddha
of the Gelugpa, the Established Church of Tibetan Buddhism ; for the Ningmapa,
the ‘Old-Style’ Church, Samanta-Bhadra is the name of the Adi-Buddha.

6 Sangsara, or the round of death and birth, as known to mankind bound to
the Wheel of Nature.

7 That is, Nirvana, known in Tibetan as ‘The Sorrowless State’ (Mya-ian-
med ).


40 INTRODUCTION BY RECHUNG


bliss, at the same time obtaining and developing the Fourfold
Principle of Immortality.

Such was the Great Being who shone the brightest among
all Great Beings, called Glorious Jetstin-Mila-Zhadpa-Dorje,!
the lustre of whose deeds and the effulgence of whose name
shone like the sun and moon themselves.

Albeit the intrinsic value of the super-normal services he
rendered to those whom he met can neither be described nor
limited, yet I have attempted to set forth a brief eulogy of his
various deeds. The History [or Biography] will be divided
into two parts: first, that dealing with his worldly career, and
second, that dealing with his religious career from its begin-
ning right to the time when he attained Virvaua.

At the outset, I shall proceed to relate some particulars re-
garding his surname Mila and its origin, his ancestors, and the
circumstances of his birth. Then I shall tell of the loss of his
father during his childhood, which turned his relatives into
enemies who robbed the orphans and the widow of their whole
patrimony and plunged them into great sorrow, which served
to impress the truth of the existence of Sorrow indelibly upon
Milarepa’s heart. Then I shall tell of his studying the Black
Art, so that he might be able to kill his enemies in compliance
with his mother’s command.

Of these three things, I shall now set forth, somewhat at
length, the first, namely a few details concerning his birth and
lineage.


! This is a shortened combination of Jetsiin-Milarepa, the ordinary name, and
of Pal-Zhadpa-Dorje, the initiatory name (as given on p. 133, following).


PART I: THE PATH OF DARKNESS!


CHAPTER I


THE LINEAGE AND BIRTH


Telling of Rechung’s Dreams, which led to the Writing of this
Biography ; and of Milarepa’s Ancestry and Birth.


AT one time, so I have heard, the Great Yogi, that Gem of
Yogis—of the Anuttara Vajra- Vana School*—Jetsin-Mila-
Zhadpa-Dorje, lived for a space in the Stomach-like Cave of
Nyanam,? which is now a most sacred place of pilgrimage. In
that place were to be found the illustrious Great Ones, Re-
chung-Dorje-Tagpa, Shiwa-W6d-Repa, Ngan-Dzong-Repa,
Seban-Repa, Khyira-Repa, Bri-Gom-Repa, Lan-Gom-Repa,
Sangyay-Kyap-Repa, Shan-Gom-Repa, Dampa-Gya-Phipa,
and T6énpa-Shakya-Guna.t These were his disciples of the


1 All headings throughout the Biography, of Parts and Chapters, and the
Synopsis at the head of each chapter, have been added by the Editor, for the
purpose of securing greater clearness, the Tibetan of the text itself not containing,
but suggesting them.

2 Or ‘School of the Immutable (or Vajra) Path of the Anuttara [Tantra]’.
This is one of the distinctly Esoteric Schools of Mahayana Buddhism, based
chiefly upon that one of the two Higher Zantrvas called the Anuttara Tantra.
The other of the Higher Zantras is the Yoga Tantra. Of both these JZantras,
Milarepa was a practical master. (See p. 292 n.)

3 Nyanam is a town, still existing, on the Tibetan frontier of Nepal, some
fifty miles north-east of Nepal’s capital Katmandu, and about the same distance
south-east of Jetsiin’s birthplace, Kyanga-Tsa, near the modern Kirong (cf.
p. 52%). It was in the Stomach-like Cave of Nyanam that Jetstin narrated the
chief subject-matter of our text which follows (cf. p. 242).

4 In their order as given, these names may be translated as follows: (1) Short-
Mantle Like a Dorje (the lamatc sceptre, symbolizing the Thunderbolt of the
Gods, and Immutability), (2) Repa the Light of Peace, (3) Repa of Ngan-Dzong,
(4) Repa of Seban, (5) Repa the Hunter, (6) Repa the Hermit of Bri, (7) Repa
the Hermit of Lan, (8) Repa the Buddha-Protected, (9) Repa the Hermit of
Shan, (10) Saint of Mighty Breath, (11) Master Shakya-Guna. (Cf. J. Bacot,
Le Poeéte Tibétain Milarcpa, Paris, 1925, p. 34.) The Tibetan term [Repa (Ras-pa:
‘cotton-clad one’) given to eight of these disciples, as to Mila-Kepa himself,
indicates that they are his followers, dressed, as he was, in a robe of white
cotton cloth. In virtue of the ‘Vital Warmth’, generated through a peculiar
yogic control of the respiration, they were proof against extremes of cold and


42 THE LINEAGE AND BIRTH [PARTI


highest order, all deeply practised in Yoga, and possessed
of tranquillity of mind. There also were Lesay-Biim and Shen-
dormo, female novices, in addition to a large number of believ-
ing laity of both sexes. And there also were the Five Im-
mortal Goddesses of the higher order of fairies who subse-
quently were evolved into angels, besides several highly-gifted
yogis and yoginis, some human, some super-human beings, pos-
sessed of superior attainments.’ In the midst of this congrega-
tion, Jetsiin set in motion the Wheel of Mahayanic Buddhism.

One night, while Rechung sat meditating in his cell, he had
a dream which he described as follows:

‘I was walking through a land which was said to be the
Western Land of Urgyan, inhabited by angels of both sexes.
The country was exquisitely beautiful and delightful, and the
houses and palaces were built of gold, silver, and precious
stones. I was passing through the capital of this country and
noticed that its inhabitants were clad in silks and adorned with
garlands of jewels and precious metals and ornaments of bone,
and that every one of them was most beautiful to behold. All
were regarding me with smiling faces and glances of approval,
though none ventured to speak to me.

‘Among them, I encountered an old acquaintance whom I
had known in Nepal as a female disciple under Tiphupa, one
of my Gurus. She, garbed in red, was presiding over the
congregation, and accosted me with words of welcome, saying,
“Nephew, I am most pleased that thou hast come.” She
forthwith led me into a palatial mansion filled with treasures,
where I was most sumptuously feasted. She then said, “ The
Buddha Akshobhya ? is at present preaching the Doctrine in
this Land of Urgyan. If thou, my nephew, wouldst like to
hear his preaching, I will go and obtain his permission.” I was


heat, and so needed to wear no other garment, even in the arctic winter of the
high Himalayan altitudes of Tibet.

1 In the Appendix (pp. 305-7) a more complete list of ‘names of the various
disciples is given.

2 Tib. Mi-bskyod-pa (pron. Mi-kyéd-pa): Skt. Akshobhya (meaning ‘The
Unshakable (One}’), the Dhyani Buddha of the Eastern Direction. The other
four of the Five Dhyani Buddhas are: Vairochana, of the Centre; Ratna-
Sambhava, of the South; Amitabha, of the West; and Amogha-Siddhi, of the
North.


LY "A Lit 7 9


ALA eh LSAe ITE WL


THE DHYANI BUDDHA AKSHOBIYVA


Described on pages xxvii, 42-3


CHAP. I] RECHUNG’S FIRST DREAM 43


extremely desirous of hearing him, and replied, “ It is very kind
of thee.”

‘ Accompanying her, I came to the middle of the city, where
I saw an immense throne made of precious metals and gems,
and upon it, seated, the Buddha Akshobhya, of a beauty and
majesty far surpassing in splendour the figure of my imagina-
tion on which I had been wont to meditate. He was preach-
ing the Dharma to a huge congregation, seemingly as vast as
the ocean. Upon seeing all this, I was filled with such ecstatic
delight and bliss that I almost swooned. “Stay thou here,
nephew, whilst I go and obtain the Buddha’s permission,” said
the lady. Instantly obtaining it, she returned to conduct me
into the Sacred Presence, whither going, I did obeisance to the
Buddha, and received His blessing. I then sat down to listen
to the religious discourse, and for a while the Holy One re-
garded me with smiling, benignant countenance and a look of
infinite love. .

‘The subject on which He was preaching was the lineage,
birth, deeds, and incidents connected with the various Buddhas
and Bodhisattvas of the past. The narrative inspired me with
profound belief. Finally He related the histories of Tilopa,
Naropa, and Marpa,! at much greater length than I had been
used to hear them told by Jetsiin, so as to impart to each
person present the deepest admiration and faith. In conclud-
ing His discourse, He said that He would narrate the story of
Jetstin-Milarepa, which would surpass in wonder that of any
of the aforementioned beings, and invited us all to come and
hear it.

‘Some present said that there could be nothing more wonder-
ful than what we had already heard, but, if anything else did
surpass this, it would have to be something very wonderful
indeed. Others said: “ The life stories we have just heard are
of persons who had annihilated their evil deeds and acquired
merit during several previous lifetimes, but Milarepa was one
who acquired merit and attained enlightenment not inferior to
that of any of these, all in one lifetime.” Others again said:


1 Concerning these three Great Yogis, whence the Kargyiitpa Sect. arose,
see pp. 7-8, and xvi-xvii.


44 THE LINEAGE AND BIRTH [PART I


“Oh, if this history be so interesting, it would really be a sin
on our part, as disciples, were we to miss hearing it, through
desisting from praying that it might be related for the benefit
of all beings. We ought by all means to try to get it told.”
One asked: “Where is Milarepa now?” Another replied:
“He is either in ’Og-min' or in Ngin-gah.”? I (Rechung)
thought: “ Why, Milarepa is now living in Tibet, but these
people seem to be hinting that I should ask Milarepa himself
to tell the story of his life ; and that I will surely do.” There-
upon, the lady laid hold of my hand, and shaking it gladly,
said, “ Nephew, hast thou understood?”

‘Then I (Rechung) woke, and found that it was early dawn ;
and that morning, my mind felt very clear and my devotions
were hearty and sincere. Recalling the dream and reflecting
upon it, I thought that it was very auspicious to have dreamt
of being in the Urgyan Land, and of listening to the preaching
of the Buddha Akshobhya, and that I had good reason to con-
gratulate myself upon having met with Jetsiin-Milarepa in real
life. My present privilege of listening to the preaching of the
Buddha, albeit only in dream, was likewise due, I considered,
to the grace of Jetstin. I reproached myself with lack of true
faith and spiritual insight when I recollected the thoughts I had
had as I listened to the people saying that Jetstin might either
be in ’Og-min or in Ngon-gah. It was, I realized, irreverent
feelings of familiarity with my Guru that had caused me to
look upon him as merely a human being * when I thought of
him as being in Tibet. What a dull, stupid person I was!
Ought I not to have known that Jetsiin had obtained perfect
enlightenment, in fact was a Buddha, and as such was able to


1 “Og-min (Skt. Akanishtha, the Heaven of the Adi-Buddha, whence Nirvava
may be attained without return to incarnation on Earth, as the meaning of
?Og-min (‘ No-Down’ or ‘ Without [Returning] Downward’) implies.

» Ngou-gah (Skt. Amardavati), the Heaven of Indra, in the East, equivalent
to the Heaven of Akshobhya, the Dhyani Buddha of the Eastern Direction.
Ngén-gah (Mngon-dgah), means ‘ Happy {to] know’, i.e. the Realm the very
thought of which fills one with bliss.

* *This parallels the Tantric saying, ‘‘ Gurung na martyang budhyeta,” i.e.
‘Never think of the Guru as a mortal.’’? Brahmanism teaches that the human


form is merely the vehicle through which the Guru manifests himself,’—Sj. Atal
Bihari Ghosh.


CHAP.I] RECHUNG’S SECOND DREAM 45


reproduce his form in inconceivably countless numbers !!
Moreover, wheresoever Jetsiin might be dwelling, did not that
place thereby become sacred and holy, yea, become equal to
’Og-min or Ngonu-gah? I took my dream about the Jady and
the others listening to the preaching to be a divine injunction
to write a biography of Jetsiin, and firmly resolved to get Jetsiin
himself to tell me all that had happened to him. In this frame
of mind I was filled with a feeling of deep and exalted true
faith in my Guru, to which I gave expression in fervent prayers.
Then I allowed my mind to rest tranquil awhile.

‘Again I fellinto a deep slumber and dreamed another dream,
though this was not so vivid as the first. Now it was five
beautiful young maidens, respectively white, blue, yellow, red,
and green,” said to be from the Urgyan Land, who came into
my presence together, one of them speaking, and saying, ‘‘ To-
morrow the story of the life of Milarepa is to be told ; let us
go and hear it!’’ whereupon another inquired: ‘ Who is going
to ask him to relate it?” To this a third replied, “Jetsiin’s chief
disciples are going to ask him.” Meanwhile all were casting
sidelong glances at me and smiling. One spoke and said,
“ This will be such an excellent sermon as all will be delighted
to hear. Should we not add our prayers as well, that it may
be delivered?”’ One answered, “It behoveth the disciples to
pray for the boon, and it shall be our duty and pleasure to
spread and protect the Faith.” Upon this all disappeared, as
disappeareth a rainbow. Waking, I found that the sun was
already high, and I recognized that my dream was a sign
from the Five Immortal Sisters.’ ’

Having partaken of his morning meal in that happy state of
mind, Rechung sought the presence of his Guru [Jetstin|, and
found that the company [of disciples and followers] had already


1 This yogic power, with which Jetsiin is credited, of assuming multifold
personalities and bodies, is illustrated in Chap. XII, wherein Jetsiin exhibits it
when he is about to pass to another world. (See pp. 268-9.)

2 These maidens are Tantric goddesses, otherwise known as Dakinis; and
the colour of each has esoteric significance.

3 These Dakinis of the five colours are the Five Incarnations of the Goddess
Durga who have their abode in the Tibetan Himalayas, some traditions say in
the Mt. Kailasa region, other traditions say on Mt. Everest, sacred to Milarepa
as a place of his meditation. (Cf. p. 306.)


46 THE LINEAGE AND BIRTH [PART I


seated themselves. Rechung then prostrated himself in wor-
ship before Jetsiin, and inquiring how he fared, with right knee
on the ground and the palms of his hands joined, addressed
him thus: ‘ May it please our gracious Lord and Teacher to
favour us with a recital of the events of his life for the benefit
of the present gathering, and to serve as an example to future
disciples and followers. The Buddhas of the past, too, have
left behind them histories of Their Twelve Great Deeds,} and
other records for the benefit of beings on Earth, which have
contributed to the diffusion and general prosperity of the
Buddhist Faith. Tilopa, Naropa, Marpa, and many other great
saints, in leaving autobiographies behind, have done much to
help the development of their fortune-favoured followers.

‘In like manner, O Lord Jetsiin, thy biography also would
greatly conduce to the development of many a being, to which
end we pray our Lord that he may be pleased to favour us
with an account of his eventful life.’ >

Entreated thus, Jetsiin smiled and said, ‘O Rechung, thou
art already well acquainted with my life and history, but, as
thou makest this request for the benefit of others, there is no
harm in my complying with it. I am of the Josays (Descend-
ants of Noblemen) Sept of the Khyungpo (Eagle) Clan, and
my own personal name is Mila-Repa.? In my youth I com-
mitted some black deeds, in my maturity some white deeds ;
but now I have done away with all distinctions of black or
white. Having accomplished the chief task, I now am one


1 These, the twelve great deeds (or rules of life) of a Buddha incarnate on
Earth (Skt. Duddasha-avadhita-gunah) are as follows: (1) wearing of cast-off
(or torn) garments ; (2) wearing of only three sorts of garments, namely, the
outer robe as a travelling cloak, and the inner robe and skirt for daily use ;
(3) using a blanket in cold countries ; (4) begging of food (or living on alms) ;
(5) partaking of but one meal per day—before or at noon; (6) abstaining from
liquid refreshments after midday; (7) meditation in the forest ; (8) sitting (or
dwelling) under trees—and not ina house; (g) dwelling in the open air—where
there are no trees; (10) dwelling in graveyards (or places of cremation)—for
purposes of meditation on the impermanence of life ; (11) sleeping in a sitting
posture, without reclining ; and (12) practising all the above rules voluntarily
(or through liking them)—and not by compulsion.

? Meaning ‘ Mila the Cotton-Robed’. (See pp. 201, 3031.)

3 In virtue of the Supreme Enlightenment of Buddhahood, Jetsiin had come
to realize the state of non-duality, wherein all opposites, even good and evil,
are seen as unity, or as having a single source, which is Mind.


CHAP. I] RECHUNG’S ENTREATY 47


who needeth not strive any more in future.!. Were I pressed
to describe at length the events of my life, the narration of
some of them would cause tears to flow while others would ex-
cite mirth; but there being little profit in such things, I prefer
that thou shouldst allow this old man to remain in peace.’

Again Rechung arose, and bowing down, entreated the
Teacher in these words: ‘ Gracious Lord, the narrative of the
manner in which thou didst first obtain the Transcendental
Truths, and of the great trouble and sacrifices it cost thee to
find them, and of how thou didst meditate upon them unceas-
ingly until thou hadst mastered the real nature of Eternal
Truth and so attained to the Highest Goal of all spiritual
knowledge, and of the way in which thou hast been able to
soar beyond the network of armic forces and prevent the
arising of future karma,? will be most interesting and profit-
able to all who cherish the like hopes and aspirations. Thy
clan being that of the Khyungpo (Eagle) and thy sept that of
the Josays (Descendants of Noblemen), how camest thou to be
called by the surname of Mila? Again, how didst thou come
to commit black deeds in thy youth and what led to thy com-
mitting white deeds, during which period thou sayest that there
were several incidents to excite laughter and some so painful
as to move to tears? To know of all these things would be of
inestimable value to future generations. So, out of compassion
for me and these my fellow-disciples, be pleased, O Lord,
kindly to set aside thy disinclination, and condescend to tell
us all in detail. I solicit my friends and brethren in the Faith
to join in this mine appeal.’

Hereupon, all present rose up, and prostrating themselves
several times, said: ‘ We also add our prayers to those of the —
Reverend Rechung, and entreat thee, Lord, to set the Wheel
of the Dharma in motion.’


1 The goal having been won, all striving, even death and birth, are at an end.

2 If, asthe Bhagavad-Gita also teaches, the Master of Life performs actions in
this world wholly disinterestedly, and for the good of sentient beings, no future
karma such as leads to rebirth in this or any other realm of the Sangsara arises,
and death and birth are normally at an end. Then the Conqueror returns, if at
all, to reincarnation voluntarily, as a Divine Incarnation, or Avata@va—a Buddha,
a Krishna, or a Christ.


48 THE LINEAGE AND BIRTH [PART I


Then Jetsiin said, ‘ Well, if ye all so much wish it, I will
gratify you, since there is nothing in my life that need be con-
cealed.

‘Regarding my clan and sept, I may add that in the northern
part of the country called Uri there was a large tribe of
nomads who owned cattle and sheep. Of their number there
was one, belonging to the Eagle Clan, who having devoted him-
self to religious study, became a Jama of the Ningmapa Sect,
to which also his father had belonged. That father had been
a Josay (nobleman’s son). This young man came from Uri
on pilgrimage along with some other pilgrims. He had de-
veloped certain super-normal powers, having become adept in
the invocation of certain tutelary deities, and attained skill in
magic. On his arrival in the Province of Tsang, at a place
called Chiingwachi, his magical powers of curing illness and
exorcizing persons obsessed by demons came to be very much
in demand, so that his fame waxed great.

‘In that place, in which he passed several years, he was
known by the name of Khyungpo-Josay (Noble Son of the
Eagle Clan), and whenever any one there was ill or troubled by
an evil spirit he used to be sent for at once. But there was one
family in the place who did not believe in him. On one occa-
sion it happened that this family was tormented by a terribly
evil spirit, which had never dared to approach Khyungpo-Josay,
but could not be exorcized by any one else. For although the
afflicted family called in other /@mas and had them try their ex-
orcisms, the demon only made ironical retorts at the attempts
to drive him out; and, making a mock of the family, tortured
them and tyrannized over them the more, till they ceased from
efforts which all alike proved wholly ineffectual.

‘At last some relatives of that unbelieving family advised
them to call in Khyungpo-Josay, quoting the proverb, “‘ Apply
even the fat of a dog if it cureth the sore.” The head of the
family said “ Yes; by all means invite him to come.” Ac-
cordingly, Josay was invited to come, and, approaching the
demon, said three times in fierce tones, “I, Khyungpo-Josay,
am coming to eat the flesh and drink the blood of all ye
demons. Wait! Wait!” at the same time rushing forward


CHAP. I] THE SURNAME MILA 49


quickly. The poor demon was filled with terror even before
Khyungpo-Josay had come near him, and cried out “Apa!
Ama! Mila’ Mila/ (O man, thou art my father, O man,
thou art my mother !)” When Josay had come near to him,
the demon said: “ Aftla/ I would never have come where
thou art ; spare my life!” Then Josay, having made the demon
take an oath that in future he would afflict no one, allowed him
to depart. Thereupon the demon went to a family who were
accustomed to worship him, and said to them, “ Mila / Mila/
I never before suffered as I did this time.” Upon their in-
quiring of him who had caused his suffering, he replied that
Khyungpo-Josay had come and inflicted upon him such ex-
cruciating pain as had nearly killed him, and at last had wrung
an oath from him. From that day Josay was called J7/z/a, by
way of extolling his wonderful magical powers, and thus his
descendants came to be called by the surname J/z/a.2, And
now, when every one saw that the demon afflicted no other
person, all concluded that the demon had been killed, or rather,
that it had transmigrated into another form of existence.

‘Khyungpo Josay now married a wife, and had a son, who
had two sons, the eldest of whom was called Mila-Dotun-Sengé
(Mila the Lion who teacheth the Sztras), his eldest son in
turn being called Mila-Dorje-Sengé (Mila the Immutable Lion).
Thenceforth that family came to be noted for having only one
male heir in each generation.

‘This Mila-Dorje-Sengé wasan expert and passionate gambler,
and used to win considerable wagers. Now it happened that
there was a man in that part of the country who was a still
greater expert in gaming, one who had many relatives and con-
nexions on the father’s side. This man came to Mila-Dorje-
Sengé with intent to test his skill, and challenged him to a few
games for small stakes, and playing with him soon obtained


1 Apa literally meaning ‘father’; Ama, ‘mother’; and Mila! ‘O man!’

2 In his. French version (p. 407), M. Bacot very plausibly takes ‘ Mila!’ to be
an ancient and more or less local interjection denoting fright or fear. The late
Lama Dawa-Samdup has rendered ‘ Mila!’ as ‘O man!’. As an appellation
popularly given to a person, it would, in the former sense, suggest that its
bearer—as is clearly the case with Eagle Josay—has power to frighten and so
exorcize evil spirits.


50 THE LINEAGE AND BIRTH [PART I


a fair idea of the strength of his play. That day the man
played as if fortune herself were watching over him, and won
quite a number of wagers from Mila-Dorje-Sengé. This was
unbearable to the latter, and he accordingly asked his opponent
to give him his revenge the next day, to which the other con-
sented. Next day the stakes were increased, and the wily man,
to lure Dorje on, lost to him thrice. Then he in his turn asked
for satisfaction, and Dorje agreed, after settling the stakes to
be played for. These were to consist of the entire property
possessed by each, lands, houses, money, and household effects,
and they drew up a signed compact to this effect, so that
neither might be able to evade his obligation by prayer or en-
treaty. They then played, with the result, which might have
been foreseen, that Mila’s opponent won the game. The man’s
male relatives thereupon took possession of the whole of the
landed and movable property of Mila-Dorje-Sengé, and the
two Milas, father and son, Dotun-Sengé and Dorje-Sengé, had
to leave everything behind them and, wandering forth in the
direction of the province of Gungthang [in Tibet on the
frontier of Nepal], and arriving at a place called Kyanga-Tsa,
settled down there.

‘ The father, Dotun-Sengé, used to spend his days in reading
the Scriptures. He also performed exorcism ceremonies for
the prevention of hail-storms ;1 he prepared charms for the
protection of children ;? and did many other things of a like
nature. Thus he became quite popular as a /@ma-performer of
ceremonies. Meanwhile, his son Dorje-Sengé took to trading,
dealing mostly in wool in the south during the winter, and


1 In the high valleys of Tibet, where hail-storms are apt to be very frequent
and destructive to crops, especially to the barley, the chief cereal produced,
there are nowadays, as in the time of Milarepa, many /amas whose duty is to
ward off the hail. On the mountain-sides or hills, overlooking all the high,
cultivated valleys there are small watch-towers in which these hail-exorcizing
lamas dwell during the growing season and until the harvest is gathered in. As
soon as any dark cloud presaging hail is seen rising over the mountain peaks
and coming towards the fields, the /amas, on guard, at once launch powerful
exorcisms, accompanied by handfuls of magic clay-pellets to drive the hail away.
A further account of this is given later, on pp. 77-9, I17-I9.

2 M. Bacot renders this phrase thus: ‘to protect children threatened by
vampires’ (p. 42).


CHAP. I] MILAREPA’S PARENTAGE 51


going to the northern cattle-pastures in summer. He also went
to and fro between Mang-Yiil and Gungthang on shorter trips.
In this way, these two, father and son, amassed much wealth.

‘About this time, Dorje-Sengé happened to meet the favourite
daughter of one of the families of the place. They fell in love ;
and, on their being united in marriage, a son was born to them,
who received the name of Mila-Sherab-Gyaltsen (Mila the
Trophy of Wisdom). While the boy was being brought up,
his grandfather died, and the funeral ceremonies were per-
formed with great pomp.

‘ Mila-Dorje-Sengé, still following his trading profession, ac-
quired more wealth than ever. Paying a good price in gold
and merchandise of the north and south, he bought a fertile
field, triangular in shape, which lay near Kyanga-Tsa, from a
man named Worma, and called it “ Worma Tosoom (Worma
Triangle) ”.1 Bordering this field there was an old house-site
belonging to a neighbour, and this also he bought and upon
it built a large house. It was just inthe twentieth year of his
age that Mila-Sherab-Gyaltsen was married to a girl belonging
to a good family among the people of Tsa,? of the royal race
of Nyang, called Karmo-Kyen (White Garland). She was a
most lovely young lady, clear-headed and energetic, who under-
stood how to treat friends and enemies according to their
several dues, with love or with hatred; and so received the
name of White Garland of the Nyang. Then, adding to the
aforementioned house, Mila-Dorje-Sengé constructed a three-
storied building with outhouses and kitchens, the whole rest-
ing upon four columns and eight pillars. It was one of the
best houses in Kyanga-Tsa, and became known as “ The Four
Columns and Eight Pillars”. In this house they [he and his
wife and father] lived in great affluence.

‘ Meanwhile, Mila-Dotun-Sengé’s old relations who lived in
Chiingwachi heard that he and his son were prospering at
Tsa. So a cousin of Mila-Dorje-Sengé, named Yungdung-


1M. Bacot notes that the field was so named in accord with the Tibetan
custom of giving to purchased fields, houses, horses, and mules the name of


their former owner (p. 427).
2 A shortened form of Kyanga-Tsa.


52 THE LINEAGE AND BIRTH [PART I


Gyaltsen (Svastika-Banner of Victory) together with his family
and a sister named Khyung-tsa-Palden (Demonstrator of the
Nobility of the Descendants of the Eagles) removed from that
place and came to Kyanga-Tsa. Dorje, being fond of his rela-
tives, welcomed them upon their arrival with unfeigned pleasure
and delight. He gave them all the assistance in his power in
teaching them how to trade, and they also came to amass much
wealth.

‘ About this time White Garland of the Nyang found herself
great with child, at a season when Mila-Sherab-Gyaltsen was
away on a trading journey, in the North Taktsi Mountains,
with a variety of southern merchandise, in the course of which
he was considerably delayed.

‘It was in the Male Water-Dragon year! [A. D. 1052], in the
first autumn month? and on the twenty-fifth day, under a pro-
pitious star, that I was born ;* and no sooner was my mother


1 The Tibetan system of chronology, derived from China and India, is based
upon the twelve-year and sixty-year cycles of the planet Jupiter. In the twelve-
year cycle, employed for measuring short periods of time, each year bears the
name of one of the twelve cyclic animals, which are: (1) Mouse, (2) Ox,
(3) Tiger, (4) Hare, (5) Dragon, (6) Serpent, (7) Horse, (8) Sheep, (9) Monkey,
(10) Bird, :r1) Dog, and (12) Hog. In the sixty-year cycle the names of these
animals are combined with the names of five elements—Wood, Fire, Earth,
Iron, and Water—and each of these elements is allotted a pair of animals, the
first animal being considered male and the second female. For example, A. D. 1900
was Iron-Mouse year and the thirty-fourth of the cycle of sixty years; and
A.D. 1867, the Fire-Hare year, having been the first of the last sixty-year
cycle, the current year, A.D. 1928, is the second of a new sixty-year cycle. The
Male Water-Dragon year, in which Milarepa was born, is the twenty-sixth year
of the sixty-year cycle.

The Tibetan year being lunar, nominally of 360 days, the difference from the
solar year is made good by adding seven intercalary months each nineteen
years. The year begins with the rise of the new moon in February. The
Tibetan week, following the Aryan system, is of seven days, named after the
Sun, Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus, and Saturn, (Cf. L. A. Waddell, The
Buddhism of Tibet, or Lamatsm, London, 1895, pp. 451-5.)

2 Or, according to the Tibetan year, which begins with February, the seventh
month, i.e. August.

8 The Tibetan month being lunar, this is the twenty-fifth day of the moon.

* M. Bacot and the Translator agree in their calculation that Milarepa was born
in the year A.D. 1052, but according to Dr. Waddell’s reckoning the year was
A.D. 1038. (Cf. L. A. Waddell, op. cit., p. 65°.) The place of Milarepa’s birth,
Kyanga-Tsa, in the Province of Gungthang, is on the Tibetan frontier of Nepal,


a few miles east of the modern Kirong, about fifty miles due north of Katmandu,
the capital of Nepal.


CHAP. I] MILAREPA’S GIVEN NAME 53


delivered of me than a messenger was dispatched with a letter
to my father which said, “ The work of the autumn is approach-
ing, and I have been delivered ofason. Come with all the speed
thou canst, to name the child and perform the natning cere-
mony.” The messenger who carried the letter also conveyed
to him the news verbally. My father was highly delighted and
said, “ O, well done! My son hath already received his name.
My race produceth but one male heir, and I am delighted to
get the news that the child is a son. Call him Th6é-pa-ga (De-
lightful-to-hear). As my trading business is all finished, I can
return home at once.” So saying, he returned homewards, and
my name was fixed as Tho-pa-ga, the naming ceremony being
carried out with great pomp and display. During my child-
hood I was tended with great care. In course of time I became
endowed with a beautiful voice, which so delighted every one
who heard it that people used to say I had been very appro-
priately named “ Delightful-to-hear ”.

‘When I was about four years old, my mother gave birth to
a daughter who was named Gon-ma-kyit (Fortunate Pro-
tectress), but she was also called, by way of a pet name, Peta,
whence she came to be spoken of as Peta-Gonkyit. I remember
even now that we two [Peta and I] used to have our hair plaited
with gold and turquoises. We were very influential, being
connected by marriage with the highest families in the place ;
and the poor people, all coming under our influence, we were
in a position to regard almost as our tenants or subjects; so
that the natives of the place used to say of us quietly among
themselves, “ Never could there be adventurous settlers from
other parts more industrious and wealthy than these folk.
Look at the house outside! Look at the furnishing and wealth
inside! And the ornaments for both sexes! They are worthy
of regard from every point of view.”

‘ At the time when we were thus the envy of all, my father,
Mila-Sherab-Gyaltsen, died ; and the ceremonies in connexion
with his funeral were performed on a magnificent scale.’


This is the first part of the story, and telleth of the manner
of Jetsiin’s birth.


[PART I


CHAPTER II
THE TASTING OF SORROW


Telling of the Death and Last Will of Milarepa’s Father ;
the Misappropriation of the Estate by the Paternal Uncle and
Aunt; and the Resulting Sorrows which Milarepa and his
Mother and Sister endured.


AGAIN Rechung spoke, and said: ‘O Teacher, be pleased to
relate the details of thy sufferings, and of the troubles that
followed the death of thy father.’

Jetsiin then continued: ‘When I had about reached the age
of seven, my father, Mila-Sherab-Gyaltsen, was seized with
a very serious illness. Physicians and /@mas attendant upon
him alike offered no hope of his recovery, but announced his
approaching end. All his relatives were also aware that he
was dying, and even the patient himself despaired of living and
resigned himself to death. Mine uncle and aunt, other kinsfolk
and friends, and all the neighbours gathered together, and, in
the presence of all, my father made known his last wishes,
entrusting the care of his widow and orphans to mine uncle and
aunt, as also the management of his entire estate. Finally, he
had a written testament made out, and had it read, signed,
and sealed in the presence of all assembled.

‘Then he spoke as follows: “I well perceive that I shall
not survive this illness. My son being at present of tender
years, I confide him to the care of all my relatives, especially
his uncle and aunt. All my possessions, including my herds
of cattle, sheep, and ponies on the pastures high up in the
hills; my fields, including ‘Worma Triangle’, and several
smaller fields; my cows, goats, and donkeys here below the
house ; my household utensils of gold, silver, copper, and iron ;
my personal ornaments and wardrobe; my turquoises, silks,
and garments ; my granaries, and, in short, all those my posses-
sions, regarding which I need not bear envy towards others,
I leave behind me. Out of these let a portion be spent upon
my funeral ceremonies. As regardeth the remainder, I entrust
the care of them to all of you [who are here gathered together],


CHAP. 1] THE LOSS OF THE PATRIMONY 55


until such time as my son is of age to look after everything
for himself. But chiefly I entrust this property to the care of
my child’s uncle and aunt. When my son cometh to be of age,
Zesay having been betrothed to him in infancy, let the pair be
married ; and when the bride hath been received into the house,
let the twain be put in charge of the entire property, and let
them manage the household by themselves, following in the
footsteps of their parents. But until my son attaineth mature
age I entrust everything to you, all my relatives, but chiefly
to you two, my children’s uncle and aunt. See that they come
tono harm! Be sure that I will watch you from the realm of
the dead!” Saying this, my father expired.

‘When my father’s funeral ceremonies had been completed,
all the relatives said, “ Let White Garland of the Nyang her-
self be given the charge of the whole property, and let each of
us from time to time render her such help and assistance as
she may stand in need of, to the best of our ability.”

‘But mine uncle and aunt said, “ Ye can all say what ye
please, but we are the nearest relatives, and we will see to it our-
selves that the widow and the orphans do not suffer. As for the
property, we will take care of it.” And despite all that my
maternal uncle and the father of Zesay might say, my father’s
personal property was then divided between mine uncle and aunt
thus: mine uncle took all the men’s ornaments and raiment,
while mine aunt took all the female appurtenances ; the remain-
der of the property was divided equally between them, and we
were bidden to go and live with each of them by turn. And thus
we were deprived of all rights over our property, and not only
that, but compelled in summer to work as field-labourers for
mine uncle, and in winter as spinners and carders of wool for
mine aunt. The food given us was so coarse that it was fit only
fordogs. Our clothing was miserable rags tied to our bodies with
a rope for girdle. Compelled to work without respite, our hands
and feet became cracked and blistered. The insufficiency and
coarseness of our food made us miserably emaciated and hag-
gard. Our hair, once adorned with gold and turquoises, now
became hard and stiff, and infested with lice.

‘ Tender-hearted folk who had known us in the days of our


56 THE TASTING OF SORROW [PART I


prosperity could not withhold their tears at the sight of us.
Whispered talk about the villainous conduct of mine uncle and
aunt ran through the whole neighbourhood, but they paid no
attention to it. My mother, my sister, and myself were reduced
to such a state of misery that my mother used to say of my
aunt, ‘‘She is not Khyung-tsa-Palden (Demonstrator of the
Nobility of the Descendants of the Eagles), but a Dumo-Takden
(a Demoness who showeth the nature of the tigress),” and
thenceforth mine aunt was known by the nickname of “ Tiger-
Demon”. My mother also used to say that the proverb, “ En-
trust the ownership to others and have thyself turned into the
dog that guardeth the door”, had been proved true in our case.
“For see,” she said, “while thy father Mila-Sherab-Gyaltsen
was alive, every one used to watch our faces to see if we smiled
or frowned. But now, they who own the wealth becoming as
it were the kings, all now regard the smiles and frowns of our
uncle and aunt.” My mother also came in for a share of the
compliments whispered about, and people said “‘ Rich hus-
band, able wife! Soft wool, fine blanket!’ How true this
saying is in this instance. See what happeneth when a clever
man is no longer to the fore. Formerly, when her husband
was living, White Garland of the Nyang used to be called the
model housewife because of her energy and ability; her hand
used to be called nourishing. But now her energy and ability
have been put to the test, and her weakness is exposed.” Thus
the more we suffered, the more unpleasant were the things
said about us, and the common folk, our former inferiors, missed
no opportunity of decrying us behind our back.

‘Zesay’s parents used to provide me with a piece of cloth
or a pair of shoes from time to time. They also used to say
to me, “As long as men themselves are not turned into
property, property is not stable; it is like the dew on the
blades of the grass. So thou needest not mourn too much the
loss of thy wealth. Thy parents and ancestors acquired wealth
by their own exertions and industry. They were not always
wealthy, but only acquired wealth latterly. And a time will
come when thou also wilt earn wealth thyself.” In this way
they often consoled me.


CHAP.1U] WHITE GARLAND’S FEAST 57


‘About my fifteenth year, my mother possessed a small
field of her own called “ Tepe-Tenchung (Little Famine Car-
pet)” which, though bearing a not very auspicious name,
yielded a very fair crop of grain. This field was cultivated by
my maternal uncle, and its yield stored away. With part of it
he bought stores of meat, while the brown barley was brewed
into chhang and the white ground into flour.

‘Now the news was spread abroad that White Garland of
the Nyang and her children were going to give a feast with
a view to recovering their patrimony. Many carpets were bor-
rowed from all sides, and spread on the floor of our large house.
To the feast were invited all our neighbours, more especially
those who had been present at my father’s decease and knew
about his will, and all our relatives headed by our uncle and
aunt. One whole sheep each was given to mine uncle and aunt,
and the other guests were treated to quarters, legs, chops, and
ribs, according to their position and the degree of their rela-
tionship to us. Chhang was served in brimming cups, and the
feast began.

‘Then my mother stood up in the midst of the assembly and
spoke as follows: “I beg the honourable company here as-
sembled to give me leave to explain why they have been in-
vited to be present on this occasion, for, as the saying goeth,
‘The birth of a son maketh necessary a naming ceremony ;
and the offer of chhang, a talk.’ So I have a few words to say
touching the last wishes of my deceased husband, Mila-Sherab-
Gyaltsen, the father of these children,—a matter known to all
of you, the elders of the place, headed by their uncle and aunt.
So please listen to the will which I am now going to have
read.” Thereupon my maternal uncle proceeded to read the
will aloud to the company. When he had finished, my mother
again spoke, saying, “ All here present are aware of the oral


1 Chhang, a beer of very small alcoholic content, is made in the higher parts
of Tibet chiefly of home-grown barley; in Sikkim and other lower-lying
countries tributary or formerly, as Sikkim was, a part of Tibet, chhang is
commonly made by pouring boiling water over fermented millet. Either Chinese
tea, in which butter has been melted at the time of the brewing, or else chhang,
is the ceremonial beverage offered to guests by all Tibetans ; and no hospitality
shown to travellers or pilgrims would be complete without one or the other.


58 THE TASTING OF SORROW [PART I


testament uttered in their presence by my late husband, so I
shall not weary them with a repetition of it. To come to the
point, we [mother and children] are deeply grateful for all that
we owe to our uncle and aunt, and for all their care in looking
after us up to the present moment. But now that my son is
able to manage a house for himself, I request that the property
be restored to our care. I also ask you all to see that he be
married to Zesay, and that she be duly installed in their joint
home, in accordance with the wishes of my late husband.”
‘Upon my mother saying this, mine uncle and aunt, although
at variance on all other matters, here united forces, since they
had jointly misappropriated my patrimony to their own use.
Moreover, I was an only son, while mine uncle had several sons.
Mine uncle and aunt, thus in agreement in a scheme to defraud
us, replied: “ Where is this property ye are talking about?
When Mila-Sherab-Gyaltsen was alive, he borrowed these
houses, fields, cattle, ponies, gold, and silver. They all were
ours, he restoring them to us only when at the point of death.
This was only the restoration of the property to its rightful
owners. Where did ye ever have a particle of wealth, a measure
of barley, a roll of butter, a piece of cloth, or even a living head
of cattle of your own? We never saw any. And now ye have
the audacity to say a thing like this! Who wrote that will of
yours? Ye ought to be thankful we did not leave miserable
creatures like you to perish of starvation. Indeed the saying,
‘Rather try to measure a running stream with a quart measure,
than to oblige wicked people’, would seem to apply to you.”
‘Sneering at us, they rose abruptly from their seats, shook
their garments, and, stamping the heels of their shoes on the
floor, said, “If it really cometh to that, this very house we are
inis ours. Out with you, ye ungrateful orphans, out with you!”
With that, they slapped my mother, my sister, and myself in
the face with the ends of their long sleeves! And all my
mother could say, was, “O Mila-Sherab-Gyaltsen! look at the
treatment we have to endure, thou who didst say, ‘I will watch
over you from the realm of the dead!’ Now, if thou canst,


1 That is, the long loose sleeves of the national Tibetan dress, which wheh
hanging free cover the hands and so protect them from the cold.


CHAP, II] WHITE GARLAND’S FEAST 59


surely is the time to do so.” And falling down in a fit of
hysterical weeping she swooned away. I and my sister could
render no aid other than weeping.

*‘ My maternal uncle, seeing that mine other uncle had many
sons, did not dare to fight him. The other neighbours who
were kindly disposed towards us added their tears to my
mother’s, saying, “ Poor widow! Poor orphans!” Many were
sobbing, and few there were who did not shed tears.

‘Mine uncle and aunt continued: “Ye are asking for wealth
from us, but ye seem to have quite a lot yourselves, since ye
have been able to invite all your neighbours and friends to
such a grand feast. Ye need not ask for anything from us, for
we have not got any of your wealth, say what ye like. And
even if we have, we are not going to restore it. Do your worst,
ye wretched orphans! If ye feel yourselves strong enough in
numbers, fight us! If ye think yourselves too few, curse us!”

‘Having said this, they went out. Those who sided with
them followed next, mother still weeping, until our maternal
uncle and Zesay’s folk, with a few others who sided with us,
alone remained behind to console my mother. These continued
drinking what was left of the chhang, saying, “ Oh, do not weep!
It is of no avail.” They proposed that a subscription be raised
from all who had been at the dinner, offering themselves to
give their share, and that our paternal uncle and aunt should
again be appealed to with the confident expectation of their
making at least a decent contribution. With the sum so raised
it was proposed that I should be sent away to be educated.
My maternal uncle said to my mother: “ Yes, yes, let us do
that, and send the boy away to learn something. As for thy-
self and thy daughter, ye may come and live with me while ye
cultivate your fields by your own labour. We must do our
best to put to shame that uncle and aunt.”

‘But my mother said, “Since we are not to get back our
own property, I do not consider it possible to bring up my
children by means of wealth obtained in charity from others.
Besides, there is not the least probability of their uncle and
aunt ever restoring to us even a portion of our property. As
for my son, he must, of course, be educated. After this refusal


60 THE TASTING OF SORROW [PART I


of the uncle and aunt to restore to us our own, they will do
their utmost to expose us to shame should we again submit
ourselves to them. They will ill-treat us worse than ever; and
we should be like a drum on its stand or smoke in flight... We
shall remain here and work our field.”

‘ Accordingly, I was sent to a place in Tsa, called Mithong-
gat-kha (The Invisible Knoll), and there put under the tuition
of a Jama of the Red Sect called Lu-gyat-khan (Eight Ser-
pents), a very popular teacher of the place.

‘ During this period, our relatives seem to have contributed
some pecuniary aid towards our support. Zesay’s parents, espe-
cially, were very kind ; from time to time they sent us flour
and butter, and even fuel ; and often let Zesay herself come to
the place where I was studying, to console me. My maternal
uncle supplied my mother and sister with food so that they
were not forced to beg nor to serve others, and he used to
have the wool for spinning and weaving brought to his house
to save my mother going from door to door to ask for it.
Thus he greatly assisted us to make a living and earn a little
money. My sister, on her part, doing such tasks as others
gave her, by dint of hard work managed somehow to take care
of herself [so far as having money to spend was concerned].
But, in spite of everything, we got only coarse food, and had
to content ourselves with ragged clothes. All this caused me
much grief; at that time, not the least joy whatsoever did I
ever know.’

As the narrative ceased, all those listening were, without ex-
ception, deeply moved with sorrow and distress. Tears trickled
down their cheeks, and for a while all were silent.


This is the account of that part of his/life in which Jetsiin
had actual experience of the existence of sorrow.
1 That is, made to run when the drum-call sounds or wafted about like smoke


by the wind—an idiomatic expression similar to ‘at their beck and call from
early till late’.


CHAP. III]


CHAPTER III
irik PRACTISING OF “THEr BLACK “ART


Telling of Fetsiin’s Guru and Mastery of the Black Art; and
of how Fetsiin Destroyed Thirty-Five of his Enemies and the
Rich Barley Harvest of the Others, by Magic.


AGAIN Rechung addressed Jetsiin, saying, ‘O Jetsiin, thou
hast said that thou didst first commit some black’ deeds.
What were those black deeds, and how were they committed ?’

Jetstin made answer, ‘ By black magic, and by bringing on
hail-storms, I heaped up piles of demerit.’

Rechung then asked, ‘ How didst thou happen to have re-
course to such a thing? What led thee to do so?’

And Jetstin replied, ‘Once I accompanied my preceptor to
a feast held in the lower village of Tsa, at which feast he was
the most important personage present, and seated at the head
of the entire company. He was plied with drink by the guests
and by several others also, and thus partaking too freely of the
liquor provided was in a state of considerable excitement. At
this stage, I was sent home in advance of my preceptor with
the presents which he had received.' Being somewhat tipsy my-
self, and having seen several persons at the feast singing, I was
seized with an irresistible desire to sing, being moved thereto
by a desire to show off my fine voice, of which I was very proud.

‘I came singing all along the way. The road to “ The In-
visible Knoll” passed right in front of our own house; and
I still went on singing, even when I was nearing the house.
My mother, who was roasting some barley inside the house,
hearing my voice, could scarcely believe her ears, albeit my
voice on account of its unusual sweetness could hardly be
mistaken. Still, she thought, it could not be possible that I

1 Here reference is made to the custom of making gifts to preceptors, in this
instance of food, to be taken home. At this time, Milarepa’s preceptor is an
ordinary /ama, probably the village schoolmaster. Had he been a /asma-gurn,
highly developed spiritually, Milarepa would have been safeguarded from the


deplorable evil of drunkenness, which, according to Buddhist teachings, is as
reprehensible as it is productive of bad karma.


62 PRACTISING THE BLACK ART _ [PaRTI


should be singing at a time when our circumstances were such
that it could be said of us that we were about the most unhappy
creatures alive. But looking out and seeing that it really was
myself, she was utterly dumbfounded.

‘She dropped her tongs to the right and her roasting-whisk
to the left, and, leaving the barley to burn in the pan, came
out with a rod in her right hand and a handful of ashes in her
left. Sliding down the longer steps and jumping down the
shorter steps, she came and threw the ashes in my face, and
striking me several times on the head with the rod exclaimed,
“QO, Mila-Sherab-Gyaltsen, see what a son hath been born to
thee! Surely it cannot be thy blood that floweth in the veins
of this vagabond! O, look what we have come to!” There-
upon she fell fainting to the ground.

‘ At that moment my sister came out, and saying, “ O brother,
what art thou thinking of? See to our mother!” she burst
out weeping. This brought me to my senses; and feeling the
justice of the rebuke I also wept. Then, for a time, we two
continued tugging at our mother’s hands, calling to her in our
anguish.

‘After a while she revived, and regarding me with a fixed,
displeased look on her tear-stained faced, said, “ Son, dost thou
really feel merry enough to sing? As for me, I think we are
the most unhappy of all the unhappy beings existing in all the
world; and the only thing I can do is to weep for very sorrow
and grief.” And all three of us again wept loudly.

‘Then I said, “ Mother, thou art right ; but do not take it so
much to heart. I solemnly promise to do for thee whatever
thou mayst desire of me. What is thy will, my mother ?”

‘My mother said, “ What I should like is to see thee dressed
in a coat of mail and mounted ona steed, dragging thy stirrups
over the necks of these our enemies ; but that would be a diffhi-
cult thing to bring to pass, and attended, too, by much risk.
However, what I wish is that thou shouldst learn the Black
Art thoroughly, so that thou mayst be able to kill these enemies
of ours, chiefly thine uncle and aunt who have caused us so much
grief and misery, and cut off the root of their posterity down
to the ninth generation. See if thou canst do that for me.”


CHAP. 11] GURUS OF THE BLACK ART 63


‘I faithfully promised to do my best to fulfil her wish, if she
would provide the fees for the Gurus! of the Black Art, as
also mine expenses on the road and for the time that I should
be engaged in study.

‘My mother then sold half of the field called “ Little Famine
Carpet” in return for a splendid turquoise called “ Radiant
Star”, and a white pony called “ Unbridled Lion”, well known
in the place. She also managed to get together two loads of
madder for dyeing, and two loads of raw sugar. The sugar
I disposed of to meet my present needs; and, setting out, duly
arrived at Gungthang. In this place there was an inn called
“ Self-perfected Inn”, and there I stayed some days looking
out for companions—fellow-travellers who might be going the
same way as myself. Thither soon arrived five favourite sons
of good families, of Ngari-Dél, bound for U and Tsang,? to
learn something of religion as well as of black magic. I told
them that I was out on the same errand as themselves, and
asked if I might be allowed to accompany them. To this they
agreed. Then I took them down to the lower part of Gung-
thang and there treated them to the best food and refreshments
procurable.

‘ Meanwhile, my mother had taken them aside and entreated
them thus: “ Young gentlemen, my son is not of a very studious
disposition, neither doth he possess much perseverance. So
I beg you to urge him to study, and to make himself proficient.
And when ye return, I shall know how to show you my grati-
tude, and repay you for your kindness to him.”

‘When the two loads of dye-stuff had been set upon the


1 The title Guru (Spiritual Preceptor, or Teacher) is applied to one who follows
the Left-hand Path, of Black Magic, as well as to one who follows the Right-
hand Path, of White Magic. Up to acertain point the process of developing the
chishya psychically is much the same for either Path. Afterwards, the vast gulf
separating Black and White Magic is due entirely to the intention of the shishya
or Guru and the use to which the psychic powers are put; in Black Magic the
aim and practice is purely selfish and evil, in White Magic altruistic and pro-
ductive of benefit to all sentient beings.

2 The Provinces of U and Tsang, frequently mentioned throughout this
Biography, are known to Tibetans as Péd, i.e, Tibet proper. Their respective
capitals, Lhasa and Tashi-lhiinpo, are Tibet's chief cities. The former is the seat
of the Dalai Lama; the latter, the seat of the Tashi Lama.


64 PRACTISING THE BLACK ART [PAaRT!1


pony, and I had secured the turquoise about my person, we
set forth, My mother accompanied us a considerable way,
every now and then, at each halt, serving out chhang; and
while we were walking and also during halts she appealed
again and again to my companions to look after me. I was
her only son, and she could hardly bear to part from me; she
clung to my hand and shed many tears. At length, taking
me aside, she gave me the following parting admonition, in
a low voice broken with sobs: “ My dear son, consider what
a state of wretchedness we are in, and carry out the object that
lieth before thee. Thou must show thy power here in this
place, by working some destruction. Thy study of magic is not
the same as that of these young men; theirs is a matter of
acquiring fame, but ours is a matter of desperate necessity.
Shouldst thou return without being able to give some visible
manifestation of thy power here, I swear to thee that I will
kill myself in thy very presence.” *

‘Having thus admonished me, she left us; but I could
hardly bear the parting, my heart was attached to her so
fondly. Again and again I looked back at her, and could not
withhold the tears which flowed unbidden down my cheeks
despite all that I could do to keep them back. My mother,
too, suffered no less. I being her only son, she keenly felt
the anguish of parting. I could see her gazing back at me
as long as we were within sight of one another; and a well-
nigh irresistible desire came over me to turn back and see her
once more, but, by an almost superhuman effort, I conquered it.
Later events caused me to see that this was a premonition of
what was to occur—a feeling foreshadowing that I was never
to see my mother alive again. When we were completely out
of sight of one another, my mother went back weeping to the
village. And a few days later it was rumoured far and wide
that the son of White Garland of the Nyang had gone away
to learn black magic in order to be able to avenge his wrongs.

‘I and my companions now proceeded along the U-Tsang
road till we came to a place called Yakde, in Tsang-rong. Here
I sold my pony and my dye-stuffs to a rich man, and receiving
payment in gold secured it about my person. Crossing the


cHAP. U1] STUDY OF THE BLACK ART 65


Tsangpo (Purifier) River, we struck towards the Province of U,
arriving duly at a place called Thoén-luk-rakha (Sheep-Pen of
Thon), where we met several Jamas from U. On iriquiring of
them as to who was the:most noted adept in the Black Art
for producing death, and destruction of property by hail-storms,
one of them replied that there was a famous sorcerer named
Lama Yungtun-Trogyal (Wrathful and Victorious Teacher of
Evil), of Nyak, in a village called Yarlung-Kyorpo, who was
well known for his accomplishments in the art of producing
death and destruction by means of black magic, of which Lama
he himself was a pupil. So we all turned our steps towards
Lama Yungtun-Trogyal.

‘On arriving at Yarlung-Kyorpo, and meeting the Black
Magician, I saw that my companions made a present to him
of part of their money only ; but, as for me, I presented to him
everything I had—all my pieces of gold, and the turquoise,
and, in addition, even my very self, body and life, begging only
that he would teach me black magic in such wise that I might be
able to demonstrate mine attainments in unmistakable fashion
by working some havoc on those who had robbed me of my
patrimony. A further request I made was that he would provide
me with food and clothing until I had acquired proficiency in the
Art. The Lama smiled and said, “I will consider thy request.”

‘And so we all began our studies, which, however, were not
of a really effectual kind. We were taught some branches of
black magic bearing high-sounding titles, such as that which
was said to bestow the power of joining heaven and earth;
also a method of dealing death ; and, in addition, a few others
of a beneficial kind.

‘At this sort of study we were kept for nearly a year, about
which time my companions began to think of returning home.
As a parting gift, our Teacher presented each of us with a coat
made of the fine woollen cloth that is woven in the Province
of U. But I was far from feeling satisfied. I thought that such
magical lore as we had mastered up till then was hardly enough
for the production of any real effect in my village. And I knew
that if I were not able to do something striking my mother
would certainly kill herself in my presence. So I could not


66 PRACTISING THE BLACK ART [PaRTI


think of returning home. Observing my reluctance, my com-
panions asked me if I did not want to go home. I replied that
I had not yet learned anything. To this they rejoined, “ What
we have received is quite sufficient ; all now dependeth upon our
own application and perseverance. We had best follow these
methods. Our Teacher telleth us that he hath nothing better
to impart to us; and we know that to be true. However, if
thou wish to stay on, by all means do so, and see if thou
can learn a little more.” Thereupon, they prostrated them-
selves before the Teacher, and, offering him such gifts as they
thought fit, started homeward.

‘Putting on the coat given me by the Teacher, I accom-
panied them the distance of a morning’s walk, by way of see-
ing them off; and then, bidding them farewell, retraced my
steps towards my Teacher’s house. On the way up, I collected
in the lap of my robe quite a quantity of manure which I
found lying on the road. My Teacher having a nice piece of
garden land, I dug a hole in it and buried the manure there.
From the roof of his house, the Teacher, having seen what I
had done, is said to have spoken to the pupils at that moment
round about him thus:—“ Among all the pupils I ever have
had, I never had nor ever shall have one more affectionate and
industrious than that boy. It seemeth that the reason why he
did not come to bid me farewell this morning was because
he was returning to me. I recollect that on his first coming
here he spoke of some neighbours having ill-treated him, and
that he wished me to teach him magic so that he might be
able to give demonstration of his acquirements in his native
place, at the same time offering himself to me body and life.
What a simple fellow he is! If what he sayeth be true, it would
be a shame, nay, downright cruelty, to refuse to teach him the
Art.” I was told of this afterward by one of the young
pupils; and I was filled with joy at the prospect of being
favoured with really effective instruction.

‘Upon my going into the presence of my Teacher, he ad-
dressed me thus: “ Well, Thopaga, how is it that thou hast
not gone home?” I had folded up the dress which he had
presented to me, and now offered it to him as a fresh gift.


CHAP. III] THE GURUS INQUIRY 67


Then, bowing in reverence before him, and touching his feet
with my forehead, I said, “O Venerable Guru, 1am an orphan,
with a widowed mother and a sister. We have been deprived of
our patrimony by our neighbours, headed by our paternal
uncle and aunt, and ill-treated beyond endurance. As we had
no power to obtain our rights or avenge ourselves, my mother
hath sent me away to learn the Black Art; and if I return
without being able to wreak vengeance upon those who have
wronged us, my mother will kill herself in my presence. So I
did not dare to go home; and I now entreat thee to teach me
the Art in a manner that will be really effective.” The Guru
then asked me to tell him the whole story of our ill-treatment,
and of how we had been defrauded. I related to him all that
had happened from the time of my father’s death, and of how
we had been wronged and ill-treated by our uncle and aunt,
my narrative being broken by my sobs, while the tears
streamed from mine eyes.

‘On hearing the whole story, my Teacher, too, was unable
to restrain his tears, which I could see coursing down his
cheeks. Then he said, “ If what thou sayest be true, thou hast
indeed been treated most cruelly and unjustly. I could myself
wreak vengeance by mine Art, but must not do so without due
cause, after full inquiry. Many an appeal hath been made to
me by various people that I might teach them this peerless
Art of mine. Unlimited quantities of gold and turquoises from
the Ngari-Province, silks and brick-tea from Kham and Amdo,
grain, butter, and woollen fabrics in loads upon loads from the
Provinces of U and Tsang, cattle and ponies by the thousands
from Dzayul, Tagpo, and the Kongpo Provinces, have come
pouring in upon me, as offerings in exchange for this Art.
But none yet hath said as thou hast, that he offered himself to
me, body and life. So I will make inquiry into thy case.”

‘My Teacher had a disciple who was fleeter than a horse and
stronger than an elephant. This disciple was sent to my native
place with instructions to make inquiry into the facts of my
case; and in a few days he came back with a report that all
my statements were perfectly true, and that it seemed only an
act of justice to bestow on me the Art.


68 PRACTISING THE BLACK ART _ [PARTI


‘Thereupon my Guru said to me, “I withheld the Art from
thee in the beginning, because I feared that thou mightst use
it stupidly, without having sufficient cause for its exercise.’
But now that I am satisfied as to thy truthfulness, I shall
teach thee the whole Art. Only, thou must go to another
place to learn it. Formerly I had a most destructive piece
of black magic called the Zadong-Marnak (Purple Basilisk),
potent to paralyse and to kill, which I taught to Khulung-
Yonton-Gyatso (Ocean of Virtue of Khulung), of Nub-Khu-
lung, in the valley of the Tsangpo. He was a physician and
also a Tantric.2 He possessed a knowledge of the art of
launching hail-storms and of guiding them with the tips of his
fingers, which art he taught to me. We then swore friendship
to each other, and arranged that whoever went to him to learn
the art of launching hail-storms should be sent to me, while
those who came to me to learn the art of producing death
should be sent to him with my recommendations. It will,
therefore, be necessary for thee to go to him to learn the art
thou desirest, and thither I now shall send thee.”

‘Thereupon he provided me and his eldest son named
Darma-Wangchuk (Powerful Young Man) with a yak-load of
eatables and with presents, consisting of fine woollen cloth,
and, also having received from him a letter of recommendation
bound with a scarf,> we set out upon our journey and in due
time arrived at Nub-Khulung, in the valley of the Tsangpo.
There we each made a gift of a picce of fine woollen cloth, and
presented our letter ; and, relating all the circumstances again,
I prayed that I might be favoured with instruction in the Art.

‘Khulung-Y6ntén-Gyatso said, “My friend is constant in
friendship and keepeth his promises. Assuredly I will give

1 Itis an inviolable rule observed to the present day that no guru of any school,
either of black or white magic, communicates to the disciple the essential teach-
ings until satisfied that they will not be abused.

* That is, one versed in the ritual and occult lore of the Tantric School.

$ No introduction or ceremonial presentation is complete in Tibet and neigh-
bouring countries, as far as Mongolia, without the accompaniment of a scarf;
this applies to both the highest and lowest personages, from the peasant to the
Dalai Lama, Europeans themselves conforming to it. The scarf is usually white,


except in Mongolia, where it is said to be blue. (Cf. The Earl of Ronaldshay,
Lands of the Thunderbolt, London, 1923, py. 120-2.)


CHAP. III] MILAREPA’S VENGEANCE 69


thee the instruction thou desirest. Build thyself a strong cell
which cannot easily be pulled down with the hands, at the end
of that spur down there,” pointing out the intended site to
me. “Let it have three stories all underground ; while one
story more, on top of these three, must be built with strong
beams, closely joined together. At the outer angles Ict it be
covered with stones large as the body of a yak. Let it be so
constructed that none will be able to find the entrance to it, or
force their way into it.” He then gave me the necessary in-
structions [in magical practice].

‘ After I had applied the instructions during seven days, my
Teacher came and said, “ Usually seven days are enough in
which to achieve results, and they ought also to be sufficient
in the present case.” But, since it was a far-off part of the
country in which I wished to operate, I prayed that I might
be allowed another seven days; and this prayer was granted.

‘On the night of the fourteenth day, my Teacher again came
to see me, and said, “ To-night, at the end of thine altar, [or
circle of offerings], thou wilt see the sign of thy success, and
the accomplishment of thy wishes.” And, sure enough, that
very night the Tutelary Deities made their appearance, bring-
ing with them the bleeding heads and hearts of thirty-five
persons, and laying down the trophies in a heap said, “Were
not these the objects of thy wishes, in calling upon us over
and over again these last few days ?”’

‘Next morning, my Teacher came again, and said that there
were two more persons who ought to be sacrificed, asking me
whether I wanted them killed or not. I prayed that they
might be spared alive as objects over which to gloat, and cite
as examples of my power in the future. Thus it was that my
two worst enemies, mine uncle and aunt, were omitted from the
general destruction. I next offered thanks to the Karmic and
Tutelary Deities, and left my cell-retreat. The site of that cell
can be seen to the present day in Khulung.

‘To come now to the practical phase of the accomplishment
of my vengeance by means of the Black Art ; if ye would like
to know how it appeared to others, it took place thus: The
eldest son of my paternal uncle was going to be married, and


70 PRACTISING THE BLACK ART [PARTI


all who had taken my paternal uncle’s side were invited to the
wedding feast. There were assembled in the house the other
sons of that uncle, the bride, and those particular persons who
had ill-treated us most, thirty-five persons in all. Some of the
invited guests, of whom most were among those who inclined to
our side, were on their way to the feast, talking and whispering
to one another, saying, “ These people are acting exactly accord-
ing to the proverb: ‘ Trust others with possession of thy house,
and be turned out of doors.’ Even if Thépaga’s efforts at
vengeance by means of black magic do not take effect, it is
high time that the effect of karma should overtake them.”

‘Thus, walking along and talking at their ease, they had
just come in sight of the house, but had not had time to enter,
when a maidservant, formerly ours, but now our uncle’s, came
out of the house to fetch some water. As she passed the
fenced-in yard where a large number of ponies had been en-
closed, she could not see anything of them ; but, instead, the
whole place seemed to be filled with scorpions, spiders, snakes,
frogs, and lizards; and, in the midst of them all, one mon-
strous scorpion? was driving its claws into the principa) pillar
of the house, tugging at it and pulling it outwards. She was
terrified at the sight, and barely had time to get away when
several colts and mares, which had been tethered together
below the house, became excited and raised a great commo-
tion. Some of the colts, getting loose, rushed upon the mares.
The whole lot were flung into the utmost confusion, the colts
neighing and the mares kicking, until one of them knocked
against the main pillar with such terrific force that it broke
and fell, and the whole house came down with a tremendous
crash.

‘In all, there perished thirty-five persons, among them the
bride, and all mine uncle’s sons. Clouds of smoke and dust
obscured the sky. Dead bodies of men, women and children,
and ponies choked the ruins.

‘A heart-rending wail arose from those outside, which was
heard by my sister, who, when she saw what had happened,


1M. Bacot’s version reads: ‘a scorpion as big as a yak’ (p. 64)—the yak
being the great shaggy buffalo used as a beast of burden in Tibet.


CHAP. II] THE MOTHER’S GLOATING 71


rushed to her mother, crying out, “ O mother, come and look!
Our uncle’s house hath fallen down, and a lot of people have
been killed.”

‘My mother got up and came to see what had happened,
all the while very much doubting if it really could be so. But
seeing the fallen house covered with clouds of dust, and hear-
ing the piteous cries and wailing which filled the air, she was
filled with astonishment, as also with cruel joy. Putting some
rags on the end of a long pole, and raising it aloft like a ban-
ner, she cried aloud, “ All glory to the Teachers and to the
Gods! All ye neighbours, look now and see if Mila-Sherab-
Gyaltsen hath begotten a worthy son or not, and if I have
avenged myself or not. Though I had to eat coarse food and
wear rags for a dress, see if this is not well worth our sacrifices.
Look and tell whether or not that paternal uncle’s challenge
hath been answered,—he who said, ‘ Fight if strong, and curse
if weak!’ Now the curse of the weak and the few hath done
more than the might of the many could ever have done.
Look, just look at the human beings above and the animals
below! See the treasures and provisions ruined! O what a
cheering sight hath my son brought before mine eyes to bless
mine old age! Deiighted am I to have lived to enjoy such a
scene! Could any other moment of my life be the equal of
this in perfect triumphant joy!”

‘With exclamations such as these, my mother gloated over
the cruel spectacle, being heard by all the neighbours. Some
of them said that she was right; others said that she was
going too far,—that it was quite enough to have been avenged
and that she ought not to give vent to such an excess of ill
will.

‘News of my mother’s joy came to the ears of the people
who had lost relatives in the catastrophe, and they began to
say, “Not only hath she been the cause of the mischief, but
she giveth vent to her malignant triumph in language which is
unbearable. Let us put her to the torture and wring out her
wicked heart.” The older and more prudent said, “ What ad-
vantage will it be to kill her, since her son will only do the
same thing over again, and kill us all. Rather let us hunt out


72 PRACTISING THE BLACK ART  [parTI


the cub first, and kill him on the spot; then we can do what
we like with the dam.” To this all agreed.

‘My paternal uncle, coming to hear of their plan, said, “ Ha!
I have no more sons or daughters to lose; death will be wel-
come!” and rushed forth intending to kill my mother forthwith.
But the neighbours caught hold of him and said, ‘Listen! It
was through our siding with thee that we have brought this
calamity upon our heads. Thou art its main cause, and now
again thou art about to do something of the same sort. If thou
do not abide by the plan of action on which we have decided,
of seeking out the son first and then dispatching the mother,
we will fall out; for we are resolved to oppose thee in this
matter.” Mine uncle, accordingly, had no choice but to submit
to them.

‘Meanwhile, they concocted a plot against my life, and were
considering how best to send some persons to seek and kill me,
when news of their plot came to the ears of my maternal
uncle, who, going to my mother, upbraided her roundly with
her rashness. “ Thy recklessness ”, he said, “is likely to imperil
thine own life and that of thy son. The neighbours are con-
spiring against thee. What benefit was it to vent thy malig-
nant joy in that fashion? Was it not enough to have wrought
such havoc upon them?” Thus he scolded her at great length.

‘My mother only wept and said, “O my dear brother and
uncle of my children, I feel the justice and the sound sense of
thy rebuke, but put thyself in my place, and think of what
I have endured! The property, vast and extensive as it was,
taken from me by fraud, and myself subjected to such in-
dignities and ill treatment! Could any mortal help feeling as
I did?”

‘My uncle replied, “ Thou hast some reason on thy side, but
I fear for thee. Look to the doors—fasten them well—mur-
derers may come.” As soon as he had gone, my mother
fastened the doors securely, and sat down to ponder what she
should do next.

‘The maidservant who had escaped the catastrophe, getting
an inkling of the plot against us, and unable to bear the thought
of the orphans of her dear old mistress and her late master


cHap. 1] © THE MOTHER’S MESSAGE 73


being massacred, sent a private message informing my mother
of the conspiracy, and exhorting her to send me warning of
the danger.

‘My mother, perceiving that for some time at least her life
was safe, made up her mind how to act. She sold the remaining
half of her field, “‘ Little Famine Carpet”, getting seven pieces
of gold for it. But seeing no one in the place whom she felt
she could trust-to take them to me, and being unable to find
a reliable messenger elsewhere, she thought of coming herself to
bring me the gold, as well as to warn me of the impending danger.

‘However, as luck would have it, a pilgrim from U, who
had been on pilgrimage to the sacred places in Nepal! and
was on his way home again, came to the door to beg alms.
She asked him to come in; and, artfully putting a number of
questions regarding his home and so forth, discovered that he
would be a suitable person to whom to entrust a message for
me. She next invited him to stay in her house for a few days,
telling him that she had a son in U or Tsang to whom she
wished to send a message. During the time that he stayed she
treated him to the best of everything she had and made him
very comfortable.

‘Trimming a lamp and addressing a prayer to the Deities
invoked and worshipped by me, she begged them to give her
a sign whether her message would be safely delivered or not,
and whether her wishes would be accomplished. If she were to
have success, so she prayed, then the lamp was to continue
burning fora long time; but if failure were to attend her, then
the lamp was to go out speedily. It so happened that the
lamp continued burning for a whole day and night. Thus
assured that her message would not miscarry, she gave the
pilgrim some pieces of cured hide to serve as soles for his
leather boots, and told him to get them put on, as he would
find them needful.

‘The pilgrim had an old blanket-cloak, and my mother,
offering to mend it for him wherever it had rents or holes, took
it and put a somewhat large patch on the back ; and, unknown
to its owner, hid the seven pieces of gold within the patch.


1 Nepal, like India, is still a place of many pilgrimages for Tibetan Buddhists.


74 PRACTISING THE BLACK ART [PARTI


She sewed over it another patch, black in colour and square in
shape, and ornamented it with a star prominently worked in
thick white thread-work. In doing this, she fastened the seven
pieces of gold by putting in stitches all around each, so as to
make the pattern look like a group of six stars, one in each
angle of the large enclosing star, and one in its centre,’ but
showing less prominently than the large star itself. She then
handed the pilgrim a sealed letter which he was to deliver to
me, and, giving him a handsome present, charged him to con-
vey the letter to me in safety.

‘When the pilgrim-devotee had departed, my mother, wishing
to instil fear in the minds of the neighbours, instructed my
sister Peta to tell some of the folk that the pilgrim had brought
a letter from me. The letter which, of course, was a sham one,
ran thus: “I hope that my mother and sister are quite well,
and that they have seen the results of my magical powers.
Doth any one dare to bear enmity towards you or to intimi-
date and ill-treat you? If so, ye have only to let me know
that one’s name and family, together with the causes of his or
her behaviour, and so forth, and I will simply annihilate that
one. It is easily done. Indeed it is easier for me to kill a per-
son than to say grace before meat. I will not only kill one,
two, or three persons, but I will root out entire generations,
even down to the ninth generation. If it be the whole com-
munity that beareth you ill will, just come here, and I will
simply sweep the whole countryside with destruction, leaving
not a trace of any one behind. Here I am living in ease and
comfort. Ye need not have any anxiety about me. I am
spending my days in the study of the Art.”

‘This letter was signed and sealed in a way to make it appear
as if it had come from me, and was shown to those round about
whom we knew to be on our side ; and, finally, it was handed
over to our maternal uncle, that it might be shown to all in the
place. This stratagem had the intended effect of causing the
enraged people to abandon their design of having recourse to
desperate measures. They consulted together, and induced my


1 Or, ‘the pattern was made to represent the constellation of seven stars known
as the Pleiades’.


CHAP. IIT] THE MESSAGE’S RIDDLE 75


paternal uncle to restore our field called “ Worma Triangle”,
my patrimony, to my mother.

‘ Meanwhile, the pilgrim-messenger went on from place to
place inquiring for my: whereabouts; and learning that I was
at Nub-Khulung, came thither ; and, finding me and giving me
all the news concerning the welfare of my mother and sister,
handed me my mother’s letter, part of which ran thus: “My
dear son Thoépaga, I hope thou art enjoying sound health.
I am well satisfied with thee ; thou hast proved thyself worthy
of the name of thy father, the noble Mila-Sherab-Gyaltsen, and
my desires have been accomplished. The manifestations of thy
knowledge of black magic have been seen here in most im-
pressive fashion. Thirty-five persons have been killed in a house
which fell down on them. But the occurrence hath embittered
the people against us; they hate us and mean us no good.
I now request thee to launch a terrible hail-storm. I have heard
that there are nine different kinds of hail-storms. Launch one
of them. That will complete the satisfaction of thine old mother.
These people here are conspiring against our lives. They speak
of sending some men to kill thee and, after thee, myself. So,
for both our sakes, take good care of thyself. Shouldst thou
be short of means, search for a valley facing north, overshadowed
by a black cloud, and lit by the stars called Mindook (the
Pleiades). There thou wilt find seven of our relatives. Ask of
them, and thou wilt obtain whatever thou desirest in the way
of provisions. Shouldst thou fail to find the valley, know that
the pilgrim-devotee who beareth this liveth in that valley. Do
not inquire about it from any one else.”

“Now here was a riddle indeed. I was quite unable to make
out what the letter meant. My desire to return home and see
my mother was very great. I had run short of money and
needed it sorely, but I knew not where these relatives lived.
I knew nothing of the valley. My cheeks ran with floods of
tears. I inquired of the pilgrim concerning the relatives, whom,
so the letter said, he knew. I asked him who they were, and
where they lived ; I also asked him where he himself lived. He
replied that he belonged to Ngari-Gungthang. On my question-
ing him further as to the whereabouts of my relatives spoken of


76 PRACTISING THE BLACK ART _ [PARTI


in the letter, as also about himself and his movements, he said
that he had been to several places, but knew of none where
any relatives of mine lived nor anything of such relatives them-
selves. He himself was a native of U. So I asked him to wait
a little until I came back. I then went and showed the Ictter
to my Guru, at the same time telling him the news that I had
got by word of mouth from the messenger.

‘My Guru glanced once at the letter and said, “ Thépaga,
thou seemest to have a very vindictive mother. So many persons
dead, and yet she commandeth thee to launch hail-storms!
What relatives hast thou in the North?” “I never before
heard that I had any,” I replied, ‘‘and the letter is very ob-
scurely worded. I have asked the pilgrim, but he knoweth
nothing about them.”

‘My Guru's wife was a lady endowed with supernatural in-
telligence, being the incarnation of a dakinz. She read through
the letter once, and then ordered me to call the pilgrim, which
I did. She then had a nice big fire made, and chhang served,
and caused the pilgrim to take off the cloak he was wearing.
Then, assuming a playful air, she put it on her own back, and
strutting up and down the room said, “Happy indeed those
persons must be who can go everywhere with no other clothing
but this on their back!” Thereupon she danced about a little
and moved out of the room with the cloak on her back. Going
to the roof of the house, she cut open the patch, took out the
gold pieces, replaced the patch as it had been before, and,
coming back into the room, restored the cloak to the pilgrim.
Thereafter she gave him some dinner and sent him off to
another apartment.

‘ Having seen the pilgrim safely lodged, the lady called to
me, saying, “ Thépaga, thy Teacher requesteth thee to come
here into his presence.” Going thither, she presented me with
the seven pieces of gold. On asking her where she had found
the gold, she replied that it had been in the pilgrim’s cloak,
and continued, “ Thépaga must have a very shrewd mother.
The valley facing north was the pilgrim’s cloak; for, as the
sun doth not shine into a valley facing north, so also the
pilgrim’s cloak was one through which no sun-rays could pierce.


CHAP. 11] LAUNCHING OF HAIL-STORMS 7%


The black cloud referred to the square black patch. The con-
stellation referred to the thread-work on the patch, and the
seven relatives referred to the seven pieces of gold. Her am-
biguous remark about not inquiring of any one else save the
pilgrim himself referred to the fact that the pilgrim was clad
in the cloak ; and the remark itself was intended to direct thine
attention to his own person, which thou wert to search.” At
this my Teacher was highly pleased, and said, ‘Ye women
are proverbially sharp-witted and keen-sighted, and this is
only another proof of it.”

‘Out of the sum which thus came into my hands, I gave the
pilgrim a tenth of one piece, at which he was delighted. I also
offered the lady seven tenths ; and to my Teacher gave three
pieces, entreating him to teach me the art of launching hail-
storms which my mother desired me to learn. For a knowledge
of the Hail-Charm, he,in his turn, referred me back to my former
Guru, Lama Yungtun-Trogyal. Furnished with the necessary
letter and a scarf, recommending that my request should be
granted, [ returned to Yarlung-Kyorpo.

‘Meeting my former Guru, I presented to him the letter
and the scarf sent by Khulung-Y6ntén-Gyatso, and made
offering to him of the three pieces of gold that still remained
to me. He inquired as to my success in my former studies.
I told him that I had been successful ; that thirty-five people
had been killed ; and that I had received a letter asking for
a plague of hail, and now prayed him to grant my request.
“Very good,” said he, and at once imparted to me the Charm,
ordering me to complete the ceremonial connected therewith
in an old secluded cell [of a hermitage].

‘At the end of seven days I saw clouds gathering in the
cell and lightning flashing, and heard the growling of thunder.
I now thought I might direct the course of a hail-storm with
my finger, and my Teacher agreed, saying, “ Now thou art
able to launch hail-storms,” at the same time asking me how
tall the barley would be at that time.

‘So I told him at about what time the seed was usually
sown, when the young shoots commonly appeared, when it
was high enough to hide pigeons, and finally at about what


78 PRACTISING THE BLACK ART [PARTI


time the season for weeding arrived. My Teacher listened to
me, and said that it was still too early. Later on, he again
asked me about the seasons of the barley. I told him when
the ears would appear, and when they would be full. He then
said that it was time for me to go and launch my hail-storm ;
and with me he sent the strong, fleet pupil already mentioned.

‘We disguised ourselves as pilgrims; and, coming to my
village, saw that the harvest that year was so abundant that
even the oldest folk of the place could not remember anything
like it. On this account, a regulation was made for that year
to the effect that nobody should reap at his or her own
pleasure; a few days more, and all would begin to reap at
one and the same time.

‘Then I erected the apparatus required for the working of
my spell, on the heights above the valley, and began to chant
the Charm ; but not even a cloud as big as a sparrow gathered.
I then called upon the names of the deities ; and reciting the
tale of our wrongs and the cruelty of our neighbours I struck
the earth with my folded robe and wept bitterly.

‘Almost immediately a huge, heavy, black cloud gathered
in the sky; and when it had settled down there burst from it
a violent hail-storm, which destroyed every single ear of grain
in the fields. Three falls of hail followed in succession and cut
deep gorges in the hill-sides. The country folk, thus deprived
of their harvest, set up one great wail of distress and grief.

‘The hail was followed by a heavy downpour of rain and
a strong wind, which made the two of us feel very cold. So
we sought a rocky cave facing north, and, having made a fire
of stunted shrubs, were busy warming ourselves when we
heard the voices of some people of the place who had come
out hunting for game, with which to celebrate the usual harvest


1 In Tibet, as in other lands with primitive manners, the peasantry are accus-
tomed to cultivate and harvest their fields in common.

The exact dates for sowing and reaping crops are fixed by the village astrolo-
ger, who, after examining the relative positions of the planets and constellations,
utters predictions as to the possibility of rain, while the older and more ex-
perienced peasants tell when the rains will start by examining the condition of


the soil. Such predictions are no less accurate than those of our modern meteoro-
logical bureaux.


CHAP. 11] THE HAIL-STORM’S HAVOC 719


thanksgiving. They were saying among themselves, “ Oh, this
Thépaga hath plagued the countryside more than any one
ever hath done. See how many people he hath killed! And
now this rich harvest, the like of which was never before seen,
is all destroyed! If he fell into our hands at this moment,
chopping him up piecemeal and dividing his flesh by morsels
and his blood by drops would hardly suffice to satisfy our
vengeance.”

‘ As they thus spoke, they were passing right in front of our
cave, and one of the older persons said, “Keep quiet; talk
low! I see smoke in the cave over yonder. We do not know
who it may be.” One of the younger men said, “It must
surely be Thépaga. He cannot have seen us. Let us hurry
down to the village and bring up men, surround him, and kill
him, else he will certainly work more mischief on the village.”

‘So saying, they turned back to the village ; whereupon my
companion said to me, “ Get thyself away first and I will im-
personate thee and mock them.” We made an agreement to
meet again on the fourth night at the Inn of Tingri. Knowing
how fleet and strong he was, I had no misgivings in leaving
him behind ; and, much as I then yearned to see my mother,
I had to forgo my wish. Because of mine enemies, I had to
get away as quickly as possible and go round by the Nyanam
Pass. On the way I was bitten by a dog, which caused me
some delay and prevented mine arrival at the Inn within the
appointed time.

‘Meanwhile, my friend had been surrounded, but had burst
right through the line of those seeking his life; and, eluding
them by running swiftly when they neared him and walking
slowly again when they were far behind, he lured them on.
When they began to shoot arrows and throw missiles at him
he retaliated by hurling a big stone amongst them, saying at
the same time, “ Beware, ye rascals! I will surely destroy by
magical means whoever of you singles himself out as my most
prominent foe. Have I not cause to feel delight at having
killed so many of you before? How comforting to my heart !
More than that, I have destroyed the whole of this year’s rich
harvest so completely that not a single grain of corn is left for


80 PRACTISING THE BLACK ART  [ParRTI


any of you to pick up. Is not that splendid too? For the
future, if ye do not behave properly to my mother and my
sister, I will put a curse upon your hill-tops and a blight upon
your valleys, and make what is left of you barren and accurst
down io the ninth generation. I will turn this country into
a desolate wilderness! See if I do not.” And as he went on
speaking thus, his pursuers became frightened and began to
say each to the other, “It was thou who brought on this,”
and so forth and so on, upon which they all turned back.

‘Thus it was that my friend, having reached Tingri before
me, asked the inn-keeper there if a pilgrim answering to my
description had come to the Inn. The inn-keeper replied,
“No”; and added, “ Ye pilgrims have no objection to drink-
ing when ye get the chance. Now if thou go over there
thou wilt find a marriage-feast going on, where thou wilt be
welcome. If thou have no bowl of thine own, I will lend thee
mine, and thou canst have a proper time of it. Wilt thou go?”

‘Of course my friend said “ Yes”, and took the bowl, which
was as big as the head of Shinje,! deep and capacious, shape-
less and unpolished. Armed therewith, he proceeded to the
house of feasting, where I already was, seated in one of the
back rows. My friend approached me and asked, “ How is it
that thou didst not reach the appointed place earlier?” I re-
plied, “ As I was going out begging one morning, a dog bit
me on the leg and that delayed me.” My friend said, ‘‘ Never
mind!” And from that place we proceeded on our way to-
gether.

‘On our arrival at Yarlung-Kyorpo, our Guru said, “ Ye
two have been attended by success and good fortune.” As
there was no one who could have reached him before us and
informed him we were astonished, and asked, “ Who hath told
thee? No one went ahead of us to inform thee.” He replied
that the deities had appeared to him with countenances beam-

? Tib. Gshin-rje (pron. Shine), the King and Judge of the Dead, otherwise
known by his Sanskrit names as Yama-Raja (‘ King of the Dead’) and Dhkarma-
Raja (‘ King of Truth’). He is called Yama- Raja because he rules or judges with
restraint (Skt. Sangyama), and Dharma-Ra4ja because he judges and metes out


punishment in strict accordance with the karmic deserts of each of the dead, or
in accordance with Truth (Skt. Dharma).


CHAP, 11] THE DESTROYING OF ENEMIES 81


ing with light like the full moon; and that he had already
performed the due thanksgiving ceremonies. On the whole, he
seemed highly pleased.

‘In this wise it was that I committed black deeds, avenging
the wrongs done to me by mine enemies, waging war to the
death with them.’


This is the first act [done by JetsiinJ—the worldly act of
destroying his enemies.


LIFE ON THE PATH


‘I heeded all He said and left the world

And all its cares behind, and gave myself

To follow where He taught, and realize

Life on the Path to great good fortune bound.

Now all my sorrows are hewn down, cast out,

Uprooted, brought to utter end,

In that I now can grasp and understand

The base on which my miseries were built.’

Vasitthi, a Bhikkhuni.

Psalms of the Early Buddhists, 1. li.
(Mrs. Rhys Davids’ Translation.)


PART: THE ;PATH-OF*: LIGHT


INTRODUCTION


NEXT come the acts of his attaining the Perfect State of
Buddhahood, which are as follows:

First: The act of his repentance and sincere search for a gifted
and accomplished Guru [to guide him towards Nirvana].

Second: The act of his unwavering obedience in fulfilling
every command of his Guru when once found, despite the pain
and anguish and despondency to which he was subjected that
his sins might be expiated.

Third: The act of his obtaining the Truths which procured
for him spiritual development and Final Emancipation.

Fourth: The act of his meditation under the personal
guidance of his Guru, whence the shoots of experience and
knowledge began to grow.

Fifth: As the Truths began to take their own course of
development, the act of his obtaining the final ear-whispered
occult truths, when led by an injunction given in a dream,
after which he departed from his Guru.

Sixth: The act of his impulsion to take the vow of devoting
his life wholly to the attainment of the Highest Goal, having
been impressed by some unfortunate occurrence with the
triviality of worldly pursuits.

Seventh: The act of his carrying out the commands of his
Guru, by an undistracted application to ascetic devotion in an
entirely secluded place, high on a hill, far removed from the
haunts of men, putting away all thoughts of worldly fame,
with boundless energy and untiring perseverance.

Eighth: The act of his acquiring Transcendental Know-
ledge and Experience as the result of such devotion, whereby
he was able to confer great benefit upon all sentient beings.

Ninth: His final act, that of the dissolution of his mortal
body into Cosmic Space, with intent to impart by example
his last teaching of all, so that every sentient being might find
in it an impulsion to live the religious life.


84 [PART II


CHAPTER IV
THE SEEKING OF THE HOLY DHARMA


Telling of how Setsiin departed from his Guru of the Black
Art; and of how Fetsiin found his Guru of the True Doctrine,
Marpa the Translator.


AGAIN Rechung spoke and said, ‘O Teacher, thou didst men-
tion some white deeds done by thee which, of course, must
mean devotion to the Holy Dharma. How and by what
chance wert thou brought to seek religion, and how didst
thou come to encounter it?’

Jetsiin said, ‘I deeply repented the destruction and mischief
I had wrought by sorcery, in the killing of so many of mine
enemies and in producing hail-storms. I longed so for religion
that I forgot to eat. In the day-time I wished to be sitting
down when I was going about, and to. be going about when I
was sitting down. At night I was unable to sleep. I was
thus full of remorse and repentance, and yet I could not bring
myself to ask my Teacher to allow me to adopt a religious
life. Thus I continued serving my Teacher, all the while
earnestly desirous of an opportunity to ask him to let me go
and learn the Holy Doctrine.

‘ About this time, a wealthy and devout lay supporter of my
Teacher fell seriously ill, and my Teacher was immediately
invited to attend upon the sick man. Three days later my
Teacher returned with a sad and downcast mien. I asked the
reason of his looks, and he replied, “ How transitory are all
states of existence! Last night that excellent layman passed
away, and I cannot but mourn his loss deeply. I realize the
misery of all worldly existence. Moreover, from my youth up
I have spent my whole time in the practice of sorcery, dealing
in the Black Art of producing death and in bringing about
hail-storms. And thou, too, my son, from thy youth hast taken
to this sinful Art, and already hast gathered a heap of evil
karma, all of which will lay a heavy load on me, since I am
responsible for what thou hast done.” ?

' The Guru, whether of the Left-hand Path or of the Right-hand Path, be-


CHAP.IV] THE PATH OF EMANCIPATION 85


‘I asked him if it were not true that all sentient beings
killed by means of sorcery were in some manner saved and
sent to higher states of existence. He replied, “I understand
that all sentient beings possess a ray of the Eternal, and that
we must work for their salvation and development. I also
know the rituals to be used for the purpose; but everything
dependeth upon a true understanding of the purport of the
ritual, as also of the meaning of the words used. I do not,
however, feel confident that this superficial knowledge would
stand the test of real danger. I therefore wish now to devote
myself to such sound doctrine as will stand firm and solid in
the face of everything that may threaten. Do thou remain here
and act as guardian to my children and disciples, and I will
go and work for thy salvation along with mine own. Or else,
go thou thyself, learn and practise the Holy Dharma on my
behalf as well as thine own, so as to save me and procure me
a birth in my next existence which will further my progress
on the Path of Emancipation. I will supply thee with all
material support.”

‘This was exactly what I wished, and it filled me with
great joy. I immediately prayed to be permitted to take to
the religious life. My Teacher at once gave his consent, say-
ing, “Certainly. Thou art young, and richly endowed with
energy, abundant perseverance, and faith. Thou wilt make
a very sincere devotee. Go, and live a life of pure religious
study.”

‘He presented me with a yak-load of fine Yarlung woollen
cloth, with the yak itself—a cow yak—and directed me to
a place in the Tsang Valley called Nar, where lived a famous
Lama of the old mystic sect named Rongton-Lhaga. This
Lama was said to have acquired supernormal faculties in the
doctrine called “ The Great Perfection”, of the Ningma Sect.


comes spiritually responsible for whatever he directs his disciples to do—reaping
evil karma from evil deeds thus done, and good karma from good deeds,

$j. Atal Bihari Ghosh has here added the following : ‘The Sanskrit terms
Vama (Left) and Dakshina (Right) have also a higher significance, the first being
the Path of Renunciation (Skt. Muy itti-Marga), the second the Path of Worldly
Acquisition and Enjoyment (Skt. Pravrittt-Marga). This is the primary distinc-
tion as understood by the learned in India.’


86 SEEKING THE HOLY DHARMA _ [PART II


My Teacher asked me to go and learn the doctrine from this
Guru, and to practise it well. In accordance with his wish
I went to Nar, in the Tsang Valley, and sought the Lama.

‘There I found the Lama’s wife and some of the Lama’s
disciples, who told me that the place was the seat of the chief
monastery, but that the Lama himself was not at home at the
time, that he had a branch monastery at Rinang, in the upper
Nyang Valley, where he would be found. Thereupon, I told
them that I had been sent by Lama Yungtun Trogyal, and
that I was willing to reward any one who would take me to
the Lama. The lady accordingly sent one of the disciples
with me as a guide.

‘At Rinang I found the Lama, and offered him the cow yak
and the bale of woollen cloth as a present, saying that I was
a great sinner who had come from the West Highlands in
search of a doctrine which would lead to deliverance from all
sangsavic existence in one lifetime, and prayed him that he
would impart it to me.

‘The Lama said, “ My doctrine, called ‘ The Great Perfec-
tion’, is perfection indeed. It is excellent alike in its root, in
its trunk, and in its branches,!—profitable to him from whom
it hath been obtained, to him who hath obtained it, and in its
fruit, which is the knowledge of Yoga. He who meditateth
upon it in the day is delivered in the course of that day ; and
the like happeneth to him who meditateth upon it in the
night. To the gifted, to those whose karma favoureth, the
mere hearing of the doctrine is sufficient to procure them
Deliverance ; they do not need to meditate upon it. This is
a doctrine for those intellects that are most highly developed.
I will impart it to thee.” He initiated me there on the spot
and gave me the necessary instruction.

‘At this the thought arose within me that formerly, while
I was engaged in learning sorcery for killing purposes, it had
taken me fourteen days to attain my desire, and in the case
of launching hail-storms I had required seven days, whereas
now I had met a doctrine which would emancipate me at any


’ This parallels the Buddha’s saying that His doctrine is ‘perfect in the be-
ginning, perfect in the middle, and perfect in the end’.


CHAP. IV] THE GURU MARPA 87


time, by day or by night, whenever I chose to meditate upon
it; while to the gifted and specially favoured by their good
karma the mere hearing thereof was sufficient to deliver them.
I said to myself, “Why, I myself may be one of these favoured
and gifted persons!” Thus was I so puffed up with pride that
I would not meditate, but instead went to sleep over my task,
and so failed to put the doctrine to the test of practice.

‘ After a few days, the Lama came to me and said, “ Thou
didst call thyself a great sinner, hailing from the Highlands,
and in that thou wert quite correct. On my part, however, I
have been rather too lavish in my praises of my doctrine. At
all events, I see quite well that I shall not be able to convert
thee. Now there is a monastery called Dowo-Lung (Wheat
Valley), in Lhobrak, wherein liveth at present a faithful dis-
ciple of Naropa, the great Indian Saint. He is the worthiest
among the worthiest of men, a very prince among translators,
—one who hath obtained supernormal knowledge in the new
Tantric Doctrines, unequalled in all the three worlds; he is
called Marpa the Translator. Between thee and him there is
a karmic connexion, which cometh from past lives. To him
thou must go.”

‘On hearing the name Marpa the Translator, my mind was
filled with an inexpressible feeling of delight, and a thrill went
through my whole body, setting in motion every hair, while
tears started from mine eyes, so strong was the feeling of faith
aroused within me. I therefore set out with the single purpose
of finding this Guru, carrying only a few books and some provi-
sions for the journey. All along the way I was possessed by
but one idea: ‘When shall I set eyes upon my Guru? When
shall I behold his face?”

‘The night before mine arrival at Wheat Valley, Marpa had
a dream to the effect that his Guru, the great Saint Naropa,
came to him and performed the Initiation Ceremony and gave
him a dorje made of lapis lazuli, five-pointed and slightly
tarnished, and along with it a golden pot for holding holy
water, filled with elixir; and ordered him to wash the dirt off
the dorje with the elixir in the pot and to raise up the dorje
upon a Banner of Victory. He added that this would please


88 SEEKING THE HOLY DHARMA _ [PART II


the Victorious Ones of the past, and be welcome to all sentient
beings, thus fulfilling the aims both of ourselves and of others.
Having said this, the Saint reascended into the Heaven-World.

‘Then in his dream Marpa saw that he carried out the
instructions of his Guru, washing the dorvje with the holy elixir,
as directed, and elevating it upon a Banner of Victory. Thence
the dorje shed abroad such a brilliant radiance as filled all the
worlds with its light, and falling upon the sentient beings
existing in the Six Lokas dispelled all their griefs and sadness,
filling them instead with bliss unalloyed with sorrow, so that
in their delight they all looked upon Marpa and his Banner of
Victory with overflowing faith and reverence, some worshipping,
some singing praises, and some making offerings. He further
saw in his dream that the Victorious Ones pronounced benedic-
tions upon the Banner and performed the consecration cere-
mony, and that he himself was somewhat elated and proud.
He then awoke feeling very happy.

‘When his wife came in to serve breakfast, she said, “O
Master, I dreamt last night that two women who said they
were from the Urgyen Land of the West came carrying in
their hands a-crystal reliquary,’ which was a little dirty, and
asked me to tell thee that thy Guru Naropa enjoined thee to
consecrate the reliquary with all the due ceremonial of a proper
consecration, and to place it on the top of a hill. And thou
wert saying that already it had been blessed by the great
Saint Naropa, but that whatever he commanded must be
obeyed, and thereupon didst wash it with holy water from the
urns, perform the consecration ceremony over it, and place
it on the top of a hill. Thence it emitted a light bright as the
sun and the moon, and in addition reproduced several other
reliquaries similar to itself, which settled down on the tops of
neighbouring hills, two female forms acting as guardians.
What doth this mean?”

‘Albeit inwardly pleased at the coincidence in the purport
of these two dreams, outwardly Marpa only said, “I do not


1 This is a reliquary in the shape of a miniature s¢#pa. Compare with it the
crystal reliquary borne by the Dakmis at the time of Milarepa’s translation,
Pp. 291-2.


CHAP. Iv] THE GURU MARPA 89


know the meaning of dreams which have no cause. I am going
down along the road there to plough the field to-day. Make
ready.” His wife said, “ But thou hast ever so many labourers
to work for thee. What will people say if thou, a great Lama,
go and work in the fields like a common labourer? It will
create quite a scandal. Please stay at home; do not go!”
But despite all her pleading Marpa went to the field, merely
saying, “ Bring me a good supply of chhang!” Upon his wife
taking a jarful down to him, he said, ‘‘ This may perhaps do
for myself; bring some more for visitors.’ Another jar was
brought, which he placed on the ground, covering it with his
hat ; and, sitting down beside the jar, he sipped the chhang, and
rested himself after his ploughing.

‘ Meanwhile, I was approaching by the road, asking every one
I met, ‘Where doth the Great Yogz, Marpa the Translator,
live?” But none could give me the information I sought.
I asked one person more, and he said that there was a man
called Marpa who lived thereabouts, but that there was nobody
there who bore such a grand title as Great Yogi, Marpa the
Translator. I then asked him where Wheat Valley lay. He
pointed it out, saying, “ There it is.” I then asked who lived
there, and he answered that the person he had called Marpa
lived there. “Was he not called anything else?” I next in-
quired. To this he replied that some called him Lama Marpa
also. That settled my doubts, and I knew that this must be
the abode of the Marpa I sought. So I next inquired the name
of the ridge on which I stood, and was told that it was called
Chhé-la-gang (Ridge of the Dharma). I thought to myself
that it was a very auspicious omen to have obtained my first
view of my Gurz’s dwelling from this ridge.

‘Nevertheless, as I went along the road, I still kept on in-
quiring for Marpa. I met some cowherds and put my question
to them, too. The elder ones replied that they did not know.
But a bright-looking young lad, well dressed and adorned with
ornaments, with oiled and well-combed hair, said, ‘‘ Thou must
be meaning my Lord and father who used to sell off every-
thing in our house, purchase gold, and then take it away to
India and come back with ever so many rolls of paper. If it


go SEEKING THE HOLY DHARMA _ [PART II


be he thou meanest, he is ploughing his field to-day—a thing
he never did before.” I considered it likely that this might be
the person I sought, but I very much doubted whether a great
translator would be found ploughing.

‘Thus thinking, I was walking along the road, when I came
upon a heavily built Lama, rather inclined to corpulence, with
full eyes, but very dignified in appearance. He was ploughing.
The moment my eyes fell upon him, I was thrilled by a feeling
of inexpressibly ecstatic bliss, in which I lost all consciousness
of my surroundings. When I recovered, I said, “ O Reverend
Sir, where in this place doth the faithful disciple of the famous
Saint Naropa, called Marpa the Translator, live ?”

‘For a while, the Lama scanned me attentively from head to
foot, and then asked, ‘‘ Whence comest thou? What dost thou
do?” I replied that I was a great sinner from the Highlands
of Tsang, and that hearing of the fame for knowledge and
learning of Marpa the Translator I had.come to him to learn the
True Doctrine by means of which I might obtain Deliverance.

‘To this the Lama replied, “Very good; I will procure
thee an introduction to him if thou wilt finish this bit of
ploughing for me,” at the same time bringing out the chhang
from under his hat and offering it me to drink, on accepting
which I was very much refreshed. He charged me to plough
the field well, and went off. I finished the chhang, and then
ploughed the field with a will.

‘After a short time, the lad I had seen among the cowherds
who had given me the information I wanted came to call me
in, at which I was highly pleased, and said to him, “ The Lama
hath been successful in procuring the introduction for me, so
I will finish this bit of ploughing for him.” And I set to work
and completed the portion that still remained to do. This
field having aided me to an introduction to my Guru, it was
afterwards called “Aid Field”. In summer, a path runneth
round the border of the field, and straight through it in winter.

‘Going now with the lad, I found the Lama seated on two
thicknesses of cushions with a carpet over them, thus making
a triple seat. I saw that he had been at some pains to wipe
himself clean, but that his brow and the corners of his nose


CHAP.1V] THE MEETING WITH MARPA gI


still bore some traces of dust. There he sat with his fat
paunch protruding prominently in front of him. Although
I thought that this was the same gentleman that had parted
from me lately, to make sure, I looked about to see if another
Lama might be seated somewhere else.

‘Thereupon the occupant of the cushion seat said, ‘“ Of
course, thou didst not know me. I am Marpa himself, so thou
mayst salute me.”! I at once bowed down, touched his feet
with my forehead, and placed them on the crown of my head.
Having performed this ceremonial, I said, ‘“I, O Precious Guru,
am a great sinner from the West Highlands, and I have come
here to offer body, speech, and mind to thee. I pray thee to
provide me with food, clothing, and spiritual instruction, and
enable me to obtain Liberation in this very lifetime.”

‘The Lama replied, ‘‘ Thy being a great sinner hath nothing
to do with me. I did not send thee to commit sins on my be-
half. But what sins hast thou committed?” On relating in
full the circumstances of my case, the Lama said, “ Very well ;
I like thine offer to devote body, speech, and mind to me, but I
cannot give thee food, clothing, and instruction, all three.
I will either provide thee with food and clothing, thou seeking
spiritual instruction elsewhere, or thou wilt have to find food
and clothing elsewhere, while I give thee the spiritual instruc-
tion thou desirest. Choose whichever thou preferrest. If I im-
part to thee the Truth, it will entirely depend upon thine own
perseverance and energy whether thou attainest Liberation in
one lifetime or not.”

‘I replied, ‘I have come to thee, my Lama, for the Truth.
I will find my food and clothing elsewhere,” and at once pro-
ceeded to accommodate myself there, bestowing the few books
I had with me upon the altar shelf. But this the Lama im-
mediately forbade me to do, saying, “ Out with thine old books ;
they will infect my holy reliques and sacred volumes and give
them a cold!” ?


1 It is necessary that the shishya do reverence ‘o the Guru.

2 It is, as Milarepa’s surmise in the following paragraph suggests, believed by
Tibetan masters of the Occult Sciences that books, as well as persons, emanate
definite auric influences ; hence Marpa refused to have the works on Black Magic
placed near works on White Magic or in contact with holy reliques.


92 SEEKING THE HOLY DHARMA _ [PrarRTU


‘TI immediately thought within myself that he knew there
were some books of black magic among them, and on that
account objected to their being put along with his books and
images and other things. So for some days I kept them in
the quarters assigned to me. My Guru's wife gave me nice
food and other necessities.


‘This is that part of my history which telleth of the manner
of my coming to find my Gurz, the same constituting the First
of my Meritorious Acts.’


CHAP. V] 93


CHAPTER V
THE PROBATION AND PENANCE


Telling of how Fetsiin Obeyed the Commands of his Guru
Marpa, thereby Suffering Strange Trials and Great Tribula-
tions, and of how, in Despondency, he Thrice Deserted Marpa
and Sought another Guru, and then returned to Marpa.


‘I NOW went forth in search of alms up and down the whole
Lhobrak Valley, whereby I obtained four hundred and twenty
measures of barley.1 With two hundred and eighty of them
I purchased a big copper vessel, free from speck or flaw inside
and outside, and having four handles, one on each of the four
sides. With twenty measures I procured meat and chhang.
The remaining hundred and twenty measures I put into a big
sack, and putting the copper vessel on top of it I carried the
whole home to my Guru’s dwelling.

‘ Arriving there somewhat fatigued, I happened to throw
down my load a bit heavily, so that it made the house tremble
a little. This seemed to make my Guru angry, for he jumped
to his feet, saying, ‘“‘ Ha, thou appearest to be a particularly
strong little devotee. Dost thou wish to kill all of us, too,
shaking the house down by mere physical strength ? Out with
thy sack!” And he kicked the sack out of the house, so that
I was obliged to place it outside. At the time, I thought that
my Guru was simply a little short-tempered, and that I must
be careful to behave properly in his presence; I was not the
least shaken in my faith in him.” Then, after emptying the

1 M. Bacot’s version (p. 94) gives the number of measures as twenty-one,
each of these apparently being equal to twenty of the smaller measures men-


tioned in our rendering, and correspondingly for the measures mentioned in
the next sentence.

2 As will be seen later on in the Biography, the various moods—anger, ill-will,
cruelty, and others—-which Marpa apparently exhibits in his relationship as
Guru ta his Shishya, Milarepa, are wholly feigned. No true Gur would ever
allow such unworthy passions in their real form to dominate or in any degree
control him; and the fcigned display of them, when seen all together, has a two-
fold purpose, namely, to test Milarepa and to make him do penance for the evils
which he had wrought through practising the Black Art. Before being accepted
as a Shishya, the aspirant is always subjected to certain severe tests respecting


94 THE PROBATION AND PENANCE ([parT Il


copper vessel, I again took it into the house, and, bowing down,
offered it to the Lama. He accepted it by laying his hand on
it ; and then, without removing his hand from it, he remained
for a while with his eyes closed in prayer. His invocation
ended, I could see tears trickling down his face, as he said,
“It is auspicious; I offer it to my Guru Naropa” ; and simul-
taneously he made with his hands the motion of offering some-
thing. He next took hold of the handle-rings and shook them
violently, and struck the vessel with a rod, making as loud a
noise thereby as he possibly could. Finally, he took the vessel
over to the end of the altar and laid it there, filling it with
clarified butter for burning in the altar lamps.

‘Being much concerned about my Liberation, I repeatedly
entreated him to bestow upon me some instruction, whereupon
he said, “I have a number of devoted disciples and lay-fol-
lowers in the U and Tsang Provinces who would much like to
come here, but they have been repeatedly robbed on the way
by the nomad shepherds of Yamdak and Taliing, as well as by
the Lingpas. Thus frequently plundered, they are prevented
from coming here with any provisions or presents. Go thou and
launch a plague of hail upon the robbers. That itself is a re-
ligious duty ; afterwards I will then give thee instruction in
the Truth.”

‘Accordingly, I went and launched a terrific hail-storm on
each of the places mentioned, and, returning, asked for the in-
struction promised. But the Lama replied, “What! Thou
presumest to ask for the Most Sacred Dharma, which I pro-
cured at such cost and self-sacrifice from India, in return for
two or three paltry hail-stones! Now, Sir, if thou art really in
earnest about the Truth, thou wilt go and by means of sorcery,
in which thou claimest to be an adept, destroy a number of
the Lhobrak hill-men, for these, also, have often robbed dis-
ciples of mine who have been on their way here from Nyal-
Lo-ro, and frequently offered indignities to myself too. If
thou can work some signal piece of havoc in proof of thy
magical power, I will undertake to impart to thee the Mystic


his or her competency (adhikara). Only after such tests does the Guru decide
for what training, if for any, the aspirant is fitted.


CHAP. V] THE TEST THROUGH SORCERY 95


Truths, handed down to me by my reverend Guru, the great
Pandit Naropa—Truths whereby one can gain Liberation in
a single lifetime and attain to Buddhahood.”

‘ Again I did as I was bidden; and my magical curse taking
effect among the Lhobrak hill-men a feud broke out among
them ; and in the fighting many of them were killed. The
sight of the bloodshed, however, affected me with the deepest
remorse and anguish. My Guru, perceiving that among the
killed were several of those who had offended him, said to me,
“Tt is quite true that thou art an adept in sorcery.” And he
gave me the title of 7hachhen (Great Sorcerer).

‘Upon my asking him again for the saving Truths, he said,
“Ha, ha! Must I give thee the most sacred Truths, which I
brought from India with such great pains, expending all my
worldly goods in gold for them—Truths which still emit the
holy breath of the Angelic Beings who gave them, and all in
return for thy having done evil deeds? Why, Sir, that would
be such a great jest as would make everybody laugh. Were it
any one else save myself, he would have killed thee for such
presumption. Now, Sir, thou shalt go and make good all the
mischief and damage which thou hast caused to the crops of
the shepherd-folk, and restore to life the killed among the
Lhobrak men. If thou can do that, well and good; I will
let thee have the Truths. If thou can not, thou hadst better
not enter my presence again.” Thus he scolded me as if about
to beat me. As for myself, I was plunged into the depths of
despair and wept bitterly, the Lama’s wife, the while, seeking
to comfort me.

‘Next morning the Lama was kind enough to come to me
himself and say, “I fear I was a little too hard on thee yester-
day evening, but do not take it too much to heart. Have
patience and wait, and thou shalt have the Teachings. But
thou seemest to me to be a handy person. I should therefore
like thee to build a house for my son, Darma-Doday (The
Youth, the Bouquet of S#vas). When thou hast completed
it, not only will I impart the Truths to thee, but I will also
supply thee with all needful food and clothing for the period
of thy study.” ‘“ But”, I urged, “ what will happen to me if in


96 THE PROBATION AND PENANCE [PART II


the interval I happen to die undelivered?” He answered, “I
promise thee that thou shalt not die undelivered in the in-
terval. Mine is not a doctrine empty of all definite promise.
So, as thou appearest to possess a considerable stock of energy
and perseverance, thou canst please thyself, with none to
hinder, whether thou obtainest the Deliverance in one lifetime
or not. My Sect is not quite the same as other sects. In it
are to be found more emanation of Divine Grace-Waves and
a more direct Spiritual Revelation than in any other sect.’
Consoled and rejoiced by these comforting promises, I at once
asked the Lama for a plan of the proposed house.

‘Now, in asking me to do this work for him, the Lama, as
I subsequently perceived, had three objects in view. Firstly,
not having been included in an oath-taking party held by his
male relatives on a certain place [of strategic importance,
whereby it was agreed that no stronghold should be erected
thereon?], he wished to build a house there, for the site was
very desirable, being safe and not easily reached and closed
forever to those who had taken the oath. Secondly, he wished
me to expiate mine evil deeds. And thirdly and lastly, he
wished to mislead the aforementioned parties into allowing him
to proceed unopposed with the building of his house on the
site he desired.

‘He had recourse to the following stratagem. He took me
to a mountain ridge having an eastern aspect, and, pointing
out a particular place, described a circular structure and
ordered me to begin building it there; and this I at once did.
When I had finished about half of it, he came along and said
that, when giving me my orders at the outset, he had not well
considered the matter, and that I must stop work on the

1 This refers to the /amaic belief, much like the Christian, that divine grace
may be received by human beings on earth in the form of waves radiated by
spiritual beings. Marpa held the superhuman Gurus of his Sect to be more
capable of helping the devotee than those of any less spiritually-endowed sect,
because of the direct guidance thus telepathically given by them.

2 As M. Bacot notes (p. 97), in Milarepa’s time there was no centralized
government in Tibet, the power of the Tibetan kings having disappeared and the
authority of China not yet having been established ; hence the local feudal lords,


being jealous of one another, had apparently agreed not to fortify the site
referred to in our text.


CHAP. VY] THE TEST THROUGH ENDURANCE 97


building and demolish it, and carry back to the place whence
I had taken them the earth and stones I had used.

‘When I had carried out this order, the Lama, appearing
to me to be intoxicated,’ took me to a ridge having a western
aspect and, ordering me to build another house there, after
describing a crescent-shaped ground-plan, went away. When
I had built this house up to about half the height required,
the Lama again came to me while I was working and said
that even this house would not do, and that I must restore
the clay and the stones to the places whence I had taken them.
Again I obeyed his commands.

‘Once more the Lama took me away, this time to a ridge
with a northern aspect, and there addressed me thus: “ My
Great Sorcerer, I seem to have been tipsy when I last told
thee to build a house, and so gave thee a mistaken order. Ap-
parently it was a thorough mistake all through. But now thou
shalt build me a really nice house on this site.” I ventured to
observe that it was a useless expense to himself, and a great
trouble to me, to be over and over again building up and
pulling down houses. [ entreated him to consider matters
well, and then to give me his orders. He said, ‘I am not
tipsy to-day, and I have thought well over the matter. A
Tantric mystic’s dwelling ought to be triangular, so build me
one of that shape. This one shall not be demolished.”

‘So I proceeded to build a triangular-shaped house. When
I had finished about a third of it, the Lama one day came
down and said, ‘‘ Who gaveth thee the order to build a house
like this?” I answered, ‘‘ Why, it is the house for Thy Reve-
rence’s son, and was ordered by thyself.” ‘I have no recollec-
tion of having given thee any such order,” said he. “ But if it
be as thou sayest, then it must have been at a time when I
was not in full possession of my senses, or I must have been
mad outright.” “ But,” I urged, “ fearing that something of
this kind might happen, I ventured to impress upon Thy
Reverence the necessity of careful consideration; and then
thou wert pleased to assure me that thou hadst carefully con-


1 This, too, was feigned by Marpa, in order that his plans for imposing
penances of a very severe nature on Milarepa should succeed.


98 THE PROBATION AND PENANCE [part Il


sidered everything, and that this building should not be de-
molished. And Thy Reverence at the time appeared to be in
a perfectly normal state of mind.” The Lama replied, “* What
witness hast thou for this? What! Wert thou seeking to de-
stroy me and mine by means of sorcery, or what, by thrusting
us into this triangular building of thine, which looketh like a
magical triangle? Why, man, I have not robbed thee of thy
patrimony! Besides, if thou art really anxious for religious
instruction—why, the very shape of this house is enough to
set all the Local Deities against thee! See, then, that thou
demolish it at once and take all the stones and clay back
where thou didst find them. Thereupon, I will give thee the
instruction thou desirest, or else, thou canst go away!” And the
Lama went off, apparently very angry. I was very much grieved
at this, but there was no help for it. I stood in need of the
Truth, and so had no other choice but to demolish the triangular
house like the others, and to do as bidden with the materials.

‘By this time I had a big sore on my back, between my
shoulder and my spine, but I did not dare to show it to the
Lama, who, I feared, would be displeased if I did so. Neither
did I venture. to show it to his wife, lest she should think I
wanted her to notice how hard I was working for them. So
I kept my misery to myself, and only solicited her aid in pray-
ing the Lama to give me the promised instruction.

‘The motherly lady kindly went in to her husband, and said,
“My Lord, thine useless building undertakings are only wear-
ing out the poor youth’s life. Pray take pity on him now and
give him some instruction.” The Lama answered, “ Get a nice
dinner ready, and bring him in to me.” The lady, accordingly,
prepared some food, and led me in. The Lama then said to
me, “Great Sorcerer, do not falsely accuse me, as thou didst
yesterday, of things which I have not done. As for instruction,
I now give it thee.” And he imparted to me the four formulas
of the Refuges,' with the prayers and the injunctions and vows ;


* The Refuges are the Buddha, the Dharma (or Rules of Right Conduct as
contained in the Buddhist Scriptures), and the Sazgha (or Buddhist Community
of which the Priesthood is the most important part), Amongst Northern Buddhists,


the Refuges are made the basis of various formulas, similar to professions of
faith,


CHAP. V] THE TEST THROUGH FORTITUDE — 99


and added, “ These are called Temporal Religious Instructions.
But if thou seek the Non-Temporal Religious Instructions,
or Mystic Truths, thou must do such and such things in order
to merit them.” And he proceeded to recite a brief story from
the life of his Guru Naropa, and ended by saying, “ But thou
wilt hardly be able to attain to such ideal height as this;
that will be too difficult for thee I fear.” Hearing this, I was
so moved to the very depths of my heart with faith that I was
unable to repress my tears; and I inwardly resolved to do
whatsoever the Lama commanded me.

‘A few days after this, the Lama invited me to go for a walk
with him, and I did so. In the course of our stroll, we came to
the spot already mentioned, whereon the uncles and cousins
of the Lama had agreed not to build, and which was now
guarded by them. Here the Lama came to a halt, and said,
“ Thou art now to build on this spot an ordinary quadrangular
house, nine stories high, with an ornamental upper part forming
a tenth story. This house shall not be demolished ; and upon
its completion I will bestow on thee the Truths for which thou
art pining and maintain thee while thou art in retreat per-
forming Sadhana (Meditation), providing thee with all needed
food and clothing.” Here I ventured to suggest that he should
allow me to ask his wife—whom I was used to call Reverend
Mother—to come and be witness to his words. He granted
my request; so I went and called the Reverend Mother, while
the Lama occupied himself in marking out the ground-plan.
Then, in the presence of both, I said, ‘Up to the present
I have built three houses and again demolished each of them.
In the case of the first, the Lama said that he had not given
due consideration to the matter; in the case of the second,
that he had been tipsy when he gave the order for it; and, in
the case of the third, that he had either been out of his senses
or quite mad at the time, and did not remember having ever
given me the order to build it. Upon my reminding him of
the circumstances in connexion with the third house I built,
he asked me to produce a witness to his words, and seemed
highly displeased. Now once more he is giving me the order
to begin building another house, so I pray that thou, my


100 THE PROBATION AND PENANCE [PART II


Reverend Mother, mayst be pleased to act as witness to this
present order.”

‘The lady replied, ‘Of course I can stand as witness; but
thy Guru [the Reverend Father] is so imperious that he will
not pay any attention to us. Moreover, the Reverend Father
is doing a perfectly useless thing; there is no necessity for all
these building projects. It is altogether needless trouble to
cause thee to build houses so often, only to pull them down as
often again. Besides, this site is not ours by right, but closed
and guarded by all thy Gurw’s relatives, it being the site on
which a joint vow hath been taken by them. But the Reverend
Father will pay no heed to such a weak voice as mine. I shall
only incur risk of contention.” Addressing his wife, the Lama
said, “ Merely do what thou art asked to do, namely, stand
witness, and then get away home, and leave me to see to the
performance of my part in the business! Thou needest not
raise questions no one asketh thee to raise.”

‘So I set about laying the foundation of the quadrangular
building ordered, and then proceeded with its erection. But
now Ngogdun-Chudor, of Zhung, Tsurtén-Wang-gay, of Ddl,
and Metén-Tsénpo, of Tsang-rong—all advanced disciples of
my Guru—happened in sport to bring to that spot a big
boulder. As it was a good-sized stone, I set it in, as a corner
stone, just above the foundation, near to the doorway, and had
got up to about the second story from the ground when Marpa
came on a visit to the scene of my toil. After inspecting the
building all round very carefully, he pointed to the stone that
had been brought by the three advanced disciples of his, and
said, “ Great Sorcerer, whence didst thou procure that stone ?”
I replied, ‘Reverend Sir, it was brought in sport by Thy
Reverence’s three chief disciples.” ‘Oh, was it?” he said.
“Well, thou hast no business to use for thy building purposes
a stone brought by them. See that it is taken out and returned
to the place from which it was taken.” I reminded him of his
promise not to have this building pulled down. He only
replied, ‘‘But I did not promise to let thee employ, as thy
workmen, my chief disciples who have been initiated into the
Mystic Truths of twice-born beings. Besides, I am not ordering


CHAP. V] PHELGIANT ‘STONE* IOI


thee to pull down the entire edifice, but only to take out that
stone brought by my chief disciples, and to restore it to its
original place.”

‘Thus once more I had to pull down, from top to bottom,
a wall which I had erected. Taking out the stone, I put it
back whence it had come. As soon as the Lama saw that
I had accomplished this, he came and said, “ Now thou mayst
go and bring back that same stone thyself, and set it in the
same place.” Putting forth the strength of the three men,
I managed to get it up and put it into the same place as before.
This stone was ever after called my “ Giant Stone”, in token of
the unusual physical strength I displayed in connexion with it.

‘While I was thus engaged in laying the foundation of this
edifice on the prohibited site, some of those who saw me said,
“It seemeth as though Marpa really meaneth to build on this
spur. Had we not better object to it?” But others said,
‘“‘ Marpa is beside himself. He hath got hold of a strong young
novice from the Highlands, and, being possessed with a mania
for building, he keepeth the poor young man busy all the time
building houses of unapproved patterns on every ridge, spur,
and knoll round about. Then, when the building is half finished,
he getteth the same young man to pull it all down again and
carry the materials back to where they came from. He will
surely do the same in this case, too, But if he should not,
there will be ample time to stop him, Let us wait and see.”

‘However, they soon saw that this house was not to be
pulled down, but continued. Then, when it had reached the
seventh story—and another sore had come on my body near
the waist—Marpa’s relatives said to one another, “ He is not
going to pull down this building. The pulling down of the
others was only a feint designed to mislead us, and prevent our
objecting, at the outset, to the building of this one. Let us pull
it down now!” And with this intent, they collected in a body.
But the Lama produced by magical power a vast body of armed
troops who crowded the house both outside and inside. The
would-be attackers were all filled with fear. Each looked on
the other and asked, “ From where hath Marpa the Translator
managed to call up such a number of troops?” They did not


102 THE PROBATION AND PENANCE [parTII


dare to fight with them. Instead, each one privily paid his
respects to Marpa, and subsequently all became his followers.

‘ At about this time, Metén-Tsonpo, of Tsang-rong, came to
receive the Grand Initiation into the Démchog Mandala... My
Reverend Mother [my Guru’s consort] thereupon spoke to me,
saying, ‘“‘ Now is the time for thee also to try to get initiated.
Let us make the attempt.” I also thought that since I had suc-
ceeded in erecting such an edifice entirely single-handed, without
receiving so much as a piece of stone the size of a goat’s head,
a basketful of earth, a jugful of water, or a spadeful of clay in
the way of help from any one else, I surely must deserve some
consideration; and I felt quite sure that the Initiation would
now be bestowed on me. So, bowing down, I took my seat
among the candidates for initiation.

‘Seeing me there, the Lama asked, ‘‘ Great Sorcerer, what
hast thou as the offering?” I replied, ‘‘ Thy Reverence
promised me that when I had completed the building of the
house for Thy Reverence’s son, I should be favoured with
initiation and instruction. So I hope Thy Reverence will now
be pleased to grant me the Initiation.” Upon this, the Lama
exclaimed, ‘‘ What presumption! What impertinence! Just
because thou hast put together a few cubits of mud-wall, I,
forsooth, must impart to thee the sacred lore which I obtained
from India only at much personal sacrifice and cost. If thou
can pay the initiation fees, well and good; pay them! If
thou can not, out thou walkest from this Mystic Circle.”
And he struck me, and, dragging me by the hair, flung me out.
Thereupon I wished that I were dead, or that I might die
there and then, upon the spot. I wept the whole of that night
through.

‘Then the Lama’s lady came to me, and said, “ The Lama
is beyond all comprehension. He sayeth that he hath brought
the Sacred Doctrine from India into this land for the benefit
of all sentient beings; and, asa rule, he will teach, and preach
to, even a dog that may happen to come into his presence, and

1 That is, Initiation into the practical application of such mystic doctrines as


are contained in the Démchog (Bde-mch’og : Skt. Shamvara) Tantra, which is
a part of the very voluminous Kah-gyur or canon of Northern Buddhism.


CHAP. V] MANDALA OF THE ESOTERIC 103


wind up by praying for its welfare. Still, do not lose faith in
him.” Thus the good woman tried to cheer me.

‘Next morning, the Lama himself came to me, and said,
‘Great Sorcerer, thou hadst better cease work on this house
thou hast under construction, and begin on another dwelling-
house of twelve pillars, having a hall-chamber and a chapel, to
serve as an annexe to the main edifice. When thou hast finished
this, I will surely give thee the Instructions.”

‘Once more I laid the foundations of a building. All the
while the Lama’s lady continued to supply me with excellent
food and condiments daily, together with a little chhang; and
she consoled me and gave me good advice.

‘ As the annexe was approaching completion, Tsurtén-Wang-
gay, of Dol, came to receive the Great Initiation into the
Mandala of The Esoteric.! Thereupon, the Lama’s lady said
to me, “ This time, at any rate, my son, we shall manage to
get thee initiated.” She provided me with a roll of butter,
a piece of blanket-cloth, and a small copper vessel, and told
me to go and take my seat among the shzshyas who were
about to go and receive initiation. The Lama, noticing me,
said, ‘‘ Great Sorcerer, what hast thou as thine initiation fees
that thou takest thy seat in the ranks of the novices?”
I produced my roll of butter, blanket-cloth, and copper vessel,
and said that these should be mine offerings. To this the Lama
replied that these things already belonged to him, since they
had been brought as initiation fees by others ; that they would
not do, and that I must bring something belonging to myself
or else get out of the mystic circle of those to be initiated.
And, at this, he arose, seemingly in a furious temper, and drove
me out with blows from his foot, so that I wished I could sink
into the earth.


1 Text: Sang-di, here refers to a very abstruse and esoteric part of the in-
struction given to candidates for Initiation into the Occult Sciences of the
Kargyiitpa School. In other contexts, as on pp. 169, 287-8, 300, Sang-dti
(Gsang-’diis) is the Tibetan name of a Tantric deity known in Sanskrit as
Guhya-kala. Literally, Sang-dii means ‘ Esoteric’ (or ‘ Hidden’), with reference
to mystic insight conferred by the super-normal power of Siddhz (lit. ‘ Accom-
plishment’). The other classes of such insight as a Siddha enjoys are known as
Ch'ty-Dii, meaning ‘ Exoteric’ (or ‘External’), and Nang-Dii, ‘Internal’.


104 THE PROBATION AND PENANCE [part ll


‘Then the thought came to me, “‘ Seeing that I have caused
the death of so many people by means of sorcery, and destroyed
such a number of crops with storms of hail, all that I now am
suffering is the karmic result of those evil deeds. Or else,”
so I thought, “the Lama must have perceived something in me
whereby he knew that I would not be able to receive and prac-
tise the Doctrine. Or, again,” I wondered, ‘“‘ was it that the
Lama did not regard me personally with liking or esteem?
However it be,” so I thought within myself, ‘‘ without religion,
the life of man is not worth living”; and I began to make up
my mind to kill myself. At this moment, the Lama’s lady
brought me her share of the offerings of consecrated food, and
communicated her sincere condolences. But I had lost all relish,
even for consecrated food, and wept on, the whole night through.

‘Next morning, the Lama himself came to me, and said,
‘‘Thou must complete both the buildings; then I will surely
give thee the Instructions and the Truths.”

‘Going on with my building operations, I had almost com-
pleted the annexe, when another sore broke out on the small of
my back; and, blood and matter pouring forth from all three
sores, my whole back soon became nothing but one big sore.
I showed it to my Reverend Mother; and, reminding her of
the Lama’s promise to give me instructions, I asked her to
plead for me with the Lama, so that he might be pleased to
vouchsafe me the Truths for which I thirsted. My Reverend
Mother looked attentively at my sores, and, shedding profuse
tears, promised to speak for me to the Lama.

‘So she went to the Lama, and spoke thus: “ Great Sor-
cerer hath done so much building work that his hands and legs
are all cracked and bruised, and his back hath broken out into
three large sores, from which ooze blood and matter. I have
heard about sore-backed ponies and donkeys before this, and
seen some, too; but never before have I heard of a sore-backed
human being, much less seen one. What a disgrace it will be
to thee if people come to hear of it! Thou who art such
a highly respected and honoured Lama, to be so cruel! Thou
shouldst have some mercy on the lad. Moreover, thou didst
promise to give him the Instruction he desireth so much, upon


CHAP. V] SHES HISAYA S “ERTALS 105


his completing the building.” The Lama answered, “I did,
indeed, say so; I promised him that when the ten-storied
building should be finished I would give him the Instructions,
but where are the ten stories? Hath he finished them yet ?”
“But”, urged my mediator, “he hath built an annexe far exceed-
ing the ten-storied edifice in size.” ‘‘* Much talk, little work,’
as the proverb sayeth,” retorted the Lama. ‘‘ When he hath
completed the tenth story I will give him the Instructions—
and not till then. But is his back really broken out into sores?”

‘OQ Reverend Father, thy being so despotic preventeth thy
seeing it. Otherwise thou couldst not but have noticed that
not only hath he a sore back, but that his whole back is nothing
else but one big sore.” This said in her severest manner, the
Lama’s lady hurried away from him. But the Lama called after
her, saying, ‘‘ Then let the lad come up to me.”

‘ Accordingly, I went in to see him, greatly hoping that I was
at last to be given the Instructions; but, instead, he only
ordered me to show him my sore back. Upon my doing so,
he looked at it very attentively, and said, ‘“‘ This is nothing to
the trials and tribulations which were endured by my Lord
Saint Naropa. He had to undergo in his own body twelve
greater and twelve lesser trials, making twenty-four in all.
I myself did not spare my wealth or consider my body’s safety,
but, sacrificing both ungrudgingly, followed and served my
Teacher Naropa. If thou art really in search of the Truth, do
not boast so about thy services, but continue waiting patiently
and working steadily till thy building task is entirely finished.”
Once more my hopes were dashed to the ground.

‘The Lama, then, putting his robe in the shape of a pad,
showed me how ponies and donkeys are padded when any of.
them getteth a sore back, and advised me to do the same for my-
self. When I asked him of what use a pad was when the whole
of the back was one sore, he coolly told me that it would
prevent the earth getting into the sore and making it worse ;
and added that I was to go on carrying clay and stones.

“Considering within myself that such was the wish of my
Guru, I felt that I must go on and do as commanded. I there-
fore took up my loads and carried them in front of me now, and


106 THE PROBATION AND PENANCE [parT Ill


thus went about the work. The Lama, seeing what I was doing,
inwardly said, ‘‘ Worthy of praise is that noble szszya who un-
grudgingly obeyeth his Guru's commands,” secretly shedding
tears of joy at seeing my sincerity and my faith in him.

‘At length, as the sores grew more and more aggravated
and inflamed, I suffered so much pain from them that I was
unable any longer to go on working; and I asked the Lama’s
lady to plead for me again, that I might be given the Truths.
But even if this should be refused, I craved permission to rest
awhile until I should be able to resume the work. She did so,
but the Lama only said, “ Teaching or Instructions he cannot
have until he hath finished the buildings; but rest he may if
he be unable to work, since this cannot be helped. In any
case, let him do as much work as is possible for him to do.”
Whereupon my Reverend Mother allowed me to rest and get
my sores healed.

‘When they were partly cured, the Lama, making no men-
tion of Instructions whatever, said to me, “ Great Sorcerer, thou
hadst better resume thy building work and get on with it
quickly.” I was on the point of doing as bidden, when my
Reverend Mother said privily, “ Let us do something that will
make him give thee the Teachings.”

‘After she and I had consulted together, we decided that
I should sally forth with all my worldly goods [my books and
so forth], together with a small bag of barley flour, tied on my
back ; and that thereupon I should say to her, “ Oh, let me go,
let me go!” at a spot on the road where I should be visible
[and audible] to the Lama from where he [habitually] sat.
This was to be by way of pretending that I was going away,
while she was to detain me, saying, “‘ Do not go away, do not
go away ; I will do mine utmost to get the Instructions for thee.”

‘When this little play was thus enacted within the range of
the Lama’s eyes [and ears], he called, ‘‘ Damema (One Without
Egotism), what comedy is this ye two are acting?” His lady
replied, ‘“‘ Great Sorcerer sayeth that he hath come from a far
distant country, trusting to obtain from thee, his Guru, a know-
ledge of the Saving Truths. However, instead of obtaining
them, he hath only incurred thy displeasure and procured him-


CHAP. V] THE DORJE-PA-MO MEDITATION 107


self a number of beatings. And now, fearing lest he die without
having learned the Truths, he wisheth to go elsewhere in quest
of them; and I am assuring him that I will do mine utmost
to obtain the Truths for him, and am trying to detain him.”
“T see,” said the Lama; and down he came from his seat,
and, giving me several blows, cried, “ When first thou didst
come to me, didst thou not offer me thine entire self—body,
speech, and mind? Where dost thou wish to go now? Thou
belongest to me altogether. If I liked, I could chop thy body
into a hundred bits; and no one could hinder me. And even
if thou do intend to go away, what business hast thou to carry
away flour from my house?” And with that, he knocked me
down on the ground, and gave me a violent beating; then he
took the bag of flour back into the house.

‘On this, I was pierced to the heart with grief, as great as
that of a mother who hath lost her only son. But, at the same
time, I was awed by the imperious dignity of the Lama, and
by the thought that the whole occurrence was the outcome of
my consultation with the Lama’s lady. I could do no other-
wise than return and lie down weeping. My Reverend Mother
said it was evident that the ama would not be moved to
grant my request for the Truths by any of our prayers, en-
treaties, stratagems, and the like. “ But rest assured,” she said,
“he will surely grant them at last. Meanwhile, I will venture
to teach thee something.” And she kindly taught me the
method or system of meditation upon Dorje-Pa-mo,) which
greatly appeased the yearning of my heart, albeit I did not
attain to the entire boon of “The Realization of Know-
ledge”.? But for what I did receive I was very grateful indeed


1 Text: Rdorje-Plag-mo (pron. Dorje-Pa-mo): Skt. Vajra-Varaht, meaning
‘Immutable (or Thunderbolt) Sow’, an Indian Goddess, whose sow-form is a
mystic symbol. The Brahmanical conception of Varahi is contained in chapter
xxiii of the Tantra-raja (see Tantrik Texts, ed. by A. Avalon, vol. xii), and her
Dhyana (or way in which to meditate upon her) is contained in the English In-
troduction (p. 43) of the same volume. She is described as Janakatnuka, that
is, she possesses the nature of the Father (Janaka). According to Tibetan belief,
Dorje-Pamo is now incarnate in the Abbess of the famous Sam-ding Monastery.
As such, this Abbess is the only female incarnate deity in Tibet.

2 That is, the Realization of the Truths, born of practising them under a com-
petent Guru.


108 THE PROBATION AND PENANCE [parRT II


to my Reverend Mother. I thought that as she was the wife
of my Guru, such Truths as were received from her would
help to wipe out mine evil deeds. So I tried to show my grati-
tude to her by doing little services for her comfort, such as
making a seat for her to sit on when she should be milking the
cows in the summer time, and another for her use when she
should be roasting barley in the yard in front of the house.

‘About this time, I began seriously to make up my mind to
go and seek another Guru. But, pondering the matter over
again, I came to the conclusion that as regardeth the Doctrine
whereby I might obtain perfect Emancipation in this very life-
time, my present Guru was the only one possessing it. I saw,
too, that, unless I obtained Emancipation in this lifetime, the
evil deeds which I had committed would be enough to cast
me into one of the Hells. Thus I resolved to do mine utmost
to emulate Naropa in his severe trials and endurance, as well
as in his unwearied perseverance in search of the Saving Truth,
and thus to secure mine Emancipation. So minded, I went on
with my building work, stacking stones and heaping up earth
with which to make mud.

‘Then came Ngogdun-Chudor, of Zhung, bringing valuable
presents, and accompanied by a large retinue, to receive the
Grand Initiation into the Mandala [or Rite] of Gaypa-Dorje.}

‘Thereupon, the Lama’s lady spoke to me saying, “If the
Reverend Father is still dissatisfied with the great devotion
and obedience thou hast shown in building these houses single-
handed, and must have some pecuniary offerings as his initia-
tion fee, let us give him something in order to make sure of
thy participating in this initiation ceremony at all events.
Offer him this, and take the initiation; and, if he demur,
I will add my prayers to thine. So saying, she put in my
hands a valuable turquoise, of a deep blue shade, which was
her own personal property.

‘I went, then, and offering it as mine initiation fee, took my
seat among those who were going to participate in the ceremony.
The Lama took the turquoise; and, turning it over and over,


! Text: Dgyes-pa-rdorje (pron. Gay-pa-Dorje), the Tibetan name of a Tantric
deity, and also of a series of Tantras in eight volumes: Skt. He-Vayra.


CHAP. V] DAMEMA’S TURQUOISE 109


and examining it carefully, at length said to me, “Great Sor-
cerer, how didst thou come by this turquoise?” I replied,
“ The Reverend Mother gave it to me.” He smiled, and said,
“Call Damema here.” When the Reverend Mother had come,
he said, “ Damema, how did we get this turquoise?” She
prostrated herself several times before him and answered,
“Reverend Father, this turquoise is in no way our common
property. It isa special piece of private property given to me
by my parents upon our marriage. Seeing that Thy Reverence
was rather short-tempered, it was feared that we might fall
out. So the turquoise was intended to serve as a provision for
me in the event of our separation ; and I was to keep it in
secret as a piece of entirely private property. But noting how
eager this poor boy is to obtain the Doctrine, I could not help
producing it and giving it tohim. Please accept this turquoise
and grant him the Initiation. He hath suffered much agony
of mind from having been turned out of the Sacred Circle
several times already. Permit me, then, to pray that thou wilt
have mercy on him. And ye, too, my sons, Ngogdun and ye
others, I request you, in this, to add your prayers to mine.”
Having finished, she again prostrated herself several times
before the Lama.

‘Knowing the Lama’s short temper, Ngogdun and the others
dared not say anything, but simply rose and bowed down,
repeating, “Yes, let it be as our Reverend Mother sayeth.”
But the Lama—the turquoise on his necklace now—only said,
“ Damema, thy folly had very nearly lost me this valuable tur-
quoise ; it might have been lost altogether. Do not be silly,
please! When thou thyself belongest altogether to me, the
turquoise, of course, is mine. Great Sorcerer, if thou have any
property of thine own, thou mayst bring it here, and I will
bestow the Initiation upon thee. This turquoise is mine own
property.”

‘Seeing that the Reverend Mother had made him an offering
of the valuable turquoise, I thought that perhaps he might be
softened into allowing me to share in the Initiation ; so I stayed
on for a little time. At this, the Lama lost his temper, and
rising, [apparently] in fierce anger, shouted, “ Thou impertinent


110 THE PROBATION AND PENANCE [PART II


fellow, why dost thou not get out when I tell thee? What
right hast thou to remain in my presence?” Thereupon, with
stunning force, he felled me to the ground, face downward.
Then, picking me up, he threw me down again on my back,
with great violence. He was next taking up his stick to beat me,
when Ngogdun intervened and caught him. Meanwhile, in mine
extreme terror, I jumped out of a window, which made the
Lama anxious, though he still pretended to be angry.

‘The leap did me no harm, but I was so grieved and hurt at
heart that I resolved to kill myself. But again my Reverend
Mother came to me, bringing me solace, and saying, ‘‘ Great
Sorcerer, do not take it so much to heart. There cannot any-
where be a dearer or more faithful pupil than thyself. If, after
all, thou should have to go and look for another Guru, I will
help thee myself with the necessary presents and means for
thine expenses.” Thus she sought to console me, remaining
with me and weeping throughout thesentire night, neglecting
entirely her duty to be present and assist at the Lama’s
evening devotions.

‘Next morning, the Lama summoned me into his presence.
I went, in the hope that he was now going to fulfil my dearest
wishes. He asked me whether his refusal to initiate me the
previous day had shaken my faith in him or inspired me with
dislike. I answered, “It did not shake my faith in thee, for
I considered that it was my great evil-doing which debarred
me from sharing in the ceremony, and I am pierced with
remorse.” Saying this, I burst into tears, whereupon he ordered
me out, exclaiming, ‘‘ What reason hast thou, by thy weeping,
to blame me in this manner?”

‘As I came out, I felt as if my heart were almost breaking ;
a perfect whirlwind seemed tearing at its very roots. I thought
of the gold I had possessed at the time when I set out on my
career of evil-doing, and deplored the fate which deprived me
of it now, when I wished to set out on the path of righteous-
ness. Oh, how I wished that I had but half of it now! I should
then be able to obtain Initiation and the Doctrine. But without
gold, I saw that this Lama would never give me either. I should
always require to have something for a present, even if I should


CHAP. V] MILAREPA QUITS MARPA III


go elsewhere to obtain the Doctrine; nothing could be done
without it. Not possessing any worldly wealth, I should have
to die unemancipated, having failed to obtain the saving
Doctrine. It were better for me to end my life at once than
to go on living without it. What should I do? Oh, what should
Ido? Should I go and make myself the servant of some rich
man and, saving up my wages, get together enough gold to
pay mine initiation fees and to support me during the period of
penance and meditation? Or should I go home and see my
mother? Perhaps I might get some money there somehow;
but, then, I had worked such sad havoc among the folk of my
district by my wickedness and my Black Art! One of two
things, however, must be done at once. I must go forth in
search either of gold or of the Doctrine. But go I must!

‘So, taking my books, and leaving behind the bag of flour,
for fear of incurring the Lama’s displeasure, I set forth without
even telling my Reverend Mother of mine intention. When
I had gone about four or five miles on my way, I was over-
come by an intense longing to see her just once, and by remorse
at mine ingratitude in thus leaving the kind lady without a word.
It was time for the morning meal, so I collected a little barley-
flour by begging, borrowed some vessels, gathered some fuel,
and cooked my food. By the time I had eaten, it was past
noon. The thought then came to me, that in getting my food
from the Lama I had been paid at least half my wages for the
work I had done for him. And then reflecting on the trouble
I had experienced in procuring just this one morning’s meal,
and comparing it with the rich living I had enjoyed at the
Lama’s house, all ready prepared for me by his lady—tasty,
steaming hot dishes every day—I thought myself very un-
grateful indeed in coming away without first bidding the kind
lady farewell! I had half thoughts of going back, but was
unable quite to make up my mind to do so.

‘ As I was on my way to return the vessels I had borrowed,
an old man stopped me, and said, “ Dear me! thou art quite
a young man, able to work; why dost thou beg? Why dost
thou not earn thy food by reading the Scriptures, if thou can
read? Or, if thou can not read, why dost thou not work at


112 THE PROBATION AND PENANCE [PART II


something ? Thou wouldst earn thy food and a little money,
“oo. Canst thou read or not?” I replied, telling him that I
was not a professional beggar, and that I was able to read.
The old man then said, “ Very well; come and stay in my
house and read the Scriptures for me, and I will pay thee
handsomely.”

‘T was only too glad to accept the offer, and was soon en-
gaged in reading the abbreviated version of the Prajza-Para-
mita in eight thousand verses.! In the course of my reading,
I came to the history of an Arhant called Taktiingoo (Ever-
Weeping), in which it was narrated that this Arhant, being
penniless, had sold the very flesh off his body for the Doctrine.
Nothing can be dearer to a man than his own heart, yet even
this he determined to sell. Though the immediate consequence
would be death, that did not turn him from his purpose. As I
compared my trials with those of the Arhant, they seemed to
dwindle away to nothing. Thereupon, a hope sprang up in
me that, at last, the Lama might impart to me the teaching
for which I longed. “ But evenif he do not,” I reflected, “ hath
not my Reverend Mother promised to help me to find another
Guru?” So back I went to him.

‘To return to what happened at the time I left the Lama.
When the Lama’s lady perceived that I had really gone away,
she went to the Lama, and said, “ At last, Reverend Father,
thine implacable foe hath left thee. Art thou satisfied now?”
“Whom dost thou mean?” he asked. And she replied, “ Was
it not poor Great Sorcerer whom thou didst treat as thy dead-
liest enemy?” The Lama frowned, but could not repress a
tear. “O Gurus of the Kargyiitpa Deities, and Guardian
Spirits,’ he exclaimed, “ bring back my destined pupil.” This
said, he wrapped up his head in his mantle, and remained
silent for a long time.

‘Upon my coming back and doing obeisance to the Lama’s

' The Prajtia-Paramita (Tib. S’er p’yin), or ‘Transcendental Wisdom’, in
twenty-one volumes, forms the third great division of the Northern Buddhist
Canon known as the Kah-gyur, and corresponds to the Abhidharma (Tib. Ch’os-
non-pa), or Metaphysical Part of the Southern Buddhist Canon known as the 777-


Pitaka (or ‘Three Baskets (of the Law]’). Owing to its great bulk in the original,
there are various epitomized versions of it, such as this mentioned in our text.


CHAP. V] MILAREPA’S VACILLATION 113


lady, she was greatly rejoiced, and said, ‘“ Really, that was the
best thing thou couldst have done. I think the Lama will now,
at last, favour thee with some teaching, for on mine informing
him of thy departure, he shed tears and cried, ‘Let my destined
and gifted pupil be brought back!’ And I think thou hast
been brought back by the grace of the Lama.”

‘I, however, thought to myself that the Reverend Mother
was only saying this with a view to encouraging me; for I
judged that to wish me back and call me his gifted pupil, and
all that, hardly tallied with his refusing to give me even the
least morsel of spiritual teaching. If he had, indeed, called me
gifted, it would be something to rejoice over; but his refusal
to give me any teaching in the Doctrine himself, or to allow
me to go to any one else for it, filled me with grave apprehen-
sions of more trouble.

‘ The Reverend Mother now went in and said to the Lama,
“© Reverend Father, Great Sorcerer hath not been able to
forsake us. He hath come back.’ May I give him permission
to come in and do obeisance to thee?” “Qh, it is not out of
love for us, but for himself,” said the Lama ; “ but thou mayst
let him come in and pay his respects.” Upon my entering
where he was, the Lama spoke to me, saying, “ Great Sorcerer,
do not be vacillating in thine aims. If thou be really in earnest
to obtain the Doctrine, thou must be prepared to sacrifice life
itself for it. Now be gone; and, first of all, complete the three
remaining stories of the building ; and then thy wishes shall
be granted. But if thou think otherwise—why, I am only
throwing away food on thee; and thou canst go wherever
thou wishest.”

‘I left the Lama’s presence without venturing to utter a
word ; but I said to the lady: “ Reverend Mother, I have
a great desire to see my mother once again, and I feel sure
that the Lama will not give me the Teachings. If I were sure
of obtaining them when I had completed the building, I should
be very content to go on and finish it. But I see very well
that the Lama will only raise one objection after another, as
excuses for not giving them to me. I feel sure that I shall not
get them, even though I do complete the building. So please


114 THE PROBATION AND PENANCE [PartT Il


allow me to return home. I wish health and long life to you
both.”

‘I bowed down to her, and was coming away, when she said,
“Thou are quite right. I have promised to find thee a Guru.
Now there is a pupil of the Lama, named Ngogdun-Chudor,
who hath the same precepts and teachings as the Lama; I will
do my best to arrange that thou receive the Teachings thou
desirest from him. Stay here a little while longer, and for
a few days act as if thou wert working.” Delighted at the
prospect of obtaining my wish, I worked with a will for several
days.

‘It seemeth that the great Pandit Naropa, while he lived,
had been in the habit of observing the tenth day of every
month as a grand day of worship, and so Marpa, too, was accus-
tomed to do the same. Upon the occasion of this celebration
of the holy day, the Reverend Lady practised a stratagem at
his expense after this fashion. Three large vessels, each hold-
ing twenty measures of chhang, had been fermented for the
occasion. These she strained; and, drawing off the first brew
into one vessel, she had the chhang from that vessel served to
him by various assistants (among them both herself and me), who
filled his bow] with it again and again. The second brew was
served to the pupils. And of the third brew, the lady herself
sipped, and that only a little. I followed her example, and
escaped becoming affected. All the rest of the pupils, however,
became more or less affected. As for the Lama, he having
been plied so often with the over-strong brew fell sound asleep.!


' It should be noted here that this over-indulgence arises, in the first instance,
from a ritualistic usage, not unlike that in connexion with libations and Holy
Communion in other religions; and that, secondly, as it was due wholly to a
woman’s artifice, the Lama himself is not morally responsible. As more fully
explained in our Introduction, Marpa represents merely a transitional develop-
ment in Tibetan Buddhism. His illustrious successor, Milarepa, was a reformer,
more thoroughgoing even than Tsong-khapa, the Reformer of the Gelugpa, or
Established Church of Tibet. Whereas Marpa was married and lived in the world,
being a scholar more than a saint, Milarepa taught, and illustrated by his own
later life, that the higher ideal is renunciation absolute—asceticism unqualified.
In one of his Hymns (p. 191, following) he has put on record his opposition to
the use of all stimulating beverages, not only those containing alcohol, but even
tea.


CHAP. V}] HOW MILAREPA MEETS NGOGDUN 115


While he thus lay asleep, his lady abstracted from his room
certain articles, including Naropa’s garlands and rosary of
rubies. Then producing a letter in my Guru's name, which
she had all ready, and enclosing therein the garlands and the
rosary as a gift from the Lama, after wrapping it up in a
costly scarf and sealing the letter with the Lama’s seal, she
directed me to go to the aforementioned Ngogdun-Chudor and
hand it tohim. The main purport of the letter was a command
to Ngogdun to give the Great Sorcerer the Teachings. Thus
was I sent by her in the direction of the Central Province of
Tibet, to learn the Doctrine; and I went to Ngogdun with full
confidence in his ability to teach me the Saving Truths.

‘Some two days after my departure, the Lama asked his
lady what I was doing. She replied that I was probably on
the road, but exactly where she was unable to say. “ Where
hath he gone, and when ?” asked the Lama. And she replied,
‘Oh, he was saying that though he had done so much work for
thee, still thou wert not disposed to give him the Teachings,
but only scoldings and beatings, so he would go and look for
another Guru elsewhere. And as I should only have won him
another beating by coming to tell thee of his intention, I pre-
ferred not to do so. I did mine utmost to induce him to stay,
but I could not hold him; he left yesterday.”

‘On this piece of news, the Lama’s face turned black as
night. ‘“ When did he leave ?” he asked. “ Yesterday,” replied
his lady. For some time he sat silent. Then he said, “ My
pupil cannot have got very far away yet.”

‘Meanwhile, I had arrived at Riwo-Kyungding, in the
Central Province of Tibet, and found Ngogdun—himself a
Head Lama by this time—expounding the Double Analysis?
to a large body of his pupils. He was just dealing with the
passage, “I am the Expounder and I am the Truth. I am the
Hearer. I am the Teacher of the World, and I am the Devotee.
I am the Being Who hath passed beyond all states of worldly
existence, and I am the Blissful One,’ when I approached,
and, at a distance, prostrated myself. The spot came to be
known as Chag-tael-Kang (The Hill of Obeisance). Lama

1 Text: Tak-nyt, a philosophical treatise somewhat like the Bhagavad-Gita,


116 THE PROBATION AND PENANCE [PART II


Ngogdun, taking off his hat, returned my salutation, observing
that from my mode of salutation I seemed to be one of the
pupils of Marpa the Translator, and that the fact of mine arrival
whilst he was expounding those particular stanzas seemed
highly auspicious—so auspicious, indeed, that he predicted,
from this simple occurrence, that I should one day become a
master of all religious lore. He sent one of those about him to
inquire who I was. The person sent recognized me, and asked,
“What bringeth thee here?” I replied that our Guru, Lama
Marpa, being too busy to look after my private tuition, had
sent me to attend the lectures here. I told him also that I had
brought with me Naropa’s garlands and ruby rosary as a token
from the Lama.

‘When the man went back to Lama Ngogdun and told him
these things, and that I was Great Sorcerer, he was greatly
delighted, so much so that he exclaimed, “ Of a truth, rare are
the occasions of enjoying such a favour as this. My humble
monastery to be blessed and honoured by the presence within
its doors of such precious and sacred reliques of our Great
Teacher, Naropa! Such an occasion is as rare as the Udum-
vara blossom.’- We must receive it with all the respect due to
such a rare event.” Thereupon, he broke off his exposition at
the auspicious passage mentioned, and sent some of the monks
to fetch banners, ceremonial umbrellas, and pendants, while
various musical instruments were sounded in honour of the
reliques I had brought.

‘When I reached his dwelling, I prostrated myself, and
offered the letter-packet and the reliques ; and he, upon receiv-
ing them, was profoundly moved. Tears came from his eyes;
and, taking off his hat, he put the reliques on the top of his
head, praying that grace might be vouchsafed him. Then he
put them in the holy of holies of his altar.

‘ The letter, which he now read, ran thus :? “I am just about
to enter upon a close retreat, and as Great Sorcerer is im-


1 The Udumvara (Ficus Glomirata, Rox.) is said to blossom only upon the birth
of a Buddha in this world.

? Following M. Bacot’s version (p. 120), this letter begins thus: ‘ To the Im-
mutable Ngogdun, Realizer of Mirvaza.’ In our version this address is lacking.


CHAP. V}] THE TEST THROUGH OBEDIENCE R17


patient and eager to have the Teachings, I send him to thee
for the Initiation and Consecration. Do thou, therefore, grant
him these, and teach him the Truths. I authorize thee to do
so; in token, whereof, I send thee herewith Naropa’s garlands
and rosary of rubies.”

‘Having finished reading the letter, Ngogdun said that, as
ordered by the Lama, he would surely give me the Initiation
and the Consecration. He had been thinking of sending for
me, but now that I was come myself, it was very good, indeed,
and due to the Lama’s benediction and grace. He said, further,
“T have a number of pupils who come from Kham, Tagpo,
Kongpo, and Yarlung, but on their way hither, through the
depredations of those lawless folk, the Yepo and Yemo, of Dol,
they are stripped of the scanty store of gear with which they
set out for this place in order to pursue their studies. I there-
fore request thee to go and punish those lawless folk by
launching a hail-storm upon their lands. When thou hast done
this, I will bestow upon thee the Initiation and Consecration
thou desirest.”

‘I now bitterly repented the fate that had put such an
accursed power into my hands, making me the means of
wreaking vengeance by doing hurt to life and property. I had
come here in search of the Saving Truth, and here I was again
being asked to work harm and do an evil deed. If I refused,
I should be disobeying a Gurz, or, at least, one whom I in-
tended to take for my Guru—almost as heinous a sin as to
refuse to obey an actual Guru; and, in addition, I should lose
all opportunity of obtaining the Teachings. And so I decided
that I must go, that I had no choice.

‘Accordingly, I set forth, provided with the necessary ap-
purtenances; and, reaching the scene of my intended deed,
I took lodgings in the house of an old woman, in the Yepo
country. Just as the hail-storm was about to burst, as the
lightnings flashed and the thunder growled and the first hail-
stones were about to fall, the old woman, my hostess, began to
beat her breast and weep, saying, “ Alas! What shall I have
to live on if my crops are destroyed by the hail?”

‘This was too much for me. I could not bear to be so cruel


118 THE PROBATION AND PENANCE [Part II


to this poor old woman, so, at imminent risk to myself, I re-
quested her quickly to draw me a plan of her field. “Oh, my
field is like this,” she cried in a despairing tone, at the same
time describing a triangular figure with an elongated end.
I immediately covered the figure with an iron pan, in my mind
shielding it from the hail, so that it escaped destruction, all
except a tiny corner, which, protruding beyond the covering-
pan, was devastated by a gust of wind.

‘When the storm was over, on going out to look at the
country, I saw the slopes above the valley all furrowed into
ravines, the erstwhile luxuriant fields utterly laid waste, all
except the old woman’s field, which was quite fresh and green.
But that corner of the field, corresponding to the corner of the
plan which, protruding beyond the covering-pan, had been
devastated by wind, was damaged by the hail and flooded with
water. Ever afterward, this field—except for its protruding
corner which had been flooded—escaped any hail-storm which
visited that neighbourhood. And it is said that the old woman
was thus exempted from payment of the hail-tax} on all of
the field save that corner.

‘On my way back [to my new Guru], I met an old shepherd
and his child who had lost their herds in the flood. By them
I sent word to the people of the countryside, enjoining them
to refrain thenceforth from ill-treating or robbing Lama Ngog-
pa’s* disciples or adherents, on pain of being visited constantly
by similar hail-storms, thus revealing to them who had caused
the destruction. After this, the people of those two places
were so profoundly impressed with the phenomenal power of
Lama Ngogpa, that they became his devoted followers and
faithfully served him.

‘As I came along the way, I picked up some dead birds,
which I found all by themselves under a bramble bush, and
numbers of other birds, and some rats, which I found dead on
the road, until I had my cap and the lap of my robe full.
These I laid in a heap before Lama Ngogpa, and appealed to


’ A tax imposed on behalf of the hail-exorcizing Jamas. (See p. 501.)


? Lama Ngogpa (or the Lama living at Ngog) is a shortened form of the name
Lama Ngogdun-Chudor.


CHAP. V] YOGIC REVIVICATION 11g


him thus: “*O Reverend Teacher, I came here expecting to
find the Holy Doctrine, but have been compelled to heap up
sin upon sin. Have pity on such a terrible sinner!” and I burst
into bitter tears.

‘To this, the Lama replied, “ Be not despairing ; there is no
cause whatsoever for such abject fear. We, the followers of
Naropa and Maitri,? possess those Truths which can save the
greatest of sinners in the twinkling of an eye—just as one
single stone flung from a sling serveth to frighten a hundred
birds simultaneously. All those sentient creatures, and these
birds and beasts which have been killed on this occasion by
the hail-storm shall be born again as thy foremost disciples
when thou shalt attain to Buddhahood.® Till that time cometh,
I shall put forth my power so as to prevent their falling into
Hell or [degenerating] into lower states of being. Therefore,
be at ease. But if thou still doubt, let me prove the truth of
what I say, thus.” For a few moments, he sat silent with.
closed eyes, then he snapped his fingers. In a trice, all the
dead birds and rats [which I had collected] revived, and made
off to their several nests and holes. I now perceived that the
Lama himself was a Buddha. How delightful! How blissful !
I should have rejoiced had many more creatures enjoyed the
privilege of dying on such an occasion.

‘Thereafter, I was initiated into the Mandala [or Rite] of
Gaypa-Dorje.* I had found a cave facing south, from which
I could see my Guru's residence; and, having made it habitable
by the expenditure of a little labour, I shut myself up in it,
leaving only a small aperture in the side, for the passage of
food and water, and so forth.®


1 Among Christians, it is only the taking of human life which is considered to
be wrong; but among Buddhists, as among Brahmins and Jains, the precept
‘Thou shalt not kill’ applies to all living creatures.

2 Maitri (‘Love’), like Naropa, is an Indian Yogi, or Saint, upon whose doc-
trines the Kargyiitpa Sect is, in part, founded.

3 That is, in future ages they shall have evolved to the state of man, and receive
the Saving Doctrine from Milarepa, who, by then, will have attained Buddha-
hood.

4 See p. 108}.

5 It is the usual procedure for devotees of the Kargytitpa School thus to en-
close themselves in a chosen retreat and remain there in solitary meditation for


120 THE PROBATION AND PENANCE [PART II


‘My Guru had explained to me the methods of meditation,
and I persevered in their practice ; but, despite all the assiduity
onthe Guru's part, and perseverance on mine own, owing to my
not having obtained the assent of Marpa, I experienced no
spiritual development.

‘One day, my Guru came and asked me if I had had such
and such an experience. I replied that I had experienced
nothing [of like nature]. “ How is that?” he asked. “In this
line of development there ought not to be, and there never
hath been, any who have not within a very short time made
fresh progress in spiritual development, except when there hath
been something standing directly in the way of it. What can
it be here? It cannot be that our Head Guru hath not given
his assent to thine Initiation, or else he would not have sent
the tokens and the letter. Well, anyway, proceed with thy
meditation.”

‘I was a little alarmed at this encounter, and for a moment
thought of confessing to the deception [I had practised], but
my courage failed me. Now, more than ever, was I impressed
with the necessity of propitiating my Head Guru, the Lama
Marpa ; but I went on practising meditation to the best of mine
ability.

‘About this time, Lama Marpa, having had the remaining
portion of his son’s residence completed, wrote to Lama
Ngogpa requesting him to send him so many loads of small
branches for the house.! The letter added, that upon the com-
pletion of the ornamental spires and the cornice, Lama Ngogpa
was to come in person and assist both in the consecration [of
the house] and the ceremony to be performed [at the same
time] to celebrate the coming of age of Doday-Bum ? [Marpa’s
the period of time prescribed by the Guru, their sustenance being passed in to
them. In some remarkable instances, such devotees have not once left their cell
during long periods of years. Similar austerities, probably derived from the ex-
ample of Oriental asceticism, were practised by the early Christian yogis who
dwelt in the deserts of Egypt and Palestine.

1 The tops of religious edifices and of dwellings of /amas in Tibet are com-
monly fringed with twigs placed flat with ends projecting and trimmed evenly
with the line of the walls so as to form a sort of frieze.


* This is another name for Marpa’s son, who, as above (on p. 95), is also
known as Darma-Doday. Bum, which here replaces Darma, is the popular name


CHAP. V] THE? FRUIT: OF ‘DECEIT 121


son]. The letter also intimated that Lama Marpa had heard
about my being with Lama Ngogpa, reference being made to
me as a “ wicked person”, and it requested that I should be
brought back to him at the same time.

‘Lama Ngogpa came to the aperture of my cave and read
me the letter, observing, “ From the manner in which the Lama
speaketh of thee, it would appear that thou hast not obtained
his permission in regard to the bestowal of the Truths.” I
replied, “ The Lama himself did not give his consent; but his
wife furnished me with the letter and the accompanying tokens,
with which I was directed hither.” “Ah!” he said, “so we
have been engaged in profitless work. Thou surely must have
known that it is vain to hope for spiritual growth without the
Guru's hearty co-operation and approval. It isno wonder thou
dost not develop any of the signs. However, he ordereth thee
to return. Dost thou wish to go or not?” I prayed that
I might be taken with him as his attendant. He replied that
the branches had been sent by carriers, and that, until these
had returned and the exact date of the festival was known,
I was to remain in my retreat.

‘Upon the return of the carriers, he again came to the aper-
ture of my cell ; whereupon we had a long conversation about
our Guru’s approaching ceremonial of consecrating the build-
ing and bestowing it upon his son, who was also to have a
distinction conferred upon him. In the course of our talk,
I inquired whether any mention had been made of myself.
“Ves,” said Ngogpa, “our Lama’s lady asked the carriers
what thou wert doing. Being told that thou wert in retreat,
she asked what else thou wert doing there. Being told that
thou didst always cling to solitude, she set it down to thy
having left this die behind, at the same time giving it to the
man and helping him to tie it up in his waist-cloth, and
charging him to deliver it safely into thy hands.” Ngogpa
then handed me a die made of clay. I took it from his hand


given to the first twelve volumes of the Prayitd-Paramita (see p. 112'), and to
the abbreviated version of the Prajita-Paramita in 100,000 slokas. As applied to
Marpa’s son, Bum may, therefore, be either an initiatory (or religious) appella-
tion or a name given to him upon his coming of age. He is also called Doday-
Bum at the end of Chapter VII.


132 THE PROBATION AND PENANCE [Part Il


reverentially, and, deeming that it had been hallowed by the
touch of my Reverend Mother, I put it on my head.

‘When he had left me, I was taken with a desire to throw
the die and play with it. But, after a few moments, the thought
occurred to me that I had never manifested any weakness for
dice-playing in the lady’s presence, and I asked myself what
she could mean by sending me a thing that had led to the im-
poverishment of some of mine ancestors, Was it not meant to
show that I was an object of contempt to her? The thought
was infuriating. Ina rage, I threw the die on the ground with
such force that it split asunder and revealed a small roll of
paper wrapped up inside. I picked this up and read its mes-
sage, which ran thus: “Son, thy Guru is now disposed to
bestow upon thee the necessary Initiation and Scriptures.
Therefore come with Lama Ngogpa.” This was such welcome
news to me that I actually pranced oe and down my little
cave, and danced for very joy.

‘Lama Ngogpa then came ay said, “ Brave Grand Sorcerer,
prepare thyself for the journey” ; and I did so with alacrity.
The Lama himself collected everything he possessed for an
offering, except what had been given him by Marpa himself.
These possessions consisted of images, books, reliques, gold,
turquoises, cloth, silk, plate, vessels, live stock, and so on. Of
the latter, he drove off every sheep and goat in his possession,
leaving behind but one lame old she-goat, which, on account
of its lameness, was unable to keep up with the rest of the
herd, and, so perforce, had to be left behind. Everything else
he possessed he was preparing to take with him as an offering
to his Guru. He was kind enough to acknowledge the service
I had rendered to him, and gave mea silk scarf as mine own
personal offering to Lama Marpa. His wife added to it a bag
full of powdered cheese, which was to serve as mine offering to
Marpa’s lady, Damema.

‘Then Lama Ngogpa, together with his wife, and myself,
and a large retinue, set out for Dowo-Lung [Marpa’s monas-
tery]. When we had arrived at the foot of the hill, on which
Dowo-Loong stood, the Lama requested me to go in advance
and inform Lama Marpa and Damema of his approach, and to


CHAP. V] MARPA’S DISPLEASURE 123


see if they would not send out some chhang for him. Accord-
ingly, I went up towards Marpa’s dwelling and there en-
countered his lady first. I presented her with the bag of cheese,
and saluted her with reverence. I then informed her of the
approach of Lama Ngogpa, and asked her to send some re-
freshments to meet him on his approach. She was delighted
to see me, and told me to go and pay my respects to Lama
Marpa, who was inside, and to tell him of Lama Ngogpa’s
approaching arrival.

‘I then entered the dwelling and found Lama Marpa sitting
in meditation on the topmost story of the house. I presented
the silk scarf to him, and bowed down before him, he being
seated facing the East. He turned his face tothe West. Then
I bowed down from the West, but he turned round towards the
South. Then I spoke, and said, ‘“ Reverend Gurw! Although
out of displeasure thou refuse to accept mine obeisance, Lama
Ngogpa is coming here with all he possesseth of images,
books, gold, turquoises, cattle, and such like, as an offering
to thee. He surely deserveth some suitable reception befitting
his state; I therefore pray that thou wilt be kind enough to
send some chhang and refreshments out to him, on his way
hither.”

‘Apparently bursting out in rage, the Lama snapped his
fingers and shouted, “ What! Who gave me a reception when
I came plodding home with the load of the precious teachings
on my back from India? When I brought home the precious
gems of the quintessence of all the four divisions of Buddhist
Doctrine, did so much as a lame bird come out to greet me or
receive me? And must I, a great translator, go and receive
Ngogpa just because he is bringing me a few straggling cattle?
No, it cannot be. If that be what he expecteth, he had better
go back whence he came.”

‘I left the Lama’s presence and went and told his lady what
he had said. “Oh,” she said, “thy Guru is very testy. Ngogpa
is a great man, and must be received in a befitting manner.
Let us both go and meet him.” I said, “ Lama Ngogpa doth
not expect thee to go and meet him. Only give me a little
chhang and I will run back with it to him.” “No; I will go


124 THE PROBATION AND PENANCE [PART II


and meet him,” she said; and, ordering some pupils to bring
a generous quantity of chhang, she went out personally to re-
ceive Lama Ngogpa.

‘Now all the people of Lhobrak had assembled together to
celebrate the coming of age of Marpa’s son, Darma-Doday,
and to witness the ceremony of consecrating the house which
had been built for him. There was a general feast, and Lama
Marpa raised his voice and sang the benedictory psalm as a
blessing upon the congregation and the occasion. It ran as
follows :


‘I supplicate the Gracious Gurz.


‘On this, the glorious Sect of my Line,
Resteth the blessing of stainlessness ;
May the benediction of that blessing here alight.


‘On the short path-way of my Truths profound,
Resteth the blessing of unerringness ;
May the benediction of that blessing here alight.


‘On myself, Marpa the Translator,
Resteth the blessing of learning deep ;
May the benediction of that blessing here alight.


‘On Guru, Deva, and Dakini,
Resteth the blessing of grace and favour ;
May the benediction of that blessing here alight.


‘On my spiritual sons and shishyas gathered here,
Resteth the blessing of staunch and true faith ;
May the benediction of that blessing here alight.


‘On all my lay-disciples, far and near,
Resteth the blessing of charity and merit ;
May the benediction of that blessing here alight.


‘On all pure deeds and actions,
Resteth the blessing of altruism and Emancipation ;
May the benediction of that blessing here alight.


‘On good and evil spirits of this transient world,
Resteth the blessing of great merit or great punishment ;
May the benediction of that blessing here alight.


CHAP. V] MARPA’S TEST OF NGOGPA 125


‘On these Lamas and these laymen gathered here,
Resteth the blessing of gladness and good wishes;
May the benediction of that blessing here alight.’


‘When Marpa had ended, Lama Ngogpa rose up and of-
fered his gifts; after which he addressed Marpa in the follow-
ing words: “ Precious and Reverend Guru, I do not need to
say that all I have and am is thine. On this present occasion,
however, I beg leave to announce to thee that everything
I possess, save one lame old she-goat, too lame and too old to
keep up with the rest of the herd, which, therefore, had to be
left behind, hath been brought hither as an offering to thee, in
return for which I pray that thou wilt confer upon me, thine
ever devoted shishya, the Most Precious Initiations and the
Deepest Mystic Truths, and, above all, the scrolls containing
those [Esoteric] Truths that are to be whispered in the ear
only.”

‘So saying, he prostrated himself before the well-pleased
Marpa, who now spoke as follows, ‘‘ Well, if this be so, I, in
turn, have to inform thee that the Truths and Scriptures I pos-
sess are among the rarest and most efficacious. They belong
mostly to that class of Truths called the ‘Short-Cut of the Im-
mutable Path’,! by means of which it is possible to attain to
Nirvana in this very lifetime, without having to wait for count-
Jess ages. Such are the surpassing virtues of these Truths.
But there is more ; the Truths contained in the scrolls of which
thou speakest are attended by certain very strict conditions of
the Guru’s requiring. So, unless thou bring up the last she-
goat, despite all her lameness and old age, thine acquisition of
that Scripture will be a matter of some difficulty. As for the
others, thou hast already received them.” This last require-
ment evoked hearty laughter from all present, but Lama
Ngogpa gravely asked if, when the old she-goat were brought
up, he would be given the Scripture he desired. To this Marpa
replied, “ Yes; if thou go thyself and fetch it.”

‘The assembly then broke up for the day ; and, next morn-


1 That is, the short method of attaining Enlightenment by treading the Immu-
table (or Infallible) Path, or Vajra- Yana.


126 THE PROBATION AND PENANCE [PaRT Il


ing, Lama Ngogpa set forth by himself to get the lame she-
goat; and, bringing it on his own back, he offered it to Marpa,
who, much pleased, said, “ A really devoted and faithful fol-
lower of the Mystic Truths should be like thyself. I have truly
little use for a lame old she-goat. I only made requisition for
it in order to illustrate the greatness and value of religious
truths.” He then promised Lama Ngogpa that he would ini-
tiate him into various Mystic Truths and Mandalas, and, a
short time after, did so.

‘One day [later on], during a feast given to some of his dis-
ciples from the most distant parts and to the members of his
own family, Lama Marpa sat, with a long staff by his side,
looking with fierce eyes at Lama Ngogpa, who was one of
those present. After a time, pointing at him with his finger, he
said, ‘‘ Ngogdun Chudor, what explanation hast thou to give
in the matter of thy having conferred Initiation and the Truths
upon this wicked person, Thopaga?” And, as he spoke, he
kept casting glances at the stick.

‘Lama Ngogpa was terrified. “ Precious Guru,” he stam-
mered, “ Thy Reverence enjoined me under thine own hand
and seal to initiate Thépaga. Along with the letter, Thy
Reverence sent Naropa’s garlands and rosary of rubies as a
token of its genuineness, and I obeyed Thy Reverence’s com-
mand. In this I have nothing with which to reproach myself ;
so be pleased to abate Thy Reverence’s displeasure with me.”
As he spoke, he kept looking round about uneasily.

‘Marpa then turned his angry finger on me, and asked,
“Where didst thou get these things?” By this time I felt as
if my heart were being torn out of my body, and was in such
a state of terror that I could scarcely articulate. All trembling,
I faltered out that the Lady Mother had given them to me.

‘At that, Marpa jumped up abruptly from his seat and
made towards his wife apparently with intent to belabour her
with the staff. But she, apprehensive of such a thing, had risen
and moved herself some distance from him. She now ran into
the chapel and shut the door. The Lama made several at-
tempts to open it, but, failing, came back and resumed his seat,
calling out, “Thou, Ngogdun-Chudor, who hast been doing


CHAP. V] MILAREPA’S DESPONDENCY 127,


something thou wert not asked to do, I command thee to go
and bring me Naropa’s garlands and rosary instantly.” This
said, he wrapped up his head in his mantle, and so remained.

‘Lama Ngogpa bowed, and retired immediately to get the
articles required. As soon as he came out, IJ, having run out
of Marpa’s presence at the same time as the lady, saw him
from a corner, where I sat weeping ; and I prayed him to take
me with him. But he said, “If I take thee again without the
Guru’s express command, the outcome will only be a similar
scene, which will be painful to us both. Remain here for the
present. If our Guru refuse to be gracious to thee, I will then
do what lieth in my power to help thee?”

‘Then I rejoined, “On account of my much evil-doing, not
only do I myself suffer, but I involve thee and my Reverend
Mother in a share of my troubles. I have lost all hope of
obtaining the Doctrine in this life. Day by day I am only
heaping up one great sin upon another. It is much better that
I cut short this life. All I ask of thee is that by thy grace
thou procure that my next birth shall be among [well-endowed]
human beings,! and be a birth in which I shall have the oppor-
tunity to obtain the Truths.”

‘I turned away, intending to commit suicide on the spot,
but Lama Ngogpa, bursting into tears, caught hold of me and
said, “‘ Brave Grand Sorcerer, do not so! Our Mystic Doctrine,
which is the essence and ultimate meaning of the Blessed Con-
queror’s injunctions, declareth that all our various bodily prin-
ciples and faculties are divine.? If we presume to close their
present career before their natural period [of dissolution], we
incur the guilt of killing the divine in ourselves, and must face
the due punishment for the same. There is no greater sin than

1 Birth as a well-endowed human being is, by all Buddhists, regarded as afford-
ing the supreme opportunity of reaching Enlightenment. It is here in this world
that the Path to Buddhahood must first be entered upon; it cannot be entered
upon in any of the after-death states, although once sufficient progress has been
made upon it here, the Goal to which it leads may be realized in the highest of
the Paradise Realms.

2 ‘Brahmanism also teaches this, and Palen any person who attempts suicide
subject to punishment and to purification by expiatory rites (Prayash-chitta). The


Kalarnava Tantra is very emphatic about the necessity of preserving one’s life.’—
Sj. Atal Bihari Ghosh.


128 THE PROBATION AND PENANCE [Part iI


suicide. In the Savas, too, suicide is spoken of as a most
heinous sin. Understand this well, and abandon all thought of
self-slaughter. After all, our Guru may still be pleased to con-
fer the Truths upon thee. But, even if he do not, there will
surely be found some one who will give thee them.”

‘Thus did Ngogpa seek to comfort me. Other of the dis-
ciples also sympathized with me, some running in to see if
Marpa were yet in a mood to be addressed with safety, and
some sitting down by me and trying to bring me solace. But
either my heart was made of iron, or else the time had come
for it to break, so acute were my sufferings. It was because of
my having committed such terribly wicked deeds in the earlier
part of my life, that now I had to suffer such excruciating and
indescribable tortures at the very outset of my search for
a Faith and Doctrine to emancipate me.’

At the hearing of this narration, none present was able to
withhold tears of sympathy with the narrator; and some there
were who even swooned away with excess of emotion.


This is the story of the Second Meritorious Act of Milarepa,
which treateth of his chastening and his purification from sin
by means of trials and tribulations, both bodily and mental.


CHAP. VI] 129


CHAPTER VI
THE INITIATION


Telling of the Completion of Jetsiin's Probation, of Jetsiin’s
Initiation ; and of Marpa’s Predictions concerning Jetsiin.


AGAIN Rechung addressed Jetstin, and asked him how, and
under what circumstances, Lama Marpa had favoured him
afterward.

Jetstin continued: ‘The other pupils, as I have said, were
running up and down. After a while, Marpa recovered from
his sulking and became quite mild. He said, ‘“ Now let Damema
be requested to come here.” Somebody having gone for her,
he next inquired, “‘ Where are Ngogdun Chudor, and the other
pupils ?”’ Some one said, ‘“‘ Thy Reverence having commanded
Ngogdun to go and fetch Naropa’s garlands and the rosary, he
started forth; but, meeting Great Sorcerer, just as he came
out, he is even now engaged in consoling him.” And the oc-
currence was fully related to Marpa. At this, his eyes were
filled with tears, and he said, “It is necessary for disciples of
the Mystic Truths to be so; and he hath turned out exactly
what is wanted. Now I pity my pupils, so go and call them.”

‘One of the pupils went to Lama Ngogpa, and told him,
“Now our Lama hath become mild, and he hath sent me to
call thee.” I thereupon deplored my luckless condition, and
envied the happy lot of those fortunate beings who enjoyed
the Guru's grace and favour. “As for poor miserable me,”
said I, “I am debarred from the Guru’s presence even when
he is mild, for my very presence irritateth him and procureth
me only his displeasure and beatings.” And then I wept bitterly.
Lama Ngogpa stayed with me, and requested the same pupil
to go and relate my case to the Guru and to find out whether
I might be allowed to approach him, adding, ‘‘If I do not
remain here, this desperate person may do something rash.”

‘The pupil went up and represented matters to Lama Marpa,
who said, “ Formerly he would have been right, but to-day it
shall not be so. The chief guest now is to be Great Sorcerer.


130 THE INITIATION [PART II


Damema, go thou and invite him.” She came, all smiles, and
said, “Great Sorcerer, at last, I think thy Guru is going to
favour thee, for he said just now that thou wert to be the chief
guest, and that I was to go and call thee. I take it to be
a sign of an entire change on his part in thy favour. He was
not angry with me either. Now rejoice and let us go in.”

‘T was still doubtful, and went in rather diffidently. Having
taken my seat. Lama Marpa said, “When we come to think
well over matters, no one seemeth to deserve blame. Wishing
that Great Sorcerer might be absolved from his sins, I caused
him to build the edifices single-handed. Had it been for my
selfish purpose, why I could have got on much better by
coaxing and by gentle means than otherwise, hence I was not
to blame. As for Damema, she being a woman, and possessing
a more than usual share of maternal sympathy and pity, could
not bear to see me ill-treat poor Great Sorcerer, who seemed
so willing, obedient, and patient. So .who could blame her for
furnishing him with the forged letter, and the accompanying
tokens, although it was a rather serious thing to do? As for
thee, Ngogdun-Chudor, thou art not to blame, as thou hast
thyself said. I would, however, request thee to bring the
reliques back for the present occasion, but they shall be restored
to thee. As for thee, Great Sorcerer, thou art quite right in
trying to obtain Religious Truths by every possible means,
Not having heard of the dispatch of the forged letter to Ngog-
dun, who had, in accordance with it, conferred the Initiation
and the Sacred Truths upon Great Sorcerer, I was thus deprived
of the chance of filling Great Sorcerer with despair, as I, [bound
by duty], should have done. Therefore was I angered ; and,
although my anger recoiled on me like a wave of water, yet it
was not like vulgar worldly anger. Religious anger is a thing
apart ; and, in whatever form it may appear, it hath the same
object—to excite repentance and thereby to contribute to the
spiritual development of the person. Should there be any one
amongst you who are seated here, who, not understanding the
religious motive, feeleth shocked at these things, I exhort him
not to be shaken in his faith and belief. Had I had the chance
of plunging this spiritual son of mine nine times into utter


CHAP. VI] THE SH7SHYA’S TRIUMPH 131


despair, he would have been cleansed thoroughly of all his sins.
He would thus not have been required to be born again, but
would have disappeared totally, his physical body being forever
dissolved ; he would have attained Nirvana. That it will not
be so, and that he will still retain a small portion of his de-
merits, is due to Damema’s ill-timed pity and narrow under-
standing. However, he hath been subjected to eight deep
tribulations, which have cleansed him of the heavier sins; and
he hath suffered many minor chastenings, which will purify
him from minor sins. Now I am going to care for him and
give him those Teachings and Initiations which I hold as dear
as mine own heart. I myself will provide him with food while
he is in retreat, and with mine own hands will enclose him in
the place of meditation. Henceforth rejoice.”

‘I was not sure whether I was awake or dreaming. If dream-
ing, I wished the dream to continue, and that I should not
awake, such was mine inexpressible joy. I wept from very
delight, and made obeisance. It was upon this occasion that
Lama Ngogpa, and Mother Damema, along with the others
assembled there, did not know which to admire most in my
Guru—his sternness and inflexibility while chastening me, or
his mercy and kindness in undertaking the care of me, or his
wisdom and sagacity in all his deeds. They recognized him
to be a Buddha Himself, and were strongly confirmed in their
faith and belief. They regarded him with affection, and shed
tears, and again rose up and bowed down in gratitude for the
kindness shown to me. All were beaming with smiles and laugh-
ter,and in this happy mood all partook of the sacrificial cakes.

‘That very night, offerings were laid on the altar; and, in
the presence of the assembly, my hair was cropped, and I was
ordained a priest, my dress being changed [for the priestly
robe]. Marpa said that in the dream-vision which he had had,
his Guru Naropa had given me, at the very beginning, the
name Mila-Dorje-Gyaltsen (Mila, Diamond Banner). I was
required to observe the vow of a Ge-nyen (lay-brother) and
enjoined to follow the vows of those who aspire to be Teaching
Buddhas [or Bodhisattvas ].

1 See p. 119°.


132 THE INITIATION [PART II


‘When Marpa blessed the wine of the Inner Offering, every
one saw a rainbow-like halo emitted from the skull-cup? which
contained the wine. With the sacrificial wine, he worshipped
his Masters and Tutelary Deities, and then, partaking of it
himself, gave me the remainder, which I drank entirely. My
Guru said, “It is a good omen. Although the wine-offering
of mine Inner Worship is superior to the Rite of Complete
Initiation of any other sect, yet will I also give thee to-morrow
morning the Complete Initiation [of our Sect], which will tend
to ripen the seeds of the Mystic Truths that shall be sown in
thy heart.”

‘ Then he erected the Démchog Mandala of sixty-two Deities,”
and proceeded to explain it. He pointed to the dust-painted
ground plan of the M/andala and said that it was called the
symbolical and figurative diagram.’ Then, with his finger, he
pointed to the firmament above, and said, “ Look, those are
called the Mandala of the Actual Realities.”


1 A ceremonial cup made of a human skull, symbolizing the impermanence of
man’s life on Earth, and, also, renunciation of all sangsaric existence.

2 That is, he prepared the Magic Circle, or Mandala, for the reception of the
sixty-two principal deities invoked in the ritual of the god Démchog (Skt. Sham-
vara), ‘The Chief of Happiness’. Sce the late Lama Kazi Dawa-Samdup’s trans-
lation of the Déwichog Tantra, edited by Arthur Avalon, Tantrik Texts, vol. vii
(London, 1919).

3 This, as indicated, is a geometrical diagram outlined with dust or sand, com-
monly of different colours, either on a floor, if the initiation be in a temple or
house, or on the bare rock or earth, if the initiation be in a cave or in the open air.
Then the Deities are invoked, usually by intoning their secret mantra, a special
place within the diagram being assigned to each of them. Siddhas (or Yogis)
possessed of clairvoyant vision say that when the invocation is properly per-
formed, by a highly developed human Guru, the Deities appear, each in the place
assigned in the Mandala, and make the Mystic Initiation very real and effective
psychically, the neophyte at once becoming affected with divine vision and
ecstatic joy. Thence come the mystic regeneration and the true baptism in the
fire of the spirit, and the conferring of the new name, which invariably suggests
the chief spiritual qualities of the neophyte receiving it. Milarepa’s initiation
being of the most exalted character, he beholds various psychic centres, and
the Deities invoked, as though they were in the ethereal spaces directly over-
shadowing the mandala on the Earth.

The Kilarnava Tantra (see Tantrik Texts, vol. v, ch. xiv, ed. by A, Avalon)
refers to various kinds of Initiation (Diksha), The degree of competency of the
candidate determines the degree of the Initiation. Thus by the Vedha-Diksha,
the Guru transfers spiritual power to the Shishya directly. It is said that in this
way Rama-Krishna Paramahangsa initiated his chief disciple, Swami Vivekananda,


CHAP. VI] THE INITIATORY NAME 133


‘[And lo, there] I beheld, very distinctly, the Twenty-Four
Holy Places, the Thirty-Two Places of Pilgrimage, the Eight
Great Places of Cremation,! and Démchog;? with all the Deities
inhabiting these different Holy Places seated round about him.
The Deities, uniting their voice with the voice of my Guru, in one
grand chorus, conferred upon me the initiatory name of Pal-
Z hadpa-Dorje(Glorious Full-Blown Immutable One, i.e. Bearer
of the Mystic Symbol*): Skt. Shri-Vikasita (Hasita) Vajra.

‘My Guru next gave me free permission to go through the
[Mantrayanic] Zantras. He also gave me detailed explanations
of various works on meditation [or Yaga], and of their methods
and systems in full. Then, placing his hand upon the crown of
my head, he said, “ My son, I knew thee to be a worthy shishya
from the very first. The night before thine arrival here, I had
a dream which predicted that thou wouldst be one who would
serve the Cause of Buddhism very efficiently. My Damema
had a similar dream, which corroborated mine. Above all,
both our dreams, showing the temple to be guarded by
a female, predicted that the Guardian Deity of thy Teaching
would be a Dakini. Thus thou art a shkishya whom my Guru
and my Guardian Goddess have given me as a boon. Such
being the case, I really had gone to meet thee, on the pretence
of ploughing my field. Thy drinking up all the chhang which
I there gave thee, and thy ploughing up the field entirely,
predicted that thou wouldst be a worthy shishya, who would
imbibe the whole of the Spiritual Truths which I had to impart
to thee. Furthermore, thine offer of the four-handled copper
vessel predicted my having four famous disciples. The vessel’s


' See p. 36” concerning these various places of special sanctity.

2 Text: Dpal-hkhor-lo-sdom-pa (pron. Pal-Khor-lo-Dom-pa), another name of
Démchog (Bde-mch’og), ‘The Chief of Happiness’, one of the Tutelary Deities
of the Kargyiitpa Sect: Skt. Shamvara.

3 This rendering of the Initiatory Name follows that by M. Bacot, in his
Version (p. 137).

4 The Initiation being a Complete Initiation into the Démchog Mandala, the
underlying esoteric interpretation of the very profound Démchog Tantra, and ot
similar Tantas of the Mantrayanic School, is given to Milarepa; and, also, the
Secret Mantras, or Words of Power (see p.37?). In addition, there are expounded
to him various complementary treatises of an occult character concerning yogtc
systems of meditation.


134 THE INITIATION [PART II


being quite devoid of any dirt predicted thine entire freedom
from worldly passions, and that thy body would gain complete
control over the Vital Warmth. The offering of thy vessel
empty, predicted that when thou meditatest hereafter thou
wilt suffer from want. But so that thou mightest enjoy plenty
in thine old age, and that thy followers and disciples might be
filled with the Elixir of Spiritual Truths, I filled thy vessel
with melted butter for altar-lamps. With a view to making
thy name famous, I rang the handle rings as loudly as possible.
And it was with a view to cleansing thee from thy sins that
I had thee to work so hard upon the four houses. The houses
themselves symbolize the nature of the four types of action,
each house representing one of the four, namely, the peaceful,
the powerful, the fascinating, and the stern, respectively.” I
purposely wanted to fill thy heart with bitter repentance and
sorrow, verging on despair, by turning thee out ignominiously.
And thou, for having borne all those “trials with patience and
meekness, without the least change in thy faith in me, shalt


1 This is a peculiar bodily warmth acquired by yogic control of the breathing
process and the vital forces of the body, whereby the yogi? becomes immune to
coldness. In the high snowy altitudes of Tibet, where Milarepa passed his life,
fuel of all sorts, for producing fire, is rare and costly ; and the Vital Warmth is
a very necessary acquirement for yogis in hermitage there, and all practising
hermits of the Kargyiitpa Sect are enjoined by their Gur to become proficient
in acquiring it. Deep breathing, as known to Europeans, forms part of the
practice. The Editor possesses an English version of the process, which he
worked out in collaboration with the late Lama Kazi Dawa-Samdup, and which
he anticipates publishing, along with other translations of Tibetan texts on Yoga.
(See p. 1447, following.)

Sj. Atal Bihari Ghosh has added here the following: ‘ Before the shishya can
practise yoga in its highest form, in Raja- Yoga, he must perfect his material body
by means of Hatha- Yoga, so that it becomes “ beyond contraries’’ (Skt. Dvan-
dvatita)—heat and cold, dampness and dryness, and all similar physical opposites.
To this end are necessary the various yogic processes prescribed for purifying
the body (Skt. Dhauti-Shodhana), the various bodily postures (Skt. Asana and
Mudra) and control of the breathing (Skt. Pranayama). The Gheranda-Sanghita
and the Hathayoga-Pradipika describe Hatha-Yoga as the staircase leading to
Raja- Yoga; and through Rdja- Yoga, the yogi becomes Dvandvatita in a higher
sense—praise and blame, pleasure and pain, and all similar mental or intellectual
and psychic opposites becoming undifferentiated to him Under Hatha-Yoga is
classified Mantra- Yoga, which, too, is preparatory to Raja- Yoga.’

* The geometrical forms of the four structures are also symbolical, thus: the
Circle symbolizes the Element Water; the Crescent, the Element Air; the
Triangle, the Element Fire; and the Square, the Element Earth.


CHAP. VI] THE FRUIT OF VICTORY 135


have, as the result, disciples full of faith, energy, intelligence,
and kind compassion, endowed from the first with the qualifica-
tions essential to worthy skzskyas. They shall be devoid of
carnal and worldly longings, patient, hardy, and painstaking in
the time of their meditation. Lastly, they shall be blessed with
Realization of Wisdom, and be filled with grace and truth, so
that every one of them shall be a perfect Lama, and this
Hierarchy of the Kargyiitpa Sect be rendered as eminent and
conspicuous as the waxing moon. Therefore rejoice.”

‘Thus it was that my Guru encouraged, praised,.and glad-
dened me, and that my happy days began.


‘This is the Third [Meritorious] Act—the Act of mine
obtaining the anxiously sought Initiation and Truth.’


136 [PART II


CHAPTER VII
THE PERSONAL GUIDANCE BY THE GURU


Telling of the Fruits of Jetsiin’s Meditation and Study, of
Marpa’s Last Journey to India; of Jetsiin’s Prophetic Dream
and its Interpretation by Marpa ,; and of Marpa’s special charge
to each of his Four Chief Disceples.


RECHUNG then asked, ‘ Master, didst thou set off at once to
the wild solitudes after receiving the Truths, or didst thou con-
tinue to live with thy Guru?’

And Jetsiin made reply, ‘My Guru commanded that I should
continue there, saying that he would supply me with food and
other necessities, which he did most liberally; and I retired to
meditate in a rock-cave called Lhobrak-Tak-nya, with an
ample supply of provisions. There I used to sit in a rigid pos-
ture, with a lighted lamp on my head; without moving till the
light went out, were it night or day. Eleven months went by.
Then my Guru and his lady came to see me, bringing food
for the purpose of holding a religious feast. The Gurz said,
“My son, it is very creditable that thou shouldst be able to
meditate for eleven months, without the [meditation] cushion
losing warmth. Now thou mayst pull down the wall [enclosing
thee], and come to thine old father for a little rest, as well as
to recount to me what thou hast experienced.”

‘I did not much care about relaxing my meditation, but,
seeing that my Guru had thus commanded, I was bound to go.
I proceeded to demolish the wall, though it seemed to be
a pity to have to do so, and was delaying a little. Thereupon,
the Guru's lady came up, and asked me, “Son, art thou
coming?” “TI feel reluctant to pull down the wall,” I answered.
She replied, “Oh, never mind that. Thou knowest that the
Profound Mystic Omens are very important. Besides, the
Lama’s temper is quite short ; and should there occur any bad
omens through this delay, it will never do. So I will help thee
to pull down the wall and to come out quickly.” With that
she pulled it down; and I went out feeling altogether lost.


1 The wall by which Milarepa was enclosed in his place of meditation was


CHAP. VII] HYMN TO THE GURU 137


‘My Guru said, “ While we two, father and son, shall be
occupied in some rituals connected with this Meditation, do
thou, Damema, prepare food.” Then, while we were eating the
meal, he asked, “‘ My son, what beliefs or convictions hast thou
arrived at regarding these Truths; what experiences, what
insight, and what understanding hast thou obtained?” And he
added, “ Take thy time and recount them to me.”

‘Upon this, with deep and sincere humility, I knelt, and
joining the palms of my hands, with tears in mine eyes, extem-
poraneously sang to my Guru a hymn of praise, offering him
the sevenfold worship—as a prelude to submitting the narrative
of mine experiences and convictions:

I
‘« To the impure eyes of them Thou seekest to liberate,

Thou manifestest Thyself in a variety of shapes ;

But to those of Thy followers who have been purified,

Thou, Lord, appearest as a Perfected Being; obeisance to


Thee.
2,
‘“ With Thy Brahma-like voice, endowed with the sixty vocal
perfections,


Thou preachest the Holy Truths to each in his own speech,

Complete in their eighty-four thousand subjects ;

Obeisance to Thy Word, audible yet inseparable from the
Voidness.


3
‘“In the Heavenly Radiance of Dharma-K aya Mind,
There existeth not shadow of thing or concept,
Yet It prevadeth all objects of knowledge ;
Obeisance to the Immutable, Eternal Mind.


4
‘“ Tn the Holy Palace of the Pure and Spiritual Realms,
Thou Person illusory, yet changeless and selfless,
Thou Mother Divine of Buddhas, past, present, and future,
O Great Mother Damema, to Thy Feet I bow down.


a loose structure made of rough stones held together with mud, and therefore
not difficult to pull down.
1 See p. 365.


138 GUIDANCE BY THE GURU [PART II


5
‘“'O Guru), to Thy children spiritual,
To Thy disciples who Thy word obey,
To each, with all his followers,
Obeisance humble and sincere I make.


6
‘““Whate’er there be, in all the systems of the many worlds,
To serve as offerings for the rites divine,
I offer unto Thee, along with mine own fleshly form ;
Of all my sins, may I be freed and purified.


7
‘“In merits earned by others, I rejoice ;
So set the Wheel of Truth in motion full, I pray ;
Until the Whirling Pool of Being emptied be,
Do not, O Noble Guru, from the world depart.


‘“T dedicate all merit from this Hymn,
Unto the Cause of Universal Good.”


‘Having, as a prelude, sung this hymn of seven stanzas,
I then continued: ‘“ Inseparable from Dorje-Chang! Himself
art thou, my Guru, with thy consort, and thine offspring. In
virtue of thy fair and meritorious deeds, and of the power of
the waves of grace proceeding from thy boundless generosity,
and of thy kindness beyond repayment, I, thy vassal, have
imbibed a little knowledge, in the sphere of understanding,
which I now beg to lay before thee. Out of the unchanging
State of Quiescence of Eternal Truth, be pleased to listen unto
me for a little while.

‘*] have understood this body of mine to be the product of
Ignorance, as set forth in the Twelve Vzdanas,? composed of

' Or, Skt. Vajra-Dhara; see pp. ro, 39°.

2? These are the twelve interconnected causes, as taught by Buddhism, which
keep the Wheel of Birth and Death revolving. First there are the Past Causes:
(1) Avidya (Ignorance), due to non-realization that sangsdric existence—in
worlds, hells, and even in heavens—is illusory and undesirable, that the One
Reality is beyond all conditioned states of being, beyond the realm of things,
of sensation, beyond Nature; that it is the Unbecome, Unborn, Unmade, Un-


formed—Mirvara ; (2) Sangskdva (Mental Activity), arising from the Ignorance.
Then come their Present Effects: (3) Vij#ana (Mundane Consciousness) within


THE SUPREME GURU
THE ADI-BUDDHA VAJRA-DHARA


Described on pages xxvii-xxviii, 8-10


edicts


; ; heen atin & we. WW J me :

5 2 ae eS Pe tk, ray y | aptstgen| iy rae tenes
. / + Hie A beet 6 wi Tend aA: ae ied 4 hat Party Tht Saal:
= 4 ub Anal ret A ABA nf AN arate Mah fou re


F 7 hace iy tat ? as ae a Se. aeatiay ae ies
| ay gles


ee bee iz. Haus jae DF oti ey
4 wtp “ih iPenaer ada . « Milinat


CHAP. VII] KNOWLEDGE ON THE PATH 139


flesh and blood, lit up by the perceptive power of conscious-
ness. To those fortunate ones who long for Emancipation, it
may be the great vessel by means of which they may procure
Freedom and Endowments ; but to those unfortunate ones,
who only sin, it may be the guide to the lower and miserable
states of existence. This, our life, is the boundary-mark whence
one may take an upward or downward path. Our present
time is a most precious time, wherein each of us must decide,
in one way or the other, for lasting good or lasting ill. I have
understood this to be the chief end of our present term of life.
Here, again, by holding on to Thee, O powerful Lord and
Saviour of sentient beings like myself, I hope to cross over
this Ocean of Worldly Existence, the source of all pains and


the Sangsara; (4) Nama-Rupa (Name and Form) concomitant with sangsdric
existence ; (5) Shada@yatana (Sixfold Organ) of the sangsa@ric body, leading to
(6) Sparsha (Contact) and (7) Vedanad (Sensation), These are linked with
Present Causes: (8) 7yishva@ (Desire) for sangsdric sensation; (9) Updaddana
(clinging) to sangsaric sensation; and (10) Bhdva (Sangsaric existence itself).
Finally, there result the Future Effects of these ten nidanas: (11) Jatt (Birth) ;
and (12) Jara-marana (Old Age and Death). This is one aspect of the Twelve
Nidanas, or Twelve Links of the Chain of Causal Nexus. (Cf. The Earl of
Ronaldshay, Lands of the Thunderbolt, London, 1923, pp. 53-6.) Another
aspect, derived from the pictorial Wheel of Life, as found in Tibetan monastic
art, may be outlined as follows: (1) Avidya@ (Unconscious Will), as in the state
of passing from death to rebirth; (2) Sangskara (Conformations), as in the womb-
State, preceding birth; (3) Viy#ana (Consciousness), at birth; (4) Nama-Ripa
(Self-Consciousness), as personality develops and makes distinction between
self and others, by name (ama) and form (Rapa); (5) Shaddyatana (Sense-
Surfaces and Understanding) in the outside world, as developed in the growing
child ; (6) Sparsha (Contact), the exercise by the youth of the sense organs ;
(7) Vedana (Feeling), the resultant mental and physical sensations experienced ;
(8) Trishza (Desire), developed as a result of the sensations thus experienced ;
(9) Upadana (Indulgence) of the desire, leading to clinging and greed and desire
of an heir to inherit worldly possessions ; (10) Bhdva (Fuller Life), in mature
and married life, with means of obtaining an heir; (11) /Jaés (Birth) of heir;
(12) Jara-marana (Decay and Death) as the Cycle of Life completes itself.
Thence the Wheel turns until out of death there come another rebirth, through
Avidya, the first of the Nidanas. (Cf. L. A. Waddell, The Buddhism of Tibet,
London, 1895, p. 110.)

These two aspects are complementary to one another, and both are here given
in order to help the student to grasp the inner. significance of one of the most
essential doctrines of all Schools of Buddhism. It is by treading the Noble
Eightfold Path (as described on p. 140%, following) that the Chain of Enslave-
ment to the Sangsara, to Nature, is broken, and the Slave set free in Mirvantc
Bliss, all karmic necessity for further birth and death forever ended. And it is
this Supreme Goal which Milarepa is believed to have won.


140 GUIDANCE BY THE GURU [PART II


griefs, so difficult to escape from. But to be able to do so, it is
first of all necessary for me to take refuge in the Precious
Trinity,! and to observe and adopt in a sincere spirit the rules
prescribed. In this, too, I see the Gur to be the main source
and embodiment of all good and happiness that can accrue
to me.

‘“« Therefore do I realize the supreme necessity of obeying
the Guru's commands and behests, and keeping my faith in
him unsullied and staunch. After such realization, then deep
meditation on the difficulty of obtaining the precious boon of
a free and well-endowed human birth, on the uncertainty of
the exact moment of death, on the certain effect of one’s
actions, and on the miseries of sangsaric being, cannot fail to
compel one to desire freedom and emancipation from all sazg-
saric existence; and to obtain this, one must cleave to the
staff of the Noble Eightfold Path? by which only may a sen-
tient being obtain that emancipation. Then, from the level of
this Path, one must pass on, by degrees, to the Higher Paths,
all the while observing one’s vows as carefully as if they were
one’s own eyes, rebuilding or mending them should they be-
come in the least impaired. I have understood that one who
aimeth at his individual peace and happiness adopteth the
Lower Path (the Hivayaéna). But he, who from the very start,
devoteth the merit of his love and compassion to the cause of
others, I understand belongeth to the Higher Path (the J/aha-
yana). To leave the Lower Path and to enter upon the Higher
Path, it is necessary to gain a clear view of the goal of one’s
aspirations, as set forth by the unexcelled Immutable Path (the
Vajra- Yana).

‘“ Again, to gain a clear view of the Final Goal, it is
essential to have a perfectly well-accomplished Gurx, who
knoweth every branch of the four kinds of initiatory rites with-
out the slightest misunderstanding or doubt regarding them ;

) Namely, the Buddha, the Dharma (or Doctrine), the Sergha (or Priesthood),

* This is the Bodh Path, as taught by the Enlightened One. It may be
verbally described as (1) Right Belief, or Right Seeing; (2) Right Aims, or
Right Aspiring; (g) Right Speech; (4) Right Actions; (5) Right Means of


Livelihood, or Right Living ; (6) Right Endeavouring; (7) Right Mindtulness,
or Right Remembering; and (8) Right Meditation.


CHAP. VI] KNOWLEDGE ON THE PATH 141


he alone can make the Final Goal thoroughly explicit to a
shishya. The ceremony of initiation conferreth the power of
mastering abstruse and deep thoughts regarding the Final
Goal. In meditating on the Final Goal, step by step, one hath
to put forth all one’s energies, both of grammatical and logical
acumen; as well as, through moral and mental reasoning and
internal search, to discover the non-existence of the personal
Ego and, therefore, the fallacy of the popular idea that it
existeth.’ In realizing the non-existence of the personal Ego,
the mind must be kept in quiescence. On being enabled, by
various methods, to put the mind in that state asa result of
a variety of causes, all (thoughts, ideas, and cognitions] cease,
and the mind passeth from consciousness [of objects] into a
state of perfect tranquillity, so that days, months, and years
may pass without the person himself perceiving it; thus the
passing of time hath to be marked for him by others. This
state is called Shz-zay (Tranquil Rest). By not submitting
oneself to the state of total oblivion and unconsciousness [of
objects], but by exerting one’s intellect or faculty of conscious-
ness in this state, one gaineth the clear ecstatic state of
quiescent consciousness.

*« Although there be this state, which may be called a state
of superconsciousness (Lhag-tong), nevertheless, individuals, or
ego-entities, so long as they are such, are incapable of ex-
periencing it. I believe that it is only experienced when one
hath gained the first [superhuman] state [on the Path to Bud-
dhahood]. Thus, by thought-process and visualization, one
treadeth the Path. The visions of the forms of the Deities
upon which one meditateth are merely the signs attending
perseverance in meditation. They have no intrinsic worth or
value in themselves.”


1 ¢« Five things there are,” said a sage in India, ‘‘ namely, Being, Light, Bliss,
Name, and Form. ‘The first three are of the Supreme, the other two are of the
[material] world,” ’—Sj. Atal Bihari Ghosh.

2 The objective forms of deities—like the illusory visualizations produced by
practices of meditation upon them and frequently outwardly projected as
hallucinatory images—are, in the last analysis of the Enlightened Mind, non-
existent, being no more real than the objective forms of human beings or of
any other objects of Nature. In the Bardo Thédol (see the Sixth Day) it is
said, ‘The deities . . . exist from eternity within the faculties of thine own


142 GUIDANCE BY THE GURU | PART II


‘«To sum up, a vivid state of mental quiescence, accom-
panied by energy, and a keen power of analysis, by a clear
and inquisitive intellect, are indispensable requirements ; like
the lowest rungs of a ladder, they are absolutely necessary to
enable one to ascend. But in the process of meditating on
this state of mental quiescence (Sz-nay), by mental con-
centration, either on forms and shapes, or on shapeless and
formless things, the very first effort must be made in a com-
passionate mood, with the aim of dedicating the merit of one’s
efforts to the Universal Good. Secondly, the goal of one’s
aspirations must be well defined and clear, soaring into the
regions transcending thought. Finally, there is need of mentally
praying and wishing for blessings on others so earnestly that
one’s mind-processes also transcend thought. These, I under-
stand, to be the highest of all Paths.

‘“Then, again, as the mere name of food doth not satisfy
the appetite of a hungry person, but he must eat food, so, also,
a man who would learn about the Voidness? [of Thought] must
meditate so as to realize it, and not merely learn its definition.
Moreover, to obtain the knowledge of the state of supercon-
sciousness (Lhag-tong), one must practise and accustom one-
self to the mechanical attainment of the recurrence of the
above practices without intermission. In short, habituation to


intellect.’ That is, they so exist only when man is regarded as the microcosm of
the macrocosm, Likewise, the Démchag Tantra, into which Milarepa has been
initiated, says that the ‘ Devatas are but symbols representing the various things
which occur on the Path, such as the helpful impulses and the stages attained
by their means’; and that ‘should doubts arise as to the divinity of these
Devatas, one’should say ‘‘the Dé@&tni is only the recollection of the body’’, and
remember that the Deities constitute the Path’. (Cf. A. Avalon, Tantvik Texts,
London, 1919, vol. vii. 41.)

1 Text: Tong-pa-nyid: Skt. Shinyata, here meaning Voidness [of Thought],
with reference to a transcendental or Nirvanic state of unmodified or primordial
consciousness. As in Patanjali’s definition of Yoga (in his Yoga Aphorisms i, 2),
as ‘the suppression of the transformations of the thinking principle’ or, as
otherwise translated, as ‘the restraint of mental modifications’, this Voidness
{of Thought] is not the voidness of nothingness, but a state of supramundane
mind only capable of being known—as Milarepa explains—by the Perfected
Yogt who has realized it. It is the indescribable state wherein the limited
personal consciousness becomes merged, but not lost, in the unlimited cosmic
All-Consciousness—like a raindrop merged in an infinite ocean, or like the
light of a lamp merged in the light of the sun.


CHAP. VII] KNOWLEDGE ON THE PATH 143


the contemplation of Voidness, of Equilibrium, of the Inde-
scribable, and of the Incognizable, forms the four different
stages of the Four Degrees of Initiation—graduated steps in
the ultimate goal of the mystic Vajra- Yana [or Immutable
Path]. To understand these thoroughly, one must sacrifice
bodily ease and all luxuriousness, and, with this in mind, face
and surmount every obstacle, being ever willing to sacrifice
life itself, and prepared for every possible contingency.

‘“ As for myself, I have not the means to recompense thee,
my Guru and the Reverend Mother,—my benefactors; your
loving kindness is beyond my power to repay by any offer of
worldly wealth or riches. So I will repay you by a lifelong
devotion to meditation, and I will complete my final study of
your Teachings in the °Og-min Heaven.!


‘“To my Guru, the Great Dorje-Chang,
To Damema, the Mother of all Buddhas,
And to all Princes Royal, the 4vataras,
I make as offering, to Their ears, this essence of my learning
gleaned.


““Tf there be heresy or error in my speech,
I pray that They will kindly pardon it,
And set me then upon the Righteous Path.


‘“ Lord, from the sun-orb of Thy Grace,
The radiant Rays of Light have shone,
And opened wide the petals of the Lotus of my Heart,
So that it breatheth forth the fragrance born of Knowledge,
For which I am for ever bounden unto Thee;
So will I worship Thee by constant meditation.


‘“ Vouchsafe to bless me in mine efforts,
That good may come to every sentient being.
Lastly, I ask forgiveness, too, for any lavishness of words.”


‘My Guru was delighted, and said, “ My son, I had ex-


1 This, the Heaven of the Adi-Buddha, is the last outpost of the Sangsara (i. e.
the Universe of Nature). Within the ?Og-min Heaven, as the text suggests, it is
possible, as it is on Earth, to realize Nirvava, and thus escape the Sangsara
whoily, and for ever. (See p. 44!, above.)


144 GUIDANCE BY THE GURU [PART II


pected much from thee; my expectations have been fulfilled.”
Next the lady said, “ I knew that my son had the will and in-
tellect to succeed.” Both were highly gratified, and we con-
versed on religious topics for a long time. Then my Guru and
his lady took leave of me, and I resumed my meditations in
the close retreat.

‘About this time, my Guru, being on a pastoral tour in the
North Uru villages, was performing a religious ceremony in
one Marpa Golay’s house when he had a vision. In it the
Dékinis appeared, and reminded him of some enigmatical
hints of his Guru Naropa, which, when given, he had not
understood; and these the Daézmis interpreted and explained
to him. The outcome of this led him to go to India to see
Naropa.

‘Then, one night, some days after my Guru had returned
to Wheat Valley, I dreamt that a woman of somewhat dark
blue colour, dressed in silks and beautifully adorned with the
six bone ornaments, having eyebrows and eyelashes of a golden
hue, appeared to me, and said, “Son, by long continued ap-
plication to meditation thou hast obtained the Truths of the
Great Symbol,! which will enable thee to attain Mirvana.
Thou hast also obtained the Six Doctrines.? But thou lackest


1 Tib. Phyag-rgya-ch'en-po (pron. Chag-gya-ch’en-po): Skt. Maha-Mudra:
‘Great Symbol’. This is one of the chief systems of yogic meditation of the
Kargyiitpa School. Judging from an English translation of a text of this Yoga,
which the Editor and the late Lama Kazi Dawa-Samdup worked out together,
in Gangtok, Sikkim, it is a system developed under Tibetan influences, but
essentially Indian by origin.

To an Indian yogt, Mahd-Mudra denotes a yogic posture, but here, in this
Tibetan sense, a state attained by yoga practices, whereby, as the text of
The Great Symbol explains, ‘one obtaineth the highest boon of The Great
Symbol, .. . Nirvana’.

® Tib. Chos-drug (pron. Cho-dug): ‘ Six Doctrines (or Truths’). This, like the
Great Symbol, is a treatise expounding the practical application of various Yogas,
more or less of Indian origin. An old block-print copy of the Tibetan text of the
Six Doctrines, with English translation by the late Lama Kazi Dawa-Samdup
and the Editor, gives the Six Doctrines as follows: (1) Gtum-s0 (pron. Tum-
mo): ‘Vital Warmth (or Psychic Heat)’, the acquisition of which is necessary
for the sake of physical comfort in Tibet and, also, as a driving force for the
devotee seeking spiritual development; (2) Sgyu-liis (pron. Gyu-li): ‘Illusory
Body’, a teaching whereby the yogi? realizes that his own body and all objects
of Nature, being sangsaric, are illusory ; (3) Ruti-lant (pron, Mi-lam): ‘Dreams’,


CHAP. VII] THE DRONG-¥UG TEACHING 145


the precious teaching of the Drong-jug} by which thou mayst
attain Buddhahood in an instant; and this thou must
procure.”

‘I thought over the dream, and concluded that the woman
was a Dakini, since she had all the appearance of one. Never-
theless, I was doubtful whether the vision was an intimation
from the Dékznis of some coming event or a temptation from
Mara.?, Anyway, I was firmly convinced that my Guru, the
Embodiment of the Buddhas, past, present, and future, would
certainly be able to tell me, since there could be nothing which
he did not know. Especially as regarded knowledge, I knew
that his understanding embraced its whole extent, from the
Sacred Truths above-mentioned [whereby WVirvaua is obtained ]
to the science of patching broken earthenware. And if he took
it to be a premonitory revelation, I should have to obtain the
Drong-jug. So I pulled down the partition, plastered together
with mud, and went to my Guru. He seemed shocked, and
said, “Why hast thou come, instead of remaining in close
retreat? Thou runnest the risk of incurring some mishap.”
I informed him of my dream and said I wanted to be assured
whether it was a revelation or a temptation; if the former,
I begged that he should bestow on me the revealed science
for which I had come. He sat in silence for some time,
and then said, “ Yes, that was a revelation from the Dékinis.
When I was about to return from India, my Guru, the great


a teaching whereby the yog7 realizes that even as dreams are illusory so are all
sangsaric experiences, in the waking state and in the sleeping state equally ;
(4) Hod-gsal (pron. Od-sal): ‘Clear Light’, defined, in the text, as follows: ‘It
hath been said that the unmodified, phenomena-transcending mind (or mind in
the yogtc state of non-thought)—which is the Thatness of all things and
inseparable from the Voidness, the Ultimate—while experiencing the thought-
transcending Great Bliss (of Ecstatic Illumination] is the Clear Light’ ; (5) Bar-do:
‘Intermediate State’ [between death and rebirth], which teaches the yogi how
to traverse death and rebirth without break of consciousness ; and (6) Hpho-va
(pron. Pho-wa): ‘Transference’, the science of voluntarily transferring, from
body to body or from place to place, the principle of consciousness. Cf. pp. 154-6.

1 This, too, is a yogic treatise, but the Editor has not made a study of it.

2 Mara is here the Evil One, the Devil-Tempter of Buddhism. As the Devil
tempted the Christ (‘The Anointed One’) in the Wilderness, so Mara tempted
the Buddha (‘ The Enlightened One’) under the Bo-Tree at Budh-Gaya, when
He was attaining Enlightenment.


146 GUIDANCE BY THE GURU [PART II


Pandit Naropa, spoke about this same Drong-jug, but I do not
recollect having obtained it. I will look over all mine Indian
manuscripts and search for it.”

‘Thereupon, both of us spent a whole day and night in
ransacking the whole collection of manuscripts, searching for
the Drong-jug. But although we found several treatises on
Pho-wa} not a single letter regarding Drong-jug was to be
found. So my Guru said, “ Ah, the dream which I had in North
Uru is likewise a sign directing me to go and obtain this same
work [on Drong-jug]. Besides, I know not how many other
works there may be to procure. Therefore I shall go to India
to obtain them.”

‘In spite of entreaties and expostulations, urging his age as
obstacles to this toilsome journey, my Guru was resolved on
undertaking it. His disciples contributed liberally towards his
travelling expenses; and, the offerings being converted into
a cupful of gold, with this he set out for India, where he arrived
just about the time of Naropa’s disappearance. He had made


1 A manuscript text of this, fuller than that contained in the Stx Doctrines,
with English reridering by the Editor and the late Lama Kazi Dawa-Samdup,
shows it to be another treatise on Yoga—the Yoga of transferring the principle
of consciousness from one’s own body to another’s (as in spirit obsession), or,
in one’s own subtle body, to any place on Earth, or to any world, heaven, or hell
of the Universe. The Drong-jug appears from the present passage to be
a yogic treatise of like nature, except that the transference is not limited, as in
the Pho-wa, to the Universe (or Sangsara), but comprises in its scope Mirvana
(which is the Unbecome, Unformed, Unmade, beyond the Sangsdra), whereby
the mundane consciousness is transmuted into the supra~-mundane consciousness—
Nirvana not being a place, but a state of Perfect Enlightenment. In this sense,
then, the Pho-wa treats of the yogic transference of the mundane consciousness,
and the Drong-jug treats of the yogic transmutation of the mundane (or sangsanic)
consciousness of objects (of Nature) into the supra-mundane consciousness,
wherein all component things are realized to be illusion (or Maya). Hence the
importance which Marpa attaches to the Drong-jug and his insistence that
Milarepa should obtain a copy of the text and master it.

2 According to some traditions, current among Tibetan Lamas, Naropa, being
a Perfected Yogi, did not die, but merely entered into the subtle form by direct
transmutation of the grosser physical body. The Biblical translation of the old
Jewish Prophet Elijah, as it is said in symbol, ‘in a chariot of fire’, to Paradise,
and the theory that Jesus rose from the dead in the spiritual body, leaving no
corpse in the Tomb, illustrate the same belief, which has been current among
many peoples in all historical ages. Milarepa, too, passes in a similar mystical
way, as will be seen in chap. xii. Other traditions say that Naropa is still alive


CHAP. VII] MARPA MEETS NAROPA 147


up his mind to sacrifice life itself in attempting to obtain an
interview with his Guru ; and various hopeful signs and omens
he interpreted as predicting his final success and the fulfil-
ment of his wish.

‘Seeking his Guru with fervent prayers, he at last met him
in a jungle; and, taking him to the monastery of Phulahari,
asked of him the science of Drong-jug. Thereupon Saint
Naropa asked Marpa, “ Didst thou recollect this thyself, or
didst thou receive a revelation?” Marpa replied, “I did not
recollect it myself, nor was a revelation vouchsafed to me per-
sonally. I have a disciple named Thdpaga to whom the
revelation was granted, and it was on that account that I came.”
“Excellent,” said Naropa, “there are in the benighted land of
Tibet some bright spirits, like the sun illuminating the moun-
tain peaks.”


in India, being one of the Great Siddhas, that is to say, a human being made
perfect on Earth, who, as such, having control over all processes of Nature, can
live or die at will, and reincarnate at will in a new body by submitting to the
process of womb-birth. The same claim of yogic power to reincarnate is made
for the Dalai Lama, the God King of Tibet and Pope of Northern Buddhism,
and for his colleague in spiritual authority, the Tashi Lama, the former being
the incarnation of the National Divine Protector of Tibet, the All-Compassionate
One, Avalokiteshvara, and the latter of Amitaébha, the Buddha of Boundless
Light.

A remarkable example of conscious reincarnation, which the Editor takes
to be worthy of at least provisional credence, is actually exhibited by the
Burmese boy Maung Tun Kyaing, a picture of whom is in the Editor’s posses-
sion. According to trustworthy report, Maung Tun Kyaing is able, without
having been educated in this lifetime, to deliver learned discourses on the most
abstruse metaphysics of Buddhism and to read and correct errors in classical
Burmese and Pali, and to remember his incarnation immediately prior to his
present incarnation, wherein he was the head of the Yunkyaung Monastery,
near Pantanaw, Burma, and named U. Pandissa. Recently he is said to have
been preaching to immense audiences throughout Burma.

Sj. Atal Bihari Ghosh tells me that Trailanga Swami, who passed away within
recent times, is known to have been in Benares long before the advent of the
British in India. Learned pandits regularly sought the aid of the Swami in their
numerous scholarly and religious problems, but none of them had lived long
enough to remember when he first appeared in the Holy City. Govinda-Bhaga-
vat-Padacharya, the Guru of Shangkaracharya, the great monistic expounder of
the Vedanta, is believed to be yet alive. This Guru’s fame rests not only on his
profound understanding of the Vedantic philosophy, but on his knowledge ot
chemistry as well; and some of his very remarkable works on chemistry are just
being brought to light.


148 GUIDANCE BY THE GURU [PART II


‘It is said that Naropa, then holding out his hands in prayer,
chanted as follows:


‘In the gloomy regions of the North,
Like the sun illuminating the mountain peaks,
Dwelleth he who is called Thopaga ;
Obeisance to that Great Being.”


‘Then Naropa closed his eyes reverently, and nodded his
head thrice towards Tibet ; and all the Indian mountain-tops
and the trees also nodded thrice towards Tibet. It is said
that even until to-day the hill-tops and the tops of trees round
about Phulahari incline towards Tibet.!

‘ Having transmitted the whole of the Ear-Whispered Tantra
of the Dakinis,” Saint Naropa interpreted certain omens as
predicting future events. The manner of Marpa’s obeisance,,
for example, foretold the failure of Marpa’s own offspring, but
predicted the perpetual continuance of the Hierarchy through
me; and after Marpa returned to Tibet he lost his son, Darma-
Doday, just as had been predicted at the premonitory ceremony
of his obeisance.

‘On the anniversary of his son’s death, after the completion
of the ceremony [in commemoration of it], as Marpa sat amidst
the assembly of all his disciples they addressed him in a body,
representing to him his advanced age and the unfortunate loss
of his saintly son, who was the very embodiment of the Buddhas
of the past, present, and future, and who, had he lived, would
have been a worthy successor. They said, “Now we must
first of all consider the best method of rendering our Karg-
yutpa Hierarchy as enduring and eminent as possible. We
also pray that thou wilt be pleased to leave special directions
to each of us, thy skzshyas, as to what particular branches of
doctrine each should adopt, and what particular lines of prac-


' This is obviously a folk-legend to account for natural phenomena in the
Phulahari country—the dip of mountains, and the inclination of trees caused by
the direction of the prevailing winds.

* Text : Mkah-‘gro-nyen-rgyud (pron. Kah-’gro-Nyen-Gytid): Skt. Dakini Karna
Tantra, meaning Ear-Whispered (i. e. Esoteric) Tantra of (or tuspired by) the
Dakinis. Judging from the source and manner of the transmission to Marpa, it


seems to be one of the most esoteric of the orally-transmitted teachings preserved
by the Kargyiitpa Initiates.


CHAP. VII] MILAREPA’S PROPHETIC DREAM 149


tice each should pursue.”! The Guru said, “I, the spiritual
disciple of the Great Pandit Naropa, rely upon occult directions
by omens and dreams. The Kargyiitpa Hierarchy hath the
blessings of the Saintly, Naropa. Do ye, my chief shiskyas, go
and await your dreams and report them to me.”

‘Accordingly, the chief disciples concentrated their minds
upon their dreams and reported the results. All or nearly all
were more or less good, but none of them were revelations
regarding the future of the Hierarchy. I, however, had a dream
of four great pillars, which I reported to the Guru in the fol-
lowing verses :


‘“ Obedient unto Dorje-Chang’s command,
The dream of yesternight I now narrate,
Exactly in the manner it was dreamt ;
Be pleased [O Guru] to vouchsafe Thine ear awhile.


‘““Tn the ample regions of the World’s North,
I dreamt there stood a mountain grand,
Its summit touching the very skies.
Around this summit moved the sun and moon,
Their rays illumining the heavens above.
The base of the mountain covered the Earth;
From its four sides flowed four perennial streams,
Quenching the thirst of every sentient being.
Their waters fell into an ocean deep,
And on their shores bloomed varied flowers.
Such was the general purport of my dream,
Which to my Guru, the Eternal Buddha,’ I narrate.


‘“ Eastward of that glorious mountain,
Of a pillar high I chiefly dreamt.
Upon the pillar’s top a lion ramped ;
The mane of the lion was luxuriant,
His four outstretched paws clawed the mountain-side,
His eyes upturned were looking heavenward.


1 It is the duty of the Guru to set each of his shrsiyas upon that path of spiri-
tual development which is best suited to the shishya, one on one path, one on
another, according to the Guru’s insight into the innate tendency of each. (Cf.
PP. 154-5: )

2 Or ‘Buddha of the Dhree Times (the Past, Present, and Future)’.


150 GUIDANCE BY THE GURU [PART II


[Then] over the mountains the lion roamed free.
This to my Guru, the Eternal Buddha, I narrate.


‘“ Southward [of the mountain] stood a pillar high ;
Upon the pillar’s top a mighty tigress roared ;
The stripes of the tigress were beautiful,

The inner stripes were triple and bold,

Her four paws clawed the jungles deep,

Her eyes upturned were looking heavenward.
[Then] through the jungles the tigress roamed free,
And passed through the groves of wood and plain.
This to my Guru, the Eternal Buddha, I narrate.


‘“ Westward [of the mountain] stood a pillar high ;
Above the pillar’s top an eagle soared ;
The wings of the eagle were wide outspread,
The horns of the eagle pierced the skies,
The eyes of the eagle gazed heavenward ;
Then it soared on high, in the blue above.
This to my Guru, the Eternal Buddha, I narrate.


‘“Northward [of the mountain] also stood a pillar high ;
Above the pillar’s top soared a vulture bold ;
The wings of the vulture were wide outspread,
Upon a rock the vulture’s nest was perched,
And I beheld it had a young one fledged,
And that the skies were filled with smaller birds.
The vulture turned its eyes heavenward,
Then soared away to the regions high.
This to my Guru, the Eternal Buddha, I narrate.


‘“ Deeming these to be auspicious signs,
Foreboding good and virtuous deeds,
With joy ecstatic was I thrilled ;

I pray Thee, tell to us their meaning.”


‘On my recounting the above, my Guru was highly pleased,
and said, “ The dream is excellent.” Then, addressing his lady,
he said, “ Damema, prepare an ample meal.” When she had
done so, all the pupils and disciples were invited to it. The


CHAP. VII] MARPA INTERPRETS THE DREAM 151


Guru then addressed the meeting, and said, “ Mila-Dorje-
Gyaltsen? hath had such and such a dream, which is an excel-
lent sign.” The chief disciples asked him to interpret the dream
and to unravel the mysterious signs. Then [our saintly Gurz],
the Great Avatara and Translator, sang extemporaneously
the interpretation of the dream, foretelling the future destiny
of the Kargyitpa Hierarchy to his disciples, as follows:


‘“Lord, Refuge of all Sentient Beings, Thou, the Eternal
Buddha,
O Saintly Naropa, I bow down at Thy Feet.


*“QO ye, my shzshyas, in assembly seated here,
Give ear attentively unto the meaning of this wondrous and
prophetic dream,
Which to you I will now interpret.


‘“ The ample regions of the World’s North
Symbolize the Buddhist Faith in Tibet prevailing.
The mountain grand signifieth the Kargyiitpa Sect,
Founded by my agéd self, Marpa the Translator,
And by my followers and all the Hierarchy.

The mountain’s summit touching the skies
Symbolizeth our Peerless Goal ;

The sun and moon revolving

Are full Enlightenment and Love ;

Their rays illumining the heavens above

Are Grace enlightening Ignorance ;

The base of the mountain covering the Earth
Showeth how our deeds will fill the World;
The four streams from the four sides issuing
Symbolize Rites of Initiation and the Truths ;
Their waters quenching the thirst of every being
Portend that every living thing shall ripen and be saved ; ?

1 Here Milarepa is called by the family name of Gyaltsen, after that of his
father, Mila-Sherab-Gyaltsen.

2 It is thus that Buddhism, in teaching that every living thing will ultimately
reach Enlightenment, repudiates the Semitic doctrine of Eternal Damnation ;
all karmic suffering, even in Hell, must at last run its course and end. Nothing
sangsaric, whether worlds, hells, or heavens, or existence therein, is permanent


—all is subject to change, decay, and dissolution, even Brahma and all the Gods;
and Evil must eventually be transmuted or swallowed up in Good.


152 GUIDANCE BY THE GURU [PART II


Their waters falling in an Ocean Deep

Are the blending of the Inner with the Outer Light ;?
The varied blossoms blooming on the shores

Are Fruit Immaculate, Truths Realized.

O ye, my shishyas, in assembly seated here,

The dream entire is good, not ill.


‘« The great pillar eastward of the mountain grand
Is Tsurtén-Wang-gay, of Dol.
The lion ramping on the pillar’s top
Showeth Tsurtén to be in nature lion-like ;
The lion’s mane luxuriant, showeth how
With the Mystic Truths he is imbued ;
The lion’s four paws clawing the mountain-side
Show him endowed with the four boundless motives ;
The lion’s eyes turned heavenward
Show he hath bidden farewell to sangs@ric life ;
The lion’s roaming free o’er the mountains high
Showeth that he hath gained the Realms of the Free.
O ye, my shishyas, in assembly seated here,
The dream regarding the East is good, not ill.


‘“ The great pillar southward of the mountain grand
Is Ngogdun-Chudor, of Zhung ;
The tigress roaring on the pillar’s top
Showeth him to be in nature tigress-like ;


1 Tib. Chés-nyid-ma-bu : Skt. Dharmata-Matri-Putra: ‘Mother and Offspring
Reality’, or ‘Inner and Outer Light’. The Offspring Reality (or Truth, or Light)
is that realized in this world through practising deep meditation (Skt. Dhyana).
The Mother Reality is the Primal or Fundamental Truth, experienced only after
death, in the Intermediate (or Bar-do) State at the moment when the conscious-
ness-principle quits the body and before karmic propensities have begun to burst
forth into activity. There is then momentarily a glimpsing of Reality, of Supra-
mundane All-consciousness, in a state of quiescence of the primordial or un-
modified mind — a foretaste of Mirvana. Numerous are the records of great saints
and seers, in various ages and lands, and of many races and Faiths, who when
dying have seen this Light, the Pagan calling It the Light of the Goas, the
Christian the Light of Christ, or the Buddhist the Light of Truth. If, when the
Inner and Outer Light thus dawn in at-one-ment, the percipient has the yogic
power to hold fast to the transcendental experience—and usually he has not—all
karmic clingings to the Sangsara being cut off, the Complete Illumination of
Buddhahood is won.


CHAP. VI] MARPA INTERPRETS THE DREAM 153


The stripes appearing well-defined and beautiful

Show him well imbued with the Mystic Truths;

The triple all-encircling stripes

Show that he hath, within himself, realized the Trinity ;

The four paws clawing the jungles deep

Show that by him the Duties Four ? will be fulfilled ;

The eyes of the tigress turned heavenward

Show that he hath bidden farewell to sangséric life ;

The tigress roaming the jungles free

Showeth that he hath attained Salvation ;

The tigress traversing the groves of wood and plain

Showeth that his Hierarchy will be continued through his
progeny.

O ye, my skzshyas, in assembly seated here,

The dream regarding the South is good, not ill.


‘“ The great pillar westward of the mountain grand
Is Metén-Tsénpo, of Tsang-rong ;
The eagle soaring above the pillar’s top
Showeth him to be in nature eagle-like ;
The wings of the eagle wide outspread
Show him well-imbued with the Mystic Truths ;
The eagle’s horns piercing the skies
Show that he hath passed meditation’s pitfalls ; ?
The eyes of the Eagle turned heavenward
Show that he hath bidden farewell to sangsdaric life ;
The flight of the eagle in the blue above
Showeth that he hath passed to the Realms of the Free.
O ye, my shzshyas, in assembly seated here,
The dream of the West is good, not ill.


‘“ The great pillar northward of the mountain grand

Is Mila-Repa, of Gungthang ;

The vulture soaring above the pillar’s top

Showeth him to be in nature vulture-like ;

The wings of the vulture wide outspread

Show him well-imbued with the Mystic Truths ;

1 See p. 364.

2 That is, the dangers, physical and psychical, and the numerous impediments
or temptations attendant upon the practice of meditation, or Yoga,


154 GUIDANCE BY THE GURU [PART I]


The vulture’s nest perched on a rock

Showeth his life to be enduring as the rock ;

The vulture’s bringing forth a chick

Showeth that he will have a peerless [spiritual] son ;
Small birds filling the heavens wide

Show the spread of the Kargytitpa Sect ;

The vulture’s gazing heavenward

Showeth that he hath bidden farewell to sangsaric life ;
The flight of the vulture in the regions high

Showeth that he hath attained the Realms of the Free.
O ye, my skzshyas, in assembly seated here,

The dream of the North is excellent.


‘“ Now is the duty of my life fulfilled ;
On you my mantle now hath fallen.
And if my words prophetic be,
Then shall the Kargytitpa Hierarchy
Attain pre-eminence and glorious growth.”


‘When the Guruz had uttered these prophetic words, each
of the shishkyas was filled with joy. Then he opened out to
them his treasures of religious books and scrolls of Mystic
Truths and Sciences. By day he gave them instruction, by
exposition, lecture, and sermon ; by night he encouraged them
to meditation. Thus each made good progress in spiritual
development.

‘One night, during a special Initiation Rite of the Yam
(Mother Text), the Lama thought that he would find out, by
the aid of his clairvoyance, what particular line of study and
truths was most suitable for each of his four chief disciples, so
that he might give to each just those texts of the Scriptures
which would be most useful. So he resolved to observe the
omens of the dawn. Accordingly, at daybreak next morning
he regarded all his principal disciples with his clairvoyant
vision. He saw Ngogdun-Chudor, of Zhung, engaged in ex-
plaining and elucidating the rituals of Gaypa-Dorje.. Tsurtén-
Wang-gay, of Dél, was engaged in meditating on Pho-wa
(Transference—of the Principle of Consciousness) ; Meton-


1 See p. 1081.


CHAP. VII] THE GURU’S FINAL GIFTS 155


Tsénpo, of Tsang-rong, was engaged in meditating on Od-Sal
(Clear Light),! and I myself had been observed meditating on
Tum-mo (the science of generating Vital Heat).

‘Thus was he occultly apprised of the innate aptitude of
each of his chief disciples for mastering that particular line of


study which would be most profitable and into which he should
confer initiation.


‘Accordingly, he favoured each of us with the gift of his
last and best teachings. To Lama Ngogpa he gave the text
categorically explaining the Gyiid (Tantras), according to the
four methods and the six aims, which set forth the explana-
tions so clearly and methodically that it may be said to re-
semble a row of pearls strung upon a thread. To this he
added the six ornaments, the sacrificial spoon, and the ruby
rosary which were originally Naropa’s. He also gave to him
the Indian commentaries on the texts already given, and ex-
horted him to serve the universal aim by preaching to all
sentient beings.


‘To Tsurtén-Wang-gay, of Dél, Marpa gave the text on
Pho-wa (Transference—of the Principle of Consciousness),
which is to be likened toa bird flying out of an open skylight.*
This was accompanied by the reliques of Naropa’s hair, nails,


and medicinal pills,t and ritual head-dress illuminated with

1 See p. 145".

2 Ibid. In addition to its resultant physical warmth, this yogic practice also
produces very marked effects psychically, and so greatly assists the Tibetan yogi
in solitary meditation.

3 The open skylight is the Aperture of Brahma (Skt. Brahma-randhra), situated
on the crown of the head at the sagittal suture where the two parietal bones
articulate, opened by means of the yogic practice of the Pho-wa. The bird flying
out of it is the consciousness-principle going out; for it is through this Aperture
that the consciousness-principle quits the body, either permanently at death, or
temporarily during the practice of the Pho-wa, or Transference of the conscious-
ness-principle. The process is a part of Kundalini Yoga (see p. 34”).

* These are not pills for curing fleshly ills, but pills which have been occultly
compounded and psychically infused with virtue by Naropa for the cure of Igno-
rance (Avidya)—the Cause of Death and Rebirth, Their ingredients, which are
kept secret from the laity, are commonly spices and drugs, so compounded by
a Saint or Holy Lama that they are believed to be yogscally charged with his
grace-radiations and auric blessing and thus capable of conveying these to the
patient. The Editor possesses a treatise in Tibetan, with English translation,
giving a recipe for manufacturing such spiritually-potent pills as are still made
and sold by the /amas—even by the Dalai Lama himself. (Cf. p. 258.)


156 GUIDANCE BY THE GURU [PART II


paintings of the Five Dhyani Buddhas," and the injunction to
practise Pho-wa.

‘To Metén-Tsénpo, of Tsang-rong, he gave a text on the
Od-sal (Clear Light), which is like unto a lighted lamp illu-
minating the gloom of night,? along with Naropa’s /amaizc
sceptre (dorje) and bell, small double-drum (damaru), and
oyster-shell libation-cup, with the exhortation that he should
take the short path across the Bar-do (the Intermediate State—
between death and rebirth).

‘To myself Marpa gave a text on 7im-mo (the science of
generating Vital Heat), which is like unto a blazing faggot,
with Maitri’s® hat and Naropa’s raiment, and commanded me
to meditate in various solitudes—on mountain peaks, in caves,
and in wildernesses.

‘Then, before a vast assembly [of disciples], Marpa [chiefly
addressing the four disciples named] said, ‘I have given to
each of you those Texts and Branches of the Truth by which
ye will be most benefited; and I foretell that these same
Teachings shall be the best adapted to the followers of each
of you. I have no longer my son, Doday-Bum. Therefore,
I entrust to you the entire charge of all my sacred Kargyitpa
texts and reliques. May you prove to be devoted guardians
of the Faith, that it may flourish and expand.” Thereupon,
[three of] the chief disciples departed, each to his own country.

‘To me he said, “ As for thee, stay a few years longer with
me. I have several more Teachings and Initiations to impart ;
besides, thine understanding should develop well in thy Guru’s
presence.”


1 Such a head-dress consists of five pieces—usually of thickened Tibetan manu-
script-paper shaped like a pointed pear—on each being a painted image of one
of the Five Dhyani Buddhas, often illuminated with gold and silver. With the
points upward, the pieces are fastened together side-wise so as to form a cir-
cular band which fits round the head leaving the top of the head uncovered, and
when worn appear like a gorgeous crown,

® That is to say, the experiencing of the Clear Light implies an ecstatic state
wherein the gloom of Ignorance (Avidyd), which is the ‘gloom of night’, is
illuminated—in a super-conscious glimpsing of Nirvaza, or Enlightenment.

8 The hat worn by the Kargyiitpa yogis on ceremonial occasions symbolizes
this relique, the original hat of the Great Indian Yogi? Maitri; and bears a mystic
mark like a St, Andrew’s Cross (X).


CHAP. vil] THE COPPER-CAVE RETREAT 157


‘Thus, according to Marpa’s command, I shut myself up in
close retreat in the Zang-phug (Copper Cave)—a cave pro-
phesied of by Naropa. Both my Guru and his lady ever sent
me a share of any food of which they partook, and a part of
the offerings from every religious ceremony—even the smallest
—which they cclebrated.

‘In this wise did I pass my time in delightful meditation,
developing mine understanding in the presence of my Gurz for
some years, until the shoots of Spiritual Wisdom shot up in
my heart.’


[This constituteth Milarepa’s Fourth Meritorious Act. ]


[PART II


CHAPTER VIII
THE PARTING FROM THE GURU


Telling of how Fetsiin, led by a Dream, left his Hermitage, and,
going to his Guru, secured permission to visit Tsa, ¢etstin's Birth-
place; of the Guru’s Final Instructions and Admonitions ; of
the Sorrowful Parting ; and of how $etsiin reached Tsa.


THEN Rechung asked Jetsiin, ‘What led to thy coming away
from Marpa’s presence? How many years didst thou stay in
retreat ?’

And Jetsiin said, ‘I did not stay there many years, and the
circumstances which led to my returning home were these.
While in retreat I was making satisfactory progress. Usually
I never slept; but one morning it happened that I had slept
very long, and had a dream. This dream showed me that my
house, called “ Four Columns and Eight Pillars”, was in such
a broken and dilapidated condition that it looked like an old
donkey’s ears. The books of Scripture appeared damaged by
the leakage. The field called “Worma Triangle” appeared to
be overgrown with weeds. My mother was dead, and mine only
sister was roving friendless in the world. The grief I experienced
at not having met my mother again since our parting under the
aforesaid unhappy conditions so many years before, was heart-
rending; and I was calling upon my mother’s and sister’s names
and weeping bitterly. On waking up, I saw that my pillow was
quite wet with my tears. When I attempted to think, the long-
ing to see my mother only increased more and more. I could
not help shedding tears again; and I made up my mind to go
and see mine aged parent once again by any possible means.

‘At dawn, demolishing the wall enclosing me in my retreat,
I went to ask leave of my Guru. When I got there he was
sound asleep, but sitting near the head of his bed I meekly
and humbly chanted to him this appeal :


‘“Q Lord Compassionate, Thou the Immutable,


Pray let me as a mendicant go to my home once more.
Of the inhospitable land of Tsa,


A family of three members, harassed by hostile relatives,


CHAP. VIII] MILAREPA’S HOME-YEARNING 159


Have now for many years been parted ;

No longer can I bear the pain of separation.
So let me go and see my mother but this once,
And quickly, then, will I return.”


‘Just as I had finished this appeal my Guru awoke. The
sun’s rays shot through a chink above his pillow and like
a halo of glory lit up his venerable head, and at the same
moment his lady brought in the morning meal. These three
events occurred simultaneously ; they were a combination of
events with which several future happenings were inseparably
connected. My Guru at once addressed me, saying, “ My son,
how dost thou dare to come out of retreat so suddenly? Why,
thou runnest the risk of being possessed by the Demon (Mara).
And thou also incurrest great personal danger. Back again to
thy retreat, this very moment!” But once more I urged upon
him what I had dreamt, in the following verses:


““«Q Lord Compassionate, Thou the Immutable,
Permit this mendicant but once again to see his home,
In the wretched glen of Tsa.


*« Though of wealth not much remaineth,
Yet there are these to cause anxiety :
My house called ‘Columns Four and Pillars Eight’ ;
I fain would see if it be fallen in ruin.
My library of Sacred Scriptures ;
I fain would see if it be ruined or not.
My well-known field, the ‘Worma Triangle’ ;
I fain would see if it be overgrown with weeds or not.
My mother, the vessel that held my form ;
I fain would see if she be yet alive in health.
Mine only sister, Peta Gonkyit ;
I fain would know if she hath strayed or not.
My Zesay, who was betrothed to me in youth ;
I fain would see if she be fit to wed.
My neighbour and mine uncle, Yung-gyal ;
I fain would see if he still liveth.
My cruel aunt, the Tiger-Demon ;
I fain would see if she be dead or not.


160 THE PARTING FROM THE GURU [PpaRT IU


My family pastor, Kunchog-Lhabum ;

I fain would know if he liveth now or not.
And more than all, my dear old mother ;
I long to see her, oh so anxiously.

The anguish now hath grown unbearable ;
Therefore, I beg Thee, Lord,

Let me go home but once,

And quickly I'll return.”


‘Then my Guru replied, “My son, when first thou didst
come here to me, thou didst say that thou shouldst have no
reason to yearn for thy relatives or home, but now thou
yearnest for many things besides. Even though thou wert to
go home, it is not likely that thou wouldst find thy mother
alive; and, as for the others, thou canst not be quite sure of
finding any of them in good health. Thou hast passed some
years in U and Tsang, and here also thou hast been for these
many years. But if thou desire to go; I grant thine appeal. If
thou count on coming back here, know that finding me in sleep
when thou didst come to address me is an omen that we two
shall not meet again in this life. But the rays of the rising sun
shining upon my dwelling-house is a sign that thou wilt be
a shining light amongst the Buddhist hierarchies, and that
thou wilt glorify the Faith. And the sun’s rays enhaloing my
head is a sign that this Sect of meditative Kargyiitpas will
flourish and spread far and wide. Further, Damema’s bringing
in the morning meal just then showeth that thou wilt be sus-
tained by spiritual food. Now I can let thee go. Damema,
deck the altar with offerings.”

‘My Teacher set himself to prepare the mauzdala diagram,
while his lady decked the altar. Then, having conferred upon
me the last and highest Initiations, and the Mysteries of the
Dream Symbols,! and the Zaztras whispered in the ear of the

‘ As referred to in the treatise on the Six Doctrines ; sce p. 144°, above. There
is, too, a system of Yoga whereby the yogi is taught to enter the dream-state at
will, in order to explore scientifically its characteristics as compared with the
waking state, and then to return to the waking state without breaking the stream
of normal consciousness. Thus is realized the illusory nature of both states. The


practice also enables its master to die and to be reborn without loss of memory—
death being the entry into a dream-state and birth the awakening.


CHAP. viI] THE ESOTERIC TRANSMISSION 161


Shishya by the Guru, he said, “ Fix well thine attention ; upon
thee alone I confer these Texts, Mysteries, and Initiations,
because I have been so commanded by my Lord Naropa.
Thou in thy turn shalt confer them upon such of thy disciples
as the Deities shall indicate. And I command thee to confer
them thus, with the condition that they shall be handed down
from one guru to one shishya for thirteen generations. If
these Truths be exchanged for worldly vanities or for the
currying of favour, thereby will the displeasure of the Deities
be incurred, and dire will be the effect; therefore, guard them
with the utmost care. If any skiskya manifest innate aptitude
for receiving these Truths, let them be given him,’ although
he be unable to present any worldly wealth as the offering.
Take all such skishyas'in thy special care, watch and guard
over them; develop them; and let them enhance the glory of
the Faith. The method adopted by Tilopa in disciplining
Naropa, and by me in converting thee, will not be very suitable
for degenerate beings of the future, who will be narrow of heart,
and incapable of understanding the sublimest of the Truths.
Therefore, beware of adopting that method of instruction.

‘“Tn India there exist nine texts of this character, though
somewhat lighter conditions than these are sometimes attached
to them. Four of them I have given to thee. So there are
five more to be obtained from India ; one of my disciples will
journey to India and obtain these from one of the disciples of
Naropa’s other disciples. Thou, too, shouldst try thine utmost
to obtain them; they are certain to be of the greatest use to
humanity. And now, if thou entertain any thought that be-
cause thou art unable to offer me worldly goods I may still
have other texts secreted from thee, divest thy mind of such
thought ; for it is not worldly vanities alone that will satisfy me.
Much more am I satisfied with thy sincere devotion and energy.

} That is, the esoteric (or ‘ ear-whispered’) teachings, which are never com-
mitted to writing, being handed down orally from guru to shishya.

? ‘In the Mtyashodashikarnava Tantra (iv. 4) there is recorded the following
parallel command: “ Let not affection, greed, or fear prompt thee to reveal the
Great Mystery to the unworthy. Reveal it only to the deserving.” The Shruti


(Vedic Texts) likewise enjoin secrecy regarding Brahmavidya (knowledge of the
Supreme Brahma).’—Sj. Atal Bihari Ghosh.


162 THE PARTING FROM THE GURU [paRTU


Therefore, raise aloft the Banner of Zealous Devotion and
Meditation.!

‘“T have conferred upon thee the Supreme, Mystic, Ear-
Whispered Truths, as revealed by the Deities and transmitted
to me by my Lord Naropa. To no other of my disciples have
I imparted them; nay, not even to the foremost. To thee
I have handed them on in an entire and perfect manner, like
unto a vessel filled to the very brim.”

‘Then he invoked the Tutelary Deities to bear witness to
the truth of these statements.

‘The Guru having delivered this deeply impressive dis-
course sang the following song extempore:


‘“ Obeisance! Adoration to the Kind and Gracious Lord !
To meditate upon His Acts is of itself a holy text.?


‘«“ To desire much, bringeth a troubled mind ;
[So] store within thy heart [these].precepts wise :
Many seeming ‘Thats’ are not the ‘That’;
Many trees bear nought of Fruit ;
All Sciences are not the Wisdom True;
Acquiring these is not acquiring Truth.
Much talking is of little profit.


‘“« That which enricheth the heart is the Sacred Wealth ;
Desirest thou wealth? then store thou this.
The Doctrine which subdueth passions vile is the Noble
Path;
Desirest thou a safe path? then tread thou this.
A contented heart is the noblest king ;
Desirest thou a noble master? Then seek thou this.


‘“ Forsake the weeping, sorrow-burdened world ;
Make lonely caves thy home paternal,
And solitude thy paradise.
Let Thought riding Thought be thy tireless steed,
And thy body thy temple filled with gods,
And ceaseless devotion thy best of drugs.
1 Literally, ‘Banner of Sadhana’.


” Marpa’s prayer is addressed to his own Guru Naropa; while Milarepa’s is
to his Guru, Marpa. Each Guru is visualized as being a Divine Being.


CHAP. VII] THE OCCULT SCIENCES 163


‘“ To thee, thou energetic one,

The Teaching that containeth all of Wisdom I have given;

Thy faith, the Teaching, and myself are one.

And may this Perfect Seed of Truth, thus to my son en-
trusted,

Bring forth its foliage and its fruit,

Without corruption, without being scattered, without wither-
ings? 4


‘ Having sung this, the Gar placed his hand upon my head,
and said, ‘‘ My son, thy going away breaketh my heart; but
since all composite things are alike liable to dissolution it can-
not be helped. Yet remain with mea few days more; examine
thy texts, and if thou find in them uncertainties, have these
cleared.” I obeyed, and on my remaining for some days my
uncertainties touching the texts were cleared up.

‘ Then the Guru commanded his lady to deck the altar with
offerings for a ceremony, which she did upon a grand scale,
placing offerings for the Tutelary Deities, sacrificial cakes for
the Dakinis, and a splendid feast for the brotherhood. During
the assembly, my Guru showed himself in the form of Gaypa-
Dorje and in various other divine forms, with the various
symbolic implements associated with these Deities, such as
dorjes, bells, wheels, gems, lotuses, swords, and all the others.
He also showed the mystic [mantric] letters Om, Ah, Him in
different colours. Having manifested these signs of a Master
of the Occult Sciences, he said, “ These are called psycho-
physical powers, which ought never to be exhibited in a spirit
of mere bravado; I have shown them as my parting gift to
thee, Milarepa.”

‘Thus did I see that my Guru was as infallible as the
Buddha Himself; and rejoiced beyond measure at it, and
resolved within myself to emulate my Guru and obtain occult
powers of like nature. .

‘Then my Guru asked me, “Son, hast thou seen, and dost
thou believe?” I replied, “ Yes, Lord and Guru, impossible


1 The sense of this last stanza being somewhat uncertain in the late Lama
Dawa-Samdup’s translation, M. Bacot’s version has in part been followed here.


164 THE PARTING FROM THE GURU [paRT Il


is it not to believe; I myself will emulate Thee in devotion,
till I, too, obtain these powers.”

‘He answered, “ That is well, my son. And now thou art
fitted to take thy departure, for I have shown to thee the
mirage-like nature of all existing things. Realize this fact for
thyself, going into retreat in mountain recesses, lonely caves,
and the solitudes of wildernesses. Amongst mountain recesses,
that known as Gyalgyi-Shri-La (Holy Mount of Glorious Soli-
tudes) hath been blessed by the feet of many a great Indian
saint and yogi, while the Tisé Peak (Mount Kailasa) hath been
mentioned by the Lord Buddha Himself as the Great Moun-
tain, the abode of Démchog (Shamvara), and a fit place for
meditation. Do thou meditate there. The Lapchi-Kang is the
most sacred amongst all the Twenty-Four Places of Pilgrimage,
being the Godavari of the Scriptures. And Riwo-Palbar, and
Yolmo-Kangra, in Nepal, are mentioned in the Lalita-Vistara.
Meditate there. Chibar, in Brin (Drin), is a spot sacred to the
D4akinis, and any solitary cave, with fuel and water close at
hand, should be a suitable place for meditation and for raising
the Banner of Devotion. Devi-kot and Tsari, near each other,
lie in the East, but the time hath not come yet for the opening
of them. A disciple of thy succession will open these sacred
places of pilgrimage and guard them. Thou thyself shalt devote
thy whole life to meditation, taking up thine abode in these
places as foretold. If thou do so earnestly, thou shalt satisfy
thy Guru and repay thy parent’s kindness and love, and there-
by serve the Cause of Universal Good. But if thou fail in
devotion, then thy life, though long, shall be but an occasion
for heaping up demerits. Renounce, then, all the ambitions of
this life; waste not thy time in vain talk with the multitude,
who seek only to attain the aims and ends of worldly existence,
but at once devote thyself to meditation.”

‘Tears filled the Guru's eyes and ran down his cheeks, as
he continued, “ Now, my son, we shall not see each other again
in this life. I will bear thee in my heart, and thou wilt bear
me in thine. We shall without doubt meet again in the pure
celestial regions of the life beyond, so rejoice.

‘“ At some period of thy devotions, I foresee that thou wilt


CHAP. vill] THE SADNESS OF THE PARTING 165


be assailed by a very great physical danger; when that cometh,
look thou into this, but open it not till then.” And thereupon
he handed to me a sealed scroll. Every word that my Guru
uttered at this time produced a deep and lasting impression
upon my heart, and each word helped me in my subsequent
devotion.

‘Then the Guru said, “Damema, Milarepa is going to-
morrow, make suitable preparations for the occasion ; though it
is sure to depress my spirits, I must go some distance to see
him off.” To me he said, “ Sleep thou near me this night. We
two, father and son, shall converse.” And I did so. My Guru's
lady, upon coming to join us, at once began to sob and weep.
The Guru said to her, “ Damema, why weepest thou? Seeing
that my son hath received the Precious Truths in full, and
goeth to meditate on them in solitude, what cause is there here
for tears? If thou consider how all sentient creatures, though
potentially Buddhas, through ignorance of their high origin
and destiny suffer pain and sorrow and die in anguish, and
more especially how human beings, once having won [in virtue
of their human birth] the mighty opportunity of bettering their
condition, forgo it, and die without Enlightenment, then in-
deed mightest thou weep, yea, even unceasingly.”

‘The lady replied, “Thou speakest truly, but difficult is it
to hold fast to compassion such as that. I weep now because
I cannot help it. I was deprived by Death of a son, perfectly
accomplished in both temporal and spiritual affairs, who would
have fulfilled the wishes both of himself and of others. And
now this son, so faithful, energetic, and intelligent, so kind-
hearted, willing, and faultless from every point of view, is going
to be separated from me while yet living. How can I help
weeping?” And she wept still more bitterly as she said this.
I, too, was overwhelmed with weeping, and my Guru likewise.

‘The night was passed in similar expressions of sorrow,
and we had no really serious talk. The next morning the
whole party, consisting of thirteen persons, came to see me off,
up to a distance of about four or five miles. All were sad, and
expressed their sorrow in words and tears. When we came
upon a hill-top called Chhé-la-Gang (Hill of Religion), which


166 THE PARTING FROM THE GURU [PaRT II


commanded a good view of the country all round, we halted
and took our meal. This over, my Guru held my hand, and
said, ‘‘ My son, I should have liked to send thee in the com-
pany of some reliable comrades, because thou art going through
U and Tsang, and it is said that robbers infest the Silma Pass
in Tsang, but I see that thou are destined to go alone. But
I will pray for thee, and entreat the Tutelary Deities to watch
over thy safety as thou goest. Be thou very wary on the way.
Go thou hence to Lama Ngogpa, and compare notes with him
regarding the sacred texts thou hast received, noting all dif-
ferences. Having done this, thou mayst proceed straight to
thy home. Spend no more than seven days there. Then pro-
ceed at once to the wilderness to meditate and carry on thy
devotions, which thenceforth must be thine only duty. By that
alone wilt thou benefit thyself and all living creatures.”

‘Then I sang to my Guru these verses of an extempore
psalm : i


‘“O Lord, Thou the Immutable, O Dorje-Chang,
For the first time, as humble mendicant, I go to Tsang,
For the first time,as Thy Humble Shzshya, to my home I go.
O Kindly Lord and Father, Thy Gracious Love provideth,
On Silma’s Pass, an escort of twelve mountain goddesses ;
Adoration unto Thee, O Gracious Lord.


‘“ Trusting to the power of the Precious Trinity,
Escorted by hosts of Dakinis,
And by a pure and sincere heart accompanied,
I go, guarded by Divinities ;
What need have I of fear of mortal foes ?


‘“T have, howe’er, a prayer to urge:
That Thou wilt be my Constant Guide
In this as in the future life ;
Bless Thou my body, speech, and mind,
And safely keep them from temptation.


“Grant Thine Approval to my prayer,
And seal it by Thy Spiritual Power ;
Make me to realize the Truths Profound.


CHAP. VIII] THE GURU'S PRAYER 167


[Likewise] I crave Thy Blessing for a long and healthy life.
Thy suppliant’s fate lieth in Thy Hands;
Bless him, that he shall steadfastly remain in solitude.”


‘When I had offered’ up this prayer, my Guru said, “ My
son, thy words are sweet. Now shall I impart to thee my best-
prized and last instructions; bear them ever in thy heart.”
Then, placing his hand upon my head, he sang to me the fol-
lowing hymn:

‘“ Obeisance unto all the Gurus!


‘“ High-minded, noble, righteous son,
May thou the Dharma-Kaya gain;
May thy nectar-like and prayerful speech
In the Sambhoga-K aya reach perfection full ;
May thy righteous heart, so pure and grateful,
The Nirmana-K @ya realize.)


‘“ May these, my last and precious words,
Unerring as the Eternal Law,
Sink deep and rest within thy heart ;
And may the benedictions of the Devas and the Dakinis
Invigorate thy life and mind,
And the Protecting Spirits watch o’er thee.


‘“ May this, my prayer, bear speedy fruit :
By pious ones mayst thou be ever loved,
And may the escort of twelve goddesses
Attend thee o’er the Silma Pass,
And Guardian Angels guard thy path
Throughout thy journey of the following days.


1 This stanza is based upon the Mahayanic doctrine of the Three Bodies (Tib,
Sku-gsum—pron. Kii-sum ; Skt. Tri-Kdaya). Of these, the first is the Divine Body
of Truth (or Dharma), the Dharma-Kaya (Tib. Chos-sku—pron. Ché-ku), which is
the Body of all Buddhas; being beyond all concepts of the mundane mind, it
is the Voidness (Skt. Shanyata ; Tib. Tong-pa-nyid), the Unformed, Unmade,
Nirvana. The second is the Divine Body of Perfect Endowment, the Sambhoga-
Kaya (Tib. Longs-spyod-rzogs-sku—pron. Long-chéd-z0-ku), which is the body
of all Bodhisattvas in Heaven-Worlds ; it is the first reflex of the Divine Body
of Truth. The third is the Divine Body of Incarnation, the Nirmana-Kaya (Tib.
Sprul-pahi-sku—pron. Tul-pat-ku), of Avataras, or Great Teachers, on Earth.
The first Body is Transcendental Bodht; the second, Reflected Bodhi; the third,
Practical Bodhi.


168 THE PARTING FROM THE GURU [parT II


‘Tn the sad sight of thy home and fields
There is a preacher of ‘’tis vanity’.


‘« Among thy sister, aunt, and kith and kin
There is a tutor who'll dispel fond dreams [of family ties].


‘* Amid the lonely solitudes of caves
There is a mart wherein thou canst exchange
This whirlpool life for bliss eternal.


‘“ Within the temple of thy form inspired
There is a meeting-hall of deities.!


‘Within the wholesome feast of nettle soup ?
There is nectar pleasing to the gods.


‘“ Within the scientific system of thy texts
There is a harvest yielding precious fruits.


‘“ Within the hatred and contempt awaiting thee at home
There is incentive to immediate devotion.


‘“ Within the close confinement of a solitude,
By noise of men and dogs untroubled,
There is the boon of quickly gaining Szddhz.8


‘Within the freedom of one’s self-support
There is the heavenly blessing of a peaceful heart.


‘Within a region undefiled, about a sacred temple,
There is the pleasing prospect of success.*


‘“ Within sincerity of faith devout
There is the virtue born of zealous effort.


‘“ Within the sacred Garden of Obedience ©
There is a mine of all success.


1 The ‘ meeting hall’ is the ‘ Thousand-Petalled Lotus’, wherein Shiva (as the
Deva or Shakita) and Kundalini (as the Devt or Shakti) in union produce in the
yogi the ecstatic state of Illumination. (See pp. 34”, 169°.)

2 It was nettle soup, as will be seen in Chapter X, which constituted Mila-
repa’s chief food while he was practising Yoga in the solitudes.

8 Stddhi literally means ‘accomplishment’, or ‘fruition of Sadhana’. Here it
refers to success in gaining yogic or super-normal powers.

4 The magnetic or psychic influences which a sacred centre naturally radiates—
if it be undefiled by the auric emanations of towns or villages inhabited by worldly-
minded multitudes—favour success in Yoga.

* That is, obedience to the commands of the Guru.


CHAP. VIII] THE GURUS PRAYER 169


‘“ Within the Vital Truths by Dakznis revealed
There is the boundary between Sangsara and Nirvana.)


**“ Within the School of Marpa the Translator
There is the hope of endless fame.


‘“ Within the zeal and energy of Milarepa
There is a pillar of the Buddhist Faith ;
Upon the Being? who holdeth that Pillar [may there rest]
The blessings of the Noble Succession,
The blessings of the Kargyiitpa Saints,
The blessings of the Deities Divine,
Démchog, Gaypa-Dorje, and Sang-di,
The blessings of the Noble Truths,
The blessings of the Vital Truths by the Dafinis revealed,
The blessings of the Gracious Dékinis,
The blessings of the Dwellers in the three Abodes,’
The blessings of the Noble Guardians of the Faith,‘
The blessings of the Mother Kali,”
The blessings of the noble brethren in the Faith.


‘“[Let there be] blessings on thine efforts, of obedience born,
And blessings on thy lineal followers ;
And infallible may mine own blessings be.


' That is, the Vital Truths enable the devotee to differentiate the Sangsara from
Nirvana ; and also to realize—in the Supra-mundane Consciousness of Buddha-
hood—that the one is inseparable from the other.

2 The Being is Milarepa.

3 ‘Dwellers in the Three Abodes’ is probably a reference, esoterically worded,
to adepts in the science of Kuydalint Yoga, the ‘Three Abodes’ being, in this
esoteric sense, the Heart Psychic-centre (Skt. Andhata-chakra), the Throat
Psychic-centre (Skt. Vishuddha-chakra), and the Brain Psychic-centre (Skt. Sa-
hasrava-Padma). (Cf. p. 34”.)

4 These are the deities called in Sanskrit the Dharma-palas, i. e. ‘Guardians of
the Dharma’; in Tibetan they are called Ch’os-skyong.

5 Kali is the Great Wrathful Mother-Goddess Kali (or Durga) ; here she sym-
bolizes the Shakti or Primordial Negative (or Female) Energy of the Universe,
being the Spouse of Shiva, who is the personification of the Primordial Positive
(or Male) Energy.

Sj. Atal Bihari Ghosh has added here the following: ‘In another aspect, Kali
is the Ever-youthful Mother (Adya Prakrit:); for she is not always of wrathful
aspect, but appears benign or terrific in accordance with the devotee’s karmic
deserts. She is called Kali because she devours (kalanat) Time (Kala), who de-
vours all things.’ (Cf. Tantra of the Great Liberation, ch. iv, as edited by Arthur
Avalon, London, 1913.)


170 THE PARTING FROM THE GURU [paRT I


‘“ Bear these [my final admonitions] in thy heart and realize
them.”


‘Having sung this, Marpa was filled with great gladness.
Then the Reverend Mother, my Guru’s lady, presented me
with substantial presents, including clothes, boots, and provi-
sions, saying, “ My son, these are a few articles for the time
being, as a small token of regard from me. They are my last
parting gift to thee, my son. I wish thee a happy journey ;
and may we meet again in the blessed and holy paradise of
Urgyen. Forget not these last spiritual gifts, and this sincere
prayer from thy mother, which I now utter”; and, giving me
a human skull filled with oblation-wine, she sang the following
hymn:

‘“ Obeisance to the Feet of Gracious Marpa!


‘“ My patient son, so energetic,
Constant, and long-suffering,
O son of highest destiny,
Drink deeply of the nectar of thy Guru’s Divine Wisdom ;
In perfect peace and safety go thy way;
And, as friends, in future may we meet
In the blessed Holy Realm.


‘“Forget thou not thy parents spiritual ;
Oft and ever pray to them ;
Fat all thou canst of heart-sustaining
Sacred texts and sermons deep ;
In perfect peace and safety go thy way;
And, as friends, in future may we meet
In the blessed Holy Realm.


‘“ Forget thou not thy parents spiritual ;
In grateful memory hold them ever,
And of their kindly care oft think ;

The warming breath of angels wear,

As thy raiment pure and soft ;!

In perfect peace and safety go thy way ;
And, as friends, in future may we meet


In the blessed Holy Realm.
1 This refers to the Vital Warmth acquired by yogic practice.


CHAP. viI] DAMEMA’S GOOD-WISHES 171


‘«“ Thinking of the helpless beings [of Sangsara},
Train thy heart to selflessness ;
The burden of the Higher Path (the Mahayana)
Bear thou e’er with ‘faithful fortitude ;
In perfect peace and safety go thy way ;
And, as friends, in future may we meet
In the blessed Holy Realm.


‘** Damema, of noble destiny,
Unto her son her last injunctions giveth,
And may he e’er retain them in his heart ;
Thee [O son] thy loving dame shall cherish ;
May we, the loving son and mother,
As friends, in future meet
In the blessed Holy Realm.


‘“ May these good-wishes bring forth fruit,
And may devotion pure repay them.”


‘As she sang these verses, tears choked her voice, and the
long-pent-up grief of the others burst forth in torrents of tears
and sobs. I bowed down to my spiritual father and mother
for the last time, and moved backward, keeping my face to-
wards them as long as my Gurz’s countenance was within view.
I saw them standing there with tearful faces, and strong was
mine inclination to go back. But when I passed out of their
sight, I walked in the usual manner till I came to a knoll
whence I could again see them, as a dim grey group. My heart
yearned to rejoin them, and it was with a most painful effort
that I tore myself away. I thought to myself that I had now
obtained the Truths in their entirety, and that henceforth
I would commit no irreligious act. As for my Guru, I could
always meditate on him [as if he were enhaloed] above the
crown of my head! as long as I should live; and as for the
next life, he had promised that we should meet again in the Holy
Regions. Besides, I was only going away for a short while, to

1 This refers to the yogic practice of meditating on the Guru as being in the
contemplative posture (or dsana) and overshadowing the Brahmanic Aperture,


whence the consciousness-principle goes out of the body. The practice is said to
help in awakening the Kundalini or Serpent Power.


172 THE PARTING FROM THE GURU  [pPaRT II


see my mother who had given me birth, and I could hurry
back to my Guru.

‘Thus I went on communing with myself, in a sorrowful
mood, until I reached Lama Ngogdun-Chudor’s house. There,
after we had duly compared notes with each other, I found
that he exceeded me in the exposition of the Zaz¢ras, but that
in the actual practice of the rites and rituals pertaining to the
Doctrine, and in their application to daily life, I was not far
behind him, while I exceeded him in some respects, as pos-
sessing the divinely-inspired esoteric teachings which are ear-
whispered.}

‘Having done this, I paid him due worship, and expressing
a wish for a future meeting started for home. I reached there
after three days, feeling somewhat elated at the development
in the art of controlling the breath which this betokened.?

‘Thus did all come about—mine obtaining the Truth in its
entirety, my thorough study of it, and, while thus engaged,
my being impelled by a significant dream to take leave of my
Guru and return home.’


Thus endeth [the narrative which constituteth Milarepa’s]
Fourth Meritorious Act.*


! Literally, ‘the Sacred Dakint Karna Tantras’. (Cf. p. 1611.)

2 M. Bacot (p. 177) here notes that ordinarily, that is by normal means, the
ourney would have taken several months, whereas by super-normal means
Milarepa accomplished it within three days.

8 Here and onwards the textual numbering of the chapters has been made to
conform to the numerical rearrangements by the Editor, this chapter in the
Tibetan being numbered the fifth.


CHAP. IX | 173


CHAPTER IX
THE RENUNCIATION


Telling of the Disillusionment which Fetsiin met when he had
reached his Home; and of his Vows to live the Ascetic Life
and Practise Meditation in Solitude.


AGAIN Rechung asked, ‘ Venerable Guru, when thou didst
reach home, did the dream prove to be true, or didst thou find
thy mother alive?’ Jetsiin replied, ‘The inauspicious dream
proved only too true; it was not my lot to see my mother.’
Then Rechung said, ‘ Tell us, Venerable Guru, how thou didst
enter thy house,! with whom thou didst meet, and in what
spirit the people received thee.’

Thereupon Jetstin continued: ‘I saw a number of shepherds
at a place high up in the glen whence my house was visible ;
and, feigning ignorance, I asked them the names of places,
houses, and their occupants, upon which they told me every-
thing in detail. Then, finally, pointing towards mine own house,
I asked them the name of the place and its occupants. They
told me that the house was called ‘‘ Four Columns and Eight
Pillars”, but was at present occupied by ghosts only, as there
were no living occupants. On asking them how it came to be
empty, and what had happened to the inmates, whether they
had gone elsewhere or died, I was told, “‘ Formerly, there was
a very well-to-do family in that house, who had a single son.
Owing to the early death of the father, and a mistake in the
manner of his making his will, after the father’s decease the
paternal relatives usurped all the property of the minor son.
When the son had attained his majority, he asked for the
restoration of his property; and, failing to get it, had recourse
to black magic. Launching curses and hail-storms on this place
he did much mischief here. Now we are all so very afraid of his
Tutelary Deities that not one of us hardly dareth even to look
in that direction, let alone go there. On this account, the house


! The sense apparently is, ‘in what condition thou didst find thy house’,


174 THE RENUNCIATION [PART II


holdeth the corpse of the mother of the only son, and some
evil spirits. He had one sister, who, abandoning the mother’s
corpse, hath gone away begging somewhere, and not come
back. The son, too, must be dead, as nothing hath been heard
of him. If thou dare to go there thyself, O Pilgrim, thou
mayst get some books in the house.” I asked the speaker
how long ago all this had happened, and he said that it might
be about eight years since the mother’s death; but concerning
the launching of the hail-storms and the other havoc wrought
by the son’s black magic he could barely recollect them as
a child. And about the happenings previous to that he had
only heard from others.

‘This assured me that the villagers were so afraid of my
Tutelary Deities that they would not dare to harm me. The
news of the death of my mother and the disappearance of my
sister filled my heart with despair and sorrow. I hid myself
in a nook till past surset, where I wept bitterly. After sunset
I went to the village, and lo! I beheld my house exactly in the
condition I had seen in my dream. The fine house, which used
to be like a temple, was in a most dilapidated and ruinous
condition. The set of sacred volumes had been damaged by
the rain leaking in, and thick layers of dust and earth fallen
from the [ruined] roof covered them; they were serving as
nests and sleeping-places for birds and mice. Wherever I looked,
desolation and ruin met me, so that I was overwhelmed with
despondency. Then groping my way towards the outer rooms
I found a heap of earth and rags, over which a large quantity
of weeds and grass had grown. On shaking it up I found it to
be a heap of human bones, which instinctively I knew to be
my mother’s. A deep and unutterable yearning seized me. So
unbearable was the thought that I should never more see my
mother that I was about to lose consciousness, when I remem-
bered my Guru’s Teachings ; and, communing spiritually with
my mother’s spirit and the divine spirits of the saints of the
Kargyiitpa Sect, I made a pillow of my mother’s bones
and remained in an undistracted state of tranquillity, in clear
and deep meditation, whereby I realized that it was indeed
possible to save both my father and mother from the pain and


CHAP. IX] YOGIC MEDITATION 175


miseries of sangsdric existence. After passing seven days and
nights thus, I rose from the samadhi!

‘Thence, upon reflection, I came to the conclusion that there
was no permanent benefit to be obtained in any state of sang-
saric existence. So I made up my mind to dispose of my
mother’s bones in the approved way, namely, to have them
pulverized and mixed with clay and then moulded into minia-
ture reliquaries, called ¢sha-tshas.?_ I would offer the volumes of
Scripture in payment for having this done; and, as for myself,
I would go away to the Dragkar-Taso Cave? and there pass
my whole time in constant meditation. I determined to sit
there night and day, till death should put an end to my life.
I vowed that if any thought of worldly ambition should allure
me, I would commit suicide rather than allow myself to be
overcome by it. I prayed to the Tutelary Deities and Dakinis
to cut short my life if ever I should come to think of an easy
sort of devotion.

‘Making these mental resolves over and over again, I
gathered up my mother’s bones; and then, upon removing the
heap of dust and dirt that had accumulated upon the volumes
of Scripture, I saw that their letters were still clear. Carrying
the volumes on my back and my mother’s bones in my lap,
I started forth. An unutterable anguish wrung my heart to its
very core. Henceforth, the world had nothing to tempt me or

1 All Tantric yogis are exhorted by the gurx to practise meditation in cemeteries
and in places where corpses are cremated or else thrown to the birds of the air
to be devoured, in order to overcome the dislike or horror, universal among
human beings, of such environments, and to realize the transient nature of worldly
existence. In some rituals, it is necessary for the yogi to sit in solitary meditation
upon a corpse, especially during the dark hours of the night; in other rituals, he
is directed to make a pillow of the corpse, and, if need be, sleep in that posture.
Accordingly, Jetsiin practised such meditation, making of his mother’s bones a
pillow, and remained thus in samadhi for seven days and nights.

The following addition to this note has been made by Mr. Sri Nissanka : ‘ Seven
days appears to be the period of time usually passed in samddhic trance. The
Buddha Gautama is said to have passed seven days of ecstatic bliss alternating
with seven days of Nirvdntc bliss during a period of seven weeks while seated
beneath the Bodhi Tree at Budh Gaya.’

2 Tib. tsha-tsha (pron. tsha-tsha), which is shaped like a miniature stipa ; it
corresponds tothe Dharma-sharira of Indian Buddhism, and is still in use through-


out Tibet.
3 Or ‘the Rock-Cave White as the Tooth of a Horse’.


176 THE RENUNCIATION [PART II


to bind me to it. I repeated my vows to devote my life to
a rigid course of asceticism in the realization of the Truth,
and resolved to adhere to them firmly. In an almost frenzied
mood I sang the following verses of firm resolution to mysclf:


‘“OQ Gracious Lord, Thou the Immutable,
O Marpa the Translator, according to Thy Words Prophetic,
A teacher of the transitoriness of things I’ve found
Within my native land—prison of temptation ;
And by Thy Blessing and Thy Grace, may I,
From this noble teacher, experience and faith obtain.


‘«« All phenomena, existing and apparent,
Are ever transient, changing, and unstable ;
But more especially the worldly life
Hath no reality, no permanent gain [in it].
And so, instead of doing work that’s profitless,
The Truth Divine I'll seek.


‘“ First, when my father lived, the [grown-up] son lived not;
Next, when I was born [and grown], my father did not live.
Had both together met, little would have been the profit,

even then;
So I will go to gain the Truth Divine,
To the Dragkar-Taso Cave I’ll go, to practise meditation.


‘“ When my mother lived, myself, the son, was long away ;
When I come home, I find my mother dead.
Had both together met, little would have been the profit,
even then;
So I will go to gain the Truth Divine,
To the Dragkar-Taso Cave I’ll go, to practise meditation.


‘« When my sister was at home, myself, her brother, was away ;
When I, her brother, come back home, I find my sister
gone astray.
Had both together met, little would have been the profit,
even then;
So I will go to gain the Truth Divine,
To the Dragkar-Taso Cave I'll go, to practise meditation.


CHAP. IX] HYMN OF FIRM RESOLUTION 177


‘“ When the Scriptural Texts were there, no veneration had
they ;
When the veneration came, they lay damaged by the rain.
Had both together [earlier] met, little would have been the
profit, even then;
So I will go to gain the Truth Divine,
To the Dragkar-Taso Cave I’ll go, to practise meditation.


‘“ When the house stood firm, the master was away ;
When the master came, the house was fallen in ruin.
Had both remained together, little would have been the
profit, even then ;
So I will go to gain the Truth Divine,
To the Dragkar-Taso Cave I’ll go, to practise meditation.


«« When the field was fertile, the farmer was away ;
When the farmer came, the field was choked with weeds.
Had both remained together, little would have been the
profit, even then;
So I will go to gain the Truth Divine,
To the Dragkar-Taso Cave I’ll go, to practise meditation.


‘** Native land, and home, and all possessions,
I know you all to be but empty things;
Any thoughtless one may have you.
As for me, the devotee, I go to win the Truth Eternal.


‘“Q Gracious Father, Marpa the Translator,
May I succeed in meditation in the solitude.”


‘Having thus sung this, half song, half hymn, in a burst of
religious zeal, I went first to the house of my former private
tutor. I found him dead; but his son was living, and to him
I offered the volumes, asking him to cast the ¢sha-tshas of my
mother’s bones. He was afraid, he said, that if he accepted
the books my Tutelary Deities would haunt his house, but he
kindly promised to cast the ¢sha-¢shas for me. When I told him
that my Tutelary Deities would not haunt him, as I was
giving the books to him voluntarily, he consented to take them,
saying, ‘“‘So be it, then.” Thereupon he began to make the


178 THE RENUNCIATION [PART II


tsha-tshas, I helping him. The casting of them having been
finished, I saw the consecration rites performed [over them].
Then, having deposited them inside a st#pa (reliquary), I was
preparing to depart, when my tutor’s son proposed to detain
me for a few days to talk over old times, saying that he would
give me of his best; but I told him that I must hasten on
to meditate at once, and had no time for talk. He insisted,
however, on my spending at least the night with him, so as to
allow him time to furnish me with a small quantity of provi-
sions to serve me during my devotions.

‘To this I agreed ; and he, continuing the conversation, said
to me, “In thy youth thou didst destroy thine enemies by
black magic. Now, in thy maturity, thou hast become a reli-
gious devotee; this, indeed, is admirable. Thou wilt surely
become a saint in the future. What Gurus hast thou sought,
and what spiritual texts hast thou obtained?” He asked me
these questions with interest; and in reply I told him that
I had obtained the doctrine of the Great Perfection, and related
to him how I had found Marpa. He congratulated me, and
suggested that I should repair my house, marry Zesay, and
settle down as a Ningma Lama. I told him that Marpa had
married for the purpose of serving others, but that if I presumed
to imitate him without being endowed with his purity of pur-
pose and his spiritual power, it would be the hare’s emulation
of the lion’s leap, which would surely end in my being preci-
pitated into the chasm of destruction. And I added, “I have
a general conviction that I do not want anything save a life of
meditation and devotion, for I take no pleasure in the worldly
life. To live as a hermit in solitude and devote my whole life
to meditation is the essence of my Guru’s command. There-
fore will I aim to live the ideal life [of a Kargyiitpa devotee],!
thus satisfying my Guru as well as doing service to all sentient
beings and serving the Cause of the Hierarchy. Thereby will
I also rescue my parents [from sangsaric existence]; and,


1 The hermit life such as Milarepa sought is, for the Kargyiitpa devotee seek-
ing Enlightenment, the highest life on earth; for by means of it the devotee may
acquire true wisdom, and thereby preparation for returning to the world of
mankind as a guide to salvation, not by repetition of intellectual formulas of
‘T believe’, but in virtue of knowledge of truth.


CHAP. IX] HYMN ON ILLUSORINESS 179


lastly, I shall even profit myself. I know naught but medita-
tion, and so am not likely to accomplish anything else; nor
do I aspire to other than this. Moreover, after my having seen
the wretched ruins of the house and the remains of the
property which my deceased parents possessed, it hath been
indelibly impressed upon my heart that worldly pursuits are
worthless, and a burning desire to devote my life to meditation
hath been enkindled. A life of ease may do for those who
have not suffered as I have, and to those to whom the thought
of death and hell hath not been brought forcibly home. As
for myself, circumstances have convinced me most firmly of the
vital need of zealous devotion and deep meditation as long as I
live ; yea, even unto death itself, despite starvation and poverty.’

‘And with tears welling out mine eyes I sang the following
song :
‘“ Obeisance to Thy Feet, O Noble Marpa!

May I, the mendicant, be purged of worldly clingings by

Thy Grace.


‘“ Alas, alas, ye beings unfortunate,
Who cling to worldly things,
The deeper is my grief the longer that I think of you;
The deeper is my sorrow the longer that I taste of yours.
We whirl and whirl, till into Hell we fall;
For them whose karma bringeth [sorrow’s] heart-ache,
Devotion of their life to Truth is, of all things, best.


‘“ Lord Dorje-Chang, Thou the Immutable,
Grant that this mendicant, blessed by Thy Grace, may cling
to solitude ;
The guests who loiter in this world—
Illusory and transient as it is—
Must needs be ill with [sorrow’s] heart-ache.


‘“ My pasture-fields, where browsed my sheep and goats and
cows, |
Amid the charming Gungthang plains,
Are haunted now by evil spirits ;
This is a picture of Illusoriness,
Which maketh me to seek the contemplative life.


180 THE RENUNCIATION [PART II


‘“ My well-built house, ‘ Four Columns and Eight Pillars Z
Now looketh like a lion’s upper jaw;
The tower of four sides, eight pinnacles, and roof that made
these nine,
Now looketh like a donkey’s ears:
These too are pictures of Illusoriness,
Which make me seek the contemplative life.


‘“ My fertile field, the ‘Worma Triangle’,
Is now o’ergrown with weeds and grass ;
My cousins and my kith and kin
Are ready now to rise as foes [against me]:
E’en these are pictures of Illusoriness,
Which make me seek the contemplative life.


‘“ My noble father, Mila-Shergyal,’
Hath left no trace of ever having lived ;
My fond and loving mother, Nyang-Tsa-Kargyen,
Is now nought but a heap of whitened bones :
E’en these are pictures of I]lusoriness,
Which make me seek the contemplative life.


‘“ My household priest and private tutor, Kunchog-Lhabum,
Is serving now as menial under others ;
My sacred books, the Treasure of the Law,
Have served as lining for rats’ holes and nests of birds:
E’en these are pictures of Illusoriness,
Which make me seek the contemplative life.


‘“ My relative and neighbour, uncle Yung-gyal,
Now sideth with mine enemies ;
Mine only sister, Peta-Gon-kyit,
Hath strayed, and no one knoweth where she be:
E’en these are pictures of Illusoriness,
Which make me seek the contemplative life.


*“Q Gracious One, Thou the Immutable,
Bless Thou Thy Suppliant that he may cling to solitude.”


‘On my singing this melancholy song, my host sighed and
said, “Excellent; thou art quite right.” And his wife shed
1 This is a shortened form of Mila-Sherab-Gyaltsen.


CHAP. IX] THE HERMIT LIFE 181


copious tears. The sight of the wretched condition of my
home in ruins had affected me so deeply that I could not help
giving utterance to several such resolutions to live the life of
a hermit in solitary meditation. In mine own heart, too, I kept
on repeating the resolution over and over again to myself that
I would do so. And, in fact, I have no cause to blame myself
for having practised meditation and devotion instead of having
wasted my time in worldly pursuits.’


This constituteth the Fifth Meritorious Act, in which is
related how Milarepa was driven toa religious life of energetic
devotion by the sad circumstances described herein.


[PART II


CHAPTER X
THE MEDITATION IN SOLITUDE


Telling of how ¥etsiin entered into Sclitary Meditation in the
Mountain Solitudes; of the Outer Experiences, and of the
Psycho-Physical Results which Ensued; and of his Songs
Recording each Event.

RECHUNG then asked Jetsiin in what places he had meditated
and practised penance and devotion.

In reply, Jetsiin said: ‘The next morning, my teacher’s son
provided me with a bag of flour and some seasoning of butter
and cheese and other provisions, saying, “ Let these serve thee
as food during thy devotional seclusion, and pray for us, too.”
Provided with these, I started forth, and went and sat in
meditation in a spacious cave which existed in the hill-side
behind mine own house. The provisions being used rather
sparingly—only as an admixture—my constitution became
exhausted and very weak, but I made great progress in my
devotions. Thus the food lasted for some months. When it
was all exhausted, I was unable to go on long provisionless.
So I thought that I should go and beg some butter and cheese
and other provisions from the herdsmen who dwelt on the
upper parts of the hills, and some grain or flour from the
cultivators who lived on the lower parts. Thus I should not
have to starve altogether, and could go on meditating.

‘On going to the herdsmen to beg, I came to the entrance
of one of those yak-hair tents, and begged the inmates to grant
alms of seasoning, butter, and cheese toa devotee. As ill luck
would have it, this turned out to be the tent of mine aunt, who
at once recognized me. In displeasure, she let loose her dogs,
which I kept off with a stick, pelting them with stones.
Thereupon, she issued out herself, armed with a tent-pole,
crying, ‘‘O thou disgrace to a noble father! Thou seller of
thy kindred’s lives! Thou destroyer of thine own country!
Why dost thou come here? To think that thy noble father
should have begotten a son like thee!” Saying this, she be-
laboured me as hard as she could. I turned back in flight, but,
weak from want of food, I stumbled against a stone and fell


CHAP. x] THE SORROWFUL SONG 183


into a pool of water, and nearly died. She, however, continued
raging. I got up as best I could, and, leaning my body against
my staff, sang the following song to mine aunt:


‘“ At the Feet of my Kind Father Marpa I bow down!


‘In the unhappy home, amid the melancholy nook of Tsa,
Wethree unfortunates—a saddened mother and two orphans—
Were scattered far, as peas are by a staff.

Were ye or were ye not the cause of this,
Bethink yourselves, O ye aunt and uncle?


‘« Whilst I, as mendicant, was wandering afar,
My mother died, by poverty’s keen sword ;
And, begging food and cloth, my sister strayed.
Unable to destroy the longing to behold them,
Unto this prison, mine own native land, I’ve come again.


‘“ Forever severed from me hath my loving mother been ;
Because of sorrows hath my sister wandered off;
So was my heart with deepest anguish pierced.
These miseries and sorrows which we three endured—
Were they not due to you, our relatives ?


‘« These sufferings unbearable have led me to the life religious ;
Yet whilst I meditated, in the solitudes of lonely hills,
Upon the Sacred Teachings of my Gracious Marpa,

My provisions grown exhausted, no food had I to keep
alive this transient form,
And thus went forth to beg for alms.


‘* Like a dying insect attracted to the entrance of an ant-hill,
Here have I come, before mine aunt’s door-way ;
And thou dost set ferocious dogs against my weak, im-
poverished body,
And dost thyself join in the fierce attack.


‘« By thy rude curses and thy threats,
The grief, deep in my heart, thou stirrest anew ;
By thy repeated strokes, made with thy tent-pole,
Thou fillest my poor body full of pains and bruises,
And hast almost deprived me of my life.


184 MEDITATION IN SOLITUDE [PART II


‘““ Good cause have I for anger ’gainst thee,
But the commandments of my Guru I’m fulfilling ;
Be not so vengeful, O mine aunt,
And food for my devotions give to me.


‘*©Q Marpa, Lord! O Thou the Merciful !

By the power of Thy Grace, cool down Thy suppliant’s wrath!’

‘On my singing this, half in song and half in weeping tones,
a girl who had come behind mine aunt could not refrain from
shedding tears. Mine aunt also was struck with remorse and
shame, and she went inside and sent me a roll of butter and
some powdered cheese-flour by the girl.

‘Going round to the other tents to beg, I could not recognize
any of the occupants, but they all seemed to recognize me.
Staring hard at me, they each gave me a handsome quantity
of alms, with which I returned to my cave. From mine aunt’s
behaviour I could judge what would be mine uncle’s,! so I re-
solved that I would not go in his direction on any account.
But happening to go to beg from the cultivators of the upper
Tsa Valley, I chanced to come right on the door of mine uncle’s
new house, whither he had removed [after his disaster]. He,
knowing me, rushed upon me, crying, “ Though I be like an
old corpse, yet thou art the very man I have wanted to meet.”
With deadly purpose, he flung at me a stone which nearly hit
me. I turned and fled, but he flung at me as many stones as he
could, with whatever strength he possessed. I continued my
flight, but he came out armed with a bow and arrows, saying,
“Thou trafficker in lives! Thou traitor!? Hast thou not
destroyed this country? O neighbours, countrymen, we have
now got hold of our enemy ; come out quickly!” With that
he began shooting at me, while some of the youths of the
place began to pelt me with stones. I, on my part, was afraid
that I might fall a victim to their wrath and vengeance as
a retribution for having employed. black magic against them.
So intending to intimidate them with my black-magical power,
I cried out loudly: “O my Father, and ye Gurus of the Karg-


1 This is the paternal uncle who robbed Jetsiin of his inheritance, and whose
house and wedding party Jetsiin, in revenge, afterward destroyed by black magic.
2 Literally, ‘tripper up of feet’.


CHAP. X] ZESAY’S VISIT 185


yutpa Sect! O ye myriads of blood-drinking and faith-
guarding Deities! I,a devotee, am pursued by enemies. Help me
and avenge me, Although I may die, ye Deities are immortal.”

‘Thereupon, all of them were terror-stricken; and they
caught hold of mine uncle, some who sympathized with me
intervening and acting as mediators, while those who had
stoned me asked my forgiveness. Mine uncle alone would not
consent to give me any alms, but the rest gave me each a hand-
some amount, with which I returned to the cave. I thought
that if I remained there any longer I should only be stirring
the anger of the people; so I resolved to go elsewhere. But
that night I had a dream which directed me to stay there
a few days more, and this I did.

‘Zesay (to whom I had been betrothed in my childhood),
hearing about my being there, came with some nice food and
drink to meet me. She wept copiously and embraced me.
When she had told me of the manner of my mother’s death
and about my sister’s straying, I was greatly saddened, and
wept bitterly. I said to her, “ How constant thou art, that
thou shouldst not have married yet.’ She said, “ People were
so afraid of thy Deities that no one dared to ask my hand in
marriage, nor would I have married even had any one proposed
to me. That thou hast taken to this religious life is admirable ;
but what dost thou intend doing with thy house and field?”
I understood her desire, and thinking that since, by the grace
of my Guru [Marpa the Translator], I had given up worldly life
altogether, praying for her might suffice from a religious point
of view, but that I should say something to her which might
settle her doubts from a worldly standpoint. So I said to her,
“Tf thou meet my sister, give them to her; until she cometh,
thou mayst enjoy the field thyself; and, if my sister be dead,
then thou canst have both the house and the field for thine
own.” She asked me, “ Dost thou not want them thyself?” And
I replied, “I shall find my food as the mice and birds do theirs,
or I shall fast and starve, therefore I need not the field;
and, as I shall dwell only in caves and lonely solitudes, I have
no need of a house. I realize that even though I should possess
the whole world, at my death I should have to give up every-


186 MEDITATION IN SOLITUDE [part 1


thing ; and so it will confer happiness in this and the next life
if I give up everything now. I am thus pursuing a life which
is quite opposite to that followed by the people of the world.
Give up thinking of me as a living person.”

‘She then asked me, “Is thy practice also opposed to that
of all other religious persons?” And I replied, “I am of
course opposed to those hypocrites who have assumed a reli-
gious garb only for the sake of the honour attending it, and—
their aim being merely the acquisition of wealth, fame, and
greatness—have succeeded jn getting by heart the contents of
a volume or two ; and who, having strong party feelings, strive
for victory for their own party and defeat for the opposite
party. But as for those who are sincere devotees, although
they be of different:sects and creeds, if their principle be not
like the one mentioned above, then there cannot be much dis-
agreement between the aim of the one or the other, so I cannot
be opposed to any of them. On the whole, if they are not as
sincere as myself, then they must, of course, be opposed to my
creed.”

‘On this, she said, “ Then how is it that thy practice is so
poor and miserable—much worse than that of the meanest
beggar? I have never seen any one like this before. To what
particular doctrine of the Mahayana Sect dost thou belong?”
I told her that it was the highest creed of the Mahayana ; that
it was called the Path of Total Self-Abnegation, for the pur-
pose of attaining Buddhahood in one lifetime ;* and that to
attain Buddhahood thus we must scatter this life’s aims and
objects to the wind.

‘ She said, “ Indeed, I see that the practice of thy doctrine and
theirs is quite opposite ; and from what I hear and see of thee
it appeareth that the practice of the Dharma is not altogether
a very easy matter; theirs would have been an easier path to


1 It is one of the teachings peculiar to Mahayana Buddhism, as taught
throughout The Tibetan Book of the Dead, that simultaneously with realization
of the unreality of all sangsaric (i.e. worldly) existence Perfect Enlightenment,
Buddhahood, dawns; and that this supreme attainment is possible for any yogic
devotee sufficiently advanced on the Path to make the Great Renunciation and
win the Great Victory in a single lifetime, as Milarepa is later on shown to have
done.


CHAP. X] THE IDEAL YOG/ 187


tread.” I replied, “ The yogi who still retaineth a love of the
world would not attain to mine ideal of a sincere devotee. I am
of opinion that even those sincere Truth-seekers who still cling
to the yellow robe retain a little love of worldly fame and
honour; and even though they do not retain it, yet am I con-
vinced that there is [between me and them] a vast difference
in regard to the speed and efficacy of attaining Buddhahood.
This, however, thou wilt not comprehend just now. So, ifthou
think thou canst, thou shouldst devote thyself to a religious
life; but if thou feel unequal to the task, then thou canst
enjoy the house and field as I have already said, and hadst
better go home.” She replied, “I cannot accept thy house and
field which thou shouldst give to thy sister. I should like to
be a devotee, but such a devotee as thou art I cannot be.”
Having said this she went away.

‘Mine aunt, coming to learn that I did not care about my
house and field, after a while began to think that since I pro-
fessed a determination to adhere to my Guru’s command, she
might perhaps be able to obtain them for herself. So she
visited me, bringing with her a quantity of barley-flour, butter,
chhang, and other food, and said, “Some time ago I treated thee
unkindly, being steeped in ignorance; but as thou, my nephew,
art a religious person, thou must pardon me. If thou wilt
allow me, I will cultivate thy field, and supply thee with food.”
To this I agreed, saying, “So be it; please supply me with
the flour of twenty measures of barley per month; the rest
thou canst enjoy; thou mayst cultivate the field.” She went
away delighted with the bargain. For two months she supplied
the flour as agreed; then she came again and said, ‘* People
say that if I cultivate thy field perhaps thy Tutelary Deities
may injure me because of thy magical power.” When I satis-
fied her, saying, ‘‘ Why should I practise sorcery now? Rather
wilt thou be acquiring merit if thou continue to cultivate the
field and supply me as thou art doing,” she at once said, “In
that case, wilt thou kindly reassure me by taking an oath that
thou wilt not practise sorcery any more. Thou canst have no
objection to doing so.” I was not sure what she intended
doing ; but, as I considered it consistent with my calling to


188 MEDITATION IN SOLITUDE [PART II


please others, I reassured her by taking the oath in accordance
with her wish, at which she went away quite pleased.

‘ All this while, in spite of mine unremitting perseverance in
meditation, I was unable to obtain signs of any improvement
or growth in my knowledge or experience of Ecstatic Warmth ;
and I was becoming anxious as to what I should do next. One
night I dreamt that I was engaged in ploughing a very stiff
and hardened plot of land, which defied all mine efforts ; and,
despairing of being able to plough it, was thinking of giving
up the task. Thereupon, my beloved Guru Marpa appeared
in the heavens and exhorted me, saying, “Son, put forth thine
energy and persevere in the ploughing; thou art sure to suc-
ceed, despite the hardness of the soil.” Then Marpa himself
guided the team; the soil was ploughed quite easily ; and the
field produced a rich harvest. The dream gave me great
pleasure on my waking up.

‘Thereby the thought arose in me that dreams, being illu-
sory reproductions of one’s own thoughts, are not regarded as
real even by stupid and ignorant boors, and that when I thus
allowed a dream to affect my temper I must be more silly
than the greatest fool. But as it seemed to be a sign that if
I continued to meditate with zeal and perseverance mine efforts
would be crowned with success, I was filled with pleasure, and
in that mood I sang this song to impress the true interpretation
of the dream clearly on mine own memory:


‘“T pray to Thee, O Gracious Lord!
Grant that this mendicant may cling successfully to solitude.


‘*T put upon the field of Tranquil Mind
The water and manure of a constant faith,
Then sow it with unblemished seed of a heart immaculate,
And over it, like pealing thunder, reverberateth sincere
prayer;
Grace of itself upon it falleth, like a shower of rain.
‘“Unto the oxen and the plough of Undistracted Thought
I add the ploughshare of [ Right] Method and of Reason.
The oxen, guided by the undeluded person,
And with firm grasp of undivided purpose,


CHAP. Xx] SONGJION YOGIC ZEAL 189


And by the whip of zeal and perseverance goaded on,

Break up the hardened soil of Ignorance, born of the Evil
Passions Five,

And clear away the stones of the hardened, sin-filled nature,

And weed out all hypocrisies.


‘“ Then, with the sickle of the Truth of Karmic Laws,
The reaping of the Noble Life is practised.
The fruits, which are of Truths Sublime,
Are stored within the Granaryto which no concepts can apply.


‘The gods engage in roasting and in grinding this most
precious food,
Which then sustaineth my poor humble self
Whilst I for Truth am seeking.


‘“ The dream I thus interpret :
Words bring not forth True Fruit,
Mere expositions do not yield True Knowledge.
Yet those who would devote themselves unto the life religious,
In meditation must exert their utmost zeal and perseverance ;
And if they will endure hardships and strive most zealously,
And seek with care, the Most Precious can be found.


*« May all who are sincerely seeking Truth


Untroubled be by obstacles and interruptions on the Path.”?


‘ Having sung this, I made up my mind to go and carry on
my meditation in the Dragkar-Taso Cave. As I was about
to start, mine aunt came up with sixty measures of barley-flour,
a ragged dress of skins, one piece of good cloth, and some
butter and grease mixed up into a ball, and said, “ My nephew,
these are in payment of thy field, which thus is disposed of.
Take them and go away to a place far beyond my sight and
hearing, for the neighbours are saying to me, ‘Thépaga hath
wrought much mischief upon us before this ; and if thou must
still have dealings with him and serve him, we are certain that
he will do us more harm and perhaps kill the remaining
people of the place. Rather than this, we will kill both of you.’
So it is safer for thee to flee away into some other country.


1 Or: ‘in their quest for Truth’.


Igo MEDITATION IN SOLITUDE [PART II


If thou do not go, why should they sacrifice me? But there is
not the least doubt that they will kill thee.”

‘I knew that the people would not speak in that fashion,
and so I said to her, “If I were not faithful to my religious
vows, I would not refrain from practising sorcery to regain
possession of my field, especially as I have not sworn to refrain
from doing so under these circumstances. Being possessed of
such magical powers, I could with the greatest ease stretch
thee out a pale corpse in an instant ; yet I will not do so, for
on whom should I practise my patience if not on those who
have wronged me? If I should die to-night, what could I do
with the field, or with these few articles themselves? Patience
is said to be the shortest path to obtain Buddhahood, and thou
mine aunt art the very person on whom I must practise my
patience. Moreover, ye, mine aunt and mine uncle, have been
the means of bringing me to this life [of renunciation]. I am
sincerely grateful to both of you, and in return for these deeds
of yours I will ever pray for you, that ye may obtain Buddha-
hood in your future lifetime. Not only can I give to thee the
field, but the house, too.” Then I explained to her everything
explicitly, and ended by saying, “As for me—whose life is
devoted to the search for Truth—I require only my Gurvu’s in-
structions and nothing more; so thou art welcome to both
the field and house.” And I sang to her the following song:


‘“Q Lord, my Guru, by Thy Grace do I the life ascetic live ;
My weal and woe are known to Thee!


‘“Thewhole Sangsara, being e’erentangledintheWebof Karma,

Whoever holdeth fast to it severeth Salvation’s Vital Cord.
‘“Tn harvesting of evil deeds the human race is busy ;

And the doing so is to taste the pangs of Hell.
‘“ The affectionate expressions of one’s kith and kin are the

Devil's Castle ;3

To build it is to fall into the Flames [of Anguish].

1 That is, exclusive attachment to one’s own family is selfish, the true and
only family being Humanity, and for this family alone should the Bodhisattva
labour. Cf. Matthew x. 36-7: ‘And a man’s foes shall be they of his own


household. He that loveth father or mother more than me is not worthy of
me; and he that loveth son or daughter more than me is not worthy of me.’


CHAP. x] SONG OF YOGIC WISDOM 191


‘“ The piling up of wealth is the piling up of others’ property ;
What one thusstoreth formeth but provisions for one’s enemies.


‘“ Enjoying wine and tea in merriment is drinking juice of
aconite ;
To drink it is to drown Salvation’s Vital-Cord.}


‘“The price mine aunt brought for my field is things wrung
out of avarice ;
To eat them would entaila birth amongst the famished ghosts.”


‘“The counsel of mine aunt is born of wrath and vengeance ;
To utter it entaileth general disturbance and destruction.


‘* Whatever I possess, both field and house,
Take all, O aunt, and therewith happy be.


‘“T wash off human scandal by devotion true ;
And by my zeal I satisfy the Deities.


‘““By compassion I subdue the demons ;
All blame I scatter to the wind,
And upward turn my face.


1 In the Buddhist view, all stimulants—alcoholic drinks, narcotic drugs,
tobacco, and even the narcotic effects of strong tea and coffee—are not only
demonstrably deleterious to the physical organism, but in exciting the nerves
and the mind they give such control over the body to the lower or animal
nature as to inhibit all influx of the elevating spiritual influences of the higher
nature. Furthermore, sorrow, pain, and despair are to be regarded as potent
means to awaken the human race to the fact that all sangsaric existence is, in
the last analysis, inseparable from suffering, and therefore undesirable. Thus,
if stimulants are used to drown all unhappiness and an artificial and deceptive
feeling that everything is well with the world be engendered thereby, the
opportunity of reaching the purely spiritual state of Supramundaneness, beyond
the realm of sorrow, wherein there is the only true bliss, is lost—the Vital
Cord of Deliverance, the golden link between the higher and the lower, is
sundered, the sacred way to Olympus is closed, and human beings are left in
the darkness of their unbelief, slaves to the animal within them,

Although Christianity does not, most unfortunately, prohibit the use of all
such stimulants, as do Buddhism, the Higher Hinduism, and the whole of
Islam, the old Jewish prophet Isaiah has approached the right view in these
words: ‘The priest and the prophet have erred through strong drink, they are
swallowed up of wine, they are gone astray through strong drink; they err in
vision, they stumble in judgement’ (Isaiah xxviii. 7). Cf., too, Paul’s Epsstle to
the Ephesians (v. 18): ‘And be not drunken with wine, wherein is riot, but be
filled with the Spirit.’

2 That is, in the world of famished (or unhappy) ghosts (Skt. Preta-Loka).


192 MEDITATION IN SOLITUDE [PART II


‘“O Gracious One, Thou the Immutable,
Vouchsafe Thy Grace, that I may pass my life in solitude
successfully.”


‘On my singing this, mine aunt said, “A truly religious person
should be like thee, my nephew; it is very praiseworthy.”
And she went away satisfied.

‘This circumstance affected me very painfully ; but, on the
other hand, I felt relieved of the care of my field and house,
of which I had thus disposed. I resolved to carry out im-
mediately my plan of going to the Dragkar-Taso Cave to
continue my meditation. As this cave had afforded me pro-
tection while I laid the foundation of Samadhi (the Quiescent
State), it came to be called Kangtsu-Phug (i.e. the Cave
wherein he [Milarepa] was set upon his feet in devotion, or
laid the Foundation). The next morning, I set forth with the
articles which mine aunt had brought me as the price of my
field and the little remnants of the former provisions, and came
to the Dragkar-Taso Cave, which I found to be very com-
fortable, and therein settled myself. Having provided myself
with a hard. mattress seat, and spreading my bedding on it,
I took the vows of not descending to any village or human
habitation :


‘“Until I have attained to Szddhi}, unto this solitude will

I hold fast ;

Of starvation though I die, I'll not go to seek alms given in
faith or dedicated to the dead,

For that would be to choke myself with dust.?

E’en though of cold I die, I’ll not descend to beg for gar-
ments,

E’en though of misery and sorrow I should die, I’ll not
descend to join in pleasures of the worldly life.

Though I fall ill, e’en unto death, I’ll not descend to seek
one dose of medicine.


1} Siddhi, or occult powers, or transcendent or super-normal knowledge.
Immediately prior to attaining Buddhahood, Gautama while still a Bodhisattva,
as Milarepa is here, made similar resolutions (cf. the Mahapadana Sutta).


* That is, such food is unclean to a devotee, having been dedicated to a deity
or to the dead.


CHAP. x] THE YOGIC VOWS 193


And not one movement of my body will I give to any
worldly purpose ;

But body, speech, and heart I dedicate to winning Buddha-
hood.


‘“ May the Guru, Gods, and Dakinis enable me to keep my
vows,
And may they bless mine efforts ;
May the Da@kinis and Faith Protecting Deities fulfil my
wishes,
And render me all needed aid.”


‘{I added]: “Should I break these vows—seeing that it is
better to die than to live a life without seeking to acquire
Truth—may the Divine Beings, who protect the Faith, cut
my life short immediately, and may my Guru’s and Devas’s
grace combine in directing my next life to religious pursuits
and endow it with the firmness and intellect necessary to
enable it to surmount all obstacles [on the Path] and triumph
over them.”

‘Having thus vowed, I sang this song, consecrating my
vows :

‘« Offspring of Naropa and of the Saving Path,

May [I], the hermit, cling successfully to solitude.


‘“ May pleasures of the world illusory not tempt me;
But may Tranquillity of Meditation be increased ;


‘“May I not lie steeped in Unconsciousness of Quietude ; !
But may the Blossom of the Superconsciousness bloom forth
in me.


‘“ May various mind-created worldly thoughts not vex me ;
But may the foliage luxuriant, of Uncreatedness, burst forth
in me.


1 There are states of Unconsciousness, into which a yog? may fall, which do
not lead to Enlightenment. A like state, which, however, is not necessarily
a state of unconsciousness, is experienced in the yogic condition of suspended
animation or yogscally induced hibernation. Although a practised yogi may
hibernate for very long periods—according to some yogis for centuries—and
eventually revive in his physical form, it is not desirable that he should do so,
if he be aiming—as Milarepa was—at Deliverance from the Sangsara.


194 MEDITATION IN SOLITUDE [PART II


‘“ May I, in hermitage, be troubled not with mental conflicts ;
But may I ripen fruit of Knowledge and Experience.


‘“ May Mara and his hosts disturb me not ;
But may I find self-satisfaction in the Knowledge of mine
own [True] Mind.


‘“ May I doubt not the Path and Method I pursue ;
But may I follow in the footsteps of my Father [Spiritual].


‘“ © Gracious Lord, Embodiment of the Immutable,
Thy Blessings grant, that I [the mendicant], may firmly
hold to solitude.”


‘This prayer finished, I continued my meditations, living on
just a little flour mixed up with whatever food came in my
way. I mentally acquired knowledge of the Maha-Mudra
(Great Symbol) ; but my body, being too weak, was unable to
control the Airs (Psycho-Physical nervous Power, or Fluid)?
of my system, so that I did not acquire the Ecstatic Internal
Warmth, and continued to be very sensitive to the cold.

‘I prayed earnestly to my Guru ; and, one night, I had the
following vivid dream, or rather vision in a superconscious
state. A number of women came carrying all sorts of food
with which they performed a p7a (religious ceremony), saying
that they had been sent by my Guru Marpa to instruct me
in religious physical exercises.

‘[Thus directed], I began to practise the three exercises of
Physical, Vocal, and Mental Culture, and developed the Ecstatic
Physical Warmth.2, Thus a year went by, when, one day,
I had a desire to go about for a little recreation. I was about
to start forth, when I instantly recollected mine own vows, and
sang to myself the following song of self-reproof:


1 Skt. Vayu, which, being derived from the root V@ (‘to breathe’ or ‘to
blow’) refers to the motive power of the vital-force (Skt. Prava),.

3 Here M. Bacot’s version (p. 203) is more detailed, as follows: ‘Then, in
the squatting posture [or dsana] which resembleth the ‘‘ Six Internal Hearths”,
I sought the well-being of my body. By means of the condition of the breathing
which giveth regularity, 1 sought rightness of speech. By the condition of
mine own liberation which controlleth the imagination, I sought calmness
of mind. After that I entered into meditation. Soon the internal heat began
to come over me.’


CHAP. X] SONG OF SELF-REPROOF 195


‘OQ Dorje-Chang Thyself, in Marpa’s form!
Grant that this mendicant may cling to solitude.


‘“O thou strange fellow, Milarepa!
To thee I sing this song of self-counsel.


*“ Aloof thou art from all of humankind
Who might with thee sweet converse hold.


‘«“ Therefore thou feelest lonely and wouldst seek diversion ;
No reason is there for thee thus to seek.


‘“ Excite not thus thy mind, but let it rest in peace ;
If thoughts it harbour, ’twill hanker after numerous im-
pieties.
‘* To thy desire for these distractions give not way, but exert
thine intellect ;
If to temptation thou give way, scattered to the wind will
thy devotion be.


‘“ Walk thou not forth, but rest content upon thy seat ;
If forth thou walk, thy feet may strike ’gainst stones.


‘“ Raise not thy head, but bend it down;
If it be raised, ’twill seek for vain frivolities.


‘Sleep not, but continue thy devotions ;
If thou fall asleep, the Poisons Five, of Ignorance, will
subdue thee.” ?


‘Then, having sung this song of self-reproof, I continued
unceasingly my meditations for over three years, both night
and day, and I could feel my spiritual knowledge expanding
and improving greatly. But now my stock of barley-flour was
quite expended. I had resolved on the starvation diet of
twenty measures of barley-flour per year, and now even that
had run out. I might have died without being able to attain
Buddhahood ; this would have been a deplorable interruption

1 Slothfulness and torpor are condemned as unbecoming a yogi. The vow
not to sleep is one of twelve austerities permitted by the Buddha, But an
esoteric meaning is also implied here, namely, that the devotee must not allow
the hypnotic glamour of the worldly life to affect him, lest the ‘ Five (or Six]
Poisons ’—Pride, Jealousy, Sloth, Anger, Greed, and Lust—enslave him, as
they do the multitude, to sangsdaric existence.


196 MEDITATION IN SOLITUDE [PART II


in mine eternal career. I considered that worldly people re-
joiced over the acquirement of a seeka (one four-anna weight)
or two of gold and felt unhappy at losing the same. Compared
to that, my life, devoted as it was to the attainment of Buddha-
hood, was infinitely more precious. Were the entire universe
to be filled with gold, still the life devoted to the attainment
of Buddhahood was infinitely more precious. At the same
time, it would be preferable to die in the course of my devo-
tional life rather than break my vows. What should I do?
Then the thought came to me that if I started forth in search
of some article of food to sustain my life, without descending
to human habitations to beg, I should not be breaking my
vows. Moreover, it would be in the interests of my devotion
todo so. Accordingly, I strolled forth beyond the front of my
Dragkar-Taso Cave; and there discovering a sunny spot
with good springs of water, with plenty of nettles growing
round about—a delightful spot, commanding extensive views—
I removed to it.

‘Living on nettle broth alone, I continued my meditations.
I had no clothes on the outside of my body, nor any whole-
some food inside. My body became shrunken to a mere skele-
ton; and it was greenish in hue, just like the nettle, and over
it grew a covering of greenish hair.

‘TI used to regard the scroll, which my Guru had given me,
with special veneration, sometimes putting it on my head, and
touching it with fondness; and this had the effect of soothing
my stomach, although I had nothing to eat. Sometimes I used
even to have belchings [as if I had eaten my fill of food].
Once or twice I was on the point of opening and reading its
contents ; but I had some signs telling me that the time for
doing so had not yet arrived; accordingly, I kept it by me.

‘ About a year after that, some hunters from the Kyeedrong
mart chanced to come strolling my way, having failed to
obtain any sport. At first they ran away, saying they had
seen a bhuta (an evil spirit). On mine assuring them that I was
a human being and a devotee, they said I did not look like
one, but anyhow came to look well at me. They came up and
pried into every nook and corner of my cave. At last, they


CHAP. x] THE HUNTERS’ VISIT 197


said, “ Where are thy food-stuffs? Let us borrow some, and
we will repay it liberally; otherwise we will kill thee.” Thus
they threatened me. I told them I had only nettles, and even
if I had other things—seeing that they were rude enough to
insult me by lifting me up—they should not obtain them by
using force. They replied that they were not going to rob me;
and, as for insulting me, what should they gain by it? I said
that they might possibly acquire merit. Thereupon they said,
“ All right ; we will lift thee up again.” And they picked me
up and let me fall on the ground several times over. This
filled my poor weakened body with much pain; but, in spite
of it, I pitied them sincerely,! and shed tears, One of them,
who refrained from this heartless deed, said, “O ye fellows,
this man seemeth to be a real Lama, and even if he be not
one, ye will not gain glory by ill-treating such a weak person.
He hath not compelled us to be hungry. Do not act so,”
And to me he said, “ Hermit, it is admirable of thee to stand
such ill-treatment. As for me, I have done nothing against
thee; therefore remember me in thy prayers.” The others
added, in fun, “As we have lifted thee up, remember to put
us, too, under thy prayers’ protection.’ The other one said,
“Ay, ay, that he will do, ye may be quite sure—only in a
different way!” They went away laughing boisterously. I
had no intention or thought of cursing them; but it seemeth
that divine retribution overtook them, for I came to learn
afterward that the hunters had been arrested by the Governor
of the Province. The leader was killed, and all, except the
person who refrained from offering indignities to me, had their
eyes put out.

‘About a year after that, all my clothes were worn out, and
only some rags of the cloth which mine aunt had given me as
the price of my field, and the sack in which the flour had been
supplied, remained. I once thought of sewing the rags together
and making them into a sort of bedding; and then I thought

1 Milarepa here shows himself loyal to his Vow, it being essential to attain-
ment of Nirvdzic Enlightenment for the Bodhisattva to be perfected in the
‘Four Brahma Qualities’, namely, Pity, Compassion, and Altruistic Love for


every sentient being, and the Indifference of equanimity towards all states or
conditions of sangsanc existence.


198 MEDITATION IN SOLITUDE [PART II


that if I died that very night what would be the use of sewing ;
better far to go on with my meditation. So, spreading the
tattered skin dress underneath as bedding, I made it serve as
covering for the lower part of my body [by wrapping its ends
round me] as well as it could ; while I covered the upper part
of my body with the ragged empty flour sack ; and, with what
remained of the rags of the cloth, I covered those parts of my
body which required it most. At last, all these were far too
worn to be of any use at.all to serve as coverings. Finally, it
seemed to me that this was too much of self-abnegation, and
that I must sew the rags together, but I had no needle or
thread, so I twined the rags about my body in three pieces,
knotted in three places, and kept in position by ends of rope
tied together to make a girdle. Under this, I passed the days
as well as I could; and, at night, the ragged sack and the
remains of the tattered skin dress afforded me some protection
from cold.

‘Thus I continued meditating for about another year, when
one day there was a noise as of many people talking. On
peeping out, I saw another party of hunters, carrying large
quantities of meat, approach the entrance of my cave. On
seeing me, those in the front cried out, ‘“‘ Oh, there is a kita |”
and ran away; those in the rear said that it was not probable
that there would be a dhéta about in broad daylight, and
added, “ Look again, and see whether the d/é7a is there still.”
On being told that there it was still, even those old hunters
who had come last, in the rear, began to be afraid. I told them
that I was not a d4u2a, but a hermit, who was reduced to this
plight for want of provisions. They wished to see for them-
selves, and ransacked the whole place, every nook and corner
being pried into. But seeing nothing but nettles, all of them
were moved to veneration. They left me the remainder of
their provisions, and a large quantity of meat, saying respect-
fully, “It is praiseworthy of thee to practise such asceticism.
Please pray for the absolution of the animals we have killed,
and for our own sins in killing them.”

‘I rejoiced at the prospect of having food such as ordinary
human beings eat, and, on partaking of the food, I enjoyed a


CHAP. X] WORLDLY VISITANTS 199


sense of bodily ease and comfort, and a cheerfulness of mind
which tended to increase the zeal of my devotional exercises ;
and I experienced keen spiritual happiness such as transcended
anything I had known‘ before. I thought that the merit ac-
quired by those who offer a few scraps of food to the lonely
hermits in the solitudes would surely exceed that of the most
munificent gifts to those who are enjoying plenty and living
amidst human society in towns and villages. The meat I used
sparingly, till at last it was full of maggots. I once thought
of clearing it of the maggots and using it; but I considered
that it was not intended for me to enjoy the meat, since
I should have to dispute it with maggots, which would be
robbery. And I thought that however nice it might be, it was
not worth my while going to the length of committing robbery
for a meal; so I allowed the maggots to take the meat for
themselves, while I fell back upon mine own nettle broth.

‘One night, a person, believing that I possessed some wealth,
came and, groping about, stealthily pried into every corner of
my cave. Upon my observing this, I laughed outright, and
said, “ Try if thou canst find anything by night where I have
failed by daylight.” The person himself could not help laugh-
ing, too; and then he went away.

‘About a year after that, some hunters of Tsa, having
failed to secure any game, happened to come strolling by the
cave. As I was sitting in Samadhi, wearing the above triple-
knotted apology for clothing, they prodded me with the ends
of their bows, being curious to know whether I was a man
or a bhitta. Seeing the state of my body and clothes, they
were more inclined to believe me a dbhita. While they were
discussing this amongst themselves, I opened my mouth and
spoke, saying, “Ye may be quite sure that I am a man.”
They recognized me from seeing my teeth, and asked me
whether I was Thépaga. On my answering in the affirmative,
they asked me for a loan of some food, promising to repay it
handsomely. They said, “We heard that thou hadst come once
to thy home many years ago. Hast thou been here all the
while?” I replied, “Yes; but I cannot offer you any food
which ye would be able to eat.” They said that whatever did


200 MEDITATION IN SOLITUDE [PART II


for me would do for them. Then I told them to make fire
and to boil nettles. They did so, but as they expected some-
thing to season the soup with, such as meat, bone, marrow, or
fat, I said, “If I had that, I should then have food with pala-
table qualities; but I have not had that for years. Apply the
nettles in place of the seasoning.” Then they asked for flour
or grain to thicken the soup with. I told them if I had that,
I should then have food with sustaining properties ; but that
I had done without that for some years, and told them to
apply nettle tips instead. At last they asked for some salt,
to which I again said that salt would have imparted taste to
my food; but I had done without that also for years, and
recommended the addition of more nettle tips in place of salt.
They said, ‘‘ Living upon such food, and wearing such gar-
ments as thou hast on now, it is no wonder that thy body
hath been reduced to this miserable plight. Thine appearance
becometh not a man. Why, even if thou should serve as
a servant, thou wouldst have a bellyful of food and warm
clothing. Thou art the most pitiable and miserable person in
the whole world.” I said, “O my friends, do not say that.
I am one of the most fortunate and best amongst all who
have obtained the human life. I have met with Marpa the
Translator, of Lhobrak, and obtained from him the Truth
which conferreth Buddhahood in one lifetime; and now,
having entirely given up all worldly thoughts, Iam passing my
life in strict asceticism and devotion in these solitudes, far
away from human habitations. I am obtaining that which will
avail me in Eternity. By denying myself the trivial pleasures
to be derived from food, clothing, and fame, I am subduing
the Enemy [Ignorance] in this very lifetime. Amongst the
World’s entire human population I am one of the most
courageous, with the highest aspirations. But ye!—born in
a country where the Noble Doctrine of the Buddha prevaileth,
yet have not so much as listened to one religious discourse,
let alone devoting your lives to it; but, on the other hand, ye
are striving your utmost to gain the lowest depths and the
longest terms of an existence in the Infernal Regions! Ye are
accumulating sins by the pound and stone, and vying with


CHAP. X]} SONG ON YOGIC COMFORTS 201


each other in that! How foolish and perverted are your aims
in life! I not only rejoice in the prospect of Eternal Bliss, but
enjoy these things which give me contentment and self-appro-
bation.”
‘I then sang to them a song about my Five Comforts :
‘Lord! Gracious Marpa! I bow down at Thy Feet !
Enable me to give up worldly aims.


‘“ Here in the Dragkar-Taso’s Middle Cave,
On this the topmost summit of the Middle Cave,
I, the Yogz Tibetan called Repa,
Relinquishing all thoughts of what to eat or wear, and this
life’s aims,
Have settled down to win the perfect Buddhahood.

‘** Comfortable is the hard mattress underneath me,
Comfortable is the Nepalese cotton-padded quilt above me,
Comfortable is the single meditation-band which holdeth up

my knee,
Comfortable is the body, to a diet temperate inured,
Comfortable is the Lucid Mind which discerneth present
clingings and the Final Goal ;
Nought is there uncomfortable; everything is comfortable.


‘“Tf all of ye can do so, try to imitate me;
But if inspired ye be not with the aim of the ascetic life,
And to the error of the Ego Doctrine? will hold fast,
I pray that ye spare me your misplaced pity ;
For I a Yogt am, upon the Path of the Acquirement of
Eternal Bliss.


‘’ The sun’s last rays are passing o’er the mountain tops ;
Return ye to your own abodes.
And as for me, who soon must die, uncertairi of the hour of


death,


1 The meditation-band is placed so as to encircle the body and the yogtcally
postured legs and thus prevent the legs dropping when the yog? enters into
deep meditation—there being need to maintain the posture (Skt. 4sana), which
cuts off or short-circuits certain bodily forces or currents. Asanas also make
the body pliant and capable of great endurance, eliminate unhealthy physical
conditions, and cure illnesses.

2 The Doctrine of a personal Ego or Soul; see p. 38}.


202 MEDITATION IN SOLITUDE | PART II


With self-set task of winning perfect Buddhahood,

No time have I to waste on useless talk ;

Therefore shall I into the State Quiescent of Samadhi
enter now.”


‘On hearing the song, they said, “Thou art singing of
various comforts, yet, in fact, thou dost really possess a very
nice voice. As for us, we cannot rough it as thou art doing.”
Then they went off home.

‘On the occasion of an annual feast-day in Kyanga-Tsa,
they chanced to sing this song together. It happened that my
sister Peta was also there, having gone to obtain some food
and drink. She, upon hearing the song, said to them, “ Sirs,
the man who sang that must be a very Buddha himself.” One
among the hunters said, ““ Ha! Ha! see how she praiseth her
own brother” ; and another said, “ Whether he be Buddha or
animal, it is thy half-starved brother’s song; he is on the
point of death from hunger.” On this, Peta said, “Oh! my
parents are dead long ago; my relatives have become mine
enemies; my brother hath roamed away, and I myself am
reduced to a beggar’s life: what is the need of gloating over
my miseries?” And she burst out weeping. Zesay came up
just then, and comforted her by saying, “Do not weep. It is
quite possible that it is thy brother; I also met him some
time ago. Go thou to the Dragkar-Taso Cave, and find out
if he be there still. If he be, then both of us will go to
see him.”

‘Thus being led to believe the statement, she came to me
at the Dragkar-Taso Cave with a jugful of chang and a small
vessel full of flour. On first seeing me from the entrance of
the cave, she was frightened. My body was emaciated by the
privations and hardships ; mine eyes were deeply sunken into
the sockets ; my bones showed prominently; my colour was
of a bluish green ; my muscles were all shrunken and shrivelled ;
a growth of bluish-green hair covered my skeleton-like form;
the hairs of my head were stiff, and formed a formidable wig ;
and my limbs appeared as if they were about to break.
Altogether, I was a sight which inspired her with such a dread-


CHAP. X] PETA’S VISIT 203


ful fright that she took me to be a bhuta. But recollecting
that she had heard that her brother was on the point of death
from starvation, she half doubted whether it was really myself.
At last she mustered up courage, and asked me, “Art thou
a human being or a bhata?”’ I answered, and said, “I am Mila
Thépaga.” She, recognizing my voice, came in and embraced
me, crying, “ Brother, brother !” and then fainted away for
a while. I, too, knowing her to be Peta, felt both glad and
sorry at the same time. Applying the best means of restoring
her, I at last succeeded in doing so. But she put her head
between my knees, and, covering her face with both her hands,
gave way to another flood of tears, sobbing forth the following :
“Our mother died in great trouble with a keen yearning to
see thee. No one came near us; and I, being unable to bear
the great privations and loneliness in our own house, left it to
go a-begging in distant lands. I thought that thou wert also
dead. I should, however, have expected that if thou were alive
to have found thee in better circumstances than these. But,
alas! thy circumstances are such. Thou seest what mine own
destiny is! Could there be any one on the earth more wretched
than ourselves!’”’ Then she repeatedly called upon the names
of our parents, and continued wailing bitterly. I tried my
best to console her. At last, I, too, felt very sad, and sang
this song to my sister:


‘“ Obeisance to my Lords, the Gurus!
Grant that this Yog7 may hold fast to solitude.


‘«Q© sister, thou art filled with worldly sentiments and feel-
ings ;
[Know thou that worldly] joys and griefs are all imper-
manent.
But I, alone by taking on myself these hardships,
Am sure to win Eternal Happiness ;
So harken thou unto thy brother’s song :


*“To repay the kindness of all sentient beings,
They having been our parents,’ to the life religious I did


give myself.
1 So interininably, during inconceivable aeons, have evolution and transition,


204 MEDITATION IN SOLITUDE [PART II


‘“ Behold my lodgings; like those of jungle beasts are they ;
Any other person would be timid in them.


‘“ Behold my food ; ’tis like the food of dogs and pigs ;
It would excite in others nausea.


‘“Behold my body ; ’tis like a skeleton ;
Even an enemy would weep on seeing it.


‘“In my behaviour, I am like a madman ;
O sister, thou art moved thereby to disappointment and to
SOrrow ;
Yet if thou could observe my mind, ’tis the Bodhi Mind
itself ;
The Conquerors rejoice at seeing it.


‘“ Sitting upon this cold rock underneath me, I meditate with
zeal, s
Enough to bear the tearing of my skin off or my flesh from
off its bones ;
My body, both inside and out, like nettles hath become;
A greenish hue, which changeth not, it hath assumed.


‘“ Here in this solitary rocky cave,
Though with no chance of driving melancholy from my
mind,
Unchangedly I ever hold adoration and affection
For the Guru, True-Embodiment of the Eternal Buddhas.


‘“Thus persevering in my meditation,
I doubtlessly shall gain Transcendent Knowledge and Ex-
perience ;


and rebirth, been going on, that all sentient beings have been our parents. The
respect for woman among Buddhists is based on this principle, which is highly
interesting in the light of modern biological sciences.

The Hindus, likewise, say that each creature normally experiences 8,400,000
sorts of birth ere attaining to the state of mankind. As in The Tibetan Book of
the Dead (p. 178), four kinds of birth are mentioned : birth by heat and moisture,
as in the lowest forms of organic life ; birth by egg; birth by womb; and super-
normal birth, such as that when the consciousness-principle is transferred from
the human to another realm of existence, either at death normally or by yogic
practices super-normally at any time.


CHAP. X] SONG ON PETA’S VISIT 205


And if, in this, I can succeed,

Prosperity and happiness is won within this lifetime, as I go
along ;

And, in my next birth, Buddhahood I’ll win.


‘“ Therefore, my sister, Peta dear,
To woeful sorrows give not way,
But also give thyself to penances, for religion’s sake.”


‘When Peta had heard this, she said, “‘ It would be admirable
were it as thou sayest, but it is difficult to believe it true. For
were it as thou representestit to be, other devotees would practise
at least part of such hardships, even if they could not bear all
that thou hast borne. But I have not seen even one who is
undergoing such privations and penances.” Saying this, she
gave me the chhang and the food she had brought. I felt very
much strengthened and refreshed by partaking of it, and my
devotions during the night were more earnest and spiritual.

‘The next morning, after Peta’s departure, I experienced
a sharp feeling of excitement and physical pain; and a variety
of pious and impious ideas and thoughts sprang up in my
mind. I tried mine utmost to concentrate my mind upon medi-
tation, but it was of no avail. Some days after this, Zesay
paid me a visit, bringing some well-cured and seasoned meat
and butter, and a goodly supply of chhangand flour. She was
accompanied by Peta. They met me while I was going to
fetch wate1. I being stark naked (for I had no clothes), they
were both ashamed ; and yet, despite their bashfulness, they
could not help weeping at mine utter poverty. They offered me
the meat, butter, flour, and chang. While I was drinking the
chhang, Peta said, ““O my brother, whichever way I observe
thee, thou dost not look at all like a sane human being. Pray
have recourse to soliciting of alms, and do partake of the food
of men. I will try to find some cloth and bring it over to
thee. Zesay added, “Do have recourse to alms, begging for
your food, and I, also, will come to offer thee a cloth.” But
I said, “* With the uncertainty of the time of death looming
over me, I see not the use of going a-begging for food, nor
could I afford to lose the time in doing so. Even if I were to


206 MEDITATION IN SOLITUDE [PART II


die of the cold, it would be for the sake of Truth and Reli-
gion; and, therefore, I should have very little cause for regret.
I could not be satisfied with that show of devotion which is
practised amid a circle of merry relatives and friends, revelling
in unlimited quantities of food and drink, and clothed in fine
raiment—all obtained at the cost of real and sincere devotion.
Nor do I need thy clothes and visits. I will not pay heed to
thine advice of going a-begging for food.” Peta said, “ How
then, my brother, can thy heart be satisfied? It seemeth to
me that something more wretched than this would satisfy
thee, but even thine ingenuity seemeth to fail in devising any-
thing more painful and abstemious.” I replied that the three
Lower Zokas} are much more miserable than this ; yet most
sentient beings are doing their best to obtain the miseries of
these three states of existence. As for me, I am satisfied with
these present afflictions. So saying, I sang the song of what
would constitute my Satisfactions :


‘“Obeisance to the Body of my Lord, the Guru!
O grant that I may cling successfully to solitude.


‘“My happiness unknown unto my relatives,
My sorrowing unknown unto mine enemies —
Could thus I die, amid this Solitude,
Contented would I be, I the devotee.


‘My growing old unknown unto my betrothed,
My falling ill unknown unto my sister—
Could thus I die, amid this Solitude,
Contented would I be, I the devotee.


‘My death unknown to any human being,
My rotting corpse unseen by birds ?—
Could thus I die, amid this Solitude,
Contented would I be, I the devotee.


1 Namely, the World of Sub-human Creatures (Skt. Tiryaga-Loka), the
World of Unhappy Ghosts (Skt. Preta-Loka), and the Hell-world (Skt. Naraka-
Loka),

2 In most parts of Tibet it is customary to give a corpse to the birds to
devour—as the Parsees do.


cHAP. x] SONG ON YOGIC SATISFACTIONS 207


‘“ My putrid flesh sucked by the flies,
My dissolving muscles eaten by the worms—
Could thus I die, amid this Solitude,
Contented would I be, I the devotee.


*“ With no human foot-print by my door,
With no mark of blood within [the Cave] 1—
Could thus I die, amid this Solitude,
Contented would I be, I the devotee.


‘With none to crowd about my corpse [or bier],
With none to lament o’er my death—
Could thus I die, amid this Solitude,
Contented would I be, I the devotee.


‘ “With none to ask where I had gone,

And with no place which one might point to as my goal—

Could thus I die, amid this Solitude,

Contented would I be, I the devotee.

‘“ Thus, may this prayer about the manner of my death

Amid this uninhabited Solitude

Bear fruit, and, for all beings good, be granted as I wish;

Then satisfied I’ll die, I the devotee.”

‘On hearing this, Zesay said, ‘Thy first sayings and thy
present actions agree. Therefore this song is worthy of admi-
ration.” Then Peta said, “Whatever thou mayst say, my
brother, as for me, I cannot bea: to see thee in such utter want
of clothes and food. I will do my best to find a cloth for thee,
and will come over with it. Thy devotion would not run
away if thou shouldst have a sufficiency of good food and
clothing ; but seeing that thou wilt not go to beg for alms, it
is probable that thou wilt die without any one near thee, in
this solitude, of starvation and cold, just as thou desirest.

1 This refers to the Tibetan method of air-burial, whereby a corpse is given
to the denizens of the Element Air, the birds and wild beasts, after having been
dismembered. In addition—according to place, circumstances of death, and rank
of the deceased—fire-burial, i.e. the giving of the corpse to the Element Fire,
as in cremation ; water-burial, the giving of the corpse to the Element Water, by
casting it into rivers or lakes; and earth-burial, the giving of the corpse to the
Element Earth, as among Christians ; and, also, mummification of the corpses of


the Dalai and Tashi Lamas and of great nobles, somewhat after the Egyptian
fashion, are practised in Tibet. See The Tibetan Book of the Dead, pp. 25-7.


208 MEDITATION IN SOLITUDE [PART II


Should I, however, find that thou art not dead, I will come to
bring thee some sort of a cloth, which I will try to get.”
Having said this, they both went away.

‘On my partaking of the good food, my physical pains and
my mental disturbances increased so much that I was unable
to go on with my meditation. In this predicament, thinking
that there could not be a greater danger than the inability to
continue my meditation, I opened the scroll given me by my
Guru. I found it to contain the manner of treating the present
ailment, thus clearing the obstacles and dangers on the Path,
and turning the Vice to Virtue, and increasing the Spiritual
Earnestness and Energy. It was mentioned in the scroll that
I should use good wholesome food at this time.1 The per-
severance with which I had meditated had prepared my nerves
for an internal change in the whole nervous system, but this
had been retarded by the poor quality of my food. Peta’s
chhang had somewhat excited the nerves, and Zesay’s offerings
had fully affected them. I now understood what was happen-
ing ; and, on studying the contents of the scroll, I found it
contained the. accessory means and exercises [both physical
and mental], which I at once began to practise. Thereupon,
I saw that the minuter nerves of my system were being
straightened out;* even the knot of the Sushumna-Nadit
(median nerve) was loosening below the navel;* and I ex-
perienced a state of supersensual calmness and clearness
resembling the former states which I had experienced, but
exceeding them in its depth and ecstatic intensity, and therein
differing from them. Thus was a hitherto unknown and trans-
cendent knowledge born in me. Soaring free above the
obstacles, I knew that the very evil [or danger] had been
turned to good. What till now had been regarded as objective
discrimination shone forth as the Dharma-Kaya. I understood


1 As in the practice of Kundalini Yoga, the devotee is directed to change his
food as he progresses from one stage to another on the Path of Accomplishment.

2 Literally, ‘their knots were loosening’; see p. 347.

8 The navel nerve-centre (Mantpira-chakra) is the centre of the Element Fire
of the body. Next belowit isthe centre of the Element Water, the Suadhishthana-
chakra; and next below this is the centre of the Element Earth, the Maladhara-
chakra; see p. 34%


CHAP. X] THE BIRTH OF KNOWLEDGE 209


the Sangsara and Nirvana to be dependent and relative
states ;/ and that the Universal Cause is Mind, which is dis-
tinct from the ideas of Interestedness or Partiality. This
Universal Cause, when directed along the Path of Disbelief
[or Selfishness], resulteth in the Sangsadra; while if it be
directed along the path of Altruism, it resulteth in Nirvana.
I was perfectly convinced that the real source of both Sang-
sara and Nirvana lay in the Voidness [of the Supra-mundane
Mind].? The knowledge I now had obtained was born of my
previous energetic devotions, which had served as its main
cause ; and it only awaited the accident, at the crisis, of the
wholesome and nourishing food, and the timely prescription
contained in the scroll, to bring it forth. My belief in the
methods of the Mantrayanic doctrines, which teach that a real
transcendent knowledge can be obtained by proper care of the
body and without giving up nourishing food and comfortable
clothing, was thus firmly established. I also saw that Peta
and Zesay had greatly contributed to the final development
of the hitherto latent qualities, and therefore mine obligation
to them was great. So by way of proving my gratitude,
and to consecrate their pious deeds to an Eternal and In-
exhaustible Purpose, I sang this hymn [of prayer], which
embodieth the Essence of the Dependence and Relativity of
Facts : *


‘«Obeisance to the Feet of Marpa of Lhobrak!
Grant that this hermit may hold fast to Solitude successfully.


1 Sangsara and Nirvana to the Enlightened Mind of a Buddha are, as the
Ultimate Opposites, inseparable—being but states of mind, the one the state
of the mundane mind, the other the state of the supra-mundane mind of the
Dharma-Kaya.

2 Cf. pp. 35! and 36°.

3 The Translator, the late Lama Kazi Dawa-Samdup, has here added the
following explanatory note: ‘This somewhat abstruse phraseology means—as
far as can be understood—that this hymn was sung as a dedication of the merits
of Zesay’s and Peta’s pious gifts, in such a way that these gifts may become
eternal and inexhaustible sources of good £armic results to them, as their gifts
had tended to bring out and develop the latent qualities in Jetstin’s own physical
system, and accelerated his spiritual growth and development. This accelera-
tion having been brought about by their gifts, it may be said that the result
depended on their gifts. So Jetsiin wished to weigh their gifts, not according to
their value, but according to their result.’


210 MEDITATION IN SOLITUDE [PART II


‘«« Upon the charity of righteous laymen,
Success for them and me dependeth ;
This body, delicate and brittle, and difficult to gain,
By meeting food, is nourished and sustained.


‘“ The life-sustaining principle, upsprouting from the earth,
And ambrosial showers from the heavenly dome of blue,
Join together and confer a blessing on all sentient beings ;
And in a life religious this is employed the best.’


‘“ The transient body, nourished by one’s parents,
And the Sacred Teaching of the Sacred Guru,
Join together and then favour the religious life ;
Wherein, in Perseverance, lieth true success.


‘« The rocky cave, amid the uninhabited solitude,
And devotion zealous and sincere, |
Join together and bring forth the Issue of Success ;
Of Knowledge Spiritual doth this consist.


‘“ Tn the stoical and patient fortitude of Milarepa’s meditation,
And the faith of beings of the Lokas Three,
Lieth opportunity of Universal Usefulness ;
Of this, the essence is Compassion.?


‘“ The yogt who, in rocky caves, doth meditate,
And laymen who provide his sustenance,
Do each thus win the chance of gaining Buddhahood ;
Of this, the essence is the Consecration.®


1 There is herein an underlying reference to the development of the Kundalini
(or Serpent) Power. From the Root-Support Lotus (the Earth) it rises ; from
the Thousand-Petalled Lotus (the Sky or Heavens) falls the ambrosial showers,
which confer Ecstatic Illumination. (See p. 342.)

? The virtue of Milarepa’s meditation and of the faith of the beings of the
Three Lokas or Regions, viz., of Desire (Kama), of Form (Rapa), and of
Formlessness (Aripa), unite and produce a spiritual force helpful to all sentient
beings throughout the Sangsara (or Universe of Nature). Of this the essence is
Compassion.

* The yogi meditating, and the layman providing him with food, both work
for and attain Buddhahood, by means of consecrating the merits of their mutual
helpfulness to the Catise of the Enlightenment of all sentient beings. (Cf. the
first stanza above, after the Obeisance.)


CHAP. X] SONG ON INTERDEPENDENCE a


*“Tn the Sacred Guru's grace,
And the active meditation of the zealous shishya,
Lieth opportunity to uphold the Truth [the Hierarchy];
Of this, the essence is the Purity of Faith.!


‘In the Rites Initiatory, which confer and bless with Occult
Power,
And in the prayer, earnest and sincere [of the devotee],
Lieth opportunity of meeting speedily [Spiritual Com-
munion ] ;
Of this, the essence is the Benediction.”


‘“ Lord Dorje-Chang, O Thou the Immutable,
The weal and woe of this mendicant Thou knowest.”


‘ This hymn having been sung, I zealously persevered in my
meditations. At last, I began to feel that I had obtained the
power of transforming myself into any shape [desired], and of
flying through the air. By day, I thus felt that I could exercise
endless phenomenal powers ; by night, in my dreams, I could
traverse the universe in every direction unimpededly—from
the summit of Mount Meru ® to its base—and I saw every-


1 Pure faith and devotion in the shishya and the divine grace of the Guru
combine to produce the Saints who uphold the Church of Truth Universal on
Earth.

2 The benediction bestowed upon the Initiate and his fervent aspiration to
attain Realization of Truth combine and speedily lead to the Goal—True Wisdom
being won through direct communion with the superhuman Gurus, of whom
Vajra-Dhara (Tib. Dorje-Ch’ ang) is, for the Kargyiitpa School, the Chief.

3 Mount Meru is the Great Central Mountain of Buddhist as of Hindu mythology,
round which the cosmos is disposed in seven concentric circles of intervening
seas and mountains. Rationally interpreted, Mount Meru is the centre of gravi-
tation of a universe such as ours; and, in the Buddhist scheme of Cosmology,
our Universe is but one in the infinity of space, each being separated from the
other by an iron-wall, which, like an egg-shell, encloses each universe, the iron-
wall symbolizing darkness, But here, in our text, Mount Meru, the hub of the
physical universe, has an esoteric significance. It symbolizes the Mount Meru of
the human organism, the spinal column (Skt. Brahma-danda), in the hollow of
which is the median-nerve (Skt. Sushun:ua-ndaqi), the chief channel of psychic
forces in man regarded as the Microcosm of the Macrocosm. Round the Brahma-
danda, like the two serpents coiled round the wand of the messenger-god Hermes,
are the two complementary channels, the left-nerve (Skt. Jda-nadi) and the right-
nerve (Skt. Pingala-nadt), The summit of Mount Meru is the Thousand-Petalled
Lotus of the brain nerve-centre, the Sahasrara-Padma ; the base is the Root-
Support nerve-centre of the Sushumna-naqi, known as the Muladhara-chakra,


212 MEDITATION IN SOLITUDE [PART II


thing clearly [as I went]. Likewise [in my dreams] I could
multiply myself into hundreds of personalities, all endued with
the same powers as myself. Each of my multiplied forms
could traverse space and go to some Buddha Heaven, listen
to the Teachings there, and then come back and preach the
Dharma to many persons. I could also transform my physical
body into a blazing mass of fire, or into an expanse of flowing
or calm water. Seeing that I had obtained infinite pheno-
menal powers [even though it be but in my dreams], I was
filled with happiness and encouragement at mine own success.
‘Thenceforth, I persevered in my devotions in a most joyous
mood, until, finally, I actually could fly. Sometimes I flew
over to the Min-khyit-Dribma-Dzong (Castle lying in Shadows
to the Eyebrows)! to meditate; and there I obtained a far
greater development of the Vital Warmth than ever before.
Sometimes I flew back again to the Dragkar-Taso Cave.
‘Once, while I was thus flying, I happened to pass over
a small village, called Long-da, where a brother of mine uncle’s
deceased daughter-in-law happened to live. She had been one
of those who had perished in the crashing of the house. He had
also a son, and the father and son were engaged in ploughing
a field [as I flew over]. The son was leading the team, while
the father was guiding the ploughshare. The son saw me fly-
ing, and said, “ See, a man is flying!” And he left his work
to look at me. The father said, “‘ What is there to marvel at
or to be amused about in the sight ?> One Nyang-Tsa-Kargyen,
a very mischievous woman, had a wicked son, named Mila.
It is that good-for-nothing starveling. Move aside and do not
allow his shadow to fall over thee, and go on leading the team.”
The father himself was bending his body about so as to avoid


situated in the perineum. In the Thousand-Petalled Lotus, Shiva (Jaana:
‘Divine Wisdom’) and Kundalini (Shakti: ‘ Divine Power’) come together in
union, and the yogi experiences Illumination. The Zantras teach that to know
the Microcosm (Skt. Pizdazda) is to know the Macrocosm (Skt. Brahmanda)—
that whatever is here is elsewhere, that whatever is not here is not elsewhere.

1 This name may possibly also have esoteric significance. If so, the ‘ Castle
lying in Shadows to the Eyebrows’ would be the Ajid-chakra, whither Mila-
repa sometimes flew, i.e, centred his consciousness in practising Kundalini
Yoga (see p. 34”) and thus acquired the siddht of levitation and flying.


CHAP. X] THE S/DDHI OF FLYING 213


falling under my shadow. But the son said, “If a man be able
to fly, I do not mind his being a good-for-nothing person ;
there can be nothing more wonderful than a man flying.” So
saying, he continued looking at me.

‘Now I thought that I could efficiently help all sentient
beings if I liked, so I resolved to devote myself to helping
others; but I had a direct command from my Tutelary Deity
to go on devoting my whole life to meditation, as my Guru
had commanded. By that alone I should serve the Cause of
the Buddhistic Faith ; and, also, in serving all sentient beings
thereby, I could do no better; such was the command I re-
ceived. Thereupon, I thought that by dedicating my whole
life to meditation, I should be setting an example to future
devotees, who would thus be led to spend their life in devotion,
after giving up all worldly aims and prospects; and that would
conduce to the Cause of the Buddhistic Faith and to the benefit
of all sentient beings. So I resolved to spend my whole life
in rheditation.

‘Again, I thought that I had lived very long in the place,
during which I had been seen by several persons to whom I had
talked upon religious subjects; and now, that J had obtained
transcendent knowledge and stddhz (super-normal powers), and
had been seen flying by human beings, if I continued here,
worldly folk would flock to me, praying for protection from
harms and the fulfilment of selfish desires.’ This would be
courting the temptations of the Son of the Celestials.? Worldly
fame and prosperity might retard the progress of my devotion
and obscure my spiritual knowledge ; so I resolved to go and
carry on my meditation in the solitudes of Lapchi-Chiibar
(Between Rivers).2 Accordingly, I started forth, carrying on

1 This is one of the reasons why the Buddha and other of the Great Rishis ot
India prohibited the working of miracles except in cases of extreme necessity.

2 That is, Indra’s temptations, or worldly glory and prosperity. Indra, now
King of the Celestials, although risen to his present state from the human state,
once having been a prince on Earth, is said to use these temptations against any
man who practises great yogic austerities, like those that he once practised, to
prevent such a one from becoming his rival.

3 The Translator has thought that Lapchi-Chibar may possibly be another


name for Mt. Everest, in the caves of which the followers of Milarepa, even till
now, practise the Kargyiitpa system of yogtc meditation. The Tibetan name


214 MEDITATION IN SOLITUDE [PART II


my back from the Dragkar-Taso Cave the earthen vessel in
which I had been cooking my nettle-food. But as I had been
long practising meditation and living upon such poor food,
and quite naked most of the time, my soles having become
hardened, and horny scales being upon them, I slipped upon
a stone just beside my cave and fell down. The handle of the
earthen pot breaking, the pot itself rolled away and broke,
despite mine attempts to catch it. From within the broken
vessel there rolled a perfect green image of it, this being the
hardened encrustation of the nettle broth which had assumed
the shape of the outer vessel. The mishap vividly brought
home to me the impermanent nature of all worldly things. I
also understood it to be a sort of exhortation to persevere in my
devotions. Feeling the whole occurrence to be very wonderful,
I sang the following hymn in a spirit of deep faith :


*« Even the earthen pot, by having once existed, and now by

existing not,

Demonstrateth the nature of all things [component] ;

But more especially human life it symbolizeth.

Therefore do I, Mila the Devotee,

Resolve to persevere unwaveringly.

The earthen pot, which constituted my sole wealth,

By breaking, hath now become a Guru,}

For it preacheth unto me a wondrous sermon on Imper-
manence.”


‘While I was singing this, some hunters, who were coming
towards my place for a meal, had heard it. They said, “O
Hermit, thou possessest a very musical voice for singing. What
art thou doing with the broken earthen pot and the inner pot
of hardened encrustations of froth of nettle broth; and how
cometh it that thou art so emaciated and greenish in appear-
ance?” On mine explaining to them the reason of mine emacia-
tion they were filled with wonder, and asked me to partake of
their meal. While I was eating, one of the younger hunters
commonly given to Mt. Everest is Lapchi-Kang, and this name is used by
Milarepa in his song to his sister (see p. 224).


1 ‘There is this precept among the Kaula Tantrics: ‘‘ From Brahma to a blade
of grass all things are my Gurus.’’’—Sj. Atal Bihari Ghosh.


CHAP. X] ASCETICISM V. WORLDLINESS 215


said, “Why, thou seemest to be a powerfully built man. In-
stead of undergoing such troubles and privations, if thou
should take to a worldly career, thou wouldst, if things went
well, be riding a horse like a lion; and, accoutred in arms like
a thorn-bush, thou wouldst be subduing thine enemies. Byaccu-
mulating wealth thou wouldst be protecting thine affectionate
kindred, and thou wouldst be happy. Or else thou couldst
devote thyself to trade, in which line thou couldst earn sufficient
to make thee happy. At the worst, thou couldst serve as a ser-
vant, and obtain good food and clothes; as regardeth thy body
and mind, thou wouldst be far better off than this. Hitherto,
thou dost not seem to have known of this; so set about it now.”
One of the older hunters said, ‘He appeareth to me to be
a very good devotee, and it is not likely that he will mind our
worldly counsel; better keep quiet.” Then to me he said,
“Thou possessest a very fine voice. Please sing us a song,
which will do good to our minds.” To which I replied, “ Ye all
seem to think me very miserable, but there is no one in the
world who is so happy as myself, nor one who can boast of
greater sense or a nobler and more successful life; but ye could
not understand it. I enjoy the following things, which con-
stitute my felicity, just as the best of you. Listen to me.” So
saying, I sang them the hymn of a Yogi's Race:


‘“T bow down at the Feet of my Gracious Father Marpa!


‘“ Within the Temple of the Bodhi Hill, my body,
Within my breast, wherein the Altar is,
Within the chamber topmost and triangular within my heart,
The Horse of Mind, moving like the wind, doth prance
about.}


‘“ What Lasso must be used to catch this Horse?
And to what Post must It be tied when caught ?
What Food is to be given It when hungry ?


1 It is here assumed that the heart is the centre whence originate all mental
impulses, which, when uncontrolled, are as unruly as a wild horse. The catch-
ing and tying up of the Horse are the first steps in the science of mind-control
called Yoga. Once the mind processes are dominated, the bridled and saddled
Horse carries its spiritually accoutred rider, the Youth of Intellect, to Buddha-
hood.


236 MEDITATION IN SOLITUDE [PART II


What Drink is to be given It when thirsty ?
In what Enclosure is It kept when cold ?


‘“ To catch the Horse, use, as the Lasso, Singleness of Pur-

pose.

It must be tied, when caught, to the Post of Meditation ;

It must be fed, when hungry, with the Guru's Teachings ;

It must be given to drink, when thirsty, of the Stream of
Consciousness ;

It must be kept, when cold, in the Enclosure of the Voidness.

For Saddle, use the Will, for Bridle, Intellect ;

Attach to It, as Girths and Cruppers, Fixedness Immovable ;

Around it pass, as Head-stall and as Nose-band, the Vital-
Airs.


‘“Tts rider is the Youth of Intellect [Keen Watchfulness] :
The Helmet, which he weareth, is Mahayanic Altruism ;
His Coat of Mail is Learning, Thought, and Contemplation ;
Upon his back he carrieth the Shield of Patience ;

He holdeth, in his hand, the long Spear of Aspiration ;

And, by his side, hangeth the Sword, Intelligence ;

The smoothed Reed of Universal Mind [or Cause],

Made straight by lack of wrath or hatred,?

Barbed with the Feathers of the Four Unlimited [Virtues],

Tipped with the Arrow-head of Intellect made keen,

Then placed within the pliant Bow of Wisdom Spiritual,

And fixed there, in the Aperture of the Wise Path and
Right Method,

He draweth out to the full fathom of Communion Wide;

And shot forth thus, the arrows fall midst all the Nations.

They strike the Faithful Ones,

And slay the Sprite of Selfishness.*


1 These verses describe progressive stages in yoga practice, beginning with
Ekdagrata, ‘Singleness of Purpose’, or One-Pointedness of Mind, and leading
to Dhyana and Samadhi.

2 Here the figure used is of an arrow-shaft of bamboo, which is commonly
straightened and made even by heat, scraping, and polishing.

8 Herein, Milarepa justifies the life of ascetical seclusion from the world.
Unknown to the worldly multitude, who regard the yogi as a useless member
of society, he is, in fact, the most useful ; owing to his thought-force, broadcast
like silent and invisible arrows which fall among all nations, virtue and goodness


CHAP. X] SONG OF A YOG/’S RACE 217


Thus are the Enemies, all Evil Passions, overcome ;
And protected are our Kindred.


‘This Horse doth course along the widespread Plain of
Happiness ;
Its Goal is the attainment of the State of all the Conquerors.”
Its Hind-part leaveth, in its rear, attachment to sangsaric
life ;
Its Front-part goeth on to the safe place of Deliverance.


‘* By running such a race, I’m carried on to Buddhahood ;
Judge if this be like your own conception of felicity :
Worldly Happiness I covet not.”


‘On hearing this, they were moved with faith and went away
in that mood.

‘I then proceeded towards Chibar, going through Palkhung;
and, having arrived at Tingri, was lying on the road to enjoy
a view of the place, when a party of maidens, rather gaily
dressed, happened to pass by on their way to Snag-mo. Seeing
my emaciated body, one of them said, “O see how miserable
this man appeareth! Grant that I may never be born in such
a shape!” to which another added, “ How piteous! It maketh
me quite nervous to see such a sight.” I thinking them to be
poor ignorant creatures, pitied them, and, getting up, I said,
“O ye girls, do not speak thus. Ye need not be anxious
about that at all; ye would not be born such as I am even
though ye were to wish and pray earnestly for it. It is praise-
worthy to pity, but pity and self-conceit are opposed to each
other, and so inconsistent. Listen to a song of mine.” With
that, I sang them this song:


‘« At Thy Feet, O Gracious Guru, now I pray ;
Grant me Thy Blessings and Thy Grace, O Marpa!


are kept alive in the world, and the Pathway leading to the Olympus of the
Gods is guarded and kept open. See, too, our Introduction, pp. 15-24.

1 These are all sentient beings in all the Six Lokas (or Worlds) of the
Sangsara. Thus, not only is the Saint the most essential of all members of
human society, but his field of altruistic service is the whole universe.

2 Or, Skt. ‘ Jinas (the Conquerors, the Buddhas)’.


218 MEDITATION IN SOLITUDE [PART II


‘« Those creatures, who in evil Zarma are immersed,
Contemptuously regard all others save themselves ;
Women of evil £arma think a married life the most desirable
of things ;
Their self-conceit doth burn as hot as fire:
Ah, pitiable it is to see these beings thus deluded!


‘“ Tn these dark days, of the Kali-Yuga,'
Mischief-making knaves are worshipped as if gods,
And impostors are prized as if more precious e’en than gold ;
True devotees are cast aside, like stones from off a path:
Oh, pity these poor ignorant beings!


‘“ Ve group of maiden sisters, gaily dressed,
And I, Milarepa of Gungthang,
Have mutual contempt for each other,
And mutual pity, too ;
But in the lance-tilt of our mutual pity,
Let us see who winneth in the end.?


‘“ This truthful sermon is by Milarepa preached,
In answer to the senseless talk of ignorant beings ;
Tis exchanging wine for water,
And returning Good for Evil.”


‘Upon my finishing the song, the girl who had pitied me
said, “ This is the famous Gungthang-Milarepa, and we have
uttered several foolish things in a spirit of self-conceit. Now
let us ask his pardon”; and, with that, they all directed the
girl who had uttered the speech to do so. She, too, was very
sorry ; and, producing seven shells, which were used as cur-
rency then, she offered them to me with prostrations, and
prayed that I might be pleased to give them another sermon,
so then I sang to them the following song:


*“ T supplicate my Gracious Lord!
A sermon brief, on Truth, I’m preaching.


1 Or, ‘Age of Iron’—the ‘Dark Age’, of waning Religion and flourishing
Worldliness, in which the human race now is.

3 That is, whether worldly enjoyment (Skt. Pravyitti) or renunciation of the
world (Skt. Nzuritt:) leads to True Wisdom.


CHAP. X] SONG TO THE MAIDENS 219


‘“Tn the Palaces Celestial of the Gahdan Gods,}
Truths Spiritual are prized not, but Truths Scientific are ;
In the Regions Lower, in the Naga’s Palaced City,
Truths Profound and Deep are prized not, but Riches are ;?
In this World of Human Beings,
The Wise and Learned are not prized, but Liars are.


‘“Tn the Provinces of U and Tsang and the Four Districts,
Meditation is not prized, but Exposition is ;
In the dreg-like remainder of these evil times [of Darkness],
Good men are not prized, but the wicked are.


‘“Tn the eyes of gay young women,
Not the devotee, but the rake is prized ;
Unto the ears of youthful maidens,
Prosaic sermons on religion sound not sweet, but love-songs
do.


‘“ These are the truths in verse,
Sung in payment for the seven shells,
And as a joyful song betokening full pardon.”


‘On hearing this song they were moved to deep faith, and
proceeded on their way.

‘I also went on towards Brin (Drin), where I heard about
both Lapchi-Chibar (Mt. Everest?) and Kyit-Phug (Pleasant
Cave), also known as Nyima-Dzong (Sunny Castle), of which I
chose the latter. There I spent some months, and was progress-
ing favourably in my devotion and meditation ; but the people
of Brin visited me, bringing gifts of provisions. Knowing that
this would tend, to some extent, to the deterioration of my
devotional practices, I thought that if I remained in this place
any longer, popularity would only do harm to my meditative
devotions. I had been here long enough, and, thus far, had
gained by my stay. Now I must go to a most solitary region

1 Gods of the Tushita Heavens, who are more intellectual than spiritual.

2 The Nagas, or Dragon-demigods, of Hindu mythology, are of four kinds:
(1) celestial, guarding the Heaven-Worlds ; (2) aerial, causing winds and rain,
to benefit human beings ; (3) earthly, demarcating courses of rivers and streams ;
and (4), as in our text here, lovers or guardians of hidden treasures. They are


thus somewhat like the Elementals of Medieval Philosophy, each class of which
inhabited one of the elements.


2.20 MEDITATION IN SOLITUDE [PART II


and seek a cave there. So, according to my Guru's command,
I resolved to go to Lapchi-Chiibar. While I was about to start
on my way thither, my sister Peta came to offer me a piece of
blanket-cloth, woven of wool which she had collected from the
leavings of others. She had taken it to Dragkar-Taso, and,
not finding me there, had come searching for me, inquiring
from every one; and hearing, at Gungthang-Tot, that a hermit
resembling a caterpillar which feedeth upon nettles had passed
from Palkhung towards La-Tét-Lho (Upper Hills Facing
South), she had come tracking my very footprints. At Tingri,
she had seen Lama Bari-Lotsawa (The Great Bari Translator)
seated upon a high seat, with an umbrella over him, dressed
in silks of five different colours, and surrounded by his dis-
ciples, some of whom blew conchs, cymbals, clarionets, and
flutes, with a great crowd round about, all offering him tea
and chang. Upon seeing this, Peta thought, “Other devotees
and religious folk enjoy these things, but my brother’s religion
is a source of misery and trouble to himself and shame to his
relatives. If I now meet my brother, J shall try mine utmost to
persuade him to become a disciple of this Lama.” Thinking
thus, she asked some among the assembly there whether they
had heard or seen aught of me, and, being told that I was at Brin,
she had come inquiring after me right up to Kyit-Phug, where
I then was. Upon seeing me, she at once said, “O brother, it
will never do to go on in this starving, naked condition, which
thou sayest is thy mode of living a religious life. Thou art
past shame and common decency! Make a lower garment of
this blanket, and go to the Lama Bari-Lotsawa, who is
a Lama indeed, but quite different in style and practice
from thyself. He hath a throne under him, and an umbrella
over him; he is clad in silken garments, and his lips are
always dipped in tea and chhang. He is surrounded by his
disciples and followers, who walk in front of him, blowing
trumpets by pairs. He assembleth a crowd wherever he
goeth, and collecteth their offerings in large quantities, thus
benefiting his relatives ; and is one who can be boasted of as
a most eminent Lama. I would have thee try to enter his
service and follow him as his disciple. Even if thou be


CHAP. X] TRUE AND FALSE SHAME 221


accepted as his meanest disciple, that would be better than this
sort of life. Thy penurious devotion and my luckless life will
scarcely do in this world. We cannot thus sustain life.’ And
then she began to weep bitterly, deploring our lot.

‘I tried to console her by saying, “Peta, do not speak in
that fashion. Thou regardest my naked condition with shame,
because I have cast aside clothing and coverings. I am proud
that I have obtained the Truth through my being a man; and
there is no shame in that. I was born thus; therefore there is
no shame in it. But those who knowing certain acts to be
sinful commit them, thereby breaking their parents’ hearts,
and those coveting property dedicated to Gurus and the
Trinity, committing various acts of deception and meanness
to attain their selfish aims, cause pain and suffering to other
beings, and hurt themselves in the end. They are objects of
loathing and abhorrence to every righteous being among gods
and men; and they alone should feel shame. But if thou speak
of shame at seeing my body, then thou especially shouldst feel
shame because thy breasts, which did not exist at the time of
thy birth, have developed so prominently. Moreover, if thou
think that I am meditating in this penurious condition just
because I cannot earn or obtain food and clothing, thou art
quite mistaken. I am frightened at the pains and tribulations
of this Sangsara. I feel them as keenly as though I had been
cast alive into flames. Worldly acquisitions of wealth and the
need of clinging to them, as well as the pursuit of the Eight
Worldly Aims,! I regard with as much loathing and disgust as
a man who is suffering from biliousness regardeth the sight of
rich food. Nay, I regard them as if they were the murderers of
my father; therefore is it that I am assuming this beggarly
and penurious mode of life. Moreover, my Guru, Marpa the
Translator, bade me to give up all worldly concerns, aims, and
objects; to bear the loss of food, clothing, and name; to live
in various solitary places [not fixing myself to one place per-
manently]; and to carry on my devotions most energetically,
giving up all prospects in this life. Such being my Guru's
commandments, I am fulfilling them. By thus obeying my
1 Theseare : Comfort, Misery ; Wealth, Poverty ; Fame, Obscurity ; Praise, Blame.


222 MEDITATION IN SOLITUDE [PART II


Guru's commandments, I shall not only be able to confer tem-
poral ease and comfort on those who are my followers, but
I shall earn eternal happiness for every sentient being, in-
cluding myself. I gave up all thoughts of this life, because
I saw that there is no certainty as to when death may come
upon me. If I were to think of acquiring wealth and ease,
I should be able to acquire as much as Lama Bari-Lotsawa
himself is acquiring; so what need is there to speak of his
meanest follower! But I desire Buddhahood in this very life-
time; therefore am I devoting myself to devotion and medita-
tion in such an energetic way. Peta, do thou also give up all
worldly aims, and come with thy brother, who is older, to pass
thy life in meditation at Lapchi-Kang.! If thou can give up
worldly thoughts and come to pass thy life in meditative devo-
tions, the sun of thy temporal and eternal happiness will thus
shine in full splendour. Give ear to thy brother’s song.” Then
I sang this song:


‘“O Lord, Protector of all Sentient Beings, Thou the Eternal
Buddha!
Since Thou, by worldliness unsullied hath remained,
And blessed Thy Shishyas with Thy Grace,
I bow down at Thy Feet, O Marpa the Translator !


‘“ My sister Peta, listen unto me,
Immersed in worldly wishes as thou art.


‘“The pinnacle of gold, placed on an umbrella, at the top,

for one;

The fringe of Chinese silk, arranged in tasteful folds, below,
fortwo;

The ribs outspread, like a peacock’s gorgeous feathers, in
between, for three ;

The polished handle of red teak-wood, at the bottom, for
four :

These four, if needed, thine elder brother could procure.


{A Chorus, the five verses which follow, accompanies this stanza and each of
the five following stanzas, as indicated. |


' Lapchi-Kang is the name by which Mt. Everest is commonly known to the
Tibetans (cf. p. arq”, above).


CHAP. X] SONG ON WORLDLINESS 223


‘“ But these are worldly things, and I’ve eschewed them,
And, by my thus eschewing worldliness, my Sun of Happi-
ness shineth gloriously.
Likewise, do thou, O Peta, all worldliness eschew,
And come to meditate in Lapchi-Kang:
Let us together go to Lapchi-Kang, to meditate.


‘“ The white conch-shell’s far-sounding note, for one;
The practised blower’s full and potent breath, for two;
- The silken ribbons [on the conch], plaited in fine plaits, for
three ;
The vast assembly of celibate priests [summoned thus], for four:
These four, if needed, thine elder brother could procure.


[Chorus]


‘«The charming, pretty little temple, just above a village
placed, for one ;
The fluent speech, of youthful novices, for two ;
The splendid kitchen, well arranged, with goodly stock of
Chinese tea, for three;
The busy hands, of many youthful novices, for four :
These four, if needed, thine elder brother could procure.


[ Chorus |


‘« The well-liked trade, in necromantic seership, and in astro-
logy, for one;
The correctness and the modesty of a pastor’s acts, for two;
The performance of the pias, for enjoying them, for three ;
The psalms melodious, sung with a view to turn the heads
of the laity, for four:
These four, if needed, thine elder brother could procure,


[ Chorus |


‘« A building, massive, beautiful, and tall, of brick, for one;
A field, extensive and fertile, for two;
A well-stocked store, of food and wealth, for three ;
A numerous retinue, and crowd of servitors, for four:
These four, if needed, thine elder brother could procure.


[Chorus]


224 MEDITATION IN SOLITUDE [PART II


‘“ The proud, tall crest of a powerful horse, for one ;
A saddle, jewel-bedecked and gold-inlaid, for two ;
An armed escort, splendidly accoutred, for three ;
And vigilance unceasing, in conquering enemies and protect-
ing friends, for four :
These four, if needed, thine elder brother could procure.


[ Chorus|


‘“ But if thou can not give up worldliness,

And can not come to Lapchi-Kang,

No liking have I for thy sentimental, sisterly affection.

These talks of worldly things disturb my meditation.

I being born, know I must die ; uncertain of the hour of death,

No time have I to postpone my devotion ;

Uninterruptedly will I devote myself to meditation.

The teachings of my Guru-Father are beneficial to the
mind ; \

Thus, contemplating that which bringeth benefit,

I’ll earn the Great Happiness of Deliverance ;

Therefore to Lapchi-Kang I’m going.


‘** Do thou, my sister, cling to worldliness,
Acquire sins by the pound and stone,
Strive to remain, for all the time thou canst, in the Sangsara,
And strive to win thyself a birth in the Three Lower Worlds.


‘Vet if thou fear the Sangsara in the least,
Renounce, in this life now, the Eight Sangsaric Aims,
And let us go together, unto Lapchi-Kang,
Let us, the twain, brother and sister, be high-destined ones,
And go together to the Ranges of the Lapchi-Kang.”


‘On my singing thus, Peta said, “I see that thou meanest
ease and comfort by worldliness, my brother. As for that,
both of us have so little to give up. All these fine-sounding
truths and sermons are merely excuses to cloak thine inability
to be as well off as Lama Bari-Lotsawa; but, as for me, I will
not go to Lapchi-Kang, where I shall have nothing to eat, nor
anything to wear: it would be unendurable misery, which
I need not go to seek at Lapchi. I do not even know where


CHAP. X]| THE SPOILT BLANKET 225


it is; and I would entreat thee, my brother, to remain per-
manently in one place, instead of rushing about and clinging
to uninhabited cliffs and rocks, like an animal pursued by dogs.
I could find thee more easily then. The people of this place
seem disposed to regard thee with veneration, so it would be
best if thou remain here permanently. But, in any case, at
least stay on for some days more. Please sew thyself an under-
garment from this blanket; I will return in a few days.” I
consented to remain there for a few days, as she requested.
Then she went towards Tingri side, on a begging errand.
‘Meanwhile, I cut up the blanket which she had brought
me, and sewed myself a cape to cover my head entirely ; next,
I sewed a cover for each of my fingers and a pair of coverings
for my feet, as well as a cover for my nakedness; and kept
them ready. A few days later, my sister came back; and,
upon her asking me whether I had sewn the blanket into
a dress, I said that I had; and putting on the coverings, one
by one, I showed her what I had done. Upon this, she said,
“© brother! thou art no longer a human being! Thou art not
only devoid of the sense of shame, but thou hast spoilt the
blanket which I prepared with so much trouble. At times, thou
appearest to have no time to spare for anything save devotion ;
and, then, at other times, thou seemest to have ample leisure.”
I replied, “I am the worthiest of human beings, for I am
engaged in turning to the best account the precious boon of
a blessed human life. Knowing what is really shameful, I have
devoted myself to a religious life, and kept my vows rigidly.
But as thou appearest to feel shame at seeing my natural shape,
and as I could not afford to cut off the part which thou lookest
upon as shameful, I have been at the pains to sew this covering
for it, at the cost of my time for devotions, as thou sayest ; and,
since mine other limbs are also organs of this same body,
I thought a covering for each of them would be required
similarly, and so I have made these, coverings. Thy blanket
hath not been wasted, but made to serve the ends for which
thou didst intend it, for I have thus prepared a covering for
the organ of shame. As thou seemest to be so prudish and
more sensitive to the feeling of shame than myself, I must


226 MEDITATION IN SOLITUDE [PART II


tell thee that if I should feel shame thou shouldst feel more
shame. Seeing that it is better to do away with an object of
shame than to keep it on, please do away with thine own as
quickly as thou canst.” When I said this, she kept quiet, and
her face was sullen. Then I said, “ Worldly folk regard with
shame that which involveth no shame. But that which is really
shameful is evil deeds and wily deception; and these they do
not feel shame in committing. They do not know what really
is shameful and what is not. Therefore listen to this song of
mine.” With that I sang to her the song which showeth clearly
what is shameful and what is not:


‘“ To all the Lineal Gurus I bow down!
Grant me knowledge of what is really shameful.


‘“© Peta dear, held fast with prudish shame,
Give ear awhile unto thy brother’s song :


‘“ Thy shame is born of ignorant conventionalities ;
Shame thou feelest where for shame there is no cause.
To me, the devotee, who knoweth what shame truly is,
In showing in its natural shape my threefold personality,
What shame can be attached thereby ?
When ’tis known that human beings are born, each of a cer-
tain sex,
’Tis known, too, that each possesseth certain organs.


‘“ The most of worldly folk heed not
Those acts which truly are either mean or shameful :
The Daughter of Shame is bought with wealth;
The Child of Shame is dandled on the lap;
Covetous and harmful thoughts,? begot of unbelief,
Evil deeds, vile frauds, thefts, and robberies,
Deceiving friends and kindred who confide in one—
These, indeed, are acts filled full of shame and meanness;
yet few refrain from them.


1 That is, body, speech, and mind.
* Thoughts being things, the thought-waves created by them in the ether are
potent to affect for good or ill all beings throughout the universe, as on the Earth.


cHAP. X] SONG ON WHAT IS SHAMEFUL 227


‘“ Those hermits who have given up the worldly life
And taken to the practice of the Spiritual Truths,
Found in the Sacred Teachings of the Mystic Path,
They who have vowed to pass their life in meditation,
See not the need to hold to codes of shame conventional.
Therefore, do not, O Peta, seek to add unto thy present
miseries,
But let thine understanding flow within its natural channels.”


‘When I had sung this song, she sullenly handed over to me
the provisions, butter, and grease, which she had obtained by
begging, saying, “It is quite clear that thou wilt not do any-
thing such as I wish thee to do, yet I cannot give thee up. So
please use these ; and I will do what I can to obtain more.”
Having said this, she was about to go away. I, however,
wishing to turn her heart towards religion, induced her to
remain as long as the provisions might last, so that even though
she did not earn merit by practising devotion, she would for
that much time, at least, be free from committing sin. As long
as she thus lived with me, I talked to her about religious sub-
jects and about the Law of Karma. At last, I succeeded in
turning her heart towards the Faith, to some extent.

‘At about this time, mine aunt, having lost her brother, mine
uncle, and bitterly, from the very core of her heart, repenting
the wrong they had done me, also came in search of me,
bringing a yak-load of things. She had been first to Brin.
There she deposited the things, and the yak, and came with
whatever she herself could carry, right up to the place where
I was living. Peta having seen her coming from the hillock,
and recognizing her, said, “ This cruel aunt who hath caused us
so much harm and misery we must not meet.” Suiting her
action to the words, she lifted away the little bridge which
spanned the yawning chasm between the slope on the opposite
side and the front of my cave. Our aunt, coming to the brink
of the slope, on the side opposite to us, said, “ Niece, do not
lift up the bridge; thine aunt is coming over.” To this, Peta
answered, “It is for that very reason that I am lifting up the
bridge.” “Niece, thou art quite right ; but now I have come,


228 MEDITATION IN SOLITUDE [PART II


bitterly repenting of my deeds, to meet both of you; so lower
the bridge. Yet, if thou wilt not do this, then, at least, tell
thy brother that I have come here,” pleaded our aunt.

‘Just then, I arrived there, and seated myself on a little
knoll on this side of the bridge. Mine aunt bowed down several
times from the other side, and pleaded earnestly that she might
be allowed to meet me. I thought that it would not become
me, as a devotee, to refuse her the interview in the end, but
I must first speak plainly to her about her cruelties and per-
secutions. So I said, “I have given up all attachment to
relatives generally, but especially to you, mine aunt and uncle.
Ye were not satisfied with greatly persecuting us in our child-
hood and youth, but even when I had taken to a religious
career and happened to come to your door to beg, ye assaulted
me so cruelly that I ceased to think of you at all as relatives.
I will briefly recall those circumstances in this song, which
thou wilt listen to.” So saying, I sang to her a song recalling
the cruelties and persecutions with which they had pursued me:


‘“O Kind and Gracious Father, compassionate to all,
O Marpa the Translator, I bow down at Thy Feet!
Be Thou a Kindred unto me, who am bereft of kindred !


‘* © aunt, recallest thou all that thou hast done?
If thou can not, this song of mine will refresh thy memory ;
Attentively give ear to it, and in repentance be sincere.


‘“ There in the wretched land of Kyanga-Tsa,

Our noble father dying, left us, the three, a widowed mother
and two orphans ;

Of all our wealth thou didst defraud us, and brought us unto
misery.

And, as peas are by a staff, we were scattered then,

By thee, O aunt, and by our uncle, too.

So our attachment unto kith and kin was sundered.


‘“ Thereafter, when in distant lands I wandered long,
Anxious to behold my sister and my mother, I returnéd
home,
And found my mother dead, and my sister gone.


CHAP. x] SONG TO THE AUNT 229


With anguish pierced, I sought religion, and finding it my
sole solace,

The life religious thenceforth chose.

Compelled by lack of food to seek for alms,

Before thy door, O aunt, I came to beg,

And thou, in recognizing me, the helpless devotee,

Didst burst forth in a storm of spiteful anger.

With cries of ‘Cho! Cho!’ thou didst set thy dogs upon me;

With thy tent-pole thou didst belabour me most heavily,

As though I were a sheaf of corn for threshing.

I fell face downward in a pool of water,

Wherein I almost lost my precious life.

Amidst thy fury, thou didst call me ‘ Trafficker in Lives’; ;

And likewise, too, ‘ Disgrace unto my Clan’. .

With these rude words my heart was wounded ;

And, with despair and misery overwhelmed,

My breath was stopped and I was speechless.

And then, although I had no need of them,

Thou didst, by various wiles, defraud me of my house and
field.

A demoness thou art, in the body of an aunt,

That sundered me from all my love for thee, O aunt.


*« Thereafter, when I reached mine uncle’s door,
Malicious thoughts, injurious acts, vile words I met.
‘ The destroying demon of the country cometh,’ was his cry ;
He called the neighbours forth to help in killing me ;
And, words abusive uttering,
He pelted me with showers of stones,
And sought to transfix me with a rain of small keen arrows ;
With a malady incurable he filled my heart.
There, too, I almost lost my life.
O butcher’s heart in an uncle’s form !
All my respect for an uncle I lost then.


‘“ When I was poor and helpless, my kinsfolk were more cruel
to me than enemies,
Thereafter, to the hill, where I was meditating,
My constant Zesay came to see me, out of love;


2.30 MEDITATION IN SOLITUDE [PART II


And she, with pleasant words, consoled me;

She comforted my sorrow-stricken heart ;

She brought me nourishing and tasty food ;

And from starvation saved me then.

Kind, indeed, is she, more kind than I can say;

Yet since e’en she is not devoted to religion,

Little need I see to meet her when she cometh ;

And as for thee, mine aunt, far less I need to meet thee.
Return e’en now, in the manner thou hast come;

’Tis better to go early, while there is still the time.”


‘When I had sung thus, mine aunt shed many tears, and,
bowing down several times, said, “Thou art right, O my
nephew ; thus far thou art right; but be patient, I pray thee.”
Then she began to entreat me. I saw that she was really
sincere in her repentance, and had come to ask my forgiveness.
She said, “ Not being able to overcome the desire to see thee,
I have come here. Please grant me the interview which I
seek, or I shall surely commit suicide.” Being unable to harden
my heart any further, I was about to lower the bridge when
my sister whispered many reasons to withhold me from doing
so. I lowered it nevertheless. It is said to be undesirable to
live in the same country or to drink of the same fountain [or
well of water] with a person with whom a breach of faith hath
taken place; and that, if we do so, some obscuration and
defilement will occur; but the present case was not, however,
a breach of faith in a spiritual matter. Besides, I myself being
of the Religious Order, was bound to be forgiving; so I laid
the bridge across, granted the desired interview, and preached
severalsermonsontheLawof Karma. Mineaunt wasthoroughly
converted by the sermons; and, devoting herself to penance
and meditation, eventually obtained Emancipation.’

Then Shiwa-wéd-Repa addressed Jetstin in these words:
‘ O Jetsiin, it is beyond our comprehension when we hear how
constant in thy faith and purpose thou wert in obtaining the
Truths from thy Guru; how meek and faithful throughout
thy terrible ordeals; and how persevering and energetic in
carrying on devotion and meditation in lonely hilly solitudes.


CHAP. X] DISCOURSE ON KARMA 231


When we think of those deeds, our devotion seemeth to be
mere sport—done at leisure, by fits and starts; and such devo-
tion [we fear], will not emancipate us from the Sangsara.
What, then, are we to do?’ Having uttered these words, he
wept bitterly.

Jetsiin answered, ‘ When we think of the pains and troubles
endured in the Saxgsara and in the Hell-Worlds, my faith and
zeal do not really appear to have been so very great either.
Thoughtful persons, once having heard about the Doctrine of
Karma, and believing in it, will be able to put forth similar
zeal and energy. But those who understand only the wordings
of the Doctrine, not having realized the truth of it, are unable
to renounce the Eight Worldly Aims and Objects. Therefore,
it is of the highest importance to believe in the Doctrine of
Karma. These [latter folk] always appear not to believe even
in the simplest and most generally accepted [or self-evident]
of karmic laws. Thus, although they devote themselves to
various expositions of the Voidness (Shi#nyatda), as found in
the Scriptures and Gospels, the Voidness, being more subtle
and intricate, is far more difficult to comprehend, and believe
in. But when once one believeth in the Voidness, its very self
becometh manifest in the intricate workings of the Law of
Karma; and a man who realizeth the nature of Voidness
necessarily becometh more subtle, and distinguisheth the quali-
ties of actions both good and bad with a much finer power of
perception. In short, he becometh more strictly conscientious.
All piety consisteth in observing and believing in the Law of
Karma ; therefore it is of the utmost importance to be very
persevering in adopting pious acts and rejecting impious acts.
I, at first, did not understand the nature of the Voidness, but
I believed firmly in the Law of Karma; and, being conscious
of having committed deep and heinous sins, I believed that
I richly deserved to go to the three miserable states of Hell.
So I entertained the deepest reverence for, and faith in, my
Guru, and exerted the utmost energy and zeal during my
meditation, as, indeed, I could not help doing. I exhort you
all to pass your lives in strict asceticism, in deep solitudes,
meditating upon the Sacred Mystic Truths, and carrying into


232 MEDITATION IN SOLITUDE [PART II


practice the teachings of the Doctrine. If ye do so, I, the old
man, assure you of emancipation from the Sangsara,’

Then Ngan-Dzong-Ténpa Budhi-Raja addressed Jetstin in
this eulogistic style: ‘O Jetsiin Rinpoch’e,' thou must be the
great Buddha Dorje-Chang Himself, come in human shape,
to show those acts for the benefit of the sentient beings of this
world. And if not that, then, at least, thou must have acquired
much merit in countless Kalpas, and obtained the state of
such a Great Being—one who will not return again to the
Sangsadra. Thou hast been ready to sacrifice life itself for
religion, and persisted zealously in the pursuit of devotional
meditation. All the signs of an Incarnate Buddha are to be
found in thy life. For to beings like us, who live for the in-
dividual self, thy meekness and constant and unswerving faith
during the time that thou wert under thy Gwrz, and the hard-
ships which thou didst bear, appear quite incomprehensible,
even to our hearts. It would be impossible for us to think of
undergoing all those hardships for the sake of the Truth; who
would be able to do so? And even if any one had the will and
hardihood to attempt to do so, the physical frame would not
be able to bear it. So it is quite certain that Jetsiin must be,
or must have been, either a Bodhisattva or a Buddha in the
past ; and we are blest in having seen thy face and heard thy
voice. Those of us who have thus been favoured are sure of
obtaining Deliverance, although we be not able to pursue our
devotions so earnestly. Be pleased to reveal to us what Bodhi-
sattva thou wert in the past.’

To this Jetsiin replied: ‘I myself am not sure whose incarna-
tion I am; but even though I be an incarnation of a being
formerly existing in one of the Three States of Misery,? yet,
if ye regard me as Dorje-Chang, or as any other Deity, ye
will obtain the grace and blessing of such Deity, in virtue
of your faith. Personal love and regard make ye think that


1 Rinpoch’e, meaning ‘Precious’, is a Tibetan term of great respect. It is
commonly applied to Great Gurus and Yogis. Padma Sambhava, for example,
is popularly called Guru Rinpoch’e, ‘ Precious Guru’ (cf. p. 5).

? Namely, the three miserable planes of existence : the World of Brutes, the
World of Unhappy Ghosts (or Pretas), and the various Hells.


CHAP. X] THE TREADING OF THE PATH 233


I must be an Incarnation; but towards the Dharma ye commit
the great sin of doubt and scepticism. This is because ye
have not the powér of earnest devotion. For it is by the great
power of the Sacred Dharma alone that I have been able to
attain such spiritual advancement as to be very near Perfect
Buddhahood in the latter portion of my years, although I had
been guilty of such heinous sins in my youth and early man-
hood. It was because I firmly believed in the reality of the
Law of Karma that I applied myself zealously to the Truth,
giving up all thoughts of this life and world. And, more
especially, was I fortunate in being taken in hand by a perfected
Guru, who was able to give me those very Truths and Texts
which were most adapted to me, and which enabled me to
follow the Short Path of the Mystic Mantrayana. He gave
me the Truths divested of all superfluous adornments and
clothing,’ conferred on me the necessary Initiations, and em-
powered me to meditate on these Truths in the right way. If
any one else had obtained these, and continued to meditate on
them, there is not the least doubt about his obtaining perfect
enlightenment within one lifetime. But if one pass a lifetime
here doing nothing but committing the ten impious acts and
the five unlimited sins, there is not the least doubt that such
a one will fall into the most miserable of the Hells. If one do
not believe in the Law of Karma, one lacketh zeal in the
pursuit of his devotional studies; if one believe firmly in the
Law of Karma, the thought of the miseries in the Three Lower
States is sure to fill one with dread and inspire one with the
intensest desire to obtain Buddhahood. Then one’s faith and
meekness towards the Guru, zeal and energy in the meditation
on the Truth, and, finally, the way in which one beareth the
experience of the spiritual growth and knowledge, would alto-
gether equal mine in every point. And when any one obtaineth
these spiritual developments, the worldly proudly attribute
it to his being an Avatara of some Buddha or Bodhisattva,
Actually this is disbelief in the Short Path of the //antrayana.
Therefore, I exhort you all to establish your belief in the Law
- of Karma firmly. Meditate upon, consider, and weigh deeply


1 That is, flowery rhetoric and parables.


2.34 MEDITATION IN SOLITUDE [PART II


the serious facts contained in the biographies of previous saintly
lives, the Law of Karma, the inconveniences and miseries of
all sangsdaric states of existences, the difficulties of obtaining
the boon of a well-endowed human life, and the certainty of
death and the uncertainty of the exact time of death; and,
having weighed these in your minds, devote yourselves to the
study and practice of the Mantrayanic Doctrines. I have
obtained spiritual knowledge through giving up all thought
of food, clothing, and name. Inspired with zeal in my heart,
I bore every hardship and inured myself to all sorts of priva-
tions of the body ; I devoted myself to meditation in the most
unfrequented and solitary places. Thus did I obtain knowledge
and experience; do ye also follow in the path trodden by me,
and practise devotion as I have done.’


This is the Sixth Meritorious Act, which telleth how Jetsiin,
after giving up all thoughts of worldly ease, comfort, name,
and fame, obeyed his Guru's commands by devoting himself
to incessant meditating in the most unfrequented hills and
solitudes, and thus passed his whole time in devotion.


CHAP. XI] 2.35


CHAPTER XI


THE HERMITAGES AND SERVICE RENDERED
TO SENTIENT BEINGS


Telling of Fetstin's Disciples and Places of Meditation ; and of
the Recorded Writings concerning $etsiin.


THEN Rechung said, ‘ Master, thy history could not be excelled
for its wonderful humour and interest ; and, although there is
a vein of humour, which exciteth laughter, running through
the whole narrative, yet, on the whole, it is so pathetic, that one
cannot help shedding tears. I pray that thou wilt be pleased
to tell us now of those incidents which would excite laughter.’
And Jetsiin said, ‘No more true cause for laughter could ye
expect than the account of the success attending the zealous
devotional efforts which enabled me to save both well-endowed
human and non-human beings, and to place them on the Path
of Emancipation, and thus to serve the Cause of the Buddhist
Faith.’

Again Rechung asked, ‘ Master, who were thy first disciples ;
were they human or non-human beings?’ To this, Jetsiin
answered, ‘Non-human beings were my first disciples, those
that had come with intent to torment me. Afterwards, I gained
a few human disciples. Then came the Goddess Tseringma,}
to test me by displaying various super-normal powers. Sub-
sequently, other human disciples began to gather round me.
My teachings, as I now perceive, will be promulgated by
Tseringma among non-human beings, and by Upa-Ténpa
among human beings.’

Then Seban-Repa asked, ‘ Master, besides thy chief hermi-
tage in the Cave of Lapchi-Chibar, and some hermitages in
the caves previously mentioned, where else hast thou medi-
tated?’ Jetsiin replied, ‘ Another of my hermitages was Y6lmo-
Kangra, in Nepal. In addition, I had six outer well-known

1 A deity of the Kailasa Mountain—one of the twelve guardian goddesses of
Tibet called Bsten-mas (pron. Ten-mas). Tseringma (a Tibetan name meaning


‘Long-Life’) is probably a form of the Indian Goddess Durga, the Spouse of
Shiva, the God of the Himalayas.


236 THE HERMITAGES [PART II


and six inner unknown caves [in high cliffs], and six secret [or
hidden] caves—in all, eighteen. Then there were two more
caves, making altogether twenty castles. Again, there are four
larger well-known caves and four larger unknown caves, which
are included among those named before. Besides these, I medi-
tated in various other smaller caves and solitudes wherever
necessaries appeared to be plentiful—till, at last, the object of
meditation, the act of meditation, and the meditator were so
interwoven with each other that now I do not know how to
meditate.’

Then Rechung said, ‘ Lord, by thy having attained the final
goal of Dharma and exhausted [its Treasures], we, thy humble
disciples, enjoy the benefit thereof, for thou impartest the Doc-
trine to us in such an easy and impressive manner that we can,
with very little effort, grasp the true meaning, and attain firm-
ness in our belief without any fear of misconception. This
feeling of security in our belief is due to thy kindness and divine
grace. But future disciples may wish to acquire merit [by
visiting the caves wherein thou didst meditate] ; so, with a view
to leaving them some guidance thereto, I pray that thou wilt
be pleased to name each of them.’

Then Jetsiin replied, as follows: ‘ The six well-known caves
[in high cliffs]? are: (1) Dragkar-Taso-Uma-Dzong (Central
Castle [or Cave] of Rock White Like Horse Teeth) ; (2) Min-
khyut-Dribma-Dzong (Castle Lying in Shadows to the Eye-
brows); (3) Lingwa-Dragmar-Dzong (Block Castle of Red
Rock) ; (4) Ragma-Changchup-Dzong (Perfect Castle of Rag-
ma); (5) Kyang-Phan-Namkha- Dzong (Castle of the Banner-
Adorned Sky); (6) Dragkya-Dorje-Dzong (Indestructible
Castle of Grey Rock). The six inner unknown caves [in high
cliffs] are: (1) Chongliing-Khyungi-Dzong (Castle of Chongliing-
Khyung) ; (2) Khyipa-Nyima-Dzong (Joyful Sun Castle) ;
(3) Khujuk-Enpa-Dzong (Castle of the Solitary Cuckoo) ;
(4) Shelphug-Chushing-Dzong (Plantain Castle of the Crystal


1 That is to say, meditation had become so second nature to Milarepa that he,
no longer needing to think how to meditate, had forgotten the process.
® Jetsiin seems to apply the name of Dzong (Castle or Stronghold) to those


caves which were situated in high cliffs, that is, to caves in the face of cliffs and
rocks at a dizzy height.


CHAP, XI] CAVES OF MEDITATION 237


Grotto) ; (5) Bektse-Déyén-Dzong (Castle of the Savoury Cab-
bages) ; and (6) Tsigpa-Kangthil-Dzong (Castle of the Rock-
Foot’s Sole). And the six very secret caves [in high cliffs] are:
Gyadrak-Namkha-Dzong (Sky Castle Filled with Awesome
Symbols); (2) Tagphug-Sengé-Dzong (Lion Castle of the
Tiger’s Cave) ; (3) Bayphug-Mamo-Dzong (Castle of the Hid-
den Cave); (4) Laphug-Pema-Dzong (Lotus Castle of the
Grotto) ; (5) Langno-Ludiit-Dzong (Naga Castle of the Ele-
phant-Door); and (6) Trogyal-Dorje-Dzong (Castle of the
Victorious Bronze Vajra). The other two are: Kyiphug-
Nyima-Dzong (Sun Castle of the Happy Grotto), and Potho-
Namkha-Dzong (Castle of the Sky of Peaks).!

‘Then, the four well-known larger caves are: (1) Nyanam-
Trépa-Phug (Stomach-like Cave of Nyanam); (2) Lapchi-
Ditdiil-Phug (Cave wherein Demons were Defeated,in Lapchi) ;
(3) Brin-Briche-Phug (Yak-Cow Tongue Cave, in Brin); and
(4) Tisé-Dzu-Triil-Phug (Miracle Cave, in Mt. Kailasa). The
four unknown larger caves are: (1) Tsayi-Kangtsu-Phug, or
Kangtsu-Phug of Kyanga-Tsa (Cave wherein he [Milarepa]
was set upon his feet in devotion, in Kyanga-Tsa) ;? (2) Odsal-
Phug (Cave of the Clear Light)* of Ron; (3) Zawog-Phug
(Cave of Silk) of Rala; and (4) Phurén-Phug (Pigeon Cave)
of Kuthang. One meditating in these caves will find in plenty
the necessities of life [i.e. fuel, water, roots, and herbs] and
will be inspired by the grace of the previous Masters of the
Apostolic Succession. Therefore go there to meditate.’

On Jetsiin’s saying this, the whole assembly of disciples—
celestial and human, male and female—who had come to hear
the Dharma preached, were profoundly moved. The narrative
excited them to deep and fervent faith, and so touched their
hearts that they renounced the Eight Worldly Pursuits, of
ambition and affluence. All of them found such coinplete satis-
faction in the religious life, after arriving at the true apprecia-
tion of the Sacred Dharma, that they became inseparably

1 M. Bacot’s renderings of the place-names in this paragraph have, in part,
been followed. There is probably an esoteric significance attached to each name ;
cf. p. 2121.


2 This was the cave behind Milarepa’s own house.
3 As to the Clear Light, see p. 145°.


238 THE SERVICES RENDERED [PART II


attached to it. The more highly advanced among the human
disciples resolved to devote their body, heart, and speech, to
the service of all sentient beings, and to the Faith; and they
vowed to pass their whole life in undisturbed and immovable
meditation and penance, in caves and solitudes. The non-
human disciples promised and vowed to maintain and protect
the Faith. And many of the most spiritually developed among
the human lay-disciples, both male and female, forsook the
worldly life and, following Jetstin wherever he went, spent
their time in meditation, and came to realize the True State.
Thus several became Yogis and Yoginis.. Those of lesser
spiritual insight took vows to devote a certain number of years
and months to devotion. The least among the lay-followers
vowed to give up some particular impious act for the remainder
of their life, and to practise some particular pious act. Thus
was the entire congregation successfully saved.

The whole of the above history, recorded herein, is what
Jetsiin himself narrated—an autobiographical narrative taken
down in writing. When these historical facts which form the
chief subject-matter of his life-history are set forth in more
expanded form, they are commonly divided into three princi-
pal parts. The first part treateth of the malevolent attacks by
the non-human beings, who were eventually defeated and con-
verted. The second part treateth of the human disciples, of
whom many of the most fortunate were led to perfect [spiritual]
development and Emancipation. The third part treateth of
various other disciples, both lay and initiated, to whom Jetsiin
preached the Dharma.

If further expanded, the life-history goeth on to narrate the
manner in which the first non-human beings were conquered
and converted. Thus, at Dragmar-Chongliing Cave, the King
of Sprites, Vinayaka, was conquered by the singing of the song
called ‘ Lama-Dren-Drug’ (‘ The Six Ways in which he [Mila-
repa] yearned for a sight of his Guru’). Then Jetsiin went to
Lapchi-Kang, in obedience to his Guru's injunction. There
he converted the great deity, Ganapati, whence originated the


* Yogint is the feminine, Yogt the masculine, term applied to devotees who
practise or, as here, are proficient in Yoga.


CHAP. XI] JETSUN’S TRAVELS 239


Chapter on Lapchi-Chiizang. The next year, Jetsiin penetrated
into the interior of Lapchi, and this resulted in the production
of the well-known Song about the great snow-fall [and Jetsiin’s
triumph over the snow], which he sang on his emerging from
the snow. Then, again, intending to go to Mount Palbar, in
Mangyil, and to Yélmo-Kangra,! in Nepal, he returned to
Gungthang, where he felt attracted by the Rock Cave of Ling-
wa, and spent some time there. The Chapter on the malignant
demoness of the Lingwa-Cave was the result of this sojourn.
Then, in the vicinity of Mount Palbar, where lieth the Perfect
Castle of Ragma, Jetsiin defeated and converted a fairy god-
dess and the local deities of Ragma [by chanting a hymn to
them]. This is described in the Chapter concerning their con-
version. Then, while Jetstin was staying at the Castle of the
Banner-Adorned Sky, he did good to a number of both human
and non-human beings. Jetsiin next visited Yé6lmo-Kangra,
and lived for some time in the Singala Forest, in the depths
of which lay the Lion Castle of the Tiger’s Cave. There, too,
he did good to a great many human and non-human beings.
While at this place, Jetsiin received a Divine Admonition
telling him to go to Tibet and to meditate there for the good
of all sentient beings. So Jetsiin went to Tibet, and dwelt in
the [Pigeon] Cave of Kuthang. It was there that he chanted
the Hymn to the Pigeons.

Secondly, there is the account of how Jetsiin first met his
disciples. Thus, when Jetsiin was at the Indestructible Castle
of Grey Rock, and doing good toa great many sentient beings,
the Divine Mother (Vajra-Yogini)? told Jetsiin that many
disciples would come to him, and particularly one [Rechung-
Dorje-Tagpa] who would bring to Tibet from India the Dakini
Tantra.’ The very place where he would be found was made
known to Jetsiin. Accordingly, Jetsiin went to Gungthang and
sat meditating in the Silk Cave of Rala, where he met Rechung.
Thereafter, Rechung went to India to be cured of a malady
[i.e. leprosy]. After his coming back cured, he dwelt with


1 This is a place about two days’ journey north of Khatmandu.
2 Tib. Rdo-rje-rnal-hbyor-ma (pron. Do-rje-Nal jor-ma) : Skt. Vayra- Yogini.
3 Or Karna Tantra, one of the esoteric treatises on Tantric Yoga. (See p. 1487.)


240 THE SERVICES RENDERED _ [PARTI


Jetstin in the Clear-Light Cave of Ron, where Tsa-Phu-Repa
joined them. Then, at the Perfect Castle of Ragma, he met
Sangyay-Kyap-Repa. Having gone on to the Stomach-like
Cave of Nyanam, he preached the Dharma, and initiated Ténpa-
Shakya-Guna, who had been a lay believer for some time
previously, and set him on the Path of Perfection and Eman-
cipation. Then, while going to Chang-Tago, he met the female
lay disciple, Paldar-Bim, at Chungi-Ketpa-Le-sum. On his
return thence, he met Seban-Repa, at a public rest-house of
Yeru-Chang. From there, he went to meditate in a mountain
called Gyalgyi-Shri-La, in Latét,and met Bri-Gom-Repa. While
begging alms, during the autumn, he met Shiwa-Wod-Repa,
at Chimig-Ngiilbim. At Chim-ling, he delivered the sermon
called the ‘Bamboo Staff’ to Ngan-Dzong-Repa. From Lapchi,
Jetsiin. being reminded of his Guru's injunction by the Dakinis,
set out for Mount Tisé,! and met Dampa-Gya-Phiipa. While
approaching [the Mount] he met Khar-Ching-Repa at the
Lowo-Kara Pass. Then, when in winter retreat, in the vicinity
of the Dritse Peak, near the Purang Hills, he encountered
Tarma-Wangchuk-Repa. During the ensuing Spring, Jetsiin
went to [Mount] Tisé, and triumphed over [the magician]
Naro-Bén-chiing, by the display of his magical powers. The
account of this constituteth the Chapter on Tisé [or Mount
Kailasa].

Next, coming back to the Indestructible Castle of Grey
Rock, he met Rong-Chiing-Repa. Proceeding thence, as
directed by the Dakinis, he came across the Castle of the
Hidden Cave, and lived in it for a few days. While there, he
encountered a shepherd, who followed him and became a very
prominent Yogi, known as Lugdzi-Repa (Shepherd Repa).
Then he met Shan-Gom-Repa, at the Lotus Castle of the
Grotto. This disciple supplied Jetsiin with excellent food and
other necessaries as long as Jetstin thereafter dwelt in the
Naga Castle of the Elephant-Door and the Castle of the
Hidden Cave. Then, when he was going to Choro-Dri-Tsam,
he met Rechungma, [a female disciple]. At Nyishang-Gurta-


1 Mount Tisé is the Tibetan name for Mount Kailasa, the Holy Mount of both
Buddhism and Hinduism, and the goal of the famous Kailasa Pilgrimage.


CHAP. XI] FAME OF JETSUN 241


La, he met Khyira-Repa (Hunter Repa). This led to the
fame of Jetstin spreading far and wide towards Nepal, and the
Raja of Khokhom! was directed by the Goddess Tara? to
send some religious offerings to Jetsiin. Then Rechung and
Shan-Gom-Repa entreated Jetsiin to return to Lapchi; and
Jetsiin dwelt in the Nyen-yén Cave, at the foot of Lapchi.
The next year, Jetsiin lived in the rock-cave at Chong-liing.
Coming thence to Chiibar, he preached the three sermons
regarding Tseringma.

Coming down thence to the interior of Brin, he came across
Dorje-Wangchuk-Repa. Then when Jetsiin and his disciples
were living inthe Stomach-likeCaveof Nyanam,thegreat Indian
Yogi, Dharma-Bodhi, visited Jetsiin and bowed down to him.
This circumstance, having added to the respect and veneration
felt for Jetsiin, excited the envy of a Lama well versed in
metaphysical discourses, and he proposed some metaphysical
questions to Jetsiin, which Jetsiin easily answered by a display
of stddhi [or occult power]. There is one Chapter which
treateth of this contest. The Yogi's visit led to Rechung’s
visiting India again; record is made of this in the Chapter on
Rechung and Tiphoo [another Great Indian Yogi]. During
this time, Me-Gom-Repa joined Jetsiin, as a follower, at the
Cave of Drét [in Nyanam]. Again, at Nagtra, in Nyanam,
Jetsiin met Salewéd-Repa. Then Jetsiin, having gone into
retreat on the summit of the Red Rock, saw Rechung return-
ing [from India], and went to receive him. This produced the
Chapter concerning the Yak’s Horn, and the Song about the
Wild Asses. At Chibar he met Tagpo-Lan-Gom-Repa.

It was at Trode-Trashi-Gang, in Brin, that he met with the
Mahé-Purusha (Great Saint), who has been mentioned by the
Buddha in His apocryphal sayings. He became the most
favoured and eminent among the disciples of Jetsiin. He was
a fully ordained priest, and a Guru of the Vajra-Dhara

1 Khokhom is the modern Bhatgaon, near Khatmandu, Nepal. (Cp. p. 16.)


2 The National Goddess-Protectress of Tibet, who is imaged in numerous forms


and colours.
8 To judge from this, the Great Saint was one of those who are reputed to
have lived on for centuries, and who, so Indians and Tibetans believe, still exist


on Earth as the Guardians of the Human Race.


44% THE SERVICES RENDERED [PART II


School,! a Great Bodhisattva, by name Dawéd-Shyonii (Youth-
ful Lunar Light), but better known as the Peerless Doctor of
Tagpo, who has taken birth as a human being in order to
benefit all sentient creatures.

At Chiibar-Wom-Ching, Jetsiin made a proselyte of Lotén-
Gedin, who, although antagonistic to Jetstn formerly, now
became his disciple. At the Sun Castle of the Happy Grotto,
Dretén-Trashibar, of Brin, became Jetsiin’s disciple. On Jet-
siin’s manifesting certain super-normal powers, Likor-Chariiwa
was moved to discipleship.

The Ddakinis had foretold that Jetstin would have twenty-
five Saints among his human disciples ; and these are: The
eight most favoured sons, [born of the heart], the thirteen
spiritual sons, and their four sisters in the Faith. There is
a Chapter recording how Jetsiin met each of them.

Thirdly, with regard to various other meetings and inci-
dents, which occurred while Jetsiin dwelt in the secret caves,
during the intervals of his encounterings with the spiritual
sons, records have been made, but without any accuracy as to
the time of their occurrence. Again, there are some [records
in the form of] answers to [disciples’] questions. Then, there
is the Chapter recording the Songs of the Mountains of Bénpo,
dating from the time when Gampopa was with Jetsiin. There
are also the narratives of how Jetsiin preached the Dharma
and granted initiation to the people at Nyanam ; the Songs
about Shendormo and Lesay-Bim, at Tsarma; and the Song
containing Jetsiin’s exquisite expressions of delight at the
prospect of death; then the Songs about Jetsiin’s being ac-
companied by Rechung to Lapchi and their sojourn in the
Cave of the Demons’ Defeat, and of a pleasure trip, and of
Ramding-Namphug, whence Jetsiin was invited by the people
of Nyanam to the Stomach-like Cave of Nyanam, where he
narrated his own life-history. Then come the Songs about
Rechung’s departure to the Province of U, and about Jetsiin’s
meeting afterward with Dampa-Sangyay, at Thong-La, by
the special arrangement of the Lion-faced Goddess.


1 That is, the School of which Vajra-Dhara is the Celestial Guru; otherwise
known as the Vayra- Yana (‘Immutable [Vayra] Path’) School.


CHAP. XI] RECORDS ABOUT JETSUN 2.43


There are still other records: of a funeral ceremony per-
formed by Jetsiin, out of compassion for a dead person, at
Lay-Shing; his discharge of filial duties to his deceased
mother; the final testament to the lay-disciples, at Tsarma; a
narrative of Jetstin’s performance of a Boénpo-rite,! at Tingri,
when on his way to Chiibar; the Chapter on the second de-
parture of Rechung to U; the Chapter on the lay-donor,
Tashi-Tseg, of Din-Lhado ; the Chapter on Zesay-Biim, and
Khujug, and other female disciples, at Din-Dag-Khar; the
Chapter on his triumph over the four Maras [or Evil Spirits],
on the summit of the Red Rock; the Dialogue with the
Magician ; and the display of his super-normal powers for the
benefit of his disciples and lay-followers. There is, in addi-
tion, quite a large collection of other religious discourses, some
well known, some little known.

In this way did Jetstin emancipate a countless number of
fortunate beings. The most highly developed of them attained
perfect [spiritual] development and Emancipation; those of
lesser ability were set firmly upon the Path of Emancipation ;
the least among them had their hearts thoroughly converted
and inclined towards the Noble Path of Righteousness; even
those whose karma denied them the share of the Most Price-
less Boon had an inherent and habitual love of goodness im-
planted in their hearts, thereby winning the blessing of celes-
tial and human happiness for their immediate future.

Thus, through his infinite love and grace, Jetsiin made the
Buddhist Faith as luminous as the light of day, saving an
innumerable number of beings from Sorrow. All of this is
recorded at length in the Guv-Bum (‘One Hundred Thousand
Songs’) of Jetsiin.


This constituteth the Seventh Meritorious Act of Jetsiin,
wherein is related how he rendered service to all sentient
creatures by the fruits of his devotion.


1 This is interesting, as showing that Jetstin was familiar with the pre-
Buddhistic religion of Tibet known as Bon, and sympathetic towards it.


[PART II


CHAPTER XII


THE M/RVANA


Telling of how $fetsiin came to take Poisoned Curds from
Tsaphuwa’s Concubine; of the Last Assembly of Fetsin's Fol-
lowers and the Attendant Marvels, of Fetsiin’s Discourse on
Illness and Death ; of His Final Testamentary Teachings ; of
the Conversion of Tsaphuwa, of the Last Will, of the Passing
away tn Samadhi, and the Resultant Super-normal Phenomena,
of Rechung’s Late Arrival and Prayer to $etsiin, and the
Answer; of the Marvellous Events Connected with the Crema-
tion and the Reliques, of the Execution of Fctsin’s Last
Will» and concerning his Disciples.


AT the time when Jetsiin had fulfilled the various duties
mentioned above, there lived, in the. interior of Brin (Drin),
a learned Lama named Tsaphuwa, very rich and influential,
who was accustomed to take the highest seat in the as-
semblies of the people of Brin. This man feigned great rever-
ence for Jetstin, while at heart he was bursting with envy of
him, and desirous of exposing what he took to be Jetsiin’s
ignorance, by putting difficult questions to Jetsiin in a public
gathering of his own supporters. In this wise he asked Jetstin
many and various questions, all the while pretending that it
was for the clearing of his own doubts.

Then, in the first month of the autumn of the Wood-Tiger
year,' there happened to be a grand marriage feast to which
Jetstin was invited, and he was placed on the highest seat at
the head of the first row of guests, and the Gesh¢*® Tsaphuwa
was seated next to him. The Geshé bowed down to Jetsiin,
expecting that Jetsiin would bow down to him in return.
Jetstin, however, did not do so ; for never having bowed down
to, nor returned the obeisance of, any person save his own Guru,
he did not depart from his usual custom on this occasion.

Much chagrined, the Geshk¢é thought to himself, ‘What!

1 This is the forty-eighth year of the sixty-year cycle described on p. 52!.


* The title Geshé implies a learned Lama; it is equivalent to the Indian term
Pandit.


CHAP. XII] SONG TO THE GESHE 24.5


shall so learned a pandit as I am bow down to an ignoramus
like him, and he not condescend to return the salutation !
I shall certainly do my best to lower him in the esteem of the
public.’ And, producing a book on philosophy, he addressed
Jetsiin thus; ‘O Jetsiin, please be so good as to dissipate my
perplexities by going through this book and explaining it to
me word by word.’

Upon this, Jetsiin answered, ‘ As for the mere word-by-word
explication of these dialectics, thou thyself art sufficiently ex-
pert; but to realize their true import it is necessary to re-
nounce the Eight Worldly Ambitions, lopping off their heads,
to subdue the illusion of belief in the personal ego, and, re-
garding Nirvana and Sangsara as inseparable, to conquer the
spiritual ego by meditation in mountain solitudes. I have
never valued or studied the mere sophistry of word-knowledge,
set down in books in conventionalized form of questions and
answers to be committed to memory (and fired off at one’s
opponent); these lead but to mental confusion and not to
such practice as bringeth actual realization of Truth. Of such
word-knowledge I am ignorant; and if ever I did know it,
I have forgotten it long ago. I pray that thou wilt give ear
to the song which I am about to sing, to show my reasons
for forgetting book-learning.’! And then Jetsiin sang this
song :

‘Obeisance to the honoured Feet of Marpa the Translator !
May I be far removed from arguing creeds and dogmas.


‘ E’er since my Lord’s Grace entered in my mind,
My mind hath never strayed seeking various distractions.


‘ Accustomed long to contemplating Love and Pity,
I have forgot all difference between myself and others.


‘Accustomed long to meditating on my Guru as enhaloed
o’er my head,”
I have forgot all those who rule by power and by prestige.
1 Cf. the teaching of the Brthadaranyaka Upanishad (3. 5.1): ‘Put away
scholarship (pazditya) and be like a child’; and also Luke (xviii. 17): ‘ Who-
soever shall not receive the Kingdom of God as a little child shall in no wise


enter therein,’
2 See p. 171?.


246 THE NIRVANA [PART II


‘ Accustomed long to meditating on my Guardian Gods as
from myself inseparable,
I have forgot the lowly fleshly form.


‘Accustomed long to meditating on the Whispered Chosen
Truths,


I have forgot all that is said in written and in printed books.


*‘ Accustomed, as I’ve been, to the study of the Common Science,
Knowledge of erring Ignorance I've lost.


‘Accustomed, as I’ve been, to contemplating the Three
Bodies ! as inherent in myself,
I have forgot to think of hope and fear.


‘ Accustomed, as I’ve been, to meditating on this life and the
future life as one,
I have forgot the dread of birth and death.


‘Accustomed long to studying, all by myself, mine own ex-
periences,

I have forgot the need of seeking the opinions of friends and
brethren.


‘Accustomed long to application of each new experience to
mine own growth spiritual,
I have forgot all creeds and dogmas.


‘Accustomed long to meditating on the Unborn, the Inde-
structible, and the Unabiding,
I have forgot all definitions of this or that particular Goal.


‘ Accustomed long to meditating on all visible phenomena as
the Dharma-K aya,
I have forgot all mind-made meditations.


‘ Accustomed long to keep my mind in the Uncreated State
of Freedom,’
I have forgot conventional and artificial usages.


1 The 77-Kaya (or ‘Three Bodies’): the Dharma-Kaya, the Sambhoga-
Kaya, and the Mrmana-Kaya. (See p. 167}.)

2 Or ‘That which hath neither commencement, nor negation, nor place’;
that is, Mirvana.

8 That is, the unmodified or natural state of mind, which is the state of mind
of the Dharma-Kaya.


CHAP. x] THE GESHFE’S REVENGE 247


‘Accustomed long to humbleness, of body and of mind,
I have forgot the pride and haughty manner of the mighty.


* Accustomed long to regard my fleshly body as my hermitage,
I have forgot the ease and comfort of retreats in monasteries.


‘ Accustomed long to know the meaning of the Wordless,
I have forgot the way to trace the roots of verbs and source
of words and phrases ;
May thou, O learned one, trace out these things in standard
books,’


When Jetsiin had sung this song, the Geshé said, ‘ All this
may be very well according to thy yog? creed, but, following
our metaphysicians, such religious discourses lead nowhere
[i.e. show no real attainment of understanding]. I bowed
down to thee imagining thee to be a highly advanced person!’

Upon his saying this, the people (especially his own sup-
porters) showed displeasure, and, as though with one voice,
cried, ‘O Geshé Ténpa, however learned thou mayst be, and
however many professors like thee the world may hold, the
whole lot of you are not equal to the smallest downy hair on
Jetsiin’s body, nor able to fill the tiny pore containing it. Thou
hadst better be satisfied with the seat assigned to thee, at the
head of our row, and do what thou canst to add to thy wealth
by usury. As for religion, thou art not in the least permeated
with its perfume.’

The Geshé was much angered by this, but as the whole
party were unanimously against him, he could not show fight,
and so he merely sat in sulky silence, thinking to himself,
‘This ignoramus, Milarepa, by mere display of eccentric
doings and sayings and telling of lies, which tend to overthrow
the Buddhist Faith, is able to delude the people into making
him numerous alms and gifts, whereas I, though so learned in
book-learning, and the wealthiest and most influential person
in the place, count for less than a dog despite my religious
attainments. Something must be done to put an end to this.’

Acting on this resolve, he induced a concubine of his, by
promising her a valuable turquoise, to go and offer Jetsiin
some poisoned curds, which she did, while Jetstin was at Brin-


248 THE NM/IRVANA [PART II


Dragkar (Rock of Brin). Having fulfilled his duty of setting
his karma-favoured disciples upon the Path of Emancipation
and Perfection, Jetstin knew that his term of life was almost
ended, even if he did not take the poison. But foreseeing that
unless the woman procured the turquoise now she would not
procure it afterward [i.e. after the commission of the crime],
he said to her, ‘For the present, I will not accept the food
thou offerest me. Bring it later on and I will then accept it.’

Thinking that perhaps Jetstin knew her intention, the woman,
much embarrassed and distressed, returned to the Geshé, and,
relating to him the whole incident at length, said that Jetsiin,
in virtue of clairvoyance, had detected her evil design and
refused the poisoned food. But her seducer, trying to embolden
her, said, ‘If Jetsiin possessed this power he would not have
asked thee to take the food to him later on, but would have
handed it back, telling thee to take it thyself; this is proof
that he doth not possess clairvoyance. Thou mayst now have
the turquoise, but be sure that he taketh the poisoned food.’
Then he gave her the turquoise ; and she said, ‘ That Jetsiin
doth possess clairvoyant power is commonly believed, and his
refusal of the food the first time proveth it. I am satisfied
that he will refuse the food the second time. I do not want
thy turquoise; I am too much afraid to go to him again;
and most certainly I will not go.’

The Geshé replied, ‘ Illiterate folk believe that he possesseth
the power, but, not being conversant with the Scriptures, they
are duped by his trickery. The Scriptures describe a person
possessed of clairvoyance as quite different from a person such
as he is; I am convinced that he doth not possess it. Now, if
thou undertake to offer him the food again, and succeed in
getting him to eat it, thereupon—seeing that we two have
already lived together, and, as the proverb sayeth, “ No differ-
ence is there in taking a big or a little bite of garlic, since
garlic it is”—we will thenceforth live openly as husband and
wife. Then not only will the turquoise be thine, but thou wilt
be the mistress of all that I own; and we will share weal and
woe together. As we thus have the grudge in common, do
thine utmost to bring the attempt to a successful issue.’


CHAP. XII] JETSUN TAKES THE POISON 249


Taking the Geshé at his word, the woman, tempted to try
a second time, again mixed poison and curd together and took
the mixture to Jetsiin as a food-offering, when he was at Trode-
Trashi-Gang. Smilingly, Jetsiin took her offering in his hand,
and she thought that the Geshé¢ was perhaps right in asserting
that Jetstin did not possess clairvoyance. Just then, however,
Jetstin spoke and said, ‘Thou hast procured the turquoise as
thy fee for doing this deed.’ Overcome with remorse and fear,
the woman began to tremble; and, in quavering sob-choked
voice, confessed, ‘ Yes; Lord; I have procured the turquoise’ ;
and, prostrating herself at his feet, she begged him not to par-
take of the poisoned food, but to give it back to her who was
guilty of so heinous an intention [that she might drink it].

Jetsiin answered, ‘ First of all, I cannot, on any account,
give it back to thee to drink; my compassion for thee is too
great. Were I to do so, I should be transgressing the vows of
a Bodhisattva, and thus incur the heaviest of spiritual penalties.
Moreover, my life hath almost run its course; my work is
finished ; the time hath come for me to go to another world.!
Thy poisoned food would have no effect upon me whatsoever.
Nevertheless, I refused it at first, in order to enable thee to
gain the turquoise, which was promised to thee as the fee
for thy crime. Now that the turquoise is thine, I will take
the poisoned food, to satisfy the desire of the Geshké and to
secure thee in possession of the coveted turquoise. As regardeth
the many promises for the future which he hath made to thee
on condition that this crime be successfully accomplished, thou
needest place no reliance on them ; for he will disappoint thee.
There is no truth at all in any of the many things which he
hath said against me. The time shall come when both thou
and he will deeply repent of all these things. When that time
cometh, ye will devote yourselves wholly, if possible, to penance
and devotion; but if unable to do so much, at least avoid
committing such heinous sins, even though your very life be


1 Jetsun is ‘to go to another world’, whence he will return to this world, to
zontinue his work as a Teacher, in accordance with his Vow not to enter
Nirvana (the Final Release from sangsaric existence) until all sentient creatures
are led to Salvation.


2.50 THE NIRVANA [PART II


at stake, and pray to me and my disciples in deep and humble
faith. Left unassisted, ye two would be cut off from happiness
for countless ages, and suffering would thus be your lot; so,
for this once, I will see if I can absolve your evil karma.’ But
I command thee to keep this affair secret for as long as I am
alive; the time will come when it will be known to every one.
Although thou mayst not believe other sayings of mine upon
hearing them, yet in this affair thou wilt have an opportunity
of believing in me [or of being convinced]. Therefore, bear this
well in mind, and await its fulfilment.’ Then Jetstin partook of
the poisoned food.

When the woman had reported these things to the Geshé,
he said, ‘Everything that is spoken is not necessarily true.
[According to the proverb], “ Not everything that is cooked
is fit [for food].”? Enough for me that he hath taken the
poison. Now take heed and keep thy mouth shut.’

Then Jetstin sent word to the people of Tingri and Nyanam,
and to all who had known him and had faith in him, to come
to see him, each with a small offering. He sent a like invitation
to all who had a wish to meet him, but had never done so.
Also to all his disciples the message was proclaimed ; and,
greatly impressed by its ominous nature, each of them, male and
female, initiated and uninitiated, acquainted and unacquainted
with one another, assembled in a great assembly at Lapchi-
Chibar. Then for many days Jetsiin preached to them con-
cerning the Apparent Truth [i.e. the Law of Karma] and the
Real Truth [i.e. the Dharma-K aya).

During these days, the more spiritually gifted of the hearers
beheld the skies filled with gods listening [to the Master].
Many others felt [intuitively] that in the skies and on the
earth there was an innumerable congregation of divine as of


? Evil karma, i.e. sin, cannot be absolved. It can only be neutralized by an
equal amount of merit or good karma, as in physics two equally balanced
opposing forces neutralize one another. Jetsiin’s promise to see if he can absolve
the evil karma is probably intended merely to console the repentant woman.
Cf. Jetsiin’s teaching concerning the expiation of evil karma, pp. 251, 253, and
267 following.

® The sense of this seems to be, ‘ All that is said is not to be believed’, in
keeping with the context.


CHAP. XII] THE LAST ASSEMBLY 251


human beings, all joyfully listening to the preaching of the
Dharma; and they felt a joyfulness pervading the whole
gathering. And, to every one present, there appeared various
phenomenal signs, such.as rainbows arching a clear blue sky ;
[then again] clouds, of different colours, assuming the shapes
of [royal] umbrellas, and banners, and different offerings; and
showers of variegated blossoms. There was heard by all the
most exquisite music from various musical instruments; and
the most fragrant odours, such as none had ever before enjoyed,
filled the air. Those of moderate spiritual development who
experienced these phenomena of good omen, inquired of Jetsiin
why there was the feeling of wondrous communion between
the celestial auditors filling the skies and the human auditors
assembled on the earth, and why the various auspicious pheno-
menal signs, which every person present saw, had occurred.

Jetstn replied, ‘Among human beings, the number who are
spiritually developed, inclusive of both the initiated and the
uninitiated, is not great, whereas those piously inclined among
the divine beings, who are ever eager to hear the Dharma, fill
the very skies and are offering to me in worship the five celestial
objects of enjoyment,} and radiating, to all alike, joy and cheer-
fulness of mind. Thus do ye feel thrilled with gladness, and
perceive the joyous and favourable signs.’

Thereupon, they asked him, ‘ Why, then, should the divine
beings be invisible to [most of] us?’ Jetsiin replied, ‘Many
there are among the gods who have attained the Anagami
State, and various other degrees of holiness; and, to be able
to see them, it is necessary to be endowed with the perfected
vision and the highest zeal in the acquirement of the two
kinds of merit, and free from the two obscuring impurities born
of Ignorance.* If the chiefs among the gods be seen, then, too,
will their followers be seen. Whosoever desire to see these
divine beings, must devote themselves to acquiring merit suffi-
cient for the expiating of all evil karma. Thereupon, one may


1 These are such as may be enjoyed by the five senses.

2 That is, that degree of spiritual development which makes it no longer
necessary to be reborn on Earth ; Andgami meaning ‘ The Non-Returning One’.

3 See p. 33°.


252 THE NIRVANA [PART II


see in oneself the highest and holiest of all gods [which is the
Pure Mind].’


Then Jetsiin chanted a hymn on the way to see the gods:


‘ Obeisance at the Feet of Gracious Marpa!
Bless Thy Spiritual Descendants, that they may multiply.?


‘To me, Milarepa, the Devotee,

Celestial beings, from Tushita Heavens,

And other Holy Regions, come to hear my sermons.

Thy fill all quarters of the skies,

But only those [among my human followers] enjoying the

five kinds of vision,?

Can behold them; the common folk behold them not;

Yet I myself without impediment see each of them.

For the good of all the congregation,

They offer reverence unto me, with heavenly offerings.


‘The heavens are filled with radiancé of rainbows;
Celestial showers of sweet-smelling blossoms fall;
All beings alike hear harmonies melodious, and fragrance
of incense enjoy ;
Love divine, and happiness, pervade the whole assembly.


Such are the [fruits of] Grace-Waves of the Kargyiitpa
Saints.8


‘ Taking to yourselves the Gracious Refuge of the Faith,
If ye desire to see the Gods and Angels,
Give ear attentively to this, my hymn:


1 And so uphold the Kargyiitpa Higgarchy.

2 According to /amaic teachings, there are, in addition to the normal human eyes
of limited vision, five kinds of eyes : (1) Eyes of Instinct (or Eyes of the Flesh),
like those of birds and beasts of prey, which, in most cases, possess greater
range of vision than normal human eyes; (2) Celestial Eyes, such as the gods
possess, capable of seeing the human world as well as their own, and the past
and future births of beings in both worlds throughout many lifetimes ; (3) Eyes
of Truth, like the eyes of Bodhisattvas and Arhants, capable of seeing throughout
hundreds of world-periods (or Kalpas) backwards and in the future; (4) Divine
Eyes, of the most highly advanced Bodhisattvas, capable of seeing throughout
millions of world-periods that which has been and that which will be; and
(5) Eyes of Wisdom of Buddhas, capable of seeing, in like manner, throughout
eternity.


8 That is, the Saints broadcast their spiritual influences, and these phenomena
result.


CHAP. XII] HYMN ON SEEING THE GODS 253


‘ Because of evil karma, accumulated by you in past lives,
The moment ye are of your mother born, ye delight in sin-
ning ;
The doing of the good and merit-bringing deeds ye like not ;
E’en till ye are grown old, your nature is perverse:
Thus surely must ye garner the results of evil actions.


‘If ye wonder whether evil karma can be neutralized or not,
Then know that it is neutralized by desire for goodness.


‘But they who knowingly do evil deeds,
Exchange a mouthful of food for infamy.)


‘They who knowing not whither they themselves are bound,
Yet presume to pose as guides for others,
Do injury both to themselves and others.


‘If pain and sorrow ye desire sincerely to avoid,
Avoid, then, doing harm to others.


‘Repenting and confessing of all previous sins,
At the feet of the Guru and the Deities,
And vowing never more in future to commit a wrong,
Are the shortest path to rapid expiation of all evils done.


‘ The greater part of sinners are sharp-witted ;
[Of mind] unstable and unfixed, they delight in various dis-
tractions ; ?
And unendowed are they with love of the religious life:
This, in itself, doth signify that they are sin-obscured,
And need repentance and confession o’er and o’er.


‘Do ye each give yourselves, with zeal,
To expiating sins and winning merit ;
If thus ye do, not only shall ye see
The ‘Dharma-loving deities celestial,
But the holiest and highest of all gods.


1 This is similar to the saying that for a mess of pottage one selleth his birth-
right.

2 That is, the worldly, in their attachment to the pleasures of life, are mentally
unstable, one-pointedness of mind, as attained through practice of the science of
mind-control called Yoga, being lacking in them; and they continue to be
bound to the Wheel of the Sangsara.


254 THE NIRVANA [PART I


The Dharma-K aya of your own mind ye shall also see ;
And seeing That, ye shall have seen the All,

The Vision Infinite, the Sangsara and Nirvana."

Then shall your karmic actions cease.’


Upon Jetsiin’s chanting this hymn, those of the assembled
deities and human beings who were highly developed spiritu-
ally, obtained the right view of the Dharma-Kaya [or
Nirvanic| State. Those of moderate development obtained
experience of the super-sensuous divine state of Ecstatic Bliss
and Voidness? such as they had never before known, and
were helped thereby to enter upon the Path [of the Realiza-
tion of Nirvana]. And not one of all the others who were
there but was desirous of gaining the Great Emancipation.

Then Jetstin addressed the congregation, saying, ‘My dis-
ciples, gods, and men, and all who are assembled here to-day,
our coming together is the result of good karma from past
lives ; and in this life we have established a purer and holier
relationship by religious communion. Now that I am grown
very agéd, no certainty is there of our being able to meet
again [in this lifetime]. I exhort you to preserve the religious
discourses which I have delivered to you, and not to neglect
them, but to carry their teachings into practice, in so far as ye
can, in your daily lives. If ye do this, in whatever realm
I may arrive at the Perfection of Buddhahood, ye shall be the
first body of disciples to receive the Truth that I shall then
preach. Therefore rejoice in this.’

When those present from Nyanam heard these words of the
Lord Jetstin, they asked of one another whether the Master
meant that he was about to leave this world in order to go
and benefit some other world ; and said that, if this were his
meaning, they should entreat him to ascend to the Paradise
Realm from Nyanam, or, if that could not be, at least to bless
Nyanam by a final visit. So they went to Jetsiin, and, clasping
his feet, entreated him with tear-filled eyes and in fervency of


1 Or ‘The Vision Infinite, the Round of Birth and Death, and the State of
Freedom’,


* This is one of the states experienced in the yogic trance called Samadhi.
(Cf. p. 365.)


CHAP. XI] THE FINAL GOOD-WISHES 255


faith and love to grant their prayer. In like manner did the
disciples and lay-followers from Tingri entreat Jetsiin to go
to Tingri. To these entreaties Jetstin made reply :

‘I am now too far advanced in years to go to Nyanam or
Tingri; I will await death at Brin and Chibar. Therefore,
each of ye may give me your parting good-wishes and return
home; I will meet all of you in the Sacred Paradises.’

Then they prayed that, if Jetsiin were unable to visit their
countries, he might, at least, utter a blessing upon each of the
places which he had visited, and a special good-wish for those
people who had seen his face, or heard his voice, and listened
to his preaching; and, in short, that not upon them alone
[should these blessings be], but upon all sentient creatures
throughout the universe.

To this entreaty, Jetstin said: ‘Grateful am I for the faith
which ye have manifested in me, and for the necessities of
life with which ye have kept me supplied. I have shown my
thankfulness in having ever wished you well; and, to do good
to you, I have preached the Dharma to you, whereby, through
obligation, a mutual bond hath been established between us.
And, now, seeing that Iam a Yogz who hath realized the Truth,
it is my duty to utter for you a good-wish for peace and hap-
piness, both temporal and spiritual, for the present time and
for all eternity.’

Then Jetsiin sang the following good-wishes in verse :


‘O Father and Protector of all Creatures, Thou Who hast
Thine Own Good-Wishes realized,
Translator Marpa, I bow down at Thy Feet!


‘O my disciples, here assembled, hearken unto me.
Kind, indeed, have ye been unto me,
And kind have I been unto you ;
May we, thus bound together by ties of mutual helpfulness,
Meet in the Realm of Happiness.’


‘Ye donors of alms, who here are seated,
May ye live long, and be e’er prosperous ;


1 Or ‘Ngén-gah’ (Skt. Amardavati); see p. 447.


2.56 THE NIRVANA [PART II


May no perverted thought find entry to your minds ;
May all your thoughts e’er pious be and lead to your success
religiously.


‘May peace harmonious bless this land ;
May it be ever free from maladies and war ;
May there be harvests rich, and increased yield of grain ;
May every one delight in righteousness.


‘May all who have beheld my face and heard my voice,
And all who have my history known, and borne it in their
heart,
And all who have but heard my name and story,
Meet me in the Realm of Happiness.


‘ May those who make a study of my life
And emulate it, and dedicate themselves to meditation ;
And each who shall transcribe, narrate, or listen to my
history, ‘
Or whosoe’er shall read and venerate it,
Or take it as their rule of conduct,
Meet me in the Realm of Happiness.


‘May every being in future time
Who hath the will to meditate,
In virtue of mine own austerities
Be free from all impediment and error.}


‘To them who for devotion’s sake endure hardships,
There cometh boundless merit ;
To them who shall lead others to the treading of the Path,
Boundless gratitude is due ;
To them who hear the story of my life,
There cometh boundless grace :
By the power of this boundless merit, gratitude, and grace,
May every being, as soon as they shall hear [my history],
attain Deliverance,
And [True] Success as soon as they shall contemplate [it].
1 In Dhyana (or Meditation) there are many subtle dangers; and, unless
guided by an experienced Guru, such as Milarepa herein becomes to all who


follow and venerate him, the beginner is apt to meet with so many impediments
and so much error as to prevent all true spiritual progress on the Path.


CHAP. XII] THE FINAL GOOD-WISHES 257


‘May the places of my sojourn, and the objects whereon I have
rested,
And every little thing which hath been mine,
Bring peace and gladness wheresoe’er they be.


‘ The earth, the water, fire, and air,
And the ethereal spaces wheresoever they pervade—
May I be able to embrace them all.


‘And may the Devas, Nagas, and the Spirits of Eight Orders,
And all the local genii and the sprites,
Do not the least of harm;
But may they each fulfil these wishes in accordance with the
Dharma.


‘May none of living creatures, none e’en of insects,
Be bound unto sangsdaric life; nay, not one of them;
But may I be empowered to save them all.’


At these words, the lay-disciples showed great joy, for they
now doubted whether Jetsiin meant to pass away; so that those
of Nyanam and Tingri were all the more eager to seek his
grace and blessings, and to listen to his religious discourses.

As soon as the congregation had dispersed and every one
had gone home, the heavenly rainbows and the other pheno-
mena automatically vanished.

Now the people of Brin earnestly begged Jetsiin, through
Shiwa-Wéd-Repa and other advanced disciples, to preach to
them. Accordingly, Jetsiin went to dwell in a hermitage which
had been built on the top of a rock known as ‘ Poisonous-
to-Touch ’, for the rock was believed to be the serpent-hood
crowning the malignant Serpent-Spirit of Brin, the hermitage
having been built there in order that the Serpent-Spirit should
be subjugated [in virtue of hermits dwelling therein]; and
there Jetsiin continued his preaching to his lay-disciples of
Brin. When he had completed his sermons, he said to them,
‘ Those who have points to be elucidated, or perplexities to be
cleared concerning the special teachings which they have
received, should make haste to present them, for I am not
sure of living much longer.’

So the assembled disciples gathered together offerings for


258 THE NIRVANA [PART II


performing a pw#a@, and having performed the p74, listened to
the completion of the special teachings [as Jetsiin made the
elucidations and cleared the perplexities]. Then Bri-Gom-
Repa and Seban-Repa, addressing Jetstin, asked, ‘O Jetsiin,
from what thou hast [just] said we have come to fear lest thou
intend to pass away into WVzrvama. It cannot be that thy
life hath run its course?’ Jetsiin replied, ‘My life and mine
influence in converting others have reached their completion.
Therefore must I now meet the consequence of having been
born,’

A few days later, Jetsiin showed signs of illness, and Ngan-
Dzong-Repa began preparations for making propitiatory offer-
ings in the worship of the Gurus, the Devas, and the Dakinis,
on behalf of the disciples ; and, at the same time, he begged
Jetsiin to take medical and other treatment. He was about to
summon all the laymen and disciples to complete the neces-
sary preparations; but Jetsiin said, ‘It is commonly the rule
that illness befalling a yogz is to be looked upon as an exhorta-
tion to persevere in devotion, and he ought not to have any
special prayers offered up for his recovery. He should utilize
illness as an aid to progression on the Path, ever ready to
meet suffering, and even death. As for me, Milarepa, I have,
by the grace of my gracious Guru, Marpa, completed all
special rites for overcoming illness, according to his particular
method ; and now I need neither forces nor mediators. I have
made mine enemies! to be bosom friends; so I need not the
making of prayers or expiatory offerings. Nor do I need
exorcisms or propitiatory rites to any demons; for I have trans-
muted all bad omens and evil presentiments into Guardian
Deities of the Faith,? who will perform all the four kinds of
ceremonies. The Maladies born of the Five Poisons, I have
changed into the Bliss of the Five Divine Wisdoms ;? there-
fore do I need not medicines compounded of the six chief
spices.* The time hath come when the visible, illusory, phy-

1 These are interruptions and misfortunes whilst following the religious life.

2 These are the Realizations of Truth, born of the religious life.

* See p. 37°.

* Namely, saffron, cardamom, cloves, nutmeg, sandalwood, and dried rufa:
cf. p. 1554.


CHAP. XII] DISCOURSE ON DEATH 259


sical body, the mind-evolved form of the Divine Body [the
Dharma-K aya}, must be merged into the Realms of Spiritual
Light ; and for this no rites of consecration are necessary.
Worldly folk who have heaped up evil Aarma during their
lifetime, and who anticipate reaping, as the result, the pangs
of birth, old age, illness, and death, in this world, vainly seek
to evade or ameliorate the intensity and anguish thereof by
means of propitiatory ceremonies and medical treatment.
Neither through the power or authority of kings, nor the
valour of the hero nor the charming form of the belle, nor
the wealth of the rich, nor the fleetness of the coward, nor the
oratory of an able pleader, can one ward off, or retard for
a moment, the Decree of Time. There are no means or
methods, be they peaceful, noble, fascinating, or stern,’ which
can buy off or stop the execution of this unalterable decree.
If any there be who are truly fearful of those pangs, and
sincerely seek to prevent their recurrence, and are really eager
to attain a state of eternal bliss, I possess the secret rite for
the attainment thereof.’

When Jetsiin had thus spoken, some of the disciples prayed
him to impart to them this ritual [or science]; and Jetstin
said, ‘So be it. All worldly pursuits have but the one unavoid-
able and inevitable end, which is sorrow: acquisitions end in
dispersion ; buildings, in destruction; meetings, in separation ;
births, in death. Knowing this, one should, from the very first,
renounce acquisition and heaping-up, and building, and meet-
ing; and, faithful to the commands of an eminent guru, set
about realizing the Truth [which hath no birth or death].
That alone is the best ritual [or science]. I have yet my last
important testament to impart. This, forget ye not, I will do
hereafter.’ ;

Again Shiwa-Wéd-Repa and Ngan-Dzong-Repa addressed
Jetsiin, saying, ‘O Jetsiin, were thou to regain health, thou
couldst continue to do good to many more sentient creatures.
Therefore, even though thou dost not see fit to grant our
prayers in full, yet in order that we may not have regrets


1 These are the four divine methods of leading human beings to tread the
Path of Emancipation,


2,60 THE NIRVANA [PART II


hereafter, we again pray that thou wilt be pleased to perform
an efficacious Tantric ceremonial of worship for thy recovery ;
and, at the same time, take some medicine.’

Jetstin answered, ‘Were it not that my time had come,
I should have donc as ye have requested. But, if one were to
condescend to perform a Tantric rite for the prolongation of
one’s life without having, as the plea, the altruistic intention
to serve others, it would be as improper behaviour towards the
Divine Deities as it would be towards a king to ask him to
perform the menial service of sweeping and scrubbing one’s
floor ; and such act carrieth with it its own penalty. Therefore,
I adjure you never to perform sacred Tantric rites with a view
to success in worldly pursuits; though selfish folk [who know
no better] are not to blame in so doing. I have passed my
life in incessant practice of the Highest Tantric Truths, in
order to benefit all sentient beings; this will serve for religious
rites [for warding off evil] now. Because of such devotion, my
mind knoweth not how to move away from the firm Seat of
Truth [in Samadhi]; this will suffice for the rites for long life,
Marpa’s remedies have eradicated the very roots of the diseases
of the Five Poisons [i.e. lust, hatred, stupidity, egotism,
jealousy]; this will serve for medical treatment. As for your-
selves, merely to be devotees, or to have adopted the religious
career, will not suffice; ye must, in addition, use trials and
tribulations as aids on the Path. If one’s time have not come,
and some evil interruption threaten one’s life, there is no
harm in having recourse to medical treatment and [faith-cure]
rituals for one’s recovery, providing such shall assist one on
the Path. Recent evils can be warded off by exercising the
very might of the correlative and interdependent chain of cir-
cumstances which result [from them]; and even those evils
themselves can be transmuted into blessings at such times.
Thus it was that in former times the Buddha, too, thinking of
the good of his lesser developed disciples, held out his hand
to have his pulse felt by the physician Jivaka Kumara, and
took the medicines prescribed. But when His time had come,
even He, the Lord Buddha, passed away into Nirvana.
Likewise, now, my time hath come, and I will not have


CHAP. XII] THE FINAL ADMONITIONS 261


recourse to medical treatment or any sort of ceremonies for my
cure.

Thus would Jetsiin not allow anything to be done for him.
Accordingly, the two advanced disciples entreated him to in-
struct them as follows: ‘If Jetsiin is really passing away to
some other realm, then, for our good, how should the funeral
ceremonies be performed, how should the bones and reliques
be honourably preserved, and how should the st#pas and ¢sha-
tshas be made? Again, who should be elected as thy successor ;
and how are the ceremonies on the anniversary [of thy passing
away] to be conducted? Then, too, which disciple is to follow
this or that branch of religious practice, such as listening [to
instruction], cogitating, or meditating [in solitude]. In all
these matters we solicit thine own verbal directions.’

To this Jetsiin answered, ‘By the kind favour of Marpa,
I have fulfilled all the duties of the Sangsdra and attained
Deliverance [therefrom]. The three principles of my person-
ality [i.e. body, speech, and mind] having been transmuted
into the Body of Truth, there is no certainty that I shall leave
a corpse behind me. There is, therefore, no need either of
stiipas or of clay tsha-tshas. AsI own no monastery or temple,
I need not appoint any one to succeed me. The bleak, sterile
hills, and the mountain peaks, and the other solitary retreats or
hermitages, all of you may possess and occupy. All the sentient
beings of the Six Lokas ye may protect as your children and
followers. Instead of erecting s¢é#pas, cultivate loving fondness
towards all parts of the Dharma, and set up the Victorious
Banner of Devotion; and, in place of ¢sha-tshas, let there be
uninterrupted daily repetitions of the fourfold prayer. For
periodical ceremonies [in memory of my passing away], offer
me earnest prayer from the innermost recesses of your hearts.
As regardeth the method of acquiring practical knowledge, if ye
find a certain practice increaseth your evil passions and tendeth
to selfishness, abandon it, though it may appear virtuous; and
if any line of action tend to counteract the Five Evil Passions,
and to benefit sentient beings, know that to be true and holy
Dharma, and continue it, even though it should appear to be
sinful [to those bound to worldly conventionalities].


262 THE NIRVANA [PART II


‘If, after having heard these counsels, one fail to follow them
and, instead, infringe and trample upon them in defiance of
the [Divine] Law, howsoever well-informed such a one may
be, he will merely be earning a place in the lowest Hell. Life
is short, and the time of death is uncertain; so apply your-
selves to meditation. Avoid doing evil, and acquire merit, to
the best of your ability, even at the cost of life itself. In short,
the whole purport may be stated thus: Act so that ye have no
cause to be ashamed of yourselves; and hold fast to this rule.
If ye do thus, ye can be sure of never disobeying the commands
of the Supreme Buddhas, notwithstanding any conflicting rules
which may be found set down in writing. Herein is contained
all guidance concerning listening and deliberating. Satisfied
will this old man’s heart be if ye act accordingly ; for if my
heart be satisfied, then will your duties be fulfilled, both to-
wards the Sangsara and Nirvana. No other method, howso-
ever agreeable it may be from a worldly point of view, can in
the least satisfy me.’ Then, in amplification, Jetsiin chanted
the hymn concerning things useful :


‘IT bow down at the Feet of Marpa the Translator!


‘Ye, my disciples, here in faith assembled,
Give ear to this, the final testament,
Of me, the aged Milarepa, the Father [Spiritual]—
I, the Yogz, Milarepa,
Who by the Kindness and the Favour of Marpa of Lhobrak,}
Have successfully accomplished all my duties.


‘If ye, my skzshyas and my followers,

Will my behests obey, do as I heretofore have bid you;
And thus within this very lifetime ye shall do

A mighty service unto others and yourselves,

Pleasing unto me and to the Supreme Buddhas ;

Apart from that, all other acts are profitless

For self and others, and displeasing unto me.


‘Unless one’s Guru be of an unbroken [apostolic] line,
What gain is it to take Initiation ? 2


1 Lhobrak means ‘ Rock of the South’,
? That is, Initiation is worthless unless conferred by a teacher to whom the


cHAP. X11] HYMN ABOUT THINGS USEFUL 263


‘Unless the Dharma be with one’s own nature blended,
What gain is it to know by rote the Zantras?}


‘Without renunciation of all worldly aims,
What gain is it to meditate the Chosen Teachings?


‘Without attuning body, speech, and mind unto the Doctrine,
What gain is it to celebrate religious rites?


‘If anger be unconquered by its antidote,”
What gain is it to meditate on patience?


‘Unless all partiality, all likes and dislikes, be abandoned,
What gain is it to offer worship ?


‘Unless all selfishness be given up, from the very heart’s
depths,
What gain is it to offer alms?


‘Unless the beings of the Zokas Six be known to be one’s
parents,®
What gain is it to fill a certain seat hierarchical ?


‘Unless pure love and veneration be innate within one’s heart,
What gain is it to build a sti#pa?


‘Unless one have ability to meditate throughout the four
divisions of the day,
What gain is it to mould ¢sha-tshas?


‘Unless prayer rises from the heart’s recesses,
What gain is it to honour anniversaries ?


‘Unless the Secret Teachings‘ be retained within one’s ear,
What gain is it to suffer sorrow?


Esoteric Lore has been transmitted in such completeness and with such psychic
power (or ‘waves of grace’) as come only through an unbroken apostolic
succession of teachers. The Ear-Whispered Teachings are unobtainable from
one who has never had them thus conveyed to him.

1 The sense of this is, without the spirit of the Doctrine, of what profit is the
letter of the Zantras. :

2 The antidote is Love. 3 See p. 203}.

* Or ‘Specially-selected Teachings’; that is, the Esoteric, Ear-Whispered
Doctrines.


264 THE M/RVANA [PART II


‘Unless both faith and love attend the Saint while living,
What gain is it to contemplate his reliques or his image?


‘Unless repentance and remorse are born in one,
What gain is it to say, “ Renounce and make repentance?”


‘Unless one meditate on loving others more than self,
What gain is it merely from the lips to say, “‘O pity [sentient
creatures] ” ?


‘Unless all evil hankerings be overcome,
What gain is it to render service now and then?!


‘Unless the Guru’s every word e’er be regarded [and obeyed]
as being reasonable,
What gain is it to have a multitude of shkishyas?


‘ All actions which bring naught of benefit,
Do naught but harm; so leave them quietly aside.


‘To the Yogt who hath carried out ‘his mission,
No need is there to undertake fresh duties.’


The chanting of this left a deep impression upon the hearts of
the disciples.

Then Jetsiin began to manifest symptoms of serious illness.
Just about this time the Gesh¢é Tsaphuwa came with a small
quantity of meat and chkhang, ostensibly to present them to
Jetstin, but really to see [for himself] how Jetstin was. He
said to him, ‘ Such a saintly person as Jetsiin should not have
been afflicted with so serious an illness ; but since it hath come,
it ought to be distributed among all thy disciples, if this were
possible; or, if there be means of transferring it, then it might
be transferred to a person like myself; but since this, too, is
impossible, what now had best be done?’

Jetstin smiled and said, ‘ There really was no reason for this
disease afflicting me, but I had no choice in the matter, as thou
perhaps knowest quite well. Generally speaking, a yog7?’s illness
and that of the ordinary person are not of the same character ;
to the former it may seem to be accidental. But in this parti-
cular instance mine illness is to me an adornment.’


1 That is, by fits and starts—between one outburst of worldliness and another,
Service to the world must be unbroken, like the flow of a deep calm river.


CHAP. XII] SONG ON A YOG/’S ILLNESS 265


Having thus spoken, Jetsiin chanted this hymn:


‘The Round of Birth and Death and the Deliverance are seen
[or understood] within the Realm of the Clear Light ;
When the hands attain their natural posture,!
The Great Mudra@ upon them placeth its seal.?
Thus is there [in me] greatness of indifference,
And courage knowing not impediment.


‘ Diseases, evil spirits, sins, and obscurations,
But tend to beautify me greatly ;
They lie within me, shaped as nerves, as humours, and as seed.
Gifts I use to ornament the signs of my perfection ;
May the sins of evil thoughts be expiated.®
This illness, which becometh me so well,
I could transfer, but no need is there to do so.’


The Geshé thought, ‘ Jetstin suspecteth me of having been
the means of poisoning him, but is not quite sure about it.
As for transferring the illness, I am quite certain that he could
do no such thing, even had he good reason for so doing. Then
he said, ‘O Jetsiin, I wish I knew the real cause of thine illness.
If it be caused by malignant spirits, they should be exor-
cized; if merely constitutional, due to inequality of the bodily
humours, these should be equalized and set right ; but I have
no knowledge of this ailment. If, however, thou can transfer
it, please transfer it to me.’

Jetstin made answer, ‘ A certain sentient being became pos-
sessed by one of the most malignant of evil spirits, and that
spirit was the Demon of Egotism. Such was the demon that
caused mine illness, by disturbing the harmony of my constitu-
tion. Neither can the demon be exorcized nor the illness cured.
Were I to transfer the illness to thee, not for a moment
wouldst thou be able to endure it, so I will not transfer it.’


1 This posture, attained through practising Yoga, symbolizes, as in Milarepa,
Bodhisattvic renunciation of worldly aims and works, and the dedication of one’s
life so as to further the spiritual growth of all sentient creatures.

2 The Doctrine of the Great Mudra (or Symbol) has in Milarepa produced its
blossom and its fruit, which are the Realization of Truth.

5 This couplet refers to the Geshé’s gifts to Milarepa and the Geshe's evil
thoughts towards Milarepa.


266 THE NIRVANA [PART II


The Geshé thought to himself, ‘Ah; unwilling to admit his
inability to transfer the disease, he pretendeth that he doth
not wish to transfer it.’ So the Geshé said, most insistently
[to Jetsiin], ‘ Pray, do transfer it !’

Jetsiin replied, ‘ Very well then, I will not transfer it to
thee, but to yonder door; thou mayst merely observe its
force. So saying, Jetsiin transferred it to the door of the
meditation-room, whereupon the door began to emit sounds
of cracking and splitting; it throbbed and vibrated, and seemed
on the point of crumbling away. At the same time, Jetsiin
appeared to be free from pain.

The Geshé again thought to himself, ‘ Surely this is magical
illusion’; and he said, ‘Most wonderful! Pray transfer it
to me.’

Jetsiin said, ‘ Accordingly, I will show thee a little of its
force, O Geshé. And Jetsiin took back the pain from the
door and transferred it to Tsaphuwa, telling him that that was
only one-half of the pain, and asking him what he thought of
its intensity, and whether it were bearable.

The Geské was so overcome with unbearable pain that he
was about to faint away. Then, having thus felt the intensity
and anguish of the pain to which Jetstin had been subjected,
he repented deeply and sincerely of his evil; and, placing
Jetsiin’s feet upon his head and shedding tears profusely, he
wailed forth, ‘O Jetsiin, Sacred Lord, this illness hath been,
as thy Reverend Self hath said, brought upon thee by this
creature, obsessed by selfishness and jealousy. Accept, I pray
thee, all my worldly goods, movable and immovable; and
pardon me this crime, that the evil arma thereof may not
overtake me.’

These words being uttered in a spirit of sincere remorse,
Jetsiin saw that the repentance was really earnest, and gladly
granted forgiveness. Taking back the entire pain, he made
answer, ‘ During my whole lifetime, no house or property
have I ever owned ;! and now, on my death-bed, when I have

1 Milarepa, owing to his renunciation of the world, did not take possession of


the ruined house and the land to which by right of inheritance he was entitled
after the death of his mother, and so never really owned any worldly estate.


CHAP. XII] HYMN OF FORGIVENESS 267


not the least need of possessions, what should I do with
worldly goods? Take back thy gifts, and henceforth refrain
from transgressing the precepts of the Dkarma. With respect
to thy present transgression, earnestly will I pray that no evil
karma may overtake thee and that thou mayst not suffer
because of it.’ Then Jetsiin chanted this hymn:


‘Obeisance to the Feet of Perfect Marpa !


‘Even the Five Heinous Sins, limitless [in evil consequences],
If speedily repented, may be neutralized.
So may the virtue of my merit and my share of Happiness,
With that of all the Buddhas of the past, the present, and the

future,

Efface the evil karma of all sentient beings:
May all thy share of miseries, too,
Be taken o’er by me and likewise neutralized.!


‘ Pity have I for him who doeth injury
Unto his Guru, or preceptor, or his parents ;
And may the evil arma born thereof,
Be partaken of by me and thoroughly digested.


‘Mayst thou remain apart from vicious comrades,
And in all future states of being
Mayst thou encounter virtuous friends ;
May none do unto thee, by evil intent, aught
Which would exhaust thy store of merit.


‘ May every sentient creature e’er encounter
Reciprocal goodwill and the nobleness of the Bodhisattvic
mind,’

On Jetsiin’s chanting this hymn, the Geshé felt greatly
comforted. In the fervour of boundless gladness and faith he
vowed that henceforth he would shun all impious deeds and
give himself entirely to religious devotion till his death; and
he said [to Jetsiin], ‘The evil deeds which in the past I have
been tempted to commit were due to my love of wealth and
property. Henceforth, I desire neither houses nor lands nor


' Or literally : ‘Be partaken of by me and withal digested’, as in the fourth
verse following.


268 THE NIRVANA [PART II


wealth nor worldly goods. Therefore, even though Jetsiin
have no need of my possessions, they may serve to assist and
maintain the disciples and followers who are engaged in
devotional studies. So I entreat thee to accept them.’

Despite the earnestness of this entreaty, Jetsiin refused to
accept the Geshé’s possessions; but, subsequently, the disciples
took them over and utilized them for defraying the cost of
Jetsiin’s funeral ceremonies, and the periodical festivals in-
stituted thereafter to commemorate Jetsiin’s passing away,
which continue to be celebrated even now. And, eventually,
Tsaphuwa himself became a very earnest devotee.

Then Jetsiin said, ‘ As the fruit of my sojourn in this place,
a hardened sinner hath been converted through repentance
and successfully guided towards Deliverance. My mission
here thus having been accomplished, no longer is there need
for a yog? to remain in a worldly place of abode. For a yogi to
die in a village is like a king dying in the house of a common
rustic. I must go to die at Chibar.

Seban-Repa replied, ‘Owing to thy present illness, it will
be too fatiguing for thee to attempt the journey on foot. We
will carry thee in a palankeen, Sir.’

To this Jetsiin answered, ‘ To me there is no reality either
in illness or in death. I have manifested here the phenomena
of illness; I will manifest the phenomena of death at Chibar.
For this I need no palankeen. Some of the younger Repas
[i. e. Jetsiin’s disciples] may go on ahead to Chibar.’

Thereupon, some of the younger disciples went on ahead,
but they found that Jetsiin had already reached the Cave of
Brilche (Cow-Yak’s Tongue). The elder disciples, who fol-
lowed later, escorted and attended another Jetsiin. Another
Jetsiin was at the ‘ Poison-to-Touch Rock’, manifesting the
phenomena of illness. While the one Jetstin was being escorted
and served by the devout followers on the journey to Chibar,
another was preaching to those who had assembled for a final
sermon at the Red Rock. And, again, to every one who re-
mained at home and made religious offering in farewell to
Jetsiin, a Jetsiin appeared.

So those who went ahead to Chibar said that Jetsiin had


¥


TAWA
G \ » oy ~

N29) F =

NS) , |


aN
7 %


Ms
? i PANY
Is


es


MILAREPA MANIFESTING OCCULT POWERS


Described on pages xxviii, 269


DHE OIBE RAN VCZ7OR GEN:


Chorten (Mch'od-rten), lit. ‘receptacle for offerings’? : Skt. Dhatu-
garbha; corresponding to the Chazlya and Stipa (or Tope) of Indian
Buddhism and to the Dégaba of the Sinhalese. Miniature Ch’ortens, or
Chaityas, of metal, stone, wood, or clay, as found adorning /d@mazst altars,
frequently contain reliques; cf. pp. 88, 261, 279, 291-301. Throughout
the lands of Lamaism small clay funeral Chartyas (Skt. Dharma-sharira)
are customarily deposited on the ledges or in specially prepared niches
of Ch’ortens; cf. pp. 1757, 178, 261. As to other uses made of Ch’ortens,
see The Tibetan Book of the Dead, ». 163; also L. A. Waddell, Ze
Buddhism of Tibet, pp. 262-4. Exoterically’the Ch’orlen symbolizes the
five elements into which man’s body is resolved after death. The square
base typifies the solidity of the arth and thus the Element Earth; the
globular portion, the water-drop, the Element Water; the spire, triangular
like a flame, the Klement lire; the crescent, like the inverted vault of
the sky, the lement Air; the acuminated circle tapering in flame into
space, the Element Ether: cf. p. 1347. Esoterically it symbolizes the
Way to Enlightenment, from the Earth (its base) progressively th.ough
the Thirteen Bodhisat Heavens (the thirteen step-like segments of its
spire) to the Unformed, Uncreated, Beyond-Nature A7rudza—beyond
the realm of Ether (the last of the samgsa@ric elements), whither the flame
(known as the /yotzh, or Sacred Light of the Buddha) points and is lost in
the Voidness.


CHAP. XII] THE ATTENDANT SIGNS 269


preceded them there, while the elder disciples who had gone
with Jetstin said that they had escorted him. Each party of
those who separately arrived later claimed to have come along
with Jetsiin. Others asserted that, on that very day, Jetsiin had
been with them at the Red Rock ; some said that he had been
in their house then ; and those who had offered him worship
claimed that he had been in each of their houses at the same
time. Thus every one claimed Jetsiin as having been their
honoured guest and recipient of services or veneration, and
could come to no agreement. Finally, in one united group,
they put the question to Jetsiin himself, and he said, ‘ All of
you are right. It was I who was playing with you.’?

Thereafter, Jetsiin dwelt at the Cave of Brilche, in Chibar ;
and his illness continued. And at this time such phenomena
as the feeling of ecstasy and the seeing of rainbows, which
had attended his previous sermons, permeated the whole
country-side, so that the tops of the mountains were made
glorious, and everywhere there commonly prevailed a feeling
of auspiciousness. Every one was certain that Jetstin had
decided to depart for another world.

Then the foremost disciples, Shiwa-Wéd-Repa, the Master
of Ngan-Dzong,”? and Seban-Repa, together asked Jetsiin to
which Realm he intended going, and whither they should
address their prayers(to him]. They further inquired if he had
any last injunctions or commands to impart; and each prayed
for special guidance as to the line of devotion to adopt.

Jetsiin replied to them, ‘ As to the place or direction whither
ye should address your prayers, [I command you to] direct
them according to your own beliefs and faith. In whatever
place ye pray with sincerity and earnestness, there will I be in
front of each of you,’ and I will fulfil your wishes. Therefore,
pray earnestly and with firm faith. For the present, I intend


1 The Perfected Yogi possesses the power of reproducing his phenomenal
physical body in countless numbers, one such body in one place or world,
another in another. The Editor has in his possession one of the yogic treatises
concerning the acquirement of this power.

* That is, Ngan-Dzong-Repa.

3 Cf. Matthew (xviii. 20): ‘For where two or three are gathered together in
my name, there am I in the midst of them.’


270 THE NIRVANA [PART II


going to the Realm of Happiness [i.e. Vgéx-gah], wherein the
Bhagavan Akshobhya reigneth. And my last injunction, or
will, when I, Milarepa, am dead, is this: To Rechung, who,
as I foresee, will soon arrive, give my bamboo-staff and this
cotton raiment which ye all see with me as my sole posses-
sions; they will serve for him as a sort of success-bringing
talisman in his meditation on the control of the Vital Airs.
Until Rechung arriveth, no one is to touch my body. The hat
of the Master Maitri and this black staff of agarz will carry
with them success in upholding the Faith by means of deep
meditation and high aspiration; see that they are given to
Upa-Tonpa. This wooden bowl may be taken by Shiwa-Wéd.
And this skull-cup I give to Ngan-Dzong-Ténpa. To Seban-
Repa, I give this flint and steel. This bone-spoon I give to
Bri-Gom-Repa. To the other disciples I leave this cotton
mantle of mine, which they may divide among themselves in
strips. From a worldly point of view, these things are of little
value, but each beareth with it a spiritual blessing.

‘Now hear my principal testament, of which none save my
chief disciples and lay followers, male and female, should be
informed: All the gold that I, Milarepa, have amassed during
my lifetime lieth hidden here beneath this hearth ; and with
it there are written instructions as to how it is to be dis-
tributed among you all. After my departure, fail not to look
for it, and act according to the instructions found with it.

‘As to how ye are to carry the religious teachings into
practice in your everyday life, bear in mind the following :
Some there may be among you who are proud of their ap-
parent sanctity, but who, at heart, are really devoted to ac-
quiring name and fame in this world ; they dispense a hundred
necessary and unnecessary things in charity, hoping thereby
to reap a liberal return. This, though displeasing to the
Divinities gifted with divine vision, is persevered in by selfish
beings of obscured vision. The hypocrisy of thus hankering after
the rich juices of this world, while outwardly appearing pious


1 That is, the control of the psycho-physical forces of the human body with
a view to psychic development and success in Yoga. (Cf. p. 194.)


CHAP. X11] DISCOURSE ON RIGHT ACTION 271


and devout, because unable to face the ridicule of the world
[which might otherwise come to know of the hankering], is
like partaking of delicacies and rich food mixed with deadly
aconite. Therefore, drink not the venom of desire for worldly
fame and name; but casting aside all the fetters of worldly
duties, which but lead to this desire, devote yourselves to
sincere and earnest devotion.’

The disciples then inquired if they could engage in worldly
duties, in a small way, for the benefit of others, and Jetsiin
said, ‘If there be not the least self-interest attached to such
duties, it is permissible.’ But such [detachment] is indeed
rare; and works performed for the good of others seldom
succeed if not wholly freed from self-interest. Even without
seeking to benefit others, it is with difficulty that works done
even in one’s own interest [or selfishly] are successful. It is as
if a man helplessly drowning were to try to save another man
in the same predicament. One should not be over-anxious
and hasty in setting out to serve others before one hath one-
self realized Truth in its fullness ; to be so, would be like the
blind leading the blind.? As long as the sky endureth, so long
will there be no end of sentient beings for one to serve; and
to every one cometh the opportunity for such service. Till the
opportunity come, I exhort each of you to have but the one
resolve, namely, to attain Buddhahood for the good of all
living things.

‘Be lowly and meek. Clothe yourselves in rags. Be re-
signed to hardships with respect to food and dress. Renounce
all thought of acquiring worldly renown. Endure bodily
penance and mental burdens. Thus gain knowledge from ex-
perience. That your study and penance be directed towards
the right path, it is necessary to hold these injunctions in your
hearts.’


1 This, too, is the supreme teaching of the Bhagavad Gita, that all actions in
the world should be done wholly disinterestedly, and the fruits thereof dedicated
to the good of all beings.

2 To proclaim as the ignorant do, ‘I believe’, leads but to doubt and mental
confusion ; the Teacher must be filled with the divine power born of Knowledge
of Truth, and his message must be, ‘I know’.


272 THE NIRVANA [PART II
Having so spoken, Jetsiin sang this hymn:
‘ Obeisance at the Feet of Lordly Marpa the Translator !


‘If ye who would be devotees, and Wisdom win,
Do not procure and serve a Guru wise,
Though ye have faith and meekness, small will be the
Grace.


‘If ye do not obtain the Initiation deep and mystic,
The words alone, the Zantras hold, will merely serve as
fetters.


‘If ye keep not the Zaxtric Scriptures as your witness,
All practice of the rites will be but many snares.


‘If ye do not the Chosen Teachings meditate,
Mere renunciation of the worldly life will be but vain self-
torture.


‘If ye subdue not evil passions by their antidote,
Mere verbal preachings will be but empty sounds.


‘If ye know not the Subtle Methods and the Path,
Mere perseverance will bear but little fruit.


‘If ye know not the Secret and the Subtle Methods,
Mere exercise of zeal will make the Pathway long.


‘If ye do not acquire great merit,
And work for self alone, sangsaric being will continue.


‘If ye do not devote unto Religion all your worldly goods
amassed,
Much meditation will not gain much Knowledge.


‘If ye do not acquire contentment in yourselves,
Heaped-up accumulations will only enrich others.


‘If ye do not obtain the Light of Inner Peace,
Mere external ease and pleasure will become a source of
pain.


‘If ye do not suppress the Demon of Ambition,
Desire of fame will lead to ruin and to lawsuits.


CHAP. XII] HYMN OF YOG/C PRECEPTS 273


‘ The desire to please exciteth the Five Poisonous Passions ;
The greed of gain separateth one from dearest friends ;
The exaltation of the one is the humiliation of the others.


‘Hold your peace and no litigation will arise ;

Maintain the State of Undistractedness and distraction will
fly off;

Dwell alone and ye shall find a friend ;

Take the lowest place and ye shall reach the highest ;

Hasten slowly and ye shall soon arrive ;

Renounce all worldly goals and ye shall reach the highest
goal.


‘If ye tread the Secret Path, ye shall find the shortest way ;

If ye realize the Voidness, Compassion will arise within
your hearts ;

If ye lose all differentiation between yourselves and others,
fit to serve others ye will be;

And when in serving others ye shall win success, then shall
ye meet with me;

And finding me, ye shall attain to Buddhahood.


‘To me, and to the Buddha, and the Brotherhood of my
disciples
Pray ye earnestly, without distinguishing one from the other.’


Thus did Jetsiin sing. And then he said, ‘Seeing that I
may not have much longer now to live, observe my teachings
and follow me.

After saying this, Jetsiin sank into the quiescent state of
Samadhi. Thus did Jetsiin pass away at the age of eighty-
four years,! on the fourteenth day of the last of the three winter
months of the Wood-Hare Year [A.D. 1135],? at dawn.

At his passing, Jetsiin exhibited the process of merging the
physical body with the Realm of Eternal Truth,® the Devas
and Dakinis manifested then much greater and more marvellous
phenomena than ever before, and very many of the people

1 ¢ The Lord Buddha Gautama, too, entered Pant-Mrvana in His eighty-fourth
year.’—Sri Nissanka.


2 This is the forty-ninth year of the sixty-year cycle described on p. 52),
3 The Dharma-Kaya.


274 THE NIRVANA [PART I


there assembled beheld the phenomena. The unclouded sky
appeared as if it were palpable with prismatic colours, arranged
in a background of geometrically chequered designs, in the
centre of which were vari-coloured lotuses, some of eight and
some of four petals. Upon the petals were marvellously
designed mandalas [or mystic circular designs] more beautiful
than any that could be made by the most skilful artist [among
men]. The firmament contained many wondrously tinted
clouds, which assumed the form of [royal] umbrellas and ban-
ners, curtains, and draperies, and various other objects of
worship. There were profuse showers of blossoms. Clouds of
varied colours adorned the mountain peaks and assumed the
form of stipas, each with its head bending towards Chibar.
Ravishingly melodious music to the accompaniment of hea-
venly psalms in praise of the departed Saint were heard. And
a delicious perfume, more fragrant than any earthly essence,
pervaded the air, so that every one perceived it. Celestial
beings, both Devas and Dakinis, bearing various offerings, were
seen by many people, as if coming to welcome Jetstin. More
marvellous yet, the human beings upon seeing the nude forms
of Devas felt no sense of shame, nor did the celestial beings
seem to be affected with the unpleasant odour emitted by the
human beings.’ Gods and men met and conversed freely with
one another, sometimes exchanging greetings; so that, for
the time being, they were carried back to the Golden Age [or
the Sat-Yuga].?

The people of Nyanam, soon hearing that Jetsiin had passed
away, went to Chibar and proposed to the disciples and lay-
men of Brin that they should have the privilege of cremating
Jetsiin’s body at Nyanam, but the proposal was rejected.
Thereupon, the people of Nyanam requested that the cremation
be postponed until they could go and bring from Brin all the
faithful, so that these could have a last look at their deceased
Guru. This being granted, they went to Brin and returned


1 The impure auric emanations of human beings who have not been purged of
worldliness are said to be exceedingly unpleasant to the pure deities.

? «Similar divine manifestations occurred at the passing away of the Lord
Buddha Gautama. Cf. The Book of the Great Decease (Mahda-Parinibbana Suttanta)
of the Pali Canon.’—Sri Nissanka.


CHAP. XII] DISPUTE OVER THE CORPSE 275


with a strong body of men, prepared to carry away the remains
of their Guru forcibly. A conflict seemed imminent, when the
chief disciples interposed, and said, ‘Ye people of Nyanam
and of Brin! All of ye believed in Jetsiin, and were his fol-
lowers equally. Seeing that Jetsiin hath passed away in Chibar,
it is not fitting that his body be cremated at Nyanam. Ye who
are from Nyanam may remain here until the cremation is over,
and will receive a due share of the reliques from the ashes of
Jetsiin.’ But the people of Nyanam, thinking themselves to be
the more numerous and powerful, were about to carry off the
corpse by force, when a Deva appeared from the heavens, and
in the voice of Jetsiin sang this hymn:


‘O ye disciples here assembled !

And ye lay-followers, disputing o’er a corpse!

Give ear unto my judgement :

I am a deva-follower of Jetsiin,

Come to make peace between you by my counsel.
Milarepa, the best of men,

Hath merged his mind in the unbegotten Dharma-K aya ;
And since there is no form that’s real except the mind,
Whilst Jetsiin’s earthly form is [likewise] being merged in

the Dharma-K aya,

If ye do not obtain the Reliques True,

Foolish is it to quarrel about a corpse.

Only the stupid would dispute o’er Milarepa’s body ;

Not likely is it that by quarrelling ye’ll obtain it.

Pray with meekness, and have faith ;

If from the heart’s depths ye wili pray,

Though the Dharma-K aya hath no birth,

Yet by the grace come of good wishes the Unobstructed ?

shineth forth.

And thus shall all of you obtain a portion of the Reliques,
Each according to deserts.’


Having sung this, the Deva vanished like a rainbow, and
the lay-disciples felt as joyful as if they had once more beheld
their beloved Guru. They ceased disputing and began to pray.


1 That is, Divine Grace (or Mercy), as vouchsafed by the Dharma-Kaya.


276 THE NIRVANA [PART II


Then the foremost disciples and the people of Brin saw that
they possessed one corpse of Jetstin, and the people of Nyanam
that they possessed another. And the latter took the corpse
away and cremated it at the Diit-diil Cave of Lapchi, on the
rock called the ‘Eagle’s Egg’; this cremation, too, being
attended with many phenomena. Rainbows arched the skies ;
there were showers of blossoms; heavenly perfumes filled the
air; and celestial melodies everywhere resounded in Lapchi
and in Chibar.

The corpse at Chibar was attended by the foremost of the
disciples and laity. Most fervently they offered up unbroken
prayer until, after the sixth day, it was seen that the corpse
emitted a halo of radiant glory like that of divine beings, and
was no larger than the body of an eight-year-old child.

Then the chief disciples said, ‘Rechung seemeth not to be
coming; if we postpone the cremation much longer, it is likely
that there will be nothing left of the body; and thus losing
our share of the reliques we shall have no object to venerate or
worship. It would be better to perform the cremation at once.’

To this all agreed; and, after every one had been given the
opportunity of taking a last farewell look at the face, a funeral
pyre was erected on a boulder from which, as from a pulpit,
Jetstin had preached, at the foot of the Brilche Cave. The
corpse was carried thither in great state. The mandala diagram
was outlined in colours." Though the funeral offerings from
celestial beings were far more numerous, those brought by the
followers on Earth were laid out modestly and to the best
of human ability. Then an attempt was made to set fire
to the funeral pyre before daybreak, even while it was still
night, but the pyre could not be made to burn.? At the same
moment, five Dakinis appeared from amidst a rainbow-enhaloed
cloud, and in chorus sang the following hymn:


1 This is the funeral mandala, outlined on the ground with coloured earth or
other substance in such manner that the funeral pyre, like the pericarp of
a lotus, occupies the centre. As in Sikkim, it is commonly the mazdala of the
Dhyani Buddha Amitabha, who as the One of Boundless Light, the I]luminator
or Enlightener, symbolizes the Fire which purifies.

3 ‘Similarly, the funeral pyre of the Lord Buddha Gautama could not be made
to burn until Kashyapa arrived seven days late.’—Sri Nissanka.


CHAP. XII] THE DAKINIS’ HYMN 277


‘Rom /* the divine fire of the Vital Force
Having been ever contemplated [by Him],
What power hath the fire [of this world] over Him?
For Him Who hath long been engaged in devotion,
Meditating on His organic body as a shape divine,
What need is there to leave behind a fleshly corpse ?
For the Yogt Who hath the perfect Divine Mandala
Well defined in His own body,
What need is there of the J/azda/a outlined on the ground ?
For Him Who hath kept the Lamp of Mind
Ever burning bright, along with Vital Breath,
What need is there of your petty [worldly] lamps?
For Him Who ever feedeth on Pure Elixirs,
What need is there of cakes of cereal ??
For Him Who is clad in the Robe of Chastity,
Unsullied by the Twofold Defilement,*
What need is there that ye consecrate the Holy Pot? 4


‘The skies are filled with clouds of smoke
Of incense, and perfumes of heavenly offerings ;
No need is there to-day to offer your burnt incense.


‘The Four Orders of the Dakinis are chanting,
And yet higher Orders of the Dakinis are offering worship ;
What rites then shall ye celebrate to-day ?


‘The Lords of Wisdom now surround the pyre,
And Heroes vie each with the other in offering reverence ;
No need is there for you to touch the sacred form to-day.


‘The mortal relique of the Man Who hath realized the
Thatness
Hath no need of rituals conventional ; let it remain in peace.


‘That which is worshipped now by gods and men alike
Needeth not an owner; therefore worship and make prayer.


1 Or ‘ Rang’, the Biya (or ‘ Seed’) Mantra of the Element Fire.

2 This refers to the customary food-offerings at the funeral pyre, made to the
spirit of the deceased one.

8 Or ‘the Twofold Shadow’, which is Illusion and Karma, as described on
Pp. 33°, above.

‘ That is, the Holy Pot filled with lustral holy-water.


278 THE NIRVANA [PART II


‘Unto the sacred vows, enjoined by Devas and by Gurus,
No need is there to add injunctions.


‘Before this heap of priceless gems and jewels
Utter not “’Tis mine”, but practise meditation.
‘With reference to the secret and deep words of Gurus and


of Buddhas,
Give not way to prattling speech, but remain in silence.


‘The Holy Chosen Teachings, breathing forth the breath of
Angels,
Are polluted by impiety; so seek ye solitude.
‘Unto the life which ye have chosen
Many interruptions come ; so perform ye rites in secret.
‘From the admonitions by your wondrous Gurz given
There shall come a blessing ; so cast all doubts aside.
‘The history of your Teacher Jetsiin
Hath not need of formal praise.
‘From the hymns the Dékinis Divine have sung
A certain boon shall come; heed it meekly and with faith.
‘Milarepa’s spiritual descendants
Shall produce many yogic saints, O ye of highest destiny.
‘Upon the people and the cattle of this place
No maladies shall come, O ye celestial and terrestrial beings.
‘For all the beings here to-day assembled
No birth in the Unhappy Worlds shall come, O ye of human
kind.
‘For the Mandala of the Thatness,
Appearances external and the mind are one; shatter then
your theory of duality.
‘Unto the final words which Jetstin uttered ere He passed
Give greatest heed and His commands obey ; of vast import
are they.
‘May every one e’er practise the Sacred Dharma;
It bringeth Peace and Happiness to all.’


When these words had been sung, Ngan-Dzong-Ténpa said,


CHAP. XII] RECHUNG’S PREMONITION 279


‘The command that none must touch the Lord’s remains until
Rechung shall have arrived and the purport of the Dakinis’
hymn agree. But since there is no certainty that Rechung
will come at all, even though we postpone the cremation of the
sacred body, it seemeth likely that it will vanish without
leaving behind any substantial relique whatsoever.’

Then Shiwa-Wéd-Repa said, ‘ Jetsiin’s own command, the
Dakinis’ song, and the fact that the pyre refuseth to take fire
all coincide. Rechung is certain to arrive soon. Meanwhile,
let us devote ourselves to prayer.’ So every one continued
praying.

At this time Rechung was staying at the Loro-Dél
Monastery; and one night, just after midnight, he had a
dream or clairvoyant vision, while in a state of unobscured
super-conscious sleep, as followeth. At Chibar he beheld
a radiant chattya (reliquary) of crystal, whose glory filled the
skies. It was about to be taken away by a multitude of
Dakinis, aided by his brethren in the Faith and the lay-dis-
ciples of Jetstin, along with numerous other human beings and
a host of celestial beings. The skies seemed to be crowded
with this multitude, all singing and offering worship. The
offerings were unimaginably magnificent and numerous. He,
too, was bowing down to the chaztya. Then he saw Jetsiin
leaning out from the chaitya, and heard him say, ‘My son
Rechung, though thou didst not come when I bade thee come,
nevertheless it is pleasant to meet thee again; cheering indeed
is this encounter of father with son. But, there being no cer-
tainty of our meeting soon again, let us seek to appreciate fully
this rare pleasure and converse on suitable topics.’ He was
fondly passing his hand over Rechung’s head, stroking it gently
and lovingly; and Rechung was thrilled thereby with rare
happiness and fond affection and profound faith, such as he
had never before felt towards Jetsiin. Here, in the dream, he
awoke; and recalling all that Jetsiin had previously said to
him, the thought came to him, ‘ May it not be that my Guru
hath passed away?’ As this thought flashed through his mind,
a feeling of deep faith was aroused in him, so that he prayed ;
and overcome by an irrepressible yearning he decided to set


280 THE NIRVANA [PART II


out at once to find Jetsiin, although this was not at the precise
moment which Jetsiin had indicated. Thereupon, two Dakinis
appeared before him in the heavens, and said, ‘ Rechung, unless
thou now hasten to see thy Guru he will soon depart to the
Holy Realms, and thou wilt not see him more in this lifetime.
Go thou without delay.’ As they spake these words, the sky
was flooded with the glory of rainbows.

Much impressed by the vision, and filled with great yearning
to see his Guru, Rechung at once arose and started forth on
the journey. The cocks of Loro-D6l were just crowing.

Exerting his faith in his Guvzand his knowledge of controlling
the breathing process, in one morning Rechung had traversed a
distance which for travellers mounted on donkeys usually took
two months to traverse. By the power derived from his suspen-
sion of his respiration, he shot forth at the speed of an arrow;
and by daybreak reached the top of, the Pass between Tingri
and Brin, called Pozele. While he was resting there for a short
time, the remarkable clearness of the sky and the unusual dis-
play of rainbows and other marvellous phenomena which
illuminated the mountain peaks and the entire firmament,
excited in him gladness and sorrow alternately. He beheld
the summit of Jovd-Rabzang conspicuously lit up with rainbow
radiance. He also beheld tent-shaped clouds, and issuing
from the midst of them innumerable hosts of celestial beings,
gods and goddesses, all alike bearing countless offerings and
hastening on, nodding and making profound obeisance in the
direction of Lapchi with most fervent prayer. At this, Rechung
felt great misgiving, and inquired of the Deities the signification
of all the signs and of their own actions.

Some of the goddesses replied, ‘Hast thou, O man, been
living with thine eyes and ears closed, and thus askest why
all these things are made manifest? They are made manifest
because Jetsiin Mila-Zhadpa-Dorje,! who dwelt on Earth
and is venerated and worshipped by both gods and men,
is now departing to the Holier and Purer Realms. Therefore
it is that those of the celestial beings who honour the Sacred
Dharma [or the White Faith] are offering this obeisance


1 Zhadpa-Dorje is a shortened form of Milarepa’s initiatory name.


CHAP. XI] JETSUN GREETS RECHUNG 281


to Jetsiin, while all the human beings assembled at Chibar
are also offering him worship.’

Upon hearing this, Rechung felt as though his heart had
been torn from his body, and he hurried on as fast as he
could. When approaching Chibar, upon a boulder shaped
like the base of a chattya he beheld Jetsiin awaiting him.
Jetsiin greeted him most cordially, and said, ‘Hath my son
Rechung come at last?’ At that, Jetsiin passed his hand
over Rechung’s head, stroking him lovingly, as Rechung had
seen Jetsiin do in the dream.

Overjoyed with the thought that Jetsiin had not passed
away, Rechung placed Jetsiin’s feet on the crown of his head,
and prayed most fervently. Having made answer to all of
Rechung’s inquiries, Jetsiin then said, ‘My son Rechung,
proceed thou leisurely ; I will go on ahead to prepare some
reception for thee.’ And Jetsiin went on ahead, and in a few
moments was no longer seen.

On reaching Chibar, Rechung beheld at the cave where
Jetsiin was wont to dwell all the disciples and: lay-followers
assembled round Jetsiin’s body, mourning and _ perform-
ing various acts of worship. Some of Jetsiin’s most recently
accepted disciples did not know Rechung, and refused to
let him go near the body. Greatly grieved at this, Rechung
in his agony offered to his Guru this hymn, of the Seven
Branches of Offering:


©“O Lord, Embodiment of the Eternal Buddhas,
Thou Refuge of all Sentient Creatures,
Out of the depths of Thy Great Love and Wisdom
Hearest Thou the lamentation of Thy Suppliant Unfortunate,
Rechung-Dorje-Tagpa ?


‘Unto Thee, in misery and woe, I cry ;
If Thou wilt not Thy Love and Wisdom now exert
To shield Thy Son, for whom else shouldst Thou, Lord?


‘Yearning to behold my Father, to Thy Feet I fled:
Thy Son Unfortunate was fated not to see Thy Face ;
Exert Thy Kindness, grant Thy Grace, O Father.


282 THE NIRVANA [PART II


‘Omniscient and with Love endowed,
To Thee, O Lord, Thou Buddha of the past, the present, and
the future,
I, the mendicant, most humbly pray.


‘To Thy Commands obedient, I worship Thee ;
Forgive, I beg, my sins of impious doubts, and my heresy.


‘ Filled am I with joyous admiration of Thy Great and Noble
Deeds,
And pray that Thou continue e’er to turn the Wheel,
Of the Deep and Mystic Dharma.


‘ All virtue which I’ve won, by meditation and devotion,
I dedicate, O Jetsiin, to Thy Happiness ;
May this, my dedication, be acceptable,
And may I see Thy Countenance.


‘I was, O Guru, formerly Thy Favoured One,
And now, alas! not even have I power to behold Thy Body.
Though I may not have power to see Thine Actual Form,
Yet may I be blessed by seeing e’en Thy Countenance.


‘ And seeing thus Thy Countenance,
In actuality or clairvoyant vision,
May I obtain the Teachings Rare and Precious,
Essential for o’ercoming doubts and criticisms while studying
the Twofold Teachings.!


‘If thou, O Lord Omniscient, be not merciful
In answer to Thy Son’s appeal, to whose else’s shouldst
Thou be?


‘O Father, withdraw Thou not Thy Hook of Grace,?
But graciously regard me from the Unseen Realms.


1 That is, the teachings concerning the Sangsdra and those concerning
Nirvana.

2 As among Christians, who believe in the saving grace of God, so among
Tibetan Buddhists it is believed that grace-waves are emanated from a Buddha,
Bodhisattva, or Celestial Guru in a heaven-world, and from a Great Yogt still
in the fleshly form, directly to the worshipper or disciple on Earth. These
grace-waves are figuratively a ‘hook of grace’ to catch hold of and thus save
the devotee from falling into the illusion of Ignorance (or sangsanc existence)
and set him on the Highway to Emancipation.


CHAP. x11] JETSUN’S RESURRECTION 283


On me, Rechung, Thy Witless Suppliant,
Do Thou, O Knower of the Three Times, have mercy.


‘O’er me, Rechung, drunk with the poison of the Passions
Five,
Do Thou keep watch, O Father, endowed with the Five
Attributes of Divine Wisdom.


‘In general, compassion have on every sentient being,
In particular, compassion have on me, Rechung.’


As soon as Rechung began to give vent to this earnest and
mournful prayer, and his clear voice reached the corpse, the
colour of the corpse, which had faded, became once more
bright, and the funeral pyre immediately took fire and blazed
up. At the same time Shiwa-Wéd Repa, Ngan-Dzong-
Tonpa, Seban-Repa, and other brethren in the Faith, as well
as female lay-disciples, came to welcome him. But he felt so
deeply hurt at having been prevented from approaching
Jetsiin’s body by those disciples who did not know him that
he would not move until he had finished his hymn of prayer.
So great was the force and earnestness of Rechung’s faith
that Jetstin, who had already sunk into the state of the Clear
Light, reanimated his corpse? and addressed these words to
the most recently accepted disciples: ‘O ye younger disciples,
act not thus; one lion is far more to be preferred than
a hundred tigers. Such [a lion] is my son Rechung. Permit
him to approach me.’ Then to Rechung he said, ‘ And thou,
my son Rechung, take it not so much to heart, but come near
to thy Father.’

At first every one present was startled and filled with
wonder; then this feeling gave way to one of gladness.
Rechung himself caught hold of Jetsitin, and burst forth in
a flood of tears; and so overcome was he with excess of
alternate joy and sorrow that for a while he swooned.

1 ¢ Jetstin had not expired in the lay sense of the word, but had been in the
Nirodha-Samapatti trance and could reanimate his body. Likewise, when it
seemed that the Lord Buddha Gautama was dead, only the Venerable Anu-
ruddha, the greatest of the disciples and possessed of the Celestial Eye, followed


the Master’s V1xvantc Consciousness to the Heavens and back to Earth until it
was finally lost in Nirvana.’—Sri Nissanka.


284 THE NIRVANA [PART II


When Rechung had regained consciousness, he found all
the disciples and followers seated round about the front of the
cremation-house.1_ Meanwhile, Jetsiin had risen in the In-
destructible Body,? into which are merged both the spiritual
body and the phenomenal body. The flames of the funeral
pyre assumed the shape of an eight-petalled lotus, and from
the midst of this, like the stamens of the blossom, Jetsiin sat
up, one of his knees half raised and his right hand extended
in the preaching attitude pressing down the flames. ‘Listen’,
he said, ‘unto this old man’s last testament.’ Then, both as
a reply to Rechung’s prayer and as his final teachings to
his disciples, with his left hand placed against his cheek,
he sang this final hymn concerning the Six Essential Com-
mandments from the midst of the funeral pyre, in a divine
voice issuing from the Indestructible Body:


‘O Rechung, my son, as dear to me as mine own heart,
Hear thou this hymn, my final testament of precepts:


‘In the Sangsaric Ocean, of the Lokas Three,
The great culprit is the impermanent physical body ;
Busy in its craving search for food and dress,
From worldly works it findeth ne’er relief:
Renounce, O Rechung, every worldly thing.


‘Amid the City of Impermanent Physical Forms,
The great culprit is the unreal mind;
Submissive to the form of flesh and blood,
It findeth ne’er the time to realize the nature of Reality : *
Discern, O Rechung, the true nature of the Mind.


‘Upon the frontier of the Intellect and Matter,
The great culprit is the self-born [or created] knowledge ;


E’er on its guard ’gainst accidental [or destructive] mishaps
[to itself],*


1 Here we learn that the funeral pyre is contained within a cremation-house,
perhaps specially erected for the occasion.

* Or, ‘the Vajra-Kaya’ (‘Immutable or Indestructible Body ’).

* Literally, ‘ the Dharma-Dhatu’ (* the Seed or Potentiality of Truth’).

* Knowledge born of experience of a sensuous universe is (like the personal
ego), when devoid of Right Knowledge, ever fearful of some untoward accident
which might entail its destruction.


CHAP. XII] THE FINAL PRECEPTS 285


It findeth ne’er the time to realize the true nature of the
Unborn Knowledge [or Truth]:

Keep, O Rechung, within the safe stronghold of the Unborn
[or Uncreated].}


‘Upon the frontier of this and of the future life,
The great culprit is the [self-born or created] consciousness ;
It seeketh e’er a form it hath not,
And findeth ne’er the time to realize the Truth:
Find, O Rechung, the nature of the Truth Eternal.


‘Amid the City of Illusoriness of the Lokas Six,
The chief factor is the sin and obscuration born of evil
karma ;
Therein the being followeth dictates of likes and dislikes,
And findeth ne’er the time to know Equality: ?
Avoid, O Rechung, likes and dislikes.


‘ Within a certain unseen region of the Heavens,
The Perfect Buddha, expert in subtle argument,
Hath propounded’ many subtle and profound Apparent


Truths ;
And there one findeth ne’er the time to know the Real


Truths: 3
Avoid, O Rechung, subtle argument.


1 Mundane or sangsaric knowledge (like the personal ego) being compounded
of sense impressions is, like the phenomena whence it arose, transitory and
illusory, and being created (or self-born) is unreal. True Knowledge (or Truth)
is of the Beyond-Nature, beyond the Sangsdra (the Round of Birth and Death),
beyond the realm of phenomena, of appearances, of things, beyond the transi-
tory and illusory, and having had no beginning (or creation) is the Unborn or
Uncreated.

2 Or ‘the Non-Duality’—the Truth that, in the last analysis, all opposites
are at bottom one.

8 Scientific Truths dealing wholly with Nature, or the Sangsdra, are, for
example, apparent Truths, because that upon which they are based, namely
knowledge of Phenomena, is itself unreal, because Phenomena are unreal, The
Real Truths are those concerning the Voidness, the Dkarma-Kaya, Nirvana.
As suggested in this stanza, Northern Buddhists believe that the Buddha
taught—according to the need or capacity of His hearers—various kinds of
doctrines, none of which, however, are in conflict with one another, In like
manner, Tantric Buddhists maintain that the Buddha taught Tantricism as
a doctrine best suited to one kind of human beings, and the better-known
Dharma as being more suitable to another kind.


286 THE NIRVANA [PART II


‘ Gurus, Devas, Dakinis—

Combine these in a single whole, and worship that ;

The goal of aspiration, the meditation, and the practice—

Combine these in a single whole, and gain Experimental
Knowledge ;

This life, the next life, and the life between [in Bar-do|1—

Regard these all as one, and make thyself accustomed to
them [thus as one].?


‘ This is the last of my Selected Precepts,
And of my Testament the end ;
Than that, no more of Truth is there, O Rechung ;
Acquire from it Practical Knowledge, O my son.’


Having uttered these words, Jetsiin again sank in a trance
into the Clear Light. Thereupon, the funeral pyre assumed
the shape of a spacious Vzka@ra (Mansion), square in shape,
having four entrances, with pedestals for dismounting and
other embellishments, and was enhaloed by a glorious rainbow
having gleaming and waving curtains of coloured light. Roofs
and domes appeared, surmounted by banners and flags,
[royal] umbrellas and streamers, and various adornments.
The flames themselves, at the base, assumed the shapes of
eight-petalled lotus blossoms, curling and unfolding into
various designs, such as the eight auspicious emblems,® and
at the top [they formed] into the seven royal insignia Even
the sparks assumed the shapes of goddesses bearing various
objects of offering and worship. The very cracklings of the
burning flames sounded like the melodious tunings of various
musical instruments, such as violins, flutes, and timbrels. The

1 The Bar-do (‘ Between-Two’) is the Intermediate State which intervenes
between death and rebirth, treated of in The Tibetan Book of the Dead.

2 Existence is to be regarded as an unbroken flux of life, subject to incessant
transition and change. Life in a fleshly form on Earth, life in the subtle after-
death body in Heaven-Worlds, in Hells, or in the Intermediate State, and the


life which seems to take birth through the womb-doors is in reality one.
3 These are named on p. 33%, above.


* These are: (1) The Precious House, or Palace; (2) The Precious Royal
Robes ; (3) The Precious [Embroidered] Boots; (4) The Precious Elephant’s


Tusk ; (5) The Precious Queen’s Earring ; (6) The Precious King’s Earring ;
and (7) The Precious Jewel.


CHAP. XII] THE CREMATION 287


very smoke emitted the sweet odour of different kinds of
incense, its eddies assuming various rainbow colours and the
shapes of [royal] umbrellas and banners. The sky directly
above the funeral pyre’ was full of angelic beings bearing
vessels of nectar, which they poured down in showers. Others
bore celestial food and drink, unguents and perfumes, and
objects of delight for the five senses, with which every human
being assembled there was regaled.

Although the disciples assembled there beheld. the same
funeral pyre, the corpse itself appeared to one as Gaypa-Dorje,
to another as Démchog, to a third as Sang-dii, and to a fourth
as Dorje-Pa-mo.1 And all of them heard the Dakinis chant-
ing the following hymn:


‘Because of the departure of that Wish-Fulfilling Gem, the

Lord,

Some weep, and some have swooned, through their excessive
grief,

At such a time of mourning as is this,

Of themselves [unaided] the flames burst out,

Assuming shapes of lotus blossoms of eight petals,

And of the Eight Auspicious Emblems and the Seven
Precious Insignia,

And various other beauteous objects of religious offering.

The sounds emitted by the flames

Give forth melodious music as of conch-shells, cymbals,

Harps and flutes and miniature cymbals,

Small drums and double-drums and timbrels.

And from the meteoric sparks, emitted by the flames,

Spring forth various goddesses of the outer, inner, and most
esoteric conclaves,

Who offer offerings most tastefully arranged.

The smoke itself assumeth varied rainbow-colours,

And ornamental shapes of banners and [royal] umbrellas,

The Eight Auspicious Emblems, the Svastika, and the
Good-Luck Diagram.

1 The Sanskrit names of these four Tantric tutelary deities of the Kargyiitpas


(and of other sects of Northern Buddhism) are, respectively: Hé-Vajra, Sham-
vara, Guhya-Kala, and Vajra-Varahi,


288 THE MIRVANA [PART II


‘ Various goddesses, of charming shapes,
Have borne away from the funeral pyre the charred bones
and the ashes
Of Him who now hath rendered up his earthly body to the
element ethereal ;
Your cremation of his form is finished.


‘The Guru, being the Dharma-K aya, is like the expanse of
the heavens
Upon the face of which the Cloud of Good Wishes of the
Sambhoga-K aya gathereth ;
Whence descend the flowery showers of the Virmana-K aya)
These, falling on the Earth unceasingly,
Nourish and ripen the Harvest of Saved Beings.*


‘ That which is of the nature of the Uncreated,
The Dharma-Dhaiu, the Unborn, the Voidness,
The Shinyata, hath no beginning, nor doth it ever cease
[to be] ;
E’en birth and death are of the Nature of the Voidness: ?
Such being the Real Truth, avoid doubts and misgivings
[about It].


When the chanting of this hymn was finished, evening had
set in; and the funeral fire had burnt itself out, so that the
cremation-house was empty again. The multitude could see
through it from end to end; but when the disciples looked
into it some saw a great chaitya of light, others saw Gaypa-
Dorje, Démchog, Sang-dii, and Dorje-Pa-mo. Others, again,
saw various religious regalia, such as a dorje and a bell,


1 These three verses very concisely state the Doctrine of the Three Bodies
(Skt. Tri-Kaya) ; see p. 387, above.

2 As the emanations of the planetary sun sustain all physical manifestation ot
life on Earth, so the spiritual forces, disseminated among the human race by the
Compassionate Ones, from the State Beyond Nature, alone make possible the
Higher Evolution and the Ultimate Deliverance from Nature (the Sangsara).
Enlightenment brings with it realization of this.

3 The Voidness, the Shi#nyata, being the Primordial, the Uncreated, to which
no concept of the limited human understanding can be applied, is the Ultimate
Source of the Sangsdra, of Nature; and since death and birth are themselves
merely a pair of natural illusory opposites, mere phenomenal appearances cast
upon the Screen of Time, they, too, in the last analysis of the Illuminated
Supra-mundane Mind, are of the Thatness, the Beyond-Nature.


CHAP. XII] THE LOSS OF THE RELIQUES 2.89


a holy-water pot, and so on, while yet others saw different
letters formed into Jdzja-mantras. Some also saw the
cremation-house filled with radiance, like a mass of blazing
gold ; [in it], some saw a pool of water, others fire burning,
and yet others saw nothing.

The disciples then opened the door of the cremation-house
[that the ashes might cool quickly]; and, being in high
expectation of precious reliques of wonderful shapes and
virtue, all slept [that night] with their heads pointed’ towards
the cremation-house. Early in the morning, Rechung dreamt
that five Ddakinis, dressed like celestial Yoginis, in robes of
silk and adorned with bone and precious ornaments, surrounded
by many attendants of various colours, fair, yellow, red, green,
and blue, were worshipping at the funeral pyre and making
various offerings. The five chief Dakinis were taking out a
sphere of Light from within the cremation-house. For a while
he was fascinated with the sight. Then it suddenly occurred
to him that the Dakinis might actually be removing the
reliques and ashes. So he went to see; and the Dakinis all
flew away. Calling his brethren in the Faith, he went inside
the cremation-house; and then it was seen that the ashes and
bones had been completely swept away. They saw not even
a particle of dust or ash. Rechung became very sad; and,
addressing the Dakinis, he demanded of them a portion of
the reliques, for the benefit of human beings. The Dakinis,
in reply, said, ‘ As for you, the chief disciples, ye have obtained
the best of all reliques; for ye have obtained the Truths, by
which ye have found the Dharma-Kaya in your own minds.
If that be insufficient, and ye must have something more, ye
had better pray earnestly to Jetsiin, and he may possibly
grant you something. As regardeth the rest of mankind,
why, they have not valued Jetsiin as much as a fire-fly,
although he was like the Sun and the Moon. They do not
deserve any of his reliques at all; these are our own special
property.’ After saying this, the Dakcnis remained stationary
in the sky above. And the disciples, recognizing the truth of
what the Da@kinis had said, began to pray thus:


1 That is seed (bia) mantras, or fundamental mantras.


2.90 THE NIRVANA [PART II


‘O Lord, when Thou wert at Thy Guru's Feet,

All his commands Thou didst fulfil most faithfully and
dutifully,

And thus obtained the entire Chosen Teachings, full of
Subtle Truths ;

Graciously be pleased to grant to us [a portion of] Thy
Sacred Reliques,

To benefit and serve as objects for the faith of Destined
Ones,

And help all sentient beings in their [psychic] growth.


‘O Lord, when Thou wert all alone on solitary hill,

With greatest zeal and resolution Thou didst meditate

And thus obtain miraculous accomplishment [or s¢ddhz],

And this hath made Thee famous in all kingdoms of the
Earth;

Graciously be pleased to grant to us [a portion of] Thy
Sacred Reliques,

To serve as objects of veneration and of faith

Unto all who have beheld Thee or have heard Thy Name.


‘O Lord, when Thou didst dwell with Thy Disciples,

Gracious and kind wert Thou to all alike,

From Thee beamed forth Wisdom and Fore-Knowledge ;

Thy Disciples helped Thee, in Thy Kindness and Com-
passion, to assist all creatures ;

Graciously be pleased to grant to us [a portion of] Thy
Sacred Reliques,

To serve as objects of veneration and of faith

Unto all Thy Kavma-Favoured Followers.


‘O Lord, when Thou midst many didst preside,
Thou wert o’erflowing with the milk of sympathy and love,
And didst save all and set them on the Path,
While those most filled with sorrow Thou didst pity specially ;


Graciously be pleased to grant to us [a portion of] Thy
Sacred Reliques,


To serve as objects of veneration and of faith
Unto them who have not zeal and energy [like Thine].


CHAP. XII] THE SPHERE/OF;LIGHT 291


‘O Lord, when the Illusory Body Thou didst cast aside,

Thou didst prove that Thou hadst gained the State Divine of
Perfected Saints ;

Into the Body of the Truth thou hast transmuted all the
Universe,}

And become the Lord of all the Holiest Dakinis ;

O Lord, grant, with Thy Grace, [a portion of] Thy Sacred
Reliques,

To serve as objects of veneration and of faith

Unto all thy Szshyas here assembled.’


When they had sung this mournful prayer, there descended
from the Sphere of Light, which was in the hands of the
Dakinis, a lustrous relique like an orb as large as anegg. In
a streak of light it came down directly upon the funeral pyre.
All the disciples stretched out their hands eagerly, each
claiming it for himself. But the relique went back again to
the firmament, and was absorbed in the Sphere of Light which
the Dakinis still held in their hands, Then the Sphere of
Light divided itself, one part becoming a lotus throne,
supported by lions, on the surface of which lay a solar and
lunar disk,? and the other part resolved itself into a Chaztya of
crystal, clear and transparent, about a cubit in height. The
Chaitya emitted brilliant five-coloured rays.3 The end of each
ray was adorned with an image of a Buddha of the Series
of the Thousand and Two Buddhas; * and rays with all these
Buddhas surrounded the Chaitya. The four tiers at the base
[of the Chattya] were occupied [by images of] the Tutelary
Deities of the Four Classes of the Tantric Pantheon,’ in their


1 That is, the Sangsdra and Nirvana have in Jetsiin blended in the at-one-
ment of Dharma-Kaya Mind.

2 The lotus throne, lion, sun, and moon, symbolize the Glorification or En-
thronement of a Buddha.

8 These five-coloured rays, which correspond to the five colours of the halo
of the Buddha and of the Buddhist flag, are blue, white, red, yellow, and purple.

4 This is the well-known Series, as published in Tibetan books, of the
Thousand and Two Buddhas. It may possibly have taken shape as a result of
influences of such Hindu ritual treatises as that containing the Thousand Names
of Vishnu.

5 These are the Tutelary Deities associated with the four divisions of the


292 THE NIRVANA [PART II


due order. The inside of the Chattya was occupied by an
image of Jetsiin, about a span in height, surrounded by images
of Dakinis, bowing down in worship. Two Daékinis, who
guarded the Chaitya and offered worship to it, sang the follow-
ing hymn:


*O Sons, Deva-Kyong, and Shiwa-Wéd,
Ngan-Dzong-Tonpa, and others,
Disciples of high destiny, in white cotton robed,
Out of true faith and great religious fervour,
Ye called upon your spiritual Father’s Name,


Praying for a relique as an object both of veneration and of
faith.


‘ By power of the faith and zeal shown by that prayer,

An Object that embodieth in itself all virtues of the
Tri-K aya, \

Which, if merely seen, saveth beings from the Round of
Birth and Death,

And which, if believed in, bringeth Buddhahood,

The Dharma-K aya—a single sphere its symbol—

Brought forth, to be that relique, which is egg-shaped ;

An object of veneration for all sentient beings it was meant
to be.

It could not be of any one the private property, yet ye all
clutched at it;

Possessed by vulgar beings, where might it remain?

But, if ye pray most earnestly again,

Its Grace and Blessing shall not be diminished :

This is the Sacred Promise of all Buddhas.


‘ The Father-Mother Tutelary Deities, Démchog in union,
Sepulchral ornaments of [human] bone adorning them,


Vajra- Yana (‘Thunderbolt Path’) as represented by the four classes of Tantras:
(1) Kriya- Tantra, (2) Carya-Tantra, (3) Yoga-Tantra, and (4) Anuttara- Tantra,
the first two being the Lower Taxtras, and the last two the Higher Jantras

The first of the four classes of Taniras contains injunctions as to ritual; the
second, injunctions relating to the s@dhaka’s conduct in life; the third relates to
Yoga; and the fourth describes the excellent or esoteric significance of all
things, being the door to Adiyoga.


CHAP. XII] HYMN OF SACRED PROMISES 293


By hosts of Heroes and of Yoginis! surrounded,

Fill all the skies with their perfect conclaves ;

These Deities Divine, Sambhoga-Kaya Wisdom per-
sonifying,

Their powers and their [spiritual] gifts grant quickly ;

And if to them ye pray most earnestly,

Their Grace and Blessing shall not be diminished :

This is the Sacred Promise of all Dakinis.


‘ In virtue of the Goodness of the Buddha, the Dharma-K aya’s
Self,
Various phenomena have been vouchsafed—
A crystal Chattya, a cubit long,
A thousand [and two] Buddha images of stone adorning it,
And the Four Orders of the Tantric Deities,
Have been produced miraculously ;
If ye one-pointedly make earnest prayer,
The virtue of that Goodness shall not be diminished :
This is the Sacred Promise of all Dkarmapalas.


‘The Guru, Who inseparably is the Embodiment of the 777-
Kaya,

Doth manifest Himself in every form by super-normal power ;
That He should manifest Himself
Within this small and wondrous work of art is marvellous ;
If towards it ye exert your fullest faith and earnest prayer,
Praying from your hearts’ depths,
Its boon of gracious blessings shall not be diminished :
This Sacred promise of all the Greatest Yogzs ye may trust.


‘If Sacred Faith ye keep in all these firmly,
The virtue of sach Faith will bring its boon.


‘If ye can cling to Solitudes,
The Matrikas* and Dakinis are sure to gather round you.


1 ‘These Yogints are in a material sense the Shaktis of the Vira-sadhakas.
In a subtle sense they are the Goddess Kundalini. In a still more subtle sense
they are the Forces which work in Nature and upwards to the transcendent
Supreme Shakti,'—Sj. Atal Bihari Ghosh.

2 The Dharmapalas are the Spiritual Protectors of the Dharma or Faith.

3’ The Matrikds are the Mother-Goddesses.


2.94 THE NIRVANA [PART II


‘If ye in your religious practice be sincere,
A sign of quick success in Yoga it will be.


‘If in yourselves ye see no wish for ease,
A sign ’twill be that in you evil passions are uprooted.


‘If ye cling not to self and worldly goods,
’T will show that evil sprites and Maré are controlled.


‘ If difference of caste and creed do not exist among you,
Twill show your Views [or Aims]? are wholly right.


‘If ye can see both the Sangséra and Nirvana as the
Voidness,
A sign ’twill be that your Meditation, too, is right.


‘If zeal and energy flow from your hearts [spontaneously],
A sign ’twill be that your Acts are right.


‘If from your Guru ye obtain prophetic utterance,
A sign ’twill be that the Good Faith is right.


‘If ye have power to serve all sentient beings,
A sign twill be that the Result is right.


‘If the Guru and the Shishya in their hearts agree,
Twill show that their Relationship is right.


‘If ye receive good omens of success and boons divine,
A sign twill be that your Thoughts are right.


‘The Good and Mutual Faith, the Experience and the
Satisfaction, —
Let these serve as your portion of the Reliques.’


Having chanted this hymn, the Dakznis still held the
Chaitya aloft in the skies, that the chief disciples might obtain
a good view of it. Then they placed it on a throne made
of precious metals and gems, in order to transport it else-
where. When they were about to depart, Shiwa-Wéd-Repa
entreated the Dakinis to leave the Chaitya in the care of the


1 Here, as in the couplets following, the reference is to the Noble Eightfold,
Path ; see p. 140%,


CHAP. XII] THE HYMN OF ENTREATY 295


disciples, as an object of veneration for all human beings, with
the following hymn:


‘O Father, Thou Who, hast assumed the human form, in

order to serve others,

Yogi Divine, One of the Order of Sambhoga-K ayas,

Thou dost pervade all Realms Invisible whence Truth is
born ;}

To Thee, O Lord, Reality Itself,? we pray,

That to us, Thy Shzshyas, Thou mayst grant

The Chaitya, which in their hands the Dakinis now hold.


‘O Lord, when other Perfect Vogts Thou didst meet,
Like a casket filled with gold Thou wert;
A Yogi priceless and peerless Thou wert then, O Lord;
O Master of the Life Ascetic, prayer to Thee we make:
Grant to us the Chattya which the Dakinis now hold,
To us, Thy Shishyas and Thy Followers on Earth.


‘O Lord, when Thou didst serve Thy Guru,
Like fleece upon a docile sheep Thou wert,
A Yogi prepared to serve, and helpful unto all ;
O Lord Compassionate, to Thee we pray:
Grant to us the Chaitya which the Dakinis now hold,
To us, Thy Skzshyas and Thy Followers on Earth.


‘O Lord, when worldly aims Thou didst renounce,
Like the King of Riskts Wise Thou wert,
A Yogi immutable in resolution ;
O Lord of Mighty Courage, To Thee we pray:
Grant to us the Chaitya which the Dakinis now hold,
To us, Thy Shiskyas and Thy Followers on Earth.


‘O Lord, when meditating on Thy Guru's teachings,
Like a tigress feeding on the flesh of man Thou wert,
A Yogi from every doubt set free ;

O Thou of Mighty Perseverance, to Thee we pray:
Grant to us the Chattya which the Dakinis now hold,
To us, Thy Shishyas and Thy Followers on Earth.


1 Literally, ‘Realms Invisible of the Dharma-Dhatu’,
? Literally, ‘the Dharma-Kayq’,


2.96 THE NIRVANA [PART II


‘O Lord, when Thou wert passing through the wilderness,
Like a flawless block of iron Thou wert,
A Yogi evermore unchanging ;
To Thee, Who hast renounced all vain pretence, we pray:
Grant to us the Chaitya which the Dakinis now hold,
To us, Thy Shishyas and Thy Followers on Earth.


‘O Lord, when signs of Thy miraculous s¢ddhz Thou didst show,
Like a lion or an elephant Thou wert,
A Yogi fearless and strong of spirit ;
To Thee, Thou One Devoid of Fear, we pray:
Grant to us the Chaitya which the Dakznis now hold,
To us, Thy Shzskyas and Thy Followers on Earth.


‘O Lord, when Psychic Warmth and [true] Experience! Thou
didst acquire,
Like the full-grown lunar disk Thou wert,
And sheddest Thy Beams o’er all the world ;
To Thee, Who hast cast off all hankerings, we pray:
Grant to us the Chaztya which the Dakinis now hold,
To us, Thy Shzshyas and Thy followers on Earth.


‘O Lord, when Thou Thy Destined Shishyas didst protect,
’Twas like the meeting of the fire-glass and the sun.
Thou didst create, O Yog?, Masters of Siddhi ;
To Thee, O Thou Benignant One, we pray:
Grant to us the Chaztya which the Dakinis now hold,
To us, Thy Shzshkyas and Thy Followers on Earth.


‘O Lord, when worldly goods fell to Thy lot,
Like drops of mercury upon the earth Thou wert,
Unsullied by all vulgar greed, O Yogz;
To Thee, O Faultless One, we pray :
Grant to us the Chaztya which the Dakinis now hold,
To us, Thy Shzshyas and Thy Followers on Earth.


‘O Lord, when over congregations vast Thou didst preside,
Like the sun uprising o’er the world Thou wert ;
Thou didst enlighten all, O Yogi;


1 That is, Realization of Truth born of Yoga.


CHAP. XII] THE HYMN OF ENTREATY 297


To Thee, Thou Wise and Loving One, we pray:
Grant to us the Chaitya which the Dakinis now hold,
To us, Thy Shéskyas and Thy Followers on Earth.


‘O Lord, when by the people of the World Thou wert beheld,
Like the meeting of a mother and her son it was ;
O Yogi, all things for their good Thou didst ;
To Thee, Affectionate One, we pray:
Grant to us the Chaitya which the Dakinis now hold,
To us, Thy Shétshyas and Thy Followers on Earth.


‘O Lord, when for the Realms Divine Thou art departing,
Like a treasure-urn of boons Thou art ;
O Yogi, Thou Who grantest every wish,
To Thee, Thou Excellent One, we pray:
Grant to us the Chaitya which the Dakinis now hold,
To us, Thy Shishyas and Thy Followers on Earth.


‘O Lord, when Thou didst prophesy,
Like bringing to the mouth the hand [in faultless song] it was ;
O Yogi, ne’er at fault Thou wert ;
To Thee, thou Knower of the Three Times, we pray :
Grant to us the Chaitya which the Dakinis now hold,
To us, Thy Shishyas and Thy Followers on Earth.


‘O Lord, when Thou didst grant a boon,
Like a father endowing a son Thou wert;
O Yogi, Thou didst not spare or hold back anything ;
To Thee, Thou Gracious One, we pray:
Grant to us the Chaztya which the Dakinis now hold,
To us, Thy Shishyas and Thy Followers on Earth,’


When this prayer had been sung, the form of Jetstin that
was within the Chaitya gave Shiwa-Wéd Repa an answer in
a psalm, which pointed out the differences between apparently
similar things, as follows:


‘O thou, of mighty destiny and faith,
Who prayest unto me with profound earnestness,
Listen unto me, my excellent disciple in white cotton robed.


298 THE NIRVANA [PART II


‘Of the all-pervading Dkarma-K aya realized by me—
Its true nature being Voidness—
None may say, “I possess It”, or “I’ve lost It”:
When into Space the fleshly body was absorbed,
An egg-shaped and substantial relique yet remained ;
And this became a Chaitya, emitting glorious radiance—
A field wherein all sentient beings might for merits labour.
In a Realm Divine it will now fore’er remain,
Attended by the Dakinis of the Five Orders ;
By celestial beings and the Da@kznis will it be worshipped ;
If in the human world it should be left, it would slowly vanish.


‘And ye, my spiritual sons and followers, have had your share

of reliques—

The Knowledge that hath made you realize the Dharma-K aya
in your own minds ;

Of reliques and of ashes this is holiest.

When ye shall seek of This the Realization,

These Similarities which lead to Error ye shall know;

Forget them not, but keep them in your hearts,

And thus hold to the Right, abandoning the Wrong :—


‘The serving of a perfect Guru,
And the serving of a person of good fortune,
Appear to be alike, but beware, and confuse them not.


‘The true dawning of the Voidness in one’s mind,
And illusory obsessions of the consciousness,
Appear to be alike, but beware, and confuse them not.


‘The knowing of the Pure, the Unalloyed State, by meditation,
And the fondness for the Tranquil State born of the trance
ecstatic of Quiescence,
Appear to be alike, but beware, and confuse them not.


‘ The Flood-tide of the Deep of Intuition,
And other deep convictions that “ This seemeth right”, “ That
seemeth true”,
Appear to be alike, but beware, and confuse them not.


CHAP. X11] THE ANSWERING PSALM 299


‘The clear perception of the Mind Unmodified,
And the noble impulse to serve others,
Appear to be alike, but beware, and confuse them not.


‘The spiritual boon which shineth on one as resultant of
Connected Causes,
And merit temporal, which bringeth much of worldly goods,
Appear alike, but beware, and confuse them not.


‘ Guidance spiritual and commands prophetic of one’s guardian
Matrikas and Dakinis,
And temptations from misleading sprites and elementals,
Appear alike, but beware, and confuse them not.


‘Good works enjoined by guardian Dakinis,
And interruptions and temptations wrought by Mara,
Appear alike, but beware, and confuse them not.


‘ The Orb of Dharma-K aya, [blemishless],
And a relique-orb formed of earthly matter,
Appear alike, but beware, and confuse them not.


‘ The Incarnated Blossom of the Realm Nirmana-K aya,
And the Heavenly Blossom of a Sensual Paradise,
Appear alike, but beware, and confuse them not.


‘A Chaitya such as gods miraculously produce,
And a Chattya such as demons may make manifest,
Appear alike, but beware, and confuse them not.


‘The Glorious Halo, symbolizing the phenomenal universe,
And the rainbow born of [common] natural causes,
Appear alike, but beware, and confuse them not.


‘ The faith resulting from Connexions Karmic of the past,”
And faith produced by artificial methods,
Appear alike, but beware, and confuse them not.


‘The true faith, thrilling forth from the heart’s recesses,

And faith conventional, born of a sense of shame and
obligation,

Appear alike, but beware, and confuse them not.


1 That is, the yogic state of mind, the mind in its natural condition, unmodified
by mundane activity.
2 That is, in past lives,


300 THE NIRVANA [PART II


‘ The sincere devotion to religious studies,
And feigned devotion, for the pleasing of one’s Guru,
Appear alike, but beware, and confuse them not.


‘ The real success, which one hath realized,
And nominal success, of which rumour speaketh,
Appear alike, but beware, and confuse them not.


‘This Chaitya, which belongeth to the Matrikaés Divine and

Dékinis,

Doth symbolize the Realm of Buddhas of the Past, the
Present, and the Future ;

A congregational-hall for Heroes and for Yoginis it is ;

And, for thy Guru Jetsiin, is a place of meditation.

It now is being borne to Ngén-gah [the Eastern Paradise],

Wherein all Dakinis assemble,

To the Realm of Happiness,

Wherein the Bhagavan Shamvara,

Lokeshvara, and the Goddess Tara meet.

There, in that blest and happy Realm,

Hosts of Dakinis Divine a welcoming procession form.


‘If to the Chaitya thou whole-heartedly wilt pray,
With welling tears, devotion, and sincerity,
And offerings true, in worship and in veneration,
Strewing blossoms of keen intellect,
Sprinkling on it holy-water of a heart made pure,
Thyself protected and entrenched within a faith immutable,
And dost wish bestowed on thee the power of the Individual
Wisdom,
Beneath the Chaitya bow thy head.’


While this hymn was being sung, the Dékinis conveyed
the Chaztya through the skies and held it directly above the
chief disciples, so that it sent down its rays of light on
the head of each of them, thus conferring upon them its
power. Most of the assembly saw the form of Jetstin pro-
jecting from the Chaitya. And in the sky there appeared
[the Tantric Deities] Gaypa-Dorje, Démchog, Sang-dii, and


CHAP. XII] MARVELLOUS RELIQUE STONE _ 301


Dorje-Pa-mo, surrounded by innumerable hosts, who, after
circumambulating the Chief Deity, merged in him.

Finally, the whole conclave resolved itself into an orb of
light, and this then sped away towards the East. The
Chaitya was wrapped in various folds of silk by the Dakinis,
and put carefully into a casket of precious metals; and then
it was transported eastward, amid a peal of celestial music
from various instruments. Some saw Jetsiin in the garb
of a Sambhoga-K aya Buddha, mounted on a Lion, each of
whose feet was supported by a Ddakini of one colour and
order, [ white, yellow, red, and green]. The halter was held by
Dorje-Pa-mo herself. Many Heroes, Yoginis, and Ddakinis
held over him banners, [royal] umbrellas, and other ornaments
and objects of worship, while many celestial beings bore in
their hands various musical instruments. Some, again, saw
a white Dakini bearing the Chaitya eastward, under an
awning of white silk. Thus, different spectators saw different
phenomena.

The disciples and all the followers were filled with deep
despondency at not receiving a portion of the reliques ; and
wept loudly, still praying for it. In reply, a voice from
the heavens, resembling that of Jetsiin, though no body was
visible, said, ‘O sons, do not take it so to heart. As a sub-
stantial relique, for your portion ye will find on the Amolika
Boulder four letters [miraculously] produced. Ye may look
upon them reverently, and with faith. Go ye and look for
them underneath the boulder.’

Having searched all round the boulder upon which the
cremation had been performed, they found the place whereon
the letters were visible. Thereby was their grief at having
lost their portion of the reliques lessened. Even until now
this marvellous relique-stone is to be seen—an object of venera-
tion and wonder for all at the Lapchi-Chibar Monastery.

The most prominent of Jetsiin’s disciples, although mourn-
ing the unavoidable separation from their Guru, took comfort
in the hope and belief that in whatever realm Jetsiin obtained
Buddhahood they would be sure to be the first amongst his
followers. They felt sure, too, that Jetsiin’s life and example


302 THE NIRVANA [PART II


had instilled a new spirit and impulse into the religious world
and all sentient beings in general. Moreover, they all realized
that the special teaching and mantra received, and to be per-
fected by each of them, was capable of serving both themselves
and others.

It was then agreed that they should look beneath the hearth,
as Jetsiin had requested in his will. Judging from Jetsiin’s
manner of living, none of them expected that he had accu-
mulated any gold, but, since he had made a special mention
of gold, they resolved to do as he had directed them.

On digging up the hearth, they found a square piece of fine
cotton-cloth, which Jetsiin had worn. Wrapped in it there was
a knife, the point of the knife-handle being an awl, the back of
the knife arranged as a steel for striking fire, and the blade
very good for cutting. And with the knife there was a lump
of brown sugar, and a small manuscript which read as follows:
‘The cloth and the sugar, if cut with this knife, will never
become exhausted. Cut as many strips from the cloth and bits
from the sugar as possible and distribute them among the
people. All who taste of this sugar and touch this cloth will
be saved from the lower states of existence. These were the
food and clothing of Milarepa when he was in Samadhi, and
have been blessed by all previous Buddhas and Saints. Any
sentient being who heareth the name of Milarepa, even though
it be but once, will not take rebirth in a lower state of existence
during seven lifetimes, and for seven lifetimes will remember
past lives. These things have been prophesied by the Saints
and Buddhas of the past. Whosoever shall say that Milarepa
possessed hidden gold, let pollution be placed in his mouth.’

This last passage excited merriment in all the disciples,
despite the sorrow-stricken state of their mind. At the bottom
of the manuscript, they read the following verses :


‘The food which I, the Yagi, ate,
While in Samadhi I remained,
A gracious boon of twofold virtue doth possess ;
And they that have the luck to taste it,
Close tight the door of rebirth in the Preta-Loka.


CHAP. XII] THE CLOTH AND SUGAR 303


‘A bit of this white cotton-cloth,}
Worn on the body or the neck
While one be meditating on the Vital Warmth,
Will close the doors of'Hells both hot and cold.


‘And they who eat this food of grace
Are saved from the Three Lower Worlds.


‘Those who have formed with me religious bonds,
Henceforth in lower states shall not be born,
But, step by step, shall gain the goal upon the Bod Path.


‘ Those who have only heard my name,
And have been moved to faith thereby,
During seven lifetimes will recall their previous names and
castes.


‘For me, Milarepa, the Energetic One,
The entire universe hath been transmuted into gold ;
No need have I to tie gold up in packets or in pouches.


‘I bid my spiritual sons and followers to follow my commands ;
And thus to them the same accomplishment shall come,
And further evermore their good and aim.’


Accordingly, they then cut the sugar into countless pieces,
and each piece was as big as the original piece; yet the original
piece was not exhausted. Likewise, the cloth was cut into many
square pieces, and [with the sugar] distributed to as many
people as were there assembled. And those of the multitude
who were suffering from disease, and from other miseries, were
cured by the eating of the piece of sugar and the wearing of
the piece of cloth as a talisman. Those of evil disposition, or
enslaved to evil passions, were converted into faithful, earnest,
intelligent, and compassionate followers ; so that they escaped
falling into the lower states of existence. And the sugar and
the cloth lasted a lifetime for each of the recipients, without
being exhausted. :

On the day of the funeral ceremony, a shower of blossoms,
varying in colour, some blossoms having four or five colours,


1 The white cotton-cloth, in which the Kargyiitpa yogts clothe themselves, is
emblematic of Spiritual Intellect.


304 THE NIRVANA [PART I


fell in great profusion. Most of the blossoms descended until
they were just beyond a man’s reach, and thence ascended and
disappeared. Those that fell to the ground were seen to be
extremely beautiful, but melted away when touched by human
hands. Some, which were of three colours, and others, of two
colours, were as tiny and as delicately formed as the wings of
bees. In the Chibar Valley the celestial blossoms lay ankle-
deep on the ground, and in other places were sufficiently
numerous to give a new hue to the earth. Then, as soon as
the funeral ceremonies terminated, the various phenomena
ceased, and the rainbow colours in the heavens gradually faded
away.

On every anniversary of the funeral, the sky was gloriously
clear and there were rainbows and showers of blossoms,
heavenly perfume filled the air and celestial melodies resounded
everywhere, as on the day of Jetstin’s passing away.

The marvellous benefits which flowed therefrom, over all the
Earth, are too numerous to be described at length. Thus, for
example, flowers bloomed even in winter; the world enjoyed
abundant harvests; and no wars or epidemics ravaged the
Earth.

When the Great Lord of Yogis passed away to the Purer
Realms, those who are hereinafter mentioned [in the Appendix]
remained to substantiate this written history of his life.

By the virtue of his mighty grace and good wishes he left
behind him saintly disciples as numerous as the stars in the sky.
The number of those who were never to return to Sangsdric
existence ! was like the grains of sand on the Earth. Of male
and female who had entered the Path [to Arhantship],? there
were countless numbers.

Thus was the Buddhist Faith rendered bright like the sun,
and all sentient beings were saved from sorrow, and rendered
happy for ever and ever.


This is the Twelfth [and last] Chapter of Jetsiin’s Biography.


1 Or ‘those who were non-returners’ (or Andgamis),

* The first step on the Path to Arhantship is called, in Sanskrit, Svotapatt:,
or ‘Entering the Stream’; the one who takes this step is called a Sotdpanno,
‘or ‘One Who Hath Entered the Stream’ (or ‘ Path’).


THE CHIEF DISCIPLES OF JETSUN 305


THE APPENDIX
Concerning Jetsiin’s Disciples


OF Jetsiin’s shzshyas [or disciples], indicated by the spiritual
directing of the Dakinis, through dreams, at the time when
Jetstin met Shiwa-Wé6d-Repa, the disciple who, like unto
a sun, would outshine all others, was the Peerless Dvagpo-
Rinpoch’e; and the disciple destined to be of lesser glory,
like the moon, was Rechung-Dorje-Tagpa, of Gungthang; and
those, like unto the constellations, were Ngan-Dzong-Ténpa-
Byang-Chub-Gyalpo, of Chim-Lung (otherwise known as
Ngan-Dzong-Ténpa), Shiwa-Wéd-Repa, of Gyal-Tom-mad,
Seban-Repa, of Do-ta, Khyira-Repa, of Nyi-shang, Bri-Gom-
Repa, of Miis, and Sangyay-Kyap-Repa, of Ragma. These
were the eight chief disciples? Then there were thirteen
lesser disciples:*? Shan-Gom, Lan-Gom, Me-Gom, Tsa-Phu,
Khar-Chiing, Rong-Chiing, and Stag-Gom-Repa-Dorje-Wang-
chuk; and these, who [also] were all Repas:* Jo-Gom-Repa-
Dharma- Wangchuk, Dampa-Gya- Phipa, Likor-Chariwa,
Lotén-Gediin, Kyo-Tén-Shakya-Guna, and Dretén-Trashibar.

Of these [twenty-one disciples], Dvagpo-Rinpoch’e and the
five last lesser disciples were yogis and bhikshus.°

Among the female disciples there were Cho-nga Rechungma,
Sale-Wé6d, of Nyanam, Paldar-Bim, of Chiing, and Peta-Gén-
Kyit, who was Jetsiin’s own sister.®

There were also twenty-five yogis and yoginis who had made
considerable progress on the Path.

1 Another form of this name is Dvagpo-Lharje, otherwise known as Je-
Gampopa. (See p. 8.)

2 Literally, ‘sons of the heart’. $ Literally, ‘related sons’.

4 That is, they were all so inured to cold that they wore only a thin cotton
robe. (See p. 414.) 5 That is, they had received full priestly ordination.

6 It is 6ne of the outstanding glories of Buddhism that the Fathers and Saints
of the Buddhist Church have ever extended to woman the solace of religious
equality with man. At first the Buddha hesitated about permitting women to
enter the Sangha, not because He regarded. them as morally inferior to
man, but because He feared the sex-danger universal among human beings.
Eventually, however, if perhaps somewhat reluctantly, He allowed the establish-
ment of the Order of Buddhist Nuns (Bhikshunt-Sangha) ; and, as the recorded
Hymns of the Sisters suggest, woman shared with man the glory of upholding
and propagating the Teachings of the Enlightened One.


306 THE APPENDIX


Then there were one hundred Andgamis, including Dziwo-
Repa (the Cow-herd Disciple), who had realized the Truth,
and one hundred and eight Great Ones who had obtained
excellent experience and knowledge from meditation.

Again, there were a thousand sadhus and sadhunis and yogis
and yoginis who had renounced the worldly life and lived
exemplary lives of piety.

Besides these, there were innumerable lay-disciples of both
sexes, who, having heard and seen Jetstin, had established
a religious relationship with him, and thus closed for ever the
gate on the pathway to the lower states of existence.

So much for the human disciples.


Among the non-human disciples, of orders higher and of
orders lower than mankind, there were the Five Sister God-
desses [or Fairies] known as the Five Sisters of Durga, and the
Rock-Ogress of Lingwa. Countless other spiritual beings
there were who had dedicated themselves to the protection of
the Buddhist Faith.?


All the human disciples who attended the funeral ceremonies
of their Lord Jetsiin retired immediately afterward, each to
his or her particular cave or retreat, and passed their life in
meditation and devotion, as Jetstin had commanded.


Rechung set out to take the articles [or reliques which Jet-
sin had bequeathed on his death-bed] to Dvagpo-Rinpoch’e
[the chief of all the disciples]; and, as he was proceeding with
them towards the Province of U, he met Dvagpo-Rinpoch’e
at Yarlung-Phushar. The latter, although late, had remem-
bered Jetstin’s command; and there Rechung handed over to
him Maitri’s hat and the Agarz-staff, and narrated to him all
the latest news, on hearing which Gampopa [or Dvagpo-Rin-
poch’e] fell into a swoon for a while.

On reviving, Gampopa addressed many mournful prayers
to the Guru [Jetstin]; and these are to be found recorded in
Gampopa’s own biographical history [of Jetsiin].2 Then he

1 Literally, ‘the White Side’, in opposition to the Black Side (or Black


Magic) of non-emancipating religions.
? Our version is by Rcchung, the second of the disciples.


THE?DISGIPLEES’ PASSING 307


invited Rechung to his own place of abode, and received from
him the complete Karza Tantra' of Démchog.

When Rechung had transmitted to Gampopa that portion
of the reliques to which Gampopa was entitled, and had im-
parted to him all the religious teachings which it was necessary
to impart, he departed, and went on towards the Loro-D6l
Monastery; and therein he sat in deep meditation for the
remainder of his life. And Rechung was translated bodily to
the Divine Realm, [his physical body being rendered ethereal,
so that he left no corpse behind him on earth].

In like manner did Shiwa- Wéd-Repa, Khyira-Repa, and the
four female disciples who were sisters, and Paldar-Bim, and
Sale-Wéd, transmute their physical body into the ethereal
body, and entered the Higher Realms.

The other disciples all passed away in the normal manner,
leaving their corpses behind for the benefit of the world and of
all sentient creatures.

Thus did the saintly Jetstin Milarepa perform three worldly
acts and nine acts of religious devotion, making in all twelve
acts, each replete with marvellous events. And with the last act
came the greatest of all great successes that can ever fall to the
lot of mortal man, namely, the attaining in one lifetime of the
Fourfold Body and the Fivefold Wisdom of the All-pervading
Holder of the Sceptre of Spiritual Power (Vajra-Dhara) ; and,
with it, the power to traverse all the Holy Buddha Realms,
and to develop, and thus save, all sentient beings, countless in
number and inhabiting worlds as infinite as heavenly space.”

Thus endeth the history of the Great Yogt named Mila-
Zhadpa-Dorje, the Guide to Deliverance and Omniscience, and
the Bestower of the Bliss of Vzrvaua upon all sangsaric beings
alike, for ever and ever, in the blissful feast of the auspicious
gift of eternally increasing blessings.

1 That is, the esoteric teachings which are always transmitted orally, called
‘the Ear-whispered Truths’. It is prohibited by the Gurus, who are the
custodians of these secret doctrines, to set them down in writing, lest the
uninitiated and the unworthy gain access to them.

2 The conception of a plurality of inhabited worlds has been held by Oriental
peoples for thousands of years; yet, even when this passage was written—
a little more than eight centuries ago—the theory that the Earth is the centre of


the universe and the only world, or at least the only inhabited world, was still
believed in by the learned of Europe, as by the Christian Church.


308


THE COLOPHON


THE beneficent effulgence of the Gem of History,

Of that Lord among men, Jetsiin- Mila,

Hath made the Faith of the Buddha like the sun,

And hath fulfilled the hopes and expectations of all sentient
beings ; .

May it thus be the best of offerings in veneration of all
Buddhas and Saints.


This History [or Biography] hath been made beautiful at the
beginning and end with ornate language ;

May it thus be a feast of delight to all scholars and lovers of
literature.


Its words stir the very hairs of the body, in faith and
humility ;

May it thus be a feast of delight to all devotees who are
sincerely attached to religion.


The mere hearing of this Hzstory moveth to faith despite
one’s self;

May it thus be a feast of delight to all who are of high
destiny and endowed with good karma.


The mere thinking of this History cutteth off one’s attach-
ment to the world;

May it thus be a feast of delight to those striving to obtain
omniscience in one lifetime.


By the mere touching of this Hstory, the twofold aims! are
fulfilled >

May it thus be a feast of delight to them who uphold the
Faith and serve others.


1 That is, one’s own aims and the aims of others seeking freedom from
sangsaric existence, or from the interminable round of death and birth in worlds
of suffering.


THIS BOOK’S VIRTUES 309


Through one’s study and practice of this History, the
Dynasty of Gurus will be fully satisfied ;

May it thus be a feast of delight to them who uphold the
glory of the Dynasty of Gurus by living according to
their commandments.


In virtue of the Grace of this History, every sentient creature
shall find relief from all sorrow ;

May it thus be a feast of delight to all sentient creatures of
the Three Planes [or universe].


[Signed and dated]: Durtéd-fiyul-vai-naljor-riipahi-gyen-
chan [or ‘The Yogz having ornaments of bone who frequenteth
cemeteries ’].!

The year of Phurbu, the middle autumn month, and the
eighth day, at the sacred Pilgrimage of Lapchi-Kang.?


1 This designation is that of a devotee (or yogi) who has renounced the world.
The frequenting of cemeteries is a part of the yogic practice, and intended to
impress upon the devotee the transient nature of sangs@nc existence. The orna-
ments, too, being of the bones of the dead, serve the same end, besides being
symbolic; cf p. xvii. The author’s real name is that of the second of Jetsun’s
disciples, namely, Rechung-Dorje-Tagpa.

2 From this place-name it appears that the Aiistory was either written or
completed while Rechung was on Pilgrimage to Lapchi-Kang (Mt. Everest),
the place sanctified by Jetsiin’s meditation, or else while he was in hermitage
there.


INDEX


Black-type figures indicate the chief references, most of which may be


Airs (Skt.
216, 270,

Akanishtha Heaven, 44!.

Akshobhya, xix, 37', 39°,
42”, 43-4, 270.

Amaravati Heaven, 44”.

Amitabha, Xvi, 37}, 427,
147°, 276},

Amogha-Siddhi, 37', 423.

Anégami(s}, 251°, 304},
306.

Anthropos, to.

Arab punceopacis) é

Arhant, at's %, 22-3, 112,
2523.

Arhantship, 21, 21},

Asana{s], xv, xvii, xviii,
2001,

Asceticism, 114},

Astrology, xvi?, 781, 223.

Asura(s], 39}.

Atisha, 7, 8

Aura, xvi, 274),

Avalokiteshvara,37?, 147°.

Avatara(s], 4.7%, 143,151,
167', 233: see Incarna-
tion.


Banner of Victory, xx, 33‘,
87-8, 261.

Bar-do (Intermediate
State), 145", 1521, 156,
2861.


Bhagavad-Gita, 47°, 115},
270%

Bhtkshuni, 305%.

Bhikshu(s] 217, 305.

Biack Art, 40, 4
84, 111

Boda) 35”, 38,
43, 131, 232.

— Bodies of, 38?, 167}.

— Duties of, 36%, 190!,
197}.

— Eyes of, 252%, 283}.

— Renunciation of, 265}.

— Vow of, 19!, 131, 249.

Bon Religion, 6, 7, 242,
243.

Brahma, 31, 1517, 214.

Brahma-danda, 347, 2115.

Brahma Qualities, 197'.

Brahma-randhra, 155°,
171),


, Orff,


used as a Glossary.


Vayu), 194,| Brahmavidyd, 161.


Brahmins and non-killing,
TIgl.

Buddha, 2, 11, 35%, 39%)
44, Gee 149”,


164, 192},
xix, 8, 10, 395,


— Adi, xv, xix
44', 143).

— Enthronement of, 2917.

— Funeral Pyre of, 2767.

— Halo, 2915.

— Heavens, 44) 3,
143!, 307.

—Illness and Death of,
260, 2731, 274%.

— Nirvanic Consciousness
of, 283}.

— Posture, XV.

— Samadhi of, 175%.

— Sign ofa, 233.


38,


— State of, 51.
— Ushnisha of, Xix, xx.
Buddhahood, xv!, xvi?,


xix, 36%, 371, 468, 152!,
169!, 186, 190, 193,196,


200,91202,88 205,082 10°.
233, 254, 271, 273,
292, 301


Buddhas, Body of, 387.

— Dynasty of, 20.

— Meditation, of:
Dhyani Buddhas,

— Series of, 2914, 293.

— Twelve deeds of, 46},
195'.

— Vows of, 131.


Seé


Buddhism, Christianity
and, 38}.

—Cosmology of, air°,
307°.


— Drunkenness and, 61°,
1g!.

— Esoteric, 382, 417:
Esoteric Teachings.
— Evolution and, 203}.
— Gnosticism and, 10-12.

— Miracles and, 213}.
— Tibetan Schools of, 4-6.
— Woman and,204",305°.


RY 44


Chaitya, 279, 288, 291-3,
298 ff: see Chorten,
Stupa, and Reliquary.

— Symbolism of, 300,


Charms, 50, 77-8.

Chenrazee, 377: see Avalo-
kiteshvara.

Chhang, 57", 114, 123.

China and Tibet, 1, 6.

Ch'orten, facing p. 269:
see Chaitya, Stupa, and
Reliquary.

Christ (Christos), XV1
£0, 11, 477, 1457.

Christianity, Animism of,


At ca,


— Asceticism of, 11.

— Burial and, 207".

— Church-Council, 11.

— Cosmology and, 307°.

—Creeds and Anathemas
of, 12.

— Damnation and, 1517.

— Fish-Symbol and, xvi'.

— Lamaism and, 96!.

— Stimulants and, 1g1'.

— Yoga and, 120".


Chronology, Tibetan,
52'3, 244).
Clairvoyance, 1325, 154,


248, 249, 279, 282.
Confucius, 29.
Cosmology, 2118, 3075.
Gursesan 7100, O57 35


197.


Dakini{s], 4, 331, 45% $,
76, 124, 133, 142", 144-
5, 163-4, 166-7, 169,
193,243) 257) 273 fi
289 ff., 305.

— Hymns of, 277, 287,


292.

Deliverance, 86, 96:
Buddhahood.

Démchog, 133?, 164, 169,
287-8, 292, 300


seé


— Mandala, 102, 1327,
1334

— Tantra, 1021, 133',
142", 306.


Demon, xvi?, 48-9, IgI,
229, 239, 242, 258, 265,
272, 290.

Deva{s], 39°, 124, 142°,
167525750 27 au ites sce
Gods.


— Hymn of, 275.


Dhammapada, 30.

Dharma, The, xviii, xx,
39) 43) 47) 84-5, 94,
98', 186, 212, 233, 251,
257, 261, 263, 278,
2858,

Dharma-Dhatu, 37°, 37},
2845, 288, 2951

Dharma-Kaya, xvii, 37°,
37), 38%, 137, 167, 208,
2091, 246, 250, 254,
ae 07 201,m273>) 0375,
2858, 288-9, 208.

— Symbolism of, 292-3,
295%, 299.

Dharma-pala{s],
193, 293-

Dharma-RAja, 80'.

Dhyana: ses Meditation.

Dhyani Buddhas, xv, xvi,
xix-xx, 371, 39% 5,
427, 156.

Di-Kung-pa, 13, 14.

Dory 7, 88: see Vajra.

— Symbolism of, Xv, xx,
Io, 414,

Dorje-Chang, Xv, xviii, 8,
9, Io, 39°, 138, 143,
149, 166, 179, 195, 2113,
232: see Vajra-Dhara.

Dorje-Pa-mo, 107}, 287-8,
301.

Dreams, xviii, 42-5, 83,
87-8, 131, 133, 144
144*, 145-7, 149 fl,
158, 160!, 173, 185,
188, 194, 211, 279, 281,


169%,


305.

Dream Symbols, 160.

Drongjug Veaching, 145,
146', 147.

Druids, 7.

Dug-pa, 13, 14.

Durga (Kali), 45%, 1695,
235°, 306.


Ecstasy (Illumination), 32,
337, 36%, 141, 145°,
1567, 175!, 208, 2101,
254, 298: see Samadhi.

Ego, Doctrine of, 33°, 35,
381, 141, 201, 245, 285).

Eight Glorious Emblems,
33', 286-7.

Eight Worldly Aims,
221!, 231, 237, 245.

Elementals, 36, 219%, 299.

Elements, 257.

— Symbolism of, xvi, 1347,
207}, 208%, facing p. 269.


INDEX


) Elixir, 87-8, 134, 277.
Enlightened Ones, 18.
Enlightenment, xv, 7,

35° *, 37%, 465, 151%,
1567, 165, 178), 186},
193!, 197! : see Buddha-
hood.


— Christhood of, 11.

— Stages of, 5}.

— Symbols of, xx.

Esoteric Teachings, xv,
xvii, I10g!, 125, 162,
172, 195, 211°, 239%,
2634.


— Transmission of, 8, 10,
323, 125; 1611, 2633,
307%.

Everest, Mt., 9, 45°, 213°,
219, 2221, 309%.

Exorcism, xvi?, 48, 497, 50,
258, 265.

— Hail, of, so, 118).


Fairies, 33', 42, 239, 306.
Five Poisons, The, 195},
258, 260, 273. 283.
Funeral Ceremonies, 207}.


Gampopa, xviii, 8, 305},
306-7.

Ganapati, 238.

Gaypa-Dorje, 1081, 119,
154,163, 169, 287-8, 300.

Ge-lug-pas, 4, 7.

Ghost (Skt. Preta), 39',
¥73, 191, 232%,

Gnosticism, 10-12.

God, 387.

— Saints and, 17.

Godavari, 164.

Gods, 39', 250-3, 274:
see Deva.

— Existence of, 141%,

— Gahdan, 219}.

— Guardian, 246.

— Himalayas, of, 17-18.

Golden Fish, xvi, 334.

Grace, Waves of, xviii, 9,
10, 96!, 138, 252, 275).

— Hook of, 2822.

Great Perfection Doctrine,


4, 85-6, 178.

Great Symbol (Skt. Maha-
Mudra), 4, 9 144,
194, 2657.

Gur-Bum, x, 16, 243.

Guru[s), xv- i 429
61', 63}, 68}, 83-4}, 87,
937, 961, 106, 108, 110,
112, 114, 117, 120-1,


git


Guru({s] (cond.),
124, 129, 132%, 133,
136 ff., 140, 145, 147°,
149', 157, 161, 162%,
170, 1711, 178, 190 211°,
214', 221,231, 233, 241,
244, 2561, 259, 272, 290,
295, 298.

— Divine, xv, 8.

— Indian and Tibetan, 7:

— Kargyiitpa, Xv-xviii.

— Lineal, xv-xviii, 8-g',
327, 335, 262, 309.

— Lotus Order, xvi, xvii.

— Manifestation of, 44°.

— Norbu, 18.

— Prayer to, 290-1.

— Serving of, 298.

— Shishya and, 68}, 294,
296.

— Supreme, xix.

—Symbolism of, 288,
293.

— Vajra Order, xvii.

— Worship of, 45-6, 269,
281.


Hail-storms, Launching
of, 65, 75-8, 86, 94, 104,
117-8, 173.

Hail-tax, 118.!

Hallucination, 1417: see
Illusion.

Hermit, 15-20, 21, 178,
181, 193, 198, 220,


— Bengali, 17.


— Christian, 11-12, 18,

— Gnostic, 12.

— Guru, 18,

— Himalayan, g, 22.

— Kargyiitpa, 9, 134!.

— Tibetan, 21.

Hermitages, 9, 235 ff.,
247, 261,.309%.

Heruka, XV", xvi, xvii,

Hinayana, 140.

Holy Places, 367, 133.

Hymn (or Song), Aunt,
to, 228.

— Apparently
Things, on, 297.

—Cloth and Sugar, on,
302.

— Dakinis' 277, 287, 292.

— Damema’s, 170.

— Deva's, 275.

— Disciples’, 290, 295.

— Final Precepts, of, 284.

— Firm Resolution, of, 176.

— Forgiveness, of, 267.


Similar


312


Hymn (or Song) (cont.),
Geshé, to the, 245.

— Gods,on Seeing the, 252.

— Good-Wishes, Final, of,
255.

— Guru, tothe, 137, 143,
158, 166.

— Home-yeaming, of, 159.

— Illusoviness, on, 179.

— Impermanence, on, 214.

— Interdependence, on,
209.

— Maidens, to the, 217-18.

— Marpa’s, 151, 162, 167.

— Milarepa’s, x.

— Path, Life on the, 82.

— Peta’s Visit, on, 203.

— Prophetic Dream, on,
149.

— Rechung’s, 281.

— Self-reproof, of, 195.

— Shame, on, 226.

— Sisters, of, 305°.

— Sorrowful, 183.

— Things Useful, about,
262.

— Tranquil, The, 30.

— Worldliness, on, 222.

— YogicComforts, on, 201.

— Yogic Precepts, of, 272.

— Yogic Satisfactions, on,
206.

— Yogic Vows, of, 192.

— Yogic Wisdom, of, 190.

— Yogic Zeal, on, 188.

— Yogi's Car, on, vi.

— Yogi's Illness, on, 265.

— Yogi's Race, of, 215.


Illusion, 33°, 188, 141%,
266, 277°.

— Duality, of, 351.

— Ego, of, 35.

Incarnation, xvi, 47%, 76,
1671, 232, 242, 299: See
Avatira.

India, xvi?, xvii, 89, 94-5,
102, 123, 144-6, 161,
239) 241.

— Civilization of, 1, 2.

Indra, 31, 442, 2137.

Initiation Q-11, 20', 86-
7, 102-3, 108-9, 117,
I1Q, 122, 125-6, 129 ff.,
1325, 140, 143, I51,
156, 161, aII, 233, 240,
242, 251, 262, 272.

Invocation, 48, 94, 132°.

Islam and India, Culture
Glen


INDEX


Jainsand non-killing, 1197.

Jetstin-Kahbum, 2, 2', 24-
8.

— Divisions of, 40, 238.

— Place in Literature, 2'7-
8.

— Textand Translation of,
24-7.

— Virtues of, 308-9.


Kah-dam-pas, 4, 7.

Kah-gyur 102'.

Kailasa, Mt., 17, 45°, 164,
235', 2401.

Kali- Yuga, 18, 2181.

Kargyiitpa, XV, xvii, xviii,
2, 4, 12, 14, 32%, 33°,
43', 1031, 119% *, 134},
135, 144", 148, 151, 154,
156, 160, 169,178, 184,
252.

— Apostolic


Succession,


— Communities, Io,

— Dissenting Sects, 12-14.

— Hermits, 15. .

— Mystical Insight, 10.

Karma, Xiv, 15, 33, 47;
70, 179, 190, 243, 248,
Aish.

— Absolving of, 2501, 251,
253, 259, 267.

— Connexions of, 299?.

— Evil, 611, 84, 104, 218,


250", 251, 253, 2595
266-7, 285.

— Good, 87, 209%, 254,
309.


— Law of, 189, 227, 230-
I, 233, 250,
— Mirror of, xvii.
Karma-pa, 13, 14.
Karmic Veities, 69.
Knowledge (Skt. J#ana),
n


Krishiia, 28, 477.

Kundalini: see
Kundalini.

Kusulipas, 7, 8.


Yoga,


Lalita-Vistara, 164.

Lama, Bari-Lotsawa, 220,
222, 224.

— Dalai, 4, 1477, 207}.

— Dawa-Samdup, vii, 24,
29.

— Tashi, 147", 207".

— Tsaphuwa, 244 ff.

— Urgya, of, 14.

Lamaist Sects, 14.


Lang-Dar-ma, 147.
Levitation, 36.
Liberation, 91, 94, 95,
108 : see Buddhahood.
Loka{s}, 39', 88, 206°,
210%, 261, 263, 284-5,


302.
— Miserable, The Three,
2327, 233. 303.
Lokeshvara, 300.


Madhyamika, 4, 5}.

Magic, xvi?, 6, 7, 13, 48,
61, 63', 65-6, 681, 91%,
94, 101, 173, 184, 187,
266 : see Black Art.

Maha-Mudra: see Great
Symbol.

Maha-Purusha, 2415,

Mahayana, 140, 186.

— Philosophy, 3.

Maitri, 1192, 156, 270, 306.

Mandala, xx, 103, 108,
119, 126, 1325, 160, 274,
2761, 277-8.

Mantra, 11, 373, 132°,
133', 1341, 163, 277},
289, 302.

— Science of, xvi?, 373.

Mara, xix, 145", 159, 194,
243, 294, 299.

Marpa, Xvii, 2, 7.12, 43,
46, 87-90, 114!, 120,
124 ff,

— Dream Interpretation,
by, 151.

— Esoteric Transmission
of, 161.

— Final Gifts of, 55.

— Gurus of, 7.

— Hymns of, 151, 162,
167.

— Naropa and, 147.

Matrika(s| 293°, 299,
300.

Maung Tun Kyaing, 147".

Maya, xvi?, 16, 33%, 569,
1461,

Meditation (Skt. Dhyana),
1', 7, 42, 86, 87, 107},
DIOS, 120, 1230 1338
136-7, 140-4}, 1521,
153°, 154-7, 162, 164,
171}, 175, 178-9, 181-
2 ff., 233, 2361, 2561,
261, 263, 270,299, 306-
7: see Sadhana, and
Samadhi.

— Band, xviii, 201),

— Body, on, 277.


Meditation (cont.), Bud-
dhas of, xv: see Dhyani
Buddhas.

— Cemeteries, in, 46,175',
3rol.

— Guru, on, 171", 245:
see Guru.

— Mudra of, xix:
Mudra.

— Right, 294, 298.

— Stages of, 337.

Meru, Mt., 2118.

Milarepa, Acts of, 307.

— Admonitions, Final, of,
261-2, 269-71.

— Arhantship of, 21.

— Aunt and, 183 ff., 187
ff., 227-30.

— Birth of, 52.

—Black Art and, 3, 46,
61-81, 173, 178.

— Caves of, 236-7.

— Clan of, 46, 48.

— Conversion of, 3, 84-5.

—Cremation of, 276,
286 ff.

— Death of, 273.

— Deceit of, 121.

— Despondency of, 127.

—Disciples of, 41, 135,
235 ff., 250, 254, 304-7.

—Discourse on Book-
Learning, 245-7; on
Death, 259; on Illness,
258, 265 ; ; on Karma,
231, 233-4; on Right
Action, 271; on Shame,
221, 226~7.

— Dream Prophetic of, 149.


see


INDEX


Milarepa (comt.), Hymns
of: see Hymn.

— Incarnation of, 232-3.
— Initiation of, 86, 119,
131-3, 154-6, 160-3.

— Lineage of, 46- -52.


—Marpa and, 87-91,
93 ff.
— Medical Treatment and,


260.

— Meditation of, 136 ff.,
171, 174-6 ff.

— Mother’s Message,

pie Elo of, 221, 225.

— Names of, 40, 414, 46?,
47) 4% 53, 95) 131, 133,
ThIGs§ 2OR pm atSnu202.
280, 303, 307, 308.

— Naming of, 53.

— Ngogdun and, 115 ff.

— Occult Powers of, xx
32-9, 103-4, 194, 208-9,
211-13, 248-9,
303) 307-

— Parting from Marpa,
and, 165, 171.

— Patrimony, Loss of, and,
55, 58-9.

— Peta and, 202-9, 220ff.

— Poisoning of, 249.

— Precepts of, 29, 272-3,
284-6, 298-300.

— Probation and Penance
of, 93-128.

— Rechung’s Dream of, 43.

— Records of, 243.

— Reformer, as, 12, 114}.

— Reliques of, 289 ff.


— Drong - jug Teaching — Renunciation of, 175-
6 ff.


and, 145.

— Education of, 59, 613,
65, 107.

— Esoteric Transmission
to, 161, 172.

— Fame of, x, 241.

— Father’s Death, 53-5.

— Geshé and, 244 ff.

— Guru's Guidance of,
136 ff.

— Gurus of, 65, 69, 80,
87 ff., 115-16, 214.

—Hardships of, 55-60,
67, 217, 220.

— Hermitages of, 9, 235
tieyn 57

— Home-yearning of, 159.

— Humanity’s Hero, as,
28-9.

— Hunters and, 196-200.


— Resurrection of, 283.

— Social Ideal of, 2.

— Socrates of Asia, as, 29.

— Spiritual Knowledge of,
138-43, 209, 245.

— Tantric Rites, on, 260.

— Tests of, 94 ff.

— Translations of, 261.

— Travels of, 239.

— Vacillation of, 113.

— Vengeance of, 69-70.

— Vows of, 192, 225.

— Worldliness, on, 222-4.

— Yogi, as: see Yogi,
Milarepa the.

— Yogic Comforts of, 201.

— Yogic Race of, 215.

— Vogic Satisfactions of,
206,


266, |


313


Milarepa (cont.), Zesay
and, 185, 205, 207-8.
Mind, Primordial, 35},

365, 137.

— Bodhi, 204.

— Science of, vi, 35, 36%,
382, (46%, 1413) 142!,
145", 194, 2091, 246%,
252,275, 284, 289, 291},
2991.

Mudra, xix.

Mysteries, 160, 161:
Initiation.


Seé


Nagas, 219", 237, 257.

Nalanda University, 5.

Naming Ceremony, 53, 57-

Naropa, xvi, xvii, 8, 12,
43, 46, 87-8, 90, 94-5,
99, 105, 108, 114-17,
11g, 126-7, 131, 144,
146?, 147-9,151, 155-0,
161-2, 193.

Nepal, 4, 6, 16, 42, 524,


ae
gin-gah Heaven, 44?,
255', 270, 300.
Nidanas, The Twelve, 15,
A ESE
Ningma(pa}, 4, 13, 48,
5, 178.
Nirmana- Kava, 38%, 167,
288, 299.
Nirvana, xvii, 1, II, 20,
31, 334, 351, 37}, 383,


146}, 1521, 167', 209,
246’, 249',
254, 258, 260, 283},
285°, 28848, 294.


Oath-taking, 49, 96, 187.

Occult Powers, xvi, 32-9,
45), 48, 61 ff., 163,
1921, 211-13, 241-3.

Occult Sciences, xx, 5,


3
(Clear Light),
145° ’ er 237) 265,


283, 2

’Og-min Heaven, 44!',
143}.

Omens, 136, 147,149, 251,
258, 294.

Padma Sambhava, xv, 4,
5}, 7, 13, 14, 2323.


314


Panditas, 7.

Paramita, The Six, XVII.

Patanjali, 1421,

Path, The, 3, 20, 32', 35,
37, 82, 127!,140-142",
143, 162, 171, 189, 190,
193-4, 201, 2081, 209,
254, 256, 258, 271-2,
290, 305.

—Arhantship, of, 21-4,
304.


—Bodht, of, 191, 35%,
I4I, 303.
—Eightfold, 22, 32%,


139", 140%, 294}.

— Emancipation, of, 85,
235, 240, 243, 259).

— Illumination, of, 5%.

— Left- and Right-hand,
63', 84".

— Life on, 82.

— Mahayana of, 186.

— Mantra, of, 373, 233.

— Obstacles on, 193, 208,
256', 260.

— Secret, 273.

— Vajra, 6, 33°, 34, 41,


1251, 140, 143, 2427,
agi5.

Perfections, The Five-
fold, 394.

Personality, The Four-
fold, 39°.


=iThe Threefold, 226).

Phenomenal Signs, 3, 251-
2, 257, 268-9, 273 ff.,
280, 286ff., 293, 299-
301, 303-4.

Pho-wa (Consciousness
Transference), 145°,
146}, 154-6.

Pilgrimages, 9, 36%, 73,
164, 2401.

Pistis Sophia, 10}, 11.

Pleiades (Tib. Mindook),


75¢
Pod, 63?.
Prajita-Paramita, 1, 11,
112}, 1217,
Preta{s}| : see Ghost.
Preta-Loka, 302.
Proverb, 48, 56-8, 70,
10K, 230, 248, 250.
Psychic Centres, 343, 363,
1328, 1684, 1698, 208°,
211%, 212), 216},
Psychic Nerves, 2115.


Ram's (sometimes Ante-


INDEX


lope’s) Horn Trumpet,
xvi?, :
Ratna-Sambhava, 37!, 427.
Reality, 33%, 363, 38',
1383, 1521, 284, 295.
Rebirth, 6, 11, 17, 19, 36%,
477, 139", 145°, 1601,
193, 205, 3513, 302-3.
Rechung, 3, 8, 28, 31,
4l ff., 281, 305-7) 3097.
— Hymn to Jetsiin, 281.
— Introduction of, 31.
— Jetsiin’s Hymn to, 284.
— Premonition of, 279-80.
‘Red Caps,’ 4, 5', 13: See
Ning-ma-pas.
Refuges, The, 98?.
Re-incamation, 15%, 8,
147°: see Kebirth.
Reliquary, 881, 178:
Stupa.
Reliques, 155, 261, 264,
275-6, 289 ff., 301, 307.
Relique-Stone, 301.
Resurrection. 146?, 283.
Rishis, 17, 20, 213}.


see


Sadhana, 99, 1621, 168°:
see Meditation.

Sadhus and Sadhunis, 306.

Sa-kya-pa, 6, 14.

Samadhi, xviii, 1751, 192,
199, 202, 216', 254,
260, 273, 302.

Sambhoga- Kaya, xv, 38%,
167, 288, 295, 301.

— Wisdom, 293.

Sam-bhota, 6-7,

Shamvara: see Démchog.

Sam-yé, 5.

Sang-dii, 169, ao 300,

Sangsadra, xvi, 33°, 35},

36°, 38”, 39%, 139°,

eee 1461, 190, 209,
245, 254, 2858, 288%,
294.

Saturninus of Antioch, 10,

Sat- Yuga, 274.

Sautrantika, 51.

Scarf, Presentation of, 68%,
77, 115, 122-3.

Scholasticism, 1.


Seven Royal Insignia,
2864, 287.

Shakti, I, 1695, 212°,
293}.

ap aired , Guruof,
147".

Shinie, a Dharma-
Raa), 8


Shishya (Chela: Disciple),
124, 148, 211, 262,
264.

— Guidance of, 1491, 155-
6, 161.

— Test of, 3, 937, 105,
PLZ, 17, 120,130;
133-4.

Shiva, 235}.

Shinyata, XV, 365, 142',
288, 288°: see Void,
The.

Siddha, 5}, 14.7".

Stddht, 1688, 1921,
241, 290, 296.

— Lokic, xvi-xviii.

Stix Doctrines, The, 144?,
160}.

Song-tsen Gam-po, 8

Sophia (Wisdom), 11.

Sorcery, 6, 84-6, 94-5) 98,
104, 187, “TOO cMsce
Black Art.

Soul Hypothesis, 38".

Spirit(s] (Tib. Bhata), 48,
124, 179, 196, ees
203, 243, 257, 265, 294.

Stipa, 88, 1757, 178, 261,
263, 274: see CRorten.

Sufis, vii, 12, 19, 24.

Sukhavati, xvi, xvii.


213,


Tak-nyt (‘Double Analy-
sis’), 115}.

Ta-lung-pa, 13, 14.

Yantra, 87, 133, 155;
212", 263, 277.

— Anuttara, 417, 292°.

— Carya, 292°.

— Déakini Karna, 148?,
172}, 239°, 307.

— Démchog: see Démchog.

— Four Classes of, 292".

— Goddesses of, 457.

— Kriya, 292".

— Kularnava, 127)» 1328.

— Nityashod ashikarnava,
1613,

— Raja, 9, 107}.

— Yoga, 417, 292".

Tantric Deities, 293, 300.

— Mystic, 97.

— Precept, 9", 2141.

— Rite, 260.

— Teachings,
285°.

— Truths, 260.

— Yogis, 175}.

Tara, Goddess, 2412, 300.

Taranatha, 14°.


2
xvi},


9°,


Ta-wa (Mystical Insight),
9.

Telepathy, xviii, 36, 377,
96"


Tertons, 14}.

Tilopa, xvi, xvii, 8, 12,
43> 46, 161.

Ti-song De-tsen, 5, 7, 14”.

Titans, 39}.

Trance, xviii, 283!, 286,


298.

Tranquil, The, 30.

Transmigration, 49.

Tn- Kaya, 387, 167), 246,
2881, 292-3. :
Trinity, The, 140}, 153,

166, 221.

Truth (Skt. Dharma), 35%,
8o!, 91, 152', 162, 176,
200, 233, 250, 254, 261,
285: see Reality.

— Discovery of, 29.

Truths (Teachings), 32,
83, 95, 104, 106, 119,
124, 130, 133, 137, 162.

— Mystic, 99, 100, 125,
129, 132, 145, 151-2,
154, 161, 165, 169},
219, 233, 285, 289.

— Realization of, 8!, 19,
23, 38?, 107", 135, 152,
166, 176, 245, 255, 2587,
259, 2657, 271.

— Scientific, 285%.

Tseringma, 235}, 241.

Tsha-tshas,1]5*, 177,261,
263.

Tsong-khapa, 4, 12, 114'.

Tum-mo: see Vital Heat.

Tushita Heaven, 252.


U and Tsang, 63?, 67, 73,
94, 160, 166, 219.

Udumvara Blossom, 116!.

Upanishad, Brthadaran-
yaka, 245).


Vaibhashika, 5!.
Vairochana, 37', 427.
Vajra: see Dorje.
Vajra-Dhara, xix, 8, 395,
AL I3 5 44a> 307s nsce
Dorje-Chang.
Vajra-Kaya, 2847.
Vajra Order, xvii.
Vajra-Sattva, 371, 39°.


INDEX


Vajra-Varahi: see Dorje-
Pa-mo,

Vajra-Yogini, 2397.

Vampires, 503,

Vision, Five Kinds of,
2527,

Vital Heat (or Warmth),

41‘, 134", 144%, 155”,

156, 170", 188, 194, 296,


303.

Void (or Voidness), The,
Xv, 51, 11, 36°, 3¢',
387, 137, 142-3. 145°,
167', 209, 231, 254,
273, 285°, 288%, 294,
298 : see Shunydta.

Vow, Bodhisattva, of, 19°.

— Ge-nyen, of, 131.

— Guru, of, 278.

— Yogi, of, 9, 192-3,
194-7), 225, 249).


Wheel of the Law, xXx,


334, 39- es
Wisdom, Eye[s] of (Skt.
TUG) eeXIX, XX; Ls
Beans
— Flames of, Xx.
Wisdoms, The Five Di-
vine, 37’, 39%, 258, 283.


Yama-Raja, 801.

“Yellow Caps’, 4,5): see
Ge-lug-pas.

Yoga, 42, 86, 133, 134},
142}, 144) ?, 146!', 153?,
1684, 2537.

— Adi, 4, 5}, 292".

—Asana in, xvii-xx,
2o1!,

— Care of Body in, 209.

— Dreams, of, 160).

— Exercises, xvii, 5', 194,
204", 208, 2151, 216},
310),

— Hatha, 134).

— Indra and, 2137.

— Kundalini, 347, 155°,
169°, 1711, 205), 2102,
PL OUL DH OLE DOE ee

— Mantra, Xxvi*, 134).

— Raja, 134}.

— Science of, 270}.

—Success in, 294.

— Tantra, xvii, 417, 292”.

Yogachara, 5}.


315


Yogi, vii, 9, 35”, 36, 377,
41, 431, 89, 119%, 120°,
1328, 1341, 1421, 144153,
1467, 1565, 164, 175’,
187, 201, 2381, 255, 305.

— Abode of, xviii, 268.

— Asceticism of, 19}.

— Car of, vi.

— Cemetery - Meditation
of, 175}, 309".

— Comforts of, 201.

— Creed, 15-20, 247.

— Death of, 268, 273 ff.,
304, 307.

— Dharma-Bodhi, 241.

— Duties of, 19, 264,


295-7-

— Equal-Mindedness of,
XVl.

— Food of, 302.

— Function of, 18, 216%,


277.

— Goal of, 19.

— Herukapa, xv’,

— Hibernation of, 193}.

— Himalayan, 15-20.

— Ideal of, 19.

— Illness and, 258, 260,
264-5.

— Kingdom of, 16.

— Layman and, 210%,

— Meditation of: see Medi-
tation, and Samadhi.
— Meditation - Band of,

Xviii, 201'.
—Milarepa the, xviii-

xix, 16, 27, 31, 915-17,

262, 264, 295-7, 307.
— Nudity and, 221, 225-6.


—Ornaments of, xvii,
310.

— Postures of, xviii: see
Asana{s),


— Power of, 367, 372, 41‘,
451, 2691, 293, 295-6:
see Seddht.

— Questions of, 16.

— Race of, 215.

— Kishis and, 20.

— Satisfactions of, 206.

— Thoughts and, 2267,

— Tiphoo, 24!.

— Worldliness and, 222.

Yoginis, 42, 259, 293},
300, 301, 305.

Yam, UW, 154.


_ m! yg A 3


ee ao | 4 wr Wat mi
of A Eh Ute 2 re
- ¢ * we 7 '
7 _—s ri


fer


— Ms


S4" at ae i Se


; : pS
> a \ ; ; _
a ic. ¥ —
- YA _ Ae, —
~~” mas uve)! Lk


C aeyaagens - <1


2 “J Lex _ "
eek ‘ee a. 4 ; « ‘ : "S ofG ee :
BF: Taine Ny Tie ; - ARENDS pe he!
- cle ee Oe rie) '~.'| < iy he ig: .
ooh Be ha? apt A hi ri at ste
Te { 5 Aer
Sane. fies mele +o - ty
1a ' © taal ’ V) -_
ee. by a.) i4 an.
& Perrys beh’ Probe
a Gy * fe 'e
i 3s vit = _ isa,


StP bye “lt 4 ntvn x bh y Se sete


i na ‘ .
“ Ty a* Age ae
4 it J
os oir; ep) a” pine
ve 7 hate a oy > ca | ‘ * a
' . \ J >
bet etn ms | MPa Pas Fy Agi, | A
4Ole oR 4 ‘ pest
> / « ie - home ; “rr
, a ee ~— ss aie
ae mi ei § ¢ ‘
_ - tug ty ‘ r ' S
& Je pool oS sie ew =
, » is ' . ‘ } ’
wa ree =e) a Vee ,tyi a | iat
~~ o J a <- é ‘ = Al . ,
lis 908 i —_ uh : 2 2 — Tt 7
finn ets) VONEEEAR eoe9  eaee Sd ar Paka
30" wadc =" Te N pS eee ed > a when
bial PN ns ee ae
v Auton Wy Pre. Te » Pa } net oa
Fey 7 ae ,! ve ey
ase : q lh mez spel
i ' ;
ge eth ® ‘ “2 FAs |
'
Si *
ms : .


j
_


mainder in the words of his disciple
Rechung, who knew him in the flesh.”
Dr. Evans-Wentz contributed a highly
informative introduction, and liberal ex-
planatory notes.


“It is probable that anyone approaching
Buddhism for the first time will do so by
way of the Dhammapada or some other
scripture rather than by that of an out-
line of the subject; and no one has a
more profound knowledge of one group
of scriptures, the Tibetan, than Dr. Evans-
Wentz, whose editing of the life of the
eleventh-century sage Milarepa is as
masterly as that of his better-known work
on the Tibetan Book of the Dead. It is
sometimes possible to learn more from
one comparison of his in a footnote than
from the most careful exposition of doc-
trine in any introductory volume.”

The Spectator


The late Dr. W. Y. Evans-Wentz, formerly
of Jesus College, Oxford, studied occult
doctrines intensively in India and in Sik-
kim, during the early years of this cen-
tury. His tetralogy of works on yoga,
based on translations from the Tibetan,
offers.to Western scholars a rare “inter-
pretation from within.” Dr. Evans-Wentz
is also the editor of The Tibetan Book of
the Dead, The Tibetan Book of the Great
Liberation, and Tibetan Yoga and Secret
Doctrines.


Design by Tim Gaydos


Books of Related Interest


i THE USES OF THE PAST

4f; PROFILES OF FORMER SOCIETIES
~ by Herbert J. Muiler LO A Be

cloth and paper


A aes THE IDEA OF THE HOLY 2
| Second Edition My

4 by Rudolf Otte

i eloth and paper


EASTER® RELIGIOUS AND WESTERN THOUGHT
4 Secona Edition

| by Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan
cloth acd paper


MYSTICISM, SACRED AND PROFANE *
AN INQUIRY INTO SOME VARIETIES OF PRAETERNATURAL EXPERIENCE
by R. C. Zaehner


paper
- HENDUISM
_ by B.C. Zachmer
paper
CONCORDA® fF DISCORD


‘THE INTERDEPENDENCE OF PAITHS: THE GiFFPORPD LECTURES ON NATURAL RELIGION
by R. C. Zachner
cloth


ee
37


: aot


AN INTRODUCTION TO ASTA
be Jean Herbert
eloth and paper


CHRISTIAN FAITH UND OTHER FAITHS
THE CHRISTIAN DIALOGUS WITH OT! BR RELIC’ ONS
Second Edition —
by Stephen Neill
loch and paper


‘THE GOD OF THE WIT HES


eo > hy \torgaret A. Waris
Ss paper


Oxford University Press, New York -*


7
