Experimental Researches in Electricity, Vol. 2 (Michael Faraday, 1844)
==========================================================
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/bub_gb_EvYWAAAAYAAJ). Staged for the Tower of Babel library.

RADCL 



The Arthur and Elizabeth 

SCHLESINGER LIBRARY 
on the History of Women 
in America 

RADCLIFFE INSTITUTE 



MRS 



Transferred from 
Hilles Library 



Digitized by Google 



err/ 



EXPERIMENTAL RESEARCHES 

IN 

ELECTRICITY. 



VOL. II. 



EXPERIMENTAL RESEARCHES 



IN 



ELECTRICITY. 



BT 

MICHAEL FARADAY, D.C.L. F.R.S. 

m 

PULLKRIAK PROrSSSOR OP CUBMISTRT IN THE ROTAL INSTITUTION. 

CORRESPONDING MEMBER, ETC. OP THE ROTAL AND IMPERIAL ACADEMIES Of 
SCIENCE OF PARIS^ PETERSBURGH, PLOUENCE, COPENHAGEN, BERLIN, 
GOTTINOENy MODENA, STOCKHOLM, PALERMO, ETC. ETC. 



Bepfinted from the Philosophical Transactions of 1838—1843. 
- With other Electrical Papers 
From the Quarterly Journal of Scibmcr and Philosophical Maoazinb. 



VOL. II. 



LONDON: 
RICHARD AND JOHN EDWARD TAYLOR, 

PBINTBK8 AND PUBU8HBM TO THE UmVBBStTY OF LONDOS, 
RBO MON COURT, VLBBT 8TREBT, 



Digitized by Google 



PRIlfTBD BT UCBABD AND JOHN K. TATLOE, 
mSO LION OOUBTy VUK* CIUBr. 

/5 



PREFACE. 



For reasons stated in the former volume of Experimen- 
tal Researches in Electricity^ I liave been induced to 
gather the remaining Series together, and to add to them 
certain other papers devoted to Electrical research. 

To the prefatory remarks containing these reasons, I 
would recall the recollection of those who may honour 
these Researches with any further attention. I have 
printed the papers in this volume, as before, with little or 
no alteration, except that I have placed the fair and just 
date of each at the top of the pages. 

I regret the presence of those papers which partake 
of a controversial character, but could not help it ; some 
of them contain much new, important and explanatory 
matter. The introduction of matter due to other parties 
than myself, as Nobili and Antinori, or Hare, was es- 
sential to the comprehension of the further develop- 
ment given in the replies. 

I owe many thanks to the Royal Society, to Mr. 
Murray, and to Mr. Taylor, for the great kindness I 
have received in the loan of plates, &c., and in other 
facilities granted to me for the printing of the volume. 



Digitized by Google 



vi 



PREFACE. 



As the Index belongs both to the Experimental Re- 
searches and to the miscellaneous papers, its references 
are of necessitv made in two wavs : those to the Re- 
searches are, as before, to the numbers of the Paragraphs, 
and are easily recognised by the greatness of the 
numbers : the other references are to the pages, and 
being always preceded by p, or pp., are known by that 
mark. 

MICHAEL FARADAY. 



d by Google 



CONTENTS. 



P«r. 

Series XV. § 23» On the character and direction of the electric 

force of the Gyinnotus 1749 

Series XVI. § 24. On the source of power in the voltaic pile 1796 

— % 1. Exciting electrolytes being good con - 

diictora Iftig 

^ 2. Inactive conducting circles containiug 

an electrolyte 1823 

f a. Active circles contajpiDg sulphuret of 

potassium 1877 

Series XVII. 51 exciting chemical force affected 

by temperature 1913 

f 5. The exciting chemical force affected 

by dilution 1969 

% 6. Differences in the order of the metallic 

elements of voltaic circles 2010 

f Active voltaic circles and batteries 

without metallic contact 2017 



f 8. Considerations of the sufficiency of 

! . M 

chemical action 2029 

f 9« Thermo-electric evidence , 2054 

f 10. Improbable nature of the assumed 

contact force 2065 

Series XVIII. § 25. On the electricity evolved by the friction 

of water and steam against other bodies 2075 



Vm CONTENTS. 



On some new electro-magnetical motions, and on the theory of 


Papre 


matrnpf ism 




127 




147, 14.8 






151 






158 






158 








Electro-magnetic current (under the influence of a magnet). . 




162 








Electro-motive force of magnetism (Nobili and Antinori) . . 




1 \ / x* 






169 


Letter to M. Gay-Lussac (on Nobili and Antinori's errors 


in 








179 


Action of magnetism on electro-dynamic spirals (by S. dal Negro), 








200 


Magneto-electric spark (from the first induction) 




204 




206, 


210 




211, 


229 




217, 223 


Magnetic action of manganese at low temperature (Berthier) 




222 






225 






234 




239, 248 




251, 274 


Reply 


262, 274 






277 






279 


A speculation touching electric conduction and the nature 


of 








284 



d by Google 



EXPERIMENTAL RESEARCHES 



ELECTRICITY. 



FIFTEENTH SERIES* 

( 23. Notice qf the character and directum of the electric 

force of the Gynmotua* 

Received November 15, — Read December G, 1S38. 

1740. Wonderful as an the laws and phenomena of 
electricity when made evident to us in inorganic or dead matter* 
their interest can bear scarcely any comparison with that which 
attaches to the saino force when connected with the nervous 
system and with Hfe ; and though the obscurity which for the 
present surrounds the subject may for the time also veil its im- 
portancei every advance in our knowledge of this mighty power 
in relation to inert things* helps to dissipate tiiat obscurity, and 
to set forth more prominently the surpassing interest of this 
veiy high branch of Physical PhUosophy. We are indeed but 
upon the threshold of what we may* without presumption* 
belioTe man is permitted to know of this matter; and the 
many eminent philosophers who have assisted in making this 
subject known have, as is very evident in their writings, felt up 
to the latest moment that such is the case. 

1750. The existence of animals able to give the same concus- 
sion to the living system as the electrical machine, the voltaic 
battery* and the thunder storm* being with their habits made 
Imown to us by Richer* S'Gravesende^Firmin* Walsh* Hum* 
boldt* &c. &c.* it became of growing nipprtanoe to identify the 

▼OL. II. B 



Digitized by Google 



2 



Gymnotus, their electric force* [Series XV* 



living power which theyposseasy with Aat whidi man can 
call into action from inert matter, and hy him named elec- 
tricity (265. 351.). With the Torpedo this has been done to 
perfection, and the direction of the current of force deter- 
mined by the united and successive labours of Walsh ^, Ca- 
vendish*, Galvani^, Gardini*, Humboldt and Gay-Lussac*, 
Todd^, Sir Humphry Davy^ Qr. Davy% Becquerel^ and Mat- 
teucci^^. 

1751. The Gymnotns has also been experimented with for 
the same purpose, and the inyestigations of WiUiamson^^ 
Garden^^ Humboldt Fahlberg^^ and Gui8an'^ have gone 
▼ery far in showing the identity of the electric Ibrce in this 

animal with the electricity excited by ordinary means ; and the 
two latter philosophers have even obtained the spark. 

1752. As an animal 6tted for the further investigation of this 
refined branch of science, the Gymnotus seems, in certain re- 
spects, better adapted than the Torpedo^ especially (as Hum«* 
boldt has remarked) in its power of bearing confinement, and ca- 
pability of being preserved aUve and in health for a long period* 
A Gymnotus has been kept for several months in activity, 
whereas Dr. Davy could not preserve Torpedos above twelve 
or fifteen days ; and Matteucci was not able out of 1 16 such 
fish to keep one living above three days, though every circum- 
stance favourable to their preservation was attended to To 
obtain Gymnoti has therefore been a matter of consequence ; 
and being stimulated, as much as I was honoured, by very 
kind communications from Baron Humboldt, I in the year 
1835 applied to the Colonial Office, where I was promised 

1 Philosophical IVansactiotu, 1773, p. 461. * Ibid. 177^ p. 196. 

^ Aldini's Essai sur la Galvanism, ii. 61. 

4 De Electrici ignis Natura, §. 71. Mantua, 1792. 

^ Annales de Chimie, xiv. 15. 

« Philosophical Transactions, 1816, p. 120. ' IWd. 1829^ p. 15. 

8 Ibid. 1832, p. 259 ; and 1834, p. 631. 

9 Trait6 de l'E'lectricit6, iv. 264. 
Biblioth^ue Universelle, 1837, tom.xii. 163. 

" Philosophical Transactions, 1775, p. 04. « Ibid. 1775, p. 102. 

Penonal Nanativc, chap. xvii. 
M Swedith TiaiiaaetioDi, 1801, pp. 122. 156. 
" 0e Gymnoto Eleetrico. Tubingen, 1819. 
» Bibliolfadqiie Uiuv«neUe« 1837, Jdl. p. 174. 



Digitized by Google 



Nov. 1838.] 



Hou> to keep them. 



8 



every assistance m procaring some of ihese fisheSf and con- 
tinnally expect to Teeei?e either news of them or the animals 

themselves. 

1753. Since that time Sir Everard Home has also moved a 
friend to send some Gymnoti over, which are to be consigned 
to His Royal Highness our late President ; and other gentle- 
men are also engaged in the same work. This spirit induces 
me to insert in the present communication that part of the letter 
from Baron Humboldt which I received as an answer to my 
inquiry of how they were best to be conveyed across ihe At* 
lantic. He says, The Gynmotns, which is common in the 
Llanos de Caracas (near Calabozo), in all the small rivers which 
flow into the Orinoco, in English, French or Dutch Guiana, is 
not of difficult transportation. We lost them so soon at Paris 
because tliey were too much fatigued (by experiments) im- 
mediately after their arrival. MM. Norderling and Fahlberg 
retained them aliTC at Paris above four months. I would ad-*, 
▼be that they be transported from Surinam (from Essequibo^ 
Demerara, Qiyenne) in summer^ for the Glymnotus in its na- 
tive country lives in water of ^ centigrade (or Tl? Fahr.)* 
Some are five feet in height, but I would advise that sudi as 
are about twenty-seven or twenty-eight inches in length be 
chosen. Their power varies with their food, and their state of 
rest. Having but a small stomach they eat little and often, 
their food being cooked meat, not salted ^ small fish, or even 
bread. Trial should be made of their strength and the fit kind 
of nourishment before they are shipped, and those fish only 
selected already accustomed to theur prison. I retained them 
in a box or trough about four feet long, and sixteen inches 
wide and deep. The water must be fresht and be changed 
every three or four days : the fish must not be prevented from 
coming to the surface, for they like to swallow air. A net 
should be put over and round the trough, for the Gymnotus 
often springs out of the water. These are all the directions 
that I can give you. It is, however, important that the animal 
should not be tormented or futigued, for it becomes exhausted 
by frequent electric explosions. Several Gymnoti may be re- 
tained in the same trough." 

1754. A Gymnotus has lately been brought to thb country 
by Mr* Portert and purchased by the proprietors of the Gallery 



Digitized by Google 



4 



Eke§He/aree of the Gjftmunhu. [Skmes XY. 



in Adelaide Street : they immediately most liberally offered me 
tlie liberty of experimenting with the fish for acientific purpoaea ; 
they p1a<^ it for the time exclusively at my disposal, that (in 
accordance with Humboldt's directions (175J.)) its powers might 
not be impaired ; only desiring me to have a regard for its life 
and health. I was not slow to take advantage of their wish to 
forward the interests of science, and with many thanks ac- 
cepted their offer. With this Gymnotus, having the kind aa- 
aistance of Mr. Bradley of the Gallery, Mr. Gassiot, and occa- 
sionally other gentlemen, aa Profeaaora Daniell, Owen and 
Wheatatone, I have obtained every proof of the identity of ita 
power with common electricity (265. 351 , &c.). All of iheae had 
been obtained before with the Torpedo (1750.), and some, aa 
the shock, circuit, and spark (1751.), with the Gymnotus; 
but still I think a brief account of the results will be acceptable 
to the Royal Society, and I give them as necessary prelimi- 
nary experiments to the investigations which we may hope to 
institute when the expected supply of animals arrives (1752.). 

1755. The fish is forty inches long. It was caught about 
March 1838 ; was brought to the Gallery on the 15th of Au« 
gust« but did not feed from the time of its capture up to the 
19th of October. From the ^h of August Mr. Bradley 
nightly put some blood into the water, which was changed for 
fresh water next morning, and in this way the animal perhaps 
obtained some nourishment. On the 19th of October it killed 
and eat four small fish ; since then the blood has been discon- 
tinued, and the animal has been improving ever since, con- 
suming upon an average one fish daily ^ 

1756. 1 first experimented with it on the drd of September^ 
when it was apparently languid, but gave strong shocks when the 
handa were favourably disposed on the body (1760. 1773, &c.). 
The experiments were made on four different days, allowing 
periods of rest from a month to a week between each. His 
health seemed to improve continually, and it was during this 
period, between the third and fourth days of experiment, that 
he began to eat. 

1757. Beside the hands two kinda of collectors were used. 
The one sort consisted each of a copper rod fifteen inches long, 
having a copper diac one inch and a half in diameter braaed to 

^ The fish eaten were gudgeons, carp, and perch* 



Digitized by Google 



Nov. 1838.3 Collectors — shock — galvanometer. 



5 



one extremity, and a copper cylinder to serre as a handle, mfSk 
large contact to the hand, fixed to the other, the rod from the 
disc upwards being well covered with a thick caoutchouc tube 
to insulate that part from the water. By these the states of 
particular parts of the iish whilst in the water could be ascer<* 
tained. 

1758. The other kind of collectors were intended to meet 
the difficulty presented hj the complete inunersion of the fish in 
water ; for even when obtaining the spark itself I did not think 
myself justified in asking for the removal of the ammal into air* 
A plate of copper eight inches long by two inches and a half 
wide, was bent into a saddle shape, that it might pass over the 
fish, and inclose a certain extent of the back and sides, and a 
thick copper wire was brazed to it, to convey the electric force 
to the experimental apparatus ; a jacket of sheet caoutchouc 
was put over the saddle, the edges projecting at the bottom 
and the ends ; the ends were made to converge so as to fit in 
some degree the body of the fish, and the bottom edges were 
made to spring against any horisontal sur&ce on which the 
saddles were placed. The part of the wire liable to be in the 
water was covered with caontchonc. 

1759. These conductors being put over the fish, collected 
power sufficient to produce many electric effects ; but when, 
as in obtaining the spark, every possible advantage was need- 
ful, then glass plates were placed at the bottom of the water, 
and the fish being over them, the conductors were put over it 
until the lower caoutchouc edges rested on the glass, so that 
the part of the animal within the caoutchouc was thus almost 
as well msulated as if the Gymnotus had been in the air. 

i760« Skaek. — The shock of this animal was very powerful 
when the hands were placed in a favourable position, i. e. one 
on the body near the head, and the other near the tail; 
the nearer the hands were together within certain Hmits the 
less powerful was the shock. The disc conductors (1757.) 
conveyed the shock very well when the hands were wetted and 
applied in close contact with the cylindrical handles; but 
scarcely at all if the handles were held in the dry hands in an 
ordinary way. 

1761. Gahmtomeier.^VBmg the saddle conductors (1758.). 
applied to the anterior and posterior parts of the Gymnotus, a 



Digitized by Google 



6 Gfpmioitis ekeirk Uf mag nei dee omposUum, {Qnas XV. 

galranometer was readily aflbcted. It was not partieulaily de- 
Hcate; for rinc and platina plates on the upper and lower sur- 
face of the tongue did not cause a pennanent deflection of more 

than 25°; yet when the fish gave a powerful discharge the 
deflection was as much as 30^, and in one case even 40°. The 
deflection was constantly in a given direction, the electric 
current heing always from the anterior parts of the animal 
through th^ galvanometer wire to the posterior parts. The 
former were tiierefine for the time externally positive^ and the 
Utter negative. 

17&t. MaMng a magnet* — When a litde helix eontaming 
twenty-two feet of silked wire wound on a quill was put into 
the circuit, and an annealed steel needle placed in the helix, 
the needle became a magnet, and the direction of its polarity 
in every case indicated a current from the anterior to the 
posterior parts of the Gymnotus through the conductors used. 

1763. Chemical decomposiUon* — ^Polar decomposition of a 
solution of iodide of potassium was easily obtained. Three or 
four folds of paper moistened in the solution were placed 
between a platina plate and the end of a wire also df platinai 
these being respectiyely connected with the two saddle con- 
ductors (1758.). Whenever the wire was in conjunction with 
the conductor at the fore part of the Gymnotus, iodine ap- 
peared at its extremity ; but when connected with the other 
conductor, none was evolved at the place on the paper where 
it before appeared. So that here again the direction of the 
current proved to be the same as that given by the former 
tests. 

1764. By this test I compared the middle part of the fish 
witih other portions before and behind it^ and found that the 
coQ^ttctor A, which being applied to the middle was negative 
to the conductor B applied to the anterior parts, was, on the 
contrary, positive to it when B was appUed to places near the 
tail. So that within certain limits the condition of the fish ex- 
ternally at the time of the shock appears to be such, that any 
given part is negative to other parts anterior to it, and positive 
to such as are behind it. 

1766. Mvolution of heat^Vmag a Harris's thermo-electro- 
meter belonging to Mr. Gassiot, we thought we were able in one 
caiei namely^ ^at when the deflection of the galvanometer was 



Digitized by Google 



Nov. 1888.] Spar k ^tmulioM eomt efflseii. 



40° (1 761 Of to obflerre a feeble etevation of temperature. I was 
not observhig the inBtnimeiit myself^ and one of those who at 
first beliered they saw the eflfect now doubts the result^ 

1766. iS]|Miri(.— The electric spark was obtauied thus. A good 

magneto-electric coil, with a core of soft iron wire, had one ex- 
tremity made fast to the end of one of the saddle collectors 
(1758.), and the other fixed to a new steel file; another file 
was made fast to the end of the other collector. One person 
then rubbed the point of one of these files over the face of the 
other, whilst another person put the collector?; over the fish, 
and ^Kleayoured to excite it to action* By the friction of the 
files contact was made and broken very firequently; and the 
object was to cateh the moment of the current through the 
wire and helix, and by breaking contact during the current to 
make the electricity sensible as a spark. 

1767. The spark was obtained four times, and nearly all who 
were present saw it. That it was not due to the mere attri- 
tion of the two piles was shown by its not occurring when the 
files were rubbed together, independently of the animal. Since 
then I have substituted for the lower file a revolving steel 
platei cut file fashion on its face, and for the upper file wires 
of irout copper and sIlTer, with all of which the spark was ob- 
tained*. 

1768. Such were the general electric phenomena obtained 
from this Gymnotus whilst living and active in his native ele- 
ment. On several occasions many of them were obtained to- 
gether ; thus a magnet was made, the galvanometer deflected, 
and perhaps a wire heated^ by one single discharge of the 
electric force of the animal. 

1769. I think a few further but brief details of experiments 
relating to the quantity and disposition of the electricity in and 
about this wonderfiil animal will not be out of place in this 
short account of its powers. 

1770. When the shock is strong, it is like that of a large 

* In more recent experiments of the same kind we could not obtain the 
^ect. 

' At a later meeting, at which attempts were made to cause the attraction 
of gold leaves, the spark was obtained direetly between fixed surfaces, the in- 
doctiTe coil (17G6.) being removed, and only short wires (by comparison) em- 
ployed. 



Digitized by Google 



Leyden battery charged to a low degree^ or that of a good 
voltaic battery of perhaps one hundred op more pair of platea^ 
of which the eirciiit it completed for a moment only. I endea^ 
▼oured to form lome idea of the quamtiiy of electricity by ooih 
necting a large Leyden battery (291.) with two brats ballt, 
above three inchet hi diameter^ placed teven inchet apart in a 
tub of water, so that they might represent the parts of the 
Gymnotus to which the collectors had been applied ; but to 
lower the intensity of the discharge, eight inches in length of 
six-fold thick wetted string were interposed elsewhere in the 
circuit, this being found necessary to prevent the easy occur- 
rence of the spark at the endt of the collectors (1758.), when 
they were applied in the water, near -to the balls, as they had 
becm before to the fith* Being thut arranged* when the battery 
was strongly charged and discharged, and the hands put into 
the water near the ballsy a shock was felt, much resembfing 
that from the fith ; and though the experiments have no pre- 
tension to accuracy, yet as the tension could be in some degree 
imitated by reference to the more or less ready production of a 
spark, and after that the shock be used to indicate whether the 
quantity was about the same, I think we may conclude that a 
single medium discharge of the fish is at least equal to the 
electricity of a Leyden battery of fifteen jars, containiiig MOO 
square inches of glass coated on both sides, charged to its 
highest degree (^L)« This conclusion respecting the great 
quantity of electricity in a single Gymnotus shock, is in perfect 
accordance with the degree of deflection which it can produce 
in a galvanometer needle (367. 8G0. 1761.), and also with the 
amount of chemical decomposition pi'oduced (374, 860. 1763.) 
in the electrolyzing experiments. 

1771* Great as is the force in a single discharge, the Gym- 
notus, as Humboldt describes, and as I have frequently expe* 
rienced, gives a double and even a triple shock ; and this oa» 
pability of immediately repeating the efl^t with scarcely a 
sensible interval of time, is very important in the considerations 
which must arise hereafter respecting the origin and excite- 
ment of the power in the animal. Walsh, Humboldt, Ghiy« 
Lussac, and Matteucci have remarked the same thing of the 
Torpedo, but in a far more striking degree. 

177^. As, at the moment when the iisli wills the shockj the 



Digitized by Google 



Not* 1888.] Dhreelkm qftke eurreni m ike water. 



9 



anterior jmrts are pontiye and the poiterior parts negative, itmay 
be concluded that there ia a current from the former to the latter 
through every part of the water which surrounds the animal, 
to a considerable distance from its body. The shock which is 

felt, therefore, when the hands are in the most favourable po- 
sition, is the effect of a very small portion only of the electri- 
city which the animal discliarges at the moment, by far the 
largest portion passing through the surrounding water. This 
enormous external current must be accompanied by some effect 
within the fish eqtUvalent to a current, the direction of which 
b from the tail towards the head, and equal to the sum of M 
ikeee external foreee. Whether the process of evolving or e3C>* 
citing the electricity within the. fish includes the production of 
this internal current (which need not of necessity be as quick 
and momentary as the external one), we cannot at present say ; 
but at the time of the shock the animal does not apparently feel 
the electric sensation which he causes in those around him. 

1773. By the help of the accompanying diagram 1 will state 
a few experimental results which illustrate the current around 
the fish, and show the cause of the difierence in character of 
the shock occasioned by the various ways in which the person 
is connected with the animal, or his position altered with re- 
spect to it. The large circle represents the tub in which the 
animal is confined; its diameter is forty-six inches, and the 
depth of water in it three inches and a half; it is supported on 
dry wooden legs. The figures represent the places where the 
hands or the disc conductors (1757.) were applied, and where 
they are close to the figure of the animal, it implies that con- 
tact with the fish was made. I will designate different persons 
by A, By C, &C.9 A being the person who excited the fish to 
action. 

1774. When one hand was in the water the shook was fidt 
in that hand only, whatever part of the fish it was applied to ; 
it vras not very strong, and was only in the part immersed in 

the water. When the hand and part of the arm was in, the 
shock was felt in all the parts immersed. 

1775. When both hands were in the water at the same part 
of the fish, still the shock was comparatively weak, and only in 
the parts immersed. If the hands were on opposite sides, as at 
1, ^y or at 3, 4, or ^ 6, or if one was above and the other be- 



Digitized by Google 



10 G^nmohu eketrie eurreni. [Sjsribs XV. 

low at the same part> the effect was the iame« When the disc 
collectors weze used in these positions no eflfect was felt by the 




person holding them (and this corresponds with the observa- 
tion of Gay-Lussac on Torpedos^), whilst other persons, with 
Jioth hands in at a distance from the fisbi felt considerable 
« shocks. 

1776. When both hands or the disc collectors were applied at 
places separated by a part of the length of the animal^ as at 1> 
or 4, 6, or 3, 6, then strong shocks extending up the arms, and 
even to the breast of the experimenter, occurred, though another 

person witii a single hand in at any of these places, felt compara- 
tively little. The shock could be obtained at parts very near 

^ Annaiet de Chinuei av. p. 18. 



Digitized by Google 



Nor. 1838.] lU dkeeHan m the water. 



11 



the tail» as at 8, 9. I think it was atrongett at about 1 and 8. 
Am lihe hands were brought nearer together the efifoct dim^ 
nuhed* until bdng in the same cross pUme^ it was* as before 
described, only sensible in the parts immersed (1775.). 

1777. B placed his hands at 10, 11, at least four inches 
from the fish, whilst A touched the animal with a glass rod to 
excite it to action ; B quickly received a powerful shock. In 
another experiment of a similar kind, as respects the non-ne- 
cessity of touching the fish, several persons received shocks 
independently of each other ; thus A was at 4, 6 ; B at 10^ 11 ; 
C at I69 17 ; and D at 18, 19 ; all were shocked at once^ A 
and B very strongly^ C and D feebly. It is very useful^ whikt 
es^perimentmg with the galvanometer or other instrumental ar- 
rangements, for one person to keep his hands in the water at a 
moderate distance from the animal, that he may know and give 
information when a discharge has taken place. 

1778. When B had both hands at 10, 11, or at 14, 15, whilst 
A had but one hand at 1, or 3, or 6, the former felt a strong 
shock, whilst the latter had but a weak one, though in contact 
with the fish. Or if A had both hands in at I9 ^9 or 3« 4, or 
5> 6« the effect was the same. 

1779. If A had the hands at 3» 5, B at 14, 15| and C at 16, 
17» A received the mosi powerful shock, B the next powerfidl, 
and C the feeblest. 

1780. When A excited the Gymnotus by his hands at 8, 9, 
whilst B was at 10, 1 1 , the latter had a much stronger shock than 
the former, though the former touched and excited the animal. 

1781. A excited the fish by one hand at 3, whilst B had 
both Imnds at 10, 11 (or along), and C had the hands at 1^, 13 
(or across) ; A had the pricking shock in the immersed hand only 
(1774.) ; B had a strong shock up the arms ; C felt but a slight 
e£fect in the immersed parts. 

178S. The experiments I have just described are of such a 
nature as to require many repetitions before the general results 
drawn from them can be considered as estabhshcd ; nor do I 
pretend to say that they are anything more than indications of 
the direction of the force. It is not at all impossible that the 
fish may have the power of throwing each of its four electric 
organs separately into action, and so to a certain degree direct 
the shocki i. e. he may have the capability of causing the elec- 



Digitized by Google 



12 Eleetricity of the GynnwHu In ike water. [Seem XV. 



trie current to emanate from one sidei and at the same time 
bring the other side of hb body into such a condition^ that It 
•hall be as a non-conductor in that direction. But I think the 
appearances and results are such as to forbid the supposition^ 

that he has any control over the direction of the currents after 
they have entered the fluid and substances around him, 

178i^. The statements also have reference to the fish when 
in a straight form ; if it assume a bent shape^ then the lines of 
force around it vary in their intensity in a manner that may be 
anticipated theoretically. Thus if the hands were applied at 
1« 7y a feebler shock in the arms would be expected if the ani^ 
mal were curved with that side inwards, thanif it werestraight, 
because the distance between the parts would be diminished, 
and the intervening water therefore conduct more of the force. 
But with respect to the parts immersed , or to animals, as fish 
ffi the W€Uer between 1 and 7, they would be more powerfully. 
Instead of less powerfully, shocked. 

1784. It is evident from all the experiments, as well as from 
simple considerations, that all the water and all the conducting 
matter around the fish through which a discharge circuit can 
in any way be completed, is filled at the moment with circula- 
ting electric power ; and this state might be easily represented 
generally in a diagram by drawing the lines of inductive action 
(1^1. ISM, upon it : In the case of a Grymnotus, sur- 
rounded equally in all directions by water, ti&ese would resem- 
ble generally, in disposition, the magnetic curves of a magnet, 
having the same straight or curved shape as the animal, i. e. 
provided he, in such cases, employed, as may be expected, his 
four electric organs at once. 



1785. This Gymnotus can stun and kill fish which are in 

very various positions to its own body ; but on one day when 
1 saw it eat, its action seemed to me to be peculiar. A live fish 
about five inches in length, caught not half a minute before, 
was dropped into the tub. The Gymnotus instantly turned 
round in such a manner as to form a coil inclosing the fish, the 
latter representing a diameter across It ; a shock passed, and 
there In an Instant was the fish stnick motionless, as if by $ght« 



Digitized by Google 



Not. 18S8.] RdtOhmoftheGytmahuioUiprey. IS 

magf in the midst of the waten, its ude floatmg to the light 
The GynuiotUB made a turn or two to look for its prey^ which 
having found he holted» and then went searching about for 
more. A second smaller fish was given him, which being hurt 

in the conveyance, showed but little signs of life, and this he 
swallowed at once, apparently without shocking it. The coil- 
ing of the Gymnotus round its prey had, in this case, every 
appearance of being intentional on its part^ to increase the force 
of the shocki and the action is evidently exceedingly well suited 
for that purpose (1783.)} being in full accordance with the 
well-known laws of the discharge of currents in masses of con- 
ducting matter; and though the fish may not always put this 
artifice in practice, it is very probable he is aware of its advan* 
tage, and may resort to it in cases of need. 

1786. Living as this animal does in tlie midst of such a good 
conductor as water, the first thoughts are thoughts of surprise 
that it can sensibly electrify anything, but a little consideration 
soon makes one conscious of many points of great beauty, illus- 
trating the wisdom of the whole arrangement. Thus the very 
conducting power which the water has ; that which it gives to 
the moistened skin of the fish or animal to be struck ; the ex- 
tent of surface by which the fish and the water conducting the 
charge to it ara in contact ; all conduce to &vour and increase 
the shock upon the doomed animal, and are in the most perfect 
contrast with the inefficient state of things which would exist 
if the Gymnotus and the fish were surrounded by air; and at 
the same time that the power is one of low intensity, so tliat a 
dry skin wards it oti^ though a moist one conducts it (1760.) | 
so is it one of great quantity (1770.), that though the surround- 
ing water does conduct away much, enough to produce a full 
efiect may take its course through the body of the fish that is 
to be caught for food, or the enemy that is to be conquered* 

1787. Another remarkable result of the relation of the Gym- 
notus and its prey to the medium around them is, that the 
larger the fish to be killed or stunned, the greater will be the 
shock to which it is subject, though the Gymnotus may exert 
only an equal power ; lor the large fish has passing through its 
body those currents of electricity, which, in the case of a smaller 
one, would have been conveyed harmless by the water at its sides* 

1788. The Gymnotus appears to be sensible when he has 



Digitized by Google 



14 Eledra^nerwmi eandUhn qfike Ctynuwku, [Seribs XV* 

shocked an animali being made conscious of it, probably^ by 
the meehameal mpuUe ht receiyes, caused by the spasms into 
which it is tlirown. When I touched hun with my hands, he 
gave me shock after shock ; but when I touched him with glass 

rods, or the insulated conductors, he gave one or two shocks, 
felt by others having their hands in at a distance, but then 
ceased to exert the influence, as if made aware it had not the 
desired effect. Again, when he has been touched with the 
conductors several times, for experiments on the galvanometer 
or other apparatus, and appears to be languid or indifferent, 
and not willing to give shocks, yet being touched by the hands, 
they, by convukive motion, have informed him that a sensitive 
thing was present, and he has quickly shown his power and 
his willingness to astonish die experimenter. 



1789. It has been remarked by Geoffrey St. Hilaire, tliat 
the electric organs of the Torpedo, Gymnotus, and similar 
fishes, cannot be considered as essentially connected with those 
which are of high and direct importance to the life of the ani- 
mal, but to belong rather to the common teguments ; and it has 
also been found that such Torpedos as have been deprived of 
the use of their peculiar organs, have continued the functions 
of life quite as well as those in which they were allowed to re- 
main. These, with other considerations, lead me to look at 
these parts with a hope that they may upon close investigation 
prove to be a species of natural apparatus, by means of which 
we may apply the principles of action and reaction in the in- 
vestigation of the nature of the nervous it^uence. 

1790. The anatomical relation of the nervous system to the 
electric organ; the evident exhaustion of the nervous energy 
during the productionof electricity in that organ; the apparently 
equivalent production of electricity in proportion to the quan- 
tity of nervous force consumed ; the constant direction of the 
current produced, with its relation to what we may believe to 
be an equally constant direction of the nervous energy thrown 
into action at the same time ; all induce me to believe, that it 
is not impossible but that, on passing electricity per force 
through the organ, a reaction back upon the nervous system 
belonging to it might take place, and that a lestoiatioD, to a 



Digitized by Google 



Nov. 1838.] Electro-nervous actum and reaction. 15 

greater or snaller degree^ of that wlucb the anhnal expends m 

the act of exciting a current, might perhaps be effected. We 
have the analogy in relation to heat and magnetism. Seeheck 
taught us how to commute heat into electricity ; and Peltier 
has more lately given us the strict converse of this, and shown 
us how to convert the electricity into heat, including both its 
relation of hot and cold. Oersted showed how we were to 
convert electric into magnetic forces, and I had the delight of 
adding the other member of the iiill relation^ by reacting bade 
again and converting magnetic into electric forces* So perhaps 
in these organs^ where nature has provided the apparatus by 
means of which the animal can exert and convert nervous into 
electric force, we may be able, possessing in that point of view 
a power fur beyond that of the fish itself, to reconvert the 
electric into the nervous force. 

1791. This may seem to some a very wild notion^ as assu- 
ming that the nervous power is in some degree analogous to 
such powers as heati electricity« and magnetism. I am only 
assuming it> however, as a reason for making certain experi- 
ments, which, according as 'they give positive or negative re- 
sults, will regulate further expectation. And with respect to 
the nature of nervous power, that exertion of it which is con- 
veyed along the nerves to the various organs which they excite 
into action, is not the direct principle of life ; and therefore I 
see no natural reason why we should not be allowed in certain 
cases to determine as well as observe its course. Many philo- 
sophers think the power is electricity. Priestley put forth this 
Tiew in 1774 in a very striking and distinct form, both as re- 
gards ordmary anunab and those which are electric, like the 
Torpedo^ Dr. Wilson Philip considers that the agent in 
certain nerves is electricity modified by vital action^. Mat- 

> Fkiettlqr cm Air, V€L L p. 277. Editkm of 1774. 

* X>r* Wibon Philip It of opinioii, tlie nerves wliicli eidte the mnsdM. 
and efibct the cbemical changes of the vital functions, operate by the electric 
power supplied by the brain and spinal marrow, in its effects, modified fay the 
vital powers of the living animal; because he found, as he informs me, as early 
as 1815, that while the vital powers remaisi all these functions can be aa well 
performed by voltaic electricity after the removal of tlie nervous influence, aa 
by that influence itself; and in the end of that year he presented a paper to the 
Royal Society, which was read at one of their mectingSy giviog au account of 
the experiments on which this position was founded. 



Digitized by Google 



16 PropoiedMpermeiiUomikeO^mmiusne^ XV. 

teucci thinks that the nervoui fluid or energy, in the nerves 
belonging to the electric organ at least, is electricity ^ MM* 
Prerost and Dumas are of opinion that deetridty moves in the 
nerves belonging to the muscles ; and FMvost adduces a 
beautiful experiment, in which steel was magnetiaed, in proof 
of this view; which, if it should be confirmed by further ob- 
servation and by other philosophers, is of the utmost conse- 
quence to the progress of this higli branch of knowledge*. 
Now though I am not as yet convinced by the facts that the 
nervous fluid is only electricityt still I think that the agent in 
the nervous system may be an inorganic force ; and if there be 
reasons for supposing that magnetism is a higher relation of 
force than electricity (1664 1731. 17d4)» so it may well be 
imagined that the nervous power may be of a still more exalted 
character, and yet within llie reach of experiment. 

' 1792. The kind of experiment I am bold enough to suggest 
is as follows. If a Gymnotus or Torpedo has been fatigued 
by frequent exertion of the electric organs, would the sending 
of currents of similar force to those he emits, or of other de- 
grees of force, either continuously or intermittingly in the same 
direction as those he sends forth, restore him his powers and 
strength more rapidly than if he were left to his natural repose ? 

1793. Would sending currents through in the contraiy di- 
rection eadiaust the anunal rapidly ? There is, I thmk, reason 
to believe the Torpedo (and perhaps the Gymnotus) is not 
much disturbed or excited by electric currents sent only 
through tlie electric organ ; so that these experiments do not 
appear very difficult to make. 

1794. The disposition of the organs in the Torpedo suggest 
Still further experiments on the same principle. Thus when a 
current is sent in the natural direction, i. c. from below upwards 
through the organ on one side of the fish, will it excite the 
organ on the other side into action ? or if sent through in the 
contrary direction, idll it produce the same or any effect on 
that organ? Will it do so if the nerves proceeding to the 
organ or organs be tied ? and will it do so after the animal has 
been so far exhausted by previous shocks as to be unable to 

* Biblioth^quc Universelle, 1837, torn. xii. 192. 

* Ibid, 1837, xii. 202 ; xiv. 200. 



Digitized by Google 



Nov. 1838.] JEHeeirieUy o/th§ itymmius. 



17 



throw the organ into action in any, olr in a similar^ degree of 
his own will ? 

1795. Such are lome of the experiments which the confor- 
mation and relation of the electric organs of these fishes sug- 
gest, as heing rational in their performance, and promising in 
anticipation. Others n:ay not think of them as I do ; but I 
can only say for myself, that were the means in my power, they 
are the very first that I would make. 

Royal Institution, 
November 9th, 1838. 



TOL* II. 



C 



Digitized by Google 



18 Source of j^otoer in the voUmepUe* [Ssribb XVI 



SIXTEENTH SERIES. 

( 24. On the source of power tfi the voUaie pile. % L Exd^ 
ting ekctrdlytes, ^c, being conductors of thermo and feeble 
currents, ^ ii. Inactive conducting circles cot^ahUng an 

electrolytic fluid. ^ iii. Active circles excited by solution of 
sulphuret ofjfiotassium, S^c, 

Received Janiiaxy — ^Read Febniaiy 6, 1840. 
$ ^ On the source of power in the voltaic pile. 

1796. What is the source of power in a voltaic pile ? This 
question is at present of the utmost importance in the theory 
and to the development of electrical science. The opimons 
held respecting it are yarious ; but by far the moat important 
are the two which respectively find the source of power in 
contact^ and in chemical force. The question between them 
touches the first principles of electrical action ; for the opinions 
are in such contrast, that two men respectively adopting them 
are thenceforward constrained to differ, in every point, re- 
specting the probable and intimate nature of the agent or force 
on which all the phenomena of the voltaic pile depend. 

1797. The theory of contact is the theory of Volta, the 
great discoverer of the voltaic pile itself, and it has been bus* 
tained since his day by a host of philosophers, amongst whom, 
in recent times, rank such men as Pfaff, Marianini, Fechner, 
Zamboni, Matteucci, Karsten, Bouchardat, and as to the ex* 
citement of the power, even Davy ; all bright stars in the ex- 
alted regions of science. The theory of chemical action was 
first advanced by Fabroni^ Wollaston^, and Parrot^, and has 
been more or less developed since by CErsted, Becquerel, De la 
Rive, Ritchie, Pouillet, Schcenbein, and many others, amongst 
whom Becquerel ought to be distmguished as having contri* 

» A.D. 1792, 17D9. Becquercl's Trait6 de rE'lcctricit6, i. pp. 81—91, and 
Nicbolsoirs Quarto Journal, iii. 308. iv. 120, or Journal de Physi(^ue, vi. 34S. 
' AJ>. 1801. Philosophical l^ansactions, 1801, p. 427. 
* AJ). 1801. AnnalM de Chimie, 1829, xUl. 45 ; ISSl, zlvL 361. 



Digitized by Google 



Jan« 1840.] Is it contact or chemic€U action I 



19 



bated, from the first, a continually increasing mass of the 
strongest experimental evidence in proof that chemical action 
always evolves electricity* ; and De la Rive should be named 
as most clear and constant in hb newu, and most zealous in his 
production of facts and arguments, from the year 18^ to the 
pment time'. 

1798. Examinmg this question by the results of definite 
electro-chemical action, I felt constrained to take part with 
those who believed the origin of voltaic power to consist in 
chemical action alone (875, 965.), and ventured a paper on it 

* in April 1834^ (875, &c.), which obtained the especial notice 
of Marianini'*. The rank of this philosopher, the observation 
of Fechner^, and the consciousness that over the greater part 
of Italy and Germany the contact theory still prevailed, have 
induced me to re-examine the question most carefully. I 
wished not merely to escape from error, but was anxious to 
convince myself of the truth of the contact theory; for it was 
evident that if contact electromotive force had any existence, 
it must be a power not merely unlike every other natural 
power as to the phenomena it could produce, but also in the 
far higher points of limitation, definite force, and finite pro- 
duction (2065.). 

1799. I venture to hope that the experimental results and argu* 
ments which have been thus gathered may be usefid to science. 
I fear the detail will be tedious, but that is a necessary conse- 
quence of the state of the suliject. The contact theory has long 
had possession of men's minds, is sustamed by a great weight 
of authority, and for years had almost undisputed sway in some 
parts of Europe. If it be an error, it can only be rooted out 
by a great amount of forcible experimental evidence ; a fact 
sufficiently clear to my mind by the circumstance, that De la 
Rive's papers have not already convinced the workers upon 

> A.D. 1824, &c Annalea de Chimie, 1824, xzv. 405 ; 1827, xxxr. 113; 
1831^ zIvL 265, 276, 837; ilvii. 113; idix. 131. 

> lUd. 1828, zzxviL 225; xxzix. 297; 1886, fadL 147: or M^mdreBde 
Oto^f^ 1829, iv. 285; 1882, vL 149; 1835, viL 

* Philosophical Transactions, 1834, p. 425. 

* Memorie della Societii Italiana in Modena, 1837, xxi. p. 205. 

* Philosophical Magazine, 1838, xiii. 205 ; or Poggendorfs Annalen, zliu 
p. 481. Fechner refers also to Pfaff*s reply to my pspor. I novel? oesse to 
Kgret that the Geiman is a sealed language to me. 

c2 



Digitized by Google 



20 



Various opinions of coiUaei'. [Series XVI. 



thii subject Hence the reason why I have ihought it needinl 
to add my farther testimony to his and that of others, entering 
hito detail and multiplying facts in a proportion far beyond any 

which would have been required for the proof and promulga- 
tion of a new scientific truth (,^017.). In so doing I may occa- 
sionally be only enlarging, yet then I hope strengthening! what 
others, and especially De la Rive, have done* 



1800. It will tend to clear the questiony if the yarious views 
of contact are first stated. Volta's theory iS| that the simple 
contact of conducting bodies causes electricity to be developed 

at the point of contact without any change in nature of the 
bodies themselves ; and that though such conductors as water 
and aqueous fluids have this property, yet the degree in which 
they possess it is unworthy of consideration in comparison with 
the degree to which it rises amongst the metals ^ The present 
views of the Italian and German contact philosophers are, I 
bdleve, generally the same, except that occasionally more im- 
portance is attached to the contact of the imperfect conductors 
with the metals. Thus Zamboni (in 1837) considers the metallic 
contact as the most powerful source of electricity, and not that 
of the metals with the fluids^; but Karsten, holding the con- 
tact theory, transfers the electromotive force to the contact of 
the fluids with the solid conductors^. Marianini holds the same 
view of the principle of contact, with this addition, that actual 
contact is not required to the exertion of the exciting force, 
but that the two approsdmated dissimilar conductors may affect 
each other's state, when separated by sensible intervals of the 
y^^^i^dth of a line and more, air Intervening*. 

1801. De la Rive, on the contrary, contends ibr simple and 
strict chemical action, and, as far as lam aware, admits of no cur- 
rent in the voltaic pile that is not conjoined with and dependent 
upon a complete chemical effect. That admirable electrician 
Becquerel, though expressing himself with great caution, seems 
to admit the possibility of chemical attractions being able to 

^ Annales de Chimie, 1802, xl. p. 225. 

* BMoibdqae UniTaseUe, 183C, t. 387; 1837, viil 189. 
' L'lnstitat^ No. 150. 

* Mem. delh Soc. Ital. in Modena, 1837, sd. 232—237. 



Digitized by Google 



Jan. 1840.] Points assumed by the content theory. 91 

produce electrical c u w en t g wben they are not strong enough 

to overcome the force of cohesion, and so terminate in combi- 
nation ^ Schccnbein states that a current may be produced 
by a tendency to chemical action, i. e. that substances which 
have a tendency, to unite chemically may produce a current, 
though that tendency i£ not followed up by the actual combi- 
nation of the substances ^ In these cases the assigned force 
becomes the same as the contact of Yoltai inasmuch as the 
acting matters are not altered whilst produdng the current. 
DttTy*8 opinion was, that contact like that of Volta excited the 
current or was the cause of it, but that chemical changes sup- 
plied the current. For myself I am at present of the opinion 
which De la Rive holds, and do not think that, in the voltaic 
pile, mere contact does anything in the excitation of the cur- 
rent, except as it is preparatory to» and ends iu« complete che- 
mical action (1741. 1745.). 

180^ Thus the views of contact vary^ and it may be said 
that ihey pass gradually from one to another, even to the ex- 
tent of induding chemi^ action : but the two extremes appear 
to me irrecondjable in principle under any shape ; they are as 
follows. The contact theory assumes, that when two different 
bodies being conductors of electricity are in contact, there is a 
force at the point of contact by which one of the bodies gives 
a part of its natural portion of t lectricty to the other body, 
which the latter takes in addition to its own natural portion ; 
that, though the touching points have thus respectively given 
and taken electricity, they cannot retain the charge which their 
contact has caused, but discharge their electricities to the 
masses respectively behind them (£067.) : that the force which, 
at the point of contact, induces the particles to assume a new 
state, cannot enable them to keep that state (2069.) : that all 
this happens without any permanent alteration of the parts 
that are in contact, and has no reference to their chemical 
forces (2065. ^69.). 

1803. The chemical theory assumes, that at the place of 
action, the particles which are in contact act chemically upon 

> AimalesdoChiiiiie,183d,lx.l71; and Trait6 de lE'lectiifiiU, Lpp.25S, 
258. 

" Philosophical Magazine, 1838, xii. 227, 311, 314; also Biblioth^ue Uni- 
Tenelle, 1838, xiv. 155, 395. 



Digitized by Google 



£^ AssumptioM hy the ehemieal theory » [Series XVI. 

eaeh oiher and aie abki under the dremnttaneety to Unow 
more or less of the acting force mto a dynanuc foum (94/7* 906* 
1120.) : that in the most favourable circumstances, the whole 

is converted into dynamic force (1000.) : that then the amount 
of current force produced is an exact equivalent of the original 
chemical force employed ; and that in no case (in the voltaic 
pile) can any electric current be produced, without the active 
exertion and consumption of an equal amount of chemical foice^ 
endlmg in a given amount of chemical change. 



1804* Bfarianim's paper* was to me a great motife for re- 
examining the subject ; but the course I have taken was not so 

much for the purpose of answering particular objections, as for 
the procuring evidence, whether relating to controverted points 
or not, which should be satisfactory to my own mind, open to 
receive either one theory or the other. This paper, therefore^ 
is not controversial, but contains further facts and proofii of the 
truth of De k Bive's views. The cases Marianini pats are of 
extreme interest, and all his objections must, one day, be an^ 
aweredf when numerical results, both aa to intensity and 
quantity of force, are obtuned ; but they are all debateaUe, 
and, to my mind, depend upon variations of quantity which do 
not affect seriously the general question. Thus, when that 
philosopher quotes the numerical results obtained by consider- 
ing two metals with fluids at their opposite extremities which 
tend to form counter currents, the difference which he puts 
down to the effect of metallic contact, either made or inter* 
rupted, I think accountable for, on the facts partly known 
respecting opposed currents; and with me differences quite 
as great, and greater, have arisen, and are given in fonner 
papers (1046.), when metallio contacts were in the drcnit. So 
at page 213 of his memoir, I cannot admit that e should give 
an effect equal to the difference of b and d ; for in b and d the 
opposition presented to the excited currents is merely that of 
a bad conductor, but in the case of e the opposition arises £rom 
the power of an opposed acting source of a current. 
1805. As to the part of his memoir respecting the action of 

* Memoii« della Societii Italiana in Modena, 1827, xzL p. 205. 



Digitized by Google 



Jav« 1840.] Ime9tigatkm made He gaknmmeUr. ftB 



•nlphuretted solutions ^ I hope to be aUowed to refer to liie m<* 
▼estigations made farther on. I do not find> as the Italian phi* 
losopher, that iron with gold or platuuii in solution of the sul- 

phuret of potassa, is positive to them*, but, on the contrary, 
powerfully negative, and for reasons given in tlic sequel (2049.). 

1806. With respect to the discussion of the cause of the 
spark before contact^i Marianini admits the spark, but I c^ivc 
it up altogether. Jacobi*8 paper"* convinces me I was in error 
as to that prw^ of the existence of a state of tension in the 
metals before contact (916. d56.). J need not therefore do more 
at present than irithdniw my own obserratums. 

I now proceed to address myself to the general argu^ 
ment, rather than to particular controversy, or to the discus* 
sion of cases feeble in power and doubtful in nature ; for I 
have been impressed from the first with the feeling that it is 
no weak influence or feeble phenomenon that we have to ac- 
count for, but such as indicates a force of extreme power, re- 
quiring, therefore, that the cause assigned should bear some 
proportion, both in intensity and quantity, to the effects pro* 
duced. 

1808. The investigations have all been made by aid of curv 
rents and the galvanometer, for it seemed that such an instru- 
ment and such a course were best suited to an examination of 

the electricity of the voltaic pile. The electrometer is no doubt 
a most important instrument, but the philosophers who do use 
it are not of accord in respect to the safety and delicacy of its 
results. And even if the few indications as yet given by the 
electrometer be accepted as correct, they are far too general to 
settle the question of, whether contact or chemical action is the 
exciting force in the voltaic battery. To apply that instrument 
closely and render it of any force in supplying affirmative ar* 
guments to either theory, it would be necessary to construct a 
table of contacts, or the efiects of contacts, of the different 
metals and fluids concerned in the construction of the voltaic 
pile, taken in pairs (1868.), expressing in such table both the 
direction and the amount of the contact force. 

1809. It is assumed by the supporters of the contact theory^ 

* Memorie della Soctetk Italiana in Modena, 1827, xxi. p. 217. 
s lUd. p. 217. * Ibid. p. 225. 

* FbiloMpliical Magazine, 1838, ziiu 401. 



Digitized by Google 



9i jiuumedemUaeid^ermieei^meUUi ^Jhkk. [SbribsXVL 



that though the metals exert atrong electromotive forces at 
their pohits of contact with each other, yet these are so ba- 
hncedin a metallic circuit that no current is ever produced what* 
ever their arrangement may be. So in Plate III. fig. 1. if the 

contact force of copper and zinc is 10 and a third metal 

be introduced at m, the effect of its contacts, whatever that 
metal may be, with the zinc and copper at b and c, will be an 
amount of force in the opposite direction =10. ThuB, if it 

were potassium, its contact force at b might be 5 » but 

then its contact force at e would be <— 15 : or if it were 
gold, its contact force at b might be < ' ' ' 19, but then its 
contact force at e would be 9 — This is a very large as- 
sumption, and that the theory may agree with the facts is ne- 
cessary : still it is, I believe, only an assumption, for I am not 
aware of any data, independent of the theory in question, which 
prove its truth. 

1810. On the other hand, it is assumed that fluid conductors, 
and such bodies as contain water, or, in a word, those which I 
have called electrolytes (664w 8^. 921. ), either exert no con- 
tact force at their pkce of contact with the metals, or if they 
do exert such a power, then it is with tiiis most important dif- 
ference, that the forces are not subject to the same law of com- 
pensation or neutralization in the complete circuit, as holds 
with the metals (1809.). But this, I think I am justified in 
saying, is an assumption also, for it is supported not by any 
independent measurement or facts (1808.), but only by the 
theory which it is itself intended to support. 

181 !• Guided by this opinion, and with a view to ascertain 
what is, in an active circle, efiected by contact and what by 
chemical action, I endeavoured to find some bodies in this latter 
dass (1810.) which should be widiout chenucal action on the 
metals employed, so as to exclude that cause of a current, and 
yet such good conductors of electricity as to show any currents 
due to the contact of these metals with each other or with the 
fluid : concluding that any electrolyte which would conduct 
the thermo current of a single pair of bismuth and antimony 
plates would serve the required purpose, I sought for such, 
and fortunately soon found them. 



Digitized by Google 



Jan* 1840.] Electrolytes, being good conductors* 



25 



% u Exciting electrolytes, ^c, being conductors qf tkermo 

and feeble currents* 

1812. Sulphuret of potassium* — This substance and its so- 
lution were prepared as follows. Equal weights of caustic pot- 
ash (potassa fusa) and sulphur were mixed with and heated 
gradually in a Florence flasks till the whole had fused and 
united^ and the sulphur in ezoesa began to suUime. It was 
itken cooled and dissolved in water, so as to form a strong so- 
Intion, which by standing became qtute dear. 

181S. A portion of this solution was included in a dreuit 
containing a galvanometer and a pair of antimony and bismuth 
plates ; the connexion with the electrolyte was made by two 
platinum plates, each about two inches long and half an inch 
wide : nearly the whole of each was immersed, and they were 
about half an inch apart. When the circuit was completed, 
and all at the same temperature, there was no current; but the 
moment the junction of the antimony and bismuth was eiliier 
heated or cooled, the corresponding thermo current was pro- 
duced, causing the galvanometer-needle to be permanently de- 
flected, occasionally as much as 80^. Even the snuill difference 
of temperature occasioned by touching the Seebeck element 
with the finger, produced a very sensible current through the 
electrolyte. When in place of the antimony-bismuth combi- 
nation mere wires of copper and platinum, or iron and platinum 
were used, the appUcation of the spirit-lamp to^he junction of 
these metals produced a thermo current which instantly tra- 
velled round the circuit. 

1814. Thus this electrolyte will, as to high conducting power, 
fully answer the condition required (1811.). It is so excdlent 
in this respect, that I was able to send the thermo current of a 
single Seebeck's element across five successive portions con- 
nected with each other by platinum plates. 

1815. Nitrous acid, — Yellow anhydrous nitrous acid, made 
by distilling dry nitrate of lead, being put into a glass tube and 
included in a circuit with the antimony-bismuth arrangement 
and the galvanometer, gave no indication of the passage of the 
thermo current, though the immersed electrodes consisted each 
of about four inches in length of moderately thick platinum 
wire, and were not above a quarter of an inch apart 



Digitized by Google 



tf EUe^rolytes, being good timdmii^$* [Seubi XYL 

1816. A portion of thia add was misled with nearly its yo- 
Imne of pure water; the resulting action caused depression of 
temperature, the evolution of some nitrous gas, the formation 
of some nitric addi and a dark green fluid was produced. This 

was now such an excellent conductor of electricity, that almost 
the feeblest current could pass it. That produced by Seebeck's 
circle was sensible when only one-eighth of an inch in length 
of the platinum wires dipped in the acid. When a couple of 
inches of each electrode was in the fluid, the conduction was 
so good, that it made very littie difierence at the galvanometer 
whether die platinum wires touched each other in the fluid, or 
were a quarter of an inch apart ^ 

1817. Wiint aeid* — Some pure nitric acid was boiled to 
drive off all the nitrous acid, and then cooled. Being included 
in the circuit by platinum plates (1813.), it was found to con- 
duct so badly that the effect of the antimony-bismuth pair, 
when the difference of temperature was at the greatest, was 
scarcely perceptible at the galvanometer. 

1818. On using a pale yellow acid, otherwise pure, it was 
found to possess rather more conducting power than the former* 
On employing a red nitric acid, it was found to conduct the 
tiiermo current very well* On adding some of the green ni- 
trons acid (1816.) to the colourless nitric acid, the mixture ac- 
quired high conducting powers. Hence it is evident that nitric 
acid is not a good conductor when pure, but that the presence 
of nitrous acid in it (conjointly probably with water), gives it 
this power in a very high degree amongst electrolytes^. A 
very red strong nitric acid, and a weak green acid, (consisting 
of one vol* strong nitric acid and two vols, of water, which liad 
been rendered green by the action of the negative platinum 
electrode of a voltaic battery,) were both such excellent conduct- 
ors that the thermo current could pass across five separate 
portions of them connected by platinum plates, with so little 
retardation, that I believe twenty interruptions would not have 
stopped this feeble current 

> De la Rive has pointed out the iadUty inlh which an electriceuirent passes 
between pladnum and nitrous add. Annales de Chiniie« 1828, socviL 278. 

* Sehcenbein's ezpetimenti on a compoond of nitric and nitrons adds win 
piobably hear upon and iUostnta thia snll^eet BiblioChdqiae Unhrenelle^ 1817, 
X.406. 



Digitized by Google 



Jan* 1840.] Par^eiikir UqM tmd ioUd eamhteion* M 



1819. SmJ^kurie aeid^ — Strong dl of vitriol, when between 
pktinam eketrodes (1818.), conducted tlie antimony-bismuth 

thermo current sensibly, but feebly. A mixture of two volumes 
acid and one volume water conducted much better, but not 
nearly so well as the two former electrolytes (1814. 1816.). 
A mixture of one volume of oil of vitriol and two volumes sa- 
turated solution of sulphate of copper conducted this feeble 
current very fidrly* 

Paioisa. — strong solution of caustic potassa» between pUiF 
tlnum platesi conducted the thermo current sensibfy* but very 
feebly. 



1820. I will take the liberty of describing here, as the most 
convenient place, other results relating to the conducting power 
of bodies, which will be required hereafter in these investiga- 
tions. Galena, yellow sulphuret of iron, arsenical pyrites, na- 
tive sulphuret of copper and iron, native gray artificial sulphuret 
of copper, sulphurets of faumuth, iron, and copper, globules of 
oxide of burnt iron, oxide of iron by heat or scale oxide, con- 
ducted the thermo current very well. Native peroxide of man- 
ganese and peroxide of lead conducted it moderately well. 

1821. The following are bodies, in some respect analogous 
in nature and composition, which did not sensibly conduct this 
weak current when the contact surfaces were small : — ^artificial 
gray sulphuret of tin, blende, cinnabar, hsematite, £lba iron- 
ore, native magnetic oxide of iron, native peroxide of tin or 
tinstone, wolfram, fused and cooled protoxide of copper, per- 
oxide of mercury. 

18S2. Some of die foregoing substances are very remarkable 
in their conducting power. This is the case with the solution 
of sulphuret of potassium (1813.) and the nitrous acid (1816.), 
for the great amount of this power. The peroxide of manga- 
nese and lead are still more remarkable for possessing this 
power, because the protoxides of these metals do not conduct 
either the feeble thermo current or a fiur more powerful one 
from a voltaic battery. This circumstance made me especially 
anxious to verify the point with the peroxide of lead. I there- 
fi^re prepared some hom red-^lead by the action of successive 
portions of nitric acid, then boiled the brown oxide, so obtained, 
in several portions of distilled water, for days together, until 



Digitized by Google 



every trace of nitric acid and nitrate of lead kad beenremoTed ; 
after whidi it was well and perfectly dried* Still« when a heap 
of it in powder, and consequently in very imperfect contact 

throughout its own mass, was pressed between two plates of 
platinum and so brought into the thermo-electric circuit (1813.), 
the current was found to pass readily. 

f ii. Inactive eamb$eting circles coniaumg ajimd or 

electrai^te. 

1823. De la Rive has already quoted the case of potash, iron 
and platina^ to show that where there was no chemical action 
there was no current. My object is to increase the number of 
such cases ; to use other fluids than potash^ and such as have 
good conducting power for weak currents ; to use also strong 
and weak solutions ; and thus to accumulate the conjoint ex- 
perimental and argumentative evidence by which the great 
question must finally be decided. 

1824w I first used the sulphuret of potassium as an electro- 
lyte of good conducting power, but chemically inactive (1811.) 
when associated with iron and platinum in a circuit. The ar- 
rangement is given in fig. 2, where D, represent two test- 
glasses containing the strong solution of sulphuret of potassium 
(181^.); and also four metallic plates, about 0*5 of an inch 
wide and two inches long in the immersed part, of which the 
three marked P, P| P were platinum, and that marked I, of 
dean iron : these were connected by iron and platinum wires, 
as in fig. 2, a galvanometer being introduced at G. In this 
arrangement there were three metallic contacts of platinum and 
iron, a b and x : the first twoj being opposed to each other, may 
be considered as neutralizing each other's forces ; but the third, 
being unopposed by any other metallic contact, can be com- 
pared witli either the difference of a and b when one is warmer 
than the other, or with itself when in a heated or cooled state 
(1830.), or with the force of chemical action when any body 
capable of such action is introduced there (1831.). 

181^. When this arrangement is completed and in order, 
there is absolutely no current circulating through it, and the 
galvanometer-needle rests at (f\ yet is the whole chrcuit open 

1 PUIoioplikal Mi^aiias^ 1887, si. 27& 



Digitized by Google 



Jan. 1840.] 



unable to produce a current. 



to a Tery feeble carrent, for a difference of temperature at any- 
one of die junctions a, b, or causes a corresponding thermo 
current, whicli is instantly detected by the galvanometer, the 
needle standing permanently at 30° or 40°, or even 50°. 

1826. But to obtain this proper and normal state, it is ne- 
cessary that certain precautions be attended to. In the first 
place, if the circuit be complete in every part except for the 
immersion of the iron and platinum plates into the cup D, then, 
upon their introduction, a current will be produced directed 
from the platinum (which appears to be positive) through the 
solution to the iron; this will continue perhaps five or ten 
minutes, or if the iron has been carelessly cleaned, for several 
hours ; it is due to an action of the sulphuretted solution on 
o^de of irotiy and not to any effect on the metallic iron ; and 
when it has ceased, the disturbing cause may be considered as 
exhausted. The experimental proofs of the truth of this ex- 
planation, I will quote hereafter (204^^.). 

1827. Another precaution relates to the e£^t of acddental 
movements of the plates in the solution. If two platinum plates 
be put into a solution of this sulphuret of potassium, and the 
circuit be then completed, including a galvanometer, the ar- 
rangement, if perfect, will show no current ; but if one of the 
plates be lifted up into the air for a few seconds and then re- 
placed, it will be negative to the other, and produce a current 
lasting for a short time^ If the two plates be iron and plati- 
num, or of any other metal or substance not acted on by the 
sulphuret, the same effect will be produced. In these cases, 
the current is due to the change wrought by the air on]the film 
of sulphuretted solution adhering to Uie removed plate ^ ; but 
a &r less cause than this will produce a current, for if one of 
the platinum plates be removed, washed well, dried, and even 
heated, it will, on its re-introduction, almost certainly exhibit 
the negative state for a second or two. 

1828. These or other disturbing causes appear the greater 
in these experiments in consequence of the excellent conduct- 

' Marianini observed effects of this kind produced by exposure to the air, of 
one of two plates dipped in nitric acid. Annales de Chimie, 1830, xlv. p. 42. 

« Becquerel long since referred to the effect of such ex-])osure of a jjlato, 
dipped in certain solutions, to the air. Generally the plate so expoted became 
positive on re-imnienion. Annales de Chimie, 1824, xxv. 405. 



Digitized by Google 



30 Contact with fluids perfectly passive. [Series XVI* 

ing power of the solution used ; but they do not occur if care 
be taken to avoid any disturbance of the plates or the solution, 
and then, as before said^ the whole acquires a normal and per- 
fectly inactive state. 

18^. Here then is an arrangement in which the contact of 
platinmn and iron 'at is at liberty to produce any effect which 
such a contact may have the power of producing ; and yet what 
is the consequence t absolutely nothing. This is not because 
Ihe electrolyte is so bad a conductor that a current of contact 
cannot pass, for currents far feebler than this is kssumed to be, 
pass readily (1813.); and the electrolyte employed is vastly 
superior in conducting power to those which are commonly 
used in voltaic batteries or circles, in which the current is still 
assumed to be dependent upon contact. The simple conclu- 
sion to which the experiment should lead is, in my opinion, 
that the contact of iron and platinum is absolutely without any 
electromotive force (1885. 1859. 1889.). 

1890. If the contact be made really active and efiective, 
according to the beautiful discovery of Seebeck, by making its 
temperature different to that of the other parts of the circuit, 
then its power of generating a current is shown (18^4.). This 
enables us to compare the supposed power of the mere contact 
with that of a thermo contact; and we find that the latter 
comes out as infinitely greater than the former, for the former 
is nothing. The same comparison of mere contact and thermo 
contact may be made by contrasting the effect of the contact e 
at common temperatures, with either the contact at a or at 6, 
' either heated or cooled* Very moderate changes of tempera- 
ture at these places produce instantly the corresponding cur- 
rent, but the mere contact at s does nothing. 

1831. So also I believe that a true and philosophic and even 
rigid comparison may be made at .r, between the assumed effect 
of mere contact and that of chemical action. For if the metals 
at X be separated, and a piece of paper moistened in dilute 
acid, or a solution of salt, or if only the tongue or a wet finger 
be applied there, then a current is caused, stronger by far than 
the thermo currents before produced (1830.), passing from the 
iron through the introduced add or other active fluid to the 
platinum. This is a case of current from chemical action with- 
out any metallic contact in the circuit on which the efiect 



Digitized by Google 



Jan. 1840.] Contact qf metals perfectly passive. 31 

can for a momeiit be supposed to depend (879.) ; it is even a 
case where metallic contact is changed for chemical action, 
with the result, that where contact is found to be quite inef- 
fectual, chemical action is very energetic in producing a cur- 
rent. 

1832. It is of course quite unnecessary to say that the same 
experimental comparisons may be made at either of the other 

contacts, a or b. 

18d8« Admitting for the moment that the arrangement pro?es 
that the contact of platinum and iron at x has no electromo- 
tive force (1835. 1859.), then it follows also that the contact 
of either platinum or iron with any other metal has no such 
force. For if another metal, as zinc, be interposed between 
the iron and platinum at x, fig 2, no current is produced ; and 
yet the test application of a little heat at a or h, will show by 
the corresponding current, that the circuit being complete will 
conduct any current that may tend to pass* Now that the 
contacts of linc with iron and with platinum are of eqnal elec- 
tromotiye force, is not for a moment admitted by those who 
support the theory of contact activity ; we ought therefore to 
have a resulting action equal to the differences of the* two 
forces, producing a certain current. No such current is pro- 
duced, and I conceive, with the admission above, that such a 
result proves that the contacts irou-zitic and platinum-zinc are 
entirely without electromotive force. 

1834. Gold, silver, potassium, and copper were introduced 
at .V with the hke negative effect ^ and so no doubt might every 
other metal, even according to the relation admitted amongst ' 
the metals by the supporters of the contact theory (1809.). 
The same negative result followed upon the introduction of 
many other conducting bodies at the same place ; as, for in- 
stance, those already mentioned as easily conducting the thermo 
current (1820.) ; and the effect proves, I think, that the con- 
tact of any of these with either iron or platinum is utterly in- 
effective as a source of electromotive force* 

1835. The only answer which, as it appears to me, the con- 
tact theory can set up in opposition to the foregoing fficts and 
conclusions is, to say that the solution of sulphuret of potassium 
in the cup D, ffg. ^, acts as a metal would do (1809.), and so 
the effects of all the contacts in the circuit are exactly balanced* 



Digitized by Google 



S2 OiherinaeiweiirehteaiUamhg^fiuidg. [Ssribs XVI.. 



I will not stop at this moment to show that the departure with 
respect to electrolytes, or the fluid bodies in the voltaic pile,. 
from the law which is supposed to hold good with the metals 
and solid conductors, though only an assumption, is still 
essential to the contact theory of the voltaic pile (1810. 1861.)^ ; 
nor to prove that the electrolyte is no otherwise like the metals 
than in having no contact electromotive force whatever. But 
believing that this will be very evident shortly, I will go on with 
the experimental results, and resume these points hereafter 
(1859. 1889.). 

1836. The experiment was now repeated with the substitu- 
tion of a bar of nieiel for that of iron, fig. 2 (18£4.), all other 
things remaining the same*. The circuit was again found to 
be a good conductor of a feeble thermo current, but utterly in- 
efficient as a voltaic circuit when all was at the same tempera- 
ture, and due precautions taken (2051.). The introduction of 
metals at the contact was as ineffective as before (1834.) ; the 
introduction of chemical action at or was as striking in its influ- 
ence as in the former case (1831.) ; all the results were, in fact, 
parallel to those already obtained ; and if the reasoning then 
urged was good, it will now follow that the contact of platinum 
and nickel with each other, or of either with any of the different 
metals or solid conductors introduced at x, is entirely without 
electromotive forced 

1837. Many <&her pairs of metals were compared together in 
the same manner; the solution of sulphuret of potassium con- 
necting them together at one place, and their mutual contact 

* See Feclmer's words. Philotqphical Magazine, 1838, xiil. 377. 

' There h anot^ form of ibis experiment which I sometimes adopted, in 
which the cup E, fig. 2, with its contents, was dismissed, and the platinum flaiiB 
in it connected together. The arrangement may then he considered as pre- 
lenting three contacts of iron and platinum, two acting in one direction, and 
one in the other. The arrangement and the results are virtually the same as 
those already given. A still simpler but equally conclusive arrangement for 
many of the arguments, is to dismiss the iron between a and b altogether, and 
BO have but one contact, that at x, to consider. 

' One specimen of nickel was, on its immersion, positive to platinum for 
seven or eight minutes, and then became neutral. On taking it out it seemed 
to hm a ydlowith tint on it, as if invested by a coat of lolphaiot ; and I nia- 
pected this piece had acted like lead (1885.) and biBmnlh (1895.). It is diffi- 
eult to get pure and also pexftctly compact nickd ; and if porous^ dien the mat- 
ter retained in the pores piodnees currents. 



Digitized by Google 



Jan. 1840.] InaHhe wUaie dreles, sulpkuret o/pataaa. 9S 



doing that office at another. The foUowing are cases of this 
kind : iron and gdd ; Iron and paUadiam ; nickel and gold ; 
nickel and palladium ; platina and gold ; platinaandpaUadium* 
In all these cases the results were the same as those already 
given with the combinations of platinum and iron. 

1838. It is necessary that due precaution be taken to have 
the arrangements in an unexceptionable state. It often hap- 
pened that the first immersion of the plates gave deflections ; 
it is, in fact, almost impossible to put two plates of the same 
metal into the solution without causing a deflection ; but this 
generally goes off very quickly, and then the arrangement may 
be used for the investigation (18IS6.)* Sometimes there is a 
feeble but rather permanent deflection of the needle ; thus when 
platinum and palladium were the metals, the first effect fell and 
left a current able to deflect the galvanometer-needle 3°, indi- 
cating the platinum to be positive to the palladium. This effect 
of however, is almost nothing compared to what a mere 
thermo current can cause, the latter producing a deflection of 
60^ or more ; besides which, even supposing it an essential effect 
of the arrangement, it is in the wrong direction for the contact 
theory. I rather incline to refer it to diat power which platinum 
and other substances have of eflfecting combination and decom- 
position without themselves entering into union ; and I have 
occasionally found that when a platinum plate has been left for 
some hours in a strong solution of sulphuret of potassium (181S.) 
a small quantity of sulphur has been deposited upon it. What- 
ever the cause of the final feeble current may be, the eflect is 
too small to be of any service in ^support of the contact theory; 
while, on the other hand, it affords delicate, and, therefore, 
strong indications In favour of the chemical theory. 

18S9. A change was made in the form and arrangement of 
the cup D, fig. ^, so as to allow of experiments with other bo- 
dies than the metals. The solution of sulphuret of potassium 
was placed in a shallow vessel, the platinum plate was bent so 
that the immersed extremity corresponded to the bottom of the 
vessel ; on this a piece of loosely folded cloth was laid in the 
solution, and on that again the mineral or other substance to 
be compared with the platinum ; the fluid being of such depth 
that only part of that substance was in it, the rest being dean 
and dry ; on this portion the platinum wire, which completed 

VOL. II. D 



Digitized by Google 



the circuit, rested. The arrangement of this part of the circuit 
is given in section at fig. 3, where H repreienti • pieee of gap* 
lena to be compared with the platinum P. 

1840. In ibis way galena, compact yellow copper pyritec« 
yellow iron pyrites, and globulet of oxide of burnt iron^ were 
compared with platinum, (the solution of sulpburet ofpotatsinm 
being the electrolyte used in the circuit,) and with the same re- 
sults as were before obtained with metals (1829. 1833,). 

1841. Experiments hereafter to be described gave arrange- 
ments in which, with the same electrolyte, sulphuret of lead was 
compared with gold, palladium, iron, nickel, and bismuth (1885* 
1886.) ; also sulphuret of bismuth with platinum, gold, palla- 
dium, iron, mckel, lead, and sulphuret of lead (1804«), and 
always with the same result. Where no chemical action oc- 
curred there no current was formed i although the circuit re* 
mained an excellent conductor, and the contact existed by 
which, it is assumed in (he contact theory^ such a current 
should be produced. 

1842. Instead of the strong solution, a dilute solution of the 
yellow sulphuret of potassium, consisting of one volume of strong 
solution (181^*) and ten volumes of water, was used. Plates 
of platinum and iron were arranged in this fluid as before 
(1894k) ; at first the iron was negative (^04&.), but in ten 
minutes it was neutral, and the needle at 0*^^ Then a weak 
chemical current excited at^ (1831.) easily passed: and even a 
thermo current (1830.) was able to show its effects at the 
needle. Thus a strong or a weak solution of this electrolyte 
showed the same phenomena. By diluting the solution still 
further, a fluid could be obtained in which the iron was, after 
the first eiibct, permanently but feebly positive* On allowing 
time, however, it was found that in all such cases black sulphu- 
ret formed here and there on the iron« Rusted iron was ne- 
gative to platmum (2049.) in this very weak solution, which 
by direct chemical action could render metallic iron positivct 



1 Care wss taken in these and the former nmHar esMs to discharge the pla- 
tinum But&oe of any reacting force it might acquire firom the action of the pre- 
Tious ciment, hy separating it from the other metal% and touching it in the 
liquid for an instant with another pUtinum plate. 



Digitized by Google 



Jan. 1840.] Inaetwe ekeks wUk miroui aeid. S$ 



1843. In all the preceding experimeiits the electrolyte iiMd 
hat been the sulphnret of poteaiium solution; but I now 
changed this for another, very different in itB nature, namely, 
the green miroMi acid (1816.), which has already been shown 
to be an excellent conductor of electricity. Iron and platinum 
were the metals employed, both being in the form of wires. 
The vessel in which they were immersed was a tube like that 
formerly described (1815.) ; in other respects the arrangement 
was the same in principle as those already used (1824. 1836.). 
The first effect was the production of a current, the iron being 
positiye in the acid to the platba ; but this quickkf eeaitd, and 
the galTanometer-needle came to 0^. In this state, however, 
the circuit could not in all things be compared with the one 
having the solution of sulphuret of potassium for its electrolyte 
(18£4.) ; for although it could conduct the thermo current of 
antimony and bismuth in a certain degree, yet that degree was 
very small compared to the power possessed by the former ar- 
rangement, or to that of a circle in which the nitrous acid was 
between two platinum plates (1816.). This remarkable retar- 
dation is consequent upon the assumption by the iron of thai 
peculiar state which Schcenbein has so well described and illus-' 
trated by his numerous experiments and investigations. But 
though it must be admitted that the Iron in contact with the 
add is m a peculiar state (1951. ^1. S088.), yet it is also evi- 
dent that a circuit consisting of platinum, iron, peculiar iron, 
and nitrous acid, does not cause a current though it have suf- 
ficient conducting power to carry a thermo current. 

1844. But if the contact of platinum and iron has an electro* 
motive force, why does it not produce a current? The appli- 
cation of heat (18d0.), or of a little chemical action (1831.) at 
the place of contact, does produce a current, and in the latter 
ease a strong one* Or if any other of the contacts in the ar^i 
rangeroent can produce a current, why is not that shown by 
some corresponding eflfect? The only answers are, to say, that 
the peculiar iron has the same electromotive properties and re- 
lations as platinum, or that the nitrous acid is included under 
the same law with the metals (1809. 1835.) ; and so the sum of 
the effects of all the contacts in the circuit is nought, or an 
exact balance of forces. That the iron is like the platinum in 
having no electromotive force at its contacts without chemical 



Digitized by Google 



S6 Inefficacy ofeimkusL [S£BIBS XYL 



actioDy I believe ; but that it is unlike it in its electrical rela- 
tions, is evident from the difference between the two in strong 
nitric actdy as well as in weak add ; from their diflference in ihe 
power of transmitting electric currents to either nitric add or 

sulphuret of potassium, which is very great ; and also by other 
differences. That the nitrous acid is, as to the power of its 
contacts, to be separated from other electrolytes and classed 
with the metals in what is, with them, only an assumption, is a 
gratuitous mode of explaining the difficulty, which will come 
into consideration, with the case of sulphuret of potassium^ 
hereafter (1835. 1859. 1889. 2060.). 

1845. To the electro-chemical philosopher, ihe case is only 
another of the many strong instances, showing that where che- 
mical action is absent in the voltaic circuit, there no current can 
be formed ; and that whether solution of sulphuret of potas- 
sium or nitrous acid be the electrolyte or connecting fluid 
used, still the results are the same, and contact is shown to be 
inefficacious as an active electromotive condition. 

1846. I need not say that the introduction of different metals 
between the iron and platinum at their point of contact, pro- 
duced no difference in the results (1833. 1834.) and caused no 
current ; and I have said that heat and chemicid action applied 
there produced their corresponding eflfects. But these paraU 
lels in action and non-action show the identity in nature of this 
circuit, (notwithstanding the production of the surface of pe- 
cuhar iron on that metal,) and that with solution of sulphuret 
of potassium : so that all the conclusions drawn from it apply 
here ; and if that case ultimately stand firm as a proof against 
the theory of contact force, this will stand also. 

1847. I now used oxide of iron and platinum as the extremes 
of the solid part of the circuit, and the nitrous add as the fluid ; 
L e. I heated the iron wire in the flame of a spirit-lamp, coTer- 
ing it with a coat of oxide in the manner recommended by 
Schoenbein in his investigations, and then used it instead of 
the clean iron (1843.). The oxide of iron was at first in the 
least degree positive, and then immediately neutral. This cir- 
cuit, then, like the former, gave no current at common tempe- 
ratures \ but it differed much from it in conducting power, 
being a very excellent conductor of a thermo current, the oxide 
of iron not offering that obstruction to the passage of the cur- 



Digitized by Google 



Jan. 1840.] Circles including nitrous acid. 



37 



rent which the pecniur iron did {IMS. 1844'.), Hence scale 

oxide of iron and platinum produce no current by contact, the 
third substance in the proof circuit being nitrous acid ; and so 
the result agrees with that obtained in the former case, where 
that third substance was solution of sulphuret of potassium. 

1848. In using nitrous acid it is necessftry that certain pre- 
cautions be taken, founded on the following effect. If a circuit 
he made with the green nitrous acid, platinum wires, and a 
galvanometer, in a few seconds all traces of a current due to 
first disturhances will disappear ; but if one wire be raised into 
the air and instantly returned to its first position, a current is 
formed, and that wire is negative, across the electrolyte, to the 
other. If one wire be dipped only a small distance into the 
acid, as for instance one fourth of an inch, then the raising that 
wire not more than one eighth of an inch and instantly restoring 
it, will produce the same effect as before. The effect is due 
to the evaporation of the nitrous acid from the exposed wire 
(1937.)« I may perhaps return to it hereafter, but wish at pre- 
sent only to give notice of the precaution that is required in con- 
sequence, namely, to retain the immersed wires undisturbed 
during the experiment* 

1840. Proceeding on the facts made known by Schoenbein 
respecting the relation of iron and nitric acid, I used that acid 
as the fluid in a voltaic circuit formed with iron and platinum. 
Pure nitric acid is so deficient in conducting power (1817.) 
that it may be supposed capable of stopping any current due 
to the e£fect of contact between the platinum and iron; audit 
is further objectionable in these experiments, because, acting 
feebly on the iron, it produces a chemically excited current, 
which may be considered as mingling its effect with that of 
contact : whereas the object at present is, by excluding such 
chemical action, to lay bare the influence of contact alone. 
Still the results with it are consistent with the more perfect 
ones already described ; for in a circuit of iron, platinum, and 
nitric add, the joint effects of the chemical action on the iron 
and the contact of iron and platinum, being to produce a cur- 
rent of a certain constant force indicated by the galvanometer, 
a little chemical action, brought into play where the iron and 
platinum were in contact as before (1831.), produced a current 



Digitized by Google 



38 Circles including nitrous and nitric (tcids. [Series XVI. 

ftr stronger tlian that praTiously existing. If then, from die 

weaker current, the part of the effect due to chemical action 
be abstracted, how little room is there to suppose that any 
effect is due to the contact of the metals! 

1850. But a red nitric acid with platinum plates conducts a 
thermo current well, and will do so even when considerably 
diluted (1818.). When such red acid b used between iron and 
platinumi the conducting power is sueh, that one half of the 
permanent current can be overcome by a counter thermo cur-» 
rent of bismuth and anthnony. Thus a sort of comparison is 
established between a thermo current on the one hand, and a 
current due to the joint effects of chemical action on iron and 
contact of iron and platinum on the other. Now considering 
the admitted weakness of a thermo current, it may be judged 
what the strength of that part of the second current due to 
contact can, at the utmost, be ; and how little it is able to ac- 
count for the strong currents produced by ordinaiy Toltaio oom« 
binations* 

1851. If for a dean iron wire one oxidised in the flame of a 
spirit-lamp be usedi bemg associated with platinum in pure 
strong nitric acid, there is a feeble current, the oxide of iron 

being positive to tlic platinum, and the facts mainly as with 
iron. But the further advantage is obtained of comparing the 
contact of strong and weak acid with this oxidized wire. If 
one volume of the strong acid and four volumes of water be 
mixed, this solution may be used, and there is even less deflec* 
tion than with the strong acid : the iron side is now not sensi- 
bly active, except the most delicate means be used to observe 
the cunrent. Yet in both cases if a chemical action be intro* 
duced in place of the contact, the resulting current passesweH^ 
and even a thermo current can be made to show itself as more 
powerful than any due to contact. 

185^. In these cases it is safest to put the whole of the oxi- 
dized iron under the surface and connect it in the circle by 
touching it with a platinum wire ; for if the oxidized iron be 
continued through from the acid to the air^ it is almost certain 
to suffer from the joint action of the acid and air at their aur* 
face of contact 



1853. I proceeded to use a fluid difiermg from any of the 



Digitized by Google 



Jan. 1840.] Inactive circles including poUuMU 39 

former : tbis was soltitioti of potoiettf whieh Imm alffMdy been em* 

ployed by De la Rive (18^.) with iron and platina, and which 
when strong has been found to be a substance conducting so 
well, that even a thermo current could pass it (1819.), and there- 
fore fully sufficient to show a contact current, if any such exists* 
1854« Yet when a strong solution of this substance was ar- 
ranged with ailTer and platinutn, (bodies difl^ng sufficiently 
from each other when connected by nitric or muriatio aoidi) aa 
in the fbrmer caaesi a tery feeble current waa produced, and 
the galvanottieter«needle atood nearly at aero. The contact of 
tbetie metala tbereibre did not appear to produce a sensible 
current ; and, as I fully believe, because no electromotive 
power exists in such contact. When that contact was ex- 
changed for a very feeble chemical action, namely, that pro- 
duced by interposing a little piece of paper moistened in dilute 
nitric add (1831.), a current was the result. So here, aa in 
the many former casesi the arrangement with a little chemical 
action and no metallic contact produces a current, but that 
without the chemical action and with the metallic contact pro* 
dttoea none. 

1855« Iron or nickel associated with platinum in this strong 

solution of potassa was positive. The force of the produced 
current soon fell, and after an hour or so was very small. Then 
annulling the metallic contact at a:, fig. 2, and substituting a 
feeble chemical action there, as of dilute nitric acid, the cur- 
rent established by the latter would pass and show itself. Thus 
the cases are parallel to those before mentioned (1840, &c.), 
and show how little contact alone could do, since the effect of 
the conjoint contact of iron and pladnum and chemical action 
of potash and iron were very small as compared with the con* 
trasted chemical action of the dilute nitric acid« 

1856. Instead of a strong solution of potassa, a much weaker 
one consisting of one volume of strong solution and six volumes 
of water was used, but the results with the silver and platinum 
were the same : no current was produced by the metallic con- 
tact as long as that only was left for exciting cause, but on sub- 
atitttting a little chemical action in its place (1831.), the current 
was immediately produced* 

1857* Iron and nickel with platinum in the weak aolutica 
also produced similar resultai except that the positive atate of 



Digitized by Google 



40 Iingkacy ofemOo^ qf de€iirolfi€9. [Sbrus XVL 

these metab was ra&er more pennaneiit than with the etEong 
eolation* Still it was bo small as to be out of all proportion to 
what was to be expected according to the contact theory* 



1858. Thus these different contacts of metals and other well- 
conducting solid bodies prove utterly inefficient in producing a 
current, as well when solution of potassa is the third or fluid 
body in the circuit, as when that third body is either solution 
of sulphuret of potassium, or hydrated nitrous acid, or nitric 
adds or mixed nitric and nitrous acids* Furtheri all the aigu« 
ments respecting the inefficacy of the contacts of bodies inter- 
posed at the junction of the two principal solid sabstances» 
which were advanced in the case of the sulphuret of potassium 
solution (1833.), apply here with potassa ; as they do indeed in 
every case of a conducting circuit where the interposed fluid is 
without chemical action and no current is produced. If a case 
could be brought forward in which the interposed fluid is with- 
out action, is yet a sufficiently good conductory and a current is 
produced ; then» indeed, the theory of contact would find evi* 
dence in its &your, which, as ftr as I can pereeiTe, could not 
be oYcrcome* I have most anxiously sought fi>r such a case* 
but cannot find one (1798.). 



1859. The argument is now in a fit state for the resumption 
of that important point before adverted to (1835. 1844.), which, 
if truly advanced by an advocate for the contact theory, would 
utterly annihilate the force of the previous experimental results, 
though it would not enable that theory to give a reason for the 
activity of, and the existence of a current in, the pile; but 
which, if in error, would leave the contact theory utterly de- 
fenceless and without foundation* 

1860. A supporter of the contact theory may say that the 
various conducting electrolytes used in the previous experi- 
ments are like the metals ; i. e. that they have an electromotive 
force at their points of contact with the metals and other solid 
conductors employed to complete the circuit ; but that this is 
of such consistent strength at each place of contact, that, in a 
complete circle, the sum of the forces is 0 (1809*)* The actions 



Digitized by Google 



Jan. 1840*3 In^cacy of contact in voltaic circles, . 41 

at the contacts are tense ekctromotire actions, but balanced, 

and 80 no current is produced. But what experiment is there 
to support this statement ? where are the measured electromo- 
tive results proving it (1808.)? I believe there are none. 

1861. The contact theory, afler assuming that mere contacts 
of dissimilar substances have electromotive powers, further as- 
sumes a difference between metals and liquid conductors (1810.) 
without which it is impossible that the theory can explain the 
eunrent in the voltaic pile : for whilst the contact effects in a 
metallic circuit are assumed to be always perfectly balanced^ it 
is also assumed diat the contact eflfects of the ^ectrolytes or 
interposed fluid with the metals are not balanced, but are so 
far removed from anything like an equilibrium, as to produce 
most powerful currents, even the strongest that a voltaic pile 
can produce. If so, then why should the solution of sulphuret 
of potassium be an exception ? it is quite unlike the metals : 
it does not appear to conduct without decompodtion; it is an 
excellent electrolyte, and an excellent excUhtg electeolyte in 
proper cases (1880-), producing most powerful currents when 
it acts chemically ; it is in all tiiese points quite unlike the me* 
tals, and, in its action, like any of the add or saline exciting 
electrolytes commonly used. How then can it be allowed that, 
without a single direct experiment, and solely for the purpose 
of avoiding the force of those which are placed in opposition, 
we should suppose it to leave its own station amongst the elec-* 
trolytes, and class with the metals ; and that too, in a pouit of 
character, which, even with them, is as yet a mere assumption 
(1809.)? 

186£. But it is not with the sulphuret of potassium alone that 
this freedom must be allowed ; it must be extended to the ni-> 
trous acid (1843. 1847.), to the nitric acid (1840, &c.), and 
even to the solution of potash (1854.) ; all these being of the 
class of electrolytes, and yet exhibiting no current in circuits 
where they do not occasion chemical action. Further, this ex- 
ception must be made for weak solutions of sulphuret of potas- 
sium (184^) and of potassa (1856.), for they exhibit the same 
phenomena as the stronger solutions* And if the contact theo- 
rists claim it for these weak soludons, then how willthey meet the 
case of weak nitric acid which b not similar in its action on iron 
to strong nitric acid (1977.), but can produce a powerful current t 



Digitized by Google 



4^ 



CofUact eoniradietioHi* [Series XVI. 



1863. The chemical philosopher is embarrassed by none of 
these difficulties ; for he first, by a simple direct experiment, 
ascertains whether any of the two given substances in the cir- 
cuit are active chemically on each oth^r. If they are, he ex- 
poott and finds the corresponding current ; if they are not« he 
expects and he finds no current, though the circuit be a good 
conductor and he look carefhlly for it 

1864i> Agam ; taking the case of iron, p]athia> and solution 
of sulphuret of potassiuin, there is no current) but for iron 
substitute zinc, and there is a powerful current. I might for 
zinc substitute copper, silver, tin, cadmium, bismuth, lead, and 
other metals ; but I take zinc, because its sulphuret dissolves 
and is carried off by the solution, and so leaves the case in a 
very simple state ; the fact, however, is as strong with any of 
the other metals. Now if the contact theory be truci and if 
the irouy platinsi and solution of sulphuret of potassium give 
contacts which are in perfect equilibrium as to ^eirelectromo*' 
tive foroCf then why does changing the iron for lino destroy 
the equilibrium ? Changing one metal for another in a metallic 
circuit causes no alteration of this kind : nor does changing one 
substance for another among the great number of bodies which, 
as solid conductors, may be used to form conducting (but che- 
mically inactive) circuits (1867, &c.). If the solution of sul- 
phuret of potassium is to be classed with the metals as to ita 
action in the experiments I have quoted (18^^ &c*), then, how 
comes it to act quite unlike them, and with a power equal to 
the b€Mt of the other classj in the new cases of zinc> copper^ 
sflver^ &c. (188^. 1885, &c.) ? 

1865* This difficulty, as I conceivCf must be met| on the part 
of the contact theorists, by a new assumption, namely, that this 
fluid sometimes acts as the best of the metals, or first class of 
conductors, and sometimes as the best of the electrolytes or 
second class* But surely this would be far too loose a method 
of philosophizing in an experimental science (1889.) ; and fur- 
theri it is most unfortunate for such an assumption, that this 
aecond condition or relation of it never comes on by itself^ so 
as to give us a pure case of a current from iM>ntact alone { it 
never comes on wiihaut that chemical action to whidh die che- 
mist so simply refers all the current which is then produced* 

1866. It is unnecessary for me to say that the same argument 



Digitized by Google 



Jam. IdiO.] 



Contaet eireuUs* 



48 



applies with equal force to the cases where nitrous aoid, nitric 
acid, and solution of potash are used ; and it is supported with 
equal strength by the results which they have given (1843. 
1840. 185a.). 

1867* It may be thought that it wai quite uuneCeitBiyi bat 
in my deaire to ettabU^ contact electromotive fi)fee» to do 
which I waa at one time yery anxiouii I made many oircuita of 

three substances, including a galyanometer) all being conduct- 
ors, with the hope of finding an arrangement, which, without 
chemical action, should produce a current. The number and 
variety of these experiments may be understood from the fol- 
lowing summary $ in which metals, plumbago, sulphurets and 
oxides, all being conductora even of a tliermo current^ were thua 
combined in variona wayi ; 

1. Platinum. 

2. Iron. 

3. Zinc. 

4. Copper. 

5. Plumbago. 

6. Scale oxide of iron. 

7. Native peroxide of manganese. 
8* Native gray sulphuret of copper. 
9* Native iron pyrites. 

10. Native copper pyrites. 

11. Galena. 

12. Artificial sulphuret of copper. 

13. Artificial sulphuret of iron. 

14. Artificial sulphuret of bismuth. 

1 and with 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, ui turn* 
1 and 8 with 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 19, 13, 14. 
1 and 5 with 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. 

3 and 6 with 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. 

4 and 5 with 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. 
4 and 6 with 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. 

4 and 7 with 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. 
4 and 8 with 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. 
4 and 9 witii 10, 11, 1% 18, 14w 
4andl0witiill, 119,18,14. 



Digitized by Google 



M InaelhUy of etndaei ekemiM. [SbkimXVI. 

4 and 11 witli lis, IS, 14w 
4 and IS with 18, 14. 
4 and 18 with 14. 

1 and 4 with 12. 

1868. Marianini states from experiment that copper is posi- 
tive to aulphuret of copper^ : with the Voltaists, according to 
the same philosopher, sulphuret of copper is positive to iron 
(1878.)» and with them also iron is positive to copper. These 
three bodies therefore ought to give a most powerful circle : 
but on the contrary, whatever sulphuret of copper I have used, 
I have fbund not the slightest efibct from such an arrangement. 

1869. As peroxide of lead is a body causing a powerful cur- 
rent in solution of sulphuret of potassium, and indeed in every 
case of a circuit where it can give up part of its oxygen, I 
thought it reasonable to expect that its contact with metals 
would produce a current, if contact ever could. A part of that 
which had been prepared (18^.), was therefore well dried, 
which is quite essential in these cases, and formed into the fol* 
lowing combinations : 

Platinum. Zinc. Peroxide of lead. 
Platinum. Lead. Peroxide of lead. 
Platinum. Cadmium. Peroxide of lead. 
. Platinum. Iron. Peroxide of lead. 

Of these varied combinations, not one gave the least signs of 
a current, provided differences of temperature were excluded ; 
though in every case the circle formed was, as to conducting 
povrer, perfect for the purpose, i. e. able to conduct even a very 
weak thermo current. 



1870. In the contact theory it is not therefore the metals 
alone that must be assumed to have their contact forces so 
balanced as to produce, in any circle of them, an e£fect amount- 
ing to nothing (1809.); but all solid bodies that are able to 
conduct, whether they be forms of carbon, or oxides, or sul- 
phurets, must be included in the same category. So also must 
the electrolytes already referred to, namely, the solutions of 
sulphuret of potassium and potash, and nitrous and nitric acids, 
in every case where they do not act chemically. In fact all 

^ MemocM della Societk lulisna in Modena, 1827, sd. 224. 



Digitized by Google 



Jak« 1840.] Insufficiency of contact theory • 



45 



eonduetart that do not act chemically in the cinmit must be 
assumed, by the contact theory, to be in this conditioui until a 
case of voltaic current without chemical action is produced 

(1858.). 

1871. Then, even admitting that the results obtained by 
Volta and his followers with the electrometer prove that mere 
contact has an electromotive force and can produce an effect, 
surely all experience with contact alone goes to show that the 
electromotive forces in a circuit are always balanced. How else 
is it likely that the above-named most varied substances should 
be found to agree in tiiis respect ? unless indeed it be^ as I 
believe, that all substances agree in this, of having no such 
power at all. If so, then where is the source of power which 
can account by the theory of contact for the current in the vol- 
taic pile ? If they are not balanced, then where is the sufficient 
case of contact alone producing a current ? or where are the 
numerical data which indicate that such a case can be (1808. 
1868.) ? The contact philosophers are bound to produce, not 
a case where the current is infinitesimally small, for such can- 
not account for the current of the voltaic pUe, and will always 
come within the debatable ground which De la Rive has so well 
defended, but a case and data of such distinctness and import- 
ance as may be worthy of opposition to the numerous cases 
produced by the chemical philosopher (1892.) ; for without 
them the contact theory as applied to the pile appears to me 
to have no support, and, as it asserts contact electromotive 
force even wUk the balanced condition, to be almost without 
foundation. 

187^ To avoid Uiese and similar conclusions, the contact 
theory must bend about in the most particular and irregular 
way. Thus the contact of solution of sulphuret of potassium 

with iron must be considered as balanced by the joint force of 
its contact with platinum, and the contact of iron and platinum 
with each other ; but changing the iron for lead, then the con- 
tact of the sulphuret with the latter metal is no longer balanced 
by the other two contacts, it has all of a sudden changed its 
relation : afler a few seconds, when a film of sulphuret has 
been formed by the chemical action, tiien the current ceases, 
though the circuit be a good conductor (1885.) ; and now it 
must be assumed that the solution has acquired its first rela- 



Digitized by Google 



46 NumeroMiiitiump^am^eaiiiUiciikearif. [SsuifXVL 

lion to the metals and to the sulphuret of lead, and givei an 
equilibrium condition of the contacts in the circle. 

1873« So alto with Ibk gulphurelted wdalMiii and with po* 
taasa, dilation musty by the theory, be admitted as produdDg 
no ckoKge in the character of Uie contact fovce ; but with 
nitric acid, it, on the contrary, must be allowed to change the 
character of the force greatly (1977.)* So again acids and 
alkalies (as potassa) in the cases where the currents are pro- 
duced by them, as with zinc and platinum for instance, must be 
assumed as giving the preponderance of electromotive force on 
the same side, though these are bodies which might have been 
expected to give opposite currentsi since they differ so much in 
their nature* 

1874. Every case of a current is obliged to be met, on the 
part of the contact advocates, by assuming powers at the poiota 
of contact, in the parHeular oate, of such proportionate 

strengths as will consist with the results obtained, and the 
theory is made to bend about (1956. 1992. 2006. 2014. 2063.), 
having no general relation for the acids or alkalies, or other 
electrolytic solution used. The result therefore comes to thisi 
The theory can predict nothing regarding the results ; it is ac- 
companied by no case of a voltaic current produced without 
chemical action, and in those associated with chemical actkm, 
it bends about to suit the real residts, these contortiona being 
« exactly parallel to the variationt which the pure chemical force, 
by experiment, indicates. 

1875. In the midst of all this, how simply does the chemical 
theory meet, include, combine, and even predict, the numerous 
experimental results ! When there is a current there is also 
chemical action ; when the action ceases, the current stops 
(188^ 1885, 1894.); the action is determined either at the 
anode or the cathode, according to circumstances (2039* 1^1.), 
and the direction of the current is invariably associated willi 
the durection in which the active chemical foroes oblige the 
aniona and cations to move in the circle (962. S0i5f9«)* 

1876. Now when in conjunction with these circumstances it 
is considered, that the many arrangements without chemical 
action (1825, &c.) produce no current ; that those with che- 
mical action almost always produce a current ; that hundreds 
occur in which chemical action without contact producea a cur« 



Digitized by Google 



Jam* 1840,] Active circlet with tulphuret of potassium* 47 

lent (S017, &c.) i and that at mauy with contact but without 
chemical action (1867.) are known and are inactlye ; how can 
we resist the conclusion, that the powers of the voltaic battery 
originate in the exertion of chemical force ? 

1[ iiif Active circles excited by solution of sulphuret of 

potassium* 

1877. In 181^ Davy gave an experiment to show, that of two 
different roetala, copper and iron, that having the atrongest at* 
traction fbr oxygen waa positive in oaidiamg iolutiont» and that 
having the atrongest attraction for siilphur waa poaidve in bu1» 
phuretting solutions^. In 18^ De la Rive quoted several 
such inversions of the states of two metals, produced by using 
different solutions, and reasoned from them, that the mere 
contact of the metals could not be the cause of their respect- 
ive states, but that the chemical action of the Uquid produced 
^ese states^. 

1878. In a former paper I quoted Sir Humphry Davy*a ex- 
periment (943.)9 and gave its result as a proof that the contact 
of the iron and copper could not originate the current pro- 
duced ; since when a dilute acid was used in place of the sul- 
phuret, the current was reverse in direction, and yet the con- 
tact of the metals remained the same. IVI. Marianini^ adds, 
that copper will produce the same effect with tin, lead, and even 
zinc; and also that silver will produce the same results as 
eopper. In the case of copper he accounts for the effect by 
referring it to the relation of the iron and the new body formed 
on the copper, the latter being, according to Volta« positive to 
the former^ By his own experiment the same aubstance waa 
negaUve to the iron across the same solution^ 

1879. I denre at present to resume the dass of cases where 
a solution of sulphuret of potassium is the liquid in a voltaic 
circuit ; for I think they give most powerful proof that the 
current in the voltaic battery cannot be produced by contact* 
but is due altogether to chemical action. 

1880. The solution of sulphuret of potassium (1812.) is a 

I Ekmoifs of Cbenietl Philosophy, p. 148. 

« AmuJoi da Chimio, 1828, nzvfi. 231*337; mis. S9a. 

* Msmorie dtlU Socistl Italians in Modsna* 1887. sod. p. 384. 

4Ibid.p.2l9. •Ibid.p.m 



Digitized by Google 



48 Vaheofsulpkwret o/potauium at ehetrolyie, [Serhs XYL 



most exceUent condttctor of electricity (1814.). .When sub* 
jected between platinum electrodes to the decomposing power 
of a small voltaic battery, it readily gave pure sulphur at the 
anode, and a little gas, which was probably hydrogen, at the 
cathode. When arranged with platinum surfaces so as to form 
a Ritter s secondary pile, the passage of a feeble primary cur- 
rent, for a few seconds only, makes this secondary battery ef- 
fective in causing a counter current ; so that, in accordance 
with electrolytic conduction (923. ] 34<8.), it probably does not 
conduct without decomposition, or if at all, its point of elec« 
trolytic intensity (966. 988.) must be very low. Its ezcitiDg 
action (speaking on the chemical theory) is either the giving an 
amon (sulphur) to such metallic and other bodies as it can act 
upon, or, in some cases, as with the peroxides of lead and 
manganese, and the protoxide of iron (2046.), the abstraction 
of an anion from the body in contact with it, the current pro- 
duced being in the one or the other direction accordingly. Its 
chemical affinities are such, that in many cases its anion goes 
to that metal, of a pair of metals, which is left untouched when 
the usual exciting electrolytes are employed ; and so a beauti- 
ful inversion of the current in relation to Uie metals u obtsined ; 
thus, when copper and nickel are used with it, the anion goes 
to the copper ; but when the same metals are used wilb tibe 
ordinary electrolytic fluids, the anion goes to the nickel. Its 
excellent conducting power renders the currents it can excite 
very evident and strong ; and it should be remembered that the 
strength of the resulting currents, as indicated by the galvano- 
meter, depends jointly upon the energy (not the mere quantity) 
of the exciting action called into play, and the conductive ability 
of the circuit through which the current has to run* The 
value of this exciting electrolyte is increased fbr the present 
investigation, by the circumstance of its giving, by its action on 
the metals, resulting compounds, some of which are insoluble, 
whilst others are soluble ; and, of the insoluble results, some 
are excellent conductors, whilst others have no conducting 
power at all. 

1881. The experiments to he described were made generally 
in the following manner. Wires of platinum, gold, palladium, 
iron, lead, tin, and the other malleable metals, about one twen- 
tieth of an mch m diameter and six inches long* were prepared. 



Digitized by Google 



Jak. IMiJlAeHee eireuiiM emUaimng sulphurei ofpotasiium. 49 

Two of these being connected with the ends of the gahano- 
neter-wires^ were plunged at the same instant into the sobtian 
of sulphnret of potastinm in a test-glass, and kept there with- 
out agitation (1919.), the effects at the same time being ob- 
served. The wires were in every case carefully cleansed with 
fresh fine sand-paper and a clean cloth ; and were sometimes 
even burnished by a glass rod, to give them a smooth surface. 
Precautions were taken to avoid any difference of temperatuxe 
at the junctions of the different metals with the galTanometer- 
wires» 

1882. Tin and |»2ei^tiim.-»When tin was assodated with 
platinum, gold, or, I may say, any other metal which ia che- 
mically inactive in the solution of the sulphuret, a strong 

electric current was produced, the tin being positive to the 
platinum through the solution, or, in other words, the current 
being from the tin through the solution to the platinum. In a 
very short time this current fell greatly in power, and in ten 
minutes the galvanometer-needle was nearly at 0°. On then 
endeavouring to transmit the antimony-bismuth thermo cur- 
rent (18iS5.) through Uie drcuit, it was found that it could not 
pass, the circle having lost its conducting power. This was 
the consequence of the formation on the tin of an insoluble, in- 
vesting, non-conducting sulphuret of that metal ; the non-con- 
ducting power of the body formed is not only evident from the 
present result, but also from a former experiment (1821.). 

1883. Marianini thinks it is possible that (in the case of 
copper, at least (1878.), and, so I presume, for all similar cases^ 
for surely one law or principle should govern them,) the cur- 
rent ia due to the contact force of the sulphuret formed. But 
that application is here entirely excluded ; for how can a lum- 
tondncHi^ body form a current, either by contact or in any 
other way ? No such case has ever been shown, nor is it in 
the nature of things ; so that it cannot be the contact of the sul- 
phuret that here causes the current ; and if not in the present, 
why in any case? for nothing happens here that does not 
happen in any other instance of a current produced by the same 
exdting electrolyte. 

1884. On the other hand, how beautiful a proof the result 
^ves in confirmation of the chemical theory! Tin can take 
sulphur from tiie electrolyte to form a sulphuret; and whilst 

▼OL. n. B 



Digitized by Google 



DD . JMm rinkt wUk $^jpkmr^ ofpotasihm. [SnuBt XVI. 



it ii doing flo« and in proportion to the degroe in vhieb it is 
dmngio^itproduoeaaciirrtntt bttt when the ndpliufatwliiGb 
la formed, by investing the metali shuts off the fluid and pre« 
¥6nt8 further chemical action, then the current ceases also? 

Nor is it 7iecesmry that it should be a non'-conductor for this 
purpose, for conducting sulphurets will perform the same office 
(1885. 1894.), and hring ahout the same result. What, then, 
can be more clear« than that whilst the sulphuret is being 
farmed a current is produced* but that when formed its mere 
contact can do nothing towards such an effect I 

168£»« ZimmI.— This metal presents a fine result in tlie solu- 
lioii of sulphuret of potassium* Ijead and phtinum being the 
metals used, the lead was at first highly positive, but in a few 

seconds the current fell, and in two minutes the galvanometeri- 
needle was at 0°. Still the arrangement conducted a feeble 
thermo current extremely well, the conducting power not ha- 
ving disappeared, as in the case of tin ; for the investing sul- 
phuret of lead is a conductor (1820.). Nevertheless, though a 
eonduotor, it could stop the furtJier ohemical motion # and that 
eeasing, the current ceakted also. 

1886. Lend and gold produced the same effect. Lead and 
paUadinm the same* Lead and iron the samot except that the 
droumstances respecting the tendency of the latter metal under 
emnmon circumstances to produce a current from the elec- 
trolyte to itself, have to be considered and guarded against 
(1826, ,204©.), Lead and nickel also the same. In all these 
Case$, when the lead was taken out and washed, it was found 
beautifhUy invested with a thin polished pellicle of aulphuziet of 
kad. 

1887, With lead, theui we have a cmln^i^g sulphuret 
fibrmedy but still there-is no sign that its contact can produce 
a current, ai^ more than in the case of the mon-condMcinig sul- 
phuret of tin (1882.). There is no new or additional action 

produced by this conducting body ; there was no deficiency of 
action with the former non-co/nlucting product ; both are alike 
in their results, being, in fact, essentially alike in their relation 
to that on which the current really depends, namely, an active 
chemical force. A piece of lead put aionti into the solution 
of sulphuret of potassium, has its surface converted into sul* 
pburet.of leadi the proof thus being obtained^ even when the 



Digitized by Google 



JaK. ISMX] InfitnuUtency of ike eoniad kffpMem, 51 

cumnt oaniiol be fiirmed, tiuit there is a force (chemical) pie» 
eent and actire under 8iich circumttancei ; and such force can 
produce a current of cheniical force when the circuit form if 
^Ten to the arrangement. The force at the place of excite* 
ment shows itself, both by the formation of sulphuret of lead and 
the production of a current. In proportion as the formation 
of the one decreases the production of the other diminishes, 
though all (be bodie« produced are conductors, and contact 
still remains to perform any work or cau«e any effect to which 
it if competent. 

1888. It may perhaps be said tlmt the current is due to the 
contact between the solution of sulphuret and the lead, (or tint 
aa the case may be,) which occurs at the beginning of the ex- 
periment; and that when the action ceases, it is because anew 
body, the sulphuret of lead, is introduced into the circuit, the 
various contacts being then balanced in their force. This 
would be to fall back upon the assumption before resisted 
(1861. 1865. 187^^.), namely, that the solution may class with 
metals and such like bodies, giving balanced efl^cts of eontaol 
in relation to wm qf these bodies, as ui this Qase» to the suU 
phuret of lead, produced, but not with olA^a, as the lead itself; 
both the lead and its sulphuret being in the same category as 
the metals generally (1809. 1870.). 

1889. The utter improbabiUty of this as a natural effect, and 
the absence of all experimental proof in support of it, have 
been already stated (1861.1871.), but one or two additional 
reasons against it now arise* The state of things may perhaps 
be made clearer by a diagram or two, in which assumed con-< 
tact forces may be assigned, in the absence of all experimental 
•xpimion* iritbout injury to die reasonuig. Let fig. 4> Pkto 
IXL represent the electromotiTe foroes of « ciide of platimmi, 
iron, and solution of sulphuret of potassium} or platinum, nickel, 
and solution of sulphuret; cases in which the forces are, ac- 
cording to the contact theory, balanced (I860.). Then fig. 5 
may represent the circle of platinum, lead, and solution of sul- 
phuret, which docs produce a current, and, as I have assumed, 
with a resulting force of 11 This in a few minutes be- 
comes quiescent, i* e. the current ceases, and 4g. 6 may repre- 
sent this new case according to the contact theory. Now is it 
at all likely that by the intervention of sulphuret of lead at tbe^ 



Digitized by Google 



5£ Immmttemiy of ike emOaet htfpoikerit. {SamaXVL 



eontact fig. 5, and the prodttctkm of two contaets d and e, 
fig. 6, such an enonnous change of tbe contact finrce snfiRsriiig 
alteration should be made as from 10 to 1^1 ? the mterventian 

of tbe same sulphuret either at a or 6 (1834. 1840.) being able 
to do nothing of the kind, for the sum of the force of the two 
new contacts is in that case exactly equal to the force of the 
contact which they replace, as is proved by such interposition 
making no change in the effects of the circle (1867. 1840.). If 
therefore the intervention of this body between lead and plati- 
num at a, or between solution of suipkmrei qf potassium and 
platinum at b (fig. 5) causes no change^ these cases including 
its contact with both lead and the solution of sulphuret, is it 
at all probable that its intenrention between these two bodioa 
at c should make a difference equal to double the amount of 
force previously existing, or indeed any difference at all? 

1890. Such an alteration as this in the sum assigned as the 
amount of the forces belonging to the sulphuret of lead by 
virtue of its two places of contact, is equivalent I think to say- 
ing that it partakes of the anomalous character already 8up> 
posed to belong to certaui fluids, namely, of sometinies giving 
balanced forces in drcles of good conductors, and at other 
times not (1865.). 

1891. Even the metals tiiemselves must m fiiet be forced Into 
this constrained condition ; for the effect at a point of contact, 
if there be any at ally must be the result of the^'oiw^ and mutual 
actions of the bodies in contact. If therefore in the circuit, fig. 
5, the contact forces are not balanced, it must be because of 
the deficient ^'otn^ action of the lead and solution at e^ If the 
metal and fluid were to act in their proper character, and as 
inm or nickel would do in the place of the lead, tiisp the force 
there would bc - ^ gl, whereas it is less, or according to the 
assumed numbers only m 10. Now as there Is no reason 
why the lead should have any superiority assigned to it over 
tbe solution, since the latter can give a balanced condition 
amongst good conductors in its proper situation as well as the 
former; how can this be, unless lead possess that strange cha- 

' ^ My nwnben are aaramed, and If other numben wefe taken, the reaaoning 
might be removed to contact h, or even to contact a, Imt the end of Ae aign-. 
meat would in every caae be the aame. 



Digitized by Google 



Jin* 1840* j Active circles uiith sulphurei of potassium, 63 

nder of tomeliiiies giving equipoiied coDtaeti» and at other 

times not .(1865.)r 

189^ If that be true of lead, it must be true of all the metals 

which) with this sulphuretted electrolyte, give circles producing 
currents; and this would include bismuth, copper, antimony, 
silver, cadmium, zinc, tin, &c. &c. With other electrolytic 
fluids iron and nickel would be included, and even gold, plati- 
num, palladitmii in fact all the bodies that can be made to 
yield in any way active voltaic drcuits. Then is it possible 
that this can be true, and yet not a single combination of this 
extensive class of bodies be producible that can give the cur- 
rent without chemical acdon (1867.), considered not as a result, . 
but as a known and pre-existing force? 

1893. I will endeavour to avoid further statement of the ar- 
guments, but think myself bound to produce (1799.) a small 
proportion of tlic enormous body of facts which appear to me 
to bear evidence all in one direction. 

1894. Bismuth, — This metal, when associated with platinum, 
gfM, or palladium in solution of the sulphuret of potassium, 
gives active circles, the bismuth being positive. In the course 
of less than half an hour the cunent ceases; but the dreuit 
is still an excellent conductor of thermo currents. Bismuth 
with iron or nickel produces the same final result with the re- 
servation before made (1826.). Bismuth and lead give an ac- 
tive circle; at first the bismuth is positive; in a minute or two 
the current ceases, but the circuit still conducts the thermo 
current well. 

1895. Thus whilst sulphuret of bismuth is in the act of for- 
mation the current u produced; when the chemical action 
ceases the current ceases abo; though contact contmues and 
the sulphuret be a good conductor. In the case of bbmuth 
and lead the chemical action occurs at both sides, but is most 
energetic at the bismuth, and the current is determined accord- 
ingly. Even in that instance the cessation of chemical action . 
causes the cessation of the current. 

1896. In these experiments with lead and bismuth I liave 
given their associations with platinum, gold, palladium, iron, 
and nickel; because, believing in the first place that the results 
prove all current to depend on chemical action, then, the qui- 
escent state of the resulting or final circles shows that the con- 



Digitized by Google 



'taetiof diatenieUib in their mpeotivo are wUkoui/oree 
(18^0* up^" foOowB the paifire condidonof 

all those contacts which can be produced by Inierpoung odier 
conducting bodies between them (1833.); an argument that 

need not again be urged. 

1897. Copper, — ^This substance being associated with plati- 
num, gold, iron, or any metal chemically inactive in the solu- 
tion of sulphuret, gives an active circle, in which the copper is 
positive through the electrolyte to the other metal. The action^ 
though it falls, does not come to a close as in the former catea, 
and for these sfanple reasons; that the sulphuret fimned is not 
compact but porous> and does not adhere to the copper^ bnt 
separates from it in scales* Hence results a continued renewal 
of the chemical action between the metal and electrolyte, and 
a continuance of the current. If after a while the copper plate 
be taken out and washed, and dried, even the wiping will re- 
move part of the sulphuret in scales, and the nail separates the 
rest with facility. Or if a copper plate be left in abundance 
of the solution of sulphuret, the chemical action continues, and 
the coat of sulphuret of copper becomes thicker and thicker* 

1898. If| as Marianini has shown ^ a copper ]^te which has 
been dipped in the solution of sulphuret, be removed before 
the coat formed is so thick as to break up from the metal be* 
neath, and be washed and dried, and then replaced, in asso- 
ciation with platinum or iron, in the solution, it will at first be 
neutral, or, as is often the case, negative (1827. ]83S.) to the 
other metal, a result quite in opposition to the idea, that the 
mere presence of the sulphuret on it could have caused the 
former powerful current and positive state of the copper (1897* 
1878.)« A further proof that it is not the mere pressnce^ but 
the/on»alkm, of the sulphuret whk^ causes the current^ Is^ 
that, if the plate be left long enough for the solution to ipenem 
tfute the investing crust of sulphuret of copper and come into 
activity on the metal beneath, then the plate beoomes active, 
and a current is produced. 

1899. I made some sulphuret of copper, by igniting thick 
copper wire in a Florence flask or crucible in abundance of 
vapour of sulphur. The body produced is in an excellent 

>M«iiiori« dsUaSosistlk Itsliina in Modons, 1887, xxL m 



Digitized by Google 



fikrm fat Am& MLpesiuieiilSi and * good oonductori but it it 
not widumt aetion on the sulphuretted solutioii, from whidi 
It cum take more iulphur, end the consequence it, that it it 
potttive to platinum or ifon in such a solution. If such sul* 
phuret of copper be left long in the solution, and then be wash- 
ed and dried, it will generally acquire the final state of sulphu* 
rationi either in parts or altogether, and also be inactive^ at 
the tulphuret formed on the copper was before ; u e* 

when itt cheuical action It exhauttedi it ceaset to produce « 
current. 

iOOO. Naihe gray tuJ^hurei t^f tapper liat the tame relation 
to tlie eleetrolyte: it taket tulphur from it and it raited to a 
liigher ttate of combination; and, at it. it alto a conduetov 
(18^.), it produces a currenti being ittelf positiTO to long at 

the action continues. > 
1901, But when the copper is fully sulphurcttedy then all 
these actions cease; though the sulphuret be a conductor, the 
contacts still remain, and the circle can carry with faciUty a 
feeble thermo current. This is not only shown by the quiet* 
cent cases jutt mentioned (1898»)t but also by the utter inactiv 
Tity of platinum and eampaei ydhw copper pyrUeii wiien coo* 
joined by thu electrolyte^ at thown in a former part of tfait 
paper (1840.). 

I901S. i^n/ffnony.-^^This metal, being put alone into a solu* 
tion of sulphuret of potassium, is acted on, and a sulphuret of 
antimony formed which docs not adhere strongly to the metal, 
but wipes oft". Accordingly, if a circle be formed of antimony, 
platinum, and the solution, the antimony is positive in the 
electrolyte, and a powerful current is formed, which continuet» 
Here then is another beautiful Tariation of the conditiont 
under which the ehemical theory can to eatOy account for the 
e£focts, whiltt the theory of contaott cannot* The tulphuret 
prodttded In thit cate it a non-conductor whiltt in the tolid 
etate (40^.) } it cannot therefore be that any contact of this 
sulphuret can produce the current ; in that respect it is like 
the sulphuret of tin (1882.). But that circumstance does not 
stop the occurrence of the chemical current ; for, as the sul* 
phuret forms a porous instead of a continuous crust, the eleo* 
trolyte has access to the metal and the action goes on. 
. 1903* Siherr^T\m metal, atsociated with platinum^ vm^ ot 



Digitized by Google 



56 Adive dreks udik Muiphuret i^ po iaiMum , [SsbibsXVI. 



other metals inactive in this electrolyte, is strongly positive^ 
and gives a powerful continuous current. Accordingly, if a 
plate of silver, coated with sulphuret by the simple action of 
the aohition^ be ezammedy it will be found that the cmst is 
brittle and broken, and aeparates almost spontaneously from 
the metal. In this respect, therefore, silver and copper are 
aHke, and the action consequently continues in both cases; 
but they differ in the sulphuret of silver being a non-conductor 
(434.) for these feeble currents, and, in that respect, this metal 
is analogous to antimony (1902.). 

• Cac^mfum,— >Cadmium with platinum, gold, iron, &c.> 
gives a powerful current in the solution of sulphuret, 'and the 
cadmium is positive* On several occasions this current con- 
tinued for two or three hours or more ; and at such times, Uie • 
cadmium being taken out, washed and wiped, the sulphuret 
was found to separate easily in scales on the doA used. 

1905. Sometimes the current would soon cease ; and then 
the circle was found not to conduct the thermo current (1813.). 
In these cases, also, on examining the cadmium, the coat of 
sulphuret was strongly adherent, and this was more especially 
the case when prior to the experiment the cadmium, after 
having been domed, was burnished by a glass rod (1881.). 
Hence it appears that the sulphuret of this metal ia a non-con- 
ductor, and that its contact could not have caused the current 
(188S.) in the manner Marianini supposes. All the results it 
supplies are in perfect harmony with the chemical theory and 
adverse to contact theory. 

1906. Zinc. — This metal, with platinum, gold, iron, &c., 
and the solution of sulphuret, produces a very powerful cur- 
rent, and is positive through the solution to the other metak 
The current was permanent. Here another beautiful change 
in the circumstances of the general experiment occurs. Sul- 
phuret of amc is a non-conductor of electridty (18jSl.), like the 
aulphurets of tm, cadmium, and antimony ; but then-it is soluble 
in the solution of sulphuret of potassium ; a property easily 
ascertainable by putting a drop of solution of zinc into a por- 
tion of the electrolytic solution, and first stirring them a little, 
by which abundance of sulphuret of zinc will be formed ; and 
then stirring the whole well together, when it will be redis- 
solved. The consequence of this solubility is, that the ainc 



Digitized by Google 



tdien teken out of ihe aolnlioii is perfiactly £ree from investiog 
si^hniet of nnc* Hence* thereforei a very sufficient leasoot 
on lihe chemical dieory, why ihe action should go on. But 

how can the theory of contact refer the current to any contact 
of the metallic sulphuret, when that sulphuret is, in the first 
place, a non-conductor, and, in the next, is dissolved and car- 
ried off into the solution at the moment of its formation ? 

1907. Thus all the phenomena with this admirable electro- 
lyte (1880.)) whether they be those which are related to it as 
an active (1879.) or as a passive (18^, &c*) body, confirm the 
diemical theory* and oppose that of contact With tin and 
cadmium it gives an impermeable non-conducting body ; with 
lead and bismuth it gives an impermeable conducting body ; 
with antimony and silver it produces a permeable non-conduct- 
ing body ; with copper a permeable conducting body ; and 
with zinc a soluble non-conducting body. The chemical action 
and its resulting current are perfectly consistent with all these 
variations. But try to explain them by the theory of contact* 
and* as fitf as I can perceive, that can <mly be dmie by twistmg 
die tiieory about and making it still mote tortuous than before 
(186L 1865. 1872. 1874. 1889.) ; special assumptions being 
necessary to account for the effects which* under it* become 
ao many special cases. 

1908. Solution of protosulphuret of pottissium, or hihydro^ 
sulphuret of potassa* — I used a solution of this kind as the 
electrolyte in a few cases. The results generally were in ac- 
cordance with those already given, but I did not think it ne- 
cessary to pursue them at length. The solution was made by 
passing ' sulphuretted hydrogen gas for twenty-four hours 
through a strong solution of pure caustic potassa. 

1909. Iron and platinum with this solution formed a drde 
in which the iron was first negative then gradually became 
neutral* and finally acquired a positive state. The solution 
first acted as the yellow sulphuret in reducing the investing 
oxide (2049.), and then, apparently, directly on the iron, dis- 
solving the sulphuret formed. Nickel was positive to platinum 
from the first, and continued so though producing only a weak 
current. When weak chemical action was substituted for 
metallic contact at «* fig. ^ (1831.), a powerful current passed. 
Copper was highly positive to iron and nickel; as also to pk^ 
tinmn* gold» and tiie otiier metals which were unacted upon by 



Digitized by Google 



thA aolutioii. Silver was positive to iron, nickel, and even lead | 
at well aa to pUtinum, gold, &c< Lead ia positive to platinum^ 
iheii the oumnt fidla^ but doea not 49eaae« Biamutib ia alao 
poaltive at fitati but after a while the cunent ahnoat enttieljr 
eeaaea» aa with the yellow aulphuret of potaaaimn (1894.)« 

I910* Native gray sulphuret "of copper and ardficial aul- 
phuret of copper (1899.) were positive to platinum and the in- 
active metals : but yellow copper pyrites, yellow iron pyrites, 
and galena, were inactive with these metals in this solution ; as 
before they had been with the solution of yellow or bisulphuret 
of potassium. This solution, as might be expected from ita 
composition, haa more of alkaline charactera in it than the 
yellow aulphuret of potassium* 

191L Before eonduding thia account of reaulta with the 
aulphurett^d aolutionai aa exciting eleotrolytea^ I will mentioQ 
the varying and beautifhl phenomena whieh ocour when copper 
and silver, or two pieces of copper, or two pieces of silver, form 
a circle with the yellow solution. If the metals be copper and 
silver, the copper is at first positive and the silver remains un- 
tarnished ; in a short time this action ceases, and the silver 
becomes positive i at the same instant it begins to combine with 
aulphnr and becomea covered with aulphuret of silver ; in thci 
course of a few moments the copper again bedomea positiye | 
and thua the aetwn will change from aide to aide aeveral thnea» 
and the current with it^ aocordug aa the circumatancea become 
in turn more favourable at one aide or the other. 

191^. But how can it be thought that the current first pro* 
duced is due in any way to the contact of the sulphuret of copper 
formed, since its presence there becomes at last the reason why 
that first current diminishes, and enables the silver, which ia 
originally the weaker in exciting force» and haa no sulphuret as 
yet formed on it| to assume for a tune the predominance, and 
produce a current which can overcome that excited at the 
copper (1911.)? What can account for theae changea, but 
chemical actbn ? which, aa it appeara to me, accounts, aa &r 
as we have yet gonci with the utmoat aimplicity, for all the 
effects produced, however varied, the mode of action and their 
circumstances may be. 

Royal Institution, 
December 12, 1839. 



Digitized by Google 



Jam. 1840.] Exciting force affected by heat. 5B 



SEVENTEENTH SERIES. 

% 24t. On the source of power in the voUaie pile. — (Continued.) 
f iy* The exdiing chemical force effected by temperaiwtem 
f T. The exciting chemicei force qfflected by dihttioH. 
% vi. Dfferencei in the order of the metaUic elemente of 
toUaie circles. % vii. Active voltaic circles and batteries 
without metallic contact. If viii. Considerations of the suf- 
ficiency of chemical action. % ix. Thermo-electric evidence, 
% X. Improbable nature qf the assumed contact force. 

Beedfvd Jamitry 30,— Rctd Maiih It, 1840. 

I%e exciting chenUeai force affected by temperature. 

1913. On the view that chemical force is the origin of the 
electric current in the voltaic circuity it is important that we 
have the power of causing by ordinary chendcal means, a va* 
riation of that force within certain Iknits, without involving any 
alteration of the metallic or even the other contacts in the cir- 
cuit. Such variations should produce corresponding voltaic 
effects, and it appeared not improbable that these differences 
alone might be made eifective enough to produce currents 
without any metallic contact at all. 

1914. De la Rive has shown that the increased action of a 
pair of metals^ when put into hot fluid instead of cold» is in a 
great measure due to the exaltation of the chemical affinity on 
Siat metal which was acted upon^ My object was to add to 
the argument by using but one metal and one ftuidi so that tiie 
fluid might be alike at both contacts, but to exalt the che- 
mical force at one only of the contacts by the action of heat. 
If such difference produced a current with circles which either 
did not generate a thermo current themselves, or could not 
conduct that of an antimony and bismuth element, it seemed 
probable that the effect would prove to be a result of pure cbe* 
mioal force^ contact doing nothing. 

* An&slss ae Chimie, 1828, xzzvii. p. 242. 



Digitized by Google 



60 



Precautioiu, [SsEiEs XVIL . 



1915. The apparatus used was a glass tube (Plate III, fig. 7.) 
about five inches long and 0*4 of an inch internal diameter, 
open at both ends, bent, and supported on a retort-stand. 
In this the liquid was placed, and the portion in the upper 
part of one limb could then easily be heated and retained so, 
whilst that in the other limb was cold. In the experiments I 
will call the left4iand aide A, and the right-hand aide.B, 
taking care to make no change of these designations. C and 
D are the wiies of metal (1881.) to be compared ; .^ey were 
formed into a cireuit by means of the galyanometer, and, oflten 
also, a Seebeck's thermo-element of antimony and bismuth ; 
both these, of course, caused no disturbing effect so long as the 
temperature of their various junctions was alike. The wires 
were carefully prepared (1881.), and when two of the same 
metal were used, they consisted of the successive portions of 
the same piece <^ wire* 

1916* The precautbns which are necessary for the elimina« 
tion of a correct result are rather numerous^ but simple in thdr 
nature. 

1917. Effect of first tmmernon.'—lt is hardly possible to 
have the two wires of the same metal, even platinum, so ex- 
actly alike that they shall not produce a current in consequence 
of their difference ; hence it is necessary to alternate the wires 
apd repeat the experiment several times, until an undoubted 
result independent of such disturbing influences is obtained. 

1918. J^eetqftke investing flmd or Mtoanetf.— The fluid 
produced by the action of the fiquid upon the metal exerts, as 
is wdl known, a most important influence on lihe production of 
a current. Thus when two wires of cadmium were used with 
the apparatus, fig. 7, (1915.) containing dilute sulphuric acid, 
hot on one side and cold on the other, the hot cadmium was at 
first positive, producing a deflection of about 10°; but in a 
short time this eflect disappeared, and a current in the reverse 
direction equal to 10° or more would appear, the hot cadmium 
being now negative. This I refer to the quicker exhaustion of 
the diemical forces of the flhn of acid on the heated metallic 
surfiu» (1008. 1036* 1087.), and the consequent final superii>- 
ri^ of the colder side at which the action was thus necessarily 
more powerful (1953, &e. 1966. 18015. ^1, &c.). Marianmi 
has described many cases of the effects of investing solutions» 



Digitized by Google 



Jam. 1840.] Effect of moHon in the fluids 



61 



showing ihat if two pieces of the same metal (iron^ tini lead* 
ainc, &c.) be used, the one first immersed is nef^ivre to the 
other, and has given his views of the cause ' . The precaution 
against this effect was not to put the metals into the acid until 
the proper temperature had been given to both parts of it, and 
then to observe the Jirst effect produced, accounting that as the 
true indication, but repeating the experiment until the result 
was certain. 

1919. Effect qfmOkm.'^Tlm investing fluid (1918.) made 
it necessary to guard against the effect of successive rest and 
motion of die metal in the fluid. As an iUustration, if two tin 
wires (1881.) be put into dilute nitric acid, there will probably 

be a little motion at the galvanometer, and then the needle will 
settle at 0°. If either wire be then moved, the other remaining 
quiet, that in motion will become positive. Again, tin and cad- 
mium in dilute sulphuric acid gave a strong current, the cad- 
mium being positive, and the needle was deflected 80°. When 
left, the force of the current fell to 35°. If the cadmium were 
then moved it produced very Uttle alteration ; but if the tin were 
moved, it produced a great change, not showing, as before, an 
increase of its force, but the reverse, for it became more nega* 
tive, and Ihe current force rose up again to 80^. The pre- 
caution adopted to avoid the interference of these actions, was 
not only to observe the first effect of the introduced wires, but 
to keep them moving from the moment of the introduction. 

19^. The above effect was another reason for heating the 
adds, &c. (1918.) before the wires were immersed ^ for in the 
experiment just described, if the cadmium side were heated to 
Inkling, the moment the fluid was agitated on the tin -side by 

' Annales de Chimie, 1830, xlv. p. 40. 

' Tin has some remarkable actions in this respect. If two tins be immersed 
in lucc— ion into dilate iiHrio add, ihe one last in ii positive to the oiher at flie 
momontt i^ hodi being in, one be merad, that is Ibr the time poiitife to the 
ellMr. Btot k dihite anlphurie add be em^oyed, the laH tinia alwayipcgative t 
if one be taken on^ deaned, and idmmened, it is n^gatiTa : if, both being in 
and nentral, one be moved, it becomes negative to the other. The effects willi 
mwiatic acid are the same in kind as those with aulphnric add, but not so 
strong. This effect perhaps depends npon the compovnd of tm fiiit ptoduced 
in the sulphuric and muriatic acids tending to acquire some other and more ad- 
vanced state, either in relation to the oxygen, chlorine or acid concerned, and 
so adding a force to that which at the iirst moment, when only metdlic tin and 
acid are present, tends to determine a current. 



Digitized by Google 



the boiling on the cadmium side, there was more effect by far 
produced by the motion than the heat : for the heat at the cad- 
imum done did little or nothing, bnt. the jumping of the acid 
oyer the tin made a difforenoe in Uie cufrent of IK)^ or 30^f 

I9^h JBjffM ^otf .^Two platinum wiiee were pul into coU 
strong solution of sulphuret of potatsium (IBl^,), fig. 7 $ and 
the galvanometer was soon at 0*^. On heating and boiling tbe 
fluid on the side A (1915.) the platinum in it became negative; 
cooling that side, by pouring a little water over it from a jug, 
and heating the side B, the platinum there in turn became ne- 
gative 't ^d« though the aotiou was irr^ular, the same general 
result occurred however the temperatures of the parts were 
idtered. This was not due to the chemical effect of the eleo* 
tndyte on the heated platinum. Nor dolbdieveitwasatnie 
ihermo turret (193S.) ; but if it were the bitter» then the 
heated platinum was negaiwe through the electrolyte to the 
cold platinum. I believe it was altogether the increased effect 
of the air upon the electrolyte at the heated side ; and it is 
evident that the application of the heat, by causing currents in 
the fluid and also in the air, facilitates their mutual action at 
that plaoOf It has been idready showRt that lifting up a plati* 
num wire in this solution, so as to expose it for A moment to 
the air (1^7«), renders it negative when reimmersed« an effect 
whidi is in perfect accordance with the assumed action of the 
heat»d air and fluid m ibe present cast » I*he iqterfbrenco of 
this efl^ct is obviated by raising the temperature of the elec- 
trolyte quietly before the wires are immersed (191^.), and ob« 
serving only the first effect, 

1922. Effect of heat. — In certain cases w here two different 
• metals are used, there is a very remarkable effect produced on 

heating the negative metal. This will require too much detail 

to he described fully here ; hut I will brie% point it out aud 
illustrate it by an example or tweu 

19i8. When two platinum wires were compared in hot and 
cold dilute, sulphuric acid (19S5«), they gave scarcely a sen- 
sible trace of any electric current. If any real effect of heat oc- 
curred, it was that the hot metal was the least degree positive. 
When silver and silver were compared, hot and cold, there was 
also no sensible effect. But when platinum and silver were 
compared in the same acid, different effects occurred. Both 



Digitized by Google 



being cold, the tilver in the A ride fig* 7 (1915.) wm pori^ 
tiye about 4^, by the galvenoiqeter ; moving the platina on 
the other side B did not alter this effect, but on heating 

the acid and platinum there, the current became very power- 
ful, deflecting the needle 30°, and the silver was positive. 
Wliilst the heat continued, the effect continued ; but on cooling 
the acid and platinum it went down to the first degree. No 
such effect took place at the silverj for on heating that side, 
instead of be<soming negative, it became more po8itive« but only 
to the degfee of deflecting the needle Then, moHm of 
the. platinum (19}9«) facilitated the passing of the current and 
the deflection increasedi but hmK^ tbe platinum ride did far 
more. 

1924. Silver and copper in dilute sulphuric acid produced 
very little effect ; the copper was positive about 1° by the gaU 
vanometerj moving the copper or the silver did nothing; 
heating the copper ride caused no change ; but on heating the 
silver side it became negative ^0°. On Pooling the silver ride 
this effect went down, and theui either moving the silver or 
copper, or beating the copper side, caused very little change ; 
bnt beating the silver side made it negative as before* 

19£5« All this resolves itself into an effect of the foBowmg 
kind ; that where two metals are in the relation of positive and 
negative to each other in such an electrolyte us dilute acids, 
(and perhaps others,) heating the negative metal at its con» 
tact with the electrolyte enables the current, which tends to 
form, to pass with such facility, as to give a result sometimes 
tenfold more powerful than would occur without it. It is not 
diephcement of the investing fluid, for motion will in these 
cases do nothing i it is not diemical action, for the effect oo« 
curs at that electrode where tbe chemical action is not active \ 
it is not a thermo-electric phenomenon of the ordinary kmdi 
because it depends upon a voltaic relation ; i. e. the metal 
showing the effect must be negative to the other metal in the 
electrolyte; so silver heated does nothing with silver cold, 
though it shows a great effect with copper either hot or cold 
(19^4.) ; and platinum hot is as nothing to platina cold« but 
much to silver either hot or cold. 

19^. Whatever may be the intimate action of heat in these 
cases, there is no doubt that it is dependent on the current 
which tends to pass roumd the drcuit. It is essential to re- 



Digitized by Google 



PreeaMmi.-^Effeet of heat. [Sbeibs X VIL 



member tbat lihe increased effect on the gaWinometer is not 

due to any increase in the electromotive force, but solely to tbe 
removal of obstruction to the current by an increase probably 
of discharge. M. de la Rive has described an effect of heat, 
on the passage of the electric current, through dilute acid 
placed in the circuit, by platinum electrodes. Heat applied to 
the negative electrode increased the deflection of a galvano- 
meter needle in the circuit, from to 30° or 45^ ^ whilst heat 
applied to the positiTe electrode caused no changed I have 
not been able to obtain this nullity of effect at the positive elec- 
trode when a voltaic battery was used (1689.) ; but I have no 
doubt the present phenomena will prove to be virtually the same 
as those which that philosopher has described. 

1927. The effect interferes frequently in the ensuing expe- 
riments when two metals, hot and cold, are compared with 
each other ; and the more so as the negative metal approxi- 
mates in inactivity of character to platinum or rhodium. Thus 
in the comparison of cold copper^ with hot silver, gold, or 
platinum, in dflute nitric add, diis e£Ebct tends to make the 
copper appear more positive than it otherwise would do. 

19J^. Place of the wire termmaUans^It is requisite that 
the end of the wire on the hot side should be in the heated 
fluid. Two copper wires were put into diluted solution of 
sulphuret of potassium, fig. 8 ; that portion of the liquid ex- 
tending from C to D was heated, but the part between D and 
£ remained cold. Whilst both ends of the wires were in the 
cold fluid, as in the figure, there were irregular movements of 
the galvanometer, small in degree, leaving the B wire positive. 
Moving the wires about, but retaining them as in the figure, 
made no diflferenee; but on raising the wire in A, so that its 
termination should be in the hot fluid between C and D, then 
it became positive and continued so. On lowering the end 
into the cold part, the former state recurred ; on raising it into 
the hot part, the wire again became positive. The same is the 
case with two silver wires in dilute nitric acid ; and though it 
appears veiy curious that the current should increase in strength 
as the extent of bad conductor increases, yet such is often the 
case under these curcumstances. There can be no reason to 
doubt that the part of the wire which is in the hot fluid at the 
A . side, is at all times equally positive or nearly so ; but at one 

' BibUotheque UnivergeUe, 1837, vii. 388. 



Digitized by Google 



Jan. 1840.] VoUaic excUetnent affected by temperature, 65 

time the whole of the current it produces is passing ihrongh 
the entire circuit hy the wire in B, and at another, a part, or 
the whole, of it is circulating to the cold end of its own wire« 
only hy the fluid in tuhe A* 

19^* Cleamiig the ioir«t«— That this should be carefully 
done has been already mentioned (1881.) ; but it is especially 
neceasaiy to attend to the yery extremitiea of the wiiesy for li 
these circukr spacesi which occur in the most eflfectiTe part of 
the circle, he left covered with the body produced on them in a 
preceding trial, an experimental result will often be very much 
deranged, or even entirely falsified. 

1930. Thus the best mode of experimenting (1915.) is to 
heat the liquid in the Hmb A or B, fig. 8, first; and, having 
the wires well cleaned and connected, to plunge both in at 
once, and, retaining the end of the heated wire in the hot part 
of the fluid, to keep both wires in motion, and observe, espe* 
cially, the first effects : then to take out the wires, reclean them, 
change them side for side and repeat the experiment, doing 
this so often as to obtain from the several results a decided 
and satisfactory conclusion. 

1931. It next becomes necessary to ascertain whether any 
true thermo current can be produced by electrolytes and metals, 
which can interfere with any electro-chemical effects dependent 
upon the action of heat. For this purpose different combina- 
tions of electrolytes and metals not acted on chemically by them, 
were tried, with the following results. 

Platinum and a very strong eohtHon of potasta gave, 
as the result of many experiments, the hot platinum positive 
across the electrolyte to the cold platinum, producing a current 
that could deflect the galvanometer needle about 5°, when the 
temperatures at the two junctures were 60° and 240°. Gold 
and the same solution gave a similar result. Silver and a mo- 
derately strong solution, of specific gravity 1070, like that used 
in the ensuing experiments (1948.) gave the hot silver positive, 
but now the deflection was scarcely sensible, and not more than 
1^. Iron was tried in the same solution, and there was a con- 
stant current and deflection of 50** or more, but there was also 
chemical action ( 1 948. ) . 

1933. I then used solution of the sulphuret of potassium 
(1812.). As ahready said, hot platinum is negative in it to the 

VOL. II. F 



Digitized by Google 



66 Thermo currents in electrolifUs very feeble* [Series XyiL 

eM metal (1901.) ; but I do n0t think the actloa was theimo* 
dectria Palladium with a weaker aoludou gave no indication 

of a current. 

1934. Employing dilute nitric acid, consisting of one volume 
strong acid and fifty volumes water, platinum gave no certain 
indication : the hot metal was sometimes in the lea^t degree 
positive* and at otbert an equally small degree negative* Gold 
in the same acid gave a scarcely sensible result } the hot metal 
was negative. Palladium was as gold. 

1835* With dilute sulphuric add, consisting of one by weight 
of on of yitriol and eighty of water, nmther platinum nor gold 
produced any sensible current to my galvanometer by the mere 
action of heat. 

193G. Muriatic acid and platinum being conjoined, and 
heated as before, the hot platinum was very slightly negative in 
atrong acid : in dilute acid there was no sensible current. 

1937. Strong nUric aeid at first seemed to give decided re- 
sults. Platinum and pure strong nitric acid being heated at one 
of the junctions, the hot platinum became constantly negative 
across the electrolyte to the cold metal, the deflection hmg 
•bout When a yeHow acid was used, the deflection was 
greater ; and when a very orange-coloured acid was employed, 
the galvanometer needle stood at 70°, the hot platinum being 
still negative. This eflect, however, is not a pure thermo cur- 
rent, but a peculiar result due to the presence of nitrous acid 
(1848.). It disappears almost entirely when a dilute acid is 
used (1934.) ; and what eflect does remain indicates ^t the 
hot metal is negative to the ooUL 

1938. Thus thejpo^osA foluium seems to be the fluid giving 
ihe most probable indications of a thermo current. Yet there 
the deflection is only 5°, though the fluid, being very strong, 
is a good conductor (1819.). When the fluid was diluted, and 
of specific gravity 1070, like that before used (1982.), the effect 
yras only 1°, and cannot tlierefore be confounded with the re- 
sults I have to quote. 

1939. The dilute sulphuric (1935.) and niirie acids used 
(1934^) gave only doubtful indications in some cases of a thermo 
current. On trial it was found that the thermo current of an 

« 

antimony-bismuth pair could not pass these solutions, as ar- 
ranged in these and other experiments (1949. 1950.) ; that^ 



Digitized by Google 



Jak. 1840.] Voltaic currents determined by heat* 67 

tlimfere, if the little eumnt obtained in the ezperimenta be 

of a thermo-electric nature, this combination of platinum and 
acid is far more powerful than the antimony-bismuth pair of 
Seebeck; and yet that (with the interposed acid) it is scarcely 
sensible by this delicate galvanometer. Further, wlicn there is 
a current, the hot metal is generally negati?e to the cold^ and 
it is therefore impossible to confound these results with those 
to be described where the current has a contrary direction. 

1940. In Btroiig nitric acid, agam, the hot metal is negative. 

194p1. If, after I show that heat applied to metals in acids or 
electrolytes which can aei on them produces considerable cur- 
rents, it be then said that though the metals which are inactive 
in the acids produce no thermo currents, those which, like 
copper, silver, &c. act chemically, may ; then, I say, that such 
would be a mere supposition, and a supposition at variance 
with what we know of thermo-electricity ; for amongst the solid 
conductors, metallic or non*metaUic (1867.)> there are none, I 
believe, which are able to produce thermo currents with some 
of the metals, and not with others. Furtheri these metals, 
copper, silver, &:c., do not always show effects which can be 
mistaken or pass for thermo-electric, for silver in hot dilute 
nitric acid is scarcely different from silver in the same acid cold 
(1950.) ; and in other cases, again, the hot metals become ne-* 
gative instead of positive 

Ca$es qfone metal and one electrolyte { one junction being 

heated. 

1942. The cases I have to adduce are far too numerous to 
be given in detail ; I will therefore describe one or two, and 
sum up the rest as briefly as possible. 

1943. Irofi in diluted sulphur et of potassium. — The hot iron 
is well positive to the cold metal. The negative and cold wire 
continues quite clean, but from the hot iron a dark sulphuret 
feparates, which becoming diffused through the solution disco- 
lours it. When tiie cold iron is taken out, washed and wiped, 
it leaves the doth clean ; but that which has been heated leaves 
a blndc sulphuret upon the cloth when similarly treated. 

1944. Copper and the sulphuretted solution, — The hot copper 
is well positive to the cold on the first immersion, but the effect 
quickly falls, from the general causes already referred to 

v2 



Digitized by Google 



68 Influence of Iteat on voUaic excitement, [Series XVIL 

1945. Tm mid tokHon o/*/MilaiMr.— The liot tin is strongly 
and constantly poritiT* to the cold. 

1946. Iron and dilute sulphuric acid (1935.). — The hot iron 
was constantly positive to the cold, 60° or more. Iron and di- 
luted nitric acid gave even a still more striking result. 

I must now enumerate merely, not that the cases to be men- 
tioned are less decided than those already giraiy but to econo- 
mize time. 

1947. Dihie sohtHaH qf yeUoim stdpkmrei of paiattimh 
consisting of one yolume of the strong solution (181^.), and 
eighteen volumes of water. — Iron, silver, and copper, widi this 
solution, gave good results. The hot metal was positive to 
the cold. 

1948. Dilute solution of caustic potassa (1932.). — Iron, 
copper, tin, zinc, and cadmium gave striking results in this 
electrolyte. The hot metal was always positive to the cold. 
Lead produced the same effect, but there was a momentary 
jerk at the galvanometer at the instant of immersion, as if the 
hot lead was negative at that moment. In the case of iron it 
was necessary to continue the application of heat, and then the 
formation of oxide at it could easily be observed ; the alkali 
gradually became turbid, for the protoxide first formed was 
dissolved, and becoming peroxide by degrees, was deposited, 
and rendered the liquid dull and yellow. 

1949. Dilute sulphuric acid (19^5.).— Iron, tin, lead, and 
sine, in this electrolyte, showed the power of heat to produce 
a current by exalting the chemical affinity, for the hot side was 
in each case positive* 

1950. Dilute tnirie acid is remarkable for presenting only 
one case of a metal hot and cold exhibiting a striking difference, 
and that metal is iron. With silver, copper, and zinc, the hot 
side is at the first moment positive to the cold, but only in the 
smallest degree. 

1951. Strong nitric acid. — ^Hot iron is positive to cold. Both 
in the hot and cold acid the iron is in its peculiar state (1844. 
^1.). 

195^. DUuie nuariaiie add: 1 vakane strong muriatie acid, 
and 29 voktmes water, — This acid was as remarkable for the 
number of cases it supplied as the dilute nitric acid was for the 

contrary (1900.). Iron, copper, tin, lead, zinc, and cadmium 



Digitized by Google 



Jan. 1840.] Influence of heat on voliaic excUemaU* 69 

gave active circles with it, the hot metal being positive to the 
cold ; all the results were very striking in the strength and 
permanency of the electric current produced. 



1953. Several cases occur in which the hot metal hecomes 
negative instead of positive, as above ; and the principal cause 
of such an effect I have already adverted to (1918.). Thus 
with the solution of the sulphuret of potassium and zinc, on 
the first immersion of the wires into the hot and cold solution 
there was a pause, i. e. the galvanometer needle did not move 
at onccj as in the former cases ; afterwards a current gradually 
came into existence, rising in strength until the needle was de- 
fleeted 70^ or 80^1 the hot metal being negoHw through the 
electrolyte to the cold metal. Cadmium in the saihe solution 
gave also the first pause and then a cttrrent« the hot metal 
being negative ; but the eWdct was very small. Lead, hot, was 
negative, producing also only a feeble current. Tin gave the 
same result, but the current was scarcely sensible. 

1954. In dilute sulphuric acid, — Copper and zinc, after ha- 
ving produced a first positive effect at the hot metal, had that 
reversed^ and a feeble current was produced, the hot metal 
being negative. Cadmium gave the same phenomena^ but 
stronger (191S.). 

1955. In dikfte nitrie acid. — Lead produced no eflfect at the 
first moment; but afterwards an electric current, gradually 
increasing in strength, appeared, which was able to deflect the 
needle UO"^ or more, the hot metal being negative. Cadmium 
gave the same results as lead. Tin gave an uncertain result : 
at first the hot metal appeared to be a very little negative, it 
then became positive, and then again the current diminished^ 
and went down almost entirely. 



1956. I cannot but view in these results of the action of heat, 
the strongest proofs of the dependence of the electric current 
in voltaic circuits on the chemical action of the substances con- 
stituting these circuits : the results perfectly accord with the 
known influence of heat on chemical action. On the other 
hand> I cannot see how the theory of contact can take cogni- 



Digitized by Google 



70 Inejffiefiey of contact in voltaic excitement, [Sehies XVII • 

zance of them, except by adding new assiimpdons to those 
already composing it (1874.). How, for instance, can it ex- 
plain the powerful effects of iron in sulphuret of potassium, or 
in potassa^ or in dilute nitric acid ; or of tin in potassa or sul- 
phuric acid ; or of iron, copper, tin, &c. in muriatic acid ; or 
indeed of any of the effecto quoted ? That they cannot be due 
to tKermo contact has been already ihown by the results with 
inactiye metals (1931. 194L) $ and to these may now be added 
those of the active metals, silver and copper in dilute nitric 
acid, for heat produces scarcely a sensible effect in these cases. 
It seems to me that no other cause than chemical force 
(a very sufficient one)i remains^ or is needed to account for 
them. 

1957* If it be said that, on the theory of chemical excitement, 
the experiments prore either too much or not enough, that, in 
fiieti heat ought to produce ibe same- effect with aU the metals 
that are acted on by the electrolytes used, then, I say, that 
that does not follow. The force and other circumstances of 
chemical affinity vary almost infinitely with the bodies exbibit- 
ing its action, and the added effect of heat upon the chemical 
affinity would, necessarily, partake of these variations. Che- 
mical action often goes on without any current being produced ; 
and it is well known that, in almost every voltaic circuit, the 
chemical force has to be considered as divided into that which 
is local and that which is current (1 1^.), Now heat frequently 
assists the local action much, and, sometimes, without appear<» 
ing to be accompanied by any great increase in the UUeimty of 
chemical affinity ; whilst at other times we are sure, from the 
chemical phenomena, that it does affisct the intensity of the 
force. The electric current, however, is not determined by the 
amount of action which takes place, but by the intensity of the 
affinities concerned ; and so cases may easily be produced, in 
which that metal exerting the least amount of action is never- 
theless the positive metal in a voltaic circuit ; as with copper in 
weak nitric add associated with other copper in strong acid 
(1975.), or iron or silver in the same weak acid against copper 
in the strong acid (1996.). Many of tliose instances where the 
hot side ultimately becomes negative, as of sine in dflute solu« 
tion of sulphuret of potassium (1953.), or cadmium and lead in 
dilute nitric acid (1955.), are of this nature ; and yet the con- 



Digitized by Google 



Jak. 1810.] Chemicalaction the source of voltaic electricity. 71 

ditioDt and venilt are in perfect agreement with libe cfamical 
dieory of Toltaic excitement (1918.). 

1958. The distinction between currents founded upon that 
difference of intensity which is due to the difference in force of 
the chemical action which is their exciting cause, is, I think, a 
necessary consequence of the chemical theory, and in 1 83'^ I 
adopted that opinion^ (891. 908. 916. 988.). De la Kive in 
1886 gave a still more precise enundation of such a principle^ 
by saying) that the intensity of currents is exactly proportional 
to the degree of affinity which reigns between the particles^ the 
combination or separa^n of which produces the currents* 

1959. I look upon the question of the origin of the power in 
the voltaic battery as abundantly decided by the experimental 
results not connected with the action of heat (1824, &c. 1878, 
&c.). I further view the results with heat us adding very strong 
confirmatory evidence to the chemical theory ; and the nume- 
rous questions wliich arise at to the varied results produce(l» 
only tend to show how important the voltaic circuit is as a 
means of investigadon into the nature and principles of chemical 
affinity (1967.). This truth has already been most strikingly 
illustrated by the researches of De la Rive made by means of 
the galvanometer, and the investigations of my friend Professor 
Daniell into the real nature of acid and other compound elec* 
Iroiytes^* 

. C(ues qf two metals and one electrolyte; one junction being 

heated* 

1960. Since heat produced such striking results with single 

metals, I thought it probable that it might be able to affiMSt^ 
mutual relation of the metals in some cases, and even invert 
their order : on making circuits with two metals and electro* 
lytes, I found the following cases. 

1961. In the solution of sulphuret of jwtassium, hot tin is 
well positive to cold silver : cold tin is very slightly positive to 
hot silver, and the silver then rapidly tarnishes. 

196^2» In the solution ofpotassat cold tin is fairly positive to 
hot lead* but hot tin is much more positive to cold lead. Ahio 

» Philosophical Transactions, 1834, p. 428. 
' Annales de Chimie, 1836, Ixi. p. 44. &c. 
s Pbiloaopbical TrausactioM, 1838, p. 97. 



Digitized by Google 



72 FoUmc relaii&n ofmeiali imteried hy heai. [SBBifts XVII. 



cold cadtniiim w positiTe to hot lead^ but hot cadmium is Uat 
more positive to cold lead* In these cases, therdbrei there 
are great differences produced by heat, but the metab still 
keep their order. 

1963. In dilute sulphuric acid, hot iron is ivell positive to 
cold tin, but hot tin is still more positive to cold iron. Hot 
iron is a little positive to cold lead, and hot lead is very posi- 
tive to cold iron. These are cases of the actual inversion of 
order ; and tin and lead may have their states reversed exactly 
in the same manner. 

1964. In dUuie niirie aeidg tin and iron, and iron and lead 
may have theb states reversed, whichever is the hot metal being 
rendered positive to the other. If, when the iron is to be 
plunged into the heated side (1930.) the acid is only mode- 
rately warm, it seems at first as if the tin would almost over- 
power the iron, so beautifully can the forces be either balanced 
or rendered predominant on either side at pleasure. Lead is 
positive to tin in both cases $ but far more so when hot than 
when cold. 

1965. These e£Qects show beautifully tha^ in many cases, 
when two difierent metals are taken, either can be made posi- 
tive to the other at pleasure, by actmg on their chemical affi- 
nities ; though the contacts of the metals with each other (sup- 
posed to be an electromotive cause,) remain entirely unchanged. 
They show the effect of heat in reversing or strengthening the 
natural difFerences of the metals, according as its action is made 
to oppose or combine with their natural chemical forces, and 
thus add further confirmation to the mass of evidence already 
adduced. 



1966. There are here, as in the cases of one metal, some 
instances where the heat renders the metal more negative than 
it would be if cold. They occur, principally, in the solution of 
sulphuret of potassium. Thus, with zinc and cadmium, or zinc 
and tin, the coldest metal is positive. With lead and tin, the 
hot tin is a little positive, cold tin very posidve. With lead and 
ssinc, hot sine b a little positive, cold ainc much more so. With 
silver and lead, the hot silver is a little positive to the lead, ihe 
cold silver is more, and well positive. In these cases the cur^ 
rent is preceded by a moment of quiescence (1953.), during 



Digitized by Google 



Jan. 18400 VoUaie relaHmiM qfmeiait imerted heat. 73 



which the chemieal action at the hot metal reduces the effi- 
cacy of the electrolyte against it more than at the cold metali 
and the ktter afterwards shows its advantage* 



1967. Before concluding these observations on the effects of 
heat, and in reference to the probable utility of the voltaic cir- 
cuit in investigations of the intimate nature of chemical affinity 
(I959.)9 1 wOl describe a result which, if confirmed, may lead 
to very important investigations. Tin and lead were conjoined 
and plunged into cold dilute sulphuric acid ; the tin was posi- 
tive a little. The same acid was heated, and the tin and lead, 
having been perfectly cleaned, were reintroduced, then the lead 
was a little positive to the tin. So that a difference of tempe- 
rature not limited to one contact, for the two electrolytic con- 
tacts were always at the same temperature, caused a difference 
in the relation of these metals the one to the otiier. Tin and 
iron in dilute sulphuric acid appeared to give a simflar result; 
i. e. in the cold acid the tin was always positive, but with hot 
acid the iron was sometimes positive. The effects were but 
small, and I had not time to enter further into the investigation. 

1968. I trust it is understood that, in every case, the pre- 
cautions as to very careful cleansing of the wires, the places of 
the ends, simultaneous immersion, observation of the first 
effects, &c., were attended to. 

^ V. The exciting chemical force affected by dilution, 

1969. Another mode of affecting the chemical affinity of these 
elements of voltaic circuits, the metals and acids, and also ap- 
plicable to the cases of such circuits^ is to vary the proportion 
of water present. Such variation is known, by the simplest 
chenucal experiments, to affisct very Importantiy the resulting 
action, and, upon the chemical theory, it was natural to expect 
that it would also produce some corresponding change in the 
voltaic pile. The effects observed by Avogadro and CErsted 
in 1823 are in accordance with such an expectation, for they 
found that when the same pair of metals was plunged in suc- 
cession into a strong and a dilute acid, in certain cases an in- 
version of the current took place ^ In 1828 De la Rive carried 
these and similar cases much further, especially in voltaic com- 

> Annales de Cbimie, 1823, xzii. p. 361. 



Digitized by Google 



74 Sjfie^4if^lUKti^mmkai9€McUemeni. [SmmsXVIL 



binattons of copper and iron with letdK In I8ffi Becqiierel* 
oxperunented with ono metal, copper» plunged at its two extie* 
mities into a solution of the same substance (salt) of differmd 
strengths ; and in 1828 De la Rive* made many such experi- 
ments with one metal and a iluid in different states of dilution, 
which I think of very great importance. 

1970. The argument derivable from effects of this kind ap- 
peared to me so strong that I worked out the facts to some ex- 
tent, and think the general results well worthy of statement* 
Dilution is the ciroumstanoe which most generally exalts the 
existing action, but how such a circumstance should increase 
the electromotiYe force of mere emUact did not seem evident to 
me, without (umnmngi as before (1874.), exactly those influ- 
ences at the points of contact in the various cases, which the 
prior results, ascertained by experiments, would require. 

1971. The form of apparatus used was the bent tube already 
described (1915.) fig. 7. The precautions before directed with 
the wiresy tube, &c., were here likewise needful. But there 
were others also requisite* consequent upon the current pro- 
duced by combination of water with acid, an effect which has 
been described long since by Becquerel\ but whose influence 
m the present researches requires explanation. 

1972. Figs. 9 and 10 represent the two arrangements of 
fluids used, the part below m in the tubes being strong acid, 
and that above diluted. If the fluid was nitric acid and the 
platinum wires as in the figures, drawing the end of the wire 
D upwards above m, or depressing it from above m downwards* 
caused great changes at the galvanometer \ but if they were 
preserved quiet at any place, then the electro^current ceased* 
or very nearly so. Whenever the current existed it was from 
the weak to the strong add through ihe liquid. 

When the tube was arranged, as in fig. 9, with water 
or dilute acid on one side only, and the wires were immersed 
not more than one third of an inch, the effects were greatly 
diminished ; and more especially, if, by a little motion with a 
platinum wire, the acids had been mixed at m, so that the trans- 
ition from weak to strong was gradual instead of sudden. In 
Buch cases, even when the wires were moved, horiaontally, in 

1 Annales de Chiniie, 1828, mvii. p. 234. ' Ibid. 1827, mv. p. 120. 
> Ibid. 1828, zzzviL p. 240, 241. « TksitS ds I'Electridt^, ii. p. 81. 



Digitized by Google 



Jan. 1840«] Effect of dilution on voltaic excitement* 75 

dm mad, the efibct wm so small as to be soarcely sensibley and 
not likely to be eonfocmded wiih the chemical effects to be de- 
scribed hereafter. Still more surely to avoid such interference, 
an acid moderately diluted was used instead of water. The 
precaution was taken of emptying, washing, and re-arranging 
the tubes with fresh acid after each experiment, lest any of the 
metal dissolved in one experiment .should interliBre with tbo 
results of the next. 

1974. I occasionally used the tube with dilute acid on one 
side only* fig. 9» and sometimes lhat with dilute add on both 
odes, fig. 10. I will call the first No. 1. and the second No. j^. 



1975. In illustration of the general results I will describe a 
particular case. Employing tube No. 1. with strong and dilute 
nitric acid^ and two copper wires, the wire in the dilute acid 
was powerfully positive to the one in the strong acid at the 
first moment, and continued so. By using tube No. 2. the gal- 
Tanometer^needle could be held stiffly in either direction^ simply 
by simultaneously raising one wire and depressing the otherj| 
80 that the first should be in weak and the second in strong 
acid ; the former was always the positive piece of metal. 

1976. On repeating the experiments with the substitution of 
platinum, gold, or even palladium for the copper^ scarcely a 
sensible effect was produced (197o.). 

1977. Strmig and dilute nitric acid^» — The following single 
metals being compared with themselves in the^e acids, gave 
most powerful results of the kind just described with copper 
(1975.) } silver, iroui lead^ tin, cadmium, zinc. The metal in 
the weaker add was positive to that in the stronger. Silver is 
very changeable^ and after some time the current is often sud- 
denly reversed, ^e metal in the strong acid becoming positive : 
this again will change back, the metal in the weaker' add re- 
turning to its positive state. With tin, cadmium, and zinc, 
violent action in the acid quickly supervenes and mixes all up 
together. Iron and lead show the alternations of state ia the 
tube No. 2, as beautifully as copper (1975.). 

197& Strong and dihUe sidphurie aciW.— I prepared an add 

* The dilute acid consisted of three volumes of strong nitric acid and two 
volumes of water. 



Digitized by Google 



76 Effect of dilution on voltaic excitement, [Series XVIL 

of 49 by weight, strong oil of Titrioli and 9 of water, giving a 
sulphuric acid with two proportions of water, and arranged the 
tube No. 1. (1974.) with this and the strongest acid. But as 
this degree of dilution produced very Httle effect with the iron, 
as compared with what a much greater dilution effected, I 
adopted the plan of putting strong acid into the tube, and then 
adding a little water at the top at one of the sides^ with the 
precaution of stirring and cooling it preTious to the experiment 
(1978.). 

1979. With iron, the part of the metal in the weaker acid 

was powerfully positive to that in the stronger acid. With 
copper, the same result, as to direction of the current, was 
produced ; but the amount of the effect was small. With silver, 
cadmium, and zinc, the difference was either very small or un- 
steady, or nothing; so that, in comparison with the former 
cases, the electromotive action of the strong and weak acid ap- 
peared balanced. With lead and tin, the part of the metal in 
the tirong acid was posUhe to that in the weak acid ; so that 
they present an efiect the reverse of that produced by iron or 
copper. 

1980. Strong and dilute muriatic acid, — I used the strongest 
pure muriatic acid in tube No. 1, and added water on the top 
of one side for the dilute extremity (1973.), stirring it a Httle 
as before. With silver, copper, lead, tin, cadmium, and zinc» 
the metal in the strongest acid was positive, and the current in 
most cases powerful. With iron, the end in the strongest acid 
was first positive : but shortly after the weak add side became 
positive and continued so. With palhidium, gold, and plati- 
num, nearly insensible effects were the reshlts. 

1981. Strong and dilute solution of caustic potassa* — With 
iron, copper, lead, tin, cadmium, and zinc, the metal in the 
strong solution was positive : in the case of iron slightly, in the 
case of copper more powerfully, deflecting the needle 30° or 
38°, and in the cases of the other metals very strongly. 
Silver, palladium, gold, and platinum, gave the merest indi** 
cations (1973.). 

Thus potash and muriatic add are, in several respects, con* 
trasted with nitric and sulphuric acids. As respects muriatic 
acid, however, and perhaps even the potash, it may be ad- 
mitted that, even in their strongest states, they are not fairly 



Digitized by Google 



Jav. 1S40.] JHhaiw, U$ bearwgM agakui amiaei theortf. 77 



oomparable to the very strong nitric and sulphuric acicU^ but 
rather to those adds when somewhat diluted (ld85.)« 



I know it may be said in reference to the numerous 
changes with strong and dilute acids, that the results are the 
consequence of corresponding alterations in the contact force ; 
but this is to change about the theory with the phenomena and 
with chemical force (1874. 1956. 1985. 2006. 2014. 2063.) j or 
it may be alleged that it is the contact force of the solutions 
produced at the metallic sur&oes which, differing, causes dif- 
ference of eflfect ; but this is to put the effect before the cause 
in the order of ime. If the liberty of shifting the point of 
efficacy from metals to fluids, or from one place to another, be 
claimed, it is at all events quite time that some definite state- 
ment and data respecting the active points (1808.) should be 
given. At present it is difficult to ty hold of the contact 
theory by any argument derived from experiment^ because of 
these uncertainties or variations, and it is in that respect in 
singular contrast with the definite expression as to the place 
of action which the chemical theory supplies. 

1983. An the variations which have been given are consistent 
with the extreme variety which chemical action under di^rent 
circumstances possesses, ,but, as it still appears to me, are ut- 
terly incompatible with, what should be, the simplicity of mere 
contact action ; further they admit of even greater variation, 
which renders the reasons for the one view and against the 
other, still more conclusive. 

1984i. Thus if a contact philosopher say that it is only the 
very strongest acids that can render the part of the metals in 
it negative, and therefore the effect does not happen with mu- 
riatic acid or potash (1980. 1981. though it does widi nitric 
and sulphuric acids (1977. 1978.) ; then, the following result is 
an answer to such an assumption. Iron in dilute nitric acid, 
consisting of one volume of strong acid and twenty of water, is 
positive to iron in strong acid, or in a mixture of one volume 
of strong add with one of water, or with three, or even with 
five volumes of water. Silver also, in the weakest of these 
acidsy is positive to silver in any of the other four states of it. 

1985. Or if, modifying the statement upon these results^ it 



Digitized by Google 



78 . UiffgMencyoftkecoHkMiiikeory,^. [SBtni XVIL 



should be said that diluting the acid at one eontaeC aimafs 
tends to give it acertun |irofMrlio«al»electroBod¥e force, and 
therefore diluting one side more than the other will still allow 
this force to come into play ; then, how is it that with muriatic 

acid and potassa the effect of dilution is the reverse of that 
which has been quoted in the cases with nitric acid and iron or 
silver? (1977. 1984.) Or if, to avoid difficulty , it be assumed 
that each electrolyte must be considered apart, the nitric acid by 
itself, and the muriatic acid by itself, for that one may differ from 
anolherin the dtrec^NMiof the change induced by dilution, then 
how can the foUowing results with a single acid be accounted for? 

1986. I prepared four nitric adds; 

A was very strong pure nitric acid ; 
B was one volume of A and one volume of water ; 
C was one volume of A and three volumes of water : 
D was one volume of A and twenty volumes of water* 

Experimenting with thftse acids and a metal, I found that cop- 
per in C acid was positive to copper in A or D acid. Nor was 
it the first addition of water to the strong acid that brought 
about this curious relation, for copper in the B acid was posi- 
tive to copper in the strong acid A, but negative to the copper 
in the weak acid D : the negative effect of the stronger nitric 
acid with this metal does not therefore depend upon a very 
high degree of concentration. 

1987. Lead presents the same beautiful phenomena. In the 
C acid it is positive to lead either in A or D acid : in B acid it 
is positive to lead in the strongest, and negative to lead in the 
weakest acid. 

1988. I prepared also three sulphuric acids : 

B was strong oil of vitriol ; 

F one volume of £ and two volumes of water ; 

G one volume of E and twenty volumes of water. 

Lead in F was well negative to lead either in E or G. Copper 
in F was also negative to copper in E or G, but in a smaller 
degree. So here are two cases in which metals in an add of 
a certain strength are mega^vc to the same metals in the same 
addy either stronger or weaker. I used platinum whres ultU 
mately in aU these cases with die same acids to check the in^ 
terference of the combination of acid and water (1978.) ; but 



Digitized by Google 



Jan. lB4Xi]Ins^ffieieney ^ eomplexHy of the etmUet ihewy. 79 



the retidts wei« then almoit ndhing* and showed that the 
phenomena ooold not he so aeoounted for* 

1989. To render this complexity for the contact theory still 
more complicated, we have further variations, in which, with 
the same acid strong and diluted, some metals are positive in 
the strong acid and others in the weak. Thus, tin in the 
strongest sulphuric acid E (1988.) was positive to tin in the 
moderate or the weak acids F and G ; and tin in the moderate 
aeid F was positive to the same metal in G. IroOy on the con* 
tiary« bdng in the strong acid £ was negative to the weaker 
acids F and G; and iron in the medium add F was negative 
to the same metal in G. 

1990. For the purpose of understanding more distinctly what 
the contact theory has to do here, I will illustrate the case by 
a diagram. Let fig. 1 1 represent a circle of metal and sulphu** 
ric acid. If A be an arc of iron or copper, and B C strong oil 
of vitriols there will be no determinate current : or if B C be 
weak acid, there will be no such current : but let it he strong 
acid at B, and diluted at C, and an electric current will run 
round A G B. If the metal A he silver, it is equally indi£ferent 
with the strong and also with the weak add, as iron has been 
found to he as to the production of a current ; but, besides that, 
it is indifferent with the strong acid at B and the weak acid at 
C. Now if the dilution of the electrolyte at one part, as C, 
had so far increased the contact electromotive force there, 
when iron or copper was present, as to produce the current 
£yund by experiment ; surely it ought (consistently with any 
reasonable limitations of the assumptions in the contact theory,) 
to have produced the same effect with silver: but there was 
none. Making the metal A lead or tin, the difficult becomes 
lar greater ; for though with the strong or the weak acid alone 
any effect of a determinate current is nothing, yet one occurs 
upon dilution at C, but now dilution must be supposed to 
weaken instead of strengthen the contact force, for the current 
is in the reverse direction. 

1991. Neither can these successive changes be referred to a 
gradual progression in the efiOect of dilution, dependent upon 
the order of the metah. For supposing dilution more favour^ 
able to the electromotive force of the contact of an acid and a 
metal, in projJorHau as the metals were in a certain orders as 



Digitized by Google 



80 Velime orderrfihe «rtff/»eAai^figd^ilitoiaw,[8«BiB»XVIL 



Ibr initance that of their efficacy in the voltaic battery ; though 
such an assumption might seem to aeeoimt for the gradual di- 
minutioii of effiset from iron to copper, and from oopper to 
•ilfery one would not e xpect die levcite eflfectii or those on 
the other fide of iero» to appear hj a xetnm back to such 
metals as lead and tin (lf)79. 1969.), hot rather look for them 
in platinum or gold, which, however, produce no results of the 
kind (1976. 1988.). To increase still further this complexity, 
it appears, from what has been before stated, that on changing 
the acids the order must again be changed (1981.); nay, more« 
that with the same acid, and merely by chaining the propor- 
tion of dilution, such alteration of the order most take place 
(1986* 1968*)* 

199^. Thus it appears, as before remarked (1962.)> that to 

apply the theory of contact electromotive force to the facts, 
that tlicory must twist and bend about with every variation of 
chemical action ; and after all, with every variety of contact, 
active and inactive, in no case presents phenomena independent 
of the active exertion of chemical force. 

199i{. As the influence of dilution and concentration was so 
Strong in affecting the relation of different parts of the same 
metal to an acid, making one part eidier positive or negative to 
another, I thought it probable that, by mero variation in the 
strength of the interposed electrolyte, the order of metals when 
in acids or other solutions of uniform strength, might be 
changed. I therefore proceeded to experiment on that point, 
by combining together two metals, tin and lead, through the 
galvanometer (1915.); arranging the electrolytic solution in 
tube No. 1, strong on one side and weak on the other: im- 
mersing the wires simultaneously, tin into the strong, and lead 
into the weak solution, and after observing the e£^tt re-dean- 
ing the whres, ro-arranging the fluid, and re-immersing the 
wires, the tin into the weak, and the lead into the strong por- 
tion. De la Rive has already stated ^ that inversions take place 
when dilute and strong sulphuric acid is used ; these I could 
not obtain when care was taken to avoid the effect of the in- 
vesting Huid (1918.) : the general statement is correct, however, 
when applied to another acid, and I think the evidence very 

Aanslw de CaUniie, 1828, xzzriL p. 240. 



Digitized by Google 



Jan. 1840.] FoUaic excitement affected by dilution. 81 



important to the eonaideratum of the great queation of contact 
or chemical action. 
1994.. 7Wo metcUs in strong and weak solution of poiash.— 

Zinc was positive to tin, cadmium, or lead, whether in the 
weak or strong solution. Tin was positive to Ctidmium, either 
in weak or strong alkali. Cadmium was positive to lead both 
ways, but most when in the strong alkali. Thus, though there 
were differences m degree dependent on the strength of the. 
solution, there was no inversion of the order of the metals. 

1995. - Two rnetais in strong ami weak snlpkurie acid,'—" 
Cadmimn was positive to Inm and tin. both waya : tin waa alao 
positive to in>n« copper, and ailTer; and iron was positive to 
copper and stiver, whichever side the respective metals were 
in. Thus none of the metals tried could be made to pass the 
others, and so take a different order from that which they have 
in acid uniform in strength. Still there were great variations 
in degree ; thus iron in strong acid was only a little positive to 
silver in weak acid, but iron in weak acid was very positive to 
silver in strong acid. Generally the metal, usually called po- 
aitive,. waa most positive in the weak acid ; but that was not the 
case with lead, tin, and smc 

1996. TVpo metab in strong and weak nOrie aeid.^Heie 
liie degree of change produced by difference in the strength of 
the acid was so great, as to cause not merely difference in de- 
gree, but inversions of the order of the metals, of the most 
striking nature. Thus iron and silver being in tube No. 2 
(1974.), whichever metal, was in the weak, acid was positive to 
tiie other in the strong acid. It was merely requisite to raise 
the- one and lower the other metal to make either positive at 
pleasure* (1975.). Copper in weak acid was positive tasilver, 
lead, or tin, in strong add. Iron in weak add was positive to 
flUver, copper, lead, zinc, or tin, ia strong acid. Lead in weak 
add was positive to copper, silver, tin, cadmium, zinc, andiron 
in strong acid. Silver in weak acid was positive to iron, lead, 
copper, and, though slightly, even to tin, in strong acid. Tin 
in weak acid was positive to copper, lead, iron, zinc, and silver, 
and either neutral or a little positive to cadmium in strong 
acid. Cadmium in weak add is very positive, aa might be ex- 
pected, to silver, copper, lead, iron, and tin, and, moderately 
so, to sine in the staoog add.. When cadmium is in the strong 

VOL. n. Q 



Digitized by Google 



acid it is slightly positive to vlwer, copper, and VNm$ in weak 
aeid* Zinc in weak acid is very positive to silver* copper* lead* 
iron* tin* and cadnumn in strong add : when in the strong acid 
it Is a litde positive to sihrer and copper in weak add* 

1907. Thns wonderful changes occur amongat the metals in 
circuits containing this acid, merely by the effect of dilution ; 
so that of the five metals, silver, copper, iron, lead, and tin, any 
one of them can be made either positive or negative to any 
other, virith the exception of silver positive to copper* The 
order of tlicsc five metals only may there^m he varied about 
one hundred different ways in the same add* morely by the 
effect of dilution. 

1998* So also «ne* tin* eadmhim* and leadi and likowise 
nnc* tin* iron* and lead* being groups each of four metals ; any 
one of these metals may he made either positive or negative 
to any other metal of the same group, by dilution of this acid* 



1999. But the case of variation by dilution may* as regards 
file opposed theories* bo made even still stronger than any yet 
stated ; for the same metals in the samg oetd of the same 
tirength ai the koo sides may be made to chaiige tiieir order* 
as tiie ehemleal actbn of tiie add on each fuwticular matal is 
aflected, by dilution, in a smaller or greater degree. 

2000. A voltaic association of iron and silver was dipped, 
both metals at once, into the same strong nitric acid ; for the 
first instant, the iron was positive ; the moment after, the silver 
became positive* and continued so. A similar association of 
iron and silver was put into weak nitric acid, and the iron waa 
immediately positive* and continued so. With iron and ooppmr 
the same results were obtained. 

jMX)!. These* therefore* are finaliy cases of such an inverf* 
don (1999.) ; but as the iron In the strong nitric acid acquires 
a state the moment after its immersion, which is probably not 
assumed by it in the weak acid (18i8. 19^)1, 2033.), and as the 
action on the iron in its ordinary state may be said to be, to 
render it positive to the silver or copper, both in the strong or 
weak acid, we will not endeavour to force the £act* but look to 
other metals. 

j900^ SUsersmdmekel being a s sociated in weak nilric add* 



Digitized by Google 



tha nickel was positive ; being associated ia strong nitric acid, 
the nickel was still positive at the first momnt, but the silver 
was finally positive. The nickel lost its superiority through 
the influence of an investing film (1918.) ; and though the effect 
might easily pass unobserv^» the ease cannot be allowed to 
stand, as fulfilling the statement made |(1999,). 

2003, Copper and nickel were put into strong nitric acid ; 
the copper was positive from the first moment. Copper and 
nickel being in dilute nitric acid, the nickel was slightly but 
clearly positive to the copper. AgaiOi zinc and cadmium in 
strong nitric acid ; the cadmium was positive strongly to the 
nno ; the same metals being in dilute nitric acid, the zinc was 
very positive to the cadmium. These I consider beautiful and 
uueiu^ptiopable cases (18990* 



2004. Thus the nitric acid furnishes a most wonderful va- 
riety of effects when used as the electrolytic conductor in voltaic 
circles ; and its difference from sulphuric acid (1995.) or from 
potassa (1994^) in the phenomena consequent upon dilutionf 
tend, in conjunction with many preceding facts and arguments* 
to show that the electromotive force in a circle is not the coor 
sequence of auy power hi bodies generally* belong^ to them 
IP cksses rather tbiw as individuab* and having that shnplici^ 
of character which contact force has been assumed to have ; but 
one that has all (he variations which chemical force is known to 
exhibit. 

^005. The changes occurring where any one of four or five 
metals, differing from each other as far as silver and tin, can 
he made positive or negative to the others (1997. 1998.), apr 
pears to me to shut out the probability that the contact of these 
metals with each other can produce the smallest portion of the 
eflbct in these voltaic anangenients i and then* if not tb^» 
neither ^ they be eflRsctive in any other arsangements t so 
Uiat what has been deduced in that respect from former ex- 
periments (1829. 183i3.) is confirmed by the present. 

2006. Or if the scene be shifted, and it be said that it is the 
contact of the acids or solutions which, by dilution at one side^ 
produce these varied changes (1874. 198g. 1991. 2014, ii060.), 

th^n bpw uti^^ ui^k» sMob cpntaet must be to that of the 



Digitized 



84 



VolimeeseiiaiUmnoidtieioemaaei. [SesibsXVIL 



Biuneroas class of conducting solid bodies (1809* 1867.) I and 
vrhere, to give the asramption any show of support, is the ease 
of such contact (apart fttm chemical action) producing such 
currents? 

£007* That it cannot be an alteration of contact ibroe by 

mere dflntion at one side {2006.) is also shown by making such 
a change, but using metals that are chemically inactive in the 
electrolyte employed. Thus when nitric or sulphuric acids 
were diluted at one side, and then the strong and the weak 
parts connected by platinum or gold (1976.), there was no 
sensible current, or only one so small as to be unimportant* 

2008. A still stronger proof is afforded by the following re-^ 
suit. I arranged the tube, fig. 9 (IQ?^.), with strong solution 
of yellow sulphuret of potassium (181£.) firom A to and a 
solution consisting of one yolume of the strong solution, with 
six of water from m to B. The extremities were then con- 
nected by platinum and iron in various ways ; and when the 
first effect of immersion was guarded against, including the first 
brief negative state of the iron (2049.), the effects were as fol- 
lows. Platinum being in A and in that in A, or the strong 
solution, was very slightly positive, causing a permanent de- 
flection of Iron bemg in A and in B, the same result was 
obtained. Iron bemg in A and pUtinum in B, the iron was 
positive about £° to the platinum. Platinum being in A and 
iron in B, the platinum was now positive to the iron by about 
2®. So that not only the contact of the iron and pliitinum 
passes for nothing, but the contact of strong and weak solu- 
tion of this electrolyte with either iron or platinum, is ineffec- 
tual in producing a current. The current which is constant is 
very feeble, and evidentiy related to the mutual position of the 
strong and weak solutions^ and is probably due to their gradual 
mixture* 

19009. The results obtained by dilution of an electrolyte 
capable of acting on the metals employed to form with it a 

voltaic circuit, may in some cases depend on making the acid a 
better electrolyte. It would appear, and would be expected 
from the chemical theory, that whatever circumstance tends to 
make the fluid a more powerful chemical agent and a better 
electrolyte, (the latter being a relation purely chemical and not 
one of contacti) fiivours the production of a detenmnate cur- 



Digitized by Google 



Jan. 1840.] Order qfmeUiU m toUme circuits. 



85 



rent. Wbaterer the cause of the effect of dfltttion may bc^ 

the results still tend to show how ^aluahle the voltaic circle 
will become as an investigator of the nature of chemical affinity 
(1959.). 

^ vi. Differences in the order of the metalUc elements of voltaic 

circles, 

^10. Another cUuw of experimental arguments, bearing upon 
the great question of the origin of force in the voltaic battery , is 
supplied by a consideration of the difierent order in which the 

metals appear as electromotors when associated with different 
exciting electrolytes. The metals are usually arranged in a 
certain order ; and it has been the habit to say, that a metal 
in the list so arranged is negative to any one above it, and po- 
sitive to any one beneath it, as if (and indeed upon the convic« 
tion that) they possessed a certain direct power one with an- 
other. But in 1812 Davy showed inversions of this order in 
the case of iron and copper^ (943.) ; and in 18^ De la Rive 
showed many inversions in different cases* (1877.) ; gave . a 
strong contrast in the order of certain metals in strong and di- 
lute nitric acid^ ; and in objecting to Marianini's result most 
clearly says, that any order must be considered in relation only 
to that hquid employed in the experiments from which the 
order is derived^. 

^U. I have pursued thb subject in rekition to several so- 
lutions, taking die precautions before referred to (1917, ^c.), 
and find tiiat no sudi single order as that just referred to can be 
maintained. Thus nickel is negative to antimony and bismuth 
in strong nitric acid ; it is positive to antimony and bismuth in 
dilute nitric acid ; it is positive to antimony and negative to 
bismuth in strong muriatic acid ; it is positive to antimony and 
bismuth in dilute sulphuric acid ; it is negative to bismuth and 
antimony in potash ; and it is very negative to bismuth and anti- 
mony, either in the colourless or die yellow solution of sulphuret 
of potassium. 

ftOi^L In further illustration of this subject I will take ten 
metals, and give their order in seven diflferent solutions. 

> Elements of Chemical Philosophy, p. 149. 
' Annales de Chimie« 1828^ uuLvii. p. 232< 
* Ibid, p. 235. Ibid., p. 213. 



Digitized by Google 



M Order of metals in different fluids, [Seeies XVII. 



Plata nitric 


Dilute 
Bolphurie 




Strong nitric 
add. 


Solution of 
caiulifcjto* 


bihydrosul- 
phuret^oi^po- 


Tdkm hydro- 


1. silver. 

2. Copper. 

8. Apnmaay. 
4, Bimnth. 
6* MidBd* 

7. Tin. 

8. Lead. 

9. Cadmium. 


1 . Silver. 

2. Copjpcr. 

3. Antimony. 

4. Bimntli. 
•.mekaL 
ft. ban* 

5. Lead. 
7. Tin. 

9. Cadmium. 


3. Antimony. 
1 . Silver. 
S.Niekd. 

4. Bismuth. 
3. Copper. 
0. Iron. 

8. Ltad. 
7. Tin. 

9. Cadmium. 


5. Nickel. 

1 . Silver. 

3. Antimony. 

2. Copper. 

4. Bismuth. 

6. Iron. 

7. Tin. 
R. Lead. 

10. Zinc. 


It SOfW. 

s. Nkkd. 
S. Ck»|«t. 
6. 

8. Letd. 

3. AntimoBy. 

9. Cadmium. 


6. Iron. 

6. Nickel. 
4> Bismuth. 

3. Antimony. 

7. Tin. 

2. Copper. 
10. Zinc 

g^cmsm. 


6. Iron 

5. Nickel. 
4. Bismuth. 
B. **'"*'**— J. 

8. LeML 

1. Silver. 

7. Tin. 

9. Cadmium. 

2. Copper. 



^13. The dilute nitric acid consisted of one volume sttong 
Acid and seven volumes of water ; the dilute sulphuric acid, of 
otte volume strong add and thirteen of Water; the muriatic 
add, of one volume strong solution and one toliime water. The 
sttrong nitric add was pure, and of specific gravity 1*48. Both 
strong and weak solution of potassa gave die same order. The 
yellow sulphuret of potassium consisted of one volume of strong 
solution (181^.) and five volumes of water. The metals are 
numbered in the order which they presented in the dilute acids 
(the negative above), for the purpose of showing, by the com- 
parison of these numbers in the other columns, the strikmg 
departures there, from this, the most generally assumed order* 
Lron is included, but only in its ordinary state : its place in 
nitric acid being given as that which it possesses oU its first 
ittiinerrioA, not that which it afterwards acquires. 

13014. The displacements appear to be most extraordinary, 
aa ettraordinary as 6idse consequl^t on dilution (18005.) ; and 
thus show that there is no general idling influence of fluid con- 
ductors, or even of acids, alkalies, &c. as distinct classes of 
such conductors, apart from their pure chemical relations. But 
how can the contact theory account for these results ? To 
meet such fiusts it must be bent about in the most extraor* 
dihary mahner, following all the contortions of the string of 
fiicts (1874. 1956. 199^ ^006. ^063.), and yet never showing a 
case of the production of a current by contsct alone^ i. e. mmt^ 
compauied by chemical action. 

2015. On the other hand, how simply does Hhe cfaeAifcal 
theory of excitement of the current represent the facts I as far 
as we can yet follow them they go hand in hand. Without 
chemical action, no current ; with the changes of chemical ac- 



Digitized by Google 



Jam. 1840.] Ordtr ^mikOf mmrkOk oM. 



87 



tlOii, ehftoges of cutrent ; whilst Hvd influenoe of the strongett 
OMea of «oiiteel, as of silver and tin (1997.) with each other, pass 
ht aodihig in tiie results In fbrther eonfirmation, the exdting 
power does not rise, but fall, by the contact of the bodies pro- 
duced, as the chemical actions producing these decay or are 
exhausted ; the consequent result being well seen in the effect 
of the investing fluids produced (1918. 1953. 1966.). 

^16. Thus, as De la Rive has said, any list of metals in 
their order should be ooostmcted in reference to the exciting 
flttid seeled. Further, a sero pomt should he expressed in 
the aeries; for as theelectromotiTepowerniay beei^r atihe 
anode or oathode (IMMO. 10052.), or jointly at both, that sub- 
stance (if there be one) which is absolutely without any exci- 
ting action should form the zero point. The following may be 
given, by way of illustration, as the order of a few metals, and 
other substances in relation to muriatic acid : 

Peroxide of lead, 
Peroande of manganese, . 
(Mde of iron. 
Plumbago, 
Rhodium, 
Platinum, 
Gold, 
Antimony^ 
, Silrer, 
Copper, 
Zinc: 

in which plumbago is the neutral substance ; those in italics 
are active at the cathode, and those in Roman characters at the 
anode. The upper are of course negative to the lower. To 
make such lists as oomplece as they will shortly require to 
be» numbers expressive of the relatiTe exciting force, coundqg 
£h»i the aero pointt should be attached to each substanc e * 

f viL Active voltaic circles and batteries without metallic 

contact. 

2017. There are cases in abundance of electric currents pro- 
duced by pure chemical action, but not one undoubted instance 



Digitized 



88 Vidiaie eirde$ wUkam meiMe emOmet. [Sbrw XVIL 



of the production of a cunent by pure contact. As I con- 
ceive the gieat quettioii most now be .settled by the woght of 
evidence, rather than by simple philosophic condnsions (1799.)« 
I propose adding a few observations and lacts to show the 
number of these cases, and their force. In the Eighth Series 
of these Researches^ (April, 1834) I gave the first experiment, 
that I am aware of, in which chemical action was made to pro- 
duce an electric current and chemical decomposition at a 
distance, in a simple circuit, without any contact of metals 
(880, &c.). It was further shown, that when a pair of zinc and 
platinum plates were excited at one end of the dilute nitro- 
sulphuric add (880.), or solution of potash (884.), or even in 
some cases a solution of common salt (885.), decompositions 
might be produced at the other end, of solutions of iodide of 
potassium (900.), protochloride of tin (901.), sulphate of soda, 
muriatic acid, and nitrate of silver (906.) ; or of the following 
bodies in a state of fusion ; nitre, chlorides of silver and lead, 
and iodide of lead (902. 906.) ; no metallic contact being al- 
lowed in any of the experiments. 

^18. I will proceed to mention new cases ; and first, those 
already referred to, where the action of a little dilute acid pro- 
duced a current passing through the solution of the sulphuret 
of potassium (1831.), or green nitrous acid (1844»), or the solu- 
tion of potassa ( 1 854.) ; for here no metallic contact was allowed^ 
and chemical action was the evident and only cause of the cur- 
rents produced. 

2019. The following is a table of cases of similar excitement 
and voltaic action, produced by chemical action without 
metallic contact. Each horizontal line contains the four sub- 
stances forming a drcuit, and they are so arranged as to give 
the direction of the current, which was in all cases from left to 
right through the bodies as they now stand. All the comln- 
nations set down were able to effect decomposition, and they 
are but a few of those which occurred in the course of the in- 
vestigation. 

1 FliOflfopliieal TnDiadioii% 1884, p. 426. 



Digitized by Google 



.Jan. 1840*] Folfm Mrelst uMani metattk eaiUtui* 
2m. 



80 



r 



Itoa, 
boa. 



Iron. 
Iron. 
Iron. 
Iron. 
Iron. 
Iran. 
Iran. 
Iron. 
Zinc 
Zinc* 
Cadmium. 



CSoppcr* 
Lead. 
Hn. 
Copper. 

Copper. 

Copper. 



DUute nitric add. 
Dilute nitric add. 
IMkitBiiiirieaeid. 



Dilute nitric add. 
Dilute sulphuric i 
Dilute Rulpliuric i 
Muriatic acid. 
Dilute muiiatic add. 
Dilute mnriatic add. 
Soltttfon afwlt. 

DDttte vltile add* 

Muriatic add. 
Dilute nitric acid. 
Muriatie add. 
Dilute nitric add* 
Muriatic add. 
Dilute nitric add. 
Muxiatieadd. 
Strong lulphuiie add. 
Strong mlphorie acid. 
Sulphuret of potassium. 
Sulphuret of potassium. 
Strong nitric acid. 
Strong nitric acid. 
Strong nitric acid. 
Strang nitric acid. 
Sulphuret oi potauium. 



Flaliinuni 
Platinum. 



Platinum. 
PlaSimun. 

Platinum. 
Platinum. 
Platinum. 
Platinum. 



Platinum. 
Platinum. 
Platinum. 
Platinum. 
Platinum. 
Platinum. 



Iron. 
Iron. 

Iron. 
Iron. 
Iron. 
Iron. 
Iron. 
Iron* 
Inm* 



Sulph. of Potauium C181S.) 
Kea nitric add. 
P»te nitric mii , itwm* 
Otcm wteww mU* 

Io<Ude of potaaiium. 
Sulphuret of potaaaium. 
Red nitric acid. 
Green nitroiu acid. 
Red nitric acid. 
Sulphuret of poCaarinm. 
Green nitrona add. 



lodMc of podarfmu* 

Iodide of pot.'U'"«ium. 
Iodide of jiotas.'^iurn. 
Iodide of pota^Kium. 
Iodide of potaaaium. 
Iodide of potanium. 
Iodide of potanium. 
Iodide of potaanum. 
DiliUe ■ulphurie add. 
Dilute lulpburic add. 
Dilute nitric acid. 
Iodide of potassium. 
Dilute nitric add. 
Iodide of potaiaiun* 
Dilute nime add. 
lodida of potaiaiiim 
Dilute oiMo add. 



Fan 
FuU 
Good. 
Very powerful. 
Full cuntnt. 

Full. 
Good. 
Moet powerful. 
Good. 

Good. 

Moet powofU* 

Good. 
Good. 
Good. 
G(xMi. 
Goo<l. 
Good. 
Good* 



Strong. 

Sfa 
Po 

Vety p ow wlM * 



Strong. 

Good. 

Strong* 



8021. It appears to me probable tiiat any one of the very 
numerous combinations which can be made out of the following 
Table, by taking one substance from each column and ar- 
ranging them in the order in which the columns stand, would 
produce a current without metallic contact, and that some of 
these currents would be very powerful. 

Dflttte nitric acid 
Dilute sulphuric add 

Muriatic acid 
Iron J Solution of vegetable acids 
Iodide of potassium 
Iodide of zinc 
Solution of salt 
g l^Many metallic solutions. 

CO 
00 

s 

flO&2» To. these cases must be added the many in which one 
metal in a uniform acid gave currents when one dde was heated 
,(194^, &c). Also those in which one metal with an add stnmg 
and diluted ga?e a current (1977, &c). 



Rhodium 




Gold 
Platinum 


- o 


Palladium 
Silver 


2 


Nickel 


I OS 3 

r „ CO 


Copper 
Lead 


itrous 

III Ul 


Tin 

^nc 

Cadnuum 


Strong n 
solutio 



Digitized by Google 



xm 



In the cases where by dilution of the acid one metal 
can be made either positive or n^atiTC to another (1996» &cO» 
one half of the results should be added to the above, except 
that they are too strong ; for instead of proving that chemical 

action can produce a current without contact, they go to the 
extent of showing a total disregard of it, and production of the 
current against the force of contact, as easily as with it. 

2024. That it is easy to construct batteries without metallic 
contact was shown by Sir Humphry Davy in 1801 ^ when he 
described various ^fiective arrangements including only one 
. metal» At a later period Zamboni constructed a pile in which 
but one metal and one fluid was uaedS the only diffbrenoe be* 
ing extent of contact at the two surAices* The fettowmg formsi 
which are dependent upon the mere efieet of dilution, may be 
added to these. 

2025. Let abyab,abj fig. 12, Plate III., represent tubes or 
other vessels, the parts at a containing strong nitric or sul* 
phuric acid, and the parts at b dilute acid of the scune kind ; 
then connect these by wires, rods, or plates of one metal only, 
being copperi iron, silver, tin* lead, or any of those metals 
which become positive and negative by di£RMPenoe of dihition 
In the aoid (1971^ ftc). Such an Anaiigement will giv« an el^ 
Mcufe oasnry* > 

2026. If the acid used be the sulphurici and the metal em- 
ployed be iron, the current produced will be in one direction, 
thus -«e — , through the part fifrured ; but if the metal be tin, 
the resulting current will be in the contrary direction, thus 

^0^7. Strong and weak solutions of potassa being employed 
in the tubes, then the single metals zinc, lead« copper, tin, and 
cadmium (198L), wUl produce a similar battery* 

Si02S* If the arrangements be as in fig* 1 3, in which the vessels 

1, 3, 5, &c. contain strong sulphuric add, and the vessels 

2, 4, 6, &c. dilute sulphuric acid ; and if the metals a, a, a, 
are tin, and b, b, are iron (1979.), a battery electric current 
will be produced in the direction of the arrow. If the metals 

^ FhOosophical Traandiona, 1801, p. 397. Abo Joanali of die Bojal In- 
gdtutioii, 1802, p. 51 ; and Nidiobon't lounia], Svo, 1808, vd. i. p. 144. 

* Qnattedy l«mal of Sdeaoei viS. 177; or Aaasht de Cfaioiig^ sL 19d* 
(1819.). 



Digitized by Google 



91 



be cbMiged Ibr eaoh otherj Ihe adds Mmaining $ oir the acids 
be diangedi the uietali vemeiiiitig ; die diieetioii of tfaeeitineAt 
Ivfll be iNimsed. 

' f titU OUdkMerations of the sufficiency of chemical actum. 

20^. Thus there is no want of cases in which chemical 
action aione produces voltaic currents (2017.) ; and if we pro- 
ceed to look more closely to the correspondence which ought 
to exist between the chemlMd action and the otinent (ffoduoed^ 
we find that the fitrther we traceit the more ekaet it becemees 
in fflttitiatinti of whkh the Mowing caaes wiU suiiee. 

2090. Chemeai adum does evoke eleehieity^ThaB haa 
been abundandy |Mfoved by Beequeiel and De la Elireb Bec- 

querel's beautiful roltaic arrangement of acid and alkali* is a 
most satisfatory proof that chemical action is abundantly suf- 
ficient to produce electric phenomena. A great number of 
the results described in the present papers prove the same 
statement. 

fMU Where tkemital meHoH has bem^ ^ tiii M i a is to er 
eeisMa^ the eketrh emteni dimkiMei or eiae&e itfto.-^'Tbe 
Oasea of tin (im. 1884.), lead (1885 ), bimuih (l6iW.)» and 
eadndatt(19d5.)) tn ^o eohilteii of Mil|^ni«l i^potanhnn, are 

excellent instances of the truth of this proposition. 

2032. If a piece of grain tin be put into strong nitric acid, ft 
will generally exert no action, in consequence of the film of 
oxide which is formed upon it by the heat employed in the pro- 
cess of breaking it up% Then two platinum wires, connected 
hf n gahanomelet, may be put into the addi and one of theift 
pressed agauist the piece of tut) yet wilbout pfodudng an eh»> 
trie cttfrent If» whilst matters ate hi thts posilion> tiie tin be 
aeta^ under the add by a glass rod) or othsf non^eondiwfe^ 
ing substance capable of breaking the surfiice> the acid acts on 
the metal newly exposed, and produces a current; but the 
action ceases in a moment or two from the formation of oxide of 
tin and an exhausted investing solution (1918.), and the cur- 
rent ceases with it. Each scratch upon the sur&oe of the tin 
reptodnces the series of phettoniena» 

1 Annales do Cbimie, 1827, xxxv. p. 122. Bibliotli^que Univenelle, 1838; 
xiv. 129, X71. 



Digitized 



. SQ3S» The case of iron in strong lutric acid, which acts and 
produces a current at the first moment (1843. 1951. dOOl.)^ 
but is by that action deprived of so much of its activity, bo^ 
chemical and electrical^ is also a case in point. 

fSOSi* If lead and tin be associated in muriatic add* the 
lead is positive at the first moment to the tin. The tin then 
becomes positive, and continues so. This change I attribute 
to the circumstance, that the chloride of lead formed partly 
invests that metal, and prevents the continuance of the action 
there ; but the chloride of tin, being far more soluble than that 
of leadf passes more readily into the solution; so that action 
goes on there* and the metal exhibits a permanent positive 
state. 

fSOSB. Theeflfect of die investing fluid already referred to in 
the cases of tm (1919.) and cadmiimi (1918.)9 some of Ihe results 
with two metals in hot and cold acid (1966.), and those cases 
where metal in a heated acid became negative to the same 
metal in cold acid (1953, &c.), are of the same kind. The 
latter can be beautifully illustrated by two pieces of lead in di- 
lute nitric acid : if left a short time, the needle stands nearly 
at 0% but on heating either side* the metal there becomes 
negative fdlf or more* and continues so as bng as the heat is 
continued. On cooling that side and heating the otiier* that 
piece of lead which before was positive now becomes negative 
in turn, and so on for any number of times. 

^036. When the chemical actioji changes the current changes 
also, — This is shown by the cases of two pieces of the same 
active metal in the same fluid. Thus if two pieces of silver be 
associated in strong muriatic acid, first the one will be positive 
and then the other; and the changes in the direction of the 
current will not be slow as if by a gradual action* but exceed- 
ingly sharp and sudden. So if silver and copper be associated 
in a dilute solution of sulphuret of potassium* the copper vrill 
be chemically active and positive* and the silver will renuun 
clean ; until of a sudden tiie copper will cease to act* the silver 
will become instantly covered with sulphuret, showing by that 
the commencement of chemical action there, and the needle of 
the galvanometer will jump through 180°. Two pieces of silver 
or of copper in solution of sulphuret of potassium produce the 
same effect. 



Digitized by Google 



Jah. 1840.] Dependence ofexeUemeiU on ekemieal aetian* 9S 

If metals be used which are uiacdve in the fluids em- 
ployed} and the latter undergo no change during the tine» 
ironi other eirenmstanoesi as heat, ke. (1838. 19^.), then no 
currents, and of course no such alterations in direction, are 
produced. 

2038. Where no chemical action occurs no current is pro- 
duced, — This in regard to ordinary solid conductors, is well 
known to be the case, as with metals and other bodies (1867.). 
It has also been shown to be true when fluid conductors (elec- 
trolytes) are used, in every case where they exert no chemical 
action, though such different substances as acid, alkalies and 
sulphurets have been employed (1848. 1858. 18125. 18^.). 
These are very striking ftcts. 

2089. Bui a enrrent wiU occur the mameni ekemieal aeOon 
commences. — This proposition may be well iUustrated by the 
following experiment. Make an arrangement like that in fig, 
14 : the two tubes being charged with the same pure, pale, 
strong nitric acid, the two platinum wires p p being connected 
by a galvanometer, and the wire t, of iron. The apparatus is 
only another form of the simple arrangement fig* 15, where, in 
imitation of a former ezpenment (889.), two plates of iron and 
platinum are placed pandfel, but separated by a drop of strong 
mtric add at each eztranity. Whilst in this state no current 
is produced in either apparatus ; but if a drop of water be added 
at b fig. 15, chemical action commences, and a powerful cur- 
rent is produced, though without metallic or any additional 
contact. To observe this with the apparatus, fig. 14, a drop 
of water was put in at b. At first there was no chemical action 
and no electric current, though the water was there, so that 
contact with the water did nothing: the water and add were 
moved and mixed together by means of the end of the wire 
f ; in a lew moments proper chemical action came on, the iron 
erolTing nitrous gas at the place of its action, and at tiie same 
time acquiring a positive condition at that part, and producing 
a powerfiil electric current. 

2040. When the chemical action which either has or could 
have produced a current in one direction is reversed or undone^ 
the current is reversed {or undone) also, 

2041 • This is a principle or result which most strikingly 
ooofirms the chemical tiieoiy of voltaic ezdtenient, and is 



Digitized by Google 



M Dependence qfejeeitementonehemieal action* [SbehsXVII* 

iUiMtmlod bj niiQy impoHaiit fiieta* Ydte in Aa year 1806', 
showed thai QrystalHied ^Me ef wumgnnae was highly nega* 
tive to sine and similar metals, giving, according to his theory, 
electricity to the ginc at the point of contact. Becquerel 
worked carefully at this subject in 1835^ and came to the con* 
cluflion,but reservedly expressed, that the facta were favourable 
to the theory of contact. In the following year De la Rive 
e^^amined the sul])ject^, and fihowa^ to my latisfaction at leaatt 
that the peroxide it at the time undergoing ohemical change 
end loaing oi(ygen» a ebange periectly in acoordanee with the 
direotlon of the eunrent it produces. 

iOM. The peroxide associated with pUtlninn in the green 
nitrous acid originates a current, and is negative to the plati«> 
num, at the same time giving up oxygen and converting the 
nitrous acid into nitric acid, a change easily shown by a com^ 
mon chemical experiment. In nitric acid the oxide is negative 
to platinum, but its negative state is much increased if a little 
aloebol be added to the aoid^ that body assisting in the reduo* 
tion of the osude. When assomted with platinum m solution of 
potash* the addition of e little aloohol singularly fewurs the 
increase of the onrrent for the same reason. Wlm the per^ 
oxide and platinum are associated with solution of sulphurel 
of potassium, the peroxide^ as might have been expected^ la 
strongly negative. 

g043. In 1835 M. Muncke"* observed the striking power of 
peroxide of lead to produce phenomena like those of the per-i 
oxide of manganese* and these M. de la Rive in 1886 immedi-> 
ately referred to corresponding chemical changes ^ M. Schcen- 
hein does not edmit this inferenee« and bases hia view of 

currents of tendeney" on the phenomena presented by thia 
body and its non^action with nitrio aeid'^. My own results 
confirm those of M. de la Rive, for by direct experimmit I find 
that the peroxide is acted upon by such bodies as nitric acid. 
Potash and pure strong nitric acid boiled on peroxide of lead 
readily dissolved it, forming protonitrate of lead. A dilute 

^ Atmalei de Chiniie, 180S, id. 224. • lUd. 1830, Iz. 164, 171. 

• lUd. 18S6, hd. 40 f aad IHUiodil^ UniTcneMe, 1S36, i. 152, 158. 

^ Bibliotheque Universelle, 1836, 160. * Ibid. 1836, i. 162, 154. 

« PhilosophiMl MagMiii*, 1888, Kii. 886, IU i sndBibUs|hjit>l« I^»imM^ 
1838, m. 155. 



Digitized by Google 



Jan. 184a] BsdUmmt ai ike imtM0. 



nitric add was made and divided into two portions ; one wai 
tested by a aolutioB of aidphuretted kydvogeiif and diowed no 
dgiia of lead ; the other wai mingled with a little peroxide of 
lead {\S22.) at eonmoB temperatiwei, and after an hour Al- 
tered and tested in the same manner, and found to contain 
plenty of lead. 

2044, The peroxide of lead is negative to platinum in solu- 
tions of common salt and potash, bodies which might be sup- 
posed to exert no chemical action on it. But direct expert 
menta show that they do exert sufficient aetion to prodnoe all 
the effects. A circumstance in further proof that the oiirrenl 
in the voltaic eireint ibmed by theie bodies is ohemieal in its 
origin, is the rapid depression in the force of tiie currsnt pro^ 
diioedf after the first moment of innersion. 

0045. The most powerful arrangement with peroxide of lead, 
platinum, and one fluid, was obtained by using a solution of 
the yellow sulphuret of potassium as the connecting fluid. A 
convenient mode of making such experiments was to form the 
peroxide into a fine soft paste with a little distilled water, to 
cover the bwer extremity of a plathuun plate uni&rmly with 
this paste, using a glass rod for the purpose, and making the 
coat only thick enough to hide the platinum veU^ tbmi to dry 
It ndl, and finaUyf to compare that plate with a clean phtinnm 
plate in the electrolyte employed. Unless the plathium plate 
were perfectly covered, local electrical currents ( 1 1^0.) took place 
which interfered with the result. In this way, the peroxide is 
easily shown to be negative to platinum either in the solution 
of the sulphuret of potassium or in nitric acid, Red4ead gave 
the same results in both these fluids. 

2046. But using this sulphuretted sdution, the same kind 
of proof in support of the chemical theory could be obtained 
frmn protoxides as before from the peroxides. Thus, some 
ptire protoxide of lead, ojitained from the nitrate by heat and 
ftinon, was applied on the plathium plate (jM)45.), and found to 
be strongly negative to metallic platinum in the solution of 
sulphuret of potassium. White lead applied in the same 
manner was also found to acquire the same state. Either of 
these bodies when compared with platinum in dilute nitric acid 
was, on the contrary, very positive. 

^Mlp The seme cffi^ is well shown by the action of oxidiiwd 



Digitized by Google 



96 Es^temad at ike eaiJMe. [8mm XVIL 

iron. If A plate of iron be oxidized by heat so as to give an oxide 
of aucb aggregation and condition as to be acted on scarcely or 
not at all by the solution of sulpbuxet, Aen there is little or no 
conenty such an <Ndde being as platinnm in the solntion (1840.). 
But if it be ondisMd by exposure to air, or by being wetted 
and dried ; or by being moistened by a little dilute nitric or 
sulphuric acid and then washed, first in solution of ammonia 
or potassa, and afterwards in distilled water and dried ; or if it 
be moistened in solution of potassa, heated in the air, and then 
washed well in dbtilled water and dried ; such iron associated 
wilh platinum and put into a solution of the sulphuret will pro- 
duce a powerful ciinent until all the oxide is reduced, the iron 
during ihe whole time being negative. 

S0i8. A piece of rusty iron hi the same solution is power-- 
fully negative. So also is a platinum plate with a coat of pro- 
toxide, or peroxide, or native carbonate of iron on it (2045.). 

2049, This result is one of those effects which has to be 
guarded against in the experiments formerly described (IS26» 
1886.). If what appears to be a clean plate of iron is put into 
a dilute solution of the sulphuret of potassium, it is first n^g^- 
tive to platinum, then neutral, and at last generally feebly po- 
sitive; if it be put into a strong solution, it is first negative, 
and tiien becomes neutral, continuing so. It cannot be cleansed 
so perfectly mfh sand-paper, but that when immersed it will 
be negative, but the more recently and well the plate has been 
cleansed, the shorter time does this state continue. This effect 
is due to the instantaneous oxidation of the surface of the 
iron during its momentary exposure to the atmosphere, and 
the after reduction of this oxide by the solution.- Nor can this 
be considered an unnatural result to those who connider' tiie 
cfaaiacters of iron. Pure iron in the form of a sponge takes 
fire spontaneously in the air; and a plate recently cleansed, if 
dipped into water, or breatiied upon, or only exposed to the 
atmosphere, produces an instant smell of hydrogen. The thin 
film of oxide which can form during a momentary exposure 
is, therefore, quite enough to account for the electric current 
produced. 

2050. As a further proof of the truth of these explanations, 
I placed a plate of iron under the surface of a solution of the 
sulphuret of potassium, and rubbed it tiiere with a pfece of 



Digitized by Google 



Jan. IMO.] VoUaie emeUemmd not due io emUuA. 



97 



wood which had been soakmg Ibr some time in the same sul- 
phnret. The iron was then neutral or very slightly poaitiTe 
to platinnm connected with it. Whilst in connection with the 
platinnm it was again rubbed with the wood so as to acquire a 

fresh surface of contact; it did not become negative, but con* 
tinued in the least degree positive, showing tliat the former 
negative current was only a temporary result of the coat of 
oxide which the iron had acquired in the air. 

£051. Nickel appears to be subject to the same action as 
hron^ though in a much slighter degree. All the circumstances 
were parallel^ and the proof applied to unm was applied 
to it alsoi with the same result. 

j305£. So all these phenomena with protoxides and peroxides 
agree in referring the current produced to chemical action; 
not merely by showing that the current depends upon the ac- 
tion, but also that tlie direction of the current depends upon 
the direction which the chemical affinity determines the exci- 
ting or electromotive anion to take. And it is I think, a most 
striking circumstance, that Uiese bodies, which when they can 
and do act chemically produce currents, hare not the least 
power of the kind when mere contact only is allowed (1869.), 
though they are excellent conductors of electricity, and can 
readily carry the currents formed by other and more effectual 
means. 



d053. With such a mass of eTidence for the efficacy and 
sufficiency of chemical action as that which has been given 
(1878. 2052.) ; with so many current circuits without metallic 
contact (2017.) and so many non-current circuits with (1867.); 
what reason can there be for referring the effect in the joint 
cases where both chemical action and contact occur, to contact, 
or to anything but the chemical force alone ? Such a reference 
appears to me most unphilosophical : it is dismissing a proved 
and active cause to receive in its place one which is merely 
hypotheticaL 

If ix. Thermo-eleeirie evidence* 

2054. The phenomena presented by that most beautiful dis- 
covery of Seebeck, thermoelectricity^ has oceasbnally and, 
YOLt n« H 



Digitized by Google 



98 



also, recently been adduced in proof of the electromotive infltt- 
cnce of contact amongst the metals, and such like solid con- 
duetoifs^ (1809. 1867.)* A rery britf oon(udoralionia» I thinks 
■uflicient to show how little support these phenomena give to 
the theoty m question* 

ff056. If the contaet of metals exert any exeiting influenee 
in the voltaic circuit, then we can hardly doubt that thermo- 
electric currents are due to the same force ; i. e. to disturb- 
ance, by local temperature, of the balanced forces of the dif- 
ferent contacts in a metallic or similar circuit. Those who 
quote thermo effects as proo& of the effect of contaOt musti of 
course, admit this opinion. 

i066. Admitting contact force, we may then assume that 
heat either increases or diaunishes the electromotiYe force ei 
contact. For if in fig. 16. A be antimony and B bismuth, heat 
applied at .r causes a current to pass in the direction of the 
arrow ; if it be assumed that bismuth in contact with antimony 
tends to become positive and the antimony negative, then heat 
diminishes the effect ; but if it be supposed that the tendency 
of bismuth is to become negative, and of antimony positive^ 
then heat increases the effect. How we are to decide which 
of these two views is the one to be adopted* does not seem to 
me dear ; for nothing in the thermo-electric phenomena alooe 
can settle the point by the galvanometer. 

^57. If for that purpose we go to the voltaic circuit, there 
the situation of antimony and bismuth varies according as one 
or another fluid conductor is used (201^3.). Antimony, being 
negative to bismuth with the acids, is positive to it with an al- 
kali or sulphuret of potassium ; still we find they come nearly 
together in the midst of the metallic series. In the thermo 
series, on the contrary, their position is at the extremes, being 
as different or as much opposed to each oth^r Its they can be. 
This differettce was long ago pointed out by Profeitof Gum- 
ming^: how b it consistent with the contact theory of the Vol- 
taic pile? 

2058. Again, if silver and antimony form a thermo circle 
(iig.l7.), and the junction x be heated, the current there is 

' See Fechner's words. Philosophical Magasine> 18d8| ziii. ^ 206* 
^ Annals of PbUosophy, 1823^ vi. 177. 



Digitized by Google 



Jan, 1840.] proved bff ihermihekeinc phtttometuh 00 

from the silver to the antimony. If silver and bismuth form a 
thermo series (fig. 18.), and the junction w be heated, the Cur- 
rent it from the bismuth to the sih er ; and atiiuming that heat 
inoreaset the force of contact (ftOdG*), these reaoltt will gire 
the direction of contact force between these metals^ antimomif 
«g mtikerf and hutmtik—^^Mver. But in the voltaic series 
the current is from the silver to both the antimony and bi«mtith 
at their points of contact, whenever dilute sulphuric or nitric 
acid, or strong nitric acid, or solution of potassa (2012,) are 
used ; so that metallic contact, like that in the thermo circle, 
can at all events have very little to do here. In the yellow sul* 
phuret of potassium the current is from both antimony and bis* 
muth to the silver at their contacts, a result equally inconsistent 
with the thermo effect as the former* When the colourless 
hydrosulphuret of potassium is used to complete the voltaic 
tin^f the current is from bismuth to silveri and from silver to 
antimony at their points of contact ; whilst, with strong muri* 
atic acid, precisely the reverse direction occurs, for it is from 
silver to bismuth, and from antimony to silver at the junc- 
tions. 

2059* Again ; — by the heat series copper gives a current to 
gold ; tin and lead give currents to copperi rhodium, or gold ; 
line gives one to antimony, or iron, or even plumbago $ and 
bumuth gives one to nickel^ cobalt, mercury, silver, paUadiumt 
gold, platinum, rhodium, and plumbago ; at the poini qf am- 
iaei between the metals currents which are just the reverse 
of those produced by the same metals, when furnied into vol- 
taic circuits and excited by the ordinary acid solutions (201^.). 

2060. These, and a great number of other discrepancies, 
appear by a comparison, according to theory, of thermo con" 
tact and voltaic contact action, which can only be accounted 
for by assuming a specific effect of the contact of water, adds, 
alkalies, sulphurets, and other excitmg electrolytes, for each 
metal I this assumed contact force being not only unlike ther« 
mo<4iieta]lic contact, in not possessing a balanced state in the 
complete cirdult at uniform temperatures, but, also, having no 
relation to it as to the order of the metals employed. So bis- 
muth and antimony, which are far apart in thermo-electric 
order, mnst have this extra character of acid contact very 
greatly developed in an opposite direction as to its result^ to 



Digitized by Google 



100 Tkermo^ketne^voUaieeJfeeUeomp^^ LSbbibsXVIL 

Tender them only a feeble voltaic combination with each other: 
and with respect to silver, which stands between tin and zinc 
thermo-electrically, not only must the same departure be re- 
quired, but how great must the effect of this, its incongruous 
contact, be, to OTeroome so completely as it does, and eyen 
powerfully rererse the differences which the metals (according 
to the contact theory) tend to produce ! 

S061. In further contrast with such an assumption, it must 
be remembered that, though the series of thermo-electric 
bodies is different from the usual voltaic order (2012.), it is 
perfectly consistent with itself, i. e. that if iron ahd antimony 
be weak with each other, and bismuth be strong with iron, it 
will also be strong with antimony. Also that if the electric 
current pass from bismuth to rhodium at the hot junction, and 
also from rhodium to antimony at the hot junction, it will pass 
&r more powerfully from bismuth to antimony at the heated 
junction* To be at all consistent widi this simple and true re- 
lation, sulphuric acid should not be strongly energetic nitii 
iron or tin and weakly so with silver, as it is in the voltaic cir- 
cuit, since these metals are not far apart in the thermo series : 
nor should it be nearly alike to platinum and gold voltaically, 
since they are far apart in the thermo series. 

2062. Finally, in the thermo circuit there is that relation to 
beat which shows that for every portion of electric force evol- 
ved, there is a corresponding change in another force, or form 
offeree, namely beat, able to account for it; tills, the united 
experiments of Seebeck and Peltier have shown. But contact 
force is a force which has to produce something from nothing, 
a result of the contact theory which can be better stated a little 
further on (2069. 2071. 2073.). 

2063. What evidence then for mere contact excitement, de- 
rivable from the facts of thermo-electricity, remains, since the 
power must thus be referred to the acid or other electrolyte 
used (I9060.) and made, not only to vary uncertainly for each 
metal, but to vary also in direct conformity with the variation 
of chemical action (1874. 1956. im. £006. 29014.) ? 

S064. The contact theorist seems to consider that the advo- 
cate of the chemical theory is called upon to account for the 
phenomena of thermo-electricity. I cannot perceive that See- 
beck's circle has any relation to the voltaic pile, and think that 



Digitized by Google 



Jan. 1840.] Jkeamitienc^ofeaniaete^eiiing force* 101 

the researches of Beoquerel' are quite sufficient to authorise 
that condnsion* 

IT z* Improbable nature of ike asiumed eoiUaei force* 

2065. I have thus given a certain body of experimental evi- 
dence and consequent conclusions, which seem to me fitted to 
assist in the elucidation of the disputed pointy in addition to 
the statements and arguments of the great men who have al- 
ready advanced their results and opinions in favour of the 
chemical theory of excitement in the voltaic pile« and against 
that of contact I wiU conclude by adducing a further argu- 
ment founded upon the, to me, unphilosophical nature of the 
force to which the phenomena are, by the contact theory, re- 
ferred. 

2066. It is assumed by the theory (1802.) that where two 
dissimilar metals (or rather bodies) touch, the dissimilar parti- 
cles act on each other, and induce opposite states. I do not 
deny this, but on the contrary think, that in many cases such 
an eflfect tskes place between contiguous particles ; as for in- 
stance, preparatory to action in common chemical phenomena, 
and also preparatory to that act of chemical combination which, 
in the voltaic circuit, causes the current (1788. 1749.)« 

2067. But the contact theory assumes that these particles, 
which have thus by their mutual action acquired opposite elec- 
trical states, can discharge these states one to the other, and 
yet remain in the state they were first in, being in ever?/ point 
entirely unchanged by what has previously taken place. It as« 
sumes also that the particles, being by their mutual action ren- 
dered plus and minus, can, whilst under this inductive action, 
discharge to particles of like matter with themselves and so 
produce a current. 

2068. This is in no respect consistent with known actions. 
If in relation to chemical phenomena we take two substances, 
as oxygen and hydrogen, we may conceive that two particles, 
one of each, being placed together and heat applied, they in- 
duce contrary states in their opposed surfaces, according, per- 
haps, to the view of Berzelius (1739.), and that these states 
becoming more and more exalted end at last in a mutual dis- 

1 Aimales de Chimie, 1829, xli. 355. xlvi. 275. 



Digitized by Google 



lQi2 Inemmttmuiy of amtaei eaeUing fortm* [Sbeim XVIL 



charge of the forces, the |Nirticles being ultimately found com** 
bined, and unable to repeat the effect. Whilat tbej m under 
induction and before the final action comes on, tbey cannot 
apontaneously lose that state ; but by removing the emute of 

the increased inductive effect, namely the heat, the effect itself 
can be lowered to its first condition. If the acting particles 
are involved in the constitution of an electrolyte, then they 
can produce current force (921. 924.) proportiQnSttO to th^ 
apount of chemical force consumed (868.). 

2069. But the contact theory, which is obUgedf according 
to the £icts, to admit that the acting particles are not changed 
(180iS. (for otherwise it would be the cbemioel theory)* 
is constrained to admit also, that the force which is able to 
make two particles assume a certain state in respect to each 
other, is unable to make them retain that state ; and so it vir- 
tually denies the great principle in natural philosophy, that 
cause and effect are equal (2071.), If a particle of platinum 
by contact with a particle of sine willingly gives of its own 
electricity to the oinCj beci^use this by its presence tends to 
make the pktinum assume a negative state* why should the 
particle of platinum take electricity from any other particle of 
platinum behind it, since that would only tend to destroy the 
very state which the zinc has just forced it into? Such is not 
the case in common induction ; (and Marianini admits that the 
effect of contact may take place through air and measurable 
distances^); for there a ball rendered negative by induction, 
will not take electricity from surrounding bodies, however thoi^ 
roughly we may unlnsulate it ; and if we force electricity into 
it, it will, as it wm, be spumed back agfiin with A power equir 
Talent to that of the inducing body, 

Or if it be supposed rather, that the rinc particle, by 
its inductive action, tends to make the platinum particle posi- 
tive, and the latter, being in connection with the earth by other 
platinum particles, calls upon them for electricity, and so ac- 
quires a positive state ; why should it discharge that state to 
the zinc, the very substance, which, making the platinum assume 
that condition, ought of course to be able to sustain it? Or 

' Memorie della Societit Italiana in Modei^a, 1837, 3(ju. 232, 233, &c. 



ft 



Digitized by Google 



Jam. IMO.] /«yn»Mlfty of emdm&i ewMngforee, lOt 



igMB* if tbo im lendA fo nuito the pbtiDum pmnieitt ponthre» 
why iHould bo^ eleqlricity go to the platinum tkezme, 
whioh it M mndi in eontoet with It as it$ neighbouring platinun 
partidei ara ? Or if the zinc particle in contact with the plati« 
num tends to hecome positive, why does not electricity flow to 
it from the zinc particles behind, as well as from the platinum^? 
There is no sufficient probable or philosophic cause assigned 
for the assumed action ; or reason given why one or other at 
the consequent e&»ot» above mentioned should not take place: 
and^ at I have again and again saidt I do not know of a singin 
iust, 09 0^86 of contact Qorvontf on whicbi in tho abaenoe of 
aneh pt obable oause, the theory can rest. 

d071. The eontaet theory assumes, in f^ct, that a force 
which is able to overcome powerful resistance, as for instance 
that of the conductors, good or bad, through which the current 
passes, and that again of the electrolytic action where bodies 
are decomposed by it, can arise out of nothing ; that, without 
any change in the acting matter or the consumption of any ge- 
nerating force> a current can be produced which shall go on for 
ever against a constant resistance, or only be stopped^ as in the 
voltaic trough^ by the ruins which its exertion has heaped up 
in its own course. This would indeed be a creation of power, 
and is hke no other force in nature. We have many processes 
by which the form of the power may be so changed that an ap- 
parent conversion of one into another takes place. So we can 
change chemical force into the electric current, or the current 
into chemical force. The beautiful experiments of Seebeck 
and Peltier show the convertibility of h^at and electricity; and 
others by CSrsfed apd mypelf show the convertibility of eleo? 
trinity and magnetism* But in no cii^s^ not even those of ^e 
Glymnotus and Torpedo (1790.), is there a pure creation of 
fbrce ; a production of power without a corresponding exhaus* 
tion of something to supply it^. 

> I have spokeii| tm simplicity of eipreasion, as if one metal were aetive and 
the other passive in bringing about these induced states, and not, as the theory 
implies, as if each were mutually subject to the other. But this makes no dif>* 
ference in the force of the ai^gument ; whilst an endeavour to state fully the 
joint changes on both sides, would rather have obscured the oljections which 
arise, and which yet are equally strong in either view. 

' {Note, March 29, 1840.) — I regret that I was not before aware of most 



Digitized by Google 



I04f Impainbilii^i^eomtuie»eiimg/one. [SbuhiXVIL 



£07^ It should ever be remembered that the chemical the<»y 
aets out with a power the existence of which is pre-pioved, aad 
then follows its variations^ rarely assuming anything which is 
not supported by some corresponding simple chemical fiict. 

The contact theory sets out with an assumption, to which it 
adds others as the cases require, until at last the contact force, 
instead of being the firm unchangeable thing at first supposed 
by Volta, is as variable as chemical force itself. 

2073» Were it otherwise than it is, and were the contact the- 
ory true« then, as it appears to me, the equality of cause and 
effect must be denied (^069.). - Then would the perpetual mo- 
tion also be true ; and it would not be at all difficulty upon ^e 
first given case of an electric current by contact alone, to pro- 
duce an electro-magnetic arrangement, which, as to its principle, 
would go on producing mechanical effects for ever. 

Boyai ImHtutian, 

December 26, 1839. 

Note. 

2074. In a former series (925, &c.) I have said that I do not 
think any part of the electricty of the voltaic pile is due to the 

important evidence for this philosophical argument, consisting of the opinion of 
Dr. Roget, given in his Treatise on Galvanism in the Library of Useful Know- 
ledge, the date of which is January 1829. Dr. Roget is, upon the facts of the 
science, a supporter of the chemical theory of excitation ; but the striking pass* 
«g« I detire now to refer to, is the Mowing, at § 113. of tiie arliele Galvanism. 
Speaking of ihe voltaic theory of oontaet, he says, " Were any farther reasoning 
neeessaiy to overthrow It^ a ibrdble aigiiment migfat he drawn firom the follow- 
ing consideration. If Ihere oonld exist a power haiving the property aserihed 
to it hy the hypothesis^ namdy, that of givbg continnal imptdse to a fluid in 
one constant direction* without being exbansted hy its own action, it would 
diflhr essentially ftom all the other known powers in nature. All the powers 
and sources of motion, with the operation of which we are acquainted, when 
producing their peculiar effects, are expended in the same proportion as those 
effects are produced ; and hence arises the impossibility of obtaining by their 
agency a perpetual effect; or, in other words, a perpetual motion. But the 
^electromotive force ascribed by Volta to the metals when in contact is a force 
which, as long as a free course is allowed to the electricity it sets in motion, is 
never expended, and continues to be excited with undiminished power, in the 
production of a never-ceasing cfiect Against the truth of sueh a supposition, 
the prabahilitiea aia all but infinite.*'— 



Digitized by Google 



Jan* 1840.] CombincUion of acids and bases* 105 

combinatHm of the oxide of sine with the sulphuric add used, 
and that I agreed so hx wilih Sfar Humphry Dayy in thinking 
that acids and alkalies did not in combining evolye ekcCricity 

in large quantity when they were not parts of electrolytes. 

This I would correct ; for I think that Becquerel's pile is a 
perfect proof that when acid and alkali combine an electric 
current is produced ^ 

I perceive that Dr. Mohr of Coblentz appears to have shown 
that it is only nitric acid which amongst acids can in combining 
with alkalies produce an electric current^ 

For myself» I had made exception of the hydracids (929.) on 
theoretical grounds* I had also admitted that oxyadds when 
in solution might in such cases produce small currents of elec- 
tricity (928. and Note.) ; and Jacobi says tliat in Becquerers 
improved acid and alkaline pile, it is not above a thirtieth 
part of the whole power which appears as current. But I now 
wish to say 9 that though in the voltaic battery, dependent for 
its power on the oxidiseement of zinc, I do not think that the 
fuanUiy of electricity is at all increased or affected by the com- 
bination of the oxide with the add 945.)» still the latter 
eircumstance cannot go altogether for nothing. The researdies 
of Bfr* Daniell on the nature of compound electrolytes' ties to- 
gether the electrolyzation of a salt and the water in which it is 
dissolved, in such a manner as to make it almost certain that, 
in the corresponding cases of the formation of a salt at the 
place of excitement in the voltaic circuit, a similar connection 
between the water and the salt formed must exist : and I have 
little doubt that the joint action of water, acids^ and bases, in 
Becquerel's battery, in Darnell's electrolyaations, and at the 
adnc in the ordinary active pile, are, in principle, closely con- 
nected together. 

1 BiUiotii^iM Unimelle^ 1838, xiv. 129. 171. Comptes Rendus, i. p. 455. 
Annalei de Ghimie, 1827, zzzv. 122. 

* Fbiloaophical Msgiutuie^ 1838, nii. p. 382; or Poggendoif's Annaleo, zlii. 

p. 76. 

* FhikMoplucal Transactioiif, 1889, p. 97. 



Digitized by Google 



£IGtlT££NTH SERIES. 

&eGei?e4 JftAU4ry SQ,-r-Re»d f §bruary ^, Ifiid. 

J 25, On the elfi^cittf ewhed by the fridhn qfwaier mnd 

steam against other (todies, 

9ffl5. Two yem ago an expenmeot wai detoribtd by Mr* 
Annstrong and others S in which the ispue of a itream of high 

pressure steam into the air produced abundance of electricity. 
The source of the electricity was not ascertained, but was sup- 
posed to be the evaporation or change of state of the water, and 
to have a direct relation to atmospheric electricity. I have at 
various tinies since May of last year been working upon the 
subject^ and though I perceive Mr. Armstrong has, in recent 
eommttnications, anticipated by publication lome of the hats 
whieh I also have obtainedj the Royal Soeiety nay tdll perhapa 
think a eompreiaed account of my results and eonolnsionai 
whieh inelude many other Important points, worthy its attea* 
lion. 

2076. The apparatus I have used was not competent to 
ftirnish me with much steam or a high pressure, but I found it 
sufficient for my purpose, which was the investigation of the 
effect and its cause, and not necessarily an increase of the elee» 
trie development. Mr. Armstrong, as is shown by a reeenl 
paper, has well effected the latter^ The boiler I used, he* 
longing to the London Institution, would hold about ten gallons 
of water, and aUow the evaporation of five gallons* A pipe 4| 
feet long was attached to it, at the end of which was a large 
stop-cock and a metal globe, of the capacity of thirty-two cqbig 
inches, which I will call the steam-globe, and to this globe, by 
its mouth-piece, could be attached various forms of apparatus, 

' Philosophical Magazine, 1840, vol. xvii. pp. 370, 452, &c. 
* Ibid. 1843, vol xxii. p. 1. 



Digitized by Google 



Ji¥« 1848.] ApprnMOmfBut $Umm d§9iri^ff. lOf 



mmmg na wnU for ksuing ftopm^ Thus a eoek eonld 
b0 eoimected with the ttMuii-f lobe^ and this eoek he med ai 

the experimental iteatn-passage ; or a wooden tube eould be 
screwed in ; or a small metal or glass tube put through a good 
cork, and the cork screwed in ; and in these cases the steam way 
of the globe and tube leading to the boiler was so large, that they 
might be considered as part of the boiler, and these termmal 
pMiagai as the ohstaeles which, restrainipg the mm of •taeait 
produced any importent degree of inetion* 

0077* Another ipiue pieoe oonsiited of a metal tube termir 
nated by a metal fiuinely and of a eone advancing by a aerew 
more or leia into the funnel, so that the ateam as ft rushed 
forth beat against the cone (Plate I. fig. ; and this cone could 
either be electrically connected with the funnel and boiler^ or 
be insulated. 

^78. Another terminal piece consisted of a tube, with a 
atop-cock and feeder attached to the top part of ity by which 
any fluid could be admitted into the paaaage, and oanied on 
with the ateam (fig. S.)" 

S079* In anollier terminal piece, a amaU cylindrical chamber 
was constructed (fig. 4.) into which different iluida could be 
introduced, so that, when the cocks were opened, the steam 
passing on from the steam-globe (2076.) should then enter this 
chamber and take up anything that was there, and so proceed 
with it into the final passage, or out against the cone (2077.), 
according as the apparatus bad been combined together. Thia 
little chamber I will always call C. 

The preaaure at which I worlied with the ateam was 
from eight to thirteen ipchea of mereury, never higher than 
thirteen inchesi or about two-fifUia of an atmosphere. 

^081. The boiler was insulated on diree small blocks of lac, 
the chimney being connected by a piece of funnel-pipe re- 
movable at pleasure. Coke and charcoal were burnt, and the 
insulation was so good, that when the boiler was attached to a 
gold-leaf electrometer and charged purposely, the divergence 
ci the leaves did not alter either by the presenee of a large 
fire, or the abundant eaoape of the reaulta of the eomhuatton. 

* This globe and the pieces of apparatus aien^^tesen^l^a a SQflla of oes^ 
fourth in the Plate Mongii^ to this paper. 



Digitized by Google 



106 EleeMdiff notthieio enaparaUom OSbbiss XVIIL 



When the usuing steam produces ekcftricityy there 
aie two trays of examining the ^fect: eiUier the Insnlated 
boiler may be obsemd, or the steam may be ezammed, but 
these states are always contrary one to the otfier. I attached 

to the boiler both a gold-leaf and a discharging electrometer, 
the first showed any charge short of a spark, and the second by 
the number of sparks in a given time carried on the measure- 
ment of the electricity evolved. The state of the steam may 
be observed either by sending it through an insulated wide 
tube in which are some diaphragms of wire gauae, which serves 
as a discharger to the steam» or by sending a puff of it near an 
eleetrometer when it acts by mduction ; or by putting wires 
and phites of conducting matter in its course, and so discharging 
it. To examine the state of the boiler or substance against 
which the steam is excited, is far more convenient, as Mr. 
Armstrong has observed, than to go for the electricity to the 
steam itself ; and in this paper I shall give the state of the 
£[)mier> unless it be otherwise expressed* 



£068. Piroceeding to the cause of the ezdltation» I may state 
first that I haTe satisfied myself it is not due to evaporation or 

condensation, nor is it affected by either the one or the other. 
When the steam was at its full pressure, if the valve were sud- 
denly raised and taken out, no electricity was produced in the 
boiler, though the evaporation was for the time very great. 
Agaioj If the boiler were charged by excited resin before the 
valve was opened^ the opening of Uie valve and consequent 
evaporation did not afiect this charge* Again, having ob- 
tained the power of constructing steam passages which should 
give either the positive or the negative, or the neutral state 
(2102. 2110. 2117.), I could attach these to the steam way, 
so as to make the boiler either positive, or negative, or neu- 
tral at pleasure with the same steam, and whilst the evapo- 
ration for the whole time continued the same. So that the ex- 
citation of electricity is clearly independent of the evaporation 
or of the change of state. 
9084. The issue of steam alone is not suffident to evolve 



Digitized by Google 



Jan. 1843.] is produced tkefneiian of waier. 100 



eleetricity'. To iUtwtmte this fmat I may tay that tibe cone 
apparatus (2077.) Is an excellent exciter : so ako is a box- 
wood tube (I81O0. fig. 6.) soaked in water, and screwed into 

the steam-globe. If with ( ither of these arrangements, the 
steam-globe (fig. 1.) be empty of water, so as to catch and re- 
tain that which is condensed from the steam, then after the 
first moment (2089.), and when the apparatus is hot, the issu- 
ing steam excites no electricity ; but when the steam-globe is 
fiUed up so far that the rest of the condensed water is swept 
forward with tlie steam, abundance of electricity appears. If 
then the globe be emptied of its water, the electricity ceases ; 
but upon fining it up to the proper height, it immediately re- 
appears in full force. So when the feeder apparatus (2078.) 
was used, whilst there was no water in the passage-tube, there 
was no electricity ; but on letting in water from the feeder, 
electricity was immediately evolved. 

2085. The electricity is due entirely to the friction of the 
particles of water which the steam carries forward against the 
surrounding solid matter of the passage, or that which, as with 
the cone (^7.), is purposely opposed to it, and is in its nap 
ture like any other ordinary case of excitement by friction. As 
will be shown hereaflter (2180. j21d2.), a very small quantity of 
water properly rubbed against the obstructing or interposed 
body, will produce a very sensible proportion of electricity. 

2086. Of the many circumstances affecting this evolution of 
electricity, there are one or two which I ought to refer to here. 
Increase of pressure (as is well illustrated by Mr. Armstrong's 
experiments) greatly increases the e£^t, simply by rubbing 
the two exciting substances more powerfully together. - In- 
crease of pressure will sometimes change the positiye power of 
a passage to negative; not that it has power of itself to change 
the quality of the passage, but as will be seen presently (2108.), 
by carrying off that which gave the positive power; no in- 
crease of pressure, as far as I can find, can change the nega- 
tive power of a given passage to positive. In other pheno- 
mena hereafter to be described (2090, ^105.), increase of pres- 
sure will no doubt have its influence ; and an effect which has 

^ Mr. Armstrong has also ascertained that water is essential to a high deve- 
lofment, Phil. Mag. 1843, Yoi. zzii. p. 2. 



Digitized by Google 



110 Eleeirmipevoiwedb^JneiiQmf^ water. ISBMMXWm. 



been decreMedi or even annihilated (as by the addition of sub* 
■tancM to the water in the ateam-globe, or to the iaauing 
eumnt of water and steam), may, no donbt, by inereaae of 
ptesmire be again dereloped and exalted. 

The shape and form of the exdthig passage has great 
iniuenee, by &Touring more or less the contatft and subse* 
qnent separation of the particles of water and the solid sub* 
stance against which they rub. 

2088. When the mixed steam and water pass through a tube 
or stop'KSOck {ii016.)f they may issue, producing either a hissing 
smooth sound, or a rattling rough sound ^ ; and with the cone 
apparatus (9077. fig. 2,), or certain lengths of tube, these con* 
dltions alternate soddenly. With the smooth sound little or 
no eleelrioity is produoedi with the rattling sound plentya 
The rattling sound acoompanies that irregular rough yibrationi 
which casts the water more violently and effectually against 
the substance of the passage, and which again causes the bet- 
ter excitation. I converted the end of the passage into a 
steam-whistle, but this did no good. 

SOSO, If there be no water in the steam-globe (^76.), upon 
opening the steam^cock the Jirgt effect is very striking { a good 
axeitement of electricity takes place, but it Tery soon ceases* 
Thu is due to water oond^ised in the cold passages, produ* 
dng excitement by rubbing against them. Thusj^if tiie passage 
be a stop'cock, whilst cold it excites electricity with what is 
supposed to be steam only ; but as soon as it is hot, the elec- 
tricity ceases to be evolved. If, then, whilst the steam is issu- 
ing, the cock be cooled by an insulated jet of water, it resumes 
its power. If, on the other hand, it be made hot by a spirit- 
lamp before the steam be let on^ then there is no first effects 
On this principle, I have made an exciting passage by sur^ 
rounding one part of an exit tube with a fittle dstemi and put* 
ting spirito of wine or water into it* 



2090. We find then that particles of water rubbed against 
other bodies by a current of steam evolve electricity. For this 

' Messrs. Armstrong and Scbafliaeutl have both observed the Gdincidence of 
certain sounds or noises with the evolution of die electricity. 



Digitized by Google 



3am. 1640«] Tk€ wuitf mitti h9 pure* 



pitrpoM, howetefy it ii not merely water but pun water which 
Uttst b« iiied* On employing ^e feeding apparatua (Ii078*)y 
whioh supplied the rubbing water to the interior of the steam 
passage, I found, ai before said» that with steam only I ob« 

tained no electricity (^84.) « On letting in distilled water, 
abundance of electricity was evolved ; on putting a small cry- 
stal of sulphate of soda, or of common salt into the water, the 
evolution ceased entirely. Re-employing distilled water, the 
electricity appeared again ; on using the common water sup« 
plied to London, it was unable to produce it. 

SO&U Again, using the steams-globe (^76.)| and a boxwood 
tube (11100.) whioh excites well if the water diitilling over from 
the boiler be allowed to pass with the steatDi when I put A 
small crysttd of sulphate of soda^ of eomroon fealty or of nitroi 
or the smallest drop of sulphuric acid, into the steam^^globe 
with the water, the apparatus was utterly ineffective, and no 
electricity could be produced. On withdrawing such water 
and replacing it by distilled water, the excitement was again 
excellent : on adding a very small portion of any of these sub- 
ataneesy it deased; but upon again introducing pure water it 
wai rtoeW6d. 

809^. Cdniinon wat«r in the steam-globe was poweri^ss to 
eitdte. A lltde potash added to distilled water took away all 
its power; 80 alfto did the addition of an^ of those saline or 

other substances which give conducting power to water. 

^93. The effect is evidently due to the water becoming so 
good a conductor, that upon its friction against the metal of 
otlier body, the electricity evolved can be immediately dis- 
charged agaiui just as if we tried to excite lac or sulphur by 
flannel which was damp instead of dry^ It shows very clearly 
that the exciting efibct, when it occurs^ is due to water and 
not to the passing steam. 

13094* As ammonia increases the conducting power of water 
only in a stn^ll degree (5d4.)> I Concluded that it would not 
take away the power of excitement in the present case; ac- 
cordingly on introducing some to the pure water in the globe, 
electricity was still evolved though the steam of vapour and 
water was able to redden moist turmeric paper. But the ad** 
dition of a Very small portion of dilute sulphuric acid> by form* 
ing sulphate of ammonia, took away all power. 



Digitized by Google 



112 Frictionqf water aga$fUtvariaiutubiianees.{SjM^ XVUL 

^095. When in any of these cases, the steam-globe contained 
water which could not excite electricity, it was beautiful to ob- 
serve how, on opening the cock which waa inserted into the 
steam-pipe before the steam-globe, fig. !• (the use of which was 
to draw off the water condensed in ihe pipe before it entered die 
steam-globe), electricity was instantly OTolved; yet a fow inches 
further on the steam was quite powerless, because of the small 
change in the quality of the water over which it passed^ and 
which it took with it. 

2096. When a wooden or metallic tube (2076.) was used as 
the exciting passage, the application of solution of salts to the 
outside and end of the tube in no way affected the evolution* 
But when a wooden cone (2077.) was used, and that cone mout- 
ened with the solutions, there was no excitement on first letting 
out the steam, and it was only as the solution was washed away 
that the power appeared; soon rising, however, to its full de- 
gree. 



2097. Having ascerta^ed these points respecting the neces- 
sity of water and its purity, the next for examination was the 
influence of the substance against which the stream of steam 
and water rubbed. For this purpose I first used cones (2077.) 
of various substances, either insulated or not, and the following, 
namely, brass, box-wood, beech-wood, ivory, linen, kerseymere, 
white silky sulphur, caoutchouc, oiled silk, japanned leather, 
melted caoutchouc and resin, all became negative, causing the 
stream of steam and water to become positive. The fabrics 
were applied stretched over wooden cones. The melted caout- 
chouc was spread over the surface of a box-wood or a linen 
cone, and the resin cone was a linen cone dipped in a strong 
solution of resin in alcohol, and then dried* A cone of wood 
dipped in oil of turpentine, another cone soaked in olive oil, 
and a brass cone covered v|[ith the alcholic solution of resin and 
dried, were at first inactive, and then gradually became nega- 
tive, at which time tiie oil of turpentine, olive-oU and resin were 
found cleared off from the parts struck by tiie stream of steam 
and water. A cone of kerseymere, which had been dipped in 
alcoholic solution of resin and dried two or three times in suc- 
cession, was very irregular, becoming positive and negative by 



Digitized by Google 



Jam* 1843.1 Bodies rubbed by steam and water, 118 

tamsy in a maimer dilBcuh to. comprehend at first, but easy to. 
be understood hereafter {2US.). 

19098. The end of a rod of shell-lac was held a moment in 
the stream of steam and then brought near a gold-leaf electro- 
meter : it was found excited negatively, exactly as if it had 
been rubbed with a piece of flannel. The corner of a plate of 
sulphur showed the same efkct and state when examined in 
the same way. 

£099. Another mode of examining the substance rubbed 
was to use it in the shape of wires, threads or fragments, hold-*, 
ing them by an insukting handle in the jet, whilst they were 
connected with a gold-leaf electrometer. In this way the fol* 

lowing substances were tried 



Platinum, 


Horse-hair, 


Charcoal^ 


Copper, 


Bear's hair. 


Asbestus, 


Iron, 


Flint glass. 
Green glass. 


Cyanite, 


Zinc, 


Haematite, 


Sulphuret of copper, 


Quill, 


Rock-crystal, 


Linen, 


Ivory, 


Orpiment, 


Cotton, 


Shell- lac on silk. 


Sulphate of baryta. 


Silk, 


Sulphur on silk. 


Sulphate of lime, 


Worsted, 


Sulphur in piece. Carbonate of lime. 


Wood, 


Plumbago, 


fluor-spar. 



^11 these substances were rendered negative, though not in 
the same degree. This apparent difference in degree did not 
depend only upon the specific tendency to become negative, but 
also upon die conducting power of the body itself, whereby it 
gaye its charge to the electrometer; upon its tendency to be- 
come wet (wldch is very different, for instance in sheU-lac or. 
quill, to that of glass or linen), by which its conducting quality 
was affected; and upon its size or shape. Nevertheless I 
could distinguish that bear's hair, quill and ivory had very 
feeble powers of exciting electricity as compared to the other 
bodies. 

£100. I may make here a remark or two upon the introduc- 
tion of bodies into the jet* For the purpose of preventing con- 
densation on the substance, I made a platinum wire white*hot 
by an insulated Toltaic battery, and introduced it into the jet; 
it was quickly lowered in temperature by the stream of steam 

VOL. II. I 



Digitized by Google 



114 



EleeMdi?/ of $ieam tmd waier [Sbriss XVin. 



and water to but of ooune could never be below tbe boil- 
ing-point* No difference was visible between the efifect at the 
first instant of introducdon or any other time* It was always 

instantly electrified and negative. 

2101. The threads I used were stretched across a fork of 
stiff wire, and the middle part of the thread was held in the jet 
of vapour. In this case, the string or thready if held exactly 
in the middle of the jet and looked at end-ways to the thready 
was seen to be still, but if removed the least degree to the 
right or left of the axis of the stream it (very naturally) vibra- 
ted, or rather rotated, describing a beautifiil circle, of which 
the axis of the stream was the tangent: the interesting point 
was to observe, that when the thread rotated, travelling as it 
were with the current, there was little or no electricity evolved, 
but that when it was nearly or quite stationary there was abun- 
dance of electricity, thm- illustrating the effect of friction. 

2102. The difference in the quality of tbe substances above 
described (2099.) gives a valuable power of arrangement at the 
jet. Thus if a metal, glass, or wood tube^ (S076.) be used for 
the steam issue, the boiler is rendered well negative and the 
steam highly positive ; but if a quill tube or, better still, an 
ivory tube be used, the boiler receives scarcely any charge, 
and the stream of steam is also in a neutral state. This result 
not only assists in proving that the electricity is not due to 
evaporation, but is also very valuable in the experimental in- 
quiry. It was in such a neutral jet of steam and water that 
the excitation of the bodies already described (2099*) was ob- 
tained. 

j^lOS. Substances, therefore, may be held either in the neu- 
tral jet from an ivory tube, or in the positive jet from a wooden 
or metal tube; and in the latter case effects occurred whichf 
if not understood, would lead to great confusion. Thus an 

insulated wire was held in the stream issuing from a glass or 
metal tube, about half an inch from the mouth of the tube, 
and was found to be unexcited: on moving it in one direc- 
tion a little further off, it was rendered positive i on moving 

' A box-wood tube, 3 incbea long and ^th of tn inch inner diameter, weU 
soaked in distilled water and aorewed into the eteam-globe, it an admiiaUa ex« 
citsr. 



Digitized by Google 



Jan. 184S.] by/rieUan agakui variatu bodies. 1 15 



it in the other diitctiony nearer to the tuhe, it was negative. 
This was simply because, when near the tube in the forcible 
part of the eurrenti it was excited and rendered negatiye» ren- 
dering the steam and water more positive than before, but that 
when further off, in a quieter part of the current, it served 
merely as a discharger to tlie electricity previously excited in 
the exit tube, and so showed the same state with it. Platinum, 
copper, string, silk, wood, plumbago, or any of the substances 
mentioned above (^!099.)j excepting quilli ivory and bear's hair, 
could, in this way, be made to assume either one state or the 
other, according as they were used as exciters or dischargers, 
the difference being determined by their place in the stream. 
A piece of fine wire gauze held across the issuing jet shows 
the above effect very beautifully ; the difference of an eighth of 
an inch either way from the neutral place will change the state 
of the wire gauze. 

2104. If, instead of an excited jet of steam and water (2103.), 
one issuing from an ivory tube {2102,), and in the neutral state 
be used, then the wires, &c« can no longer be made to assume 
both states* They may be excited and rendered negative 
(£099.), but at no distance can they become dischargers, or 
show the positive state. 

S105. We have already seen that the presence of a very mi* 
nute quantity of matter able to give conducting power to the 
water took away all power of excitation (2090, Slc.) up to the 
highest degree of pressure, i. e. of mechanical friction that I 
used (2086.); and the next point was to ascertain whether it 
would be so for all the bodies rubbed by the stream, or whe- 
ther differences in degree would begin to manifest themselves. 
I therefore tried all these bodies again, at one time adding 
about two grams of sulphate of soda to the four ounces of water 
which the steam-globe retained as a constant quantity when in 
regular action, and at another time adding not a fourth of this 
quantity of sulphuric acid (2091.). In both cases all the sub- 
stances (2099.) remained entirely unexcited and neutral. Very 
probably, great increase of pressure might have developed 
some effect (2086.). 

^106. With dilute sulphuric acid in the steam«globe, varying 
from extreme weakness to considerable sourness, I used tubes 
and cones of sine, but could obtain no iraee of electricity. 

I 2 



Digitized by Google 



116 



BkdrkHy of iUam wnd maier ^Ssiubs XTIIL 



Chemical action, therefore, appears to have nothing to do with 
ihe excitement of electricity by a current of steam. 

S107. Having thus given the result of the frictimi of the 
steam anil water against so many bodies^ I may here point out 
the remarkable circumstance of water being positive to them 
all. It very probably will find its place above all other sub- 
stances, even cat's hair and oxalate of lime (2131.). We shall 
find hereafter, that we have power, not merely to prevent the 
jet of steam and water from becoming positive^ as by using an 
ivory tube {2102*), but also of reducing its own power when 
passing through or against such substances as wood, metal, 
gkss, &c* Whether, with a jet so reduced^ we shall still find 
amongst the bodies above mentioned some that can ren- 

der the stream positive and others that can make it negative, 
is a question yet to be answered. 



2108. Advancing in the investigation^ a new point was to 
ascertain what other bodies, than water, would do if their par- 
tides were carried forward by the current of steam. For this 
purpose the feeding apparatus (iS078.) was mounted and chaiged 
with oil of turpentine, to be let in at pleasure to the steam-esut 
passage. At first the feeder stop-cock was shut, and the issu- 
ing steam and water made the boiler negative. On letting 
down the oil of turpentine, this state was instantly changed, 
the boiler became powerfully positive, and the jet of steam, &c. 
as strongly negative. Shutting off the oil of turpentine, this 
state gradually fell, and in half a minute the boiler was nega- 
tive, as at first* The introduction of more oil of turpentine 
instantly changed this to positive, and so on with perfect com- 
mand of the phenomena* 

ftl€9. Removing the feeder apparatus and using only the 
steam-globe and a wooden exit tube (2076.), the same beauti- 
ful result was obtained. With pure water in the globe the 
boiler was negative, and the issuing steam, &c. positive ; but a 
drop or two of oil of turpentine, introduced into the steam- 
globe with the water, instantly made the boiler positive and the 
issuing stream negative. On using the little interposed cham- 
ber C (^79.), the effects were equally decided. A piece of 
dean new sail-cloth was fonned into a ring, mcnstened widi oB 



Digitized by Google 



Jam. 1843.] changed by oil, oil qf turpentine, §fc. 117 

of turpentine and placed in the box; as long as a trace of the 
fluid remained in the box the boiler was positive and the issu- 
ing stream negative. 

2110* Thus the positive or negative state can be given at 
pleasure* either to the substance rubbed or to the rubbing 
stream; and with respect to this body, oil of turpentine, its 
perfect and ready dissipation by the continuance of the pass- 
age of the steam soon causes the new eflfect to cease, yet with 
the power of renewing it in an instant. 

2111. With olive oil the same general phenomena were ob- 
served, i. e. it made the stream of steam, &c. negativey and the 
substance rubbed by it positive. But from the comparative 
fixedness of oil, the state was much more permanent, and a 
very little oil introduced into the steam-globe (^76.) > or into 
the chamber C (2079.), or into the exit tube, would make the 
boiler positive for a long time. It required, however, that this 
oil should be in such a place that the steam stream, after pass- 
ing by it, should rub against other matter. Thus, ou using a 
wooden tube (S076. 2109.) as the exciter, if a little oil were 
applied to the inner termination, or that at which the steam 
entered it, the tube was made positive and the issuing steam 
negative ; but if the oil were applied to the outer termination 
of the tube, the tube had its ordinary negative state, as with 
pure water^ and the issuing steam was positive. 

£11^. Water is essential to this excitation by fixed oil, for 
when the steam-globe was emptied of water, and yet oil left in 
it and in the passages, there was no excitement. The first ef- 
lect (S089.) it is true was one of excitement, and it rendered 
the boiler positive, but that was an effect due to the water con- 
densed in the passage, combined with the action of the oil. 
Afterwards when all was hot, there was no evolution of elec- 
tricity. 

2113. I tried many other substances with the chamber C and 
other forms of apparatus, using the wet wooden tube (^10^.) 
as the place and substance by which to excite the steam stream. 
HogVlard, spermaceti, bees -wax, castor-oil, resin applied dis- 
solved in alcohol; these, with olive-oil, oil of turpentine, and 
oil of laurel, all rendered the boiler positive, and the issuing 
steam negative. Of substances which seemed to have the 
reverse power, it is doubtful if there are any above water. 



Digitized by Google 



1 18 EUetrtcUy oj steam and water [Series XVIIL 

Sulphuret of carbon, naphthaline, sulphur, camphor, and melt- 
ed caoutchouc, occasionally seemed in strong contrast to the 
former bodies, making the boiler very negative, but on trying 
pure water immediately after, it appeared to do so quite as pow- 
erfully* Some of the latter bodies with oil-gas liquid, naphtha 
and caoutchottcine, gave ooeatioiiaUy yariable rerahs^ as if they 
were the consequence of irregular and complicated eflfects. In- 
deed^ it is easy to comprehend, that according as a substance 
may adhere to the body rubbed, or be carried off by the pass- 
ing stream, exchanging its mechanical action from rubbed to 
rubber, it should give rise to variable effects; this, I think, 
was the case with the cone and resin before referred to (2097.). 

2114. The action of salts, acids, &c., when present in the 
water to destroy its effect, I have already referred to (^090, 
&c.). In addition, I may note that sulphuric ether, pyroxyHc 
spirit, and boracic acid did the same. 

2115. Alcohol seemed at the first moment to render the 
boiler positive. Half alcohol and half water rendered the 
boiler negative, but much less so than pure water. 

2116. It must be considered that a substance having the re- 
verse power of water, but only in a small degree, may be able 
to indicate that property merely by diminishing the power of 
water. This diminution of power is very different in its cause 
to that dependent on increasing the conducting power of the 
water, as by saline matter (0090.), and yet the apparent e£fect 
will be the same* 

SI 17. When it is required to render the issumg steam per- 
manently negative, the object is very easily obtained. A little 
oil or wax put into the steam-globe (2076.), or a thick ring of 
string or canvas soaked in wax, or solution of resin in alcohol, 
and introduced into the box C (2079.), supplies all that is re- 
quired. By adjusting the application it is easy to neutralize 
the power of the water, so that the issuing stream shall neither 
become electric, nor cause that to be electrified against which 
it rubs. 

21 18. We have arrived, therefore, at three modes of render- 
ing the jet of steam and water neutral, namely, the use of an 
ivory or quill tube (SlOd.), the presence of substances in the 

water (9090, &c.), and the neutralization of its natural power 
by the contrary force of oil, resin, &c. &c. 



Digitized by Google 



Jan* 1843«] affected by oilier bodies present. 119 

91 19. In experiments of the kind juil described an ivory tube 
cannot be used safely with acid or alkalies in the steam-globe, 
for they, by their chemical action on the substance of the tube^ 

in the evolution or solution of the oily matter for instance, 
change its state and make its particular power of excitement 
very variable. Other circumstances also powerfully affect it 
occasionally (2144.). 

^120. A very little oil in the rubbing passages produces a 
great efl^ti and this at first was a source of considerable an- 
noyance, by the continual occurrence of unexpected results; a 
portion may lie concealed for a week together in the thread of 
an unsuspected screw, and yet be sufficient to mar the efibct of 
every arrangement. Digesting and washing with a little solu- 
tion of alkali, and avoiding all oiled washers, is the best way in 
delicate experiments of evading the evil. Occasionally I have 
found that a passage, which was in some degree persistently 
negative, from a little melted caoutchouc, or positive from oil, 
resin, &c., might be cleared out thoroughly by letting oil of 
turpentine be blown through it ; it assumed for a while the x>o- 
sitiTo statei but when the continuance of steam had removed 
that (19110.), the passage appeared to be perfectly dear and 
good and in its norma! condition. 

2121. I now tried the effect of oil, &c. when a little saline 
matter or acid was added to the water in the steam-globe (2090, 
&c.), and found that when the water was in such a state as to 
have no power of itself, still oil of turpentine, or oil, or resin 
in the box C, showed their power, in conjunction with such 
water, of rendering the boiler positive, but their power ap- 
peared to be reduced : increase of the force of steam, as In all 
other cases* would, there is little doubt, have exalted it again* 
When alkali was in the steam-globe, oil and resin lost very 
much of their power, and oil of turpentine very Uttle. This 
fact will be important hereafter (2126.). 

2122. We have seen that the action of such bodies as oil in- 
troduced into the jet of steam changed its power (2108.), but 
it was only by experiment we could tell whether this change was 
to such an extent as to alter the electricity for few or many of 
the bodies against which the steam stream rubbed* With olive 
oil in the box C, aU the insulated cones before enumerated 
(£097.) were made positive. With acetic add in the steam- 



Digitized by Google 



1^ Made of action by which oil, ^c» [Series XVIII. 



globe all were made neutral (i9091.)« With resin in the box C 
(SlIS.), all the substances in the former list (S099.) were made 
positive, there was not one exception. 

2123, The remarkable power of oil, oil of turpentine, resin, 
&c., when in very small quantity, to change the exciting power 
of water, though as regards some of them {2112.) they are in- 
active without it, will excuse a few theoretical observations upon 
their mode of action. In the first pkce it appears that steam 
alone cannot by friction excite the electricity, but that the mi- 
nute globules of water which it carries with it being swept over, 
rubbed upon and torn from the rubbed body (2085.) excite it 
and are excited, just as when the hand is passed over a rod of 
shell-lac. When olive oil or oil of turpentine is present, these 
globules are, I believe, virtually converted into globules of these 
bodies, and it is no longer water, but the new fluids which are 
rubbing the rubbed bodies. 

2124, The reasons for this view are the following. If a splinter 
of wood dipped in oUve oil or oil of turpentine touch die surface 
of water, a pellicle of the former instantly darts and spreads 
over the surface of the latter. Hence it is pretty certain dimt 
every globule of water passing through the box C, containing 
olive oil or oil of turpentine, will have a pellicle over it. Again, 
if a metal, wooden, or other balance-pan be well cleaned and 
wetted with water, and then put on the surface of clean water 
in a dish, and the other pan be loaded until almost, but not 
quite able to pull the first pan from the water, it will give a 
rough measure of the cohesive force of the water. If now the 
oHy splinter of wood touch any part of the clean sur&ce of the 
water in the dish, not only will itspread over the whole surface, 
but cause the pan to separate from the water, and if the pan 
be put down again, the water in the dish will no longer be able 
to retain it. Hence it is evident that the oil facilitates the sepa- 
ration of the water into parts by a mechanical force not other- 
wise sufficient, and invests these parts with a film of its own 
substance. 

2125, All this must take place to a great extent in the steam 
passage: the particles of water there must be covered each 
wilih a film of oil. The tenuity of this film is no objection to 
the supposition, for the action of excitement is without doubt 



Digitized by Google 



Jan. 184S.] ekamgei the ekdrkUy o/Htam and water. 1£1 



at that surface where tiie film is beUered to ezisti aad such a 
globule^ though afanost entirely water^ may well act as an oil 
globule, and by its ftiction render the woodi &c. positive, itself 
becoming negative. 

2126. That water which is rendered ineffective by a little 
saline or acid matter should still be able to show the effect of 
the film of oil (2121.) attached to it, is perfectly consistent with 
this view. So also is the still more striking fact that alksliaed 
water (2092.) having no power of itself should deeply injure the 
power of olive oil or resin* and hardly touch that of oil of tur- 
pentine (2l2h)f for the oUve oil or resin would no longer form 
a film over it but dissolve in it, on the contrary the oil of tur- 
pentine would form its film. 

2127. That resin should produce a strong effect and sulphur 
not is also satisfactory, for I find resin in boiling hot water 
melts, and has the same effect on the balance (2124.) as oil, 
though more slowly ; but sulphur has not this power, its point 
of fusion being too high. 

2128. It is very probable that when wood, glass or even me- 
tal is rubbed by these oily currents, the oil may be considered 
as rubbing not merely against wood, &c., but water also, the 
water being now on the side of the thing rubbed. Under the 
circumstances water has much more attraction for the wood 
rubbed than oil has, for in the steam-current, canvas, wood, &c, 
which has been well soaked in oil for a long time are quickly 
dispossessed of it, and found saturated with water. In such 
case the effect would still be to increase the positive state of 
the substance rubbed, and the negative state of the issuing 
stream* 



2129, Having carried die experiments thus far with steam, 

and having been led to consider the steam as ineffectual by it- 
self, and merely the mechanical agent by which the rubbing 
particles were driven onwards, I proceeded to experiment with 
compressed air^ For this purpose I used a strong copper box 
of the capacity of forty-six cubic inches, having two stop-cocks, 
by one of which the air was always forced in, and the other 

' Mr. Armstrong has also employed air in much larger quantities. Philono- 
fhical Magazine, 1841, vol. xviii. pp. 133, 328. 



Digitized by Google 



122 ElectrtcUy evolved by friction of air ; [Series XVUL 

letained ftir the exit aperture. The hoz wsii Tcry ctaMBy 

cleaned out by caustic potash. Extreme care was taken (and 
required) to remove and avoid oil, wax, or resin about the exit 
apertures. Tlie air was forced into it by a condensing syringe, 
and in certain cases when I required dry air, four or five ounces 
of cylinder potasaa fiisa were put into the box, and ib» con* 
denied air left in contact with the substance ten or fifteen mi- 
nntei. The ayerage quantity of air which iaaued and was used 
in each blait was 150 cubic inches. ' It was yery difficult to 
depriye this air of the smell of oil which it acquired in being 
pumped through the condensing syringe. 

SI 30. 1 will speak first of undried common air: when such com- 
pressed air was let suddenly out against the brass or the wood 
cone (2077.), it rendered the cone negative, exactly as the 
steam and water had done (2097.). This I attributed to the 
particles of water suddenly condensed from the expanding and 
cooled air rubbing against the metal or wood : such particles 
were very visible in the mist that appeared, and also by their 
effect of moistening the surface of the wood and metal* The 
electricity here excited is quite consistent with that eyolved by 
steam and water : but the idea of that being due to eyapora- 
tion {20SS,) is in striking contrast with the actual condensation 
here. 

21.31. When however common air was let out against ice it 
rendered the ice positive, again and again, and that in alterna- 
tion with the negative e^ect upon wood and metal. This is 
strongly in accordance with the high positive position which 
has already been assigned to water (2107.)« 

21S£. I proceeded to experiment with dry air {ftl29»)f and 
fbund that it was in all cases quite incapable of exciting elec- 
tricity against wood or sulphur, or brass, in the form of cones 
(2077. 2097.) ; yet if, in the midst of these experiments, I let 
out a portion of air immediately after its compression, allowing it 
no time to dry, then it rendered the rubbed wood or brass nega- 
tive (2130.). This is to me a satisfactory proof that in the former 
case the effect was d.ue to the condensed water, and that ne- 
ther air alone nor steam alone can excite these bodieSf wood, 
brass, &c«, so as to produce the effect now under investigation* 

£ldS. In the next place the box C was attached to ^is air 
apparatus and experiments made with different substances 



Digitized by Google 



Jak. 18i3.] of powder i, as sulphur ^ silica, ^c. 1^ 

iotroduced into it (dlOS.), using common air ai ihA canying 
vehicle. 

2134. With distilled water in C, the metal coi\e was every 
now and then rendered negative, but more frequently no effect 
was produced. The want of a continuous jet of air sadly in- 
terfered with the proper adjuitment of the proportion of water 
to the issuing ttream* 

With oommon water (ie090.), or a very dihits salhie 
solution, or very dOute sulphuric acid (309L) or ammonia, I 
nerer could ohtain any traces of electricity* 

£IS6. With oil of turpentine only in box C, the metal cone 
was rendered positive ; but when both distilled water and oil 
of turpentine were introduced, the cone was very positive y in- 
deed far more so than before. When sent against ice, the ice 
was made positive. 

^137. In the same manner olive oil and water in C, or resin 
in alcohol and water in C, rendered the cone positive, exactly 
as if these substances had been carried forward in their oonrae 
by steam. 



Although the investigation as respects the steam 
stream may here be considered as finished, I was induced in 
connection with the subject to try a few experiments with the air 
current and dry powders. Suipkuir in powder (sublimed) ren- 
dered both metal and wood, and even the sulphur cone nega- 
tive, only once did it render metal positife. Powdered resm 
generally rendered metal negative, and wood positive, but pre- 
sented irregularities, and often gave two states in the sdMe est» 
perimenty first diverging the electrometer leaves, and yet at 
the end leaving them uncharged. Gum gave unsteady and 
double results like the resin. Starch made wood negative. 
Silica, being either very finely powdered rock-crystal or that 
precipitated from fluo-silicic acid by water, gave very constant 
and powerful results, but both metal and wood were made 
strongly positive by it, and the sitica when caught on a wet in- 
sulated board and examined was found to be negative. 

These experiments with powders give rise to two or 
three observations. In the first place the high degree of fHe- 
tion occurring between particles carried forward by steam or 



Digitized by Google 



IM PeeuUariHes in the electricity qf powelers* [Series XVIII. 



air was wall illustrated by what happened with sulphur ; it was 
found driyen into the di^ box«wood cone opposed to it with 

such force that it could not be washed or wiped away, but had 
to be removed by scraping. In the next place, the double ex- 
citements were very remarkable. In a single experiment, the 
gold leaves would open out very wide at first, and then in an 
instant as suddenly fall, whilst the jet still continued^ and re- 
mains at last either neutral or a very litde positive or negative : 
this was particularly the case with gum and resin. The fixa- 
tion upon the wood of some of the particles issuing at the be- 
gining of the blast and the condensation of moisture by the 
expanding air, are circumstances which, with others present, 
tend to cause these variable results. 

2140. Sulphur is nearly constant in its results, and silica 
very constant, yet their states are the reverse of those that 
might have been expected. Sulphur in the lump is rendered 
negative whether rubbed against wood or any of the metals 
wUch 1 have tried, and renders them positive yet in 
the above experiments it almost always made both negative. 
Silica, in the form of a crystal, by friction with wood and metals 
renders them negative, but applied as above, it constantly made 
them strongly positive. There must be some natural cause for 
these changes, which at present can only be considered as 
imperfect results, for I have not had time to investigate the 
subject. 

2141. In illustration of the effect produced by steam and 
water striking against other bodies, 1 rubbed these other sub- 
stances (20d9.) together in pairs to ascertain their order, which 
was as follows : — 

1 . Catskin or bearskin. 8* Linen, canvas. 



Any one of these became negative with the substances above, 
and positive with those beneath it. There are however many ex* 



2. Flannel. 



9. White silk. 

10. The hand. 

11. Wood. 



3. Ivory. 

4. Quill. 



'Iron. 
Copper. 
Brass. 
Tm. 



5. Rock-crystaL 

6. Flint glass. 

7. Cotton. 



12. Lac. 

13. Metab . . . 




Digitized by Google 



Jan* 1843.] Variaium$ in eleeirieUy by^fri^iwu 125, 

ceptions to this general statement : thus one part of a catskin is 
very negative to another part, and even to rock-crystal : dif-. 
ferent pieces of flannel also differ very much from each other. 

£14^. The mode of ruhhing also makes in some cases a 
great di£fereiice« although it is not easy to say why, since the 
particles that actually rub ought to present the same constant 
difference ; a feather struck lightly against dry canvas will be- 
come strongly negative, and yet the same feather drawn with 
a little pressure between the folds of the same canvas will be 
strongly positive, and these effects alternate, so that it is easy 
to take away the one state in a moment by the degree of fric- 
tion which produces the other state. When a piece of flannel 
is halved and the two pieces drawn across each other, the two 
pieces will have different states irregularly, or the same piece 
will have both states in different parts, or sometimes both 
pieces will be negative, in which case, doubtless, air must 
have been rendered positive, and then dissipated. 

214S, Ivory is remarkable in its condition. It is very difli- 
cult of excitement by friction with the metals, much more so 
than linen, cotton, wood, &c., which are lower in the scale 
than it (2141.), and withal are much better conductors, yet 
both circumstances would havQ, led to the expectation that it 
would excite better than them when rubbed with metals. This 
property is probably very influential in giving character to it 
as a non-exdting steam passage 

2144. Before concluding this paper, I will mention, that 
haying used a thin ivory tube fixed in a cork (^076.) for many 
experiments with oil, resin, &c., it at last took up such a state 
as to give not merely a non-exciting passage for the steam, but 
to exert upon it a nullifying effect, for the jet of steam and 
water passing through it produced no excitation against any of 
the bodies opposed, as on the former occasion, to it (20&9.)m 
The tube was apparently quite clean, and was afterwards, 
soaked in alcohol to remove any resm, but it retained this pe« 
culiar state. 

jS145. Finally, I may say that the cause of the evolution of 

electricity by the liberation of confined steam is not evapora- 
tion ; and further, being, I believe, friction, it has no effect in 
producing, and is not connected with, the general electricity of 
the atmosphere ; also, that as far as I have been able to pro- 



Digitized by Google 



1196 Ewkakm i^eke^rMty bff iteam waier. [Series X VIIL 

ceed, pure gases, t. e, gases not mingled with solid or liquid 
particles, do not excite electricity by friction against solid or 
liquid eubstaiieea^ 



PLATE I. 

Description of ike Apparatus represented in section, and to a 

scale of one-fourth. 
Fig. 1. The steam-globe (2076.), principal steam-cock, and 
drainage-cock to remove the water condensed in the pipe. 
The current of steamy &c. travelled in the direction of the ar- 
Tow-heads. 

Fig. ^ The cone appamfcus (fQ77.) in one of its forms. 
The ccme ootdd be adTanoed and withdrawn by means of the 
milled head and serew. 

Fig. 3. The feeding apparatus (9078.). The feeder was a 

glass tube or retort neck fitted by a cork into the cap of the 
feeding stop-cock. Other apparatus, as that figured 2, 5, 6, 
could be attached by a connecting piece to this apparatus. 

Fig. 4w The chamber C (2079.) fitted by a cork on to a me- 
tal pipe previously screwed into the steam-globe ; and having 
a metallic tube and adjusting piece screwed into its mouth. 
Other partsi as the cone fig. ft^ or the wooden or glass tuhea 
5f 6, could he conjoined with this chamber. 

Fig. 5. The hozrwood tube (^10^.). 

Fig. 6. A glass or thin metal tube (2076.) attached by a 
cork to a mouth-piece iittmg into the steam-globe. 

* References to papers in the Philosopbioal Magazine, 1840-1843. Anii- 
strong, Phil. Mag. vol. xvii. pp. 370, 452; vol. xviii. pp. 50, 133, 328; vol, 
xix. p. 25; vol. xx. p. 5 ; vol. xxii. p. 1. Pattinsou, Phi). Mag. vol. xvii. pp. 
375, 457. Schafhaeutl, Phil. Mag. vol. xvii. p. 449 ; vol. xviii. pp. 14, 95, 
965. See also Philosophical Magazine, 1843, xziii. p. 194, for Armatrongi's 
•oeomit sf Hfdr^-deMt JfcdUne. 



Digitized by Google 



127 



Papers on Electricity from the Quarterly Journal of 

Sci£NC£> FuiLOSOPUiCAL MaOAZINB, &C 

On tome new JB^eeira-MagneHeai Mofknt^ and on the T%eory 

of Magnetism^, 

In making an experiment die beginning of last week, to as* 
certain tbe position of the magnetic needle to tbe connecting 

wire of a voltaic apparatus, I was led into a series which appear 
to me to give some new views of electro-magnetic action, and 
of magnetism altogether ; and to render more distinct and clear 
those already taken. After the great men who have already 
experimented on the subject, I should have felt doubtful that 
anything I could do could be new or possess an interest, but 
that the experiments seem to me to reconcile considerably the 
opposite opinions that aie entertained on it. I am induced in 
eonsequenee to publish this account of them» in the hope they 
will assist in making this important branch of knowledge more 
perfect. 

The apparatus used was that invented by Dr. Hftre of Phi- 
ladelphia, and called by him a calorimotor ; it is in fact a single 
pair of large plates, each having its power heightened by the 
induction of others, consequently all Uie positions and motiona 
of the needles, poles, &c., are opposite to those produced by 
an apparatus of several plates ; for, if a current be supposed 
to exist in the connecting wire of a battery from the sine to 
the copper, it will be in each connected pair of plates from 
the copper to the sine ; and the wire I have used is that con- 
nection between the two plates of one pair. In the diagrams 
I may have occasion to subjoin, the ends of a connecting wire, 
marked Z and C, are connected with the zinc and copper- 
plates respectively; the sections are all horiaontal and seen 
from above, and the arrow4ieada have been used sometimes to 
mark the pole- of a needle or magnet which points to the norths 
and tometfanes to mark the durection of motion ; no difficulty 

^ Quarterly Journal of Science xiL 74. 



Digitized by Google 



1S8 SlectrO'tnagnetic rotation, [Oct. 

can occur in ascertainmg to which of those uses any particular 
head b applied. 

On placing the wire perpendicularly, and bringing a needle 
towards it to ascertain the attractive and repulsive positions 
with regard to the wire ; instead of finding these to be four, 
one attractive and one repulsive for each pole, I found them to 
be eight* two attractive and two repulsive for each pole ; thus 
allowing the needle to take its natural position across the wire, 
which is exactly opposite to that pointed out by CErsted for 
the reason before mentioned* and then drawing the support 
away from the wire slowly, so as to bring the north pole» for. 
instance, nearer to it, there is attraction, as is to be expected ; 
but on continuing to make the end of the needle come nearer 
to the wire, repulsion takes place, though the wire still be on 
the same side of the needle. If the wire be on the other side 
of the same pole of the needle, it will repel it when opposite to 
most parts between the centre of motion and the end; but 
there is a small portion at the end where it attracts it. Fig. I, 
"jfiate n.* shows the positions of attraction for the north and 
south poles* fig. ^ the positions of repulsion. 

If the wire be made to approach perpendicularly towards 
one pole of the needle, the pole will pass oiF on one side, in 
that direction which the attraction and repulsion at the ex- 
treme point of the pole would give ; but, if the wire be conti- 
nually made to approach the centre of motion, by either the 
one or other side of the needle, the tendency to move in the 
former direction diminishes; it then becomes null, and the 
needle is quite indifferent to the wire, and ultimately the mo- 
tion is reversed* and the needle powerfully endeavours to pass 
the opposite way. 

It is evident from this that the centre of the active portion 
of either limb of the needle, or the true pole, as it may be 
called, is not at the extremity of the needle, but may be repre- 
sented by a point generally in the axis of the needle, at some 
little distance from the end. It was evident* also, that this 
point had a tendency to revolve round the wire* and necessa- 
rily* therefore* the wire round the point; and as the same 
effects in the opposite direction took place with the other pole* 
it was evident that each pole had the power of acting on the 
wire by itself* and not as any part of the needle« or as connect- 
ed with the opposite pole* 



Digitized by Google 



1S2L} 



Bteetro-magneiie raiaiiam. 



By attending to fig. 3, which represents sections of the wire 
in ito different positions to the needle, all this will be pkin ; the 
active poles are Tepieiented bj two dots, and the arrow-heads 
show the tendency of die wire in its positions to go round these 
poles. 

Several important conclusions flow from these facts ; such as 
that there is no attraction between the wire and either pole of 
a magnet; that the wire ought to revolve round a magnetic pole 
and a magnetic pole round the wire ; that both attraction and re- 
pulsion of connecting wires, and probably magnets, are com- 
pound actions ; that true magnetic poISs are centres of action 
mduced by the whole bar, &c &c. Such of these as I have been 
able to confirm by experiment, shall be stated, with their proofs. 

The revolution of the wire and the pole round each other 
being the first important thing required to prove the nature of 
the force mutually exerted by them, various means were tried 
to succeed in producing it. The difficulty consisted in making a 
suspension of part of the wire sufficiently delicate for the mo- 
tion, and yet affording sufficient mass of matter for contact. 
This was overcome in the following manner: — A piece of brass 
wire had a small button of silver soldered on to its end, a little 
cup was hollowed in the silver, and the metal being amalgama- 
ted^ it would then retain a drop of mercury in it, though placed 
upside down for an upper centre of motion ; for a lower centre^ 
a similar cup was made of copper, into which a little mercury 
was put ; this was placed in a jar of water under the former 
centre. A piece of copper wire was then bent into the form of a 
crank, its ends amalgamated, and the distances being arranged, 
they were placed in the cups. To prevent too much friction 
from the weight of the wire on the lower cup, it had been 
passed through a cork duly adjusted in sisee, and that being 
pushed down on the wire till immersed in the water, the fric* 
tbn became very little, and the wire very mobile, yet with good 
contacts. The plates being then connected with the two cups, 
the apparatus was completed. In this state, a magnetic pole 
being brought to the centre of motion of the crank, the wire 
immediately made an effort to revolve until it struck the magnet, 
and that being rapidly brought round to the other side, the wire 
again made a revolution, giving evidence that it would have 
gone round continually but for the extension of the magnet on 

VOL. II. K 



Digitized by Google 



130 



Meetro-magnetie rataiion. 



the outside. To do away with this impediment, the wire and 
lower metai cup were removed, and a deep basin of mercury 
placed beneath ; at the bottom of this was a piece of wax, and 
a small round bar magnet was stuck upright in it, so that one 
pole was about half or three-fourths of an inch above the sur- 
face of the mercury^ and directly under the silver cup. A 
straight piece of copper wire, long enough to reach from the 
cup, and dip about half an inch into the mercury, had its ends 
amalgamated, and a small round piece of cork fixed on to one 
of them to make it more buoyant ; this being dipped in the 
mercury close beside the magnet, and the other end placed 
under the little cup, the wire remained upright, for the adhe- 
sion of the cork to the magnet was sufficient for that purpose, 
and yet at its lower end had freedom of motion round the pole. 
The connection bdng now made from the plates to the upper 
cup, and to the mercury below, the wire immediately began to 
revolve round the pole of the magnet, and continued to do so 
as long as the connexion was continued. 

When it was wished to give a large diameter to the circle 
described by the wire, the cork was moved from the magnet^ 
and a little loop of platinum passed round the magnet and wire* 
to prevent them from separating too frur. Revolution again 
took place on making the connexion* but more slowly as the 
distance increased. 

The direction in which the wire moved was according to the 
way in which the connexions were made, and to the magnetic 
pole brought into action. When the upper part of the wire 
was connected with the zinc, and the lower with the copper 
plate, the motion round the north and south poles of a magnet 
were as in figs. 4 and 5, looking from above ; when the con- 
nexions were reversed, the motions were in the opposite direc- 
tion. 

On bringing the magnetic pole from the centre of motion to 
the side of the wire, there was neither attraction nor repukion; 
but the wire endeavoured to pass off in a circle, still having 
the pole for its centre, and that either to the one side or the 
other, according to the above law. 

When the pole was on the outside of the wire, the wire moved 
in a direction directly contrary to that taken when the pole 
was in the inside ^ but it did not move far* the endeavour was 



Digitized by Google 



18210 



131 



still to go round the pole as a centre, and it only moved till 
that power and the power which retained it in a circle ahout 
its own axis were equipoised. 

The next object was to make the magnet revolve round the 
wire. This was done by so loadin^^ one pole of the small mag- 
net with platinum that the magnet would float upright in a ba- 
sin of mercury, with the other pole above its surface i then 
connecting the mercury with one plate and bringing a wire 
from the other perpendicularly into it in another part near the 
floating magnet; the upper pole immediately began to revolye 
rotind the wire, whibt the lower pole being removed away 
caused no interference or counteracting efkct. 

The motions were again according to the pole and the con- 
nexions. When the upper part of the wire was in contact with 
the zinc plate, and the lower with the copper, the direction of 
the curve described by the north and south poles were as in 
figs. 6 and 7* When the connexions were reversed, the motions 
were in the opposite directions. 

Having succeeded thus far^ I endeavoured to make a wire 
and a magnet revolve on their own axis by preventing the ro- 
tation in a circle round them, but have not been able to get the 
slightest indications that such can be the case; nor does it, on 
consideration, appear probable. The motions evidently belong 
to the current, or whatever else it be, that is passing through 
the wire, and not to the wire itself, except as the vehicle of the 
current. When that current is made a curve by the form of 
the wire, it is easy to conceive how, in revolving, it should take 
tiie wire with it; but when the wire is straight, the current 
may revolve without any motion being communicated to the 
wire through which it passes. 

M. Ampere has shown that two similar connecting wires, by 
which is meant, having currents in the same direction through 
them, attract each other, and that two wires having currents in 
opposite directions through them, repel each other, the attrac- 
tion and repulsion taking place in right lines between them. 
From the attraction of the north pole of a needle on one side 
Ike wire, and of the south on the other, and the repulsion of 
the poles on the opposite sides. Dr. WoUaston called this mag- 
netism vertiginous, and codceived that the phenomena might 
be explained upon the supposition of an electro-magnetic cur^ 

k2 



Digitized by Google 



1S£ BleHra-magneHe raiaiUm. [Oct* 

rent passing round the axis of the conjunctiTe wire, its direc- 
tion depending upon that of the electric current, and exhibit- 
ing north and south powers on the opposite sides. It is, indeed^ 

an ascertained fact, that the connecting wire has different pow- 
ers at its opposite sides ; or rather, each power continues all 
round the wire, the direction being tlie same, and hence it is 
evident that the attractions and repulsions of M* Ampere*8 
wires are not simple, but complicated results. 

A simple case which may be taken of magnetic motion, is the 
circle described by the wire or the pole round each other* If a 
wire be made into a helix, as M* Amp^ describes, the arrange- 
ment is such that all the vertiginous magnetism, as Dr. Wol- 
laston has named it, of the one kind, or one side of the wire, is 
concentrated in the axis of the helix, whilst the contrary kind 
is very much diffused, i, e. the power exerted by a great length 
of wire to make a pole pass one way round it, all tends to carry 
that pole to a particular spot, whilst the opposite power is dif- 
fused and much weakened in its action on any one pole. Hence 
the power on one side of the wire is very much concentrated, 
and its particular effects brought out strongly, whibt that on 
the other is rendered insensible. A means is thus obtained of 
separating, as it were, the one power from the other; but 
when this is done, and we examine the end of the helix, it is 
found very much to resemble a magnetic pole ; the power is 
concentrated at the extremity of the helix; it attracts or repels 
one pole in all directions ; and I find that it causes the revo- 
lution of the connecting wire round it, just as a magnetic pole 
does. Hence it may, for the present^ be considered identical 
with a magnetic pole ; and I diink that the experimental en- 
dence of the ensuing pages will much strengthen that opinion. 

Assuming, then, that the pole of a magnetic needle presents 
us with the properties of one side of the wire, the phenomena it 
presents with the wire itself, offers us a means of analysis, 
which, probably, if well pursued, will give us a much more in- 
timate knowledge of the state of the powers active in magnets. 
When it is placed near the wire, always assuming the latter to 
be connected with the battery, it is made to revolve round i^ 
passing towards that side by whicb it is attracted, and from 
that side by which it is repelled, u e. the pole Is at once at- 
tracted and repelled by equal powers, and therefore neitfaer 



Digitized by Google 



Ekeiro^nagMeHe rdoHon* 



lecedea nor approaches ; but the powers being from opponte 
sides of the wiroy the pole in its double effort to recede from 
one ride and approach the other rcYolves in the circle, that 
circle being evidently decided by the particular pole and state 
of the wire, and deducible from the law before mentioned. 

The phenomena presented by the approximation of one pole 
to two or more wires, or two poles to one or more wires, oiier 
many illustrations of this double action^ and will lead to more 
correct views of the magnet. These experiments are easily made 
by loading a needle with platinum at one pole^ that the other 
may float above mercury, or by almost floating a small magnetic 
needle by cork in a basin of water, at the bottom of which is 
some mercury with which to connect the wires. In describing 
them I shall refrain from entering into all their variations, or 
pursuing them to such conclusions as are not directly important. 

Two similar wires, Ampere has shown, attract each other ; 
and Sir H. Davy has shown that the filings adhering to them 
attract from one to another on the same side. They are in 
that porition in which the north and south influence of the dif« 
ierent wures attract each other. .They seem also to neutralize 
each other in the parts that fiice» for ihe magnetic pole is quite 
inactive between them, but if put close together, it moves round 
the outside of both, circulating round them as round one wire, 
and their influences being in the same direction, the greatest 
effect is found to be at the further outside surfaces of the 
wires* If several simiUr wires be put together, side by side 
like a ribbon, the result is the same, and the needle revolves 
round them all ; the internal wires appear to lose part of their 
force, which is carried on towards the extreme wire in oppo- 
site directions, so that the floating pole is accelerated in its 
motion as it passes by the edges that they form. If, in place 
of a ribbon of parallel wires, a slip of metal be used, the effect 
is the same, and the edges act as if they contained in a con- 
centrated state the power that belonged to the inner portion 
of the sUp. In this way we procure the means of removing, 
as it were, in that direction, the two sides of the wire from 
each other. 

If two wires in opposite states be arranged parallel to each 
other, and the pole be brought near them, it will drculate 
round either of them in obedience to the law laid down; but 



Digitized by Google 



IM .EiedrcmagmHeroiaiiM. [Oct* 

as the wiiei have opporite cunents, it moves in opposite di- 
rections round the two« so ihat when equidistant from then^ 
the pole is propelled in a right line perpendicular to the line 
whidi joins them, mlher receding or approaching ; and if It 
approaches, passing between and then receding ; hence it ex« 
hibits the curious appearance of first being attracted by the 
two wires, and afterwards repelled (fig. 8.). If the connexion 
with both wires be inverted, or if the pole be changed, the line 
it describes is in the opposite direction. If these two opposite 
currents be made by brading a piece of silked wire parallel to 
itselfi fig. 9, it, when connected with the apparatus, beoomet 
a curious magnet; with the north pole, for instance, it attracts 
powerfully on one side at the line between the two currents, 
but repels strongly to the right or left ; whilst on the odier 
side the line repels the north pole, but attracts it strongly to 
the right or left. With the south pole the attractions and re- 
pulsions are reversed. 

When both poles of the needle were allowed to come into 
action on the wire or wires, the efiecU were in accordance 
with those described. When a magnetic needle was floated 
on water, and the perpendicular wire brought towards it, the 
needle turned round more or less, until it took a direction per- 
pendicular to, and across the wire, the poles bdng in such po- 
sitions that either of them alone would reyolTe round the wire 
in a circle proceeding by the side to which it had gone, accord- 
ing to the law before stated. The needle then approaches to 
the wire, its centre (not either pole) going in a direct line 
towards it. If the wire be then lifted up and put down the 
other side of the needle^ the needle passes on in ihe same line 
receding from the wire, so that the wire seems here to be both 
attractive and repulsive of the needle. This effect will be 
TeadOy understood from fig. 10, where the poles and direction 
of the wire are not marked, because they are the same as before. 
If either be reversed, the others reverse themselves. The 
experiment is analogous to the one described above ; there the 
pole passed between two dissimilar wires, here the wire be* 
twocn two dissimilar poles. 

If two dissimilar wires be used, and the magnet have both 
poles active, it is repelled, turned round, or is attracted in va- 
rious waye, until it settles across between the two wfres ; aD 



Digitized by Google 



Eleetro^magneUe rotaiiaii. 



m 



its motions being easily reducible to tbose impressed on the 
poles by the wires, both wires and both poles being active in 
giving that position. Then if it happens not to be midway be- - 
twten the two, or they are not of eqnal power, it goes slowly 
towards one of them, and acts with it just as the angle wke of 
the last paragraph. 

Figs. 11 and \2 exhibit more distinctly the direction of the 
forces which influence the poles in passing between two dis- 
similar wires : fig. 11, when tlie pole draws up between the 
wires ; fig. 12, the pole thrown out from between them* The 
poles and state of die wire are not marked, because the dia- 
grams illustrate the attraction and repulsion of both poles ; for 
any particular pole, the connexion of the wires must be accord- 
ingly. 

If one of the poles be brought purposely near either wire in 
the position in wliich it appears to attract most strongly, still 
if freedom of motion be given by a Httle tapping, the needle 
will slip along till it stands midway across the wire. 

A beautiful little apparatus has been made by M. de la Rive 
to whom I am indebted for one of them, consisting of a small 
voltaic combination floating by a cork; the ends of the little 
nnc and copper slips come through the cork, and are connected 
above by a piece of silked wire which has been wrapped 
four or five times round a cylinder, and the wires tied to- 
gether with a silk thread so as to form a close helix about one 
inch in diameter. When placed on acidulated water it is very 
obedient to the magnet and serves admirably to transform, as 
it were, the experiments with straight wires that have been 
mentioned, to the similar ones made with hehces. Thus, if a 
magnet be brought near it and level with its axis, the appara- 
tus will recede or turn round until that side of the curve next 
to the nearest pole is the side attracted by it* It will then 
approach the pole, pass it, recede from it until it gains the 
middle of the magnet, where it will rest like an equator round 
it, its motions and position being still the same as those before 
pointed out (fig. 1.'].). If brought near either pole it will still 
return to the centre ; and if purposely placed in the opposite 
direction at the centre of the magnet, it will pass off by either 
pole to which it happens to be nearest, being apparently first 
attracted by the pole and afterwards repelled, as is actually the 
case ; will, if any circumstance disturbs its perpendicularity to 



Digitized by Google 



136 



[Oct. 



the magnet, turn half way round ; and will then pass on to the 
magnet again» into the position first described. If, instead of 
passing the magnet through the curve, it be held over it, ifc 
stands in a plane perpendicular to the magnet, hut in an oppo- 
site direction to the former one* So that a magnet, both 
within and without this curve, causes it to direct. 

When the poles of the magnet are brought over this floating 
curve, there are some movements and positions which at first 
appear anomalous, but are by a Httle attention easily reducible 
to the circular movement of the wire about the pole. I do not 
think it necessary to state them particularly. 

The attractive and repulsive positions of this curve may be 
seen by fig. IS, the curve in the two dotted positions is at« 
tracted by the poles near them. If the positions be reversed, 
repulsion takes pkce. 

From the central situation of the magnet in these experi- 
ments, it may be concluded that a strong and powerful curve 
or helix would suspend a powerful needle in its centre. By 
making a needle almost float on water and putting the helix 
over a glass tube, this result has in part been obtained. 

In all these magnetic movements between wires and poles, 
those which resemble attraction and repulsion, that is to say» 
those which took place in right lines, required at least either two 
poles and a wire, or two wires and a pole ; for such as appear to 
exist between the wire and either pole of the battery, are decep- 
tive and may be resolved into the circular motion. It has been 
allowed, I believe, by all who have experimented on these phe- 
nomena, that the similar powers repel and the dissimilar powers 
attract each other ; and that, whether they exist in the poles 
of the magnets or in the opposite sides of conducting wires* 
This being admitted, the simplest cases of magnetic action will 
be those exerted by the poles of helices, for, as they offer 
the magnetic states of the opposite sides of the wire independ- 
ent, or nearly so, one of the other, we are enabled by them to 
bring into action two of those powers only, to the exclusion of 
the rest; and, from experiment it appears that when the powers 
are similar, repulsion takes place, and when dissimilar, attrac- 
tion ; so that tw^o cases of repulsion and one of attraction are 
produced by the combination of these nuignedc powers ^ • 

^ This is perhaps not strictly true, because, though the opposite powers are 
weakened, they stiU remain in action. 



Digitized by Google 



137 



The next cases of magnetic modon^ in the order of simplicity* 
are those where three powers are concernedi or those produced 
hy a pole and a wire. These are the circular motions described 
in the early part of this paper. They resolve themselves into 
two; a north pole and the wire round each otheri and a sonth 
pole and the wire round each other. The law which governs 
these motions has been stated. 

Then follow the actions between two wires : these when si- 
milarly electrified attract as M. Ampere has shown ; for then 
the opposite sides are towards each other, and the four powers 
all combine to draw the currents together, forming a double 
attraction ; but when the wires are dissimilar they repeli be- 
caiise* ibiea on both sides of the wire the same powers are op- 
posed* and cause a double repulsion* 

The motions that result from the action of two dissimilar 
poles and a wire next follow : the wire endeavours to describe 
opposite circles round the poles ; consequently it is carried in 
a line passing through the central part of the needle in which 
they are situated. If the wire is on the side on which the 
circles close together, it is attracted ; if on the opposite side* 
from whence the circles open, it is repelled* fig. 10. 

The motions of a pole with two wires are almost the same 
as the last ; when the wires are dissimilar* the pole endeavours 
to form two opposite circles about the wires ; when it is on 
that side of the wires on which the circles meet, it is attracted; 
when on the side on which they open, it is repelled, figs. 8* 
11, 12. 

Finally* the motion between two poles and two dissimilar 
wires, is an instance where several powers combine to produce 
an effect. 

M. Ampere* whilst reasoning on the discovery of M. Oersted* 
was led to the adoption of a theory, by which he endeavoured 
to account for the properties of magnets, by the existence of 

concentric currents of electricity in them, arranged round the 
axis of the magnet. In support of this theory, he first formed 
the spiral or helix wire, in which currents could be made to 
pass nearly perpendicular to, and round the axis of a cylinder. 
The ends of such helices were found when connected with the 
voltaic apparatus to be in opposite magnetic states* and to pre- 
sent the appearance of poles. Whilst pursuing the mutual 



Digitized by Google 



138 



Electro-magnetic rotation* [Oct. 



action of poles and wires, and tracing out the circular move- 
ments, it seemed to me that much information respecting the 
competency of this theory might be gained from an attempt to 
trace the action of the helix, and compare it with that of the 
magnet more rigorouBly than had yet been done ; and to form 
art^cial electro-magnets, and analyse natural ones. In doing 
this, I think I have so far succeeded as to trace the action of 
aoi electro-magnetic pole, either in attracting or repelling, to the 
circulating motion before described. 

If three inches of connecting wire be taken, and a magnetic 
pole be allowed to circulate round the middle of it, describing 
a circle of a little less than one inch in diameter, it will be moved 
with equal force in all parts of the circle, fig. 14; bend then 
the wire into a circle, leaving that part round which the pole 
revolves perpendicularly undisturbed, as seen by the dotted 
lines, and make it a condition that lihe pole be restrained from 
moving out of the circle by a radius. It will immediately be 
evident that the wire now acts very differently on the pole in 
the different parts of the circle it describes. Every part of it 
will be active at the same time on the pole, to make it move 
through the centre of the wire ring, whilst as it passes away 
from that position the powers diverge from it, and it is either 
removed from their action or submitted to opposing ones, until 
on its arriving at the opposite part of the circle it is urged by 
a very small portion indeed of those which moved it before. 
As it continues to go round, its motion is accelerated, the 
forces rapidly gather together on it, until it again reaches the 
centre of the wire ring where they are at their highest, and 
afterwards diminish as before. Thus the pole is perpetually 
urged in a circle, but with powers constantly changing. 

If the wire ring be conceived to be occupied by a plane, then 
the centre of that plane is the spot where the powers are most 
active on the pole, and move it with most force. Now this spot 
is actually the pole of this magnetic apparatus. It seems to 
have powers over the circulating pole, making it approach or 
attracting it on the one side, and making it recede or repelling 
it on the other, with powers varying as the distance ; but its 
powers are only apparent, for the force is in the ring, and this 
spot is merely the place where they are most accumulated ; and 
though it seems to have opposite powers, namely, those of at- 



Digitized by Google 



traetii^ and repelling ; yet this is merely a consequence of its 
titnatlon in the circki the modon being uniform in its direction* 
and really and truly impressed on the pole by its motor, the 
wire. 

At page 18S it was shown that two or more shidlar whres put 

together in a line, acted as one ; the power being, as it were, 
accumulated towards the extreme wires, by a species of induc- 
tion taking place among them all ; and at the same time was 
noticed the similar case of a plate of metal connecting the ends 
of the apparatus, its powers being apparently strongest at the 
edges. If, then, a series of concentric rings be placed one in- 
side the other, they having the electric current sent through 
them in the same direction; or if, which is the same thing, a 
flat spiral of silked wire passing from the centre to the circum- 
ference be formed, and its ends be in connexion with the bat- 
tery, fig. 15, then the circle of revolution would still be as in 
fig. 14, passing through the centre of the rings or spiral, but 
the power would be very much increased. Such a spiral, when 
made, beautifully illustrates this fact ; it takes up an enormous 
quantity of iron filings, which approach to the form of cones, 
ao strong is the action at the centre; and its action cm the 
needle by the different sides, is eminently powerful. 

if in place of putting ring within ring, they be placed side 
by Bide, so as to form a cylinder, or if a helix be made, then 
the same kind of neutralization takes place in the intermediate 
wires, and accumulated effect in the extreme ones, as before. 
The line which the pole would now travel, supposing the inner 
end of the radius to move over the inner and outer surfiuse of 
the cylinder, would be through the axis of the cylinder round 
the edge to one side, back up that side, and round to the axis, 
down which it would go, as before. In this case tiie force 
would probably be greatest at the two extremes of the 
axis of the cylinder, and least at the middle distance on the 
outside. 

Now consider the internal space of the cylinder filled up by 
rings or spirals, all having the currents in the same direction; 
the direction and kind of force would be the same, but very 
much strengthened : it would exist in the strongest degree 
down the axis of tiie mass, because of the circular form, and 
it would haye the two sides of the point in the centre of the 



Digitized by Google 



140 



Electr(hmagnetic rotation. [Oct* 



simple ring, which seemed to possess attractive and repulsive 
powers on the pole, removed to the ends of the cylinder ; giving 
rise to two points, apparently distinct in their action, one being 
attractive^ and the other repulsive^ of the poles of a magnet. 
Now conceive that the pole is not confined to a motion about 
the sides of the ring, or the flat spiral, or cylinder ; it is evident 
tihat if placed in the axis of any of them at a proper distance 
for aetion, it, being impelled by two or more powers in equal 
circles, would move in a right line in the intersection of those 
circles, and approach directly to or recede from, the points before 
spoken of, giving the appearance of a direct attraction and re- 
pulsion ; and if placed out of that axis, it would move towards 
or from the same spot in a curve line, its direction and force 
being determined by the curve lines representing the active 
ibrees from the portions of wire forming the ends of the cylin- 
der, spiral^ or ring, and the strengtli of those forces. 

Thus the phenomena of a helix, or a solid cylinder of spiral 
silked wire, are reduced to the simple revolution of the mag- 
netic pole round the connecting wire of the battery, and its re- 
semblance to a magnet is so great, that the strongest presump- 
tion arises in the mind, that they both owe their powers, as M . 
Ampere has stated, to the same cause. Filings of iron sprinkled 
on paper held over this cylinder, arranged themselves in curved 
lines passing from one end to the other, showing the path the 
pole would follow, and so they do oyer a magnet; the ends at- 
tract and repel as do those of a magnet ; and in almost every 
point do they agree. The following experiments will illustrate 
and confirm the truth of these remarks on the action of the 
ring, helix, or cylinder ; and will show in what their actions 
agree with, and differ (for there are differences) from, the ac- 
tion of a magnet. 

A small magnet being nearly floated in water by cork, a ring 
of silked copper wire, fig. 16, having its eadu connected with 
the battery, was brought near its poles in different positions; 
sometimes the pole was repelled from, somethnes attracted into, 
the ring, according to the position of die pole, and the con- 
nexions with the battery. If the wire happened to be opposite 
to the pole, the pole passed sideways and outwards when it 
was repelled, and sideways and inwards when it was attracted; 
and on entering within the ring and passing through, it moved 



Digitized by Googl 



18^1 .1 



^eiriMmigtteiie motions. 



141 



fiideways in the opposite direction, endeavounng to go round 
the wire. Tlie actbns also presented by M. de la Rive's ring 
are actions of this kind, and indeed are tliose which best iUtia- 
trate the relations between the ring and the pole ; some of them 

have been mentioned, and if referred to, will be found to accord 
with the statement given. 

With a flat spiral the magnetic power was very much in- 
creased ; and when the rings were not continued to the centre, 
the power of the inner edge over the outer was well shown 
either by the pole of a needle, or iron filings. With the latter 
the appemnoe was extremely beautifol and instructive; whea 
laid flat upon a heap of them, they arranged themselves in lines, 
passing through the ring parallel to its axis, and then folding 
up on either side as radii round to the edge, where they met ; 
so that they represented, exactly, the lines which a pole would 
have described round the sides of the rings ; and those filings 
which were in the axis of the rings, stood up in perpendicular 
filaments, half an inch long and so as to form an actual axis to 
the ring, tending neither one way nor the other, but according 
in their form and arrangement with what has been described ; 
whilst the intermediate portion also formed long threads, bend- 
ing this way and that firom the centre, more or less, according 
as they were further from, or nearer to it. 

With a helix the phenomena were interesting, because ac- 
cording to the view given of the attractions and repulsions, that 
is of the motions toward and from the ends, some conclusions 
should follow, that if found to be true in fact, and to hold also 
with magnets, would go far to prove the identity of the two. 
Thus the end which seems to attract a certain pole on the out- 
side, ought to repel it as it were on the inside, and that which 
seems to repel it on the outside, ought to appear to attract it 
on the inside ; f . e, that as the motions on the inside and out- 
side are in different directions for the same pole, it would move 
in the one case to and in the other case from the same end of 
the helix. Some phenomena of this kind have been described 
in explaining figs. 8, 11, 12, and 13; others are as follows. 

A helix of silked copper wire was made round a glass tube, 
the tube bemg about an inch in diameter ; the helix was about 
three inches long* A magnetic needle nearly as long was floated 
with cork, so as to move about ui water with the sKghtest im- 



Digitized by Google 



14f Eledro-muigneiie roiaikm, [Oct* 

pulse* The helix being connected with the apparatus and put 
into the water in which the needle lay^ its ends appeared to 
attract and repel the poles of the needle according to the laws 
before mentioned* But, if that end which attracted one of the 
poles of the needle was brought near that pole, it entered the 
glass tube, but did not stop just within side in the neighbour- 
hood of this pole (as we may call it for the moment) of the helix, 
but passed up the tube, drawing the whole needle in, and went 
to the opposite pole of the helix, or the one which on the out- 
side would have repelled it ; on trying the other pole of the 
magnet with its corresponding end or pole of the helix the same 
e£fect took place ; the needle pole entered the tube and passed 
to the other end, taking the whole needle into the same posi* 
tion it was in before. 

Thus each end of the helix seemed to attract and repel both 
poles of the needle ; but this is only a natural consequence of 
the circulating motion before experimentally demonstrated, and 
each pole would have gone through the helix and round on the 
outside, but for the counteraction of the opposite pole. It has 
been stated that the poles circulate in opposite directions 
round the wires> and they would consequendy circulate in op- 
posite directions through and round the helix ; when, therefore, 
one end of the helix was near that pole, which would, accord- 
ing to the law stated, enter it and endeavour to go through, it 
would enter, and it would continue its course until the other 
pole, at first at a distance, would be brought within action of 
the helix; and, when they were both equally within the helix 
and consequently equally acted on, their tendency to go in dif- 
ferent directions would counterbalance each other, and the 
needle would remain motionless. If it were possible to separate 
die two poles from each other, they would dart out of each end 
of the helix, being apparently repelled by those parts that be- 
fore seemed to attract them, as b evident from the first and 
many other experiments. 

By reversing the needle and placing it purposely in the helix 
in that position, the poles of the needle and the corresponding 
poles of the helix as they attract on the outside, are brought 
together on the inside, but both pairs now seem to repel; and, 
whicfaerer end of the helix the needle happens to be nearest to, 
it will be thrown out at. This motion may be aeen to exhibit 



Digitized by Google 



1821.] Analogy of a helix ami a magnet, 143 

in its passing state, attraction between similar poles, since the 
inner and active pole is drawn towards that end on the inside« 
by which it is thrown off on the outside ^ 

These experiments may be made with the single curve of 
M« de la Rive^ in which case it is the wire that moves and not 
ibe magnet; but as the motions are reciprocal, they may be 
readily anticipated. 

A plate of copper was bent nearly into a cylinder, and its 
edges made to dip into two portions of mercury ; when placed 
ill a current it acted exactly as a helix. 

A solid cylinder of silked wire w^as made exactly in fashion 
like a helix, but that one length of the wire served as the axis, and 
the folds were repeated over and over again. This as well as the 
former heUx, had poles the same in every respect as to kind as 
the north and south poles of a magnet ; they took up filings, 
tliey made the connecting wire revolve^ they attracted and re- 
pelled in four parallel positions as is described of common 
magnets in the first pages of this paper, and filings sprinkled 
on paper over them, formed curves from one to the other as 
with magnets ; these lines indicating the direction in which a 
north or south pole would move about them. 

Now with respect to the accordance which is found between 
the appearances of a helix or cylinder when in the voltaic 
circuit, and a cylindrical common magnet, or even a regular 
square bar magnet ; it is so great, as at first to leave little doubt, 
that whatever it is that causes the properties of the one, also 
causes the properties of the other, for the one may be substi- 
tuted for the other in, 1 believe, every magnetical experiment; 
and, in the bar magnet, all the effects on a single pole or filings, 
&c., agree with the notion of a circulation, which if the magnet 
were not sohd would pass through its centre, and back on the 
outside. 

The following, however, are differences between the appear* 
ances of a magnet and those of a helix or cylinder : one pole of 
a magnet attracts the opposite pole of a magnetic needle in all 
directions and positions ; but when the helix is held atong-side 

the needle nearly parallel to it, and with opposite poles together, 
so that attraction should take place, and then the helix is moved 

' The magnetizing power of the heluc is lo strong that if the experiment be 
made slowly, the needle will have ill mangetiiin chsnged end the fesnlt will 
be ftlliwiewi. 



Digitized by Google 



144 DffflgrMeet beiween keUeet mid magfi^ [Oct. 

on so that the pole of the needle gradually cornea nearer to the 
middle of the helix, repulsion generally takes place before the 
pole geta to the middle of the helizi and in a aituation wheie 
wiUi the magnet it would be attracted. Thia ia probaUy oo- 
caaioned by the want of continuity in the aidea of die curves or 
elements of the helix, in consequence of which the unity of 
action which takes place in the rings into which a magnet may 
be considered to be divided is interfered with and disturbed. 

Another difference is that the poles, or those spots to which 
the needle points when perpendicular to the ends or aides of a 
magnet or helix^ and where the motive power may be considered 
perhaps as most concentrated, are in ike helix at the extremity 
of its axis, and not any distance in from the end ; whilat in the 
most regular magneta they are almost alwaya situate in the axis 
at some distance in from the end ; a needle pointing perpendi- 
cularly towards the end of a magnet is in a line with its axis, 
but perpendicularly to the side it points to a spot some distance 
from the end, whilst in the helix, or cylinder, it still points to 
the end. This variation is^ probably, to be attributed to the 
distribution of the exciting cause of magnetism in the magnet 
and helix. In the latter, it is necessarily uniform everywhere^ 
inasmuch as the current of electricity is uniform. In the mag- 
net it is probably more active in Uie middle than elsewhere ; for 
as the north pole of a magnet brought near a south one 
creases its activity, and that the more as it is nearer, it is fair 
to infer that the similar parts which are actually united in the 
inner part of the bar, have the same power. Thus a piece of 
soft iron put to one end of a horse-shoe magnet, immediately 
moves the pole towards that end; but if it be then made to 
touch the other end also, the pole moves in the opposite direc- 
tion, and is weakened ; and it moves the further, and is made 
weaker as the contact is more perflect The presumption is, 
that if it were complete, ^e two poles of the magnet would be 
diffused over the whole of its mass, the instrument there exhi- 
biting no attractive or repulsive powers. Hence it is not im- 
probable that, caused by some induction, a greater accumula- 
tion of power may take place in the middle of the magnet than 
at the end, and may cause the poles to be inwards, rather than 
at the extremities. 

A third difference is, that the similar poles of magneta, 
though they repel at most distances, yet when brought very 



Digitized by Google 



1821*3 £kctr<hmagneU ^ ordmarif magnets compared. 145 

near together, attract each other. This power is not 
strong, hut I do not believe it is occasioned by the superior 
strength of one pole over the other, since the most equal mag« 
nets exert it, and since the poles as to theur magnetism remain 
lihe same, and are able to take up as much, if not motet u^i^ 
filings when together, as when separated, whereas opposite 
poles, when in contact, do not take up so much. Witb similar 
helix poles, this attraction does not take place. 

The attempts to make magnets resembling the helix and the 
flat spirals, have been very unsuccessful. A plate of steel was 
formed into a cylinder and magnetized, one end was north all 
round, the other south ; but the outside and the inside had the 
same properties, and no pole of a needle would haye gone up 
the axb and down the sides, as with the helix, but would have 
stopped at the dusimilar pole of the needle. Hence it is cer- 
tain, that the rings of which the cylinder may be supposed to 
be formed, are not in the same state as those of which the helix 
was composed. All attempts to magnetize a flat circular plate 
of steel, so as to have one pole in the centre of one side, and 
the other pole in the centre of the opposite side, for the pur- 
pose of imitating the flat spiral,, fig. 15, failed ; nothing but an 
irregular distribution of the magnetism could be obtained. 

M. Ampere is, I betieve, undecided with regard to the siie 
of the currents of electricity that are assumed to exist in mag" 
nets, perpendicular to their axis. In one part of his memoirs 
they are said, I think, to be concentric, but this cannot be the 
case with those of the cylinder magnet, except two be supposed 
in opposite directions, the one on the inside, the other on the 
outside surface. In another part, I believe, the opinion is ad- 
vanced that they may be exceedingly small ; and it is, perhaps, 
possible to explain the cause of the most irregular magnet by 
theoretically bending such small currents in the direction re- 
quired. 

In the previous attempt to explain some of the electro-mag- 
netic motions, and to show the relation between electro and 
other magnets, I have not intended to adopt any theory of the 
cause of magnetism, nor to oppose any. It appears very pro- 
bable that in the regular bar magnet, the steel, or iron, is in 
the same state as the copper wire of the helix magnet ; and 
perhaps, as M. Ampere supports in his theory, by the same 

VOL. n. L 



Digitized by Google 



146 Ekctro^magHetk dirw^ ike 0aHk. [Oor. 



means, namely, currents of electricity ; but still other proofs 
are wanting of the presence of a power like electricity than the 
magnetic effects only. With regard to the opposite aides of 
the connecting wire, and the povera emanating ^m them, I 
have merely spoken of them as two» to distinguish the one set 
of efl^ts from the other. The high authority of Dr, Wollaston 
is attached to the opinion that a single electro^magnetic current 
passing round the axis of the wire in a direction determined hy 
the position of the voltaic poles, is suffideiU to e;i^plaiu aU the 
phenomena. 

M. Ampdre, who has been engaged so actively in this branch 
of natural philosophy, drew from hia theory, the eonchiaion that 
a circular wure forming part of tiie connexion between Ae poles 
of the battery, sbpuld be directed by the earth's magnetisinf 
and stand in a plane perpendicular to the magnetic meridian 
and the dipping needle. This result was said to be actually 
obtained, but its accuracy has been questioned, both on theo^ 
retical and experimental grounds. As the magnet directs the 
wire when in form of a curve, and the curve a needle, 1 en- 
deavoured to repeat the experiment, and succeeded in the fol- 
lowing manner* A voltaic combination of two plates was formed* 
which were connected by a copper wire, bent into a circular 
fi>rm ; the plates were put into a small glass jar with dilute acid, 
and die jar floated on the surface of water i being then left 
to itself in a quiet atmosphere, the instrument so arranged itself 
that the curve was in a plane perpendicular to the magnetic 
meridian; wlien moved from this position, either one way or 
the other, it returned again ; and on examining the side of the 
curve towards the north, it was found to be that, which, ac- 
cording to the law already stated, would be attracted by a south 
pole. A voltaic circle made in a silver capsule* and mounted 
with a curve, also produced the same effect; as did likewiaei 
very readily, M. de la Rive's small ring apparatos K When 
placed on acidulated water, the gas liberated from the plates 
prevented its taking up a steady position | but when put into 
a little floating cell, made out of the neck of a Florence flask, 
the whole readily took the position mentioned above, and even 
vibrated slowly about it. 

As the straight connecting wire is directed by a magnet, 

> Qnartmly ionmal cf Sdenee, xiL 116. 



Digitized by Google 



18^1. j Eledro wutgmeiie roiatum ofpttratus, 147 



there is every reason to believe that it will act in the same way. 
with the earth, and take a direction perpendicular to the mag- 
netic meridian. It also should act with the magaetic pole of the 
earth, as with the pole of a magnet, and endeaTour to circulate 
round it* Theoretically, therefore, a horiaontal wire perpendi«« 
cular to the magnetic meridian, if connected first in one way 
with a voltaic battery, and then in the opposite way, should 
have its weight altered ; for in the one case it would tend to pass 
in a circle downwards, and in the other upwards. This altera- 
tion should take place difierently in different parts of the world. 
The e&ct is actually produced by the pole of a magnet, but 
I have not succeeded in obtaining it, employing only the po- 
larity of the earth.— September 11, l%ftU 



Electro-magnetic Rotation Apparatus^» 
Since the paper in the preceding pages has been printed, I 
have had an apparatus made by Mr. Newman, of Lisle-street, 
for the revolutions of the wire round the pole, and a pole round 
the wire. When Harems calorimeter was connected with it, 
the wire revolved so rapidly round the pole, that the eye 
could scarcely follow the motion, and a single galvanic trough, 
containing ten pair of plates, of Dr. Wollaston's construction, 
had power enough to move the wire and the pole with consi- 
derable rapidity. It consists of a stand, about 3 inches by &, 
from one end of which a brass pillar rises about 6 inches high, 
and is then continued horiaontally by a copper* rod over the 
stand ; at the other end of the stand a copper plate is fixed 
with a wire for communication, brought out to one side; in the 
middle is a similar plate and a wire ; these are both fixed. A 
small shallow glass cup, supported on a hollow foot of glass 
has a plate of metal cemented to the bottom, so as to close the 
aperture and form a connexion with the plate on the stand; the 
hollow foot is a socket, into which a small cylindrical bar mag« 
net can be placed, so that the upper pole shall be a httle above 
the edge of the glass ; mercury is then poured in until the glass 
is nearly full ; a rod of metal descends firom the horizontal arm 
perpendicularly over this cup; a little cavity is hollowed at the 
end and amalgamated, and a piece of stiff copper wire is also 

> Qmvtcrly Journal of Science, rii. 186. 



Digitized by Google 



14S Botaium pfm mre raimd a pale. [Jak. 

amalgamatedi and placed in it as described in tiie paper, ex- 
cept tibat it is attached by a piece of thread in the manner 

of a ligament, passing from the end of the wire to the inner 
surface of the cup ; the lower end of the wire is amalgamated, 
and furnished with a small roller, which dips so as to be under 
the surface of the mercury in the cup beneatli it. 

The other plate on the stand has also its cup, which is nearly 
cylindrical, a metal pin passes through the bottom of it, to con- 
nect by contact with the plate below, and to the inner end of the 
pin a small round bar magnet is attached at one pole by thread, 
so as to allow the other to be above the surface of the mer- 
cury when the cup is filled, and have freedom of motion there ; 
a thick wire descends from the rod above perpendicularly, so 
as to dip a little way into the mercury of the cup ; it forms 
the connecting wire, and the pole can move in any direction 
round it. When the connexions are made with the pillar, 
and either of the wires from the stand plates, the revolution of 
the wire, or pole above, takes place ; or if the wires be con- 
nected with the two coming from die plates, motion takes 
place in both cups at once, and in accordance with the law 
stated in the paper. This apparatus may be much reduced 
in size, and made very much more delicate and sensible. 



Deseriptum of am Eleeira'Magn^ieal ApparaiuB far the Ex* 

hibiUan cf lUsMory MoHamK 

The account given in the Miscellanea of the last Journal 
(p. 147.), of the apparatus invented in illustration of the paper 
in the body of that Number, being short and imperfect; a plate 
is given in the present Number, presenting a section of that 
apparatus, and a view of a smaller apparatus, illustrative of the 
motions of the wire and the pole round each other. The larger 
apparatus is delineated, fig. 1. Plate iv., on a scale of one half. 
It consists of two glass vessels, placed side by ride with their 
appendages. In that on the left of the plate the motion of 
a magnetic pole round the connecting wire of the voltaic bat- 
tery is produced. That a current of voltaic electricity may be 
established through this cup, a hole is drilled at the bottom, 
and into this a copper pin is ground tight, which projects up- 

^ Quarterly Journal of Science, xil. 2S3. 



Digitized by Google 



1822.} 



BoiaUam of apeie roimd a wire. 



149 



wards a little way into the cnp, and below ia riveted to a small 
round plate of copper^ forming part of the foot of the vessel. 
A simUar plate of copper is fixed to the turned wooden base 

on which the cup is intended to stand, and a piece of strong 
copper wire, which is attached to it beneath, after proceeding 
downwards a little way, turns horizontally to the left hand, and 
forms one of the connexions. The surfaces of these two plates 
intended to come togeUier^ are tinned and amalgamated^ that 
they may remain longer clean and bright, and afford better con- 
tact. A small cylindrical and powerful magnet has one of its 
poles &8tened to a piece of thready which» at the other end, is 
attached to the copper pin at the bottom of the cup ; and the 
height of the magnet and length of the thread is so adjusted, 
that when the cup is nearly filled with clean mercury, the free 
pole shall float almost upright on its surface. 

A small brass pillar rises from the stand behind the glass 
vesseb : an arm comes forward from the top of it, supporting 
at its extremity a cross wize» which at the place on the left 
handy where it is perpendicularly over the cup just described^ 
bends downwards, and is continued till it just dips into the 
centre of the mercurial surfiice. The wire is diminished in 
size for a short distance above the surface of the mercury, and 
its lower extremity amalgamated, for the purpose of ensuring 
good contact ; and so also is the copper pin at the bottom of 
the cup. When the poles of a voltaic apparatus are connected 
with the brass pillar, and with the lateral copper wire, the upper 
pole of the magnet immediately rotates round the wire wl^ch 
dips into the mercury ; and in one direction or the other, ac- 
cording as the connexions are made. 

The other vessel is of the form delineated in the plate. The 
stem is hollow and tubular ; but, instead of being filled by a 
plug, as is the aperture in the first vessel, a small copper 
socket is placed in it, and retained there by being fastened to 
a circular plate below, which is cemented to the glass foot, so 
that no mercury shall pass out by it. This plate is tinned and 
amalgamated on its lower surfiicei and stands on another plate 
and wire, just as in the former instance. A small dreular bar 
magnet is placed in the socket, at any conrenient height, and 
then mercury poured in imtil it rises so high that nothing but 
the projecting pole of the magnet is left above its surface at 



Digitized by Google 



180 Ek^finmagmHe fnirnHm appamhiM. [Jah. 

the centre* The fomw and TeUithre pontkmi of the magneti 
lockety phte» ftc*, are seen in fig. 

The cross wire supported bj the brasa piUar it ako pro- 
longed on the right hand, vntU oi?er the centre of the vessel 

just described ; it then turns downwards and descends about 
half an inch : it has its lower extremity hollowed out into a 
cup, the inner surface of which is well amalgamated. A smaller 
piece of copper wire has a spherical head iixed on to it, of such 
a siae that it may play in the cup in the manner of a ball and 
socket-joint, and being veU amalgamated, it, when in the eop^ 
retains snffidoit fluid mereurf b]r capiNary attraetien to ionn 
an excdlent contact with freedom of motion. The ball is pte- 
yented from falling out of die socket by a piece of fine thread, 
which, being fastened to it at the top, passes through a small 
hole at the summit of the cup, and is made fast on the outside 
of the thick wire. This is more minutely explained by figs. 3 
and 4. The small wire is of such a length that it may dip a 
little way into the mercury^ and its lower end is amalgamated. 
When the conneoDona are so made with the pillar and right- 
hand wire> that the cunrent of electricity shall pasathm^k this 
moveable wire, it immediately rwrolfes womA the p<^ of the 
magnet, in a difeetion dependent on the pole imed, and the 
manner in which the connexions are made. 

Fig. 5 is the delineation of a small apjjaratus, the wire in 
which rerolves rapidly, with very little voltaic power. It con- 
sists of a piece of glass tube, the bottom part of which is closed 
by a cotk, through which a. small piece of soft iron wivepasaea^ 
so as to project above and beiow the cork. A little mereory is 
then poured in, to form a dwnnel between lAie iron wire and 
the glaas tube. The upper orifice is ako dosed by a eork, 
through which a piece of platmum wire passes which is ter- 
minated within by a loop ; another piece of wire hangs from 
this by a loop, and its lower end, which dips a very little way 
into the mercury, being amalgamated, it is preserved from ad- 
hering either to the iron wire or the glass. When a very 
minute voltaic combination ia connected with the upper and 
lower ends of this apparatus, and the pole of a magnet is placed 
in contact with iSbm external end of the iron wire, the moieafak 
wire within rapidly rotates round the mstgoA. than Ibsmed at 
the moMut^ and by changing cither the conneoDOB^ mt llm 



Digitized by Google 



New BleeirtMnagnetie motions. 151 

pole of ihe magnet in conttot with the boa, the diieetioii of ihe 
wotiQii itself is changed. 

The tmall apparatus in the plate is not drawn to any scale. 
It has been made so small as to produce rapid revolutions, by 
the action of two plates of zinc and copper^ containiiig not more 
than a square inch of surface each. 

in place of the ball and socket-joint (fig. 3 and 4) loops may 
be used : or the fixed wive may terminate in n small cop con* 
takiing mercaryi with its aperture upwards, and the moveable 
wire may be bent into the Ibrm of a hook« of whieh the ex«* 
tremity should be sharpened, and rest in the BMroufy on the 
bottom of the cop* 



Note on New Eledro-Magneiicai Motions K 

At page 147 of this volume, I mentioned the expectation I 
entertained of making a wire through whieh n current of vc4taie 
eleetrkify waa passings obey the magnetic poles of the earth 
in the way it does the poles of a bar magneto In the latter 
ease it rotates, in the former I espeeted it would vary in weight ; 
but the attempts I then made, to prove the existence of this 
action, failed. Since then 1 have been more successful, and 
the object of the present note is so far to complete that paper, 
as to show in what manner the rotative force of the wire round 
the terrestrial magnetk pole, is enerted, and what the effects 
prodnosd by it, are« 

CoMidefii^ the sai^gnetie pole as a mere centre of actum, 
the eodstenee and poskioli of which may bo determined by w^ 
known meafis, it waa shown by many experiments, in die paper, 
page 127, that the electro-magnetic wire would rotate round the 
pole, without any reference to the position of the axis joining 
it with the opjwsite pole in the same bar ; for sometimes the 
axis was horizontal, at other times vertical, whilst the rotation 
continued the same. It was also shown that the wire, when iiH 
fluenesd by the pole, moved laterally, its parts descrifaang cirdea 
in phnms perpendieaktf neariy to the vrire itself^ Hence the 
wire, when straight and conftned to one point above, described 

* Quarterly Journal of Science, xu. 416. 



Digitized by Google 



15£ Motion of am eleetrie who by the eartVs magnetkm. [Jam. 

a cone in its revolutton, but when bent into a crank, it described 
a cylinder; and the effisct was evidently in all cases for each 
point of the wire to describe a circle round the pole, in a plane 
perpendicular to the current of electricity through the wire. 
In dispensing with the magnet, used to give these motions, and 
operating with the terrestrial magnetic pole, it was easy, by 
applying the information gained above, to deduce before-hand 
the direction the motions would probably take ; for, assuming 
that the dippingnieedle, if it does not point to the pole of the 
earth, points at least in the direction in which that pole is ac- 
tivCf it is evident that a straight electro-magnetic wire, afiected 
by ihe terrestrial as by an artificial pole, would move laterally 
at right angles to the needle ; that is to say, it would endeavour 
to describe a cylinder round the pole, the radius of which may 
be represented by the line of the needle prolonged to the pole 
itself. As these cylinders, or circles, would be of immense 
magnitude, it was evident that only a very minute portion of 
them could be brought within the reach of the experiment; 
still, however, that portion would be sufficient to indicate thdr ' 
existence, inasmuch as the motions taking place in the part 
under consideration, must be of the same kind, and in the same 
direction, as in every other part. 

Reasoning thus, I presumed that an electro-magnetic wire 
should move laterally, or in a line perpendicular to the current 
of electricity passing through it, in a plane perpendicular to 
the dipping-needle ; and the dip being here 72^ 30f, that plane 
would form an angle with the horizon of 17^ Sff, measured on 
the magnetic meridian. This is not so far removed from the 
horizontal plane, but that I expected to get motions in the 
latter, and succeeded in the Ibllowing manner : — piece of 
copper wire, about '045 of an inch thick, and fourteen inches 
long, had an inch at each extremity bent at right angles, in the 
same direction, and the ends amalgamated ; the wire was then 
suspended horizontally, by a long silk thread from the ceiling. 
A basin of clean pure mercury was placed under each extre- 
mity of the wire and raised until the ends just dipped into the 
metal. The mercury in both basuis was covered by a stratum of 
diluted pure nitric acid, which dissolving any film, allowed firee 
motion. Then connecting the mercury in one basin willi one 



Digitized by Google 



18129.] Terretirial ekdro-magnetie raiaiimu. ISS 

pole of Hare's calorimotory the instrnmeDt mentioned page lfS7, 
the moment the other pole was connected with the other basin* 
the suspended wire moved kterally across the basins till it 
touched the sides : on breaking the connexion, the wire resumed 

its first position; on restoring it, the motion was again produced. 
On changing the position of the wire, the effect still took place; 
and the direction of the motion was always the same relative 
to the wire, or rather to the current passing through it being 
at right angles to it. Thus when the wire was east and west, 
die east end to the wme, the west end to the copper pkte, 
the motion was towards the north ; when the connexions were 
reversed, the motion was towards the south* When the wire 
hung north and souths the north end to the zinc plate, the 
south end to the copper plate, the motion was towards the 
west ; when the connexions were reversed, towards the east ; 
and the intermediate positions had their motions in interme- 
diate directions. 

The tendency, therefore, of the wire to revolve in a circle 
round the pole of the earth* is evident* and the direction of 
the motion is precisely the same as that pointed out in the 
former experiments* The experiment ako points out the power 
which causes Amp^'s curve to traverse, and the way in which 
that power is exerted. The well-known experiment, made by 
M. Ampere, proves, that a wire ring, made to conduct a current 
of electricity, if it be allowed to turn on a vertical axis, moves 
into a plane east and west of the magnetic meridian ; if on an 
east and west horisontal axis, it moves into a plane perpendi- 
cular to the dipping-needle* Now if the curve be considered 
as a polygon of an infinite number of sides* and each of these 
sides be compared in succession to the straight wire just de- 
scribed, it win be seen that the motions given to them by the 
terrestrial pole, or poles, are such as would necessarily bring 
the polygon they form into a plane perpendicular to the dipping- 
needle ; so that the traversing of the ring may be reduced to 
the simple rotation of the wire round a pole. It is true the 
whole magnetism of the earth is concerned in producing the 
effect* and not merely that portion which I have* for the mo- 
ment* supposed to respect tiie north pole of the earth as its 
centre of action; but the effect is tiie same^ and produced in 



Digitized by Google 



IM Tmt€Hrial eledro-iiu^gneiie roiaU&iu. [Jan. 



die Bam nttmner; and the itrtrodaetion <^ the influence of die 
smidiem beraisphere, only renders the result analogotts to die 
expenment at page 1^, where two polet are eonoemed^ inatead 

oftiiatat page 129, &c., where one pole only is active. 

Besides the above proof of rotation round the terrestrial pole, 
I have made an experiment still more striking. As in the ex- 
periment of rotation round the pole of a magneti the pole is 
perpendicular to but a small portion of the wire, and more <»r 
lesa obHque to the rest, I eons id er ed it probaUe, that a wire, 
very delioately hung^ and eoimeetedi ari^rht be made to rotate 
mmd die dip ei the needle by the eardi*a UMgnetisni alone i 
the Qpper part being re s tr ain ed to a point In the line of the dip, 
the lower being made to move in a circle surrounding it. This 
result was obtained in the fallowing manner : a piece of copper 
wire, about 0*018 of an inch in diameter, and six inches long, was 
well amalgamated all over, and hung by a loop to another piece 
of the same wire, as described at page 151, so as to allow verf 
ftee motioDy and its lower end was thmst through a snail piece 
of eotk, to make it buoyant on mercury ; the upper piece waa 
connected widi a diick wire, that went away to one pde of the 
▼oltalc apparatus ; a glase ba^n, ten inches iff dianieter, was 
filled with pure clear mercury, and a little dilute acid put on 
its surface as before ; the thick wire was then hung over the 
centre of the glass basin, and depre^^sed so low that the thin 
moveable wire having its lower end resting on the surface 
of the mereuryt made an angle of about 40^ with the horizon. 
Immediate^ die cvenit dirough the mercury waa oonpleted^ 
fhu wire began to move and rotate, and continued to describe 
a cone whilst the connexions were preserved, whicli though 
its axis was perpendictiTar, evidently, from the varying rapidity 
of its motion, regarded a line parallel to the dipping-needle as 
that in which the power acted that formed it. The direction of 
the motion was, as expected, the same as that given by the pole 
of a magnet pointing to the south. If the centre from which 
the wire hung was elevated until the inclination of the wire 
was equal to diat of the dip, no motion took fdace when the wire 
was parallel to the dip ; if the wire was not so randi inclined as 
the dip, the motion in one part of the drele capable of being 
described by the lower end was reversed ; results that necessa- 



Digitized by Google 



ISSOL'] TermtrUd ekciro^map$eiie moikm. 186 



1% Mkm horn the rektioii of the dip and the novfaig irire, 
and which maj easily he extended* 

I have descrihed the effects above as produced by the north- 
pole of the earth, assuming that pole as a centre of action, act- 
ing in a line represented by the dip of the needle. This has 
been done that the phenomena might more readily be com- 
pared with those produced by the pole of a magnet. M. Biot 
baa ihowB by calcuktioo that the magnetie poles of the earth 
nay be conaideied as two pointa in ^e nuignetic axia my 
near to eaeh other hi the centre of the globe. M. Ampdre haa 
m bis fbeorj adTanced the opanon that iibe magneCisai of tbo 
earth is camed bf e kctii c currents MOfbig round ita axis pa* 
rallel to the equator. Of the consonance existing among the 
calculation, the theory and the facts, some idea may perhaps 
be gained from what was said, pajre 138, on the rotation of a 
pole through and round a wire hog. The different sides of 
the plane which pasa throng the ring, there described, and 
which may represent the equator m M* Ampere's theory, ae* 
cofdperlbctlywiditheheanspheteaof the §^ohe; aadtboiak^ 
tive position of supposed pointa of attraction and TCpdUkm, 
coincide wkh those assigned by M« Biot inr the polea of the 
earth itself. Whatever, however, may be the state and ar- 
rangement of terrestrial magnetism, the experiments 1 have 
described bear me out, I think, in presuming, that in every 
part of the terrestrial globe an elect ro-magnetic wire, if left to 
the free action of terreatrial magnetisnii wiU asove in a plane 
(f6r so the snudl part we can experinent on may be consi- 
dered) perpen^idar to the dip of the needle^ and hi a direo- 
tion perpendicular to the current of electricity passing timmgh 
it. 

Reverting now to the expectation I entertained of altering 
the apparent weight of a wire, it was founded on the idea that 
the wire, moving towards the north round the pole, must rise, 
and moving towards the south, must descend ; inasmuch as a 
phine perpendicular to the dipping^ieedle« ascends and de- 
scends in these directions. In order to aacestaui the existence 
of this eflecty I bent a wire twice at right angkay aa in the ftrat 
expeibnent described hi this nete^ and festened on to eadi ex* 
trennty a short piece of thin wire amalgamated, and made tbo 



Digitized by Google 



156 Moieeular atiraeiian qfmmwry [Jav. 

eoonexloii into the baains of mercury by these ihin wiies* 
The wire was then suspended, not as before, from the ceiling, 
but from a small and delicate lever, which would indicate any 

apparent alteration in the weight of the wire ; the connexions 
were then made with a voltaic instrument, but I was surprised 
to find that the wire seemed to become lighter in botli direc- 
tions, though not so much when its motion was towards the 
south as towards the north. On further trial it was found to 
ascend on the contacts being made, whatever its position to 
the magnetic meridian, and I soon ascertained that it did 
not depend on the earth's magnetism, nor on any local mag- 
netic action of the conductors, or surrounding bodies on the 
wire* 

After some examination I discovered the cause of this unex- 
pected phenomenon. An amalgamated piece of the thin cop- 
per wire was dipped into clean mercury, having a stratum of 
water or dilute acid over it; this, however, was not necessary, 
but it preserved the mercury dean and the wire cool. In this 
position the cohesive attraction of the mercury raised a little 
elevation of the metal round the wire of a certain magnitude, 
which tended to depress the wire by adding to its wei^t. 
When the mercury and the wire were connected witii the 
poles of the voltaic apparatus^ this elevation visibly diminished 
in magnitude by an apparent alteration in the cohesive attrac- 
tion of the mercury, and a part of the force which before 
tended to depress the wire was thus removed. This alteration 
took place equally, whatever the direction in which the current 
was passing tiirough the wire and the mercury, and the effect 
ceased tiie moment the connexions were broken* 

Thus tiie cause which made tiie wire ascend in tiie former 
case was evident, and by knowing it, it was easy to construct 
an apparatus in which the ascent should be very considerable. 
A piece of copper bell wire, about two inches long, had portions 
of the amalgamated fine copper wire soldered on to its ends, 
and those bent downwards till parallel to each other. This 
was then hung by a silk thread from the lever, and the fine 
wire ends dipped into two cups of clean mercury. When the 
communications were completed from the voltaic instrument 
tiurougb these two cups, the wires would rise nearly an inch 



Digitized by Google 



affected a current of dtditiiMy. 157 



out of the niercaiyy and detcend again on breaking the com- 
munication* 

Thus it appears that, when a fine amalgamated copper wire 
dips into mercury, and a current of voltaic electricity passes 
through the combination, a peculiar effect is produced at the 
place where the wire first touches the mercury, equivalent to 
a diminution of the cohesive attraction of the mercury. The 
effect rapidly diminished by increasing the size of the wire« 
and SO pair of plates of Dr. WoUaston s construction, and four 
inches square, would not produce it with the fine wire: on 
the contrary, two large plates are suffident* Dr« Hare's calo- 
rimotor was the instrument used, and the charge was so weak 
that it would barely warm two inches of any sized wire. Whe- 
ther the effect is an actual diminution of the attraction of the 
particles of the mercury, or depends on some other cause, re- 
mains as yet to be determined. But in any case its influence 
is so powerful, that it must always be estimated in experiments 
made to determine the force and direction of an electro-mag- 
netic wire, acted on by a magnetic pole, if the direction is 
otherwise than horizontal, and if they are observed in die way 
described in thb note. Thus, at the magnetic equator, for 
instance, where the apparent alteration of weight in an electro- 
magnetic wire may be expected to be greatest, the diminution 
of weight in its attempt to ascend would be increased by this 
effect, and the apparently increased gravity produced by its 
attempt to descend would be diminished, or perliaps entirely 
counteracted. 

I have received an account by letter from Paris, of an inge- 
nious apparatus^ contrived by M. Amp^e, to illustrate die 
rotatory motions described in my former paper. M. Ampere 

states that, if made of sufficient size, it will rotate by the mag- 
netic action of the earth, and it is evident that will be the case 
in latitudes at some distance from the equator, if the rotatory 
wires, namely, those by which the ring of zinc is suspended, 
are in such a position as to form an angle with a vertical 
line, larger than that formed by the direction of the dip. 

It is to be remarked that the motions mentioned in this note 
were produced by a single pair of plates, and therefore, as well 

> Ses Qoarteily Journal of Sde&ee^ xii. 415. 



Digitized by Google 



158 Effect qf cold OH maguetie needles. [Jam* 

as those described in the paper, page 127, are the reverse of 
what would be produced by two or more pair of plates* It 
should be remembered also, that the north pole of the earth is 
opposite in its powers to what I have called the north poles of 
needles or magnets^ and similar to their south poles. 

I may he aHowed, in conclusion, to express a hope that the 
law I have rentured to announce, respecting the directions of 
the rotatory motions of an electro-magnetic wire, influenced by 
terrestrial magnetism, will be put to the test in diiferent lati- 
tudes; or, what is nearly the same thing, that the law laid 
down by M« Ampere, as regulating the position taken by his 
curve, namely, that it mores into a plane perpendicular to the 
dipping-needle, will he experimentaUy ascertained by all those 
having the opportunity. 



Historical Sketch, 
Prior to and just before September iS^l, I had been en- 
gaged in writing an ' Historical Sketch of Electro-Magnetism/ 
which may be found published in the Annals of Philosophy^ 
New Series, for September and October ISlSl, and February 
lS»Si, or hi volumes ii. 195, ^4, and iii. 107. The thoughts 
which then arose led to the preceding papers and the discovery 
of Electro-Magnetic rotation. As papers further on refer to 
it for dates, I think it needful to indicate here where it may be 
found, though I do not think it necessary to reprint the account, 
as it describes the ftusts of others and not of myself. — ^Mar. 1844. 



Effect of Cold on 3Iagnetic Needles^* 

Dr« De Sanctis has lately published some experiments on 
die efiect of cold in destroying the magnetic power of neediest 
or at least in rendering them insensible to the action of iron 
and other magnets. Mr. Ellis has claimed the merit of this 

discovery, and the reasoning upon it, for the late Governor 
Ellis. Conceiving it important to establish the fact, that cold as 
well as heat injured or destroyed the maj^nietic power of iron 
or steel, we wrapped a magnetic needle up in lint, dipped it in 
sulphuret of carbon, placed it on its pivot under the receiver 

> Qnarterly Journal of Science^ ziv. 43d. ^ JehiL Mag. Iz. 199. 



Digitized by Google 



ffiiioricai sfat€men$0 



of an air-pumpi and rapidly exhausted : in this way a cold, be- 
low the freezing of mmtcary, it readily obtained. When in this 
state, the needle was readily afifected by iron or a magnet, and 
the number of ▼ibrations performed in a giren time by the in^ 
fluence of the earth upon it were observed. A fire was now 
placed near the pump, and the whole warined ; and when at 
about 80° Fahr. the needle was again examined, it appeared 
to be just in th(5 same state as before as to obedience to iron 
and a magnet, and the number of oscillations were very nearly 
the same, though a little greater. The degree of exhaustion 
imnained uniform throughout the experiment.--£o. 



Historical Statement rejecting ElectrO'Magnetic Rotatum^. 

In the xiiih volume of the Quarterly Journal of Science, at 

page 74, I published a paper on some new electro-magnetical 
motions, and on the theory of magnetism (p. 127.). In conse- 
quence of some discussion, which arose immediately on the 
publication of that paper, and also again within the last two 
months, I think it right, both in justice to Dr. WoUaston and 
myself, to make the following statement 

Dr. WoUaston was, I believe, the person who first enter* 
tained the possibility of electro^magnetic rotation ; and if I now 
miderstand aright, had that opinion very early after repeating 
Professor CErsted's experiments. It may have been about Au- 
gust 1820, that Dr. WoUaston first conceived the possibility of 
making a wire in the voltaic circuit revolve on its own axis. 
There are circumstances which lead me to believe that I did 
not hear of this idea till November following ; and it was at 
the beginning of the following year that Dr. WoUaston, pro- 
vided with an apparatus he had made for the purpose, came 
to the Institution with Sir Humphry Davy, to make an experi- 
ment of this kind. I was not present at the experiment, nor 
did I see the apparatus, hut 1 came in afterwards, and assisted 
in making some further experiments on the rolling of wires on 
edges ^ I heard Dr. Wollaston's conversation at the time, 
and hia expectation of making a wire revolve on its own axis ; 
and I suggested (hastUy and uselessly) as a delicate method of 

* Quarterly Journal of Science, xv. 288. 

« See Sir Humphry Davy 's Letter to Dr. WoUaston, Phil. Trans. 1821, p. 17 



Digitized by Google 



160 



[July 



suspension, the hangipg the needle from a magnet. I am not 
able to recollect, nor can I excite the memory of others to the 
jecollectioii of the time when this took place. I beUeve it was 
In the beginning of IS21. 

The paper which I first publbhed was written, and the ex- 
periments all made, in the beginning of September, 18S1. It was 
published on the first of October ; a second paper was published 
in the same volume on the last day of the same year. I have 
been asked, why in those papers I made no reference to Dr. 
WoUaston's opinions and intentions, inasmuch as I always ac- 
knowledged the relation between them and my own experi- 
ments. To this I answer, that upon obtaining the results de- 
scribed in the first paper, and which I showed very readily to 
all my friends, I went to Dr. Wollaston's house to conununicate 
them also to him, and to ask permission to refer to his views 
and experiments. Dr. Wollaston was not in town, nor did he 
return whilst I remained in town ; and, as I did not think I had 
any right to refer to views not published, and as far as I knew 
not pursued, my paper was printed and appeared without that 
reference whilst I remained in the country. I have regretted 
ever since I did not delay the publication, that I might have 
shown it first to Dr. Wollaston* 

Pursuing the subject, I obtained some other results which 
seemed to me worthy of being known. Previous to their ar- 
rangement in the form in which they appear at page 416 of 
the same volume (p. 151.), I waited on Dr. Wollaston, who was 
so kind as to honour me with his presence two or three times, 
and witness the results. My object was then to ask him permis- 
sion to refer to his views and experiments in the paper which I 
should immediately publish, in correction of the error of judg- 
ment of not having done so before. The impression that has 
remained on my mind ever since (one and twenty months) and 
which I have constantly expressed to every one when talking 
on the subject, is, that he wished me not to do so. Dr. Wol- 
laston has lately told me that he cannot recollect the words 
he used at the time; that, as regarded himself, his feelings were 
it should not be done, as regarded me, that it should ; but that 
he did not tell m^ so. I can only say that my memory at this 
time holds most tenaciously the following words : I would 
rather you should not but I must, of coursei have been mis- 



Digitized by Google 



Electr(Mnagnetic rotation*, 



161 



taken. However, that is the only cause why the above states 
ment was not made in December 1821 ; and that cause being 
removed, I am glad to make it at this, the first opportunity. 

It has been said I took my views from Dr. WoUaston. That 
I deny ; and refer to the following statement, as offering some 
proof on that point. It has, also, been said, that I could neven 
unpreptredy have gained in the courie of eight or ten days, the 
Acts described in my first paper. The following information 
may daddate that point also. 

It cannot but be well known, (for Sir Humphry Davy himself 
has done me the honour to mention it) that I assisted liim in 
the important series of experiments he made on this subject. 
What is more important to me in the present case, however, is 
not known ; namely, that I am the author of the Historical 
Sketch of Electro-magnetisntf which appeared in the Annals 
of Philosophy, New Seriess ^ob. ii. and iii. Nearly the whole 
of that sketch was written in the months of July, August, and 
September of 18IS1 ; and the first parts, to which I shall parti** 
colarly refer, were published in September and October of the 
same year. Although very imperfect, I endeavoured, as I think 
appears on the face of the papers, as far as in me lay, to make 
them give an accurate account of the state of that brancli of 
science. I referred, with great labour and fatigue, to the dif- 
ferent journals in which papers by various philosophers had 
appeared, and repeated almost all the experiments described. 

Now this sketch was written and published ii^Jter I had heard 
of Dr. WoUaston's expectations, and assisted at the experi- 
ments before referred to ; and I may, therefore, refer to it as a 
public testimony of the state of my knowledge on the subject 
before I began my own experiments. I think any one, who 
reads it attentively, will find, in every page of the first part of 
it, proofs of my ignorance of Dr. WoUaston's views ; but I will 
refer more particularly to the paragraph which connects the 
19Sth and 199th pages, and especially to the 18th and 19th 
lines of it; and also to fig. 4 of the accompanying plate. There 
is there an e£fect described in the most earnest and dedded 
manner (see the next paragraph but one to that referred to) ; 
my accuracy, and even my ability, is pledged upon it ; and yet 
Dr. WoUaston's views and reasonmgs, which it is said I knew, 
are founded, and were, from the first, as I now understand, 

VOL. 11. M 



Digitized by Google 



162 Electric current under nmgnetic influence* [JuLT 

upon ihe knowledge of an e Act quite tbe Mvene of that I hm 
stated. I detcribe a neutral potition when the needle is oppo* 

site to the wire j Dr. Wollaston had observed, from the first, 
that there was no such thing as a neutral position, but that the 
needle passed by the wire : I, throughout the sketch, describe 
attractive and repulsive powers on each side of the wire ; but 
what I thought to be attraction to, and repulsion from the wire 
in August IS^tl, Dr. WoUaston long before perceived to afise 
from a power not directed to or from the wirci bat acting cir« 
eumlerentiaUy round it as auS| and upon that knowledge 
founded his expectation. 

I have before said, I repeated most of the experiments de- 
scribed in the papers referred to in the sketch ; and it was in 
consequence of repeating and examining this particular experi- 
ment, that I was led into the investigation given in my first 
paper. He who will read that part of the sketchf above 
Jce&rred toS and then the first, second and third ^Miges of my 
paper*, wiU, I think, at once see tbie connexion between them ; 
and from my difference of expression in the two, with regard 
to the attractive and repulsive powers, which I at first sup* 
posed to exist, will be able to judge of the new information 
which I had, at the period of writing the latter paper, then, for 
the first time acquired. 



EUetr&magnetie Curreni {under ike Influence ofaMagnei^). 

As the current of electricity, produced by a voltaic battery 
when passmg through a metalHc conductor, powerfiiUy a&cts 
a magnet, tending to make its poles pass round the wire, and 
in this way moving considerable masses of matter, it was 
supposed that a reaction would be exerted upon the electric 
current capable of producing some visible effect; and the ex- 
pectation being, for various reasons, that the approximation of 
a pole of a powerful magnet would diminish the current of 
electricity, the following experiment was made* The poles of a 
battery of from two to thirty 4v>inch plates were connected by a 

' Annals of Philosophy, N. S., ii. 198, 199. 

* Quarterly Journal, xii. 74-76, or pp. 127-129 of this volume. 

' Quarterly Journal of Science, ziz. 338. 



Digitized by Google 



18^«] Electric powers of oxalate of lime* 1G3 

metalHe wnre fbnndd in one part into a hefix willi numerous 

OOhToltttions, ivhilst into the circuit, nt another part, was intro* 
duced a delicate galvanometer. The magnet was then put, in 
various positions, and to different extents, into the iielix, and 
the needle of the galvanometer noticed; no eftect, howeveri 
upon it could be observed* The circuit was made very long, 
shorty of wires of different metals and different diameters down 
toextreuefinenessibttttlieresuhs were always tlie same. Ma^^ 
nets more and less powetfiil were used^ some so strong as to ' 
bend the wire In Its endeavours to pass round it* Ifonoe it 
appears, that however powerful the action of an eleetric current 
may be upon a magnet, the latter has no tendency, by reaction^ 
to diminish or increase the intensity of the former; — a fact 
which, though of a negative kind, appears to me to be of some 
importance.— M. F. [See note at end of Series 1. of £xp. Res* 
18430 



Ekeirie Paw&ri {and place) qf OamUOe qflAmtiK 

Some oxalate of lime, obtained by precipitation, when well- 
washedi was dried in a Wedgewood's basin at a temperature 
approaching 300°, until so drj as not to render a cold glass 
platoi phwed over it, dim. Being then stirred with a platina 
spatula^ ity in a few moments^ by irietion against the metals 
became so strongly electricali that it could not be collected 
together! hut flew about the dish whenever it was moved, and 
over its sides into the sand-bath. It required some little stir- 
ring before the particles of the powder were all of them suffi- 
ciently electrical to produce this effect. It was found to take 
place either in porcelain, glass, or metal basinsi and with por- 
celain, glass, or metal stirrers ; and when well excited, the 
electrified particles were attracted on the approach of all bo- 
dies, and when shaken in small quantity on to the cap of a gold* 
leaf electrometer, would make the leaves diverge two or three 
inches. The effect was not due to temperature, for when 
cooled out of the contact of air, it equally took place when 
stirred ; being, however, very hygrometric, tlie effect soon went 
off if the powder were exposed to air. l^xcited in a silver cap- 

^ Quarteiljf J<niiiial of Sdsiiee, zix. 338. 



Digitized by Google 



164 Nobili and Andnori on Electro-magnetism : [Feb, 1832. 

sule« and then left out of contact of tbe air, die substance re- 

mained electrical a great length of time, proving its very bad 
conducting power; and in this respect surpassing, perhaps, all 
other bodies. The effect may he produced any number of 
times, and after any number of desiccations of the salt. 
. Platina rubbed against the powder became negative — the 
powder positive ; all other metals tried, the same as platina. 
When, rubbed with glass, the glass became strongly nega- 
tive, the oxalate positive^ both bemg dry and warm; and in- 
deed this body appears to stand at the head of the hat of all 
substances as yet tried, as to its power of becoming positively 
electrical by friction. 

Oxalates of zinc and lead produced none of these effects.— 
M.F. 



On the Ekeiro^Hve Force qf Magnetism. By Signori 
NoBiLi and Antikori {from the Antobgia, No. 181) : with 
Notes by Michael Faraday, F.RJS., §'cK 

Mr. Faraday has recently discovered a new ckss of electro- 
dynamic phenomena* He has presented a memoir on this sub- 
ject to the Royal Society of London, which is not yet published, 
and of which we have received the simple notice, communi- 
cated by M, Hachette to tlie Academy of Sciences at Paris on 
the 86th of December last, in consequence of a letter which he 
had received from Mr. Faraday himself^. This relation in- 

» Philosophical Magazine and Annals, 1832, xi. 402. 

In this paper the date on the right-hand page is that of my notes, that on 
the left-hand is meant to be the one of Signori Nohili and Antinori's paper. 
Of the latter however there is great doubt, for the date attached by the miter is 
diet January, 1832, whilst the number of Ihe Antologia in which it appears pro- 
fesses to have fiir date, November 1831. The litter is probably the £dae date, 
and so the leal date of pnUicatioii x> unknown; it oodd not however be belbte 
Febniafy 1832. 

I am glad of an opportunity of adding a few notes to a public version 
of Sig. Nobili and Antinori'a paper. My hasty letter to M. Hachette, in 
consequence^ probaUy, of my bad writing, has been translated with some 
cRon; and has been, by Sig. Nobili at least, seriously misunderstood. Had 
it remained private, it would not have been of much consequwce: but as it 



Digitized by Google 



June 1832.] with Notes by Mr. Faraday* 



165 



duced Cav. Antinori and myself immediately to repeat the fun- 
damental experiment, and to study it under its various aspects. 
As we flatter ourselves we have arrived at results of some im- 
portance, we hasten to pubhsh them without any other pre- 
amble than the same notice which has seized as the ppint^ 9f. 
departure in our researches. ' * 

"The memoir of BIr. Faraday," so says the notice, " is di* 
Tided into four parts. In the ftrst, mtitled 'Production of 
Voltaic Electricity ^' is found the following important fact, — 
that a voltaic current which traverses a metallic wire produces 
another current in a neighbouring wire ; that the second current 
is in a direction contrary to the first, and continues but for a 
moment ; that if the producing current is removed, a second 
current is manifested in the wire submitted to its action con- 
trary to that which was first formed in it^ u e. in the same di- 
rection as the producing current. 

The second part of the memour treats of electric currents 
produced by the magnet. On causing helices to approach to 
magnets, Mr. Faraday has produced electric currents ; on re- 
moving the spirals, currents in the contrary direction were 
formed. These currents act powerfully on the galvanometer ; 
pass, though feebly, through brine and other solutions, and in 
a particular case Mr. Faraday has obtained a tpark* Hence it 
follows that this philosopher has by using a magnet only pro- 
duced the electric currents discovered [studied] by M. Am- 

• ** The third part of the memoir is relative to a particular 



has appeared in three or four languages, and forms the text of all subsequent 
papers on magnetic electricity, it is very requisite to correct certain errors 
which have ansen from it^ especially that of Sig. Nobili relative to Arago's 
rotation. 

My first paper was read to the Royal Society, November 24, 1831 ; and my 
letter to M. Hachette was dated the 17th of December, 1831; my second . 
paper was read January 12th, 1832. Sig. Nobili's paper is dated Januaiy 
Slfly 1832. Signod Noliili and Antmoii innked only from my letter to 
M. Hachette; but at I hope I may cUum whatev«r ia contafaied in my two 
papeiB, I have mtrodnoed into the present pi^r rafecenoes, in figuref induded 
vitliia pttentheeea^ to pwagraphi in my papen, wheierer thejexperimenta do- 
aeribed are either altogeflier, or only to a partiai extent, repeiitioni of my re- 
sults.— M. F.] 

\} Xhia should be Mietion of voUaic eUetridly^il, F.] 



Digitized by Google 



I6B ViMXimiiAn^6mAonEkeifomagMtu^ [Plni-lWt» 



deetiie state, which Mft Fiurftd«y odb ilfd^^ Ha 
intandi to write of ihit another time. 

" The fourth part speaks of the experiment not less curious 
than extraordinary of M. Arago, which consists, as is known, in 
making a magnetic needle revolve under the influence of a ro* 
tatory metallic disc, and vice versd. Mr. Faraday considers 
this phenomenon as intimately connected with that of the mag- 
netic rotation, which he had the fortune to diacOTer about ten 
years ago. He ha« ascertaioed that by the rotatbn of the 
metallic diac under the uifluence of a magiiet, there may be 
formed electric currents in the direction of the rays of the disc 
in sufficient number to render the disc a new electrical machmet'* 
^Le Temps, Dec. 1831. 

1. Ordinar ij Magnetism (Phil. Trans. 1832. Part I. Experiment 
ua Besearches in Electricity, 27 to 5^; 83 <o 138 i%\lto m). 

We had no occasion to make trials before we succeeded in 
the experiment of Mr. Faraday. The first spirals which we 
brought near to the pole of a magnet quickly manifested their 
Influence on the galvanometer. We observed three facts in suc- 
cession {Eisp. Beg* 30. 37. 47*). llVhilst approaching the mag- 
net| the needle of the instrument is in the first place seen to 
deviate a certain number of degrees^ which indicates a current 
excited by the magnetism, in the spirals preyiously made to 
communicate with the galvanometer. This current lasts but for 
a moment, and is then completely extinct, as is proved by the 
needle returning to its first position : this is the second ob- 
servation. The third (finally) occurs when the spiral is taken 
firom the magnet : the needle of the galvanometer then deviates 
on the other side^ demonstrating the development of a eurrept 
contrary to that excited in the first instance* 

On experimenting with an annular spiral between the poles 
of a horse-shoe magnet, we observed that the action was much 
less than that produced with the same spiral when the lifter 
of the magnet was put to it or suddenly taken from it {Exp, 
Res. .11-.). This fact suggested the idea of rolling a copper wire 

covered with silk round such a magneti so as to have an ap- 

\} This should be clectrotonic iUUe^ I said I should write to my &iend about 
it another time.«-M, f .] 



Digitized by Google 



Arm 1882.] . wUk Nates by Mi.Vm4iKf. 



pazmtiu alwayt noimtad tat the ezperinidiit m question. The 
spiral to he lulijected to the negnetie influence is then alwsys 
upon llie magnet, and the immediate cause of the phenomena 

resides in the lifter, because of the property which that little 
piece of soft iron possesses of being magnetized and de-mag- 
netized rapidly. When the lifter is detached, the spiral which 
before was in the presence of this piece of iron strongly mag* 
netizedf is suddenly removed from its actionj and represents, 
the case of a spiral whieh having been first approximated to a 
magnet is than Yemored. When the lifter is repkoed, it is aa 
if a magnet were caused to approach the sphnd, for iha lifter 
becomes magnetic on being attadied to Ihe poles of its own 
magnet* 

This arrangement, besides being very active, has the advan- 
tage of supplying the philosopher with a constant source of 
voltaic electricity (Exp. Res. 46 note). The want of a constant 
current is often felt in such researches ; and if thenoo-magnet- 
ism offers a plausible means of satisfying such necessities, as 
I have indicated elsewhere ^ yet the new method offered us by 
a magnet covered with electro-dynamic spirals is not to be de* 
spised. Here the currents are always resdy to be maniftstedi 
Suppose, as is usual, the lifter of the magnet is in its plaoe» 
nothing more is required to obtain a current in the spiral than 
to detach the lifter, the current in the wire beingi as it were* 
at first in a latent state. 

There are two modes of using this arrangement ; the one by 
attaching the lifter* the other by detaching it. When the two 
motions are made with the same rapidity, and with relation to- 
the same points of the magnet* the deviations are in the inverse 
directions to each other* but precisely of the same value* The 
detachments are* however* always equally instantaneous* and 
for constancy of eflbct are preferable to approximations ; for 
the latter to be always equally successful would require a me- 
chanical arrangement, which it is not wortli while either to 
imagine or lo execute. By taking care that tlie lifter is con- 
stantly in its right place and position, there will always be pro- 
duced the same deviation of the galvanometer when it is de- 

* Tbit meana eoiuIstB in having a thenno-eleetiie elementary comliinatiflii 
composed of two metoli only» and heated at one juncture to Fahr.* at llie 
other to 2W FtSxt^Am, d$ CkimU, Feh. 1S30, p. 180. 



Digitized by Google 



168 liom tmdAjatiomimEleetrO'mttg^ [Fbb.1880. 



tached from the magnet. This we repeat is a Talnable leaiilt 
applicable in numerous cases^ and perhaps proper to measure 
the force of large magnets in a more ^xact manner than by the 
ordinary mode of ascertaining the weights sustained. 

The arrangement described is highly advantageous ; but 
does it produce the maximum of electro-dynamic effects ? 
There is indeed another much better (Exp. Res, 46 note), which 
consists in applying the electro-dynamic spiral to the central 
part of the lifter^ corresponding to the interval which separates 
the poles of the horse-shoe magnet. In this position a spiral 
of a few turns is able to surpass the eflfects of a 6ur greater num- 
ber of spirals otherwise disposed. Behold then the arrange- 
ment which it is convenient to make to obtain all the efiects of 
a magnet. The central part of the lifter is to be entirely co- 
vered with wire, leaving exposed only the extremities, which are 
to come in contact with the pole of the magnet. The ordinary 
form of the lifter is not the most convenient upon which to ar- 
range this species of large electro-dynamic ring, but upon con- 
Teniently modifying its shape the wire may be applied with 
facility, and thus the effect be obtained at its highest degree of 
intensity. The reason is evident ; for two conditions in foct 
require to be ^dfilled : one, that the spiral should be subjected 
to all the influence of the magnetic 'force; tbe other> that this 
influence should he abstracted in the shortest possible time. 
Now the wire round the lifter is exactly in the most favourable 
position for the magnetic force to be concentrated upon it ; and 
this force vanishes the instant the lifter is detached, as is re- 
quired by the second condition. 

S^drah of varunu Metah {Exp.Eet. 1^ 189. l9S.20B. ice.). 

The metals with which we have experimented are four,— 
copper, iron, bismuth, and antimony : iron is interestipg as the 
foremost amongst magnetic metals (Exp, Bes. 8. 9. 211.) ; bis- 
muth and antimony for the distinct position they hold in the 

tbermo-magnetic scale. In experiments made under circum- 
stances approximating to equality, it appeared that copper was 
the most active in the present point of view ; then at a little 
distance iron (Exp, Res. 207. 212.) ; afterwards antimony ; and 
finally, bismuth. But in truth the fragility of the two latter 



Digitized by Google 



mik Notet by Mr. Faraday. 



169 



only allowed lu to give them the spiral figure by fiinng iheni. 
For thu methody which was long and difficulty we supplied 
another ; which was, to make quadrangular spirals of a num- 
ber of rods of these metals soldered at their extremities, or else 
merely held and pressed the one against the other, to ensure 
contact. It is scarcely necessary to say, that in order to obtain 
comparative results the same quadrangular form was given to 
the spirals of copper and iron. 

2. Electric Spark {Exp. Res. S2. 57.^). 

The relation placed at the head of this article says, " t/iat in 
a particular case Mr. Faraday had obtained a spark " (Exp, 
Res. 32,), Although this expression gave no light on the sub- 
ject^ and rather rendered doubtful the constancy of so extra- 

[} Being much engaged in the investigation and confirmation of the laws of 
magneto-electric action, terrestrial magnetic induction, &c. &c. some of the re- 
sults of which are contained in my second paper (The Bakerian Lecture), it 
will be seen that in the race which Sig. Nobili and Antinori (probably inad- 
verteniljr) ran- against me (see the last pnagraph of their paper), they Obtained 
the eleetric spark irom the common magnet befbve me. I have great pleanire 
in bearing witness to the accoiaflj of thdr reasoning on this point, and also to 
the snooess of the result Having made a variation of (he experiment hy ob- 
taining the spark from the action of a oommon hMdstone, in wluch their most 
perfect mode could not be applied, I will take the opportunity of describing the 
simple adjustment I have devised. A helix was fixed round the lifter, the wire 
ends were raised upwards one, which may 
he called a, was bent into a hook as in the 
figure ; the other, 6, after rising was bent at a 
right angle, and had a thick small circular 
plate of copper fixed to it, which was made 
by the spring of the wire to press in the 
middle slightly against the rounded end of 
o; this plate and the end of a were amal- 
gamated. On bringing the lifter down sud- 
denly upon the poles in the position figured^ the momentum of the plate caused 
it to separate from the end of a, and the apaik passed. On lifting it up the - 
concussion always separates the end of a firom the plate, -and a spark is again 
seen. When the phte and Ihe point are well amalgamated, the spark will not 
foil once in a hundred times either at making or breaking contact I have 
shown it brilliantly to two or three hundred persons at once^ and over all parts 
of the theatre of the Royal Institution. 

A» Professor Ritchie expresses it, the ^ark has not yet been obtained ex- 
cept Irom a tempoiaiy magnet, i. r. fimn a magnet in the act of b«iig made or 




Digitized by Google 



170 NobmofMlAiituioriwiiSM^^ [fiB.1880; 



ordkiary a phenoneiiony we nenertlideM did not luapend our 
mearehet, and have been so fortunate at to saceeed beyond 

our hopes. The following are the theoretical views which have 
conducted us to this important result, but which, we fairly say,> 
at first gave us but very little confidence. 

The voltaic pile gives a spark only when composed of a cer- 
tain number of pairs of plates. A single Wollaston'a voltaic 
element yields it ; and when of a certain activity produces it 
constantly at the surface of mercury, to which the conjoining 
wires destined to close the circuit are conducted* In the vol- 
taic pile having a certain degree of elecirie tenritm, the sparks 
pass between the zinc and copper poles, either in the case of 
opening or of closing the circuit. In a single WoUaston s element 
the tension is feeble, and the spark occurs only when the cir- 
cuit is interrupted. At that moment the current which before 
was moving, accumulates as it were at the place of interruption^ 
and acquires the intensity necessary to cause the spark. Such 
tension is wanting in the other case of closmg the circuit, and 
the spark also is absent 

The currents developed in the ekctro^ynamic spirals by 
virtue of magnetism are also in motion, but circulate only for 
the moment during which they are approaching tcf or receding 
from the magnet. It was therefore, we concluded, in one of 
those two moments that we ought to open the circuit in ma- 
king the experiment for the spark. 

Thus we arranged our ideas relative to the best disposition 
of the electro-dynamic spirals; nothing therefore remained 
but to select a good horse-sboe magnet; to surround the lifter 



destroyed. I obtained the first spark from a soft iron magnet made by the 
well-known influence of electric currents. Sig. Nobili and Antiuori obtained 
the second spark from a soft iron magnet made so by the influence of a common 
artificial steel magnet; their result has been repeated by a great number of 
persons. Mr. Forbes of Edinbuigh first obtained the spark from a soft iron 
magnet macle to by the inflnenee of the natural loadatone. The latter experi* 
ment ia alao that which I have made irith Mr. Oaniell'a loaditoae, lifting only 
about thirty poiindi» and in the manner deieribed. I waa not aware of any other 
model of performing the experiment except my origfaial one, and Sig. NohOi 
and Antiuori 's. — M. F.] Since this time I have obtained the apark a step 
nearer to the inducting magnet than in any of these cases : see onwards at date 
of NoTember 1831, or PhiL Mag. 1834« v. p. 3dO.~Deoember IMS. 



Digitized by Google 



m 



with A OOppMP WIM in the maniiMr before deaoribed i to iniiient 

the extremitiet of lliii wire in a enp of mescary, and to 

one or the other extiemity at that preoise moment when the 

lifter was attached to or detaehed from the magnet. When 

two persons operate without any kind of machinery, it is more 
easy to lose than to catch this moment. But when the move- 
ments were simultaneous, which happened every now and then, 
we had the satisiaction of seeing a spark, which left nothing to 
be desired. 

Such was the mode by which we saw the first spark: but 
as tiiis beautifhl result deserved to be produced at pleasure, 
it claimed an appropriate apparatus; and after Taiious ar- 
rangements more or less complicated, we stopped at the fol- 
lowing, which has the advantage of being very successful and 
very simple. 

The whole of the contrivance is attached to the lifter of the 
magnet. This piece, which is a parallelopiped, is surrounded 
in the middle by the electro-dynamic spiral, to which it is firmly 
attached by two pieces of brass, so that the latter can enter 
between the maipiedc poles whilst the lifter comes in contact 
with the poles in the ordinary way. The extremities of the 
spiral come in contact one with each magnetic pole by means 
of two little springs in the form of wings attached to the Hfter, 
and which press slightly against the poles when the lifter is in 
its place. To leave room for these springs, the lifter is nar- 
rower than usual, covering about half the poles ; the remaining 
apace serves for the contact of the springs, which are in this 
way isolated as it were iVom the lift;er ; and yet by means of 
the magnet itself serve to complete the electro-dynamic circuit. 
Suppose that the lifter is in its place, the springs touch the 
poles, and the chrcuit of the sfurals is metallically closed by the 
magnets ; on deteching the lifter, the circuit opens in two places ; 
and either at the one or the other interruption the spark al- 
most constantly appears. When the effect does not take place, 
it is because the separation has not been well effected ; but it 
is so easy to repeat the experiment, that it is useless to think 
of a piece of mechanism to remedy an inconvenience which is 
80 easily remedied. 

In this apparatus the spiral on the lifter was of copper. On 
substituting an iron wire the spark also occurred. This ex* 



Digitized by Google 



peiiment was interesting in illustration of any influence which 
ihe ordinary power of the magnet oTer iron might exert upon 
the electro-dynamic influence. It did not appear that the one 
action disturbed the other ; but before positively affirmiiig the 
independence^ it will be necessary to obtain other proof, 
wbidi we shall endeavour to do at a more favourable opportunity 
(Exp. Res. 9. 254.). 

3. Terrestrial 3Iagnetism {Exp. Res. Vol. 140. &c.}. 

We took a paper tube two inches in diameter and four inches 
long^ a copper wire forty metres long was coiled round it, the 
two ends being left at liberty to connect with the galvanometer ; 
the tube was trimmed at the ends, so that it could be placed 
upright upon the table either in one direction or the other at 
pleasure (Exp. Res* 14^). A cylinder of soft iron, as is well 
known, placed parallel to the dip is subject to the terrestrial 
magnetic influence ; the lower part becomes a north pole, the 
upper a south pole. This is a phenomenon of position always 
occurring in the same direction with this kind of iron, which 
is as incapable of retaining the magnetism received, as it is 
disposed to receive the new magnetism to which it may be 
subjected. 

In our latitudes the inclination of the needle is about 63°* 
The paper tube with its spiral was therefore arranged in that 
direction, and an iron cylinder introduced ; whilst in the act of 

introducing it, the galvanometer was seen to move (Exp. Res. 
146.), owing to the presence of an electric current excited by 
the magnetism. On taking out the cylinder the motion was re- 
versed : there is no doubt, therefore, that terrestrial magnetism 
is suflicient of itself to develope currents of electricity. It 
should not be concealed here, that in the above experiment the 
electricity is developed by the intermedium of soft iron intro- 
duced into the spiral : this without doubt is true, but it is also 
true that it is not essentially necessary to recur to this aid to 
obtain unequivocal signs of the influence of which we speak. 
On placing our cylindrical spiral so that its axis should be 
parallel to the magnetic dip, and then inverting it by a half 
revolution in the magnetic meridian {Exp. lies. 148.), we ob- 
served at the comparative galvanometer the signs of a current 



Digitized by Google 



June 1832.] with Noi0i hy Mr. Faraday. 173 

excited in the spiral by the sole influence of terrestrial mag- 
netism. 

It is not even necessary for this effect to place the spiral in 
the direction of the dip : the experiment will succeed in the 
vertical position ; the effect is less, but always so distinct as to 
remove every error [Exp, Ret. 153^ &c.). 

We experimented with three copper wires of different dia- 
meters ; the smallest was 0*5, the second 0*66^ and the third 
1* millimetre in diameter. The efiects increased with the size:—* 
the first gave deviations from ^ to 4 ; the second from 4 to 8 ; 
and the third from 10 to 20. To obtain these great motions, 
we operated in the usual way of inverting the current at the 
most ^vourable moment^ which is easily learned by repeating 
the experiment a few times. 

In the present state of science this is most certainly the sim- 
plest mode of obtaining the current^ ; all is done by terrestrial 
magnetism, which is everywhere* We purpose hereafter to 
study the manner of increasing the effect, and of making some 
useful applications, if certain apparatus which we purpose con- 
structing should meet our wishes {Exp. Res. 147. lo4, &c.). 
The first thought is that of using it to measure the terrestrial 
magnetic intensity ; but what precision the mode may be ca- 
pable of, remains at present to be determined. 

The galvanometer which should be used for the experiments 
of this section should be very sensible. And I repeat on this 
occasion what I have elsewhere said relative to these instru- 
ments : two systems may be adopted to obtain maximum effects ; 
the one for hydro-electric currents, the other for thermo-electric 
currents. The galvanometer of my thermo-multiplicator is of 
the latter kind, and precisely tliat which is best in the present 
researches'^. The reason will be evident, by observing that 
the new currents of Faraday are entirely developed in metallic 
circuits, like the thermo-electricity of Dr. Seebeck; and that, 
also like those of thermo-electricity, they pass with difficulty 
through humid conductors* 

A much more simple mode U described in my paper at (170, &c.) ; fur 
neither spiral nor soft iron is necesiaiy. — ^M. F.] 
> Noliili, Bib. Univ., JuiUet 1830, p. 275. 



Digitized by Google 



174 Nobili aful Antinori on Elecira^magnetim: [Feb. 183^. 

4. Electric Tension. 

The trials which wc have as yet made on this new class of 
currentsi to obtain by the electrometer the ordinary signs of 
tenBion^ have not conducted us to any positiYe result: but the 
means which we have employed ftre far from satisfying us fbUy. 
We are preparing others for the purpose* of attacking the 
question with more efficacious means. We shall then extend 
the research to thermo-electric combinations, which deserve 
to be studied in the same point of view, as they have never yet 
presented sensible signs of electric tension. We shall also try 
with these latter currents to obtain the spark under favourable 
circumstances ; but we cannot but confess that at present we 
doubti and consider the thermo-electric currents as in their 
nature the least fitted to produce either tension or a sparky as 
we will explain in due time and place. 

The new currents of Faraday pass, although with difficulty, 
tihrough humid conductors. So says the notice ; and such is 
the fact, as may be readily verified by introducing a conductor 
of that kind into the circuit of the electro-dynamic spiral (JBsp. 
Jb«* 20. jSS. 3S. 56.). In the case of other known currents^ 
I have demonstrated elsewhere that there is always chemical 
decomposition when they pass liquid conductors; and that 
however feeble they may be, the decomposition is always as- * 
sured by their transit through the fluid. It is therefore very 
probable that the new currents will produce the phenomena 
of decomposition, but their distinctive character of brief dura- 
tion must not be forgotten (Exp,- Res, 59, &c.). I believe that 
the time, however shorty is still sufficient for decomposition ; 
but I will not venture anything before I have interrogated that 
grsnd master in everything— experiment. 

The physiological effects {Ea;p. Res, 22* 56, &c.) consist, as 
Is well known, in the shocks or contractions of the muscles, the 
acrid and acidulous taste on the tongue, and the light before 
the eyes^. For obtaining these effects, it is absolutely neces- 
sary that the electricity should penetrate into our organs; 

[} Hie sentadon on the tongae and the light belbfe the eyes I beliefe I have 
obtained. See (56) of my papen.-— M. F.] 



Digitized by Google 



Aese latter belonging to humid conducton. This path, as we 
have seetif is vexy difficult for the new currents ; neverdielessi 
the frog put uito the circuit of our electro-dynamic spiralsi 
arranged around the lifter of our magnet, was powerfiilly con- 
vulsed each time that the lifter was separated or attached {Exp. 
Res. 56.) . The experiment is beautiftil and instructive ; beau- 
tiful, because of the energetic convulsions produced apparently 
by the immediate action of the magnet ; and instructive, be- 
cause it confirms the fact of the passage of these currents 
through humid conductorsi and because also it shows that the 
frog is in all cases the most delicate galvanoscope^ This is a 
fit occasion to say what I have already said elsewhere relative 
to the discovery of Dr. Seeheck, that it was not necessary that 
CErsted's discovery and die following one of the galvanometer 
should be known, to arrive at the knowledge of the thermo« 
electric currents'. The frog properly prepared was sufficient 
for the purpose, and the same animal would have been quite 
sufficient to discover the new currents of Faraday. Although 
it is not by this road that these two discoveries have been ar- 
rived at| still it is not less true that they might have been made 
by the simple assistance of this interpreter, which astonished 
Europe in the first times of galvanism* 

6. Magnetism of Rotation [Exp, Res,^\ to 139: 149 to 169: 
181 to 192: 217 to230:^ta 254, &c). 

What will happen when an electro-dynamic spiral is ap» 

proached to the pole of a bar magnet? A current is pro- 
duced in its successive spirals, which enters upon itself in 
consequence of the conjunction of the extremities of the wire. 
But if in place of the spiral a mass of copper is submitted to 
the influence of the same magnetic pole, what will happen? 
It would appear reasonable to admit in this mass the same de- 
velopment of currents, with this difference only ; that in the 
spiral they cannot re-enter upon themselves in each spire; 
whilst in the mass the currents will re-enter direcdy into diem- 
selves, on the circle or zone of matter in which they are deter- 
mined by the influence of the magnet: these currents, in the 
present state of science, cannot be considered as other than 
the consequence of a movement of Uie same nature whicli takes 
> Bib. Univ. aiavii. 10. UUd. 



Digitized by Google 



176 Nobili anc; Antinori on Ei^c/ro-flM^fiMlMm/ [FsB.18S^. 

place around each particle of the magnetic metal. This in- 
duction aeems sufficiently natural ; and for its greater confirma- 
tion we have instituted the following experiment a ring of 
copper was taken, and the two conjoining wires intended to 

complete the communication with the galvanometer soldered 
to it at the extremities of one of its diameters. On placing this 
ring between the two poles of a horse-shoe magnet, in the place 
where we introduced our electro-dynamic spiral, motions were 
instantly manifested at the galyanometer, due to the presence 
of currents excited by the magnetism in the copper ring^* 

Our idea being thus fixed relative to the circular currents* 
which we believed ought to be produced in the mass of cop- 
per submitted to the influence of the magnetic polCs let us pass 
to the question of magnetism by rotation, the wonderful dis- 
covery of ISI. Arago. Here we have magnetic poles in pre- 
sence of a disc, which instead of being quiescent as in the pre- 
ceding case, is continually moving on its own axis. The lat- 
ter condition is the only one added, and by it we see that the 
final result of the phenomena will be excessively complicated* 
but that in reality nothing new will happen. In all cases it 
is the currents developed by the magnetism at the place of 
disc which is directly acted upon by this magnedsm which are 
concerned. This part is rapidly removed by the rotation, and 
another comes forward, which is subjected to the same in- 
fluence, which always tends to form currents in the contrary di- 
rection to those which may be supposed to exist in the magnetic 
pole (Ea;p, Mes. 58. 255.). These currents, by their nature* 
tend to be inverted so soon as they are withdrawn from the 
presence of the cause which produced them, and are in fact 
inverted every time that the velocity of rotation will permit it. 
The theory of this species of magnetism appears mature'; 
we shall endeavour to develope its physical principles in a 
more detailed manner in a separate paper, being content here 

This experiment will heax another inteipcetation. I do not (at I under- 
stand ihe description) believe the ting to have anything particular to do with 
the result; the whde appeals tome a repetition of the eipenment I have de- 
scribed {Egp. Bet, 109).— M.F.] 

Sig. Nobili and Antinori have mistaken the character of the acting causes 
in Arago'g e^qpeiimmt altogether ; the view which they have briefly e^qpiessed 
and mean to pume, Is precisely that which I at first entertained and poisoedy 



Digitized by Google 



June ISS2J] 



wUk Notes by Mr. Faraday. 



177 



to state ihe particular character which distinguishes it from 

all other kinds, and which rendered it not easily assailable 
before the discovery of Mr. Faraday. This character does not 
consist only in momentary duration, which it has in common 
with soft iron, but also in being a double magnetism, inverse 
and direct ; inverse^ at the moment of its production, opposite 
to the producing cause ; dkreetf at the moment after, wh^ this . 
cause disappears. 

BIr. Faraday considers Arago's magnetism of rotation as 
entirely connected with a phenomenon which he discovered 
about ten years ago [Exp. Res. 121.). " He then ascertained^* * 
so says the notice, " that by the rotation of a metallic disc under 
the injiucnce of a magnet , there may be formed, in the direction 
of the radii of that disc, electric currents in sufficient number to 
render the disc a neio electric nwchineJ' We are quite igno» 
rant how Mr* Faraday has ascertained this fact ; and we do 
not know how a result of such a nature could remain so long 
a time generally unknown, and as it were lost m the hands 
of the author of the discoyery^. Besides, there is something 
here very problematical to us ; and before we leave the subject 
we will describe the experiment we have made relative to it. 



but wbieh I soon found experimental reason to reject. Hoirever, I need 
merely refer here to Ihe fourth division of my first paper, expressly on that 
fbenomenon, and to parts of the sixth division in the continuation of the Re- 
searches, for what I believe to be a true view of the phenomenon (tee eepeciaUy 
£xp. Res. 121. 122. 123.).— M. F.] 

Sig. Nobili and Antinori here seriously mistake the sense of my letter to 
M. Hachette. I did not write " I then ascertained." The French translation 
of my letter in Le Lycee, No. 35, sent to me by M. Hachette, does not say so. 
*' M. Faraday considdre le ph6nomene qui se manifeste dans cette experience, 
comme intimement li^ k celui de la rotation magnetique qu'il a eu le bunheur 
de trouver il y a dix ans. II a reconnu que par la rotation du disc metallique, 
&c. fte." I am not Italian lobolar enough to say how Sig. Nobili and Antinori 
themadTOB at first expressed it; hut the phrase used in the present part of their 
paper is, " Egli reconobbe fm d^aUora eke, fe, whilst that which they naed 
aft die head of the paper, to express the same words of my letter, is, EgU ha ri- 
eoMOfcttflo eke,IBfe, 8fe." It was in consequence of the recent researches detailed in 
my paper that laaoertaineddie state of the revolving plate, and could then refer 
the effect in its Und to that which I had so long before Covered. The auc* 
ceeding remarks of Sig. Nobili and Antinori have no reference therefore except 
to their mistake of my meaning.— M. F.] 

TOL. n. N 



Digitized by Google 



178 liohiU ami Antiium oit Eieetro^nMgnetism^ IFeb.IS3». 

A disc of copper was revolved, and two long copper wires 
prepared, attached at one set of ends to the galvanometer, 
and at the other held by the hand against the disc, the one at 
the centre^ and the other at the circumference, in the direc- 
tion of the radii. In the rotation of the disc, the pointa of 
copper pressed against it will be heated, bttt tinequdly ; that 

. pressed against the circumference will be most heated, and 
that at the centre the least. This difference is quite sufficient 
to determine an electric current capable of moving the needle 
of the galvanometer, and retaining it after a few vibrations 

• at a certain degree of the division ^ When the needle is 
thus quiescent, if a horse-shoe magnet be advanced towards 
the plate so as to embrace it without interrupting its motion, 
n will be seen that the deviation of the needle will augment or 
diminish according as the poles act in the one direction or 
the other. This effect is a sure proof of the current manifested 
in the disc by the action of the magnet : but because the wires 
connected with the galvanometer are arranged with their ends 
in the direction of the radius of the disc, are we to conclude 
that they are exactly in the direction in which the current ex- 
cited by the magnetism exists'? We do not believe it, for 
the reasons given above ; and though we should, with Mr. 
Faraday, admit this species of irradiating currents, there 
would still exist for us a great difierence between this mode 
of exciting electricity, and the ordinary one of our common 
electrical machines. There is here a great void to fill, in 
passing from a superlative conductor, like the metallic disc of 
M. Arago» to the worst, such as the glass plate of an ordinary 
machine^. 

All these causes of error were fully guarded against in tvnry part of my 
researches {Exp. lies. 91. 113. 18G.). — M. F.] 

[- I have nowhere drawn such concluaions. — M. F.] 

The case of the ciurents tending to be formed, or really existing in tha 
direction of Ihe ndii throughout the whole plate, ooourt only wlwn fbe uda 
of the magnet approached coinddei iviih the axia of the revolving plate {Exp, 
Rm. 156, 158.), or when the magnetic curves inteneetecl fay the revolving plate 
are of equal atrength, and past ibrotm^h aU parts of the platt in the same di- 
rection, as happens when (he earth's magnetism is used aa tne exciting cause 
{Exp. Res. 149. 155.). My reasons for calling the revolving plate an electncal 
machine (£d^.JRet. 154. 158.) are endrely untouched by what is said in the text. 
It must not be supposed that in these notes I am critidxing Sig. Nobili and 



Digitized by Google 



Dse. 18S2.] Faraday's letter io M. Gay^Luasac. 179 



But tihese our particular opinions do not in any way diminish 
the intrinsic merit of Mr. Faraday's discovery* It is one of 

the most beautiful of our time, whether it be considered in 
itself for the largeness of the vacancy which it serves to fill, 
or for the light which it throws over the various theoriesj and 
especially that of magnetism of rotation. 

We hope that these our first researches will justify the Hvely" 
interest which we have taken in this new branch of electro* 
dynamics. We have but one regret^ namelyi that of having 
entered into a path before we knew all the steps taken in it by 
the illustrious philosopher who threw it open* 

Florence, Jan. 31, 1832. 



NoliiU and Antinori's Errors in Magnetihelectric Induction / 

in a Letter to M« Gay*Lus8ac'« 

My dear Sir, Royal Institution, Dec. 1, 1832. 

I AM anxious to write you a letter on Electro-magnetism, and 
1 beg you to insert it in the Annales do Chimie et de Physique, 
if you can grant me that favour. I fear that this letter may oc- 
casion more controyersy than I desire, but the circumstances 
are such as to force me to take the pen ; for if I am silent the 
silence will be regarded as the acknowledgement of error, not 
only in a philosophical, but in a moral point of view, and that 
in cases where I believe I am exempt from both. 

You doubtless comprehend that I wish to speak of the me- 
moire of MM. Nobili and Antinori. I write to you because you 



Antinori for not understanding my views. It was impossible that I could put 
forth in a brief letter, matter which, though I have condensed it as much as 
possible, still occupies seventy quarto ])agcs of the Philosophical Transactions; 
and I may perhaps be allowed to say, (xnovi-i in reference however to what I 
think ought to be a general regulation than to the present case,) that had I 
thought that that letter to M . Hachette would be considered as giving the sub- 
ject to the philosophical world for general pursuit, I should not have written it ; 
or at least not until after the pnUication of my frst paper,'-'M. F.] 
1 Annalet de Chimie et de Physique, 18S2, t. li. p. 404. 

1x2 



Digitized by Google 



180 Faraday's /Sffiltfr to M. Gay-Lu8sac [Dec. 

have ihought so well of the matter of my paper as to introduce 
it into your excellent and truly philosophical jouma!, and be- 
cause haying inserted also the m^moire of MM. Nobili and An- 
tinori. all that has been written on thb subject is found in the 

Annales. I may therefore hope you will not refuse me that 
which I now desire. 

On the 24th November, 1831, my first paper was read to the 
Royal Society ; it is that which you have done me the honour 
to insert in the Annales for May 1832 (t. 1. pp. 5-69). Thiji 
paper was the first announcement which I made of my researches 
oil electricity. The 18th December, 1831, 1 wrote a letter to my 
friend M. Hachette^ who did me the honour to communicate it 
to the Academy of Sciences the j86th of the same month ^. This 
letter was also inserted in the Number of the Annales for De- 
cember 1831 (t. xlviii. p. 402). The second series of my re- 
searches, dated the 21st December, 1831, was read to the Royal 
Society the 12th January, 1832, and found a place in the 
Annales for June 183^ (t. 1. pp. 113-16^). These are the 
only publications (except certain notes appended to the me^ 
moirs of others) which I have made respecting the present 
matter up to this time, and the whole of them were written and 
read before anything whatsoever by any other philosopher on 
the same subject. 

In the meantime the letter which I wrote to M. Hachette, 
and which you did me the honour to insert in the Annales, drew 
tlie attention of MM. Nobili and Antinori, and those industrious 
philosophers published a memoire, the date of which is 31st 
January, 1832, and consequently posterior to all my writings* 
This memoire obtained a place in the Annales for December 
1831 (t. xlviii. pp. 41^-430). A second memoire, entitled ** New 
EUdra-magnetie Expermenis,** by the same philosophers, 
dated the 24fth March, 1892, has also appeared, and has been 
inserted in the Annales for July (t. 1. pp. 280-304). 

I fear that the letter which I wrote to M. Hachette, and which 
in his kindness for me he did me the honour to read to the 
Academy of Sciences, has become a source of misunderstanding 
and errors, and in its result has injured rather than served the 
cause of philosophic truth. Nevertheless I do not know how 

^ According to the account of tho fitting which is given in the Lyc^, No.35. 



Digitized by Google 



on magneiiheketric indueiunu 



181 



to explain this point and re-establifili matters in their right po- 
sition without having the appearance of complaining in some 
degree of MM. Nobili and Antinori ; than which there cannot 
be to me a more disagreeable thing. I honour those gentlemen 
for all that they have done, not only for electriciQr but also for 
science in general, and if it were not that the contents and 
wording of their m^moires oblige me to speak and place me 
in the alternative of admitting or denying the correctness of 
their assertions, I should have put aside the scientific errors 
which 1 believe them to contain, leaving to others the care of 
removing them. These philosophers unfortunately had no 
other knowledge of my researches than the short letter which 
I wrote to M. Hachette^ and not being careful to refer to my 
papers (though it appears to me they should have done so 
under the circumstances), they have mistaken altogether the 
sense of a phrase relating to the beautiful observations of 
M. Arago ; they have presumed that I had not previously done 
that which they thought they had done themselves ; and finally, 
they advance what appear to me to be erroneous ideas of mag- 
neto-electric currents and give their ideas as corrections of 
mine, which had not as yet come under their eyes. 

First let me rectify that which I consider as the most serious 
error^ the misinterpretation given of my words; for those com- 
mitted in the experiments would have been easily removed by 
the course of time. 

MM. Nobili and Antinori say (Annales, t. xlviii. p. 428), 
Mr. Faraday considers Arago's magnetism of rotation as al- 
together connected with the phenomenon which he discovered 
ten years ago. He then recognised, as the notice utyg^ that by 
** the rotation of a metallic disc under the injluence of a magnet 
we may produce electric currents in the direction of the radii 
qf the disc in sifficiewt quantity to make this disc become a 
" new electric machine. We are entirely ignorant how Mr. 
•* Faraday had ascertained this fact, and we do not know how 
** a result of this nature could remain generally unknown for 
" so LONG A TIME, and so to say forgotten in the hands of the 
•* author of the discovery; besides, &c.** 

Now I never said that which MM. Nobiii and Antinori here 
impute to me. In my lettei: to M. Hachette, referred to at the 
begmning of this letter^ I gave a brief account of that which I 



Digitized by Google 



182 Faraday's ^/itfr to M. Gay-Lussac [Dbcu 



had recently discovered and read on the 4th of the preceding 
month to the Royal Society. This notice is found page 402 of 
the same Number of the Annates, and it there says : ** The 
fourth part of the papers considers the equally curious and 
extraordiniury experimentjof M. Arago, which, as is known, 
consists in revolving • notaUie disc under the influence of ft 
magnet. Mr* Faraday considers the phenomena exhibited in 
thb experiment as hiHmaiefy eonMclfcf with that of the mag- 
netic rotation which he had the good fortune to discover ten 
•* years ago. He has ascertained that hy the rotation of a 
** metaUic disc under the influence of a magnet we may form 
** electric currents in the direction of the radii of the disc in 
sufficient number to make the disc become anew electric ma« 
" chine," 

I have never said, nor ever had the intention of saying, that 
I had obtained electric currents by the rotation of a metallie 
disc at a period previous to the date of the memoir which I had 
then just written ; but I said that the extraordinary efiect dig- 
covered by M. Arago was connected in its nature with the 
electro-magnetic rotation which I had discovered several years 
before, for both of them are due to a tangential action ; and 
I said that by the rotation of a disc near a magnet I can (now) 
cause electric currents to pass or tend to pass in the direction 
of the radii, thus constituting the disc ft new electric maohine: 
and that I think is satisfactorily proved in the part of the paper 
of whichi was giving an account, as maybe seen at pp. 65-118 
of vol. L of the Annales, 

I have the most earnest desire to have this error removed, 
for 1 have always admired the prudence and philosophic reserve 
shown by M. Arago in resisting the temptation to give a theory 
of the effect he had discovered so long as he could not devise 
one which was perfect in its appUcation, and in refusing bis 
assent to the imperfect theories of others* Admiring his reserve 
I adopted it in this respect, and perhaps for that reason bad 
my eyes open to recognise the truth when it was presented. 

I have now arrived at that which concerns the philosophy of 
my writings. My paper of £4th November, 1831, contains in 
its fourth part my opinion of the cause of Arago's phenomenon, 
an opinion which I at this time see no reason to change. MM. 

Nobili and Antipori, in their writings of the 31st January and 



Digitized by Google 



183^] 



on magnetO'electric induction. 



dMiBf8reli,1831S» profen to remove certain errors from among 
my facts, and to give extensive developments of electro-mag- 
netic phenomena. I have not been able to perceive that the 
writings of these philosophers add a single fact to those con- 
tained in my papers, except it may be that they make mention of 
the spark obtained from the ordinary magnet* a result which I 
had myself obtained before from the eleotro-magnet. On the 
other hand I think that the mteoires of these gentlemen contain 
erroneous ideas of the nature of magneto-electric currents* and 
that they are mistaken hoth as to the actbn and the direction 
of the currents in the revolving disc of Arago. These philoso- 
phers say, " We have recently verified^ extended, and perhaps 
" rectified in some parts the results of the Knglish philoso' 
phrr, c^'c." (Annales, 1. 281.) And afterwards at p. 298, in 
reference to what they supposed to be my ideas (fo^ though 
they had been read* and are now published, they had not 
tboiight proper to consult them), they say, We have already 
given our opinion on this idea i but if* at the commencement 
of our researches* it appeared to us not easy to make it ao- 
cord with the nature of the currents discovered by Mr. Fara- 
" day himself, what shall we now say after all the new obser- 
vations which we have arrived at during the continuation 
** of our researches i We say that we have in the galvano- 
meter the competent judge^ and that it is for it to resolve the 
" question." 

With the greatest desire to be corrected when in error* it is 
still impossible for me to discover in the writings of these g^tk^ 
men any correction by whush I can profit ; but I fully admit the 
competence of the galvanometer* and shaU proceed as briefly 
as possible to submit to its judgement our different notions 
concerning the phenomenon of Arago : and I am so satisfied at 
present with the facts and results contained in the papers which 
I have published (though I could make changes in certain parts 
if I had to rewrite them) that I shall have no need to go be- 
yond the experiments which they contain. 

It is not my intention to enlarge further on the first m^noire 
of the learned Italians* I have added correcting notes to an 
Englbh translation of it which has appeared in the Philoso- 
phical Magazine \ and I have had the honour to send some 

^ Seu page 104 of the present volttme. 



Digitized by Google 



184* Faraday's letter to M. Gay-Lussac [Dec. 

copies to you and to the authors. At present my object is to 
compare the second part of their writings with the fourth part 
of my first paper and with some other portions of other papers 
throwing light on tlie general principles. The two writings 
have for their object the explication of the phenomenon of 
Arago, and fortimfttely both are found in the fiftieth volume of 
the Annale8> so that reference to them is ea^« I shall refer 
to my paper |)y the numbers thus indicated (F. 114.) and to 
the writings of MM. Nobili and Antinori simply by indication 
of the page of the Annales. 

At page 281, after some general remarks, we read, ** We 
** have recently verified, extended, perhaps rectified in some 
" parts the results of tiie English philosopher : we then said 

that the magnetism of rotation found a true point of bearing 
" in the new facts of Mr. Faraday, and that consequently the 

theory of magnetism appeared to tfs at present so far ad- 
*^ Tanced as to deserve that we should undertake to devdope 

ihe physical principles on which it depends. The wrUing 

wMeh WE now cause to appear is destined to fill this void, 
" ^c." On this point I will only remark, that just four months 
before, the paper which I had read to the Royal Society said 
the same thing, and had given that which is, I hope, a true 
and exact exposition of the philosophy of the efiect in question 
(F. 4. 80.). 

At page 282 we read, We have already distinguished 

these currents in our first researches/* that is to say, in the 
first paper which was inserted in the Number for December 
(p. 418): but I had already described Uiese currents four 
months before (F.90.)* 

At page 283 are found described " the explorers or galva- 
'* nometric sounds," which are nothing else than what I had be- 
fore described and distinguished by the name of collectors or 
conductors (F. 86, &c.). 

At the commencement of the investigation by the Italian phi* 
losophers of the state of Arago's disc reTolving in the neigh* 
bourhood of a magnet, two relative positions of the plate and 
magnet were chosen, one called (p. d84>) the eeniral arrange- 
ment" where the magnetic pole was placed vertically over the 
centre of the disc, the other (p. 285), ** eccentric arrangement,** 
in which the magnet acted out of that position. In respect of 



Digitized by Google 



1832.] on magHiekhdecine induetion* 



185 



the central arrangement we read (p. ^84), " in this case when 
themagnet acts on the centre of the disc the BOunds(collectors) 
transmit no signs of a currrat to the galvanometer wherever 
they areplaeed, and if small deriations are accidentally ob- 
served it is only because of a fiiult in the centralisation, so that 
we have only to eorreei ihh fault, and immediately all signs 
** from this equivocal source disappear,&c. In fact, what happens 
** with an electro-dynamic spiral turning on its own axis always 
** in front of the same magnetic pole ? Absolutely/ nothing. Its 
turning is an mdifferenU circumstance. The formation of the 
currents belongs to an enHrely different condition, for they 
** are not produced except at the moment the spirals are ap» 
proaeked to or uAtkdr awn from tlie magnet* As long as the 
spirak remain at a constant distance, numng or not moving, 
" there is no current, just as in the same manner there is none 
** in the case of central rotation, when the points of the disc, 
*' remaining constantly at the same distance from the magnetic 
" pole, thus renew the combination of continual presence to 
which the new laws of the currents of Mr. Earaday assign 
" 710 effect:* 

This statement is so erroneous in all its parts that I have 
been obliged to copy the whole of it. In the first place the 
electric currents tend as strongly to be produced in the re- 
volving disc in the case of the central arrangement " as in any 

other case (F. 149-156.), but their direction is from the centre 
to the circumference or vice versd, and it is at these parts that 
the collectors should be applied. It is precisely this case which 
makes the revolving disc a new electric machine (F. 154.), and 
it is on this point that MM. Nobili and Antinori have altogether 
deceived themselves in both their m^moires. This error is 
found in every part of the m^moire which I am now comparing 
with my first paper; and appears, as I think, in all the parts, 
without exception, of the theory given of Arago's phenomenon 
in that memoire. 

It is said at p. 284, that absolutely nothing happens when a 
helix revolves on its axis concentric with a magnetic pole, and 
that the circumstance of rotation is indi^terent. I venture to 
say, though I have not made the experiment, that an electric 
current will tend to pass transversely to the helix, and that the 
circumstance of rotation,' instead of being indifferent, contains 



Digitized by Google 



186 Faraday's kUer io M. Gay*Luiaac [Dsct 

in this case the only essential condition re(|uired to produce cur- 
rents. The helix in fact may be considered as analogous to a 
cylinder occupying its place, except that it is by no means so 
good, because it is as it were cut into a long spiral wire* The 
helix may be considered as a simjiie wire placed in any part of 
the space occupied by the cylinder; and I hare demonstrated 
that such inres produce currents when they rotate, their op- 
posed extremities being applied to a galvanometer. 

It is said at p. 281, that the formatii)n of currents " depends 
" upon an entirely differant condition, for they are not pro- 
" duced except at the moment when the spirals are cither ap- 
" proached to or withdrawn from the magnet; as iQog as 

the spirals remain at a constant distance there i» no eurreni 
" whether they move or not, just as in the same manner there 

is no corrent in the case of central rotation, &c/* 

Now, in my first paper I proved that the essential condition 
was, not an approximation or a recession, but simply that the 
moving metal should cut the magnetic curves (F. 101. 116. 118. 
&c.), and that consequently, all other things heing equal, mo- 
tion without change of distance is the most efibctuiil and the most 
powerful means of obtaining the current, instead of being that 
condition in which absolutely nothing occurs. In my second 
paper I proved that motion across the magnetic curves was the 
onlif condition necessary (F. ^17.), and that far irom approxi* 
mation ov recession being required^ we might produce the cur* 
rents from the magnet itself, drawing them off in the properdin 
rection (F. 220.). 

Finally, when speaking of tliis " central arrangement,'* and 
the supposed absence of effect when " the parts of the disc 
" remained constantly at the same distance from the magnetic 
" pole," MM. Nobili and Antinori 6ay, (p. ^5) " in renewing 
*^ thus the combination of continued presence to which the new 
" laws of the currents of Mr. Faraday assign no effect," and 
then we read in a note, " these laws may be reduced to Ihree 
which are then specified, first fully and afterwards as follows : 

Ist Law. During the approximation : a current produced 
" contrary to the producing current ; repulsion between the two 
** systems, 2nd Law. Invariable distance : no effect, ord Law. 
" During recession: current reproduced in thesame direction as 

the producing current ^ attraction between the two systems." 



Digitized by Google 



183^] on magnetOHkctrio indnclMN 



187 



I have not myself ever given the above as the simple laws 
which govern the production of the currents I was so fortunate 
at to discover } neither can I comprehend why MMt Nobili 
and Antinorl say they are mp laws, though at p. 98$$ one of 
them is so called. But I described three similar cases both in 
ray first paper (F. 96* 39. 53.) and in the notice, t. e, in my 
letter to M. Hachette, as the general effects that I had ob- 
served. It has been shown by that which I have already said, 
that they are not the laws of magneto-electric action, for the 
simple fact of obtaining electric currents by means of the re- 
volution of a cylinder (F. ^190, or of a disc (F. ^18.) attached 
to a magnet, or of the magnet itself (F« ^^.), contradicts every 
one of these hws. On law which includes the whole of the 
eflfecta is given in my paper (F« 114v 116. &c.)» sod it simply 
expresses the direetkm in which the moving conducting body 
intersects the magnetic curves. This law of direction being 
given 1 endeavoured to express the whole generally (F. 118.) 
in the terms which I will here repeat : All these results show 
<^ that the power of inducing electric currents is circumferen^ 
" tially exerted by a magnetic resultant or axis of power, just 
" as circumferential magnetism is dependent upon and is ax« 

bibited by an electric current,*' 

I have quoted at length the passage of the learned Itafiaai 
because it contains nearly all the difference between us» at to 

the facts and the views of this part of our subject. Having 
shown the errors which the passage contains, I may now be 
allowed to be more concise in showing by the aid of the gal' 
vanometer the mistakes which flowing from them, are found 
apread through the other parts of the m^moires. It is in fact 
▼eiy curious to observe hoWf with galvanometric indications 
generally correct* these philosophers have suffered themselves 
to he led away under the influence of preeoncmved notions. 
For example, at pp. ^7, ^8, and in fig, 2, plate III, we find 
the result of an examination by the galvanometer of the cur- 
rents in a revolving disc ; these currents are represented almost 
with perfect accuracy by means of the arrows, nevertheless the 
two conclusions which are drawn from them accords with the 
theory announced, but are diametrically opposed to the facts* 
One of these conclusions (p. ^7) results fi*om the imme- 
* ' diate inspection of the arrows indicating the currents in the two 



Digitized by Google 



188 Faraday's letter to M. Gay-Lussac [Dec 

" parts of the disc (fig. 2), and it is, that in the parts {or side) 
** which approach {or enter)^ the system of currcmts developed 
is contrary to that produced on the other side* The other 
conclusion ia obtained by comparing the currents produced 
on the disc with the currents of the producing cause ; and it 
is, that, the direction of the currents on the parts of the disc 
" which enter {or approach) is eordra/ry to that of the prO' 
" ducing currents, wkUst on the other side there is identity of 
direction in the two systems,^ 

Now I had demonstrated in ray first paper (F. 111).) ** that 
" when a piece of metal passed either before a single pole, or 
" between the two opposite poles of a magnet, or near electro- 
magnetic poles, whether ferruginous or not, electric currents 
are produced across the metal transveise to the direction of 
motion." This fiict is proved by means of wires (F. 109.), 
plates (F. 101.), and discs (F. 92, &c.)« and in all these cases the 
electric current was in the same direction, whether die metal 
approximated or receded from the magnet, provided the direc- 
tion of the motion did not change. In the revolving disc of 
Arago the electricity which in innumerable experiments I drew 
from its various parts, always accorded with this result (F. 92, 
95. 96.); and consequently (F. 119, &c.) I have recapitulated 
them in a short description as those presented by Arago's disc ; 
establishing above all (F. 1^.) that the currents produced near 
to or under the poles are discharged or return in the parts of 
" the plate on [each side of and more distant from the place of 
the pole, where of course the magnetic induction is weaker.** 
I have represented this state of things under a general form in 
the figure 2, plate V. (joined to this paper), which, as respects 
the arrows, the designation of parts, &c. I have also made to cor- 
respond as well as I could with the figure 2, plate III. of the m^- 
moire of the Italian philosophers. 1 will now proceed to show 
how far it accords with their galvanometrical results and how 
far with their eonekisions. 

As regards the galvanometric results, my figure might be used 
in place of theurs without causing any difference, and I indeed 
have no reason to say that their results are inaccurate. 

With regard to that " one of the conclusions which result 
from the immediate inspection of the arrows indicating the 
« currents in the two parts of the disc," or of any other atten- 



Digitized by Google 



1832«] on nu^nekheketrie indi$eUon. 189 

tive and ezperimeiital ezanunatioiiy it is seen that the entering 
currents n, n, instead of being in a emtirary direeUon to 
those in the retreating parts follow exactly the same di- 
rection ; that is to say, that as to the general motion, near the 

pole they go from above downwards, or from the circumference 
towards the centre transversely to the lines which the different 
parts describe in their course, and that at a greater distance 
(F. 92.) on each side of the pole they pass in the contrary 
direction. As any point in a line described by the motion 
approaches the pole, a current begins to traverse it, and in- 
creases in intensity until the pdnt has arrived at the shortest 
distance (or perhaps a littie beyond^ if time enters as an ele- 
ment intotheeffect); ai1terwards,becanseof increase of distance, 
the current diminishes in intensity, but without ever having 
changed its direction relative to its own course. It is only 
when it arrives at parts still more distant where the excited elec- 
tricity may be discharged, that a current appears either in the 
opposite direction, or more or less oblique. I presume that 
it is quite unnecessary to speak of the partial change in the 
direction of the current at the parts of the disc towards the 
centre or the circumference ; the two or three curves which 
I have roughly traced will show in what direction these changes 
take place. 

The second conclusion wiiich results from the m^moire of the 
learned Italians (p. 288) is that " in the parts which approach 
•* the direction of the currents is contrary to that of the pro- 
*' ducing currents " (that is, of those which are considered as 
existing in the magnet), " whilst on the other side there is 
** identity in the direction of these two systems." This asser- 
tion is exactiy the reverse of the trutii (F« 117.). By means 
of the arrows, fig. 2 and 1, I hare indicated the direction of 
the currents in the magnetic pole, and it is the same as the di- 
rection given by MM. Nobili and Antinori in their figure 1 , 
plate III. But my figure 2, as well as the indication of the 
galvanometer, evidently prove the approaching parts n, n, w, 
have currents which pass across them in the saj?ie direction as 
the current in that side of the magnetic pole, and that the parts 
which recede s, s, have currents which follow a eonirary di- 
rection to those which are assumed as existing in tiiat side of 
the magnetic pole from which they recede. 



Digitized by Google 



190 



Faraday's kiier to hL Gay-Luiiae 



[Die. 



I supppse, but am not quite aure* that MM. Nobili and An- 
tiiioii imagine that circular currents 9Xt excited in the part of 
the metal near to the pole, in the same maimer and absolutely like 
those which are foruMBd in a helix when it is brought towards a 
magnet; and that as this part of the disc recedes, the circular 
ourrents are somehow reTersed, as is the case with the hehx 
when it is withdrawn from the magnet. A passage in their first 
paper, and another at the end of page 2H iy appears to imply 
that such is their notion. This idea occurred to me more than 
a year ago, but I soon saw from many experiments (I have just 
quoted some of them) that it did not satisfy the &ots : and when 
I found that the action of the helix, in approaching to and 
receding £roni the polCf was perfectly explained (F. ^) 
by the law (Filli.)^ I was constrained to gi?e up my previous 
opuuon* 

The m^moire then goes on (p. 2SS) to explain the pheno- 
mena of Arago's revolving disc : but as I have shown that the 
theory generally is founded on two conclusions, which are the 
reverse of reality, it will not be necessary to make a close ex- 
amination of this part. It is not possible that it can accurately 
represent the phenomena. Those who are curious to know the 
true state of things can decide for themselves, by the assistance 
of a very fewexperimentSy whether the view which I published 
in the paper which first announced the discovery of these cur- 
rents is the true one, or whether the learned Italians have 
reason to say I was in error, and have themselves published 
more correct views of the subject. 

All the world knows that when M. Arago published his re- 
markable discovery^ he said that the action of the disc on the 
magnet might be resolved into three forces : the jSr«< perpendi- 
cular to the revolving disc« and this he found repulsive s the 
wcond horiaontal and perpendicular to the vertical plane con- 
taining the radius beneath the magnetic pole i this is a tan* 
gentlal fbroe, and causes the rotation of the pole with the 
metal : the third is horizontal and parallel to the same radius ; 
this at a certain distance from the circumference is null, nearer 
the centre it tends to urge the pole towards the centre, and 
nearer the circumference it tends to move it from the centre. 

At p. ^89, MM. Nobili and Antinori give the explanation of 
the first of these forces. As I have said, these philosophers 



Digitized by Google 



183^] Ml nu^pmUheleeine kiduetimu 



191 



consider the approaching parts of the disc as having currents 
contrary to thoie which exist in that side of the pole which 
they ate approaching, and consequently repulsive ; and they 
c^onsider the parts which are receding as having currents iden- 
tical in their direction with those in the side of the magnet from 
which they recede, and consequently these parti are attrao* 
tive. The amount of each of these two forces is equal the one to 
the other, but as concerns the needle or magnet their relation 
is not the same ; ** the repulsive forces being the nearest exist 
*' in the disc to the part even under the needle, and thus ob- 
" tain a preponderance over the action of the contrary forces 

which are exerted more obHquely and further off ; on the 
" wholoy it is only one part of the repulsive force which i« 

balanced by the attractive force; the difference finds no 
" opposition, and it is that portion which produces the efiect/' 

But I have proved in this letter that the currents in the parti 
whicli either approach or recede are exactly the reverse of 
those supposed by the learned Italians ; and tliat consequently 
where tliey expect attraction they should have reptdsion, and 
for repulsion attraction ; so that according to their conclusions, 
corrected by experiment, the result should be a/^rao^tofi instead 
of repuUion* But M. Arago was right in saying the force was 
repulsive, consequently the theory of the eflbct here given 
cannot be true. 

In my first paper will he found my view of this efi^t. I have 
there inquired whether it was possible or probable (F. 125.) 
that time may be required for the development of the maximum 
current in the plate, in which case the resultant of all the forces 
would be in advance of the magnet when the plate is rotated, 
or in the rear of the latter when the magnet is rotated : the 
line joining this resultant with the pole would be oblique to 
the plane of rotation : and then the force directed according 
to this line may be resolved into two others, the one parallel 
and the other perpendicular to the plane of rotation t the latter 
w<rald be a repulsive force, producing an effect analogous to 
that remarked by M. Arago. 

The second force is that which makes the magnet and disc 
mutually follow each other. On referring to page 290, and 
fig. 1 or S (my figure 2 will answer the same purpose), we read 

there exist in s, attractive forces towards which it (the 



Digitized by Google 



192 Faraday's letter to M. Gay-Liuaac [Disc, 

magnet) is drawiii and at »» » there are repulsive forces 

which push it in the same direction/' coiMeqaently the mag* 
net mores afiter the metal. But the currents, and consequently 
the forces, are exactly the reverse of that which is supposed, 
as I have just shown: the magnet and disc therefore ought to 
move in opposite directions if the forces act in the manner 
assumed ; nevertheless as the fact is they do not move in op- 
posite directions, it is evident that the theory which explains 
their motions by reversing the facts must itself be erroneous. 

The third force is that which tends to carry the magnetic 
pole either towards the centre or towards the circumference on 
each side of a neutral point in that radius ahove which the 
magnet is placed ; this eflfect is described at p. 281, and also 
in the figure 4 which accompanies the m^oire, which latter 
I believe to be quite correct. The memoire goes on to explain 
this effect by referring to the repulsive force admitted (p. 289), 
to render a reason for the Jirst effect observed by M. Arago, 
namely, the vertical repulsion from the disc ; and assuming 
that this repulsive force is spread over a certain extent of the 
disc under the magnet, it is concluded (p. 292, fig* 5) that if 
the pole is situated very near to the circumference, the portion 
of the disc from whence this force emanates is diminished,being 
cut off by the circumference itself, and consequently the parts 
nearer to the centre act more powerfully and push tiie pole out- 
wards : whilst on the other hand, if the pole is placed nearer 
to the centre, the extent of disc from whence the force ema- 
nates will reach beyond the centre, and as this part beyond 
is considered (though wrongly) as inactive, so the portion 
near the circumference is the most powerful and pushes the 
pole towards the centre. 

One or two little objections offex themselves at once to this 
opinion, but they are as nothing in comparison with that 
which arises when we remember that, according to the views 
of the authors themselves respecting the action of these cur- 
rents, the error made in giving the direction of those excited 
near the pole obliges us to substitute attraction for repulsion, 
as I have shown in speaking of the first of these forces ; con- 
sequently all the motions connected with the third force 
ought to be exactly the contrary of what they really are : and 
the iheozy which when it is corrected by experiments made 



Digitized by Google 



am magneto-electric inditctian. 



193 



with the galvanometer indicates such motions deserves to be 
abandoned. 

At page 292 I find that the mteoire refers to the " second 
law" of Mr. Faraday. As I have said^ I never gave the three 
atatements as kws. In feet, I regret very much that a letter 
which was not intended to give minute detailsi but only certain 
fects gathered in haste from the hundreds previously described 
in the paper read to the Royal Society, I regret, I say, that this 
letter, which was never intended for printing, should have led 
the learned Italians into error. And yet after a re-examination 
of all the facts I cannot see that I am in the least degree an- 
swerable for the nustakes into which they have fallen ; either as 
having advanced erroneous results, or as concerns the paper^ 
in not having given to the sdentific world full details as soon 
as it was possible for me to do'so. 

I have not as yet published my view of the cause of the 
ikird force distinguished by M. Arago ; hut as the Italian phi- 
losophers, when giving the hypothesis which I have just now 
condemned as inaccurate, say (293) " in fact what other hypo- 
** thesis can reconcile the verticality which the needle preserves 

in the two positions n n" i" (fig. 4) with the other fact of 
*' repulsion from below upwards, which raises the needle in the 

second position ii" I am tempted to oflfer another in this 
place ; premising always that the directions and forms which I 
may trace as tiiose of the excited electro-magnetic currents 
are to be considered only as general approximations. 

If a piece of metal sufficiently large to contain without de- 
rangement all the currents which may be excited in its mass 
by a magnetic pole placed above it, moves in a rectiUnear di- 
rection beneath the pole, then an electric current will pass 
across the line of motion in all those parts in the immediate 
neighbourhood of the pole and will return in the opposite di- 
rection on each side in those parts which being frnrther from 
the pole are suljected to a feebler inductive force, and thus 
the current will be completed or discharged (fig. 3). Let 
A, B, C, D, represent a plate of copper moving in the direction 
of the arrow E, and N the north end of a magnet placed above 
it, electric currents will be produced in the metal ; and though 
they extend without doubt from the part just under the pole 
to a great distance round (F« 92,) and at the same time diminish 

YOU II* O 



Digitized by Google 



194 



Faradfty's leher t» M. Oay*Liliiac 



[Dm* 



in intensity and change in direetion as the diitanoe from thk 
part increases^ neverthelesa the two circles may serve to repM^ 
■ent the resultant of these ciimnts : and it trifi he etident that 
the most intense point of action Is where these oirdea toui^ 
and immediately heneath Ihe magnetic pole ; or, because Of tfle 
time required, a little in atlvance. Hence that portion of the 
force which acts parallel to the plane of the metal will carry 
the pole ill advance in the direction of the arrow E, because 
the forces arc equally powerful on the side A, B, of the pole 
as on the side C, D : and that portion of the force wliich, be- 
cause of the time necessary for the production of the excited 
eunentiis pertvendieular to the direction of the metali as Ilmipe 
already said, will he fepulsite* and tend to push the pole up^ 
wards or outwards* 

But suppose that instead of this plate which moves in a 
rectilinear direction, we substitute a circular disc revoMng on 
its axis, and then consider the case of the magnetic pole placed 
over its centre (fig. 4), there will then be no electric currents 
produced, not because they do not tend to be produced) for 
I have already said in this letter and shown in my papers 
(F. 149. 166. iSi7.) that from the noment the disc moves, the 
cunrenta also are ready to motoi tendhig to be feimed kt the 
direction of radii from the oifcutti^rence to the centre | but be- 
cause all the pmrts are equally influenced) all of them bttof 
equally distant from the centre, so none of them can gain an 
excess of ])ower over the others, no discharge can take place, 
and conse(}uently no current can be formed. As no current can 
exist, so none of the effects due to the action of a current on a 
pole can be produced, and thus it is that there is neither re^ 
volfttton nor repulsion of the magnet* Hence the cause of the 
ver/tctf^'fy wkktHit repuUim which oeeiiM at this plaoe* 

Now let ua eonsider the ease where die pole of the neguiti 
instead of being plaeed over the eentre of the levdving netali 
is on one aide, aa at K, fig. 5* The tendency to the fbrmntioe 
of electric currents is due to tiie motion of the parts of the 
disc across the magnetic curves (F, IIG. 217.), and when these 
curves are of equal intensity the electric currents increase in 
force in proportion to the increased velocity with which the 
parts of the disc bisecting these magnetic cams move (F»I358»)» 
Ijst us therefore tiaoe a drde, a fig* ronad the Mgnetis 



Digitized by Google 



Oft magnekh-electrie induetim* 



pole afl a centre^ and it trili represent the projection on the disc 
of magnetie ctirvea haidng equal mtenutifi a and b will he thoie 
points in the radius passing immediately under the pole^ which 

are at an equal distance from the pole ; but as the part a passes 
under the pole with a much greater velocity than the part b, 
the intensity of the electric current excited in that part is pro- 
portionally greater. The same is true for points in any other 
radius cutting the circle a b, and it will be also true for any 
other circle drawn round N as a centre^ and representing there- 
fore magnetie curves of equal intensity, eieepl that when this 
elrde extends beyond the centre c of the reYolving disc, aa at 
e d, instead of a weaker current at d than at e it will be a con* 
trary current that tends to be produced. 

The natural consequence of these actions of the various parts 
is, that, as the sum of the forces tending to produce an electric 
current in the direction from c to c/ is greater on the side c of 
the magnetic pole than on the side dy the curvature, or the re« 
turn of these currents by the right and left, will also commenoS 
on this sidoi and therefore the two circles which we may re« 
gard, as before, as representing the resultants of these cur- 
rents will not touch enaotly under the pole, but at a greater or 
•mailer distance from it towards the circumference, as in fig. 6. 

This circumstance alone would give rise to no motion of the 
pole constrained so as to move only in the direction of the 
radius, but being combined with tliat which results from the 
time necessary for the development of the current, and to which 
I have already referred as explaining the j^rit of the three 
Ibreas by whioh M. Arago represents the action of the pole 
and the rerolvingdisc, it will explain I hope perfectly all the 
•ffeots whioh we are examining and prove also the influence of 
time as an element !-~for let c, fig. 7, be the oentre of the re« 
solving disc, and r c a part of the radius under the magnetic 
pole p : the contact of the two circles (representing the cur- 
rents) is, as we have just seen, on the side of the pole furthest 
from the centre c : but because of the element of time and the 
direction of the rotation R of the disc of metal, it is also a little 
4o the left of the radius r c, so that the pole is subjected, not 
symmetrically, but obliquely to the action of these two sets of 
«iimnts* The neeessary consequence is that if it be free to 
aaofve iA tiie diieotion of the radius, and in that only, it will 

o2 



Digitized by Google 



196 Faraday's letter to M. Gay-Lussac [Dec. 

move towards the centre c, because the currents produced by 
a marked (or north) pole are precisely such as by their mutual 
action with the pole would push it in that direction. 

This relation of the currents to the pole which produces 
theniy 18 as easily proved by experiment as by calculation. I 
liaTe shown (F. 100.) that when a marked (north) pole is above 
a disc reyolving in the direction of the arrow R in the figures 
of the m6noire of the Italian philosophers or in mine> the car- 
rents (indicated by the circles) are as in fig. 3, 6 or 7. Upon 
bending a metal wire carrying a current in this double direc- 
tion, fig. 8, and placing a marked (north) pole abuve it, limited 
so that it could only move parallel to r c, I found that when- 
ever it was placed in the line r c it had not the least tendency to 
move. There is also another line perpendicular to this first line» 
and which crosses the contact of the cirdes, in which the pole 
has no tendency to move* But placed in any point out of these 
two lines it will move in one direction or the othert and when 
it is placed in the positions marked 1,2,3, 4, it will move in tiie 
direction of the arrows placed in these points. Now the posi- 
tion of the pole to the currents produced in the disc of M, 
Arago, when the magnet and disc are arranged as in fig. 5 or 7, 
is exactly that of position 1 in fig. 8^ and hence the pole has a. 
tendency towards the centre C. 

Let us now direct our attention to that which will occur if 
we gradually carry tiie pole from the centre towards the dr- 
cnmfierence. Let fig. 9 represent the new condition of things 
at a given time, as fig. 5 represented tiie ^nrmer state: it is 
evident that the velocities of the parts ^ a of the radius under 
the pole do not differ so much from each other as they did be- 
fore, being now nearly as 1 : IJ, instead of 1:6, and with all 
the magnetic curves of equal intensity comprised within this 
circle the difference will be erai less. That alone would cause 
that the place of the magnetic pole and the place of contact 
of the circles which represent tiie currents (fig. 7) would ap- 
proach tiie one to the other in tiie direction of the line r Cg and 
consequently carry the pole at 1, fig. 8, nearer to tiie neutral 
line / f. Casting the eyes on the second circle d, fig. 9, of mag- 
netic curves of equal intensity, we perceive that as the disc 
does not extend to c, or even beyond a, there is nothing to add 
to the force of the current on that side of the pole, whilst at 



Digitized by Google 



. &m magnekhdeeirie kkkeium^ 197 



the ndiiis moiing across magnetic curves adds to the intenniy 
of the current ezdted In b and everywhere else on this side 
of the pole» and can easily, according to the position of the 

pole over the plate of metal (that is, nearer to or further from 
the edge), render their sum equal to or greater than the sum 
of the forces on the other side, or towards the circumference. 
If the sums of the forces on the two sides of the pole are 
equal, then the pole will he in some part of the neutral line 
li, asm 6, fig. 8, and will haye no tendency either towards the 
centre or the circumference^ though its tendency to move with 
lihe disc or upwards item the disc will remain unchanged. Or 
if the sum of the forces is greater on the side d than on the 
side c, then the pole will be in the position 2, fig. 8, and will 
be urged outwards in the direction of the radius, in conformity 
with Arago's results. 

Besides this cause of change in the motion of the pole parallel 
to the radiusi and which depends on the position of the pole 
near the drcumferenee* there is another cause which occurs^ 
I believe^ at the same time and assists the action of the former. 
When the pole is placed near tiie edge of the disc the dis- 
charge of ^e currents excited near the centre is resisted at 
the part towards the edge in consequence of the want of con* 
ducting matter : so that instead of having the regular forms 
represented in figs. 7 and 8, they will, as in fig. 10, be arrested 
and directed in their course towards the circumference, whilst 
they will have ail the room necessary for their motion in those 
places where they are directed towards the centre. That alone 
would cause that the point of greatest force would be a little 
nearer llie centre than the projection of the axis of the mag- 
netic pole, and would assist in placing the pole in the position 
2, fig. 8. I have such confidence in this opinion, that though 
I have not had the opportunity of making the experiment my- 
self, I venture to predict, that if instead of using a revolving 
disc, a band or plate of metal 5 or 6 inches wide, as A, B, C, 
fig. llf were moved in a rectilinear direction according to the 
arrow under a magnetic pole placed at a, the pole would tend 
to move forward with the plate as before^ but not to the right 
or left; whereas if the pole were placed above the point 6, it 
would also tend towards the border A B ; or if it were placed 
over c it would tend to move towards the border C D. 



Digitized by Google 



188 Fandty'i kiiir t0 iL G^^Iiuifac [Die. 

Htmng Ihui leplied to th« question of What odiw hypo- 
ibetes/* &o, pat by the authore of the mteoive el p* 888^ 
I may now conthme the eiewlnatfon of the mfooiie. At p. 894 
the error relative to the nature of the currents (i . e. their 8up» 

posed inversion) is repeated : such inversion is the case with a 
helix and some other forms of apparatus ; but the simple and 
elementary current produced by the motion of a wire before a 
magnetic pole if not reversed as the wire recedes (F« Hit 

At page 896 it is supposed that when the rotation is slow 
the revolution of the currents is eireunserihed in snaU limits* 
and there is iiUls to aid to the results which hava served as a 

foundation to the whole of the (our) theory.'* But when the 

motion is rapid the currents envelope the whole disc, " so as to 
become a kind of labyrinth." For my part, I believe that the 
currents have the same general direction which I have given 
already in the figures, whether the rotation be slow or rapid, 
and that the only difference is an augmentation of £»roe with 
increase of velocity. 

A condition is then chosen (in the mteoire)» reslly simplef 
though it appears at first complicated* that* where the opposila 
poles are placed over a plata so as to be in the same diameter^ 
but on opposite sides of the centre. This condition, with the 
direction of revolution, and the currents produced, is found in 
fig. 7 of the m^moire of the Italian philosophers* It is not 
necessary to quote pp. 296, 297, which explains this figure, 
but 1 will give my figure 12, which accords with my views ami 
experiments, and which so far corresponds with the format 
figure that the two may be compared with each other. It is ^mff 
satisfactory to me to find that in this part of the vntmok^t aa 
wen as in the firsti I do not find a single important ezperf. 
mental result adverse to the views whidi I have published, 
though I am very far from adopting the couclugion^ drawn 
from them. 

If we examine fig. 12 we shall see that it results in the simplest 
possible manner from the use of two contrsry poles i thus as 
to the upper or north pole only, the currents are es in fig* & 
But as with this pole the current produced by it goes from the 
circumference towards the centve« so with the south pole in the 
same ora correspondmg position the currents will goftom Ibe 



Digitized by Google 



18K] 



MQtre to lh« wrcumfmno^ (F. 100.)» nnd conieqiieBtly im 
tg* Ifi tb«y will oQQliBiie along tbe diuneter N 8> acroai tbf 
iOBtfa of tho itivoWing plate, to return in the direction of tho 
arrowi at the sides £ O. The points where I do not agree 
with the indications of the galvanometer obtained by MM. 
Nobili and Antinori are, first, the direction of the currents in 
N and in S, which with them are contrary to those which 1 
obtain ; and secondly, the existence of an oblique axis of power^ 
as at P Q of their figure 7, 

The nemoire finishes, as far as I am concerned, at p* in 
again speaking of the error (but not as an error) relatiTO to the 
l^olying 4isc becoming a new elecirieal maekh^t At the com- 
mencement the authors, but little acquainted with the principles 
under the influence of which such a result is obtained, deny 
it and though they here say further, ** What shall we say 
** after all the new observations which we have made during 
f< the continuation of our researches I am still in no degree 
moved to alter anything that I have published : on the contrary^ 
I have more confidence than before in it ; since if their conclu* 
slons had been in accordance with the results I had arrived at, 
I should have had great reason, after the examination I have 
|ust made, to fear that my own views were erroneous. 

I cannot terminate this letter without again expressing the 
regret I feel in having been obliged to write it : but if it be re- 
membered that the memoires of the Italian philosophers were 
written and pubUshed eifter my original papers ; that their last 
writing has appeared in the same Number of the Annates de 
ChkmM et de Physique with mine ; and that consequently they 
bave the appearance of carrying science beyond that which I 
bad myself done ; that both their papers accuse me of errora 
in experiment and theory and, beyond that, of good faith ; that 
the last of these writings bears the date of March, and has not 
been followed by any correction or retraction on the part of 
the authors, though we are now in December ; and that I sent 
them several months ago (at the time when I sent to you and 
othev persons) copies of my original papers, and also copies of 
notes on a translation of (heir first paper ^ ; aud if it be remeni"' 
bared that efk^ all I have none of those errors to answer for 

' See page 1§4, &o. 



Digitized by Google 



1300 Dillifegimm^magneio-^leeirhefeetif [Apk. 1831^ 



with which they reproach me ; and that the mdmoires of these 
genUemen are so worded that 1 was constrained to reply to the 
otjectioni they made against me ; I hope thai no person witt 
say that I have been too hasty to write that which might have 
been avoided ; or that I shonlil hare shown my respeet for the 
truth or rendered justice to my own writings and this branch 
of science, if, knowing of such important errors, I had not 
pointed them out. 

1 am^ my dear Six, yours very faithfully, 

M. Fa&aday. 



New Experiments relative to the Action of Magnetism on 
Electro-dt/namic Spirals, and a Description of a new Elec- 
tro-motive Battery, By Signor Salvatore Dal Negao ; 
tM/A Nates by Michael Faraday, FJLS^ 

[Addressed to Dr. Ambrogio Fusinieri, Director of the AmmU 

delle iScienxe, SfC. ^c] 

Sir, 

On repeating the experiments relative to the action of ter- 
restrial magnetism on electro -dynamic spirals, an action which 
was first observed^ by the two illustrious ItaUan philosophers 
Nobili and Antinori, it occurred to me to examine the effect of 
an ordinary magnet on similar spirals at the moment when one 
of the poles traversed the asds of the spiral {Exp. Res. 41. 
114.), and I obtained such results as indicated the path which 
it would be proper for me to follow, in order to profit by this 
new property of magnetism. Ultimately I succeeded in con- 
structing a new electrometer, by means of which the efficacy of 
the instantaneous currents discovered by the celebrated Fara* 
day may be augmented without limit, and obtained in suoces- 

1 Lond. and Bdinb. FUL Mag., 1 832, vol. i. p. 45. That date wMeh at lha 
top of lliesa pages is on tha laft-hand is dia date of dia Italian paper, diat on 
iha rig^iMiaad Is tiia date of my notea.— M. F. 

* [This ii an enor. Aloogaeetionisdevotadtotainatrialm^inato-alaetria 
induetum in my original rasearches (140 to 192) of Aa date of Deeambar 21, 
1S81, Aa'my brief letter to M. Hachette is continually taken instead of my 
memoin ae representing ray views of magnetoi«leetrioi<y, I venture to add a 
few notes and references to this paper, in the same manner as I have dona to 
the paper by Signori Nobili and AntintHn, at 401, of the lait ▼(^nma of 
the f bil Mag. and AnnaU.— M. f .] 



Digitized by Google 



JUI.Y 18S2.] witk Noiet by Mr. Faraday. 



aioii with such celerity as to render (as it were) continual the 
action of these currents \ He [Dr. Fnsinieri] has already wit- 
nessed the principal part of these my ezperiments, and more 
than once has been so good as to assist me iaithfiilly in regis- 
tering the results, and has sohdted a description that might be 
made public. I did not hesitate to make a brief exposition 
that might be transmitted and inserted in the forthcoming 
number of his Journal. He returned from us as quickly as 
possible, and did not forget to take with him the magnet I had 
promised. 

His most affectionate friend, 

Mm, April 20, 1832. SaIiYATORB DaL NboRO. 

New BxperimefUs, ^c. 

1. Place a cylindrical tube of paper surrounded by a spiral 
of silk-coTered copper wire upright upon a tittle table, and 
connect ihe extremities of the spiral with a very sensible gal- 
vanometer, constructed according to the method of Signer No- 
bili : introduce the north pole of an ordinary horse-shoe mag- 
net into the axis of the cylinder, and an electric current will be 
obtained, which will act strongly on the galvanometer. (Exp, 
Res. 39. 147.) On withdrawing the pole of the magnet, a cur- 
rent, in the contrary direction, will be obtained {Exp, Res, 39,), 
On repeating the experiment with the south pole, currents will 
be manifested in the contrary direction {E^. Res, 114. &c.) to 
those caused by ihe north pole^ and less powerfulj as has been 
observed. 

SL Introduce into the same spiral the north pole of a more 
powerfo] magnet than the first, and the conflict will produce 
a much greater effect ; I say, ** conflict," because the pheno- 
mena in question obey the laws of the coUisions of solids. 
The magnetism of rotation discovered by the celebrated Araga 
has already shown what influence motion has in these pheno- 
mena. Then slowly moving the magnet, it may be introduced 
and removed from the spiral without causing any sensible cur- 
rent. To obtain the maTimnm effect, it ,is necessary that the 

P I hive damibed at kngth a different but perfect way of obtaming a con* 
tinuous current by migiMto-eleetrio indndioo. Rit* 90. 154^ 166. 150. 



Digitized by Google 



fM Dal Negvo mimagmh'^ktirk i/f^: [An. im. 



magnetic pole should make its entranoe «» oxit with gfp»t ?«• 

Im^. (Ewp. iu$. \m. m. m) 

S* Inteodim at th« same time the pol#a of tka mifnat inli 
two oqual ipiiabf haying the tame diroctioii, and two coatwy 
ourrtnta will he obtained, which would destroy each other if 
the poles of the magnet were of equal strength. But as the 
north pole is in our latitudes more active than the south, the 
effect obtained will equal the difterence of the two currents, 
and be in the direction of the greater force ; ewtly M b«i^ 
pens in the collision of solida* It results from this my experii 
ment, that henceforth we may aseertain at once with fscili^ 
which is the most powerful of two magnets* and how omeh 
more actiye the north pole is than the opposite south pole of 
the same magnet'; 

4. In order to take advantage at the same moment of both 
the poles of the same magnet, construct two spirals turning in 
opposite directions, and place them as usual in connection with 
the galvanometer. Then on introducing the poles of the mag- 
nets, an effect will be obtainedj equal to the sum of those whi^ 
could be produced by the poles separately. To measure the 
e£foct pr«>duced by thfse two spirals with a more powerfyl 
magnet thw the ftrstj I was obliged to use a galvanomoter of 
only one*twentieth the sensibility of the first. 

5. I immediately perceived that this pair of spirals was a 
valuable element capable of furnishing a mode of augmenting 
without liqiit (he efficacy of the instantaneous currents. { 

\^ The stateinent that the north pole is in our latitudes more powerful than 
the south is a mistake. The cause of tlie effects obtained by Signor Negro 
will be found at (147) of my Exp. Research., and is dependent on the induce 
tive force of the earth, as a magnet, upon other magnets, as well as upon soft 
iron. When a straight magnet is held in the dip, or even vertically with its 
marked pole downwards, both poles arc strengthened; when held with it« 
unmarked pole downwards, both poles are weakened. And though when a 
borse-shoe magnet is held with both |)oles downwards, a^ in Signor Negro's 
experiment, the marked pole it stronger thtn the unmarked one, it is only be- 
eaiisothe two Umlw art afteted as the single magnets just refened to^ and &• 
Wid of die iBtgBot being the upper partbeoonut virtnaUy a fioble eottih 
If the horse-shoe magnet bo held with ita poles upwards, then the oontiaiy 
iibit hiq^MM, and <M uiwuvM iimnXtg Mllid di« imi^ pdii b«np9a the 
flMngir) fw if betik poles are in fiul vtlatiMi t9 4f PWgPfyQ ilqb tbiii Ml 
axe equally atfongv— M J*.] 



Digitized by Google 



HkMfm mUMkAy constructed • HwnA pair of ipirtlt tyial to 
fifil, and putting both in connaotioB with tha gtlnnmnettv. 
I oauftd two magnet* to enter them oontemperaMMmly* and 
obtained an eflSNil due lo the anm of both imir of spiralt. On 

using still more powerful magnets, even the second galvano** 
meter became useless. The galvanometer which I substituted 
consists of a rhomboidal needloi about five Paris inches in 
length, and suspended as in the ordinary compass. The wire 
which eonnecte the extremitieg of the apirals passes beneath 
tht needle diitant about lines, and ia parallel to it when the 
latter is at rest; on obtaining thia fortunate reiult I eoBCeiTed 
tb« idea of c^trucUng a battery of aeviial aagiefti pot m 
eonfliet with an ^qiial number of piun of apirebi 

Cimstructkm of a new Eleetr<MnoHve Battery, 

6. I had at command only four magnets* so that for the pre* 
sent I am limited in my construction to four pairs of aplrala^ 
aa in the manner following : On a little table is placed one after 
the other four pairs of spiratss with the axes horizontal^ and so 
that the perimetere of the cylinders shall have the same hori- 
zontal line as a common tangent, it being parallel to one of tbf 
sides of the table. On a second table contiguous to the ^rst, 
but not in contact, was placed a little carriage consisting of a 
rectangular table supported on four wheels, by means of which 
it could easily receive a motion to and fro. The four magnets 
were placed upon this carriage, so that the poles of each could 
move hoiiiontally towards the pairs of spirals, and enter within 
dwm. 

The magnets were firmly fixed on the carriage so as not to 
^Iter In position, and the latter was so arranged as to move to and 

fipo only in one dfreetion. On moving the oarrlage, the limbs of 
the magnets passed at once into all the spirals, and they could 
be made to enter or move out with the utmost facility, and with 
any required velocity. 

That the battery thus disposed may give an electric current 
equal in force to the sum of all the currents excited in the pairs 
of spirals, it is necessary that all the spirals turning to the 
right should communioate with each other, that they may form 
• single metallic wiro. The same must he done with all Aose 
turning to the left. Then these wires are to be connected in 



Digitized by Google 



MM OmtkemagnetO'^deeiHeipmrk. 



[Oer. 



ihe ttiual weU-known mumer with a galvanomelery which we 
may rappote phoed on a third litlile table, so ht dlstaiit fiom 
the magnets tibat it may not be inflnemsed by iheir presence. 
Although these electric currents are only obtsined of instan- 
taneous duration naturally, nevertheless with my battery they 
may be excited successively with such celerity as to produce 
an action, which is as it were continuous From the little I 
have done, and from what I have said, it follows that being 
able by this method to sum up the simultaneous action of an 
indefinite number of electric currents^ this my battery may be- 
come fiilminatmg. 

I hope I haye said enough to enable my readers to com- 
prehend the mode of constructing this ekctaro-motiTe battery. 
Hereafter, and by the help of a figure, I will describe the most 
useful and convenient distribution of the elementary pairs, and 
the mode of obtaining the maximum effect when employing the 
smallest possible number of elements, or of pairs of spirals* 



On the Magneto-electric Spark and Shock, and on a peculiar 
Condition of Electric and Magneto-^lectric Induction^, 

To Richard PhilUps, Esq., %c. 

My dear Sir, 

If you think well of the following facts and reasoning, you 
will, perhaps, favour them with a place in the PhilosopUcal 
Magazine. 

When I first obtained the magneto-electric spark^ it was by 
the use of a secondary magnet, rendered for the time actiye by 
a principal one ; and this has always, as far as I am aware, 

been the general arrangement. My principal was an electro- 
magnet ; Nobili's was, I believe, an ordinary magnet ; others 
have used the natural magnet, but in all cases the secondary 
magnet was a piece of soft iron. 

1 [See the note at page 201.— M.F.] 
s Lond. and Ellin. FhiL Mag. 1834, vol. v. p. 349. 
> Flulotopliical Tnnaaetiona, 1882, p. 132. [See also FbiL Mag. and Annab, 
N«S. voL zi. p. 401, &e.-*Ei>iT.] 



Digitized by Google 



The spark is never the electricity of the principal, or even 
of the secondary magnet. The power in the first induces a 
OcymBponding power in the second^ and that induces a motion 
of the electricify in the wire round the latter^ which electricity 
produces the spark* It seemed to me, however, no diflicult 
matter to dispense with the secondary or temporary magnet, 
and thus approach a step nearer to the original one ; and this 
was easily accomplished in the following manner. About 20 
feet of silked copper wire were made into a short ring helix, 
on one end of a pasteboard tube, through which a cylindrical 
magnet, an inch in diameter, could move freely ; one end of the 
helix wire was fastened to a small amalgamated copper plate, 
and the other end bent round so as to touch this plate perpen- 
dicularly upon its flat surfiue, and also in such a manner that 
when the magnet was passed through the cylinder it should 
come against this wire, and separate the end from contact with 
the plate. The consequence was that whenever this action 
was quickly performed, the magneto-electric spark appeared at 
the place of disjunction. « 

My apparatus was placed horiaontally, and a short loose 
plug of wood was put into the 
end of the cylinder, so that the 
di^unction at die plate should 
take place at the moment the 
end of the magnet was passing 
through the helix ring, that be- 
ing the most favourable condition of the apparatus. The mag- 
net was driven with a sharp quick motion through the cylin- 
der, its impetus being overcome, as soon as the spark was ob- 
tained, by an obstacle placed at a proper distance on die out- 
side of the moveable wire. fVom die brightness and appear^ 
ance of the spark, I have no doubt that if both ends of a 
horse-shoe magnet were employed, and a jogging motion were 
communicated to the light frame carrying the helices, a spark 
equal, if not superior, to those which down to this time have been 
obtained with magnets of a certain power, would be produced. 

Thus the magneto-electric «park has been brought one step, 
nearer to the excidng magnet* The much more important 
matter still remains to be eflSseted of lendermg that electricity 




Digitized by Google 



806 Mugmkh9keiHo §park. [OoT« 

which h in the magnet itself, and gites it power, efident under 
the form of the apark. 

The neit point to which I wish to dfareet your attentioa ii 
tile magneio^ledrie ikoei. Thia eflfect 1 have foil prodtteed 
by Mr. WOliam Jenkina in a manner ihat waa new to me ; and 
as he does not intend to work out the result any further, but haa 
given me leave, through Mr. Newman, to make it known to 
you, I think the sooner it is published the better. Mr. Jenkins's 
apparatus consists of a helix cylinder formed of copper wire in 
the usual manner. An iron rod, about 2 feet long and half an 
inch in diameter, can he passed at pleasure into the centra 
of thb cylinder. The helLc conaista of three lengths of wiroi 
(which, bowem, might as well be replaced by one thick wire,) 
tile afanilar ends of which are aoldered to two tiiicker cermlnal 
wires, and on these are soldered also two short copper cylindersi 
to be held in the hand and give extensive contact. The electro- 
motor was a single pair of plates, exposing, perhaps, 3 square 
feet of surface on both sides of the zinc plate. On holding the 
two copper handles tightly in the liands, previously moistened 
with brine, and then alternately making and iMreaking the con* 
tact of the ends of the helix with the electro-motor, there waa A 
conaiderable electric ahock felt in the latter caae><«#» on breaking 
contact, proyided the iron rod were in tiie beUx ; but none 
either on making or breaking contact when the latter was away. 

This effect appears very singular at first, in consequence of 
its seeming to be the shock of the electricity of a single pair of 
plates. But in reality it is not so* The shock is not due to 
the electricity set in motion (through the body) by the plates, 
but to a current in the rcTerae direction, induced by the soft 
iron electro*magnel at the moment when, from the cesaatiOB 
•f the original current, it loaea its power* It ia, howeter, very 
intareatiBg tbua to obaerve an original current of eleotricityi 
baTing a ^ry low intenaity, producmg ultimately a counter 
(second) current having an intensity probably a hundredfold 
greater than its own, and the experiment constitutes one of 
the very few modes we have at command of converting quan- 
tity into intensity as respects electricity in currents. 

It has been generally supposed that the electric spark pro* 
dttaibU by a aiiif la pair of plates can only be obtained upon 



Digitized by Google 



16M.] 



Weakiiig eontact; but diis> m I lui?e shown in die Elghtli 
GMei of my Exparimtntal ReteAfohM« is tn «rfor« «nd a nsij 
uupottnit one ai tegardt the theory of voltaic eleetrieity ^ ; it is, 

however, true that the spark upon breaking contact can be very 
greatly exalted by circumstances having no such effect upon 
that produced at the moment of making contact. 

Every experimenter on electro-magnetism is aware, that 
when the current from a tingle pair of plates is passed through 
a helix etirrounding a piece of soft iron (to {Mroduce an eleo« 
tifOHBAgnety) the tpark} upon breaking contaet» la much 
brighter Aan if the soft iron were away $ and because this eiftet 
occurs at the same moment with the shock in Mr* Jenkins's CK* 
feriment, it might at first be supposed that the electricity pro^ 
ducing both the spark and the shock was the same, and that 
the effects of both were increased, because of the increase in 
power of this their common cause. But the fact is not so, for 
the electricity producing the spark is passing in one direction, 
being that which the einc plate and acid determine, whilst the 
electricity producing the shock is circulating in the contrary way» 

From the appearance of the spark, which is alw4ye in iMt 
form of the experiment due to the electrioi^ which ia passing 
At the moment when contact is brokeui it might seem that n 
greater current of electricity is circulating during the time that 
the contact is preserved, whilst the iron is present in the helix, 
than when it is away. But this is not the case ; for when the 
quantity is measured by a very delicate galvanometer, it is 
found to remain unchanged after the removal or replacement 
of the iron, and to depend entirely upon the action at the xino 
pkte» StiU the appearance of the spark is an evident and de* 
cisi?e proo( that the electrietty which is passing at the moment 
of disjunction is of greater intensify when the iron ia in the heliit 
than when it is away, and this increased %&tci is etidently 
dependent, not upon any change in the state of things at the 
source of the electricity, but in a change of the condition of 
the conducting wire caused by the presence of the soft iron. 
I do not suppose that this change is directly connected with 
the magnetiaing power of the current over the irotti but ia due 
rather to the power of the iron after it becomes a magnet, to 

' See this correeltd, p. 6 of the preface of the firtt volume of these Researches 
and papers; and as to the whole paper see £zp. Rm» lD4e,&e»'^MkFk Jho* 



Digitized by Google 



SeffMmfihe aeUrn^ qf a emrmU. [Oct. 



react upon the wire ; and I have no doubt^ though I have not 
had time to make the experiment^ that a magnet of very hard 
•teely of equal force with the soft bon magnet, if put mto the 
hetix m the same diiMaon^ would exert an equal Influence oyer 

the wire ^ 

I will now notice another circumstance, which has a similar 
influence in increasing the intensity of the spark which occurs 
when the junction of the circuit is broken. If a pair of zinc 
and copper plates unmersed in acid are connected by a short 
mte, and all precautions are taken to a?oid sources of inaccu- 
tfucff tfaeuy as I have already shown^ the sparky upon breaking 
contact, is not greater than that upon making contact. But 
if the connecting wire be much lengthened, then the spark 
upon breaking contact is much increased. Thus, a connecting 
copper wire of yV^h of an inch in diameter when \2 inches 
long, produced but a small spark with the same pair of plates 
which the moment before or after would give a large spark 
with a wire of the same diameter and 114 feet long. Again, 
12 inches in length of wire ^th of an inch in diameter gave a 
much smaller spark than SO feet of the same wire. 

In bodi diese cases, though the long wires gave the larger 
spark, yet it was the short wires which conducted the greatest 
quantity of electricity in the given time ; and that was very evi- 
dent in the one of small diameter, for the short length became 
quite hot from the quantity of electricity passing through 
it, whereas the longer wire remained cold. Still there can be 
no doubt that the sparks from the long wires were of greater 
intensity than those from the short wires, for they passed over, 
a greater interval of air ; and so the paradoxical result comes 
forth, that currento of electricity having the same common 
source, and passing the same quantity of electricity in the same 
time, can produce in this way sparks of very diflferent inten- 
sity. 

This effect, with regard to lengthened wires, might be ex- 
plained by assuming a species of momentum as being acquired 
by the electricity during its passage through the lengthened 
conductor, and it was this idea of momentum which guided 

^ See forward, p. 211. It does not do so, and for reasons very evident when 
ire oaoiider how nmbh kMthemagnelo-indiiettvt aetbnis emted upon haid 
iteel flisn 19011 soft Icoii (No?. 1848). 



Digitized by Google 



ISSi.] Se ff ituiu ethe adum of a eurreni. 



1309 



Signori Nobili and Antinori ia their process for obtaining 
the magneto-electric spark by means of a common magnet. 
Whether a current of electricity be considered as depending . 
upon the motion of a fluid of electricity or the passing of mere 
▼ibrations, still the essential idea of momentum might with 
propriety be retained. But it is evident that the similar effect 
produced by the soft iron of increasing the intensity of the 
spark cannot be explained in this way, s. e, by momentum ; and 
as it does not seem likely that the effects, which in these cases 
are identical, should have two causes, I helieve that both are 
produced in the same way, although the means employed are 
apparently so different. 

When the electric current passes through a wire, that wire 
becomes magnetic; and although the direction of the mag« 
netism is peculiar, and very different to that of the 'soft iron 
placed in the helix of the first experiments, yet the direction 
of the magnetic curves, both of the wire so magnetised and of 
the soft iron magnet, in relation to the course which the cur- 
rent is pursuing (i. e, in the conducting wire), is tlie same. If, 
therefore, we refer the increased spark to a peculiar effect of 
induction exerted by the magnetism over the passing electric 
current, all becomes consistent. Let us, for instance, for the 
sake of reference, represent the magnetism by the magnetic 
curves : then, in the first place, the longer the wire the greater 
the number of magnetic curves which can exert their inductive 
influence ; and the efiect in a wire of a hundred feet in length 
win be nearly a hundred times greater than in a wire of the 
same diameter only a foot in length. The reason why a core 
of soft iron produces the same effect as elongation of the wire, 
will be that it also brings magnetic curves into inductive action 
exactly in the same direction as those around the wire ; and the 
rest of the circumstances, as far as I can perceive, will accord 
with the cause assumed* 

That the magnetic curves of the wire carrying the current 
shall actually aflfect the character of the current which gives 
them origin, need not excite any difficulty, for thb branch of 
science shows many such cases* Ampere's experiment of revol« 
ving a magnet on its own axis, and the case which I have shown 
of drawing away electricity from the poles and equator of a 
magnet when it is revolved, are both instances of the same kind. 

VOL. II. P 



Digitized by Google 



210 Sel/'inductive action of a curreni» [No?. 

In conclusion, I wish to say that I ihink I see here some of 

those indications of an electro-tonic or peculiar state, of which 
I have expressed expectations in the second series of my Ex- 
perimental Researches, par. 242.^ ; for though I here speak of 
magnetism and magnetic curves for the sake of reference, yet 
allowing Amp^re*s theory of the magnet, all the effects may be 
viewed as effects of induction produced by electrical currents. 
Hence many extensions of the experiments. I have no doubt, 
for mstance, that if a long wire were arranged so as to dis- 
charge a single pair of plates, and the spark occurring at the 
breaking of contact were noted, and then another irire car- 
rying a current in the same direction from another electromo- 
tor, were placed parallel and close to but without touching the 
first, the spark obtained on breaking the contact at the first 
wire would be greater than before. This experiment can easily 
be made with a double helix ; but at my present distance from 
town I have no means of trying the experiment, or of examining 
more closely these indications*. 

I am, my dear Sir, very truly yours, 
Brighton, Oot 17, 1834. M* Faradat. 



AddUianal Observations respecting the Magnetihelectric 

Spark and Shock^, 

To Richard Phillips, Esq., F.R.S., ^c. 
My deae Sir, 

Like most things done in haste, my letter to you last month 
involves several errors, some from want of attention, others 
from want of knowledge. Will you do me the favour to print 
the present in correction of them ? 

The first error consists in supposing the electricity of the shock 
and the electricity of the spark (obtained at the moment of 
disjunction) are due to different currents, page 9Xfl (of this 
volume). They are, as I find by careftil experiments, due to the 

' Philosophical Transactions, 1832, p. 189. 

* See forward, p. 211. 

• Lond. and Edin. Phil. Mag. Dec. 1831, vol. v. p. 444. 



1884.] Reply to Dr. John Davy's Remarks. £11 

same cuxrentj namely, one produced by an inductive action at 
the moment when the current from the electromotor ceases. 

If at p. 206, line 28, after " set in motion " be inserted 
-** through the body;" and at line 33 for " counter" be read 
" second", and if tlie above statement be allowed to stand for 
that in page 207, this error will be corrected. 

The experimental results which 1 anticipated, page 208, 
lines 1 — 5, and page 210, lines 9 — 15, do not occur except 
under peculiar circumstanoesi and I am now aware why, for 
natural reasons, they should not. AU the effects, in fact, belong 
to the inductive action of currents of electricity described in 
the first section of the first series of my Experimental Re* 
searches. 1 have investigated them to a considerable extent, 
and find they lead to some exceedingly remarkable and novel 
consequences. I have still some points to verify, and shall 
then think it my duty to lay them (in continuation of my first 
paper) before the Royal Society ^ 

I am, my dear Sir, very truly yours. 

Royal Inidtntioii, Nov. 20, 1834. MlCHAEL FaRAOAT. 



Reply to Dr. John Davy's " Reniarks on certain Slatcjncnts of 
Mr. Faraday contained in his * Researches in ElectricityV '* 

To Richard Phillips, Esq* 

My dear Phillips, 
Tou know as well as most persons how great my dislike is to 
controversy, but you also know that upon some rare occasions 

I have been driven into it ; an occasion of this kind constrains 
me at present to ask a favour of you. On the 22nd of January 
of this year, two papers were read at the Royal Society, the 
first entitled " Remarks on certain Statements of Mr. Faraday 
contained in the Fourth and Fifth Series of his Experimental 
Researches ui Electricity," by Dr. Davy; the second, A Note 

^ This paper i« in the former volume as the NhUh Seriea of the Eiperimenfal 
Researehes, p. 322. 

s Lond. and Edmb. FhiU Mag. May 1835, vol. vn. pw 337. 

See Jameson's Edinbuigh New PhUosophieal Jonma], October 1835, p. 317- 
325. 

p2 



i^iyuizco by GoOglc 



tl2 Beply to Dr. Jolin Davy*8 Bemmrhi. [Jav. 



inieferenoetDthepMeediiigOlMemtioiii/'lisrnytel^^ These 
lihe Royal Society did not think fit to publish in the Philoso- 
phical Transactions, hnt the notice of ^e readmgs appears in 
the ' Proceedings* of the Society, No. 19, and in your Philo- 
sophical Magazine, April 1835, page 301. 

I now find that Dr. Davy has published his paper in the last 
number of the Edinburgh New Philosophical Journal, p. 317. 
I was in hopes that if that paper appeared in print mine might 
have immediately followed it; and meeting Dr*Davy in the 
Royal Institution in May last, asked him to do me the fAvovat 
to allow that to be the case : tliis, I presume for good reasons, 
(which, however, I do not understand,) he declined. I am 
thus placed in a difficult position ; for, however willing Pro- 
fessor Jameson, the learned Editor of the Edinburgh Journal, 
may be to act impartially, and give me the same opportunity of 
publication he has given Dr. Davy, he cannot do so before the 
lapse of three months. Under these circumstances, and with 
the old adage before my eyes that delays are dangerous,'* 
may I beg you to insert this letter and my paper in the next 
Number of the Philosophical Magazine ? and I may still, per- 
haps, be indebted to the kindness of Professor Jameson for its 
insertion in the next Number of the Journal in which Dr. Davy's 
'^Remarks** have appeared. 

I am, my dear Sir, most truly yours. 

Royal iDBtitution, Oct. 10, 1835. M. Fit&ADAY. 



. The secretary of the Royal Society having mentioned to me 
the preceding paper, I requested a sight of it, that I might as 
soon as possible correct any error in the papers to which it 
referred, and of which it might make me conscious ; and having 
read it, I am Induced to hope the present note may accompany 
Dr« Davy's observations. 

I do not know that I have any right to suppose Dr. Davy 
generally does not understand me in my papers, and yet some- 
thing of this kind must have occurred ; for instance, the new 
law of conduction referred to in my Fourth Series^ is not even 

\} An Abstract of Mr. Faraday's Fourth Series will be found in I«oad. and 
Edinb. Pltil. Mag., vol. iii. pp. 449, 450.— Edit.} 



18S5.] Reply to Dr. John Davy's Remarks. %U 



now evident to him, and therefore I llinik I cannot have erred 

in supposing Sir Humphry Davy unacquainted with it. The 
law is, that all substances decomposable by the pile are in the 
fluid state conductors, and in the soHd state non-conductors, of 
the electricity of the voltaic battery (393. 394. 404. 407. 413. 
505. 676. 679. 697«9 &c.^). The more careful examination of 
this law in other parts of my printed Researches shows that no 
bodies but electrolytes have this relation to heat and electricity^ 
the few c|3cceptions which seem to occur being probably only 
apparent (690* &c.^). That the title of lawt therefore, is me- 
rited ^ and that this law was not known to Sir Humphry Davy, 
are, I think, justifiable conclusions, notwithstanding Dr. Davy's 
remarks. As to Priestley's results with the electric machine» 
they really have nothing to do with the matter. 

I have said that Sir Humphry Davy spoke in general terms. 

The mode of action by which the effects take place is stated 
▼ery generally, so generally indeed that prolmbly a doasen 
predse schemes of electro*chemical action might be drawn 
up differing essentially from each other, yet all agreeing with 
the statement there given (48^.).*' In this and other parts 
of what I have written (4«83. 484.*), which Dr. Davy quotes, he 
thinks that I have been deficient in doing justice, or in stating 
Sir Humphry Davy's ** hypotheses" correctly. 

Dr. Davy for my word " general" substitutes " vagueness**, 
I used general in contradistinction to particular ^ and I fear 
tiiat vagueness cannot with propriety stand in the same rela* 
tion. I am sure that if Sir Humphry Davy were alive, Jie would 
approve of the word I have used ; for what is the case ? Nearly 
thirty years ago he put forth a general view of electro-chemical 
action, which, as a general view, has stood the test to this day; 
and I iiave had the high pleasure of seeing the Royal Society 
approve and print in its Transactions of last year, a laborious 
paper of mine in support and confirmation of that view (1834. 

\} The paragraphs here referred to belong to Mr. Faraday's Fourth and 
Seventh Series, and will be found reprinted in Loud, and £dinb. JPhil. Mag., 
vol. V. p. 166-169.— Edit.] 

These paragraphs belong to the Fifth Series, noticed in Lond. and £dinb« 
Phil. Mag., vol. iii. p. 460.— Edit.] 



i^iyuizco by GoOglc 



S14 



Eepip to Dr. John Davy's Eemarks* 



Part ii. page 448.^ £xp. Res. Series viiL). But that it ia not 
a particular account is shown^ not merely by the manner in 
which Sir Humphry Davy wrote^ but by the sense of hb ex* 
pressions* for, oi Dr. Daoy sayt^ " he attached to them no un- 
due importance, believing that our philosophical systems are 
very imperfect, and confident that they must change more or 
less with the advancement of knowledge^;" and what have I 
done but helped witii many others to advance what he began; 
to support what he founded ? 

That I am not the only onCf as Dr. Davy seems to think, 
who cannot make out the precise (or, I would rather say, the 
particular) meaning of Sir Humphry Davy in some parts of his 
papers may be shown by a reference to Dr. Turner's excellent 
Elements of Chemistry, where, at page 167 of the fifth edition, 
the author says : The views of Davy, both in his original 
essay and in his subsequent explanation (Philosophical Trans- 
actions 1826), were so (lencrally and ohscurchj expreb^ed that 
chemists have never luUy agreed, as to some points of the doc- 
trine, about his real meaning. If he meant that a particle of 
free oxygen or free chlorine is in a negatively excited state, 
then his opinion is contrary to the fact, that neither of these 
gases affect an electrometer/* &c. &c. Having similar feelings, 
I thought that I was doing Sir Humphry Davy far more justice 
$n considering his expressions as general, and not particular, 
except where they were evidently intended to be precise, as in 
the cases which I formerly quoted (483. 484.)^. 

Again, Dr. Davy says, *' \\ hat can be more clear than this ; 
that my brother did not consider water as essential to the for- 

[> See Lond. and Edinb. Fhil. Mag., vol. vi. p. 18] .—Edit.] 

3 Pbil. Trans. 1826, p. 390. Edinb. New Phil. Joum., Oct 1835, p. 323. 

' I may be allowed to quote in a note a passage from one of Mr. Prideaux's 

papers, of the date of March 1833; I was not aware of it wlicn I wrote in 
answer to Dr. Davy. Mr. Prideaux says, '* Sir Humphry Davy's theory assumes 
that * chemical and electrical attractions are produced by the same cause ; acting 
in one case on particles, in the other on masses : and the same property, under 
different modifications, is the cause of all the phenomena exhibited by dif- 
ferent voltaic combinations.' A view so comprehensive, embracing every mo- 
dification of*cbemical as well as electrical action, seems to include the other 
two« ami wwji on« iftof hu htm or earn be attempted on the mlject. But what 
it gains in extent it wants in distinctness." Lond. and Edinb. PhQ. Mag., 
to), ii. p. 215. 



18350 



Eeply to Dr. John Davy'a Mmarit^ 



mation of a Tolteic eombiiiation ?" &c. If tfait be so clear, how 
happens it that Mr. Brande, in the Uuit edition of his Maniial» 

vol. i. p. 97, says that " Sir Humphry Davy further remarks 
that there are no fluidsy except such as contain waterf which 
are capable of being made the medium of connexion between 
the metals of the voltaic apparatus ;" and Mr. Brande's obser- 
vation iSf ^* Thisy however, appears to me to admit of doubt*" i 
How happens it also that Dr. Ure, in giving his eloquent account 
of Sir Humphry Davy's cUscoveries', uses the very same words 
as those I have quoted from Mr. Brande, adding, It is probable 
that the power of water to receive double polarities and to 
evolve oxygen and hydrogen is neeessart^ to the constant ope- 
ration of the connected battery."? I ought, perhaps, rather to 
ask, How could Sir Humpiiry Davy use such words, and mean 
what Dr. Davy wishes to be considered as his meaning? Why, 
there can be no doubt that if I had proved that water was the 
only substance that could perform these duties^ Dr.Davy 
would haw claimed the dueweryfor his brother. 

As I cannot impute to Dr. Davy the mteniion qf doing tii- 
jusiicet the only conclusion I can come to is that the language 
of Sir Humphry Davy is obscure even to his brother^ who 
thinks it perfectly clear ; so obscure, indeed, as to leave on his 
mind the conviction of a meaning the very reverse of that which 
it bears to Mr. Brande and Dr. Ure. Thus Dr. Davy puts his 
seal to the truth of Dr. Turner^s observation^ by the very act 
of denying it. 

What makes the matter still more remarkable is, that Dr« 
Davy charges it upon me as a fault, that I, and / akme, have 
said what he denies in words, but proves in fact; whereas / 
have not iaid it, and others have. 

If Sir Humphry Davy's meaning is thus obscure to his brother, 
I have no right to expect that mine should have been rightly 
taken ; and therefore it is that I suspect, as I said before, that 
Dr. Davy generally does not understand me in my papers. 

That ** probably a dozen precise schemes of electro-chemical 
action might be drawn up" differing from each other, but all 
agredng with Sir Humphry Davy*s general statement, is no 
exaggeration. I have in the very paper which is the subject 

^ Chemical Dictionary, art, Electbicity. 
' And to that of Mr. Pfeidisiiz'i also. 



i^iyuizco by GoOglc 



216 Reply to Dr. John Davy's Bemarks. [Jan. ISSS. 



of Dr. Day/s remarks quoted six : L that of Grotihus, (481*) ; 
2. of Sir Humphry Davy himself (482.); ^* of Riffiiult and 
Chompr^ (485.) ; 4. of Biot (486.) ; 5. of De la Rive (489.) ; 

and 6. my own (518. &c.). These refer to modes of decom- 
position only ; but as I spoke in the passage above quoted of 
** electro-chemical action" in reference to chemical effects and 
their cause generally, I may now quote other particular views. 
Volta, Pfaffi Marianini, &c« consider the electricity of the vol- 
taic pile due to contact alone. Davy considered it as excited • 
by contact^ but continued by chemical action. WoUaston* De 
la Rive, Parrot, Pouillet, &c* considered it as of purely che- 
mical origin. Davy, I believe, considered the particles of 
matter as possessing an inherent electrical state to which their 
chemical properties were due ; but I am not sure of his meaning 
in this respect. Berzelius, according to Turner, views them as 
being naturally indifferent, but having a natural appetency to 
assume one state in preference to another ^ and Uiis appears 
to be the theory of M. Fechner also Again, electro-chenucal 
phenomena have been hypothetically referred to vibrations by 
Fictet, Savary, myself, and others. Now» all these views differ 
one from another ; and there are, I think, a dozen of them, and 
it is very likely that a dozen more exist in print if I knew where 
to look for them ; yet I have no doubt that if any one of those 
above could be proved by a sudden discovery to be the right 
one, it would be included by Dr. Davy, and, as far as I can 
perceive, by myself also, in Sir Humphry Davy*s general state* 
ment. What ground is therci therefore, for Dr. Davy's re- 
marks on this point? 

In reference to another part of Dr. Davy's observations I 
may remark, that I was by no means in the same relation as to 
scientific communication with Sir Humphry Davy after I be- 
came a fellow of the Royal Society in 1824, as before that 
period, and of this I presume Dr. Davy is aware. But if it 
had been otherwise, I do not see that 1 could have gone to a 
fitter source for information than to his printed papers. When- 
ever I have ventured to follow in the path which Sir Humphry 
Davy has trod, I have done so with respect and with the highest 
admiration of his talents, and nothing gave me more pleasure 

' Turner's Elements, Fifth Edit., p. 167. 

' Quarterly J oumal of Science, vol. zxvi. p. 428. 



L^iyiiizcu Oy Google 



Mar. 1886.] MagnHk rekaUmB of the metak. Wt 

in relation to my last published paper, the Eighth Series^ than 
lihe thought, that whiUt 1 waa helping to elucidate a MtUl ob* 
Mcure branch of science, I was able to support the iriews ad- 
yanced twenty-eight years ago, and for the first time, by our 
great philosopher. 

I have such extreme dislike to controversy that I shall not 
prolong these remarks, and regret much that I have been 
obliged to make them. I am not conscious of having been un- 
just to Sir Humphry Davy, to whom I am anxious to give all 
due honour ; but, on the other hand, I feel anxious lest Dr. 
Davy should inadvertently be doing injury to his brother by 
attaching a meaning, sometimes of particularity and sometimea 
of extension, to his words, which I am sure he would never 
himself have claimed, but which, on the contrary, I feel he has 
disavowed in saying that our philosophical systems are very 
imperfect," and in expressing his confidence that they must 
change more or less with the advancement of science," On 
. these points, however, neither Dr. Davy nor myself can now 
assume to be judges, since with respect to them he has made 
us both partisans. Dr. Davy has not made me aware of any- 
thing that I need change; and I am quite willing to leave the 
matter as it stands in the printed papers before scientific men, 
with only this request, which I am sure beforehand will be 
granted, that such parts of Sir Humphry Davy's papers and my 
own as relate to the subject in question, be considered both 
as to their letter and spirit before any conclusion be drawn. 
Royal Institutioiiy January 9, 1S35. 



On the general Magnetic Melations and Characters qf the 

MetalsK 

Gbneral views have long since led me to an opinion, which is 
probably also entertained by others, though I do not remember 
to have met/wtlhjt, that all the metals are magnetic in the 

same manner as iron, though not at common temperatures or 
under ordinary circumstances^ I do not refer to a feeble mag- 

> Lond. and Edinb. Pbil. Mag., 1836, vol. viU. p. 177. 

' It may be proper to remark, that the obsenrations made in par. 255 of my 
« Experimental Researches," have reference only to tbe three clanei of bodiei 
there defined at esdating at ordiaaiy tempentoret. 



i^iyuizco by GoOglc 



f 18 Oh ike general magneUe reia^cm [BiAR. 1886, 

neliimS uncertain in its existence and souroe, but to a distinct 
and decided power, such as that possessed by iron and nickel ; 
and my impression has been that there was a certain tempera- 
ture for each body, (well known in the case of iron,) beneath 

which it was magnetic, but above which it lost all power ; and 
that, further, there was some relation between this point of 
temperature, and the intensitij of magnetic force which the body 
when reduced beneath it could acquire. In this view iron and 
niekel were not considered as exceptions from the metals ge- 
nerally with regard to magnetism, any more than mercury could 
be considered as an exception horn this dass of bodies as to 
liquefiu^tion. 

I took occasion during the very cold weather of December 

last, to make some experiments on this point. Pieces of va- 
rious metals in their pure state were supported at the ends of 
fine platinum wires, and then cooled to a very low degree by 
the evaporation of sulphurous acid* They were then brought 
close to one end of one of the needles of a delicate astatic ar- 
rangement, and the magnetic state judged of by the absence or 
presence of attractive forces. The whole apparatus was in an 
atmosphere of about ^ Fahr. : the pieces of metal when tried 
were always far below the freewng-point of mercury, and as 
judged, generally at from G0° to 70*^ Fahr. below zero. 
The metals tried were, 

Arsenic, Lead, 
Antimony, Mercury, 
Bismuth, Palladium, 
Cadmium, Platinum, 
Cobalt, Silver, 
Chromium, Tin, 
Copper, Zinc, 
Gold, 

and also Plumbago ; but in none of these cases could 1 obtain 
the least indication of magnetism. 

Cobalt and chromium are said to be both magnetic metals. 
I cannot find that either of them is so, in its pure state, at any 
temperatures. When the property was present in specimens 
supposed to be pure, I have traced it to iron or nickel. . 

> Encyclop. Metrop. < Mixed Sdeneet,' foL i. p. 761. 



i^iyuizco by GoOglc 



Mab. 1896.] 



mud ekaraeters qf ike meidU* 



«19 



The 8tep which we can make downwacdt in temperature is^ 
howeverj so small as compared to the changes we can produce 
in the opposite direction^ that negative results of the kind here 
stated could scarcely be allowed to have much wdght in de- 
ciding the question under examination, although, unfortunately, 
they cut off all but two metals from actual comparison. Still, 
as the only experimental course left open, I proceeded to com- 
pare, roughly, iron and nickel with respect to the points of 
temperature at which they cease to be magnetic In this re* 
spect iron is well known ^. It loses all magnetic properties at 
an orange heat, and is then, to a magnet, just like a piece of 
copper, silver, or any other unmagnetic metaU It does not inter- 
cept the magnetic influence between a magnet and a piece of 
cold iron or a needle. If moved across magnetic curves, a 
magneto-electric current is produced within it exactly as in 
other cases. The point at which iron loses and gains its mag- 
netic force appears to be very definite, for the power comes on 
suddenly and fully in small masses by a small diminution of 
temperature, and as suddenly disappears upon a small elevap 
tion, at that degree. 

With nickel I found, as I expected, that the point at which it 
lost its magnetic relations was very much lower than with iron, 
but equally defined and distinct. If heated and then cooled, 
it remained unmagnetic long after it had fallen below a heat 
visible in the dark : and, in fact, almond oil can bear and com- 
municate that temperature wliich can render nickel indifferent 
to a magnet. By a few experiments with the thermometer it ap- 
peared that the demagnetizing temperature for nickel is near 
GS(f or 640°* A slight change about this point would either 
give or take away the full magnetic power of the metal 

Thus the ezperimentS5 as far as they go, justify the opinion 
advanced at the commencement of this paper, that all metals 
have similar magnetic relations, but that there is a certain 
temperature for each beneath which it is magnetic in the man- 
ner of iron or nickel, and above which it cannot exhibit this 
property. This magnetic capability, like volatility or fusibi- 
lity, must depend upon some peculiar relation or condition of 
the particles of the body ; and the striking difference between 

' See Barlow on the Magnetic Condition of Hot Iron. Phil. Trans., 1822, 
p. 117, &c. 



i^iyuizco by GoOglc 



MO On the general magtieiie relaium$ PICar* 

the necessary temperatures for iron and nickel appears to me 
to render it far more philosophical to allow that magnetic ca- 
pability is a general property of all metals, a certain tempera- 
ture being the essential condition for the development of this 
state, than to suppose that iron and nickel possess a physical pro- 
perty which is denied to all the other substances of the class. 

An opinion has been entertained with regard to iron, that 
the heat which takes away its magnetic property acts somehow 
within it and amongst its electrical currents (upon which the 
magnetism is considered as depending) as flame and heat of 
a similar intensity act upon conductors charged with ordinary 
electricity. The difference of temperature necessary for iron 
and nickel is against this opinion* and the view I take of the 
whole is still more strongly opposed to it. 

The close relation of electric and magnetic phenomena led 
me to think it probable, that the sudden change of condition 
with respect to the magnetism of iron and nickel at certain 
temperatures, might also affect, in some degree, their con- 
ducting power for electricity in its ordinary form ; but 1 could 
not| in such trials as I made, discover this to be the case with 
iron. At the same time, although sufficiently exact to indicate 
a great change in conduction, they were not delicate enough 
to render evident any small change ; which yet, if it occurred, 
might be of great importance in illustrating the peculiarity of 
magnetic action under these circumstances, and might even 
elucidate its general nature. 

Before concluding this short paper, I may describe a few 
results of magnetic action, which, though not directly con- 
cerned in the argument above, are connected generally with 
the subject ^ Wishing to know what relation that temperature 
which could take from a magnet its power over soft iron, had 
to that which could take from soft iron or steel its power rela- 
tive to a magnet, I gradually raised the temperature of a mag- 
net, and found that when scarcely at the boiling-point of al- 
mond oil it lost its polarity rather suddenly, and then acted 
with a magnet as cold soft iron : it required to be raised to a 
full orange heat before it lost its power as soft iron. Hence 
the force of the steel to retain that condition of its particles 

^ See on this luljeet, Christie oa Eflfeeti of Temperature^ &c FbiL Tram. 
1825ip.62,fte. 



i^iyuizcu by GoOglc 



Mab. 18960 



and eharaetert of the metali* 



which renders it a permanent magnet, giTCS way to heat at a 
&r lower temperature than 4hat which is necessary to prevent 
its particles assuming the same etate by the inductive action of 
a neighbouring magnet. Hence at one temperature its par- 
ticles can of themselves retain a permanent state; whilst at a 
higher temperature, that state, though it can be induced from 
without, will continue only as long as the inductive action lasts ; 
and at a still higher temperature all capability of assuming this 
condition is lost. 

The temperature at which polarity was destroyed appeared 
to vary with the hardness and condition of the steel. 

Fragments of loadstone of very high power were then ex- 
perimented with* These preserved their polarity at higher 
temperatures than the steel magnet; the heat of boiling oil was 
not sufficient to injure it. Just below visible ignition in the 
dark they lost their polarity, but from that to a temperature a 
little higher, being very dull ignition, they acted as soft iron 
would do, and then suddenly lost that power also. Thus the 
loadstone retained its polarity longer than the steel magnet, but 
lost its capability of becoming a magnet by induction much 
sooner. When magnetic polarity was given to it by contact with a 
magnet, it retained this power up to the same degree of tem- 
perature as that at which it held its first and natural magnetism* 

A very ingenious magnetizing process, in which electro- 
magnets and a high temperature are used, has been proposed 
lately by M. Aim^ ^ I am not acquainted with the actual re- 
sults of this process, but it would appear probable that the tem- 
perature which decides the existence of the polarity, and above 
which all seems at liberty in the bar, is that required. Hence 
probably it will be found that a white heat is not more advan- 
tageous in the process than a temperature just above or about 
that of boiling oil ; whilst the latter would be much more con* 
venient in practice. The only theoretical reason for com- 
mencing at high temperatures would be to include both the 
hardening and the polarizing d egrees in the same process ; but 
it appears doubtful whether these are so connected as to give 
any advantage in practice, however advantageous it may be to 
commence the process above the depolarizing temperature. 

Royal Institution, Jan. 27, 1836. 

^ Annalei de Cbimie et de FbydqiM^ tome Iviit p. 442. 



i^iyuizco by GoOglc 



Si2» On ike geiietta nmgneik r0ltti$<mi [July 1836. 



NoHee <tf ike Magnetic Action qf Manganece ai Law Tem^ 
perature9f ae $taied by M. Berthier^. 

To ikeEdUors qfihe Pkihsopkieal MagOMine andJommaL 

GfiNTLEMBN, 

The following fact, stated by M. Berthier, has great interest 
to me, in consequence of the views I have taken of the general 

magnetic relatioiib and characters of the metals. As you have 
done me the favour to publish these views in your Magazine ^, 
perhaps you will think the present note also worth a place in 
the next Number* 

Berthier» in his TraiU des Essais par la Vote S^che, tome L 
p* 632, has the following passage in his account of the physical 
properties of the metals : — Magnetism,— There are only three 
metals which are habitoally endowed with magnetic force: 
these are iron, cobalt, and nickel ; bui manganae alio poseeeeet 
it beneath a certain degree of temperature much below uero*** 
There is no reference to any account of this experimental re- 
sult, and it is therefore probable that M. Berthier himself has 
observed the fact, in which case it cannot be doubted ; but the 
result is so important, that any one possessing pure manganese 
who can verify the result and give an account of the degree of 
temperature at which the change takes place, will be doing a 
service to science. The great point will be to secure the|»0r* 
feet absence of iron or nickel from the manganese* With re- 
spect to cobalt, I have already stated that when pure, I cannot 
find it to possess magnetic properties at common or low tem- 
peratures. 

I am, Gentlemen, yours, &c., 
Royal Institution, June 17, lb36. M. Faraday. 

' Lond. and Edinb. Phil, ^^ag., 1830, vol. ix. p. Go. 

' See Loud, and Edinb. Phil. Mag., vol. viii. p. 177.— Edit, or p. 217. 



SfAR. 1889.] €md ekaraeters of the meiaii. fM 



On the general Magnetic Relations and Ckaraeters of the 

Metals,' Additional Facts^. 

Am idea that the metals would be all magnetic if made ex- 
tremely cold, as they are all non-magnetic if above a certain 
temperature, was put forth in Marcli 18;i()', and some experi- 
ments were madej in which several were cooled as low as —60° 
or —70° Fahr., but without acquiring magnetic powers. It 
was afterwards noticed^ that Berthier had said^ that beaidea 
iron^ cobalt, and nickel, manganese alio potsesses magnetic 
force beneath a certain degree of temperaturey much below zero, 
Havii^ bad last May the opportunity of working with M. Thi- 
lorier's beautiful apparatus for giving both the liquid and the 
solid state to carbonic add gas^ I was anxious to ascertain what 
the extvemely low temperature procurable by its means would 
effect with regard lo the magnetic powers of metals and other 
substances, especially with relation to nianganese and cobalt ; 
and not having seen any account of similar trials, I send the 
results to the Philosophical Magazine (if it please the Editors 
to insert them) as an appendix to the two former notices* 

The substances were cooled by immersion in the mixture of 
ether and solid carbonic acidt and moved either by platina 
wires attached to them, or by small wooden tongs, also cooled. 
The temperature, according to Thilorier, would be about llif* 
below (y* of Fahrenheit. The test of magnetic power was a 
double astatic needle, each of the two constituent needles being 
small and powerful, so that the whole system was very sensible 
to any substance capable of having magnetism induced in it 
when brought near one of the four poles. Great care was re- 
quired and was taken to avoid the effect of the downward cur- 
rent of air formed by the cooled body $ ver^ thin plates of mica 
being interposed in the most important cases. 

The following metals gave no indications of any magnetic 
power when thus cooled to —11^ Fahr. 

Antimony, Cadmium, 
Arsenic, Chromium, 
Bismuth^ Cobalt, 

» Lond. and Edinb. Phil. Mag., 1839, vol. xiv. p. 161. 

* Ibid. vol. viii. p. 177, or p. 217. * Ibid., vol. ix. p. 65, or p. 222. 



i^iyuizco by GoOglc 



ftSii Om the general magneHe rekdumt [Mar. 1839. 

Copper, Platinum, 

Gold* RhocUum, 

Lead, Silver, 

Mercury, Tin, 

Palladiam, Zinc. 
A piece of metallic manganese given to me by Mr, Ererett 
was very slightly magnetic and polar at common temperatures. 
It was not more inagiietic wlicn cooled to the lowest degree. 
Hence I believe the statement with regard to its acquiring such 
powers under such circumstances to be inaccurate. Upon very 
careful examination a trace of iron was found in the piece of 
metal, and to that I think the magnetic property which it pos- 
sessed must be attributed. 

I was very careful in ascertaining that pure cobaU did not 
become magnetic at the very low temperature produced. 

The native alloy of iridium and osmium, and also crystals 
of titanium, were found to be slightly magnetic at common tem- 
peratures ; I helieve because of the presence of iron in them^. 
Being cooled to the lowest degree they did not present any 
additional magnetic force, and therefore it may be concluded 
that iridium^ osmitim, and titanium may be added as non-mag- 
netic metals to the list already given. 

Carbon and the following metallic combinations were then 
experimented upon in a similar manner, but all the results were 
negative : not one of the bodies gave the least sign of Ae ac- 
quirement of magnetic power by the cold applied. 

1. Carbon. 12. Galena. 

2. Haematite. 13. Realgar. 
8. Protoxide of lead. 14. Orpiment. 

4. — — antimony. 15. Dense natiye cinnabar. 

5. ■ bismuth. 16. Sulphuret of silver. 

6. White arsenic. 17. — — copper. 

7. Native oxide of tin. 18. — — tin. 

8. • manganese. 19. bismuth. 

9. Chloride of silver. 20. antimony. 

10. —lead. ^1. Protosul. iron crystallized. 

11. Iodide of mercury. 22. ' anhydrous. 

[1 See Dr. WoUaston's paper on this subject, PbiU Tnuii. 1823, Part II., or 
Phil. Mag. Pint SeriM, vol. bdit. p. 15.— £otT.] 



JwNB 1836.] Sulphuret and Oxide qfAniinumy. 

The carbon was the dense hard kind obtained from gas re- 
torts; the substances 3. 4. o. G. 9. 10. 11. and some of the sul- 
phurets had been first fused and solidified ; and all the bodies 
were taken in the most sotid and dense state which they could 
acquire. 

It is perhaps superfluous to add^ except in reference to 
effects which have been supposed by some to occur in northern 
latitudes^ that the iron and nickel did not appear to suffer any 
abatement of their peculiar power when cooled to the very 
lowest degree. 

Boyal Institution, Feb. 7, 1839. 



On a supposed new Sulphuret and Oxide of Antimony^ m 

To ikeBdUore of the PkUoeqpkieal Mag€ut$ne and Joumah 

Gentlemen, 

In my Experimental Researches, paragraphs 693. 694. 695. 
696., I have, in relation to antimony, described what I con- 
sidered to be a new sulphuret, and expressed my belief that a 
new and true protoxide existed consisting of single propor- 
tions, " but could not stop to ascertain this matter strictly by 
analysis." Professor Rose when in London informed me that 
Berzelius objected to my new sulphuret, and I was induced to 
make more accurate experiments on that point, which showed 
me my error, and accorded generally with what Rose had de- 
scribed to me« I intended to publish these results in the first 
electric paper which I might have to put forth ; but my friend 
Mr« Solly has put into my hands a translation of Berselius's 
paper, and it is so clear and accurate as to the facts that I now 
prefer asking you to publish it, adding merely that my experi- 
ments quite agree with those described in it, as regards the 
sulphuret. With respect to the supposed chloride and oxide, 
I have not anywhere implied that I bad made quantitative ex- 
periments on them. 

^ Lond. and Edinb. Phil. Mag., 1836, vol. viiL p. 476. 
VOL. U. Q 



On a iuppos^ new [JuNfi 1836. 



On Faradai^s ntpposed Sulphuret of Antimony and Oxide of 
Antimony; by J. J. Dbrzelius.— JVom hu Jahresbericht/ 
No. 15. 

"Faraday has stated, that when sulpliuret of antimony is 
heated with more metalhc antimony, a new sulphuret of anti- 
mony is formedj which when in the fused state is distinguish- 
able from the common sulphuret. According to a few experi- 
ments, this sulphuret of antimony is composed of Sb or one 
atom of each element. When this sulphuret is dissolyed in 
muriatic acid, sulphuretted hydrogen is evolved, and although 
a little antimony is separated, yet there remains in solution a 
coiiiljiiiatiuii with chlorine SbCl, which when decomposed with 
carbonate of soda furnishes a new oxide. The mixing of this 
with the common oxide is said to have given rise to the contra- 
dictory views of its composition, and also to the appearance 
that tlie fused oxide of antimony is decomposed to a certain 
extent by the dectrio eurrent only until tba naw oxide ia re- 
duced. 

Faraday appears convinced of the truth of this statement, 
but adds that he has not confirmed by analysis the composi- 
tion of this oxide, because he should thereby have interrupted 
the course of his main experiments. 

*• This appeared to me to deserve a nearer investigation, as 
well for itself as for the importance of its influence on Fara- 
day's electro-chemical views. I have therefore repeated the 
above-described experiments of Faraday on the three new com- 
binations of antimony with sulphur, chlorine, and oxygen, and 
I have found that even if they do exist they cannot possibly 
be formed by the means which he has described, and they are 
therefore still to be discovered. 

** The following is the substance of my examination. I mixed 
together very carefully and intimately sulphuret of antimony 
and metallic antimony in the j)roportions that, through melting, 
the combination Sb + S must be formed: the mixture was then 
put into a glass tube : this was drawn out to a capillary endi 
the air was then expelled by heat, and the tube was hermeti- 
cally sealed. The tube was then placed in a vessel covered 
with sand, heat^ ta a full red-heat, and then suffered to cool 



slowly. When the mass was taken out there was at the bottom 
a reguhis, which contained 63 per cent, of the antimony which 
had been added after it had been separated from some ad- 
hering portions of sulphuret of antimony by boiling with a little 
muriatic acid. 

This had all the properties of pare antunony. Rubbed to 
powder and boiled with muriatic acid» it still evolved how- 
ever a little sulphuretted hydrogen and gave some antimony 
to the acid. The powder when thus boiled had lost per 
cent. 

" From all this it is evident that though the resulting sul- 
phuret of antimony contained more antimony after than before 
the process^ it is not the combination which Faraday thought 
it was. Even in the cleavage it bad not the appearance of a 
pure sulphuret of antimony. The upper portions had the same 
radiated structure as the common sulphuret of antimony^ and 
a lew larger crystals had shot up into the upper surface of the 
regulus, where they were surrounded with an irregular mass 
of a lighter colour. The upper and the lower portions of this 
so- formed antimony were each separately analysed, in such a 
manner that a weighed portion was put into muriatic acid and 
digested in it in the water-bath. The solution went on rapidly. 
From the lowermost portion crystals fell off one after another^ 
upon which the acid did not act. The same happened likewise 
with the uppermost portion^ only they were smaller and fewer 
in number. These insoluble parts when well boiled and washed • 
were from the lowermost 15 and from the uppermost 10 per 
cent. It proved to be pure metallic antimony formed in feathery 
crystals, and shows, therefore, the interesting fact that sul- 
phuret of antimony can dissolve at a high temperature 18} per 
cent, of metallic antimony, which when the solution is suftered 
to cool sufficiently slowly crystallizes out of the yet fluid sul- 
phuret of antimony before this latter solidifies. By a more 
rapid cooling the whole mass congeals together^ and the clea- 
▼age is then quite similar throughout. 

From what has been said it is quite evident that the mu* 
riatic acid takes up nothing but the common chloride of anti- 
mony. I have examined this behaviour further in detail, and 
thereby found, that by this method neither with water nor 
alkali is it possible to obtain any other oxide. 



i^iyuizco by GoOglc 



j%38 Sulphur et and Oxide of Antimony. [June 1 836* 

The aboTe-mentioned experiment of Faraday, that melted 

oxide of antimony is decomposed by the electric eurrenty clearly 
proves that the law proposed by him, that similar quantities of 
electricity always evolve equal chemical proportions, only holds 
good so long as the comparison is made between combinations 
of proportional composition. 

As for the cause of the appearance, that the decomposi- 
tion of the oxide of antimony becomes gradually weaker and 
weaker, and at last ceases, it is evident that Faraday has over- 
looked the drcumstance that the oxide is decomposed into 
metal at the negative conductor and antimonlous add at tiie 
positive conductor, which then soon becomes encrusted with 
a solid substance, after which the electricity could not have 
any further action. " 



With respect to Berzelius's objection in the last paragraph 
but one of his paper, I will ask you to reprint paragrapli 8^1. 
of my series. ** All these facts combine into, I think, an irre- 
sistible mass of evidence, proving the trutli of the important 
proposition which I at first laid down, namely, that the eke* 
tnieal power of a current of electricity is in direct proportion 
to the absoktte guantity of electricity which passes* (377. 783.) 
They prove too tiiat this is not merely true with one substance, 
as water, but generally with all electrolytic bodies ; and further 
that the results obtained with any one substance do not merely 
agree amongst themselves, but also with those obtained from 
other substanceSf the whole combining together into otie series 
of definite electro'chemical actions^ (505.) I do not mean to 
say that no exceptions will appear ; perhaps some may arise, 
especially amongst substances existing only by weak affinity: 
but I do not expect that any will seriously disturb the result 
announced* If, in the well-considered, well-examined, and I 
may surely say, well-ascertauied doctrines of the definite nature 
of ordinary chemical affinity, such exceptions occur, as they do 
in abundance, yet without being allowed to disturb our minds 
as to the general conclusion, they ought also to be allowed, if 
they should present tliemselves at this the opening of a new 
view of electro-chemical action; not being held up as obstruc- 
tions to those who may be engaged in rendering that view 



June 1836.] Reply to Dr. John Davy's RemarkM. 229 

more and more perfect, but laid aside for a while, in hopes that 
their perfect and consistent explanation will finally appear." 

With regard to my having overlooked the cause of the di- 
muitttion and cessation of voltaic action on the oxide of anti- 
mony, I do not know how that can well be said, for Benselias's 
statement seems in parts to be almost a copy of the reasons I 
have given: see paragraph 801. of the Seventh Series of my 
Researches. My explanation is actually referred to in the 
account of the action on the oxide of antimony at paragraph 
693., but by a misprint 802. has been stated instead of 801 K 

I am, Gentlemen, yours, &c. 

M. Fabaday. 



On the History of the Condensation of the Gases, in reply to 
Dr. Davy, introduced by some Remarks on that of Electro^ 
magnetic Rotation^. 

My dear Sir, Royal Institution, May 10, 183G. 

I HAVE just concluded looking over Dr. Davy's Life of his 
brother Sir Humphry Davy. In it, between pages 160 and 164 
of the second volume, the author Imks togeUier some account, 
with observations, of the discovery of electro-magnetic rota- 
tion, and that of the condensation of the gases, concluding at 
page 164> with these words : I am surprised that Mr. Fara- 
day has not come forward to do him [Sir Humphry Davy] 
justice. As I view the matter, it appears hardly less necessary 
to his own honest fame than his acknowledgement to Dr.Wol- 
laston, on the subject of the first idea of the rotary magnetic 
notion.** 

I regret that Dr. Davy by saying this has made that neces- 
sary which I did not before think so ; but I feel that I cannot 
after his observation indulge my earnest desire to be silent on 

the matter without incurring the risk of being charged with 
something opposed to an honest character. This I dare not 

* TUt reference is correctly made in Lond« and Edinb. Phil. Mag., vol. v. 
p. 170.f— Edit. 

* Lond. and Edinb. PhU. Mag. 1836, vol. im. p. 521. 



i^iyuizco by GoOglc 



230 Jieply to Dr. John Davy's Bemark*. [Junb 1836* 



risk ; but in answering for myself, I trust it will be understood 
that I have been driven unwillingly into utterance. 

Dr. Davy speaks of electro^magnetic rotation^ and so also 
must I, for the purpose of showing certain coincidenoes in dates, 
&o. between the latter part of that a£Ur and the eondensatioii 
of chlorine and die gases, ftc. CErsted's ei^erimente were 
published inThomson's Amials of ^ilosophy fbr October 18^, 
and from this, I believe, was derived the first knowledge of them 
which we had in this country. At all events it was the first in- 
timation Sir Humphry Davy and I had of them, for he brought 
down the Number into the laboratory on the morning of its 
appearance (October 1st) and we repeated the experiments to- 
gether. I may remark that this is a proof that Dr. Davy, in 
the Life^ as well as elsen^reS does not always understand 
the meaning of his brother's words* and I think that he would 
never have written the lines which have driven me to the pre^ 
sent and a former reply' if he had. 

Immediately upon G^Lrsted's great discovery, the subject was 
pursued earnestly, and various papers were written, amongst 
which is one by Sir Humphry Davy, Phil. Trans. 1821, page 7, 
read before the Royal Society November 16| 18^^, in which, 
at page 17, he describes the rolling of certain wires upon knifi^ 
edgesi being aiiraeted when the north pole of the magnet was 
presented under certmn conditions of current^ and repeUed 
under certain other conditions of current^ &c« 

Another paper was a brief statement by the Editor of the 
Quarterly Journal of Science, (Mr. Brande,) in which he an- 
nounces distinctly and clearly Dr. WoUaston's view of the na- 
ture of the electro-magnetic force, and its circumferential cha- 
racter. It is in the tenth volume, p. 363, and may be dated 
according to the number of the Journal, 1st January 1821. 

Then there are my historical sketches in the Annals of Phi- 
losophy» N.S», vols* ii. and iii» written in July, August^ and 
September 18^1, and the paper describing my discovery of the 
electro-magnetic rotation dated 11th September lBlSt\\ and 

» Vol. ii. p. 143. 

*Lond.snd Edinb.Fliil.Jifi^.» 1835, voL Til. p.340i or p. 816 of this vdmm. 
' Ibid. p. 337 ; or page 211 of thia volume. 

« Quarterly Jooratl ef Seienee^ vol. xiL p. 74; or page 187 «f tUs vohmie. 



J0MB 1686.1 ^ Dr« John Davy'a RmatJu. ISSi 



<>Cher9 ; but we will pass on to that of Sir Humphry Davy^ 
read eth March which with its comequenta la ^ynehro^ 

natu with afikir of the condenaation of gaaea« Thia ia ihe 
paper which Dr. Davy aaya he (Sir H. D.,) condudea by an 
act of jnatice to Dr. Wolhiaton, poindnif out how the discoTery 
of the rotations of the electro-magnetic wire round its axis by 
the approach of a magnet, realized by the ingenuity uf Mr. 
Faraday, had been anticipated, and even attempted byDr. Wol- 
laston in the laboratory of the Royal Institution*." 

I have elsewhere^ done full juatice to Dr. Wollaston on the 
point of electro-magnetic rotation, and have no deaire to lessen 
the force of anything I have aaid, but would rather exalt it* 
But as Dr. Davy has connected it with the condenaation of the 
gases, I muat ahow the continual tendency to error which haa 
occurred in both these matters. Dr. Davy, then, is in error 
when he says I realized Dr. Wollaston's expectation ; nor does 
Sir Humphry Davy say what his brother imputes to him. I 
did not realize the rotations of the electro-magnetic wire round 
ita axia ; that fact was discovered by M. Ampere, at a later 
date ; and even aflter I had discovered the rotation of the wire 
round the magnet aa a centrci and that of the magnet round 
the wire» I could not aucceed in cauaing the wire to revolve on 
ita own axia^* The reault which Wollaaton very philoaophically 
and beatttiliiUy deduced from hia principles^ and which he tried 
to obtain in the laboratory, was, that wires could be caused to 
roll, not by attraction and repulsion as had been eflectcd by 
Davy ^, but by a tangential action, according to the princii)les 
which had been already made known to the public as his (Dr« 
W.'s)by Mr. Brande«. 

What Sir Humphry Davy says in his printed paper ^ ia thia: 
^* I cannot with propriety condude without mentioning a cir^ 
cumatance in the hiatory of the progreaa of electro>*niagnetiam« 
which, though well known to many Fellowa of thia Society^ 
has, I believe, never been made public, namely, that we owe to 
the sagacity of Dr. Wollaston the first idea of the possibility 

1 Phil. Trans. 1823, p. 153. « Lifg^ vol. ii. p. IHO. 

* Quarterly Journal of Science, vol. xv. p. 288; or page 159 of thia voliune. 

* Ibid., vol. xii. p. 79 ; or page 131 of this volume. 

* Fliil. Trans. 1821, p. 17. ^ Quarterly Journal of Science, vol.x. p. 363. 
' Phfl. Tnm. 1823, p. 168. 



Beply to Dr. John Davy's Bmarki. [June 1896. 



of the rotations of the electro-magnetic wire round it* <$xis by 
the approach of a magnet \ and I witnessed early in 1821 an 
unsuccessfiil experiment which he made to produce the effect 
in the kboratory of the Royal Institution.*' This fiaper being 
zead on the 6th of March 18£S» was reported on the first of the 
Ibllowing month in the Annals of Philosophy, N.S.» voL t. 
p. 304 ; the reporter giving altogether a different sense to what 
is conveyed by Sir Humphry Davy's printed paper, and saying 
that " had not an experiment on the subject made by Dr. W. 
in the laboratory of the Royal Institution^ and witnessed by Sir 
Humphry^ failed^ merely through an accident which happened 
to the apparatus^ he would have been the diseoverer of thai 
phemmenonK*' 

I have an impression that this report of the paper was first 
made known to me by Sir Humphry Davy himself, but a fnend's 

recollection makes me doubtful on this point : however, Sir 
Humphry, when first he adverted to the subject, told me it was 
inaccurate and very unjust ; and advised me to draw up a contra- 
diction which the Editor should insert the next month. I drew 
up a short note, and submitting it to Sir Humphry he altered 
it and made it what it appears in the May Number of the 
Annals of Philosophy, N.S. vol. v. p. 891, as from the £ditor, 
aU the parts from but writing only '* to the end being Sir 
Humphry's; and I have the manuscript in hie hamd^writing 
mserted as an illustration into my copy of Paris's Life of Davy. 

The whole paragraph stands thus: " We endeavoured 
last month to give a full report of the important paper commu- 
nicated by the President to the Royal Society on the 5th [6th] 
of March ^ ; but writing only from memory, we have made two 
errors, one with respect to the rotation of the mercury not 
being stopped^ but produced, by the approximation of the mag- 
net ; the other in the historical paragraph in the conclusion, 
which, as we have stated it, is unjust to Mr. Faraday, and does 
not at all convey the sense of the author. We wish, therefore, 
to refer our readers forward to the original paper, when it shall 
be published, for the correction of these mistakes. — Edit.'^ 

* Injustice to the reporler, 1 have Mnight carefully at the Royal Society for 
the origitial manuscript, being the paper which he heard read; but it cannot be 
found in its place. 

' So far is miue \ the rest is Sir Humphry Davy's. 



Ju£i£ 1836.] Reply to Dr. John Davy's Remarks. 2SS 



From this collection of dates and documents any one may 
judge that I at all events was unjustly subject to some degree 
of annoyance, and they will be the more alive to this if they 
recollect that all these things were happeninig at the very time 
of the occurrence of the condensation of gases and its conse- 
quences, and during the time that my name was before the 
^SUnpX Sodety as a candidate for its fellowship. I do not be* 
licTC that any one was wittingly the cause of this state of things, 
but all seemed confusion, and generally to my disadvantage. 
For instance, this very paper of Sir Humphry Davy's which 
contains the " act of justice," as Dr. Davy calls it, is entitled, 
** On a new phenomenon of Electro-magnetism" Yet what is 
electro-magnetic was not new, but merely another form of my 
rotation; and the new phenomenon is purely electrical, being 
the same as that previously discovered by M. Ampere. As 
M. Ampere's result is described for the first time in a paper 
of the date of the 4th of September 182^S and Sir Humphry 
Davy's paper was read as soon after as the 6th of March 18^% 
the latter probably did not know of the result which the former 
had obtained. 

To conclude this matter : in consequence of these and other 
circumstances, and the simultaneous ones respecting the con- 
densation of chlorine, I wrote the historical statement^, to which 
Dr. Davy refers'*, in which, admitting everything that Dr. 
Wollaston had done, I claim and prove my right to the dis- 
covery of the rotations I had previously described* This paper 
before its publication I read with Dr. Wollaston ; he examined 
the proofs which I have adduced at p. £91 (page 161 of this 
volume), and after he had made a few alterations he brought it 
into the state in which it is printed, expressed his satisfaction 
at the arguments and his approval of the whole. The copy I 
have preserved, and I will now insert the most considerable 
and important of Dr. WoUaston's corrections as an illustration. 
At the end of tlie paragraph at the bottom of page 291 (page 
162 of this volume), I had expressed the sense thus : "But what 
I thought to be attraction and repulsion in August 18£1, Dr. 

> Ann. de Chim., 1 822, vol. xxi. p. 47. * i>}^i] Trans. 1 823, p. 153. 

• Quarterly Journal of Science, vol. xv. p. 288 j or page 169 of this volume. 
^ Life, vol. ii. p. 146, bottom of the page. 



i^iyuizco by GoOglc 



Schoenbein <m a peeuUar ConMum of Ir<m% [May 

Wollaston long before perceived to be an impulsion in one 
direction only, and upon that knowledge founded his expecte* 
tions.'* This he altered to : " But what I thought to be attrac« 
tion to and re pulsion /him lA^ wire in August ISiSli Dr. Wol* 
las ton long before perceived to arise ffom apomer nai dir^eM 
to at fnm ike whe, bni aeihg eiremitfermtiaUf t&mmi U «t 
tutU, and upon that knowledge founded his ezpectatton.** The 
parts in Italics are in his hand-writing. 

[The remainder of this letter regards the condensation of 
the gases, which as it has no connexion with electricity or mag- 
netism, I omit, with the exception of the concluding paragraph, 
which is as follows.] 

Believing that I have now said enough to preserve my own 
" honest fiune" from any injury it might have risked from ^ 
mistakes of Dr. Davy^ I willingly bring this letter to a close, and 
trust that I shall never again have to address yon on the subj ect. 

I am, my dear Sir, yours, &c* 
Richard Fhillips, Esq,, ^*c. ^c. M. Faraday* 



Oh a peeuUar Voltaic Condition of Iron, by Prt^essor Schobm* 
BBitfy tfBdiei inaLetter toMt. Faraday: wUhfwrth&rEs* 
permenU ofi the iame wbfeet, by Mr. Faradat» eomiiNiiit* 
caied m a Letter to Mr. PhilHps^ 

To Michael Faraday, D.CL., ^c. 

Sir, 

As our continental and particularly German periodicals are 

rather slow in pul^lishing scientific papers, and as 1 am anxious 
to make you as soon as possible acquainted witii some new 
electro-chemical phenomena lately observed by me, I take the 
liberty to state them to you by writing. Being tempted to do 
so only by scientific motives, I entertain the flattering hope that 
the contents of my letter will be received by you with kindness* 
The facts I am about laying before you seem to me not only to 
be new, but at the same time deserving the attention of chemical 
philosophers. Lee eoiei. 

If one of the ends of an iron wire be made red hot, and after 
^ I^nd. and Edinb. PhU. Mag., 1836, vol. ix» p. 5d* 



1^] 



tn m.LeHeur to Mr. Furtday. 



885 



cooling be immersed in nitric acid, sp. gr. 1*35, neither the 
end in question nor any other part of the wire will be affected^ 
whilst the acid of the aaid strength is well known to act rather 
▼ioleiitly upon common iron. To see how far the influence of 
the oxidiied end of the wire goes, I took an iron wire of M 
In length and 0^*5 in thickness, heated one of its ends about 
3" in length, immersed it in the acid of the strength above men- 
tioned, and afterwards put the oilier end into the same fluid. 
No action of the acid upon the iron took place. From a si- 
milar experiment made upon a cylindrical iron bar of 16' in 
length and ^'^ diameter the same result was obtained* The 
limits of this protecting influence of oxide of iron with regard 
to quantities I have not yet ascertained; but as to the influence 
<tf Heat, I found that above the temperature of about 75^ the 
acid acts in the common way upon iron, and ui the same manner 
also, at common temperatures, when the said acid contains 
water beyond a certain quantity, for instance, 1, 10, 100, and 
even 1000 times its volume. By immersing an iron wire in 
nitric acid of sp. gr. 1*5 it becomes Ukewise indifierent to the 
same acid of 1*35* 

But by fhr the most curious fact observed by me is, that any 
number of iron wires may be made indifferent to nitric acid by 
the following means* An iron wire with one of its ends ox- 
idized is made to touch another common iron wire; both 
are then introduced into nitric acid of sp. gr. 1*35, so as to 
immerse the oxidized end of the one wire first into the fluid, 
and have part of both wires above the level of the acid. 
Under these circumstances no chemical action upon the wires 
will take place, for the second wire is, of course, but a continua- 
tion of that provided with an oxidised end. But no action oc- 
curs, even after the wires have been separated from each other. 
If the second wire having become indiflbrent be now taken out 
of the acid and made to touch at any of its parts not having been 
immersed a third wire, and both again introduced into the 
acid so as to make that part of the second wire which had pre- 
viously been in the fluid enter first, neither of the wires will be 
acted upon either during their contact or after their separation* 
In this manner the third wire can make indifferent or passive 
a fourtti one, and so on. 



i^iyuizco by GoOglc 



2S6 8ehoeahem(mapeeuUarCkmdUiM [Mat 

Another fact, which has sls, yet, as far as I know, not been 
observed, is the following one. A wire made indifferent by 
any of the means before mentioned is immersed in nitric acid of 
sp. gr. 1 *35, so as to have a considerable part of it remaining 
out of the fluid ; another common wire is put into the same 
acid» likewise having one of its ends rising above the level of 
the fluid. The part immersed of this wire will, of course, be 
acted upon in a lively manner. If the ends of the wires which 
are out of the acid be now made to touch one another, the in- 
different wire will instantly be turned into an active one, what- 
ever may be the lengths of the parts of the wires not immersed. 
[If there is any instance of chemical affinity being transmitted 
in the form of a current by means of conducting bodies, I think 
the &ct just stated may be considered as such.] It is a matter 
of course that direct contact between the two wires in question 
is not an indispensably necessary condition for communicating 
chemical activity from the active wire to the passive one ; for 
any metal connecting the two ends of the wires renders the 
same service. 

Before passing to another subject, I must mention a fact, 
which seems to be one of some importance. An iron wire 
curved into a fork is made to touch at its bend, a wire provided 
with an oxidised end ; in this state of contact both are intro- 
duced mto nitric add of sp. gr. VS5 and so as first to im- 
mersein the add the oxidized end; the fork wiU, of course, 
not be aflected. If now a common iron wire be put into the 
acid, and one of the ends of the fork touched by it, this end w^ill 
immediately be acted upon, whilst the other end remains pas- 
sive ; but as soon as the iron wire with the oxidized end is put 
out of contact with the bend of the fork, its second end is also 
turned active. If the parts of the fork rising above the level 
of the acid be touched by an iron wire, part of which is im* 
mersed and active in the acid, no communication of chemical 
activity will take place, and both ends of the fork remain pas- 
sive ; but by the removal of the iron wire (with the oxidized 
end) from the bend of the fork this will be thrown into chemical 
action. 

As all the phenomena spoken of in the preceding lines are, 
no doubt, in some way or other dependent upon a peculiar 



1836.] 



in a Letter to Mr. Faraday. 



electrical state of the wires, I was very curious to see in what 
manner iron would be acted upon by nitric acid when used as 
an electrode. For this purpose I made use of that form of the 
]»le called the caurmme de* tasset, consisting of fifUen pairs of 
sine and copper. A platina wire was connected with (what we 
call) the negative pole of the pile, an iron wire with the positive 
one. The free end of the platina wire was first plunged into 
nitric acid sp. gr. 1*35, and by the free end of the iron wire 
the circuit closed. Under these circumstances the iron was not 
in the least affected by the acid ; and it remained indifferent 
to the fluid not only as long as the current was passing through 
it, but even after it had ceased to perform the function of the 
posltiye electrode. The iron wire proved, in fact, to be pos- 
sessed of all the properties of what we have called a passive 
one. If such a wire is made to touch the negative electrode, it 
instantaneously becomes an active one, and a nitrate of iron is 
formed ; whether it be separate from the positive pole or still 
connected with it, and the acid be strong or weak. 

But another phenomenon is dependent upon the passive state 
of the iron, which phenomenon is in direct contradiction with 
all the assertions hitherto made by philosophical experimenters. 
The oxygen at the anode arising from the decomposition of 
water contained in the acid, does not combine wiUi the iron 
serving as the electrode, but is evolved at it, just in the same 
manner as if it were platina, and to such a volume as to bear 
the ratio of 1 : 2 to the quantity of hydrogen evolved at the 
cathode. To obtain this result I made use of an acid con- 
taining 20 times its volume of water ; 1 found, however, that an 
acid containing 400 times its volume of water still shows the 
phenomenon in a very obvious manner. But I must repeat it, 
the indispensable condition for causing the evolution of the 
oxygen at the iron wire is to close the circuit exactly in the 
same manner as above mentioned. For if, exempli gratid, the 
circuit be closed with the negative platina wire, not one single 
bubble of oxygen gas makes its appearance at the positive iron ; 
neither is oxygen given out at it, when the circuit is closed, by 
plunging first one end of the iron wire into the nitric acid, and by 
afterwards putting its other end in connexion with the positive 
pole of the pile. In both cases a nitrate of iron is formed, even 



i^iyuizco by GoOglc 



2SS Schoenbein on a peculiar Omdiiian qf Iron. [Mat 

ill an acid containing 400 times its volume of water; which salt 
may be easily observed descending from the iron wire in the 
shape of brownish-yellow-coloured streaks. 

X have still to state the remarkable fact» that if the evolution 
of oxygen at the anode be ever so rapidly going on, and the 
iron wire made to touch the negative electrode within the mead, 
the disengagement of oxygen la discontinued* not only during 
the time of contact of the wires* but after the electrodes ha^e 
been separated from each other. A hw moments boldiRg the 
iron wire out of the acid is, however, sufHcient to recommunicate 
to it the property of letting oxygen gas evolve at its surface. 
By the same method the Avire acquires its evolving power again, 
whatever may have been the cause of its loss. The evolution 
of oxygen also takes place in dilute sulphuric and phospborie 
acidsi provided, however* the circuit be closed in the manner 
abovedescribed* It is worthy of remark* that the ditengagenenl 
of oxygen at the iron in the laat«nanied adds is much easier 
stopt, and much morediffieuH to be caused again, than is the case 
in nitric acid. In an aqueous solution of caustic potash, oxygen is 
evolved at the positive iron, in whatever manner the circuit may 
be closed ; but no sucli disengagement takes place in aqueous 
solutions of hydracids, chlorides* bromides* iodides* fluorides. 
The oxygen, resulting in these cases from the decomposition of 
water* and the anion (chlorine* bromine* &c.) of the other eke* 
troljte decomposed combine at the same time with the iron. 

To generalise these facts* it may be said* that independency * 
of the manner of closing the circuit, oxygen is always disen* 
gaged at the positive iron, provided the aqueous fluid in which 
it is immersed do not (in a sensible manner) chemically act upon 
it; and that no evolution of oxygen at the anode in contact 
with iron under any circumstances takes place* if besides oxygen 
another anion is set firee possessed of a strong affinity for iron. 
This metal having once had oxygen evolved at itself* proves 
always to be indifibrent to nitrie acid of a certain strength, 
whatever may he the chemical nature of the fluid in which the 
phenomenon lias taken place. 

I have made a series of experiments upon silver, copper, tin, 
lead, cadmium, bismuth, zinc, mercury, but none showed any 
resemblance to iron* for all of them were oxidized when serving 



la^.] Faraday on a ptetMar Comiiikm i^ lnm. ^ 



as positive electrodes. Having at this present moment neither 
cobalt nor nickel at my commaad^ I could not try tliese oiag- 
netic matals, which I strongly smpect to act in the same man* 
ner as iron does. 

It apjpears from what I have just stated that the anomalous 
bearing of the iron has nothing to do with its degree of affinity 
for oxygen, but must be founded upon something else. Your 
sagacity, which has already penetrated into so many mysteries 
of nature, will easily put away the veil which as yet covers the 
phenomenon stated in my letter, in case you should tliink it 
worth while to make it the object of your researches. 

Before I ^uish X asust beg of you the favour of overlooking 
with indulgence the many faults I have, no doubt, committed 
in my letter. Formerly I was tolerably well acquainted with 
your native tongue; but now, having been out of practice in 
vnntiKig4>r speaking it, it is rather hturd work to me to express 
myself in English. 

It is hardly necessary to say that you may privately or pub- 
licly make any use of the contents of this letter. 

I am^ Sir, your most obedient Servant, 

C. T. SCHOENBEIN, 
B&Ie, May 17, 1830. Frof. of Ch«m. in the University of B41e. 



Dear Phillips, 
The preceding letter from Professor Schoenbein^ which I re* 
eeived a week or two ago, contains facts of such interest in re- 
lation to the first principles of chemical electricity, that I think 
you will be glad to publish it in your Philosophical Magazine. 
I send it to you unaltered, except in a word or two here and 
there ; but am encouraged by what I consider the Professor's 
permission (or rather the request with whicii he has honoured 
me), to add a few results in confirmation of the effects de- 
scribed^ and illustrative of some conclusions that may be drawn 
from the ikcta. 

The influence of the oxidised iron wire, the transference of 
the inactive state from wire to wire, and the destruction of that 

state, are the facts I have principally verified ; but they are so 
well described by Professor Schoeiibein that 1 will not add a 
word to what he has said on these pointSi hut go at once to 
other results. 



i^iyuizco by GoOglc 



^40 Faraday on a peculiar Comlition of Iron* [July 1836. 

Iron wire, as M. Schoenbein has stated, when put alone into 
strong nitric acid, either wholly or partly immersed, acquires 
the peculiar inactive state. This I find takes place best in a 
long narrow close vessel, such as a tube, rather than in a flat 
broad open one like a dish* When thus rendered quiescent 
by itself, it has the same properties and relations as that to 
which the power has been conununicated from other wires. 

If a piece of ordinary iron wire be plunged wholly or in part 
into nitric acid of about specific gravity 1*3 or 1*S5, and after 
action has commenced it be touched by a piece of platina wire, 
also dipping into the acid, the action between the acid and the 
iron wire is instantly stopped. The immersed portion of the 
iron becomes quite bright, and remains so, and is in fact in the 
same state, and can be used in the same manner as the iron 
rendered inactive by the means already described. This pro- 
tecting power of platina with respect to iron is very constant 
and distinct^ and is the more striking as being an effect the 
very reverse of that which might have been anticipated prior 
to the knowledge of M. Schoenbein*s results. It is equally 
exerted if the communication between it and the iron is not 
immediate, but made by other metals; as, for instance, the wire 
of a galvanometer ; and if circumstances be favourable, a small 
surface of platina will reduce and nullify. the action of the acid 
upon a large surface of iron. 

This effect is the more striking if it be contrasted with that 
produced by xinc ; for the latter metal, instead of protecthig 
the iron, throws it into violent action with the nitric acid, atid 
determines its quick and complete solution. The phenomena 
are well observed by putting the iron wire into nitric acid of 
the given strength, and touching it in the acid alternately by 
pieces of platina and zinc : it becomes active or inactive ac- 
cordingly; being preserved by association with the platina, and 
corroded by association with the zinc. So also, as M. Schoen- 
bein has stated, if iron be made the negative electrode of a 
battery containing from two to ten or more pairs of plates in 
such acid, it is violently acted upon; but when rendered the 
positive electrode, although oxidized and dissolved, the pro* 
cess, comparatively, is extremely slow. 

Gold has the same power over iron immersed in the nitric 
acid that platina has. Even silver has a similar action ; but 



July 1836.} Faraday an a peeuUar OmdUum oflnm. £41 



from its relation to the acid, the effect is attended with pecu« 
liar and changeable results, which I will refer to hereaflter. 

A piece of box-wood charcoal, and also charcoal from other 
sourcea, has this power of preserving iron, and bringing it into 
the inactive state. Plumbago^ as might be expected, has the 
same power. 

When a piece of bright steel was first connected with a piece 
of platina, then the platina dipped into the acid, and lastly the 
steel immersed, according to the order directed in the former 
cases by Professor Schoenbein, the steel was preserved by the 
platina, and remained clear and bright in the acid, even after 
the platina was separated from it, having, in fact, the proper- 
ties of the inactive iron. When immersed of itself, there was 
at first action of the usual kind, which, being followed by the 
appearance of the black carbonaceous crust, known so well in 
the common process of examining jsteel, the action immediately 
ceased, and the steel was preserved, not only at the part im- 
mersed, but upon introducing a further portion, it also remained 
clean and bright, being actually protected by association with 
the carbon evolved on the part first immersed. 

When tiie iron is in this peculiar inactive state, aa M. Schoen- 
bein has stated, there is not the least action between it and 
the nitric acid. I have retained such iron in nitric acid, both 
alone and in association with platina wire for 30 days, without 
change ; the metal has remained perfectly bright, and not a 
particle has been dissolved. 

A piece of iron wire in connexion with platina wire was en- 
tirely immersed in nitric acid of the given strength, and the 
latter gradually heated. No change took place until the acid 
was nearly at the boiling-point, when it and the iron suddenly 
entered into acdon, and the latter was instantly dissolved. 

As an illustration of the extent and influence of this state, I 
may mention, that with a Httle management it can be shown 
that the iron has lost, when in the peculiar state, even its power 
of precipitating copper and other metals. A mixture of about 
equal parts of a solution of nitrate of copper and nitric acid 
was made. Iron in the ordinary, or even in the peculiar state, 
when put into thia solution, acted, and copper was precipitated ; 
but if the inactive iron was first connected with a piece of pla- 
tina dipping into the solution, and then its own prepared sur- 

VOL. II. B 



i^iyuizco by GoOglc 



9tA Faraday on a pecuUar QmdUiou o/ Jron, [July 

jEace immersed, after a few seconds the platina might be re- 
movedy and the iron would remain pure and bright for some 
time. At last it usually started into activity, and began to pre- 
cipitate oopper, being itself rapidly corroded. When silver is 
the metal in solution, the effect is still more striking, and will 
be referred to immediately. 

I then used a galvanometer as the means of connexion be- 
tween the iron and other metals thus associated together in 
nitric acid, for the purpose of ascertaining, by the electric cur- 
rents produced, in what relative condition the metals stood to 
each other ; and I will, in the few results I may have to de- 
8oribe« use the relations of platina and sine to each other aa 
ihe terms of comparison by which to Indicate the states of these 
metals under various circumstances. 

The oxidised iron wire of Professor Schoenbein is, when in 
association with platina, exactly as another piece of platina 
would be. There is no chemical action, nor any electric cur- 
rent. The iron wire, rendered inactive either by association 
with the oxidised wire or in any other way, is also as platina 
to the platina, and produces no current. 

When ordinary iron and platina in connexion by means of 
the galvanometer are dipped into the acid, (it matters not which 
first,) there is action at the first moment on the iron, and a 
very strong electric current, the iron being as zinc to the pla- 
tina. The action on the iron is, however, soon stopped by the 
influence of the platina, and then the current instantly ceases, 
the iron now acting as platina to the platina. If the iron be 
lifted into the air for a moment until action recommences on itt 
and be then reimmersed, it again produces a current, acting 
as sine to the platina { but as before, the moment the action 
stops, the current is stopt alsot 

If an active or ordinary, and an inactive or peculiar iron wire 
be both immersed in the nitric acid separately, and then con- 
nected either directly or through the galvanometer, the second 
does not render the first inactive, but is itself thrown into ac- 
tion by it* At the first moment of contact, however, a strong 
electric current is formed, the first iron acting as zinc, and the 
second as platina. Immediately that the chemical action is 
re-established at the second as well as the first, all current 
oeaaes, and both pieces act like ainc. On tooobiDg eillier of 



them in the acid with a piece of platina, both are protected, 
and cease to act ; but tbere ia no current through the galva^ 
Qometer, for both change together. 

When hron was tMoclated with gold or charcoal, the phe» 
Qomena were the same. Using steel instead of iron, like effects 
ensuedt 

One of the most valuable results in the present state of this 
branch of science which these experiments aftbrd, is the addi- 
tional proof that voltaic electricitij is due to chemical action^ and 
not to contact. The proof is equally striking and decisive with 
that which I was able to give in the Eighth Series of my 
perimental Researches (par, 880), What indeed can show 
more evidently that the current of electricity is due to chemi* 
eal action rather than to contact, than the iact, that though the 
contact is continuedi yet when the chemical action ceases, the 
current ceases also ? 

It might at first be supposed, that in consequence of the 
peculiar state of the iron, there was some obstacle, not merely 
to tke/ormaiion of a current, but to the pcusage of one ; and 
that, therefore, the current which metaUie contact tended to 
produce could not circulate in the system. This suppositbn 
was, however^ negatived by removing the platina wire into a 
second cup of nitric acid, and then connecting the two cups by 
a compound platina and iron wire, putting the platina into the 
first vessel, and the iron attached to it into the second. The 
second wire acted at the first moment, producing its corre^ 
aponding current, which passed through the first cup, and con* 
aequently through the first and inactive wire, and aActed the 
galvanometer in the uaual way. As soon as the second iron 
was brought into the peemUa/r condition, the current of course 
ceased ; but that very cessation showed that the electric cur» 
rent was not stopped by a want of conducting power, or a want 
of metallic contact, for both remained unchanged, but by the 
•bsence of chemical action. These experiments, in which the 
current ceases whilst contact is continued, combined with thoae 
I formerly gave, in which the current is produced though con* 
tact does not exist, form together a perfect body of evidence in 
respect to this elementary principle of voltaic action. 

With respect to the state of the iron when inactive in the 
nitric acid, it mmi not be confounded with the inactive state 

^2 



i^iyuizco by GoOglc 



fMf l^mjd^y a pee^iUmr CmidUum of Irm^ [July 1836. 



of amalgamated or pure zinc in dilute sulphuric acid. The 
distinction u easily made hy the contact of platina with either 
in the respective adds, for with the iron such association does 
nothing) whereas with the mnc it deyelopes the fall force of that 
metal and generates a powerftil electric current. The iron is 
in fact as if it had no attraction for oxygen, and therefore could 
not act on the electrolyte present, and consequently could pro- 
duce no current. My strong impression is that the surface 
of the iron is oxidized, or that the superficial particles of the 
metal are in such relation to the oxygen of the electrolyte as 
to he equivalent to an oxidation; and that having thus their 
affinity for oxygen satisfied^ and not being dissolved by ihe acid 
under the curcumstances» there is no renewal of the metallic 
surface, no reiteration of the attraction of successive particles 
of the iron on the elements of successive portions of the elec- 
trolyte, and therefore not those successive chemical actions by 
which the electric current (which is definite in its production 
as well as in its action) can he continued* 

In support of this view, I may observe, that in the first 
experiment described by Professor Schoenbem^ it cannot be 
doubted that the formation of a coat of oxide over the iron 
when heated is the cause of its peculiar and inactive state : the 
coat of oxide is visible by its colour. In the next place, all the 
forms of experiment by which this iron, or platina, or charcoal, 
or other voltaic arrangements are used to bring ordinary iron 
into the peculiar state, are accompanied by a determination of 
oigrgen to the surface of the iron ; this is shown by the electric 
current produced at the first moments and which in such cases 
always precedes the change of the iron from the common to 
the peculiar state. That the coat of oxide produced by com- 
mon means might be so thin as not to be sensible and yet be 
effectual, was shown by heating a piece of iron an inch or two 
from the end, so that though blue at the heated part, the end 
did not seem in the sHghtest degree affected, and yet that end 
was in the peculiar state. Again^ whether the iron be oxidised in 
the flame much or only to Ihe very slight degree just described^ 
or be brought into tiie peculiar state by voltaic assodaticm 
with other pieces or with platma, &c., still if a part of its sur- 
face were removed even in the smallest degree and then the 
new surface put into contact with the nitric acid^ that part was 



July 1836.] Fandny m a peeuMin^ CaiMiom 245 



at the first moment as oomiiion iron ; the state being abundantly 
eirident by the electrical current produced at the instant of 
inunersion. 

Why the superficial film of oxide, which I suppose to be 
formed when the iron is brought into the peculiar state by 
voltaic association, or . occasionally by immersion alone into 
nitric acid, is not dissolved by the acid, is I presume dependent 
upon the peculiarities of this oxide and of nitric acid of the 
strength required for these experiments ; but as a matter of 
&ct it is well known that the oxide produced upon the sur&ce of 
iron by heat, and showing itself by thin films of various colours, 
is scarcely touched by nitric acid of the gi ven strength though 
left in contact with it for days together. That this does not 
depend upon the film having any great thickness, but upon its 
peculiar condition, is rendered probable from the fact, that 
iron oxidized by heat, only in that slight degree as to offer no 
difference to the eye, has been left in nitric add of the given 
strength for weeks together without any change. And that 
this mode of superficial oxidation, or this kind of oxide, may 
occur in the voltaic cases, is rendered probable by the results 
of the oxidation of iron in nitrate of silver. When nitrate of 
silver is fused and common iron dipped into it, so as to be 
thoroughly wetted, being either alone or in association with 
platina, the iron does not commence a violent action on the 
nitrate and throw down silver, but it is gradually oxidized on 
the sur&oe with exactly the same appearances of colour, uni- 
formity of surface, &c«, as if it were slowly oxidised by beat 
in the air. 

Professor Schoenbein has stated the case of iron when acting 
as the positive electrode of a couronne des tosses* If that in- 
strument be in strong action, or if an ordinary battery be used 
containing from two to ten or more plates, the po&itive iron in- 
stantly becomes covered in the nitric acid with a coat of oxide, 
which though it does not adhere closely still is not readily dis-* 
solved by the add when the connexion with the battery is 
broken, but remains for many hours on the iron, which itself 
is in the peculiar inactive state. If the power of the voltaic 
apparatus be very weak, the coat of oxide on the iron in the 
nitric add often assumes a blue tint like that of the oxide 



M6 IVtfadAy cm a pecMot OmdMon oflnm. [Jm^T 1886. 



fomed by heat* A part of the iron ia however alwaya diaaohed 
in these eaaes. 

If it be allowed that the surface particles of the iron are as- 
sociated with oxygen, are in fact oxidized, then all the other 
actions of it in combination with common iron and other metals 
will be coiuustent ; and the cause of its platina^like action, of 
its forming a strong voltaic current with common iron in the 
first instancei and then being thrown into action by it^ will be 
explained by considering it as having the power of determining 
and disposing of a certain portion of hydrogen from the 6lec«- 
trolyte at the first moment and being at the same time brought 
into a free metalHc condition on the surface so as to act after- 
wards as ordinary iron. 

I need scarcely refer here to the probable existence of a 
very close connexion between the phenomena which Professor 
Bchoenbein has thus pointed out with regard to iron, and those 
which have been observed by others, as Bitter and Marianini, 
with regard to secondary piles^ and A. De la Rive with respect 
to pecnliar affections of platina surfiices* 

In my Experimental Researches (par. 476.) I have recorded a 
case of voltaic excitement, which very much surprised me at the 
time, but which I can now explain. I refer to the fact stated, that 
when platina and iron wire were connected voltaically in associa- 
tion with fiised nitrate or chloride of silver, there was an electric 
current produced, but in the reverse direction to that expected. 
On repeating the experiment, I found that when iron waa asso- 
ciated with platina or silver in fused nitrate or chloride of silver, 
there was occasionally no current, and when a current did occur 
it was almost constantly as if the iron was as platina, the silver 
or platina used being as zinc. In all sucli cases, however, it 
was a thermo-electric current which existed. The volta-electric 
current could not be obtained, or lasted only for a moment. 

When iron in the peculiar inactive state was associated with 
silver in nitric acid sp. gr. 1*85, there was an electric current, 
the iron acUng as platina; the silver gradually became ta^• 
nished and the current continued fbr some time. When ordi- 
nary iron and silver were used in the nitric acid there was 
immediate action and a current, the iron being as zinc, to the 
silver as platina. In a few moments the current was reversed, 



July 1836.] Faraday an a peeuUar QmdUkm qfJron. ^7 

and the relation of the metals was also reversed, the iron being 
as platina, to the silver as zinc ; then another inversion took 
place* and then another, and thus the changes went on some- 
times eight or nine times together, ending at last generally in 
a current constant in its directioui the iron being as »nc, to 
the silver as platba : occasionally tiie reverse was the casoy the 
predominant current being as if the silver acted as line* 

This relation of iron to silver, which was before referred to 
page 242, produces some curious resuhs as to the precipitation 
of one metal by another. If a piece of clean iron is put into 
an aqueous solution of nitrate of silver, there is no immediate 
apparent change of any kind. After several days the iron will 
become slightly discoloured^ and small irregular crystals of silver 
will appear; but the action is so slow as to require time and 
care for its observation. When a solution of nitrate of silver 
to which a little nitric acid had been added was used) there 
was still no sensible immediate action on the iron. When the 
solution was rendered very acid, then there was direct imme- 
diate action on the iron ; it ])ecame covered with a coat of pre- 
cipitated silver : the action then suddenly ceased, the silver was 
immediately redissolved* and the iron lei^ perfectly clear* in 
the peculiar condition, and uuable to cause any furUier pred^ 
pitation of the silver firotn the solution* It is a remarkable 
thing in this experiment to see the silver rapidly dissolve away 
In a solution which cannot touch the iron, and to see the iron 
in a clean metallic state unable to precipitate the silver. 

Iron and platina in an aqueous solution of nitrate of silver 
produce no electric current ; both act as platina. When the 
solution is rendered a little acid by nitric acid, there is a very 
feeble current for a moment, the iron being as zinc. When 
still more acid^is added so as to cause the iron to precipitate 
silver, there is a strong current whilst that action lasts, but 
when it ceases the current ceases, and then it is that the silver 
is redissolved. The association of the platina with the iron 
evidently helps much to stop the action. 

When iron is associated with mercury, copper, lead, tin, zinc, 
and some other metals, in an aqueous solution of nitrate of 
silver, it produces a constant electric current, but always acts 
the part of pbUmumm This is perhaps most striking with mer- 
cury and copper, because of the marked contrast it affords to 



i^iyuizco by GoOglc 



Faraday o» a peculiar Co»diium qf Iron. [Aug. 18d6t 

the effects produced in dilute sulphuric acid and most ordinary 
solutions. The constancy of the current even causes crystals 
of silver to fom on the iron as the negative electrode. It 
might at first seem surprising that the power which tends to 
reduce silver on the iron negative electrode did not abo bring 
back the iron from its peculiar statCj whether that be a state 
of oxidation or not. But it must be remembered that the mo- 
ment a particle of silver is reduced on the iron, it not only 
tends to keep the iron in the peculiar state according to the 
facts before described, but also acts as the negative electrode; 
and there is no doubt that the current of electricity which con- 
tinues to circulate through the solution passes essentially be- 
tween it and the silver, and not between it and the iron, the 
latter metal being merely the conductor interposed between the 
silver and the copper extremities of the metallic arrangement. 

I am afraid you will think I have pursued this matter to a 
greater length than it deserves ; but I have been exceedingly 
interested by M. Schoenbein's researches, and cannot help 
thinking that the peculiar condition of iron which he has 
pointed out will (whatever it may depend upon) enable us 
hereafter more closely to examine the surface-action of the 
metak and electrolytes when they are associated in voltaic 
combinations, and so give us a just knowledge of the nature 
of the two modes of action by which particles under the in- 
fluence of the same power can produce either local effects of 
combination or current affinity ^ 

I am, my dear Phillips, very truly yours. 

Royal Inititation, Juim 16, 1836. M. Faraday. 



Letter from Mr. Faraday to Mr. Brayley on some former /Je- 
searches relative to the peculiar Voltaic Condition of Iron 
reobterved by Profeuor Scroenbbin, supplementary to a 
Letter to Mr. Phillips, in the last Number*. 

My dear Sir, Royal Institution, July 8, 1836. 

I AM greatly your debtor for having pointed out to me Sir 
John F. W. Herschel's paper on the action of nitric add on 

* Exp. Researches, Eighth Series, 947. 996. 

* Lond. and Edinb. Phil. Mag., 1836, vol. ix. 122. 



Aug. 18^0 Faraday an a peeuUar CamUtian o/Jraiu £40 

iron in the Annales de Chimie et de Physique ; I read it at the 
time of its publication, but it had totally escaped my me- 
mory, which is indeed a very bad one now. It renders one 
half of my letter (supplementary to Professor Schoenbein's) in 
the last Number of the Philosophical Magazine, page 57 (or 
page of this Tolume), superfluous ; and I regret only that 
it did not happen to be recalled to my attention in time for me 
to rearrange my remarks, or at all events to add to them an 
account of Sir John HerscheFs results. However, I hope the 
^Editors of the Phil. Mag. will allow my present letter a place 
in the next Number ; and entertaining that hope I shall in- 
clude in it a few references to former results bearing upon the 
extraordinary character of iron to which M. Schoenbein has 
renred the attention of men of science. 

Bergman relates that upon adding iron to a solution of 
silTer in the mtrous acid no precipitation ensued^." 

Keir, who examined this action in the year 1790*, made 
many excellent experiments upon it. He observed that the 
iron acquired a peculiar or altered state in the solution of sil- 
ver; that this state was only superficial ; that when so altered 
it was inactive in nitric acid ; and that when ordinary iron was 
put into strong nitric add there was no actioui but the metal 
assumed the altered state. 

Westlar, whose results I know only from the Annales des 
Mines for \SS2^, observed that iron or steel which had been 
plunged into a solution of nitrate of silver lost the power of 
precipitating copper from its solutions ; and he attributes the 
effect to the assumption of a negative electric state by the part 
immersedy the other part of the iron having assumed the posir 
tive state. 

Braconnot in 1833^ observed« that filings or even plates of 
iron in strong nitric add are not at all affected at common tem- 
peratures, and scarcely even at the boiling-point. 

Sir John Herschei's observations are in reality the first which 
refer these phenomena to electric forces ; but Westlar's, which 
do the samcy were published before them. The results ob- 

1 Fba. T^ans. 1790, p. 374. > Ibid. pp. 374, 879.2 

' Annales del Minai, 1332, vol. ii. p. 322 ; or Mag. de lliann. 1830. 
* Annales d« Chimie 6t dePbyii^ vol. lii. p.288. 



i^iyuizco by GoOglc 



fUO Faraday on a peetdiat CkmdiUonqfJnm. [Aoa. 1886. 



tained by the former, extracted from a private journal dated 
August 1825, were first published in 1833 ^ He describes the 
action of nitric acid on iron ; the altered state which the metal 
assumes ; the superficial character of the change ; the effect of 
the contact of other metals in bringing the iron back to its first 
atate ; the power of platina in assisting to bring on the altered 
or prepared state ; and the habits of steel in nitric acid : he 
attributes the phenomena to a certain permanent electric state 
of the surface of the metal, I should recommend the republi* 
cation of this paper in the Philosophical Magazine. 

Professor Daniell, in his paper on Voltaic Combinations* 
(Feb. 1836)5 found that on associating iron with platina in a 
battery charged with nitro^sulphuric acid, the iron would not 
act as the generating metal, and that when it was afterwards 
associated with zinc it acted more powerfully than platina itself. 
He considers the effect as explicable upon the idea of a force 
of heterogeneous attraction existing between bodies, and is in- 
clined to beUeve that association with the platina cleanses the 
surface of the iron, or possibly causes a difference in the me** 
chanicai structure developed in this particular position. 

In my letter, therefore, as published in the Philosophical 
Magazine for the present month (July), what relates to the 
preserving power of platina on iron ought to be struck out, as 
having been anticipated by Sir John Herschel, and also much 
of what relates to the action of silver and iron, as having been 
formerly recorded by Keir. The facts relating to gold and 
carbon in association with iron ; the experimental results as to 
the electric currents produced ; the argument respecting (he 
chemical source of electricity in the voltaic pile; and my opH 
nion of the cause of the phenomena as due to a relation of the 
superficial particles of the iron to oxygen> are what renudn in 
the character of contributions to our knowledge of this very 
beautiful and important case of voltaic condition presented to 
us by the metal iron. 

I am, my dear Sir, yours very truly, 
E, W, Brayley, Esq. M. Faraday. 

London Imiitution. 

* Annalcs de Chimie et de Physique, 1833, vol, liv. p. 87. 
3 Phil. Trans. 1836, p. 114. 



Jait. IMO.] Him oh Farftday's ThewreHeidOiriiihiu. £51 



A Letter to Prof. Faraday, on certain Theoretical Opinions* 
By R. Hare, M.D,t Frqfeuot qf ChemUtry tn the Umver^ 
sUy of PemuyhamaK 

Dear. Sir, 

1. 1 HAVE been indebted to your kindness for several pam«» 
phlets comprising your researches in electricity^ which I have 
perused with the greatest degree of interest 

Yoa must be too well aware of the height at which you 
stand, in the estimation of men of science, to doubt that I en- 
tertain with diffidence any opinion in opposition to yours. I 
may say of you as in a former instance of Berzelius, that 
you occupy an elevation inaccessible to unjustifiable criticism. 
Under these circumstances, I hope that I may, from you, ex- 
perience the candour and kindness which were displayed by 
the great Swedish chemist in his reply to my strictures on his 
nomenclature. 

8. I am unable to reconcile the language which you hold in 
paragraph 1615, with the fundamental position taken in 1165. 
Agreeably to the latter, you believe ordinary induction to be 
the action of covfiguous particles, consisting of a species of 
polarity, instead of being an action of either particles or masses 
at sensible distances,*' Agreeably to the former, you con- 
ceive that assuming that a perfect vacuum was to intervene 
in the course of the line of inductive action, it does not follow 
from this theory that the line of particles on opposite sides 
of such a vacuum would not act upon each other*** Again, 
supposing " it possible for a positively electrified particle to 
be in the centre of a vacuum an inch in diameter, nothing in 
my present view forbids that the particle should act at a di- 
itance of half an inch on all the particles forming the inner 
superficies of the bounding sphere." 

4* Laying these quotations before you fi>r reconsideration^ 
I beg leave to inquire how a positively excited particloi situated 
as above described, can react inductrically " with any particles 

■ From SOliman'a American Journal of Seienoe and Arti» voL 38, No. 1., 
or Phil. Mag. 1840, vol. xviLp.44.. 

[We have taken the liberty of numbering tbe panigiaphs o£ Or. Hare's 
l«tter^£0it.] 



i^iyuizco by GoOglc 



2S» Dr. Hare's Letter to FtoU Faraday [Jan. 1839. 



in the superficies of the surrounding sphere, if this species of 
reaction require that the particles between which it takes place 
be contiguoas. Moreover if induction be not ^' an action either 
of partidea or masses at teneihle distances/' how can a partidey 
situated as above described^ act at the dUtanee of hdff am 
inch on aU the parHeles forming the dUk of the inner evper^ 
Jicies of the bounding sphere f " What is a sensible distance, 
if half an inch is not? 

5. How can the force thus exercised obey the " well-known 
law of the squares of the distances,** if as you state (1375) the 
rare&ction of the air does not alter the intensity of the induc- 
tive action? In proportion as the air is rarefied, do not its 
particles become more remote ! 

6. Can the ponderable particles of a gas be deemed conti- 
guous, in the true sense of this word, under any circumstances ? 
And it may be well here to observe, that admitting induction 
to arise from an affection of intervening ponderable atoms, it 
is difficult to conceive that the intensity of this affection will 
be inversely as their number^ as alleged by you. No such law 
holds goqd in ihe communication of heat. The air in contact 
with a surfiu» at a constant elevation of temperature, such for 
instance as might be supported by boiling water, would not 
become hotter by being rarefied, and consequently could not 
become more efficacious in the conduction of beat firom the 
heated surface to a colder one in its vicinity. 

7. As soon as I commenced the perusal of your researches 
on this sttbjecti it occurred to me that the passage of electricity 
through a vacuum, or a highly rarefied medium, as demon- 
strated by various experiments, and especially those of Davy, 
was inconsistent with the idea that ponderable matter could 
be a necessary agent in the process of electrical induction. I 
therefore inferred that your efibrts would be primarily directed 
to a re-examination of that question. 

8. If induction, in acting through a vacuum, be propagated 
in right lines, may not the curvilinear direction which it pur- 
sues, when passing through " dielectrics," be ascribed to the 
modifying influence which they exert? 

9. If, as you concede, electrified particles on opposite sides 
of a vacuum can act upon each other, wherefore is the received 
theory of the mode in which the excited surface of a Ley den jar 



Jan. 1899.] on eeriam Theoretical Opmkmt. 2SS 

induces in the opposite surface a contrary state^ ol\jection« 
able? 

10. As the theory which you have proposed gives great 
importance to the idea of polarity, I regret that you have not 

defined the meaning which you attach to this word. As you 
designate that to which you refer, as a " species of polarity,'* 
it is presumable that you have conceived of several kinds with 
which ponderable atoms may be endowed. I find it difficult to 
conceive of any kind which may be capable of as many degrees 
of intensity as the known phenomena of electricity requh* $ 
especially according to your opinion that the only difference 
between the fluid evolred by galvanic apparatus and that 
evolved by friction, is due to opposite extremes in quantity and 
intensity; the intensity of electrical excitement producible by 
the one being almost infinitely greater than that which can be 
produced by the other. What state of the poles can consti- 
tute quantity — what other state intensity, the same matter being 
capable of either electricity, as is well known to be the fiust? 
Would it not be well to consider how, consistently with any 
conceivable polarizationy and without the assistance of some 
imponderable matter, any great difference of intensity in in- 
ductive power can be created ? 

11. When by friction the surface is polarized so that par- 
ticles are brought into a state of constraint from which they 
endeavour to return to their natural state, if nothing be super- 
added to them, it must be supposed that they have poles ca- 
pable of existing in two dififerent positions. In one of these 
positions, dissimiiar poles coincidingi are neutralized; while 
in the other position, they are more remote, and consequently 
capable of acting upon other matter. 

12. But I am unable to imagine any change which can ad- 
mit of gradations of intensity, increasing with remoteness. I 
cannot figure to myself any reaction which increase of distance 
would not lessen. Much less can I conceive that such ex- 
tremes of intensity can be thus created, as those of which you 
consider ihe existence as demonstrated. It may be suggested 
that the change of polarity produced in particles of electrical 
inductions, may arise from the forced approximation by reci- 
procally repellent poles, so that tlie intensity of the inductive 
force, and of their effort to return to their previous situation. 



i^iyuizco by GoOglc 



Sm Dr. Hm'8 Lgtfer to P^f. Faraday [Jan. 1889. 



may be tusoeptable of the gradation which your electrical doc 
trinea require. But could the existence of such a repeUeot 
force be consistent with the mutual cohesion which appean 
almost uniyersally to be a property of ponderable particles? 
I am aware that, agreeably to the ingenious hypothesis of Mos- 
sottiS repulsion is an inherent property of the particles which 
we call ponderable ; but then he assumes the existence of an 
imponderable fluid to account for cohesion ; and for the neces- 
sity of such a fluid to account for induction it is my ultimate 
ol^ect to contend. I would suggest that it can hardly be ex- 
pedient to ascribe the phenomena of electrici^ to the polans»* 
tion of ponderable particles^ unkss it can be shown, that if 
admitted, it would be competent to produce all the known 
varieties of electric excitementi whether as to its nature or 
energy. 

13. If I comprehend your theory, the opposite electrical state 
induced on one side of a coated pane, when the other is dip 
rectly electrified, arises from an aflfection of the intenreni^g 
vitreous particles, by which a certain polar state caused on one 
aide of the pane, induces an opposite state on the other wide. 
Each vitreous particle having its poles severally in opposite 
states, they are arranged as magnetized iron filings in lines ; 
so that alternately opposite poles are presented in such a 
manner that all of one kind are exposed at one surface, and all 
of the other kind at the other surface. Agreeably to this or 
any other imaginable view of the subject, I cannot avoid eon* 
sidering it inevitable that each particle must have at least two 
poles. It seems to me that the idea of polarity requvea that 
there shall be in any body possessing it, two opposite poles. 
Hence you correctly allege, that agreeably to your views it 
is impossible to charge a portion of matter with one electric 
force without the other. (See par. 1177.) But if all this be 
true, how can there be a " positively excited particle (See 
par. I GIG.) Must not every particle be excited negatively, if 
it be excited positively ? Must it not have a negative, aa well 
as a positive pole? 

14. I cannot agree with you in the idea, that consistently 
inth the theory which ascribes the phenomena of electricity to 

^ [See Sdentifie Memcyii vol. i, p, 448.— Bpif J 



Jan. im] on certain Theoretical OpuUone. 256 

one fluid, there can ever be an isolated existence either of the 
positive or negative state. Agreeably to this theory, any ex- 
cited space, v^hether minus or plus^ must have an adjoining 
apace relatively in a different state. Between the phenomena 
of positive and negative excitement there will be no other di* 
atinction than that arising from the direction in which the 
£uid will endeavour to move. If the excited space be positive, 
it must strive to flow outward ; if negative, it will strive to flow 
inward. Wlien sufficiently intense, the direction will be shown 
by the greater length of the spark, when passing from a small 
ball to a large one. It is always longer when the small ball ia 
positive, and the large one negative than when their positions 
are reversed^ 

1& But for any current it is no less necessary that the preso 
sure should be on one side, comparatively minus, than that on 
the other side, it should be comparatively plus ; and this state 
of the forces must exist whether the current originates from a 
hiatus before or from pressure behind. One current cannot 
differ essentially from another, however they may be produced. 

16. In paragraph 1330i I have been struck with the following 
queryi What then is to separate the principle of these ex* 
tremesi perfect conduction and perfect insulation, from each 
other ; since the moment we leave the smallest degree of per- 
fection at either extremity, we involve the element of perfec- 
tion at the opposite ends ?" Might not this query be made with 
as much reason in the case of motion and rest, between the 
extremes of which there is an infinity of gradations ? If we 
are not to confound motion with rest, because in proportbn 
as the former is retarded, it difiera less from the latter | where- 
fore should we confound insulation with conduction, because 
in proportion as the one is less eflicient, it becomes less re- 
mote from the other ? 

17. In any case of the intermixture of opposite quahties, may 
it not be said in the language which you employ, " the moment 
we leave the element of perfection at one extremity, we involve 
the element of perfectmn at the opposite " t Might it not be 

' See my Essay on the causes of the diversity in the lenglli sf Ae qparks, 
MToneously distinguiihed as poiitivs and negative, in vol. v. Amsiiosft Fhtfo- 
lophical TranisctisiM. 



i^iyuizco by GoOglc 



256 Dr. Hare*8 Letter to Prof. Faraday [Jan. 1899. 



said of light and darknesSi or of opakeness and translucency ? in 
which casOi to resort to your language again, it might be added, 
especially as we haTe not in nature a case of perfection at 
one extremity or the other.** Bat if there be not in natnre any 

two bodies, of which one possesses the property of perfectly 
resisting the passage of electricity, while the other is endowed 
with the faculty of permitting its passage without any resistance ; 
does this affect the propriety of considering the qualities of in" 
eukitum and conduction in the abstract, as perfectly distinct, 
and inferring that so far as matter may be endowed with the 
one property, it must be wantmg in the other t 

18. Have you ever known electricity to pass through a pane 
of sound glass. My knowledge and experience create an im- 
pression that a coated pane is never discharged through the 
glass unless it be cracked or perforated. That the property by 
which glass resists the passage of electricity, can he confounded 
with that which enables a metallic wire to permit of its transfer, 
agreeably to Wheatstone's experiments, with a velocity greater 
than that of the solar rays, is to my mind inconceivable. 

19. You infer that the residual charge of a battery arises 
from the partial penetration of the glass by the opposite ex- 
citements. But if glass be penetrable by electricity, why does 
it not pass through it without a fracture or perforation? 

20. According to your doctrine, induction consists " in a 
forced state of polarization in contiguous rows of the particles 
of the glass" (1300) ; and since this is propagated from one side 
to the other, it must of course oust equaUy at.all depths. Yet 
the partial penetration suggested by you, supposes a collateral 
afibction of the same kind, extending only to a limited depth. 
Is this consistent ? Is it not more reasonable to suppose that 
the air in the vicinity of the coating gradually relinquishes to 
it a iportion of free electricity, conveyed into it by what you 
call ** convection" ? The coating being equally in contact with 
the air and glass, it appears to me more easy to conceive that 
the airm^^ht be penetrated by the excitement, than the glass. 

21. In paragraph 1300, I observe the following statement : 
When a Leydeiijar i$ charged^ the partielee of the glaee are 

forced into this polarized and constrained condition hy the 
electricity of the charging apparatus. Discharge is the return 
qf tJi€ particles to their natural state ^ from their state qf tet^ 



Jan* 1839. 3 on certain Theoretical Opinions. £57 

Mhn, whenever the two electric forces are allowed to be dis^ 
posed of in some other direction," As you have not previously 
mentioned any particular direction in which the forces are ex- 
ercised during the prevalence of this constrained conditioiiy I 
am at a loss as to what meaning I am to attach to the words 
some other direction.'* The word some, would lead to the 
idea that there was m uncertainty respecting the direction in 
which the forces might be disposed of ; whereas it appears to 
me that the only direction in which they can operate, must be 
the opposite of that by which they have been induced. 

22, The electrified particles can only " return to their natural 
state" by retracing the path by wliich they departed from it. 
I would suggest that for the words to be disposed of in some 
other direction^" it would be better to substitute the following, 
" to compemaie each other by an adequate eammumcaiian.** 

23. Agreeably to the explanation of the phenomenon of 
coated electrics afforded in the paragraph above quoted (ISOO)* 
by what process can it be conceiyed that the opposite polariza- 
tion of the surfaces can be neutralized by conduction through 
a metallic wire ? If I understand your hypothesis correctly, the 
process by which the polarization of one of the vitreous sur- 
faces in a pane produces an opposite polarization in the other, 
is precisely the same as that by which the electricity applied 
to one end of the wire extends itself to the other end. 

24h I cannot conceiye how two processes severally producing 
results so diametrically opposite as insulation and conduction* 
can be the same. By the former, a derangement of the electric 
equilibrium may be pennanently sustained, while by the other, 
all derangement is counteracted with a rapidity almost infinite. 
But if the opposite charges are dependent upon a polarity in- 
duced in contiguous atoms of the glass, which endures so long 
as no communication ensues between the surfiices ; by what con- 
ceivable process can a perfect conductor cause a discharge 
to take place, with a velocity at least as great as tiiat of tiie 
sohur light? Is it conceivable that all the lines of contra- 
induction" or depolarization can concentrate themselves upon 
the wire from each surface so as to produce therein an in- 
tensity of polarization proportioned to the concentration ; and 
that the opposite forces resulting from the polarization are thus 
recipxocally compensated ? I must confess^ such a concentra- 

TOIm lb 8 



i^iyuizco by GoOglc 



258 Dr. Hare's Letter to Prof. Faraday [Jan. 1829. 



tmtloil of ftttoh Ibreet or states, if to me difficult to roooneild 

with the conception that it is at all to be ascribed to the actioo 
of rows of contifruous ponderable particles. 

25. Does not your hypothesis require that the metallic par- 
tlGleS) at opposite ends of the wire, shall in the first instance 
be subjected to the same polarisation as the excited particles 
of the glass; and that the opposite polariaatioiisi transBiitfeBd 
to simie interrefiing point, should ihus be mutually destroyedi 
the one by the other? But if discharge inroWes a return to 
the same state in vitreous particles, the same mast be true in 
those of tlie metallic wire. Wherefore then are these dissi- 
pated, when the discharge is sufficiently powerful? Their dis- 
sipation must take place either wliile they are in the state of 
being polarized^ or in that of returning to their natural state* 
But if it happen when in the iirBt<*mentioned state, the oon- 
duotor must be destroyed before the opposite polarisation upon 
the sur&oes can be neutralised by its intervention. But if not 
dissipated In the aet of being polarised, is it reasonable to sup^ 
pose that the metallic particles can be sundered by returning 
to their natural state of polarization ? 

26. Supposing that ordinary electrical induction could be 
satisfactorily ascribed to the reaction of ponderable particles, it 
oannot) it seems to me, be pretended that magnetic and eleotro* 
magnetic induction is referable to this species of reaction. It 
will be admitted that the Faradian currents do not for tiieir 
production require interrening ponderable atoms* 

in. From a note subjoined to page 87 of your pamphlet^, it 
appears that " on the question of the existence of one or more 
imponderable fluids as the cause of electrical phenomena, it 
has not been your intention to decide." 1 should be much grati* 
fied if any of the strictures in which I have been so bold as to in- 
dulge, should contribute to influence your ultimate decision. 

It appears to me that there has been an undue disposi* 
tioti to burden the matter, usually regarded as such» with more 
duties than it can perfbrm. Although it is only with the pro- 
perties of matter that we have a direct acquaintance^ and the 
existence of matter rests upon a theoretical inference that since 
we perceive properties, there must be material particles to which 
those properties belong ; yet there is no conviction which the 
* Page400 of the fonaor Tdumii of thsM paptti* 



Jan. 1839.] on certain Theoretical OpinioM. 2S9 



mass of mankind entertain with more firmness than that of 
the existence of matter in that ponderable form, in which it is 
instinctively recognised by people of common sense. Not per- 
ceiving that this conviction can only be supported as a theoretic 
deduction from our perception of the properties ; there is a re* 
luctanoe to admit the existence of other matter, which has not 
in its iayonr the same instinctiTe conception, although theore- 
tieally similar reasoning would apply. But if one kind of matter 
be admitted to exist because we perceive properties, the ex- 
istence of which cannot be otherwise explained, are we not 
warranted, if we notice more properties than can reasonably 
be assigned to one kind of matter, to assume the existence of 
another kind of matter ? 

29, Independently of the considerations which have hereto- 
fore led some philosophers to suppose that we are surrounded 
by an ocean of eleetric matter, which by its redundancy or de- 
ficiency is capable of producing the phenomena of mechanical 
electricity, it has appeared to me inconceivable that the phe- 
nomena of galvanism and electro-magnetism, latterly brought 
into view, can be satisfactorily explained without supposing 
the agency of an intervening imponderable medium by whose 
subserviency the inductive influence of currents or magnets is 
propagated. If in that wonderfid reciprocal reaction between 
masses and particles, to which I have alluded, die polarisation of 
condensed or accumulated portions of intervening imponderable 
matter, can be brought in as a link to connect the otherwise 
imperfect chain of causes ; it would appear to me a most im- 
portant instrument in lifting the curtain which at present hides 
£rom our intellectual vision, this highly important mechanism 
of nature. 

SO* Having devised so many ingenious experiments tending 
to show that the received ideas of electrical induction are in- 
adequate to explain the phenomena without supposing a modi- 
fying influence in intervening ponderable matter, should there 
prove to be cases in which the results cannot be satisfactorily 
explained by ascribing them to ponderable particles, I hope 
that you may be induced to review the whole ground, in order 
to determine whether the part to be assigned to contiguous 
ponderable particles, be not secondary to that performed by 
the imponderable principles by which iJiey are surrounded. 

s2 



i^iyuizco by GoOglc 



iSeO Dr. Hare*8 Letter to Frof. Faraday {Jav, 1889. 



81. But if galvanic phenomena be due to ponderable (mi- 
panderahlet) mattery evidently that matter Qiust be in a state of 
ccmibination. To what other cauie than an intense affinity be- 
tween it and the metallic particles with which it is associated, 
can its confinement be ascribed consistently with your estimate 
of tlie enormous quantity which exists in metals ? If ** a grain 
of water* or a grain of zinc, contain as much of the electric fluid 
as would supply eight hundred thousand charges of a battery 
containing a coated sur&ce of fifteen hundred square inches," 
how intense must be the attraction by which this matter is con- 
fined ! In such cases may not the material cause of electricity 
be considered as latent, agreeably to the suggestion of CErsted, 
the founder of electro-magnetism ? It is in combination with 
matter, and only capable of producing the appropriate eflects 
of voltaic currents when in act of transfer from combination 
with one atom to another ; this transfer being at once an efiect 
and a cause of chemical decomposition^ as you have demon- 
strated. 

8!S. If polarization in any form can be conceived to admit of 

the requisite gradations of intensity, which the phenomena 
seem to demand ; would it not be more reasonable to suppose 
that it operates by means of an imponderable fluid existing 
throughout all space, however devoid of other matter t May 
not an electric current, so called, be a progressive polariaation 
of rows of the electric particles, the polarity being produced 
at one end and destroyed at the other incessantly, as I under^ 
stood you to suggest in the case of contiguous ponderable 
atoms? 

SS. When the electric particles within different wires are 
polarized in the same tangential direction, the opposite poles 
being in proximity, there will be attraction. When the cur- 
rents of polarisation move oppositely, similar poles coincidingi 
there will be repulsion. The phenomena require that the mag- 
netized or polarized particles should be arranged as tangents 
to the circumference, not as radii to the axis. Moreover, the 
progressive movement must be propagated in spiral lines in 
order to account for rotary influence. 

34. Between a wire which is the mean of a galvanic dis- 
charge and another not making a part of a circuit, the electric 
matter which intervenes may, by undergoing a polarization. 



r 



Digitized by Google 



Jan. 18390 



omeertamTkeoreHealOpimmu^ 



become the medium of producing a progressive polarization in 
the second wire movuig in a direction opposite to that in the 
inducing wire ; or in odier words^ an electrical current of the 
species called Faradian may be generated. 

35* By progressive polarisation in a wire, may not stationary 
polarissation or magnetism be created ; and reciprocally by mag- 
netic polarity may not progressive polarization be excited ? 

36. Might not the difficulty, above suggested, of the incom- 
petency of any imaginable polarization to produce all the va- 
rieties of electrical excitement which facts require for explana* 
tion, be surmounted by supposing intensity to result from an 
accumulation of free electric polariied particles^ and quantity 
from a still greater accumulation of such partides, polarised in 
a latent state or in chemical combination ? 

97. There are it would seem many indications in favour of 
the idea that electric excitement may be due to a forced po- 
larity, but in endeavouring to define the state thus designated, 
or to expl&in by means of it the diversities of electrical charges, 
currents and effects, I have always felt the incompetency of 
any hypothesis which I could imagine* How are we to explain 
the insensibility of a gold-leaf electroscope to a galvanised 
wire* or the indi£ference of a magnetic needle to the most in* 
tensely electrified sur&ces t 

38. Possibly the Franklinian hypothesis may be combined 
with that above suggested, so that an electrical current may be 
constituted of an imponderable fluid in a state of polarization, 
the two electricities being the consequence of the position of 
the poles, or their presentation. Positive electricity may be 
the result of an accumulation of electric particles, presenting 
poles of one kind ; negative, from a like accumulation of tiie 
same matter witii a presentation of tiie opposite poles, inducing 
of course an opposite polarity. The condensation of the elec- 
tric matter, within ponderable matter, may vary in obedience 
to a property analogous to that which determines the capacity 
for heat, and the different influence of dielectrics upon the 
process of electrical induction may arise from this source of 
variation* 

With the highest esteem, I am yours truly, 

Robert Habb* 



i^iyuizco by GoOglc 



Jbmm to Dr. Hire's XiMir 



4m Amweir lo Dr. Hare's LeUer on eeriam TkeareiietU Opkuom* 

My dear Sir, 

i. Your kind remarks have caused me very carefully to re- 
vise the general principles of the view of ttatic induction which 
I have ventured to put forthf with the very natural fear that as 
it did not obtain your acceptance^ it night be founded in enm; 
£at it is not a mere complimentary expression when I say I have 
▼ery great respect for your judgement. As the reconsideration 
of them has not made me aware that they differ amongst them- 
selves or with facts, the resulting impression on my mind is, that 
I must have expressed my meaning imperfectly, and I have a 
hope that when more clearly stated my words may gain your 
approbation. I feel that many of the words in the language 
of electrical science possess much meaning | and yet their inter* 
pretation by different philosophers often varies more or less, . 
so that they do not carry exactly the same idea to the minda 
of different men : this often renders it difficult, when such words 
Ibrce titemsehes into use, to express with brevity as much aa» 
and no more than, one really wishes to say. 

ii. My theory of induction (as set forth in Series xi. xii. and 
xiii.) makes no assertion as to the nature of electricity, or at all 
questions any of the theories respecting that subject (1667«)« 
It does not even include the origination of the developed or 
excited state of the power or powers ; but taking that as it ia 
given by experiment and observation, it concerns itself only 
witii die arrangement of the force in its communication to a 
distance in that particular yet very general phenomenon called 
static induction (1668.). It is neither the nature nor the 
amount of the force which it decides upon, but solely its mode 
of distribution. 

iii. Bodies whether conductors or non-conductors can be 
ehargecU The word charge is equivocal: sometimes it means 
that state which a glass tube acquires when rubbed by silk, or 
which the prime conductor of a machine acquires vhen the 
latter is in action ; at other tunes it means the state of a Ley- 
^en jar or similar inductive arrangement when it is said to be 
charged. In the first case the word means only the peculiar 



July 1840.] 



(murtaki TkioreiuHU Opmkmii 



condition of 411 electrified mass of matter considered by itself 
and does not appareotly involve the idea of induction t in the 
second it means the whole of the reletiont of two fueb mtssee 
charged in opposite states^ and most intimately connected bj 
induetiTe aetlon. 

Let three insulated metallic spheres A, B and C be 
placed in a line, and not in contact : let A be electrified posi- 
tively, and then C uninsulated ; besides the general action of 
the whole system upon all surrounding matter, there will occur 
a case of inductive action amongst the three balls, which may 
be considered apart, as the type and illustration of the whole 
of my theory: A will be charged potitivelys B will acquire 
the negative state at the surface towards At and the positive 
state at the surfiuse furthest from it ; and C will be charged 
negatively. 

V. The ball B will be in what is often called a polarized 
condition, i, e. opposite parts will exhibit the opposite elec- 
trical states, and the two sums of these opposite states will be 
exactly equal to each other. A and C will not be in this pc 
lariaed state, for they will each be, as it is said, charged (iiL)» 
the one positively^ the other negatively^ and they will present 
no polarity as fiur as diis particular act of induction (iv.) is cow 
cemedf 

vi. That one part of A is more positive than another part 
does not render it polar ia the sense in which that word has 
just been used. We are considering a particular case of in- 
duction, and have to throw out of view the states of those parts 
not under the inductive action. Or if any embarrassment stiU 
arise from the fiict that A is not uniformly charged all over^ 
then we have merely to surround it with balls, such as B and 
Cf on every side» so that its state shall be alike on every part 
of its surface (because of the uniformity of its inductive im- 
fiueuce in all directions) and then that difficulty will be re- 
moved* A therefore is charged, but not polarly ; B assumes 
a polar condition ; and C is charged iuducteously (1483.), being 
by the prime influence of A brought into the opposite or nega- 
tive electrical state through the intervention of the intermediate 
and polarissed ball 3- 

vii* Simple charge therefore does not imply polarity in the 
body charged. Inductive charge (applymg that term to the 



i^iyuizco by GoOglc 



Ammer to Dr. Hare's LeUer 



[July 1840. 



sphere B and all bodies in asinular condition (▼.)) does(167l&)» 
The word charge as applied to a Leyden jar^ or to the whole 

of any inductive arrangementi by including all the eflfects» com- 
prehends of course both these states. 

viii. As another expression of my theory, I will put the fol- 
lowing case. Suppose a metallic sphere C, formed of a thin 
shell a foot in diameter ; suppose also in the centre of it another 
metallic sphere A only an inch in diameter ; suppose tihe central 
aphere A charged positively with electricity to the amount we 
idll say of 100; it would act by induction through the aur, lac» 
or other insulator between it and the large sphere C ; the inr 
terior of the latter would be negative, and its exterior positivey 
and the sum of the positive force upon the whole of the ex- 
ternal surface would be 100. The sphere C would in fact be 
polarized (v.) as regards its inner and outer surfaces* 

ix. Let us now conceive that instead of mere air, or other 
insuUting dielectrici withm C between it and A^ there is a thin 
metallic concentric sphere B six inches in diameter. This 
will make no difibrence in the uldmate result, for the charged 
ball A will render the inner and outer surfaces of this sphere B 
negative and positive, and it again will render the inner and 
outer surfaces of the large sphere C negative and positive, the 
sum of the positive forces on the outside of C being still 100. 

X. Instead of one intervening sphere let us imagine 100 or 
1000 concentric with each oth^, and separated by insulating 
matteri still the same final result will occur; the central ball 
will act inductrically, the influence originating with it will be 
carried on from sphere to sphere, and positive force equal to 
100 will appear on the outside of the external sphere. 

xi. Again, imagine that all these spheres are subdivided 
into myriads of particles, each being effectively insulated from 
its neighbours (1679.), still the same final result will occur; 
the inductric body A will polarise all these, and having its in- 
fluence carried on by them in their newly acquired state, will 
exert precisely the same amount of action on the external 
sphere C as before, and positive force equal to 100 will ap- 
pear on its outer surface. 

xii. Such a state of the space between the inductric and in- 
ducteous surfaces represents what 1 believe to be the state of 
an insulating dielectric under inductive influence ; the particles 



July 1840.] on eertam TkeweHcdl Opimaiu. jS65 



t>f which by the theory are asenmed to he conductors indm* 
dually, but not to one another (1669.). 

xiii. In asserting that 100 of positive force will appear on 
the outside of the external sphere under all these variations, I 
presume I am saying no more than what every electrician will 
admit. Were it not so, then positive and negative electricities 
could exist by themselves, and without rehition to each other 
(1169. 1177*)9 or they could exist in proportions notequira- 
lent to each other. There are plenty of experiments, bodi old 
and new, which prove the truUi of the principle, and I need 
not go further into it here. 

xiv. Suppose a plane to pass through the centre of this sphe- 
rical system, and conceive that instead of the space between 
the central ball A and the external sphere C being occupied 
by a uniform distribution of the equal metallic particles, three 
times as many were grouped in the one half to what occurred 
in the other half, the insulation of the particles being always 
preserred : then more of the inductric influence of A would 
be conveyed outwards to the inner surface of the sphere C, 
through that lialf of the space where the greater number of 
metallic particles existed, than through the other half: still the 
exterior of the outer sphere C would be uniformly charged 
with positive electricity, the amount of which would be 100 as 
before. 

XV* The actions of the two portions of space, as they have 
just been supposed to be constituted (xiv.), is as if they pos- 
sessed two different specific wdmetwe eapaeiHes (1^96.) ; but 

I by no means intend to say, that specific inductive capacity 
depends in all cases upon the number of conducting particles 
of which the dielectric is formed, or upon their vicinity. The 
full cause of the evident difference of inductive capacity of dif- 
ferent bodies is a problem as yet to be solved. 

xvi. In my papers I speak of all induction as being dependent 
on the action of contiguous particles, f . e, I assume that insu- 
lating bodies consist of pardcles which are conductors indivi- 
dually (1669.), but do not conduct to each other provided the 
intensity of action to which they are subject is beneath a given 
amount (1326. 1674. 1675.) : and that when the inductric body 
acts upon conductors at a distance, it does so by polarizing 
(1298. 1670.) all those particles which occur in the portion of 



i^iyuizco by GoOglc 



Amwerio Dr.Hm's LHiBf [July 184& 



dittlcetrifi between it and them* I have lued the term cmrf^gfiMMKt 
(1 164. 1673.), but baye I hope tufficieiitly ezpfeaied the mean' 
ing I attach to it; first by saying at par. 1615, Ae next ex- 
isting particle being conBidered as the contiguous one then 
in a note to par. 1665, by the words, " I mean by contiguous 
particles those which are next to eacli other, not that there is 
no space between them;" and further by the note to par. 1164. 
of the octavo edition of ny Researches, which is as folbwa : 
*' The word contiguous is perhaps not the best that might haife 
been used here and elsewhere^ for as particles do not toudi 
each other it is not strictly correct. I was induced to employ 
it because in its common acceptation it enabled me to state the 
theory plainly and with facility. By contiguous particles, I 
mean those which are next." 

xvii. Finally, my reasons for adopting the molecular theory 
of induction were the phenomena of electrolytic discharge 
(1164. 1343.), of induction in curved lines (1166. 11^15.), of 
specific inductive capacity (1167* l^^.)* of penetration and 
return action (19i5.)* of diflbrence of conduction and inaulip* 
tion (13^.), of polar forces (1665.), &c. 8fG., but for these 
reasons and any strength or value they may possess I refer to 
the papers themselves. 

xviii. I will now turn to such parts of your critical remarks 
as may require attention. A man who advances what he thiniu 
to be new truths, and to develope principles which profess to 
be more consistent with the laws of nature than those already 
in the field, is liable to be charged, first with self-contradio- 
tion; then with the contradiction of faotsi or he may be oIh 
scure in his expression, and so justly subject to certain queries ; 
or he may be found in non-agreement with the opinions of 
others. The first and second points are very important, and 
every one subject to such charges must be anxious to be made 
aware of, and also to set himself free from or acknowledge 
them ; the third is also a fault to be removed if possible ; the 
fourth is a matter of but small consequence in comparison with 
the other three ; for as every man who has the courage, not to 
say rashness, of forming an opinion of his own, thinks it better 
than any from which he differs, so it is only deeper investiga- 
tion, and most generally future investigators, who can decide 
which i& m the rigiit* 



JtrtT 1840.] on certain Theoretical Opinions, 267 

ziz, I am afipaid I ahall find it rather diffienlt to refer to 

your letter. I will, however, reckon the paragraphs in order 
from the top of each page, considering that the first which has 
its beginning first in the page'. In referring to my own matter 
I will employ the usual figures for the paragraphs of the Ex- 
perimental Researches, and small Bx>man numerals for those 
of this communication. 

Z3k At paragraph you say, you cannot reconcile my lan- 
guage at 1615, with that at 1165. In the latter place I have 
said I believe crdmuiry huhtetion in all cases to be an action of 
contiguous particles, and in the former assuming a very hypo« 
thetical case, that of a vacuum, I have said nothing in my 
theory forbids that a charged particle in the centre of a vacuum 
should act on the particle next to it, though that should be 
half an inch off. With the meaning which I have carefully 
attached to the word contiguous (xvi*) i see no contradictioa 
here in the terms used, nor any natural impossibility or im- 
probability in such an action* Nevertheless all ordmarff in* 
duction is to me an action of contiguous particles, being par- 
ticles at insensible distances : induction across a vacuum is not 
an ordinary instance, and yet I do not perceive that it cannot 
come under the same principles of action. 

zxi* As an illustration of my meaning, 1 may refer to the 
case, parallel with mine, as to the extreme difference of interval 
between the acting particles or bodies, of the modem views of 
die radiation and conduction of heat. In radiation the rays leave 
the hot particles and pass occasionally through great distances 
to the next particle, fitted to receive them: in conduction, 
where the heat passes from the liotter particles to those which 
are contiguous and form part of the same nias^^, still the pass- 
age is considered to be by a process precisely like that of ra« 
diation ; and though the effects are, as is well known, extremely 
diffinrent in their appearance, it cannot as yet be shown that 
the principle of communication is not the same in both. 

xxii. Ho on this point respecting contiguous particles and 
induction across half an inch of vacuum, I do not see that I am 
in contradiction with myself or with any natural law or fact. 

• 

* We shall change Prof. Faraday's references for the numbers which we havf 
•ttadted to Dr. awe's letter, »od refer thtia, ptr, 23, &c^£d. Plul. M^g. 



i^iyuizco by GoOglc 



[Jolt im 



jodSL Pteagraph 4 is answered by the above remarks and 
by Tui. ix. %• 

xxiv. Paragrapk 5 is answered according to my theory by 
viii. ix. X. xi. xii. and xiii. 

XXV. Paragraph 6 is answered, except in the matter of opinion 
(xviii.), according to my theory by xvi. The conduction of 
heat referred to in the paragraph itself, will, as it appears to 
me, bear no comparison with the phenomenon of electrical induc- 
tion : — ^the first refers to the distant influence of an agent which 
travels by a very slow process^ the second to one where distant 
inflnence is simultaneous, so to speak, with the origin of the 
force at the place of action : — the first refers to an agent which 
is represented by the idea of one imponderable fluid , the se- 
cond to an agency better represented probably by the idea of 
two fluids, or at least by two forces: — ^the first involves no 
polar action, nor any of its consequences, the second depends 
essentially on such actions;— with the first, if a certain portion 
be originaUy employed in the centre of a spherical arrange- 
ment, but a small part appears ultimately at die surface i with 
the second, an amount of force appears instantly at the surikce 
(viii. ix. X. xi. xii. xiii. xiv.) exactly equal to the exciting or 
moving force, which is still at the centre. 

xxvi. Paragraph 13 involves another charge of self-contra- 
diction, from which, therefore, I will next endeavour to set 
myself free* You say I " correctly allege that it is impossible 
to charge a portion of matter wiUi one electric force without 
the other (see par. 1177). But if all this be true, how can 
ihere be a poiUivefy excited paHkHet (see par. 1616). Must 
not every particle be excited negatively if it be excited posi- 
tively? Must it not have a negative as well as a positive 
pole?" Now I have not said exactly what you attribute to 
me ; my words are, 'Mt is impossible, experimentally, to charge 
a portion of matter with one electric force independent^ of 
the other : charge always implies induciionf for it can in no in- 
stance be effected without (ll??.)." I can, however, easily per- 
ceive how my words have conveyed a very difiereht idea to your 
mind, and probably to others, than that I meant to express. 

xxvii. Using the word charge in its simplest meaning (iiu 
iv.), I think that a body can be charged with one electric force 
without the other, that body being considered in relation to 



July 1840.} on certain Theoretical Opinions. . 269 

itself only. But I think that such charge cannot exist without 
induction (1178.), or independently of what is called the de» 

velopment of an equal amount of the other electric force, not 
in itself, but in the neighbouring consecutive particles of the 
surrounding dielectric, and through them of the facing particles 
of the uninsulated surrounding conducting bodies, which, un- 
der the circumstances, terminate as it* were the particular case 
of induction. I have no idea, therefore, that a particle when 
charged must itself of necessity he polar ; the spheres A B C of 
iv*, T., vL, vii., fully illustrate my views (67f .)• 

xxviii. Paragraph 20 includes the question, " is this con- 
sistent ?" implying self-contradiction, which, therefore, I pro- 
ceed to notice. The question arises out of the possibility of 
glass being a (slow) conductor or not of electricity, a point 
questioned also in the two preceding paragraphs. I heUeve 
that it is* I have charged small Leyden jars made of thin flint 
glass tube with electricity, taken out the diarging wires, sealed 
them up hennetically, and after two and three years have 
opened and found no charge in them. I will refer you also to 
Belli*s curious experiments upon the successive charges of a 
jar and the successive return of portions of these charges ^ I 
will also refer to the experiments with the shell lac hemisphere, 
especially that described in 1^7. of my Researches ; also the 
experiment in 1^46. I cannot conceive how, ui these cases^ 
the ahr in the vicinity of the coating could gradually relinquish 
to it a pordon of free electricity, convcjred into it by what I 
called convection, since in the first experiment quoted (1237.), 
when the return was gradual, there was 7io coating ; and in 
the second (1246.), when there was a coatings the return action 
was most sudden and instantaneous* 

xsx. Paragraphs ^1 and fi2 perhaps only require a few words 
of explanation* In a charged Leyden jar I have considered 
the two opposite forces on the inductric and inducteous sur- 
faces as being directed towards each other through the glass of 
the jar, provided the jar have no projection of its inner coating, 
and is uninsulated on the outside (1682.). When discharge by 
a wire or discharger, or any other of the many arrangements 
used for that purpose is effected, these supply the some other 
directions*' spoken of (168^. 1683.> 

> BiUiodieca Italiana, 1837, hoov. p. 417*' 



i^iyuizco by GoOglc 



870 AMmtr to Dr* Uaxe's LttUr [Jvlt 1840. 



XXX. The inquiry in paragraph 33,1 should answer by saying, 
that the process is the same as that by which the polarity of the 
tpheze B (iT*i Tv) would be neutralized if the spheres A and C 
were made to communicate by a metallic wire \ or that by which 
the 100 orlOOO intermediate spheres (x.) or the myriads of po- 
larized conducting particles (xi.) would be discharged, if the 
inner sphere A, and the outer one C, were brought into com- 
munication by an insulated wire ; a circumstance which would 
not in the least affect the condition of the power on the ex- 
terior of the globe C. 

xxxi. The obscurity in my papers^ which has led to your re- 
marks in paragraph £5| arises, as it appears to me (after my 
own imperfect expression), from the uncertain or double mean* 
ing of the word discharge* You say» ^' if discharge involTea a 
return to the same state in Titreous particles, the ssme moat 
be true in those of the metalhc wire. Wherefore then are 
these dissipated when the discharge is sufficiently powerful 
A jar is said to be discharged when its charged state is re- 
duced by any means, and it is found in its first indifferent con- 
dition. The word is then used simply to express the state of 
the apparatus; and so I haye used it in the ezpreesions cri* 
tioised in paragraph SI, ahready referred to. The prooees of 
discharge, or the mode by which the jar is brought into the 
discharged state, may be subdiyided, as of various kinds ; and 
I have ypoken of conductive (1^20.), electrolytic (1343.), dis- 
ruptive (l.i59.), and convective (1562.) discharge, any one of 
which may cause the discharge of the jar, or the discharge of 
the inductive arrangements described in this letter (xxx.), the 
action of the particles in any one of these cases being entirely 
different from the mere return action of the polariaed partidea 
of the glass of the jar, or the polariaed globe B (v.), to tlieir 
first state. My view of the relation of insulators and conduc* 
tors, as bodies of one class, is given at 13J30. 1675. &c. of the 
Researches ; but I do not think the particles of the good con- 
ductors acquire an intensity of polarization anything like that 
of the particles of bad conductors ; on the contrary, I conceive 
that the contiguous. polarized particles (1670.) of good con- 
ductors discharge to each other when their poUrity is at a very 
low degree of intensity (1306. 1088. 1675.). The question of 
why are the metallic particles dissipated when the charge is 



Jmr 1840.] on eeriam Tkeor€tieal Opimmu. 1^1 

SUffidently poweriuly U one that my theory is not called upon 
at present to answer, since it will be acknowledged by all, that 
the dissipation is not necessary to discharge. That different 
efiects ensue upon the subjection of bodies to different degrees 
of the same power, is common enough in experimentd phi* 
losophy ; thus, one degree of heat will merely make water hot, 
whilst a higher degree will dissipate it as steam^ and a lower 
will convert it into ice. 

xxxii. The next most important point, as it appears to 
ine, is that contained in paragraphs 16 and 17. I have said 
(1S30.), " what then is to separate the principle of these two ez«> 
tremesi perfiict conduction and perfect insulation, firom each 
otiier, since 'the moment we leave in the smallest degree per* 
fection at either extremity we introlve the element of perfect 
tion at the opposite end?" and upon this you say, might not 
this query be made with as much reason in the case of motion 
and rest and in any case of the intermixture of opposite qua- 
lities, may It not be said, the moment we leave the element of 
perfection at one end, we introl?e the element of perfection at 
the opposite ?**4nay it not be said of light and darknessj or of 
opakenesB and translucency ? and so forth. 

xxxiii. I admit that these questions are very properly put ; 
not that I go to the full extent of them all, as for instance that of 
motion and rest ; but I do not perceive their bearing upon the 
question, of whether conduction and insulation are different 
properties, dependent upon two different modes of action of 
the particles of the substances respectively possessing these 
actions) or whether they are only differenoes in degree of one 
and the same mode of action? In this question, however, lies 
the whole gist of the matter. To explain my views, I will put 
a case or two. In former times a principle or force of levity 
was admitted, as well as of gravity, and certain variations in 
the weights of bodies were supposed to be caused by different 
combinations of substances possessing these two principles. 
In later times, the levity principle has been discarded; and 
though we still have imponderable substances, yet the pheno* 
mena causing weight have been accounted for by one force or 
principle only, that of gravity | the difference in the gravitation 
of diffiurent bodies being considered due to diflerenees in de^ 
gr€9 of this mm fpme resident in them all. Now no onie can 



i^iyuizco by GoOglc 



9^2 Answer to Dr. Haie's Letter [Jvly 1840. 

for a moment suppose that it ie the same thing philosophically 
to assume either the two forces or the one force for the expla- 
nation of the phenomena in question* 

xxxiv. Again, at one time there was a distinction taken be- 
tween the principle of heat and that of cold : at present that 
theory is done away with, and the phenomena of heat and cold 
are referred to the same class, (as I refer those of insulation 
and conduction to one class,) and to the influence of different 
degrees of the same power. But no one can say that the two 
theories, namely, that including but one positive principle, and 
that including two, are alike. 

xzxT. Again, there is the theory of one electric fluid and also 
that of two. One explains by the difference in degree or quan- 
tity of one fluid, what the other attributes to a variation in the 
quantity and relation of two fluids. Both cannot be true. That 
they have nearly equal hold of our assent, is only a proof of 
our ignorance ; and it is certaii|, whichever is the false theory, 
is at present holding the minds of its supporters in bondage, 
and is greatly retarding the progress of science. 

xxxvi. I think it therefore important, if we can, to ascertain 
whellier hisulation and conduction are cases of the same class, 
just as it is important to know that hot and cold are pheno- 
mena of the same kind. As it is of consequence to show that 
smoke ascends and a stone descends in obedience to one pro- 
perty of matter, so 1 think it is of consequence to show that 
one body insulates and another conducts only in consequence 
of a difference in degree of one common property which they 
both possess; and tiiat in both cases the effects are consistent 
witii my theory of induction. 

xxxviL I now come to what may be considered as queries in 
your letter which I ought to answer. Paragraph 8 contains 
one. As I concede that particles on opposite sides of a vacuum 
may perhaps act on each other, you ask, wherefore is the 
received theory of the mode in which the excited surface of a 
Leyden jar induces in the opposite surface a contrary state, 
oljectionable V* My reasons for thinking the excited sur&ce 
does not directly induce upon the opposite sur&ce, &c*, ia, 
first, my belief that the glass consists of particles conductive 
in themselves, but insulated as respects each other (xvii.) ; and 
next, that in the arrangement given iv., ix., or x., A does not 



July 1840.] on eertam TkeareUedl OpMans. SftS 

induce directly on but through the intermediate masBes cat 
particles of conducting matter. 

xxxviii. In the next paragrapht the question is rather im- 
plied than asked — ^what do I mean by polarity ? I had hoped 
that the paragraphs 1669. 1670. 1671. 167^. 1679. 1686. 1687. 
1688. 1699. 1700. 1701. 1702. 1703. 1704. in the Researches, 
would have been sufficient to convey my meaning, and I am in- 
clined to think you had not perhaps seen them when your 
letter was written. They, and the observations already made 
(t.« xxvi.)y with the case given (iv., v.), will, I think, be suJffi- 
cient as my answer. The sense of the word polaritif is so di- 
verse when appUed to light, to a crystal, to a magnet, to the 
▼oltaic battery, and so different in all these cases to that of 
the word when applied to the state of a conductor under in- 
duction (v.), that I thought it safer to use the phrase species 
of polarity," than any other, which being more expressive would 
pledge me further than I wished. 

xxxix. Paragraph 1 1 involves a mistake of my views. I do 
not consider bodies which are charged by friction or other- 
wise, as polarized, or as having their particles polarized (iii., 
iv.j xzvii.). This paragraph and the next do not require, there- 
fore, any further remark, especially after what I have said of 
polarity above (xxxviii.). 

xL And now, my dear sir, I think I ought to draw my reply 
to an end. The paragraphs which remain unanswered refer, 
I think, only to differences of opinion, or else, not even to dif- 
ferences, but opinions regarding which I have not ventured to 
judge. These opinions I esteem as of the utmost importance ; 
but that is a reason which makes me the rather desirous to 
decline entering upon their consideration, inasmuch as on 
many of their connected points I have formed no decided no- 
tion, but am constrained by ignorance and the contrast of £actB 
to hold my judgment as yet in suspense. It b, indeed, to me 
an annoying matter to find how many subjects there are in 
electrical science, on which, if 1 were asked for an opinion, I 
should haye to say, I cannot tell, — I do not know ; but, on the 
other hand, it is encouraging to think that these are they which 
if pursued industriously, experimentally, and thoughtfully, will 
lead to new discoveries. Such a subject, for instance, occurs 
in the currents produced by dynamic induction, which you say 

YOXi. n* T 



i^iyuizco by GoOglc 



Meply to Hare's erUUml remarks. |>LkA. 



it will be admitted do not require for their production inter- 
vening ponderable atoms. For my own part, I more than half 
incline to think they do require these intervening particles, that 
IB, where any particles intenreno (1 729. 1783. 17^.)- But on 
this question, as on numy othera^ I have not yet made np my 
mind. Allow me^ therefore, here to conclude my letter ; and 
believe me to be, with the highest esteem. 

My dear Sir, 
Your obliged and faithful Servant, 
Royal luvtitution, April 18, 1840. M. Fa&AD/IY. 



A second letter was written by Dr. Hare to Mr. Faraday on 
the same subject, which may be found in the American Jotmal 
of Science, vol. xli. p. £;or the Lend* and Edinb. Phil* Bfag. 
1841* vol. xviu. p. 465. 

V 



On Dr. Hare*8 Secmd Letter, and on the Chemical and Con* 
tact Theories qf the Voltaic Battery^. 

To Taylor, Esq. 

My ]>fiA& Sir, 

You are aware that considerations regarding health have 
preTented me from worUng or reading in sdenee for tbe lasi 
two years. This will account to you for my ignorance of the 
drcumstance that you bad reprinted Dr« Hare's second letter 

to me' ; and I believe I knew it only for the first time a week 
or two ago, on beginning to read up. As some persons think 
a letter unanswered is also unanswerably, I write merely to say, 
that when it was sent to me as printed in Silliman's Journal, I 
sent a brief letter back, declining to enter into discussion, since 
I had nothing more to say than had been said, and still thought 
that that was sufficient to enable my own mind to rest in the 
view it bad taken of static induction, &e« My reisson &r de* 
dining was no want of respect to Dr» Harei but a strong con- 
viction that controversial reply and rejoinder is but a vain oocii*' 

1 JmdA, ^ £dhih.Pli]l.Mag^ 1843, vd.zzHl 
• Ibid. 1841, vd. snriii. p.46S. 



Mar. 1843.] Reply to Hare's erkiedi renmrki. iff 6 



patlon* Profeisor SflUnum wrote me word that he had yery 
unfortunately lost my brief note^ but hoped to find it and print 
itK Since then I haye forgotten the matter, and only renew it 

' I have recently found the rough copy of this letter and venture to print it 
as a aole^M. F,, June 18i4. 

Eoyal Institution, London, 6th May 1841. 

Mr »BAa Sis, 

I Koeiyed a week or two ago tiie printed copy of your seeond letter, dated 
Jannaiy 1, 1841, and am greatly obliged by it, botih ai it is another ezpreision 
of your kfaidnea^ and also an evident proof ihat yon think the views I have 
vSDtored to p«t fijvfth on Electrical Induction are worthy of notice. 

Tou must excuse me however for leveial reasons from answering it at any 
length: the first is my distaste for controversy, wliich is so great, that I would 
on no account our correspondence should acquire tliat character. I have 
often seen it do great harm, and yet remember few cases in natural knowledge 
where it has helped much either to pull down error or advance truth. Criti- 
cism, on the other hand, is of much value ; and when criticism, such as yours, 
has done its duty, then it is for other minds than those either of the author or 
pride to decide upon and acknowledge \he right. 

A second reason is, that I do not wisli to be drawn into statements more 
precise than are my thoughts^ and this I have already expressed In my former 
letter (zl.). 

A ddid Is, Aat I do not find anything in yomr hst eommunieation whioh 
emeatea aay diflkiilty ia my mind with vsspeet to my Ttew of eleetrioal indue- 
Ijon, nor aay important point which is not answered by my papers generally, 
or by my former letter to you. In saying this, I keep in mind paragfaphs i., 
xviii., and also xvii. and zxxi. of mine to you. Do not think however that I 
have the vanity to suppose that this my opinion is of any importance to the 
scientific world, or any answer to your letter ; it is merely of consequence as 
giving a reason why I need not go furtlier into the statement of that which at 
present appears to me already correctly stated. 

The fourth reason ia, that judging from what I have been able to observe, I 
do not perceive that the statement I have endeavoured to give of my theory le^ds 
other persons to apprehend its principles in a manner seriously dtflforent from 
that whieh I should desire ;*aad such being the ease, I can have nothing more to 
aay, since they are the judges, and have the evidenoe as fairly before them as 
praeeat ^lets and cirenmstancea permit 

I am, my dear Sir, ytm oUlged aad ftilbtul Servants 
Dr, Hare, tj^e. tt^e. 4re. Faraday, 

Dear Sir, 

Will you let me trouble you with the above for your Journal, as my answer 
to Dr. Hare's second letter to me ? 

Ever your obliged Swvant, 
Professor SiOimant Sfc, 8fc. 8fc, M. Faraday. 

t2 



i^iyuizco by GoOglc 



Repfy to Hare's eriiieai remark$, [Mar* ISiS. 



to give the same sort of answer to the letter as contained in 
your JoumaL 

I perceive also in your Magazine several attacks, from Grer- 
many, Italy and Belgium, upon the chemical theory of the vol- 
taic battery, and some of them upon experiments of mine. For 
my own part I refrain from publicly noticing these arguments, 
simply because there is nothing in them which suggests to my 
mind a new thought illustrative of the subject, or gives any 
ground for a change in my opinion. But whilst speaking on 
this point I cannot help expressing a wish that some of the 
advocates of the contact theory would touch upon the consi- 
deration which, up to this time, seems to have been most care* 
fully avoided, namely the unphilosophical nature of the assumed 
contact force, as I have endeavoured to express it in par. ^065 
to ^73 of my " Experimental Researches," and as Dr. Roget 
has expressed it in words which I have appended in a note to 
my paper. Such a consideration seems to me to remove the 
foundation itself of the contact theory. I wish you could be 
persuaded to think it worth while to reprint those three pages 
in your Magazine ^. As far as I can perceive, they express a 
fundamental principle which cannot be set aside or evaded by 
a philosophical mind possessing only a moderate degree of 
strictness in its reasonings; and I must confess, that untO 
some answer, or some show of answer in the form of assump- 
tion or otherwise, is made to that expression of what I believe 
to be a law of nature, I shall feel very little inclined to attach 
much importance to facts which, though urged in favour of the 
contact theory, are ever found by the partisans of the chemical 
theory just as favourable to, and consistent with, their peculiar 
fiews. 

I am, my dear Sir, 

Very iaitbfidly yours, 

M. Faraday* 

Boysl Inatitatioii, Maicb 11, 1848. 

^ We purpose to insert theee pages in our next Number*"— So. VhSU M^g, 



1. 



July 184L] Appeanmeei LtglUnmg. 



£77 



On some supposed farms of Lightning^* 

To ike EMors of the Pkihsqphicai Magazine and Jowmal* 
Gbntlbiibn, 

Thb magnificent display of lightning which we had on the 
evening of the £7th of last month, and its peculiar appearance to 

crowds of observers at London, with the consequent impress 
sions on their minds, induce me to trouble you with a brief 
letter on certain supposed appearances and forms of lightning, 
r^pecting which the judgment of e?en good observers is often 
in error. 

When, after a serene sky, or one that is not overcast, thun- 
der-douds form in the dbtance, the ohserrer sees the clouds 
and ihe illumination of the lightning displayed hefore him as 
a magnificent picture ; and what he often takes to he forked 

lightning (f. e. the actual flash, and not a reflexion of it), ap- 
pears to run through the clouds in the most beautiful manner. 
This was the case on that evening to those who, being in Lon- 
don, observed the storm in the west, about nine o'clock, when 
the clouds were at a distance of twenty miles or more ; and I 
have very frequently observed the same efiect from our south- 
ern coasts over the sea. In many of these cases, Uiat which is 
thought to be the electric discbarge is only the illuminated 
edge of a cloud, beyond and behind which the real discharge 
occurs. It is in its nature like the bright enlightened edge 
which a dark well-defined cloud often presents when between 
the sun and the observer ; and even the moon also frequently 
produces similar appearances. In the case of its production 
by lightning and distant clouds^ the line is so bright by com- 
parison with the previous state of the clouds and sky, so sud- 
den and brief in its existence, so perfectly defined, and of such 
a form, as to lead every one at the first moment to think it is 
the lightning itself which appears* 

But the forms which this line assumes, being dependent on 
the forms of the clouds, vary much, and have led to many mis- 
takes about the shape of the lightning flash. Often, when the 
hghtning is supposed to be seen darting from one cloud to 
another, it is only this illuminated edge which the observer 
^ Loud, and Edinb. PhU. Mag., 1841, vd. ziz. p. 104. 



i^iyuizco by GoOglc 



£78 Oh nippo$9dform$ lAghtmng* [JoiiV 1841« 



sees. On other occasions, when he was sure he saw it ascend, 
it was simply this line more brilliant at its upper than at its 
lower part. Some writers have deieribed curved flashes of 
lightning, the electric fluid having parted from the clouds, 
gone obliquely downwards to the sea, and then turned upwards 
to the clouds again i this eflfoet I have occasionally seefif and 
have always finmd It lo bo metoly tbe illuminated edge of i 
oloud. 

I have seen cases of this kind in which the flash appeared 
to divide in its course, one stream separating into two ; and 
when flashes seen at a distance are supposed to exhibit this 
rare condition, it is very important the observer should be 
awal« of this very probable cause of deception. 

I have also frequently seen, and others with mdi a flash 
having an apparently sensible duration, as If It were a no* 
mentary stream, rather than that sudden, brief flash which tho 
electric spark always presents, whose duration evert Wheat-- 
stone could not appreciate. This I attribute to two or three 
flashes occurring very suddenly in succession at the same place, 
or nearly so, and illuminating the same edge of a cloud. 

The efiect I have described can frequently be easily traced 
to Its cause, and when thus traced best prepares the mind to 
appreciate the mistakes it may lead, and has ledi to in tha 
character, shape and conditioti of the lightning flash. It often 
happens at the sea-sldei that, after a fine day, clouds wiU to» 
wards evening collect over the sea on the horicon, and light* 
ning will flash about and amongst them, recurring at intervals 
as short as two or three seconds, for an hour or more together. 
At such times the observer may think he sees the lightning of 
a flash ; but if he waits till the next illumination, or some future 
one, takes place, he will perceive that the flash appears a ae- 
cond time in the same place, and with the same form ; or per- 
haps it has travelled a Uttle distance to the left or right, and 
yet has the same form as befbra. Sometunes an apparent flaah, 
having the same shape, has occurred three or four ^es In 
suecessioo; and sometunes It has happened ^at a certain 
shaped flash having appeared in a certain place, other flashes 
have appeared in other places, then the first has reappeared in 
its place, and even the others again in their places. Now in all 
these cases it was simply the illuminated edges of clouds that 



MiUU 18430 ^ JSieekieal Inductw9 Actum. 



were seen, and not the real flashes of Hghtning. These forms 
frequently exist in the cloud, and yet are not dutinguishable 
till the lightning occurs. It is easy, however, to undmtand 
why they are then only developed^ for that which appears in 
the distance to be one dull mass of cloudy distinguiihable in 
figure only at its principal otttline» often consists of many suIh 
ordinate and well-shaped masses, which, when the lightning 
occurs amongst or beyond them, present forms and lines before 
unperceived. 

The apparent duration, which I before spoke of, is merely 
a case of very rapidly recurring flashes, and may, by a careful 
observer, be easily connected with that which I have now pro* 
posed as the best test of the nature of the phenomena. 

There are some other circumstances which will help to di« 
stinguish the effect I have thus endeavoured to describe from 
the true appearance of the lightning flash, as the apparent 
thickness, sometimes, of the supposed flash, and its degree of 
illumination ; but I have, I think, said enough to call attention 
to the point; and, considering how often the philosopher is, in 
respect to the character of these appearances, obliged to de- 
pend upon the report of casual observers, the tendency of whose 
minds is generally rather to give way to their surprise than to 
simplify what may seem- remarkable, I hope I have not said too 
.much. 

I ain» Gentlemen, your obedient Servant* 

June 22, 1841. M. FaEADAT* 



On Static Electrical Inductive Action ^ 

To R. Phillips, Esq., F.Jt.S. 

Dear Phillips, 
Perhaps you may think the following experiments worth 
notice ; their value consists in their power to give a very pre- 
cise and decided idea to the mind respecting certain ' prin- 
ciples of inductive electrical action, which I find are by many 
accepted with a degree of doubt or obscurity that takes away 

' Load. andEdinb. PhU. Mag., 1843, voL uii. 



i^iyuizco by GoOglc 



280 



On SUUto Eketrieal Inductile AeUwu [Mae* I8I18. 



© 



much of their importance : they arc the expression and proof 
of certain parts of my view of induction Let A in the dia^ 
gram represent an insulated pewter 
ice-pail ten and a half inches high 
and seven inches diameter, con- 
nected by a wire with a delicate 
gold-leaf electrometer £, and let C 
be a round brass ball insulated by 
a dry thread of white silk, three 
or four feet in length, so as to re- 
move the influence of the hand 
holding it from the ice-pail below. 
Let A be perfectly discharged, 
then let C be charged at a di- 
stance by a machine or Leyden 
jar, and introduced Into A as in 
the figure. If C be positive, £ 
also will diverge positively ; if C 
be taken away, E will collapse 
perfectly, the apparatus being in 
good order. As C enters the ves- 
sel A the divergence of £ will in- 
crease until C is about three Inches below the edge of the 
sel, and will remain quite steady and unchanged for any greater 
depression. This shows that at that distance the inductive ac- 
tion of C is entirely exerted upon the interior of A, and not in 
any degree directly upon external objects. If C be made to 
touch the bottom of A, all its charge is communicated to A ; 
there is no longer any inductive action between C and A, and 
Coupon being withdrawn and ezaminedi is found perfectly dis- 
charged* 

These are all well-known and recognised actions^ but being 
a littie varied, the following conclusions may be drawn from 
them. If C be merely suspended in A, it acts upon it by in- 
duction, evolving electricity of its own kind on the outside of 
A ; but if C touch A its electricity is then communicated to it, 
and the electricity that is afterwards upon the outside of A 

' See Experimental llcsearclies, Par. 1295, &c., 1667, &e., and Answer to 
Dr.Hare^PhiL Mag., 1840, N.S. vol. zvii. p. 66. viu. (or p«ge 264 of this 
vohune.) 





Maiu 18430 On SiaUe Ekeirieal Indmeiive Actum. 281 

may be considered as that which was originally upon the car- 
rier C. As this change, however, produces no effect upon 
the leaves of the electrometer, it proves that the electricity tn* 
duced by C and the electricity tit C axe accurately equal in 

amount and power. 

Again, if C charged be held equidistant from the bottom 
and sides of A at one moment, and at another be held as close 
to the bottom as possible without 
dischargmg to A, still the diver- 
gence remains absolutely unchan- 
ged, showing that whether C acts at 
a considerable distance or at the 
very smallest distance, the amount 
of its force is the same. So also if 
it be held excentric and near to the f 2 

side of the ice-pail in one place, so 
as to make the inductive action take 
place in lines expressing almost 
every degree of forcQ m different 
directions^ still the sum of their 
forces is the same constant quantity 
as diat obtained before; for the 
leaves alter not. J^othing like ex- 
pansion or coercion of the electric 
force appears under these varying 
circumstances. 

I can now describe experiments with many concentric me- 
tallic vessels arranged as in the diagram, where four ice-pails 
are represented insulated from each other by plates of shell- 
lac on which they respectively stand. With this system the 
charged carrier C acts precisely as with the single vessel, so 
that the mtervention of many conducting plates causes no 
difference in the amount of inductive effect. If C touch the 
inside of vessel 4, still the leaves are unchanged. If 4 be taken 
out by a silk thread, the leaves perfectly collapse ; if it be in- 
troduced again, they open out to the same degree as before. 
If 4 and 3 be connected by a wire let down between them by 
a silk thread, the leaves remain the same, and so they still re- 
main if 3 and 2 be connected by a similar wire ; yet all the 



© 




i^iyuizco by GoOglc 



fiSSi On Static Electrical Inductive Action. [Ma&. 

electricity originally on the carrier and acting at a considerable 
distance, is now on the outside of 2, and acting through only 
a small non-conducting space. If at last it be communicated 
to the outside of 1, still the leaves remain unchanged. 

Again, consider the charged carrier C in the centre of the 
system, the divergence of the electrometer measures its induc- 
tive influence ; this divergence remains the same whether 1 be 
there alone^ or whether idl four vessels be there ; whether these 
vessels be separate as to insulation^ or whether S» S and 4 be 
connected so as to represent a very thick metallic vessel, or 
whether all four vessels be connected. 

Again, if in place of the metallic vessels 2, 3, 4, a thick vessel 
of shell-lac or of sulphur be introduced, or if any other varia- 
tion in the character of the substance within the vessel 1 be 
made^ still not the slightest change is by that caused upon the 
divergence of the leaves* 

If in place of one carrier many carriers in different positions 
are within the inner vessel, there is no interference of one with 
the other ; they act with the same amount of force outwardly as 
if the electricity were spread uniformly over one carrier, how- 
ever much the distribution on each carrier may be disturbed 
by its neighbours. If the charge of one carrier be by contact 
given to vessel 4 and distributed over it, still the others act 
through and across it with the same final amount of force ; and 
no state of charge given to any of the vessels 1, 3 or 4, pre- 
vents a charged carrier introduced within 4 acting with pre- 
cisely the same amount of force as if they were uncharged* If 
pieces of shelMac, slung by white silk thread and excited, be 
introduced into the vessel, they act exactly as &e metallic 
carriers, except that their charge cannot be communicated by 
contact to the metallic vessels. 

Thus a certain amount of electricity acting within the centre 
of the vessel A exerts exactly the same power externally, 
whether it act by induction through the space between it and 
A, or whether it be transferred by conduction to A, so as ab- 
solutely to destroy the previous induction within* Also, as to 
the inductive action, whether the space between C and A be 
filled with air, or with shell-lac or sulphur, having above twice 
the specific inductive capacity of air ; or contain many concen- 
tric shells of conducting matter \ or be nine-tenths filled with 



Maa. 184a.] On Siatie Eleciricai Induetive Action. 



conducting matter, or be metal on one side and shell-larc on the 
other ; or whatever other means be taken to vary the forces, 
either by yariation of distance or substancet or actual charge 
of the matter in this spacei atili the amouat of action it pie<* 
eisely the same. 

Henoe if a body be charged« whether it be a partide or a 
massy there b nothing about its action which can at aU oonaiit 
with the idea of exaltation or extinction i the amount of force 
is perfectly definite and unchangeable : or to those who in their 
minds represent the idea of the electric force by a fluid, there 
ought to be no notion of the compression or condensation of 
this fluid within itself, or of its coercibility, as some under- 
stand that phrase* The only mode of affecting this force is 
by connecting it with force of the same kind, either in the 
same or the contrary direction. If we oppose to it force of 
the contrary kind, we may dUeharge neutraliie the original 
force, or we may withoui dUeharge connect them . by the 
simple laws and principles of static induction ; but away from 
induction, which is always of the same kind, there is no other 
state of the power in a charged body ; that is, there is no state 
of static electric force corresponding to the terms of simulated 
or disguised or latent electricity away from the ordinary prin- 
ciples of inductive action; nor is there any case where the 
electricity is mare latent 6t more dhguued than when it exists 
upon the charged conductor of an electrical machine and is 
ready to give a powerful spark to any body brought near it* 

A curioud consideration arises from this perfection of induc- 
tive action. Suppose a thin uncharged metallic globe two or 
three feet in diameter, insulated in the middle of a chamber, 
and then suppose the space within this globe occupied by my- 
riads of little vesicles or particles charged alike with electricity 
(or diflerently), but each insulated from its neighbour and the 
globe ; their inductive power would be such that the outside 
of the globe would be charged with a force equal to the sum of 
dU their forces, and any part of this globe (not charged of 
itself) would give as long and powerful a spark to a body 
brought near it as if the electricity of all the particles near and 
distant were on the surface of the globe itself. If we pass 
from this consideration to the case of a cloud, then, though we 
cannot altogether compare the external surface of the cloud to 



i^iyuizco by GoOglc 



On Electric CondnusUm [Jan. 184i 



the metallic surface of the globe, yet the previous inductive 
eflfectt upon the earth and its buildings are the same; and 
when a charged cloud it over the earth* although its electricity 
may be diiRised over every one of its particles* and no import 
tant part of the imdMchic diarge be accumulated upon its under 
surface, yet the induction upon the eardi will be as strong as 
if all that portion of force which is directed- towards the earth 
were upon that surface ; and the state of the earth and its ten- 
dency to discharge to the cloud will also be as strong in the 
former as in the latter case. As to whether lightning-discharge 
begins first at the cloud or at the earth* that is a matter far 
more difficult to decide than is usually supposed^ ; theoretical 
notions would lead me to expect that in most cases* perhaps in 
all* it begins at the earth. I am* 

My dear Phillips, ever yours* 

Royal InstituUon, Feb. 4, 1843. M. FarADAY. 



A speculation touching Electric Conduction and the Nature qf 

MatterK 

To Michard Taylor, Esq. 

Dear Sir, Royal Institution, Jan. 25, 1844. 

Last Friday I opened the weekly evening-meetings here by 
a subject of which the above was the title* and had no intention 
of publishing the matter further* but as it involves the consi' 
deration and application of a few of those main elements of na- 
tural knowledge, facts, I thought an account of its nature and 
intention might not be unacceptable to you, and would at the 
same time serve as the record of my opinion and views, as far 
as they are at present formed. 

The view of the atomic constitution of matter which I think 
is most prevalent, is that which considers the atom as a some- 
thing material having a certain volume, upon which those powers 
were impressed at the creation* which have given it* from that 

» Experimental Researches, Par. 1370, 1410, 1484. 
3 Lond. and Edinb. Phil. Mag., 1844, vol.xxiv. p. 136. 



Jan. 1844.] and the Naiure of MaUer. 



£85 



tine to the present^ the capability of constituting, when many 
atoms are congregated together into groups, the different 
substances whose effects and properties we obsenre* These» 
though grouped and held together by their powers, do not 
touch each other, but have intervening space, otherwise pres- 
sure or cold could not make a body contract into a smaller 
bulk, nor heat or tension make it larger ; in liquids these atoms 
or particles are free to move about one another, and in vapours 
or gases they are also present, but removed very much fiirther 
apart, though still related to each other by their powers. 

The atomic doctrine is greatly used one way or another in this* 
€Nir day, for the interpretation of phenomena, especially those 
of crystallography and chenustry, and is not so carefiilly dbtin« 
guished from the facts, but that it often appears to him who 
stands in the position of student, as a statement of the facts 
themselves, though it is at best but an assumption ; of the truth 
of which we can assert nothing, whatever we may say or think 
of its probability. The word atom, which can never be used 
"without involving much that is purely hypothetical, is often t»- 
tended to be used to express a simple fact; but good as the in- 
tention is, I have not yet found a mind that did habitually se- 
parate it from its accompanying temptations ; and there can 
be no doubt tiiat the words defimte proportbns, equivalents, 
primes, &c., which did and do express frilly all the fads of what 
is usually called the atomic theory in chemistry, were dismissed 
because they were not expressive enough, and did not say all 
that was in the mind of him who used the word atom in their 
atead ; they did not express the hypothesis as well as the fact* 

But it is always safe and philosophic to distinguish, as much 
as is in our power, fact from theory; the experience of past 
ages is sufficient to show us the wisdom of such a course $ and 
considering the constant tendency of the mind to rest on an 
assumption, and, when it answers every present purpose, to 
forget that it is an assumption, we ought to remember that it, 
in such cases, becomes a prejudice, and inevitably interferes, 
more or less, with a clear-sighted judgment. I cannot doubt 
but that he who, as a wise philosopher, has most power of 
penetrating the secrets of nature, and guessing by hypothesis at 
her mode of working, will also be most careful, for his own safe 
progress and tiiat of otiiersi to distinguish that knowledge which 



i^iyuizco by GoOglc 



t 



fM Om Eleeirie CfmdueiUm [Jan. 18ii 

confiifits of assumption, by which I mean theory and hypoCliedfi 
from that which ia the knowledge of facts and laws; Ii0f6r 
raiiiDg the fomer to the dignity or euthority of the latter* nor 
eimiiuhig tiie letter more then is inevitable with the femier. 

I4ght and electrietty are two great and searehing ioTestip 
gators of the molecular structure of bodies, and it was whflsl 
considering the probable nature of conduction and insulation 
in bodies not decomposable by the electricity to which they were 
subject, and the relation of electricity to space contemplated as 
void of that which by the atomists is called matter, that consi- 
derations somethiog like those which foUow were presented to 
my mind. 

If the view of the eonstltntion of nutter already refinrred to 
he assumed to be correct, and Imay be allowed to speak of th^ 
partioles of matter and of the space between them (in wateVv 
or in the rapour of water for instance) as two diftrent things, 
then space must be taken as the only continuous part, for the 
particles are considered as separated by space from each other. 
Space will permeate all masses of matter in every direction 
like a net, except that in place of meshes it will form cells, iso^ 
latingeach atom from its neighbours, and itself only being con** 
Cinuons. 

Then take the case of a piece of shell-laei a non-eondoetor, 
and it would appear at once from such a view of its atoasic 
eonstitution that space is an insulator, for if It were a con- 
ductor the shell-lac could not insulate, whatever might be 
the relation as to conducting power of its material atoms ; the 
space would be like a fine metallic web penetrating it in every 
direction, just as we may imagine of a heap of siliceous sand 
having all its pores filled with water ; or as we may consider 
ef a stick of black wax, which, though it contains an infinity 
'of particles of conducting charcoal diffused through every part 
of it, cannot conduct, because a non-conducting body (a resin) 
faitervenes and separates them one from another, like the sup*- 
posed space in the lac. 

Next take the case of a metal, platinum or potassium, con- 
stituted, according to the atomic theory, in the same manner. 
The metal is a conductor ; but how can tiiis be, except spac^ 
be a conductor ? for it is the only continuous part of the metal, 
and the atoms not only do not touch (by the theoi^), but as we 



Jam. 18M.] 



mtd ike Nature ofMaHer. 



shall see presently, must be assumed to be a eonsiderable way 
apart. Space therefore must be a conductor, or else the metals 
could not condacty but would be in the situation of the black 
flealing«wax re^nred to a little while ago. 

But if space be a conductor^ how then can ehell-laoi sul- 
phur, &o. insulate? for space permeates them in erery dire^ 
tion. Or if space be an insulator, how can a metal or other 
similar body conduct? 

It would seem, therefore, that in accepting the ordinary 
atomic theory, space may be proved to be a non-conductor in 
non-conducting bodies, and a conductor in conducting bodies, 
but the reasoning ends in this, a subversion of that theory al* 
together ; for if space be an insnlator it cannot esnsi in con** 
doeting bodietf and if it be a conductor it cannot exist in iiiSH<* 
lating bodies. Any ground of reasoning which tends to such 
mmcliisions as these must in itself be false. 

In connexion with such conclusions we may consider shortly 
what are the probabilities that present themselves to the mind, 
if the extension of the atomic theory w hich chemists have ima- 
gined, be applied in conjunction with the conducting powers 
of metals. If the specific gravity of the metals be divided by 
the atomic numbersi it gives us the number of atoms, upon the 
hypotheala, In equal bulks of the metals. In the following 
table the first column of figures expresses nearly the number 
of atoms in, and the second column of figures the qondueting 



power of, ^qual volumes 


of the metahi named. 


Atoms. 


Conducting power. 


100 . . 




1-00 


• , • silver. • « . 4 (i(i 






1-30 


• . « tin . . . . t , 1 '00 








• • • sine • * 9 • « 1*80 











So here iron, which contains the greatest number of atoms 
in a given bulk, is the worst conductor excepting one; gold, 
which contains the fewest, is nearly the best conductor. Not 
that these conditions are in inverse proportions, for copper, 
wbicb contains nearly as many atoms as iron^ conducts better 



i^iyuizco by GoOglc 



£88 



On Eleeitie Conduction [Jam. 1841 



still than gold, and with above six times the power of iron. 
Lead, which contains more atoms than gold, has only about 
one-twelfth of its conducting power; lead, which is much 
heayier than tin and much Ughter than platina, has only half 
the conducting power of either of these metals. And all this 
happens amongst substances which we are bound to consider^ 
at presenti as elementary or simple* WhicheTer way we con- 
sider the particles of matter and the space between them, and 
examine the assumed constitution of matter by this table^ the 
results are full of perplexity. 

Now let us take the case of potassium, a compact metallic 
substance with excellent conducting powers, its oxide or hy« 
drate a non-conductor ; it will supply us with some £EU!ts having 
▼exy important bearings on the assumed atomic construction 
of matter* 

When potassium is oxidized an atom of it combines with an 

atom of oxygen to form an atom of potassa, and an atom of 
potassa combines with an atom of water, consisting of two 
atoms of oxygen and hydrogen, to form an atom of hydrate of 
potassa, so that an atom of hydrate of potassa contains four 
elementary atoms. The specific gravity of potassium is 0*865, 
and its atomic weight 40 ; the specific gravity of cast hydrate 
of potassa, in such state of purity as I could obtain it, I found 
to be nearly £, its atomic wdight 57. From these, which may 
be taken as facts, the followmg strange conclusions flow. A 
piece of potassium contains less potassium than an equal piece 
of the potash formed by it and oxygen. We may cast into 
potassium oxygen atom for atom, and then again both oxygen 
and hydrogen in a twofold number of atoms, and yet, with all 
these additions, the matter shall become less and less, until it 
is not two-thirds of its original volume. If a given bulk of po- 
tassium contains 45 atoms, the same bulk of hydrate of potassa 
contains 70 atoms nearly of the metal potassium, and besides 
that, £10 atoms more of oxygen and hydrogen. In dealing 
with assumptions I must assume a little more for the sake of 
making any kind of statement ; let me therefore assume that in 
the hydrate of potassa the atoms are all of one size and nearly 
touching each other, and that in a cubic inch of that substance 
there are ^800 elementary atoms of potassium, oxygen and hy- 
drogen; take away ^100 atoms of oxygen and hydrogen, and 



Jan. 1844.] 



and the Naiwre of Matter* 



the 700 atoms of potassium remaining will swell into moie than 
a cnhic inch and a half, and if we diminish the numher until 
only those containable in a cubic inch remain, we shall have 
490, or thereabout. So a space which can contain 2800 atoms, 
and amongst them 700 of potassium itself, is found to be en- 
tirely filled by 430 atoms of potassium as they exist in the or- 
dinary state of that metal. Surely then, under the suppositions 
of the atomic theory, the atoms of potassium must be very far 
apart in the metal, t . e» there must be much more of space than 
of matter in that body : yet it is an excellent conductor, and so 
space must be a conductor ; but then what becomes of shell-lac, 
sulphur, and all the insulators ? for space must also by the 
theory exist in them. 

Again, the volume which will contain 4^30 atoms of potas- 
sium, and nothing else, whilst in the state of metal, will, when 
that potassium is converted into nitre, contain very nearly the 
same number of atoms of potassium, i. e, 416, and also then 
seven times as many, or atoms of nitrogen and oiqfgen 
besides. In carbonate of potassa the space which will contain 
only the 480 atoms of potassium as metal, being entirely filled 
by it, will, after the conversion, contain 256 atoms more of 
potassium, making 686 atoms of that metal, and, in addition 
^44 atoms of oxygen and carbon. 

These and similar considerations miglit be extended through 
compounds of sodium and other bodies with results equally 
striking, and indeed still more so, when the relations of one 
substance, as oxygen or sulphur, with di£ferent bodies are 
brought into comparison. 

I am not ignorant that the mind is most powerfully drawn by 
the phenomena of crystallization, chemistry and physics gene- 
rally, to the acknowledgement of centres of force. I feel my- 
self constrained, for the present hypothetically, to admit them, 
and cannot do without them, but I feel great difficulty in the 
conception of atoms of matter which in solids, fluids and va- 
pours are supposed to be more or less apart from each other, with 
intervening space not occupied by atoms, and perceive great 
contradictions in the conclusions which flow from such a "new. 

If we must assume at all, as indeed in a branch of know- 
ledge like the present we can hardly help it, then the safest 
course appears to be to assume as little as possible, and in that 

VOL. II. U 



i^iyuizco by GoOglc 



On Eieeirie GmdueHam 



[Jijf. 1844. 



respect the atoms of Boscovich appear to me to have a great 
advantage over the more usual notioii. His atoms^ if I under- 
stand aright, are mere centres of forces or powers, not particles 

of matter, in which the powers themselves reside. If, in the 
ordinary view of atoms, we call the particle of matter away 
from the powers a, and the system of powers or forces in 
and around it m, then in Boscovich's theory a disappears, or 
is a mere mathematical point, whilst in the usual notion it is a 
little uncbangeahle, impenetrable piece of matter, and m is an 
atmosphere of force grouped around it 

In many of the hypothetical uses made of atoms, as in ciy- 
stallography, chemistry, magnetism, &c., this difference in the 
assumption makes little or no alteration in the results, but in 
other cases, as of electric conduction, the nature of light, the 
manner in which bodies combine to produce compounds, the 
effects of forcesi as heat or electricity, upon matter, the dif- 
ference will be very great* 

Thus, veferring back to potassium, in which as a metal the 
atoms must, as we have seen, be, according to the usual view, 
yetj far apart from each other, how can we for a moment ima* 
ginethat its conducting property belongs to it, any otherwise 
than as a consequence of the properties of the space, or as I 
have called it above, the m ? so also its other properties in re- 
gard to light or magnetism, or solidity, or hardness, or specific 
gravity, must belong to it, in consequence of the properties or 
forces of the not those of the a, which, without the forces, 
is conceived of as having no powers. But then sui^ the m 
is the maUer of the potassium, for whete ia there the least 
ground (except in a gratuitous assumption) for isugining a dif- 
ference in kind between the nature of that space midway be- 
tween the centres of two contiguous atoms and any other spot 
between these centres ? a difference in degree, or even in the 
nature of the power consistent with the law of continuity, I can 
admit, but the difierenee between a supposed httle hard par- 
ticle and the powers around it I cannot imagine. 

To my mind, therefore, the a w nudeiM vanishes, and tlK 
suibstance consists of the powers or m ; and indeed what no- 
tion can we form of the nudeus independent of its powers t all 
our perception and knowledge of the atom, and even our fancy, 
is limited to ideas of its powers: what thought remains on 



and ike Natwre efMtMef. 



S91 



which to hang the hnagination of an a mdependant of the 
acknowledged forces? A nnnd just entering on the subject 
may consider it difBcnlt to think of the powers of matter inde* 
pendent of a separate something to be called the matter, but 
it is certainly far more difficult, and indeed impossible, to think 
of or imagine that matter independent of the powers. Now 
the powers we know and recognise in every phenomenon of the 
creationi the abstract matter in none \ why then assume the 
existence of that of which we are ignorant^ which we cannot 
GQDceiirey and fbqr wliich time is no pliilosophical necessity % 

Before concluding tliese speculations I will refer to a few 
of the important differences between the assumption of atoms 
consisting merely of centres of force, like those of Boscovich, 
and that other assumption of molecules of something specially 
material, having powers attached in and around them* 

With the latter atoms a mass of matter consists of atoms 
and intervening space, with the fenaer atoms matter is every-' 
where presenty and there is no intervening space unoccupied 
hy it. In gases the atoms touch each other just as truly as in 
solids* In this respect the atoms of water touch each other 
whether that substance be in the form of ice, water or steam y 
no mere intervening space is present. Doubtless the centres of 
force vary in their distance one from another, but that which is 
truly the matter of one atom touches the matter of its neighbours* 

Hence matter will be emdumom* throughout, and in con* 
sidering a mass of it we hirve not to suppose a distinction be- . 
tween its atoms and aiqrintervenmg space. The powers around 
the centres give these centres the properties of atoms of matter \ 
and these powers again, when many centres by their conjoint 
forces are grouped into a mass, give to every part of that mass 
the properties of matter. In such a view all the contradiction 
resulting from the c<msideration of electric insulation and con- 
duction disappears* 

The atoms may be conceived of as highly elastic^ instead of 
being supposed excessively haid and unalterable in form} ihe 
mete conqpiession of a bladder of air between the handscan alter 
their siae a little ; and the exper im ents of Cagniard de la Tour 
carry on this change in size until the difference in bulk at onetime 
and another may be made several hundred times. Such is also 
the case when a solid or a fluid body is converted into vapour* 

v2 



i^iyuizco by GoOglc 



On Electric CkmductioH 



[Jam. 1844. 



With regard also to the shape of the atouut^ and, according 
to the ordinary assomptiony its definite and unalterable cha- 
racter, another new must now be taken of it. An atom by 
itself might be conceiyed of as sphericalyor apheroidal* or where 
many were touching in all directioiuiy the form might be thouglit 
off as a dodecahedron, for any one would be surrounded by 
and bear against twelve others, on different sides. But if an 
atom be conceived to be a centre of power, that which is or- 
dinarily referred to under the term shape would now be re- 
ferred to the disposition and relative intensity of the forces. 
The power arranged in and around a centre might be uniform 
in aihrangement and intensity in every direction outwards firom 
that centre, and then a section of equal intensity of force 
through the radii would be a sphere ; or the law of decrease 
of force from the centre outwards might vary in different di- 
rections, and then the section of equal intensity might be an 
oblate or oblong spheroid, or have other forms ; or the forces 
might be disposed so as to make the atom polar ; or they might 
circulate around it equatorially or otherwise, after the manner 
of imagined magnetic atoms. In £EUSt nothing can be supposed 
of the disposition offerees in or about a solid nucleus of matter, 
which cannot be equally conceived with respect to a centre. 

In the view of matter now sustsined as the lesser assump- 
tion, matter and the atoms of matter would be mutually pene- 
trable. As regards the mutual penetrability of matter, one 
would think that the facts respecting potassium and its com- 
pounds, already described, would be enough to prove that point 
to a mind whidi accepts a fact for a fact, and is not obstructed 
In its judgement by preconceived notions. With respect to 
the mutual penetrability of the atoms, it seems to me to pre- 
sent in many points of view a more beautiful, yet equally pro- 
bable and philosophic idea of the constitution of bodies than 
the other hypotheses, especially in the case of chemical com- 
bination. If we suppose an atom of oxygen and an atom of 
potassium about to combine and produce potash, the hypo- 
thesis of solid unchangeable impenetrable atoms places these 
two particles side by side in a position easily, because me- 
chanically, imagined, and not unfrequently represented i but if 
these two atoms be centres of power they will mutually penetrate 
to the very centres, thus forming one atom or molecule with 



Jan. 1844.] and the Nature of Maiter, 



99S 



powers^ either unifonnly around it or arranged aB the resultant 
of the powers of the two constituent atoms ; and the manner in 
which two or many centres of force may in this way combine, 

and afterwards, under the dominion of stronger forces, sepa- 
rate again, may in some degree be illustrated by the beautiful 
case of the conjunction of two sea waves of different velocities 
into one, their perfect union for a time, and final separation 
into the constituent waves, considered, I think, at the meeting 
of the British Association at Liverpool. It does not of course 
follow^ from this view, that the centres shall always coincide ; 
that will depend upon the relative disposition of the powers of 
each atom. 

The view now stated of the consfttution of matter would 
seem to involve necessarily the conclusion that matter fills all 
space, or, at least, all space to which gravitation extends (in- 
cluding the sun and its system) ; for gravitation is a property 
of matter dependent on a certain force, and it is this force 
which constitutes the matter. In that view matter is not merely 
mutually penetrable, but each atom extends, so to say, through- 
out the whole of the solar system, yet always retaining its own 
centre of force. This, at first sight, seems to fall in very har- 
moniously with Mossotti's mathematical investigations and re- 
ference of the phenomena of electricity, cohesion, gravitation, 
&c. to one force in matter ; and also again with the old adage, 
" matter cannot act where it is not." But it is no part of my 
intention to enter into such considerations as these, or what 
the bearings of thb hypothesb would be on the theory of light 
and the supposed aether. My desire has been rather to bring 
certain facts from electrical conduction and chemical combina- 
tion to bear strongly upon our views regarding the nature of 
atoms and matter, and so to assist in distinguishing in natural 
philosophy our real knowledge, i. e. the knowledge of facts and 
laws, from that, which, though it has the fontf of knowledge, 
may, from its including so much that is mere assumption, be 
the very reverse. 

I am, my dear Sir, yours, &c., 

Michael Faraday. 

* 



i^iyuizco by GoOglc 



INDEX. 



N.B. A dash rule represents the italiet immediately preceding it. The references are 
sometimes to the individual paragraph, and sometimes to tliat and such as succeed it. 
Those which follow/; or are to pages, the others to the paragraphs of the Experimental 
Researches. 



yiciDS, effect of dilution, 1977. 

, their effect on electricity of steam, 
8091, 2121. 

and metaUy their thermo currents, 



1934, 1939. 

with heat, 1946, 1949, 1956, 

1963. 

Active voltaic circlei without metallic con- 
tact, 2017. 

— with sulphuret of potassium, 1877, 

1881, 1907. 

Air, its effect on excitement, 1921. 

Air compressed, electricity evolved by^ 
2129. 

, due to moisture in it, 2130, 2132. 

, double excitements, 2139. 

, with sulphur, 2138, 2140. 

silica, 2138, 2140. 

gum, 2138, 2139. 

, resin, 2138, 2139. 

Alcohol, its effect on the electricity of 

steam, 2115. 
Alkalies, their effect on electricity of steam, 
2092, 2094, 2121,2126. 

and metals \^-ith heat, 1945, 1948, 

1956. 1962, 1966. 
Ammonia, its effect on the electricity of 

steam, 2094. 
Animal electricity^ 1749. 
. See Gymnotus. 

Anomalous character of contact force, 1862, 

1864, 1871, 1888, 1989,2056. 
Antimony^ on a supposed new oxide of, 

in sulphuret of potassium, 1902. 

Apparatus for electricity from steam and 

water, 2076, 2087. 
Arago^s magnetic phenomena, pp. 176, 182. 

, third force in, pp. lUO, 1113. 

Auumption qf the contact theory, as re- 

gardg solids, 1800, 1844, 1870, 1888, 

1982, 2014. 



Assumption qf the contact theory, as re. 

yards fluids, 1810, 1835, 1844, I860, 

1865, 1870, 1888. 1982, 1992, 2006, 

2014, 2060. 
Atmosphere, its electricity, no relation to 

that of steam, 2145. 
Atomic hypothesis of matter, p. 284. 
Atoms, their hypothetical nature, pp. 285. 

291. ^ * 

, their shape, 292. 

of metals and conducting power, 

p.m^ 

of potassium, pp. 288, 2f)0. 

, their penetrability, pp» 289. 

290. 292. — 
Attraction, cohesive, of mercury affected 

by the electric current, />. 156. 

Batteries, voltaic, without metallic con- 
tact, 2024. 

Bismuth with sulphuret of potassium. 
1894. 

shows excitement is not due to con- 
tact, 1895. 
Boscovich, liis atoms,/;. 290. 
Breaking contact, spark, p. 2(iZ. 

Cadmium with sulphuret of potassa, 1904. 
Cathode, excitement at, 2016, 2045, 
2052. 

Centres of force,/;. 289. 

Charge, state, defined, p. 262. 

Chemical and contact excitement compared, 

1831, 1836, 1844. 
Chemical theory of the voltaic pile, 1801, 

1803,2017,2029. 
Chemical action evolves electricity, 2030. 

2039. 

being changed, electricity chanores 

vrith it, 2031, 2036, 2040. 
the source of voltaic power, 1796, 

1884, 1876, 1956, 1982, 2029, 2053. 
. See Voltaic pile, source of its power. 



296 



IKDEX 



Chemical ercifemmt, sufficiency of, 1845, 
18Hd, IK75, 1884, 1957, 1983, 2015, 
2029, 2053. 

affected by temperature, 1913. 

Chemical decomposition by the Gymnotus 
current, 1763. 

Circles ro//atc withoutmetalliccontact,201 7. 

with sulphuret of potassium, 1877, 

1881, 1907. 

Circuit, long, its influence on inductive ac- 
tion, p. 208. 

Cleanliness of metal terminations, 1929. 

Cobalt not magnetic, pp. 21S, 221^ 

Cohesion of merciu-)' affected by the elec- 
tric current,/?. I^IL 

Cold, its influence on magnetism of metal, 
pp. 218. 222. 223. 

, its non-effect on magnetic needles, 

p. 1£& 

Collectors of Gymnotus electricity, 1757. 

Condensation of steam does not produce 
electricity, 2083. 

Conduction^ speculation on, p. 284;. 

• and insulation, their relation, p. 271. 

Conducting power of metals,/;. 287. 

Conducting circlet of solid conductors, 1867. 

, effect of heat on, 1942, 1956, 1960. 

, active, containing sulphuret of potas- 
sium, 1877, iy07, 1881. 

, inactive, containing a fluid, 1823. 

, , sulphuret of potassium, 1824, 

1862, 1864, 1838, 1839. 

, , hydrated nitrous acid, 1843, 

1848, 1862. 

, , nitric acid, 1849, 1862. 

, , potassa, 1853. 

Conductors, good, solid, 1820, 1822. 

, fluid, 1812, 1822. 

— , , sulphuret of potassium, 1812, 

1880. 

, • , nitrous acid and water, 1816. 

, , nitric acid, 1817. 

, , sulphuric acid, 1819. 

Cones, various, rubl)ed by water and steam, 
2097. 

Constitution of matter,/;. 284. 

Contact theory of the voltaic pile, 1 797, 

1800, 1802, 1829, 1833, 1859, 1870, 

1889, 2065. 
, its assumptions, 1809, 1835, 1844, 

1860, 1870, 1888, 1992, 2006, 2014, 

2060,2066. 

,thermo-eIectricevidence against, 2054. 

Contact not the sottrce of voltaic power, 

1796, 1829, 1836, 1844,1858,1883, 1891, 

1956, 1959, 1982, 2053, 2065,/;. 276, 

. See Voltaic pile, source of its power. 

Contact force, its anomalous character, 

1862, 1864, 1871, 1889, 1989, 2056. 
improbable nature, 2053, 2062, 2065, 

2069,2071,2073. 



Contact and thermo-contact compared, 

1830, 1836, 1844, 2054. 
chemical action compared, 1831, 

1836, 1844. 
Contact qf metals, 1809, 1864, 1891, 2065, 

p. m, 

inactive in thepUe, 1829, 1833, 1836, 

1843, 1846, 1854, 1858. 

, active circles without, 2017. 

Contact qf solid conductors, 1809, 1829, 

1836, 1841, 1858, 1867, 1888, 2065. 
. fluid conductors, 1810, 1835, 1844, 

1860. 

inactive in the pile, 1825, 1829, 

1835, 1844, 1858. 
, assumptions respecting it, 1810, 

1835, 1844, 1860, 1865, 1870, 1888, 

1982, 1992, 2006, 2014, 2060. 
Contiguous particles, pp. 265, 267. 
Continuity of matter, p. 221. 
Coj^er in dilute nitric acid, 1986. 
sufy)huret of potassium, 1897, 1909, 

1911, 1944, 2036. 

, its variations, 191 1, 2036. 

shows excitement is not in con- 
tact, 1901, 1912. 
Current, electric, none without chemical 

action, 1867, 2038. 
, direction given to it by the earth, 

pp. 146, Ihlx 
, inductive action on, p. 207. 

Dal Negro on electro-dynamic spirals,/?. 200. 
Davy, Dr. John, reply to, pp. 211, 22S1 
Decomposition by the Gymnotus current, 
1763. 

Definite inductive action, pp. 265, 279. 
Differences in the order of metals, 1877, 
2010. 

"between magnets and helices, p. 143. 

Dilution, its influence over exciting voltaic 

force, 1969, 1982, 1993. 
changes the order of the metals, 1993, 

19()y, 1999. 
Direction ({^electro-magnetic rotation, pp. 

130, laL 

new electro-magnetic motions, p. 133. 

Gymnotus electricity, 1761, 1762, 

1763, 1764, 1772. 

Earthy its magnetism directs an electric 

current,/). llfL 
, electro-magnetic motions produced 

by, p. 152. 

Electric and nervous power of the GymnO' 
tus, 1789. 

convertible, 1790, 1792. 

Electric current affected by terrestrial mag- 
netism,/;/;. 147, 15L 

- affects the molecular attraction of 
mercury,/;. I5£. 



Ly Google 



INDEX. 



297 



Electric current under the influence of a 

magnet,/?. IM. 
and a magnet, their relative positions, 

p. 12& 

— — , direction given to it by the earth, 

p, m 

EUectric induction, static, principles of, 

pp. 263, 279, 

polarity, pp, 263, 2Z3^ 

charge, static, defined, p. 2fi2. 

conduction, speculation on,/>. 284. 

Electric gpark from the Gymnotus, 1766. 

from the magnet, 169. 

Electricity of the. Gymnotus, 1749, 1769. 

See Gymnotus. 
' oxalate of lime, p. 163- 
Electricity evolved by friction of bodies, 

2141. 

chemical action, 2030, 2039. See Vol- 
taic pile, source of its power. 

varies with the action, 2031, 



2036, 2040. 
Electricity from compressed air, 2129. 

due to moisture in it, 2130, 2132. 

, double excitements, 2139. 

with sulphur, 2138, 2140. 

silica, 2138, 2140. 

resin, 2138, 2139. 

Electricity from steam and water, 2075, 
2085,2090. 

, apparatus described, 2076, 2087. 

, how examiued, 2082. 

— — not due to evaporation or condensa- 
tion, 2083, 2145. 
- not produced by steam alone, 2084, 
2089, 2093. 

has no relation to electricity of the 



atmosphere, 2145. 

— not chemical in its origin, 2106. 

— affected by pressure of steam, 2086. 
— , sound of the issuing current, 2088. 
— , active or passive jets, 2102, 2104. 
— , place of its excitation, 2103. 
— , collection, 2103. 

positive or negative at pleasure, 2108, 



2117. 

— rendered null, 2118. 

— due to fiiction of water, 2085, 2089, 
2090, 2093, 2130, 2132. 

— , pure water required, 2090, 2093. 
— , water always positive, 2107. 
— , effect of salts or acids, 2090, 2096, 
2115, 2121. 

— , ammonia, 2094. 

— , alkalies,2092, 2094,2121,2126. 

— , — fixedoas,2Ill,21204J123,2137. 

— , volatile oils, 2108, 2123, 2136. 

, other bodies, 2113. 

, substances rubbed by the water, 2097, 

2099, 2122. 

— , — , all rendered negative, 2107. 



Electricity from steam and water, effect of 
substances rubbed by the water, all ren- 
dered positive, 2122. 

Electro-dynamic spirals, Dal Negro on. 

Electrolysis by the Gymnotus current, 1 763. 
Electrolytes in inactive circles, 1823. 
Electrolytes being good conductors, 1812, 
1822. 

, sulphuret of potassium, 1812, 1880, 

, nitrous add, 1816. 

, nitric acid, 1817. 

, sulphuric acid, 1819. 

EXectro-magnetic motions, new, pp. 127, 

132, m. 

, tangential, p. 128. 

Electro-magnetic ring,Ue la Rive's, p. 135. 
Electro-magnetic rotation, pp. 129, 152. 

, its direction, pp. 130, 131. 

, wire round the pole, p. 129. 

, pole round the wire, p. liiL 

, apparatus for, pp. 129, 147, 148- 

, terrestrial, p. 154. 

, historical statement respecting, /?. 159. 

Electro-magnetic shock, Mr. Jenkins's, pp, 
206,210. 

due to an induced current,/?. 206. 

Electro-magnetic spark obtained, p. 169. 

from the first induction,/?. 204. 

Electro^magnetism, historical sketch of, v. 
158. 

Electrometer results, their comparative va- 
lue, 1808. 

Electro-motive force of magnetism, Nobili 

and Antinori, p. 164. 

, reclamations by Faraday, p. 164. 

Electro-tonic state, /?. 210. 

Errors of Nobili and Antinori, p. 179. 

Evaporation does not produce electricity, 

2083. 

Evolution of heat by the Gymnotus current, 
1765. 



— electricity by chemical action, 2030, 
2039. 

varies with the action, 2031, 



2036, 2040. 
Excitement, thermo and contact, compared, 

1830, 1836, 1844,2054. 
, chemical and contact, compared, 1 831 , 

1836, 1844. 
, how affected by heat, 1913, 1922, 

1942, 1956, 1960, 1967. 

at the cathode, 2016, 2045, 2052. 

Exciting electrolytes being good conductors, 

1812. 

, sulphuret of potassium, 1812, 1880. 

Exciting voltaic force influenced by first 
immersion, 1917. 

investing fluid, 1918, 

motion, 1919. 

air, 1921. 



298 



INDEX. 



Bxeiting voltaic force wrtumeed by place 

of metal terminationi, 1928. 
— — cleaning of metals, 1929. 

dilution, 19611, 1982, 1993. 

heat, 1913, 1922. 1941, 1956, 1960, 

1967. 

, peculiar results, 1926, 1963, 

1966, 1967. 
Experiments for the Gymnotus proposed, 

1792. 

First immersion, its influence, 1917. 

Fish killed by a Gymnotus, 1786. 

Rxed oils, their effect on the electricity of 

steam, &c., 2111, 2120, 2123, 2137. 
Fluids, contact of, 1810, 1836. 1861, 1844. 
i , inactive in the pUe, 1826, 1829, 1836, 

1844, 1868. 
Fltads being good conductort, 1812, 1822. 
, assumptions respecting them, 1810, 

1835, 1844, 1860, 1865,1870, 1888,1982, 

1992, 2006, 2014, 20f)0. 
Fluids and metals, thermo currents of, 

1931. 

Porms of lightning, p. 277. 
Friction, its effects in producing electricity, 
2142. 

Friction of bodies against each other, elec- 
tricity evolved, 2141. 

Friction of water produces electricity, 2076, 
2085, 2090. 

- See Electricity from steam and water. 

against sulphur, 2007, 2098. 

metals, 2097, 2099, 2106. 

wood, 2097. 

ivory, 2102, 2104, 2144. 

Gases or vapours do not excite electricity 

by friction, 2146. 
Gay-Lussac, letter to, on Nobili and Anti- 

nori's errors, p. 179. 
Glass a conductor,/?. 269. ^ 
Gymnottu, mode of preserving it in travel, 

1753. 

— -, electric force of the, 1749, 1769. 

, its electricity collected, 1767. 

, quantity of electricity, 1770, 1772, 

1784. 

, direction of its force, 1761, 1762, 

1763, 1764, 1772. 

— affects the galvanometer, 1761. 

can make a magnet, 1 762. 

■ effect chemical decomi>o8ition, 

1763. 

evolve electric heat, 1766. 

, the spark from, 1766. 

, shock from, 1760, 1770, 1773. 

, its relation to the water around it, 

1786. 

, curves of force around it, 1784. 

— — , its mode of shocking its prey, 1785. 



Gymnottu, conscious of its influence on 

other animals, 1788. 
, relation of nervous and electric power 

in it, 1789. 
— — , experiments on ita electro-nervous 

system, 1792. 

Hare's critical remarks on Faraday* » theory 

qf induction^ pp. 251^ 274< 

, reply, pp. 262i 22A^ 

Heat evolved by the Gymnotus currenti 

1766. 

Heat, its influence on magnetism qf iron, 

p. 219. 

nickel, 219. 

loadstone, p. 22L 

— — magnets, p. 220. 

Heat, its efect on excitement^ 1913, 1922, 

1942, 1956, I960, 1967. 
, peculiar results, 1926, 1963, 1966, 

1967. 

Heat with metals and acids, 1946, 1949, 
1956 1963 

alkaUes, 1945, 1948, 1956, 1962,1966. 

sulphuret of potassa, 1 943, 1 953, 1956, 

1961, 1966. 
Helices and magnets, p. 137. 

, compared, pp. 138. 146. 

, their differences, p. 143. 

Historical sketch of electro-magnetism, 

p. m 

Historical statement respecting electro- 
mimetic rotation, p. 152^ 

Himiboldt on preservation of Gymnoti, 
1763. 

Ice positive to rubbing air, &c., 2132. 
Immersion, first, its influence, 1917. 
Improbable nature of contact force, 2053, 

2062, 2065, 2069, 2071, 2073. 
Inactive conducting circles of solids, 1867* 

containing an electrolyte, 1823. 

sulphuret of potassium, 1824, 

1838, 1839, 1861, 1864. 
hydrated nitrous add, 1843, 

1848, 1862. 

nitric acid, 1849, 1862. 

■ potassa, 1853. 

Induction, static principles of, pp. 263, 279. 

, definite, pp. 265, 2iil. 

across a vacuum, p. 267. 

, Hare's remarks on, pp. 251, 274. 

, reply, pp. 262^ 274, 

Inductive action on a current, pp. 207, 210. 

, ii^uenceof an electro-magnet, p. 207. 

, a long circuit, p. 20iL 

Insulation and conduction, their relation, 

p. 271. 

Investing fluid, its influence, 1918. 
Iron, influence of heat on its magnetism, 
p. 219. 



Ly Google 



INDEX. 



299 



Irtm, its peeuUar voltaic conditWHi Schdn- 

bein on, p. 

, Faraday on, p. 239. 

■ , others on, p. 248. 
Iron in acids with heat, 1946, 1950, 1952, 

1963. 

in nitric acid, 2039. 

■ in sulphuret of potassium, 1824, 1909, 

1943, 1947. 2049. 
, oxides of, in sulphuret of potassa, 

3047. 

Ivorv issue for steam and water inactive, 
2102, 2104, 2144. 

Ivory, its peculiarity in frictional electri- 
city, 2143. 

Lead, its voltaic effects in sulphuret of po- 
tassium, 1885, 1887. 

in diluted nitric acid, 1987, 2035. 

Lead, peroxide of, a good conductor, 
1822. 

not excite by contact, 1869. 

, its chemical exciting power and place, 

2043. 

Letter to Gay-Lussac on errors of Nobili 

and Antinori, p. 179. 
Lightning, its supposed forms, p. 277. 
Lirne, oxalate of, electricity of,/). 163. 
Liquid cotiductors, good, 1812, 1822. 

, contact force of anomalous, 1862, 

1888. 

, , assumptions respecting, 1810, 

1835, 1844, 1860, 1865, 1870, 1888, 
1982, 1992, 2006, 2014, 2060. 

Mofftiet made by a Gymnotus, 1762. 
, its positions in relation to the electric 

current,/). 128. 
and electric current, mutual influence 

of, p. l&L 

f influence of heat on, pp. 220, 22L 
— — not affected by cold, p. 158. 
■<■ and magnetic helicet, p. 137. 

— , compared, pp. 138, 145. 

, their difference, p. 143.. 

Jlffl^n^/ic attractions and repulsions,/;. 136. 
relations of the metals, pp. 217, 222, 

Magnetic polet, pp. 132, 144. 

, their revolution round wires, /;>p. 131, 

, differences between them and helix 

. poles,/). 143. 

, their relations to an electric current, 

/). m 

Magnetism, on the theory of, p. 127. 

of the earth directs an electric cur- 
rent, p. lifL 

Magneto-electric spark obtained firom the 
first induction, p. 204. 

shock, Mr. Jenkins's, p. 206. . 



Magneto-electric shock, Mr. Jenkins's, due 

to an induced current, p. 20fL 
Manganese not magnetic, p. 224. 

, Berthier on its magnetism, p. 222. 

, peroxide of a good conductor, 1822. 

, , its exciting power and place, 

S042. 

Marianini on source of power in the pile, 

1800, 1804. 
Matter, speculation on its nature,/). 284. 
, mutual penetrability of its parts, pp. 

288,292. 

, its continuity, p. 29L 

, its atoms, /)p. 285, 220. 

Mercury, its molecular attraction affected 

by the electric current,/;. 156. 
MetaUic contact, active circles without, 

2017. 

Metals, their atoms and conducting 

powers, p. 287. 
, magnetic relations of, pp, 217. 222, 

223. — 
rubbed by water and steam, 2097, 

2099, 2106. 

, contact qf, 1809, 1864, 1891, 2065. 

, , inactive in the pile, 1829, 1833, 

1836, 1844, 1846, 1854, 1858. 
, their order, differences in, 1877, 

2010. 

, in different fluids, 2012. 

, inverted by heat, 1965, 1967. 

, in different electrolytes, 

1877, 2010. 
, by dilution, 1969, 1993, 

1999. 

, their thermo-electric order, 2061, 

in potassa, 1932, 1945, 1948. 

Metals in sulphuret qf potassium, 1880, 
1908, 1943, 2036. 

show excitement is not due to con- 
tact, 1833, 1887, 1895, 1901, 1902, 1903, 
1904, 1907, 1912. 

— — , antimony, 1902. 

, bismuth, 1894, 1906. 

— — , cadmium, 1904. 

, copper, 1897. 1909, 1911, 1944. 

, iron, 1824, 1909, 1943, 1947, 2049. 

, lead, 1888, 1909. 

, nickel, 1836, 1909. 

, silver, 1903, 1909, 1911. 

, tin, 1882. 

, zinc, 1906. 

Metals and fluid, thenno currents of, 1931. 

potassa, thermo currents of, 1932, 

1938. 

acids, thermo currents of, 1934, 1939. 

.withheat, 1946, 1949, 196;j,1056. 

alkalies with heat, 1945, 1948, 1956, 

1962, 1966. 
, sulphuret of potassa with heat, 1943, 

1953, 1956, 1961, 1966. 



soo 



INDEX. 



Metals in voltaic circles, peculiar effects of 
heat on, 1922. 1925, 1953, 1966, 1967. 

Motion, its influence in voltaic excitement, 
1919. 

Motions, new electro-magnetical, pp. 127, 
132, 

Muriaticacid, order of metals in, 201 2, 2016. 
Nature of matter, />. 

Needles, magnetic, not affected by cold, p. 

Negative electricitv of bodies rubbed by 

water, 2107, 2131. 
Nervous and electric power qf a Gymnotus, 

1789. 

convertible, 1790, 1792. 

New electro-magnetical motions, pp. 127. 
132, I5L 

Nickel, influence of heat on its magnetism, 

p.m. 

in sulphuret of potassium, 1836, 

1909. 

Nitric acid in inactive circles, 1849. 

, order of metals in, 2012. 

, its character as an electrolyte, 2004. 

and nitrous acid as conductors, 1817. 

and iron, peculiar results, p. 2.'^. 

and peroxides, 2042, 2043. 

Nitrous acid a bad conductor, 1815. 

, with water, an excellent conductor, 

1816. 

in inactive circles, 1843, 1862. 
Nobiii and Antinori on magnetic electricity ^ 

p. mi. 

— , reclamations by Faraday, p. 164. 
— , theur errors, p. 179. 

Oil, its effect on the electricity of steam, 

2111,2123, 2137. 
Order, electric, of rubbed bodies, 2141. 
Order qf metals, thermo-electric, 2061. 

in different fluids, 2012, 2016. 

, inversions qf, in different fluids, 

1877, 2010. 

, , by dilution, 1969, 1993, 1999. 

, , by heat, 1963, 1964. 

Origin of the voltaic force, 1 796. 
— See Voltaic pile, source of its power. 
Oxalate of lime, electricity of, p. \SSL 
Oxide of antimony, supposed new, p. 225. 
Oxides, conducting, not excited by contact, 

1840, 1847. 
, in sulphuret of potassa, exciting 

power of, 2045, 2046. 

Peculiar voltaic condition of iron, p. 234. 
Penetrability of matter, /?p. 288, 222. 
Peroxide of manganese a good conductor, 
1822. 

— , its chemical exciting power and place, 
3041. 



Peroxide of lead a good conductor, 1822. 

, its chemical exciting power and place, 

2043. 

Phenomena, electric, of the G vmnotus,! 760, 

1768. ~' 
Pile, voltaic, 1796. See Voltaic pile, source 

of its power. 

Place of metal terminations, the effect,1928. 
Platinum wire red-hot in water and steam- 
jet, 2100. 

Plumbago, its relations to metals, &c. in 

muriatic acid, 2016, 
Polarity, static, electrical, pp. 263, 
Poles^ magnetic, pp. 132. LLL 
, their revolutions round wires, /^y. 131, 

, difference between them and helix 

poles, p. 143. 
, their relations to an electric current, 

p.m. 

Positive electricity of rubbing water, 2107, 
2131. 

Potassa a fltiid conduct4)r, 1819. 

in inactive circles, 1853. 

, order of metals in, 2012. 

and metals, 1945, 1948, 1932. 

, thermo currents of, 1932. 

Potassium, its atomic state, pp. 288, 2S!Sh 
, its extraordinary penetrability, jjp. 

289. 292. 

, nature of its atoms, p. 288. 

, sulphuret qf, a good conductor, 1812, 

1880. See Sulphuret of potassium. 
Powders and air, electricity from, 2138. 
Power, its creation assumed by contact, 

2071. 

Power qfthe voltaic pile, its source^ 1796. 

. See Voltaic pile, soiu-ce of its power. 

Precautions, 1838, 1848, 1916, 1971. 
Pressure of steam, its influence on evolved 
electricity, 2086. 

Quill issue for steam and water inactive, 
2102. 

Reply to Dr. John D&yy, pp. 311^229. 

Dr. Hare, pp. 262^ 274. 

Resin and air, electricity from, 2138, 2139. 
Revolution of a magnet and a wire, p. 129. 
Ring, electro-magnetic, De la Rive's, p. 135. 
Rotation, Arago's third force in, explained, 
p. 133. 

Rotation, electro-magnetic, discovered, pp, 

, its direction, ppAliO, 131. 

, wire round the pole, p. 129. 

, pole round the wire, p. 13L 

, apparatus for, pp. 129, 147, 14K. 

, terrestrial,//. 154- 

, historical statement respecting, p. 

159. 



Ly Google 



INDEX. 



301 



Schonbein on peculiar voltaic condition of 
iron, p. 

Shell-lac rabbed by water and steam is 

negative, 2098. 
Shock vdth one voltaic pair, p. 206. 

of the Gj mnotus, 1760, 1770, 1773, &c. 

Silica and air, electricity from, 2138, 2140. 
Silver, its influence on iron in nitric acid, 

p. 24fiL 

in muriatic acid, 2036. 

in mfythuret of pottugium, 1903, 1911. 

shows excitement is not due 

to contact, 1903. 

, its variations, 1911. 

Single voltaic currents without metallic 

contact, 2017. 
Solid conductors for contact, 1820, 1822. 
■ • , peroxide of manganese, 1822. 

, peroxide of lead, 1822, 1869. 

— , no excitement by contact, 1840, 1841, 

1867. 

, hypothetical assumptions respecting, 
1809, 1844, 1870, 1888, 1982, 2014. 

Sotind of steam exciting electricity, 2088. 

Source of power in the voltaic pile, 1796. 

' . See Voltaic pile. 

Space, is it a conductor ? p. 287. 

in matter, its relation, pp. 285, 287. 

Spark before contact, 1806. 

in breaking contact, p. 207. 

from the Gymnotus, 1766. 

, electro-magnetic, obtained, p. 169. 

, from the first induction, p. 204. 

Speculation on conduction, and nature of 
matter, p. 284. 

Static induction, principles of, pp, 263, 279. 

Steam electricity, 2075. 

. See Electricity from steam and water. 

Steam alone not produces electricity, 2084. 

Substances rubbed by water and steam,20Q7 , 
2099. 

, sulphur, 2098, 2097. 

, shell-lac, 2098. 

, wood, 2097, 2099. 

, ghiss, 2099. 

, metals, 2097, 2099. 

SuflBciency of chemical action, 1845, 1863, 
1875, 1884, 1957,1983,2015,2029,2053. 

Sufyhur and air, electricity frt>m,2138, 2140. 

nibbed by water and steam is nega- 
tive, 2098. 

Sulphurets, solid, not excited by contact, 

1840, 1867, 1868. 
Sulphuret of antimony, supposed new, 

p. 225. 

Sulphuret qf potassa solution, 1805, 1812, 

1835, 1880. 
— an excellent conductor, 1813, 1880. 

a good exciting electrolyte, 1880. 

in inactive circles, 1824, 1829, 1835, 

1842, 1861, 1864. 



Sufyfhuret of potassa solution in active cir- 
cles, 1877, 1881, 1907. 

and metals with heat, 1943, 1953, 

1956, 1961, 1966. 

, order of metals in, 2012. 

and metals, 1880, 1908, 1943, 2036. 

— shows excitement is not in con- 
tact, 1907. 

and antimony, 1902. 

, bismuth, 1894. 

, cadmium, 1904. 

, copper,1897, 1909, 1911, 1944, 2036. 

, iron, 1824, 1909, 1943, 1947,2049. 

, lead, 1885. 

, nickel, 1836, 1909. 

, sUver, 1903, 1911, 2036. 

, tin, 1882. 

, zinc, 1906. 

, gray sulphuret of copper, 1900. 

, peroxide o/lead, 2045. 

, manganese, 2042. 

, protoxides, 2046. 

Su^huric acid a fluid conductor, 1819. 

, order of metals in, 2012. 

Supposed forms of lightning, 277. 

Table q/" order of metals in different liquids, 

2012, 2016. 
voltaic pairs without metallic contact, 

2020. 

inactive contact conducting circuits, 

1867. 

bodies rubbed by steam and water, 

2099. 

exciting bodies rubbed together, 2141. 

non-inai^iieticsubstanccs, 218, 221L 

Tangential electro-magnetic inut ions, jy. 128. 
Temperature, its influence over exciting vol- 

taic force, 1913, 1922, 1941. 
Terrestrial magmetism affects the electric 

current, pp. 147, IhL. 
directs the electric current, pp. 146, 

152. 

produces electro-magnetic motions, 

p. 152. 

Theory of magnetism, on the, p. 127. 
Theory of Arago's magnetic phenomena, 
p.lMs 

Theory of the voltaic pile, 1796, 1800. 

. See Voltaic \n\e, source of its jwwer. 

Thermo currents with fluids and metals, 
1931. 

■ of metals and potassa, 1932, 1938. 

acids, 1934, 1939. 

Thermo and contact excitement compared, 

1830, 1836, 1844, 2054. 
Thermo-electric evidence ^;ainst contact 

theory, 2054. 
Third force of Arago, cause of, p. 193. 
Threads in steam-jet, their motion, 2101. 
j Time in magnetic phenomena, pp. 191, 195^ 



302 



INDEX. 



7Vr, remarkAble exciting effects of, 1919. 

Note. 

and potiusa, 1945, 1948. 

in nitric acid, 2032. 

— — m suiphuret of pntnsfinm, 1S82. 
— • shows excitement is not due to 

contact, 1883. 
Turpentine, oil of, its effect on electricity 

of steam, 2108, 2121, 2123, 2136. 

Vacnam, induction across, p. 267. 

Volta's contact theory, 1800. 

VoUaie escitement not in contact, 1912, 

1956, 2014, />. 243. 
is in chemical action, 1912, 1956, 

2015, /7.24a. 

a/ec/6J*y dilution, 1969, 1982, 1993. 

temperature, 1913, 1922, 1942, 

1956, 1960, 1967. 
Voltaic batteries, acthre, without contact, 

2024. 

Voltaic circles, active, without contact, 
2017. 

Voltaic circlet, order of ike metals in, 2010. 

varied, 1877, 19t>3, 1969, 1993, 1999, 

2010. 

Voltaic spark before contact, 180C. 
Voltaic pile, chemical theory, 18U1, 1803, 
2029. 

, contact theory, 1797. 1800, 1802, 

1829, 1833, 1859, 1870, 1889, 2065. 
Voltaic pile, source of its power, 1 796. 
, not in contact, 1829, 1835, 1844, 

1858, pp. 243. 275. 
' ■ ■ ■ , proved by inactive conducting 

electrolytes, 1823, 1829, 1836, 1843, 

1849, 1853, 1858, 1870. 

— , ■ active conducting elec- 
trolytes, 1877, 1883, 1889, 1907, 1912. 

— - ■ , — - effects of temperature, 

1913, 1941, 1956, 1960, 1965. 

, dilution, 1969,1982,1993, 

2005. 



Voltaic pile, source of its power not in cm- 

tact, proved by order of the metals, 2010, 
2014. 

— — , arrangements vnthout me- 
tallic contact, 2017. 

- , thermo-electric pheno- 
mena, 1830, 2054, 2063. 

, iron in nitric acid, p. 243. 

is in chemical action, 1845, 1863, 

1875. 

, , proved by active conducting 

electrolytes, 1882, 1884, 1907, 1912. 

, effects of temperature, 

1913, 1941, 1956, 1960, 1965. 

, dilution, 1969, 1982, 1993, 

2005. 

, order of metals, 2010, 

2014. 

-, ■ ■ arrangements without me- 
tallic contact, 2017. 

— — , comparison of contact and 

chemical excitement, 1831. 

, comparison of contact and 

thermo«excitement, 1830. 

, iron in nitric acid, p. 243^ 

, sufficiency of this action, 1846, 

1863, 1875, 1884,1957,1983,2015,2029, 
2063. 

Water and steam, electricity from^ 2075. 

. See Electricity from Mcam and water. 

Water, pure, excites electricity, 201H). 
, saline or add, excites no electricitT, 

2090,2091. 
, positive electricity of, by frictiOD, 

2107. 

, positive to all other rubbing bodies, 

2107, 2131. 
Wires of various substances nibbed by 

steam and water, 2099. 
Wood rubbed by water, 2097. 

Zinc in suiphuret of poiasaiumy 1906. 



FINIS. 



Printed by Richard and John E. Taylor, Red Uon Court, Fleet Street 



L lyij^uu Ly Google 



Plate L tfoL S^Egpermentol Researches, 




i^iyuizco by GoOglc 



V 



Digitized by Google 



£LaU li. Vol. n.JiJ^p. Researckes . 





i^iyuizco by GoOglc 



Digitized by Google 




i^iyuizco by GoOglc 



HILLES LIBRARY 
RADCLIFFE COLLEGE 



boolcp '
