The Evolution of Religion (L.R. Farnell, 1905)
==========================================================
Farnell's 1905 Hibbert Lectures on the evolution of religion — the Oxford scholar's comparative morphology of faith. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

Google 


This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 


-op. I 


1 


I 


CROWN THEOLOGICAL LIBRARY 


VOL. XIL 
FARNELL'S THE EVOLUTION OF RELIGION 


^ 


THE EVOLUTION OF 

RELIGION 


AN ANTHROPOLOGICAL STUDY 


BY 

L. R. FARNELL, M.A., DXitt. 

AUTHOR OP "cults OP THE GRBBK STATES*' 

FELLOW AND TUTOR OF EXETER COLLEGE, OXFORD; UNIVERSITY LECTURER 

IN CLASSICAL ARCHiBOLOGY ; CORRESPONDING MEMBER OP THE 

GERMAN IMPERIAL ARCILBOLOGICAL INSTITUTE ; FELLOW 

OF THE ANTHROPOLOGICAL SOCIETY 


■♦-'--' 


» - 


•- • • 


NEW YORK: G. P. PUTNAM'S SONS 
LONDON : WILLIAMS AND NORGATE 

1905 


« * 


••:. 


'v'-V 


• •••«. 


• • 


• 


• • • 


• •••* 


• • • 


• _ 


• 


• • • 


•••^ 


• 


• •• 


• 


« • • • • 
• • • 


:•;:: 


• 


%}y. 


;;V/ 


• • • 

• • 


..•• 


'!:!: 


a • 


• • 


• ••• 


• • • 


v.%* 


• • 


• • • 


•••• 


• • • 


# . 


• •••• 


.2- 


• •• 
• • •• 


• 


• • 


• •• •• 


• • 


• 


• • • 


••:.• 


•• 


•• 


••••* 


• • •• 


• 


• 


• • •• 


• • • • • 


• ••• 


• • 


•••• 


• •••• 


• •- 


• • •• 


Prefa 


ce 


A SMALL book on a great and difficult subject 
must explain and apologise for itself, especially 
) if it cannot claim a raison (THre as a hand- 
'. book for beginners. Having accepted the 
\ stimulating invitation to give in the spring of 
; this year a short series of lectures for the 
Hibbert Trust on some subject belonging to 
the department of comparative religion, I felt 
that it was desirable to avoid those topics that 
had been appropriated by former lecturers ; and 
also that the Trustees, as well as the audience, 
deserved that what the lecturer put forth 
should embody the results of some personal 
and original study. I finally selected for 
special discussion the ritual of purification, and 

V 


vi Preface 

the influence of the ideas associated with it 
upon law, morality, and religion ; and secondly, 
the development of prayer from lower to 
higher forms. These subjects do not appear 
to have been as yet exhaustively treated by 
modem anthropology or scientific and com- 
parative theology, and I had already worked 
upon them to some extent as " parerga " of the 
treatise that I am completing for the Clarendon 
Press on the history of Greek cults. I am 
aware that these special questions would well 
repay longer and more minute research, and 
could each furnish material for a large volume. 
But having been advised to publish the lectures 
more or less as they were deUvered, I put 
them forth as tentative and incomplete work. 
I specially regret to have been unable to have 
gone further at present into the Egjrptian 
evidence, with the kindly proffered assistance 
of Mr Griffiths, the Reader in Egyptology at 
Oxford. 

The first two lectures, dealing with the 
methods and the value of the study of com- 


Preface 


• • 


Vll 


parative religion and its relations to anthro- 
pology, are of a more general character. If 
they seem to occupy somewhat too large a 
part of a work of this small compass, the 
urgency of the questions theyjraise ^may serve 
as an apology. It was suggested to me that 
some such pronouncement might be timely at 
the point we have reached. For the subject 
is wmning greater consideration, and even 
receivmg endowment, in the organisation of 
the newer Universities. From the scientific 
point of view it is one of the most fascinating 
of studies; and its practical importance for 
our colonial administrators and our missionaries 
is obvious to those who reflect. It is also a 
legitimate hope that its wider and more intel- 
ligent recognition in England may tend to 
cool and temper the heated atmosphere of 
dogmatic controversy, by presenting religious 
facts m their true proportion and proper 
seUmg. 

I must take this opportunity of expressing 
my gratitude to many Mends for valuable 


Vlll 


Preface 


assistance, and especially to my friend and 
colleague, Mr. R. Marett, to whose compre- 
hensive knowledge of the religious thought 
and ritual of savage races I owe many im- 
portant clues. 

L. R. FARNELL. 
August, 1905. 


\ 


/ 


Contents 


LECTURES I. AND IL 

PAGE 
THE COMPARATIVE STUDY OF RELIGIONS I ITS METHOD 

AND PROBLEMS 1 


LECTURE IIL ^^ 

THE RITUAL OF PURIFICATION AND THE CONCEPTION 
OF PURITY : THEIR INFLUENCE ON RELIGION^ 
MORALITY, AND SOCIAL CUSTOM .... 88 

LECTURE IV. . 

THE EVOLUTION OF PRAYER FROM LOWER TO HIGHER 

FORMS . .163 

INDEX 232 


IX 


The Evolution of Religion 

LECTURES I. AND II. 

THE COMPARATIVE STUDY OF RELIGIONS: 
ITS METHOD AND PROBLEMS 

The reasonable and sympathetic study of the 
various religions of mankind, which are per- 
haps the clearest mirror we possess of human 
feeUng, aspu-ation, and thought in its highest 
and lowest forms, is only possible for the 
individual or for the age that feels no con- 
straining call to suppress and obliterate all 
save one cherished creed. Such study began, 
as we should expect, in the earlier Hellenic 
period, the Hellenic religion throwing few 
or no obstacles in the way of undogmatic 
investigation ; and the first anthropologist of 

religion is Herodotus. Then among Hellen- 

1 


2 The Evolution of Religion 

istic scholars and those of pre-Christian Rome 
there were some who devoted themselves to 
the collection and exposition of the religious 
institutions of foreign races. But save a few 
short treatises, such as Plutarch's De Iside et 
Osiride^ Sallustius' Z>e IHis et Mundo^ Lucian's 
De Dea Syria^ nothing has survived beyond the 
titles and the fragments of their works ; and 
by an irony of fortune we owe much of our 
knowledge of Hellenic and other religions of 
the Mediterranean area to the Christian con- 
troversialists, who reveal many of the essential 
features of the various pagan creeds in order 
to expose them to obloquy: they could 
not anticipate that we should gather as the 
fruit of their labours a better appreciation 
than we could otherwise have gained of the 
religions which they strove to destroy, and 
possibly of Christianity itself. If I were 
attempting, as I do not propose to attempt, 
to give a complete survey of the growth 
and development of the study which we are 
considering, I should probably be able to cull 


Comparative Study of Religions 3 

but little material for the narrative from 
Byzantine and mediaeval sources. We may 
note that the spirit of these ages was, on the 
whole, alien to our present interest ; and that 
it is not till after the Renaissance and the 
discovery of America that systematic work in 
this field begins again. To two Spaniards of 
Peruvian and Mexican descent,^ we owe our 
knowledge of the religions of the Incas and 
the Aztecs, that of the latter at least being of 
prime unportance for the student of the higher 
religions of mankind. A Polish nobleman of 
the 16th century has left us a fairly detailed 
account of the religious practices and beliefs 
of the then semi-pagan Lithuania.^ But it 
may be regarded as one of the greatest achieve- 
ments of the latter part of the 19th century 
to have raised the comparative study of re- 
ligion to a high position in the whole domain 
of inductive speculation and inquiry. And 

^ Garcilasso de la Vega, Royal Commentary of the Inca^ 

(Haklu3rt Society) : Sahagun — transl. Jourdanet et Simeon. 

^ Jacob Laskowskij inde Usener, Gottemamen, p. 82, etc. 


4 The Evolution of Religion 

its development has been mainly due to two 
independent lines of investigation. The first 
stimulus came with the discovery and the 
interpretation of the sacred books of the 
East, a momentous epoch in the history of 
European thought, and certain important 
theories concerning religious origins were put 
forth by Vedic scholars, and based on the 
evidence of Vedic literature: at the same 
time the decipherment of the Assyrian-Baby- 
lonian and Egyptian texts has contributed a 
wealth of new material, and has started new 
problems of religious inquiry, which specially 
concern the students of Hellenic as well 
as those of Semitic antiquity. But an 
equally or, as some may think, more power- 
ful factor in the recent advance towards 
the organised knowledge of religions has 
been the growth, in the last half-century, 
of the study that has appropriated the name 
of anthropology, which is. generally under- 
stood to mean the study of primitive or 
savage man, both in the past and the present. 


Comparative Study of Religions 5 

in respect of his physical and mental condi- 
tions. It is quite unnecessary for me to dilate 
on the high and manifold utility, both practical 
and speculative, of this new branch of human 
inquiry; the theme has become almost a 
popular commonplace in the leading journal- 
ism of the day. And anthropology, defined 
as above, has a definite value and object apart 
from its contributions to our knowledge of 
the religions of the world. It is nevertheless 
true that the religious interest in England is 
so strong and penetrating, that many of our 
leading anthropologists, in their investigations 
of savage society, have directed their attention 
mainly to religious or quasi-religious pheno- 
mena. Even if their labours were confined 
to the discovery and the exposition of savage 
ritual and belief, we should still be greatly 
indebted to them ; for to many of us at least 
the savage man is interesting in his own right, 
whether it is true or not that the study of his 
mental phenomena helps to explain the mental 
phenomena of our higher selves or of the 


6 The Evolution of Religion 

higher races in the past. But these writers 
claim, and I think with right, to have done 
more than this, and by comparison, induction, 
and hjrpothesis to have thrown some light on 
the evolution of religion from lower to higher 
forms, and therefore to have laid the founda- 
tion for the science with which we are con- 
cerned. /Also attempts have been recently 
made by an accomplished scholar of the new 
doctrine, Dr Frazer, to trace what may be 
called the anthropological genesis of the 
central idea of Christianity itself.^ It is not 
then surprising that in England at least such 
claims and such ambitions should excite mis- 
trust, even hostility, and the prestige of 
anthropology may have also suffered at times 
from the indiscretion of its friends. Still, its 
work is of wide vogue, its energy exuberant, 
and its influence in the future assured. In 
considering, therefore, the aims and methods 
of the comparative science of religion, it has 
appeared to me that its relations to anthro- 

^ Golden Bough, 2nd ed., vol. iii. p. 186. 


Comparative Study of Religions 7 

pology are now one of the main points in the 
inquiryy^ And we may seem to have reached 
a stage where it is desirable to test our posi- 
tion, to take stock as it were, to examine our 
methods, and to consider whether they are 
capable of improvement. The task is difficult, 
and in facing it one must face the imputation 
of presumption, especially as in a short course 
of lectures one must be brief, and may there- 
fore appear over-dogmatic. 

If the comparative study of religion is to 
examine, as on the ground of its title it must, 
the various recorded or discoverable religions 
of every branch of the human family, then a 
part of anthropology, limited, as it has usually 
chosen to limit itself, to the study of the savage 
races, is obviously a sub-department of the 
whole. And its work, conducted often under 
great difficulties, has been solid, well-organised, 
and of high importance. Even those who 
deny its claim to be called a science, whatever 
that word may mean, must admit that it is 
at least an indispensable branch of historic 


8 The Evolution of Religion 

inquiry, and that it has deepened the self- 
knowledge of mankind. 

Some of its pioneers may have been over- 
eager in their theorising, premature in their 
attempts to reveal the origin of all religion in 
some savage ritual or in the background of 
savage thought, for instance in ancestor- worship 
or totemism. Such rash generalisations are 
inevitable in the opening periods of a new 
study, and may be discredited or abandoned 
without discrediting the investigations that 
gave rise to them. We may have come to 
be aware of the excesses of the students of 
totemism : we may have come to the convic- 
tion that neither theirs nor any other special 
and single hjrpothesis has as yet supplied us 
with the master-clue by which we can pene- 
trate to the aboriginal source of human 
religion : we may have found scientific reasons 
for rejecting the belief that all gods arose as 
ghosts of departed ancestors. But if we dis- 
card such theories of origin, we owe this 
negative result to the maturer study of anthro- 


Comparative Study of Religions 9 

pology itself; and we may owe to it the 
positive induction that the religious product 
at the different stages and in the different 
branches of mankind was a complex growth 
from many different germs. 

It has taught us also much more than this, 
/it has shown us that all through the present 
societies of savage men there prevails an ex- 
traordinary uniformity, in spite of much local 
variation, in ritual and mythology, a uniformity 
so striking as to suggest beUef in an ultimately 
identical tradition, or, perhaps more reason- 
ably, the psychologic theory that the human 
brain-cell in different races at the same stage 
of development responds with the same 
religious speech or the same religious act to 
the same stimuli supplied by its environment^ 
We have learnt to discover a certain savage 
/ style, as we may call it, in myth and ritual ; and 
;' anthropology has performed a twofold work 
of comparison ; for it has not only compared 
the various savage races of mankind, but it 
has compared the results of this colligation 


lo The Evolution of Religion 

with the religious phenomena of the higher 
races, and has revealed the savage style in 
much of their mythology and ritual. It was 
first discovered by the earlier investigators of 
the antiquity of Northern Europe, such as the 
brothers Grimm and Mannhardt, that under- 
lying the religion of Christendom lay a stratum 
of peasant-ritual and belief, not yet extinct 
nor likely soon to be, that reveals the 
same mental condition in early Europe that 
exists among our savage contemporaries in 
various parts of the world. Then the sacred 
edifice of Hellenism was attacked ; and the 
complacency of Hellenic scholars was some- 
times disturbed by the revelation, through a 
strict comparative method, of the same savage 
style in much of Hellenic ritual and Hellenic 
myth. pThus for the first time we came to 
understand the true significance of many of 
the crude and repulsive facts in Hellenic 
religion — ^the human sacrifices, the reverence 
paid to animals, stones, and trees, the demon- 
ology and magic rites. Many of these practices 


Comparative Study of Religions ii 

had lost their meaning for the more advanced 
generations, who nevertheless retained them 
under the strong constraint of religious con- 
servatism ; but if we find the same practices 
among existing races who perform them with 
a living and plenary faith as part of a quasi- 
logical structure of belief, we can place them 
back into their proper setting when we dis- 
cover them stiU surviving in the higher and 
alien society. Greek religion especially, having 
never violently broken with its own past, is 
a bed of rich deposit still inviting exploration. 
And now Hellenic scholars are ransacking 
the same treasure for further anthropological 
material ; while Assyriologists and Egypto- 
logists are treating a part of the phenomena 
of their special departments in the same spirit^/ 
We realise the gain of this : we are slowly 
and surely arriving at inductive conclusions 
concerning the similarity of development 
through which the higher and lower races 
have passed and are passing ; the solidarity of 
the human family appears stronger than we 


12 The Evolution of Religion 

might have supposed. At the same time we 
have now to be on our guard against certain 
common anthropological fallacies. Some of 
these are less inevitable than others: for 
instance, that which we may call the fallacy 
of simple enumeration. On the ground of 
the general inductive belief that the higher 
races have at one time passed through a 
savage phase, it is often too rashly assumed 
that each and all of them must at one time 
have possessed a particular institution, such 
as totemism or ancestor- worship, which, as a 
matter of fact, is found among the majority of 
the savage races of to-day. This is to ex- 
aggerate the principle of solidarity, to ignore 
the fact of the great diversity actually observ- 
able among existing primitive societies, and 
the possibility that it was just by avoiding 
some particular detrimental institution that 
some of the higher peoples were able to pro- 
ceed on their path of progress. Again, the 
anthropological explanation is often obUged 
to be hypothetical, for the evidence presented 


Comparative Study of Religions 13 

is often very fragmentary: by means of a 
reasonable and expert imagination, an attempt 
is made to reconstruct a whole fabric out of 
a few fragments. A single bone may enable 
the expert biologist to reshape unerringly the 
once living animal; but in anthropology the 
fragment in question may have descended 
from either one of two differing organisms or 
organic institutions that may have left very 
much the same imprint upon mythology and 
religion. fFor instance, a full-fledged totemistic 
system, having fallen into decay, might leave ^^/uV 
its trace in certain stories about animals or mm/'. 
in occasional reverence paid to a particular y^ ^ 
animal : but direct animal- worship, a religious f^^f 
view that may be quite independent of totem- ^ 

ism, or certain forms of ancestor- worship may 
equally well have deposited the same fossil- 
thought or fossil-rite. v-^Did we know how 
recklessly the theory of the ubiquitous practice 

1 For instance^ an ancestor may for certain reasons be 
worshipped in the form of a snake^ and yet this need not 
imply a snake-tribe or any tribal worship of snakes in 
general. 


14 . The Evolution of Religion 

of human sacrifice has been used to explain 
certain pecuUar phenomena in later ritual, such 
as the scourging of the Spartan boys, for 
example. 

But a stricter anthropology can correct the 
over-narrow hypotheses of its immaturity, and 
can render masterly aid to the evolutionary 
study of the higher reUgions; for each of 
these, in spite of revelation or transforming 
enthusiasm that would obUterate the past, 
contains a mass of mysterious dead matter ; 
and it is for the anthropologist to show the 
prior functional organic significance of this. 
But if, in obedience to the currently accepted 
limitation of his subject, he confines himself 
mainly to the study of savage life and to the 
dead matter of the higher religions, and yet is 
tempted to deal with the more vital and 
essential elements in these, he will be liable to 
the special bias of his own study. We may 
note such bias in recent attempts to ex- 
plain the essential features of the Eleusinian 
Mysteries in the Ught of merely savage anthro- 


Comparative Study of Religions 15 

pology. And of course we are all apt to lose 
the sense of proportion and to exaggerate the 
importance of the special phenomena to which 
we confine our regard. The folk-lorist will be 
liable to over-emphasise the part played by 
mythology in rehgion, and may ignore the 
higher importance of prayer and ritual ; for 
the most conscientious cobbler is never really 
able to stick to his last. In fact, though the 
whole exposition of the higher religions is 
impossible without anthropology, there is some 
danger at present lest the part be at times 
mistaken for the whole. For instance, we 
may feel with some uneasiness that recent 
expositions of Hellenic religion tend, uninten- 
tionally no doubt, to distort the view of the 
reader and to produce a false impression by 
exaggerating the savage and primitive facts, 
missing the true perspective and misjudging 
the whole. Our appreciation of Greek myth- 
ology may suffer in the same way, unless we 
can keep the keen edge of our appreciative 
faculty : the Greek myth has often its striking 


1 6 The Evolution of Religion 

affinities with the Arunta or the Pawnee, and 
it is necessary for comparative folk-lore and 
anthropology to point this out, and often to 
insist on the beauty of the legend and the 
dignity of the religious thought among savages : 
but it is unfortunate if these studies should 
result in our loss of the perception that Greek 
mythology, after all, is the most beautiful of 
any of which we have record. 

The fallacy which I have so far tried to 
indicate arises from the temper of mind that a 
special study is liable to engender. On the 
other hand, there is a particular fallacy of 
method to which the modem study of anthro- 
pology, as it has chosen to limit itself, specially 
exposes us. It is liable to withdraw us from 
the immediate entourage of a particular fact — 
a particular legend or a reUgious service — ^to 
the distant circumference. It was inevitable 
for the earliest pioneers of the study to travel 
far, for the circumference was vmexplored, and 
there were facts lying at the distant points 
that concerned us. But, after all, our first 


Comparative Study of Religions 17 

object of study should be the more immediate 
environment of the thing which we wish to 
understand. The student of Hellenic religion 
and myth may have ultimately to roam, in a 
literary sense, into Central Australia and the 
byways of America; but he ought first to 
explore the Mediterranean regions and the 
lands of anterior Asia. It is interesting, and 
may be necessary, to know " the Pawnee ver- 
sion of the Eleusinia " ; but, for the true 
understanding of the great Greek mystery, 
certain elements in the Egyptian religion, m 
Mithraism, and in Christianity itself will prob- 
ably afibrd a more illuminative comparison. 
The mind of our student is sometimes tempted, 
in fact, to travel too easily and too cheaply to 
the other side of the globe, and to leave un- 
done work that should first have been done 
nearer home. 

To reduce these ideas to something like a 
working formula of method, may we say 
that the anthropology which the comparative 

study of any one of the more complex and 

2 


1 8 The Evolution of Religion 

advanced religions immediately demands is 
"an adjacent anthropology"? (For religious 
ideas, legends, and ritual are most contagious, 
and tend to propagate themselves over large 
contiguous areas : for, to reverse a stereotyped 
question, " what is less its own than a people's 
gods?" We greatly desiderate an anthro- 
pology of the Mediterranean basin, including 
anterior Asia ; for there are strong reasons for 
the belief that from very early times the fre- 
quent intercourse of the leading peoples in this 
region endowed them with a common stock of 
religious ideas, ritual, and legend which have 
probably left their impress on the higher 
religions of the world. It is these that speci- 
ally interest most of us, and we feel we cannot 
solve their problems by means of savage 
anthropology alone. Why, after all, should the 
latter term be restricted, as it usually is, to the 
study of savage life? Doubtless we cannot 
so extend the use of the word as to cover its 
full etymological signification: else it would 
come to include the whole of human history 


Comparative Study of Religions 19 

from the beginning down to the present, and 
would lose its value as a mark of any special 
science. But we might somewhat enlarge its 
present connotation with advantage to the 
comparative method, and without a too wide 
departure from current usage. We might 
define the anthropological study of any one of 
the higher religions as an evolutionary study 
of its embryology : the evolutionary law might 
appear in the first instance as a proximate 
law of growth. For probably every one of the 
world-creeds has inherited, apart from its own 
achievement, a double tradition, a tradition 
from the more remote and one from the more 
immediate past. The first may descend from 
immemorial antiquity, and from really primi- 
tive or savage mental and social life; and it 
has been the task of primitive anthropology 
to expound and explain the facts that this 
tradition has deposited. But many if not 
most of these facts may be regarded as ftmc- 
tionally dead matter surviving in the more 
advanced system of belief, and as not belong- 


20 The Evolution of Religion 

ing to its essential life. On the other hand, 
from the immediate tradition much will be 
found to have been taken over by an inevitable 
law of assimilation, certain potent ideas which, 
though transformed, will enter into the very 
life-blood of the new creed. And these are to 
be discovered and analysed by what I have 
ventured to call an " adjacent " anthropology, 
which will include a comprehensive study of 
the literature and monuments belonging to 
the more proximate past of the race which 
develops the new faith as well as of the races 
that are its nearer neighbours. 

Such a method, though not hitherto styled 
anthropological, has already been applied by 
various scholars in the different parts of 
our field; the exposition of the Babylonian 
elements in Judaic religion, of the Judaic 
and pagan elements in Moslemism, are 
examples of it. On the present occasion I 
would prefer to illustrate it by noting its 
application to the scientific study of Chris- 
tianity itself, of which the remarkable com- 


Comparative Study of Religions 21 

plexity, the variety of forms that it has 
assumed in different parts of Christendom at 
different periods, seems specially to invite the 
higher anthropological treatment. Moreover 
it probably contains a richer deposit than any 
other of the world-religions from the various 
streams of thought and belief that nourished 
the life of early civilised or semi -civilised man. 
The illustration drawn from our own religion 
will be also more personally interesting to 
ourselves ; and though the limits of time 
and my own knowledge may prevent me 
from puttmg forth any original statement, 
yet something may be gained and a more 
extended interest awakened by a brief notice 
of what has been and what remains to 
be done. 

There is now no need for apology if one 
wishes frankly to consider the genesis of the 
fundamental ideas and prevailing institutions of 
earlier and later Christianity, although hitherto 
a certain religious shyness, which belongs to 
the national character, may have made English 


22 The Evolution of Religion 

scholars reluctant to attempt the anthropology 
of our national faith ; and the progress of the 
subject owes more to foreign workers. Our own 
theological students of distinction have not 
evaded the question as to the early influences 
that may have moulded the religious thought of 
Christ and St Paul ; but these were naturally 
sought mainly in the later Judaism; and 
though the debt of the developed Christianity 
to Hellenic philosophy has never been ignored, 
yet that neither our sacred books nor Judaic 
literature nor Greek philosophy explain the 
whole complex of historic Christianity, is a 
conviction of recent growth, and the investiga- 
tions to which it has prompted are recent. 
For instance, it was a new departure of great 
promise for the future of our science when, in 
a course of Hibbert lectures delivered some 
years ago, Dr Hatch publicly expounded the 
deep indebtedness of Christianity in respect of 
ritual, organisation, and even religious con- 
cept to the Eleusinian Mysteries and other 
mystic societies of Greek lands. And the few 


Comparative Study of Religions 23 

students of Hellenic religion in England have 
often noted its many ties of affinity with our 
own, though of these there has been as yet no 
complete and authoritative account. We may 
admit that the triumph of a new and great 
creed may imply a potent revelation, perhaps 
a sudden mental transformation in the 
catechumens difficult to equate with any 
formulated law of evolution. Still we cannot 
gainsay the experience that as the religion 
establishes and organises itself, it draws 
nourishment from the old soil which is full of 
the Uving germs of past organisms. Therefore 
it was inevitable that Hellenic religion should 
leave a deep impress upon earlier and later 
Christianity; partly because the religious 
temper in the Greek world throughout 
the centuries immediately preceding the adop- 
tion of Christianity was more powerful and 
fervid than it had been in the days of Homer 
or Pericles, and mainly because Hellenic 
converts became the pillars of the Church. 
But the comparative student must pursue the 


24 The Evolution of Religion 

problem fiirther afield and beyond the track 
of Hellas. The old Phrygian religion, which 
Professor Ramsay's travels and investigations 
have assisted us to know, must be seriously 
taken into account ; for Phrygia was one of 
the earliest homes of Christianity, its ab- 
original religion had germinated in ideas 
strikingly akin to some that are primary in all 
or many of the creeds of Christendom ; and the 
morbid and ecstatic temperament of the native 
Phrygian, which gave so distinct a colour to 
the Cybele- Attis cult, seems to have appeared 
again in certain schismatic forms of Christian 
doctrine in Phrygia, especially in the heresy of 
Montanism. Finally, we may learn much, 
even adopt much, from our enemies. The 
most dangerous antagonists of Christianity 
were, after all, the worship of Isis and 
Mithraism. It may be possible to trace the 
influence of these on their conqueror: the 
great work of M. Cumont on Mithras cult 
suggests at least many interesting religious 
parallels ; and even the older Zoroastrian 


Comparative Study of Religions 25 

Uterature must be considered within the range 
of necessary and legitimate comparison. 

As I am here concerned with illustration of 
method rather than with positive proof, I can 
only offer a very brief summary of the results 
which the anthropological study of Christianity 
has hitherto achieved, and may yet achieve. 

The religious affinities discoverable be- 
tween the earlier and later "Mediterranean" 
systems may be classified according as they 
appear in the legends, in nomenclature and 
terminology, in external symbols and liturgical 
objects, in hieratic institutions, and finally in 
the ideas, aspirations, and concepts of faith. 
As regards legend and mythology, a great 
historic religion may of course claim to be 
free from all mythology; nevertheless it, is a 
matter of experience that popular legends are 
siwe at some period earlier or later to creep in, 
for the people insist on telling the old stories 
under changed names. I myself have heard 
the immemorial story of Odysseus walking 
inland with his oar, which the rustic mistakes 


26 The Evolution of Religion 

for a winnowing-fan, told about St Peter, 
St Paul, and St John on the coast of the 
Peloponnese; just as an old Norse legend 
about Odin and Baldur is retold of Christ and 
St Peter. ^ And students of mediaeval hagi- 
ology will discover more and more clearly 
various fragments of pre-Christian mythology 
embedded in the legends of the saints. Such 
facts are the material of comparative folk-lore, 
which plays a useful but quite subordinate part 
in the work of comparative religion. Legends 
have indeed their own independent interest, 
poetical, ethical, and other ; but the importance 
of mere mythology in the study of religion has 
been often much overrated ; St Augustine, mis- 
taking Greek legends for Greek religion, could 
discover no morality in it at all,^ and modem 
scholars have inherited the fallacy. Myths are 
often irresponsible, capricious, volatile, and flit 
like a vapour round the solid structure of real 

1 Vide infra, pp. 192, 193. 

^ E.g. De Civ, Dei., bk. 2, ch. 6: deos paganorum 
nunquam bene vivendi sanxisse doctrinam. 


Comparative Study of Religions 27 

belief and ritual. A high religion may attract 
low mjrths : some of our own are not spotless, 
but Christianity can ignore them. The myth 
that is an essential fact for the student of religion 
is that which enshrines some living religious 
idea or institution, or one which proves the 
survival of some ritual or faith that belonged 
to an older system. I may note a few of this 
kind which illustrate the affinities of Judaic, 
Christian, and pagan legend. The cessation 
of human-sacrifice in the Mediterranean area, 
the awakening of the conviction that the 
practice was abhorrent to a mercifiil God, 
implied so momentous a change in religious 
and moral thought and practice that it would 
be strange if it left no legendary record of 
itself. We may discern one in the story of 
Abraham's sacrifice ; to which we find a very 
striking and close parallel in the Laconian 
leg^id of Helen, whose father intended to 
sacrifice her to God in order to stay a plague :^ 

^ Plutarch, Parallela, 35. Vide my CuUs of Greek States, 
vol. i. p. 93. 


28 The Evolution of Religion 

the eagle, the messenger of God, swooped 
down and snatched the knife from the sacri- 
ficer's hand, and let it fall on a kid that was 
pasturing near. Again, we are all familiar 
with the story of Jephtha's vow : the fact is 
not so well known that a story identical in 
nearly every detail was told of Idomeneus, 
the Cretan hero,^ who vowed that if he re- 
turned home from the Trojan war he would 
sacrifice to God the first thing that he met on 
landing: his daughter was the first that met 
him — ^and Idomeneus " did with her according 
to his vow," or intended to do so, and the 
people exiled him for it. Different from 
these, but belonging to the inner circle, so 
to speak, of sacred narrative, are one or 
two Gospel stories which are not peculiar to 
Palestine or to our sacred books. The mir- 
aculous star that guides sacred personages 
on a divine errand must be an Anatolian star- 
legend, for it is told of MncsLS and his voyage 
to Italy.^ And a critical appreciation of the 

1 Servius, jEn. ui. 121. 2 /^j^.^ ^^ goi. 


Comparative Study of Religions 29 

style of Hellenic folk-lore detects at once a 
marked Hellenic colour in the legends that 
gather around the birth and rearing of the 
Virgin in the apocryphal Gospel of St James. 
More important and suggestive of much more 
is the parallelism that we discover between 
the story of our Lord's temptation and the 
temptation of Zarathustra in the Zend-Avesta: 
here also the evil god offers the holy prophet 
the kingdoms of the world if he will fall down 
and worship him/ 

Finally, it is not improbable that the strange 
legend preserved in various late Greek MSS., 
of the Virgin Mary's descent into hell,^ where 
she is shown the torments of the damned, is 
derived ultimately from the Babylonian myth 
of the descent of Ischtar, which in the Greek 
world transformed itself into the story of the 
descent of Aphrodite. This suggestion is in 
harmony with the evidence which will be 

^ Sacred Books of the East, vol. iv. (ed. Mills), p. 211. 

2 Vide account of these in Revue des £tudes grecques, xiii. 
(1900), p. 233, and Annuairede V Association pour V encourage- 
ment des Etudes grecques, 1871, p. 92. 


30 The Evolution of Religion 

noticed below for the belief that the develop- 
ment of the worship and the divine character 
of the Virgin owed much, directly or indirectly, 
to the great Anatolian cult of the mother- 
goddess. 

As regards the legend just mentioned, we 
may suppose direct borrowing, or at least 
direct mental suggestion from an older 
mythology and faith. To the other examples 
which I have adduced — probably only a few 
among many that might be quoted — ^the theory 
of borrowing may be inappropriate. 

It may be more scientific, and certainly it is 
at present more expedient, to be content with 
the assumption that for thousands of years 
over contiguous human areas a similarity of 
religious temperament, religious institutions, 
religious crises may tend to produce a common 
stock of legend ; whether the legend is true or 
false is not our present concern. 
^ I turn now to the second group of affini- 
ties, those in nQm^^dUttui:e_and terminology. 
This may at first sight appear a matter un- 


Comparative Study of Religions 31 

important for the evolution of religion, and of 
merely linguistic concern, fk people changing 
its religion cannot suddenly change its speech, 
but must adapt the old terminology to the 
new though^ It may be of interest for the 
student of language to know that when St 
Patil promises to " s how you a m ystery " he is 
borrowing the Jaiiguage_-Qf_j[agamsm ; that 
when Bishop Clemens^ ecstatically exclaims, 
"The Lord is our hierophant; bearing the 
sacred torch He has marked the initiate with 
His own seal . . . once join our mystery and 
you will dance in the choir of angels," he is 
using the phraseology of the Eleusinian and 
Attis Mysteries. But the interest of such a 
style, upon which Dr Hatch has sufficiently 
commented, is more than linguistic ; for it 
foreshadows a real though fortunately a 
temporary change which came over Chris- 
tianity in the first few centuries of its life, 
transforming it from an open doctrine into a 
mystery organised after the old Greek type. 

1 ProtrepL, 12, § 120 (p. 92 P). 


32 The Evolution of Religion 

Moreover the modem logical view of names 
as merely indifferent speech-symbols, which 
can be changed without affecting the essence 
of the things, was by no means the old-world 
view. The formula nomina sunt nuviina was 
valid in all the old religions of the Mediter- 
ranean area, including earlier and even later 
Christianity : the divine name was felt to be 
part of the divine essence and itself of super- 
natural potency ; and this will be seen to be 
of paramount importance when we consider 
the forms of ancient prayer. Therefore 
the propagation of a new religion was greatly 
assisted if it could allow itself to employ some 
at least of the names potent and familiar 
in the older creed. Now the personal 
names of the various deities of paganism, 
owing to the mental illusion noted above, were 
necessarily hateful to the new faith and were 
ruthlessly suppressed, surviving merely as 
names of demons or for purposes of magic : 
only in remote comers of the old world one 
or two may still be lingering, purified as it 


\ 


Comparative Study of Religions 33 

were and at peace, as in the modem chapel 
of "Panagia Aphroditissa," near the old 
Paphos in Cjrprus. But some of the sacred 
names of Greek paganism were mere appel- 
latives, possessing less individual personality, 
and were therefore innocent in the ears of 
the Christian propagandists. And two of 
these were destined to become names of 
primary virtue m the terminology of the new 
faith. When the apostles and their successors 
preached the Gospel of "the Saviour," this title 
could awaken at least a responsive religious 
thrill in the hearts of the Hellenes who had 
been nursed in their ancestral religion. For it 
had long been attached to their supreme god, 
and in its feminine form to theh: beloved 
goddess Kore, and as appUed to her the 
appellative already connoted " salvation " after 
death ; ^ and already it had been used by the 
Alexandrian Greeks to sanctify the divine 
man, God's representative on earth, "the 

^ I have noticed the evidence of this in my forthcoming 
third volume of the CuUs of the Greek States. 

3 


34 The Evolution of Religion 

living image of God," as one of the later 
Ptolemies is styled in the ecstatic language of 
the Rosetta inscription.^ But in the history 
of divine names none have been of greater 
import for paganism and Christianity aUke 
than " Kore-Parthenos " and that of the Greek 
and Phrygian "Divine Mother," the deSiv 
MiJTqp. It is at least probable that the pre- 
valence of the cult and the name of " Kore," 
the goddess who proffered salvation in the 
pre-Christian Hellenic world, afforded strong 
stimulus to the later growth and diffusion of 
Mariolatry, which is one of those phenomena 
in the history of the Church which cannot be 
adequately explained without looking beyond 
the limits of Christianity proper. A passage 
in the Panarium of Epiphanios * is of singular 
interest for those who wish to study the 
period of transition between old things and 

1 aiG,, 4697. 

2 Haeres. 51, 22; Dindorf, vol. ii. p. 483, 12-29: vide 
Philologus, l6, p. 354. I find that the view I have taken 
of this important text agrees on the whole with that of 
Usener in his Untersuchungen^ p. 27. 


Comparative Study of Religions 35 

new. This writer tells us that on the night 
of the 5th or 6th of January, in Alexandria, 
the worshippers met in the sacred enclosure or 
temple of " Kore," and having sung hymns to 
the music of the flute till dawn, they de- 
scended by the light of torches into an under- 
ground shrine and brought up thence a 
wooden idol on a bier representing Kore, 
seated and naked, with the sign of the cross 
on her brow, her hands, and her knees. 
And with the accompaniment of flutes, hynans, 
and dances the image was carried round the 
central shrine seven times, before it was 
restored again to its nether dwelling-place: 
" and the votaries say that to-day at this hour 
Kore — ^that is, the Virgin — ^gave birth to the 
Eternal." 

It is strange that Epiphanios should quote 
this rite as an example of pure paganism. 
This cannot be true : the image has been 
carefully signed with the cross in such a way 
as to suggest, not casual violence, but the 
deliberate intention of the worshippers; nor 


36 The Evolution of Religion 

could the formula, "the Virgin has born the 
Eternal," have been part of a piu'ely pagan 
liturgy consecrated to the Hellenic Kore. 
Still less could the service be purely Christian : 
at least I imagine that a naked Virgin, kept in 
a cavern shrine and carried round with timbrels, 
would be a unique fact in Christian archae- 
ology. The belief is forced upon us that we 
have here a blending of at least two rival 
creeds in a period of transition. An old ritual 
of Kore at Alexandria, the goddess of the 
underworld whose statue was kept in a sub- 
terraneous cavern, may have included a kind 
of passion play in which a holy child was 
born: as this occurred near the beginning of 
January, it could all the more easily be adapted 
to the requirements of a gradually prevailing 
Christianity. The idol is sanctified with the 
sign of the cross, and the child is called " the 
Aion." This name betrays the influence at 
work. The doctrine which laboured most 
zealously to combine the various elements of 
the pagan and Christian creeds was Gnosti- 


Comparative Study of Religions 37 

cism, and " Aion " was a figure which the 
Gnostics borrowed firom Mithraism.^ It seems 
that the religious rays firom Hellas, Persia, 
and Bethlehem converged at the " Korion " of 
Alexandria. But the name Koprj does not 
seem to have usually formed part of the sacred 
title accepted by the early Church for the 
Mother of our Lord. Probably the name had 
acquired a personal association with the pagan 
goddess too strong to allow it to be used for 
the new faith ; ^ nor was the idea of virginity 
so directly connoted by it as by the term 
irapdevo^l hence 17 ayin) irapdivo^ or i) ayia 

irapOii^os is chosen for the Christian appellation 
of Mary. But these words themselves belong 
to the ancient hieratic vocabulary of Hellas, 
for the maiden-goddess known by no other 
name than Parthenos had long been adored in 

^ That Aion was a real figure of Mithraic religion has 
been finally proved by the Mithras-Uiurgiey published by 
Dieterich, p. 4^ 1. 21. 

2 Usener quotes a few examples from the liturgy of the 
Greek ChurJh and one or two from patristic iSerature, 
Religionsgesch. Untersuchungen, I, p. 28^ n. 5 : some of 
these are poetical. 


38 The Evolution of Religion 

various states of Asia Minor and Thrace ; ^ 
" Hagne," the " Holy One," was a divinity 
dear to the Arcadians;* and at Assos, the 
chief port of Mysia, visited by St Paul on one 
of his journeys, an inscription attests that 
" the Holy Virgin of our fatherland " — such 
is her style-had been pre-eminent m the 
pagan worship.^ Moreover the sacred title, 
" the Mother of God," was S3rmpathetic with 
a very ancient and dominant Mediterranean 
faith: in prehistoric times from Crete, and 
at a later period from Phrygia, had gone 
forth the worship of the divine mother, 
known generally as "the Gk)ds' Mother" or 
" the Mother," which had left a deep impress 
upon the religious imagination of the various 
races of the Greek and Roman world. It is 
no paradox to affirm that one of the streams 

^ Vide Artemis R. 37, in my CuHs of th§ Greek States, 
vol. 11. p. 567. 

^ Paus. 4, 33, 4: inscription in Dittenberger, Sylloge^, 
653, 

' Vide Report of American School at Athens, vol. i., inscr. 
No, xxvi. 


Comparative Study of Religions 39 

that fostered the later growth of Mariolatry 
may have descended from the Minoan palace 
of Knossos.^ 

As regards the tlurigroup in my classifica- 
tion, ex ternaL sy Tn ho]s_ftn H li turgical objects, 
we might suppose that these mainly belong to 
the minutiae of archaeological study. A phil- 
osopher may ignore them as trivial facts ; but 
they have been the cause of too much blood- 
shed and strife to be ignored by the history of 
religions, and the feelings they excite are still 
powerful enough to divide the churches and the 
sects of Christendom. ^Besides, if one religion 
borrows its symbols and sacred objects from an- 
other, it probably borrows much more besides. 
The use of candles and incense in churches, 
the fashion of certain ecclesiastic vestments, 
can be shown to have descended to us from a 
pre-Christian world. And it was quite natural 
that the new faith should take over the religious 
property of paganism, whatever at least it could 

^ Vide chapter on Cybele in the forthcoming third 
volume of my CuUs of the Greek States, 


4© The Evolution of Religion 

receive without violation of its own essential 
principles. It is only the anthropological study 
of these particulars, apparently insignificant in 
themselves, that enables us to understand 
certain modem controversies, as for instance 
concerning incense, and also to appreciate 
the extraordinary tenacity with which the 

things of cult . These latter are felt to be part 
of the spell which is exercised upon us by an 
immemorial tradition, a spell that is all the 
stronger because it works upon the "sub- 
conscious " self ; and those who maintain them 
are rarely aware of the aboriginal reason which 
prompts them. And often the question about 
the symbols or the sacred objects of worship, 
as distinct from the ideas and personalities, 
becomes obviously of prime importance for 
the comparison and classification of religions. 
Thus the distinction between iconic or idola- 
trous and aniconic or non-idolatrous cults 
is of deep significance, for it may correspond 
to the distinction between a more and a less 


k 


Comparative Study of Religions 41 

anthropomorphic conception of the divmity, 
or to a belief that the embodiment of him 
in material objects is right and seemly or 
wrong and unseemly. The more spiritual a 
religion becomes,, the greater is its inclination 
to dispense with the idol and even to reprobate 
it ; the worshipper of Jahv^ was thus set in 
antagonism to the surrounding tribes, and in the 
Iranian region the Zarathustrian votary to the 
worshipper of the Dae vas. The history of Chris- 
tianity in regard to this matter is famiUar to us 
all: in spite of the vehement protests of its 
apostles and earUer propagandists who in- 
herited the spiritual Judaic view, we know that 
all the efforts of the iconoclastic emperors 
could not suppress the veneration of images in 
the later period. Even in the Teutonic north, 
Christianity came, in the days before the Refor- 
mation, to assume an iconic character which is 
not accounted for by the ancestral tradition 
of oiu* pagan forefathers : who certainly carved 
images, in spite of what Tacitus tells us, but 
do not appear to have been markedly idola- 


42 The Evolution of Religion 

trous. We in&llibly detect here the abiding 
influence of Greco-Roman paganism, in which 
idolatry had taken so deep a root, satisfying 
as it did the artistic-religious cravings of the 
people. We have records of the transforma- 
tion of the old statues into Christian images ; 
in an epigram we find Heracles pathetically 
complaining that he is forced to become 
St Luke : ^ a beautiful head of Aphrodite in 
Athens is rudely stamped with the cross, 
perhaps to convert her into the Virgin : ^ at the 
present day there exists in South Italy an 
image of a Madonna del Granato, holding a 
pomegranate, which by a curious chain of 
evidence can be traced with some probability 
back to the Hera of Argos, carved by 
Polycleitos. 

Now the image may be regarded in two 
aspects : as a s3niibol merely bringing close to 
the sense the spiritual idea of divinity, and 

^ AtUk. Pal. xi. 269, " I am Heracles^ the triumphant son 
of Zeus ; I am not Luke, but they compel me.'' 
2 Ephemefis Archaiologik^y 19OO, wtv. 5. 


f 


Comparative Study of Religions 43 

serving to stimulate the prayerful thought of 
the worshipper : or it may be venerated as the 
indwellmg abode of the divinity, m which he 
habitually resides, or into which, by spells and 
blood-oflferings, he may be compelled to enter. 
The first is the more spiritual and advanced point 
of view, the orthodox aspect of the image in 
the iconic churches of Christendom at most 
periods ; and this is put forward as an apology 
for what may seem idolatry : we may note in 
passing that the same apology was put forward 
by the advanced champions of paganism. The 
second is the more primitive view, accepted at 
most periods by the people, and sometimes 
tolerated or even encouraged by certain of the 
churches : the idol is regarded as miraculous, 
as infused with divine power, perhaps itself the 
very divinity ; and the uncultured Greeks who 
whipped the idol of Pan with squills if food 
was scarce,^ or bound the image of Aphrodite 
with cords to prevent it running away,^ the 

1 Theocritus, Id. 7, 106. 

2 CuUs of Greek States, vol. ii. p. 735 : R. 25b, 


44 The Evolution of Religion 

Breton smith mentioned by Renan, who 
threatened the saint's image with red-hot 
pincers to compel him to heal his son, the 
modern savage who smears his idols with 
blood,^ are to be classed together in the 
morphology of religion. 

Idolatry in this sense is a higher form of 
fetichism, which, strictly defined, is the venera- 
tion of material objects, often shaped by art 
and handled in such a way as to endow them 
with divine potency, which bring good fortmie 
to the owner. It is supposed to connote 
savagery, but survivals of it are found in most 
civilised communities, and we probably all 
inherit some faint impress of the fetichistic 
spirit, nor need we be startled if we find it in 
the higher religions. 

In ancient Greece the fetich was common 
enough: sacred axes, sacred sceptres, pyra- 
midical or cone-shaped stones, rudely hewn 

^ Cf, the method of Greco-Egyptian magic of strangling 
birds before the idol of Eros, in order that their breath may 
animate it, mentioned in an Abraxas papyrus, Class, Rev, 
1896, p. 409. 


% 


Comparative Study of Religions 45 

tree-stumps, are examples which we find in 
the literature and art of the historic or pre- 
historic periods; the most common kind of 
private fetich was the gem, carried as an 
amulet. This superstitious view of gems 
belonging to primitive faith has continued 
through many ages. Moreover, both in the 
public and private reUgion of Christendom in 
many periods, and even at the present time, 
we can easily recognise the fetichistic value of 
the sacred objects, relics, crucifixes; and the 
Bible itself might sometimes be carried as an 
amulet about the person to secure one from 
danger, and its modem use in the English 
legal oath, the witness "kissing the book," 
conforms to a fetichistic type of oath which 
was common in the primitive Teutonic com- 
munities.^ When Tertullian exclaims, " How 
great is the difference between the wood of 
the cross and the shapeless wooden emblems 
of Pallas or Ceres," ^ he is thinking generally 

^ Vide Schrader, Real-Lexikon^ s,v, Eid. 
2 Ad Nat, i. 12. 


46 The Evolution of Religion 

of the wide diflference between Christianity 
and Hellenic polytheism. As regards the 
attitude of the Christian and pagan wor- 
shippers towards these emblems of their cult 
which TertuUian mentions, we are not siu'e 
that any such general distinction could be 
drawn. The " adoration of the true wood of 
the cross," of which we have heard in recent 
times, if we merely consider the nature of the 
religious object and the value of the material 
thing for faith, must be called fetichistic : at 
least I know of no other word equally appro- 
priate in the terminology of the science of 
religions. Doubtless the modem mind, m the 
performance of such ritual practices, can dis- 
tinguish between the inanimate or material 
thing and the divine spuit which sanctifies it. 
But so also can the inteUigent savage, who 
cares nothing for his piece of wood when he 
thinks the power-giving spirit has departed 
from it. The fetichism then of the higher 
religions and of the savage faith is morpho- 
logically the same ; the vital difference lies in 


Comparative Study of Religions 47 

the conception of the divinity that is supposed 
to animate or sanctify the material thing. 

It would be wrong to attribute the fetichistic 
proclivities discovered in the Christian com- 
munitieswhollyto the Hellenicor Mediterranean 
strain in our religion ; for we must reckon with 
the survival among the later ritual-observances 
of the superstitions of the Northern peoples, and 
fetichism was certainly characteristic of the 
early Teutonic, Celtic, and Slavonic races. In 
this matter, as in others, we have to note that 
the puritanism of the early Church could not 
prevail against the strength of habit and im- 
memorial tradition. 

The illustration of this group of affinities may 
conclude with the observation that the most cher- 
ished emblem of our creed, the type of the cross 
itself, had already been in vogue as a religious 
symbol of certain of the earlier pagan peoples ; 
it played a part in the ancient Egyptian^ and 

1 The Tatu, Tat, or Ded pillar erected in the ritual of 
Osiris, perhaps as a symbol of the resurrection of the god, 
had the form of a cross : vide Frazer, Golden Bougk^''\ ii. p. 141 . 


48 The Evolution of Religion 

Assyrian ritual, and recently Dr Evans has 
revealed to us in the Palace of Minos in 
Crete a chapel of the cross dedicated to 
the worship of the divine mother.^ (We can 
go no further than the surmise that the 
propagation of Christianity may have been 
assisted by the fact that the emblem of the 
new faith would not appear wholly unfamiliar 
to some of the converted races) 

As regards the aflSnities discernible in re- 
spect of hieratic institutions, the organisation 
of churches, the relations of Church and State, 
I have only space to cite a few salient illustra- 
tions. The earliest Christian Church, a private 
religious society united by the bond of faith, 
the members contributing to each other's 
wants, with a simple democratic organisation 
of ecclesia and sacred officials, would not strike 
the contemporary Greco-Roman world as an 
unfamiliar phenomenon ; for its family like- 

1 Vide Pahce of Knossos : Provisional Report for year 
1903, p. 92 : the writer quotes Babylonian and Assyrian 
examples. 


k 


Comparative Study of Religions 49 

ness to the Hellenic " thiasoi " or brotherhoods 
of cult was sufficiently obvious, and has often 
been commented on. They, like it, were 
often proselytisers, and. ignoring the barriers 
of caste, gens, and city, accepted in principle 
the religious fellowship of man. "It is well 
to consider all men friends and brothers, as 
being the family of God," says Apollonius,^ 
echoing the doctrine of the Stoics. The soil 
was ready prepared for the new cosmopolitan 
religion. 

In considering the history of the hierarchy 
in Christendom, we are often obliged to turn 
our eyes back upon the pre-Christian period. 
For instance, the insistence on the apostolic 
succession in the various churches, a primary 

1 Epist. 395 : the doctrines of the Orphic sects from 
the fourth century b.c. onwards also emphasised the kin- 
ship of man with God^ as the well-known Orphic tablets, 
found in South Italy and Crete, reveal (Hell. Jottm, 3, 
p. 112 : Miss J. Harrison^ Prolegomena to the Study of Greek 
Religion: Appendix by Prof. Murray, p. 660). In the 
pseudo-Platonic Axtochns, p. 371 D, the sick man is 
assured of salvation as being '^of the family of God'' 

4 


50 The Evolution of Religion 

article of faith with many at the present time, 
is entirely in keeping with a very old Mediter- 
ranean tradition: for we find it not in- 
frequently maintained in Hellenic paganism 
that the priest should descend directly from 
the god whom he serves, or from the first 
apostle who instituted the particular cult or 
mystery ; ^ we hear of the priest being quali- 
fied " by descent and by divine appointment."* 
But in the earlier religious period the succes- 
sion or descent was regarded in the linear and 
physical sense: this has become refined into 
the idea of a spiritual succession, maintained 
however by a continuity of physical though 
mystic contact. Here, as so often in the 
comparative study of religion, we have to note 

^ E,g. a priest of Megalopolis^ a hierophantes of the 
Great Goddesses^ is spoken of as descended from "those 
who first established the mystic worship of the Great 
Goddesses among the Arcadians/' Epk, Archaiol, 1896^ p. 
122 : the priests of Poseidon at Halikamassos traced their 
descent from those who brought his cult from Troezen at 
the foundation of the city, C.LG, 2655. 

^ At Cos^ vide Paton and Hicks, Inscriptions of Cos, 
No. 103 (Roman Imperial period). 


Comparative Study of Religions 51 

the physical and material ideas of the more 
primitive period maintaining themselves in 
the later but translated into a spiritual 
significance. 

The relation between the priesthood and the 
State has been one of the burning questions of 
the secular and religious history of Europe. 
To understand fully all the features in the 
State organisation of the * Church and the 
many points of controversy, we need often 
to go far back into the records of early Aryan 
and Mediterranean society. We may mark 
here and there in the pagan Anatolian region 
the emergence of the idea that the priest 
should be temporal lord,^ while in most early 
Aryan societies the subordination of the 
spiritual to the secular power appears to have 
been maintamed. A study of the sagas of the 
North suggests the reflection that the struggle 
fought out to a definite decision at the Refor- 
mation had already been decided in the 

^ E.g. the priest of Cybele at Pessinus, and the priest of 
Ma in the two Comanas. 


52 The Evolution of Religion 

Teutonic North in the far-off days before 
Christianity ; ^ also that the secular character of 
the married EngUsh priesthood in our pre- 
Conquest period is only the reflex of old 
Teutonic custom. 

The ceUbacy of the priesthood is, again, a 
question that has agitated and divided the 
churches, nor does it appear that we ourselves 
have finished with it. To trace its origin and 
inner significance, a wide anthropological study 
is necessary, and I may be able to return to 
it in another association in a later lecture. 
Within the history of the Church, we may 
trace back the religious ideas underlying the 
dogma of celibacy to the ascetic enthusiasm of 
the third and fourth centuries, and we may be 
right in connecting it with the growth of 
Mariolatry. But the original source of the 
phenomenon lies far in the background of our 
religion ; the impulse to religious celibacy had 
long been congenial to the temperament of 

^ Vide Golther, Handbuch der germanischen Mtfthologie, 
p. 612, 617. 


Comparative Study of Religions 53 

some of the Anatolian races. We find it power- 
ful in the Judaic sect of the Essenians ; and in 
the anthropology of primitive societies we are 
often confronted with the idea that the virgm 
body is the only fit organ for the fiiU divine 
afflatus. 

In another question of administration, in the 
position of women in regard to the ministry, 
we can trace the opposing forces of differing 
pre-Christian traditions.^ Their present total 
exclusion from sacred functions in all but a 
few sects shows the triumph of the Judaic 
rule sanctioned and insisted upon by St Paul ; 
it is not at all in accordance with Teutonic 
or Greco-Roman religious custom; and in 
fact we find in the early centuries of the 
Church, when Greek influence was strongest, 
that certain offices of the ministry could be 
fulfilled by women ; we even hear of a heretic 
sect in the fifth century that signalised itself 
by the orgiastic processions of the " priestesses 

^ Fide my paper in the Archiv fur Religionsfvissenschqft, 
1904, on "The Position of Women in Ancient Religion/' 


54 The Evolution of Religion 

of the Virgin Mary."^ It is still possible that 
the old Teutonic view in this matter may 
reassert itself. 

If we try to give a complete account of 
any of the important mstitutions of the 
churches, infant baptism or the Boman 
confession for instance, we ought at least, 
before we can pronounce that any particular 
one is a spontaneous or a unique growth, to 
survey the religions contiguous to or immedi- 
ately preceding Christianity. As regards the 
practice of confession, a usage which, as I hope 
to show, may be explained as connected with 
a ritual of purification, its institution cannot 
at least be regarded as a unique phenomenon 
in the early Church. A very simple form of 
it appears to have been known to the Judaic 
system, and it appears as a formal element 
in the Babylonian liturgy:* as a spiritual 
relief to which a man might voluntarily 
resort, it was encouraged by the Delphic 

1 Fide infra, p. 72. 

^ See King^ Babylonian Religion, p. 211. 


Comparative Study of Religions 55 

oracle ; ^ as part of the cathartic ritual which 
was preliminary to initiation it was required 
by the ordinances of the Samothracian 
Mysteries; and it is in an anecdote con- 
cerning these that we meet with the first 
example of the free Protestant spirit repro- 
bating the practice.* We may infer that it 
was uncongenial to the character and alien 
to the tradition of our Teutonic forefathers, 
in the record of whose pagan institutions there 
is no hint of it, and Alcuin complains of his 
Goths " that no one of the laity was willing 
to confess to the priests." ^ It may well have 
been a spontaneous growth of southern 
Christianity ; but it appears to have arisen 
first within the early monastic orders,* and 

^ Fide chapter on "Apollo Cult" in my forthcoming 
fourth volume of CuUs, 

^ Plutarch, Apophtkeg, Lacon, p. 229 P : Lysander is 
told by the priest that before initiation he must confess 
his worst sin : he asks if this was the gods' command or 
the priests', and on hearing that it was the gods who 
enjoined it, he replied, " Then do you stand aside and I 
will tell the gods if they ask me." 

8 Opp, Ep. 96. 

^ Vide Herzog, ReaUEncyclopddiey s,v, Beichte, 


56 The Evolution of Religion 

as these in their origin had certain affinities 
with the non-Christian mystic brotherhoods, 
where the practice was not unknown, it is 
possible that in this matter also a pre-Christian 
tradition was still of some effect. Or, if this 
is unlikely, we must maintain that like 
conditions evolve similar products over the 
whole area with which comparative religion 
deals ; and the most striking resemblance to a 
Christian confessional is to be observed in the 
old Mexican ritual, if we can trust Sahagun.^ 
As regards the other suggested example, we 
should probably find, if we followed out the 
history and origin of infant baptism, that the 
pre-Christian tradition was a strong efficient 
force in the settlement of the question ; there 
were urgent reasons at least why the rite 
should soon have come to be maintained by 
the early Church, for analogous rites whereby 
the new-born child was consecrated to the 
divinity were probably part of the hereditary 
tradition of most of the converted races. 

^ Jourdanet et Sim^on^ p. 24. 


Comparative Study of Religions 57 

We know that many of the Hellenes had 
been in the habit of passing the infant 
solemnly round the fire, a purificatory and also 
consecrating process;^ the northern Teutons 
sprinkled the infant with water : ' and when 
Aristotle tells us that many of the barbarian 
tribes were in the habit of plunging the new- 
bom into river- water, to harden the little ones, 
he is mistaking a religious for a secular 
practice.^ Looking at the baptism of the 
adult neophjrte, we find interesting resem- 
blances to the ceremonies of the pre-Christian 
mystic initiations ; the idea commonly ex- 
pressed in these latter, that the catechumen 
died to his old life and was born again, was 
eagerly adopted and developed by the later 
religion, and here as there left its imprint on 
the ritual: death and rebirth were actually 
simulated in the mystic service.* 

^ Heszch, s.v, ' Afi<l>iBp6fua. 

2 Fide Golther, op. cU. p. 555. » PolU. p. 1336 B. 

* In the Attis Mysteries the reborn and initiated were 
fed on milk — Sallustius^ De Diis et Mundo, 4 : for a care- 
ful treatment of the whole question, vide Dieterich, Eine 


58 The Evolution of Religion 

The affinities between Christian and pagan 
ritual, in many cases no doubt the result of 
direct inheritance, demand a more detailed 
investigation than they have yet received, 
especially in respect of the festival calendar: 
even the early writers of the Church were of 
opinion that the feast of the Purification of 
the Virgin Mary in February, was a develop- 
ment of the old Roman FebruaUa instituted 
by Numa ; ^ and such names of Christian saints 
and bishops as Hilarion, Hilarius, attest the 
popularity of the Hilaria, the festival of 
Adonis in the last days of paganism. Much 
might be still discovered by a minute know- 
ledge of the Greco-Roman records, combined 
with travel in Mediterranean lands and with 
personal observation of the ritual of feast- and 
fast-days in the remoter villages.^ 

MUhrM-Litvrgie, pp. 157-178 : for various savage parallels 
showing the prevalence in primitive societies of the idea 
of death and rebirth at initiation^ vide Frazer, Golden 
Bougk, vol. iii. pp. 424-446. 

1 Fide Herzog, ReaUEncycLy xii. p. 81 9. 

2 Vide Trede, Das Heidenthum in der romischen Kircke, 
vol. i. p. 280, '* Neue und alte Fest-Lust." 


Comparative Study of Religions 59 

Finally, there remains the question, of greater 
moment and perplexity than all the preceding, 
concerning the affinities of the Christian and 
pre-Christian reUgions in primary ideas and 
essential belief. To point out resemblances 
is not necessarily to ignore contrasts; only 
it is of more avail for present science to 
emphasise the former, as the latter are obvious 
enough and have always been emphasised. 
But we must guard again st accepting too 
rashly tliPjfWj^^f ffijspmlili^.nrft fiyL-H^c^^^.. !?^ 
actual orig^y nor must wJ2-.i^^ 

that two re1i£[mns rnqy^ be vitAlly Hiffprent in 

effect, while they use the same-materials- of 
thought and belief. The subject demands 
great knowledge and critical insight, and I 
can only indicate here clues that have already 
been followed and might be followed further. 
There is probably no need to call to your 
notice the fact that the incarnation of the / 
Godhead in human form was a familiar con- / 
ception to the civilised and half-civilised races 
of the old world, and was attached equally to \ 


6o The Evolution of Religion 

mythic personages as well as to actual men. 
That such a personality could serve as a 
mediator between man and the Supreme Gk)d 
was conceivable to the Hellenic, Egjrptian, 
even the Latin imagination ; and though the 
idea does not seem to have been woven into 
any fabric of faith by these races, it appears 
as a natural product in the higher stages of 
polytheism, and in many primitive and 
advanced societies it has dominated men's 
views concerning the person and position of 
the King. 

More important still for the purposes of the 
religious comparison is the wide prevalence in 
the Mediterranean communities of the belief 
in the death and resurrection of the divinity : 
and this has been the theme of much recent 
anthropological investigation.^ This is not 

1 Vide Frazer s Golden Bough, passim, especially vol. ii. 
pp. 115-168 (death and resurrection in rites of Adonis, 
Attis, Osiris, Dionysos), and vol. iii. pp. 138-200: cf. 
articles by Bernard Cook in Classical Review, 1903, 1904^ on 
'* Zeus Jupiter and the Oak " : we must distinguish between 
the simulated death of the divine effigy, and the simu- 
lated or real death of the human representative of divinity. 


Comparative Study of Religions 6i 

the time to examine into its origin and signi- 
ficance or to track out the various phenomena 
that illustrate and group themselves around 
it in the Mediterranean cults. I would 
merely call attention in passing to the fact 
that the belief existed, and was probably ex- 
pressed in the pre-Christian ritual of St 
Paul's own city of Tarsos,^ and that it was 
especially strong in the Attis Mysteries of the 
Great Mother of Phrygia and Crete ; we know 
that these were celebrated at a season which 
corresponded to the end of our Lenten period 
and the beginning of Easter, that they were 
preceded by fasting and began with lamenta- 

In Hellenic religion we can trace the idea in the worship 
of Pan, in the legends and ritual of Artemis-Iphigenia and 
Aphrodite^ vide CuUs of the Greek States, vol. ii. pp. 440- 
442^ 650-652^ and in the Cretan worship of Zeus^ vol. i. 
pp. 36-38 : but it had lost its vitality in the purely Hellenic 
cults of the classical period^ and was only real and energetic 
in the legends and ritual of Adonis and Dionysos. 

1 Fide Dio Chrys., vol. ii. p. l6 (Dindorf), and K. O. 
Miiller's Sardon und Sardanapal {Kleine Schrifteriy vol. ii. 
p. 100) : on a coin published in British Museum Catalogue^ 
"Lycaonia/* etc., pi. xxxiii. 2, p. 180, we see the god on 
his lion standing on what may be his pyre. 


62 The Evolution of Religion 

tions, the votaries gathering in sorrow around 
the bier of the dead divinity; then followed 
the resurrection, and the risen god gave hope 
of salvation to the mystic brotherhood, and 
the whole service closed with the feast of 
rejoicing, the Hilaria/ The Christian fathers 
themselves were struck with the deep resem- 
blance between this and their own mystery, 
and they were tempted to attribute it to the 
diabolic spirit of parody. We may take the 
words of Firmicus Matemus,^ with which he 
concludes his description of such an Attis 
Mystery as I have outlined — " truly the devil 
has Christians of his own"— as the text of 
a very important chapter in comparative 
religion. We hear of a Christian convert in 
Crete being seduced by the fascinations of the 
Hilaria ; and Phrygia, its ancestral home, was 
one of the earUest strongholds of Christian- 
ity. Here at least we may assume that the 

^ Ficle especially Hippol., Ref. Haeres. 5, p. 118 (Miller) : 
Macrob.^ Saturn, 1, 21, 7: Amobius, Adv, Gent. 5, 7, 16; 
7, 49 : Julian, Or. 5, l68 C. 

2 De error, c. 22. 


Comparative Study of Religions 63 

ancient dogma and ritual of the people was 
one of the predisposing causes operating in 
favour of the new. 

The comparative student must also give 
careful consideration to what are called the 
eschatologic doctrines, the beliefs concerning 
posthumous happiness, salvation, and damna- 
tion, not only of the Judaic, but also of the 
Hellenic, AnatoUan, and Egyptian religions : 
and especially to those of the Hellenic, for it was 
they that were most widely known in the area 
of the Greco-Roman world, and modem theory 
has at times endeavoured to trace back the 
apocalyptic literature of Christianity to Hellenic 
sources.^ The investigation would demand a 
careful study of the Eleusinian and the Orphic 
Mysteries, in both of which we find the preg- 
nant idea that salvation after death depended 

^ For the Greek origin of the Christian apocalyptical 
literature, vide Dieterich^ Bekrage sur Erkldrung der neu- 
etUdeckten Petrus Apokalypie, Leipzig^ 1893. The clearest 
trace of Orphic influence on historic Christianity is the 
doctrine of purgatory^ which was popularised for the 
later ages by Vergil's Vlth Mneid: vide especially the 
purgatorial theory in Servius' Commentary^ ^n, vi. 741. 


64 The Evolution of Religion 

on a religious act of faith or on a mystic 
communion with a divinity that might be 
attained on earth by a sacrament or other 
liturgical means: and the inquiry will in- 
clude the question how far in these earlier 
systems the doctrine of salvation by faith 
was actually blended with any admixture 
of the ethical doctrine of salvation by 
works. And the problem, like many others 
in the scientific study of religion, will be 
found to concern philosophic as well as 
religious history. 

The ideas attaching to sacrifice in the Medi- 
terranean world have long been recognised as 
a vital subject of inquiry for the comparative 
science; and both the lower and the higher 
anthropology can contribute much that is 
essential to the AiU understanding of the 
evolution of the Christian doctrine concern- 
ing the divine sacrifice and the Holy Com- 
munion. I need not here enlarge on this 
subject, even by way of mere illustration, for 
I have already dealt with it, however inade- 


\ 


Comparative Study of Religions 65 

quately, in a former paper : ^ it is an intricate and 
fascinating theme and invites further research. 
But for proving the revival on the new 
Christian soil of the older pre-Christian 
religious thought and aspiration, there is no 
special subject so fruitful as the study of 
Mariolatry. I have already suggested by 
way of illustration the possibility of such 
pagan titles as " Kore-Parthenos," the " Gods' 
mother," having exercised an abiding influence 
in exciting and shaping the nascent thought 
of earlier Christendom ; and I affirmed that 
their prevalence corresponded to a prevailing 
religious bias which turned the minds of 
many of the peoples in the old world to 
cleave affectionately to the mother-goddess 
or to the divine maid. Apart from mere 
titles, the student of the latter days of 
paganism is forced to note at almost every 
point the deep impress of such ideas and the 
enthusiasm they evoked. In all the leading 
Greek mysteries, the Mother and the Maid 

^ Hibhert Journal, January 1904. 


66 The Evolution of Religion 

held a dominant position, and the Orphic 
brotherhoods had ranged the Mother by the 
side of the Son-God and the Father-God; 
and even in the state-cults of the ancient 
centres of Hellenic civilisation, the maternal 
character of the divine power had long been 
cherished. Finally, the Phrygian rehgion of 
the Mother, to which even Mithraism, a pre- 
eminently masculine or paternal rehgion, was 
obUged to accommodate itself, had captured the 
greater part of the Greco-Roman world ; and 
was certainly very influential in the districts of 
Asia Minor visited by St Paul and in every one 
of the cities of the Seven Churches. The senti- 
ment it evoked is expressed by the words of a 
poet of the Middle Attic comedy : " For those 
who have true knowledge of things divine, there 
is nothing greater than the Mother ; hence the 
first man who became civihsed founded the 
shrine of the Mother."^ This then is a lead- 
ing factor in the reUgious psychology of the 
converted nations with which we must reckon. 

^ Alexis in Stobseus^ Florileg, (Meineke), vol. iii. p. 83. 


I 


Comparative Study of Religions 67 

We cannot, in accordance with the laws of 
human nature, suppose that a religious tra- 
dition of such hereditary power as this could 
wholly lose its force under a changed creed. 
The gaps in the record will probably make it 
impossible to supply a detailed and geogra- 
phical statement showing how in the various 
communities of the ancient cult the person- 
ality of the pre-Christian goddess was fiised 
gradually with the ideal image of the Virgin- 
Mother of Christ. Only a few suggestive 
facts in the development and organisation 
of Mariolatry may be mentioned here. The 
heretic Montanists of Phrygia were charged 
with deifying the Virgin and believing that 
one of their leaders was united in a mystic 
marriage with her, a belief natural to Phry- 
gian paganism ; and their founder Montanus 
is said to have originally been a priest of 
Cybele.^ The mother of Constantine, the 

1 Fide Herzog, Real-Encycl.y s,v. " Montanismus " : cf, 
the article there on "Maria" and the chapter in Trede, 
op. cU. vol. ii., " Die grosse Mutter." 


68 The Evolution of Religion 

Empress Helena, who is supposed to have 
been of Bithynian origm, was praised for 
decking the grotto of Bethlehem with sacred 
gifts as the shrine of the Virgin;^ it is 
noteworthy that her earliest recorded chapel 
should be a grotto or cave; for it was in 
such underground shrines that the Phrygian 
Mother was commonly worshipped in her 
own land. Another striking analogy to 
the ancient ritual of the mother-goddess is 
presented by the feast called the koi/xtjo-i? 
and avdXrjyltv^ rrj^ d^oroKov^ first mentioned 
by Andreas of Crete {drc. 650 a.d.), but 
probably in existence long before his time: 
the Mother of God dies and rises again in 
the Assumption. It would be of special 
interest if we could discover that this ritual 
first became canonical in Crete, the home 
of Andreas ; for in. Crete as in Cyprus, 
where the Virgin succeeded to the name of 
Aphrodite, we have traces of a similar rite in 
which the goddess Aphrodite was laid out 

^ Euseb.^ V, Const, iii. 43, 2. 


Comparative Study of Religions 69 

as dead on a bier and was afterwards raised 
to life.^ 

And is it nothing more than a coincidence 
that in the same city of Ephesus, where during 
St Paul's visit the fanatics raised a tumult 
in behalf of their Virgin Artemis, some six 
centuries later the people with equal ecstasy 
hailed the decision of the Synod that pro- 
claimed the Virgin-Mother of God {d€OT6Kos) ? 
The mention of Ephesus suggests another 
consideration of the greatest importance for 
the study of the development and propa- 
gation of the Christian dogma concerning 
the virginity of the Mother of God. The 
Virgin-birth, an idea which has long been a 
stumbling-block to science, and which has 
recently been pronounced by some to be un- 
essential to Christianity, was a dogma that 
could easily be understood and even eagerly 
accepted by the converts of AnatoUa ^ and the 

1 Vide Cults of the Greek States, pp. 650-652. 

^ One of the Babylonian goddesses is addressed in the 
same hymn as ^* Mother^ wife^ and maid/' Jastrow^ Relig. 
BabyL Assyr,, p. 459. 


70 The Evolution of Religion 

Greek world. In Ephesus itself the ancient 
goddess had been imagined in some sense as 
a maternal or generative divinity, yet also as 
a virgin, in whose ritual, conducted partly 
by a priesthood of monks, a strong rule of 
austerity and chastity was enforced.^ The 
great Phrygian Mother was herself, according 
to a native legend, miraculously conceived, 
and there are grounds for suggesting that she 
was occasionally regarded as a virgin.^ The 
evidence indeed concerning such ideas in the 
pre-Christian cults is always confused, casual, 
and often contradictory, with no power 
apparently in themselves to develop a fixed 
dogma of faith. It would be in fact unreason- 
able to maintain that the Christian doctrines 
concerning the Virgin-Mother could have been 
evoked merely by the spontaneous demand 
of the Anatolian or Greek converts. But 
we may affirm that when that doctrine was 

1 Vide Cults of the Greek States, vol. ii., Artemis, R 133 : 
cf. Paus. 8, 13, 1. 

^ I am treating this question in an appendix to the 
Cybele chapter in vol. iii. of my Cults, etc. 


Comparative Study of Religions 71 

presented to them, their own traditions had 
prepared their imaginations to receive it as 
congenial. We meet in the late pagan liter- 
ature passages in praise of virginity as a 
divine quality quite as ecstatic and extrava- 
gant as many in the Christian fathers.^ Many 
of the nations had long cherished the ideal 
of a virgin goddess; most had been devotees 
of the Divine Mother. The successful pro- 
pagation of Christianity may have owed much 
to the means which it possessed for satisfying 
these two sentiments and for reconciling 
them in a primary article of faith. Then, 
we must certainly ascribe the exaltation 
of Mary in the Church of the first six 
centuries to the enthusiasm engendered by 
the older goddess-worships. Alexandria may 
have contributed much more than we have 
already noted; and more than one writer 
has explored the deep indebtedness of the 
developed Mariolatry to the older figure of 

^ E.g. fragment of Naumachius in Stobseus^ op. cit,, vol. iii. 
pp. 16-17. 


72 The Evolution of Religion 

Isis.^ The extravagance of an enthusiasm 
that was rooted in old pagan sentiment 
occasionally engendered heresies. Besides 
the records concerning the Montanist, of 
which the significance has ah-eady been 
noticed, most interesting and valuable for 
our purpose is the sermon of Epiphanius 
against the heresy of the Collideriani,^ wild 
women who devoted themselves to the wor- 
ship of Mary, and whose orgiastic service he 
describes and reprobates : in their processions 
they appear to have drawn the Virgin round in 
a car strewn with raiment, and they solemnised 
a sacrament with bread : and he adds that they 
came from Thrace, the immemorial home 
of fanatic women and of the goddess "Artemis 
the Queen," to whom also offerings of corn 
were made.* The procession of a goddess in 
a car was probably part of an old Thrako- 

^ Vide specially Trede, Das Heidenthum in der romischen 
Kirche : Renan, Les origines du christianisme, vol. vii. 572-573. 
The resemblances are particularly striking between the 
Catholic and the Isiac sacerdotalism. 

2 Haeres., 79. * Herod., 4, 33. 


\ 


Comparative Study of Religions 73 

Phiygian ceremonial, and we hear of a sacra- 
mental eating of bread in the service of 
Cybele. 

We may finally note that the enthusiastic 
literature devoted to the pre-Christian Divine 
Mother and Maid and to the Virgin-Mother of 
God is the same in quality and tone. The 
prayer addressed to Isis in the story of 
Apuleius reminds us of a Christian hymn of 
praise; and the older liturgical or literary 
expressions would naturally colour the later.^ 

Another question with which the compara- 
tive study of Christianity is concerned touches 
the evolution of the Trinitarian idea.^ Here 

^ Cf. the prayer to Ninlil or Belit (a parallel form to 
Ischtar) of Asarhaddon^ "may the lips of Nin-lil, the 
Mother of the Great God, utter daily a gracious word 
before Aschur for the King of Assjnda " (Jastrow,- op, cii, 
p. 525), Mary was chiefly worshipped in the same way as 
an intercessor. 

2 For the identity of Father and Son in the later 
Mithraic cult-dogma, vide Dieterich, Fine MitkraS'LUurgie, 
p. 68 : for the Trinitarian idea in Mithraism, vide Cumont, 
Die Mysterien von Mithra (deiUsche Avsgabe), pp. 96, 145 : 
Mr Cook endeavours to trace it in the old Pelasgian cult 
of Zeus, Class, Rev, 1903, 1904 : vide Hell, Joum,, I9OI, 


74 The Evolution of Religion 

again it is necessary carefully to sift the 
phenomena of the contiguous religions, to 
consider whether they present such a con- 
caption .t an, and wheL in any of then, 
it had gained sufficient vividness and power 
to be likely to evoke a dogma of religious 
metaphysic. Moreover, to understand the 
complete genesis of the Christian doctrine, we 
must trace out the idea of divine emanations 
in the Mediterranean and the East; for the 
religions of the Iranian and even the Greek 
world present us with parallels to the process 
whereby the Holy Spirit becomes in relation 
to the personal God a distinct though closely 
attached personality. In the Zoroastrian 
ritual the Fravashi or Soul of Ahura receives 
reverence,^ and in Greek speculation and even 
cult the deov Upovoia or Divine Providence 
is sometimes regarded as an individual and 

p. 1 39, for Trinitarian symbolism in Carthaginian worship. 
(Note a certain mystic sanctity attached to the triad in later 
Greek philosophy, e.g. in Porphyry, Serv., Verg., EcL, 5, 
66 : lo. Lydus, de Mens., 2, 19.) 

^ Sacred Books of the East, vol. xxxi. pt. iii. p. 278. 


Comparative Study of Religions 75 

personal power ;^ nor is the conception of 
a plurality of beings within the limits of 
the same personality unfamiliar to primitive 
thought. The subject is one of the most 
intricate in the field of religious study, and 
the more hopeful investigation of it would 
demand anthropological study in its widest 
sense, combined with a knowledge of the 
later Greek metaphysic which has clearly 
left its impress on our doctrine. 

I will close these illustrations with the most 
obvious example of the contribution of anthro- 
pological study to our knowledge of actual 
Christendom. One of the most fruitful off- 
shoots of the older Hellenic system was 
h ero-worship , which itself may have arisen 
as a^jWelnprnpntt^o f auccstor-c ult. At first 
confined to the mythic figures of the past, 
it came to be applied to founders of colonies, 
legislators, and even to athletes; in its final 
development in the last centuries before Christ 
it was chiefly consecrated to kings and djmasts, 

1 Vide CuUs of the Greek States, vol. i. p. 306. 


76 The Evolution of Religion 

the founders of religious societies, men of 
science, and political benefactors. The divine 
worship of the mortal, an idea abhorrent to 
Judaism, and not accepted by the severer Zoro- 
astrian, was part of the state system of earlier 
and later Egypt, and was finaUy imposed on 
the Greco-Roman world. The soil in which 
it had most rankly flourished was Greek, 
and Greece and Anatoha were crowded with 
chapels consecrated to recently living men or 
to faded figures who were supposed to have 
once lived on earth, some of them perhaps 
actual ancestors, some imaginary personages 
of the epic or legendary world, some merely 
functional divinities of subordinate depart- 
ments, like the hero of the ploughshare or the 
tutelary hero of the potters. This growth 
of poljiiheism had struck its roots so deeply 
that Christianity, in spite of its monotheistic 
ideal, was unable to eradicate it. The ancient 
hero may sometimes be lurking under the 
later disguise of the saint: the mediaeval 
guild, like the Attic fraternity of potters. 


Comparative Study of Religions 77 

had its sacred tutelary patron; and it is 
curious to observe that in the matter of 
canonisation the Pope came to play exactly 
the same part as the Delphic oracle had \j 
played in the public consecration of the hero- 
cult: the divine authorisation is given or 
withheld by the vicar or agent of God. 
The importance of this inherited tradition in 
determining our religious estimate of historical 
Christendom is of the highest : for whatever 
may have been or may be the orthodox dogma 
of the Church concerning the status of the 
saint, such worship inevitably means poly- 
theism from the point of view of the popular 
faith: and we gather that in many outlying 
communities of Christendom, as of the ancient 
Greek world, the lower cult overshadows 
the higher. And this is one of the most 
salient and sure examples that we can quote 
of the direct influence of the older religions 
upon the later^ This special influence is 
mainly Gree^ though the pagan North, 
the Celtic and Lithuanian, and perhaps the 


78 The Evolution of Religion 

Teutonic peoples, have contributed much to 
the tradition of saint- worship. 

The iUustrations given may suffice as a 
sketch of the various applications of a com- 
parative method to the problems that the 
phenomena of Christianity offer to the student. 
In the choice of illustration I may seem to 
have ignored the strength of the Judaic 
element in determining the evolution; but I 
have considered it unnecessary to touch on 
this, as it has long been the familiar theme of 
scientific theology. I have also ventured to 
suggest that our own religious history should 
be traced back to the period of our ancestral 
paganism. And 1 would strongly recommend 
to the student of comparative religion in 
England a devoted attention to the world of 
the Norse Saga: for this has been strangely 
and fatally neglected by our English system 
of culture, with grievous loss to our poetic 
^ imagination, and to our knowledge of the 
early law and the religious institutions and 
temperament of our ancestors. Such a work 


Comparative Study of Religions 79 

as Golther's Handhuch der germanischen e> 
Mythologie shows us what a harvest may be 
reaped in that field for the science of religion. 
The subject in its own right claims our interest, 
and certain phenomena in the old Teutonic 
religion, its fatalistic ideas, its eschatologic 
beliefs concerning a "day of judgment," 
demand consideration in the light of more 
advanced creeds. On the other hand it may 
be wrong to attribute to it any direct influence 
on the inner development of Northern Christi- 
anity ; for there may be reason for the view that, 
when the new religion conquered the Teutonic 
North, it found there in some sense a religious 
vacuum, the old ritual and faith having lost its 
vitality and hold ; and certainly our ancestral 
paganism made no such struggle to survive 
as did the Greco- Roman. Nevertheless the 
history of its institutions may be necessary, as 
has been suggested already, to explain the 
struggle between Church and State in Teu- 
tonic lands ; and, further, it is only the pages 
of the Norse Saga-book that can yield us 


8o The Evolution of Religion 

an answer to the question whether we may 
not have inherited from remote times a certain 
average racial law of religious temperament 
resulting in a characteristic attitude towards 
matters of religion that may have determined 
our religious history. If the answer were 
affirmative and definite, the fact would have 
a practiq^l no less than a speculative import- 
ance. /At least we shall not know ourselves 
completely in this or in other matters if we 
continue to think that Greece and Rome and 
Palestine are our sole intellectual and spiritual 
ancestors ; in fact we may say that no account 
of the history of Christianity in any European 
State can be real and complete unless we can 
get back to the pre-Christian past of that 
community.^ 

Yet, while making full allowance for the 
influence of special ancestral traditions, those 
who work on the lines which have been 
indicated in the illustrations of method which 
I have selected, will acquire the ever-growing 
C conviction that Hellas has dominated the 


L 


Comparative Study of Religions 8i 

creed as she has dominated the intellectual ^ 

history of Christendom ; that the new faith, in 

spite of its fierce or contemptuous intolerance 

of the past, was only able to transform blit not 

to abolish the Mediterranean tradition : that in 

fact Sir Henry Maine's often quoted aphorism, ^ 

while by no means wholly true, was truer in 

respect of rehgious history than he himself 

was aware. 

I have been speaking hitherto mainly on the 

relations of anthropology to the comparative 

study of religion. And it may be well now 

to point out that anthropology, as I have tried 

to define and distinguish its functions, though 

an essential part, is only a part of the whole. 

For we must know not only the past but the 

present conditions, not only the embryology 

but the perfected growth. And, again, we 

compare religions not merely to test theories 

of origin^ ancestry, and indebtedness, but also 

to form the proper estimate of each one, and 

to correct the one - sided judgment that is 

always quick to pronounce this phenomenon 

6 


82 The Evolution of Religion 

or feature in any particular system as unique. 
If the comparison reveals more divergences 
than parallels, the result is no less important. 
And the comparative method should be applied 
not merely to ritual, liturgy, hieratic institu- 
tions, legends, and dogmas, but also to the 
varying phenomena and expressions of the 
religious temperament in the various races. 
Only the study of the latter can enable us to 
test the living. force of a faith, the degree with 
which it possesses the national mind ; and 
such a study is only possible when a nation 
has produced a rich religious literature or 
monuments of art embodying the public and 
private worship and religious sentiment. We 
know what we have gained by the discovery 
of the sacred books of the East, by the 
interpretation of the Babylonian inscriptions, 
and from their revelation to us in the Vedic, 
Iranian, and Mesopotamian cult-centres of a 
fervour as deep and passionate as any that we 
find in Hebraic or Christian writings. On the 
other hand, when a religion has passed away. 


Comparative Study of Religions 83 

as is the case with that of pre-Hellenic Rome, 
without leaving any articulate expression of 
its inner life, our knowledge of it can be 
superficial only, confined to mere ritual, 
fragments of liturgies, and the externals of 
cult. 

A dispassionate and uncontroversial study 
of that which is at least one of the greatest 
forces in human society cannot but be interest- 
ing, and fruitful also for other branches of 
inquiry, such as the history of early law and 
morals, of which in many primitive communi- 
ties the religion is the only record. It may 
even solve certain problems concerning the 
early migrations of races, as I have been con- 
vinced by the investigation of various Greek 
cults. In England the trained workers in 
this field are still imfortunately few, perhaps 
because a certam latent prejudice, bom of 
religious partisanship, is not yet extinct, and 
may act somewhat as a deterrent. I have 
avoided hitherto alluding to any of the 
practical and controversial considerations 


84 The Evolution of Religion 

which the methodical pursuit and propaga- 
tion of this science may excite, though I am 
well aware that its practical effects may be of 
high importance ; but they are not immediately 
our concern at present. There is, however, 
one such consideration that it is pertinent to 
touch on before concluding the survey of the 
methods and functions of this branch of 
historical inquiry, which deals much with 
origins and with the evolution of higher 
forms of religion from the lower. Dis- 
coveries of origins may appear to affect the 
vahdity of a creed or certain articles of creed. 
That this is actually the case in regard to the 
great problem with which the illustrations I 
have put before you are mainly concerned, 
namely, the genesis of Christianity, has been 
recently frankly admitted by a leading digni- 
tary of the Roman Church : who, moved by 
a rumour of anthropological research, has 
promptly turned it to the profit of his cause 
by maintaining that the Roman ritual and 
communion gains in force and validity by 


i^ 


Comparative Study of Religions 85 

the discovery that it has inherited and ab- 
sorbed the religious thought and practice of 
ancient Greece and Rome. On the other 
hand, others may find the exposition of the 
so-called pagan elements in the essence of 
Christianity repugnant to their sentiment; 
and hence are inclined to accept the dictum 
"that origm does not affect validity." I 
imagine the facts of rehgious psychology make 
somewhat against this aphorism. But it only 
concerns the science of comparative religion, 
because in the history of creeds validity has 
been very often found to maintain itself mainly 
by an appeal to origin ; and as our science, to 
reiterate, is much concerned with origins, it 
is indirectly concerned with those claims of 
validity that support themselves by such an 
appeal. 

Another cause of the paucity of workers in 
this field is the complexity and difficulty of 
the subject, which can be handled success- 
fully only by the advanced and mature student. 
The pre-requisites of competence are an 


86 The Evolution of Religion 

exact philological as well as an archaeological 
training, with a view to the proper appreciation 
both of texts and monuments; secondly, a 
general acquaintance with the problems and 
history of philosophy, and especiaUy of ethics, 
and with the history of early social institutions 
and law ; thirdly, a comprehensive study of 
anthropology. To this must be added a 
sympathetic and minute knowledge of at least 
two of the great world-religions, whereby 
alone a critical insight into the essential 
and significant phenomena of the religious 
experiences of our race can be obtained. 
The comparative science of religion has 
now become possible, thanks partly to the 
labours of philological specialists in the 
ancient languages of Europe and Asia, and 
partiy to the organisation of anthropological 
travel. 

Let me conclude with remarking that 
subdivision of labour is imperative in this 
field : and it is especially in Oxford that the 
opportunities for the requisite preliminary 


^ 


Comparative Study of Religions 87 

training are plentiful. It would be a gain for 
more than science if we could see a group of 
mature students organised here exploring the 
various departments of this complex subject 
in co-operation and with mutual assistance. 


LECTURE III. 

THE RITUAL OF PURIFICATION AND THE CON- 
CEPTION OF PURITY : THEIR INFLUENCE ON 
RELIGION, MORALITY, AND SOCIAL CUSTOM 

Among all the varied religious acts of man, 
there is probably none that has been so widely 
prevalent throughout the different races of 
mankind as the ritual of purification, nor does 
any idea seem to have possessed so strong a 
legislative power in the various departments 
of our life as the concept of purity. We can 
trace it back to instipcts that we appear to 
share with the higher animals, and we can 
track it upwards through the complex rites 
of the higher religions. The record presents 
us with a vast mass of phenomena which, as 
far as I am able to discover, have not yet been 
reduced to system or unified by any con- 

88 


The Ritual of Purification 89 

structive theory of evolution. In this lecture 
I venture to attempt the systematisation of 
the subject, first giving a brief summary 
of the main facts which are well known to 
the students of primitive anthropology and 
comparative religion and which confront us 
in nearly all the societies that have been 
explored. 

In the stage of our conscious life which we 
may call, relatively to man's growth, primeval, 
certain bodily acts and states and certain 
material substances are regarded as unclean 
and impure, likely to imprint a stain upon the 
person. It is impossible here to attempt to 
enumerate all the examples, and it is enough 
to mention a few that are salient and tjrpical. 
The generative processes of life, the states and 
activities of the male and especially the female 
organism connected with them, the bodily 
changes incident on puberty, are among the 
most familiar phenomena with which the idea 
of impurity in some pecuHar sense has been 
universally associated. A chief centre or 


90 The Evolution of Religion 

" nidus " of impurity is child-birth ; but still 
more dangerously impure is its counterpart, 
death and all the phenomena of death. In 
respect of child-birth the idea is fading away 
from our civilised consciousness; but it has 
left a deep deposit in our conscious or sub- 
conscious self in regard to death. The 
material substance that has been most 
generally felt to be impure is blood ; the 
curious feeling that the mere mention of the 
word often excites in certain modem people is 
a faint reflex of the savage mental state in 
respect to the thmg ; and the influence of this 
disposition upon advanced society raises the 
most interesting question in which com- 
parative law, ethics, and religion are jointly 
concerned, and which wUl be considered later. 
To continue our enumeration we may not 
find that the objects of the inanimate world out- 
side ourselves are usually regarded by primi- 
tive thought as in themselves impure, but all 
or most of them are capable of catching the 
infection from ourselves, from death or child- 


^ 


The Ritual of Purification 91 

birth for instance : hence it may be necessary 
to break or destroy or purify the utensils and 
furniture of the house where a death or a birth 
has occurred. At a somewhat more advanced 
stage, certain food-stuffs come to rank as 
impure, and a complicated code of " tapu " is 
established for specially sanctified persons. 
Then we are confronted, but not apparently 
in the most primitive period, with the distinc- 
tion between pure and impure animals, which 
also dictates certain rules and practices of 
diet. 

On the other hand certain natural things 
may come to be regarded as specially 
"pure," whether on the ground of a certain 
intrinsic quaUty, because for instance they 
are bright and lustrous, or from the fact that 
they were habitually used for cathartic or 
cleansing processes, as fire, water, odorous 
wood or spices, or substances which emitted 
a pungent odour such as sulphur. Such 
objects " are used in ritual," says Jamblichus,^ 

1 Be Mysteriis^ 5, 23. 


92 The Evolution of Religion 

" because they are specially full of the divine 
nature." But the psychic phenomena and the 
corresponding acts with which we are dealing 
may be well suspected of descending from an 
age at which no definite concept of a divine 
nature had as yet arisen, an age not yet 
perhaps even animistic, for in their crudest 
form they do not seem necessarily to imply 
any articulate system of belief in a world of 
ghosts and spirits. And this reflection brings 
us to the first question of importance, what 
this primitive concept of purity and impurity 
really is, and what were the sensations from 
which it was evolved. Nothing is more 
difficult to describe than simple sensations, 
but it is possible to distinguish one from 
another. And we must distinguish between 
the modem feeling about cleanliness and the 
primitive feelings which we are considering. 
That " cleanliness is next to godliness " is an 
aphorism suggested no doubt by sensations 
fundamentally akin to these ; but many a savage 
who is most particular about " impurity " 


The Ritual of Purification 93 

cares little or nothing for what we call 
" cleanliness." We consider that the cleansing 
acts we ourselves perform are purely hygienic 
or pleasure-giving, partly connected with the 
instinct of self-preservation, and some of them 
we find performed by other animals than man. 
But the savage ritual of purification does 
not by any means tend necessarily to self- 
preservation, but at times may lead to self- 
destruction, and no hygienic or utilitarian or 
secular considerations will carry us far in ex- 
plaining the cathartic code of Leviticus or the 
Zend-Avesta, or Buddhism, or the impurity of 
tabooed animals. These codes, while some 
of their prescriptions may be such as modem 
utilitarian ideas might dictate, are obviously 
instinct with religious or superstitious beliefs, 
and to explain the distinction between the 
pure and the impure animals would need a 
long excursus into ' primitive religion ; the 
distinction is certainly not one between 
wholesome and unwholesome, or pleasant and 
unpleasant, meat. 


94 The Evolution of Religion 

/We may probably discover the nature of 
the mstinct underlying much of the cathartic 
custom-law by taking as our typical example 
the savage feeling about blood. Evidence 
from almost every society in the world yields 
proof that the stain of blood is the primary 
hnpurity that needs a purifying ritual : hence 
arose a body of rules that were a burden upon 
domestic life, hence the elaborate purifications 
of warriors after battle or of the individual 
homicide/ Such rules in no way remind us 
of the natural desire to take a bath at the end 
of a warm field-day : the savage purifications 
after battle may last for weeks ; it is recorded 
that a North American Indian tribe was ex- 
tirpated because it needed a month to wipe 
off the stain of a single conflict, while their 
enemies needed only a week for that purpose 
and therefore had the advantage of three 
weeks' start in preparing for the next attack. 
The sense - instinct that suggests all this is 
probably some primeval terror or aversion 
evoked by certain objects, as we see animals 


% 


The Ritual of Purification 95 

shrink with disgust at the sight or smeU of 
blood. The nerves of savage man are strangely 
excited by certain stimuli of touch, smell, 
taste, sight: the specially exciting object is 
something that we should call "mysterious," 
" weird," or, still more expressively, " uncanny." 
To the primitive mind nothmg was more 
uncanny than blood, and there are people 
still who faint at the sight of it: for "the 
blood is the life," life and death are the 
great primeval mysteries, and all the physical 
substances that are associated with the inner 
principle of either partake of this mysterious- 
ness. For the savage, what is mysterious is 
also dangerous and not to be lightly handled 
or approached. Now, the man who incurs 
such stain not merely is exposed to some un- 
accountable danger himself, but he is able to 
infect others by contagion ; he spreads a sort 
of miasma, he is the conducting vehicle of a 
dangerous spiritual electricity — mere meta- 
phors, which, however, may enable us to catch 
something of the primitive thought. Such a 


96 The Evolution of Religion 

man therefore must avoid communion with his 
fellows for a time, must be "tabooed"; and 
will naturally endeavour to remove the " tapu " 
or dangerous " miasma " by some magic rites of 
cleansing or release. The kinsmen of the re- 
cently dead in all primitive societies are impure, 
because they have come into contact with death, 
the chief source of all impurity ; therefore they 
must be isolated, and, until they are purified, 
must wear some badge or external mark — 
which we call "mourning" — to warn others 
against approaching them. The "tapu" still 
remains in civilised communities; we abstain 
from intruding on the bereaved family, though 
we give a different motive for our keeping 
aloof. It so often happens that in such 
matters we act as the savage acts; but we 
must abandon for a time our normal way of 
looking at things in order to imagine his. 
To us a corpse may be an object of aversion, 
and it is in some degree contagious ; but our 
view of it, when we are cool, is secular and 
scientific : while the primitive aspect of it is 


k 


The Ritual of Purification 97 

supranonnal and mystic, and the contagion is 
something spiritual and incalculably danger- 
ous. In the Zend-Avesta we find an inter- 
esting special application of this idea: the 
defiling power of the dead varies directly 
according to the sanctity or rank of the 
deceased ; thus it is greatest in the corpse of 
the priest, somewhat less in that of a warrior, 
and least in that of the husbandman:^ 
corruptio optimi pessima: the most sacred 
person can defile the most, because he is 
charged with the most mysterious and there- 
fore dangerous potency. The Latin term 
"sacer" has the double meaning of "holy" 
and "accursed": from the same Greek root, 
ay, spring a word connoting holiness and a 
word meaning " pollution." Primeval thought 
or feeling holds together in a vague unity ideas 
that afterwards differentiate themselves and 
even become antithetical. The same power 
of radiating dangerous influence, supposed 

1 Sacred Books of the East, vol. iv., Zend-Avesta^ pt. i. 

pp. 58-59. 

7 


98 The Evolution of Religion 

to attach to the holy man, the polluted man 
and the pollutmg thing, brought them 
originally under the same dim conception. 

It would not repay us here to endeavour to 
trace out and explain all the minutiae of this 
superstition : the long lists of pure and impure 
things that one might compile do not disclose 
any single regulative idea, and nothing is more 
baffling than the eccentricities of prejudice and 
terror. But this superstition often proceeds 
with a logic of its own : as a corpse is most un- 
clean, and all who touch it are impure, there- 
fore dogs and wolves and carrion birds are 
impure and must not be eaten : and anything 
that however distantly reminds us of danger 
and death, such as quarrelsome acts and 
words, may come to be rigidly prohibited 
during a ritual of purification. As blood is 
primevally impure, therefore any substance 
analogous to it or of the same colour might 
be regarded as ill-omened, such as beans or 
pomegranates. The same kind of sensational 
aversion will cause malodorous substances to 


The Ritual of Purification 99 

be regarded usually as unclean ; therefore food 
of an evil savour, or such as leaves unpleasant 
traces in the person, will often be tabooed by 
certain strict sects. ^ There is also a certain 
common-sense discoverable in the distinction 
between substances on the ground of their 
greater or less susceptibility to spiritual con- 
tagion: earthen pots, for instance, have been 
often considered more- easily infected than 
metal, and need longer purification, liquid 
substances more dangerous conductors than 
dry. " Should the dry mingle with the dry," 
says Ahura Mazda in a conversation with 
Zarathustra, ^^how soon all this material 
earth of mine would be only one Pesh6tanu," 
which is as much as to say that the earth 
would become a charnel-house of impurity. 
And Darmesteter * remarks, in commenting on 
this verse, " Nowadays in Persia, the Jews are 

^ E,g, onions^ pease-soup^ cheese : I-Tsing^ Records of 
the Buddhist Religion, p. 138^ ^^ onions have a foul smell and 
are impure " : cf. list of impure substances in ritual inscrip- 
tion of Rhodes, C.I.G. Ins. Mar. Mg. i. No. 789- 

^ Sacred Books of the East, Zend-Avesta, pt. i. p. 105. 


loo The Evolution of Religion 

not allowed to go out of their house on a 
rainy day, lest the religious impurity conducted 
through the rain should pass from the Jew to 
the Mussalman." We have here a view of 
contagion that seems to agree with that of 
modern science, only the latter is physical, 
the former mystic or spiritual. Again, the 
choice of substances used for purification was 
not dictated by the modem idea of a cleansing 
quaUty, but by a certain superstitious logic 
which we can sometimes detect. If liquid 
substances have a natural affinity for contagion, 
then if we take them while they are uninfected 
and use them for lustration, they will easily 
absorb the impurities of, our own persons and 
rid us of them ; therefore the modem savage 
or the ancient Greek might think it desirable 
to daub himself with clay or mud to wash 
away his taint : and from this example we see 
how distinct these primeval lustral processes 
are from the modem hygienic washing, to 
which nevertheless they often bear a close 
resemblance. By a similar reasoning we 


The Ritual of Purification loi 

may explain an inconsistency that occasion- 
ally appears in the cathartic ritual; a sub- 
stance impure as food might be used for 
purposes of lustration: for instance, we find 
garlic used as a cathartic in the worship of 
the Phrygian god M^n at Athens,^ Fire, the 
universal purifier, may have been accredited 
with this power by right of its own nature, 
but partly in all probability because it was be- 
lieved to dry up miasma and damp infection.* 

In the Zend-Avesta code, after drying for a 
whole year under the light of the sun, the 
corpse at last becomes pure ; for by the same 
natural instinct that caused the aversion to 
blood, the sun's light comes to be regarded as 
the purest thing in the world : meat cooked by 
its warmth is more sanctified than fire-cooked 
meat ; and certain acts and states of man 
have a greater defilement in the sun's face. 

So far I have been trying to present the 

1 C.LA.y S, 73. 

^ The purifying power that ashes possess in certain 
ritual may be derivative from fire. 


I02 The Evolution of Religion 

phenomena without reference to any definite 
religious belief, to express them as far as 
possible in terms of simple sensation ; for, as 
was said at the beginning of the discussion, it 
is possible that they have descended from a 
pre-religious age. We may now ask how the 
baneful influence of the impure thing in this 
primeval stage of thought was supposed to 
work, unassisted by any spiritual agency such 
as spirit or god. We may suppose that it 
produced its results indirectly by depressing 
the vital energies of the man who was the 
victim of the superstition : the savage might 
believe that it worked directly, by some 
mysterious law of luck, paralysing a man's 
force and spoiling his hunting and fighting. 
This idea of a spontaneous mesmeric power 
of evil that certain things possess seems to 
glimmer through the verse in the Zend- 
Avesta. I" Here am I," says an unlucky 
man to those whom he meets, " one who has 
touched the corpse of a man and who is 
powerless in mind, powerless in tongue, 


The Ritual of Purification 103 

powerless in hand; do make me clean/' ^ 
Is it an illusion to believe that we have 
here penetrated to the psychological root of 
the whole matter? And here there is no 
direct reference to spirit o r ^od. / 

But at an early period such reference was 
made, and it was then that this cathartic ritual 
really started on a momentous career, /w hen 
the doctrine of animism became firmly estab- 
lished, it attracted the ritual and the ideas 
associated with it, and the animistic imprint 
upon them can still be traced even in the 
higher religions,/ A dangerous spirit was sup- 
posed to abide m the impure thing and to be 
evoked by the unclean act ; the potency which 
in the primeval stage of feeling had been per- 
haps regarded merely as something mysteriously 
baneful and " uncanny," now becomes personal 
and intelligible and can be dealt with and. 
exorcised by certain efficacious rules/ '^^^xhe 
stain of blood on the homicide attracts the 
ghost of the slain to pursue him, certain foods 

1 Op. at,y pt. i. p. 120. 


I04 The Evolution of Religion 

are impurejbecause evil spirits attach ta them, 
disease is specially their work, and a veritable 
pandemonium gathers around the corpse, 
the woman in child-birth, and the new-bom 
child. Illustrations showing how this de- 
moniac faith has pervaded the thought of the 
world are broadcast in the records of primi- 
tive man as well as in the higher literature of 
our race, the Vedic and Iranian sacred books, 
the New Testament, the Pythagorean, Platonic, 
and Neoplatonic texts. In the view of the 
Zend-Avesta, which regards the whole uni- 
verse as an overcharged battery of spiritual 
electricity, a single careless act of accidental 
uncleanliness is a cosmic catastrophe : legions 
of " drugs " or devils start up at once into exist- 
ence to destroy the world of righteousness.^ 
Plato, though on the whole he preserves his 
sanity in the matter, is under the dominion 
of similar ideas, and Neopl atonism revert s 
back to the savage view, believingjhattiie^ 
chief aim of ayv€iaL^ or pimfications, was to 

1 E.g. op. cU., pp. 201, 204. 


The Ritual of Purification 105 

drive the Qsji spirits out of ceri:ain kinds 
^ food.^.. 

The deep animistic colouring that the con- 
ception we are analysing came at a very 
early time to acquire may be responsible for a 
very important event in the history of religion : 
the evolution, namely, of the dualistic principle, 
the idea of the antagonism between good and 
evil spirits, the germ of which we can ab-eady 
detect in the animistic stage which may have 
preceded the faith in high personal gods. If 
the impure things and acts are impregnated 
with evil spirits, it is natural to suppose 
that the pure are the abode of the good, and 
these are contrary the one to the other. It 
may have requfa-ed a very long period for a 
clear belief in the good spirit to crystallise ; for 
to the very primitive mind aU spirits are 
mysteriously dangerous, even the ghosts of 
one's dearest kinsmen. Still, the ancestral 
spirits make on the whole for righteousness, 
and can be given the position of guardians of 

^ E,g, Porphyry in Euseb., Prcep, Evang,, 4, 22. 


io6 The Evolution of Religion 

the purification code. Thus the New Cale- 
donians avert the wrath of the ghosts of their 
ancestors by washing, fasting, and chastity:* 
the ancient Greek might pray or sacrifice to 
a vague animistic company of deol ^AiroTpo" 
Tratoi or MeiXCx^oij regarded perhaps as ghosts 
of the lower world, to avert the impure omen 
or to wash off the taint of blood. 

Finally, the conception of purity comes under 
the dominion of the higher faith in a personal 
god. In Greece, ApoUo and Zeus attach to 
themselves the ritual and the associated ideas ; 
in Persia the whole complex code of purity 
is established by Ahura Mazda; in Israel by 
Jahv^, who enforces the minutest details of the 
law with insistence on the purity of Gk)d.* 
In Babylonian as in Vedic religion, the fire- 
god is pre-eminently the purifier, a name 
which is attached particularly to Agni, and we 
find in the Babylonian liturgical texts the 

^ Steinmetz, Die ErUwickeUmg der Strafe, vol. ii p. 355. 
2 Cf. " Ye shall be holy, for I am holy," Lev. xi. 44 ; 
Deuteron. xxiii. IS. 


The Ritual of Purification 107 

prayer^" May the torch of the shinmg fire- 
god cleanse me.y Nor does Buddhism appear 
to differ from Leviticus or the Zend-Avesta in 
respect of the complications of its cathartic 
rules and the importance it attached to them. 
The Buddhist missionary, I-Tsing, exhorts the 
faithful to observe the elaborate prescriptions 
of the Buddha, " because," as he naively puts it, 
" gods and spirits get disgusted with our ways 
of wearing garments and eating food." With 
this abundance of testimony before us, we are 
all the more surprised to find that very little 
is forthcoming from the records of our own 
ancestral paganism. We can scarcely believe 
that our Teutonic ancestors were destitute of 
the idea of lustration, and that their cleanliness 
and chastity, attested by the Roman writers 
and still more clearly by their own sagas, were 
virtues of purely secular origin. And in fact 
we have certain records of Teutonic ritual that 
seem to point to cathartic ideas : " After the 
goddess Nerthus had gone on her annual 

^ Jastrow^ op. ct7.^ p. 500. 


io8 The Evolution of Religion 

procession round the villages," as Tacitus in- 
forms us,^ " her chariot and garments and her 
own person were solemnly washed in the 
waters of a sacred lake, as if the holy divinity 
had been polluted by her intercourse with men." 
It is also possible that the custom still pre- 
valent in the Teutonic populations of Europe, 
of leaping over the bonfire on midsummer's 
eve, is the relic of a ceremony of fire-lustration 
performed before the beginning of harvest.* 
Doubtless also they had the same rules as 
those prevailing in nearly all communities, 
whether civilised or imcivilised, concerning the 
purity of temples ; for we have record of an 
Icelandic law that the " Holy Place of Peace " 
was not to be defiled by blood or any human 
uncleanness.' Still, though other evidence 
pointing in the same direction might be 
gathered, it seems clear that the burden of 
the cathartic ritual did not weigh heavily on 
the consciences of our fathers when the dawn 

1 Getmania^ c. 40. * Golther, op. ciL p. 570. 

• Golther, op. cit, p. 607. 


The Ritual of Purification 109 

of their history begins. I am not aware of 
any indication, for instance, that they regarded 
formal lustration after bloodshed to be obliga- 
tory or desirable. And their comparative 
freedom in regard to such ceremonies is a fact 
of great importance with which we must 
reckon in our estimate of our later spiritual 
history. We may at the same time believe, 
on general grounds, that they also had at some 
remoter epoch passed through a period of 
bondage to the same ideas and the same 
formalities that we find so generally prevalent 
in other kindred and alien races. 

The more interesting side of the inquiry 
now presents itself, the question about the 
influence that these cathartic ideas may have 
exercised upon religion, morality, and law. 
We may endeavour, for the sake of systematis- 
ation, to maintain this tripartite classification, 
although we find it becoming more and more 
illusory the further our investigation travels 
back to the earlier social life of man. 

But before attempting to survey the special 


no The Evolution of Religion 

facts that present themselves within these 
three departments, it is well to note one 
phenomenon that concerns religion and 
morality in equal measure, and is of perhaps 
greater importance than all others in the 
varied process of the evolution of the 
cathartic idea. We have mainly been 
dealing so far with facts that seem to belong 
to the most primitive deposit of human 
consciousness and not properly to be ethical 
in the modem sense at all : the stain of blood, 
even incurred by ruthless murder, the stain 
of childbirth and the sexual processes, the 
contagion of the corpse, are all for the same 
reason "suspect" to primitive man because 
they involve vague and mysterious danger, 
not because they are associated with the 
concept of sin. Nor does this latter concept 
necessarily enter in, even when a more articu- 
late animism has taken possession of the 
superstition, and the impurity means the 
presence of an evil spirit : the leper, the man 
who has come into contact with the dead. 


The Ritual of Purification iii 

the blood-stained murderer, are all regarded 
as suffering from the same trouble, though 
in greater or lesser degree. The idea of 
purity and impurity, in fact, whether cor- 
poreal and external or whether spiritual in 
the sense of its association with the world 
of spirits, is still non-ethical, and we must 
not apply our moral standards to it until 
a later stage. It arrives at this stage and 
at its higher significance for morality when 
it has evolved the conception of a pure 
heart, a pure soul. And that this latter, 
which is one of the most pregnant of the 
concepts of developed ethics, was actually 
evolved from the primitive ritualistic and 
demoniac superstition can, I believe, be 
proved by the evidence, and accords with a 
well-known psychologic law of early thought. 
We deceive ourselves if we are content 
to say that terms such as "pure heart," 
" pure soul " are mere metaphors. The theory 
of metaphors is a reftige for those who do 
not understand, or who do not wish to under- 


112 The Evolution of Religion 

stand, religious history, and much might be 
said of the far-reaching effects of this fallacy 
of interpretation. The soul was not called 
"^/»vx^" or "animus" or "spiritus" by mere 
metaphor: nor was the phrase "white liver" 
a metaphor for the people who first applied 
it to the coward. Primitive man may be 
the victim of false analogy and association 
of ideas, but these mental processes mean 
for him something other than metaphor 
means for us. It is not by way of metaphor 
that the modem Basuto speaks of his heart 
"being black and dirty," that is, "impure" 
or "sad," the same word being used for 
corporeal impurity, sadness, and sin.^ The 
colour of the impure act or bodily state is, 
so to speak, transferred inwards: if the act 
involves a physical stain, then, as things, 

^ Casalis, Les Bassoutos, p. 9,69' among the Zulus^ sin 
and dirt are spoken of as the same, — '^ You have dirt, you 
are dirty " = " You have done wrong," Leslie, Among the 
Zulus, p. 170. (These and other references to the evidence 
from savage society I owe to the kindness of my friend 
Mr R. Marett.) 


The Ritual of Purification 113 

words, and thoughts are so closely correlated 
in early psychology, the term " unclean word," 
"unclean thought" expresses a literal belief: 
gradually, as the concept of mind and soul 
becomes more and more immaterial, we 
may reach the spiritual concept of mental 
purity which is of value for modem ethics. 
The example quoted above reveals the Basuto 
at the half-way point in this evolution: and 
a certain North- American Indian tribe, whose 
customs have been recorded by Miss Alice 
Fletcher, appears to have reached the same 
mental stage ; in her paper called the " Shadow 
of a Ghost Lodge," ^ she mentions that the 
kinsmen who sit together isolated from others 
and mourning the dead for a period must 
rigidly abstain from any tales of fighting or 
"bad words," they must forget old injuries 
and cancel all grudges. The mental process 
that leads to this excellent tapu may be 
stated thus : the mourners are in a condition 
of deep impurity which they are endeavouring 

1 P. 801. 

8 


114 The Evolution of Religion 

to cleanse away ; quarrelling, vindictive speech, 
and memories would intensify the impurity, 
because all these are associated with blood- 
shed and death. This analogy may serve 
to explain the curious rule prevailing at 
Athens that anyone who laid a suppliant- 
bough on the altar in the Eleusinion during 
the period of the Eleusinian Mysteries was 
liable to the penalty of death or a heavy fine.^ 
I would suggest that the underlying thought 
is the same: the laying the suppliant-bough 
indicated a grievance and was a legally quarrel- 
some act, and therefore a violation of the purity 
of the solemn season. It was probably a 
similar chain of reasoning that induced the 
Greeks and other races of the higher religion 
to enforce silence before and during the 
sacrifice, not merely in order that the priest 
should not be disturbed by the chatter of 
the crowd ; for the word used for this sacred 
silence is 6v<^fiux, ^* auspicious speech": it is 
obvious that the original motive of the rule 

1 Andoc, De Mygt,, 110. 


The Ritual of Purification 115 

was to guard against the utterance of any 
impure word that might produce an ill-omened 
condition of mind in the congregation. 

Of this development of the idea of spiritual 
from that of ritualistic purity, the language 
of certain of the higher races affords the 
same indication as we find in the Basuto 
phrase: the Latin "purus" and the Greek 
Kadapos and <^ot^o9 themselves have an original 
material or physical significance; the blood 
that is shed and the unburied corpse emit a 
" miasma/' a defiling atmosphere charged with 
dangerous spirits, and the same word fiiaa-iia 
comes to denote a spiritual corruption of the 
soul: touching a corpse is called "sin" in 
the Zend-Avesta;^ and it is significant that 
the same word which is used to express the 
material idea of impurity in the Old Testament 
in the earlier books of the Law is employed 
in the later and more advanced ethical 
vocabulary of the Bible for a real sin against 
God as understood in the modem sense. 

1 Op, cit., p. 102. 


ii6 The Evolution of Religion 

/Again, we have other evidence besides the 
linguistic that the earliest conception of sin 
which we can call spiritual was still half- 
materialistic, and was still closely allied to 
that of bodily impurity. In the theory of 
earlier ritual, the sin can be washed away 
like a physical taint, the atonement takes the 
form of certain lustrations, and repentance 
is not considered necessary as a moral con- 
dition of release. And to the same middle 
stage of development belongs the process 
C" known as the transference of sin, whereby 
the sin can be extracted as if it were a 
substance from the person of the sinner and 
transferred into another man or animal or 
even an inanimate object^ Think of sin as 
an inner vapour or exhalation and the idea of 
quasi-mechanical transference is intelligible.^ 
It no doubt belongs to a comparatively early 

^ The same kind of ceremonious logic inspires the 
practice of the Damaras^ who^ when making peace with 
an alien tribe^ go into a river with their foes and throw 
water into their faces to wash away enmity. — Sir J. E. 
Alexander, Expedition and Discoveries, vol. ii. p. 171. 


The Ritual of Purification 117 

period of savage religion. Among the Atkans, 
for instance,^ we hear of such a release as this : 
the sin, which in this case was a gross violation 
of a natural law of the sex-instinct, was made 
to enter into certain weeds which were worn 
about the person, and then, under a clear sun 
were carefully thrown away, the sim himself 
being called to witness the act of transference. 
In the ancient Peruvian Church, the shaking 
off of evils was a great public festival : bands 
of warriors marched forth crying out, "Go 
forth, all evils," and then bathed in the river, 
while the people shook out their clothes from 
the doors.^ A similar record speaks of the 
Inca praying to the river-god to bear away 
his sins, which he had confessed in the sight 
of the sun. And during the Peruvian puri- 
fication a similar rule prevailed to that which 
was noticed above, that all abusive language 
and strife was to be avoided. Or again, the 

^ Veniaminoff ap. Petroff, Alaska, p. 158. 
^ Molina, Fables and Biles of the Yncas (Hakluyt 
Society), p. 22. 


ii8 The Evolution of Religion 

belief that the sin is an evil spirit that can be in- 
duced to find another living-lodgment, suggests 
the scapegoat, a familiar figure in Leviticus and 
in Greek ritual, the animal who bears away 
with it into the wilderness the sins of the 
people, or is put to death with the uttered 
prayer that into it may enter all the evils 
of the community. The Judaic record tells 
us that Aaron "confessed over him all the 
iniquities of the children of Israel , , . putting 
them on the head of the goat"; after this, 
as the animal was in a high degree of sin- 
infection, both Aaron and the man who led it 
away into the wilderness must wash and change 
their clothes.^ The Egyptian rite described by 
Herodotus,* shows us the same idea differently 
worked out : the head of the animal is severed 
with the imprecation that it may bear the evils 
of the community, and is then either thrown 
into the river so that the stream may carry 
them away, or is sold to the Hellenes wherever 
there happens to be a Hellenic market : Hero- 

1 Lev. xvii. « 2, 39- 


f 


The Ritual of Purification 119 

dotus does not tell us the reason of this, which, 
however, is easily divined : the Hellene is the 
stranger who, as the Egyptians hoped, might 
eat the infected flesh and thereby absorb into 
his alien person the people's sins ; for the eating 
of other people's sins is a recognised primitive 
process of transference.^ What is unique in 
the Egyptian management of the ceremony 
is the skilful combination of religion and trade. 
Finally, the ritual may demand a human 
scapegoat, who will fulfil exactly the same 
fimction as the animal. He may be put to 
death, or driven over the border, carrying 
away the national sins : he may be very vile, 
and therefore a fitting receptacle for sin, like 
the "ica^ap/xa," the "purifying man" in the 
Attic festival of the Thargelia, who was led 
through the streets, whipped with rods, and 
at one time burnt ; or the slave at Marseilles,* 
who was fed up and reverentially treated for 

^ The cathartic process of transference applied to plague 
as well as actual sin^ e,g, Aristotle, Frag,, 454, transference 
of disease into a raven. 

2 Serv., ^n. 3, 57. 


120 The Evolution of Religion 

a year, and then was led forth m solemn 
procession through the streets and expelled 
from the city, praying that on him might 
fall all the evils of the community:^ or the 
scapegoat-man may be exceptionally holy, 
being the better able, through his very holi- 
ness, to absorb harmlessly and dissipate the 
evils of others. Thus even the miserable 
victim of the Thargelia was mysteriously in- 
vested with a certain sacred character, and 
seems once to have been regarded in a certain 
degree as the counterpart of the divinity.^ 

Much of this ritual of sin-transference is 
altogether independent of the higher gods; 
it is worked by mesmeric or mimetic or 
mechanical magic. At a later period it is 
harmonised with their service and accom- 
panied with prayer ; and at this stage we note 
a curious ritualistic phenomenon. Blood, the 
primeval source of impurity, becomes itself 

^ In modem India a criminal and his wife sometimes 
midertake to transfer into their own persons the sins of the 
Rajah and the Rani : Anthrop. Joum., 1901^ p. 302. 

2 Fide chapter on Apollo Ritual^ Cults, vol. iv. 


The Ritual of Purification 121 

a purifier, not by the law similia simililms 
curantur^ but owing to the growing power of 
the sacrificial concept. "The blood of bulls 
and goats can wash away sins," because the 
animal that has been consecrated by contact 
with the altar becomes charged with a divine 
potency, and its sacred blood, poured over the 
impure man, absorbs and disperses his impurity. 
Illustrations are easily gathered from Hellenic 
ritual,^ which frequently employed the blood 
of swine for cathartic purposes. On an early 
vase-painting we see the hero Theseus seated 
on the altar of God the Atoner with pig's 
blood running down his body to cleanse him 
from the slaughter of the brigands.^ In the 
Judaic rule the blood of the red heifer was 

1 Cf, Blood-purification in Vedic ritual^ Hillebrandt^ 
Vedische Opfer und Zauber, p. 179 (evil spirits driven away 
by a reed dipped in blood of the sacrifice, p. 176) : in the 
Lupercalia at Rome the foreheads of youths were smeared 
with the blood of the sacrificed goat and dog and then 
wiped with wool dipped in milk^ probably a piacular 
ceremony ; vide W. Fowler, The Roman Festivals, p. 311. 

2 Cf, ApoUon. Rhod., 4, 478, for pig's blood in purifica- 
tion fi*om murder. 


122 The Evolution of Religion 

first sprinkled by the priest before the 
tabernacle of the congregation seven tini fiSy> 
but for special purposes of lustration the 
" water of separation " was used, that is, water 
made holy by being mingled with the ashes of 
the heifer that had been burnt. We have a 
curious illustration of the double character of 
this water of separation: being consecrated 
and holy, it was powerful to cleanse away stain 
and sin : yet its own impure composition was 
not wholly forgotten, for he who sprinkled the 
water or touched it was unclean till evening.^ 

These ideas belong to very old-world thought, 
yet their reflex abides with us still in the heart 
of a spiritual creed ; for their association is 
clear with the Christian conception of the 
transference of sin and of the divine victim that 
takes upon himself the sins of the people. 

As far as we have examined it as yet, the 
concept of a " pure heart " is not necessarily 
wholly ethical; it is often coexistent with 
the ideas of sin that do not clearly recognise 

1 Numbers c. 19. 


The Ritual of Purification 123 

moral responsibility or the essential differ- 
ence between deliberate wrong-doing and 
the ritualistic or accidental or involuntary sin. 
In the middle stage of ethical - religious 
growth, an innocent (Edipus may yet be 
regarded as ttSs avayvo^^ impure body and 
soul. The final point is reached when it is 
realised that the blood of bulls and goats 
cannot wash away sin, that nothing external 
can defile the heart or soul, but only evil 
thoughts and evil will. This purged and 
idealised concept will then in the progressive 
religions revolt against its own parentage, and 
will prompt the eternal antagonism of the 
prophet against the ritual priest, of the Christ 
against the Pharisee. 

It would be interesting to trace the points 
of this long development, which has here been 
hastily sketched, atnong the higher races of 
the old world; but a brief and partial indi- 
cation of its history among some of them 
must here suffice. We are all acquainted with 
the final evolution of the idea of purity in 


124 The Evolution of Religion 

Judaic history : but the phenomena of its 
embryonic stages, as revealed in the ritual 
books of the Old Testament, may not be so 
familiar. They present the Hebrew mind in 
regard to this particular as on the same level 
with the Zarathustrian Persian, the Vedic 
Indian, and the Hellene of the seventh century. 
Purity is the strictest law of Jahve, the pure 
god, who intimates that he would punish 
Aaron with death if he heedlessly entered the 
holy place without purification.^ But the 
processes by which it is secured are mechani- 
cal, quasi-magical, and the concept itself 
appears more materialistic than spiritual, rit- 
ualistic rather than ethical in our sense: the 
processes of cleansing are such as the use of 
incense, lustrations with blood, water, and even 
fire, cathartic methods which are almost uni- 
versal : we hear nothing of prayer or repent- 
ance. Blood is the chief impurity, whether 
shed deliberately, accidentally, or righteously. 
The warriors after battle must be purified 

1 Levit. xvi. 2, 


The Ritual of Purification 125 

before they enter the camp.^ Murder has 
indeed become a tribal offence, and this marks 
a great advance in the social development of 
human society: no satisfaction such as the 
were-gilt was allowed for murder; but it is 
regarded as a sin rather than a crime, and its 
sinfulness is the uncleanness of the land on 
which the blood is shed. "Blood defileth 
the land," and " I the Lord dwell among the 
children of Israel. " ^ Even the accidental homi- 
cide must fly to the city of refuge, not merely 
to escape the avenger of blood, who represents 
the old family right of the blood-feud, but to 
rid the land of the impurity of his presence. 
Nor must he return till the death of the high 
priest.^ This latter restriction has not yet 
been explained, so far as I am aware. I 
venture the explanation that the high priest 
is regarded here as the temporary representa- 
tive of Jahve, and as infected with the impurity 
that cleaves to the outraged god; but when 

^ Numbers xxxi. 19. * Numbers xxxv. 

^ Numbers xxxv. 25. 


126 The Evolution of Religion 

he dies, the stain that has been put upon the 
god fades away and his wrath ceases. Finally, 
we may note the rule that when the murderer 
could not be discovered, the nearest city must 
offer cathartic sacrifices, " and thy sin " — that 
is, the ritualistic sin of having an impure spot 
of ground in one's territory — "shall then be 
forgiven thee." ^ In fact the Judaic law con- 
cerning homicide as shown in these books, 
though it has advanced far beyond savagery, 
and has even attained to the modem view 
that manslaying concerns the whole community, 
is yet barbaric on the whole. The concept of 
purity aided development up to a certain point 
and then probably retarded it. On the other 
hand, in the department of sexual morality its 
operation was most powerful for good ; it con- 
secrated and safeguarded the fundamental laws 
if it did not actually construct or evoke them ; 
but, as we should expect, the sexual purity of 
the Hebrew code remains a religious law and 
does not pass into the domain of secular ethic. 

1 Deuteron. xxi. 


The Ritual of Purification 127 

Another religion that is of equal value for 
our present purpose is the Zarathustrian. 
Trusting as far as we may the translation and 
interpretation of its sacred books, we may 
^Z the impression fto. the study of thel 
that no religion on the earth has ever been 
imder such bondage to the cathartic ideal as 
this one ; nor does it appear very profitable at 
first sight to put the question here of the 
influence of the idea of purity on religion, law, 
and morals, for the idea seems all-absorbing 
and these three to have no independent exist- 
ence apart from it. It creates for the Mazdean 
believer a morality of its own, with which the 
secular systems have little or nothing to do. 
"Oh, maker of the world," asks Zarathustra 
of Ahura Mazda, " can he be clean again who 
has eaten of the carcase of a dog or the corpse 
of a man ? " The deity answers — " He cannot, 
oh holy Zarathustra."^ Nor is therci any 
purification possible for the unforgivable sin 
of walking about after fifteen years of age were 

^ Sacred Books of the East, vol. iv. part i. p. 81. 


128 The Evolution of Religion 

reached without a gu-dle or a proper shirt : 
"such a one goes henceforth with power to 
destroy the world of righteousness." ^ On the 
other hand, the highest act of righteousness 
which brings forgiveness of aU sins to him who 
performs it is the pulling down of a dakhma, 
the scaffold on which the corpses were hung 
according to the Persian system of burial, 
after it had served its purpose ; for naturaUy 
it was a focus of impurity, and demons con- 
gregated there in swarms.^ f And the Persian 
concept of purity makes its own law. As the 
ritual of cleansing is the prime article of the 
Zarathustrian code, so the sacrilegious cleanser, 
that is, the amateur who tried to purify another 
without knowledge of the Mazdean ceremonies, 
brought sterility upon the land and was 
punished with death.* And death was the 
penalty for him who dared to carry a corpse 
alone, for the dead body spread around the 
contagion of..yri«i»d^' or den^ons. 

^ Sacred Books of the East^ vol. iv. part i. p. 204. 
« R. p. 88. » Ih. p. 136. 


The Ritual of Purification 129 

and two men at least must set hand to it^to 
prevent an intolerable epidemic of impurity.^ 
Legislation in the Zend-Avesta is merciless 
beyond any recorded code ; we must suppose 
that it was mainly idle thunder, or Persia 
would have been depopulated. The whole 
universe of Mazdeism is permeated with these 
cathartic ideas, and a secular or physical view 
of things scarcely gUmmers through : the 
ritual order dominated what we call the 
material as well as the spiritual world; the 
sun, moon, and stars are purified by the Word. 
On this basis arose a religion of great exalta- 
tion and a religious fervour of rare intensity : 
and the sacred books of Persia are of great 
value for the present inquiry, for they show 
us more clearly than any other record the 
spiritual concept of the pure heart emerging 
from the ritualistic idea; while it is often 
hard in any particular text to distinguish 
between the lower and the higher significance. 
When God speaks to the prophet thus — 

1 Sacred Books of the East, vol. iv. p. 28. 

9 


130 The Evolution of Religion 

" Purity is for man, next to life, the highest 
good: that purity, O Zarathustra, that is in 
the religion of Mazda for him who cleanses 
himself with good thoughts, words, and 
deeds," ^ we believe we have reached a high 
ethical conception ; but the phrase is supposed 
by Darmesteter to refer to him who cleanses 
himself according to the prescriptions of the 
law. Yet in their cathartic code were the 
germs of an advanced morality, and truthful- 
ness and chastity were fostered by it.^ The 
lustrations were partly of the primitive type, 
taken over, as usual, from a lower stratum of 
religion ; their most interesting features are the 
cleansing words that accompanied them, which 
were not usually prayers but spells, formulae 
of magic potency, but drawn from a high 

1 Sacred Books of the East, vol. iv. p. 56 ; c/! p. 141. 

2 The virtue of chastity is religious rather than ethical ; 
the courtesan is reprobated because she mingles the seed 
of believers and unbelievers alike, ib, p. 205. Yet the 
Zarathustrian system escaped the extravagant exaltation 
of mere virginity that is found in early Christian literature : 
*' the man who has a wife is far above him who lives in 
continence *' (Fargard, iv.-iii. 6, p. 46). 


The Ritual of Purification 131 

religion, such as these, for instance: — "The 
will of the Lord is the Law of Righteousness " ; 
" Holiness is the best of all Good : it is also 
Happiness." ^ Even the virtue of philanthropy- 
is given cathartic value in a spell-formula, " he 
who relieves the poor makes Ahura King," 
recited before the person was washed with 
the holy water of Mazda and the "g6m§z" 
of an ox.^ 

In a certain sense the Mazdean religion has 
been the " purest " the world has known ; but 
the high spiritual concept of purity that it 
evolved never escaped nor struggled to 
escape, as did the Judaic and Hellenic, from 
the bondage to ritual. Therefore the religion 
was doomed to ceremoniousness and sacer- 
dotalism ; and the modern student who is 
fascinated with its frequent outbursts of genius 
and its deep, whole-hearted conviction must be 
prepared for the inevitable bathos that awaits 
him. Its remoteness from the modem and 
civilised view of things may be estimated from 

^ Sacred Books, vol. iv. p. 21 6. 2 /^^ p 216, 


132 The Evolution of Religion 

the Zarathustrian text, in which the prophet 
exalts the priestly medicine-man who heals the 
diseased limb with a cleansing spell and by the 
ejection of the demon, above the surgeon who 
heals it with a knife.^ 

It is with a feeling of relief that we now 
turn to the survey of the Hellenic phenomena, 
passing by as we must the Vedic and the 
Islamic, which appear to be of lesser im- 
portance so far as I have been able to study 
them. The Hellenic reUgion more than all 
others of the ancient world is the mirror 
of the manifold civilisation of a people; 
for its lesser intensity allowed it more 
varied application, and it was obliged to re- 
concile itself speedily with the utilitarian and 
secular forces of rational progress, which there 
was no sacerdotal caste strong enough to 
oppose. And it is in the light of this religion 
therefore that the concept of purity can best 
be studied in its relations to law and morality. 
The history of the cathartic ritual in Greece 

1 Sacred Books, vol. iv. p. 87. 


The Ritual of Purification 133 

does not begin till the eighth century; for 
the Homeric age was strikingly sane, cheerful, 
and secular in its views about such things. 
Though Hektor feels, as any modem gentle- 
man would feel, that it was wrong to go to a 
religious service "bedabbled in gore and filth," 
though Odysseus purifies his house with 
sulphur-fumigation after the carnage of the 
fight, the world for whom Homer sang does 
not appear to have been burdened with the 
ceremoniousness of purification or with dread 
of the impurity of blood and death, or with 
any sort of care for the vengeance or miasma 
of the ghost. An age that could rise to the 
height of such a sentiment as " best of omens 
is it to fight for one's country," was likely to 
be healthy-minded in all such matters. The 
first mention of purification for bloodshed is 
in a poem of Arctinos of the eighth century ; 
and a certain ritual-code of purity begins to 
emerge in Hesiod. Henceforward cathartic 
legislation comes to be very rife in Greece, 
emanating chiefiy from two centres as it 


134 The Evolution of Religion 

seems, Delphi and Crete. The gods to whom 
the domain of ritual-purity belongs especially 
are Apollo, Zeus, and Dionysos ; at the 
same time the ghostly terrors of the under- 
world appear to be gaining a greater hold 
on the Hellenic imagination, and " catharsis " is 
specially needed to deal with these. Probably 
all this is only a revival of aboriginal practices 
and superstitions rooted in the Hellenic soil, a 
religion which the intellectualism of Homeric 
civilisation had happily suppressed for a tinie, 
but which asserted itself with renewed strength 
when that civilisation was overthrown. Yet the 
revival, though apparently a " set-back," bore 
fair fruit for morality, law, and even religion. 
The history of Greek ethic must reckon as it 
has not yet done with the ritual of purity, and 
the history of Greek law with the fear of the 
ghost and the miasma of bloodshed. 

At first the idea is, as usual, ritualistic and 
non-moral : and much that we find in savage 
communities, and in Judaea, Persia, and India, 
we find again in Greece. As the Hebrew 


The Ritual of Purification 135 

warriors were purified before returning to 
camp, so the Macedonian army was purified 
in spring before the campaign/ and the mis- 
understood story of the Phokians daubing 
themselves with gypsum before battle points 
to a cathartic ritual.^ And the Hellenic 
ceremonies agreed with those of most other 
nations in regard to the causes of uncleanness 
and the methods of deliverance : fire, water, 
blood, onions, the skins of animals sacrificed, 
even clay and bran, are the usual purifying 
media. In one method of KaOapai^ only the 
Hellenic ritual is imique so far as I know: 
sacrificial communion with God was some- 
times considered an effective means of obliter- 
ating the impurity which the kinsmen con- 
tracted by a death in the family : at Argos the 
mourners put off the " tapu " by eating of the 
sacrifice to Apollo, beUeving that the spirit of 
the pure god in the sacred food could destroy 

1 Livy, 40, 6, 1-3 : the whole host was led between the 
severed limbs of a dog. 

2 Herod., 8, 27. 


136 The Evolution of Religion 

the miasma within and around them.^ The 
strongholds of Pharisaic purification were the 
religious brotherhoods of Orphism and the 
eariier Pythagoreanism, a religious-philosophic 
school closely associated with the former; in 
these the law of " the pure life " is a cere- 
monious law, specially concerned with abstin- 
ence from certain food. But Greek thought 
did not remain long on this level : a saying is 
attributed to Charondas of Catana, but perhaps 
of later origin, which asserts that " foul speech 
is a defilement of the soul";* and in a fragment 
of Epicharmos of the fifth century, we have the 
utterance of the higher gospel, " If thou art 
piu^e of soul, thou art pure of all thy body " ; 
and the later Pythagorean literatiu^e, such as 
the " Golden Song " of Hierocles, contains the 
doctrine that " purity of soul is the only divine 
service " ; " God has no more famiUar abode 
on the earth than the pure soul." And to 
an unknown writer, probably of the same 

^ Plutarch, Quastt, Grcec.^ 24. 

^ Stobeeus^ Florileg. Meineke, vol. ii. p. 184. 


The Ritual of Purification V137 


school,^ we owe the dogma, " We worship God 
most meetly if we render our own soul pure 
from every stain of evil." There are two 
epigrams in the Anthology, included in the 
fanciful collection of Pythian oracles, express- 
ing the same idea that holiness is a spiritual fact 
independent of ceremonies or lustrations : " Oh 
stranger, if holy of soul, enter the shrine of the 
holy God, having but touched the lustral 
water : lustration is an easy matter for the 
good, but all ocean with its streams cannot 
cleanse the evil man."^ The other maintains 
as clearly as Isaiah or the New Testament the 
uselessness of all mere washing of hands : " The 
temples of the gods are open to all good men, 
nor is there any need of piu^ification : no stain 
can ever cleave to virtue. But depart, who- 
soever is baneful at heart, for thy soul will 
never be washed by the cleansing of the body." * 
The better Greek mind attained this free- 
dom the more easily in that it was not strongly 

1 MuUach, Frag. Pkilos., Adespota. 

« Antk Pal, 14, 71. » /6. No. 74. 


• 


138 The Evolution of Religion 

or generally possessed with the belief in the 
aboriginal impurity or sinfulness of the flesh 
and the earthly life. And Greek ritual itself, 
conservative as it was and never abandoning 
its code of purification, comes at last to be 
influenced by this freer atmosphere and to 
reconcile ceremonious piu-ity with a higher 
moral law. Before the temple of Asclepios 
at Epidauros stood the text, "Within the 
incense-filled sanctuary one must be pure ; and 
purity is to have righteous thoughts."^ An 
inscription on a temple in Rhodes of the time 
of Hadrian * shows a strange blend of primi- 
tive and advanced thought. Its preamble 
mentions " rules concerning righteous entrance 
into the shrine." " The first and greatest rule 
is to be pure and unblemished in hand and 
heart and to be free from an evil conscience." 
Then follows the usual ceremonious code of 
rules concerning the impurities of food, 

1 Wilamowitz, IsyUos, 6 ; Anth, Pal., Adespota, ccxxxiii. h : 
cf, inscription from Astypalaia in CoUitz, Dialect-Inschrijien, 
No. 3472. 

2 CJ.G. Ins. Mar. Mg. 1, 789. 


The Ritual of Purification 139 

funerals, and natural affections of the body : 
and the last clause shows the ethical idea 
penetrating even these, for the code prescribes 
that a person may enter the shrine "on the 
same day after lawfiil married intercourse." 
This means that the adulteress was excluded, 
as she was at Athens by a law quoted by 
Demosthenes/ It appears then that the 
liberal ethic judgment attributed to Theano, 
the female Pythagorean teacher, that while 
lawful intercourse was no bar to participating 
in a religious service on the same day, the 
adulteress was to be for ever excluded,^ was 
not wholly out of accordance with the ad- 
vanced ritualistic code of Greece. 

The above is some slight illustration of the 
development of the Greek concept of purity 
and of its ethical influence. It remains to 
trace its action in a very important depart- 
ment of law — the law of homicide. Perhaps 
the most significant distinction between the 
code of a civilised and that of a savage or 

1 In NeaBram,§ 85. 2 Qem. Alex., Strom., 619, Pott. 


140 The Evolution of Religion 

barbaric community lies in their respective 
attitudes towards manslaughter or murder: 
in the latter society it is mainly an affair 
between the families concerned, to be settled 
by the were-gilt or the blood-feud: in the 
former the whole community feels itself to 
be deeply concerned. Our Teutonic ancestors, 
at the time of Tacitus and for centuries after, 
remained at the lower stage, though we discern 
that the legal genius of the Icelanders was 
impelling them towards the higher even before 
Christianity reached them. What is strange 
is that some societies appear to have at- 
tained a high general level of civilisation with- 
out making this momentous advance : the 
Homeric world, for instance, was scarcely 
abreast with the early Icelandic in this 
respect, although we may see signs that the 
higher idea was ready to emerge in the later 
Homeric period.^ Then follows a blank in 

^ I believe that the trial scene on the shield of Achilles^ 
rightly interpreted, implies that the community are begin- 
ning to decide whether the avenger shall accept the were- 
gilt or not. 


The Ritual of Purification 141 

our record which may be tentatively filled up 
by the interpretation of mythology, until in the 
developed Attic law — which we know better 
than the law of any other Greek state — ^we find 
the modem idea fully recognised and applied 
to a criminal code, probably from the sixth 
century onward, though traces of legal bar- 
barism still survive. We would gladly 
discover the constructive forces, spiritual or 
political, that brought this great reform about. 
The anthropology of our contemporary savage 
societies has not yet supplied us with analo- 
gies that we could apply to Greek history : a 
few savage states have indeed spontaneously 
achieved the great advance from the blood- 
feud to a public law of homicide, but there 
is no record showing how they have achieved 
it. Some writers have supposed that the 
emergence of criminal law in general is always 
due to some great increase of power in the 
central government, probably to the develop- 
ment of the monarchy. But as a universal 
axiom this cannot be accepted; for, as 


142 The Evolution of Religion 

Steinmetz in his treatise on "The Develop- 
ment of Punishment"^ has shown, such a 
suggested cause is not found operative in the 
backward commimities of modern times that 
have developed a pubUc criminal law. Nor 
would it be reasonable to lu^ge that the 
central authority was stronger in Greece of 
the seventh century than in the earlier mon- 
archical period. Probably Steinmetz is right 
in his belief that among savage societies the 
earliest criminal law arises from some intense 
feeling of hatred or dread excited by acts 
that violate reUgious feeling or secular 
interests. One of the earUest crimes to be 
punished by death at the hands of the society 
is incest: the horror that it excites among 
savages is a feeling that we may call religious. 
We may not be able to show indeed that the 
primitive ideas of purity would explain the 
earliest compUcated codes of human marriage : 
but the circles of kinship that are thus estab- 
lished seem certainly to have been consecrated 

1 Die Entrvickelung der Strafe^ vol. ii p. 347. 


The Ritual of Purification 143 

at a very early time by the concept of purity 
that came to be attached to them/ Now it 
is probable that a similar religious feeling was 
operative in the case of homicide. 

If in any given society the primitive belief 
in the impurity of bloodshed became 
intensified beyond a certain point, homicide 
might easily come to be regarded no longer 
as a matter to be settled by the families of the 
slayer and the slain, but as the deep concern 
of the people of the land. We have seen 
that it was just this religious concept of 
impurity that brought the act under the 
cognisance of the national religious law of 
Israel : the people are terrified because the soil 
has been made impure and their god has been 
stained. In the Zend-Avesta we find that 

1 An example is given by Steinmetz^ op. cit, ii. p. 336, of 
the punishment of incest among the Pasemaker : the guilty 
pair were buried alive with a hollow pipe reaching from 
their mouths to the top of the earth : if they survived 
seven days of this agony their lives were spared : no ex- 
planation is offered, but it is not improbable that the law 
is inspired by the idea that the earth could absorb their 
impurity. 


144 The Evolution of Religion 

the slaying of a water-dog was an impure act 
against God, and was avenged by the whole 
community; and sacrifice was offered to 
appease the holy soul of the dog.^ These facts 
then offer some analogy for the theory that I 
would suggest, namely, that the civilised law 
in Greece concerning homicide arose in the 
post-Homeric period through an intensifica- 
tion of the feeling concerning the impurity 
of bloodshed and owing to the greater hold 
that the terrors of the ghostly world had come 
to gain over the later Hellenic imagination; 
for the ghost or the Erinys of the dead is the 
embodiment of the miasma that arises from 
the slaying ; and the ghost knows how to drive 
it home, and is no respecter of persons, but 
can make a whole area uninhabitable. The 
religious phenomenon and the legal fact that 
I would connect as cause and effect are not 
found in the Homeric period: both are 
found coexisting in the later. And much 
legendary evidence accords with this hypo- 

^ Sacred Books, vol. iv. p. I69 (pt. i.). 


The Ritual of Purification 145 

thesis. Perhaps the earliest indication of the 
emergence of the idea in Greek society that 
certain kinds of homicide concern the State, is 
found in the legends about exile and ex- 
communication for the shedding of kindred 
blood, the exile, for instance, of Bellerophon 
and Ixion. Such exile is not the ordinary 
flight of the homicide to avoid the avenger of 
blood ; for in the cases where a man is of the 
same kin as the slain, there is no family 
avenger, but the whole community in horror 
cast him out lest the curse should infect them- 
selves. Kinsmen's blood was more sacred than 
other, therefore the shedding it spread the 
greater impurity over the land. And the Greek 
legends suggest that this offence was one of the 
earliest in the legal history of the race which 
awoke the religious conscience of the State. ^ 

1 Vide Cults of the Gi*eek States^ vol. i. pp. 66-69 : 
Steinmetz, op. cit., vol. ii. p. S4>5, discusses a record concern- 
ing the Ossetes, who live habitually in the system of the 
blood-feud, to the effect that a person guilty of parricide 
was surrounded and burnt in his house by the whole people, 
and he suggests that this may be the first example among 
them of a State cognisance of murder. 

10 


146 The Evolution of Religion 

Now if we assume that the old ideas associ- 
ated with kinship came to be extended 
to the whole community of the polis — 
as might easily happen through the inter- 
marriage of the yeurj — ^then a similar miasma 
would be caused by the slaying of a citizen 
as by kindred murder: the State would feel 
the supernatural peril of the act and would 
take cognisance. 

The reasons for supposing that this was 
the actual order in the Hellenic evolution of 
the homicide law may appear to rest on mere 
legends, but legends are often direct and first- 
hand evidence of early thought, and the stories 
about the slayers of kindred who were driven 
out of the communities and who were the 
first applicants for the ritual of purifi- 
cation, such as Ixion, Orestes, Theseus, 
accord well with the early belief that the 
Erinyes were the ghostly avengers of kindred 
slaughter. Then we find that in the Aithiopis, 
the poem of Arctinos of Miletus, Achilles has 
to leave the army and retire to Lesbos for 


The Ritual of Purification 147 

purification, although Thersites, whom he has 
slain, is no real kinsman of his: whence we 
may draw the conclusion that the State of 
Miletus, in the eighth century, had come to 
take cognisance of the slaying of any citizen. 
And the Argives, in the fifth or fourth century, 
offer atonement to Zeus Meilichios for a civic 
massacre, the god who has a legendary asso- 
ciation with purification for the shedding of 
kindred blood. By the fifth century in Athens 
the reUgious feeling concerning the sacredness 
of all life within the city had so deepened that 
even the slaying of a slave caused a miasma 
and was a State offence.^ 

Now when we examine certain details of 
Attic law, together with certain expressions of 
sentiment concerning homicide in the classical 
writers of Attica, we see the clear imprint of 
its origin. Accidental homicide was as gravely 
regarded by the Athens of the fourth century 
as by the old Hebrew code : such homicides 
must fly over the border, but if they went by 

^ Antiphon^ Or. 6, p. 764: cf. Eurip., Hecuba, pp. 291*^92. 


148 The Evolution of Religion 

a certain road, the State refiised to allow the 
avenger of blood to follow them : they must 
remain in exile until they have won the for- 
giveness of one of the kinsmen of the dead.^ 
We may suppose that the kinsmen are regarded 
as taking up the feud of the ghost, who is likely 
to be vindictive, even when the slaying was acci- 
dental. Finally, when the pardoned homicide 
returns he must go through elaborate purifica- 
tions. These latter were to wipe off the 
miasma, not to ease what we might call the 
burden of conscience. And the community 
were obliged to expel temporarily even a per- 
fectly innocent man, because of their fear of the 
wrath of the dead. This dread of the ghost is 
appealed to by an Attic orator as a motive that 
should influence the judges to condemn the 
prisoner.^ The first legal preUminary in a case 
of murder, which reveals clearly the religious 
origin of the State law, was the solemn procla- 
mation, made by one of the relatives holding 

1 Demosthenes, c. Aristocrat,, pp. 643-644. 
^ Antiphon^ p. 686. 


The Ritual of Purijfication 149 

a spear at the funeral, that the murderer should 
keep aloof from all the holy and public places 
of the commimity.^ And Antiphon strongly 
expresses the popular sentiment that the 
unpimished miurderer pollutes the pubUc altars 
and vitiates the atmosphere of the city : ^ and 
the whole of Plato's legislation* concerning 
homicide is based on the idea of the miasma 
arising from bloodshed, and is quite in accord 
with Attic law. The exile of the murderer 
purges the city as well as his execution ; there- 
fore the accused was allowed to go out of the 
country before the verdict.* The contagion 
was worse under a roof than in the open air ; 
therefore the Athenian judges insisted on 
trying homicide in an unroofed court, "lest 
they should be under one roof with the slayer." * 
Also it is part of primitive animistic belief 
that such miasma could cleave to things which 
had caused the death of a man : hence the 

1 Plato, Laws^ 873 A-B : Demosth., c. Euerg.^ p. II60. 

2 P. 749 ; cf. 764. » Laws, pp. 854, 865. 
^ Demosthenes, c. Aristocrai,, p. 643. 

* Antiphon, p. 709. 


T50 The Evolution of Religion 

inanimate object such as an axe or bar of iron 
might be solemnly tried and, if found guilty, 
would be thrown into the sea to rid the State 
of infection : ^ the same superstition explains the 
old English law that a waggon which ran over 
a man and caused his death should be given to 
God — " deodand " : that is, it was to become a 
perquisite of the King, who represented God. 

So far we seem to discern clearly the concept 
of purity evolving State law in a very vital 
matter. And this is a great achievement. 
But it might easily evolve law which from our 
point of view would be unjust and superstitious. 
The terrors of the ghost, the inequitable 
wrath of a pure god, the insistence on the 
rituaUstic view of impurity, might retard pro- 
gress and prevent the evolution of the highest 
law which regards extenuating circumstances 
and admits justifiable homicide. Such law 
is not heard of in the Mosaic books, but it 

1 Demosthenes^ op, city p. 645 : cf, the account in 
Pausanias^ 5, 9,1, 10^ of the purification by the Eleans at 
Olympia of the bronze ox which had caused the death of a 
boy. 


The Ritual of Purification 151 

existed in the Attic code/ which specially on 
this account may be called civilised. The 
court which tried admitted cases of homicide 
where the plea of justification was raised was 
the Delphinion, and its foundation legend 
claimed that it was instituted to try Theseus 
for slaying the Pallantids who attacked him, 
and that the plea of justifiable homicide 
was allowed.^ The name of the court 
shows that its patron is the pure god, and 
points to Crete and Delphi, the chief 
centres of the ritual of purification. Now 
it is quite possible that this momentous 
advance in law may have been prompted by 
the healthy rationalism of the early Greek 
mind, to some extent by secular utilitarian 
thought, which reacted on the religious view 
of purity. We shall then say that the religion 
adapted itself dexterously to a secular move- 
ment, as it usually did in Greece. Or it may 

^ Drako appears to have systematised it, but it may have 
existed as custom-law before his period. 

2Paus., 1, 19, 1; 1> 28, 10: Plut, vit Thes., 12, 18: 
Demosth., c. ArUtocrat,, 74. 


152 The Evolution of Religion 

be the truth that the advance was due to a 
spontaneous movement within the religion 
itself, beginning perhaps in the seventh century, 
and to the growing consciousness that the 
purity or impurity of an act depended on 
motive and will. If this idea penetrated at 
an early time, as it certainly did at a later, 
into the sacerdotal circle, then the priest of 
Apollo might grant or withhold purification 
according to the degree of justification the 
homicide might prove :^ in this case a court 
would be estabUshed at the instigation of the 
purifying god to consider the circumstances. 
This explanation must remain a hypothesis, but 
it is one that assumes the action of real forces. 
Enough has been said to illustrate the 
intimate association of the idea of purity with 
legal progress,^ and it only remains to indicate 

1 We note the legend that purification was refiised to 
Ixion^ and the express statement that no one would purify 
King Pausanias from his brutal crime against the 
Olynthian maiden. 

2 The procedure by ordeal^ prevalent in the ancient 
world and common among contemporary savages, is prob- 
ably derived firom an animistic conception of purity : the 


The Ritual of Purification ^S^S^ 

very briefly its impress and effect on religious 
institutions, f One of the methods most 
frequently employed to attain mental purity 
or freedom fr om the evil spir it is fastin| 
from all human societies, primitive and 
advanced, we could gather a copious stock of 
illustration. And mankind has, on the whole, 
agreed as to the occasions at which the ritual 
is desirable; in spring before the crops and 
the first-fruits appear, before the warriors go 
forth to battle, before any kind of intimate 
communion with God, when the family is in 
mourning for a kinsman and evil influences 
are abroad, fa sting ha s been practised as a. 
mode of jgurging t hejindy nnd nnfr{;unrHin|r 
it against spiritual harm or prepari^ it for 
the privilege of divine intercourse/ It has 
been held necessary before any mystic initia- 

primitive theory appears to be that^ if the person is inno- 
cent^ the pure spirit within him makes his body able to 
resist the trials and is not dependent upon any idea of a 
higher god of righteousness. The ordeal procedure is 
very common in Aj&ican society: Post, Afrikanisck, 
Jurisprud,, 2, p. 110. 


154 Th^ Evolution of Religion 

tion,^ the early Christian Church prescribmg 
it for the days preceding the Easter com- 
munion ; also before the individual can attain 
the divine afflatus of prophecy or the super- 
natural potency for expelling evil spirits or 
working wonder-cures. "Such kind goeth 
not forth save by prayer and fasting." rThe 
psychological basis of the ritual is the belief 
that certain foods, and finally all food, are 
liable to engender evil influences in the 
body ; and, moreover, the experience that the 
abstinence generates a pecuUar mental con- 
dition of exaltation, ecstasy, and supra-normal 
self-confidence: other ideas, such as the dis- 
cipline of self-denial, that come to gather round 
the practice are of later growth. >^ 

From the same primitive view of the 
relations between our body and the spiritual 
world has arisen the enforcement of celibacy 
upon the priesthood. To trace the pheno- 

^ E,g. the Eleusinian^ Mithraic^ and Phrygian Mysteries : 
for examples of it in savage initiation rites^ see Annual 
RepoH Smithsonian Instituie, 1899-1900^ p. 435. 


The Ritual of Purification 155 

menon, which is commonly or exception- 
ally fomid in all human societies, throughout 
the history of the churches, would require a 
separate chapter. It is not a late growth in 
religion, nor of necessity a sign of high 
development. And here again the original 
psychological motive is not a spirit of self- 
mortification, but the belief that the chaste 
body is the purer abode for the Divine Spirit, 
and the mental experience that such self-abne- 
gation usually engenders a stronger conscious- 
ness of religious power. There are signs that 
the idea is losing its hold on the modem con- 
sciousness, but we see the deep impress it has 
made upon some of the ideas and dogmas of 
our religion. The institution of a sacerdotal 
rule of ceUbacy corresponds to the view pre- 
valent in any given society of the priestly 
ftmction; it is likely to be enforced when 
the priest is invested with a specially pro- 
phetic and mystic character, and is required 
to mediate between the society and God by 
means of frequent communion with the 


156 The Evolution of Religion 

divinity : it is rare when the civic and semi- 
secular view of the sacerdotal office prevails, 
rare therefore among the Northern Aryans and 
in the pre-Christian Greek and Roman states, 
although the Hellenic ritual generally required 
virginity, or at least a prolonged chastity, in 
the prophetess and occasionally in the ordinary 
priest. It was common in the ecstatic religions 
of Anatolia, and in the worship of Cybele was 
pushed to an unnatural extreme. It is in- 
teresting again to trace the association between 
the Phrygian-Christian heresy of Montanism 
and the older Phrygian paganism ; and we have 
noted that Montanus, its founder, the champion 
of celibacy, is reported to have been in his 
unppnverted days a priest of Cybele. 
[ Again, the baptismal rite is a form of purifi- 
cation of world-wide prevalence, as has been 
already intimated. The washing of the new- 
bom has been generally interpreted as a 
purgation of dangerous and evil influence 
among the lower,„asjgell as the higher races. 


An interesting form of such lustration is 


The Ritual of Purification 157 

recorded of the old Aztec home-life: the 
midwife washed the infant with the prayer, 
" May this water purify and whiten thy heart : 
may it wash away all that is evil."^ The adult, 
before initiation into any mystic society, usually 
needed elaborate purification; and this often 
took the form of baptism with water and 
occasionally with blood : and in certain of the 
Mediterranean religions the lustration was not 
merely regarded as a washing away of the 
old sin, but as a spiritual rebirth.^ In the 
Isis rites the baptism with water was supposed 
to raise the mortal to the divinity ; in the 
description of the baptismal purification of 
Setis I. the words occur : " I have purified thee 
with life and power, so as to make thee young, 
like thy father Ra." And the gods themselves 
were beUeved to be reborn through the 
sprinkling of lustral water over their images^ 
We discover the same theories held by the 

^ Sahagun^ Jourdanet^ pp. xxxix. and 4t55, 

2 Fide supra, p. 57. 

® Vide Archiv fur ReligUmstvissensckaft, 1904, pp. 401-<409. 


158 The Evolution of Religion 

early Church concerning the Christian rite : 
the font washes away the taint of the flesh, 
while at the same time the divine potency 
of the water revivifies and recreates the 
catechumen, who dies to the old life and is 
bom again ; so that the font, which itself was 
exorcised and purified in the early period, was 
in some sense the womb of spiritual life, and 
the rite is both an exorcism and a communion. 
Very soon in the history of the Church it came 
to be regarded as of such serious and critical 
significance that the catechumen must prepare 
himself for it by prior purifications and exor- 
cisms : such ceremonies as the breathing on his 
forehead by the priest, the sacramental partak- 
ing of the salt, the anointing with oil, together 
with the utterance of a prayer that "the 
enemy might be put to flight," have an 
obvious cathartic significance.^ 
/ We must also regard^^^wifession as a kind 
of purification: for the "speaking out" of 

^ Duchesne, Origines du cuUe Ckritien, transl. by M'Clure, 
p. 296. 


The Ritual of Puriification 159 

sin would be regarded as _a.-.real-j«irgation. 
and deliverance at that period of thought 
when words might be viewed as things, or 
at least as controlling things. This was its 
meaning in the preliminary ritual of the 
Samothracian Mysteries, in the Mexicaii 
religion^ where it was associated with purifi- 

c'ationfan^ concept otjce^uM^M^^ 
ili_the earlyChristian Chu rch, wher e it was 

Eagter communion, a, s part of the pu rificgtory 
preparation,^ An interesting formula of 
confession is found among the Babylonian 
Uturgical tablets: the penitent prays to the 
god and the goddess — "I^et the seven winds 
carry away my sighs . • . let the bird bear 
my wickedness to the heavens: let the fish 
carry off my misery, let the river sweep it 
away. Let the beast of the field take it 
from me. Let the waters of the river wash 
me clean." Here the purificatory confessional 

^ Sahagun^ op. cit,, pp. 340-341. 

^ Fide Herzog^ Real-Encyclop,, s.v. Beickte. 


i6o The Evolution of Religion 

works partly by prayer to the high god, 
partly by the old idea of the magic trans- 
ference of sin into an alien substance.^ 

These are examples of practices in the 
advanced rehgions aiming at the purging of 
internal and spiritual sin. But the older 
and more materiahstic view of impurity as 
a physical taint or as the miasma of an evil 
spWt, has not whoUy faded even from historic 
Christianity : the ceremony of the churching 
of women, though transformed into a thanks- 
giving service, has descended from an old 
cathartic ritual that purged away the danger- 
ous pollution of child-birth : and the consecra- 
tion of churches was originally merely a 
special application of the old-world practice 
of purifying the house against demons, as 
we may see from the legendary example 
given in the ago cryphal "Acts of St 
Thomas." ^ 

^ King^ Babylonian Religion, p. 212. 

2 Fide Von der Goltz, Das Gebet, p. 297 : Cabrol, PrOre 
Antique, p. 31 6: the aspersion with holy water in the 
present Roman ritual does not seem to have been 


The Ritual of Purification i6i 

The facts which I have collected and exposed, 
incomplete as the statement is, may justify 
what was said at the outset of the inquiry, 
that t he aborifflnal idea of pui itry h^^ gtmplf 
d eep roots in the soil on which much of our 
ethical thou ght smtl frpljng, many f>f f>nr 
legal and r eligions institutions, have grow g 
and develop ed^ The concept, owing perhaps 
to its immemorial continuity of life and deep 
primeval instmctiveness, if the word may 
pass, is liable to fantastic exaggerations. It 
has sometimes proved itself an insurmountable 
barrier to moral and legal progress. When 
it has crystallised into a hard "pharisaic" 
form, it has arrested and imprisoned the life 
of a hitherto progressive people. On the 
other hand, though its innate quality, so to 
speak, is never secular-utilitarian, its contri- 
butions to our civilisation have been, as we 
have seen, of inestimable service. It has 
engendered the modem horror of murder 

obligatory in the early period: vide Duchesne, OrigineSj 

p. 404, Engl, transl. 

11 


i62 The Evolution of Religion 

and bloodshed, and the ideal of the chaste 
life: we owe to it in great degree the 
delicate sensitiveness of spiritually gifted 
characters. For good and for evil, it has 
been an instinctive reUgious force more 
potent than any other of these in the mental 
evolution of man. -^ 


LECTURE IV 

THE EVOLUTION OF PRAYER FROM 
LOWER TO HIGHER FORMS 

IE is no part of the religious service of 
ind that so clearly reveals the various 
of the divine nature held by the different 
races at the different stages of their develop- 
ment as the formulae of prayer, or reflects so 
vividly the material and psychologic history of 
man. The historic material at our disposal is 
unfortimately modem, not reaching back, that 
is to say, to a period earlier than some four 
thousand years before Christ ; but this can 
be supplemented, as usually happens, by the 
evidence gathered from the lower societies, as 
well as by the observation of practices that 
frequently accompany and are very closely 
blended with prayer even in the higher reli- 

103 


164 The Evolution of Religion 

gions, and that we may with confidence believe 
to have descended from an immemorial anti- 
quity. The question as to the origin of praver 
is one of great difficulty and of the deepest 
significance for the history and philosophy of 
religion ; for il/inevitably involves the questions 
concemmg the origin of the beUef in a personal 
divinity, concerning the relation of magic to 
religion, of the spell-ritual which commands 
or constrains to a prayer-ritual of humiliation 
and entreatyy Even if I had an original and 
matured judgment to put before you on ques- 
tions of such importance, a single lecture would 
be a very inadequate space for its exposition.^ 
Therefore, though I may indicate, I will not 
attempt in this lecture to decide on, the ques- 
tion of origin. I will content myself with 
arranging the phenomena according as they 
appear from our point of view to belong to a 
lower stratima of religion or a higher ; such an 

1 An interesting and original contribution to the solu- 
tion of the questiojn will be found in a recent paper by 
Mr R. Marett in Folk-Lore, 1904, '' From Spell to Prayer." 


The Evolution of Prayer ^65 

arrangement begs no question, and agrees with 
our experience that in all religions, whether 
savage or civilised, lower and higher elements 
are able to coexist. I will fii^^t give a general 
sketch of the facts, with some interpretation of 
them, and will follow this with an illustrative 
selection of the prayers of primitive and 
advanced communities. 

According to the modern definition of ^^^ 
prayer, man addresses uttered or inaudible ^^^• 
speech to a divine power conceived as Spirit 
or God, but always as personal, in order to 
obtain material, moral, or spiritual blessings: 
that part of the address that contains the J 
actual prayer will be often accompanied by 
words of homage, adoration, confession of 
sin, expressions of doctrinal faith, statements 
concerning the beneficent operations of the 
divinity in time past, self-assuring utterances 
of confidence in divine protection or the divine 
promise. Though the formulae contain much 
positive statement and are by no means con- 
fined to the optative mood, the attitude of the 


1 66 The Evolution of Religion 

supplicator is always reverential and self-abased ; 
modem religion reprobates any idea of com- 
pelling the divinity ; only it generally seals its 
petitions with the mystic signature of a power- 
ful name. If this may pass as a fairly com- 
prehensive and adequate account of modem or 
advanced prayer, it will still be found to con- 
tain elements that may descend from a very 
ancient mould of religious thought not easy 
to reconcile with our higher religious con- 
sciousness ; and it is no adequate account of 
the various modes which less advanced socie- 
ties have used and are still using to express 
their desires to the supernatural power. It 
has indeed been recently asserted, with some 
plausibility,^ that no savage community yet 
explored lacks the conception of a high 
god making for righteousness; and cer- 
tainly many of the lower races have spon- 
taneously developed genuine prayer in the 
modern sense. Still it is sometimes reported 
by scientific observers that some backward 

1 Fide A. Lang, The Making of Religion, 


The Evolution of Prayer 167 

peoples do not pray at all;^ and it appears 
not to be uncommon for the savage to 
regard his high god as too remote to be 
addressed for any practical purpose. 

But the savage, though he may pray as we 
do, has other ways of addressing himself to the 
unseen personal agencies that he believes to 
surround him ; and these are the ways of 
magic and the magic-spell. Havmg learned 
from human experience that he can project his 
will-power by an occult process so as to subdue 
the mind of his fellow-man, he experiments 
with this method upon the world of nature 
and spirits : he deals with ghosts chiefly in this 
way, though he may pray to them also ; and 
he has no reluctance in applying his magic even 
to the higher divinities. As magic- worker he 
stands on a different footing altogether from 
the petitioner: his attitude towards the 
supernatural power is self-confident and im- 
perious, his speech is no prayer but a com- 
mand. He may project his will by dumb show, 

1 Vide Anthropology Joum,, 1904, p. l65. 


I 


1 68 The Evolution of Religion 

by action suggestive of his desire : but in most 
cases he will probably prefer to accompany 
it with potent speech, so as to drive his will 
home to the mark, so to speak: and the 
psychology of such magic practices has been 
ably investigated by recent writers, n The 
technical name for such exercise of will upon 
another person is suggestion; a modem 
application of it sometimes appears in the 
extreme form that we call mesmerism or 
hypnotism. For the successful application of 
the charm, it is often an essential condition 
that one should possess oneself of the name 
of the person against whom it is directed, and 
at times of his picture or effigy, for both 
the name and the picture are regarded as 
vital parts of the whole individuality that one 
seeks to control. The same ideas transferred 
into the world of supernatural personalities 
account for the potency and deep significance 
that attaches to the divine name, and for the 
prominence of the picture and the effigy in 
the religious magic. But the savage has also 


The Evolution of Prayer 169 

learned from experience that he can work upon 
his fellows by entreaty, flattery, soothing and 
endearing address : and it was obviously 
natural for him to approach the divine powers 
in the same fashion, and to use humble and 
prayerfiil petitions. Nor does there seem 
any reason why he should not employ the 
methods of magic and prayer simultaneously 
or in close conjunction on the same occasion. 
We may often in fact be in doubt whether to 
interpret a certain primitive religious act from 
one point of view or the other. Thus we are 
told that when the Khonds of Orissa are 
about to enter on a campaign, " the priest cuts 
a branch and dresses it and arms it, so as to 
personate one of the foe: thereupon it is 
thrown down at the shrine of the war-god " : ^ 
This formal appeal to the god is speechless, 
and may be thought to be a speechless prayer ; 
but it is of the same colour as a multifarious 
mass of practices which are mimetic and which 
are intended to work by means of suggestion. 

^ R. Marett^ op. cit,, p. 145. 


170 The Evolution of Religion 

A singular ritual is recorded of the rain 
societies of North America:^ emblems or 
picture-writing representing clouds, with 
vertical drops symbolising rain, are placed on 
an altar, ears of maize are placed by the side 
of them with other objects, and the corn-ears 
are sprinkled with water, while at the same 
time prayers are proffered to the ghosts that 
control the rain-supply. We would wish to 
know what the manner of the praying is ; but 
it seems clear that we here have the ritual 
of prayer combined with magic-suggestion, 
which consists in pretending to do the thing 
which it is desired to bring about. Again, the 
primitive formulae devised to drive out the 
demons of disease and poverty are usually im- 
perious commands and not prayers : such as the 
Chinese " Let the devil of poverty depart " ; * 
the Greek, " Go out, hunger," ' and " To the 
door, you ghosts."* 

1 Man, 1902, p. 104. 

2 Frazer, Golden Bough «) iii. 83. » Plutarch, 69S F. 
^ At the Anthesteria, Photius, s,v. Ovpa^t ic^/ocs: 

Hesych., s,v. 


The Evolution of Prayer 171 

But when, as in Buro, the bidding takes such 
a form as " Grandfather small-pox, go away," ^ 
the reverential and soothing address allows 
us to approximate this to prayer, for in the 
liturgies of the earlier as well as the advanced 
religions the divinity is commonly addressed 
in terms of kinship. We shall note instances 
of real prayers proffered by the uncultured 
races to a high god, yet retaining something 
of the magic character and tone : we detect it 
m the mystic employment of the name, in the 
reiteration of the same short phrase, in the 
droning sing-song in which, according to 
Professor Tylor,^ savage prayers are usually 
intoned, the tone of a mesmeric incantation. 
But gradually, as the concept of divinity 
deepens in the progressive race, and the mind 
becomes penetrated with the consciousness of 
the Uttleness of man and of the incomparable 
greatness of God, the worshipper tends to 
become the humble petitioner and prayer 

^ Frazer, op, qU,, iii. 98 : vide Marett, op. cit., p. l63. 
2 Primitive Culture, vol. ii. (concluding chapter). 


172 The Evolution of Religion 

comes to predominate over spell. And it 
has happened in the legislation of the higher 
religions that magic at last becomes " suspect " 
and tabooed : yet the most austere and 
purified religion often unconsciously retains 
certain elements of spell-ritual, and even 
legitimatises the spell by virtue of the distinc- 
tion between white magic and black^) The dis- 
tinction is morphologically unsound, and arises 
generally from ex-parte prejudice. We do 
not find, in fact, if we broadly compare the 
phenomena of all religions, that cleavage and 
irreconcilable antagonism between magic and 
religion which has often been supposed, /^ven 
in religions that we must class as high, the 
deity himself is often imagined to work by 
means of magic, and the Christian Church 
itself has given its patronage and consecra- 
tion to practices of magical significance, such 
as the ordeal, purification, certain forms of 
healing, exorcisms of evil spirits : all these will 
be accompanied by prayers to God, but the 
prayers are so impregnated with the ideas of 


The Evolution of Prayer 173 

animistic magic that we can hardly regard 
them as pure forms. Nevertheless, though the 
lower elements Are. so i^fficult to eradicate, 
yet the experience of some few of the higher 
communities may reassure us that as a religion 
progresses in spirituality it can pui^e itself 
^ore and more thoroughly of these, and the 
progresses from jpell to prajCT^^ 

Again, we may compare the phenomena 
from the point of view of the progress in 
aspiration. In the primitive period, when the 
struggle is to live at aU rather than to live 
well, the objects of prayer must be material 
blessings, and these are still prominent in the 
liturgies of the civiUsed societies. There is a 
sameness in aU these, and the chief distinction 
to note is between the prayers that look to the 
individual alone and those that look to the 
good of the community^ A higher stage is 
reached when moral and spiritual qualities 
become the object of prayer ; and when this 
is attained, the principle of pray er is Jikdy 
to become mo;; Ld more spLt ! ^ '^he 


174 The Evolution of Religion 

petitioner more and more diffident in the 
expression of his material wants, and with a 
growing consciousness that the Deity knows 
best what is good for man, may rise to the 
height of the formula, " Th y will be done.^ It 
is interesting to note in how many races some 
such utterance has been heard ; and at times 
men may have been helped to it by the 
consciousness which scientific advance had 
awakened, that the laws of the material 
universe cannot be capriciously altered to suit 
the temporary needs of the individual: a 
formula of acquiescence appears then to be the 
deepest and truest prayer. Finally, in the 
evolution of prayer we may consider that the 
consummation is marked by the theory, 
maintained by later Greek philosophy and 
early Christian fathers alike, that the tru e 
intention of prayer is not the mere petition f pr 
some special blessing, but rather the com- 
mimion with God, to whom it is a spiritual 
approach. Jlere as often elsewhere, the 
highest spiritual product of human thought 


The Evolution of Prayer 175 

reveals its affinity with some dimly remote 
primeval concept ; for much of the spell-ritual 
at which we have been glancmg implies an 
idea of such communion, the human agent 
endeavouring to charge himself with a potency 
drawn from a quasi-divine source. ^. "^^ 

It remains now to take coiKrete examples 
from the record of prayer illustrative of these 
phases of development. Looking first at the 
savage races, we have already observed that 
some of their formulae seem to belong to the 
borderland between spell and prayer. When 
the New Caledonian says over the fire that he 
kindles to increase the heat of the sim, " Sun, 
I do this that you may be burning hot," it is 
obviously not a prayer that he utters to the 
sun-god but a formula expressing the sugges- 
tion of his magic.^ And when the Karens of 
Burma at the threshing of the rice call out to 
the corn-mother, " Shake thyself, grandmother, 
shake thyself. Let the paddy ascend till it 
equals a hill, equals a mountain ; shake thy- 

^ Marett^ op. cit., p. 152. 


176 The Evolution of Religion 

self, grandmother, shake thyself,"^ we have 
surely a command rather than a pure prayer ; 
for primitive vegetation - ritual works by 
compulsion rather than entreaty. On the 
other hand, we have record of a genuine 
Karen prayer addressed to " the Gkni of heaven 
and earth, God of the mountains and hills," on 
the occasion when a sin of unchastity was 
supposed to have sterilised the earth : ** Do 
not be angry with me, do not hate me, but 
have mercy on me and compassionate me. 
. . . Now I repair the mountains, now 1 
heal the hills. . . . Make thy paddy firuitful, 
thy rice abundant. ... If we cultivate but 
little, still grant that we may obtain a little." 
But the prayer is accompanied with rites that 
are purely magical and aiming at the restora- 
tion of the earth.* 

The buffalo clan among the Sioux Indians 
decorate themselves with emblems of their 
totem animal before going on the war-path, 

^ Tylor, op. cit,, ii. p. 334. 

2 Frazer, Golden Bough,^^) vol. ii. p. 212. 


The Evolution of Prayer 177 

and express the purpose of the dressing with a 
sententious phrase: "My little grandfather 
is always dangerous when he makes an 
attempt,"^ Such an utterance, considered 
formally, is not a prayer but a statement 
about the power of the buffalo, " the little 
grandfather"; for it is an article of faith in 
the magic creed that the supernatural force, 
which the spell aims at setting in operation, 
can be made to work by definite statements 
that it is working; these are suggestive 
assurances that increase one's own confidence ; 
and the Sioux formula is of such a nature; 
only the coaxing and endearing phrase of 
kinship seems to imply a half entreaty as well. 
We discern more clearly the rudiments of a 
prayer in the words addressed by the Santee 
Indians to the buffalo when they have offered 
him a feast: "Grandfather, venerable man, 
thy children have made this feast for you: 
may the food thus taken cause them to live 

1 Annual Report of Smithsonian Institute, " Study of Sioux 
Cults, by Dorsey," 1899-1900, p. 381, etc 

18 


178 The Evolution of Religion 

and bring them good fortune." ^ The account 
of the Sioux religion preserves a quaint form of 
words which are used for the riddance of the 
ghost, to despatch the soul of the deceased to 
the home of the dead : " You are going to the 
animals, you are going to your ancestors, you 
came hither from the animals and you are 
going back thither: do not face this way 
again: when you go, continue walking."* 
The tone of the words is kind and considerate, 
but authoritative rather than supplicatory, 
and unlike the formula which the same 
Indians are reported to use when praying to 
their ancestors for good weather or good 
hunting, " Spirits of the dead, have mercy on 
us." * Certain prayers used habitually by the 
Todas of the Nalgiri hills for the thriving of 
the dairy and the buffalo herd have recently 
been published,^ and as the formulae are all 

1 Peabody Museum Reports, vol. iii. p. 276, etc. 
^ Annual Report Smithsonian Institute, 1899-1900, pp. 420- 
421. 

^ Tylor, op. cit., ii. p. 331. 

4 FoUc'Lore, 1904, p. I68 : Toda Prayer, W. H. R. Rivers. 


The Evolution of Prayer 179 

in the optative mood — "May it be well for 
the buffaloes, may there be no destroyer, 
etc.," and there is an appeal to divine 
personages or powers — "for the sake of such 
or such a god may this happen" — we may 
class them as prayers ; but the appeal is very 
faint and the formulae seem to be used as 
if they possessed a self-dependent efficacy. 
More interesting and fervent is the address 
to the sun, proffered by a solitary hunter of 
the half-christianised Kekchi tribe of Indians : ^ 
his object is to secure game and food in the 
wilderness both for himself and as an oblation 
to the god ; but in the very long and im- 
passioned utterance, with its many repetitions, 
there is very little direct entreaty : the Indian 
contents himself with definite and reassuring 
statements concerning the omnipresence of the 
deity and the ease with which the latter can 
execute his will : " It will give you no trouble 
to give me aU kind of game"; and a movmg 

^ Published by Carl Sapper in Nordlickes MtUel-Amerika, 
vide Archiv jur vergl, Relig. Wist,, 1904^ p. 468. 


i8o The Evolution of Religion 

appeal is made on the ground of kinship: 
"Thou art my father: who is my mother, 
who is my father ? Only thou, O God." 

We may regard these utterances of the 
hunter not indeed as spells, for his attitude 
is most reverent and loving, but as potent 
statement effecting the purpose of prayer. 
Nor need we see Christian influence in the 
striking phrase last quoted, though of course 
this is possible ; such endearing address 
is common both in the lower and higher 
liturgies: the Egyptian appealed to Isis in 
similar terms ^ — "Oh my father, my brother, 
my mother Isis," the Babylonian addressed Bel 
as father and mother^ and a Vedic hymn con- 
tains the phrase, "Thou, oh Agni, art our 
father, we are thy kinsmen."* Such appeals, 
suggested by the affection between kinsmen 

^ Budge^ Egyptian Magic, p. 49. 

^ Jastrow, Religion Babyloniens Assyriens, p. 490 : cf, 
the formula in the prayer of one of the early kings to 
the goddess Ga-tiim-dug : '^I have no mother — ^Thou 
art my mother : I have no father — ^Thou art my father," 
Jastrow, p. 895. 

' Sacred Books, vol. xlvi p. 23. 


The Evolution of Prayer i8i 

and the idea of the kinship of man with God, 
belong to the alphabet of pure prayer. 

Of still more value for the light it throws on 
the attitude of the Indian's mind to the powers 
of the unseen world, is the so-called prayer of 
a Navajo Shaman belonging to the district of 
Arizona, recently published in the American 
Anthropologist ; ^ and to understand it the 
circumstances must be briefly stated. The 
Shaman had been telling the American in- 
quirer the story of his tribe's descent through 
the lower world and their re-emergence : after 
the narrative he fears that speaking about the 
lower regions may have caused his own spirit- 
ual or astral part to have left his body and 
departed thither ; and he therefore proceeds 
to recite a long so-called prayer intended to 
deliver his soul from the witchcraft that may 
be detaining it below. We should not strictly 
call it a prayer at all, but a narrative in the 
indicative mood stating that the war-gods of 
the tribe are actually doing what he specially 

1 VoL I. 


1 82 The Evolution of Religion 

wants them to do, namely, to go down and 
rescue his soul from the woman-chieftain, " the 
underground witch." Every step of their 
way there and back is carefiilly recounted 
several times over^ so that they cannot go 
wrong ; and when they are supposed to have 
brought back his soul, the recital ends with the 
joyful refrain, " The world before me is restored 
in beauty: my voice is restored in beauty," 
each phrase repeated five times. It is really 
a spell-nArrative about the gods, having the 
same effect as prayer, and is a twofold illus- 
tration of the primitive idea that talking 
about a thing makes it happen; an idea not 
wholly extinct among ourselves, and possibly 
underlying some of the Uturgies of higher 
religions. 

/^or the rest, savages often pray very much 
/as the civiUsed man, and accompany some of 
their purifications and medicine-magic with 
real prayers to higher gods to give them 
efficacy: for instance, the African doctor 
administering the medicine shown him by 


The Evolution of Prayer 183 

the fetich holds it first up to heaven and 
prays, "Father Heaven, bless this medicine 
that I now give."^ But I have not been able 
to find any example of a savage prayer for 
moral or spiritual blessings/ An interesting 
feature is, however, observable in a verbose and 
very exacting prayer made by the Khonds of 
Orissa to the earth-goddess; after particular- 
ising very carefully their material wants, they 
conclude with the words, " We are ignorant of 
what it is good to ask for. You know what is 
good for us, give it us."* This appears to be 
a unique savage version of the great phrase, 
" Thy will be done." 

Turning now to the liturgies of the more 
advanced peoples,' we may note briefly at the 

1 Tylor, Prim. CuU., ii. p. 333. 

2 Tylor, op. cit., ii. p. 335. 

^ I have only space to make a summary reference here 
to the very noteworthy collection of Peruvian prayers pre- 
served by De Molina^ Fables and Rites of the Yncas, p. 28, 
etc., 38, 56: they have all the character of pure prayer, 
and occasionally reach a high spiritual level : the only 
appearance of magic is in the sacrifice that accompanies 
the singular petition " that the Creator and the sun may 
remain ever young." 


184 The Evolution of Religion 

outset one feature that is found in most of 
them if not common to all ; namely, the idea 
that the prayer gains potency from the solemn 
utterance of the true divine name. The 
phenomenon has been examined by recent 
writers on comparative religion, especiaUy by 
Giesebrecht in his treatise on Die AU-testa^ 
mentUche Schdtzung des Gottesnamens} In 
primitive psychology, the name is part of 
the personaUty, and the soul or power of the 
individual inheres in it : therefore he who has 
the name of the person, whether human, 
superhuman, or divine, can exercise a certain 
control over him by means of its magical 
application. Thus in the appeal to the god 
Ukko in the Kalevala, ^^Ukko, oh thou god 
in heaven, Ukko come, we call upon thee, 
Ukko come, we need thee sorely," there is 
virtue in the threefold repetition of the name, 
and the passage is part of an address which 
is called "magic words." Evidence from 

^ Vide also Andrian in Detdsch, GeselUck AiUhropoL, zxviL, 
1896, p. 109. 


The Evolution of Prayer 185 

Teutonic paganism, so far as I know, is 
lacking, although the idea has left its clear 
imprint on the human saga. Its influence is 
strongest and its operation most interesting 
in the liturgies of the Mediterranean and of 
India. In old Latium, it seems, the pontifices 
endeavoured to conceal the true names of the 
gods, lest they might be wrongly used by 
unauthorised persons^ or lest the enemy 
should get the knowledge of them and there- 
with the power to draw the divinities away. 
We may thus understand the often misinter- 
preted statement in Herodotus, that the 
Pelasgian deities were nameless; and the 
Greeks themselves must have been familiar 
with the ritual precaution of keeping secret 
the divine name, as we may gather from the 
phrase in the Euripidean fragment^ about 
the enlightened man "who knows the silent 
names of the gods'*: it is curious to find 
exactly the same expression in a Vedic hymn,' 

1 Serv., JEn., 2, 351. 2 2^^. 78I, Phaethon. 

^ Vedic Hynrns {Sacred Books, etc.)^ pt. ii. p. 378. 


1 86 The Evolution of Religion 

in which the sacrificial post, or tree to which 
the sacrifices were attached, is thus addressed : 
"Where thou knowest, oh tree, the sacred 
names of the gods, to that place make the 
offerings go." It is possible that the same 
superstition may have been the original cause 
of the custom that has sometimes been observed 
of silent or inaudible prayer: the formulas 
with the divine name attached to them being 
of such potency that they must be concealed. 

The belief that the name belongs to the 
essence of the personality explains the curious 
formula in the Umbrian prayer preserved in 
the Tabulae Iguvinae, where the god Gra- 
bovius is implored to be propitious to the 
" Arx Fisia " and to " the name of the Arx 
Fisia," as if the name of the city was a living 
and independent entity. 

In the Greek hturgies we note the anxious 
care with which particular qualifying epithets 
were selected and attached to the personal 
name of the divinity, so as to make clear 
what was the precise operation of divine 


^e Evolution of Prayer 187 

favour which the prayer aimed at evoking. 
This explains why so many divinities, some 
of whom were scarcely known outside a 
narrow area, were invoked as TroXvoJj/vftc, 
" thou god of many names," all possible titles 
of power being summed up in one word. 
Certain passages in the poets become intelli- 
gible only in the light of this idea : such as 
the well-known phrase in the chorus of the 
Agamemnon of ^Eschylus : ^ " Zeus, whoso- 
ever the god is, if this name of Zeus is dear 
to him, by this name I now appeal to him." 
The thought and the words of the Vedic 
poet are often the same as the Greek: Agni 
is TToXvoJwfios : " Agni, many are the names 
of thee the Immortal one " ; and again, " The 
father adoring gives many names to thee, oh 
Agni, if thou shouldest take pleasure therein." * 
But it is in Egypt, the land of magic, where 
the idea of the potency of the divine name 

1 1. 160 : cf. Plat. Crat., 400 E., ^* It is our custom in our 
prayers to call the gods by whatsoever name they most 
rejoice to be called by." 

2 Fedic Hymns, pt. ii., pp. 281, 372. 


1 88 The Evolution of Religion 

assumes dimensions that are truly gigantic 
In an early metaphysical theory of the origin 
of things, which in its harmonious self-con- 
tradiction reaches quite to the level of 
Hegelian philosophy, the universe is said to 
have come into being, and the first god 
himself effects his own creation by the utter- 
ance of his own portentous name:^ in the 
begmning was the name. It is said of the 
great god Ra that ^^his names are manifold 
and unknown, even the gods know them 
not." Naturally, therefore, the goddess Isis 
was desirous of knowing his real name, and 
having discovered it by a ruse, she became 
mistress over him and all gods.^ In certain 
Egyptian papyri contammg Abraxas prayers, 
we find the prayer sometimes coupled with 
the reminder that the petitioner knows the 
divine mystic name;' thus equipped, the 
prayer is more than a mere humble entreaty. 

^ Budge^ op, cit,, p. l6l. 
2 Budge, op. cit,, pp. 187-141. 

^ Fide examples quoted by Ausfeld, De Grwcorum Fr^ 
cationibus, p. 519* 


The Evolution of Prayer 189 

Was it from Egypt that the early Israelites 
derived the same mystic illusion concerning 
the divine name, which to some of the 
scholars of the last generation appeared to 
be a faith peculiar to the chosen people? 
At least we are now enabled, by the recent 
exposition of the facts, to understand the 
inner force of such prayers as the Psalmist's 
" Save me, oh God, by thy name and judge 
me by thy strength " : ^ of Jahv^'s warning to 
his people in the Exodus to obey the angel 
whom he sends them, "Obey his voice . . . 
for my Name is in him : " ^ of the oath taken 
by those initiated into the Essenian sect not 
to reveal the names of the angels:* of ex- 
pressions in the New Testament concerning 
the casting out of devils and the heahng of 
the sick in the name of Jesus : finally, of the 
significant baptismal phrase, ** to baptize into 
the name of Christ," * which reveals the name 
as a religious potency into which as into a 

1 Ps. 54, 31. 2 c. 23, V. 21. 

3 Joseph, De hell. Jud,, 2, 8. * Acts 8, l6 ; 19, 5. 


~i 


-) 


I go The Evolution of Religion 

spiritual atmosphere the adult catechumen 
or the initiated infant is brought. And these 
facts of old-world religion and religious logic 
cast a new light on the name-formuke which 
close most of the prayers of the Christian 
Church, and which are words of power to 
speed the prayer home; and though the 
modem consciousness may often be unaware 
of this mystic function of theirs, we may 
beUeve that it was more clearly recognised 
in the early days of Christianity, for in the 
apocryphal acts of St John we find a long 
Ust of mystical names and titles attached to 
Christ giving to the prayer much of the tone 
of an enchantment.^ 

Connected as it seems with this superstition 
about names is the beUef that, in order to 
gain complete power over a human or divine 
personality, it is necessary to know their 
origin and to express what one knows about 
them in the charm: thus in the Kalevala 
the young magician is taught the origin 

1 Von der Goltz, Das Gebet, p. S5S. 


The Evolution of Prayer 191 

of things in order that he may know the 
proper enchantment against them, and a long 
account of the origin of iron, regarded as a 
demoniac substance, occurs in the word-magic 
used to cure the wound it inflicted. Hence 
we may account for the descriptive or, so to 
speak, biographical element in charms that 
are on the borderland of prayer. The 
exorciser of evil dreams in the Atharva-Veda 
prays or sings thus : " We know, oh sleep, thy 
birth ; thou art the son of the divine women- 
folk, the instrument of Death. Thou art the 
ender, thou art Death. Thus do we know 
thee, oh sleep: do thou, oh sleep, protect us 
from evil dreams."^ And in the worship of 
Agni the belief is expressed that " the prayers 
fill thee with power and strengthen thee," 
and this is at once followed by an account 
of his nature and origin.^ Is it then too 
far-fetched to trace the survival of this old- 

^ Hymns of the Atharva-Veda (Sacred Books, etc.^ xlii. 
p. 167). 

^ Vedic Hymns^ pt. ii. p. 391. 


192 The Evolution of Religion 

world thought, rooted as it is in the magic 
of the word and the statement, in the promi- 
nence given to the dogmatic biographical 
statement in our own liturgy? We regard 
it as a confession of faith: it may also be 
regarded as an expression of the worshipper's 
knowledge of the divine personality, whereby 
he raises himself into communion with it 
and thus gains power for his prayer.^ 

Considering now in a more general survey 
the liturgies of the nations that have attained 
culture, we might begin with our own fathers. 
But so little that touches the inner life of their 
pre-Christian religion has been preserved, that 
probably not much material for our present pur- 
pose is to be discovered from the records. We 
know that they were given to the employment 
of the rune or the spell, the rival or the parent 
of prayer ; and one of these, used by Odin to 
heal the sprained foot of Baldur's foal, is per- 

^ Cf, a, formula in an Egyptian papjmis published by 
Kenyon (122^ v. 18), '^I know thee, Hermes, who thou 
art and whence thou art and what city is the city of 
Hermes " : quoted by Ausfeld, op. cU. p. 524, n. 1. 


\ 


The Evolution of Prayer 193 

haps the only surviving fragment of Indo- 
Germanic poetry.^ Odin sings, "Bone to 
bone, blood to blood, limb to limb, as 
though they were glued together"; in a 
later Norwegian, and also in a Scottish 
version, it is Christ who heals the foal with 
the same magic words, strengthened however 
by the formula, "Heal in the Holy Ghost's 
name." And this useful medicine - charm 
was not forgotten by the Aryan Indians, for 
we find the words in the Atharva- Veda, " Fit 
together, hah- with hah-, fit together, skin 
with skin: thy blood, thy bone shall grow."^ 
Neither god nor ghost was needed to help 
out the force of such incantations. But prob- 
ably some time before Christianity prayer had 
come to prevail over spell in the Teutonic 
North, for there are traces there of a certain 

^ The '^Merseburg charm/' old High German tenth- 
century MS. : cf, R. Chambers, Fireside Stories, Edinburgh^ 
1842. My attention was called to the great antiquity of 
this Norse charm by Prof. Napier^ to whose kindness I owe 
these references. 

^ Sacred Books, xlii. p. 20. 

13 


184 The Evolution of Religion 

outset one feature that is found in most of 
them if not common to all ; namely, the idea 
that the prayer gains potency from the solemn 
utterance of the true divine name. The 
phenomenon has been examined by recent 
writers on comparative religion, especially by 
Giesebrecht in his treatise on Die AU'testa- 
mentUche Schdtzung des Gottesnamens} In 
primitive psychology, the name is part of 
the personality, and the soul or power of the 
individual inheres in it : therefore he who has 
the name of the person, whether human, 
superhuman, or divine, can exercise a certain 
control over him by means of its magical 
appUcation. Thus in the appeal to the god 
Ukko in the Kalevala, **Ukko, oh thou god 
in heaven, Ukko come, we call upon thee, 
Ukko come, we need thee sorely," there is 
virtue in the threefold repetition of the name, 
and the passage is part of an address which 
is called "magic words." Evidence from 

^ Vide also Andrian in Deutsch, GeseUsch, AtUhropoL, xxviL, 
1896, p. 109. 


The Evolution of Prayer 185 

Teutonic paganism, so £ar as I know, is 
lacking, although the idea has left its clear 
imprint on the human saga. Its influence is 
strongest and its operation most interesting 
in the Uturgies of ihe Mediterranean and of 
India. In old Latium, it seems, the pontifices 
endeavoured to conceal the true names of the 
gods, lest tliey might be wrongly used by 
unauthorised persons^ or lest the enemy 
should get ihe knowledge of them and there- 
witli the power to draw the divinities away. 
We may thus understand the often misinter- 
preted statement in Herodotus, that the 
Pelasgian deities were nameless; and the 
Greeks themselves must have been familiar 
with the ritual precaution of keeping secret 
the divine name, as we may gather from the 
phrase in the Euripidean fragment^ about 
the enlightened man "who knows the silent 
names of the gods": it is curious to find 
exactly the same expression in a Vedic hymn,^ 

1 Serv., Mn., 2, 351. « Fr. 781, Phaetkon. 

* Fedic Hymns (^Sacred Books, etc.), pt. ii. p. 378. 


196 The Evolution of Religion 

Cato's that has been preserved is merely 
materialistic.^ 

We expect much more from Greece, and in 
some measure we are not disappointed. Spell- 
ritual was no doubt always much in vogue, 
especially for the purposes of agriculture and 
purification : we hear of certain " magicians " 
or fidyoL of Cleonae who averted hailstorms 
with incantations and the shedding of their 
own blood.^ And a solemn part of the State 
liturgy in Greece was a commination service, 
which pronounced a curse on certain offences 
against the State. The religious curse is an 
interesting phenomenon of which it is not easy 
to give briefly a full and exact anthropo- 
logical account ; it is taken up by the higher 
reUgions, but it by no means originated in 
them, belonging to the sphere of spell rather 
than of prayer, and working out its effect 
by means of magic suggestion. Even the 

^ De Re Rustica^ 139, 141 : Wordsworth, Fragments and 
Specimens of Early Latin, p. 335. 
2 Clemens, Strom., p. 754, Pott. 


The Evolution of Prayer 197 

Jewish service, which we still use on Ash 
Wednesday, employs curse-formulaB in which 
there is no immediate reference to God, and 
they may have been regarded originally as 
having an independent efficacy. This was 
certainly the case in Greece, for the curse was 
itself personified as an independent, personal 
power; and the Erinyes themselves, in some 
degree the personal embodiments of the curse, 
work their effisct on the victim by singing a 
spell-song, according to iEschylus, which binds 
his soul and withers him away.^ And the 
many private "devotiones" or "dirae" that 
have come down to us from Greek antiquity, 
written usually on leaden tablets and conse- 
crating the enemy to the powers of the lower 
world, employ indeed an appeal to these powers 
that may be interpreted as prayer, but their 
essential quality is magical, and they certainly 
were supposed to operate as speUs agamst the 
individual, while even the divinities to whom 
they are addressed appear to be constrained 

1 Eumen., SS2, 


198 The Evolution of Religion 

rather than entreated. In one interesting 
example of the first century a.d., found in 
iEgina/ of Hellenic -Christian or possibly 
Judaic origin, the curse takes on the form of a 
prayer for righteous vengeance — " I call on the 
Highest God, the Lord of all spirits and of 
all flesh, before whom every soul this day is 
humbled with suppUcation, against those who 
have treacherously slain or poisoned the unfor- 
tunate Heracleia." In the Greek legal pro- 
cedure a curse was sometimes uttered against 
oneself if one forswore oneself or if one 
was guilty of the charge; and here as in 
similar cases in Christian jurisprudence the 
curse is an invocation of the high god who 
will punish perjury ; but we find it similarly 
employed in the animistic stage of reUgion, by 
the African for instance, who takes an oath by 
his fetich,^ " May this fetich slay me if I do 
not fulfil the contract " ; and in such cases we 
must regard the curse as a spell working by 

1 Dittenberger, Sylloge^\ vol. iii. 8I6. 
^ Post, Afrikanisck, Juruprud,, 2, p. 128. 


The Evolution of Prayer 199 

suggestion against oneself rather than as a 
prayer. 

Before considering Greek prayer proper, we 
may note as a last example of an ambiguous 
formula, standing midway as it seems between 
spell and prayer, the striking liturgical utter- 
ance of the old Dodonaean ritual, employed 
for an agricultural service: the priestesses 
chanted the refrain in two hexameters, the old 
metre of religion, " God was, God is, God will 
be, oh Great God ; the earth brings forth fruits, 
therefore call on mother earth."^ The resem- 
blance of this to the early English formula 
quoted above is striking enough. The first 
line belongs to an elevated religion and seems 
far removed from the region of magic ; but 
equally spiritual formulae concerning the 
nature and the attributes of God were used in 
the Zarathustrian and Babylonian liturgies for 
magical purposes, just as texts from the Bible 
and Koran have been. And the second line 
employs the same method as the Navajo 

1 Pans., 10, 12, 10. 


I go The Evolution of Religion 

spiritual atmosphere the adult catechumen 
or the initiated infant is brought And these 
facts of old-worid religion and religious logic 
cast a new light on the name-formulae which 
close most of the prayers of the Christian 
Church, and which are words of power to 
speed the prayer home; and though the 
modern consciousness may often be unaware 
of this mystic function of theirs, we may 
believe that it was more clearly recognised 
in the early days of Christianity, for in the 
apocryphal acts of St John we find a long 
list of mystical names and titles attached to 
Christ giving to the prayer much of the tone 
of an enchantment.^ 

Connected as it seems with this superstition 
about names is the belief that, in order to 
gain complete power over a human or divine 
personality, it is necessary to know their 
origin and to express what one knows about 
them in the charm: thus in the Kalevala 
the yoimg magician is taught the origin 

1 Von der Goltz^ Das Gebet, p. 353. 


The Evolution of Prayer 193 

haps the only survivmg fragment of Indo- 
Germanic poetry.^ Odin sings, "Bone to 
bone, blood to blood, limb to limb, as 
though they were glued together"; in a 
later Norwegian, and also in a Scottish 
version, it is Christ who heals the foal with 
the same magic words, strengthened however 
by the formula, "Heal in the Holy Ghost's 
name." And this useful medicine - charm 
was not forgotten by the Aryan Indians, for 
we find the words in the Atharva-Veda, " Fit 
together, hah- with hah-, fit together, skin 
with skin : thy blood, thy bone shall grow." ^ 
Neither god nor ghost was needed to help 
out the force of such incantations. But prob- 
ably some time before Christianity prayer had 
come to prevail over spell in the Teutonic 
North, for there are traces there of a certain 

^ The '^Merseburg charm/' old High German tenth- 
century MS. : cf. R. Chambers^ Fireside Stories, Edinburgh^ 
1842. My attention was called to the great antiquity of 
this Norse charm by Prof. Napier^ to whose kindness I owe 
these references. 

^ Sacred Books, xlii. p. 20. 

13 


194 The Evolution of Religion 

antagonism growing between magic and 
religion, which led to the condemnation of 
certam forms of magic.^ 

An interesting question arises about a 
prayer - charm used by the early English 
against sterility of the fields : " Hail be thou, 
Earth, Mother of Men, wax fertile in the 
embrace of God, fulfilled with fruit for the 
use of man."* This poetic utterance implies 
a veritable Upos ydfio^^ or holy marriage of 
earth and heaven in the Greek sense ; and 
reminds us vividly of the spell-formula, used 
in the Eleusinian Mysteries and descending 
from the period when the purpose of these 
was mainly agricultural, Yc Kvc, "Rain and 
Conceive," which was uttered by the mystes, 
who folded his arms and glanced up to the sky 
at the first word and down to the earth at 
the second : a spell-prayer for fertility and 
human increase. It is probably then correct 

1 Golther, op, cit,, pp. 647-648. 

^ In a pre-Conquest Cotton MS. in the British Museum, 
vide Grein's BibUothek der angeUachsischen Poesie : ed. 
Mtilcker^ vol. i. p. 31 6. 


The Evolution of Prayer 195 

to call this phrase of our ancestors, which is 
the only surviving fragment, so far as I am 
aware, of their pre-Christian liturgy, a spell- 
prayer that was efficacious by way of sugges- 
tion rather than of entreaty. 

Of the same ambiguous character was the 
old Roman chant of the priests of Mars, 
" Enos Lases juvate," " Help us, O spirits of 
our ancestors," repeated with the iteration 
common in enchantments and accompanied 
with dancing and with the utterance of the 
word "triumpe." From the higher point of 
view the Roman prayers that have come 
down to us are barren and dull; the well- 
known liturgical archive containing Rome's 
address to Jupiter in the critical days of the 
Hannibalic war is a wary and cleverly drawn 
legal document, intended to bind the god 
as well as the State.^ In fact the spiritual 
side of the old Roman character has left 
no trace of itself in any ritual or liturgy 
of which we have record. The prayer of 

1 Livy, 22, 10. 


196 The Evolution of Religion 

Cato's that has been preserved is merely 
materialistic.^ 

We expect much more from Greece, and in 
some measure we are not disappointed. Spell- 
ritual was no doubt always much in vogue, 
especially for the purposes of agriculture and 
purification : we hear of certain " magicians " 
or fidyoL of Cleonae who averted hailstorms 
with incantations and the shedding of their 
own blood.^ And a solemn part of the State 
liturgy in Greece was a conunination service, 
which pronounced a curse on certain offences 
against the State. The religious curse is an 
interesting phenomenon of which it is not easy 
to give briefly a full and exact anthropo- 
logical account ; it is taken up by ihe higher 
religions, but it by no means originated in 
them, belonging to the sphere of spell rather 
than of prayer, and working out its effect 
by means of magic suggestion. Even the 

1 De Re Rustica^ 139, 141 : Wordsworth, Fragments and 
Specimens of Early Latin, p. 335. 

2 Clemens, Strom,, p. 754, Pott. 


The Evolution of Prayer 197 

Jewish service, which we still use on Ash 
Wednesday, employs curse-formulae in which 
there is no immediate reference to Gk)d, and 
they may have been regarded originally as 
having an mdependent efficacy. This was 
certainly the case in Greece, for the curse was 
itself personified as an independent, personal 
power; and the Erinyes themselves, in some 
degree the personal embodiments of the curse, 
work their effect on the victim by singing a 
spell-song, according to iEschylus, which binds 
his soul and withers him away.^ And the 
many private "devotiones" or "dirae" that 
have come down to us from Greek antiquity, 
written usually on leaden tablets and conse- 
crating the enemy to the powers of the lower 
world, employ indeed an appeal to these powers 
that may be interpreted as prayer, but their 
essential quality is magical, and they certainly 
were supposed to operate as spells against the 
individual, while even the divinities to whom 
they are addressed appear to be constrained 

1 Eumen., SS2. 


198 The Evolution of Religion 

rather than entreated. In one interesting 
example of the first century a.d., found in 
^gina,^ of Hellenic -Christian or possibly 
Judaic origin, the curse takes on the form of a 
prayer for righteous vengeance — " I call on the 
Highest God, the Lord of all spirits and of 
all flesh, before whom every soul this day is 
humbled with supplication, against those who 
have treacherously slain or poisoned the unfor- 
tunate Heracleia." In the Greek legal pro- 
cedure a curse was sometimes uttered against 
oneself if one forswore oneself or if one 
was guilty of the charge; and here as in 
similar cases in Christian jurisprudence the 
curse is an invocation of the high god who 
will punish perjury ; but we find it similarly 
employed in the animistic stage of religion, by 
the African for instance, who takes an oath by 
his fetich,^ " May this fetich slay me if I do 
not fulfil the contract " ; and in such cases we 
must regard the curse as a spell working by 

1 Dittenberger, Sylloge^\ vol. iii. 8I6. 
^ Post, Afrikanisck. Juruprud,, 2, p. 128. 


The Evolution of Prayer 199 

suggestion against oneself rather than as a 
prayer. 

Before considering Greek prayer proper, we 
may note as a last example of an ambiguous 
formula, standing midway as it seems between 
spell and prayer, the striking liturgical utter- 
ance of the old Dodonaean ritual, employed 
for an agricultural service : the priestesses 
chanted the refrain in two hexameters, the old 
metre of religion, " God was, God is, God will 
be, oh Great God ; the earth brings forth fruits, 
therefore call on mother earth."^ The resem- 
blance of this to the early English formula 
quoted above is striking enough. The first 
line belongs to an elevated religion and seems 
far removed from the region of magic ; but 
equally spiritual formulae concerning the 
nature and the attributes of God were used in 
the Zarathustrian and Babylonian liturgies for 
magical purposes, just as texts from the Bible 
and Koran have been. And the second line 
employs the same method as the Navajo 

1 Pans., 10, 12, 10. 


200 The Evolution of Religion 

Sharman employed, for it states that the 
divinity is doing that very thing which it 
is the object of the liturgy to bring about. 
The appeal to mother earth which is enjoined 
may have been merely the invocation of her 
name, a spell at least as much as a prayer. 
The same may be said of the other popular 
refrains chanted by the husbandmen of ancient 
Greece to obtain good crops or fair weather — 
'' Give us big sheaves, sheaves," to Demeter,^ 
or " Come forth, dear sun," to the sim-god.^ 

The public prayers of Greece, those actually 
used in the temple-service and the official 
liturgies, have not been preserved, and in this 
respect the Greek record is very barren com- 
pared with the Babylonian, Vedic, or Iranian. 
But though the actual formulae are lost, we can 
gather some impression from the inscriptions 
and other literary sources as to the objects of 
prayer. The Athenian state prayed, " For the 

^ ttXciotov oSAov t€i, iovAov i€i, Athenee., 6l8 £. 

* The song sung by the children, probably an old 
weather-spell, called <f>ikrf\iaSi with the refrain, i(€x' ^ ^"X' 
fXic, Pollux, 9, 123, Athens., 619 B. 


The Evolution of Prayer 191 

of things in order that he may know the 
proper enchantment against them, and a long 
account of the origin of iron, regarded as a 
demoniac substance, occurs in the word-magic 
used to cure the woimd it inflicted. Hence 
we may accoimt for the descriptive or, so to 
speak, biographical element in charms that 
are on the borderland of prayer. The 
exorciser of evil dreams in the Atharva-Veda 
prays or sings thus : " We know, oh sleep, thy 
birth ; thou art the son of the divine women- 
folk, the instrument of Death. Thou art the 
ender, thou art Death. Thus do we know 
thee, oh sleep: do thou, oh sleep, protect us 
from evil dreams."^ And in the worship of 
Agni the beUef is expressed that " the prayers 
fill thee with power and strengthen thee," 
and this is at once followed by an account 
of his nature and origin.^ Is it then too 
far-fetched to trace the survival of this old- 


^ Hymns of the Atharva-Veda (Sacred Books, etc., xlii. 
p. 167). 

^ Fedic Hymns^ pt. ii. p. 391. 


192 The Evolution of Religion 

world thought, rooted as it is in the magic 
of the word and the statement, m the promi- 
nence given to the dogmatic biographical 
statement in our own liturgy? We regard 
it as a confession of faith : it may also be 
regarded as an expression of the worshipper's 
knowledge of the divine personality, whereby 
he raises himself into communion with it 
and thus gains power for his prayer.^ 

Considering now in a more general survey 
the liturgies of the nations that have attained 
culture, we might begin with our own fathers. 
But so little that touches the inner life of their 
pre-Christian religion has been preserved, that 
probably not much material for our present pur- 
pose is to be discovered from the records. We 
know that they were given to the emplojrment 
of the rune or the spell, the rival or the parent 
of prayer ; and one of these, used by Odin to 
heal the sprained foot of Baldur's foal, is per- 

^ Cy! a formula in an Egyptian papyrus published by 
Kenyon (122, v. IS), ^^ I know thee, Hermes, who thou 
art and whence thou art and what city is the city of 
Hermes" : quoted by Ausfeld, op, cU, p. 524, n. 1. 


The Evolution of Prayer 193 

haps the only surviving fragment of Indo- 
Germanic poetry.^ Odin sings, "Bone to 
bone, blood to blood, Umb to limb, as 
though they were glued together"; in a 
later Norwegian, and also in a Scottish 
version, it is Christ who heals the foal with 
the same magic words, strengthened however 
by the formula, "Heal in the Holy Ghost's 
name." And this useful medicine - charm 
was not forgotten by the Aryan Indians, for 
we find the words in the Atharva- Veda, " Fit 
together, hair with hair, fit together, skin 
with skin: thy blood, thy bone shall grow."^ 
Neither god nor ghost was needed to help 
out the force of such incantations. But prob- 
ably some time before Christianity prayer had 
come to prevail over spell in the Teutonic 
North, for there are traces there of a certain 

^ The '^Merseburg charm/* old High German tenth- 
century MS. : cf, R. Chambers, Fireside Stories, Edinburgh, 
1842. My attention was called to the great antiquity of 
this Norse charm by Prof. Napier, to whose kindness I owe 
these references. 

^ Sacred Books, xlii. p. 20. 

13 


204 The Evolution of Religion 

be taken as typical of the average ethical 
feeling of their respective periods : the former 
petitions for "health, bodily strength, good 
feeling among friends, safety in war, and 
wealth " ; ^ the latter for " wealth, concord, 
righteousness in word and deed,"^ 
/^Meantime the philosophers from Socrates 
onwards were insisting on the more spiritual 
view of prayer, preaching that, in the first place, 
there was no need to particularise one's needs 
in one's petitions to God, for there was danger 
lest one should pray for what is injurious ; in 
the second place, that prayer should look only 
to the spiritual, not the material lifeT^ And we 
owe to this theory some striking utterances 
that must rank high in the literature of ethical 
religion : such as the prayer of Socrates, Som^tc 
fioL KoX^ yeveaOai, TavhoOa/^ " Grant me to be- 
come noble of heart "^ ; of Apollonius of Tyana, 
& d€.o\ BoCrjTe fioi ra 6(f}€iX6ii€i/af " Oh gods, grant 
me that which I deserve " * ; the longer poetic 

1 (Econ., 11, 8. 2 j)g Superst., p. 116 D. 

8 Plat., Pkcedr., 279 B. * Philostr., FU. ApoU., 4, 41. 


The Evolution of Prayer 205 

formula quoted by Plato, " King Zeus, grant 
us the good whether we pray for it or not, but 
evil kieep from us though we pray for it " ^ : and 
with these we may compare the dictum of 
Epictetus ^ : " In praying to the divine powers 
ask for divine things, things free from fleshly or 
earthly circumstance," Other expressions of 
the Stoic sect are equally striking for the spirit 
of fervent acquiescence and resignation that in- 
spires them. Here is the prayer of Epictetus : 
" Do with me what thou wilt : my will is thy 
will : I appeal not against thy judgments " * ; 
and a poetic version of this has come down to 
us from earlier stoicism — " Lead me, O God, 
and I will follow, willingly if I am wise, but if 
not willingly I still must follow." A prayer re- 
corded in the apocrjrphal Acts of St Thomas * 
seems almost an echo of these : " 1 go whither 
Thou wilt, oh Jesus : Thy will be done." 
When the best thought of the age had 

1 Plat., Alcib., 2, p. 143 A. 

2 Epictet. (Schenkle), p. 479. ^ Id., p. 158. 
* Von der Goltz, Das Gebet, p. 292. 


2o6 The Evolution of Religion 

reached to such a point of spiritual abstraction, 
it was natural that the same question should 
arise as arose among the more philosophic 
adherents of early Christianity, whether special 
prayers were justifiable at all. It seems that 
at some period the Pythagorean school were 
inclined to forbid prayer altogether,^ for the 
reason that God knew better how to give than 
man knew how to ask; but the later Neo- 
Platonism discovered an ideal raison-d^Hre 
for the practice, on the ground that it raised 
the mind to direct communion and converse 
with God ; and this view is developed at 
great length by Proclus.* 

This sketch of the Greek phenomena that 
belong to our subject may close with an 
example of that perfervid mysticism that 
marks the liturgies of latest paganism: the 

1 Diog. Laert. 8, l6, 7 : yet, according to Clemens, "The 
Pythagoreans enjoin that prayer should be uttered aloud, so 
that one might never pray for what one would be ashamed 
that others should hear," Strom,, p. 641, Pott. 

2 Porphyry ap. Proclus in Tim,, 2, 64 B : Procl. in Tim,, 
2^ 65 : Sallustius, De DOs et Mundo, c. l6 : cf. Max. Tyr., 
Disseri. xi. 


The Evolution of Prayer 207 

following is the close of a long address to 
Asclepios — an Hellenic deity attracted here 
into the Egyptian circle— found m the treatise 
called AsclepioSy attributed to Apuleius : ^ " We 
rejoice in thy divine salvation, because thou 
hast shown thyself wholly to us : we rejoice 
that thou hast deigned to consecrate us to 
eternity, while we are still in these mortal 
bodies. We have known thee, oh true life of 
the life of man, . . . Adoring thy goodness, 
we make this our only prayer . • • that thou 
wouldst be willing to keep us all our lives in 
the love of thy knowledge." Portions at least 
of this prayer, which was the prelude to a 
communion supper, would not surprise us if 
we found it in a Christian liturgy.* 

1 Vide ArcMvfur vergl, Religionsmssensck,, 1904^ p. 395, 
^ The remarkable ethical fragment of an unknown 
philosopher, Eusebios, in Ionic dialect, quoted by Stobseus, 
TTcpl operas, § 85 (vol. i. p. 89, Meineke), contains moral 
aspirations that strikingly resemble New Testament 
doctrine, and may possibly have been intended as a prayer, 
but it contains no appeal to a divinity : he may belong to 
the Neo-Platonic sect, vide Orelli, Opusc, Grasc. Sentent,^ 
vol. ii. p. 728. 


2o8 The Evolution of Religion 

It will be convenient next to glance at the 
records of the other great branches of the 
ancient Aryan world, the Vedic Indians and 
the Iranians. One does not read long in the 
sacred books of India without attaining the 
conviction that the highest religion of the Vedas 
was deeply penetrated with sacerdotal magic ; 
which was so far from losing its hold in the 
later period that it imprisoned the religious 
thought, and the later Brahmanism was cap- 
able of the belief that without the spell of the 
sacrifice the sun could not run his course in 
heaven. And the recital of spells forms a 
great part of the Vedic ritual. Thus the 
hymns say of the fire-god Agni, " The thought- 
ful men find Agni when they have recited 
the spells " ; and the gods themselves, like the 
Norse divinities, work by spells: "Agni up- 
holds the sky by his efficacious spells." ^ Yet 
the early record gives us also copious illustra- 
tion of real prayer, and occasionally of a very 
exalted tone. It is true, as we should expect, 

^ Fedic Hymns ^ pt. ii. p. 6l. 


The Evolution of Prayer 209 

that material and temporal advantages are by 
far the predominant objects of the petition: 
the head of the household prays for wealth, 
offspring, victory in battle or the races ; with 
rare exceptions, the prayers are personal and 
private rather than political, and are thus in 
marked contrast to the Hellenic ; yet we have 
a few that are evidently proffered for the 
community,^ and at times the deity is peti- 
tioned to grant an abundant supply of valiant 
men. But even in the few prayers that reflect 
the political life of the State, the individualistic 
spirit is apt to appear. We have a curious 
example of a petition to Indra to make a 
man powerful in the political assembly: 
" In this entire gathering render, O Indra, 
me successfiil," and this is combined with a 
naive spell whereby the politician endeavours 
to mesmerise the whole meeting: he names 
the assembly — as our Speaker might name a 
recalcitrant member — " We know thy name, 

^ E.g., ^^ Protect our people all around with those un- 
deceived guardians of thine, oh Agni/' ib,, p. 158. 

14 


2IO The Evolution of Religion 

oh assembly. ... Of them that are sitting 
together I take to myself the power and the 
imderstanding " : and again, " With my mind 
do I seize your minds." ^ But even when 
the prayer is personal and materiahstic a real 
fervour and a genial poetic freshness is often 
to be found. Here is a beautiful prelude 
to a prayer for long Ufe proffered to the 
ancient heaven-god: "Many dawns have not 
yet dawned: grant me to Uve in them. 
O Varuna." And often the worshipper rises 
above mere material aspirations, as in such 
appeals to Agni as the following: "May we 
be well-doers before the gods."^ "Give us 
not up, oh Agni, to want of thought."* 
" Mayest thou bestow splendour, renown, and 
(wise) mind upon such mortals as satisfy thee 
with refreshment, oh Agni."* "Drive far 
from us senselessness and anguish: drive far 
all iU-wUl from whom thou attendest."* 


1 Atharva-Veda (Sacred Books, vol. xlii. p. 1S8). 

2 Fedic Hymiis, pt. ii. p. 876. 

8 76., p. 273. * 76., p. 383. » 7&., p. S5^, 


The Evolution of Prayer 211 

At times also the hymns reveal a deep 
consciousness of sin and a desire for divine 
forgiveness. "Through want of strength; 
thou strong and bright god, have I gone 
astray. Have mercy, Ahnighty, have 
mercy !"^ "Agni, drive away from us sin, 
which leads us astray," * " By the earth's great- 
ness, oh Agni, forgive us even committed sm, 
that we may be great."* "Whatever sin we 
have committed against thee in thoughtless- 
ness, men as we are, make thou us sinless 
before Aditi."* Yet we may suspect that 
the term sin is not always used in these 
prayers in its modem ethical sense, not for 
instance in the prayer, " From the sins which 
knowingly or unknowingly we have com- 
mitted, do ye, all gods, of one accord release 
us " ; ^ and the primitive concept on which 
the old magic of sin-transference was based 
survives in such passages as the following: 

^ Quoted by Prof. Tylor, Primitive Culture, vol. ii. p. 339, 
from Rig Veda, vii. 89> 3. 

2 Vedic Hymns, pt. ii. p. 181. « Ih., p. 249. 

* 76., p. 354. 5 Atharva-Veda, p. 164. 


212 The Evolution of Religion 

" Pass far away, oh sin of the mind : why dost 
thou utter things not to be uttered? Pass 
away, I love thee not: to the trees and the 
forests go on ! " ^ " Enter into the rays, into 
smoke, oh sin ; go into the vapours, and into 
the fog."^ The context discloses only an 
indirect appeal to a personal deity, though 
the term sin in the former passage is clearly 
applied to what we should call moral offences. 
In the Vedic ritual, then, we find a pure and 
spiritual form of prayer; yet a certain spell- 
power may attach even to the highest types, 
for we find not infrequently the conception 
that not only the power of the worshipper but 
the power of the deity also is nourished and 
strengthened by prayer ; * and the prayer itself 
is usually accompanied by a potent act With 
this aspect of Vedic prayers we may associate 

1 Atharva-Veda, p. l6S. * 76., p. l65. 

^ '^ Bring ye forward an ancient mighty speech to Agni. 
. . . May our prayers increase Agni^'' Vedic Hi/mns, 
pt. ii. p. 259: cf. p. S91, ''The prayers fill thee (oh 
Agni) with power and strengthen thee^ like great rivers 
the Sindhu." 


The Evolution of Prayer 213 

the fact that Agni, the fire-god, appears as the 
chief divmity to whom they are addressed ; for 
his ritual is purificatory, and the prayers are 
thus based on a liturgy of purification which 
stimulates the mental or spiritual force of the 
worshipper. 

We may now turn to another great Aryan 
stock, the Iranian, whose earUer reUgion 
culminated in the Zarathustrian system. The 
relation of spell to prayer is, on the whole, 
the same in the Zend-Avesta as we find it in 
the Vedic hymns, a real spell can accompany 
a real prayer, and the text of the prayer itself 
becomes a most potent charm. The "sacer- 
dotal" physician, who, as we have seen, occupied 
a higher rank in the Zarathustrian estimate 
than the scientific practitioner, offers first a 
genuine prayer to Ahura-Mazda for spiritual 
strength to deal with the disease — " Give us, 
Ahura, that powerful sovereignty by the 
strength of which we may smite down the 
drug (the demon)." Fraught with this 
mesmeric power he then directs his spell 


214 The Evolution of Religion 

against the sickness - demon : "To thee, oh 
Sickness, I say — A vaunt 1 To thee, oh Death, 
I say — Avauntl"^ And in the ritual of 
purification, which closely resembles the 
system of therapeutics, the formulae of prayers 
of the most exalted type in the sacred books 
are used, not as prayers, but as cathartic spells.* 
It is not hard to discern the steps that lead 
jfrom this grade of thought to the highest at 
which the religious speculation of the Zara- 
thustrian arrived. The uttered Word of God 
is given a supernatural cosmic force ; and the 
prophet pronounces that this utterance of the 
" Holy Word is of such a nature that if all 
the corporeal and living world should learn it, 
and learning hold fast to it, they should be 
redeemed jfrom their mortality."* And we 
can understand why a large part of the Zara- 
thustrian liturgy should be devoted to the 
recital of formulae which are statements of the 

1 Sacred Books, etc., vol. iv. (Zend-Avesta, pt. i, p. 228). 

« 76., pp. 145-147. 

* Sacred Books, etc., vol. xxxi. {Zend-Avesta, pt. iii. p. 262.) 


The Evolution of Prayer 215 

Mazdean faith. Before rising in the morning 
and retiring at night, the pious Persian was 
recommended to say, " All good thoughts, all 
good words, all good deeds I do willingly: 
all evil thoughts, all evils words, all evil deeds 
I do unwillingly."^ It is interesting to com- 
pare with our own creed the following Mazdean 
confession : " I confess myself a Mazdayasnian 
of Zarathustra's order : I celebrate my praises 
for good thoughts, good words, and good 
deeds. . . . With chanting praises I present all 
good thoughts, good words, and good deeds, 
and with rejection I repudiate all evil 
thoughts and words and deeds. Here I give 
to you, oh ye Bountiful Immortals, sacrifice 
and homage with the mind,^ with words, deeds, 
and my entire person, yea, I offer to you the 
flesh of my very body."* The formulae of 
confession, as well as other parts of this liturgy, 
are penetrated with the idea of a moral-theo- 

^ Zend-Avesta, pt. i. p. 246. 

^ Cf, the Grreek sentiment^ Ovaia apCfmi yvw/irf 6ya0riy 
Joann. Damascen.^ Stur, Par,, tit. ix. p. 640. 
^ Zend-Avesta,, pt. iii. p. 247. 


2i6 The Evolution of Religion 

logical dualism to which our Christian theology 
has been indirectly deeply indebted. The 
Mazdean proclaims his detestation of the 
Daevas, and of Angra-Mainyii, the evil god. 
"Taught by Ahura, I drive away Angra- 
Mainyu from this house, this borough " ; such 
words are "victorious, most healing,"^ and 
could be used as the recitation of our creed 
and paternoster have been used, as veritable 
spells against the evil power or demon. But 
in comparing the spell-prayers of the Persian 
with the Vedic, we are struck with the superi- 
ority of the former liturgy in one respect, 
that here the spell is only brought to bear on 
the demon, not on the highest god ; the 
prayer increases the spiritual force of the 
worshipper but does not constrain Ahura. 

And the Iranian prayers appear to rise 
above the Vedic in the enthusiasm of the idea 
of righteousness that pervades them, and in 
the conviction that the beUever can aid Ahura- 
Mazda in the continual struggle against the 

^ Zend'AvestOy pt. i. p. 138. 


The Evolution of Prayer 217 

power of evil and in helping towards the final 
establishment of the righteous kingdom. He 
prays that, "Through the good thought and 
the holiness of him who offers thee the due 
meed of praise thou mayest, oh Lord, make 
the world of Resurrection appear at thy will, 
under thy sovereign rule."^ " May we be such 
as those who brmg on this great Renovation."* 
" May we help to bring on the good govern- 
ment of Ahura, which is the best for us at 
every present hour."* " Be righteousness life- 
strong and clothed with body. In that realm 
which shines with splendour as the sun, let 
piety be present, and may she, through the 
indwelling of thy good mind, give us blessings 
in reward for deeds."* In fact the greater 
number of the prayers are strikingly spiritual, 
and for spiritual, not material blessings. The 
prophet asks Ahura, " How man may become 
most like unto thee?"* and prays for "aids 
of grace, beseeching what in accordance with 

1 Pt. i. p. 147. 2 pt. iii. pp. 33-34. 

8 Ih,, p. 179. * Ih., p. 106. 5 Ih., p. 49. 


2i8 The Evolution of Religion 

thy wished-for aim is best."^ And the prayer 
is sometimes directed to abstract moral powers, 
emanations of Ahura : " If the Mazda- Ahura 
and Righteousness and Pious Concord be 
invokable, I implore through the good mind a 
kingdom for myself, through whose increase 
we may conquer the Lie." The kingdom is 
here the " Desirable Kingdom of Righteous- 
ness."^ Certainly the Mazdean kingdom was 
not of this world, and the Zarathustrian 
reUgion is one of the least materialistic that 
the world has known ; its chief moral weakness 
being, as we have seen, its bondage to ritualistic 
purity. We may note in conclusion, as show- 
ing the continuity of the national spirit, the 
pronouncement of a Persian Christian, Bishop 
Aphrahat of East Sjoia, that the only valid 
object of prayer was purity of heart.* 

Many of the phenomena that we have been 
noting among the Aryan races confront us 

1 Pt. iii., p. 170. 

^ Archivf, Religioruwiss,, 1904, p. 395. 

3 Von der Goltz, Das Gebet, p. 288. 


The Evolution of Prayer 219 

again when we turn to the Chaldsean-Baby- 
lonian liturgies. Here also there appears no 
real antagonism between spell and prayer, 
magic and religion.^ Spell-formulae are used 
and accompanied with a ritual of purification 
to drive out the evil spirits of sickness ; and 
the highest hymns containing real prayers 
can be employed as texts for magic purposes ; 
even the gods themselves work by magic, and 
Marduk himself is invoked as the arch- 
magician.* And the idea that the prayer 
could in some sense exercise compulsion on 
the god appears in an anecdote told by 
Porphjrry about a Chaldaean who was an expert 
in " purifications of the soul : but found his 
efforts thwarted because another man who was 
powerful in the same art had, by means of 
mystic prayers, bound over the powers he had 
invoked not to grant his demands."' Yet by 
the side of all this we find often an exalted 


^ Jastrow^ Religion BabyUmiens tv, Assyriens, vol. i. pp. 
391-898, 428, 427. 

2/6., p. 497. * S. Aug., De Civ. Dei,, 10, 9. 


2 20 The Evolution of Religion 

type of prayer, with spiritual and fervent 
expressions of homage ; and the religious law 
that "prayer absolves from sin" is given as 
part of Marduk's revelation to man.^ A large 
number of the records contain the liturgies 
used by the kings, and while victory, health, 
and long life, the permanence of the dynasty 
are the more usual objects of the petition, the 
deeper ethical tone is often heard. The 
following are a few examples of the higher 
aspirations of the Babylonian reUgion. The 
founder of the new Babylonian kingdom has 
recorded his convictions for the guidance of his 
successor: "Marduk sees through the lips, 
sees the heart : he who keeps true to Bel and 
the son of Bel will last for ever."* One of the 
greatest prayers in this or any other Uturgical 
collection is that which Nebukadnezar made to 
Marduk on his accession :* " Oh Eternal Ruler, 
Lord of All ... lead the King by the right 
way ... I am . . . the work of thy hand : 

^ King, Babylonian ReUgion, p. 83. 

2 Jastrow, op, cU., p. 401. * 76., p. 402. 


The Evolution of Prayer 221 

after thy great mercy which thou showest to 
all, oh Ijord, grant that thy high majesty may 
show compassion upon me: set in my heart 
the fear of thy Godhead : grant me what thou 
deemest best : for thou it is that hast created 
my life." This is scarcely the Nebukadnezar 
whom we once thought we knew. There is 
also a pathetic interest attaching to the prayer 
of Nabonnedos to the god Schamasch for his son 
Belsazar : ^ " Prolong the days of Belsazar, my 
first-bom son — ^may he commit no sin." The 
king Nabonnedos prays also to Marduk : " May 
I rule as king according to thy wish ... let 
me not in my pride lose knowledge of thee, 
for it is thou that hast chosen me out." ^ The 
following phrases in a prayer to Marduk of an 
unknown ruler are still more striking : " Oh 
Marduk, great Lord ... let me behold thy God- 
head, let me attain my heart's desire : set right- 
eousness on my lips and grace in my heart." ^ 

^ Jastrow, op, cU,, p. 408. ^ lb,, p. 411. 

* lb, J p. 501 : the elevated tone of the old Babylonian 
royal liturgy was still preserved under the later Seleukid 
rule, vide p. 414. 


222 The Evolution of Religion 

Among the attributes of the gods there is a 
fervent recognition of their mercy and com- 
passionateness : Marduk is ^^the god full of 
mercy, who loves to quicken that which is 
dead " ; ^ and Ischtar, the goddess, is invoked 
as "the helper of the oppressed, oh thou 
endowed with majesty ; thou who raisest 
the fallen and exaltest the trodden under 
foot."* And the same idea reappears in a 
hynm to another goddess of like character 
with Ischtar, in which we catch the tones of 
a high religious poetry of homage:* "Oh 
strong and majestic, highest of the goddesses, 
radiant star . . . strongest of the goddesses 
whose robe is the light: thou who dost 
course through heaven and engirdle the 
earth . . . dealing punishment and plead- 
ing for men, rewarding the just, leading 
the wanderer, overthrowing the enemy who 
feareth not thy Godhead, protecting the 
captive, taking the weak by the hand — ^be 

1 Jastrow, op, cit,, p. 501. ^ lb., p. 533. 

8 lb., p. 536. 


The Evolution of Prayer 223 

gracious unto thy servant, who calls upon 
thy name with grace." 

This brief illustrative selection may close 
with the quotation of a prayer or hymn of 
praise to Marduk, perhaps the most remark- 
able among those that have as yet been 
translated:^ "The Lord, peerless in might, 
the King of grace, the Ruler of the lands, that 
bringeth peace in heaven, that through his 
glance overthroweth the mighty. Lord, thy 
seat is Babylon, thy crown Borsippa. Thy 
thought, oh Lord, passeth over the wide 
heavens, and with thine eyes thou beholdest 
the affliction of men, through the anger of thy 
countenance thou spreadest lamentation, and 
thou takest him captive who regardeth thee 
not and setteth himself up against thee. 
Through thy gracious coimtenance thou 
showest men favour, thou lettest them see 
the light and they proclaim thy Righteous- 
ness. Oh Lord of the lands. Light of Izizi, 
thou who proclaimest grace, who is it whose 

1 Jastrow, op. cit,, p. 509. 


224 The Evolution of Religion 

mouth doth not tell of thy Righteousness, who 
doth not praise thy majesty, and glori£y thy 
lordship? . . . Look down upon the hands 
raised in prayer to thee. Grant favour to thy 
city Babylon . . . and turn thy countenance 
upon thy house, and give help to the sons of 
Babylon and all thy people." 

With all their spells and their magic, the 
higher minds of the Babylonians knew how 
to pray, and the fervent and exalted tones of 
such liturgies remind us of the religious poetry 
of Israel. And it is interesting to note that 
among the few deities of Babylon whose ideal 
reached to such a point of ethical development, 
the moon-god Sin appears, who gave his name 
to Sinai, and who has been thought by some to 
have had some original affinity with the God 
of Israel.^ 

As regards the Uturgies of Egypt, so far as 
I have been able with very limited oppor- 
tunities to examine them, the superstition of 
the spell lay so heavy on the Egyptian mind, 

^ JastroW| op, dt., pp. 439-440. 


The Evolution of Prayer 225 

that prayer does not seem able to extricate 
itself jfrom its prepossession. Not only do the 
deities work by means of spells and the magic 
of their names, but the worshipper uses the 
same means to work upon them; and the 
prayer that accompanies the spell seems 
usually to savour of self-confidence and 
command. At least this is the impression 
one gathers from what is published concerning 
the Book of the Dead and the ritual practised 
to secure the happiness of the deceased. By 
utterance of words of enchantment over 
pictures, the soul of the dead becomes divine.^ 
The magic word helps to transfer the power 
of the deity into the fetich, and this with the 
word written upon it is placed on the body 
of the dead : for instance, an amulet with the 
words, "May the blood of Isis . . . and the 
word of power of Isis be mighty to protect 
this mighty one " ; * a terra-cotta lamp of the 
Greco-Roman period, carved with the symbol 

1 Budge, Egyptian Magic, pp. 108, 110, 120. 
2/6., p. 127. 

16 


\ 


226 The Evolution of Religion 

of the frog-headed goddess Heqt, and bearing 
the words, " I am the Resurrection." ^ On an 
object placed under the head of the deceased 
to mamtam the warmth of the body, we find 
the following words, supposed to be addressed 
by the spirit to Amen:^ "I am a perfect 
spirit among the companions of Ra, and I 
have gone in and come forth among the 
perfect souls . . . grant thou unto me the 
things which my body needeth, and heaven 
for my soul and a hidden place for my 
mummy." "May the god who himself is 
hidden and whose face is concealed, who 
shineth upon the world in his forms of exist- 
ence and in the underworld, grant that my 
soul may live for ever."^ Here we have the 
statement of a conviction that gains its 
assurance from magic, followed by prayer. 
It seems that the Egyptian prayed to the 
gods, as if by such prayer he might gain 
immortality, but that he trusted equaQy to 

^ Budge, Egyptian Magic ^ p. 63. 
2/6., p. 119. 8/6., p. 119. 


The Evolution of Prayer 227 

magical means, to pictures and words of power 
from the sacred texts, and employed at once 
the methods of religion and of enchantment.^ 

Looking at the Christian rehgion, we should 
find it hard to give a succinct and accurate 
account of these phenomena in the various 
stages of its history. We may be able to 
set forth the theories and ritual-practices of 
the various churches and compare them with 
what we find elsewhere; but it is more 
difficult to analyse accurately the religious 
psychology, the thought and feeling which 
accompanies the ritual : the quality of the 
mental state would depend partly on the 
ancestral conditions and the strength of the 
ancestral instincts of the individual. And 
the teaching of the most spiritual Christian 
philosophy has not been able to prevent 
some touches of the old-world magic from 
contaminating the worship. The theory of 
the leading thinkers among the early Christian 
fathers agreed, as we have seen, with the 

^ Budge^ Egyptian Mtigic, p. 184. 


22 8 The Evolution of Religion 

pronouncement of later Greek philosophy. 
Both for Clemens, who gives us the earliest 
theory of Christian prayer, without finding, 
however, a clear logical system, and for Origen, 
the final justification of prayer was com- 
munion with God, TO avaKpaOrjvaL rS Tn/cvftart,^ 
ofiiXia wpo^ Tov deov tj ^vxi*^ And Clemens 
maintains that the true gnostic, he who has 
the true knowledge of God, "works himself 
with God in his prayer so as to attain per- 
fection."* The gnostic of Clemens, then, is 
not purely petitionary in his prayer; by his 
spontaneous self - projection he contributes 
something himself to the attainment of the 
end he prays for; and, as I have ventured 
to suggest above, we may discern in this 
theory the meeting-point of the more primi- 
tive and the more exalted religious views. 

Meantime the actual heretic sect of the 
gnostics were applying much of the old magic 

1 Origen, ircpt €u;^9, c. 10, 2. 

2 Clemens, Strom,, vii., ch. 7, § 39, p. 854, Pott. 
8 lb,, § 38, p. 853, Pott. 


% 


The Evolution of Prayer 229 

under new names and new texts, and did not 
even care to discard wholly the old spell- 
nomenclature.^ And even in the orthodox 
churches, as we have seen, the mystic power 
and liturgical use of the name has continued, 
being the inheritance of a different religious 
world from that with which we are familiar 
or of which we are conscious. We may also 
legitimately compare many of the ritual acts 
which accompany prayer, for instance in the 
earlier and later Roman Church, with the 
suggestive or mimetic religious actions of less 
advanced cults. One of the most interesting 
examples that may be quoted is the description 
of the blessing of the baptismal water on the 
eve of the Epiphany, a custom prevalent in 
the earlier Church of Rome : * the priest, while 
praying to God to sanctify the water, dipped a 
crucifix thrice into it, recalling m his prayer 
the miracle described in Exodus, the sweeten- 
ing of the bitter water with wood; then 

^ Fide Von der Goltz^ op. cU.^ p. 310. 

^ Vide Usener, Archivfur ReUgioMtviss., 1904, p. 29S, 


230 The Evolution of Religion 

followed antiphonal singing describing Christ's 
baptism in Jordan, which sanctified the water. 
We appear to have here a combination of 
the great t3rpical forms of the immemorial 
religious energy, prayer pure and simple, the 
potent use of the spiritually charged object, 
the fetich (in this case the crucifix), and an 
intoned or chanted narrative which has the 
spell- value of suggestion.^ 

What maintained the use of the spell- 
prayer in fiill vigour throughout the earlier 
and medieval epochs of Christendom, even in 
the orthodox ritual, was chiefly the practice 
of exorcism and the belief in demons and 
demoniac possession ; and the legal institution 
of the ordeal contributed also to its main- 
tenance. As modern society has abandoned 
such institutions, and the modem mind is no 
longer possessed with demonology, so in the 
modem worship prayer has become more and 
more purified from the associations of the 
spell ; the traces that remain of the latter are 

1 Vide supra, pp. 181-182. 


^ 


The Evolution of Prayer 231 

faint and usually unintelligible to the modem 
worshipper. And on the other side there is 
a progressive tendency beginning to be felt, 
making for a reform of our liturgy in respect 
of the objects for which prayer should be 
proffered. But in this respect, as the com- 
parison has shown, we cannot be said to have 
advanced as yet beyond many of the old-world 
religions. 

The special subjects of these last two 
lectures, the history of purification and prayer, 
have only been presented in an inadequate 
sketch. The full and exhaustive treatment 
of either would serviceably fill a gap in the 
library of comparative religion. But they 
have served my present purpose, if they have 
been able to illustrate and to some extent test 
the value of the comparative study of the 
various theologies of mankind. 


Index 


Aion, 36, 37. 

Anthropology, value of, 5 : 
occasional defects in its 
method of treating re- 
ligious problems^ 12-17: 
suggested improvements in 
method, 17-23. 

Apostolic succession^ 49-50. 

Babylonian spells and prayers^ 

218-224. 
Baptism^ a cathartic ritual^ 

156-158: of infants, 56- 

57. 
Buddhism, ideas concerning 

purity, 107. 

Celibacy of priesthood, 154- 
156. 

Christianity, comparison with 
earlier " Mediterranean " 
religions in mythology, 25- 
30 ; in terminology, 30-39 ; 
external S3anbols, 39-48 ; 
institutions and organisa- 
tion, 48-58 ; in dogma and 
belief, 59-75 : vide Prayer. 


Collideriani, 72. 

Comparative religion, method 
of study, 81-85 : short 
survey of its groMrth, 1-6. 

Confession, 54-56, 158-l60. 

Cursing-ritual, a form of spell, 
196-198. 

Eschatological beliefs, 63-64. 

Fasting, a cathartic ritual, 

153-154. 
Festivals, influence of pagan 

on Christian, 58. 
Fetichism, 44-47 : in Hellas, 

44-45 : in Christianity, 45- 

47. 

Hellenism, influence on 

Christianity, 23. 
Hero-worship, 75-76. 
Hilaria, 62. 
Homicide, cathartic origin 

of law concerning, 140— 

152. 
Human incarnation of divinity, 

59-60. 


asa 


Index 


233 


Human sacrifice, legends 
concerning, 27-28. 

Idolatry, 40-44. 
Indo-Germanic spell, 193. 
Ischtar, legend of, 29- 

Kalevala, 184, 191. 
Kore, 33 : gnostic-pagan wor- 
ship of, 34-35, 05. 

Mariolatry, 65, 69, 72. 
Mexican religion, 3. 
Montanism, 67. 
Mother of God, 38, 66. 

Names, religious influence of, 
32, 184-192. 

Parthenos, 37-38 : cf 65, 69, 
70. 

Peruvian religion, 3. 

Phrygian religion, 24, 62, 66~ 
68. 

Prayer {vide Spell) definition 
of, ] 65 : distinction be- 
tween prayer and spell, l67- 
169: antagonism between 
them, 193-194: objects of 
prayer, progress from 
material to spiritual, 173- 
174: prayer a form of 
communion with the deity, 
1 74 : Christian theory of 
prayer, 227-228 : survival 
of spell in Christian liturgy, 
228-230 : Egyptian prayer, 
188; dominated by spell, 
224-227: English, earliest 


example of spell-prayer, 
194 : Eleusinian spell- 
prayer, 194 : Hellenic 
prayer, 187, 200-205, 207 ; 
Hellenic spells, 196; spell 
prayer, 199-200 ; theory of 
prayer in Hellenic phil- 
osophy, 206 : Iranian lit- 
urgical magic, 199 ; prayers 
and spells in Zarathustrian 
ritual, 213-218: Latin 
prayer, 185 : Roman spell- 
prayer, 195 : Peruvian 
prayer, 183 n. 3 : savage ex- 
amples of real prayer, 182- 
] 83 : Umbrian prayer, 186 : 
Vedic spell-formidse com- 
bined with prayer, 208-2 1 3. 
Purification : primitive ideas 
concerning pure and im- 
pure substances, 89-91 - 
analysis of primitive sensa- 
tion of impurity, 92-98 : 
purification after battle, 94 ; 
after funerals, 96 : logical 
development of idea of 
purity, 98-101 : psycho- 
logical effect of impure 
contact, 102-103 : purity 
connected with belief in 
spirits, 103-104 ; dualism 
of good and evil spirits, 
] 05 : with belief in gods, 
1 06 : earliest concept non- 
moral, 110-111 : evolution 
of idea of ^^pure heart," 
111-115: cathartic sacrifice, 
120-122 : opposition be- 
tween spiritual and ritual- 

16 


234 


Index 


istic purity^ 123 : Iranian 
ideas, 97, 101, 107, 115, 
127-132 : Jewish, 124, 126 : 
Hellenic, 132-139; in- 
fluence on Hellenic law, 
140-152 : influence of idea 
of purity on religious 
institutions, 152-l60. 

Rebirth, mystic sense of, 57. 
Resurrection, belief in, 60- 

62 : resurrection of divinity, 

68. 

Sacrifice, 64, 120-122. 

Saint-worship, 77. 

Savagery, survival of, in higher 

religion, 10, 11, 15, 17. 
Scapegoat^ cathartic use of, 

119, 120. 
Spell, examples of spell- 


prayer, 169, itO, 175, 180 : 
spell-value of the name in 
lower and higher religions, 
184-192: use of narrative 
as a spell-form of sugges- 
tion (Navajo prayer), 181- 
182: knowledge of origin 
of person or substance 
useful for spell-purposes, 
19O-I93 : progress from 
spell to prayer, 171-173. 

Teutonic religion, 41, 51, 53, 
55, 57, 78-80: ideas of 
purity, 107-109. 

Thiasoi, 48-49. 

Totemism, 13. 

Transference of sin, 1 16-1 19. 

Trinitarian ideas, 73-74. 

Virginity, exaltation of, 70-7 1 . 


FBnmD BT NULL AHD OOl, LfD., BDDIBUROH. 


. I 


i 


r 


I 


^-^1 


C«P- 1 


Stanford UnhersHy library 

Stanford, CalUorais 


Id order that others may uie this book, 
please retura it as soon as possible, but 
not later than the date due.
