Sartoris (William Faulkner, 1929)
==========================================================
The decayed Sartoris family of Jefferson — the first novel of Yoknapatawpha County. Public domain. Sourced from the Internet Archive scan 'sartoris0000will_b0p9' (https://archive.org/details/sartoris0000will_b0p9).

733 


= as 


mn Tm 


A SIGNET CLASSIC 


ae #) sq hOe 

Pa, 08d? Pea 
oh ee 

rh 


A i ape 
reas! rigs 


Generally regarded as America’s 
most distinguished modern novel- 
ist, William Faulkner garnered most of the literary 
honors available, including the Nobel Prize, the Pulitzer 
Prize, and the National Book Award. In his own lifetime, 
he moved from relative obscurity to international prom- 
inence. Born in New Albany, Mississippi, on September 
25, 1897, he lived in nearby Oxford until his death, on 
July 6, 1962. His parents were members of old and 
respected Southern families, and his schooling was con- 
centrated but informal. He read extensively on his own 
and attended high school and the University of Missis- 
sippi, although he was never graduated from either. He 
served in the British Royal Air Force during the First 
World War, then worked at odd jobs and drifted to 
New Orleans, where he began writing for a “little maga- | 
zine.” His early novels, Soldiers’ Pay, Mosquitoes, 
Sartoris, and The Sound and the Fury, attracted favor- 
able attention, but with the publication of Sanctuary he 
finally achieved financial as well as critical success. 
Despite the honors his writings earned, Faulkner pre- 
ferred farming, hunting, and fishing in Oxford to the 
literary haunts of New York or California. A non- 
conformist as a person and as a writer, acutely sensitive 
and a dedicated artist, William Faulkner was an authen- 
tic and powerful storyteller who never deserted his 
vision, “to create out of the materials of the human 
spirit, something which did not exist before.” 


ora. 


Ps 


Sartoris 


WILLIAM FAULKNER 


FOREWORD BY 
ROBERT CANTWELL 


AFTERWORD BY 
LAWRANCE THOMPSON 


CS A SIGNET CLASSIC 


Published by 
"THE NEW AMERICAN LIBRARY, NEW YORK AND TORONTO 


Rg 6 FE PO I 


CAREFULLY SELECTED, EDITED, AND PRINTED, 
SIGNET CLASSICS PROVIDE A TREASURY OF THE WORLD'S GREAP 
WRITINGS IN HANDSOMELY DESIGNED VOLUMES, 


hd 0 SO PE OE) PTE ES PT OS PK) 


COPYRIGHT, 1929, BY HARCOURT, BRACE & WORLD, INC, 
© 1957, BY WILLIAM FAULKNER 
COPYRIGHT, 1953, BY ROBERT CANTWELL 
AFTERWORD COPYRIGHT © 1964 BY THE NEW AMERICAN 
LIBRARY OF WORLD LITERATURE, INC, 


All rights reserved under Pan-American and international copyrights. 
For information address Harcourt, Brace & World, Inc., 757 Third 
Avenue, New York, New York r1oo17. 


Published by arrangement with 
Harcourt, Brace & World, Inc., 
who have authorized this softcover edition, 


Eighth Printing 


SIGNET TRADEMARK RNG. U.S. PAT. OFF. AND FORHIGN COUNTRINS 
REGISTERED TRADEMARK—MAROA RHGISTRADA 
HEHOHO BN OHIOAGO, U.S.A. 


SIGNET CLASSICS are published in the United States by 
The New American Library, Inc., 
_ 1301 Avenue of the Americas, New York, New York 1oo19, 
in Canada by The New American Library of Canada Limited, 
295 King Street East, Toronto 2, Ontario 


PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 


= 


opines 


GNC SE 


5 A ee 


TO SHERWOOD ANDERSON 


through whose kindness I was first published, 
with the belief that this book will give him 
no reason to regret that fact 


ares 


FOREWORD * 


William Faulkner’s third novel, Sartoris, first published 
in 1929, is in many respects a key volume in his works, the 
one that sets the pattern for them all. Sartoris introduces 
the two great families who figure directly or indirectly 
throughout his cycle of novels—the Sartoris family and the 
Snopes family. In Sartoris Faulkner first outlined the town 
of Jefferson, which is the center of his fiction. And, finally, 
Sartoris marked a decisive change in his attitude toward his 
own work. His first two books, Soldiers’ Pay and Mosquitoes, 
were bright and sardonic, and sometimes brilliant novels, but 
they were characterized by a casual and indifferent air, 
whereas with Sartoris his purpose became serious and re- 
mained so. 

The change, which can almost be felt in the prose as 
the novel proceeds, is one of the most dramatic and unusual 
developments in literary history. Faulkner has told how he 
began to write fiction under the influence of Sherwood Ander- 
son, to whom Sarioris is dedicated: he noticed that Anderson 
had a pretty good life, only working in the morning, and he 
thought that he would like to be a writer himself. Mrs. 
Anderson told him that if he wrote a novel she would get 
Sherwood to read it, and if Sherwood liked it he would get 
his publisher, Liveright, to publish it. 

Faulkner wrote Soldiers’ Pay in six weeks and took the 
manuscript to Mrs. Anderson. She returned it the next day, 
saying, “Sherwood says if he isn’t required to read this he’ll 
get Liveright to publish it.” And so Faulkner became a novel- 
ist, Liveright giving him advances of $200 apiece on his next 


* Here reprinted in abbreviated form. 
vii 


viii FOREWORD 


two novels. “And then,” he said, “I liked that money. It 
seemed to me a mighty easy way to earn money.” 
In his book William Faulkner, the critic Irving Howe has 


suggested that Faulkner was pulling the public’s leg with — 


this story. But he has so concluded by leaving out the most 
important part of it. What Faulkner was saying was that the 


same attitude toward his writing lasted until he wrote — 


Sartoris. He was halfway through Sartoris when suddenly “I 


discovered that writing was a mighty fine thing,” he said. — 


“You could make people stand on their hind legs and cast 


a shadow. I felt that I had all these people, and as soon as # 


I discovered it I wanted to bring them all back.” 

His story is confirmed by the lift in the quality of his 
writing in Sartoris. And after Sartoris Faulkner turned out in 
a few months, in an unbroken surge of creative activity, the 
great books on which his standing as a novelist depends: 


The Sound and the Fury, As I Lay Dying, Sanctuary (though | 


it is not generally listed with them, and he has written 
disparagingly of it), Light in August. When he turned away 
from the Sartoris theme and the locale of Jefferson, as in 
Pylon and The Wild Palms, the result was a sense of strain 
in the books; he seems to be trying to recapture his earlier 
inspiration in them rather than to actually possess it. When 
he returned to the Sartoris story and setting with The Ham- 
let, in 1940, he wrote one of his best novels. 


The dividing line in his work between its arty and frivo- — 


lous earlier phase, and the power of its great period, is in 
Sartoris. More specifically, it is in something in Sartoris that 
reached beyond the novel itself and gave Faulkner the vision 
of his work as a whole. His first two novels were satires, but 
the basis of their satire is uneven, so that they often seem 
an expression of personal irritation and nervous rejection. 
Turning from them to Sartoris, we find ourselves at once 
in the concrete reality of the town of Jefferson, seventy-five 
miles from Memphis, a town in upland country, lying in 
tilted slopes against the unbroken blue of the hills, in the 


midst of good broad fields richly somnolent. As the novel — 
proceeds we become aware of a mysterious sense of excite- 


ment and intensity, communicated by the sensuous images 
of the town, the country, and the woods rather than (as is 
customary in Faulkner’s books) the violent action or the 
violent imagery. : 


_ FOREWORD ix 


_ There are the landmarks so often found in Faulkner’s 
novels, the brick courthouse with stone arches rising among 
_ the elms, the monument of the Confederate soldier under 
the trees, shading his carvef eyes with his stone hand, and 
the courthouse square, with its unbroken low skyline of old 
_ weathered brick. Four miles from the square, beyond the 
streets arched with trees, is the Sartoris house, white and 
~ simple, with a curving drive and iron gates, set among oaks 
and locust trees, with wisteria and roses at one end of the 
veranda, and inside a curving stairway of white spindles 
and red carpet, an expanse of shuttered sunlight broken by 
‘a the crystal chandelier and the tall mirror. .. . 
_ The quality that adds intensity to Sartoris is inspiration, 
_ and the sources of inspiration are always beyond the reach’ 
_ of critical analysis. About all we can say is that continued 
_ effort along probably fruitful lines ensures a greater likeli- 
hood of inspiration finding an outlet when, if ever, it occurs. 
~ Faulkner had been writing for a considerable period on 
_ Soldiers’ Pay and Mosquitoes when he was inspired with the 
- concept of Colonel Sartoris that came with this book. ... 
_ Colonel Sartoris is modeled on Colonel William C. Falkner, 
his greai-grandfather. ... 
Colonel Falkner was born in Knox County in eastern Ten- 
nessee in 1825 (though the authorities differ as to the exact 
time and place), and was taken to Ste. Genevieve, Missouri. 
_ His father died when William was still a child. As an orphan 
_he walked from Middleton, Tennessee, to Ripley, Mississippi, 
_to make his home with an uncle, some time between the 
_ ages of ten and fourteen—an epic journey of which he wrote 
_a brilliant, if romanticized, account in his novel The White 
Rose of Memphis. For four years, while he went to school, he 
_worked in the Ripley jail, employed by the sheriff—another 
experience of which he. made good use in The White Rose. 
In 1845 an emigrant family named Adcock, moving from 
Tennessee to the West, stopped for the night at the camping 
grounds north of Ripley. A man named McCannon killed all 
the members of the family with an ax, stole the slaves, and 
started back to Tennessee. McCannon was caught near the 
Tennessee line, and a mob prepared to lynch him. Young 
Falkner started out at midnight with the posse after Mc- 
‘Cannon, rode twenty miles, and helped rescue the murderer 
from the mob, despite guns drawn against him. McCannon 


x FOREWORD 
was taken back to Ripley to stand trial. There, however, an- 


other mob got him away from the authorities. Again at the 
point of being hanged, McCannon gained some time by | 
promising to tell the full story of the crime. He confessed; | 
and in the period before his execution told the story of his | 


life to young Falkner, who wrote it up and had it printed 


as a pamphlet, on credit, at the press of the Ripley Ad-— 


vertiser. 
He offered the pamphlet for sale on the day of McCan- 


non’s execution. It was a terrific success, and after paying | 


the newspaper, Falkner cleared $1,250, the first money he 
had ever earned. His enemies later pictured him hawking the 
pamphlet to the crowd while McCannon’s body was still spin- 
ning from the limb of a tree in the yard before the Ripley 
courthouse—some townspeople continued to do so, in fact, 
in William Faulkner’s lifetime. But there is no contemporary 
evidence for such a grisly scene, nor any indication in Falk- 
ner’s character of a tendency to work in that fashion. 
There is abundant contemporary evidence, however, that 
Falkner’s pamphlet aroused intense hostility from prominent 
people in nearby communities—Tuscumbia, Alabama, and 
Holly Springs, Mississippi, among others—who were men- 
tioned in McCannon’s narrative as his friends and the com- 
panions of his drinking bouts. These threatened to horsewhip 
Falkner, or worse. The Ripley Advertiser came to Falkner’s 
defense. It stated that there was no young man in the com- 
munity who stood higher in terms of moral integrity and 


courage. These comments were exchanged early in 1846. In 


May of that year, when the Mexican War began, Falkner was 


elected first lieutenant of the Tippah Volunteers, his com- 
mission being dated June 1, 1846. The company was at-— 
tached to the Second Regiment, Second Mississippi Infantry, 


and saw service in Mexico, where Falkner was wounded on 
April 14,1847. 
The second lieutenant of the company was Robert Hind- 


man, whose brother, Thomas Hindman, was a private in the - 


ranks.* These were the sons of a prominent and long-estab- 


* According to Biographical Sketches of Gen. Pat Cleburne, and Gen. 
T. C. Hindman, by Charles Edward Nash, a kinsman of Hindman by 
marriage, Hindman, who had “a wonderful talent for getting into 
fusses” and was “ambitious and overbearing,” was promoted to first 
lieutenant in Mexico for valorous conduct. 


So Ben 


FOREWORD xi 


lished family, the father a hero of the War of 1812, who. 
- lived in a new mansion two and a half miles from Ripley. 


Young Falkner and the Hindmans were friends. After the 
war they returned to Ripley, where Falkner married Miss 


_ Holland Pearce, of Knoxville, Tennessee, and began to prac- 


tice law in his uncle’s law office. 

On May 8, 1849, Falkner met Robert Hindman, apparently 
beside the Hindman house. To his astonishment, Hindman 
violently attacked him. He stated that he knew of no reason 


- for Hindman’s fury, and his account is altogether convinc- 


ee hy 


- ing. Hindman drew a pistol. Falkner grabbed his arm. Hind- 


man, who was stronger, threw Falkner back against the wall 
of the house. (Both Hindman brothers were large, powerful 


_ men, locally remembered as “brave, fearless, high-strung,” or 
- even aggressive in the extreme, inclined to be reckless, but 
- “no braver men ever lived than those two brothers.) Hind- 
man placed his pistol at Falkner’s breast and pulled the trig- 


ger. 
The gun failed to fire. Falkner drew his knife. Hindman 
cocked the gun again and fired again. The pistol again 


- failed to fire. Subsequent examination revealed that the bul- 
lets did not exactly fit; the hammer did not quite strike the 


z cap. As Hindman tried to fire the third time, Falkner stabbed 


and killed him. 
Falkner was arrested, charged with murder. The case split 


; ‘the town. The trial was not held until February, 1851, the 


next regular term of the court. In the meantime, Falkner’s 


_ wife died, after bearing him a son, William Faulkner’s grand- 


father. Thomas Hindman, who had just been admitted to the 
bar, made his first speech as the prosecuting attorney, “preg- 
nant with bitter denunciation.” But the evidence made out a 
clear case of self-defense, and Falkner was acquitted. 

As he stepped from the courtroom into the Kipley street, 


Thomas Hindman attacked him. In the struggle, Falkner 


killed a man named Morris, a Hindman partisan in the feud 
that was dividing the town. : 
Falkner was immediately rearrested and tried for the mur- 


der of Morris and again acquitted. 


On this occasion, as he stepped forth free, he met Thomas 
Hindman in the dining room of the Ripley hotel. Hindman 
drew his pistol, but dropped it, and it fired as it hit the 


4 floor, the bullet striking the ceiling above Falkner’s head. 


xii FOREWORD 


Hindman challenged Falkner to a duel. Falkner did not be- 
lieve in dueling as a matter of principle, but he accepted the 
challenge and prepared to meet Hindman at 6 A.M. on April 
1, 1851, at the dueling ground 400 feet from the Arkansas 
bank of the Mississippi River, opposite the foot of Jefferson 
Street in Memphis. There were to be no seconds or surgeons_ 
present, and only one witness, who was to do nothing but 
keep out of the way. Both men were to be armed with two © 
pistols at fifty paces, and at the word were to advance on- 
each other, firing as often as they wished or were able. 

Before the duel, Falkner and a friend, Dr. De Soto, met — 
Hindman. De Soto drew his pistol and started to shoot Hind- 
man, but Falkner grabbed the gun, and the hammer struck | 
his hand. 

The witness chosen was Colonel Galloway, an editor of 
the Memphis Appeal, who had a reputation as a peacemaker. 
He learned that Falkner knew of no reason for the Hind- 
mans’ animosity and succeeded in preventing the duel; Hind- 
man subsequently moved to Arkansas. 

Falkner remained in Ripley, where he became a leader 
of the Know-Nothing party and the editor of its paper, Uncle 
Sam, which held it together.* When the Civil War began, 


* The Know-Nothing party was an attempt to substitute anti-Cath- 
olic and antiforeign agitation for the issue of slavery, which was di- 
viding the country. At the height of its influence, in 1855, the ~ 
Know-Nothings elected governors and legislatures in New Hampshire, — 
Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Connecticut, New York, Kentucky, and | 
California, and nearly carried Texas, Virginia, Georgia, Alabama, 
Mississippi, and Louisiana. It was a secret, fraternal order, organized 
in lodges like the Masons, and only members who reached the higher 
degrees knew its full name (“The Sons of ’76, or Order of the Star- 
Spangled Banner”) or its precise objectives. They answered ques- 
tions about it by saying “I don’t know,” which resulted in its popular 
name. 

After leaving Mississippi, Hindman as a young lawyer and politi- 
cian conducted a whirlwind campaign against the Know-Nothings, 
who were at the point of dissolution nationally, and became famous 
for having destroyed the Know-Nothings forever in Arkansas. He ~ 
fought, or barely avoided by the action of peacemakers, a number 
of duels. At a political rally, Colonel Falkner strangely spoke in his 
favor. 

In 1858 Hindman accused a politician named Rice of selling out 
to the Know-Nothings. Rice left town, Helena, Arkansas, and re- ~ 
turned with his brother. Saying that he feared he would not have a 
fair chance, Hindman asked the help of Pat Cleburne, a young 
drug clerk, formerly a British Army officer and later one of the 
finest officers in the Confederate Army. As the two men walked past 


REWORD xiii 


| Falkner raised his own company, the Magnolia Rifles of Tip- 
- pah County, and was elected captain on February 23, 1861. 
~ The Magnolia Rifles became part of the Second Infantry of the 
. _ Confederate States Army, of which Falkner was elected colo- 
a nel. He had in the meantime, in 1850, married a second 
a time, his second wife bearing him four children: three daugh- 
ters and a son. The Second Infantry under his command 
played an important part at the Battle of Bull Run, after 
~-which it went into winter quarters at Harpers Ferry. There 
‘Mrs. Falkner and the children joined the Colonel, one son 
and a newborn daughter, christened Elizabeth Manassas, hav- 
_ ing died in Ripley in Colonel Falkner’s absence. In the elec- 
‘tions in the spring of 1862, John M. Stone, a former station 
— at Iuka on the Memphis and Charleston Railroad, was. 
elected colonel of the Second Mississippi, and Colonel Falk- 
- ner returned to Ripley. He bore a commission from Jefferson 
— _ Davis to raise a cavalry regiment. 
— Some local sources in Ripley imply that Colonel Falkner’s 
_ Civil War record was “nothing to be proud of.” Actually, no 
_ such interpretation need be made of his return. The fime 
‘was after the Confederate disaster in Grant’s capture of 
- Fort Donelson and Island No. 10, and the need for cavalry 
- in the vast country, now wide open for invasion, was evident 


__Moore’s dry-goods store on the streets of Helena, a shot from be- 
hind the door, at a distance of three feet, missed Hindman. A 
second shot struck Cleburne in the back. A ‘physician, a cousin of 
_ the Rice brothers, standing across the street, shot Hindman in the 
breast, and was killed, as both Cleburne and Hindman, before falling, 
shot him in the bowels. Cleburne hovered between life and death for 
ten days. Hindman was not seriously wounded. 
Dr. Nash, in whose drugstore Cleburne worked, and who wrote his 
- recollections of both men, feared to remove the bullet from 
Cleburne’s back. It was later removed by Hindman’s_ brother-in-law. 
-__ Hindman became a power in Arkansas politics, built a mansion in 
_ Helena (later a Catholic school), and resigned his seat in Congress 
as secession got under way. He enlisted as a private in Yell’s Rifles, 
was elected captain, became a Confederate major general, and fled 
- to Mexico, where he operated a coffee plantation, after the Civil 
War. His wife’s parents had objected to his courtship of her. They 
- sent her to a Catholic school, St. Agnes, in Memphis, to get her 
away from him. Posing as her uncle, Hindman managed to see her 
at the school, and they were subsequently married. In Mexico Hind- 
man seems to have prospered, but Mrs. Hindman objected to the 
children being brought up under Catholic influence, and they re- 
turned to Helena during Reconstruction. At a political meeting, 
Hindman objected to statements made by Clayton Powell at a Negro 
meeting and was killed. 


xiv FOREWORD 


even before Shiloh, only forty-odd miles away. Also, the 
strange local situation in northern Mississippi, always ex- . 
ceptional in the course of American history, warranted the 
presence of an experienced officer who knew the country. 
Falkner organized the Seventh Mississippi Cavalry, some- 
times called the First Partisan Rangers. He had his regiment - 
up to full strength in the spring, but in the fall of that year _ 
it was completely disorganized. In March, 1863, we find him | 
reporting to the head of the Confederate Secret Service in — 
the Middle West that the men were leaving the regular army | 
to enroll in the irregular state units, where they were not | 
subject to discipline and were able to live at home. He re- — 
ported that they were foraging off the people, stealing all the 
horses (a forecast of Ab Snopes), terrorizing the women, and — 
confiscating the property of those they called Tories. He re- — 
ported that robberies and the murders of unarmed citizens 

were a daily occurrence, that the independent squads were 

growing rich by speculation and trading with the enemy, and 

that the people would not be able to make a crop unless 

some protection was afforded them. He added a note that 
“the Genl”’—meaning Forrest—“need have no fears of my 

being surprised or overpowered, because I know every creek, 

road and path in these northern counties.” 

A Northern expedition that set out for Ripley in May, 
1864, from Memphis reported that for forty miles the coun-~ 
try was completely devastated. In July of that year Ripley 
itself was destroyed. The circumstances were strange. When 
Sherman started for Atlanta, he ordered a movement of 
8,000 troops from Memphis to distract Forrest and to pre- 
vent Forrest striking his lines of communication. When this 
force reached Ripley, a Northern officer, Colonel De Witt 
Thomas, asked Colonel Falkner’s wife (who he said was a 
very intelligent woman) where General Forrest was and how 
many men he had. Mrs. Falkner laughed and said that For- 
rest had left the region to go after Sherman, but had now 
returned and would attack in a few days. She said that For- 
rest had 28,000 men. 

The Northern commander stopped in Ripley and held a 
council of his senior officers. He said that he wanted to turn 
back because Forrest had probably concentrated an over- 
whelming force against him. His officers were inclined to 
agree with him, but since a previous expedition had turned 


_ FOREWORD xv 


bg back only a short time before, they felt the blow to morale 
would be disastrous. 
_ The decision was therefore reached to continue. On the 
- morning of June 10, 1864, the two armies met at Guntown, 
eo or Brice’s Cross Roads, on Tishmingo Creek. From its physi- 
ee: cal description, the town is probably the original of Faulk- 
- ner’s legendary town of Frenchman’s Bend. The result was 
. a Northern debacle. The Northern losses were 2,240 men 
_ killed, wounded, or missing, 22 guns, 250 six-horse wagons, 
= a thousand rounds of artillery ammunition and 300,000 
rounds of small-arms ammunition, and great stores of medi- 
cal and quartermaster supplies. Forrest, who had about 
- 8,000 ratheg than 28,000 men, lost 96 men killed. At dawn 
_ the next day, the fleeing Northern officers reached Ripley. 
- Mrs. Falkner had breakfast prepared and invited Colonel 
- Thomas to eat with her. “She wanted to know,” he said, “if 
- 1 did not find her words very nearly correct.” * 
_ After the Civil War, as is told in Sartoris, Colonel Falkner 
built the Ripley, Ship Island and Kentucky Railroad. At the 
_ height of his prosperity he operated a plantation of 1,200 
acres, managed a hundred tenants, and ran a gristmill, cot- 
ton mill, and sawmill. He started a college, Stonewall Col- 
_ lege, and wrote and produced a play about the Civil War, 
_ The Lost Diamond. In 1880 the plant of the Ripley Ad- 
__vertiser burned and Colonel Falkner advanced the money to 
‘get the paper started again, also writing The White Rose of 
_ Memphis as a serial to help the paper along. With its back- 
_ ground as the inside story of something comparable to the 
_ Falkner-Hindman feud, The White Rose was a sensation and 
doubled the circulation of the paper before it was reprinted 
~ as a book. (It went into thirty-five editions and sold 160,000 
copies before it went out of print, in 1909.) He then wrote 
_a historical novel, The Little Brick Church, and a book about 
his travels in Europe. 

In Sartoris Colonel Sartoris is described as having been 
~ elected to the legislature after a hard fight. In life, Colonel 
Falkner was nominated to the Mississippi legislature while 
_ he was absent in New York. At five o’clock on the day of 
his election he walked into the public square at Ripley. Ac- 


- *Colonel Thomas’ report of his conversations with Mrs. Falkner are 
- included in The Official Records of the War of the Rebellion, 
volume 77. 


xvi FOREWORD 


cording to contemporary newspaper accounts, he stopped to 
talk with an old friend, Thomas Rucker, about sawing some 
timber. 4 

The two men were approached by a Ripley businessman, — 
J. H. Thurmond, Falkner’s partner in the building of the | 
railroad and now his business ‘rival and personal enemy. — 
According to the Memphis Appeal, Thurmond drew a pee 
without speaking and pointed it at the colonel. 

“What do you mean, Dick?” Falkner said. “Don’t shoot!” 

Thurmond fired, and the bullet, a .44-caliber, entered Falk- _ 
ner’s mouth, passed under his tongue, breaking the jawbone, 
and lodged in the right side of his neck under his ear. The 
shot was at such close range that Thomas Rucker’s face was 
powder-burned. Colonel Falkner fell to the pavement. His 
son-in-law, Dr. Carter, wiped the blood from his face. Sitting 
on the pavement, Falkner turned to Thurmond, who remained 
standing nearby, and said, “Dick, what did you do it for?” — 

He died at eleven o’clock that night, November 5, 1889. 
Thurmond was tried and acquitted in one of the most sensa- 
tional trials in the history of northern Mississippi. He moved 
to North Carolina, where he established another fortune in 
the textile industry, and the Falkners, after selling the rail-— 
toad, began the moves that resulted in their settling in 
Oxford, Mississippi, where William Faulkner lived across the 
street from the old home of Jacob Thompson, the top secret 
agent of the Confederacy. 

“Great God,” says one of Faulkner’s Negro characters 
after a comparable tragedy. “White folks.” It is an appro- 
priate comment for so strange and violent a career. The 
legend of Colonel Falkner was alive throughout the years of © 
Faulkner’s youth. The manner of Colonel Falkner’s death 
was not a topic of casual conversation. It is still a delicate 
subject in the region. When William Faulkner was writing 
his great novels Colonel Falkner was still a living reality to 
people who lived around Ripley. They spoke of him as if he 
were still alive, up in the hills somewhere, and might come. 
in at-any time. As late as 1938, when I asked about Colonel 
Falkner there, I encountered the sensation described in the 
opening sentences of Sartoris, that of a living presence in the 
room, summoned up by the intensity of feeling that the colo- 
nel’s life and death had aroused. 

Ordinarily I do not take much stock in supernatural visita- 


_ FOREWORD xvii 
tions, but I must admit that I felt uneasy at the response 


__ when I inquired about Colonel Falkner, and I felt that the 


people of whom I inquired were even more uneasy than I 
was. In 1952, in gathering some additional facts in Ripley, 


I encountered an even deeper sense of disquiet, as if the 
_ people who supplied the information feared that by doing so 


they ran the risk of arousing the spirits of Colonel Falkner 
and those of his former opponents to resume their quarrels. 
In retrospect the opening sentences of Sartoris are an ex- 
tremely unusual beginning for a novel. What is that specific 


fe description again? The banker and the pauper sitting silently 


in the presence of a dead man who is more real than they 


are? A strange beginning for Sartoris, but an even stranger 


beginning for the cycle of novels that it inspired. The dis- 


_ covery that William Faulkner made when he was halfway 


through Sartoris, that writing was a mighty fine thing, was 
a potent revelation. It led to the creation of a picture of a 


- whole society, a whole area, through three generations, the 


visualization of a kind of life previously unsuspected. It 


formed a vision of the South and of Southern small-town 
- life that has profoundly modified American thought and in- 


fluenced American literature so deeply that much contempo- 
rary writing scarcely reflects anything else. It led to the 
thirty years of labor to which Faulkner referred in his speech 


_ accepting the Nobel Prize. 


A powerful visitation. In my own case, in asking about 
Colonel Falkner, I did not get quite the same impression 
of benignity in the spectral invocation that is ascribed to 
Colonel Sartoris’ return in Sartoris. Fear would be a better 
word. But it is true that the ghost itself seemed benign, the 
fear being associated with something other than the recol- 
lection of Colonel Falkner personally. In any event, the 


_ legend of Colonel Falkner is so real that the opening scene 


of Sartoris is simply an acute description of a social fact in 
the region around Ripley. And this leads to an observation 
that must strike every reader who tries to relate Faulkner’s 
fiction to the Mississippi countryside. 

It is commonly asserted that the strength of Faulkner’s 
novels comes from the depth of his absorption with the life 
of his own region. Most critics would agree that a prevailing 
weakness in modern American literature is the lack of a 


comparable sense of identification in most writers. Faulkner 


xviii FOREWORD» 
has consequently always been a central figure to the regional- 
ists. He has been their proof of the advantage to the author — 
of remaining in his own hometown, close to his origins, a 
-among people he knows, with traditions he understands, and — 
away from the vast anonymous crowds of the cities, with — 
whom he can have at best only.a formal kinship. I am in — 
agreement with their argument in general, but Sartoris and, 
still more, the legend of Colonel Falkner seem to me to >| 
prove that the writer must choose most carefully the small 
town he is to remain in. Faulkner’s achievement was not — 
that he chose to live in a provincial community, but that he © 
selected this particular one. The life of northern Mississippi, — 
on which he focused his imagination, needed an interpreter 

in the way that desert regions need irrigation. The immense 
influence of his work stands as a renewed affirmation of what 
one man can do.... 


ROBERT CANTWELL 


y ¥ 
nn 


PART ONE 


As USUAL, old man Falls had brought John Sartoris into the 


room with him, had walked the three miles in from the 
county Poor Farm, fetching, like an odor, like the clean 
dusty smell of his faded overalls, the spirit of the dead man 


- into that room where the dead man’s son sat and where the 


two of them, pauper and banker, would sit for a half an 


_. hour in the company of him who had passed beyond death 
_ and then returned. 


Freed as he was of time and flesh, he was a far more 


- palpable presence than either of the two old men who sat 


shouting periodically into one another’s deafness while the 
business of the bank went forward in the next room and 


E people in the adjoining stores on either side listened to the 


indistinguishable uproar of their voices coming through the 
walls. He was far more palpable than the two old men 
cemented by a common deafness to a dead period and so 
drawn thin by the slow attenuation of days; even now, al- 
though old man Falls had departed to tramp the three miles 
back to that which he now called home, John Sartoris seemed 
to loom still in the room, above and about his son, with his 
bearded, hawklike face, so that as old Bayard sat with his 
crossed feet propped against the corner of the cold hearth, 
holding the pipe in his hand, it seemed to him that he could 


hear his father’s breathing even, as though that other were 


so much more palpable than mere transiently articulated clay 
as to even penetrate into the uttermost citadel of silence in 
which his son lived. 

The bowl of the pipe was ornately carved, and it was 
charred with much usage, and on the bit were the prints 
of his father’s teeth, where he had left the very print of 


19 


20 WILLIAM FAULKNER — 


his ineradicable bones as though in enduring stone, like 
the creatures of that prehistoric day that were too grandly © 


conceived and executed either to exist very long or to vanish 


utterly when dead from an earth shaped and furnished for — 


punier things. Old Bayard sat holding the pipe in his hand. 
“What are you giving it to me for, after all this time?” 
he had asked. 


“Well, I reckon I’ve kept it long as Cunnel aimed for | 


me to,” old man Falls answered. “A po’house ain’t no fitten 


place for anything of his’n, Bayard. And I’m gwine on | 


ninety-fo’ year old.” 


Later he gathered up his small parcels and left, but still — 


old Bayard sat for some time, the pipe in his hand, rubbing 
the bowl slowly with his thumb. After a while John Sartoris 


fj 


departed also, withdrawn rather to that place where the © : 


peaceful dead contemplate their glamorous frustrations, and 
old Bayard rose and thrust the pipe into his pocket and took 
a cigar from the humidor on the mantel. As he struck the 


match the door across the room opened and a man wearing a 


green eyeshade entered and approached. 

“Simon’s here, Colonel,” he said in a voice utterly without 
inflection. 

“What?” old Bayard said across the match. 

“Simon’s come.” 

“Oh. All right.” 

The other turned and went out. Old Bayard flung the 
match into the grate and put the cigar in his pocket and 
closed his desk and took his black felt hat from the top of 
it and followed the other from the room. The man in the 
eyeshade and the cashier were busy beyond the grille. Old 
Bayard stalked on through the lobby and passed through the 
door with its drawn green shade and emerged upon the 
street, where Simon in a linen duster and an ancient top hat 
held the matched geldings glittering in the spring afternoon, 
at the curb. There was a hitching-post there, which old 
Bayard retained with a testy disregard of industrial progress, 
but Simon never used it. Until the door opened and Bayard 
emerged from behind the drawn shades bearing the words 
“Bank Closed” in cracked gold leaf Simon retained his seat, 
the reins in his left hand and the thong of the whip caught 
smartly back in his right and usually the unvarying and 
seemingly incombustible fragment of a cigar at a swaggering 


aA 


SARTORIS 21 
angle in his black face, talking to the shining team in a 


- steady, loverlike flow. He spoiled horses. He admired Sar- 


torises and he had for them a warmly protective tender- 


- ness, but he loved horses and beneath his hands the sorriest 
beast bloomed and acquired comeliness like a caressed 


- woman, temperament like an opera star. 


Old Bayard closed the door behind him and crossed to 


_ the carriage with that stiff erectness which, as a country- 


man once remarked, if he ever stumbled, would meet itself 
falling down. One or two passers and a merchant or so in 
the adjacent doorways saluted him with a sort of florid 
servility. 

Nor did Simon dismount even then. With his race’s fine 
feeling for potential theatrics he drew himself up and ar- 
ranged the limp folds of the duster, communicating by some 
means the histrionic moment to the horses so that they too 


- flicked their glittering coats and tossed their leashed heads, 


and into Simon’s wizened black face there came an expres- 
sion indescribably majestical as he touched his whiphand to 
his hat-brim. Bayard got into the carriage and Simon clucked 
to the horses, and the onlookers, halted to admire the mo- 
mentary drama of the departure, fell behind. 

There was something different in Simon’s air today, in 
the very shape of his back and the angle of his hat; he 
appeared to be bursting with something momentous and ill- 
contained. But he withheld it for the time being and at a 
dashing, restrained pace he drove among the tethered 
wagons about the square and swung into a broad street 
where what Bayard called paupers sped back and forth in 
automobiles; withheld it until the town was behind and they 
trotted on across burgeoning countryside cluttered still with 
gasoline-propelled paupers but at greater intervals, and his 
employer had settled back for the changing and peaceful 
monotony of the four-mile drive. Then Simon checked the 
team to a more sedate pace and turned his head. 

His voice was not particularly robust nor resonant, yet 
somehow he could talk to old Bayard without difficulty. 
Others must shout in order to penetrate that wall of deaf- 
ness within which Bayard lived, yet Simon could and did 
hold long, rambling conversations with him in that monot- 
onous, rather high singsong of his, particularly while in the 


22 WILLIAM FAULKNER | 


carriage, the vibration of which helped Bayard’s hearing a 
little. 
“Mist? Bayard done got home,” Simon remarked in a con- — 
versational tone. —— 

Old Bayard sat perfectly and furiously still for a moment _ 
while his heart went on, a little too fast and a little too — 
lightly, cursing his grandson for a furious moment; sat so | 
still that Simon looked back and found him gazing quietly — 
out across the land. Simon raised his voice a little. 

“He got offen de two o'clock train,” he continued. — 
“Jumped off de wrong side and lit out th’ough de woods. ~ 
Section han’ seed ’im. Only he ain’t never come out home ~ 
yit when I lef’. I thought he wuz wid you, maybe.” Dust. 
spun beneath the horses’ feet and moiled in a sluggish cloud — 
behind. Against the thickening hedgerows their shadow ~ 
rushed in failing surges, with twinkling spokes and high-— 
stepping legs in a futility of motion without progress. 
“Wouldn’t even git off at de dee-po,” Simon continued, with © 
a kind of fretted exasperation, “de dee-po his own folks — 
built. Jumpin’ off de bline side like a hobo. He never even 
had on no sojer-clothes. Jes’ a suit, like a drummer er some- 
thin’. And when I ’members dem shiny boots and dem light — 
yaller pants and dat ’ere double-jinted backin’-up strop he — 
wo’ home las’ year . . .” He turned and looked back again. 
“Cunnel, you reckon dem foreign folks is done somethin’ ter 
him?” i 

“What do you mean?” Bayard demanded. “Is he lame?” — 

“I mean, him sneakin’ into his own town. Sneakin’ into 
town on de ve’y railroad his own gran-pappy built, jes’ like — 
he wuz trash. Dem foreign folks done done somethin’ ter — 
him, er dey done sot dey po-lice atter him. I kep’ a-tellin’ 
him when he fust went off to dat ’ere foreign war him and ~ 
Mr. Johnny neither never had no business at 

“Drive on!” Bayard said. “Drive on, damn your black 
hide.” 

Simon clucked to the horses and shook them into a 
swifter gait. The road went on between hedgerows paral- 
leling them with the terrific antics of their shadow. Be- — 
yond the bordering gums and locusts and massed vines fields 
new-broken or being broken spread on toward patches of 
woodland newly green and splashed with dogwood and judas 


~ SARTORIS 23 


trees. Behind laborious plows viscid shards of new-turned 
earth glinted damply in the sun. 

This was upland country, lying in tilted slopes against the 
unbroken blue of the hills, but soon the road descended 
sheerly into a valley of good broad fields richly somnolent 
in the leveling afternoon, and presently they drove upon 
Bayard’s own land and from time to time a plowman lifted 


his hand to the passing carriage. Then the road approached 


the railway and crossed it, and at last the house John Sartoris 
had built stood among locusts and oaks and Simon swung 
between iron gates and into a curving drive. 

There was a bed of salvia where a Yankee patrol had 
halted on a day long ago. Simon brought up here with a 
flourish and Bayard descended and Simon clucked to the 
team again and rolled his cigar to a freer angle and took the 
road back to town. 

Bayard stood for a while before his house. The white 
simplicity of it dreamed unbroken among ancient sunshot 
trees. Wistaria mounting one end of the veranda had 
bloomed and fallen, and a faint drift of shattered petals lay 
palely about the dark roots of it and about the roots of a 


- Tose trained on to the same frame. The rose was slowly but 


steadily choking the other vine. It bloomed now thickly 


~ with buds no bigger than a thumbnail and blown flowers no 


larger than silver dollars, myriad, odorless and unpickable. 

But the house itself was still and serenely benignant and 
he mounted to the empty colonnaded veranda and crossed it 
and entered the hall. The house was silent, richly desolate 
of motion or any sound. He stopped in the middle of the 
hall. 

“Bayard.” 

The stairway with its white spindles and red carpet 
mounted in a tall slender curve into upper gloom. From the 
center of the ceiling hung a chandelier of crystal prisms and 
shades, fitted originally for candles but since wired for elec- 
tricity. To the right of the entrance, beside folding doors 
rolled back upon a dim room emanating an atmosphere of 
solemn and seldom violated stateliness and known as the 
parlor, stood a tall mirror filled with grave obscurity like a 
still pool of evening water. At the opposite end of the hall 


- checkered sunlight fell in a long slant across the door, and 


from somewhere beyond the bar of sunlight a voice rose 


24 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


and fell in a steady preoccupied minor, like a chant. The — 
words were not distinguishable, but Bayard could not hear 
them at all. He raised his voice again. 

“Jenny.” 

The chanting ceased, and as he turned toward the stairs — 
a tall mulatto woman appeared in the slanting sunlight at ~ 


the back door and came sibilantly into the house. Her faded + 
blue garment was pinned up about her knees and it was _ | 


darkly and irregularly blotched with moisture. Beneath it 
her shanks were straight and lean as the legs of a tall bird, — 


and her bare feet were pale coffee-splashes on the dark E 


polished floor. 


“Wuz you callin’ somebody, Cunnel?” she said, raising — : 


her voice to penetrate his deafness. Bayard paused with his 
hand on the walnut newel post and looked down at the 
woman’s pleasant yellow face. i 
“Has anybody come out here this afternoon?” he asked. — 
“Why, naw, suh,” Elnora answered. “Dey ain’t nobody 
here a-tall, dat I knows about. Miss Jenny done gone to — 
her club-meetin’ in town dis evenin’,’ she added. Bayard 
stood with his foot raised to the step, glowering at her. 
“Why in hell can’t you niggers tell me the truth about 
things?” he raged suddenly. “Or not tell me anything at all?” 
“Lawd, Cunnel, who’d be comin’ out here, lessen you er 
Miss Jenny sont ‘um?’ But he had gone on, tramping furi- 
ously up the stairs. The woman looked after him, then she 
raised her voice: “Does you want Isom, er anything?” He 
did not look back. Perhaps he had not heard her, and she 
stood and watched him out of sight. “He’s gittin’ old,” she 
said to herself quietly, and she turned on her sibilant bare 
feet and returned down the hall whence she had come. 
Bayard stopped again in the upper hall. The western win- 
dows were closed with lattice blinds, through which sun- 
light seeped in yellow dissolving bars that but served to in- 
crease the gloom. At the opposite end a tall door opened 
upon a shallow grilled balcony which offered the valley and 
the cradling semicircle of the eastern hills in panorama. On 
either side of this door was a narrow window set with leaded ~ 
panes of vari-colored glass that, with the bearer of them, 
constituted John Sartoris’ mother’s deathbed legacy to him, 
which his. youngest sister had brought from Carolina in a 
straw-filled hamper in ’69. 


RTORIS 25, 


- This was Virginia Du Pre, who came to them two years 
a E wife and seven years a widow at thirty—a slender woman 
with a delicate replica of the Sartoris nose and that expres- 
“sion of indomitable and utter weariness which all Southern 
- women had learned to wear, bringing with her the clothing 
in which she stood and a wicker hamper filled with colored 
| glass. It was she who told them of the manner of Bayard 
' Sartoris’ death prior to the second battle of Manassas. She 
had told the story many times since (at eighty she still told it, 
_on occasions usually inopportune) and as she grew older the 
"tale itself grew richer and richer, taking on a mellow splendor 
like wine; until what had been a harebrained prank of two 
_heedless and reckless boys wild with their own youth had 
become a gallant and finely tragical focal point to which the 
_history of the race had been raised from out the old miasmic 
"swamps of spiritual sloth by two angels valiantly fallen and 
“strayed, altering the course of human events and purging the 
souls of men. 
- That Carolina Bayard had been rather a handful even for 
_Sartorises. Not so much a black sheep as a nuisance, all of 
whose qualities were positive and unpredictable. His were 
“merry blue eyes, and his rather long hair fell in tawny curls 
about his temples. His high-colored face wore that expression 
of frank and high-hearted dullness which you imagine 
‘Richard First as wearing before he went Crusading, and 
: once he hunted a pack of fox hounds through a rustic taber- 
-nacle in which a Methodist revival was being held; and thirty 
minutes later (having caught the fox) he returned alone and 
rode his horse into the ensuing indignation meeting. In a 
spirit of fun, purely: he believed too firmly in Providence, 
as all his actions clearly showed, to have any religious con- 
-victions whatever. So when Fort Moultrie fell ana the gover- 
nor refused to surrender it, the Sartorises were privately a 
little glad, for now Bayard would have something to do. 
In Virginia, as an A.D.C. of Jeb Stuart’s, he found plenty 
to do. As the A.D.C. rather, for though Stuart had a large 
military family, they were soldiers trying to win a war and 
needing sleep occasionally: Bayard Sartoris alone was will- 
ing, nay eager, to defer sleep to that time when monotony 
should return to the world. But this. was a holiday. 
The war was a godsend to Jeb Stuart also, and shortly 
thereafter, against the dark and bloody obscurity of the 


26 WILLIAM FAULKNER t 


northern Virginia campaigns, Stuart at thirty and Bayard! 
Sartoris at twenty-three stood briefly like two flaming stars) 
garlanded with Fame’s burgeoning laurel and the myrtle: 
and roses of Death, incalculable and sudden as meteors ini 
General Pope’s troubled military sky; thrusting upon him like : 
an unwilling garment that notoriety which his skill as a. 
soldier could never have won him. And still in a spirit of 
pure fun: neither Jeb Stuart nor Bayard Sartoris, as their’ 
actions clearly showed, had any political convictions involved | 
at all. 

Aunt Jenny. told the story first shortly after she came a | 
them. It was Christmas time and they sat before a hickory — 
fire in the rebuilt library—Aunt Jenny with her sad resolute 
face and John Sartoris bearded and hawklike, and his three © 
children and a guest, a Scottish engineer whom John Sartoris — 
had met in Mexico in ’45 and who was now helping him to 
build his railroad. 

Work on the railroad had ceased for the holiday season 
and John Sartoris and his engineer had ridden in at dusk 
from the suspended railhead in the hills to the north, and 
they now sat after supper in the firelight. The sun had set 
ruddily, leaving the air brittle as thin glass with frost, and 
presently Joby came in with an armful of firewood. He put 
a fresh billet on the fire, and in the dry air the flames crackled 
and snapped, popping in fading embers outward upon the 
hearth. 

“Chris’mus!” Joby exclaimed, with the grave and simple 
pleasure of his race, prodding at the blazing logs with the 
Yankee musket barrel which stood in the chimney corner 
until sparks swirled upward into the dark maw of the chim- 
ney in wild golden veils. “Y’ear dat, chilluns?” John Sartoris’ 
eldest daughter was twenty-two and would be married in 
June, Bayard was twenty, and the younger girl seventeen; 
and so Aunt Jenny, for all her widowhood, was one of the 
chilluns too, to Joby. Then he replaced the musket barrel in 
its niche and fired a long pine sliver at the hearth in order 
to light the candles. But Aunt Jenny stopped him, and he was 
gone—a shambling figure in an old formal coat too large 
for him, stooped and gray with age; and Aunt Jenny, speak- 
ing always of Jeb Stuart as Mister Stuart, told her story. 

It had to do with an April evening, and coffee. Or the 
lack of it, rather; and Stuart’s military family sat in the 


_ SARTORIS 27 


_ scented darkness beneath a new moon, talking of ladies and 
_ dead pleasures and thinking of home. Away in the darkness 
_ horses moved invisibly with restful sounds, and bivouac fires 
Z sank to glowing points like spent fireflies, and somewhere 
_ neither near nor far, the General’s body servant touched a 
a guitar in lingering, random chords. Thus they sat in the 
_poignance of spring and youth’s immemorial sadness, forget- 
: _ ting travail and glory, remembering instead other Virginian 
~ evenings with fiddles among the myriad candles and slender 
_ grave measures picked out with light laughter and lighter 
_ feet, thinking “When will this be again? Shall I make one?” 
-—until they had talked themselves into a state of savage 
- nostalgia and words grew shorter and shorter and less and 
~ less frequent. Then the General roused himself and brought 
_ them back by speaking of coffee, or its lack. 
This talk of coffee began to end a short time later with 
a ride along midnight roads and then through woods black 
_ as pitch, where horses went at a walk and riders rode with 
- saber or musket at arm’s length before them lest they be 
_ swept from saddle by invisible boughs, and continued until 
_ the forest thinned with dawn-ghosts and the party of twenty 
— was well inside the Federal lines. Then the dawn accom- 
plished itself yet more and all efforts toward concealment 
were discarded and they galloped again and crashed through 
-astonished picket parties returning peacefully to camp, and 
- fatigue parties setting forth with picks and axes and shovels 
in the golden sunrise, and swept yelling up the knoll where 
_ General Pope and his staff sat at breakfast al fresco. 
Two men captured a fat staff-major. The others pursued 
- the fleeing breakfasters for a short distance into the sanctuary 
_ of the woods, but most of them rushed on to the General’s 
_ private commissary tent and emerged presently from the 
cyclonic demolition of it, bearing plunder. Stuart and the 
three officers with him halted their dancing mounts at the 
table and one of them swept up a huge blackened coffee-pot 
_and tendered it to the General, and while the enemy shouted 
_ and fired muskets among the trees, they toasted one another 
in sugarless and creamless scalding coffee, as with a loving- 
cup. ; 
~ “General Pope, sir,” Stuart said, bowing to the captured 
officer. He drank and extended the pot. 


28 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


“['ll drink it, sir,” the major replied. “And thank God he 
is not here to respond in person.” 


“I had remarked that he appeared to leave hurriedly,” 


Stuart said. “A prior engagement, perhaps?” : 
“Yes, sir. With General Halleck,” the major agreed dnl 

“J am sorry we have him for an opponent instead of Lee.” 
“So am I, sir,” Stuart answered. “I like General Pope in| 


a war.” Bugles were shrilling among the trees far and near, : 
sending the alarm in flying echoes from brigade to brigade — 
lying about the forest, and drums were beating wildly to — 


arms and erratic bursts of musketry surged and trickled 
along the scattered outposts like the dry clatter of an open- 
ing fan, for the name Stuart speeding from picket to picket 
had peopled the blossoming peaceful woods with gray phan- 
toms. 

Stuart turned in his saddle and his men came up and 
sat their horses and watched him alertly, their spare eager 
faces like mirrors reflecting their leader’s constant consuming 
flame. Then from the flank there came something like a con- 
certed volley, striking the coffee-pot from Bayard Sartoris’ 
hand and clipping and snapping viciously among the dappled 
branches above their heads. 

“Be pleased to mount, sir,” Stuart said to the captive 
major, and though his tone was exquisitely courteous, all 
levity was gone from it. “Captain Wylie, you have the heavi- 
est mount: will you 2?” The Captain freed his stirrup 
and hauled the prisoner up behind him. “Forward,” the Gen- 
eral said and whirled, roweling his bay, and with the thun- 
derous codrdination of a single centaur they swept down 


the knoll and crashed into the forest at the point from ~ 


which the volley had come, before it could be repeated. Blue- 
clad shapes plunged scattering before and beneath them, and 
they rushed on among trees vicious with Miniés like wasps. 
Stuart now carried his plumed hat in his hand, and his long 
tawny locks, tossing to the rhythm of his speed, appeared 
as gallant flames smoking with the wild and self-consuming 
splendor of his daring. 

Behind them and on one flank muskets still banged and 
popped at their flashing phantoms, and from brigade to 
brigade lying spaced about the jocund forest bugles shrilled 
their importunate alarms. Stuart bore gradually to the left, 
bringing all the uproar into his rear. The country became 


| 
| 
i) 


_SARTORIS 29 
‘more open and they swung into column at the gallop. The 
captured major bounced and jolted behind Captain Wylie, 
'and the General reined back beside the gallant black thun- 
dering along beneath its double load. 
' “I am distressed to inconvenience you thus, sir,” he began 
with his exquisite courtesy. “If you will indicate the general 
location of your nearest horse picket, I shall be most happy 
to capture a mount for you.” 
~ “Thank you, General,” the major replied. “But majors 
can be replaced much easier than horses. I shall not trou- 
ble you.” 
_ “Just as you wish, sir,” Stuart agreed stiffly. He spurred 
on to the head of the column again. They now galloped 
-along a faint trace that was once a road. It wound on be- 
“tween vernal palisades of undergrowth and they followed it 
“at a rapid but controlled gait and debouched suddenly into a 
-glade, and a squadron of Yankee cavalry reined back in 
amazement, then hurled forward again. 

Without faltering Stuart whirled his party and plunged 
back into the forest. Pistol balls were thinly about their 
“heads, and the flat tossing reports were trivial as snapping 
twigs above the converging thunder of hooves. Stuart swerved 
from the road and they crashed headlong through under- 
growth. The Federal horse came yelling behind them and 
Stuart led his party in-a tight circle and halted it panting in 
a dense swampy copse, and they heard the pursuit sweep 
_ past. 

They pushed on and regained the road and retraced their 
former course, silently and utterly alert. To the left the sound 
of the immediate pursuit crashed on, dying away. Then they 
cantered again. Presently the woods thickened and forced 
them to a trot, then a walk. Although there was no more 
firing and the bugles too had ceased, into the silence, above 
the strong and rapid breathing of the horses and the sound of 
their own hearts in their ears, was a nameless something—a 
tenseness seeping from tree to tree like an invisible mist, 
filling the dewy morning woods with portent although birds 
flashed swooping from tree to tree, unaware or disregardful 
of it. : 

A gleam of white through the trees ahead; Stuart raised 
his hand and they halted and sat their horses, watching him 
quietly and holding their breath with listening. Then he ad- 


30 WILLIAM FAULKNER . 


vanced again and broke through the undergrowth into another ' 
glade. They followed, and before them stood the knoll: 
with the deserted breakfast table and the rifled commissary 
tent. They trotted warily across and halted at the table while . 
the General scribbled hastily upon a scrap of paper. The | 
glade lay quiet and empty of threat beneath the mounting | 
golden day; laked in it lay a deep and abiding peace like 
golden wine, yet beneath this solitude and permeating it, was — 
that nameless and waiting portent, patient and brooding and 7 


sinister. 


“Your sword, sir,” Stuart commanded. The prisoner re- 


moved his weapon and Stuart took it and pinned his scribbled 
note to the table top. The note read: “General Stuart’s com- 
pliments to General Pope, and he is sorry to have missed him 
again. He will call again tomorrow.” 

Stuart gathered up his reins. “Forward,” he said. 

They descended the knoll and crossed the empty glade 
and at an easy canter they took the road they had traversed 
that dawn; the road that led home. Stuart glanced back at 
his captive, at the gallant black with its double burden. “If 
you will direct us to your nearest cavalry picket, I will pro- 
vide you with a proper mount,” he offered again. 

“Will General Stuart, cavalry leader and General Lee’s 
eyes, jeopardize his safety and that of his men and his cause 
in order to provide for the temporary comfort of a minor 
prisoner to his sword?” the major said. “This is not bravery: 
it is the rashness of a heedless and headstrong boy. There 
are fifteen thousand men within a radius of two miles of 
this point; even General Stuart cannot conquer that many, 
though they are Yankees, single-handed.” 


“Not for the prisoner, sir,” Stuart replied haughtily, “but. 
for the officer suffering the fortune of war. No gentleman 


would do less.” 

“No gentleman has any business in this war,” the major 
retorted. “There is no place for him here. He is an anach- 
ronism, like anchovies. At least General Stuart did not cap- 
ture our anchovies,” he added tauntingly. “Perhaps he will 
send Lee for them in person.” 

“Anchovies,” repeated Bayard Sartoris, who galloped near 
by, and he whirled his horse. Stuart shouted at him, but 
Sartoris lifted his reckless stubborn hand and flashed on; 
and as the General would have turned to follow, a Yankee 


ia 


 sxronss ii 


picket fired his piece from the roadside and dashed into the 
_ woods, shouting the alarm. Immediately other muskets ex- 
-ploded on all sides, and from the forest to the right came 
_ the sound of a considerable body put suddenly into motion, 
; and behind them in the direction of the invisible knoll a 
' volley crashed. A third officer spurred up and caught Stuart’s 
bridle. 
“Sir, sir!’ he exclaimed. “What would you do?” 
ie Stuart. held his mount rearing, and another volley rang 

behind them, dribbling off into single scattered reports, 

- crashed again, and the noise to the right swelled nearer. “Let 
: go, Alan,” Stuart said. “He is my friend.” 

But the other clung to the bridle. “It is too late,” he 
- cried. “Sartoris can only be killed; you would be captured.” 
_ “Forward, sir, I beg,” the captive major added. “What is 
- one man to a renewed belief in mankind?” 

“Think of Lee, for God’s sake, General!” the aide im- 
- plored. “Forward!” he shouted to the troop, spurring his 

Own mount and dragging the General’s onward as a body of 
- Federal horse broke from the woods behind them. 
_ “And so,” Aunt Jenny finished, “Mister Stuart went on 
~ and Bayard rode back after those anchovies, with all 
_ Yaaaiiiih, come on, boys!’ right up the knoll and jumped dis 
horse over the breakfast table and rode it into the wrecked 
commissary tent, and a cook who was hidden under the 
_ mess stuck his arm out and shot Bayard in the back with a 
_ derringer. 
“Mister Stuart fought his way out and got back home 

- without losing but two men. He always spoke well of Bayard. 
He said he was a aved officer and a fine cavalryman, but 
_ that he was too reckless.” 

They sat quietly for a time in the firelight. The flames 
leaped and popped on the hearth and sparks soared in wild 
swirling plumes up the chimney, and Bayard Sartoris’ brief 
career swept like a shooting star across the dark plain of their 
mutual remembering and suffering, lighting it with a transient 

_ glare like a soundless thunder-clap, leaving a sort of radiance 
when it died. The guest, the Scottish engineer, had sat 
quietly, listening. After a time he spoke. 

“When he rode back, he was no actually certain there 

_Were anchovies, was he?” 


32) WILLIAM FAULKNER 


“The Yankee major said there were,” Aunt Jenny re- | 
plied. 
“Ay.” The Scotsman pondered again. “And did Muster 
Stuart return next day, as he said in’s note?” =) 

“He went back that afternoon,” Aunt Jenny answered, 
“looking for Bayard.” Ashes soft as rosy feathers shaled 
glowing on to the hearth and faded to the softest gray. John: | 
Sartoris leaned forward into the firelight and punched at | 
the blazing logs with the Yankee musket barrel. 

“That was the goddamnedest army the world ever an | 
I reckon,” he said. 

“Yes,” Aunt Jenny agreed. “And Bayard was the god- | 
damnedest man in it.” | 

“Yes,” John Sartoris admitted soberly, “Bayard was wild.” | 

The Scotsman spoke again. “This Muster Stuart, who said | 
your brother was reckless—who was he?” | 

“He was the cavalry general Jeb Stuart,” Aunt Jenny 
answered. She brooded for a while upon the fire; her pale 
indomitable face held for a moment a tranquil tenderness. 
“He had a strange sense of humor,” she said. “Nothing 
ever seemed quite so diverting to him as General Pope in 
his night-shirt.” She dreamed once more on some far-away 
place beyond the rosy battlements of the embers. “Poor 
man,” she said; then she said quietly, “I danced a valse with 
him in Baltimore in °58,” and her voice was proud and still — 
as banners in the dust. 


But the door was closed now, and what light passed 
through the colored panes was richly solemn. To Bayard’s 
left was his grandson’s room, the room in which his grand- 
son’s wife and her child had died last October. He stood 
beside this door for a moment, then he opened it quietly. 
The blinds were closed and the room had that breathless 
tranquillity of unoccupation, and he closed the door and 
tramped on with that heavy-footed obliviousness of the deaf 
and entered his own bedroom and crashed the door behind 
him, as was his way of shutting a door. 

He sat down and removed his shoes, the shoes that were 
made to his measure twice a year by a St. Louis house, and in 
his stockings he went to the window and looked down upon 
his saddled mare tethered to a mulberry tree in the back 
yard and a Negro lad lean as a hound, richly static beside 


- SARTORIS 33 


it. From the kitchen, invisible from this window, Elnora’s 
endless minor ebbed and flowed, unheard by Bayard, upon 


_ the lazy scene. 


He crossed to the closet and drew out a pair of scarred 
riding-boots and stamped into them and took a cigar from 
the humidor on his night table, and he stood for a time 
with the cold cigar between his teeth. Through the cloth 
of his pocket his hand had touched the pipe there, and he 
took it out and looked at it again, and it seemed to him 
that he could still hear old man Fall’s voice in roaring re- 


_ capitulation: “Cunnel was settin’ thar in a cheer, his sock feet 


propped on the po’ch railin’, smokin’ this hyer very pipe. 
Old Louvinia was settin’ on the steps, shellin’ a bowl of 
peas fer supper. And a feller was glad to git even peas 
sometimes, in them days. And you was settin’ back again’ 


_ the post. They wa’n’t nobody else thar ’cep’ you’ aunt, the 


one fo’ Miss Jenny come. Cunnel had sont them two gals to 


_ Memphis to yo’ gran’pappy when he fust went to Virginny 


with that ’ere regiment that turnt right around and voted him 
outen the colonelcy. Voted ’im out because he wouldn’t be 
Tom, Dick and Harry with ever’ skulkin’ camp-robber that 
come along with a salvaged muskit and claimed to be a 
sojer. You was about half-grown then, I reckon. How old 


was you then, Bayard?” 


“Fourteen.” 

“Hey?” 

“Fourteen. Do I have to tell you that every time you 
tell me this damn story?” 

“And thar you was a-settin’? when they turned in at the 


- gate and come trottin’ up the carriage drive. 


“Old Louvinia drapped the bowl of peas and let out one 
squawk, but Cunnel shet her up and told her to run and git 
his boots and pistols and have ’em ready at the back do’, and 
you lit out ter the barn to saddle that stallion. And when 
them Yankees rid up and stopped—they stopped right whar 
that flower bed is now—they wa’n’t nobody in sight but 
Cunnel, a-settin’ thar like he never even heerd tell of no 
Yankees. 

_ “The Yankees they sot thar on the hosses, talkin’ ’mongst 
theyselves if this was the right house or not, and Cunnel 
settin’ thar with his sock feet on the railin’, gawkin’ at ’em 
like a hill-billy. The Yankee officer he tole one man to 


34 WILLIAM FAULKNER : 


ride back to the barn and look fer that ’ere stallion, then 
he says to Cunnel: 
“‘Say, Johnny, whar do the rebel John Sartoris live? —_ 
“ives down the road a piece,’ Cunnel says, not bat- © 


tin’? a eye even. ‘’Bout two mile,’ he says. ‘But you won't | 


find ’im now. He’s away fightin’ the Yanks agin.’ 


“ ‘well, I reckon you better come and show us the way, | 


anyhow,’ the Yankee officer says. 
“So Cunnel he got up slow and tole ’em to let ’im git — 


his shoes and walkin’-stick, and limped into the house, . 


leavin’ ’em settin’ thar waitin’. 

“Soon’s he was out of sight he run. Old Louvinia was 
waitin’ at the back do’ with his coat and boots and pistols 
and a snack of cawn bread. That ’ere other Yankee had rid 
into the barn, and Cunnel taken the things from Louvinia 
and wropped ’em up in the coat and started acrost the back 
yard like he was jest takin’ a walk. ’Bout that time the Yankee 
come to the barn do’. 

“They ain’t no stock hyer a-tall,’ the Yank says. 

“ T reckon not,’ Cunnel says. ‘Cap’m says fer you to come 
on back,’ he says, goin’ on. He could feel that ’ere Yank 
a-watchin’ him, lookin’ right *twixt his shoulder blades whar 
the bullet would hit. Cunnel says that was the hardest thing 
he ever done in his life, walkin’ on thar acrost that lot with 
his back to’a’ds that Yankee without breakin’ into a-run. He 
Was aimin’ to’a’ds the corner of the barn, where he could 
put the house between ’em, and Cunnel says hit seemed like 
he’d been walkin’ a year without gittin’ no closer and not 
darin’ to look back. Cunnel says he wa’n’t even thinkin’ of 
nothin’ ’cep’ he was glad the gals wa’n’t at home. He says he 
never give a thought to you’ aunt back thar in the house, 
because he says she was a fullblood Sartoris and she was a 
match fer any jest a dozen Yankees. 

“Then the Yank hollered at him, but Cunnel kep’ right 
on, not lookin’ back nor nothin’. Then the Yank hollered 
agin and Cunnel says he could hyear the hoss movin’ 
and he decided hit was time to stir his shanks. He made 
the corner of the barn jest as the Yank shot the fust time, and 
by the time the Yank got to the corner, he was in the hawg- 
lot, tearin’ through the jimson weeds to’a’ds the creek 
whar you was waitin’ with the stallion hid in the willers. 

“And thar you was a-standin’, holdin’ the hoss, and that 


SARTORIS 3D 


ere Yankee patrol yellin’ up behind, until Cunnel got his 
boots on. And then he tole you to tell yo’ aunt he wouldn’t 


_ be home fer supper.” 


“But what are you giving it to me for, after all this time?” 
he had asked, fingering the pipe, and old man Falls had 
said a poorhouse was no fit place for it. 

“A thing he toted in his pocket and got enjoyment outen, 
in them days. Hit ’ud be different, I reckon, while we was a- 
buildin’ the railroad. He said often enough in them days we 
was all goin’ to be in the po’house by Sat’d’y night. Only I 
beat him, thar. I got thar fo’ he did. Or the cemetery he 
meant mo’ likely, him ridin’ up and down the survey with 
a saddle-bag of money night and day, keepin’ jest one cross 
tie ahead of the po’house, like he said. That ’us when hit 
changed. When he had to start killin’ folks. Them two cyar- 
pet-baggers stirrin’ up niggers, that he walked right into the 
room whar they was a-settin’ behind a table with they 
pistols layin’ on the table, and that robber and that other 
feller he kilt, all with the same dang der’nger. When a feller 
has to start killin’ folks, he ’most always has to keep on 
killin’ *°em. And when he does, he’s already dead hisself.” 

It showed on John Sartoris’ brow, the dark shadow of 
fatality and doom, that night when he sat beneath the 
candles in the dining-room and turned a wineglass in his 
fingers while he talked to his son. The railroad was fin- 
ished, and that day he had been elected to the state legis- 
lature after a hard and bitter fight, and doom lay on his 
brow, and weariness. 

“And so,” he said, “Redlaw’ll kill me tomorrow, for I 
shall be unarmed. I’m tired of killing men. . . . Pass the 
wine, Bayard.” 

And the next day he was dead, whereupon, as though he 
had but waited for that to release him of the clumsy clut- 
tering of bones and breath, by losing the frustration of his 
own flesh be could now stiffen and shape that which 
sprang from him into the fatal semblance of his dream; 
to be evoked like a genie or a deity by an illiterate old 
man’s tedious reminiscing or by a charred pipe from which 
even the rank smell of burnt tobacco had long since faded 
away. 

Old Bayard roused himself and went and laid the pipe 
on his chest of drawers. Then he quitted the room and 


36 WILLIAM FAULKNER ~ 


tramped heavily down the stairs and out through the 
back. i 

The Negro lad waked easily and untethered the mare and _ 
held the stirrup. Old Bayard mounted and remembered the 
cigar at last and fired it. The Negro opened the gate into — 


the lot and trotted on ahead and opened the second gate = | 
and let the rider into the field beyond. Bayard rode on, | 


trailing his pungent smoke. From somewhere a ticked setter 
came up and fell in at the mare’s heels. 


Elnora stood barelegged on the kitchen floor and soused ~ 1 


her mop into the pail and thumped it on the floor again. 


Sinner riz fum de moaner’s bench, 

Sinner jump to de penance bench; 

When de preacher ax ’im whut de reason why, 

Say, “Preacher got de women jes’ de same ez I.” 
Oh, Lawd, oh, Lawd! 

Dat’s whut de matter wid de church today. 


Z 


Simon’s destination was a huge brick house set well up to 
the street. The lot had been the site of a fine old colonial 
house which stood among magnolias and oaks and flowering 
shrubs. But the house had burned, and some of the trees had © 
been felled to make room for an architectural garbling so 
imposingly terrific as to possess a kind of majesty. It was 
a monument to the frugality (andthe mausoleum of the 
social aspirations of his women) of a hill-man who had 
moved in from a small settlement called Frenchman’s Bend 
and who, as Miss Jenny Du Pre put it, had built the hand- 
somest house in Frenchman’s Bend on the most beauti- 
ful lot in Jefferson. The hill-man had stuck it out for two 
years, during which his womenfolk sat on the veranda all 
morning in lace-trimmed “boudoir caps” and spent the after- 
noons in colored silk, riding about town in a rubber-tired 
surrey; then the hill-man sold his house to a newcomer 
to the town and took his women back to the country and 
doubtless set them to work again. 


SARTORIS 37 


A number of motor cars ranked along the curb lent a 

formally festive air to the place, and Simon with his tilted 
_ cigar stub wheeled up and drew rein and indulged in a 
brief, colorful altercation with a Negro sitting at the wheel of 
a car parked before the hitching-block. “Don’t block off no 
Sartoris ca’iage, black boy,” Simon concluded, when the 
other had moved the motor and permitted him access to 
the post. “Block off de commonality, ef you wants, but 
don’t intervoke no equipage waitin’ on Cunnel er Miss Jenny. 
Dey won’t stan’ fer it.” 

He descended and tethered the horses, and his spirit mol- 
lified by the rebuke administered and laved with the beati- 
tude of having gained his own way, Simon paused and 
examined the motor car with curiosity and no little super- 
ciliousness tinged faintly with respectful envy, and spoke 
affably with its conductor. But not for long, for Simon had 
sisters in the Lord in this kitchen, and presently he let him- 
self into the yard and followed the gravel driveway around 
to the back. He could hear the party going on as he passed 
beneath the windows—that sustained, unintelligible gabbling 
with which white ladies could surround themselves without 
effort and which they seemed to consider a necessary (or 
unavoidable) adjunct to having a good time. The fact that it 
was a card-party would have seemed neither paradoxical 
nor astonishing to Simon, for time and much absorbing ex- 
perience had taught him a fine tolerance of white folks’ 
vagaries and for those of ladies of any color. 

The hill-man had built his house so close to the street that 
the greater part of the original lawn with its fine old trees 
lay behind it. There were once crape myrtle and syringa and 
lilac and jasmine bushes without order, and massed honey- 
suckle on fences and tree trunks; and after the first house 
had burned, these had taken the place and made of its 
shaggy informality a mazed and scented jungle loved of 
mocking-birds and thrushes, where boys and girls lingered 
on spring and summer nights among drifting fireflies and 
choiring whippoorwills and usually the liquid tremolo of a 
screech owl. Then the hill-man had bought it and cut some 
of the trees in order to build his house near the street after 
the country fashion, and chopped out the jungle and white- 
washed the remaining trees and ran his barn- and hog- and 


38 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


chicken-lot fences between their ghostly trunks. He hadn't © 


remained long enough to learn of garages. 

Some of the antiseptic desolation of his tenancy had 
faded now, and its present owner had set out more shrub- 
bery—jasmine and mock-orange and verbena—with green 
iron tables and chairs beneath them, and a pool and a 
tennis court; and Simon went on with discreet assurance, 
and on a consonantless drone of female voices he rode into 
the kitchen, where a thin woman in a funereal purple 
turban, poising a beaten biscuit heaped with mayonnaise, 
and a mountainous one in the stained apron of her call- 
ing drinking melted ice cream from a saucer, rolled their 
eyes at him. 

“I seed: him on de street, and he looked bad; he jes’ 
don’t favor hisself,” the visitor was saying as Simon en- 
tered, but they dropped the theme of the conversation and 
made him welcome. 

“Ef it ain’t Brother Strother,” they said in unison. “Come 
in, Brother Strother. How is you?” 

“Po’ly, ladies; po’ly,’ Simon replied. He doffed his hat 
and unclamped his cigar stub and stowed it away in the 
hat. “TI’se had a right smart mis’ry in de back. Is y’all kep’ 
well?” 

“Right well, I. thank you, Brother Strother,” the visitor 
replied. Simon drew a chair to the table, as he was bidden. 

“Whut you gwine eat, Brother Strother?” the cook de- 
manded hospitably. “Dey’s party fixin’s, en dey’s some col’ 
greens en a little sof’ ice cream lef’ fum dinner.” 

“I reckon [Il have a little ice cream en some of dem 
greens, Sis’ Rachel,” Simon replied. “My teef ain’t so much 
on party doin’s no mo’.” The cook rose with majestic de- 
liberation and waddled across to a pantry and reached 
down a platter. She was one of the best cooks in Jefferson; 
no mistress dared protest against the social amenities of 
Rachel’s kitchen. 

“Ef you ain’t de beatin’es’ man!” the first guest exclaimed. 
“Ratin’ ice cream at yo’ age!” 

“I been eatin’ ice cream sixty years,” Simon said. “Whut 
reason I got fer quittin’ now?” 

“Dat’s right, Brother Strother,” the cook agreed, placing 
the dish before him. “Eat yo’ ice cream when you kin git 
it. Jes’ a minute en [ll Here, Meloney,” she interrupted 


SARTORIS 39 


herself as a young light Negress in a smart white apron and 
cap entered, bearing a tray of plates containing remnants of 
edible edifices copied from pictures in ladies’ magazines and 
possessing neither volume nor nourishment, with which the 
party had been dulling its palates against supper, “git Brother 
Strother a bowl of dat ’ere ice cream, honey.” 

The girl clashed the tray into the sink and rinsed a bowl 
at the water tap while Simon watched her with his still 
little eyes. She whipped the bowl through a towel with a 
fine show of derogatory carelessness, and with her chin at 
a supercilious angle she clattered on her high heels across 
the kitchen, still under Simon’s unwinking regard, and 
slammed a door behind her. Then Simon turned his head. 

“Yes, ma’am,” he repeated, “I been eatin’ ice cream too 
long ter quit at my age.” 

“Dey won't no vittles hurt you ez long ez you kin stomach 
*um,” the cook agreed, raising her saucer to her lips again. 
The girl returned and with her head still averted she set the 
bowl of viscid liquid before Simon, who, under cover of this 
movement, dropped his hand on her thigh. The girl smacked 
him sharply on the back of his gray head with her flat palm. 

“Miss Rachel, can’t you make him keep his hands to his- 
self?” she said. 

“Ain’t you ’shamed,” Rachel demanded, but without rancor, 
“a ole gray-head man like you, wid a fam’ly of grown chillen 
and one foot in de graveyard?” 

“Hush yo’ mouf, woman,” Simon said placidly, spoon- 
ing spinach into his melted ice cream. “Ain’t dey erbout 
breakin’ up in yonder yit?” 

“T reckon dey’s erbout to,” the other guest answered, put- 
ting another laden biscuit into her mouth with a gesture of 
elegant gentility; “seems like dey’ talkin’ louder.” 

“Den dey’s started playin’ again,” Simon corrected. “Talk- 
in’ jes’ eased off whiles dey et. Yes, suh, dey’s started play- 
in’ again. Dat’s white folks. Nigger ain’t got sense ernough 
ter play cards wid all dat racket gwine on.” 


But they were breaking up. Miss Jenny Du Pre had just 
finished a story which left the three at her table avoiding 
one another’s eyes a little self-consciously, as was her way. 
Miss Jenny traveled very little, and in Pullman smoking- 
rooms not at all, and people wondered where she got her 


40 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


stories, who had told them to her. And she repeated them 
anywhere and at any time, choosing the wrong moment 
and the wrong audience with a cold and cheerful au- 


dacity. Young people liked her, and she was much in demand — 1 


as a chaperone for picnic parties. 
She now spoke across the room to the hostess. “I’m 


going home, Belle,” she stated. “I think we are all tired of 


your party. I know I am.” The hostess was a plump, young- 
ish woman and her cleverly-rouged face showed now a 


hysterical immersion that was almost repose, but when — | 


Miss Jenny broke into her consciousness with the imminence 
of departure, this faded quickly and her face resumed its 
familiar expression of strained and vague dissatisfaction and 
she protested conventionally but with a petulant sincerity, as 
a well-bred child might. ; 

But Miss Jenny was adamant. She rose and her slender 
wrinkled hand brushed invisible crumbs from the bosom of 
her black silk dress. “If I stay any longer, Pll miss Bayard’s 
toddy-time,” she explained with her usual forthrightness. 
“Come on, Narcissa, and Ill drive you home.” 

“T have my car, thank you, Miss Jenny,” the young woman 
to whom she spoke replied in a grave contralto, rising also; 
and the others got up with sibilant gathering motions 
above the petulant modulation of the hostess’ protests, and 


they drifted slowly into the hall and clotted again before 
various mirrors, colorful and shrill. Miss Jenny pushed — 


steadily toward the door. 

“Come along, come along,” she repeated. “Harry Mitchell 
won’t want to run into all this gabble when he comes home 
from work.” 

“Then he can sit in the car out in the garage,” the 
hostess rejoined sharply. “I do wish you wouldn’t go, Miss 
Jenny; I don’t think I'll ask you again.” 

But Miss Jenny only said “Good-bye, good-bye” with cold 
affability, and with her delicate replica of the Sartoris nose 
and that straight, grenadier’s back of hers which gave the 
pas for erectness to only one back in town—that of her 
nephew Bayard—she stood at the steps, where Narcissa Ben- 
bow joined her, bringing with her like an odor that aura 
of grave and serene repose in which she dwelt. “Belle meant 
that, too,” Miss Jenny said. 

“Meant what, Miss Jenny?” 


-SARTORIS 41 
“About Harry. .. . Now, where do you suppose that damn 
‘Nigger went to?” They descended the steps and from the 
parked motors along the curb came muffled starting ex- 
plosions, and the two women traversed the brief flower- 
bordered walk to the street. “Did you see which way my 
‘driver went?” Miss Jenny asked of the Negro in the nearest 
car. 
_ “He went to’ds de back, ma’am.” The Negro opened the 
door and slid his legs, clad in army O.D. and a pair of 
linoleum putties, to the ground. “Tl go git ’im.” 

“Thank you. Well, thank the Lord, that’s over,” she 
added. “It’s too bad folks haven’t the sense or courage to 
send out invitations, then shut up the house and go away. 
All the fun of parties is in dressing up and getting there.” 
Ladies came steadily in shrill groups down the walk and 
got into cars or departed on foot with bright, not quite 
‘musical calls to one another. The sun was down behind 
Belle’s house, and when the women passed from the shadow 
into the level bar of sunlight beyond, they became delicately 
brilliant as paroquets. Narcissa Benbow wore gray, and her 
eyes were violet, and in her face was that tranquil repose of 
lilies. 

“Not children’s parties,” she protested. 

“Tm talking about parties, not about having fun,” Miss 
Jenny said. “Speaking of children—what’s the news from 
- Horace?” 

“Oh, hadn’t I told you?” the other said quickly. “I had 
‘a wire yesterday. He landed in New York Wednesday. It was 
such a mixed-up sort of message, I never could understand 
what he was trying to tell me, except that he would have 
to stay in New York for a week or so. It was over fifty 
words long.” 

“Was it a straight message?” Miss Jenny asked. The 
other said yes and she added: “Horace must have got 
rich, like the soldiers say all the ¥.M.C.A. did. Well, if it 
has taught a man like Horace to make money, the war was a 
pretty good thing, after all.” 

“Miss Jenny! How can you talk that way, after John’s 
—after...” 

“Fiddlesticks,” Miss Jenny said. “The war just gave John 
a good excuse to get himself killed. If it hadn’t been that, 


42 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


it would have been some other way that would have been a 
bother to everybody around.” 

“Miss Jenny!” 

“IT know, my dear. I’ve lived with these bullheaded Sar- 
torises for eighty years, and I’ll never give a single ghost of — 
’em the satisfaction of shedding a tear over him. What did / 
Horace’s message say?” =] 

“It was about something he was bringing home with him,” 
the other answered, and her serene face filled with a sort — 
of fond exasperation. “It was such an incoherent message. . 

. - Horace never could say anything clearly from a distance.” — 
She mused again, gazing down the street with its tunnel of | 
oaks and elms, between which sunlight fell in spaced tiger 
bars. “Do you suppose he could have adopted a war-orphan?” 

“War-orphan,” Miss Jenny repeated. “More likely it’s some — 
Wwar-orphan’s mamma.” 

Simon appeared at the corner of the house, wiping his 
mouth on the back of his hand, and crossed the lawn wil 
shuffling celerity. His cigar was not visible. 

“No,” the other said quickly, with grave concern. “You 
don’t believe he would have done that? No, no, he wouldn’t 
have; Horace wouldn’t have done that. He never does any- 
thing without telling me about it first. He would have written; 
I know he would. You really don’t think that sounds like 
Horace, do you? A thing like that?” 

“Hmph,” Miss Jenny said through her high-bridged Nor-- 
man nose. “An innocent like Horace straying with that trust- 
ing air of his among all those man-starved European women? 
He wouldn’t know it himself, until it was too late; especially 
in a foreign language. I bet in every town he was in over 
seven days, his landlady or somebody was keeping his sup- 
per on the stove when he was late, or holding out sugar on 
the other men to sweeten his coffee with. Some men are 
born to always have a woman making a doormat of her- 
self for him, just as some men are born cuckolded. ... 
How old are you?” 

“Tm still twenty-six, Miss Jenny,” the younger woman 
replied equably. Simon unhitched the horses and he stood 
now beside the carriage in his Miss Jenny attitude. It 
differed from the bank one; there was now in it a gallant 
and protective deference. Miss Jenny examined the still 
serenity of the other’s face. 


a 


| SARTORIS 43 


“Why don’t you get married, and let that baby look after 
himself for a while? Mark my words, it won’t be six months 
before some other woman will be falling all over herself for 
the privilege of keeping his feet dry, and he won’t even miss 
) you.” : 
“I promised mother,” the other replied quietly and with- 
out offense. . . . “I don’t see why he couldn’t have sent an 
intelligible message.” 
_ “Well...” Miss Jenny turned to her carriage. “Maybe 
it’s only an orphan, after all,” she said with comfortless 
reassurance. 
_ “Tl know soon, anyway,” the other agreed, and she crossed 
to a small car at the curb and opened the door. 
- Miss Jenny got in her carriage and Simon mounted and 
gathered up the reins. “Let me know when you hear again,” 
she called as the carriage moved forward. “Drive out and get 
some more flowers when you want ’em.” 

“Thank you. Good-bye.” 

“All right, Simon.” The carriage moved on again, and 

again Simon withheld his news until they were out of town. 

“Mist’ Bayard done got home,” he remarked, in his former 
conversational tone. 

“Where is he?” Miss Jenny demanded immediately. 

“He ain’t come out to de place yit,” Simon answered. “I 
“speck he went to de graveyard.” 

“Nonsense,” Miss Jenny snapped. “No Sartoris ever goes 
to the cemetery but once. . . . Does Colonel know he’s 
home?” 

“Yessum. I tole him, but he don’t ack like he believed I 
wuz tellin’ him de troof.” 

“You mean nobody’s seen him but you?” 

’ “JT ain’t seed ’im neither,” Simon disclaimed. “Section han’ 
seed ’im jump off de train and tole me——” 

“You damn fool nigger!” Miss Jenny stormed. “And you 
went and blurted a fool thing like that to Bayard? Haven't 

you got any more sense than that?” 

“Section han’ seed ’im,” Simon repeated stubbornly. “I 
reckon he knowed Mist’ Bayard when he seed ’im.” 

“Well, where is he, then?” 

“He mought have gone to de graveyard,” Simon suggested. 

“Drive on!” 


44 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


Miss Jenny found her nephew with two bird dogs in 
his office. The room was lined with bookcases containing | 
rows of heavy legal tomes bound in dun calf and emanating 
an atmosphere of dusty and undisturbed meditation, and a 
miscellany of fiction of the historical-romantic school (all 
Dumas was there, and the steady progression of the volumes — 
now constituted Bayard’s entire reading, and one volume | 
lay always on the night table beside his bed) and a collection | 
of indiscriminate objects—small packets of seed, old rusted | 
spurs and bits and harness buckles, brochures on animal and | 
vegetable diseases, ornate tobacco containers which people | 
had given him on various occasions and anniversaries and 
which he had never used, inexplicable bits of rock and — 
desiccated roots and grain pods—all collected one at a time © 
and for reasons which had long since escaped his memory, 
yet preserved just the same. The room contained an enormous 
closet with a padlocked door, and a big table littered with 
yet more casual objects, and a locked roll-top desk (keys and 
locks were an obsession with him), and a sofa and three 
big leather chairs. This room was always referred to as the 
office, and Bayard now sat here with his hat on and still 
in his riding boots, transferring bourbon whisky from a small 
rotund keg to a silver-stoppered decanter, while the two 
dogs watched him with majestic gravity. 

One of the dogs was quite old and nearly blind. It spent 
most of the day lying in the sun in the back yard or, during 
the hot summer day, in the cool dusty obscurity beneath 
the kitchen. But toward the middle of the afternoon it went 
around to the front and waited there quietly and gravely until 
the carriage came up the drive; and when Bayard had de- 
scended and entered the house it returned to the back and 
waited again until Isom led the mare up and Bayard came 
out and mounted. Then together they spent the afternoon 
going quietly and unhurriedly about the meadows and fields 
and woods in their seasonal mutations—the man on his horse 
and the ticked setter gravely beside him, while the descending 
evening of their lives drew toward its peaceful close upon 
the kind land that had bred them both. 

The young dog was not yet two years old; his net was 
too hasty for the sedateness of their society overlong, and 
though at times he set forth with them or came quartering 
up, splashed and eager, from somewhere to join them in 


bg 
et 


SARTORIS 45 


‘midfield, it was not for long, and soon he must dash away 
‘with his tongue flapping and the tense, delicate feathering 
‘of his tail in pursuit of the maddening elusive smells with 
‘which the world surrounded him and tempted him from 
‘every thicket and copse and ravine. 

Bayard’s boots were wet to the tops and the soles were 
caked with mud, and he bent with intent preoccupation 
over his keg and the bottle under the sober curiosity of the 
dogs. The keg was propped bung-upward in a second chair 
and he was siphoning the rich brown liquor delicately into 
the decanter by means of a rubber tube. Miss Jenny entered 
with her black bonnet still perched on the exact top of her 
trim white head and the dogs looked up at her, the older 
with grave dignity, the younger more quickly, tapping his 
tail on the floor with fawning diffidence. But Bayard didn’t 
raise his head. Miss Jenny closed the door and stared coldly 
at his boots. 

“Your feet are wet,” she stated. Still he didn’t look up, 
but held the tube delicately in the bottle-neck while the 
liquor mounted steadily in the decanter. At times his deaf- 
ness was very convenient, more convenient than actual, per- 
haps; but who could know certainly? “You go upstairs and 
get those boots off,’ Miss Jenny commanded, raising her 
voice; “I'll fill the decanter.” 

But within the serene walled tower of his deafness his 
imperturbability did not falter until the decanter was full 
and he pinched the tube and raised it and drained it back 
into the keg. The older dog had not moved, but the younger 
one had retreated beyond Bayard, where it lay motionless 
and alert, its head on its crossed forepaws, watching Miss 
Jenny with one melting, unwinking eye, Bayard drew the tube 
from the keg and looked at her for the first time. ‘““What did 
you say?” 

But Miss Jenny returned to the door and opened it and 
shouted into the hall, eliciting an alarmed response from 
the kitchen, followed presently by Simon in the flesh. “Go 
up and get Colonel’s slippers,” she directed. When she turned 
into the room again neither Bayard nor the keg was visible, 
but from the open closet door there protruded the young 
dog’s interested hindquarters and the tense feathering of his 
barometric tail; then Bayard thrust the dog out of the closet 


46 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


‘with his foot and. emerged himself and locked the door 
behind him. 

“Has Simon come in yet?” he asked. 3 

“He’s coming now,” she answered; “I just called him. 
Sit down and get those wet boots off.” At that moment — 
Simon entered with the slippers, and Bayard sat obediently © 
and Simon knelt and drew his boots off under Miss Jenny’s~ 
martinet eye. “Are his socks dry?” she asked. 

“No’m, dey ain’t wet,” Simon answered. But she bent and — 
felt them herself. | 

“Here,” Bayard said testily, but Miss Jenny ran her hand | 
over both his feet with brusque imperturbability. | 

“Precious little fault of his if they ain't,” she said 
across the topless wall of his deafness. “And then you have © 
to come along with that fool yarn of yours.” 

“Section han’ seed ’im,” Simon repeated stubbornly, thrust- 
ing the slippers on Bayard’s feet; “I ain’t never said I seed 
him.” He stood up and rubbed his hands on his thighs. 

Bayard stamped into the slippers. “Bring the toddy fix- 
ings, Simon.” Then to his aunt, in a tone which he con- 
trived to make casual: “Simon says Bayard got off the 
train this afternoon.” But Miss Jenny was storming at Simon 
again. 

“Come back here and get these boots and set ’em behind 
the stove,” she said. Simon returned and sidled swiftly to the 
hearth and gathered up the boots. “And take these dogs out 
of here, too,” she added. “Thank the Lord he hasn’t thought 
about bringing his horse in with him.” Immediately the old 
dog came to his feet, and followed by the younger one’s 
diffident alacrity, departed with that same assumed delibera- - 
tion with which both Bayard and Simon obeyed Miss Jenny’s 
brisk implacability. 

“Simon says ”” Bayard repeated. 

“Simon says fiddlesticks,” Miss Jenny snapped. “Have you 
lived with Simon sixty years without learning that he don’t 
know the truth when he sees it?” And she followed Simon 
from the room and on to the kitchen, and while Simon’s tall 
yellow daughter bent over her biscuit board and Simon filled 
a glass pitcher with fresh water and sliced lemons and set 
them and a sugar bowl and two tall glasses on a tray, Miss 
Jenny stood in the doorway and curled Simon’s grizzled re- 
maining hair into tighter kinks yet. She had a fine command 


i ‘SARTORIS 47 


of language at all times, but when her ire was aroused she 
soared without effort to sublime heights. Hers was a force- 
ful clarity and a colorful simplicity and a bold use of 
metaphor that Demosthenes would have envied and which 
even mules comprehended and of whose intent the most 
obtuse persons remained not long in doubt; and beneath it 
| Simon’s head bobbed lower and lower and the fine assump- 
tion of detached preoccupation moulted like feathers 
_from about him, until he caught up the tray and ducked from 
the room. Miss Jenny’s voice followed him, descending easily 
with a sweeping comprehensiveness that included a warning 
and a suggestion for future conduct for Simon and Elnora 
and all their descendants, actual and problematical, for some 
years. 

“And the next time,” she concluded, “you, or any section 
hand, or brakeman, or delivery boy either, sees or hears 
-anything you think will be of interest to Colonel, you tell 
me about it first; Pll do all the telling after that.” She gave 

Elnora another glare for good measure and returned to the 
office, where her nephew was stirring sugar and water care- 
fully in the two glasses. 


Simon in a white jacket ‘officiated as butler—doubled in 
brass, you might say. Only it was not brass, but silver so 
fine and soft that some of the spoons were worn now almost 

to paper thinness where fingers in their generations had held 
them; silver which Simon’s grandfather Joby had buried on 

a time beneath the ammoniac barn floor while Simon, aged 

three, in a single filthy garment, had looked on with a 
_child’s grave interest in the curious game. 

- An effluvium of his primary calling clung about him al- 
ways, however, even when he was swept and garnished for 
church and a little shapeless in a discarded Prince Albert 
“coat of Bayard’s; and his every advent into the dining-room 
with dishes brought with him, and the easy attitudes into 

which he fell near the sideboard while answering Miss Jen- 
-ny’s abrupt questions or while pursuing some fragmentary 
conversation which he and Bayard had been engaged in 
earlier in the day, disseminated, and his exits left behind 
him, a faint nostalgia of the stables. But tonight he brought 

the dishes in and set them down and scuttled immediately 


48 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


back to the kitchen: Simon realized that again he had talked 
too much. 

Miss Jenny, with a shawl of white wool about her shoul- 
ders against the evening’s coolness, was doing the talking to- 
night, immersing herself and her nephew in a wealth of 
trivialities—petty doings and sayings and gossip—a behavior _ 
which was not like Miss Jenny at all. She had opinions, and | 


a pithy, savagely humorous way of stating them, but it was 
very seldom that she descended to gossip. Meanwhile Bay- — 


ard had shut himself up in that walled tower of his deafness 
and raised the drawbridge and clashed the portcullis to, where 
you never knew whether he heard you or not, while his 
corporeal self ate its supper steadily. Presently they had 
done, and Miss Jenny rang the little silver bell at her hand 
and Simon opened the pantry door and received again the 
cold broadside of her displeasure, and shut the door and 
lurked behind it until they had left the room. 

Bayard lit his cigar in the office and Miss Jenny followed 
him there and drew her chair to the table beneath the lamp 
and opened the daily Memphis newspaper. She enjoyed hu- 
manity in its more colorful mutations, preferring lively ro- 
mance to: the most impeccable of dun fact, so she took in 
the more lurid afternoon paper, even though it was yester- 
day’s when it reached her, and read with cold avidity ac- 
counts of arson and murder and violent dissolution and 
adultery; in good time and soon the American scene was to 
furnish her with diversion in the form of bootleggers’ wars, 
but this was not yet. Her nephew sat beyond the mellow 
downward pool of the lamp, his feet braced against the 
corner of the hearth, from which his boot-soles and the boot- 
soles of John Sartoris before him had long since worn the 
varnish away, puffing his cigar. He was not reading, and at 
intervals Miss Jenny glanced above her glasses and across 
the top of the paper at him. Then she read again, and there — 
was no sound in the room save the sporadic rustling of the | 
page. | 

After a time he rose, with one of his characteristic plung- 
ing movements, and she watched him as he crossed the room 
and passed through the door and banged it behind him. She | 
read on for a while longer, but her attention had followed 
the heavy tramp of his feet up the hall, and when this 


SARTORIS 49 


ceased she rose and laid the paper aside and followed him 
to the front door. 

The moon had got up beyond the dark eastern wall of 
hills and it lay without emphasis upon the valley, mounting 
like a child’s balloon behind the oaks and locusts along the 
drive. Bayard sat with his feet on the veranda rail, in the 
moonlight. His cigar glowed at special intervals, and a shrill 
monotone of crickets rose from the immediate grass, and 
further away, from among the trees, a fairylike piping of 
young frogs like endless silver small bubbles rising. A thin, 
sourceless odor of locust drifted up, intangible as fading 
tobacco-wraiths, and from the rear of the house, up the 
dark hall, Elnora’s voice floated in meaningless minor sus- 
pense. 

Miss Jenny groped in the darkness beside the door, and 
from beside the yawning lesser obscurity of the mirror she 
took Bayard’s hat from the hook and carried it out to him 
and put it in his hand. “Don’t sit out here too long, now. 
It ain’t summer yet.” 

He grunted indistinguishably, but he put the hat on and 
she turned and went back to the office, and finished the 
paper and folded it and laid it on the table. She snapped the 
light off and mounted the dark stairs to her room. The moon 
shene above the trees at this height and fell in broad silver 
bars through the eastern windows. 

Before turning on the light she crossed to the southern 
wall and raised a window there, upon the crickets and frogs 
and somewhere a mocking-bird. Outside the window was a 
magnolia tree, but it was not in bloom yet, nor had the 
honeysuckle massed along the garden fence flowered. But 
this would be soon, and from here she could overlook the 
garden, could look down upon Cape jasmine and syringa 
and callacanthus where the moon lay upon their bronze and 
yet unflowered sleep, and upon other shoots and graftings 
from the far-away Carolina gardens she had known as a girl. 

Just beyond the corner, from the invisible kitchen, Elnora’s 
voice welled in mellow, falling suspense. “All folks talkin’ 
*bout heaven ain’t gwine dar,” Elnora sang, and presently 
she and Simon emerged into the moonlight and took the path 
to Simon’s cabin below the barn. Simon had fired his cigar at 
last, and the evil smoke of it trailed behind him, fading. But 
when they had gone the rank pungency of it seemed still to 


50 WILLIAM FAULKNER — 


linger within the sound of the crickets and of the frogs upon 
the silver air, mingled and blended inextricably with the 
dying fall of Elnora’s voice: “All folks talkin’ *bout heaven 
ain’t gwine dar.” aay 


His cigar was cold, and he mioved and dug a match 
from his waistcoat and relit it and braced his feet again 
upon the railing, and again the drifting sharpness of to- 
bacco lay along the windless currents of the silver air, stray- 
ing and fading slowly with locust-breaths and the ceaseless 
fairy reiteration of crickets and frogs. There was a mocking- 
bird somewhere down the valley, and after a while another 
sang from the magnolia at the corner of the garden fence. 
An automobile passed along the smooth valley road, slowed 
for the railway crossing, then sped on. Before the sound 
of it had died away the whistle of the nine-thirty train drifted 
down from the hills. 

Two long blasts with dissolving echoes, two short follow- 
ing ones, but before it came in sight his cigar was 
cold again and he sat holding it in his fingers and watched 
the locomotive drag its string of yellow windows up the 
valley and into the hills once more, where after a time it 
whistled again, arrogant and resonant and sad. John Sartoris 
had sat so on this veranda and watched his two daily trains 
emerge from the hills and cross the valley into the hills, with 
lights and smoke and a noisy simulation of speed. But now 
the railway belonged to a syndicate and there were more 
than two trains on it that ran from Lake Michigan to the Gulf 
of Mexico, completing his dream, while John Sartoris slept 
among martial cherubim and the useless vainglory of what- 
ever God he did not scorn to recognize. 

Old Bayard’s cigar was cold again. He sat with it dead 
in his fingers and watched a tall shape emerge from the 
lilac bushes beside the garden fence and cross the patchy 
moonlight toward the veranda. His grandson wore no hat 
and he came on and mounted the steps and stood with the 
moonlight bringing the hawklike planes of his face into high 
relief while his grandfather sat with his dead cigar and 
looked at him. f 

“Bayard, son?” old Bayard said. Young Bayard stood in 
the moonlight. His eyesockets were cavernous shadows. 

“I tried to keep him from going up there on that goddam 


- SARTORIS 51 


little popgun,” he said at last with brooding savageness. Then 


- he moved again and old Bayard lowered his feet, but his 


grandson only dragged a chair violently up beside him and 


- flung himself into it. His motions were abrupt also, like his 


grandfather’s, but controlled and flowing for all their vio- 


- lence. 


“Why in hell didn’t you let me know you were coming?” 
old Bayard demanded. “What do you mean, straggling in here 


_ like this?” 


“T didn’t let anybody know.” Young Bayard dug a ciga- 
tette from his pocket and raked a match on his shoe. 

“What?” 

“T didn’t tell anybody I was coming,” he repeated above 
the cupped match, raising his voice. 

“Simon knew it. Do you inform nigger servants of your 
movements instead of your own granddaddy?” 

“Damn Simon, sir,” young Bayard shouted. “Who set him 
to watching me?” 

“Don't yell at me, boy,” old Bayard shouted in turn. His 
grandson fiung the match away and drew at the cigarette 
in deep, troubled draughts. “Don’t wake Jenny,” old Bayard 
added more mildly, striking a match to his cold cigar. “All 
right, are you?” 

“Here,” young Bayard said, extending his hand, “let me 
hold it. You’re going to set your mustache on fire.” But old 
Bayard repulsed him sharply and sucked stubbornly and 
impotently at the match in his unsteady fingers. 

“T said, are you all right?’ he repeated. 

“Why not?” young Bayard snapped. “Takes damn near as 
big a fool to get hurt in a war as it does in peacetime. Damn 
fool, that’s what it is.” He drew at the cigarette again, then 
he hurled it, not half consumed, after the match. “There was 
one I had to lay for four days to catch. Had to get Sibleigh 
in an old crate of an Ak. W. to suck him in for me. Wouldn’t 
look at anything but cold meat, him and his skull and bones. 
Well, he got it. Stayed on him for six thousand feet, put a 
whole belt right into his cockpit. You could ’a’ covered ’em 
all with your hat. But the bastard just wouldn’t burn.” His 
voice rose again as he talked on. Locust drifted up in sweet 
gusts, and the crickets and frogs were clear and monotonous 
as pipes blown drowsily by an idiot boy. From her silver 


22 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


casement the moon looked down upon the valley dissolving 
in opaline tranquillity into the serene mysterious infinitude 
of the hills, and young Bayard’s voice went on and on, re- 
counting violence and speed and death. 

“Hush,” old Bayard said again. “You'll wake Jenny.” And 
his grandson’s voice sank obediently, but soon it rose again, 
and after a time Miss Jenny emerged with the white 
woolen shawl over her night-dress and came and kissed him. 

“I. reckon you're all right,” she said, “or you wouldn’t 
be in such a bad humor. Tell us about Johnny.” 

“He was drunk,” young Bayard answered harshly, “or a 
fool. I tried to keep him from going up there, on that damn 
Camel. You couldn’t see your hand that morning. Air all full 
of hunks of cloud, and any fool could ’a’ known that on their 
side it’d be full of Fokkers that could reach twenty-five 
thousand, and him on a damn Camel. But he was hell-bent 
on going up there, damn near to Lille. I couldn’t keep him 
from it. He shot at me,” young Bayard said; “I tried to drive 


him back but he gave me a burst. He was already high as 


he could get, but they must have been five thousand feet 
above us. They flew all over him. Hemmed him up like a 
damn calf in a pen while one of them sat right on his tail 
until he took fire and jumped. Then they streaked for home.” 
Locust drifted and drifted on the still air, and the silver 
rippling of the frogs. In the magnolia at the corner of the 
house the mocking-bird sang; down the valley the other 
one replied. 

“Streaked for home, with the rest of his gang,” young 
Bayard said, “him and his skull and bones. It was Ploeckner,” 
he added, and for the moment his voice was still and un- 
troubled with vindicated pride. “He was one of the best they 
had. Pupil of Richthofen’s.” 

“Well, that’s something,” Miss Jenny agreed, stroking his 
head. 

- Young Bayard brooded for a time. 

“TI tried to keep him from going up there on that goddam 
little popgun,” he burst out again. 

“What did you expect, after the way you raised him?” 
Miss Jenny asked. “You're the oldest. . . . You’ve been to 
the cemetery, haven’t you?” 

“Yessum,” he answered quietly. 


SARTORIS 53 


“What’s that?” old Bayard demanded. 

“That old fool Simon said that’s where you were. ... You 
come on and eat your supper,” she said briskly and firmly, 
entering his life again without a by-your-leave, taking up the 
snarled threads of it after her brisk and capable fashion, and 
he rose obediently. 

“What's that?” old Bayard repeated. 

“And you come on in, too.” Miss Jenny swept him also 


into the orbit of her will as you gather a garment from a 


chair in passing. “Time you were in bed.” They followed her 
to the kitchen and stood while she delved into the ice-box 
and set food on the table, and a pitcher of milk, and drew 
up a chair. 

“Fix him a toddy, Jenny,” old Bayard suggested. But Miss 
Jenny vetoed this immediately. 

“Milk’s what he wants. I reckon he had to drink enough 
whisky during that war to last him for a while. Bayard used 
to never come home from his without wanting to ride his 
horse up the front steps and into the house. Come on, now,” 
and she drove old Bayard firmly out of the kitchen and up 
the stairs. “You go on to bed, you hear? Let him alone for a 
while.” She saw his door shut and entered young Bayard’s 
room and prepared his bed, and after a while from her 
own room she heard him mount the stairs. 

His room was treacherously illumined by the moon, and 
without turning on the light he went and sat on the bed. 
Outside the windows the interminable crickets and 
frogs, as though the moon’s rays were thin glass impacting 
among the trees and shrubs and shattering in brittle musical 
rain upon the ground; and above this and with a deep, 
timbrous quality, the measured respirations of the pump in 
the electric plant beyond the barn. 

He dug another cigarette from his pocket and lit it. But 
he took only two draughts before he flung it away. And then 
he sat quietly in the room which he and John had shared 
in the young masculine violence of their twinship, on the 
bed where he and his wife had lain the last night of his 
leave, the night before he went back to England and out to 
the Front again, where John already was. Beside him on the 
pillow the wild bronze swirling of her hair was hushed now 
in the darkness, and she lay holding his arm with both 


54 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


hands against her breast while they talked quietly, soberly 
at last. 

But he had not been thinking of her then. When he thought 
of her who lay rigid in the dark beside him, holding his arm 
tightly to her breast, it was only to be a little savagely 
ashamed of the heedless thing he had done to her. He was 
thinking of his brother whom he had not seen in over a year, 
thinking that in a month they would see one another again. 

Nor was he thinking of her now, although the walls held, 
like a withered flower in a casket, something of that magical 
chaos in which they had lived for two months, tragic and 
transient as a blooming of honeysuckle and sharp as the odor 
of mint. He was thinking of his dead brother; the spirit of 
their violent complementing days lay like dust everywhere 
in the room, obliterating that other presence, stopping his 
breathing, and he went to the window and flung the sash 
crashing upward and leaned there, gulping air into his lungs 
like a man who has been submerged and who still cannot 
believe that he has reached the surface again. 

Later, lying naked between the sheets, he waked himself 
with his own groaning. The room was filled now with a gray 
light, sourceless and chill, and he turned his head and saw 
Miss Jenny, the woolen shawl about her shoulders, sitting 
in a chair beside the bed. 

“What’s the matter?” he said. 

“That’s what I want to know,” Miss Jenny answered. 
“You make more noise than that water pump.” 

“I want a drink.” 

Miss Jenny leaned over and raised a glass from the floor 
beside her. Bayard had risen to his elbow and he took the 
glass. His hand stopped before the glass reached his mouth 
and he hunched on his elbow, the glass beneath his nose. 

“Hell,” he said, “I said a drink.” 

“You drink that milk, boy,” Miss Jenny commanded. 
“You think I’m going to sit up all night just to feed you 
whisky? Drink it, now.” 

He emptied the glass obediently and lay back. Miss Jenny 
set the glass on the floor. 

“What time is it?” 

“Hush,” she said. She laid her hand on his brow. “Go 
to sleep.” 


_ SARTORIS 55 


He rolled his head on the pillow, but he could not 
evade her hand. 

“Get away,” he said. “Let me alone.” 

“Hush,” Miss Jenny said. “Go to sleep.” 


PART TWO 


Srmon said: “You ain’t never yit planted nothin’ whar hit 
ought ter be planted.” He sat on the bottom step, whet- 
ting the blade of a hoe with a file. Miss Jenny stood with 
her caller at the edge of the veranda above him, in a man’s 
felt hat and heavy gloves. A pair of shears dangled below 
her waist, glinting in the morning sunlight. 

“And whose business is that?” she demanded. “Yours, or 
Colonel’s? Either one of you can loaf on this porch and 
tell me where a plant will grow best or look best, but if 
either of you ever grew as much as a weed out of the 
ground yourselves, I’ve never seen it. I don’t give two whoops 
in the bad place where you or Colonel, either, thinks a flower 
ought to be planted: I plant my flowers just exactly where I 
want ’em to be planted.” 

“And den dares ’um not ter come up,” Simon added. “Dat’s 
de way you en Isom gyardens. Thank de Lawd Isom ain’t got 
to make his livin’ wid de sort of gyardenin’ he learns in dat 
place.” Still whetting at the hoe blade he jerked his head 
toward the corner of the house. 

He wore a disreputable hat, of a fabric these many years 
anonymous. Miss Jenny stared coldly down upon this hat. 

“Isom made his living by being born black,” Miss Jenny 
snapped. “Suppose you quit scraping at that hoe and see if 
you can’t dare some of the weeds in that salvia bed to 
come up.” 

“I got to git a aidge on dis curry-comb,” Simon said. 
“You go’n out dar to yo’ gyarden: I'll git dis bed cleaned 
up.” He scraped steadily at the hoe blade. 

“You’ve been at that long enough to find out you can’t 
possibly wear that blade down to the handle with just a file,” 

56 


_ SARTORIS 57 


Miss Jenny said. “You’ve been at it ever since breakfast. 
_I heard you. You get on out there where folks passing will 
_ think you’re working, anyhow.” 
| Simon groaned dismally and spent a half minute laying 
the file aside. He laid it on a step, then he picked it up 
and moved it to another step. Then he laid it against the 

step behind him. He ran his thumb along the blade, examin- 
_ ing it with morose hopefulness. 

ES “Hit mought do now,” he said. “But hit’ll be jes’ like 
_ weedin’ wid a curry-c se 

— “You try it, anyway,” Miss Jenny said. “Maybe the 
_weeds’ll think it’s a hoe. You go give ’em a chance to, any- 
how.” 

“Ise gwine, Ise gwine,’ Simon answered pettishly, rising 
_and hobbling away. “You go’n see erbout dat place o’ yo’n; 
- Vl ’tend ter dis.” 

Miss Jenny and the caller descended the steps and went 
-on toward the corner of the house. 

“Why he’d rather sit there and rasp at that new hoe 
‘with a file instead of grubbing up a dozen blades of grass 

in that salvia bed, I can’t see,” Miss Jenny said. “But he’ll 
do it. He’d sit there and scrape at that hoe until it looked 

like a saw blade, if I’d let him. Bayard bought a lawn 
-mower three or four years ago—God knows what for—and 
turned it over to Simon. The folks that made it guaranteed 

it for a year. They didn’t know Simon, though. I often 
thought, reading about those devastations and things in the 
paper last year, what a good time Simon would have had 
in the war. He could have shown ’em things about devasta- 
tion they never thought of. Isom!” she shouted. 

They entered the garden and Miss Jenny paused at the 
gate. “You, Isom!” 

This time there was a reply, and Miss Jenny went on 

with her caller and Isom lounged up from somewhere and 
_ clicked the gate after him. 

“Why didn’t you ” Miss Jenny looked back over her 
shoulder, then she stopped and regarded Isom’s suddenly 
military figure with brief and cold astonishment. He now 
wore khaki, with a divisional emblem on the shoulder and a 
tarnished service stripe on his cuff. His lean sixteen-year- 
old neck rose from the slovenly collar’s limp, overlarge em- 
brace and a surprising amount of wrist was visible below 


= 


58 WILLIAM FAULKNER. 


the cuffs. The breeches bagged hopelessly into the unskill- 
ful wrapping of the putties which, with either a fine — 
sense for the unique or a bland disregard of military usage, 
he had donned prior to his shoes, and the soiled overseas — 
cap came down regrettably on his bullet head. 

“Where did you get those clothes?” The sunlight glinted _ 
on Miss Jenny’s shears, and Miss Benbow in her white | 
dress and soft straw hat turned also and looked at him 4 
with a strange expression. ; 

“Dey’s Caspey’s,” Isom answered. “I jes’ bor’d ’um.” 

“Caspey?” Miss Jenny repeated. “Is he home?” 

“Yessum. He got in las’ night on de nine-thirty.” 

“Last night, did he? Where is he now? Asleep, I reckon?” 

“Yessum. Dat’s whar he wuz when I lef’ home.” 

“And I reckon that’s how you borrowed his uniform,” — 
Miss Jenny said tartly. “Well, let him sleep this morning. 
Give him one day to get over the war. But if it made a 
fool out of him like it did out of Bayard, he’d better put 
that thing on again and go back to it. Ill declare, men 
can’t seem to stand anything.” She went on, the guest in her 
straight white dress following. 

“You are awfully hard on men, not to have a husband 
to bother with, Miss Jenny,” she said. “Besides, you’re judg- 
ing all men by your Sartorises.” 

“They ain’t my Sartorises,” Miss Jenny disclaimed prompt- 
ly; “I just inherited ’°em. But you just wait: you'll have one 
of your own to bother with soon; you just wait until Horace 
gets home, then see how long it takes him to get over it. 
Men can’t stand anything,” she repeated. “Can’t even stand 
helling around with no worry and no responsibility and no — 
limit to all the meanness they can think about wanting to do. 
Do you think a man could sit day after day and month ~ 
after month in a house miles from nowhere and spend the 
time between casualty lists tearing up bedclothes and win- 
dow curtains and table linen to make lint, and watching 
sugar and flour and meat dwindling away, and using pine 
knots for light because there aren’t any candles and no 
candlesticks to put ’em in if there were, and hiding in 
nigger cabins while drunken Yankee generals set fire to the 
house your great-great-grandfather built and you and all - 
your folks were born in? Don’t talk to me about men suffer- 
ing in war.” Miss Jenny snipped larkspur savagely. “Just 


% 


oe: 


‘SARTORIS 59 


{ you wait until Horace comes home; then you'll see. Just a 


good excuse for ’°em to make nuisances of themselves and 
stay in the way while the womenfolks are trying to clean 


‘up the mess they left with their fighting. John at least had 


consideration enough, after he’d gone and gotten himself 
into something where he had no business, not to come back 
and worry everybody to distraction. But Bayard now, com- 
ing back in the middle of it and having everybody thinking 


he was settled down at last, teaching at that Memphis flying 
‘school, and then marrying that fool girl.” 


“Miss Jenny!” 
“Well, I don’t mean that, but she’d ought’ve been spanked, 
hard. I know: didn’t I do the same thing, myself? It was all 


that harness that Bayard wore. Talk about men being taken 


in by a uniform!” She clipped larkspur. “Dragging me up 
there to the wedding, mind you, with a church full of rented- 
swords and some of Bayard’s pupils trying to drop roses on 


em when they came out. I reckon some of ’em were not his 


pupils, because one of ’em finally did drop a handful that 
missed everything and fell in the street.” She snipped lark- 


spur savagely. “I had dinner with ’em one night. Sat in the 


hotel an hour until they remembered to come for me. Then 
we stopped at a delicatessen and Bayard and Caroline got 
out and went in and came back with about a bushel of pack- 


ages and dumped ’em into the car, where they leaked grease 


on my new stockings. That was the dinner I’d been invited 
to, mind you; there wasn’t a sign of anything that looked 


or smelled like a stove in the whole place. I didn’t offer to 


help ’em. I told Caroline I didn’t know anything about. that 
sort of housekeeping because my folks were old-fashioned 
enough to cook food. 

“Then the others came in—some of Bayard’s soldier 
friends, and a drove of other folks’ wives, near as I could 
gather. Young women that ought to’ve been at home, seeing 
about supper, gabbling and screeching in that silly way young 
married women have when they’re doing something they 


hope their husbands won’t like. They were all unwrapping 
bottles—about two dozen, I reckon, and Bayard and Caro- 
line came in with that silver I gave ’°em and monogrammed 


napkins and that delicatessen fodder that tasted like swamp- 
grass, on paper plates. We ate it there, sitting on the floor 
or standing up or just wherever you happened to be. 


60 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


“That was Caroline’s idea of keeping house. She said 
they’d settle down when they got old, if the war was over 


by then. About thirty-five, I suppose she meant. Thin as a 


rail; there wouldn’t have been much to spank. But she’d 


ought to have had it, just the same. Soon as she found out 


about the baby, she named it. Named it nine months before. 
it was born and told everybody about it. Used to talk about — 
it like it was her grandfather or something. Always sayings i 


Bayard won’t let me do this or that or the other.” 

Miss Jenny continued to clip larkspur, the caller tall in a 
white dress beside her. The fine and huge simplicity of the~ 
house rose among thickening trees, the garden lay in sun- 
light bright with bloom, myriad with scent and with a drowsy 
humming of bees—a steady golden sound, as of sunlight 
become audible—all the impalpable veil of the immediate, 
the familiar; just beyond it a girl with a bronze swirling of 
hair and a small, supple body in a constant epicene unrepose, 
a dynamic fixation like that of carven sexless figures caught 
in moments of action, striving, a mechanism all of whose 
members must move in performing the most trivial action, 
her wild hands not accusing but passionate still beyond the 
veil impalpable but sufficient. 

Miss Jenny stooped above the flower bed, her narrow 
back, though stooping, erect still, indomitable. A thrush 


flashed modestly across the bright air and into the magnolia ~ 


tree in a dying parabola. “And then, when he had to go 
back to the war, of course he brought her out here and left 
her on my hands.” The caller stood motionless in her white 
dress, and Miss Jenny said, “No, I don’t mean that.” She 
snipped larkspur. 


“Poor women,” she said, “I reckon we do have to take ~ 


our revenge wherever and whenever we can get it. Only 
she ought to’ve taken it out on Bayard.” 

“When she died,” Narcissa said, “and he couldn’t know 
about it; couldn’t have come to her if he had? And you 
can say that?” 

“Bayard love anybody, that cold devil?” Miss Jenny 


clipped larkspur. “(He never cared a snap of his fingers for — 


anybody in his life except John.” She snipped larkspur sav- 
agely. “Swelling around here like it was our fault, like we 
made ’em go to that war. And now he’s got to have an auto- 
mobile, got to go all the way to Memphis to buy one. An 


| 
| 
| 


"SARTORIS 61 


automobile in Bayard Sartoris’ barn, mind you; him that 
won't even lend the bank’s money to a man that owns one. 
..- Do you want some sweet peas?” 

“Yes, please,” Narcissa answered. Miss Jenny straightened 
up, then she stopped utterly still. 

- “Just look yonder, will you?” She pointed with the shears. 
“That’s how they suffer from war, poor things.” Beyond a 
frame of sweet peas Isom in his khaki strode solemnly back 

and forth. Upon his right shoulder was a hoe and on his face 
an expression of rapt absorption, and as he reversed at the 
end of his beat he murmured to himself in measured sing- 
song. 

“You, Isom!” Miss Jenny shouted. 

_- He halted in mid-stride, still at shoulder arms. “Ma’am?” 
he said mildly. Miss Jenny continued to glare at him, and 
his military bearing faded and he lowered his piece and 
executed a sort of effacing movement within his martial 
shroud. 

“Put that hoe down and bring that basket over here. That’s 
the first time in your life you ever picked up a garden tool 
of your own free will. 1 wish I could discover the kind of 
uniform that would make you dig in the ground with it; I’d 
certainly buy you one.” 

“Yessum.” 

“If you want to play soldier, you go off somewhere with 
Bayard and do it. I can raise flowers without any help 
from the army,” she added, turning to the guest with her 
handful of larkspur. “And what are you laughing at?” she 
demanded. 

“You both look so funny,” the younger woman eeitied. 
“You looked so much more like a soldier than poor Isom, 
for all his uniform.” She touched her eyes with her finger 
tips. “I’m sorry: please forgive me for laughing.” 

“Hmph,” Miss Jenny sniffed. She put the larkspur into the 

basket and went on to the sweet peas and snipped again, 
viciously. The guest followed, as did Isom with the basket; 
and presently Miss Jenny had done with sweet peas and she 
moved on again with her train, pausing to cut a rose here 
and there, and stopped before a bed where tulips lifted their 
bright inverted bells. She and Isom had guessed happily this 
time; the various colors formed an orderly pattern. 

_- “When we dug ’em up last fall,” she told her guest, “I’d 


62 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


put a red one in Isom’s right hand and a yellow one in his 
left. Then I’d say, ‘All right, Isom, give me the red one.’ — 
He’d never fail to hold out his left hand, and if I just 
looked at him long enough, he’d hold out both hands. ‘Didn’t. 
I tell you to hold that red one in your right hand?’ I’d say. 
“Yessum, here ’tis,’ and out wowld come his left hand again. 
‘That ain’t your right hand, stupid,’ I’'d say. “Dat’s de one | 
you said wuz my right hand a while ago,’ Isom says. Ain’t | 
that so, nigger?” Miss Jenny glared at Isom, who again per-- 
formed his deprecatory effacing movement behind the slow | 
equanimity of his grin. : 

“Yessum, I ’speck it is.” 

“You'd better,” Miss Jenny rejoined warningly. “Now, how 
can anybody have a decent garden, with a fool like that? I 
expect every spring to find corn or lespedeza coming up in 
the hyacinth beds or something.” She examined the tulips 
again, weighing the balanced colors one against the other in 
her mind. “No, you don’t want any tulips,” she decided, 
moving on. 

“No, Miss Jenny,” the guest agreed demurely. They went 
on to the gate, and Miss Jenny stopped and took the basket 
from Isom. 

“And you go home and take that thing off, you hear?” 

“Yessum.” 

“And I want to look out that window in a few minutes 
and see you in the garden with that hoe again,” she added. 
“And I want to see both of your hands on it this time, and I ~ 
want to see it moving, too. You hear me?” 

“Yessum.” 

“And tell Caspey to be ready to go to work in the morn- 
ing. Even niggers that eat here have got to work some.” But - 
Isom was gone, and they went on and mounted to the 
veranda. “Don’t he sound like that’s exactly what he’s going © 
to do?” she confided as they entered the hall. “He knows as 
well as I do that I won’t dare look out that window, after 
what I said. Come in,” she added, opening the parlor doors. 

This room was open but seldom now, though in John 
Sartoris’ day it had been constantly in use. He was always 
giving dinners, and balls too on occasion, with the folding 
doors between it and the dining-room thrown open and 
three Negroes with stringed instruments on the stairway and 
all the candles burning, surrounding himself with a pageantry 


-SARTORIS 63 


of color and scent and music against which he moved with 
his bluff and jovial arrogance. He lay also overnight in this 
Toom in his gray regimentals and so brought to a conclusion 
_ the colorful, if not always untarnished, pageant of his own 
' career, contemplating for the last time his own apotheosis 

from the jocund mellowness of his generous hearth. 
But during his son’s time it fell less and less into use, 

and slowly and imperceptibly it lost its jovial but stately 
masculinity, becoming by mutual agreement a place for his 
wife and his son John’s wife and Miss Jenny to clean thor- 
oughly twice a year and in which, preceded by a ritualistic 
-unswaddling of brown holland, they entertained their more 
formal callers. This was its status at the birth of his grand- 
sons and it continued thus until the death of their parents, 
and later, to that of his wife. After that Miss Jenny bothered 
with formal callers but little and with the parlor not at all. 
She said it gave her the creeps. 

And so it stayed closed nearly all the time, and slowly 
acquired an atmosphere of solemn and macabre fustiness. 
- Occasionally young Bayard or John would open the door 
and peer into the solemn obscurity in which the shrouded 
furniture loomed with a sort of ghostly benignance, like al- 
“bino mastodons. But they did not enter; already in their 
minds the room was associated with death, an idea which 
even the holly and tinsel of Christmastide could not com- 
pletely obscure. They were away at school by the time they 
reached party age, but even during vacations, though they 
had filled the house with the polite bedlam of their contem- 
poraries, the room would be opened only on Christmas Eve, 
when the tree was set up and a fire lighted, and a bow! of 
eggnog on the table in the center of the hearth. And after 
they went to England in ’16 it was opened twice a year to 
be cleaned after the ancient ritual that even Simon had in- 
herited from his forefathers, and to have the piano tuned, 
or when Miss Jenny and Narcissa spent a forenoon or after- 
noon there, but formally not at all. 

The furniture loomed shapelessly in its dun shrouds. The 
piano alone was uncovered, and Narcissa drew the bench out 
and removed her hat and dropped it beside her. Miss Jenny 
set the basket down and from the gloom back of the instru- 
ment she drew a straight, hard chair, uncovered also, and 
‘sat down and removed her felt hat from her trim white 


64 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


head. Light came through the open door, but the windows 


were shuttered behind heavy maroon curtains, and it served 
only to enhance the obscurity and to render more shapeless 
the hooded anonymous furniture. 


But behind these dun bulks and in all the corners of the~ 


room there waited, as actors stand within the wings beside 


the waiting stage, figures in crinoline and hooped muslin~ | 
and silk; in stocks and flowing coats, in gray too, with crim-— | 


son sashes and sabers in gallant, sheathed repose; Jeb Stuart 
himself, perhaps, on his glittering garlanded bay or with his 
sunny hair falling upon fine broadcloth beneath the mistle- 


toe and holly boughs of Baltimore in ’58. Miss Jenny sat with — | 


her uncompromising grenadier’s back and held her hat upon 
her knees and fixed herself to look on as her guest touched 
chords from the keyboard and wove them together, and 
rolled the curtain back upon the scene. , 

In the kitchen Caspey was having breakfast while Simon 
his father, and Elnora his sister, and Isom his nephew (in 


uniform) watched him. He had been Simon’s understudy — 


in the stables, and general handy man about the place, doing 
all the work that Simon managed, through the specious ex- 
cuse’of decrepitude and filial gratitude, to slough on to his 
shoulders and that Miss Jenny could devise for him and he 
could not evade. Old Bayard also employed him in the fields 


occasionally. Then the draft had got him and bore him to © 


France and the Saint Sulpice docks as one of a labor bat- 
talion, where he did what work corporals and sergeants man- 
aged to slough on to his unmilitary shoulders, and that white 
officers could devise for him and he could not evade. 

Thus all the labor about the place devolved on Simon 


and Isom. But Miss Jenny kept Isom piddling about the © 


house so much of the time that Simon was soon as bitter 
against the War Lords as any professional Democrat. 


Meanwhile Caspey was working a little and trifling with — 
continental life in its martial phases rather to his future © 


detriment, for at last the tumult died and the captains de- 
parted and left a vacuum filled with the usual bitter bicker- 
ings of Armageddon’s heirs-at-law; and Caspey returned to 
his native land a total loss, sociologically speaking, with a 
definite disinclination toward labor, honest or otherwise, and 
two honorable wounds incurred in a razor-hedged crap game. 


SARTORIS 65 


But return he did, to his father’s querulous satisfaction and 
Elnora’s and Isom’s admiration, and he now sat in the 


ee kitchen, telling them about the war. 


“TJ don’t take nothin’ fum no white folks no mo’,” he 
was saying. “War done changed all dat. If us cullud folks 


» is good enough ter save France fum de Germans, den us 


is good enough ter have de same rights de Germans is. 
French folks think so, anyhow, and ef America don’t, dey’s 
ways of learnin’ ’um. Yes, suh, it wuz de cullud soldier saved 
France and America bofe. Black regiments kilt mo’ Germans 
dan all de white armies put together, let “lone unloadin’ 
steamboats all day long fer a dollar a day.” 

“War ain’t hurt dat big mouf o’ yo’n, anyhow,” Simon 
said. 

“War unloosed de black man’s mouf,” Caspey corrected. 
“Give him de right to talk. Kill Germans, den do yo’ oratin’, 
dey tole us. Well, us done it.” 

“How many you kilt, Unc’ Caspey?”’ Isom asked defer- 
entially. 

“I ain’t never bothered to count ’um up. Been times [I 
kilt mo’ in one mawnin’ dan dey’s folks on dis whole place. 
One time we wuz down in de cellar of a steamboat tied up to 
de bank, and one of these submareems come up and 
stopped, and all de white officers run up on de bank and 
hid. Us boys downstairs didn’t know dey wuz anything wrong 
’twell folks started clambin’ down de ladder. We never had 
no guns wid us at de time, so when we seed dem green legs 
comin’ down de ladder, we crope up behin’ ’um, and ez dey 
come down one of de boys would hit ’um over de haid wid a 
piece of scantlin’ and another would drag ’um outen de way 
and cut dey th’oat wid a meat-plow. Dey wuz about 
thirty of ’em. . . . Elnora, is dey any mo’ of dat coffee lef’?” 

“Sho’,” Simon murmured. Isom’s eyes poppea quietly and 
Elnora lifted the coffee-pot from the stove and refilled Cas- 
pey’s cup. 

Caspey drank coffee for a while. 

“And another time me and a boy wuz gwine along a 
road. We got tired unloadin’ dem steamboats all day long, 
so one day de Captain’s dog-robber foun’ whar he kep’ dese 
here unloaded passes and he tuck a han’ful of ’em, and me 
and him wuz on de road to town when a truck come along 
and de boy axed us did us want a lif’. He wuz a school boy, 


66 WILLIAM FAULKNER - 


so he writ on three of de passes whenever we come to a 


place dat mought be M.P. infested, and we got along fine, 
ridin’ about de country on dat private truck, ’twell one maw- 
nin’ we looked out whar de truck wuz and dey wuz a M_P. 


settin’ on it whilst de truck boy wuz tryin’ to explain to him. — 


So we turned de other way and lit out walkin’. After dat we 


had to dodge de M.P. towns, *tase me and de other boy. | 


couldn’t write on de passes. 
“One day we wuz gwine along a road. It wuz a busted-up 


road and it didn’t look like no M.P. country. But dey wuz — 


some of ’em in de las’ town we dodged, so we didn’t know 


we wuz so close to whar de fightin’ wuz gwine on ’twell we 


walked on to a bridge and come right on a whole regiment of 
Germans, swimmin’ in de river. Dey seed us about de same 
time we seed dem and div under de water, and me and de 
other boy grabbed up two machine guns settin’ dar and 
we sot on de bridge rail, and ev’y time a German stuck his 
haid up fer a new breaf, us shot ’im. It wuz jes’ like shootin’ 
turkles in a slough. I reckon dey wuz close to a hund’ed us 


kilt ’fo’ de machine guns run dry. Dat’s whut dey gimme dis 


fer.” He drew from his pocket a florid, plated medal of Porto 
Rican origin, and Isom came quietly up to see. 


“Umumuh,” Simon said. He sat with his hands on his 


knees, watching his son with rapt astonishment. Elnora came 
up also, her arms daubed with flour. 
“Whut does dey look like?” she asked. “Like folks?” 
“Dey’s big,” Caspey answered. “Sort of pink lookin’ and 


about eight foot tall. Only folks in de whole American war ~ 


dat could handle ’um wuz de cullud regiments.” 
Isom returned to his corner beside the woodbox. 


him. 


“Ain't you got some gyardenin’ to do, boy?” Simon asked 


“Naw, suh,” Isom answered, his enraptured gaze still on 


his uncle. “Miss Jenny say us done caught up dis mawnin’.” 

“Well, don’t you come whinin’ ter me when she jumps 
on you,” Simon warned him. “Whar’d you kill de nex’ lot?” 
he asked his son. 


“Us didn’t kill no mo’ after dat,” Caspey said. “We de- | 


cided dat wuz enough and dat we better leave de rest of ‘um 
fer de boys dat wuz gittin’ paid fer killin’ "um. We went on 
*twell de road played out in a field. Dey wuz some ditches 
and ole wire fences and holes in de field, wid folks livin’ in 


_ SARTORIS 67 


*um. De folks wuz white American soldiers and dey egvised 
us to pick out a hole and stay dar fer a while, ef us wanted 
de peace and comfort of de war. So we picked us out a dry 
hole and moved in. Dey wasn’t nothin’ to do all day long 
but lay in de shade and watch de air balloons and listen to de 
shootin’ about fo’ miles up de road. De boy wid me claimed 
it wuz rabbit hunters, but I knowed better. De white boys 
could write, so dey fixed up de passes and we tuck time 
about gwine to whar de army wuz and gittin’ grub. When 


- de passes give out we foun’ whar a French army wid some 


cannons wuz livin’ over in de woods a ways, so we went 
over whar dey wuz and et. 

“Dat went on fer a long time, ’twell one day de balloons 
wuz gone and de white boys says it wuz time to move 
again. But me and de other boy didn’t see no use in gwine 
nowhar else, so us stayed. Dat evenin’ we went over to whar 
de French army wuz fer some grub, but dey wuz gone too. 
De boy wid me says de Germans done caught ’um, but we 
didn’t know; hadn’t heard no big racket since yistiddy. So 
we went back to de hole. Dey wuzn’t no grub, so we 
crawled in and went to bed and slep’ dat night, and early de 
nex’ mawnin’ somebody come in de hole and tromped on us 
and woke us up. It wuz one of dese army upliftin’ ladies 
huntin’ German bayonets and belt-buckles. She say, ‘Who 
dat in here?’ and de other boy says, ‘Us shock troops.’ So 
we got out, but we hadn’t gone no piece fo’ here come a 
wagginload of M.P.’s. And de passes had done give out.” 

“Whut you do den?” Simon asked. Isom’s eyes bulged 
quietly in the gloom behind the woodbox. 

“Dey tuck us and shut us up in de jail-house fer a while. 
But de war wuz mos’ th’ough and dey needed hands to load 
dem steamboats back up, so dey sont us to a town name’ 
Bres’. . . . I don’t take nothin’ offen no white man, M.P. 
er not,” Caspey stated again. “Us boys wuz in a room one 
night, shootin’ dice. De bugle had done already played de 
lights out tune, but we wuz in de army, whar a man kin do 
whut he wants to es long es dey’ll let ’im, so when de M.P. 
come along and says, ‘Put out dat light,’ one of de boys 
says, ‘Come in here, and we’ll put yo’n out.’ Dey wuz two of 
the M.P.’s and dey kicked de do’ in and started shootin’, and 
somebody knocked de light over and we run. Dey foun’ one 
of de M.P.’s de nex’ mawnin’ widout nothin’ to hole his col- 


68 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


lar on, and two of de boys wuz daid, too. But dey couldn’t 
fin’ who de res’ of us wuz. And den we come home.” 
Caspey emptied his cup. “I don’t take nothin’ offen no 
white man no mo’, lootenant ner captain ner M.P. War 
- showed de white folks dey can’t git along widout de cullud 
man. Tromple him in de dus’, but when de trouble bust 


loose, hit’s ‘Please, suh, Mr. Cullud Man; right dis way whar ~ 


de bugle blowin’, Mr. Cullud Man; you is de savior of de 
country.’ And now de cullud race gwine reap de benefits of 
de war, and dat soon.” 

“Sho,” murmured Simon. 

“Yes, suh. And de women, too. I got my white in France, 
and I’m gwine git it here, too.” 

“Lemme tell you somethin’, nigger,” Simon said. “De good 
Lawd done took keer of you fer a long time, now, but He 
ain’t gwine bother wid you always.” 

“Den I reckon I'll git along widout Him,” Caspey retorted. 
He rose and stretched. “Reckon I'll go down to de big road 
and ketch a ride to town. Gimme dem clothes, Isom.” 


Miss Jenny and her guest stood on the veranda when 
he passed along beside the house and crossed toward the 
drive. 

“There goes your gardener,” Narcissa said. Miss Jenny 
looked. 

“That’s Caspey,” she corrected. “Now, where do you 
teckon he’s headed? Town, I'll bet a dollar,” she added, 
watching his lounging khaki back, by means of which he 
contrived to disseminate in some way a sort of lazy inso- 
lence. “You, Caspey!”’ she called. 

' He slowed in passing Narcissa’s small car and examined 
it with a disparagement too lazy to sneer even, then he 
slouched on. 

“You, Caspey!” Miss Jenny repeated, raising her voice. 
But he went steadily on down the drive, insolent and slouch- 
ing and unhurried. “He heard me,” she said ominously. 
“We'll see about this when he comes back. Who was the 
fool anyway, who thought of putting niggers into the same 
uniform with white men? Mr. Vardaman knew better; he 
told those fools at Washington at the time it wouldn’t do. 
But politicians!” She invested the innocent word with an 
utter and blasting derogation. “If I ever get tired of as- 


SARTORIS 69 


sociating with gentlefolks, I know what Ill do: Pll run for 
Congress. . . . Listen at me!—tiradin’ again. I declare, at 
times I believe these Sartorises and all their possessions just 
set out to plague and worry me. Thank the Lord, I won’t 
have to associate with ’em after I’m dead. I don’t know 
where they'll be, but no Sartoris is going to stay in heaven 
any longer than he can help.” 

The other laughed. “You seem very sure of your own 
destination, Miss Jenny.” 

“Why shouldn’t I be? Haven’t I been laying up crowns and 
harps for a long time?” She shaded her eyes with her hand 
and gazed down the drive. Caspey had reached the gate and 
he now stood beside the road, waiting for a wagon to pass. 
“Don’t you stop for him, you hear?” she said suddenly. ... 
“Why won’t you stay for dinner?” 

“No,” the other answered, “I must get on home. Aunt 
Sally’s not well today.” She stood for a moment in the sun-. 
light, her hat and her basket of flowers on her arm, musing. 
Then with a sudden decision she drew a folded paper from 
the front of her dress. 

“Got another one, did you?” Miss Jenny asked, watching 
her. “Lemme see it.” She took the paper and opened it and 
stepped back out of the sun. Her nose glasses hung on a 
slender silk cord that rolled on to a spring in a small gold 
case pinned to her bosom. She snapped ihe cord out and 
set the glasses on her high-bridged nose. Behind them her 
eyes were cold and piercing as a surgeon’s. 

The paper was a single sheet of foolscap; it bore writ- 
ing in a frank, open script that at first glance divulged no 
individuality whatever; a hand youthful, yet at the same 
time so blandly and neatly unsecretive that presently you 
wondered a little: 


“You did not answer mine of 25th. I did not expect you 
answer it yet. You will answer soon I can wait. I will not 
harm you I am square and honest you will lern when our 
ways come to gether. I do not expect you answer yet but 
you know where you make a sign.” 


Miss Jenny refolded the paper with a gesture of fine and 
delicate distaste. “I’d burn this thing, if it wasn’t the only 


70 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


thing we have to catch him with. Pll give it to Bayard to- 
night.” 

“No, no,” the other protested quickly, extending her 
hand, “please don’t. Let me have it and tear it up.” 

“It’s the only oy eee. child—this and the other one. 
We'll get a detective.” 

“No, no; please! I don’t want anybody else to know about 
it. Please, Miss Jenny.” She reached her hand again. 

“You want to keep it,’ Miss Jenny accused coldly. 
“Just like a young fool woman, to be flattered by a thing 
like this.” 

“Tl tear it up,” the other repeated. “I would have sooner, 
but I wanted to tell somebody. It—it—I thought I wouldn’t 
feel so filthy, after I had shown it to somebody else. Let 
me have it, please.” 

“Fiddlesticks. Why should you feel filthy? You haven’t 
encouraged it, have you?” 

“Please, Miss Jenny.” 


But Miss Jenny still held on to it. “Don’t be a fool,” she 


snapped. “How can this thing make you feel filthy? Any 
young woman is liable to get an anonymous letter. And 
a lot of ’em like it. We are all convinced that men feel that 
way about us, and we can’t help but admire the one that’s got 
the courage to tell us, no matter who he is.” 

“If he’d just signed his name. I wouldn’t mind who it 
was. But like this . . . Please, Miss Jenny.” 

“Don’t be a fool,” Miss Jenny repeated. “How can we find 
who it is if you destroy the evidence?” 

“I don’t want to know.” Miss Jenny released the paper and 
Narcissa tore it to bits and cast them over the rail and 
rubbed her hands on her dress. “I don’t want to know. I 
want to forget all about it.” 

“Nonsense. You’re dying to know, right now. I bet you 
look at every man you pass and wonder if it’s him. And 
as long as you don’t do something about it, itll go on. 
Get worse, probably. You better let me tell Bayard.” 

“No, no. I’d hate for him to know, to think that I would 
—might have .. . It’s all right: I'll just burn them up after 
this, without opening them. . . . I really must go.” 

“Of course: you'll throw ’em right into the stove,” Miss 
Jenny agreed with cold irony. Narcissa descended the steps 
and Miss Jenny came forward into the sunlight again, letting 


SARTORIS 71 


her glasses whip back into the case. “It’s your business, of 
course. But I’d not stand for it, if ’twas me. But then, I 
ain’t twenty-six years old. . . . Well, come out again when 
you get another one, or you want some more flowers.” 

“Yes, I will. Thank you for these.” 

“And let me know what you hear from Horace. Thank 
the Lord, it’s just a glass-blowing machine and not a war- 
widow.” 

“Yes, I will. Good-bye.” She went on through the dap- 
pled shade in her straight white dress and her basket of 
flowers stippled upon it, and got in her car. The top was 
back and she put her hat on and started the engine. She 
looked back again and waved her hand. “Good-bye.” 

The Negro had moved down the road, slowly, and stopped 
again, and he was watching her covertly as she approached. 
As she passed he looked full at her and she knew he was 
about to hail her. She opened the throttle and passed 
him with increasing speed and drove swiftly on to town, 
where she lived in a brick house among cedars on a hill. 


She was arranging the larkspur in a dull lemon urn on 
the piano. Aunt Sally Wyatt rocked steadily in her chair be- 
side the window, clapping her feet flatly on the floor at 
each stroke. Her work-basket sat on the window ledge be- 
tween the gentle billowing of the curtains, her ebony walk- 
ing-stick leaned beside it. 

“And you were out there two hours,” she said, “and never 
saw him at all?” 

“He wasn’t there,” Narcissa answered. “He’s gone to Mem- 
phis.” 

Aunt Sally rocked steadily. “If I was them, I’d make him 
stay there. I wouldn’t have that boy around me, blood or 
no blood. . . . What did he go to Memphis for? I thought 
that aeroplane what-do-you-call-it was broke up.” 

“He went on business, I suppose.” 

“What business has he got in Memphis? Bayard Sartoris 
has got more sense than to turn over any business to that 
harebrained fool.” 

“I don’t know,” Narcissa answered, arranging the lark- 
spur. “He’ll be back soon, I suppose. You can ask him then.” 

“Me ask him? I never said two words to him in his life. 


72 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


And I don’t intend to. I been used to associating with gentle- 
folks.” 

Narcissa broke some of the stems, arranging the blooms in 
a pattern. “What’s he done that a gentleman doesn’t do, Aunt 
Sally?” 

“Why, jumping off water tanks and going up in balloons 
just to scare folks. You think I’d have that boy around me? © 


I’d have him locked up in the insane asylum, if I was Bayard — 


and Jenny.” 

“He didn’t jump off the tank. He just swung off of it on 
a rope and dived into the swimming-pool. And it was John 
that went up in the balloon.” 

“That wasn’t what I heard. I heard he jumped off that 
tank, across a whole row of freight cars and lumber piles, 
and didn’t miss the edge of the pool an inch.” 

“No, he didn’t. He swung on a rope from the top of a 
house and then dived into the pool. The rope was tied to 
the tank.” 

“Well, didn’t he have to jump over a lot of lumber and 
freight cars? And couldn’t he have broken his neck just as 
easy that way as jumping off the tank?” 

“Yes,” Narcissa answered. 

“There! What’d I tell you? And what was the use of it?” 

“T don’t know.” 

“Of course you don’t. That was the reason he did it.” 
Aunt Sally rocked triumphantly for a while. Narcissa put the 
last touches to the blue pattern of the larkspur. A tortoise- 
shell cat bunched suddenly and silently on the window be- 
side the work-basket, with an effect as of sleight-of-hand. 
Still crouching, it blinked into the room for a moment, then 
it sank to its belly and with arched neck fell to grooming its 
shoulder with a narrow pink tongue. Narcissa moved to the 
window and laid her hand on the creature’s sleek back. 

“And then, going up in that balloon, when 3 

“That wasn’t Bayard,” Narcissa repeated. “That was John.” 

“That wasn’t what I heard. I heard it was the other one 
and that Bayard and Jenny were both begging him with tears 
in their eyes not to do it. I heard x 

“Neither of them were there. Bayard wasn’t even there. 
It was John did it. He did it because the man that came 
with the balloon got sick. John went up in it so the country 
people wouldn’t be disappointed. I was there.” 


_ SARTORIS 73 


“Stood there and let him do it, did you, when you could 
?a’ telephoned Jenny or walked across the square to the 
bank and got Bayard? You stood there and never opened 
your mouth, did you?” 

“Yes,’’ Narcissa answered. Stood there beside Horace in 
the slow, intent ring of country people, watching the globe 
swelling and tugging at its ropes, watched John Sartoris in a 
faded flannel shirt and corduroy breeches while the carnival 
man explained the rip-cord and the parachute to him; stood 
there feeling her breath going out faster than she could draw 
it in again, and watched the thing lurch into the air with 
John sitting on a frail trapeze bar swinging beneath it, with 
eyes she could not close; saw the balloon and people and all 
swirl slowly upward and then found herself clinging to 
Horace behind the shelter of a wagon, trying to get her 
breath. 

He landed three miles away in a brier thicket and dis- 
engaged the parachute and regained the road and hailed 
a passing Negro in a wagon. A mile from town they met 
old Bayard driving furiously in the carriage, and the two 
vehicles stopped side by side in the road while old Bayard in 
the one exhausted the accumulate fury of his rage and in 
the other his grandson sat in his shredded clothes, and 
on his scratched face that look of one who had gained 
for an instant a desire so fine that its escape was a purifica- 
tion, not a loss. 

The next day, as she was passing a store, he emerged 
with that abrupt violence which he had in common with 
his brother, pulling short up to avoid a collision with her. 

“Oh, ex Why, hello,” he said. Beneath the criss- 
crosses of tape his face was merry and bold and wild, and he 
wore no hat. For a moment she gazed at him with wide, 
hopeless eyes, then she clapped her hand to her mouth and 
went swiftly on, almost running. 

Then he was gone, with his brother, shut away by the 
war as two ncisy dogs are penned in a kennel far away. 
Miss Jenny gave her news of them, of the dull, dutiful letters 
they sent home at sparse intervals; then he was dead—but 
away beyond the seas, and there was no body to be re- 
turned clumsily to earth, and so to her he seemed still to 
be laughing at that word as he had laughed at all the other 
mouth-sounds that stood for repose, who had not waited 


74 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


for Time and its furniture to teach him that the end of 
wisdom is to dream high enough not to lose the dream in_ 
the seeking of it. 

Aunt Sally rocked steadily in her chair. 

“Well, it don’t matter which one it was. One’s bad as the 
other. But I reckon it ain’t their fault, raised like they were. 
Rotten spoiled, both of ’em. Lucy Sartoris wouldn’t let any-- 
body control ’em while she lived. If they’d been mine, 


now... She rocked on. “Beat it out of ’em, I would. | 


Raising two wild Indians like that. But those folks, thinking ~ 
there wasn’t anybody quite as good as a Sartoris. Even Lucy 
Cranston, come of as good people as there are in the state, | 
acting like it was divine providence that let her marry one 
Sartoris and be the mother of two more. Pride, false pride.” 

She rocked steadily in her chair. Beneath Narcissa’s hand 
the cat purred with lazy arrogance. F 

“It was a judgment on ’em, taking John instead of that 
other one. John at least tipped his hat to a lady on the 
street, but that other boy .. .” She rocked monotonously, 
clapping her feet flatly against the floor. “You better stay 
away from that boy. He’ll be killing you same as he did that 
poor little wife of his.” 

“At least, give me benefit of clergy first, Aunt Sally,” 
Narcissa said. Beneath her hand, beneath the cat’s sleek hide, 
muscles flowed suddenly into tight knots, like wire, and the 
animal’s body seemed to elongate like rubber as it whipped 
from beneath her hand and flashed out of sight across the 
veranda. 

“Oh!” Narcissa cried. Then she whirled and caught up 
Aunt Sally’s stick and ran from the room. 

“What ” Aunt Sally said. “You bring my stick back 
here,” she said. She sat staring at the door, hearing the 
swift clatter of the other’s heels in the hall and then on 
the veranda. She rose and leaned in the window. “You 
bring my stick back here,” she shouted. 

Narcissa sped on across the porch and to the ground. In 
the canna bed beside the veranda the cat, crouching, jerked 
its head around and its yellow unwinking eyes. Narcissa 
rushed at it, the stick raised. 

“Put it down!” she cried. “Drop it!” For another second 
the yellow eyes glared at her, then the animal ducked its 


_SARTORIS 75 


head and leaped away in a long fluid bound, the bird be- 
tween its jaws. 

“Qh-h-h, damn you!” she cried. “Damn you! You—you 
Sartoris!” And she hurled the stick after the final tortoise 
flash as the cat flicked around the corner of the house. 

“You get my stick and bring it right back this minute!” 
Aunt Sally shouted from the window. 


She and Miss Jenny were sitting in the dim parlor. The 
doors were ajar as usual, and young Bayard appeared sud- 
denly between them and stood looking at her. 

“It’s Bayard,” Miss Jenny said. “Come in here and speak 
to Narcissa, sonny.” 

He said “Hello” vaguely and she turned on the piano 
bench and shrank a little against the instrument. 

“Who is it?” he said. He came in, bringing with him that 
leashed cold violence which she remembered. 

“It’s Narcissa,” Miss Jenny said testily. “Go on and speak 
to her and stop acting like you don’t know who she is.” 

Narcissa gave him her hand and he stood holding it 
loosely, but he was not looking at her. She withdrew her 
hand. He looked at her again, then away, and he loomed 
-above them and stood rubbing his hand through his hair. 

“T want a drink,” he said. “I can’t find the key to the 
desk.” 

“Stop and talk to us a few minutes and you can have one.” 

He stood for a moment above them, then he moved ab- 
ruptly and before Miss Jenny could speak he had dragged the 
envelope from another chair. 

“Let that alone, you Indian!” Miss Jenny exclaimed. She 
rose. “Here, take my chair, if you’re too weak to stand up. 
Tll be back in a minute,” she added to Narcissa; “I'll have 
to get my keys.” 

He sat laxly in the chair, rubbing his hand over his head, 
his gaze brooding somewhere about his booted feet. Nar-— 
cissa sat utterly quiet, shrunk back against the piano. She 
spoke at last. 

“T am so sorry about your wife . .. John. I asked Miss 
Jenny to tell you when she .. .” 

He sat rubbing his head slowly, in the brooding violence of 
his temporary repose. 

“You aren’t married yourself, are you?” he asked. She sat 


76 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


perfectly still. “Ought to try it,” he added. “Everybody ought 
to get married once, like everybody ought to go to one war.” 
Miss Jenny returned with the keys, and he got his long | 
abrupt body erect and left them. 
“You can go on, now,” she said. “He won’t bother us 
again.” 


“No, I must go.” Narcissa rose quickly and took her hat. | 


from the top of the piano. 

“Why, you haven’t been here any time, yet.” 

“T must go,” Narcissa repeated. Miss Jenny rose. 

“Well, if you must. Pll cut you some flowers. Won’t take _ 
a minute.” 4 

“No, some other time; I—I have—lI’ll come out soon and 
get some. Good-bye.” At the door she glanced swiftly down 
the hall; then she went on. Miss Jenny followed to the veranda. 
The other had descended the steps and she now went swiftly 
on toward her car. 

“Come back again soon,” Miss Jenny called. 

“Yes. Soon,” Narcissa answered. “Good-bye.” 


2 


Young Bayard came back from Memphis in his car. Mem- 
phis was seventy-five miles away and the trip had taken an 
hour and forty minutes because some of the road was clay 
country road. The car was long and low and gray. The 
four-cylinder engine had sixteen valves and eight spark-plugs, | 
and the people had guaranteed that it would run eighty miles 
an hour, although there was a strip of paper pasted to the’ 
windshield, to which he paid no attention whatever, asking 
him in red letters not to do so for the first five hundred miles. 

He came up the drive and stopped before the house, where 
his grandfather sat with his feet on the veranda railing and | 
Miss Jenny stood trim in her black dress beside a post. She | 
descended the steps and examined it, and opened the door 
and got in to try the seat. Simon came to the door and | 
gave it a brief, derogatory look and retired, and Isom ap- | 
peared around the corner and circled the car quietly with | 
an utter and yearning admiration. But old Bayard just 


_SARTORIS 77 


looked down at the long, dusty thing, his cigar in his 
fingers, and grunted. 

“Why, it’s as comfortable as a rocking-chair,” Miss Jenny 
said. “Come here and try it,” she called to him. But he 
grunted again, and sat with his feet on the rail and watched 
young Bayard slide in under the wheel. The engine raced © 
experimentally, ceased. Isom stood like a leashed hound be- 
side it. Young Bayard glanced at him. 

“You can go next time,” he said. 

“Why can’t he go now?” Miss Jenny said. “Jump in, Isom.” 

Isom jumped in, and old Bayard watched them move 
soundlessly down the drive and watched the car pass from 
sight down the valley. Presently above the trees a cloud of 
dust rose into the azure afternoon and hung rosily fading 
in the sun, and a sound as of remote thunder died mut- 
tering behind it. Old Bayard puffed his cigar again. Simon ap- 
peared again in the door and stood there. 

“Now whar you reckon dey gwine right here at supper- 
time?” he said. Bayard grunted, and Simon stood in the 
door, mumbling to himself. 

Twenty minutes later the car slid up the drive and came 
to a halt almost in its former tracks. In the back seat Isom’s 
face was like an open piano. Miss Jenny had worn no hat, 
and she held her hair with both hands, and when the car 
stopped she sat for a moment so. Then she drew a long 
breath. 

“I wish I smoked cigarettes,” she said, and then: “Is 
that as fast as itll go?” 

Isom got out and opened the door for her. She descended 
a little stiffy, but her eyes were shining and her dry old 
cheeks were flushed. 

“How fer y’all been?” Simon asked from the door. 

“We've been to town,” she answered proudly, and her 
voice was clear as a girl’s. Town was four miles away. 

One day a week later old man Falls came in to town and 

_found old Bayard in his office. The office was also the di- 
rectors’ room. It was a large room containing a long 
table lined with chairs, and a tall cabinet where blank 
banking forms were kept, and old Bayard’s roll-top desk and 
swivel chair and a sofa on which he napped for an hour 
each noon. 

The desk, like the one at home, was cluttered with a 


78 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


variety of objects which bore no relation whatever to the 
banking business, and the mantel above the fireplace bore 
still more objects of an agricultural nature, as well as a | 
dusty assortment of pipes and three or four jars of tobacco 
which furnished solace for the entire banking force from— 
president to janitor and for a respectable portion of the 
bank’s clientele. Weather permitting, old Bayard spent most- 
of the day in a tilted chair in the street door, and when | 
these patrons found him there, they went on back to the — 
office and filled their pipes from the jars. It was a sort of | 
unspoken convention not to take more than a pipeful at a 
time. Here old man Falls and old Bayard retired on the old | 
man’s monthly visits and shouted at one another (they 

were both deaf) for a half hour or so. You could hear them 

plainly from the street and in the adjoining store on either 

side. 

Old man Falls’ eyes were blue and innocent as a boy’s 
and his first act was to open the parcel which old Bayard 
had for him and take out a plug of chewing-tobacco, cut 
off a chew and put it in his mouth, replace the plug and 
tie the parcel neatly again. Twice a year the parcel con- 
tained an entire outfit of clothing, on the other occasions 
tobacco and a small sack of peppermint candy. He would 
never cut the string, but always untied it with his stiff, 
gnarled fingers and tied it back again. He would not ac- 
cept money. 

He sat now in his clean, faded overalls, with the parcel on 
his knees, telling Bayard about the automobile that had — 
passed him on the road that morning. Old Bayard sat quite 
still, watching him with his fierce old eyes until he had 
finished. 

“Are you sure who it was?” he asked. 

“Hit passed me too fast fer me to tell whether they was 
anybody in hit a-tall or not. I asked when I fetched town 
who ’twas. Seems like ever’body but you knows how fast 
he runs hit.” 

Old Bayard sat quietly for a time. Then he raised his voice. 

“Byron.” 

The door opened and the bookkeeper entered. 

“Yes, sir, Colonel,” he said without inflection. 

“*Phone out to my house and tell my grandson not to 
touch that car until I come home.” 


SARTORIS 79 


“Yes, sir, Colonel.” And he was gone as silently as he 
appeared. 

Bayard slammed around in his swivel chair again and 
old man Falls leaned forward, peering at his face. 

“What’s that ’ere wen you got on yo’ face, Bayard?” 
he asked. 

“What?” Bayard demanded, then he raised his hand to a 
small spot which the suffusion of his face had brought into 
relief. “Here? I don’t know what it is. It’s been there about 
a week. Why?” 

“Is it gittin’ bigger?” the other asked. He rose and laid 
his parcel down and extended his hand. Old Bayard drew his 
head back. 

“It’s nothing,” he said testily. “Let it alone.” But old man 
Falls put the other’s hand aside and touched the spot with his 
fingers. 

“H’m,” he said. “Hard’s a rock. Hit’ll git bigger, too. Ill 
watch hit, and when hit’s right, I'll take it off. ’Tain’t ripe, 
yit.’ The bookkeeper appeared suddenly and without noise 
beside them. 

“Yo’ cook says him and Miss Jenny is off car-ridin’ some- 
wheres. I left yo’ message.” 

“Jenny’s with him, you say?” old Bayard asked. 

“That’s what yo’ cook says,” the bookkeeper repeated in 
his inflectionless voice. 

“Well. All right.” 

The bookkeeper withdrew and old man Falls picked up his 
parcel. “I'll be gittin’ on too,” he said. “I'll come in next 
week and take a look at it. You better let hit alone till I 
git back.” He followed the bookkeeper from the room, and 
presently old Bayard rose and stalked through the lobby and 
tilted his chair in the door. 

That afternoon when he arrived home, the cat was not in 
sight nor did his aunt answer his call. He mounted to his 
room and put on his riding-boots and lit a cigar, but when 
he looked down from his window into the back yard, 
neither Isom nor the saddled mare was visible. The old 
setter sat looking up at his window. When old Bayard’s 
head appeared there the dog rose and went to the kitchen 
door and stood there; then it looked up at his window again. 
Old Bayard tramped down the stairs and on through the 


80 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


house and entered the kitchen, where Caspey sat at the table, 
eating and talking to Isom and Elnora. 

“And one mo’ time me and another boy ” Caspey was 
saying. Then Isom saw Bayard, and rose from his seat in | 
the woodbox corner, and his eyes rolled whitely in his bullet 
head. Elnora paused also with her broom, but Caspey turned 
his head without rising, and still, chewing steadily, he blinked | 
his eyes at old Bayard in the door. F 

“IT sent you word a week ago to come on out here at | 
once, or not to come at all,” Bayard said. “Did you get it?” — 
Caspey mumbled something, still chewing, and old Bayard 
came into the room. “Get up from there and saddle my | 
horse.” 

Caspey turned his back deliberately and raised his glass 
of buttermilk. “Git on, Caspey!” Elnora hissed at him. 

“T ain’t workin’ here,” he answered, just beneath Bayard’s 
deafness. He turned to Isom. “Whyn’t you go’n git his hoss 
fer him? Ain’t you workin’ here?” 

“Caspey, fer Lawd’s sake!” Elnora implored. “Yes, suh, 
Cunnel; he’s gwine,” she said loudly. 

“Who, me?” Caspey said. “Does I look like it?” He raised 
the glass steadily to his mouth; then Bayard moved again 
and Caspey lost his nerve and rose quickly before the other 
reached him, and crossed the kitchen toward the door, but 
with sullen insolence in the very shape of his back. As he 
fumbled with the door Bayard overtook him. 

“Are you going to saddle that mare?” he demanded. 

“Ain’t gwine skip it, big boy,” Caspey answered, just 
below Bayard’s deafness. 

“What?” 

“Oh, Lawd, Caspey!” Elnora moaned. Isom crouched 
into his corner. Caspey raised his eyes swiftly to Bayard’s 
face and opened the screen door. 

“I says, I ain’t gwine skip it,” he repeated, raising his voice. 
Simon stood at the foot of the steps beside the setter, gaping 
his toothless mouth at them, and old Bayard reached a stick 
of stove wood from the box at his hand and knocked Caspey | 
through the opening door and down the steps at his father’s | 
feet. | 

“Now, you go saddle that mare,” he said. | 

Simon helped his son to rise and led him away toward | 
the barn while the setter looked after them, gravely in- | 


_ SARTORIS 81 


terested. “I kep’ tellin’ you dem new-fangled war notions of 
yon wa’n’t gwine ter work on dis place,” he said angrily. 
“And you better thank de good Lawd fer makin’ yo’ haid 
hard ez hit is. You go’n git dat mare, and save dat nigger 
freedom talk fer townfolks: dey mought stomach it. Whut 
us niggers want ter be free fer, anyhow? Ain’t we got ez many 
white folks now ez we kin suppo’t?” 


That night at supper, old Bayard looked at his grandson 
across the roast of mutton. “Will Falls told me you passed 
him on the poorhouse hill today running forty miles an 
hour.” 

“Forty fiddlesticks,” Miss Jenny answered promptly. “It 
was fifty-four. I was watching the—what do you call it, 
Bayard?—speedometer.” 

Old Bayard sat with his head bent a little, watching his 
hands trembling on the carving knife and fork; hearing be- 
neath the napkin tucked into his waistcoat, his heart a little 
too light and a little too fast; feeling Miss Jenny’s eyes upon 
his face. 

“Bayard,” she said sharply, “what’s that on your cheek?” 
He rose so suddenly that his chair tipped over backward 
with a crash, and he tramped blindly from the room. 


3 


“I know what you want me to do,” Miss Jenny told old 
Bayard across her newspaper. “You want me to let my house- 
keeping go to the dogs and spend all my time in that car, 
that’s what you want. Weill, I’m not going to do it. I don’t 
mind riding with him now and then, but I’ve got too much to 
do with my time to spend it keeping him from running that 
car too fast. Neck, too,” she added. She rattled the paper 
crisply. 

She said: “Besides, you ain’t foolish enough to believe he’ll 
drive slow just because there’s somebody with him, are you? 
If you do think so, you’d better send Simon along. Lord 
knows Simon can spare the time. Since you quit using the car- 


82 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


riage, if he does anything at all, I don’t know it.” She read 
the paper again. 

Old Bayard’s cigar smoked in his still hand. 

“I might send Isom,” he said. 

Miss Jenny’s paper rattled sharply and she stared at her 
nephew for a long moment. “God in heaven, man, why don’t | 
you put a block and chain on him and have done with it?” 

“Well, didn’t you suggest sending Simon with him, your- | 
self? Simon has his work to do, but all Isom ever does is | 
saddle my horse once a day, and I can do that myself.” 

“I was trying to be ironical,” Miss Jenny said. “God knows, 
I should have learned better by this time. But if you’ve got to — 
invent something new for the niggers to do, you let it be 
Simon. I need Isom to keep a roof over your head and some- 
thing to eat on the table.” She rattled the paper. “Why don’t 
you come right out and tell him not to drive fast? A man 
that has to spend eight hours a day sitting in a chair in that 
bank door ought not to have to spend the rest of the after- 
noon helling around the country in an automobile if he don’t 
want to.” 

“Do you think it would do any good to ask him? There 
never was a damned one of ’em yet ever paid any attention 
to my wishes.” 

“Ask, the devil,’ Miss Jenny said. “Who said anything 
about ask? Tell him not to. Tell him that if you hear again 
of his going fast in it, that you'll frail the life out of him. 
I believe anyway that you like to ride in that car, only you 
won’t admit it, and you just don’t want him to ride in it- 
when you can’t go too.” But old Bayard had slammed his feet 
to the floor and risen, and he tramped from the room. 

Instead of mounting the stairs, however, Miss Jenny heard 
his footsteps die away down the hall, and presently she rose 
and followed to the back porch, where he stood in the dark- 
ness there. The night was dark, myriad with drifting odors 
of the spring, and with insects. Dark upon lesser dark, the 
barn loomed against the sky. | 

“He hasn’t come in yet,” she said impatiently, touching his | 
arm. “I could have told you. Go on up and go to bed, now; 
don’t you know he’ll let you know when he comes in? You're | 
going to think him into a ditch somewhere, with these fool 
notions of yours.” Then, more gently: “You’re too childish 


SARTORIS 83 


about that car. It’s no more dangerous at night than it is in 
daytime. Come on, now.” 

He shook her hand off, but he turned obediently and en- 
tered the house. This time he mounted the stairs and she 
could hear him in his bedroom, thumping about. Presently 
he ceased slamming doors and drawers and lay beneath the 
reading-lamp with his Dumas. After a time the door opened 
aud young Bayard entered and came into the radius of the 
light with his bleak eyes. 

His grandfather did not remark his presence and he 
touched his arm. Old Bayard looked up, and when he did 
so young Bayard turned and quitted the room. 


After the shades on the bank windows were drawn at 
three o’clock old Bayard retired to the office. Inside the 
grille the cashier and the bookkeeper could hear him clat- 
tering and banging around beyond the door. The cashier 
paused, a stack of silver clipped neatly in his fingers. 

“Hear im?” he said. “Something on his mind here; lately. 
Used to be he was quiet as a mouse back there until they 
come for him, but last few days he tromples and thumps 
around back there like he was fighting hornets.” 

The bookkeeper said nothing. The cashier set the stack of 
silver aside, built up another one. 

“Something on his mind lately. That examiner must ’a’ 
put a bug in his ear, I reckon.” 

The bookkeeper said nothing. He swung the adding- 
machine to his desk and clicked the lever over. In the back 
room old Bayard moved audibly about. The cashier stacked 
the remaining silver neatly and rolled a cigarette. The 
bookkeeper bent above the steady clicking of the machine, 
and the cashier sealed his cigarette and lit it and waddled to 
the window and lifted the curtain. 

“Simon’s brought the carriage, today,” he said. “That 
boy finally wrecked that car, I reckon. Better call Colonel.” 

The bookkeeper slid from his stool and went back to 
the door and opened it. Old Bayard glanced up from his 
desk, with his hat on. 

“All right, Byron,” he said. The bookkeeper returned to his 
desk. 

Old Bayard stalked through the bank and opened the street 
door and stopped utterly, the doorknob in his hand. 


84 WILLIAM FAULKNER 
“Where’s Bayard?” he said. 


“He ain’t comin’,” Simon answered. Old Bayard crossed 


to the carriage. 
“What? Where is he?” 


“Him en Isom off somewhar in dat cyar,” Simon said. — 


“Lawd knows whar dey is by now. Takin’ dat boy away fum 


his work in de middle of de day, cyar-ridin’.” Old Bayard — | 
laid his hand on the stanchion, the spot on his face coming | 
again into white relief. “Atter all de time I spent tryin’ to 


git some sense inter Isom’s haid,” Simon continued. He held —— 


the horses’ heads up, waiting for his employer to enter. 
“Cyar-ridin’,” he said. “Cyar-ridin’.” 

Old Bayard got in and sank heavily into the seat. 

“Tl be damned,” he said, “if I haven’t got the triflingest 
set of folks to make a living for God ever made. There’s 
one thing about it: when I finally have to go to the poor- 
house, every damned one of you'll be there when I come.” 


“Now, here you quoilin’ too,” Simon said, “Miss Jenny 


yellin’ at me ’twell I wuz plum out de gate, and now you 
already started at dis en’. But ef Mist’ Bayard don’t leave 
dat boy alone, he ain’t gwine ter be no better’n a town 
nigger spite of all I kin do.” 

“Jenny’s already ruined him,” old Bayard said. “Even 
Bayard can’t hurt him much.” 

“You sho’ tole de troof den,” Simon agreed. He shook the 
reins. “Come up, dar.” 

“Here, Simon,” old Bayard said. “Hold up a minute.” 

Simon. reined the horses back. “Whut you want now?” 

The spot on old Bayard’s cheek had resumed its normal 
appearance. 

“Go back to my office and get me a cigar out of that jar 
on the mantel,” he said. 

Two days later, as he and Simon tooled sedately home- 
ward through the afternoon, simultaneously almost with the 
warning thunder of it, the car burst upon him on a curve, 
slewed into the ditch and on to the road again and rushed 
on, and in the flashing instant he and Simon saw the whites 
of Isom’s eyes and the ivory cropping of his teeth behind the 
steering-wheel. When the car returned home that afternoon 
Simon conducted Isom to the barn and whipped him with a 
harness strap. 

That night they sat in the office after supper. Old Bayard 


SARTORIS 85 


held his cigar unlighted in his fingers. Miss Jenny read the 
paper. Faint airs blew in, laden with spring. 

Suddenly old Bayard said, “Maybe he'll get tired of it 
after a while.” 

Miss Jenny raised her head. “And when he does, don’t 
you know what he’ll get then?—-when he finds that car 
won't go fast enough?” she demanded, staring at him across 
the paper. He sat with his unlighted cigar, his head bent a 
little, not looking at her. “He’ll buy an aeroplane.” She 
rattled the paper, turned the page. “He ought to have a wife,” 
she added, reading again. “Let him get a son, then he can 
break his neck as soon and as often as he pleases. Provi- 
dence doesn’t seem to have any judgment at all,” she said, 
thinking of the two of them, of his dead brother. She said: 
“But Lord knows, I’d hate to see any girl I was fond of mar- 
ried to him.” She rattled the paper again, turned another 
page. “I don’t know what else you expect of him. Of any 
Sartoris. You don’t waste your afternoons riding with him 
just because you think it’ll keep him from turning that car 
over. You go because when it does happen, you want to 
be in it, too. So do you think you’ve got any more considera- 
tion for folks than he has?” 

He held his cigar, his face still averted. Miss Jenny was 
watching him again across the paper. 

“T'm coming down town in the morning and we're going 
and have the doctor look at that bump on your face, you 
hear?” 


In his room, as he removed his collar and tie before his 
chest of drawers, his eye fell upon the pipe which he had 
laid there four weeks ago, and he put the collar and tie 
down and picked up the pipe and held it in his hand, rub- 
bing the charred bowl slowly with his thumb. 

Then with sudden decision he quitted the room and 
tramped down the hall, at the end of which a stair mounted 
into the darkness. He fumbled the light switch beside it and 
mounted, following the cramped turnings cautiously in the 
dark, to a door set at a difficult angle, and opened it upon a 
broad, low room with a pitched ceiling, smelling of dust and 
silence and ancient disused things. 

The room was cluttered with indiscriminate furniture— 
chairs and sofas like patient ghosts holding lightly in 


86 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


dry and rigid embrace yet other ghosts—a fitting place for 
dead Sartorises to gather and speak among themselves of 
glamorous and old disastrous days. The unshaded light swung 
on a single cord from the center of the ceiling. He unknotted 
it and drew it across to a nail in the wall above a cedar chest 
and fastened it here, and drew a chair to the chest and sat 
down. ' 

The chest had not been opened since 1901, when his son 
John had succumbed to yellow fever and an old Spanish 
bullet-wound. There had been two occasions since, in July 
and in October of last year, but the other grandson still pos- 
sessed quickness .and all the incalculable portent of his heri- 
tage. So he had forborne for the time being, expecting to be 
able to kill two birds with one stone, as it were. 

The lock was stiff, and he struggled patiently with it for 
some time. Rust shaled off, rubbed off onto his hands, and he 
desisted and rose and rummaged about and returned to the 
chest with a heavy, cast-iron candlestick and hammered the 
lock free and removed it and raised the lid. From the chest 
there rose a thin exhilarating odor of cedar, and something. 
else: a scent drily and muskily nostalgic, as of old ashes. 
The first object was a garment. The brocade was richly 
hushed, and the fall of fine Mechlin was dustily yellow, pale 
and textureless as February sunlight. He lifted the garment 
carefully out. The lace cascaded mellow and pale as spilled 
Wine upon his hands, and he laid it aside and lifted out next 
a rapier. It was a Toledo, a blade delicate and fine as the pro- 
longed stroke of a violin bow, in a velvet sheath. The 
sheath was elegant and flamboyant and soiled, and the 
seams had cracked drily. 

Old Bayard held the rapier upon his hands for a while, 
feeling the balance of it. It was just such an implement 
as a Sartoris would consider the proper equipment for raising 
tobacco in a virgin wilderness, it and the scarlet heels and 
the ruffled wristbands in which he broke the earth and fought 
his stealthy and simple neighbors. 

He laid it aside. Next came a heavy cavalry saber, and 
a rosewood case containing two dueling pistols with silver 
mountings and the lean, deceptive delicacy of race-horses, 
and what old man Falls had called “that ’ere dang der’nger.” 
It was a stubby, evil-looking thing with its three barrels, 
viciously and coldly utilitarian, and between the other two 


_ SARTORIS 87 


weapons it lay like a cold and deadly insect between two 
flowers. 

He removed next the blue army forage-cap of the ’forties 
and a small pottery vessel and a Mexican machete, and a 
long-necked oil-can such as locomotive drivers use. It was 
of silver, and engraved upon it was the picture of a loco- 
motive with a huge bell-shaped funnel and surrounded by an 
ornate wreath. Beneath it, the name “Virginia” and the date 
“August 9, 1873.” 

He put these aside and with sudden purposefulness he re- 
moved the other objects—a frogged and braided coat of Con- 
federate gray and a gown of sprigged muslin scented faintly 
of lavender and evocative of old formal minuets and drifting 
honeysuckle among steady candle-flames—and came upon a 
conglomeration of yellowed papers neatly bound in packets, 
and at last upon a huge, brass-bound Bible. He lifted this 
to the edge of the chest and opened it. The paper was brown 
and mellow with years, and it had a texture like that of 
slightly moist wood-ashes, as though each page were held in- 
tact by its archaic and fading print. He turned the pages 
carefully back to the fly-leaves. Beginning near the bottom 
of the final blank page a column of names and dates rose in 
stark and fading simplicity, growing fainter and fainter where 
time had Jain upon them. At the top they were still legible, 
as they were at the foot of the preceding page. But halfway 
up this page they ceased, and from there on the sheet was 
blank save for the faint, soft mottlings of time and an 
occasional brownish pen-stroke. 

Old Bayard sat for a long time, regarding the stark 
dissolving apotheosis of his name. Sartorises had derided 
Time, but Time was not vindictive, being longer than Sar- 
torises. And probably unaware of them. But it was a good 
gesture, anyway. 

“In the nineteenth century,” John Sartoris said, “gene- 
alogy is poppycock. Particularly in America, where only 
what a man takes and keeps has any significance and where 
all of us have a common ancestry and the only house 
from which we can claim descent with any assurance is the 
Old Bailey. Yet the man who professes to care nothing about 
his forebears is only a little less vain than the man who bases 
all his actions on blood precedent. And I reckon a Sartoris 
can have a little vanity and poppycock, if he wants it.” 


88 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


Yes, it was a good gesture, and old Bayard sat and mused 
quietly on the tense he had unwittingly used. Was. Fatality; 
the augury of a man’s destiny peeping out at him from the 
roadside hedge, if he but recognize it, and again he ran 
panting through undergrowth while the fading thunder of — 
the smoke-colored stallion swept on in the dusk and the 
Yankee patrol crashed behind ‘him, crashed fainter and 
fainter until he crouched with spent, laboring lungs in a | 
brier thicket and heard the pursuit rush on. Then he crawled | 
forth and went to a spring he knew that flowed from the 
roots of a beech, and as he leaned down to it the final light _ 
of day was reflected on to his face, bringing into sharp 
relief forehead and nose above the cavernous sockets of his 
eyes and the panting snarl of his teeth, and from the still 
water there stared back at him, for a sudden moment, a skull. 

The unturned corners of man’s destiny. Well, heaven, 
that crowded place, lay just beyond one of them, they claimed; 
heaven filled with every man’s illusion of himself and with 
the conflicting illusions of him that parade through the 
minds of other illusions. . . . He stirred and sighed quietly, 
and took out his fountain pen. At the foot of the column 
he wrote: 


“John Sartoris. July 5, 1918.” 
and beneath that: 
“Caroline White Sartoris and son. October 27, 1918.” 


When the ink was dry he closed the book and replaced it 
and took the pipe from his pocket and put it in the rosewood - 
case with the dueling pistols and the derringer and re- 
placed the other things and closed the chest and locked it. 


Miss Jenny found old Bayard in his tilted chair in the 
bank door. He jooked up at her with a fine assumption of 
Surprise and his deafness seemed more pronounced than 
usual. But she got him up with cold implacability and led 
him, still grumbling, down the street where merchants and | 
others spoke to her as to a martial queen, old Bayard stalking 
along beside her with sullen reluctance. 

They turned presently and mounted a narrow stairway 


-SARTORIS 8&9 


debouching between two stores, beneath an array of dingy 
professional signs. At the top was a dark corridor with doors, 
the nearest of pine, its gray paint scarred at the bottom as 
though it had been kicked repeatedly at the same height 
and with the same force. In the door itself two holes an inch 
apart bore mute witness to the missing hasp, and from a 
staple in the jamb depended the hasp itself, fixed there by a 
huge, rusty lock of an ancient pattern. Bayard offered to 
_ stop here, but Miss Jenny led him firmly on to a door across 
the hail. 

This door was freshly painted and grained to represent 
walnut. Into the top half of it was let a pane of thick, 
Opaque glass bearing a name in raised gilt letters, and two 
embracing office hours. Miss Jenny opened this door and 
Bayard followed her into a small cubbyhole of a room of 
Spartan but suave asepsis. The walls were an immaculate 
new gray, with a reproduction of a Corot and two spidery 
dry-points in narrow frames, and it contained a new rug in 
warm buff tones and a bare table and four chairs in fumed 
oak—all impersonal and clean and inexpensive, but revealing 
at a glance the proprietor’s soul; a soul hampered now by 
material strictures, but destined and determined some day to 
function amid Persian rugs and mahogany or teak, and a 
single irreproachable print on the chaste walls. A young 
Woman in a starched white dress rose from a smaller table 
on which a telephone sat, and patted her hair. 

“Good morning, Myrtle,” Miss Jenny said. “Tell Dr. Alford 
we'd like to see him, please.” 

“You have an appointment?” the girl asked in a voice with- 
out any inflection at all. 

“We'll make one now, then,” Miss Jenny replied. “You 
don’t mean to say Dr. Alford don’t come to work before 
ten o’clock, do you?” 

“Dr. Alford don’t—doesn’t see any one without an ap- 
pointment,” the girl parroted, gazing at a point above Miss 
Jenny’s head. “If you have no appointment, you’ll have to 
have an ap fe 

“Tut, tut,” Miss Jenny interrupted briskly. “You run and 
tell Dr. Alford Colonel Sartoris wants to see him, there’s a 
good girl.” : 

“Yessum, Miss Jenny,” the girl said obediently and she 
crossed the room, but at the other door she paused again, 


90 WILLIAM FAULKNER |} 


and again her voice became parrotlike. “Won’t you sit: 
down? I'll see if the doctor is engaged.” 

“You go and tell Dr. Alford we’re here,” Miss Jenny ' 
repeated affably. “Tell him I’ve got some shopping to do thy) 
morning and I haven’t got time to wait.” 

“Yessum, Miss Jenny,” the girl agreed, and disappeared, 
and after a dignified interval she returned, once more 
clothed faultlessly in her professional manner. “The doctor | 
will see you now. Come in, please.” She held the door 
open and stood aside. 

“Thank you, honey,” Miss Jenny replied. “Is your mamma | 
still in bed?” 

“No’m, she’s sitting up now, thank you.” 

“That’s good,” Miss Jenny agreed. “Come on, Bayard.” | 

This room was smaller than the other, and brutally car- 
bolized. There was a white enameled cabinet filled with | 
vicious nickel gleams, and a metal operating-table and 
an array of electric furnaces and ovens and sterilizers. The 
doctor in a white linen jacket bent over a small desk, and 
for a while he proffered them his sleek oblivious head. Then | 
he glanced up, and rose. | 

He was in the youthful indeterminate thirties, a new- 
comer to the town and nephew of an old resident. He had 
made a fine record in medical school and was of a personable 
exterior, but there was a sort of preoccupied dignity, a sort 
of erudite and cold unillusion regarding mankind, about him 
that precluded the easy intimacy of the small town and 
caused even those who remembered him as a visiting boy 
to address him as Doctor or Mister. He had a small mustache 
and a face like a mask—a comforting face, but cold; and 
while old Bayard sat restively the doctor probed delicately 
with dry, scrubbed fingers at the wen on his face. Miss Jenny 
asked him a question, but he continued his exploration raptly, 
as though he had not heard, as though she had not even 
spoken; inserting a small electric bulb, which he first steril- 
ized, into Bayard’s mouth and snapping its ruby glow on and 
off within his cheek. Then he removed it and sterilized it 
again and returned it to the cabinet. 

“Well?” Miss Jenny said impatiently. The doctor shut the 
cabinet carefully and washed and dried his hands and came 
and stood above them, and with his thumbs hooked in his 
jacket pockets he became solemnly and unctuously technical, 


SARTORIS 91 


rolling the harsh words upon his tongue with epicurean delib- 
eration. 

“Tt should be removed at once,” he concluded. “It should 
be removed while in its early stage; that is why I advise an 
immediate operation.” 

“You mean, it might develop into cancer?” Miss Jenny 
asked. 

“No question about it at all, madam. Course of time. 
Neglect it, and I can promise you nothing; have it out now, 
and he need never worry about it again.” He looked at old 
Bayard again with lingering and chill contemplation. “It will 
be very simple. I’ll remove it as easily as that.” And he made 
a short gesture with his hand. 

“What's that?” Bayard demanded. 

“T say, I can take that growth off so easily you won’t know 
it, Colonel Sartoris.” 

“Tll be damned if you do!” Bayard rose with one of his 
characteristic plunging movements. 

“Sit down, Bayard,” Miss Jenny ordered. “Nobody’s 
going to cut on you without your knowing it.—Should it 
be done right away?” she asked. 

“Yes, ma’am. I wouldn’t have that thing on my face over- 
night. Otherwise, it is only fair to warn you that no doctor 
can assume responsibility for what might ensue. . . . I could 
remove it in two minutes,” he added, looking at Bayard’s 
face again with cold speculation. Then he half turned his 
head and stood in a listening attitude, and beyond the thin 
walls a voice in the other room boomed in rich, rolling waves. 

“Mawnin’, sister,” it said. “Didn’t I hear Bayard Sartoris 
cussin’ in here?” The doctor and Miss Jenny held their ar- 
rested attitudes; then the door opened and the fattest man in 
the whole county filled it. He wore a shiny alpaca coat over 
waistcoat and trousers of baggy black broadcloth; above a 
plaited shirt the fatty rolls of his dewlap practically hid his 
low collar and a black string tie. His Roman senator’s head 
was thatched with a vigorous curling of silvery hair. “What 
the devil’s the matter with you?” he boomed; then he sidled 
into the room, filling it completely, dwarfing its occupants and 
its furnishings. 

This was Dr. Lucius Quintus Peabody, eighty-seven years 
old and weighing three hundred and ten pounds and possess- 
ing a digestive tract like a horse. He had practiced medicine 


92 WILLIAM FAULKNE 


in the county when a doctor’s equipment consisted of a sa’ 
and a gallon of whisky and a satchel of calomel; he had bee 
John Sartoris’ regimental surgeon, and up to the day of thes 
automobile he would start out at any hour of the twenty-: 
four in any weather and for any distance, over practically; 
impassable roads in a lopsided buckboard, to visit any one, 
white or black, who sent for him, accepting for fee usually a2 
meal of corn pone and coffee, or perhaps a small measure: 
of corn or fruit, or a few flower bulbs or graftings. 

When he was young and hasty he had kept a daybool | 
kept it meticulously until these hypothetical assets totaled® 
$10,000. But that was forty years ago, and since then hes 
hadn’t bothered with a record at all; and now from time ter 
time a countryman enters his shabby office and discharges4 
an obligation, commemorating sometimes the payer’s entry" 
into the world, incurred by his father or grandfather, which! 
Dr. Peabody himself had long since forgotten about. Every" 
one in the county knew him and sent him hams and wild 
game at Christmas, and it was said that he could spend the 
balance of his days driving about the county in the buck- « 
board he still used, with never a thought for board and lodg-- 
ing and without the expenditure of a penny for either. He: 
filled the room with his bluff and homely humanity, and as. 
he crossed the floor and patted Miss Jenny’s back with one: 
flail-like hand, the whole building trembled to his tread. 

“Mawnin’, Jenny,” he said. “Havin’ Bayard measured for 
insurance?” 

“This damn butcher wants to cut on me,” old Bayard said 
querulously. “You come on and make ’em let me alone, 
Loosh.” 

“Ten A.M.’s mighty early in the day to start carvin’ white 
folks,” Dr. Peabody boomed. “Nigger’s different. Chop up a 
nigger any time after midnight. What’s the matter with him, 
son?” he asked Dr. Alford. 

“IT don’t believe it’s anything but a wart,” Miss Jenny said, 
“but I’m tired of looking at it.” 

“It’s no wart,’ Dr. Alford corrected stiffly. He recapitu- 
lated his diagnosis in technical terms while Dr. Peabody 
enveloped them all in the rubicund benevolence of his pres- 
ence. 

“Sounds pretty bad, don’t it?” he agreed, and he shook 
the floor again and pushed Bayard firmly into his chair with 


nA 


 SARTORIS 93 


one huge hand, and with the other he dragged his face up 
to the light. Then he dug a pair of iron-bowed spectacles 


from the pocket of his coat and examined Bayard’s face. 
“Think it ought to come off, do you?” 
“TI do,” Dr. Alford answered coldly. “I think it is im- 


perative that it be removed. Unnecessary there. Cancer.” 


“Folks got along with cancer a long time befo’ they in- 
vented knives,” Dr. Peabody said drily. “Hold still, Bayard.” 

And people like you are one of the reasons, was on the 
tip of the younger man’s tongue. But he forbore and said 
instead, “I can remove that growth in two minutes, Colonel 
Sartoris.” 

“Damned if you do,” Bayard rejoined violently, trying to 
tise. “Get away, Loosh.” 

“Sit still,’ Dr. Peabody said equably, holding him down 
while he probed at the wen. “Does it hurt any?” 

“No. I never said it did. And I'll be damne ie 

“You'll probably be damned anyway,” Dr. Peabody told 
him. “You’d be about as well off dead, anyhow. I don’t 
know anybody that gets less fun out of living than you do.” 

“You told the truth for once,” Miss Jenny agreed. “He’s 
the oldest person I ever knew in my life.” 

“And so,” Dr. Peabody continued blandly, “I wouldn’t 
worry about it. Let it stay there. Nobody cares what your 
face looks like. If you were a young fellow, now, out sparkin’ 


_the gals every night———” 


“If Dr. Peabody is permitted to interfere with impu- 
nity——”’ Dr. Alford began. 

“Will Falls says he can cure it,” Bayard said. 

“With that salve of his?” Dr. Peabody asked quickly. 

“Salve?” Dr. Alford repeated. “Colonel Sartoris, if you 
permit any quack that comes along to treat that growth 
with home-made or patent remedies, you'll be dead in six 
months. Dr. Peabody even will bear me out,” he added with 
fine irony. 

“T don’t know,” Dr. Peabody replied slowly. “Will has done 
some curious things with that salve of his.” 

“J must protest against this,” Dr. Alford said. “Mrs. Du 
Pre, I protest against a member of my profession sanction- 
ing, even negatively, such a procedure.” 

“Pshaw, boy,” Dr. Peabody answered, “we ain’t goin’ to 
let Will put his dope on Bayard’s wart. It’s all right for 


94 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


niggers and livestock, but Bayard don’t need it. We'll just 
let this thing alone, long as it don’t hurt him.” 


“If that growth is not removed immediately, I wash my . 


hands of all responsibility,” Dr. Alford stated. “To neglect 


it will be as fatal as Mr. Falls’ salve. Mrs. Du Pre, I ask | 


you to witness that this consulation has taken this un- 


ethical turn through no fault of*mine and over my protest.” 

“Pshaw, boy,” Dr. Peabody said again, “this ain’t hardly— | 
worth the trouble of cuttin’ out. We'll save you an arm ora | 
leg as soon as that fool grandson of his turns that automo- | 


bile over with ’em. Come on with me, Bayard.” 

“Mrs. Du Pre ” Dr. Alford essayed. 

“Bayard can come back, if he wants to,” Dr. Peabody 
patted the younger man’s shoulder with his heavy hand. 
“T’m going to take him to my office and talk to him a while. 


Jenny can bring him back, if she wants to. Come on, | 


Bayard.” And he led old Bayard from the room. Miss Jenny 
rose also. 

“That Loosh Peabody is as big a fogy as old Will Falls,” 
she said. “Old people just fret me to death. You wait: Ill 
bring him right back here, and we’ll finish this business.” Dr. 
Alford held the door open for her and she sailed in a stiff, 
silk-clad rage from the room and followed her nephew across 
the corridor and through the scarred door with its rusty 
lock, and into a room resembling a miniature cyclonic devas- 


tation mellowed peacefully over with dust ancient and un- 


disturbed. 

“You, Loosh Peabody,” Miss Jenny said. 

“Sit down, Jenny,” Dr. Peabody told her. “And be quiet. 
Unfasten your shirt, Bayard.” 

“What?” old Bayard said belligerently. The other thrust 
him into a chair. 

“Want to see your chest,” he eeplaiieds He crossed to an 
ancient roll-top desk and rummaged through the dusty 
litter upon it. There was litter and dust everywhere in the 


huge room. Its four windows gave upon the square, but the | 


elms and sycamores ranged along the sides of the square 
shaded these first floor offices, so that light entered them, 
but tempered, like light beneath water. In the corners of the 
ceiling were spider webs thick and heavy as Spanish moss and 
dingy as old lace, and the once-white walls were an even 
and unemphatic drab save for a paler rectangle here and 


5 


. SARTORIS 95 


_ there where an outdated calendar had hung and been re- 
moved. Besides the desk, the room contained three or four 
miscellaneous chairs in various stages of decrepitude, a 
Tusty stove in a sawdust-filled box, and a leather sofa hold- 
ing mutely amid its broken springs the outline of Dr. Pea- 
body’s recumbent shape; beside it and slowly gathering suc- 
- cessive layers of dust, was a stack of lurid, paper-covered 
nickel novels. This was Dr. Peabody’s library, and on this 
sofa he passed his office hours, reading them over and over. 
Other books there were none. 

But the waste-basket beside the desk and the desk itself 
and the mantel above the trash-filled fireplace, and the win- 
dow ledges too, were cluttered with circular mail matter and 
mail-order catalogues and government bulletins of all kinds. 
In one corner, on an up-ended packing-box, sat a water cooler 
of stained oxidized glass, in another corner leaned a clump 
of cane fishing-poles warping slowly of their own weight; 
and on every horizontal surface rested a collection of objects 
not to be found outside of a second-hand store—old gar- 
ments, bottles, a kerosene lamp, a wooden box of tins of 
axle grease, lacking one; a clock in the shape of a bland 
china morning-glory supported by four garlanded maidens 
who had suffered sundry astonishing anatomical mishaps, 
and here and there among the dusty indiscrimination, various 
instruments pertaining to the occupant’s profession. It was 
one of these that Dr. Peabody sought now in the littered 
desk on which sat a single photograph in a wooden frame, 
and though Miss Jenny said again, “You, Loosh Peabody, 
you listen to me,” he continued to seek it with bland and 
unhurried equanimity. 

“You fasten your clothes and we'll go back to that doc- 
tor,” Miss Jenny ordered her nephew. “Neither you nor I 
can waste any more time with a doddering old fool.” 

“Sit down, Jenny,” Dr. Peabody repeated, and he drew out 
a drawer and removed from it a box of cigars and a handful 
of faded artificial trout flies and a soiled collar, and lastly a 
stethoscope; then he tumbled the other things back into the 
drawer and shut it with his knee. 

Miss Jenny sat trim and outraged, fuming while he lis- 
tened to old Bayard’s heart. 

“Well,” she snapped, “does it tell you how to take that 


96 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


wart off his face? Will Falls didn’t need any telephone to 
find that out.” 

“Tt tells more than that,” Dr. Peabody answered. “It tells | 
how Bayard’ll get rid of all his troubles, if he keeps on riding 

in that hellion’s automobile.” ¥ 

“Fiddlesticks,” Miss Jenny said, “Bayard’s a good driver. 
I never rode with a better one.” + =| 

“It'll take more’n a good driver to keep this”’—he tapped | 
Bayard’s chest with his blunt finger—‘“goin’, time that boy 
whirls that thing around another curve or two like I’ve seen 
him do.” 

“Did you ever hear of a Sartoris dying from a natural | 
cause, like anybody else?” Miss Jenny demanded. “Don’t | 
you know that heart ain’t going to take Bayard off before his 
time? You get up from there, and come on with me,” she | 
added to her nephew. Bayard buttoned his shirt. Dr. Pea- 
body sat on the sofa and watched him quietly. 

“Bayard,” he said suddenly, “why don’t you stay out of | 
that damn thing?” 

“What?” 

“If you don’t stay out of that car, you ain’t goin’ to need 
me nor Will Falls, nor that boy in yonder with all his hand- 
boiled razors, neither.” 

“What business is it of yours?” old Bayard demanded. 
“By God, can’t I break my neck in peace if I want to?” He 
rose. He was trembling, fumbling at his waistcoat buttons, 
and Miss Jenny rose also and made to help him, but he put 
her roughly aside. Dr. Peabody sat quietly, thumping his fat 
fingers on one fat knee. “I have already outlived my time,” 
old Bayard continued more mildly. “I am the first of my 
name to see sixty years that I know of. I reckon Old Marster 
is keeping me for a reliable witness to the extinction of it.” 

“Now,” Miss Jenny said icily, “you’ve made your speech, 
and Loosh Peabody has wasted the morning for you, so I 
reckon we can leave now and let Loosh go out and doctor 
mules for a while, and you can sit around the rest of the 
day, being a Sartoris and feeling sorry for yourself. Good | 
morning, Loosh.” 

“Make him let that place alone, Jenny,” Dr. Peabody said. | 

“Ain’t you and Will Falls going to cure it for him?” | 

“You keep him from letting Will Falls put anything on it,” | 


TORIS 97 


Dr. Peabody repeated equably. “It’s all right. Just leave it 
alone.” 

' “We're going to a doctor, that’s what we’re going to do,” 
‘Miss Jenny replied. “Come on here.” 

When the door had closed, he sat motionless and heard 
em quarreling beyond it. Then the sound of their voices 
moved on down the corridor toward the stairs, and still 
quarreling loudly and, on old Bayard’s part, with profane 
emphasis, the voices died away. Then Dr. Peabody lay back 
‘on the sofa shaped already to the bulk of him, and with 
random deliberation he reached a nickel thriller blindly from 
ithe stack at the head of the couch. 


4 


As they neared the bank Narcissa Benbow came along from 
the opposite direction, and they met at the door, where he 
made her a ponderous compliment on her appearance while 
she stood in her pale dress and shouted her grave voice into 
his deafness. Then he took his tilted chair, and Miss Jenny 
followed her into the bank and to the teller’s window. There 
was no one behind the grille at the moment save the book- 
keeper. He looked at them briefly and covertly across his 
shoulder, then slid from his stool and crossed to the window, 
but without raising his eyes again. 

He took Narcissa’s check, and while she listened to Miss 
Jenny’s recapitulation of Bayard’s and Loosh Peabody’s stub- 
born masculine stupidity she remarked the reddish hair which 
clothed his arms down to the second joints of his fingers, and 
remarked with a faint yet distinct distaste, and a little curi- 
osity since it was not particularly warm, the fact that his 
hands and arms were beaded with perspiration. 

Then she made her eyes blank again and took the notes 
which he pushed under the grille to her and opened her bag. 
From its blue satin maw the corner of an envelope and 
some of its superscription peeped suddenly, but she crumpled 
it quickly from sight and put the money in and closed the 
bag. They turned away, Miss Jenny still talking, and she 
paused at the door again, clothed in her still aura of quiet- 


4 


98 WILLIAM FAULKNE 


ness, while old Bayard twitted her heavily on imaginary aff 
fairs of the heart which furnished the sole theme of con: 
versation between them, shouting serenely at him in return. 
Then she went on, surrounded by tranquillity like a visible 
presence or an odor or a sound. 

As long as she was in sight the bookkeeper stood at th 
window. His head was bent ‘and his hand made a series 
of neat, meaningless figures on the pad beneath it. Then shi 
went on and passed from sight. He moved, and in doing sea 
he found that the pad had adhered to his damp wrist, s 
that when he moved his arm it came also. Then its own: 
weight freed it and it fell to the floor. 


After the bank closed that afternoon Snopes crossed the: 
square and entered a street and approached a square frame: 
building with a double veranda, from which the mournfull 
cacophony of a cheap talking-machine came upon the after- 
noon. He entered. The music came from the room to the 
right and as he passed the door he saw a man in a collar- 
less shirt sitting in a chair with his sock feet on another: 
chair, smoking a pipe, the evil reek of which followed him 
down the hall. The hall smelled of damp, harsh soap, and 
the linoleum carpet gleamed, still wet. He followed it and| 
approached a sound of steady, savage activity, and came 
upon a woman in a shapeless gray garment, who ceased mop- 
ping and looked at him across her gray shoulder, sweeping 
her lank hair from her brow with a reddened forearm. 

“Evenin’, Miz Beard,” Snopes said. “Virgil come home 
yet?” 

“He was through here a minute ago,” she answered. “If 
he ain’t out front, I reckon his paw sent him on a arr’nd. 
Mr. Beard’s takin’ one of his spells in the hip agin. He might 
’a’ sent Virgil on a arr’nd.” Her hair fell lankly across her 
face again. Again she brushed it aside with a harsh gesture. 
“You got some mo’ work fer him?” 

“Yessum. You don’t know which-a-way he went?” 

“Ef Mr. Beard ain’t sont him nowheres he mought be 
in the back yard. He don’t usually go fur away.” Again she 
dragged her lank hair aside; shaped so long to labor, her | 
muscles were restive under inaction. She grasped the mop 
again. | 

Snopes went on and stood on the kitchen steps above an 


SARTORIS 99 


enclosed space barren of grass and containing a chicken 
pen, also grassless, in which a few fowls huddled or moved 
about in forlorn distraction in the dust. On one hand was a 
small kitchen garden of orderly, tended rows. In the corner 
of the yard was an outhouse of some sort, of weathered 
iboards. 

| “Virgil,” he said. The yard was desolate with ghosts; 
ghosts of discouraged weeds, of food in the shape of empty 
tins, broken boxes and barrels; a pile of stove wood and a 
chopping-block across which lay an ax whose helve had been 
mended with rusty wire amateurishly wound. He descended 
the steps and the chickens raised a discordant clamor, antici- 
pating food. 

“Virgil.” 

_ Sparrows found sustenance of some sort in the dust among 
the fowls, but the fowls themselves, perhaps with a fore- 
Knowledge of frustration and of doom, huddled back and 
forth along the wire, discordant and distracted, watching 
him with predatory, importunate eyes. He was about to 
turn and reénter the kitchen when the boy appeared silently 
and innocently from the outhouse, with his straw-colored 
hair and his bland eyes. His mouth was pale and almost 
sweet, but secretive at the corners. His chin was negligible. 

“Hi, Mr. Snopes. You calling me?” 

“Yes. If you ain't doing anything special,” Snopes an- 
swered. 

“T ain’t,” the boy said. They entered the house and passed 
the room where the woman labored with drab fury. The 
reek of the pipe, the lugubrious reiteration of the phono- 
graph, filled the hall, and they mounted stairs carpeted also 
with linoleum fastened to each step by a treacherous sheet- 
iron strip treated to resemble brass and scuffed and scarred 
by heavy feet. The upper hall was lined by two identical 
rows of doors. They entered one of these. 

The room contained a bed, a chair, a dressing-table, and 
a wash-stand with a slop-jar beside it. The floor was covered 
with straw matting, frayed in places. The single light hung 
unshaded on a greenish-brown cord. Upon the wall above the 
paper-filled fireplace a framed lithograph of an Indian maiden 
in immaculate buckskin leaned her naked bosom above a 
formal moonlit pool of Italian marble. She held a guitar 


100 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


and a rose, and dusty sparrows sat on the window ledge: 
and watched them brightly through the dusty screen. 

The boy entered politely. His pale eyes took in the room » 
and its contents at a comprehensive glance. He said, eh | 
air gun ain’t come ‘yet, has it, Mr, Snopes?” 

“No, it ain’t,” Snopes answered. “It'll be here soon, 
though.” ; 

“You ordered off after it a long time, now.” | 

“That’s right. But it’ll be here soon. Maybe they havea 4 
got one in stock, right now.” He crossed to the dresser and 
took from a drawer a few sheets of foolscap and laid them | 
on the dresser top and drew a chair up and dragged his suit- | 
case from beneath the bed and set it on the chair. Then he | 
took his fountain pen from his pocket and uncapped it and | 
laid it beside the paper. “It ought to be here any day, now.” | 

The boy seated himself on the suitcase and took up the 
pen. “They got ’em at Watts’ hardware store,” he suggested. 

“Tf the one we ordered don’t come soon, we'll git one 
there,” Snopes said. “When did we order it, anyway?” 

“Week ago Tuesday,” the boy answered glibly. “I wrote | 
it down.” 

“Well, it'll be here soon. You ready?” 

The boy squared himself before the paper. “Yes, sir.” 
Snopes took a folded paper from the top pocket of his 
trousers and spread it open. 

“Code number forty-eight. Mister Joe Butler, Saint Louis, 
Missouri,” he read, then he leaned over the boy’s shoulder, 
watching the pen. “That’s right: up close to the top,” he 
commended. “Now.” The boy dropped down the page about 
two inches, and as Snopes read, he transcribed in his neat, 
copy-book hand, pausing only occasionally to inquire as to 
the spelling of a word. 

“‘T thought once I would try to forget you. But I can- 
not forget you because you cannot forget me. I saw my letter 
in your hand satchel today. Every day I can put my hand 
out and touch you you do not know it. Just to see you walk 
down the street To know what I know what you know. Some | 
day we will both know to gether when you got use to it. 
You kept my letter but you do not anser. That is a a | 
sign you do——’” The boy had reached the foot of the. 
page. Snopes removed it, leaving the next sheet ready. He 
continued to read in his droning, inflectionless voice: | 


| SARTORIS 101 


es not forget me you would not keep it. I think of 
you at night the way you walk down the street like I was 
dirt. I can tell you something you will be surprised I know 
imore than watch you walk down the street with cloths. I 
will some day you will not be surprised then. You pass me 
you do not know it I know it. You will know it some day. 
Be cause I will tell you.’ Now,” he said, and the boy dropped 

on to the foot of the page. “ “Yours truly Hal Wagner. Code 
' number twenty-four.’ ” Again he looked over the boy’s shoul- 
der. “That’s right.” He blotted the final sheet and gathered 
'it up also. The boy recapped the pen and thrust the chair 
back, and Snopes produced a small paper bag from his coat. 
__ The boy took it soberly. “Much obliged, Mr. Snopes,” he 
said. He opened it and squinted into it. “It’s funny that air 
-gun don’t come on.” 

“It sure is,” Snopes agreed. “I don’t know why it don’t 
come.” 

_ “Maybe it got lost in the post office,” the boy suggested. 

“Tt may have. I reckon that’s about what happened to it. 
Til write ’em again, tomorrow.” 

The boy rose, but he stood yet with his straw-colored 
hair and his bland, innocent face. He took a piece of candy 
from the sack and ate it without enthusiasm. “I reckon I 
better tell papa to go to the post office and ask ’em if it got 
lost.” 

“No, I wouldn’t do that,” Snopes said quickly. “You wait; 
Til ’tend to it. We'll get it, all right.” 

“Papa wouldn’t mind. He could go over there soon’s he 
comes home and see about it. I could find him right now, 
and ask him to do it, I bet.” 

“He couldn’t do no good,” Snopes answered. “You leave 
it to me. I'll get that gun, all right.” 

“I could tell him I been working for you,” the boy pur- 
sued. “I remember them letters.” 

“No, no, you wait and let me ’tend to it. Pll see about it 
first thing tomorrow.” 

“All right, Mr. Snopes.” He ate another piece of candy, 
without enthusiasm. He moved toward the door. “I remem- 
ber ever’ one of them letters. I bet I could sit down and 
write ’em all again. I bet I could. Say, Mr. Snopes, who is 
Hal Wagner? Does he live in Jefferson?” 

“No, no. You never seen him. He don’t hardly never 


102 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


come to town. That’s the reason I’m ’tending to his business 
for him. I’ll see about that air gun, all right.” 

The boy opened the door, then he paused again. “They 
got ’em at Watts’ hardware store. Good ones. Id sure like 
to have one of ’em. Yes, sir, I sure would.” 


“Sure, sure,” Snopes repeated. “Ourn’ll be here tomorrow. 


You just wait; I’ll see you git that gun.” 


The boy departed. Snopes locked the door, and for a_ 


while he stood beside it with his head bent, his hands slowly 
knotting and writhing together. Then he took up the folded 
sheet and burned it over the hearth and ground the car- 
bonized ash to.dust under his heel. With his knife he cut 
the address from the top of the first sheet and the signature 
from the bottom of the second, and folded them and inserted 
them in a cheap envelope. He sealed this and stamped it, and 
took out his pen and with his left hand he addressed the en- 
velope in labored printed characters. That night he took it to 
the station and mailed it on the train. 

The next afternoon Virgil Beard killed a mocking-bird. It 
was singing in the peach tree that grew in the corner of the 
chicken-yard. 


J 


At times, as Simon puttered about the place during the day, — 


he could look out across the lot and into the pasture and 
see the carriage horses growing daily shabbier and less pride- 
ful with idleness and lack of their daily grooming, or he 
would pass the carriage motionless in its shed, its tongue 
propped at an accusing angle, and in the harness room the 
duster and the top hat gathered slow dust on the nail in the 
wall, holding too in their mute waiting a patient and ques- 
tioning uncomplaint. And at times, when he stood shabby 
and stooped a little with stubborn bewilderment and age, 
on the veranda with its ancient roses and wistaria and all its 
spacious and steadfast serenity, and watched Sartorises come 
and go in a machine a gentleman of his day would have 
scorned and which any pauper could own and any fool 


would ride in, it seemed to him that John Sartoris stood be- . 


SARTORIS 103 


side him, with his bearded and hawklike face and an expres- 
sion of haughty and fine contempt. 

: And as he stood so, with afternoon slanting athwart the 
southern end of the porch and the heady and myriad odors 
of the waxing spring and the drowsy humming of insects 
and the singing of birds steady upon it, Isom within the cool 
doorway or at the corner of the house would hear his grand- 
father mumbling in a monotonous singsong in which was in- 
‘comprehension and petulance and querulousness; and Isom 
‘would withdraw to the kitchen where his mother with her 
placid yellow face and her endless crooning labored steadily. 
_ “Pappy out dar talkin’ to Ole Marster again,” Isom told 
her. “Gimme dem cole ’taters, mammy.” 

_ “Ain’t Miss Jenny got some work fer you dis evenin’?” 
Elnora demanded, giving him the potatoes. 

“No’m. She gone off in de cyar again.” 

_ “Hit’s de Lawd’s blessin’ you and her ain’t bofe gone 
in it, like you is whenever Mist’ Bayard’ll let you. You git 
‘on outen my kitchen, now. I got dis flo’ mopped and I 
don’t want it tracked up.” 

Quite often these days Isom could hear his grandfather 
talking to John Sartoris as he labored about the stable or the 
flower beds or the lawn, mumbling away to that arrogant 
shade which dominated the house and the life that went on 
there and the whole scene itself, across which the railroad 
he had built ran punily with distance. But distinct with 
miniature verisimilitude, as though it were a stage set for the 
diversion of him whose stubborn dream, flouting him so de- 
viously and cunningly while the dream was impure, had 
shaped itself fine and clear, now that the dreamer was purged 
of the grossness of pride with that of flesh. 

“Gent’mun equipage,” Simon mumbled. He was busy again 
with his hoe in the salvia bed at the top of the drive. “Ridin’ 
in dat thing, wid a gent’mun’s proper equipage goin’ ter 
rack en ruin in de barn.” He wasn’t thinking of Miss Jenny. 
It didn’t make much difference what women rode in, their 
menfolks permitting. They only showed off a gentleman’s 
equipage, anyhow; they were but the barometers of his estab- 
lishment, the glass of his gentility: horses themselves knew 
it. “Yo’ own son, yo’ own twin grandson, ridin’ right up in 
yo’ face in a contraption like dat,” he continued, “and you 
lettin’ um do it. You bad ez dey is. You jes’ got ter lay down 


104 WILLIAM FAULKNER , 


de law ter ’um, Marse John; wid all dese foreign wars en 
sich de young folks is growed away fum de correck be- 
havior; dey don’t know how ter conduck deyselfs in de. 
gent’mun way. Whut you reckon folks gwine think when dey 
sees yo’ own folks ridin’ in de same kine o’ rig trash rides 
in? You jes’ got ter resert yo’self, Marse John. Ain’t Sartorises 
sot de quality in dis country since befo’ de War? And now | 
jes’ look at ’um.’ =| 

He leaned on his hoe and watched the car swing up tha 
drive and stop before the house. Miss Jenny and young | 
Bayard got out and mounted to the veranda. The engine was | 
still running; a faint shimmer of exhaust drifted upon the | 
bright forenoon, and Simon came up with his hoe and | 
peered at the array of dials and knobs on the dash. Bayard 
turned in the door and spoke his name. 

“Cut the switch off, Simon,” he ordered. 

“Cut de which whut off?” Simon said. 

“That little bright lever by the steering-wheel there. Turn 
it down.” 

“Naw, suh,” Simon answered, backing away, “I ain’t gwine 
tech it. I ain’t gwine have it blowin’ up in my face.” 

“It won’t hurt you,” Bayard said impatiently. “Just put 
your hand on it and pull it down. That little bright jigger 
there.” 

Simon peered doubtfully at the gadgets and things, but 
without coming any nearer; then he craned his neck further 
and stared over into the car. “I don’t see nothin’ but dis 
yere big lever stickin’ up thoo de flo’. Dat ain’t de one you 
mentionin’, is hit?” 

Bayard said “Hell.” He descended in two strides and 
leaned across the door and cut the switch under Simon’s 
curious blinking regard. The purr of the engine ceased. 

“Well, now,” Simon said, “is dat de one you wuz talkin’ 
erbout?” He stared at the switch for a time, then he straight- 
ened up and stared at the hood. “She’s quit b’ilin’ under 
dar, ain’t she? Is dat de way you stops her?” But Bayard 
had mounted the steps again and entered the house. 

Simon lingered a while longer, examining the gleaming 
long thing, touching it lightly with his hand, then rubbing | 
his hand on his thigh. He walked slowly around it and | 
touched the tires, mumbling to himself and shaking his head. 


ye 


“SARTORIS 105 


Then he returned to the salvia bed, where Bayard, emerging 
presently, found him. 

“Want to take a ride, Simon?” he said. 

Simon’s hoe ceased and he straightened up. “Who, me?” 

“Sure. Come on. We'll go up the road a piece.” 

Simon stood with his static hoe, rubbing his head slowly. 

“Come on,” Bayard said, “we'll just go up the road a 
piece. It won’t hurt you.” 

“Naw, suh,” Simon agreed, “I don’t reckon hit’s gwine 
ter hurt me.” 

He allowed himself to be drawn gradually toward the 
car, gazing at its various members with slow, blinking specu- 
lation, now that it was about to become an actual quantity 
in his life. At the door and with one foot raised to the 
running-board, he made a final stand against the subtle 
powers of evil judgment. “You ain’t gwine run it th’ough 
de bushes like you en Isom done dat day, is you?” 

Bayard reassured him, and he got in slowly, with mum- 
bled sounds of anticipatory concern, and he sat well for- 
ward on the seat with his feet drawn under him, clutching 
the door with one hand and a lump of shirt on his chest 
with the other as the car moved down the drive. They 
passed through the gates and on to the road, and still he 
sat hunched forward on the seat. The car gained speed, 
and with a sudden convulsive motion he caught his hat just 
as it blew off his head. 

“I ’speck dis is fur enough, ain’t it?” he suggested, rais- 
ing his voice. He pulled his hat down on his head, but when 
he released it he had to clutch wildly at it again, and he 
removed it and clasped it beneath his arm, and again his 
hand fumbled at his breast and clutched something beneath 
his shirt. “I got to weed dat bed dis mawnin’,” he said, 
louder still. “Please, suh, Mist’ Bayard,” he added, and his 
wizened old body sat yet further forward on the seat and 
he cast quick, covert glances at the steadily increasing rush 
of the roadside growth. 

Then Bayard leaned forward and Simon watched his fore- 
arm tauten, and then they shot forward on a roar of sound 
like blurred thunder. Earth, the unbelievable ribbon of the 
road, crashed beneath them and away behind into mad dust, 
and the roadside greenery w-s a tunnel rigid and streaming 
and unbroken. But he said no word, made no other sound, 


106 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


and when Bayard glanced the cruel derision of his teeth at 
him presently, Simon knelt on the floor, his old disreputable 
hat under his arm and his hand clutching a fold of his shirt 
on his breast. Later Bayard glanced at him again, and Simon 


was watching him and the blurred irises of his eyes were 


no longer a melting, pupilless brown: they were red, and in 


the blast of wind they were unwinking and in them was ~ | 


that mindless phosphorescence of an animal’s. Bayard 
jammed the throttle down to the floor. 

The wagon was moving drowsily and peacefully along 
the road. It was drawn by two mules and was filled with 
Negro women asleep in chairs. Some of them wore draw- 
ers. The mules themselves didn’t wake at all, but ambled 
sedately on with the empty wagon and the overturned chairs, 
even when the car crashed into the shallow ditch and surged 
back on to the road again and thundered on without slowing. 
The thunder ceased, but the car rushed on under its own 
momentum, and it began to sway from side to side as 
Bayard tried to drag Simon’s hands from the switch. But 
Simon knelt in the floor with his eyes shut tightly and the 
air-blast toying with the grizzled remnant of his hair, hold- 
ing the switch with both hands. 

“Turn it loose!” Bayard shouted. 

“Dat’s de way you stops it, Lawd! Dat’s de way you stops 
it, Lawd!” Simon chanted, keeping the switch covered with 
his hands while Bayard hammered at them with his fist. 
And he clung to it until the car slowed and stopped. Then 
he fumbled the door open and climbed out. Bayard called to 
him, but he went on back down the road at a rapid limping 
shuffle. 

“Simon!” Bayard called again. But Simon went on stiffly, 
like a man who has been deprived of the use of his legs 
for a long time. “Simon!” But he neither slowed nor looked 
back, and Bayard started the car again and drove on until he 
could turn it. Simon now stood in the ditch beside the road, 
his head bent above his hands, when Bayard overtook him 
and stopped. 

“Come on here and get in,” he commanded. 

“Naw, suh. Dll walk.” } 

“Jump in, now,” Bayard ordered sharply. He opened the 
door, but Simon stood in the ditch with his hand thrust in- 
side his shirt, and Bayard could see that he was shaking as 


ae 


_ SARTORIS 107 


with an ague. “Come on, you old fool; I’m not going to 
' hurt you.” 

“Tll walk home,” Simon repeated stubbornly, but with- 
out heat. “You git on wid dat thing.” 

“Ah, get in, Simon. I didn’t know I’d scare you that bad. 
Tll drive slow. Come on.” 

“You git on home,’ Simon said again. “Dey’ll be wor- 
tied erbout you. You kin tell ’um whar I’m at.” 

Bayard watched him for a moment, but Simon was not 
looking at him, and presently he slammed the door and 
drove on. Nor did Simon look up even then, even when the 
car burst once more into thunder and a soundless dun crash 
of fading dust. After a while the wagon emerged from the 
dust, the mules now at a high, flop-eared trot, and jingled 
past him, leaving behind it upon the dusty, insect-rasped 
air a woman’s voice in a quavering wordless hysteria. This 
faded slowly down the shimmering reaches of the valley, 
and Simon removed from the breast of his shirt an object 
slung by a greasy cord about his neck. It was small and of 
no particular shape and it was covered with soiled, napped 
fur—the first joint of the hind leg of a rabbit, caught sup- 
posedly in a graveyard in the dark of the moon, and Simon 
rubbed it through the sweat on his forehead and on the back 
of his neck; then he returned it to his bosom. His hands 
were still trembling, and he put his hat on and got back 
into the road and turned homeward through the dusty noon. 


Bayard drove on down the valley toward town, passing the 
iron gates and the serene white house among its trees, and 
went on at speed. The sound of the unmuffied engine 
crashed into the dust and swirled it into lethargic burst- 
ing shapes and faded across the planted land. Just outside 
of town he came upon another wagon and he held the car 
upon it until the mules reared, tilting the wagon; then he 
swerved and whipped past with not an inch to spare, so 
close that the yelling Negro in the wagon could see the lip- 
less and savage derision of his teeth. 

He went on. In a mounting swoop like a niggard zoom 
the cemetery with his great-grandfather in pompous effi- 
gy flashed past, and he thought of old Simon trudging along 
the dusty road toward home, clutching his rabbit’s foot, 
and he felt savage and ashamed. 


108 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


Town among its trees, its shady streets like green tunnels, 
along which tight lives accomplished their peaceful trag- 
edies. He closed the muffler and at a sedate pace he ap- 
proached the square. The clock on the courthouse lifted its 
four faces above the trees, in glimpses seen between arch- 
ing vistas of trees. Ten minutes to twelve. At twelve exactly 


his grandfather would repair to the office in the rear of the — 


bank and drink the pint of buttermilk which he brought in 
with him in a vacuum bottle every morning, and then sleep 
for an hour on the sofa there. When Bayard turned on to the ~ 
square the tilted chair in the bank door was already vacant. 
He slowed the car and eased it in to the curb before a 
propped sandwich-board. 

Fresh Catfish Today the board stated in letters of lique- 
fied chalk, and through the screen doors beyond it came a 
smell of refrigerated food—cheese and pickle and such— 
with a faint overtone of fried grease. 

He stood for a while on the sidewalk, while the noon 
throng parted and flowed about him—Negroes slow and 
aimless as figures of a dark, placid dream, with an animal 
odor, murmuring and laughing among themselves; there was 
in their consonantless murmuring something ready with 
mirth, in their laughter something grave and sad—country 
people, men in overalls or corduroy or khaki and without 
neckties, women in shapeless calico and sunbonnets and 
snufi-sticks—groups of young girls in stiff mail-order finery, 
the young heritage of their bodies’ grace dulled already by 
self-consciousness and labor and unaccustomed high heels, 
and soon to be obscured forever by childbearing—youths 
and young men in cheap, tasteless suits and shirts and caps, 
weather-tanned and clean-limbed as race-horses and a little 
belligerently blatant. Against the wall, squatting, a blind 
Negro beggar, with a guitar and a wire frame holding a 
mouth-organ to his lips, patterned the background of smells 
and sounds with a plaintive reiteration of rich, monotonous 
chords, rhythmic as a mathematical formula, but without 
music. He was a man of at least forty and his was that pa- 
tient resignation of many sightless years; yet he too wore 
filthy khaki with a corporal’s stripes on one sleeve and a 
crookedly-sewn Boy Scout emblem on the other, and on his 
breast a button commemorating the fourth Liberty Loan 
and a small metal brooch bearing two gold stars, obviously 


SARTORIS- 109° 


intended for female adornment. His weathered derby was 
encircled by an officer’s hat-cord, and on the pavement be- 
tween his feet sat a tin cup containing a dime and three 
pennies. 

Bayard sought a coin in his pocket, and the beggar sensed 
his approach and his tune became a single repeated chord, 
but without a break in the rhythm, until the coin rang into 
the cup, and still without a break in the rhythm and the 
meaningless strains of the mouth-organ, his left hand 
dropped groping a little, to the cup and read the coin in 
a single motion; then once more guitar and mouth-organ 
resumed their monotonous pattern. As Bayard turned away 
some one spoke at his side—a broad, squat man with a 
keen weathered face and gray temples. He wore corduroys 
and boots, and his body was the supple body of a horse- 
man, and his brown still hands were the hands that horses 


love. MacCallum his name, one of a family of six brothers 


who lived eighteen miles away in the hills and with whom 
Bayard and Jobn hunted foxes and ’coons during their vaca- 
tions. 

“Been hearing about that car of yourn,” MacCallum said. 
“That’s her, is it?” He stepped down from the curb and 
moved easily about the car, examining it, his hands on. his 
hips. “Too much barrel,” he said, “and she looks heavy in 
the withers. Clumsy. Have to use a curb on her, I reckon?” 

“T don’t,” Bayard answered. “Jump in, and I'll show you 
what she’ll do.” 

“No, much obliged,” the other answered. He stepped on 
to the pavement again, among the Negroes gathered to stare 
at the car. The clock on the courthouse struck twelve, and al- 
ready along the street there came in small groups children 
going home from school for the noon recess—little girls 
with colored boxes and skipping ropes, talking sibilantly 
among themselves of intense feminine affairs, and boys in 


- various stages of deshabille, shouting and_ scuffling and 


jostling the little girls, who shrank together and gave the 
little boys cold reverted glares. “Going to eat a snack,” 
MacCallum explained. He crossed the pavement and opened 
the screen door. “You ate yet?” he asked, looking back. 
“Come on in a minute, anyway,” and he patted his hip 
significantly. 

The store was half grocery and confectionery, and half 


110 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


restaurant. A number of customers stood about the clut- 
tered but clean front, with sandwiches and bottles of soda- 
water, and the proprietor bobbed his head at them with 
flurried, slightly distrait affability above the counter. The 
rear half was filled with tables. at which a number of men 
and a woman or so, mostly country people, sat eating with 


awkward and solemn decorum. Next to this was the kitchen, 


filled with frying odors and the brittle hissing of it, where — 
two Negroes moved like wraiths in a blue lethargy of smoke. 
They crossed this room and MacCallum opened a door set in 
an outthrust angle of the wall, and they entered a smaller 
room, or rather a large closet. There was a small window 
high in the wall, and a bare table and three or four chairs, 
and presently the younger of the two Negroes followed 
them. 

“Yes, suh, Mr. MacCallum and Mr. Sartoris.” He set two 
freshly rinsed glasses, to which water yet adhered in sliding 
beads, on the table, and stood drying his hands on his 
apron. He had a broad, untroubled face, a reliable sort of 
face. 

“Lemons and sugar and ice,” MacCallum said. “You don’t 
want none of that soda-pop, do you?” The Negro paused 
with his hand on the door. 

“No,” Bayard answered. “Rather have a toddy myself.” 

“Yes, suh,” the Negro agreed. “Y’all wants a toddy.” And 
he bowed again with grave approval, and turned again and 
stepped aside as the proprietor in a fresh apron entered at 
his customary distracted trot and stood rubbing his hands on 
his thighs. 

“Morning, morning,” he said. “How’re you, Rafe? Bay- 
ard, I saw Miss Jenny and the old Colonel going up to Doc 
Peabody’s office the other day. Ain’t nothing wrong, is 
there?” His head was like an inverted egg; his hair curled 
meticulously away from the part in the center into two care- 
ful reddish-brown wings, like a toupee, and his eyes were a 
melting, passionate brown. 

“Come in here and shut that door,” MacCallum ordered, 
drawing the other into the room. He produced from be- 
neath his coat a bottle of astonishing proportions and set it 
on the table. It contained a delicate amber liquid, and the 
proprietor rubbed his hands on his thighs, and his hot mild 
gaze gloated upon it. 


_ SARTORIS 111 


“Great Savior,” he said, “where’d you have that demijohn 
hid? In your pants leg?”” MacCallum uncorked the bottle and 
extended it and the proprietor leaned forward and sniffed 
it, his eyes closed. He sighed. 

“Henry’s,” MacCallum said. “Best run he’s made in six 
months. Reckon you'd take a drink if Bayard and me was to 
hold you?” The other cackled loudly, unctuously. 

“Ain’t he a comical feller, now?” he asked Bayard. “Some 
joker, ain’t he?” He glanced at the table. “You ain’t got 
but two gl * Some one tapped at the door; the proprietor 
leaned his conical head to it and waggled his hand at them. 
MacCallum concealed the bottle without haste as the other 
opened the door. It was the Negro, with another glass 
and lemons and sugar and ice in a cracked bowl. The pro- 
prietor admitted him. 

“If they want me up front, tell ’em I’ve stepped out but 
I'll be back in a minute, Houston.” 

— “Yes, suh,” the Negro replied, setting his burden on the 
table. MacCallum produced the bottle again. 

“What do you keep on telling your customers that old 
lie for?” he asked. “Everybody knows what you are doing.” 

The proprietor cackled again, gloating upon the bottle. 
“Yes, sir,’ he repeated, “he’s sure some joker. Well, you 
boys have got plenty of time, but I got to get on back and 
keep things running.” 

“Go ahead,” MacCallum told him, and the proprietor made 
himself a toddy. He raised the glass, stirring it and sniffing 
it alternately, while the others followed suit. Then he re- 
moved his spoon and laid it on the table. 

“Well, I hate to hurry a good thing mighty bad,” he 
said, “but business don’t wait on pleasure, you know.” 

“Work does interfere with a man’s drinking,” MacCallum 
agreed. 

“Yes, sir, it sure does,” the other replied. He raised his 
glass. “Your father’s good health,” he said and drank. “I 
don’t see the old gentleman in town much, nowadays.” 

“No,” MacCallum answered, “he ain’t never got over Buddy 
being in the Yankee army. Claims he ain’t coming to 
town again until the Democratic party denies Woodrow Wil- 
son.” 

“It’ll be the best thing they ever done, if they was to 
recall him and elect a man like Debs or Senator Vardaman 


112 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


president,” the proprietor agreed sagely. “Well, that sure was 
fine. Henry’s sure a wonder, ain’t he?’ He set his glass down 
and turned to the door. “Well, you boys make yourselves at 
home. If you want anything, just call Houston.” And he 
bustled out at his distracted trot. 


“Sit down,” MacCallum said. He drew up a chair, and — 


Bayard drew another up opposite. across the table. “Deacon —_ 


sure ought to know good whisky. He’s drunk enough of it 


to float his counters right out the front door.” He filled his 
glass and pushed the bottle across to Bayard, and they drank 
again, quietly. 

“You look bad, son,” MacCallum said suddenly, and Bayard 
raised his head and found the other examining him with his 
keen, steady eyes. “Overtrained,” he added. Bayard made 
an abrupt gesture of negation and raised his glass, but he 
could still feel the other watching him steadily. “Well, you 
haven’t forgot how to drink good whisky, anyhow. . . . Why 
don’t you come out and take a hunt with us? Got an 
old red we been saving for you. Been running him off and 
on for two years, now, with the young dogs. Ain’t put old 
General on him yet, because the old feller’ll nose him out, 
and we wanted to save him for you boys. John would have 
enjoyed that fox. You remember that night Johnny cut across 
down to Samson’s bridge ahead of the dogs, and when we 
got there, here come him and the fox floating down the 
river on that drift log, the fox on one end and Johnny on 
the other, singing that fool song as loud as he could yell? 
John would have enjoyed this fox. He outsmarts them young 
dogs every time. But old General’ll get him.” 

Bayard sat turning his glass in his hand. He reached a 


packet of cigarettes from his jacket and shook a few of ~ 


them on to the table at his hand and flipped the packet 
across to the other. MacCallum drank his toddy steadily and 
refilled his glass. Bayard lit a cigarette and emptied his glass 
and reached for the bottle. 

“You look like hell, boy,”” MacCallum repeated. 

“Dry, I reckon,” Bayard answered in a voice as level as 
the other’s. He made himself another toddy, his cigarette 
smoking on the table edge. He raised the glass, but instead of 
drinking, he held it for a moment beneath his nose while the 
muscles at the base of his nostrils tautened whitely, then he 
swung the glass from him and with a steady hand he emp- 


B 


| SARTORIS 113 


‘tied it on the floor. The other watched him quietly while he 
/poured his glass half full of raw liquor and sloshed a little 
water into it and tilted it down his throat. “I’ve been good - 
‘too damn long,” he said aloud, and he fell to talking of 
the war. Not of combat, but rather of a life peopled by 
-young men like fallen angels, and of a meteoric violence 
‘like that of fallen angels, beyond heaven or hell and par- 
‘taking of both: doomed immortality and immortal doom. 

MacCallum sat and listened quietly, drinking his whisky 

steadily and slowly and without appreciable effect, as 
though it were milk he drank, and Bayard talked on and pres- 
ently found himself without surprise eating food. The bottle 
‘was now less than half full. The Negro Houston had brought 
the food in and had his drink, taking it neat and without 
batting an eye. “Ef I had a cow dat give dat, de calf 
-wouldn’t git no milk a-tall,” he said, “and I wouldn’t never 
churn. Thanky, Mr. MacCallum, suh.” 
__ Then he was out, and Bayard’s voice went on, filling the 
cubbyhole of a room, surmounting the odor of cheap 
food too quickly cooked and of sharp, spilt whisky with 
ghosts of a thing high-pitched as a hysteria, like a glare of- 
fallen meteors on the dark retina of the world. Again a 
light tap at the door, and the proprietor’s egg-shaped head 
and his hot, diffident eyes. 

“You gentlemen got everything you want?” he asked, rub- 
bing his hands on his thighs. 

“Come and get it,” MacCallum said, jerking his head to- 
ward the bottle, and the other made himself a toddy in his 
stale glass and drank it, while Bayard finished his tale of 
himself and an Australian major and two ladies in the 
Leicester lounge one evening (the Leicester lounge being out 
of bounds, and the Anzac lost two teeth and his girl, and 
Bayard himself got a black eye), watching the narrator with 
round, melting astonishment. 

“Great Savior,” he said, “them av’aytors was sure some 
hell-raisers, wasn’t they? Well, I reckon they’re wanting me 
up front again. You got to keep on the jump to make a 
living, these days.” And he scuttled out again. 

“Tve been good too goddam long,” Bayard repeated harshly, 
watching MacCallum fill the two glasses. “That’s the only 
thing Johnny was ever good for. Kept me from getting in a 
tut. Bloody rut, with a couple of old women nagging at 


114 WILLIAM FAULKNER t 


me and nothing to do except scare niggers.” He drank his; 
whisky and set the glass down, still clutching it. “Damn ham- - 
handed Hun,” he said. ““He never could fly, anyway. I kept! 
trying to keep him from going up there on that goddam pop- - 
gun,” and he cursed his dead brother savagely. Then he: 

raised his glass again, but halted it halfway to his mouth. . 

“Where in hell did my drink go?” | 

MacCallum emptied the bottle into Bayard’s glass, and he: 
drank again and banged the thick tumbler on the table and 
rose and lurched back against the wall. His chair crashed 
over backward, and he braced himself, staring at the other. | 
“I kept on trying to keep him from going up there, with ’ 
that Camel. But he gave me a burst. Right across my nose.” 

MacCallum rose also. “Come on here,” he said quietly, and - 
he offered to take Bayard’s arm, but Bayard evaded him and 
they passed through the kitchen and traversed the long tun- 
nel of the store. Bayard walked steadily enough, and the 
proprietor bobbed his head at them across the counter. 

“Call again, gentlemen,” he said, “call again.” 

“All right, Deacon,” MacCallum answered. Bayard strode 
on. As they passed the soda-fountain a young lawyer standing 
beside a stranger addressed him. 

“Captain Sartoris, shake hands with Mr. Gratton here. Grat- 
ton was up on the British front last spring.” The stranger 
turned and extended his hand, but Bayard stared at him 
bleakly and strode so steadily on that the other involun- 
tarily gave back in order not to be overborne. 

“Why, God damn his soul,” he said to Bayard’s back. The 
lawyer grasped his arm. 

“He’s drunk,” he whispered quickly, “he’s drunk.” 

“T don’t give a damn,” the other exclaimed loudly. “Be- 
cause he was a goddam shave-tail he thinks——-” 

“Shhhhh, shhhhhh,” the lawyer hissed. The proprietor 
came to the corner of his candy case and peered out with 
hot, round alarm. 

“Gentlemen, gentlemen!” he exclaimed. The stranger made 
another violent movement, and Bayard stopped. 

“Wait a minute while I bash his face in,” he told Mac- 
Callum, turning. The stranger thrust the lawyer aside and 
stepped forward. 

“You never saw the day 
Bayard’s arm firmly and easily. 


” he began. MacCallum took 


‘ARTORIS 115 


“Come on here, boy.” 
. “Tl bash his bloody face in,” Bayard stated, looking bleakly 

t the angry stranger. The lawyer grasped his companion’s 
again. 

_ “Get away,” the stranger said, flinging him off. “Just let 
aim try it. Come on, you limey. 2 

“Gentlemen! Gentlemen!” the proprietor wailed. 

“Come on here, boy,” MacCallum said. “I’ve got to look 
t a horse.” 

“A horse?” Bayard repeated. He turned obediently. Then 
e stopped and looked back. “Can’t bash your face in now,” 
e told the stranger. “Sorry. Got to look at a horse. Call for 
ou later at the hotel.” But the stranger’s back was turned, 
d behind it the lawyer grimaced and waggled his hand at 
MacCallum. 

“Get him away, MacCallum, for God’s sake.” 

_ “Bash his face in later,” Bayard repeated. “Can’t bash yours, 
ough, Eustace,” he told the lawyer. “Taught us in ground- 
< never seduce a fool nor hit a cripple.” 


“Come on, here,” MacCallum repeated, leading him on. At 
the door Bayard must stop again to light a cigarette; then 
‘they went on. It was three o’clock and again they walked 
among school children in released surges. Bayard strode 
steadily enough, and a little belligerently, and soon Mac- 
Callum turned into a side street and they went on, passing 
Negro stores, and between a busy grist mill and a silent 
cotton gin they turned into a lane filled with tethered horses 
and mules. From the end of the Jane an anvil clanged. 
They passed the ruby glow of it and a patient horse stand- 
ing on three legs in the blacksmith’s doorway and the squat- 
ting overalled men along the shady wall, and came then to a 
high-barred gate backing a long, dun-colored brick tunnel 
smelling of ammonia. A few men sat on the top of the 
gate; others leaned their crossed arms upon it. From the 
paddock itself came voices, then through the slatted gate 
gleamed a haughty, motionless shape of burnished flame. 

The stallion stood against the yawning cavern of the livery 
stable door like a motionless bronze flame, and along its 
burnished coat ran at intervals little tremors of paler flame, 
little tongues of nervousness and pride. But its eye was 
quiet and arrogant, and occasionally and with a kingly air, 
its gaze swept along the group at the gate with a fine dis- 


116 WILLIAM FAULKNE 


dain, without seeing them as individuals at all, and againr 
little tongues of paler flame rippled flicking along its coat.) 
About its head was a rope hackamore; it was tethered to az 
door post, and in the background a white man moved about} 
at a respectful distance with a proprietorial air, beside hime 
a Negro hostler with a tow-sack tied about his waist with az 
string. MacCallum and Bayard halted at the gate, and the: 
white man circled the stallion’s haughty immobility and= 
crossed to them. The Negro hostler came forth also, with a: 
soft, dirty cloth and chanting in a mellow singsong. The stal-- 
lion permitted him to approach and suffered him to erase: 
with his rag the licking nervous little flames that ran in re-“ 
newed ripples under its skin. 

“Ain’t he a picture, now?” the white man demanded ofl 
MacCallum, leaning his elbow on the gate. A cheap nickel! 
watch was attached to his suspender loop by a length of raw-- 
hide lace leather worn black and soft with age, and his: 
shaven beard was heaviest from the corners of his mouth: 
to his chin: he looked always as though he were chewing: 
tobacco with his mouth open. He was a horse-trader by) 
profession, and he was constantly engaged in litigation withc 
the railroad company over the violent demise of his stock by; 
its agency. “Look at that nigger, now,” he added. “He’ll lett 
Tobe handle him like a baby. I wouldn’t git within ten foot! 
of him, myself. Dam’f I know how Tobe does it. Must be 
some kin between a nigger and a animal, I always claim.”* 

“J reckon he’s afraid you’ll be crossing the railroad withr 
him some day about the time Thirty-nine is due,” Mac-- 
Cullum said drily. 

“Yes, I reckon I have the hardest luck of any feller in thes 
county,” the other agreed. “But they got to settle this time: 
I got ’°em dead to rights, this time.” 

“Yes,” MacCallum said, “the railroad company ought to 
furnish that stock of yourn with time tables.” The other on- 
lookers guffawed. 

“Ah, the company’s got plenty of money,” the trader re-| 
joined. Then he said: “You talk like I might have druv them 
mules in front of that train. Lemme tell you how it come 
about A 

“I reckon you won’t never drive him in front of no train.” 
MacCallum jerked his head toward the stallion. The Negro} 


RTORIS 117 


urnished its shimmering coat, crooning to it in a monot- 
ynous singsong. The trader laughed. 
“T reckon not,” he admitted, “not less’n Tobe goes too. 
ust look at him now. I wouldn’t no more walk up to that 
imal than I'd fly.” 
“I’m going to ride that horse,” Bayard said suddenly. 
“What hoss?” the trader demanded, and the other on- 
ookers watched Bayard climb the gate and vault over into 
e lot. 
“You let that hoss alone, young feller,” the trader said. 
But Bayard paid him no heed. He went on, the stallion 
ept its regal regard upon him and away. 
“You let that hoss alone,” the trader shouted, “or Til 
have the law on you.” 

“T et him be,” MacCullum said. 

“And let him damage a fifteen-hundred-dollar stallion? 
|That hoss’ll kill him. You, Sartoris!” 
| From his hip pocket MacCallum drew a wad of bills en- 
closed by a rubber band. “Let him be,” he repeated. “That’s 
what he wants.” 

The trader glanced at the roll of money with quick cal- 
culation. “I take you gentlemen to witness ” he began 
loudly; then he ceased, and they watched tensely as Bayard 
| approached the stallion. The beast swept its haughty, glow- 
/ing eye upon him again and lifted its head without alarm and 
‘snorted. The Negro glanced over his shoulder and crouched 
against the animal, and his crooning chant rose to a swifter 
: beat. “Go back, white folks,” he said. 
The beast snorted again and swept its head up, snapping 
the rope like a gossamer thread, and the Negro grasped at the 
fiying rope-end. “Git away, white folks,” he cried. “Git 
away, quick.” 
_ But the stallion eluded his hand. It cropped its teeth in 
a vicious arc and the Negro leaped sprawling as the animal 
soared like a bronze explosion. Bayard had dodged beneath 
the sabring hooves, and as the horse swirled in a myriad 
flickering like fire, the spectators saw that the man had 
contrived to take a turn with the rope-end about its jaws; 
then they saw the animal rear again, dragging the man 
from the ground and whipping his body like a rag upon its 
flashing arc. Then it stopped, trembling, as Bayard closed its 
nostrils with the twisted rope, and suddenly he was upon 


118 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


its back while it stood with lowered head and rolling eyes, 
rippling its coat into quivering tongues before exploding again. 

The beast burst like bronze unfolding wings; the on- 
lookers tumbled away from the gate and hurled themselves 
to safety as the gate splintered to matchwood beneath its 
soaring volcanic thunder. Bayard crouched on its shoulders — 
and dragged its mad head around and they swept down 
the lane, spreading pandemonium among the horses and 
mules tethered and patient about the blacksmith shop and 
among the wagons there. Where the lane debouched into the 
street a group of Negroes scattered before them, and without 
a break in its stride the stallion soared over a small Negro 
child clutching a stick of striped candy directly in its path. 
A wagon drawn by mules was just turning into the lane: these 
reared madly before the wild, slack-jawed face of the white 
man in the wagon, and again Bayard sawed his thunder- 
bolt around and headed it away from the square. Down the 
lane behind him the spectators ran shouting through the 
dust, the trader among them, and Rafe MacCallum still clutch- 
ing his roll of money. 

The stallion moved beneath him like a tremendous mad 
music, uncontrolled, splendidly uncontrollable. The rope 
served only to curb its direction, not its speed, and among 
shouts from the pavement on either hand he swung the ani- 
mal into another street. This was a quieter street; soon they 
would be in the country, where the stallion could exhaust 
its rage without the added hazards of motors and pedestrians. — 
Voices faded behind him in his own thunder: “Runaway! 
Runaway!” But the street was deserted save for a small 
automobile going in the same direction, and further along 
beneath the green tunnel, bright small spots of color scuttled 
out of the street. Children. “Hope they stay there,” he said 
to himself. His eyes were streaming a little; beneath him the 
surging lift and fall; in his nostrils a sharpness of rage and. 
energy and violated pride like smoke from the animal’s body, 
and he swept past the motor-car, remarking in a flashing 
second a woman’s face and a mouth partly open and two 
eyes round with tranquil astonishment. But the face flashed 
away without registering on his mind and he saw the chil- 
dren huddled on one side of the street, and on the op- 
posite side a Negro playing a hose on the sidewalk and be- 
side him a second Negro with a pitchfork. 


SARTORIS 119 


Some one screamed from a veranda, and the huddle of 
ichildren broke, shrieking. A small figure in a white shirt 
and diminutive pale blue pants darted into the street and 
Bayard leaned downward and wrapped the rope about his 
‘hand and swerved the beast toward the opposite sidewalk 
lwhere the two Negroes stood, gape-mouthed. The small 
figure came on, flashed safely behind; then a narrow band 
lof rushing green, a tree trunk like a wheel spoke in re- 
verse, and the stallion struck clashing fire from wet concrete. 
‘It slid, clashed, fighting for balance, lunged and crashed 
down, and for Bayard a red shock, then blackness. 

The horse scrambled up and whirled and poised and struck 
‘viciously at the prone man with its hooves, but the Negro 
'with the pitchfork drove it away and it trotted stiffly and 
with tossing head up the street and passed the halted motor- 
/car. At the end of the street it stood trembling and snorting 
/and permitted the Negro hostler to touch it. Rafe MacCallum 
still clutched his roll of bills. 


6 


They gathered him up and brought him to town in a com- 
‘mandeered motor-car and roused Dr. Peabody from slumber, 
and Dr. Peabody profanely bandaged Bayard’s head and 
gave him a drink from the bottle which resided in the clut- 
tered waste-basket, and threatened to telephone Miss Jenny 
if he didn’t go straight home. Rafe MacCallum promised to see 
that he did so, and the owner of the impressed cutomobile 
offered to drive him out. It was a Ford body with, in place 
of a tonneau, 2 miniature one-room cabin of sheet iron, no 
larger than a dog kennel, in each painted window of which 
a painted housewife simpered across a painted sewing-ma- 
chine; in it an actual sewing-machine neatly fitted, borne thus 
about the countryside by the agent. The agent’s name was 
V. K. Suratt and he now sat, with his shrewd, plausible face, 
behind the wheel. Bayard with his humming head sat be- 
side him, and to the fender clung a youth with brown fore- 
arms and a slanted extremely new straw hat, who let his 


120 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


limber body absorb the jolts with negligent ease as they 
rattled sedately out of town on the valley road. 

The drink Dr. Peabody had given him, instead of quieting 
his jangled nerves, rolled sluggishly and hotly in his stomach 
and served only to nauseate him a little, and against his 
closed eyelids red antic shapes coiled in throbbing and 
tedious cycles. He watched them dully and without astonish- 
ment as they emerged from blackness and swirled sluggishly _ 
and consumed themselves and reappeared, each time a little 
fainter as his mind cleared. And yet, somewhere blended with | 
them and at the same time apart and beyond them with a 
tranquil aloofness and steadfast among their senseless 
convolutions, was a face. It seemed to have some relation 
to the instant itself as it culminated in crashing blackness; 
at the same time it seemed, for all its aloofness, to be a part 
of the whirling ensuing chaos; a part of it, yet bringing into 
the red vortex a sort of constant coolness like that of a 
faint, shady breeze. So it remained, aloof, not quite distinct, 
while the coiling shapes faded into a dull unease of physical 
pain from the jolting of the car, leaving about him like an 
echo that cool serenity and something else—a sense of shrink- 
ing, yet fascinated distaste of which he or something he 
had done was the object. 

Evening was coming. On either hand cotton and corn 
thrust green spears above the rich, dark soil, and in the 
patches of woodland where the sun slanted among violet 
shadows, doves called moodily. After a time Suratt turned 
from the highway into a faint, rutted wagon road between 
a field and a patch of woods, and they drove straight into 
the sun and Bayard removed his hat and held it before his 
face. 

“Sun hurt yo’ haid?” Suratt asked. “’Tain’t long, now.” 
The road wound presently into the woods, where the sun 
was intermittent, and it rose to a gradual, sandy crest. Be- 
yond this the land fell away in ragged, ill-tended fields and 
beyond them, in a clump of sorry fruit trees and a stunted 
grove of silver poplar shrubs pale as absinthe and twinkling 
ceaselessly with no wind, a small weathered house squatted. 
Beyond it and much larger, loomed a barn gray and gaunt 
with age. The road forked here. One faint arm curved sandily 
away toward the house; the other went on between rank weed 


SARTORIS 121 


toward the barn. The youth on the fender leaned his head 
into the car. “Drive on to the barn,” he directed. 

Suratt obeyed. Beyond the bordering weeds a fence strag- 
gled in limp dilapidation, and from the weeds beside it the 
handles of a plow stood at a gaunt angle while its share 
rusted peacefully in the undergrowth, and other implements 
rusted half concealed there—skeletons of labor healed over by 
the earth they were to have violated, kinder than they. The 
fence turned at an angle and Suratt stopped the car and the 
youth stepped down and opened the warped wooden gate 
and Suratt drove on into the barnyard where stood a wagon 
with drunken wheels and a home-made bed, and the rusting 
skeleton of a Ford car. Low down upon its domed and bald 
radiator the two lamps gave it an expression of beetling and 
patient astonishment and a lean cow ruminated and 
watched them with moody eyes. 

The barn doors sagged drunkenly from broken hinges, held 
to the posts with twists of rusty wire; beyond, the cavern of 
the hallway yawned in a stale desolation—a travesty of 
earth’s garnered fullness and its rich inferences. Bayard sat 
on the fender and leaned his bandaged head against the 
side of the car and watched Suratt and the youth enter the 
barn and mount slowly on invisible ladder-rungs. The cow 
chewed in slow dejection, and upon the yellow surface of 
a pond enclosed by banks of trodden and sun-cracked clay, 
geese drifted like small muddy clouds. The sun fell in a 
long slant upon their rumps and upon their suave necks, and 
upon the cow’s gaunt, rhythmically twitching flank, ridging 
her visible ribs with dingy gold. Presently Suratt’s legs 
fumbled into view, followed by his cautious body, and 
after him the youth slid easily down the ladder in one- 
handed swoops. 

He emerged carrying an earthen jug close against his leg. 
Suratt followed in his neat, tieless blue shirt and jerked 
his head at Bayard, and they turned the corner of the barn 
among waist-high jimson weeds. Bayard overtook them as 
the youth with his jug slid with a single motion between two 
lax strands of barbed wire. Suratt stooped through more 
sedately, and he held the top strand taut and set his foot on 
the lower one until Bayard was through. Behind the barn 
the ground descended into shadow, toward a junglish growth 
of willow and elder, against which a huge beech and a clump 


\ 


122 WILLIAM FAULKNER © 


of saplings stood like mottled ghosts and from which a cool 
dankness rose like a breath to meet them. The spring welled 
from the roots of the beech, into a wooden frame sunk to its 
top in white sand that quivered ceaselessly and delicately 
beneath the water’s limpid unrest, and went on into the wil- 
low and elder growth. 

The earth about the spring was trampled smooth and 
packed as an earthen floor. Near the spring a blackened iron 
pot sat on four bricks; beneath it was a heap of pale wood- 
ashes and a litter of extinct brands and charred fagot-ends. 
Against the pot leaned a scrubbing-board with a ridged 
metal face, and a rusty tin cup hung from a nail in the 
tree above the spring. The youth set the jug down and he 
and Suratt squatted beside it. 

“I don’t know if we ain’t a-goin’ to git in trouble, givin’ 
Mr. Bayard whisky, Hub,” Suratt said. “Still, Doc Peabody 
give him one dram hisself; so I reckon we kin give him 
one mo’. Ain’t that right, Mr. Bayard?” Squatting, he looked 
up at Bayard with his shrewd affable face. Hub twisted the 
corn-cob stopper from the jug and passed it to Suratt, who 
tendered it to Bayard. “I been knowin’ Mr. Bayard ever 
since he was a chap in knee pants,” Suratt confided to Hub. 
“But this is the first time me and him ever taken a drink 
together. Ain’t that so, Mr. Bayard? .. . I reckon you'll want 
a drinkin’-cup, won’t you?” But Bayard was already drinking, 
with the jug tilted across his horizontal forearm and the 
mouth held to his lips by the same hand, as it should be 
done. “He knows how to drink outen a jug, don’t he?” 
Suratt added. “I knowed he was all right,” he said in a tone 
of confidential vindication. Bayard lowered the jug and re- 
turned it to Suratt, who tendered it formally to Hub. 

“Go ahead,” Hub said. “Hit it.” Suratt did so, with measured 
pistonings of his Adam’s apple. Above the stream gnats 
whirled and spun in a leveling ray of sunlight, like erratic 
golden chaff. Suratt lowered the jug and passed it to Hub and 
wiped his mouth on the back of his hand. 

“How you feel now, Mr. Bayard?” he asked. Then he said 
heavily: “You'll have to excuse me. I reckon I ought to said 
Cap’m Sartoris, oughtn’t 1?” 

“What for?” Bayard asked. He squatted also on his heels 
against the bole of the beech tree. The rising slope of 
ground behind them hid the barn and the house, and the 


SARTORIS 123 


three of them squatted in a small bowl of peacefulness re- 
mote from the world and time, and filled with the cool and 
limpid breathing of the spring and a seeping of sunlight 
among the elders and willows like a thinly diffused wine. 
On the surface of the spring the sky lay reflected, strippled — 
over with windless beech leaves. Hub squatted leanly, his 
brown forearms clasped about his knees, smoking a cigarette 


' beneath the tilt of his hat. Suratt was across the spring 
i from him. He wore a faded blue shirt, and in contrast to it 


his hands and face were a rich, even brown, like mahogany. 
The jug sat rotund and benignant between them. 

“Yes, sir,’ Suratt repeated, “I always find the best cure fer 
a wound is plenty of whisky. Doctors, these here fancy young 
-doctors’ll tell a feller different, but old Doc Peabody his- 
self cut off my granpappy’s laig while granpappy laid back 
on the kitchen table with a demijohn in his hand and a mat- 
tress and a cheer acrost his laigs and fo’ men a-holdin’ 
‘him down, and him cussin’ and singin’ so scandalous the 
womenfolks and the chillen went down to the pasture be- 
hind the barn and waited. Take some mo’,” he said, and he 
passed the jug across the spring and Bayard drank again. 
“Reckon you're beginnin’ to feel pretty fair, ain’t you?” 

“Damned if I know,” Bayard answered. “It’s dynamite, 
boys.” 

Suratt poised the jug and guffawed, then he lipped it and 
his Adam’s apple pumped again, in relief against the wall 
of elder and willow. The elder would soon flower, with 
pale clumps of tiny bloom. Miss Jenny made a little wine 
of it every year. Good wine, if you knew how and had the 
patience. Elder-flower wine. Like a ritual for a children’s 
game; a game played by little girls in small pale dresses, be- 
tween supper and twilight. Above the bowl where sunlight 
yet came in a leveling beam, gnats whirled and spun like 
dust-motes in a still, disused room. Suratt’s voice went on 
affably, ceaselessly recapitulant, in polite admiration of the 
hardness of Bayard’s head and the fact that this was the 


_ first time he and Bayard had ever taken a drink together. 


They drank again, and Hub began to borrow cigarettes 
of Bayard and he too became a little profanely and ro- 
bustly anecdotal in his country idiom, about whisky and 
girls and dice; and presently he and Suratt were arguing 


amicably about work. They appeared to be able to sit tire- 


124 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


lessly and without discomfort on their heels, but Bayard’s 
legs had soon grown numb and he straightened them, 
tingling with released blood, and he now sat with his back 
against the tree and his long legs straight before him, hear- ~ 
ing Suratt’s voice without listening to it. 

His head was now no more than a sort of taut discom- ~ 


fort; at times it seemed to float away from his shoulders and — | 


hang against the green wall like a transparent balloon, within 
which or beyond which that face that would neither emerge 
completely nor yet fade completely away, lingered with 
shadowy exasperation—two eyes round with grave, shocked 
astonishment, two lifted hands flashing behind little white 
shirt and blue pants swerving into a lifting rush plunging 
clatter crash blackness. ... 

Suratt’s slow, plausible voice went on steadily, but with- 
out any irritant quality. It seemed to fit easily into the still 
scene, speaking of earthy things. “Way I learnt to chop cot- 
ton,” he was saying, “my oldest brother taken and put me in 
the row ahead of him, Started me off, and soon’s I taken a 
lick or two, here he come behind me. And ever’ time my hoe 
chopped once, I could hear hisn chop twice. I never had no 
shoes in them days, neither,” he added drily. “So I had to 
learn to chop fast, with that ’ere hoe of hisn cuttin’ at my 
bare heels. But I swo’ then, come what mought, I wouldn’t 
never plant nothin’ in the ground, soon’s I could he’p my- 
self, It’s all right fer folks that owns the land, but folks like 
my folks was don’t never own no land, and ever’ time we 
made a furrow, we was scratchin’ dirt fer somebody else.” 
The gnats danced and whirled more madly yet in the sun, 
above the secret places of the stream, and the sun’s light was 
taking on a rich copper tinge. Suratt rose. “Well, boys, I got 
to git on back to’rds town, myself.” He looked at Bayard 
again with his shrewd, kind face. “I reckon Mr. Bayard’s 
clean fergot about that knock he taken, ain’t he?” 

“Dammit,” Bayard said, “quit calling me Mr. Bayard.” 

Suratt picked up the jug. “I knowed he was all right, 
when you got to know him,” he told Hub. “I been knowin’ 
him since he was knee-high to a grasshopper, but me and 
him jest ain’t been throwed together like this. I was raised a 
pore boy, fellers, while Mr. Bayard’s folks has lived on that 
’ere big place with plenty of money in the bank and niggers 
to wait on ’em. But he’s all right,” he repeated. “He ain’t 


Ey SARTORIS 125 


goin’ to say nothin’ about who give him this here whisky.” 

“Let him tell if he wants to,” Hub answered. “I don’t 
give a damn.” 

They drank again. The sun was almost gone, and from 
the secret marshy places of the stream came a fairylike piping 
of young frogs. The gaunt invisible cow lowed barnward, 
and Hub replaced the corn cob in the jug and drove it home 
with a blow of his palm, and they mounted the hill and 
crawled through the fence. The cow stood in the barn door 
and watched them approach and lowed again, moody and 
mournful. The geese had left the pond and they now paraded 
sedately across the barnyard towards the house, in the door 
of which, framed by two crape myrtle bushes, a woman 
stood. 

“Hub,” she said in a flat, country voice. 

“Goin’ to town,” Hub answered shortly. “Sue’ll have to 
milk.” 

The woman stood quietly in the door. Hub carried the jug 
into the barn and the cow followed him, and he heard her 
and turned and gave her a resounding kick in her gaunt ribs 
and cursed her without heat. Presently he reappeared and 
went on to the gate and opened it, and Suratt drove through. 
Then he closed it and wired it to again and swung on to the 
fender. Bayard moved over and prevailed on Hub to get in- 
side. The woman stood yet in the door, watching them 
quietly. About the doorstep the geese surged erratically with 
discordant cries, their necks undulant and suave as formal 
gestures in a pantomime. 

The shadow of the fruit trees fell long across the untidy 
fields, and the car pushed its elongated shadow before it 
like the shadow of a huge, hump-shouldered bird. They 
mounted the sandy hill in the last of the sun and dropped 
downward out of the sunlight and into violet dusk. The 
road was soundless with sand, and the car lurched in the 
worn and shifting ruts and on to the highroad again. 

The waxing moon stood overhead. As yet it gave off no 
light, though, and they drove on toward town, passing an 
occasional country wagon homeward bound. These Suratt, 
who knew nearly every soul in the county, greeted with a 
grave gesture of his brown hand, and presently where the 
road crossed a wooden bridge among more willows and elder 


126 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


and where dusk was denser and more palpable, Suratt 
stopped the car and climbed out over the door. 

“You fellers set still,” he said. “I won’t be but a minute. 
Got to fill that ’ere radiator.” They heard him at the rear ~ 
of the car; then he reappeared with a tin bucket and let 


himself gingerly down the roadside bank beside the bridge. 


Water chuckled and murmured beneath the bridge, invisible 
in the twilight, its murmur burdened with the voice of cricket 
and frog. Above the willows that marked the course of the 
stream gnats still spun and whirled, for bull bats appeared 
from nowhere in-long swoops, in mid-swoop vanished, then 
appeared again swooping against the serene sky, silent as 
drops of water on a window-pane; swift and noiseless and 
intent as though their wings were feathered with twilight 
and with silence. 

Suratt scrambled up the bank with his pail and removed 
the cap and tilted the bucket above the radiator. The moon 
stood without emphasis overhead; yet a faint shadow of 
Suratt’s head and shoulders fell upon the hood of the car, 
and upon the pallid planking of the bridge the leaning willow 
fronds were faintly and delicately penciled in shadow. The 
last of the water gurgled with faint rumblings into the en- 
gine’s interior and Suratt replaced the pail and climbed over 
the blind door. The lights were operated from a generator; 
he switched these on now. While the car was in low speed, 
the lights glared to crescendo, but when he let the clutch in 
they dropped to a wavering glow no more than a luminous 
shadow. 

Night was fully come when they reached town. Across 
the land the lights on the courthouse clock were like yellow 
beads above the trees, and upon the green afterglow a column 
of smoke stood like a balanced plume. Suratt put them out 
at the restaurant and drove on, and they entered and the 
proprietor raised his conical head and his round, melting 
eyes from behind the soda-fountain. 

“Great Savior, boy,” he exclaimed, “ain’t you gone home 
yet? Doc Peabody’s been huntin’ you ever since four o’clock, 
and Miss Jenny drove to town in the carriage, looking for 
you. You'll kill yourself.” 

“Get to hell on back yonder, Deacon,” Bayard answered, 
“and bring me and Hub about two dollars’ worth of ham and 
eggs.” 


SARTORIS 127 


Later they returned for the jug in Bayard’s car, Bayard 
and Hub and a third young man, freight agent at the rail- 
way station, with three Negroes and a bull fiddle in the rear 
seat. But they drove no farther than the edge of the field 
above the house and stopped there while Hub went on afoot 
down the sandy road toward the barn. The moon stood pale 
and cold overhead, and on all sides insects shrilled in the 
dusty undergrowth. In the rear seat the Negroes murmured 
among themselves. 

“Fine night,’ Mitch, the freight agent, suggested. Bayard 
made no reply. He smoked moodily, his head closely helmeted 
in its white bandage. Moon and insects were one, audible 
and visible, dimensionless and without source. 

After a while Hub materialized against the dissolving 
vagueness of the road, crowned by the silver slant of his hat, 
and he came up and swung the jug on to the door and re- 
~ moved the stopper. Mitch passed it to Bayard. 

“Drink,” Bayard said, and Mitch did so. The others drank. 

“We ain’t. got nothin’ for the niggers to drink out of,” 
Hub said. 

“That’s so,” Mitch agreed. He turned in his seat. “Ain’t 
one of you boys got a cup or something?” The Negroes 
murmured again, questioning one another in mellow con- 
sternation. 

“Wait,” Bayard said. He got out and lifted the hood and 
removed the cap from the breather-pipe. “It'll taste a little 
like oil for a drink or two. But you boys won’t notice it after 
that.” 

“Naw, suh,” the Negroes agreed in chorus. One took the 
cup and wiped it out with the corner of his coat, and they 
too drank in turn, with smacking expulsions of breath. Bay- 
ard replaced the cap and got in the car. 

“Anybody want another right now?” Hub asked, poising 
the corn cob. 

“Give Mitch another,” Bayard directed. “He’ll have to 
catch up.” 

Mitch drank again. Then Bayard took the jug and tilted 
it. The others watched him respectfully. 

“Dam’f he don't drink it,” Mitch murmured. “I’d be afraid 
to hit it so often, if I was you.” 

“It’s my damned head.” Bayard lowered the jug and 


128 _ WILLIAM FAULKNER 


passed it to Hub. “I keep thinking another drink will ease it 
off some.” 

“Doc put that bandage on too tight,” Hub said. “Want it 
loosened some?” 

“J don’t know.” Bayard lit another cigarette and threw 
the match away. “I believe I'll take it off. It’s been on there 
long enough.” He raised his hands and fumbled at the ban- 
dage. 

“You better let it alone,” Mitch warned him. But he con- 
tinued to fumble at the fastening; then he slid his fingers be- 
neath a turn of the cloth and tugged at it savagely. One of 
the Negroes leaned forward with a pocket knife and severed 
it, and they watched him as he stripped it off and flung it 
away. 

“You ought not to done that,” Mitch told him. 

“Ah, let him take it off if he wants,” Hub said. “He’s 
all right.” He got in and stowed the jug away between his - 
knees, and Bayard turned the car about. The sandy road 
hissed beneath the broad tires of it and rose shaling into the 
woods again where the dappled moonlight was intermittent, 
treacherous with dissolving vistas. Invisible and sourceless 
among the shifting patterns of light and shade, whippoorwills 
were like flutes tongued liquidly. The road passed out of the 
woods and descended, with sand in shifting and silent lurches, 
and they turned on to the valley road and away from town. 

The car went on, on the dry hissing of the closed muf- 
fler. The Negroes murmured among themselves with mellow 
snatches of laughter whipped like scraps of torn paper away 
behind. They passed the iron gates and Bayard’s home se- 
renely in the moonlight among its trees, and the silent, box- 
like flag station and the metal-roofed cotton gin on the 
railroad siding. 

The road rose at last into hills. It was smooth and 
empty and winding, and the Negroes fell silent as Bayard 
increased speed. But still it was not anything like what they 
had anticipated of him. Twice more they stopped and drank, 
and then from an ultimate hilltop they looked down upon 
another cluster of lights like a clotting of beads upon the 
pale gash where the railroad ran. Hub produced the breather- 
cap and they drank again. 

Through streets identical with those at home they moved 
slowly, toward an identical square. People on the square 


| SARTORIS 129 


turned and looked curiously after them. They crossed the 
Square and followed another street and went on between 
broad lawns and shaded windows, and presently beyond an 
iron fence and well back among black-and-silver trees, 
lighted windows hung in ordered tiers like rectangular lan- 
| terns strung among the branches. 

They stopped here, in shadow. The Negroes descended 
and lifted the bass viol out, and a guitar. The third one held 
a slender tube frosted over with keys upon which the inter- 
_ mnittent moon glinted in pale points, and they stood with 
their heads together, murmuring among themselves and 
_ touching plaintive muted chords from the strings. Then the 
one with the clarinet raised it to his lips. 

The tunes were old tunes. Some of them were sophisti- 
| cated tunes and formally intricate, but in the rendition this 
was lost, and all of them were imbued instead with a plain- 
__tive similarity, a slurred and rhythmic simplicity; and they 
drifted in rich, plaintive chords upon the silver air, fading, 
dying in minor reiterations along the treacherous vistas of 
| the moon. They played again, an old waltz. The college 
_ Cerberus came across the dappled lawn to the fence and 
_leaned his arms upon it, a lumped listening shadow among 
| other shadows. Across the street, in the shadows there, 
| other listeners stood. A car approached and slowed to the 
_ curb and shut off engine and lights, and in the tiered win- 
dows heads leaned, aureoled against the lighted rooms be- 
hind, without individuality, feminine, distant, delicately and 
| divinely young. 
| They played “Home, Sweet Home,” and when the rich 
' minor died away, across to them came a soft clapping of 
_ slender palms. Then Mitch sang “Good Night, Ladies” in his 
true, oversweet tenor, and the young hands were more im- 
portunate, and as they drove away the slender heads leaned 
aureoled with bright hair in the lighted windows and the 
soft clapping drifted after them for a long while, fainter and 
fainter in the silver silence and the moon’s infinitude. 

At the top of the first hill out of town they stopped and 
Hub removed the breather-cap. Behind them random lights 
shone among the trees, and it was as though there still came 
to them across the hushed world that sound of young palms 
like flung delicate flowers before their masculinity and their 

youth, and they drank without speaking, lapped still in the 


130 WILLIAM FAULKNER . 


fading magic of that lost moment. Mitch sang to himself 
softly; the car slid purring on again. The road dropped 


curving smoothly, empty and blanched. Bayard spoke, his 
voice harsh, abrupt. 
“Cut-out, Hub,” he said. Hub bent forward and veschen 


his hand under the dash, and the car swept on with a | 
steady, leashed muttering like waking thunderous wings; — 
then the road flattened in a long swoop toward another rise — 


and the muttering leaped to crescendo and the car shot 


forward with neck-snapping violence. The Negroes had | 


stopped talking; one of them raised a wailing shout. 
“Reno lost his hat,” Hub said, looking back. 


“He don’t need it,” Bayard replied. The car roared up 


this hill and rushed across the crest of it and flashed around 
a tight curve. 


“Oh, Lawd,” the Negro wailed. “Mr. Bayard!” The air- | 


blast stripped his words away like leaves. “lemme out, Mr. 
Bayard!” 


“Jump out, then,” Bayard answered. The road fell from: | 
beneath them like a tilting floor, and away across a valley, 
straight now as a string. The Negroes clutched their instru- — 


ments and held to one another. The speedometer showed 
fifty-five and sixty and turned gradually on. Sparse houses 
flashed slumbering away, and fields and patches of wood- 
land like tunnels. 


The road went on across the black-and-silver land. Whip- 


poorwills called on either side, one to another inquiring, 
liquid reiterations; now and then as the headlights swept in 
the road’s abrupt windings, two spots of pale fire blinked in 
the dust before them as the bird blundered awkwardly some- 
where beneath the radiator. The ridge rose steadily, with 
wooded slopes falling away on either hand. Sparse Negro 
cabins squatted on the slopes or beside the road. 

The road dipped, then rose again in a long slant broken 
by another dip; then it stood directly before them like a 
wall. The car shot upward and over the dip and left the 
road completely, then swooped dreadfully on, and the 
Negroes’ concerted wail whipped forlornly away. Then the 
ridge attained its crest and the car’s thunder ceased and it 
rolled to a stop. The Negroes now sat in the bottom of the 
tonneau. 

“Is dis heaven?” one murmured after a time. 


SARTORIS I31 


“Dey wouldn’t let you in heaven, wid likker on yo’ breaf 
and no hat, feller,” another said. 

“Ef de Lawd don’t take no better keer of me dan He 
done of dat hat, I don’t wanter go dar, noways,” the first 
rejoined. 

“Mmmmmmm,” the second agreed, “when us come down 
dat ’ere las’ hill, dis yere cla’inet almos’ blowed clean outen 
my han’, let “lone my hat.” 

“And when us jumped over dat ’ere lawg er whutever 
it wuz back dar,” the third one added, “I thought fer a 
minute dis whole auto’bile done blowed outen my han’.” 

They drank again. It was high here, and the air moved 
with grave coolness. On either hand lay a valley filled with 


_ silver mist and with whippoorwills; beyond these valleys the 
silver earth rolled on into the sky. Across it, mournful and 


far, a dog howled. Bayard’s head was as cool and clear as 
a clapperless bell. Within it that face emerged clearly at last: 


| those two eyes round with grave astonishment, winged se- 
'tenely by two dark wings of hair. It was that Benbow girl, 


he said to himself, and he sat for a while, gazing into the 


| sky. The lights on the town clock were steadfast and yellow 


and unwinking in the dissolving distance, but in all other di- 


_ rections the world rolled away in slumbrous ridges, milkily 
_ opaline. 


Her appetite was gone at supper, and Aunt Sally Wyatt 
mouthed her soft prepared food and mumbled querulously 


at her because she wouldn’t eat. 


“My mother saw to it that I drank a good cup of bark 
tea when I come sulking to the table and wouldn’t eat,” 
Aunt Sally stated, “but folks nowadays think the good Lord’s 
going to keep ’em well and them lifting no finger.” 

“[’m all right,’ Narcissa insisted. “I just don’t want any 
supper.” 

“That’s what you say. Let yourself get down, and Lord 
knows, I ain’t strong enough to wait on you. In my day 
young folks had more consideration for their elders.” She 
mouthed her food unprettily, querulously and monotonously 
retrospective, while Narcissa toyed restively with the food 
she could not eat. Later Aunt Sally continued her monologue 
while she rocked with her interminable fancy-work on her 
lap. She would never divuige what it was to be when com- 


132 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


pleted, nor for whom, and she had been working on it for 
fifteen years, carrying about with her a shapeless bag of 
dingy, threadbare brocade containing odds and ends of 

colored fabric in all possible shapes. She could never bring 
herself to trim them to any pattern; so she shifted and fitted 
and mused and fitted and shifted them like pieces of a pa- 
tient puzzle-picture, trying to fit them to a pattern or create 
a pattern about them without using her scissors; smoothing 
her colored scraps with flaccid, putty-colored fingers, shifting 
and shifting them. From the bosom of her dress the needle — 
Narcissa had threaded for her dangled its spidery skein. 

Across the room Narcissa sat with a book. Aunt Sally’s 
voice droned on with querulous interminability while Nar- 
cissa read. Suddenly she rose and laid the book down and 
crossed the room and entered the alcove where her piano © 
sat. But she had not played four bars before her hands | 
crashed in discord, and she shut the piano and went to the | 
telephone. 

Miss Jenny thanked her tartly for her solicitude, and dared 
to say that Bayard was all right: still an active member of the 
so-called human race, that is, since they had received no of- | 
ficial word from the coroner. No, she had heard nothing of 
him since Loosh Peabody ’phoned her at four o’clock that 
Bayard was on his way home with a broken head. The 
broken head she readily believed, but the other part of the © 
message she had put no credence in whatever, having lived 
with those damn Sartorises eighty years and knowing that 
home would be the last place in the world a Sartoris with a 
broken head would ever consider going. No, she was not even 
interested in his present whereabouts, and she hoped he hadn’t 
injured the horse. Horses were valuable animals. 

Narcissa returned to the living-room and explained to Aunt 
Sally whom she had been talking to and why, and drew a 
low chair to the lamp and took up her book. 

“Well,” Aunt Sally said after a time, “if you ain’t going 
to talk any .. .” She fumbled her scraps together and 
crammed them into the bag. “I thank the Lord sometimes | 
you and Horace ain’t any blood of mine, the way you all 
go on. But if you’d drink it, I don’t know who’s to get 
sasscfras for you: I ain’t able to, and you wouldn’t know 
it from dog fennel or mullein, yourself.” 

“T’m all right,” Narcissa protested. | 


| SARTORIS 133-2 


“Go ahead,” Aunt Sally repeated, “get flat on your back, 
| with me and that trifling nigger to take care of you. She 
ain’t wiped off a picture frame in six months, to my certain 
_ knowledge. And I’ve done everything but beg and pray.” 
, She rose and said good night and hobbled from the room. 
Narcissa sat and turned the pages on, hearing the other 
mount the stairs with measured, Jaborious tappings of her 
stick, and for a while longer she sat and turned the pages of 
her book. 
But presently she flung the book away and went to the 
piano again, but Aunt Sally thumped on the floor overhead 
with her stick, and she desisted and returned to her book. So 
_ it was with actual pleasure that she greeted Dr. Alford a 
| moment later. 
_ “I was passing and heard your piano,” he explained. “You 
haven’t stopped?” 
She explained that Aunt Sally had gone to bed, and he 
_-sat formally and talked to her in his stiff, pedantic way on 


+ cold and erudite subjects for two hours. Then he departed 


and she stood in the door and watched him down the drive. 
_ The moon stood overhead; along the drive the cedars in a 
_ rigid curve were pointed against the pale, faintly spangled 
sky. 

She returned to the living-room and got her book and 
turned out the lights and mounted the stairs. Across the hall 
Aunt Sally snored with genteel placidity, and Narcissa stood 
for a moment, listening to the homely noise. “I will be glad 
when Horry gets home,” she thought, going on. 

She turned on her light and undressed and took her book 
to bed, where she again held her consciousness submerged 
deliberately, as you hold a puppy under water until its strug- 
gles cease. And after a time her mind surrendered to the 
book and she read on, pausing from time to time to think 
warmly of sleep, reading again. And so when the Negroes 
first blended their instruments beneath the window she paid 
them only the most perfunctory notice. “Why in the world 
are those jellybeans serenading me?” she thought with faint 
amusement, visioning immediately Aunt Sally in her night- 
cap leaning from a window and shouting them away. And 
she lay with the book open, seeing upon the spread page the 
picture she had created while the plaintive rhythm of the 
strings and clarinet drifted into the open window. 


a 


134 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


Then she sat bolt upright, with a sharp and utter cer- 
tainty, and clapped the book shut and slipped from bed. 
From the adjoining room she looked down. 

The Negroes were grouped on the lawn; the frosted clari- 
net, the guitar, the sober, comical bulk of the bass fiddle. 
At-the street entrance to the ,drive a motor-car stood in 
shadow. The musicians played once; then a voice called from 
the car, and they retreated across the lawn and the car moved | 
away, without lights. She was certain, then: no one else would — 
play one tune beneath a lady’s window, just enough to waken | 
her from sleep, then go away. 

She returned to her room. The book lay face down upon 
the bed, but she went to the window and stood there, be- 
tween the parted curtains, looking out upon the black-and- 
silver world and the peaceful night. The air moved upon her | 
face and amid the dark, fallen wings of her hair with grave | 
coolness. “The beast, the beast,” she whispered to herself. | 
She let the curtains fall and on her silent feet she descended 
the stairs again and found the telephone in the darkness, — 
muffling its bell when she rang. | 

Miss Jenny’s voice came out of the night with its usual 
brisk and cold asperity, and without surprise or curiosity. — 
No, he had not returned home, for he was by now safely 
locked up in jail, she believed, unless the city officers were ~ 
too corrupt to obey a lady’s request. Serenading? Fiddle- 
sticks. What would he want to go serenading for? He couldn’t 
injure himself serenading, unless some one killed him with a 
flatiron or an alarm clock. And why was she concerned 
about him? 

Narcissa hung up, and for a moment she stood in the 
darkness, beating her fists on the telephone’s unresponsive 
box. The beast, the beast. 


She received three callers that night. One came formally; 
the second came informally; the third came anonymously. 

The garage which sheltered her car was a small brick 
building surrounded by evergreens. One side of it was a 
continuation of the garden wall. Beyond the wall a grass-— 
grown lane led back to another street. The garage was about | 
fifteen yards from the house and its roof rose to the level of 
the first-floor windows: Narcissa’s bedroom windows looked 
out upon the slate roof of it. 


SARTORIS 135 


This third caller entered by the lane and mounted on to 
the wall and thence to the garage roof, where he now lay in 
the shadow of a cedar, sheltered so from the moon. He 
had lain there for a long time. The room facing him was 
dark when he arrived, but he had lain in his fastness quiet 
as an animal and with an animal’s patience, without move- 
ment save to occasionally raise his head and reconnoiter the 
immediate scene with covert dartings of his eyes. 

But the room facing him remained dark while an hour 
passed. In the meantime a car entered the drive (he recog- 
nized it; he knew every car in town) and a man entered 
the house. The second hour passed and the room was still 
dark, and the car stood yet in the drive. Then the man 
emerged and drove away, and a moment later the lights 
downstairs went out, and then the window facing him glowed, 
and through the sheer curtains he saw her moving about the 
room, watched the shadowy motions of her disrobing. Then 
_ she passed out of his vision. But the light still burned and he 

lay with still and infinite patience; lay so while another hour 
passed and another car stopped before the house and three 
men carrying an awkwardly-shaped burden came up the 
drive and stood in the moonlight beneath the window; lay 
so until they played once and went away. When they had 
gone, she came to the window and parted the curtains and 
stood for a while in the dark fallen wings of her hair, look- 
ing directly into his hidden eyes. 

Then the curtains fell again, and once more she was a 
shadowy movement beyond them. Then the light went off, 
and he lay face downward upon the steep pitch of the roof, 
utterly motionless for a long time, darting from beneath his 
hidden face covert, ceaseless glances, quick and darting, all- 
embracing as those of an animal. 


To Narcissa’s home they came finally. They had visited the 
dark homes of all the other unmarried girls one by one and 
sat in the car while the Negroes stood on the lawn with their 
blended instruments. Heads had appeared at darkened win- 
dows, sometimes lights went up; once they were invited in, 
but Hub and Mitch hung diffidently back; once refreshment 
was sent out to them; once they were heartily cursed by a 
young man who happened to be sitting with the young lady 
on the dark veranda. In the meantime they had lost the 


136 WILLIAM FAULKNER ! 


breather-cap, and as they moved from house to house, all six | 


of them drank fraternally from the jug, turn and turn| 
about. At last they reached the Benbows’ and played once! 
beneath the cedars. There was a light yet in one window, , 
but none came to it. 

The moon stood well doa the sky. Its light was now a. 
cold silver on things, spent and a little wearied, and the world 
was empty as they rolled without lights along a street life- 
less and fixed in black and silver as any street in the moon 
itself. Beneath stippled intermittent shadows they went, 
passed quiet intersections dissolving away, occasionally a car | 
motionless at the curb before a house. A dog crossed the 


street ahead of them trotting, and went on across a lawn | 


and so from sight, but saving this there was no movement | 


anywhere. 

The square opened spaciously about the absinthe-cloudy 
mass of elms that surrounded the courthouse. Among them 
the round spaced globes were more like huge, pallid grapes 
than ever. Above the exposed vault in each bank burned a 


single bulb; inside the hotel lobby, before which a row of | 
cars was aligned, another burned. Other lights there were | 


none. 
They circled the courthouse, and a shadow moved near 


the hotel door and detached itself from shadow and came > 


to the curb, a white shirt glinting within a spread coat; and 
as the car swung slowly toward another street, the man 
hailed them. Bayard stopped and the man came through the 
blanched dust and laid his hand on the door. 

“Hi, Buck,” Mitch said. “You're up pretty late, ain’t you?” 

The man had a sober, good-natured horse’s face. He wore 
a metal star on his unbuttoned waistcoat. His coat humped 
slightly over his hip. “What you boys doin’?” he asked. 
“Been to a dance?” 

“Serenading,” Bayard answered, “Want a drink, Buck?” 

“No, much obliged.” He stood with his hand on the door, 
gravely and good-naturedly serious. “Ain’t you fellers out. 
kind of late, yo’selves?” | 

“It is gettin’ on,’ Mitch agreed. The marshal lifted his 
foot to the running-board. Beneath his hat his eyes were in 
shadow. “We're going home now,” Mitch said. The other pon- 
dered quietly, and Bayard added: | 

“Sure; we're on our way home now.” 


ee 
au 
| 


SARTORIS 137 


The marshal moved his head slightly and spoke to the 
Negroes. “I reckon you boys are about ready to turn in, ain’t 
you?” 

“Yes, suh,” the Negroes answered, and they got out and 
lifted the viol out. Bayard gave Reno a bill and they thanked 
him and said good night and picked up the viol and de- 
parted quietly down a side street. The marshal turned his 
head again. 

“Ain’t that yo’ car in front of Rogers’ café, Mitch?” he 
asked. 

“Reckon so. That’s where I left it.” 

“Well, suppose you run Hub out home, lessen he’s goin’ 
to stay in town tonight. Bayard better come with me.” 

“Aw, hell, Buck,” Mitch protested. 

“What for?” Bayard demanded. 

“His folks are worried about him,” the other answered. 
“They ain’t seen hide nor hair of him since that stallion 
throwed him. Where’s yo’ bandage, Bayard?” 

“Took it off,” he answered shortly. “See here, Buck, we’re 
going to put Mitch out and then Hub and me are going 
straight home.” 

“You been on yo’ way home ever since fo’ o’clock, Bay- 
ard,” the marshal replied soberly, “but you don’t seem to git 
no nearer there. I reckon you better come with me tonight, 
like yo’ aunt said.” 

“Did Aunt Jenny tell you to arrest me?” 

“They was worried about you, son. Miss Jenny just phoned 
and asked me to kind of see if you was all right until 
mawnin’. So J reckon we better. You ought to went on home 
this evenin’.” 
| “Aw, have a heart, Buck,” Mitch protested. 

“TI ruther make Bayard mad than Miss Jenny,” the other 
answered patiently. “You boys go on, and Bayard better come 
with me.” 

Mitch and Hub got out and Hub lifted out his jug and they 
said good night and went on to where Mitch’s car stood be- 
fore the restaurant. The marshal got in beside Bayard. The 
jail was not far. It loomed presently above its walled court, 
square and implacable, its slitted upper windows brutal as 
saber-blows. They turned into an alley, and the marshal de- 
scended and opened a gate, and Bayard drove into the grass- 
less and littered compound and stopped while the other went 


” 


138 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


on ahead to a small garage in which stood a Ford. He backed 
this out and motioned Bayard forward. The garage was built 
to the Ford’s dimensions and about a third of Bayard’s car 
stuck out the door of it. 

“Better’n nothin’, though,” the marshal said. “Come on.” — 
They entered through the kitchen, into the jail-keeper’s liv- 
ing-quarters, and Bayard waited in a dark passage until the © 


other found a light. Then he entered a bleak, neat room, con- — | 


taining spare conglomerate furnishings and a few scattered 
articles of masculine apparel. 

“Say,” Bayard objected, “aren’t you giving me your bed?” 

“Won’t need it befo’ mawnin’,” the other answered. “You'll 
be gone, then. Want me to he’p you off with yo’ clothes?” 

“No. I’m all right.” Then, more graciously: “Good night, 
Buck. And much obliged.” 

“Good night,” the marshal answered. 

He closed the door behind him and Bayard removed his 
coat and shoes and his tie and snapped the light off and 
lay on the bed. Moonlight seeped into the room impalpably, 
refracted and sourceless; the night was without any sound. 
Beyond the window a cornice rose in a succession of shal- 
low steps against the opaline and dimensionless sky. His head 
was clear and cold; the whisky he had drunk was com- 
pletely dead. Or rather, it was as though his head were one 
Bayard who lay on a strange bed and whose alcohol-dulled 
nerves radiated like threads of ice through that body which 
he must drag forever about a bleak and barren world with 
him. “Hell,” he said, lying on his back, staring out the win- 
dow where nothing was to be seen, waiting for sleep, not 
knowing if it would come or not, not caring a particular 
damn either way. Nothing to be seen, and the long, long 
span of a man’s natural life. Three score and ten years to 
drag a stubborn body about the world and cozen its insistent 
demands. Three score and ten, the Bible said. Seventy years. 
And he was only twenty-six. Not much more than a third 
through it. Hell. 


PART THERE 


Horace BENBOow in his clean, wretchedly-fitting khaki 
which but served to accentuate his air of fine and delicate 
futility, and laden with an astonishing impedimenta of knap- 
sacks and kit bags and paper-wrapped parcels, got off the 
two-thirty train. Across the tight clotting of descending 
and ascending passengers the sound of his spoken- name 
reached him, and he roved his distraught gaze, like a som- 
nambulist rousing to avoid traffic, about the agglomerate 
faces. “Hello, hello,” he said; then he thrust himself clear and 
laid his bags and parcels on the edge of the platform and 
moved with intent haste up the train toward the baggage car. 

“Horace!” his sister called again, running after him. The 
station agent emerged from his office and stopped him and 
held him like a finely-bred restive horse and shook his hand, 
and thus his sister overtook him. He turned at her voice 
and came completely from out his distraction and swept 
her up in his arms until her feet were off the ground, and 
kissed her on the mouth. 

“Dear old Narcy,” he said, kissing her again. Then he set 
her down and stroked his hands on her face, as a child 
would. “Dear old Narcy,” he repeated, touching her face 
with his fine spatulate hands, gazing at her as though he 
were drinking that constant serenity of hers through his eyes. 
He continued to say “Dear old Narcy,” stroking his hands 
on her face, utterly oblivious of his surroundings until she 
recalled him. 

“Where in the world are you going, up this way?” 

Then he remembered, and released her and rushed on, 
she following, and stopped again at the door of the baggage 
car, from which the station porter and a train hand were 


139 


140 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


taking trunks and boxes as the baggage clerk tilted them out. 

“Can’t you send down for it?” she asked. But he stood 
peering into the car, oblivious of her again. The two Negroes 
returned and he stepped aside, still looking into the car with 
peering, birdlike motions of his head. “Let’s send back for 
it,” his sister said again. 


“What? Oh. I’ve seen it every time I changed cars,” he | 
told her, completely forgetting the sense of her words. “It'd __ 


be rotten luck to have it go astray right at my doorstep, 
wouldn’t it?” Again the Negroes moved away with a trunk, 
and he stepped forward again and peered into the car. “That’s 
just about what. happened to it; some clerk forgot to put it 
on the train at M there it is,” he interrupted himself. 
“Rasy now, Cap,” he called in the country idiom, in a fever 
of alarm as the clerk slammed into the doorway a box of 
foreign shape stenciled with a military address; “she’s got 
glass in her.” 

“All right, Colonel,” the baggage clerk agreed. “We ain’t 
hurt her none, I reckon. If we have, all you got to do is sue 
-us.” The two Negroes backed up to the door and Horace laid 
his hands on the box as the clerk tilted it outward. 

“Easy now, boys,” he repeated nervously, and he trotted 
beside them as they crossed to the platform. “Set it down 
easy, now. Here, sis, lend a hand, will you?” 

“We got it all right, Cap’m,” the station porter said; “we 
ain’t gwine drop it.” But Horace continued to dab at it with 
his hands, and when they set it down he leaned his ear to it. 

“She’s all right, ain’t she?” the station porter asked. 

“It’s all right,” the train porter assured him. He turned 
away. “Let’s go,” he called. 

“I think it’s all right,’ Horace agreed, his ear against the 
box. “I don’t hear anything. It’s packed pretty well.” The 
engine whistled and Horace sprang erect, and digging into 
his pocket he ran toward the moving cars. The porter was 
closing the vestibule, but he leaned down to Horace’s hand, 
then straightened up and touched his cap. Horace returned 
to his box and gave another coin to the second Negro. “Put 
it in the house for me, careful, now,” he directed. “I’ll be 
back for it in a few minutes.” 

“Yes, suh, Mr. Benbow. I’ll look out fer it.” 

“I thought it was lost, once,” Horace confided, slipping 
his arm within his sister’s, and they moved toward her car. 


_ SARTORIS 141 


“It was delayed at Brest and didn’t come until the next boat. 
I had the first outfit I bought—a small one—with me, and 
I pretty near lost that one, too. I was blowing a small one 
in my cabin on the boat one day, when the whole thing, cabin 
and all, took fire. The captain decided that I’d better not try 
it again until we got ashore, what with all the men on board. 
The vase turned out pretty well, though,” he babbled, “lovely 
little thing. ’'m catching on; I really am. Venice. A volup- 
tuous dream, a little sinister. Must take you there some day.” 
Then he squeezed her arm and fell to repeating “Dear old 
Narcy,” as though the homely sound of the nickname on his 
tongue was a taste he loved and had not forgotten. A few 
people still lingered about the station. Some of them spoke to 
him and he stopped to shake their hands, and a marine 
private with the Second Division Indian head on his shoul- 
der, remarked the triangle on Horace’s sleeve and made a 
vulgar sound of derogation through his pursed lips. | 

“Howdy, buddy,” Horace said, turning upon him his shy 
startled gaze. 

“Evenin’, General,” the marine answered. He spat, not 
exactly at Horace’s feet, and not exactly anywhere else. Nar- 
cissa clasped her brother’s arm against her side. 

“Do come on home and get into some decent clothes,” she 
said in a lower tone, hurrying him along. 

“Get out of uniform?” he said. “I rather fancied myself 
in khaki,” he added, a little hurt. “You really think I am 
ridiculous in this?” 

“Of course not,” she answered immediately, squeezing his 
hand. “Of course not. I’m sorry I said that. You wear your 
uniform just as long as you want to.” 

“It’s a good uniform,” he said soberly. “I don’t mean this,” 
he said, gesturing toward the symbol on his arm. They went 
on. “People will realize that in about ten years, when non- 
combatants’ hysteria has worn itself out and the individual 
soldiers realize that the A.E.F. didn’t invent disillusion.” 

“What did it invent?” she asked, holding his arm against 
her, surrounding him with the fond, inattentive serenity of 
her affection. 

“God knows. . . . Dear old Narcy,” he said again, and 
they crossed the platform toward her car. “So you have 
dulled your palate for khaki.” 

“Of course not,” she repeated, shaking his arm a little 


142 ' ‘WILLIAM FAULKNER 


as she released it. “You wear it just as long as you want 
to.” She opened the car door. Some one called after them 
and they looked back and saw the porter trotting after them 
with Horace’s hand-luggage, which he had walked off and 
left lying on the platform. 
“Oh, Lord,” he exclaimed, “ worry with it for four thou- 
sand miles, then lose it on my own doorstep. Much obliged, — 
Sol.” The porter stowed the things in the car. “That’s the © 
first outfit I got,” Horace added to his sister, “and the vase I . 
blew on shipboard. I’ll show it to you when we get home.” 


His sister got in under the wheel. “Where are your clothes? ' 


In the box?” 

“Haven’t any. Had to throw most of ’°em away to make 
room for the other things. No room for anything else.” Nar- 
cissa sat and looked at him for a moment with fond exaspera- 
tion. ‘““What’s the matter?” he asked innocently. “Forgot some- 
thing yourself?” 

“No. Get in. Aunt Sally’s waiting to see you.” 

They drove on and mounted the shady gradual hill toward 
the square, and Horace looked about happily on familiar 
scenes. Sidings with freight cars; the platform which in the 
fall would be laden with cotton bales in serried rotund ranks; 
the town power plant, a brick building from which there 
came a steady, unbroken humming and about which in the 
spring gnarled heaven-trees swung ragged lilac bloom against 
the harsh ocher and Indian red of a clay cut-bank. Then a — 
street of lesser residences, mostly new. Same tight little 
houses with a minimum of lawn, homes built by country-bred 
people and set close to the street after the country fashion; 
occasionally a house going up on a lot which had been 
vacant sixteen months ago when he went away. Then other 
streets opened away beneath arcades of green, shadier, with 
houses a little older and more imposing as they got away 
from the station’s vicinity; and pedestrians, usually dawdling 
Negro boys at this hour or old men bound townward after 
their naps, to spend the afternoon in sober, futile absorp- 
tions. 

The hill flattened away into the plateau on which the town 
proper had been built these hundred years and more ago, 
and the street became definitely urban presently with garages 
and small shops with merchants in shirt sleeves, and cus- 
tomers; the picture show with its lobby plastered with life, 


SARTORIS : 143 


episodic in colored lithographed mutations. Then the square, 
with its unbroken low skyline of old weathered brick and 
fading dead names stubborn yet beneath scaling paint, and 
drifting Negroes in casual and careless O.D. garments worn 
by both sexes, and country people in occasional khaki too; 
and the brisker urbanites weaving among their placid chew- 
ing unhaste and among the men in tilted chairs before the 
stores. 

- The courthouse was of brick too, with stone arches rising 
amid elms, and among the trees the monument of the Con- 
_. federate soldier stood, his musket at order arms, shading his 
carven eyes with his stone hand. Beneath the porticoes of 
the courthouse and on benches about the green, the city 
fathers sat and talked and drowsed, in uniform too, here and 
there. But it was the gray of Old Jack and Beauregard and 
Joe Johnston, and they sat in a grave sedateness of minor 
political sinecures, smoking and spitting, about checker- 
_ boards. When the weather was bad they moved inside to the 
circuit clerk’s office. 

It was here that the young men loafed also, pitching 
dollars or tossing baseballs back and forth or lying on the 
grass until the young girls in their little colored dresses and 
cheap nostalgic perfume should come trooping down town 
through the late afternoon, to the drug store. When the 
weather was bad these young men loafed in the drug stores 
or in the barbershop. 

“Lots of uniforms yet,” Horace remarked. “All be home 
by June. Have the Sartoris boys come home yet?” 

“John is dead,” his sister answered. “Didn’t you know?” 

“No,” he answered quickly, with swift concern. “Poor old 
Bayard. Rotten luck they have. Funny family. Always going 
to wars, and always getting killed. And young Bayard’s wife 
died, you wrote me.” 

“Yes. But he’s here. He’s got a racing automobile and he 
spends all his time tearing around the country in it. We are 
expecting every day to hear he’s killed himself in it.” 

“Poor devil,” Horace said, and again: “Poor old Colonel. 
He used to hate an automobile like a snake. Wonder what 
he thinks about it.” 

“He goes with him.” 

“What? Old Bayard in a motor-car?” 

“Yes. Miss Jenny says it’s to keep Bayard from turning 


144 WILLIAM FAULKNER . 


it over. But she says Colonel Sartoris doesn’t know it, but: 
that Bayard would just as soon break both their necks; that | 
he probably will before he’s done.” She drove on across the | 


square, among tethered wagons, and cars parked casually and 
without order. “I hate Bayard Sartoris,” she said with sud- 
den vehemence; “I hate all men.” Horace looked at her 
quickly. 

“What’s the matter? What’s Bayard done to you? No, that’s 
backward: what have you done to Bayard?” But she didn’t 


answer. She turned into another street bordered by Negro | 
stores of one story and shaded by metal awnings beneath | 


which Negroes lounged, skinning bananas or small florid 
cartons of sweet biscuits; and then a grist mill driven by a 
spasmodic gasoline engine. It oozed chaff and a sifting dust, 


motelike in the sun, and above the door a tediously hand- — 
lettered sign: W. D. BEARDS MILL. Between it and a shut- — 


tered and silent gin draped with feathery soiled festoons of 


lint, an anvil clanged at the end of a short lane filled with | 


wagons and horses and mules and shaded by mulberry trees 
beneath which countrymen in overalls squatted. 

“He ought to have more consideration for the old fellow 
than that,” Horace said fretfully. “Still, they’ve just gone 
through with an experience that pretty well shook the verities 
and the humanities, and whether they know it or not, they’ve 
got another one ahead of ’em that'll pretty well finish the 
business. Give him a little time. . . . But personally I can’t 
see why he shouldn’t be allowed to kill himself, if that’s 
what he thinks he wants. Sorry for Miss Jenny, though.” 

“Yes,” his sister agreed, quietly again. “They’re worried 
about Colonel Sartoris’ heart, too. Everybody is except him 
and Bayard, that is. I’m glad I have you instead of one of 
those Sartorises, Horry.” She laid her hand quickly and 
lightly on his thin knee. 

“Dear old Narcy,” he said. Then his face clouded again. 
“Damn scoundrel,” he said. “Well, it’s their trouble. How’s 
Aunt Sally been?” 

“All right.” And then: “I am glad you’re home, Horry.” 

The shabby small shops were behind and now the street 
opened away between old shady lawns, spacious and quiet. 
These homes were quite old, in appearance at least, and set 
well back from the street and its dust, they emanated a 
gracious and benign peace, steadfast as a windless afternoon 


'JSARTORIS 145 


a world without motion or sound. Horace looked about 
im and drew a long breath. 

“Perhaps =e is the reason for wars,” he said. “The mean- 
fing of peace.” 


They turned into an intersecting street, narrower but more 
shady and even quieter, with a golden Arcadian drowse, and 
turned through a gate in a honeysuckle-covered fence of iron 
pickets. From the gate the cinder-packed drive rose in a 
grave curve between cedars. The cedars had been set out by 
an English architect of the ’40’s, who had built the house 
(with the minor concession of a veranda) in the funereal 
light Tudor which the young Victoria had sanctioned; and 
beneath and among them, even on the brightest days, lay a 
resinous exhilarating gloom. Mocking-birds loved them, and 
catbirds, and thrushes demurely mellifiluous in the late after- 
/noon; but the grass beneath them was sparse or nonexistent, 
and there were no insects save fireflies in the dusk. 

The drive ascended to the house and curved before it and 
descended again to the street in an unbroken arc of cedars, 
Within the arc rose a lone oak, broad and huge and low; 
around its trunk ran a wooden bench. About this half-moon 
of lawn and without the arc of the drive were bridal wreath 
and crape myrtle bushes old as time and huge as age would 
make them. Big as trees they were, and in one fence corner 
was an astonishing clump of stunted banana palms and in 
the other a lantana with its clotted wounds, which Francis 
Benbow had brought home from Barbados in a top-hat box 
in 71. 

About the oak and from the funereal scimitar of the drive 
descending, lawn flowed streetward with good sward broken 
by random clumps of jonquils and narcissi and _ gladioli. 
Originally the lawn was in terraces and the flowers a formal 
bed on the first terrace. Then Will Benbow, Horace’s and 
Narcissa’s father, had had the terraces obliterated. It was 
done with plows and scrapers and seeded anew with grass, 
and he had supposed the flower bed destroyed. But the next 
spring the scattered bulbs sprouted again, and now every year 
the lawn was stippled with bloom in yellow, white, and pink 
without order. A certain few young girls asked and received 
permission to pick some of them each spring, and neighbors’ 
children played quietly among them and beneath the cedars. 


146 WILLIAM FAULKNEE 


At the top of the drive, where it curved away descendin’ 
again, sat the brick doll’s house in which Horace and Nar 
cissa lived, surrounded always by that cool, faintly astnnee 
odor of cedar trees. 

It was trimmed with white and it had mullioned casement’ 
brought out from England; along the veranda eaves ane 
above the door grew a wistaria vine like heavy tarred rop 
and thicker than a man’s wrist. The lower casements stooy 
open on gently billowing curtains; on the sill you expecte: 
to see a scrubbed wooden bowl, or at least an immaculati 
and supercilious cat. But the window sill held only a wicke 
work-basket from which, like a drooping poinsettia, spillee. 
an end of patchwork in crimson and white; and in the door 
way Aunt Sally, a potty little woman in a lace cap, leanec 
on a gold-headed ebony walking-stick. 

Just as it should be, and Horace turned and looked back a# 
his sister crossing the drive with the parcels he had fort 
gotten again. 


He banged and splashed happily in his bathroom, shouting 
through the door to his sister where she sat on his bed. His 
discarded khaki lay on a chair, holding yet through long as: 
sociation, in its harsh drab folds, something of that taut ano 
delicate futility of his. On the marble-topped dresser lay the 
crucible and tubes of his glass-blowing outfit, the first one 
he had bought, and beside it the vase he had blown on ship- 
board—a small chaste shape in clear glass, not four inches 
tall, fragile as a silver lily and incomplete. 

“They work in caves,” he was shouting through the door. 
“down flights of stairs underground. You feel water seeping 
under your foot while you’re reaching for the next step; and 
when you put your hand out to steady yourself against the 
wall, it’s wet when you take it away. It feels just like blood.” 

“Horace!” 

“Yes, magnificent. And ’way ahead you see the glow. All 
of a sudden the tunnel comes glimmering out of nothing: 
then you see the furnace, with things rising and falling be- 
fore it, shutting off the light, and the walls go glimmering 
again. At first they’re just shapeless things hunching about. 
Antic, with shadows on the bloody walls, red shadows. A 
glare, and black shapes like paper dolls weaving and rising 
and falling in front of it, like a magic-lantern shutter. And 


SARTORIS 147 


then a face comes out, blowing, and other faces sort of swell 
| out of the red dark like painted balloons. 

“And the things themselves. Sheerly and tragically beau- 
tiful. Like preserved flowers, you know. Macabre and in- 
violate; purged and purified as bronze, yet fragile as soap 
bubbles. Sound of pipes crystallized. Flutes and oboes, but 
mostly reeds. Oaten reeds. Damn it, they bloom like flowers 
Tight before your eyes. Midsummer Night’s Dream to a sala- 
mander.” His voice became unintelligible, soaring into meas- 
_ ured phrases which she did not recognize, but which from 
_ the pitch of his voice she knew to be Milton’s archangels in 
their sonorous plunging ruin. 

He emerged at last, in a white shirt and serge trousers, but 
still borne aloft on his flaming verbal wings, and while his 
voice chanted in measured syllables she fetched a pair of 
shoes from the closet, and while she stood holding the shoes 
in her hands he ceased chanting and touched her face again 
| with his hands after that fashion of a child. 

At supper Aunt Sally broke into his staccato babbling: 
“Did you bring your Snopes back with you?” she asked. This 
Snopes was a young man, member of a seemingly inexhausti- 
ble family which for the last ten years had been moving to 
town in driblets from a small settlement known as French- 
man’s Bend. Flem, the first Snopes, had appeared unheralded 
| one day behind the counter of a small restaurant on a side 
street, patronized by country folk. With this foothold and 
_ like Abraham of old, he brought his blood and legal kin 
_ household by household, individual by individual, into town, 
and established them where they could gain money. Flem 
himself was presently manager of the city light and water 
plant, and for the following few years he was a sort of handy 
man to the municipal government; and three years ago, to 
old Bayard’s profane astonishment and unconcealed annoy- 
ance, he became vice president of the Sartoris bank, where 
already a relation of his was a bookkeeper. 

He still retained the restaurant, and the canvas tent in the 
rear of it, in which he and his wife and baby had passed 
the first few months of their residence in town; and it 
served as an alighting-place for incoming Snopeses, from 
which they spread to small third-rate businesses of various 
_ kinds—grocery stores, barbershops (there was one, an invalid 

of some sort, who operated a second-hand peanut roaster)— 


148 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


where they multiplied and flourished. The older residents 
from their Jeffersonian houses and genteel stores and offices: 
looked on with amusement at first. But this was long since« 
become something like consternation. 

The Snopes to which Aunt Sally referred was named Mont-+t 
gomery Ward, and just before the draft law went into opera+ 
tion in ’17 he applied to a recruiting officer in Memphis and! 
was turned down for military service because of his heart! 
Later, to every one’s surprise, particularly that of Horacex 
Benbow’s friends, he departed with Horace to a position in 
the Y.M.C.A. Later still, it was told of him that he had 
traveled all the way to Memphis on that day when he had: 
offered for service, with a plug of chewing tobacco beneath: 
his left armpit. But he and his patron were already departed! 
when that story got out. 

“Did you bring your Snopes back with you?” Aunt Sally, 
asked. 

“No,” he answered, and his thin, nerve-sick face cloudec! 
over with a fine cold distaste. “I was very much disappointed! 
in him. I don’t even care to talk about it.” | 

“Anybody could have told you that when you left.” Aunt: 
Sally chewed slowly and steadily above her plate. Horace: 
brooded for a moment; his thin hand tightened slowly upon. 
his fork. | 

“It’s individuals like that, parasites ” he began, but: 
his sister interrupted. 

“Who cares about an old Snopes, anyway? Besides, it’s too} 
late at night to talk about the horrors of war.” 

Aunt Sally made a moist sound through her food, a sound 
of vindicated superiority. 

“It’s the generals they have nowadays,” she said. “General 
Johnston or General Forrest wouldn’t have took a Snopes 
in his army at all.” Aunt Sally was no relation whatever. She 
lived next door but one with two maiden sisters, one younger 
and one older than she. She had been in and out of the 
house ever since Horace and Narcissa could remember, hav-. 
ing arrogated to herself certain rights in their lives before 
they could walk; privileges which were never definitely ex- 
pressed and of which she never availed herself, yet the mu-| 
tual admission of whose existence she never permitted to fall 
into abeyance. She would walk into any room in the house 
unannounced, and she liked to talk tediously and a little 


SARTORIS 149 


tactlessly of Horace’s and Narcissa’s infantile ailments. It 
§ was said that she had once “made eyes” at Will Benbow, al- 
though she was a woman of thirty-four or -five when Will 
‘married; and she still spoke of him with a faintly disparaging 
possessiveness, and of his wife she always spoke pleasantly 
too. “Julia was a right sweet-natured girl,” she would say. 
So when Horace went off to the war Aunt Sally moved 
over to keep Narcissa company: no other arrangement had 
ever occurred to any of the three of them; the fact that Nar- 
-€issa must have Aunt Sally in the house for an indefinite 
year or two or three appeared as unavoidable as the fact 
that Horace must go to the war. Aunt Sally was a good old 
soul, but she lived much in the past, shutting her mind with a 
bland finality to anything which had occurred since 1901. 
For her, time had gone out drawn by horses, and into her 
-stubborn and placid vacuum the squealing of automobile 
brakes had never penetrated. She had a lot of the crudities 
| which old people are entitled to. She liked the sound of her 
Own voice and she didn’t like to be alone at any time, and as 
| she had never got accustomed to the false teeth which she 
| had bought twelve years ago and so never touched them 
other than to change weekly the water in which they re- 
posed, she ate unprettily of unprepossessing but easily mal- 
_ leable foods. 
_ Narcissa reached her hand beneath the table and touched 
: her brother’s knee again. “I am glad you’re home, Horry.” 
He looked at her quickly, and the cloud faded from his 
"face as suddenly as it had come, and his spirit slipped, like a 
swimmer into a tideless sea, into the serene constancy of her 
affection again. 


He was a lawyer, principally through a sense of duty to 
the family tradition, and though he had no particular af- 
finity to it other than a love for printed words, for the 
dwelling-places of books, he contemplated returning to his 
musty office with a glow of .. . not eagerness, no: of deep 
and abiding unreluctance, almost of pleasure. The meaning 
of peace. Old unchanging days; unwinged perhaps, but un- 
disastrous, too. You don’t see it, feel it, save with perspective. 
Fireflies had not yet come, and the cedars flowed unbroken 
on either hand down to the street, like a curving ebony wave 
with rigid unbreaking crests pointed on the sky. Light fell out- 


150 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


ward from the window, across the porch and on a bed ofi 
cannas, hardy, bronzelike—none of your flowerlike fragility,) 
theirs; and within the room Aunt Sally’s quavering mono- 
tone. Narcissa was there too, beside the lamp with a book, 
filling the room with her still and constant presence like thes 
odor of jasmine, watching the door through which he hadi 
passed; and Horace stood on the veranda with his cold pipe,, 
surrounded by that cool astringency of cedars like anothers 
presence. “The meaning of peace,” he said to himself once: 
more, releasing the grave words one by one within the cooll 
bell of silence into which he had come at last again, hearing: 
them linger with a dying fall pure as silver and crystal strucki 
lightly together. 


“How’s Belle?” he asked on the evening of his arrival. 

“They’re all right,” his sister answered. “They have a new 
car.” | 
“Dare say,” Horace agreed with detachment. “The war: 
should certainly have accomplished that much.” 

Aunt Sally had left them at last and tapped her slow bed-- 
ward way. Horace stretched his serge legs luxuriously, andl 
for a while he ceased striking matches to his stubborn pipe: 
and sat watching his sister’s dark head bent above the maga-- 
zine upon her knees, lost from lesser and inconstant things. . 
Her hair was smoother than any reposing wings, sweeping: 
with burnished unrebellion to a simple knot low in her neck.. 

“Belle’s a rotten correspondent,” he said. “Like all women.” * 

She turned a page, without looking up. 

“Did you write to her often?” 

“It’s because they realize that letters are only good to: 
bridge intervals between actions, like the interludes in) 
Shakespeare’s plays,” he went on, oblivious. “And did you 
ever know a woman who read Shakespeare without skipping | 
the interludes? Shakespeare himself knew that, so he didn’t | 
put any women in the interludes. Let the men bombast to»: 
one another’s echoes while the ladies are backstage has Il 
the dinner dishes or putting the children to bed.” 

“I never knew a woman that read Shakespeare at all,” Nar-> 
cissa corrected. “He talks too much.” 

Horace rose and stood above her and patted her dark head | / 

“OQ profundity,” he said, “you have reduced all wisdom 
to a phrase, and measured your sex by the stature of a star.” | 


* SARTORIS 151 


“Well, they don’t,” she repeated, raising her face. 

“No? Why don’t they?” He struck another match to his 
pipe, watching her across his cupped hands as gravely and 
with poised eagerness, like a striking bird. “Your Arlens and 
Sabatinis talk a lot, and nobody ever had more to say and 
more trouble saying it than old Dreiser.” 

“But they have secrets,” she explained. “Shakespeare 
doesn’t have any secrets. He tells everything.” 

“I see. Shakespeare had no sense of discrimination and 
no instinct for reticence. In other words, he wasn’t a gentle- 
man,” he suggested. 

“Yes. ... That’s what I mean.” 

“And so, to be a gentleman, you must have secrets.” 

“Oh, you make me tired.” She returned to her magazine 
and he sat beside her on the couch and took her hand in his 
and stroked it upon his cheek and upon his wild hair. 

“It’s like walking through a twilit garden,” he said. “The 
| flowers you know are all there, in their shifts and with 
their hair combed out for the night, but you know all of 
them. So you don’t bother ’em, you just walk on and sort 
of stop and turn over a leaf occasionally, a leaf you hadn’t 
noticed before; perhaps you find a violet under it, or a blue- 
bell or a lightning bug; perhaps only another leaf or a blade 
of grass. But there’s always a drop of dew on it.” He con- 
tinued to stroke her hand upon his face. With her other 
hand she turned the magazine slowly on, listening to him 
with fond and serene detachment. 

“Did you write to Belle often?” she repeated. “What did 
you say to her?” 

“TI wrote what she wanted to read. What all women want 
in letters. People are really entitled to half of what they 
think they should have.” 

“What did you tell her?” Narcissa persisted, turning the 
pages slowly, her passive hand in his, following the stroking 
movement of his. 

“I told her I was unhappy. Perhaps I was,” he added. His 
‘sister freed her hand quietly and laid it on the page. He said: 

“T admire Belle. She’s so cannily stupid. Once I feared her. 
Perhaps .. . No, I don’t. I am immune to destruction: I have 
a magic. Which is a good sign that I am due for it, say 
the sages,” he added. “But then, acquired wisdom is a dry 
thing; it has a way of crumbling to dust where a sheer and 


152 WILLIAM FAULKNER : 


blind coursing of stupid sap is impervious.” He sat without 
‘touching her, in rapt and instantaneous repose. “Not like | 
yours, O Serene,” he said, waking again. Then he fell to 
saying “Dear old Narcy,” and again he took her hand. It did 
not withdraw; neither did it wholly surrender. 

“J don’t think you ought to say I’m dull so often, Horry,” | 
she said. ; 

“Neither do I,” he agreed. “But I must take some sort of 
revenge on perfection.” 

Later she lay in her dark room. Across the corridor Aunt 
Sally snored with placid regularity; in the adjoining room — 
Horace lay while that wild, fantastic futility of his voyaged | 
in lonely regions of its own beyond the moon, about meadows 
nailed with firmamented stars to the ultimate roof of things, 
where unicorns filled the neighing air with galloping, or 
grazed or lay supine in golden-hoofed repose. 

Horace was seven when she was born. In the background 
of her sober babyhood were three beings—a lad with a wild, | 
thin face and an unflagging aptitude for tribulation; a darkly 
gallant shape romantic with smuggled edibles, with strong, 
hard hands that smelled always of a certain thrilling car- 
bolic soap—a being something like Omnipotence but without 
awesomeness; and lastly a gentle figure without legs or any — 
inference of locomotion whatever, like a minor shrine, sur- 
rounded always by an aura of gentle melancholy and an end- © 
less and delicate manipulation of colored silken thread. This 
last figure was constant with gentle and melancholy unasser- 
tion; the second revolved in an orbit which bore it at regular 
intervals into outer space, then returned it with its strong 
and jolly virility into her intense world again. But the first 
she had made her own by a sober and maternal perseverance, 
and so by the time she was five or six people coerced Horace 
by threatening to tell Narcissa on him. 

Julia Benbow died genteelly when Narcissa was seven, had 
been removed from their lives as a small sachet of lavender 
might be removed from a chest of linen, leaving a delicate 
lingering impalpability, and through the intense maturity of 
seven and eight and nine she cajoled and commanded the 
other two. Then Horace was in school at Sewanee and later | 
at Oxford, from which he returned just in time to see Will | 
Benbow join his wife among pointed cedars and carven doves | 
and other serene marble shapes; later Horace was separated 


| 


SARTORIS 153 


from her again by a stupid mischancing of human affairs. 
But now he lay in the adjoining room, voyaging in safe 

and glittering regions beyond the moon, and she lay in her 

dark bed, quiet, peaceful, a little too peaceful to sleep. 


‘Zz 


He was settled soon and easily into the routine of days be- 
tween his office and his home. The musty, solemn familiarity 
of calf-bound and never-violated volumes, on whose dusty 
bindings prints of Will Benbow’s dead fingers might probably 
yet be found; a little tennis in the afternoons, usually on 
Harry Mitchell’s fine court; cards in the evenings, also with 
Belle and Harry as a general thing, or again and better still, 
with the ever-accessible and never-failing magic of printed 
pages, while his sister sat across the table from him or 
played softly to herself in the darkened room across the hall. 
Occasionally men called on her; Horace received them with 
unfailing courtesy and a little exasperation, and departed soon 
to tramp about the streets or to read in bed. Dr. Alford 
came stiffly once or twice a week, and Horace, being some- 
what of an amateur casuist, amused himself by blunting 
delicately feathered metaphysical darts upon the doctor’s 
bland scientific hide for an hour or so; it would not be until 
then that they realized that Narcissa had not spoken a word 
for sixty or seventy or eighty minutes. “That’s why they 
come to see you,” Horace told her—‘“for an emotional mud- 
bath.” 

Aunt Sally had returned home, with her bag of colored 
scraps and her false teeth, leaving behind her a fixed im- 
palpability of a nebulous but definite obligation discharged 
at some personal sacrifice, and a faint odor of old female 
flesh which faded slowly from the premises, lingering yet in 
unexpected places so that at times Narcissa, waking and lying 
for a while in the darkness, in the sensuous pleasure of hav- 
ing Horace home again, imagined that she could hear yet, in 
the dark myriad silence of the house, Aunt Sally’s genteel 
and placid snores. 

At times it would be so distinct that she would pause sud- 


¥ 
154 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


denly and speak Aunt Sally’s name into an empty room. And 
sometimes Aunt Sally replied, having availed herself again 
of her prerogative of coming in at any hour the notion took | 
her, unannounced, to see how they were getting along and to 
complain querulously of her own household. She was old, too 
old to react easily to change, and it was hard for her to re- 
adjust herself to her sisters’ ways again after her long sojourn 
in a household where every one gave in to her regarding all 
domestic affairs. At home her elder sister ran things in-a — 
capable, shrewish fashion; she and the third sister persisted 
in treating Aunt Sally like the child she had been sixty-five . 
years ago, whose diet and clothing and hours must be rigor- 
ously and pettishly supervised. 

“I can’t even go to the bathroom in peace,” she complained 
querulously. “I’m a good mind to pack up and move back 
over here and let ’em get along the best they can.” She rocked 
fretfully in the chair which by unspoken agreement was 
never disputed her, looking about the room with bleared, pro- 
testing old eyes. “That nigger don’t half clean up, since I left. 
That furniture, now ...adamp cloth...” 

“I wish you would take her back,” Miss Sophia, the elder 
sister, told Narcissa. “She’s got so crochety since she’s been 
with you that there’s no living with her. What’s this I hear 
Horace has taken up—making glassware?” 

His proper crucibles and retorts had arrived intact. At first 
he had insisted on using the cellar, clearing out the lawn 
mower and the garden tools and all the accumulate im- 
pedimenta, and walling up the windows so as to make a 
dungeon of it. But Narcissa had finally persuaded him upon 
the upper floor of the garage and here he had set up his 
furnace and had set fire to the building once and had had 
four mishaps and produced one almost perfect vase of clear 
amber, larger, more richly and chastely serene, which he kept 
always on his night table and called by his sister’s name in 
the intervals of apostrophizing both of them impartially in 
his moments of rhapsody over the realization of the meaning 
of peace and the unblemished attainment of it, as “Thou 
still unravished bride of quietness.” 


Bareheaded, in flannels and a blue jacket with his Oxford 
club insignia embroidered on the pocket and his racket under 
his arm, Horace passed on around the house, and the court 


_ SARTORIS 155 


came into view with its two occupants in fluid violent action. 
Beneath an arcade of white pilasters and vine-hung beams, 
Belle, surrounded by the fragile, harmonious impedimenta 
of the moment, was like a butterfly. Two sat with her, in 
bright relief against the dark foliage of a crape myrtle not 
yet in flower. The other woman (the third member of the 
group was a young girl in white, with a grave molasses bang, 
and a tennis racket across her knees) spoke to him, and Belle 
greeted him with a sort of languid possessive desolation. Her 
hand was warm, prehensile, like mercury in his palm explor- 
ing softly, with delicate bones and petulant scented flesh. Her 
eyes were like hothouse grapes and her mouth was redly 
mobile, rich with discontent. 

She had lost Meloney, she told him. 

“Meloney saw through your gentility,” Horace said. “You 
grew careless, probably. Your elegance is much inferior to 
Meloney’s. You surely didn’t expect to always deceive any 


/— one who can lend as much rigid discomfort to the function 


of eating and drinking as Meloney could, did you? Or has 
she got married some more?” 

“She’s gone in business,” Belle answered fretfully. “A 
beauty shop. And why, I can’t for the life of me see. Those 
things never do last, here. Can you imagine Jefferson women 
supporting a beauty shop, with the exception of us three? 
Mrs. Marders and I might; I’m sure we need it, but what 
use has Frankie for one?” 

“What seems curious to me,” the other woman said, “is 
where the money came from. People thought that perhaps 
you had given it to her, Belle.” 

“Since when have I been a public benefactor?” Belle said 
coldly. Horace grinned faintly. Mrs. Marders said: 

“Now, Belle, we all know how kind-hearted you are; don’t 
be modest.” 

“I said a public benefactor,” Belle repeated. Horace said 
quickly: 

“Well, Harry would swap a handmaiden for an ox, any 
day. At least, he can save a lot of wear and tear on his 
cellar, not having to counteract your tea in a lot of casual 
masculine tummies. I suppose there’ll be no more tea out 
here, will there?’ he added. 

“Don’t be silly,” Belle said. 

Horace said: “I realize now that it is not tennis that I 


156 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


come here for, but for the incalculable amount of uncom- 
fortable superiority I always feel when Meloney serves me 
tea... . 1 saw your daughter as I came along.” 

“She’s around somewhere, I suppose,” Belle agreed indif- 
ferently. “You haven’t had your hair cut yet,” she stated. 
“Why is it that men have no sense about barbers?” she said 


generally. The older woman watched Belle and Horace — 


brightly, coldly, across her two flaccid chins. The young girl 
sat quietly in her simple, virginal white, her racket on her 
lap and one brown hand lying upon it like a sleeping tan 
puppy. She was watching Horace with sober interest but 
without rudeness, as children do. “They either won’t go to 
the barber at all, or they insist on having their heads all 
gummed up with pomade and things,” Belle added. 

“Horace is a poet,” the other woman said. Her flesh draped 
loosely from her cheekbones like rich, slightly soiled velvet; 
her eyes were like the eyes of an old turkey, predatory, un- 
winking; a little obscene. “Poets must be excused for what 
they do. You should remember that, Belle.” 

Horace bowed toward her. “Your race never fails in tact, 
Belle,” he said. “Mrs. Marders is one of the few people I 
know who give the law profession its true evaluation.” 

“It’s like any other business, I suppose,” Belle said. ““You’re 
late today. Why didn’t Narcissa come?” 

“I mean, dubbing me a poet,” Horace explained. “The law, 
like poetry, is the final resort of the lame, the halt, the im- ~ 
becile, and the blind. I dare say Caesar invented the law 
business to protect himself against poets.” 

“You're so clever,” Belle said. 

The young girl spoke suddenly: “Why do you bother about 
what men put on their hair, Miss Belle? Mr. Mitchell’s bald.” 

The other woman laughed, unctuously, steadily, watching 
them with her lidless unlaughing eyes. She watched Belle 
and Horace and still laughed steadily, brightly and cold. 
“Out of the mouths of babes——’ ” she said. The young girl 
glanced from one to another with her clear, sober eyes. 
She rose. 

“I guess I'll see if I can get a set now,” she said. 

Horace moved also. “Let’s you and I ” he began. With- 
out turning her head Belle touched him with her hand. 

“Sit down, Frankie,” she commanded. “They haven’t fin- 
ished the game yet. You shouldn’t laugh so much on an 


- SARTORIS 157 


empty stomach,” she told Mrs. Marders. “Do sit down, 
Horace.” 

The girl stood yet with slim and awkward grace, holding 
her racket. She looked at Belle a moment, then she turned 
her face to the court again. Horace took the chair beyond 
Belle. Her hand dropped hidden into his, with that secret 
movement; then it grew passive; it was as though she had 
turned a current off somewhere—like one entering a dark 
Toom in search of something, finding it and pressing the light 
off again. 

“Don’t you like poets?” Horace spoke across Belle’s body. 
The girl did not turn her head. 

“They can’t dance,” she answered. “I guess they are all 
right, though. They went to the war, the good ones did. 
There was one was a good tennis player, that got killed. 
Tve seen his picture, but I don’t remember his name.” 

“Oh, don’t start talking about the war, for heaven’s sake,” 
Belle said. Her hand stirred in Horace’s. “I had to listen to 
Harry for two years. Explaining why he couldn’t go. As if I 
cared whether he did or not.” 

“He had a family to support,’ Mrs. Marders suggested 
brightly. Belle half reclined, her head against the chair- 
back, her hidden hand moving slowly in Horace’s, ex- 
ploring, turning ceaselessly, like a separate volition curious 
but without warmth. 

“Some of them were aviators,” the girl continued. She 
stood with one little unemphatic hip braced against the table, 
her racket clasped beneath her arm, turning the pages of a 
magazine. Then she closed the magazine and again she 
watched the two figures Jeanly antic upon the court. “I 
danced with one of those Sartoris boys once. I was too scared 
to know which one it was. I wasn’t anything but a baby, 
then.” 

“Were they poets?” Horace asked. “I mean, the one that 
got back? I know the other one, the dead one, was.” 

“He sure can drive that car of his,” she answered, still 
watching the players, her straight hair (hers was the first 
bobbed head in town) not brown, not gold, her brief nose 
in profile, her brown, still hand clasping her racket. Belle 
stirred and freed her hand. 

‘Do go and play, you all,” she said. “You make me 
nervous, both of you.” 


158 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


Horace rose with alacrity. “Come on, Frankie. Let’s you 
and I take ’em on for a set.” 

They took the court, matched against the two youths. | 
Horace was an exceptional player, erratic and brilliant. One 
who knew tennis and who had a cool head could have de-= 
feated him out of hand by letting him beat himself. But 
not these. His partner overreached herself frequently, but 
Horace managed to retrieve the point with stroking or — 
strategy so audacious as to obscure the faultiness of his — 
tactics. 3 = 

Just as Horace made the final point Harry Mitchell ap- | 
peared, in tight. flannels and a white silk shirt and new ornate 
sport shoes that cost twenty dollars. With a new racket in a 
patent case and press, he stood with his squat legs and his 
bald bullet head and his undershot jaw of rotting teeth beside 
the studied picture of his wife. Presently, when he had been 
made to drink a cup of tea, he would gather up all the men 
present and lead them through the house to his bathroom 
and give them whisky, pouring a glass and bringing it down 
to Rachel in the kitchen on the way back. He would give 
you the shirt off of his back. He was a cotton speculator and 
a good one; he was ugly as sin and kind-hearted and dogmatic 
and talkative, and he called Belle “little mother’ until she 
broke him of it. 

Horace and his partner left the court together and ap- 
proached the group. 

Mrs. Marders sat now with her slack chins in a raised 
teacup. 

The girl turned to him with polite finality. “Thanks for 
playing with me,” she said. “I'll be better some day, I hope. 
We beat ’em,” she said generally. 

“You and the little lady gave ’em the works, hey, big boy?” 
Harry Mitchell said, showing his discolored teeth. His heavy 
prognathous jaw narrowed delicately down, then nipped 
abruptly off into bewildered pugnacity. 

“Mr. Benbow did,” the girl corrected in her clear voice. 
She took the chair next Belle. “I kept on letting °em get my 
alley.” 

“Horace,” Belle said, “your tea is getting cold.” 

It had been fetched out by the combination gardener- 
stableman-chauffeur, temporarily’ impressed in a white jacket 


SARTORIS 159 


and smelling of vulcanized rubber and ammonia. Mrs. 
Marders removed her chins from her cup. j 

“Horace plays too well,” she said, “really too well. The 
other men can’t compare with him. You were lucky to have 
him for a partner, child.” 

“Yessum,” the girl agreed. “I guess he won’t risk me again.” 

“Nonsense,” Mrs. Marders rejoined. “Horace enjoyed play- 
ing with you, with a young, fresh girl. Didn’t you notice it, 
Belle?” 

Belle made no reply. She poured Horace’s tea, and at this 
moment her daughter came across the lawn in her crocus- 
yellow dress. Her eyes were like stars, more soft and melting 
than any deer’s, and she gave Horace a swift shining glance. 

“Well, Titania?” he said. 

Belle half turned her head, with the teapot poised above 
the cup, and Harry set his cup on the table and went and 
knelt on one knee in her path, as though he were cajoling a 
puppy. The child came up, still watching Horace with radiant 
and melting diffidence, and permitted her father to embrace 
her and fondle her with his short, heavy hands. 

“Daddy’s gal,” Harry said. She submitted to having her 
prim little dress mussed, pleasurably but a little restively. Her 
eyes flew shining again. 

“Don’t muss your dress, sister,” Belle said. The child 
evaded her father’s hands with a prim movement. “What is 
it now?” Belle asked. “Why aren’t you playing?” 

“Nothing. I just came home.” She came and stood dif- 
fidently beside her mother’s chair. 

“Speak to the company,” Belle said. “Don’t you know bet- 
ter than to come where older people are without speaking to 
them?” The little girl did so, shyly and faultlessly, greeting 
them in rotation, and her mother turned and pulled and 
patted at her straight, soft hair. “Now, go on and play. Why 
do you always want to come around where grown people 
are? You’re not interested in what we’re doing.” 

“Ah, let her stay, mother,’ Harry said. “She wants to 
watch her daddy and Horace play tennis.” 

“Run along, now,” Belle repeated, with a final pat. “And 
do keep your dress clean.” 

“Yessum,” the child agreed, and she turned obediently, 
giving Horace another quick shining look. He watched her 


_ and saw Rachel open the kitchen door and speak to her as 


160 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


she passed, saw her turn and mount the steps into the kitchen. 

“What a beautifully mannered child,” Mrs. Marders said. 

“They’re so hard to do anything with,” Belle said. “She has ~ 
some of her father’s traits. Drink your tea, Harry.” 

Harry took his cup from the table and sucked its luke- 
warm contents into himself. noisily and dutifully. “Well, big 
boy, how about a set? These squirrels think they can beat 
us.” = 4 


“Frankie wants to play again,” Belle interposed. “Let the — 
child have the court for a little while, Harry.” Harry was | 
busy uncasing his racket. He paused and raised his savage . 
undershot face and his dull kind eyes. 

“No, no,” the girl protested quickly. “I’ve had enough. Id 
rather look on a while.” 

“Don’t be silly,” Belle said. “They can play any time. 
Make them let her play, Harry.” 

“Sure the little lady can play,” Harry said. “Help your- 
self; play as long as you want to.” He bent again and re- 
turned his racket to its intricate casing, twisting nuts here 
and there; his back was sullen, with a boy’s sullenness. 

“Please, Mr. Mitchell,” the girl said. 

“Go ahead,” Harry repeated. “Here, you jelly beans, how 
about fixing up a set with the little lady?” 

“Don’t mind him,” Belle told the girl. “He and Horace 
can play some other time. He’ll have to make a fourth, any- 
way.” 

The two players stood now, politely waiting. 

“Sure, Mr. Harry, come on. Me and Frankie’ll play you 
and Joe,” one of them said. 

“You folks go ahead and play a set,” Harry repeated. “I’ve 
got a little business to talk over with Horace. You all go- 
ahead.” He overrode their polite protests, and they took the 
court. Then he jerked his head significantly at Horace. 

“Go on with him,” Belle said. “The baby!” Without look- 
ing at him, without touching him, she enveloped him with 
rich and smoldering promise. Mrs. Marders sat across the 
table from them, curious and bright and cold with her tea- 
cup. “Unless you want to play with that silly child again.” 

“Silly?” Horace repeated. “She’s too young to be uncon- 
sciously silly yet.” 

“Run along,” Belle told him, “and hurry back. Mrs. 
Marders and I are tired of one another.” 


SARTORIS 161 


Horace followed his host into the house, followed his short, 

' rolling gait and the bald indomitability of his head. From the 
} kitchen as they passed little Belle’s voice came steadily, re- 
counting some astonishment of the day, with an occasional 
mellow ejaculation from Rachel for antistrophe. In the bath- 
| room Harry got a bottle from a cabinet, and preceded by 
labored, heavy footsteps mounting, Rachel entered without 
knocking, bearing a pitcher of ice water. 

_ “Why’n’t y'all go’n and play, ef you wants?” she demanded. 
“Whut you let that ?oman treat you and that baby like she 
do, anyhow?” she demanded of Harry. “You ought to take 
and lay her out wid a stick of wood. Messin’ up my kitchen 
at fo’ o’clock in de evenin’. And you ain’t helpin’ none, 
neither,” she told Horace. ““Gimme a dram, Mr. Harry, please, 
suh.” 

She held her glass out and Harry filled it, and she waddled 

_heavily from the room. They heard her descend the stairs 
slowly and heavily on her fallen arches. “Belle couldn’t get 

along without Rachel,” Harry said. He rinsed two glasses 
with ice water and set them on the lavatory. “She talks too 
much, like all niggers.” He poured into the two tumblers, set 
the bottle down. “To listen to her you'd think Belle was 

some kind of a wild animal. A damn tiger or something. 
| But Belle and I understand each other. You’ve got to make 

_ allowances for women, anyhow. Different from men. Born 
contrary; complain when you don’t please ’em and complain 

when you do.” He added a little water to his glass; then he 
said, with astonishing irrelevance: “I’d kill the man that 
tried to wreck my home like I would a damn snake. Well, let’s 
take one, big boy.” 
Presently he sloshed water into his empty glass and 
gulped that, too, and he reverted to his former grievance. 
“Can’t get to play on my own damn court,” he said. 
“Belle gets all these damn people here every day. What I 
want is a court where I can come home from work and get 
- in a couple of fast sets every afternoon. Appetizer before 

_-supper. But every damn day I get home from work and find 
a bunch of young girls and jelly beans, using it like it was a 
public court in a damn park.” Horace drank his more mod- 
erately. Harry lit a cigarette and threw the match on to the 

floor and swung his leg across the lavatory. “I reckon I'll 

_ have to build another court for my own use and put a hog- 


162 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


wire fence around it with a Yale lock, so Belle can’t give 
picnics on it. There’s plenty of room down there by the lot 


fence. No trees, too. Put it out in the damn sun, and I 


reckon Belle’ll let me use it now and then. Well, suppose we 
get on back.” 


He led the way through his bedroom and stopped to show 


Horace a new repeating rifle he had just bought and to press 
upon him a package of cigarettes which he imported from 
South America, and they descended and emerged into after- 
noon become later. The sun was level now across the court 


where three players leaped and sped with soft quick slap- ° 


pings of rubber soles, following the fleeting impact of the 
ball. Mrs. Marders sat yet with her ceaseless chins, although 
she was speaking of departure when they came up. Belle 
turned her head against the chair-back, but Harry led Horace 
on. 

“We're going to look over a location for a tennis court. 
I think Tl take up tennis, myself,” he told Mrs. Marders 
with heavy irony. It was later still when they returned. Mrs. 
Marders was gone and Belle sat alone, with a magazine. A 
youth in a battered Ford had called for the girl Frankie, but 
another young man had dropped in, and when Horace and 
Harry came up the three youths clamored politely for Harry 
to join them. 

“Take Horace here,” Harry said, obviously pleased. “He’ll 
give you a run for your money.” But Horace demurred and 
the three continued to importune Harry. 

“Lemme get my racket, then,” he said finally, and Horace 
followed the heavy scuttling of his backside across the court. 
Belle looked briefly up. 

“Did you find a place?” 

“Yes,” Harry answered, uncasing his racket again; “where 
I can play myself, sometimes. A place too far from the 
street for everybody that comes along to see it and stop.” 


But Belle was reading again. Harry unscrewed his racket 


press and removed it. 


“T’ll go in one set; then you and I can get in a fast one | 


before dark,” he told Horace. 

“Yes,” Horace agreed. He sat down and watched Harry 
stride heavily on to the court and take his position, watched 
the first serve. Then Belle’s magazine rustled and slapped on 
to the table. 


| SARTORIS 163 


} “Come,” she said, rising. Horace rose, and Belle preceded 
: him and they crossed the lawn and entered the house. Rachel 


} moved about in the kitchen, and they went on through the 
) house, where all noises were remote and the furniture 


gleamed peacefully indistinct in the dying evening light. Belle 
» slid her hand into his, clutching his hand against her silken 
| thigh, and led him on through a dusky passage and into her 
music room. This room was quiet too and empty and she 
'-stopped against him half turning, and they kissed. But she 
freed her mouth presently and moved again, and he drew 
the piano bench out and they sat on opposite sides of it 
and kissed again. “You haven’t told me you love me,” Belle 
said, touching his face with her finger tips, and the fine 
devastation of his hair, “not in a long time.” 

“Not since yesterday,” Horace agreed, but he told her, 
she leaning her breast against him and listening with a sort 
of rapt, voluptuous inattention, like a great, still cat; and 
when he had done and sat touching her face and her hair 
' with his delicate wild hands, she removed her breast and 
opened the piano and touched the keys. Saccharine melodies 
she played, from memory and in the current mode, that you 
_ might hear on any vaudeville stage, and with a shallow skill, 

a feeling for their oversweet nuances. They sat thus for some 
time while the light faded, Belle in another temporary vac- 
uum of discontent, building for herself a world in which she 
_ moved romantically, finely, and a little tragically, with Horace 
sitting beside her and watching both Belle in her self-im- 
posed and tragic rdle, and himself performing his part like 
the old actor whose hair is thin and whose profile is es- 
_ caping him via his chin, but who can play to any cue at a 

-moment’s notice while the younger men chew their bitter 
thumbs in the wings. 

Presently the rapid heavy concussions of Harry’s feet 
thumped again on the stairs mounting, and the harsh word- 
less uproar of his voice as he led some one else in the back 
way and up to his bathroom. Belle stopped her hands and 
_-leaned against him and kissed him again, clinging. “This is 
intolerable,” she said, freeing her mouth with a movement 
of her head. For a moment she resisted against his arm, 
then her hands crashed discordantly upon the keys and slid 
_ through Horace’s hair and down his cheeks tightening. She 
freed her mouth again. “Now, sit over there.” 


164 WILLIAM FAULKNER}? 


He obeyed; she on the piano bench was in half shadow.. 
Twilight was almost accomplished; only the line of her benti 
head and her back, tragic and still, making him feel young: 
again. We do turn corners upon ourselves, like suspicious old! 
ladies spying on servants, Horace thought. No, like boys: 
trying to head off a parade. “There’s always divorce,” he said. - 

“To marry again?’ Her hands trailed off into chords;; 
merged, faded again into a minor in one hand. Overhead! 
Harry moved with his heavy staccato tread, shaking the: 
house. “You’d make a rotten husband.” | 

“I won’t as long as I’m not married,” Horace answered. | 

She said, “Come here,” and he went to her, and in the: 
dusk she was again tragic and young and familiar with a 
haunting sense of loss, and he knew the sad fecundity of the : 
world and time’s hopeful unillusion that fools itself. “I want 
to have your child, Horace,” she said, and then her own 
child came up the hall and stood diffidently in the door. 

For a moment Belle was an animal awkward and mad 
with fear. She surged away from him in a mad, spurning 
movement; her hands crashed on the keys as she controlled 
her instinctive violent escape that left in the dusk a mindless 
protective antagonism, pervading, in steady cumulate waves, 
directed at Horace as well. 

“Come in, Titania,” Horace said. 

The little girl stood diffidently in silhouette. Belle’s voice 
was sharp with relief. “Well, what do you want? Sit over 
there,” she hissed at Horace. “What do you want, Belle?” 
Horace drew away a little, but without rising. 

“T’ve got a new story to tell you, soon,” he said. But little 
Belle stood yet, as though she had not heard, and her mother 
said: 

“Go on and play, Belle. Why did you come in the house? 
It isn’t suppertime yet.” 

“Everybody’s gone home,” she answered. “I haven’t got 
anybody to play with.” 

“Go to the kitchen and talk to Rachel, then,” Belle said. 
She struck the keys again, harshly. “You worry me to death, 
hanging around the house.” The little girl stood for a mo- 
ment longer; then she turned obediently and went away. 
“Sit over there,” Belle repeated. Horace resumed his chair 
and Belle played again, loudly and swiftly, with cold hysteri- 
cal skill. Overhead: Harry thumped again across the floor; 


SARTORIS 165 


they descended the stairs. Harry was still talking; the voices 
passed on toward the rear, ceased. Belle continued to play; 
still about him in the darkening room that blind protective 
antagonism, like a muscular contraction that remains after 
the impulse of fright has died. Without turning her head 
she said, “Are you going to stay to supper?” 

He was not, he answered, waking suddenly. She did not 
tise with him, did not turn her head, and he let himself 
out the front door and into the late spring twilight, where 
was already a faint star above the windless trees. On the 
drive just without the garage, Harry’s new car stood. At the 
moment he was doing something to the engine of it while 
the house-yard-stable-boy held a patent trouble-lamp above 
the beetling crag of his head, and his daughter and Rachel, 
holding tools or detached sections of the car’s vitals, leaned 
their intent dissimilar faces across his bent back and into 
the soft bluish glare of the light. Horace went on homeward. 
Twilight, evening, came swiftly. Before he reached the corner 
where he turned, the street lamps sputtered and failed, then 
glared above the intersections, beneath the arching trees. 


3 


It was the evening of little Belle’s recital, the climacteric 
of her musical year. During the whole evening Belle had 
not looked at him, had said no word to him, even when, 
in the departing crush at the door and while Harry was 
trying to persuade him upstairs for a night-cap, he felt her 
beside him for an instant, smelled the heavy scent she used. 
But she said no word to him even then, and he put Harry 
aside at last and the door closed on little Belle and on 
Harry’s glazed dome, and Horace turned into the darkness 
and found that Narcissa hadn’t waited. She was halfway to 
the street. 

“If youre going my way, Ill walk along with you,” he 
called to her. She made no reply, neither did she slacken her 
pace nor increase it when he joined her. 

“Why is it,’ he began, “that grown people will go to so 
much trouble to make children do ridiculous things, do you 


166 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


suppose? Belle had a houseful of people she doesn’t care any- 
thing about and most of whom don’t approve of her, and 
kept little Belle up three hours past her bedtime; and the re- 
sult is, Harry’s about half tight, and Belle is in a bad humor, 
and little Belle is too excited to go to sleep, and you and I 
wish we were home and are sarry we didn’t stay there.” 

“Why do you go there, then?” Narcissa asked. Horace was 
suddenly stilled. They walked on through the darkness, to- 
ward the next street light. Against it branches hung like 
black coral in a yellow sea. : 
“Oh,” Horace said. Then: “I saw that old cat talking with © 
you.” : . 

“Why do you call Mrs. Marders an old cat? Because she 
told me something that concerns me and that everybody else 
seems to know already?” 

“So that’s who told you, is it? I wondered. . . .” He 
slid his arm within her unresponsive one. “Dear old Narcy.” 
They passed through the dappled shadows beneath the light, 
went on into darkness again. 

“Ts it true?” she asked. 

“You forget that lying is a struggle for survival,” he said, 
“little puny man’s way of dragging circumstance about to fit 
his preconception of himself as a figure in the world. Revenge 
on the sinister gods.” 

“Is it true?” she persisted. They walked on, arm in arm, 
she gravely insistent and waiting, he shaping and discarding 
phrases in his mind, finding time to be amused at his own 
fantastic impotence in the presence of her constancy. 

“People don’t usually lie about things that don’t concern 
them,” he answered wearily. “They are impervious to the 
world, even if they aren’t to life. Not when the actuality is 
so much more diverting than their imaginings could be,” he 
added. She freed her arm with grave finality. 

“Narcy: ey 

“Don’t,” she said. “Don’t call me that.” The next corner, 
beneath the next light, was theirs; they would turn there. 
Above the arched canyon of the street the sinister gods stared 
down with pale unwinking eyes. Horace thrust his hands into 
his jacket and for a space he was stilled again while his 
fingers learned. the unfamiliar object they had found in his 
pocket. Then he drew it forth: a sheet of heavy note-paper, 
folded twice and impregnated with a fading heavy scent. A 


SARTORIS 167 


familiar scent, yet baffling for the moment, like a face watch- 
ing him from an arras. He knew the face would emerge in a 
moment, but as he held the note in his fingers and sought 
the face through the corridors of his present distraction, his 
sister spoke suddenly and hard at his side. 

“You've got the smell of her all over you. Oh, Horry, 
she’s dirty!” 

“I know,” he answered unhappily. “I know.” 


It was now well into June, and the scent of Miss Jenny’s 
transplanted jasmine drifted steadily into the house and filled 
it with constant cumulate waves like a fading resonance of 
viols. The earlier flowers were gone, and the birds had fin- 
ished eating the strawberries and now sat about the fig bushes 
all day, waiting for them to ripen; zinnia and delphinium 
bloomed without any assistance from Isom, who, since 
Caspey had more or less returned to normalcy and laying-by 
time was yet a while away, might be found on the shady 
side of the privet hedge along the garden fence, trimming 
the leaves one by one from a single twig with a pair of mule 
shears until Miss Jenny returned to the house; whereupon he 
retreated himself and lay on the creek-bank for the rest of 
the afternoon, his hat over his eyes and a cane fishing-pole 
propped between his toes. 

Simon pottered querulously about the place. His linen 
duster and top hat gathered chaff and dust on the nail in 
the harness room, and the horses waxed fat and lazy and 
insolent in the pasture. The duster and hat came down from 
the nail and the horses were harnessed to the carriage but 
once a week now—on Sundays, to drive in to town to church. 
Miss Jenny said she was too far along to jeopardize salvation 
by driving to church at fifty miles an hour; that she had 
as many sins as her ordinary behavior could take care of, 
particularly as she had old Bayard’s soul to get into heaven 
somehow also, what with him and young Bayard tearing 
around the country every afternoon at the imminent risk of 
their necks. About young Bayard’s soul Miss Jenny did not 
alarm herself at all: he had no soul. 

Meanwhile he rode about the farm and harried the Negro 
tenants in his cold fashion, and in two-dollar khaki breeches 
and a pair of field boots that had cost fourteen guineas he 
tinkered with farming machinery and with the tractor he had 


168 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


persuaded old Bayard to buy: for the time being he had be- 
come almost civilized again. He went to town only oc-_ 
casionally now, and often on horseback, and all in all his 

days had become so usefully innocuous that both his aunt 
and his grandfather were growing a little nervously antici- 
patory. 5 : 

“Mark my words,” Miss Jenny told Narcissa on the day 
she drove out again, “he’s storing up devilment that’s going 
to burst loose all at once, some day. And then there’ll be hell 
to pay. Lord knows what it'll be—maybe he and Isom will 
take his car and that tractor and hold a steeple-chase with | 
’em. . . . What did you come out for? Got another letter?” _ 

“I’ve got several more,” Narcissa answered lightly. “I’m 
saving them until I get enough for a book; then Ill bring 
them all out for you to read.” Miss Jenny sat opposite her, 
erect as a crack guardsman, with that cold briskness of hers 
that caused agents and strangers to stumble through their er- 
rands with premonitions of failure before they began. The 
guest sat motionless, her limp straw hat on her knees. “I just 
came to see you,” she added, and for a moment her face 
held such grave and still despair that Miss Jenny sat more 
erect yet and stared at her guest with her piercing gray eyes. 

“Why, what is it, child? Did the man walk into your 
house?” 

“No, no.” The look was gone, but still Miss Jenny watched 
her with those keen old eyes that seemed to see so much 
more than you thought—or wished. “Shall I play a while? 
It’s been a long time, hasn’t it?” 

“Well,” Miss Jenny agreed, “if you want to.” 

There was dust on the piano. Narcissa opened it with a 
fine gesture. “If you'll let me get a cloth *e 

“Here, lemme dust it,’ Miss Jenny said, and she caught 
up her skirt by the hem and mopped the keyboard violently. 
“There, that’ll do.” Then she drew her chair from behind the 
instrument and seated herself. She still watched the other’s 
profile with speculation and a little curiosity, but presently 
the old tunes stirred her memory again, and in a while her 
eyes softened, and the other and the trouble that had shown 
momentarily in her face were lost in Miss Jenny’s own van- 
quished and abiding dead days, and it was some time before 
she realized that Narcissa was weeping quietly while she 
played. 


Aree 
rd 
ee 


|) SARTORIS 169 


Miss Jenny leaned forward and touched her arm. “Now, 
you tell me what it is,” she commanded. And Narcissa told 
_ her in her grave contralto, still weeping quietly. 

“Humph,” Miss Jenny said. “That’s to be expected of a 
man that hasn’t any more to do than Horace has. I don’t 
see why you are so upset over it.” 

“But that woman,” Narcissa wailed suddenly, like a little 
girl, burying her face in her hands. “She’s so dirty!” 

Miss Jenny dug a man’s handkerchief from the pocket 
of her skirt and gave it to the other. “What do you mean?” 
she asked. “Don’t she wash often enough?” 

“Not that way. I m-mean she’s—she’s 
turned suddenly and laid her head on the piano. 

“Oh,” Miss Jenny said. “All women are, if that’s what you 


” Narcissa 


/ mean.” She sat stiffly indomitable, contemplating the other’s 


shrinking shoulders. “Hmph,” she said again, “Horace has 


| spent so much time being educated that he never has learned 


anything. . . . Why didn’t you break it up in time? Didn’t 
you see it coming?” 
The other wept more quietly now. She sat up and dried 


| her eyes on Miss Jenny’s handkerchief. “It started before he 


went away. Don’t you remember?” 

“That’s so. I do sort of remember a lot of women’s gabble. 
Who told you about it, anyway? Horace?” 

“Mrs. Marders did. And then Horace did. But I never 
thought that he’d I never thought ”” Again her head 
dropped to the piano, hidden in her arms. “I wouldn’t have 


| treated Horace that way,” she wailed. 


“Sarah Marders, was it? I might have known. . . . I admire 
strong character, even if it is bad,” Miss Jenny stated. “Well, 
crying won’t help any.” She rose briskly. “We’ll think what 
to do about it. Only I’d let him go ahead: it'll do him good if 
she'll just turn around and make a doormat of him. .. . Too 
bad Harry hasn’t got the spunk to. . . But I reckon he’ll be 
glad; I know I would. . . . There, there,” she said, at the 
other’s movement of alarm, “I don’t reckon Harry’ll hurt 
him. Dry your face, now. You better go to the bathroom and 
fix up. Bayard’ll be coming in soon, and you don’t want him 
to see you’ve been crying, you know.” Narcissa glanced 
swiftly at the door and dabbed at her face with Miss Jenny’s 
handkerchief. 


170 WILLIAM FAULKNER} 


Then he would seek her through the house, and cross the: 
drive and descend the lawn in the sunny afternoon to where : 
she sat in the white dresses he loved beneath the oak, into) 
which a mocking-bird came each afternoon to sing, bring-- 
ing her the result of his latest venture in glass-blowing. He: 
had five now, in different colors and all nearly perfect, and | 
each of them had a name. And as he finished them and| 
while they were scarce cooled, he must bring them across | 
the lawn to where she sat with a book or with a startled 
caller perhaps—in his stained disheveled clothes and his | 
sooty hands in which the vase lay demure and fragile as a’ 
bubble, and with his face blackened too with smoke and a 
little mad, passionate and fine and austere. 


4 


For a time the earth held him in a hiatus that might have 
been called contentment. He was up at sunrise, planting 
things in the ground and watching them grow and tending 
them; he cursed and harried niggers and mules into motion 
and kept them there, and put the grist mill into running 
shape and taught Caspey to drive the tractor, and came in at 
mealtimes and at night smelling of machine oil and of 
stables and of the earth, and went to bed with grateful mus- 
cles and with the sober rhythms of the earth in his body 
and so to sleep. But he still waked at times in the peaceful 
darkness of his room and without previous warning, tense 
and sweating with old terror. Then, momentarily, the world 
was laid away and he was a trapped beast in the high blue, 
mad for life, trapped in the very cunning fabric that had 
betrayed him who had dared chance too much, and he 
thought again if, when the bullet found you, you could only 
crash upward, burst; anything but earth. Not death, no: it 
was the crash you had to live through so many times before 
you struck that filled your throat with vomit. 

But his days were filled, at least, and he discovered pride 
again. Nowadays he drove the car into town to fetch his 
grandfather from habit alone, and though he still considered 
forty-five miles an hour merely cruising speed, he no longer 


SARTORIS 171 


took cold and fiendish pleasure in turning curves on two 
wheels or detaching mules from wagons by striking the whif- 
fietrees with his bumper in passing. Old Bayard still insisted 
on riding with him when he must ride, but with freer breath, 
and once he aired to Miss Jenny his growing belief that at 
last young Bayard had outworn his seeking for violent de- 
struction. 

Miss Jenny, being a true optimist—that is, expecting the 
worst at all times and so being daily agreeably surprised— 
promptly disillusioned him. Meanwhile she made young Bay- 
ard drink plenty of milk and otherwise superintended his 
diet and hours in her martinetish way, and at times she en- 
tered his room at night and sat for a while beside the bed 
where he slept. 

Nevertheless young Bayard improved in his ways. Without 
being aware of the progress of it he had become submerged 
in a monotony of days, had been snared by a rhythm of 
activities repeated and repeated until his muscles grew so fa- 
) miliar with them as to get his body through the days without 
assistance from him at all. He had been so neatly tricked by 
earth, that ancient Delilah, that he was not aware that his 
_ locks were shorn, was not aware that Miss Jenny and old 
Bayard were wondering how long it would be before they 
grew out again. “He needs a wife,’ was Miss Jenny’s 
| thought; “then maybe he’ll stay sheared. A young person 
to worry with him,” she said to herself; “Bayard’s too old, 
and I’ve got too much to do to worry with the long devil.” 
He saw Narcissa about the house now and then, some- 
times at the table these days, and he still felt her shrinking 
' and her distaste, and at times Miss Jenny sat watching 
' the two of them with a sort of speculation and an exaspera- 
‘ tion with their seeming obliviousness of one another. 
“He treats her like a dog would treat a cut-glass pitcher, 
» and she looks at him like a cut-glass pitcher would look at a 
' dog,” she told herself. 

- Then sowing-time was over and it was summer, and he 
found himself with nothing to do. It was like coming dazed 
out of sleep, out of the warm, sunny valleys where people 
lived into a region where cold peaks of savage despair stood 
- bleakly above the lost valleys, among black and savage stars. 


The road descended in a quiet red curve between pines 


LZ WILLIAM FAULKNER} 


through which the hot July winds swelled with a long: 
sound like a far-away passing of trains, descended to a mass} 
of lighter green of willows, where a creek ran beneath a: 
stone bridge. At the top of the grade the scrubby, rabbitlike - 
mules stopped, and the younger Negro got down and lifted | 
a gnawed white-oak sapling from the wagon and locked! 
the off rear wheel by wedging the pole between the warped, f 
wire-bound spokes of it and across the axletree. Then he: 
climbed back into the crazy wagon, where the other Negro sat : 
motionless with the rope-spliced reins in his hand and his: 
head tilted creekward. ““Whut ’uz dat?” he said. Z| 

“Whut wuz whut?” the other asked. His father sat in his. 
attitude of arrested attention, and the young Negro listened 
also. But there was no further sound save the long sough of 
the wind among the sober pines and the liquid whistling of a . 
quail somewhere among the green fastnesses of them. | 
“Whut you hear, pappy?” he repeated. : 

“Somethin’ busted down dar. Tree fell, maybe.” He jerked | 
the reins. “Hwup, mules.” The mules flapped their jack-_ 
rabbit ears and lurched the wagon into motion and they de- 
scended among cool, dappled shadows, on the jarring scrape 
of the locked wheel that left behind it a glazed bluish ribbon — 
in the soft red dust. At the foot of the hill the road crossed | 
the bridge and went on mounting again; beneath the bridge 
the creek rippled and flashed brownly among willows, and 
beside the bridge and bottom up in the water, a motor-car 
lay. Its front wheels were still spinning and the engine ran at 
idling speed, trailing a faint shimmer of exhaust. The older 
Negro drove on to the bridge and stopped, and the two of 
them sat and stared statically down upon the car’s long 
belly. The young Negro spoke suddenly. 

“Dar he is! He in de water under hit. I kin see his 
foots stickin’ out.” 

“He liable ter drown, dar,” the other said, with interest and | 
disapproval, and they descended from the wagon. The young 
Negro slid down the creek-bank. The other wrapped the | 
reins deliberately about one of the stakes that held the bed | 
on the frame and thrust his peeled hickory goad beneath the | 
seat, and went around and dragged the pole free of the locked 
wheel and put it in the wagon. Then he also slid gingerly 
down the bank to where his son squatted, peering at Bayard’s 
submerged legs. 


| 


i 


wae 
as 


SARTORIS 173 
“Don’t you git too clost ter dat thing, boy,” he commanded. 


_ “Hit mought blow up. Don’t you hear it still grindin’ in dar?” 


“We got to git dat man out,” the young one replied. “He 
gwine drown.” 

“Don’t you tech ’im. White folks be sayin’ we done it. We 
gwine wait right here *twell some white man comes erlong.” 

“He'll drown ’fo’ dat,” the other said, “layin’ in dat water.” 
He was barefoot, and he stepped into the water and stood 


again with brown flashing wings of water stemming about his 
_ lean black calves. 


“You, John Henry!” his father said. “You come ’way fum 
dat thing.” 
“We got to git im outen dar,” the boy repeated, and the 


- one in the water and the other on the bank, they wrangled 


amicably while the water rippled about Bayard’s boot toes. 
Then the young Negro approached warily and caught Bay- 
ard’s leg and tugged at it. The body responded, shifted, 
stopped again, and grunting querulously, the older Negro sat 


and removed his shoes and stepped into the water also. “He 
| hung again,” John Henry said, squatting in the water with 
his arms beneath the car. “He hung under de guidin’-wheel. 


His haid ain’t quite under water, dough. Lemme git de pole.” 

He mounted the bank and got the sapling from the wagon 
and returned and joined his father where the other stood in 
sober, curious disapproval above Bayard’s legs, and with the 


| pole they lifted the car enough to drag Bayard out. They 


lifted him on to the bank and he sprawled there in the sun, 


} with his calm, wet face and his matted hair, while water 


drained out of his boots, and they stood above him on al- 


ternate legs and wrung out their overalls. 


“Hit’s Cunnel Sartoris’s boy, ain’t it?” the elder said at 
last, and he lowered himself stiffly to the sand, groaning 
and grunting, and donned his shoes. 

“Yessuh,” the other answered. “Is he daid, pappy?”’ 

“Co’se he is,” the elder answered pettishly. “Atter dat 
otto’bile jumped offen dat bridge wid ’im en den trompled 
im in de creek? Whut you reckon he is ef he ain’t daid? 


! And whut you gwine say when de law axes you how come 


' you de onliest one dat foun’ ’im daid? Tell me dat.” 


“Tell ’um you holp me.” 
“Hit ain’t none of my business. I never run dat thing 


174 WILLIAM FAULKNER | 


offen dat bridge. Listen at it _ dar, mumblin’ and grindin’’ 
yit. You git on ’fo’ hit blows up.” 

“We better git ’im into town,” John Henry said. “Dey! 
mought not nobody else be comin’ ‘long today.” He stooped | 
and lifted Bayard’s shoulders and tugged him to a sitting i 
position. “He’p me git im up de bank, pappy.” 

“Hit ain’t none o’ my business,” the other repeated. But 4 
he stooped and picked up Bayard’s legs and they lifted! 
him, and he groaned without waking. 

“Dar, now,” John Henry exclaimed. “Hear dat? He ain’t 
daid.” But he might well have been, with his long, inert | 
body and his head wrung excruciatingly against John Henry’s 
shoulder. They shifted their grip and turned toward the: 
road. “Hah!” John Henry exclaimed. “Le’s go!” 

They struggled up the shaling bank with him and on to: 
the road, where the elder let his end of the burden slip to 
the ground. “Whuf.” He expelled his breath sharply. “He 
heavy ez a flow’ bar’l.” 

“Come on, pappy,” John Henry said, “le’s git ’im in de 
waggin.” The other stooped again, and they raised Bay- 
ard with dust caked redly on his wet thighs and heaved 
him by grunting stages into the wagon. “He look like a daid 
man,” John Henry added, “and he sho’ do ack like one. 
Pll ride back here wid ’im and keep his haid fum bumpin’.” 

“Git dat brakin’ pole you lef’ in de creek,” his father 
ordered, and John Henry descended and retrieved the sapling 
and got in the wagon again and lifted Bayard’s head on to 
his knees. His father unwrapped the reins and mounted to 
the sagging seat and picked up his peeled wand. 

“I don’t like dis kin’ o’ traffickin’,” he repeated. “Hwup, 
mules.” The mules lurched the wagon into motion once 
more, and they went on. Behind them the car lay on its 
back in the creek, its engine still muttering at idling speed. 

Its owner lay in the springless wagon, lax and inert with 
the jolting of it. Thus for some miles, while John Henry 
held his battered straw hat between the white man’s face 
and the sun. Then the jolting penetrated into that region 
where Bayard lay, and he groaned again. 

“Drive slower, pappy,” John Henry said. “De joltin’s wak- 
in’ im up.” 

“I can’t help dat,” the elder replied; “I never run dat 


‘SARTORIS 175 


otto’bile offen de bridge. I got to git on into town en git 
on back home. Git on dar, mules.” 
John Henry made to ease him to the jolting, and Bayard 


) groaned again and raised his hand to his chest. He moved 


and opened his eyes. But he closed them immediately against 
the sun, and he lay with his head on John Henry’s knees, 
cursing. Then he moved again, trying to sit up. John Henry 
held him down, and he opened his eyes again, struggling. 

“Let go, God damn you!” he said. “I’m hurt.” 

“Yessuh, Captain, ef you'll jes’ lay still 

Bayard heaved himself violently, clutching his side; his 
teeth glared between his drawn lips and he gripped John 
Henry’s shouider with a clutch like steel hooks. “Stop!” he 
shouted, glaring wildly at the back of the older Negro’s 
head. “Stop him; make him stop! He’s driving my damn ribs 


» right through me.” He cursed again, trying to get on to his 


knees, gripping John Henry’s shoulder, clutching his side 


) with the other hand. The older Negro turned and looked 


back at him. “Hit him with something!” Bayard shouted. 


| “Make him stop. I’m hurt, God damn it!” 


The wagon stopped. Bayard was now on all fours, his 
head hanging and swaying from side to side like a wounded 
| beast’s. The two Negroes watched him quietly, and still clutch- 
'ing his side, he moved and essayed to climb out of the 


: wagon. John Henry jumped down and helped him, and he 


got slowly out and leaned against the wheel, with his sweat- 


f ing, bloodless face and his clenched grin. 


“Git back into de waggin, Captain,” John Henry said, 
“and le’s git to town to de doctor.” 

The color seemed to have drained from his eyes too. He 
leaned against the wagon, moistening his lips with his tongue. 
He moved again and sat down at the roadside, fumbling at 


the buttons of his shirt. The two Negroes watched him. 


“Got a knife, son?” he asked. 
“Yessuh.” John Henry produced it, and by Bayard’s di- 


‘rection he slit the shirt off. Then with the Negro’s help 
' Bayard bound it tightly about his body. He got to his feet. 


“Got a cigarette?” 
John Henry had not. “Pappy got some chewin’-terbacker,” 


» he suggested. 


“Gimme a chew, then.” They gave him a Beane and helped 
‘him back into the wagon and on to the seat. The other 


176 WILLIAM FAULKNER? 


Negro took up the lines. They jingled and rattled inter-- 
minably on in the red dust, from shadow to sunlight, up- - 
hill and down. Bayard clutched his chest with his arms and! 
chewed and cursed steadily. On and on, and at every jolt,, 
with every breath, his broken ribs stabbed and probed into) 
his-flesh; on and on from shadow to sunlight and into) 
shadow again. 
A final hill, and the road emerged from the shade and! 
crossed the flat, treeless valley and joined the highway. Here ‘ 
they stopped, the sun blazing downward on his naked shoul- - 
ders and bare head, while he and the old Negro wrangled || 
as to whether they should take Bayard home or not. Bayard — 
raged and swore, but the other was querulously adamant, | 
whereupon Bayard took the reins from his hand and swung ; 
the mules up the valley and with the end of the reins lashed © 
the astonished creatures into mad motion. 
This last mile was the worst of all. On all sides of them | | 
cultivated fields spread away to the shimmering hills. Earth | 
was saturated with heat and broken and turned and satu-— 
rated again and drunken with it, exuding heat like an al- | 
coholic’s breath. The trees along the road were sparse and > 
but half grown, and the mules slowed to a maddening walk | 
in their own dust. He surrendered the reins again, and in a 
red doze he clung to the seat, conscious only of dreadful : 
thirst, knowing that he was becoming lightheaded. The 
Negroes too realized that he was going out of his head, and 
the young one removed his frayed hat and Bayard put it on. 
The mules with their comical, overlarge ears assumed fan- 
tastic shapes, merged into other shapes without significance; 
shifted and merged again. At times it seemed that they 
were traveling backward, that they would crawl terrifically 
past the same tree or telephone pole time after time; and 
it seemed to him that the three of them and the rattling 
wagon and the two beasts were caught in a senseless tread- 
mill: a motion without progress, forever and to no escape. 
But at last and without his being aware of it, the wagon | 
turned in between the iron gates. Shadow fell upon his | 
naked shoulders and he opened his eyes, and his home| 
swam and floated in a pale mirage. The jolting stopped and 
the two Negroes helped him down and the young one fol- 
lowed him to the steps, holding his arm. But he flung him 
off and mounted and crossed the veranda. In the hallway, 


; SARTORIS 177 


| after the outer glare, he could see nothing for a moment, 


and he stood swaying and a little nauseated, blinking. Then 
Simon’s eyeballs rolled out of the obscurity. 
“Whut in de Lawd’s name,” Simon said, “is you been into 


| now?” 


“Simon?” he said. He swayed, staggered a little for bal- 
ance, and blundered into something. “Simon.” 
Simon moved quickly and touched him. “I kep’ tellin’ 


| you dat car ’uz gwine kill you; I kep’ tellin’ you!” Simon 
slid his arm around Bayard and led him on toward the 
| stairs. But he would not turn here, and they went on down 
} the hall and Simon helped him into the office and he stopped, 


leaning on a chair. 
“Keys,” he said thickly, “Aunt Jenny. Get drink.” 
“Miss Jenny done gone to town wid Miss Benbow,” Simon 
answered. “Dey ain’t nobody here, ain’t nobody here a-tall 


+ ’cep’ de niggers. I kep’ tellin’ you!” he moaned again, pawing 
} at Bayard. “Dey ain’t no blood, dough. Come to de sofa 


and lay down, Mist’ Bayard.” 
Bayard moved again. Simon supported him and he lurched 


. ‘around the chair and slumped into it, clutching his chest. 
} “Dey ain’t no blood,” Simon babbled. 


“Keys,” Bayard repeated. “Get the keys.” 
“Yessuh, Ill git um.” But he continued to flap his dis- 


tracted hands about Bayard until Bayard swore at him and 
= flung him violently off. Still moaning “Dey ain’t no blood,” 


Simon turned and scuttled from the room. Bayard sat for- 
ward, clutching his chest. He heard Simon mount the stairs 


| and cross the floor overhead. Then he was back, and Bayard 


watched him open the desk and extract the silver-stoppered 


, decanter. He set it down and scuttled out again and re- 
. turned with a glass, to find Bayard beside the desk, drinking 
| from the decanter. Simon helped him back to the chair 
' and poured him a drink into the glass. Then he fetched 
_ him a cigarette and hovered futilely and distractedly about 
_ him. “Lemme git de doctuh, Mist’ Bayard.” 


“No. Gimme another drink.” 

Simon obeyed. “Dat’s three already. Lemme go git Miss 
Jenny en de doctuh, Mist’ Bayard, please, suh.” 

“No. Leave me alone. Get out of here.” 

He drank that one. The nausea, the mirage shapes, were 
gone, and he felt better. At every breath his side stabbed 


178 WILLIAM FAULKNER‘ 


him with hot needles, so he was careful to breathe shallow- - 
ly. If he could only remember that . . . Yes, he felt much) 
better; so he rose carefully and went to the desk and had! 
another drink. Yes, that was the stuff for a wound, like: 
Suratt had said. Like that time he got that tracer in his; 
belly and nothing would stay.on his stomach except gin-- 
and-milk. And this, this wasn’t anything: just a few caved! 
slats. Patch up his fuselage with a little piano wire in ten! 
minutes. Not like Johnny. They were all going right intos 
his thighs. Damn butcher wouldn’t even raise his sights ai 
little. He must remember to breathe shallowly. 

He crossed the room slowly. Simon flitted in the dim 
hall before him, and he mounted the stairs slowly, holding: 
to the rail, while Simon flapped his hands and watched him.. 
He entered his room, the room that had been his and John’s, , 
and he stood for a while against the wall until he could! 
breathe shallowly again. Then he crossed to the closet and 
opened it, and kneeling carefully, with his hand against his: 
side, he opened the chest which was there. 

There was not much in it: a garment, a small leather-- 
bound book, a shotgun shell to which was attached by ar 
bit of wire a withered bear’s paw. It was John’s first bear.. 
and the shell with which he had killed it in the river bot-- 
tom near MacCallum’s when he was twelve years old. The: 
book was a New Testament; on the flyleaf in faded brown,. 
“To my son, John, on his seventh birthday, March 16, 1900,. 
from his Mother.” He had one exactly like it; that was the: 
year Grandfather had arranged for the morning local freight! 
to stop and pick them up and take them in to town to start! 
school. The garment was a canvas hunting-coat, stained and! 
splotched with what had once been blood, and scuffed and! 
torn by briers and smelling yet faintly of saltpeter. 

Still kneeling, he lifted the objects out one by one and! 
laid: them on the floor. He picked up the coat again, and! 
its fading, stale acridity drifted in his nostrils with an inti-: 
mation of life and of warmth. “Johnny,” he whispered, 
“Johnny.” Suddenly he raised the garment toward his face: 
but halted it as sharply, and with the coat half raised he: 
looked swiftly over his shoulder. But immediately he re- 
covered himself and turned his head and lifted the garment 
and laid his face against it, defiantly and deliberately, and 
knelt so for a time. : 


» SARTORIS 179 


Then he rose and gathered up the book and the trophy 
and the coat and crossed to his chest of drawers and took 
from it a photograph. It was a picture of John’s Prince- 
ton eating-club group, and he gathered this also under his 
'arm and descended the stairs and passed on out the back 
door. As he emerged, Simon was just crossing the yard with 
the carriage, and as he passed the kitchen Elnora was croon- 
ing one of her mellow, endless songs. 

Behind the smoke-house squatted the black pot and the 
wooden tubs where Elnora did her washing in fair weather. 
She had been washing today; the clothesline swung with its 
damp, limp burden, and beneath the pot smoke yet curled 
from the soft ashes. He thrust the pot over with his foot 
and rolled it aside, and from the woodshed he fetched an 
armful of rich pine and laid it on the ashes. Soon a blaze, 
pale in the sunny air, and when the wood was burning 
| strongly he laid the coat and the Testament and the trophy 
' and the photograph on the flames and prodded and turned 
| them until they were consumed. In the kitchen Elnora crooned 
'mellowly as she labored. Her voice came rich and plaintful 
and sad along the sunny reaches of the air. He must re- 
member to breathe shallowly. 


Simon drove rapidly to town, but he had been forestalled. 
| The two Negroes had told a merchant about finding Bayard 
'-on the roadside, and the news had reached the bank, and 
old Bayard sent for Dr. Peabody. But Dr. Peabody had gone 
| fishing, so he took Dr. Alford instead, and the two of them 
in Dr. Alford’s car passed Simon just on the edge of town. 
He turned about and followed them, but when he arrived 
| home they had young Bayard anesthetized and temporarily 
incapable of further harm; and when Miss Jenny and Nar- 
/ cissa drove unsuspectingly up the drive an hour later, he 
| was bandaged and conscious again. They had not heard of it. 
_ Miss Jenny did not recognize Dr. Alford’s car standing in the 
_ drive, but she had one look at the strange motor. 
“That fool has killed himself at last,” she said, and she 
_ got out of Narcissa’s machine and sailed into the house 
and up the stairs. 
Bayard lay white and still and a little sheepish in his 
bed. Old Bayard and the doctor were just leaving, and 
Miss Jenny waited until they were out of the room. Then 


180 : WILLIAM FAULKNER} 


she raged and stormed at him and stroked his hair while: 
Simon. bobbed and mowed in the corner between bed and! 
wall. “Dasso, Miss Jenny, dasso! I kep’ a-tellin’ ’im!” 

She left him then and descended to the veranda where: 
Dr. Alford stood in impeccable departure. Old Bayard sat: 
in the car waiting for him, and on Miss Jenny’s appearance: 
he became his stiff self again and completed his departing, , 
and he and old Bayard drove away. i 

Miss Jenny also looked up and down the veranda, then. 
into the hall. “Where—” she said; then she called, “Nar- | 
cissa.” A reply. “Where are you?” she added. The reply came ' 
again, and Miss Jenny reéntered the house and saw Nar-— 
cissa’s white dress in the gloom where she sat on the piano 
bench. “He’s awake,” Miss Jenny said. “You can come up | 
and see him.” The other rose and turned her face to the — 
light. “Why, what’s the matter?” Miss Jenny demanded. “You | 
look lots worse than he does. You’re white as a sheet.” 

“Nothing,” the other answered. “I *” She stared at Miss 
Jenny a moment, clenching her hands at her sides. “I must — 
go,” she said, and she emerged into the hall. “It’s late, 
and Horace...” | 

“You can come up and speak to him, can’t you?” Miss 
Jenny asked, curiously. “There’s not any blood, if that’s 
‘what you are afraid of.” 

“It isn’t that,” Narcissa answered. “I’m not afraid.” 

Miss Jenny approached her, piercing and curious. “Why, 
all right,” she said kindly, “if you'd rather not. I just 
thought: perhaps you’d like to see he’s all right, as long as 
you're here. But don’t if you don’t feel like it.” 

“Yes. Yes. I feel like it. I want to.” She passed Miss 
Jenny and went on. At the foot of the stairs she paused 
until Miss Jenny came up behind her; then she went on, 
mounting swiftly and with her face averted. 

“What’s the matter with you?” Miss Jenny demanded, try- 
ing to see the other’s face. “What’s happened to you? Have 
you gone and fallen in love with him?” 

“In love . . . him? Bayard?” She paused, then hurried 
on, clutching the rail. She began to laugh thinly, and put 
her other hand to her mouth. Miss Jenny mounted beside 
her, piercing and curious and cold. Narcissa hurried on. At 
the stairhead she stopped again, still with her face averted, 
and let Miss Jenny pass her, and just without the door 


SARTORIS I81 


she stopped and leaned against it, throttling her laughter 
and her trembling. Then she entered the room, where Miss 
Jenny stood beside the bed, watching her. 

There was a sickish-sweet lingering of ether in the room, 
and she approached the bed blindly and stood beside it 
with her hidden clenched hands. Bayard’s head was pallid 
and calm, like a chiseled mask brushed lightly over with 
his spent violence, and he was watching her, and for a 
while she gazed at him; and Miss Jenny and the room and 
all, swam away. 

“You beast, you beast,” she cried thinly, “why must you 
_ always do these things where I’ve got to see you?” 

“I didn’t know you were there,” Bayard answered mildly, 

with weak astonishment. 


Every few days, by Miss Jenny’s request, she came out 
| and sat beside his bed and read to him. He cared nothing 
' at all about books; it is doubtful if he had ever read a 
book on his own initiative, but he would lie motionless 
in his cast while her grave contralto voice went on and 
on in the quiet room. Sometimes he tried to talk to her, 
but she ignored his attempts and read on; if he persisted, 
she went away and left him. So he soon learned to lie, 
usually with his eyes closed, voyaging alone in the bleak 
and barren regions of his despair, while her voice flowed 
on and on above the remoter sounds that came up to them 
—Miss Jenny scolding Isom or Simon downstairs or in the 
garden, the twittering of birds in the tree just beyond the 
window, the ceaseless groaning of the water pump below 
the barn. At times she would cease and look at him and 
find that he was peacefully sleeping. 


J 


Old man Falls came through the lush green of early June, 
came into town through the yet horizontal sunlight of morn- 
ing, and in his dusty, neat overalls he now sat opposite 
old Bayard in immaculate linen and a geranium like a merry 
wound, The room was cool and still, with the clear morning 


182 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


light and the casual dust of the Negro janitor’s infrequent . 
disturbing. Now that old Bayard was aging and what with 
the deaf tenor of his stiffening ways, he was showing more 
and more a preference for surrounding himself with things 
of a like nature; showing an incredible aptitude for choosing 
servants who shaped their days to his in a sort of pottering 
and hopeless futility. The janitor, who dubbed old Bayard 
General, and whom old Bayard, and the other clients for 
whom he performed seemingly interminable duties of a sloy- 
enly and minor nature, addressed as Doctor Jones, was one 
of these. He was black and stooped with querulousness and 
age, and he took advantage of every one who would permit 
him, and old Bayard swore at him all the time he was 
around and allowed him to steal his tobacco and the bank’s 
winter supply of coal by the scuttleful and peddle it to other 
Negroes. 

The window behind which old Bayard and his caller sat 
gave upon a vacant lot of rubbish and dusty weeds. It was 
bounded by weathered rears of sundry one-story board build- 
ings in which small businesses—repair- and junk-shops and 
such—had their lowly and ofttimes anonymous being. The 
lot itself was used by day by country people as a depot for 
their teams. Already some of these were tethered somnolent 
and ruminant there, and about the stale ammoniac droppings 
of their patient generations sparrows swirled in garrulous 
clouds, or pigeons slanted with sounds like rusty shutters 
and strode and preened in burnished and predatory pom- 
posity, crooning among themselves with guttural unemphasis. 

Old man Falls sat on the opposite side of the trash- 
filled fireplace, mopping his face with a clean blue bandana. 

“It’s my damned old legs,’ he roared, faintly apologetic. 
“Used to be I'd walk twelve-fifteen mile to a picnic or a 
singin’ with less study than what that ’ere little old three 
mile into town gives me now.” He mopped the handker- 
chief about that face of his, browned and cheerful these 
many years with the simple and abounding earth. “Looks 
like they’re fixin’ to give out on me, and I ain’t but ninety- 
three, neither.” He held his parcel in his other hand, but he 
continued to mop his face, making no motion to open it. 

“Why didn’t you wait on the road until a wagon came 
along?” Old Bayard shouted. “Always some damn feller 
with a fieldful of weeds coming to town.” 


SARTORIS 183 


“TJ reckon I mought,” the other agreed. “But gittin’ here 
so quick would sp’ile my holiday. I ain’t like you town folks. 
I ain’t got so much time I kin hurry it.” He stowed the hand- 
kerchief away and rose and laid his parcel carefully on the 
mantel, and from his shirt pocket he produced a small object 
wrapped in a clean, frayed rag. Beneath his tedious and un- 
hurried fingers there emerged a tin snuff-box polished long 
since to the dull, soft sheen of silver by handling and age. 
Old Bayard sat and watched, watched quietly as the other 
removed the cap of the box and put this, too, carefully 
aside. 

“Now, turn yo’ face up to the light,” old man Falls di- 
rected. 

“Loosh Peabody says that stuff will give me blood-poison- 
ing, Will.” 

The other continued his slow preparations, his blue in- 
nocent eyes raptly preoccupied. “Loosh Peabody never said 
that,” he corrected quietly. “One of them young doctors told 
you that, Bayard. Lean yo’ face to the light.” Old Bayard 
sat tautly back in his chair, his hands on the arms of it, 
watching the other with his piercing old eyes soberly, a little 
wistfully; eyes filled with unnamable things, like the eyes of 
old lions, and intent. 

Old man Falls poised a dark gob of his ointment on one 
finger and set the box carefully on his vacated chair, and 
put his hand on old Bayard’s face. But old Bayard still re- 
sisted, though passively, watching him with unutterable 
things in his eyes. Old man Falls drew his face firmly and 
gently into the light from the window. 

“Come on here. I ain’t young enough to waste time hurtin’ 
folks. Hold still, now, so I won’t spot yo’ face un. My hand 
ain’t steady enough to lift a rifle-ball offen a hot stove-led 
no mo’.” 

Bayard submitted then, and old man Falls patted the 
salve on to the spot with small deft touches. Then he took 
the bit of cloth and removed the surplus from Bayard’s 
face and wiped his fingers and dropped the rag onto the 
hearth and knelt stiffly and touched a match to it. “We allus 
do that,” he explained. “My granny got that ’ere from a 
Choctow woman nigh a hundred and thutty year ago. Ain’t 
none of us never told what hit air, nor left no after-trace.” 
He rose stiffly and dusted his knees. He recapped the box 


184 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


with the same unhurried care and put it away, and picked 
up his parcel from the mantel and resumed his chair. 

“Hit’ll turn black tomorrer, and long’s hit’s black, hit’s: 
workin’. Don’t put no water on yo’ face befo’ mawnin’, and 
I’li come in again in ten days and dose hit again, and on— 
the’—he mused a moment, counting slowly on his gnarled 
fingers; his lips moved, but with no sound—“the ninth day of 
July, hit’ll drap off. And don’t you let Miss Jenny nor none of 
them doctors worry you about hit.” 

He sat with his knees together. The parcel lay on his 
knees and he now opened it after the ancient laborious ritual, 
picking patiently at the pink knot until a younger person 
would have screamed at him. Old Bayard merely lit a cigar 
and propped his feet against the fireplace, and in good time 
old man Falls solved the knot and removed the string and 
laid it across his chair-arm. It fell to the floor and he bent 
and fumbled it into his blunt fingers and laid it again across 
the chair-arm and watched it a moment lest it fail again; then 
he opened the parcel. First was his carton of tobacco, and 
he removed a plug and sniffed it, turned it in his hand and 
sniffed it again. But without biting into it he laid it and its 
fellows aside and delved yet further. He spread open the 
throat of the resulting paper bag, and his innocent boy’s 
eyes gloated soberly into it. 

“Til declare,” he said, “sometimes I’m right ashamed for 
havin’ sech a consarned sweet tooth. Hit don’t give me no 
rest’ a-tall.” Still carefully guarding the other objects on his 
knees, he tilted the sack and shook two or three of the 
striped, shrimplike things into his palm, and returned all but 
one, which he put in his mouth. “I’m a-feard now I'll be 
losin’ my teeth some day and I’ll have to start gummin’ ’em 
or eatin’ soft ones. I never did relish soft candy.” His leathery 
cheek bulged slightly with slow regularity like a respira- 
tion. He peered into the sack again, and he sat weighing it 
in his hand. 

“They was times back in sixty-three and -fo’ when a feller 
could ’a’ bought a section of land and a couple of niggers 
with this here bag of candy. Lots of times I mind, with 
everthing goin’ agin us like, and sugar and cawfee gone 
and food sca’ce, eatin’ stole cawn when they was any to 
steal, and ditch weeds ef they wa’n’t; bivouackin’ at night 
in the rain, more’n like . . .” His voice trailed away among 


SARTORIS 185 


ancient phantoms of the soul’s and body’s fortitudes, in those 
regions of glamorous and useless striving where such ghosts 
abide. He chuckled and mouthed his peppermint again. 

“T mind that day we was a-dodgin’ around Grant’s army, 
headin’ nawth. Grant was at Grenada then, and Cunnel had 
rousted us boys out and we taken hoss and jined Van Dorn 
down that-a-way. That was when Cunnel had that ’ere silver 
| stallion. Grant was still at Grenada, but Van Dorn lit out 
one day, headin’ nawth. Why, us boys didn’t know. Cunnel 
mought have knowed, but he never told us. Not that we 
keered much, long’s we was headin’ to’a’ds home. 

“So our boys was ridin’ along to ourselves, goin’ to jine 
up with the balance of ’em later. Leastways the rest of ’em 
thought we was goin’ to jine ’°em. But Cunnel never had no 
idea of doin’ that; his cawn hadn’t been laid by yit, and he 
was goin’ home fer a spell. We wa’n’t runnin’ away,” he ex- 
plained. “We knowed Van Dorn could handle ’em all right 
fer a week or two. He usually done it. He was a putty good 
man,” old man Falls said, “a putty good man.” 

“They were all pretty good men in those days,” old 
Bayard agreed. “But you damn fellers quit fighting and went 
home too often.” 

“Well,” old man Falls rejoined defensively, “even ef 
the hull country’s overrun with bears, a feller can’t hunt 
bears all the time. He’s got to quit once in a while, ef hit’s 

only to rest up the dawgs and hosses. But I reckon them 
dawgs and hosses could stay on the trail long as any,” he 
added with sober pride. “’Course ever’body couldn’t keep 
up with that ’ere mist-colored stallion. They wasn’t but one 
animal in the Confedrit army could tech him—that last 
hoss Zeb Fothergill fotch back outen one of Sherman’s 
cavalry pickets on his last trip into Tennessee. 

“Nobody never did know what Zeb done on them trips 
of hisn. Cunnel claimed hit was jest to steal hosses. But 
he never got back with less ’en one. One time he come back 
with seven of the orneriest critters that ever walked, I reckon. 
He tried to swap ’em fer meat and cawn-meal, but wouldn’t 
nobody have ’em. Then he tried to give ’em to the army, but 
even the army wouldn’t have ’em. So he finally turned ’em 
loose and requisitioned to Joe Johnston’s haidquarters fer ten 
hosses sold to Forrest’s cavalry. I don’t know ef he ever 

got air answer. Nate Forrest wouldn’t ’a’ had them hosses. I 


186 WILLIAM FAULKNER . 


doubt ef they’d even ’a’ et ’em in Vicksburg. . . . I never did | 


put no big reliability in Zeb Fothergill, him comin’ and! 


goin’ by hisself like he done. But he knowed hosses, and he: 


usually fotch a good ’un home ever’ time he went away to’a’ds | 


3 393 


the war. But he never got another’n like this befo’. 


The bulge was gone from his cheek, and he produced his — 
pocket knife and cut a neat segment from his plug of to- | 
bacco and lipped it from the knife-blade. Then he rewrapped | 
his parcel and tied the string about it. The ash of old | 
Bayard’s cigar trembled delicately about its glowing heart, 


but did not yet fall. 


Old man Falls spat neatly and brownly into the cold — 


fireplace. “That day we was in Calhoun county,” he con- 
tinued. “Hit was as putty a summer mawnin’ as you ever 
see; men and hosses rested and fed and feelin’ peart, 
trottin’ along the road through the woods and fields whar 
birds was a-singin’ and young rabbits lopin’ acrost the road. 
Cunnel and Zeb was ridin’ along side by side on them two 
hosses, Cunnel on Jupiter and Zeb on that sorrel two-year- 
old, and they was a-braggin’ as usual. We all knowed Cunnel’s 
Jupiter, but Zeb kep’ a-contendin’ that he wouldn’t take no 
man’s dust. The road was putty straight across the bottom 
to’a’ds the river and Zeb kep’ a-aggin’ the Cunnel fer a race, 
until Cunnel says ‘All right.’ He told the boys to come on 
and him and Zeb would wait fer us at the river bridge *bout 
fo’ mile ahead, and him and Zeb lined up and lit out. 
“Them hosses was the puttiest livin’ things I ever see. 
They went off together like two hawks, neck and neck. They 
was outen sight in no time, with dust swirlin’ behind, but we 
could foller °em fer a ways by the dust they left, watchin’ 
it kind of suckin’ on down the road like one of these here 
ottomobiles was in the middle of it. When they come to whar 
the road drapped down to the river, Cunnel had Zeb beat by 


about three hundred yards. Thar was a spring-branch jest _ 


under the ridge, and when Cunnel sailed over the rise, thar 
was a comp’ny of Yankee cavalry with their hosses picketed 
and their muskets stacked, eatin’ dinner by the spring. Cunnel 
says they was a-settin’ thar gapin’ at the rise when he come 
over hit, holdin’ cups of cawfee and hunks of bread in 
their hands and their muskets stacked about fo’ty foot away, 
buggin’ their eyes at him. 

“It was too late fer him to turn back, anyhow, but I don’t 


SARTORIS 187 


reckon he would have ef they’d been time. He jest spurred 
down the ridge and rid in amongst ’em, scatterin’ cook-fires 
and guns and men, shoutin’, ‘Surround ’em, boys! Ef you 
/ move, you air dead men.’ One or two of ’em made to break 
away, but Cunnel drawed his pistols and let ’em off, and they 
come back and scrouged in amongst the others, and thar they 
Set, still a-holdin’ their dinner, when Zeb come up. And that 
was the way we found ’em when we got thar ten minutes 
- later.” Old man Falls spat again, neatly and brownly, and he 
chuckled. His eyes shone like periwinkles. “That cawfee was 
sho’ mighty fine,” he added. 

“And thar we was, with a passel of prisoners we didn’t 
have no use fer. We held ’em all that day and et their 
grub; and when night come we taken and throwed their 
muskets into the branch and taken their ammunition and the 
rest of the grub and put a gyard on their hosses; then the rest 
of us laid down. And all that night we laid thar in them fine 
Yankee blankets, listenin’ to them prisoners sneakin’ away 
one at a time, slippin’ down the bank into the branch and 
wading off. Time to time one would slip er make a splash 
er somethin’; then they’d all git right still fer a spell. But 
putty soon we’d hear ’em at it again, crawlin’ through the 
bushes to’a’ds the water, and us layin’ thar with blanket- 
aidges held agin our faces. Hit was nigh dawn ’fore the 
last one had snuck off in a way that suited ’em. 

“Then Cunnel from whar he was a-layin’ let out a yell 
them pore critters could hear fer a mile. 

“Go it, Yank,’ he says, ‘and look out fer moccasins!’ 

“Next mawnin’ we saddled up and loaded our plunder and 
ever’ man taken him a hoss and lit out fer home. We’d been 
home two weeks and Cunnel had his cawn laid by, when 
we heard ’bout Van Dorn ridin’ into Holly Springs and burnin’ 
Grant’s sto’s. Seems like he never needed no help from us, 
noways.” He chewed his tobacco for a time, quietly ret- 
rospective, reliving, in the company of men now dust with 
the dust for which they had, unwittingly perhaps, fought, 
those gallant, pinch-bellied days into which few who now 
trod that earth could enter with him. 

Old Bayard shook the ash from his cigar. “Will,” he said, 
“what the devil were you folks fighting about, anyhow?” 

“Bayard,” old man Falls answered, “be damned ef I ever 
did know.” 


188 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


After old man Falls had departed with his small parcel — 


and his innocently bulging cheek, old Bayard sat and smoked 
his cigar. Presently he raised his hand and touched the wen 
on his face, but lightly, remembering old man Falls’ parting 


stricture; and recalling this, the thought that it might not yet — 
be too late, that he might yet remove the paste with water, 


followed. . 


He rose and crossed to the lavatory in the corner of the 


room. Above it was fixed a small cabinet with a mirror in the | 
door, and in it he examined the black spot on his cheek, | 


touching it again with his fingers, then examining his 
hand. Yes, it might still come off. .. . But be damned if he 
would; be damned to a man who didn’t know his own mind. 
He flung his cigar away and quitted the room and tramped 
through the lobby toward the door where his chair sat. But 
before he reached the door he turned about and came up to 
the cashier’s window, behind which the cashier sat in a green 
eyeshade. 

“Res,” he said. 

The cashier looked up. “Yes, Colonel?” 

“Who is that damn boy that hangs around here, looking 
through that window all day?” Old Bayard lowered his voice 
Within a pitch or so of an ordinary conversational tone. 

“What boy, Colonel?” 

Old Bayard pointed, and the cashier raised himself on 
his stool and peered over the partition and saw, beyond the 
indicated window, a boy of ten or twelve watching him 
with an innocent and casual air. “Oh. That’s Will Beard’s 
boy, from up at the boarding-house,” he shouted. “Friend 
of Byron’s, I think.” 

“What’s he doing around here? Every time I walk through 
here, there he is looking in that window. What does he 
want?” 

“Maybe he’s a bank robber,” the cashier suggested. 

“What?” Old Bayard cupped his ear fiercely in his palm. 

“Maybe he’s a bank robber,” the other shouted, leaning 
forward on his stool. Old Bayard snorted and tramped 
violently on and slammed his chair back against the door. The 
cashier sat lumped and shapeless on his stool, rumbling 
deep within his gross body. He said without turning his 
head: “Colonel’s let Will Falls treat him with that salve.” 
Snopes at his desk made no reply; did not raise his head. 


So ae 


, SARTORIS 189 


| After a time the boy moved, and drifted casually and in- 
| nocently away. 


Virgil Beard now possessed a pistol that projected a stream 


» of ammoniac water excruciatingly painful to the eyes, a 


small magic lantern, and an ex-candy showcase in which 
he kept birds’ eggs and an assortment of insects that had 


| died slowly on pins, and a modest hoard of nickels and 


dimes. 

In July Snopes had changed his domicile. He avoided 
Virgil on the street and so for two weeks he had not seen 
the boy at all, until one evening after supper he emerged 
from the front door of his new abode and found Virgil 
sitting blandly and politely on the front steps. 

“Hi, Mr. Snopes,” Virgil said. 


6 


Miss Jenny’s exasperation and rage when old Bayard arrived 
home that afternoon was unbounded. “You stubborn old 
fool,” she stormed, “can’t Bayard kill you fast enough that 
you’ve got to let that old quack of a Will Falls give you blood 
poisoning? After what Dr. Alford told you, when even Loosh 
Peabody, who thinks a course of quinine or calomel will cure 
anything from a broken neck to chilblains, agreed with 
him? Til declare, sometimes I just lose patience with you 
folks; wonder what crime I seem to be expiating by having 
to live with you. Soon as Bayard sort of quiets down and I 
can quit jumping every time the phone rings, you have to 
go and let that old pauper daub your face up with axle 
grease and lampblack. I’m a good mind to pack up and 
get out, and start life over in some place where they never 
heard of a Sartoris.” She raged and stormed on; old Bayard 
raged in reply, with violent words and profane, and their 
voices swelled and surged through the house until Elnora and 
Simon in the kitchen moved furtively, with cocked ears. 
Finally old Bayard tramped from the house and mounted his 
horse and rode away, leaving Miss Jenny to wear her rage 


190 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


out upon the empty air, and then there was peace for a 
time. 

But at supper the storm brewed and burst again. Behind 
the swing door of the butler’s pantry Simon could hear them, 
and. young Bayard too, trying. to shout them down. “Let | 
up, let up,” he howled, “for God’s sake. I can’t hear myself _ 
chew, even.” i 

“And you’re another one.” Miss Jenny turned promptly | 
upon him. “You’re just as trying as he is. You and your | 
stiff-necked, sullen ways. Helling around the country in that © 
car just because you think there may be somebody who cares — 
a whoop whether or not you break your worthless neck, and © 
then coming in to the supper-table smelling like a stable 
hand! Just because you went to a war. Do you think you’re | 
the only person in the world that ever went to a war? Do 
you reckon that when my Bayard came back from The War | 
that he made a nuisance of himself to everybody that had to 
live with him? But he was a gentleman: he raised the devil — 
like a gentleman, not like you Mississippi country people. 
Clod-hoppers. Look what he did with just a horse,” she 
added. “He didn’t need any flying-machine.” 

“Look at the little two-bit war he went to,” young Bayard 
rejoined, “a war that was so sorry that grandfather wouldn’t 
even stay up there in Virginia where it was.” 

“And nobody wanted him at it,” Miss Jenny retorted, “a 
man that would get mad just because his men deposed him 
and elected a better colonel in his place. Got mad and 
came back to the country to lead a bunch of red-neck brig- 
ands.” 

“Little two-bit war,” young Bayard repeated, “and on a 
horse. Anybody can go to a war on a horse. No chance for 
him to do much of anything.” 

“At least he got himself decently killed,” Miss Jenny 
snapped. “He did more with a horse than you could do 
with that aeroplane.” 

“Sho’,” Simon breathed against the pantry door. “Ain’t 
dey gwine it? Takes white folks to sho’ ’nough quoil.” 

And so it surged and ebbed through the succeeding days; 
wore itself out, then surged again when old Bayard re- 
turned home with another application of salve. But by this 
time Simon was having troubles of his own, troubles on 
which he finally consulted old Bayard one afternoon. Young 


SARTORIS 19] 


Bayard was laid up in bed with his crushed ribs, with Miss 
Jenny mothering him with savage and cherishing affection 
and Miss Benbow to visit with him and read aloud to 
him, and Simon had come into his own again. The top hat 
and the duster came down from the nail, and old Bayard’s 
' cigars depleted daily by one, and the fat matched horses 
spent their accumulated laziness between home and the bank, 
| before which Simon swung them to a halt each afternoon 
as of old, with his clamped cigar and smartly-furled whip 
and all the theatrics of the fine moment. “De ottomobile,” 
' Simon philosophized, “is all right fer pleasure en excite- 
ment, but fer de genu-wine gentlemun tone, dey ain’t but 
one thing: dat’s hosses.” 

Thus Simon’s opportunity came ready to his hand, and 
once they were clear of town and the team had settled into 
its gait, he took advantage of it. 

“Well, Cunnel,” he began, “looks like me en you’s got to 
make some financial ’rangements.” 

“What?” Old Bayard brought his attention back from where 
it wandered about the familiar planted fields and the blue, 
shining hills beyond. 

“T says it looks like me en you’s got to arrange erbout 
a little cash money.” 

“Much obliged, Simon,” old Bayard answered, “but I dante 
need any money right now. Much obliged, though.” 

Simon laughed heartily. “I declare, Cunnel, you sho’ is 
comical. Rich man like you needin’ money!” Again he 
laughed, with unctuous and abortive heartiness. “Yes, suh, 
you sho’ is comical.” Then he ceased laughing and be- 
came engrossed with the horses for a moment. Twins they 
were: Roosevelt and Taft, with sleek hides and broad, com- 
fortable buttocks. “You, Taf’, lean on dat collar! Laziness 
gwine go in on you some day en kill you, sho’.”” Old Bayard 
sat watching his apelike head and the swaggering tilt of the 
top hat. Simon turned his wizened, plausible face over his 
shoulder again. “But sho’ ’nough, now, we is got to quiet dem 
niggers somehow.” 

“What have they done? Can’t they find anybody to take 
their money?” 

“Well, suh, hit’s like dis,” Simon explained. “Hit’s kind of 
all ‘round cu’i’s. You see, dey been collectin’ buildin’ 
money fer dat church whut burnt down, en ez dey got de 


192 WILLIAM FAULKNER | 


money up, dey turnt hit over ter me, whut wid my ’ficial | 
position on de church boa’d en bein’ I wuz a member of de: 
bes’ fambly round here. Dat ’uz erbout las’ Chris’mus time, , 
en now dey wants de money back.” 

“That’s strange,” old Bayard said. - 

“Yessuh,” Simon agreed readily. “Hit struck me jes’ 
*zackly dat way.” 

“Well, if they insist, I reckon you’d better give it back to — 
em.” . 

“Now, you’s gittin’ to it.” Simon turned his head again; | 
his manner was confidential, and he exploded his bomb in a | 
hushed, melodramatic tone: “De money’s gone.” ) 

“Dammit, I know that,” old Bayard answered, his levity 
suddenly gone. “Where is it?” 

“I went and put it out,” Simon told him, and his tone | 
was still confidential, with a little pained astonishment at | 
the world’s obtuseness. “And now dem niggers ’cusin’ me of 
stealin’ it.” | 

“Do you mean to tell me you took charge of money be- 
longing to other people, and then went and loaned it to 
somebody else?” 

“You does de same thing ev’ry day,” Simon answered. 
“Ain’t lendin’ money yo’ main business?” 

Old Bayard snorted violently. “You get that money back 
and give it to those niggers, or you'll be in jail, you hear?” 

“You talks jes’ like dem uppity town niggers,” Simon 
told him in a pained tone. “Dat money done been put out, 
now,” he reminded his patron. 

“Get it back. Haven’t you got collateral for it?” 

“Is I got which?” 

“Something worth the money, to keep until the money is 
paid back.” 

“Yessuh, I got dat.” Simon chuckled again, unctuously, 
a satyrish chuckle rich with complacent innuendo. “Yes- 
suh, I got dat, all right. Only I never heard hit called col- 
lateral befo’. Naw, suh, not dat.” 

“Did you give that money to some nigger wench?” old 
Bayard demanded. 

“Well, suh, hit’s like dis—” Simon began. But the other 
interrupted him. 

“Ah, the devil. And now you expect me to pay it back, 
do you? How much was it?” 


| SARTORIS 193 


“T don’t rightly ricollick. Dem niggers claims hit wuz 
sevumty er ninety dollars er somethin’. But don’t you pay 
*um no mind; you jes’ give ’um whutever you think is right: 
dey’ll take it.” 

“Tm damned if I will. They can take it out of your 
worthless hide, or send you to jail—whichever they want 
to, but I’m damned if Ill pay one cent of it.” 

“Now, Cunnel,” Simon said, “you ain’t gwine let dem 
town niggers ’cuse a member of yo’ fambly of stealin’, is 
you?” 

“Drive on!” old Bayard shouted. Simon turned on the 
seat and clucked to the horses and drove on, his cigar 
tilted toward his hat-brim, his elbows out and the whip 
_ caught smartly back in his hand, glancing now and then 
with tolerant and easy scorn at the field niggers laboring 
| among the cotton-rows. 


Old man Falls replaced the cap on his tin of salve, wiped 
| the tin carefully with the bit of rag, then knelt on the cold 
hearth and held a match to the rag. 

“I reckon them doctors air still a-tellin’ you hit’s gwine 
to kill you, ain’t they?” he asked. 

Old Bayard propped his feet against the hearth, cupping 
a match to his cigar, cupping two tiny match-flames in 

his eyes. He flung the match away and grunted. 

Old man Falls watched the rag take fire sluggishly, with a 
pungent pencil of yellowish smoke that broke curling in the 
still air. “Ever’ now and then a feller has to walk up and 
spit in deestruction’s face, sort of, fer his own good. He has 
to kind of put a aidge on hisself, like he’d hold his ax to the 
grindstone,” he said, squatting before the pungent curling of 
the smoke as though in a pagan ritual in miniature. “Ef a 
feller’ll show his face to deestruction ever’ now and then, 
deestruction’ll leave ’im be ’twell his time comes. Deestruc- 
tion likes to take a feller in the back.” 

“What?” old Bayard said. 

Old man Falls rose and dusted his knees carefully. 

“Deestruction’s like airy other coward,” he roared. “Hit 
won't strike a feller that’s a-lookin’ hit in the eye lessen he 
pushes hit too clost. Your paw knowed that. Stood in the 
do’ of that sto’ the day them two cyarpetbaggers brung them 
niggers in to vote ’em that day in ’72. Stood thar in his 


194 WILLIAM FAULKNER ~ 


Prince Albert coat and beaver hat, with his arms folded, 
when ever’body else had left, and watched them two Missouri 
fellers herdin’ them niggers up the road to’ds the sto’; stood 
right in the middle of the do’ while them two cyarpetbaggers 
begun backin’ off with their hands in their pockets until they 
was cl’ar of the niggers, and cussed him. And him standin’ - 
thar jest like this.” He crossed his arms on his breast, his 
hands in sight, and for a moment old Bayard saw, as 
through a cloudy glass, that arrogant and familiar shape 
which the old man in shabby overalls had contrived in 
some way to immolate and preserve in the vacuum of his 
own abnegated self. 

“Then, when they was gone on back down the road, 
Cunnel reached around inside the do’ and taken out the 
ballot-box and sot hit between his feet. 

“*You niggers come hyer to vote, did you?’ he says. ‘All 
right, come up hyer and vote.’ 
“When they had broke and scattered he let off that ‘ere 
dang der’nger over their heads a couple of times; then he 
loaded hit agin and marched down the road to Miz Winter- 

bottom’s, whar them two fellers boa’ded. 

“ “Madam, ’ he says, liftin’ his beaver, ‘I have a small matter — 
of business to discuss with yo’ lodgers. Permit me,’ he says, 
and he put his hat back on and marched up the stairs steady 
as a parade, with Miz Winterbottom gapin’ after him with 
her mouth open. He walked right into the room whar they 
Was a-settin’ behind. a table facin’ the do’, with their pistols 
layin’ on the table. 

“When us boys outside heard the three shots we run in. 
Thar wuz Miz Winterbottom standin’ thar, gapin’ up the 
Stairs, and in a minute hyer come Cunnel with his hat cocked 
over his eye, marchin’ down steady as a co’t jury, breshin’ the 
front of his coat with his hank’cher. And us standin’ thar, 
a-watchin’ him. He stopped in front of Miz Winterbottom and 
lifted his hat agin. 

“‘“Madam,’ he says, ‘I was fo’ced to muss up yo’ guest- 
Toom right considerable. Pray accept my apologies, and 
have yo’ nigger clean it up and send the bill to me. My 
apologies again, madam, fer havin’ been put to the necessity 
of exterminatin’ vermin on yo’ premises. Gentlemen,’ he says 
to us, ‘good mawnin’.’ And he cocked that ’ere beaver on his 
head and walked out. 


) SARTORIS 195 


/ “And, Bayard,” old man Falls said, “I sort of envied them 
‘two Nawthuners, be damned ef I didn’t. A feller kin take a 
' wife and live with her fer a long time, but after all they ain’t 
no kin. But the feller that brings you into the world or 
' sends you outen hit...” 


Where he lurked behind the pantry door Simon could 
| hear the steady storming of Miss Jenny’s and old Bayard’s 
voices; later when they had removed to the office and 
Elnora and Caspey and Isom sat about the table in the 
| Kitchen waiting for him, the concussion of Miss Jenny’s 
raging and old Bayard’s rocklike stubbornness came in 
muffled surges, as of far-away surf. 

“What de quoilin’ erbout now?” Caspey asked. “Is you 
been and done somethin’?” he demanded of his nephew. 

Isom rolled his eyes quietly above his steady jaws. “Naw, 
suh,” he mumbled. “I ain’t done nuthin’.” 

“Seems like dey’d git wo’ out, after a while. What’s pappy 
doin’, Elnora?” 

“Up dar in de hall, listenin’. Go tell ’im to come on and 

git his supper, so I kin git done, Isom.” 
Isom slid from his chair, still chewing, and left the 
kitchen. The steady raging of the two voices increased; 
where the shapeless figure of his grandfather stood like a 
disreputable and ancient bird in the dark hallway, Isom could 


distinguish words: poison ... blood .. . think you can cut 
_ your head off and cure it . . . fool put it on your foot 
but ... face head . . . dead and good riddance... 


fool of you dying because of your own bullheaded folly 
- - - you first lying on your back though... 

“You and that damn doctor are going to worry me to 
death.” Old Bayard’s voice drowned the other temporarily. 
“Will Falls won’t have a chance to kill me. I can’t sit in my 
chair in town without that damn squirt sidling around me 
and looking disappointed because I’m still alive on my feet. 
And when I get home, get away from him, you can’t even let 
me eat supper in peace. Have to show me a lot of damn 
colored pictures of what some fool thinks a man’s insides 
look like.” 

“Who gwine die, pappy?” Isom whispered. 

Simon turned his head. “Whut you hangin’ eround here 
fer, boy? Go’n back to dat kitchen, whar you belongs.” 


196 WILLIAM FAULKNER ( 


“Supper waitin’,” Isom said. “Who dyin’, pappy?” 

“Ain’t nobody dyin’. Does anybody soun’ dead? You git oni 
outen de house, now.” 

Together they returned down the hall and entered the: 
kitchen. Behind them the voices raged and stormed, blurred a1 
little by walls, but dominant and unequivocal. 

“Whut dey fightin’ erbout now?” Caspey, chewing, asked. , 

“Dat’s white folks’ bizness,” Simon told him. “You tend. 
to yo’n, and dey’ll git erlong all right.” He sat down 
and Elnora rose and filled a cup from the coffee-pot on the » 
stove and brought it to him. “White folks got dey troubles — 
same as niggers is. Gimme dat dish o’ meat, boy.” | 

In the house the storm ran its nightly course, ceased as 
though by mutual consent, both parties still firmly en- 
trenched; resumed at the supper table the next evening. And | 
so on, day after day, until in the second week in July and 
six days after young Bayard had been fetched home with his 
chest crushed, Miss Jenny and old Bayard and Dr. Alford 
went to Memphis to consult a well-known authority on blood - 
and glandular diseases with whom Dr. Alford, with some 
difficulty, had made a formal engagement. Young Bayard lay 
upstairs in his cast, but Narcissa Benbow had promised to 
come out and keep him company during the day. 

Between the two of them they got old Bayard on the early 
train, still protesting profanely, like a stubborn and be- 
wildered ox. There were others who knew them in the car 
and who remarked Dr. Alford’s juxtaposition and became 
curious and solicitous. Old Bayard took these opportunities 
to assert himself again, with violent rumblings which Miss 
Jenny ignored. 

They took him, like a sullen small boy, to the clinic where 
the specialist was to meet them, and in a room resembling an 
easy and informal summer hotel lobby they sat among quiet, 
Waiting people talking in whispers, and an untidy clutter 
of papers and magazines, waiting for the specialist to arrive. 
They waited a long time. 

Meanwhile from time to time, Dr. Alford assaulted the 
impregnable affability of the woman at the switchboard, 
was repulsed, and returned and sat stiffly beside his pa- 
tient, aware that with every minute he was losing ground in 
Miss Jenny’s opinion of him. Old Bayard was cowed too, by 
now, though occasionally he rumbled hopefully at Miss Jenny. 


ARTORIS 197 


“Oh, stop swearing at me,” she interrupted him at last. 
“You can’t walk out now. Here, here’s the morning paper— 
take it, and be quiet.” 

Then the specialist entered briskly and went to the switch- 
oard woman, where Dr. Alford saw him and rose and went 
him. The specialist turned—a brisk, dapper man, who 
oved with arrogant, jerky motions, as though he were 
ercising with a smallsword, and who in turning almost 
tepped on Dr. Alford. He gave Dr. Alford a glassy, im- 
atient stare; then he shook his hand and broke into a high, 
lesiccated burst of words. “On the dot, I see. Promptness. 
Promptness. That’s good. Patient here? Stood the trip all 
ight, did she?” 

“Yes, Doctor, he’s 4 
“Good; good. Undressed and all ready, eh?” 

“The patient is a m a 
“Just a moment.” The specialist turned. “Oh, Mrs. Smith.” 
“Yes, Doctor,” The woman at the switchboard did not 
aise her head, and at that moment another specialist of 
some kind, a large one, with a majestic, surreptitious air like 
a royal undertaker, entered and stopped Dr. Alford, and 
for a while the two of them rumbled and rattled at one 
another while Dr. Alford stood ignored near by, fuming 
stiffly and politely, feeling himself sinking lower and lower 
in Miss Jenny’s opinion of his professional status. Then the 
two specialists had done, and Dr. Alford led his man toward 
the patient. 

“Got the patient all ready, you say? Good; good; save 
time. Lunching down town today. Had lunch yourself?” 

“No, Doctor. But the patient is a 3 
' “Dare say not,” the specialist agreed. “Plenty of time, 
though.” He turned briskly toward a curtained exit, but Dr. 

Alford took his arm firmly but courteously and halted him. 
Old Bayard was reading the paper. Miss Jenny was watching 
them frigidly, her bonnet on the exact top of her head. 

“Mrs. Du Pre; Colonel Sartoris,” Dr. Alford said, “this 
is Dr. Brandt. Colonel Sartoris is your p i 

“How d’ye do? How d’ye do? Come along with the pa- 
tient, eh? Daughter? Granddaughter?” Old Bayard looked up. 

_ “What?” he said, cupping his ear, and found the specialist 
Staring at his face. 

“What’s that on your face?” he demanded, jerking his 


198 WILLIAM FAULKNEE 


hand forth and touching the blackened excrescence. Whe« 
he did so the thing came off in his fingers, leaving on oll) 
Bayard’s withered but unblemished cheek a round spot o 
skin rosy and fair as any baby’s. 

On the train that evening old Bayard, who had sat for 
long time in deep thought, spoke suddenly. 

“Jenny, what day of the month is this?” 

“The ninth,” Miss Jenny answered. “Why?” . 

Old Bayard sat for a while longer. Then he rose. “Thini 
Pll go up and smoke a cigar,” he said. “I reckon a litti! 
tobacco won’t hurt me, will it, Doctor?” | 

Three weeks later they got a bill from the specialist fo: 
fifty dollars. “Now I know why he’s so well known,” Miss 
Jenny said acidly. Then to her nephew: “You better thank 
your stars it wasn’t your hat he lifted off.” 

Toward Dr. Alford her manner is fiercely and belligerenti 
protective; to old man Falls she gives the briefest and coldes: 
of nods and sails on with her nose in air; but to Loosh Pea: 
body she does not speak at all. 


/ 


She passed from the fresh, hot morning into the cool hall: 
where Simon, uselessly and importantly proprietorial witt 
a duster, bobbed his head to her. “Dey done gone to Mem: 
phis today,” he told her. “But Mist’ Bayard waitin’ fer you: 
Walk right up, Missy.” 

“Thank you,” she answered, and she went on anc 
mounted the stairs and left him busily wafting dust from one 
surface to another and then back again. She mounted intc 
a steady draft of air that blew through the open door: 
at the end of the hall. Through these doors she could see 
a segment of blue hills and salt-colored sky. At Bayard’: 
door she stopped and stood there for a time, clasping the 
book to her breast. 

The house, despite Simon’s activity in the hall below 
was a little portentously quiet without the reassurance 0! 
Miss Jenny’s bustling presence. Faint sounds reached her from 
far away—out-of-door sounds whose final drowsy rever: 


SARTORIS 199 


berations drifted into the house on the vivid July air; sounds 


too somnolent and remote to die away. 
But from the room before her no sound came at all. 
Perhaps he was asleep, and the initial impulse—her passed 


' word, and the fortitude of her desperate heart which had 


enabled her to come out despite Miss Jenny’s absence 
—having served its purpose and deserted her, she stood just 


| without the door, hoping that he was asleep, that he would 
Sleep all day. 


But she would have to enter the room in order to find if he 
slept, so she touched her hands to her face, as though by 
that she would restore to it its wonted serene repose for him 
to see, and entered. 

“Simon?” Bayard said. He lay on his back, his hands be- 


| neath his head, gazing out the window across the room, 


and she paused again just within the door. At last, roused by 
her silence, he turned his héad and his bleak gaze. “Well, 


' I’m damned. I didn’t believe you’d come out today.” 


“Yes,” she answered. “How do you feel?” 
“Not after the way you sit with one foot in the hall all 
the time Aunt Jenny’s out of the room,” he continued. “Did 


| she make you come anyway?” 


“She asked me to come out. She doesn’t want you to be 


' alone all day, with just Simon in the house. Do you feel 
better today?” 


“So?” he drawled. “Won’t you sit down, then?” She crossed 
to where her customary chair had been moved into a corner 
and drew it across the floor. He was watching her as she 
turned the chair about and seated herself. “What do you 
think about it?” 

“About what?” 

“About coming out to keep me company.” 

“I’ve brought a new book,” she said. “One H— one I just 
got. I hope you'll like this one.” 

“I hope so,” he agreed, but without conviction. “Seems 
like I’d like one after a while, don’t it? But what do you think 
about coming out here today?” 

“I don’t think a sick person should be left alone with 
just Negroes around,” she said, her face lowered over the 
book. “The name of this one is 

“Why not send a nurse out, then? No use your coming 
way out here.” She met his gaze at last, with her grave, des- 


200 WILLIAM FAULKNER | 


perate eyes. “Why do you come when you don’t want to?” he : 
persisted. 

“I don’t mind,” she answered. She opened the book. “The 
name of this one 3 

“Don’t,” he interrupted. “I m have to listen to that dant 
thing all day. Let’s talk a while. *» But her head was bent and 
her hands were still on the open book. “What makes you — 
afraid to talk to me?” 

“Afraid?” she repeated. “Had you rather I'd go?” 

“What? No, damn it. I want you to be human for one ~ 
time and talk to me. Come over here.” She would not look 
at him, and she raised her hands between them as though 
he did not lie helpless on his back two yards away. “Come 
over here closer,” he commanded. She rose, clutching the 
book. 

‘I’m going,” she said. “I'll tell Simon to stay where he 
can hear you call. Good-bye.” 

“Here,” he exclaimed. She went swiftly to the door. 

“Good-bye.” 

“After what you just said, about leaving me alone with 
just niggers on the place?” She paused at the door, and he 
added with cold cunning: “After what Aunt Jenny told you 
—what’ll I tell her, tonight? Why are you afraid of a man 
flat on his back, in a damn cast-iron strait-jacket, anyway?” 
But she only looked at him with her sober hopeless eyes. “All 
right, damn it,’ he said violently. “Go, then.” And he 
jerked his head on the pillow and stared again out the 
window while she returned to her chair. He said, mildly, 
“What’s the name of this one?’ She told him. “Let her go, 
then. I reckon Ill be asleep soon, anyway.” 

She opened the book and began to read, swiftly, as though 
she were crouching behind the screen of words her voice 
raised between them. She read steadily on for some time, 
while he on the bed made no movement, her head bent over 
the book, aware of time passing, as though she were in a con- 
test with time. She finished a sentence and ceased, without 
raising her head, but almost immediately he spoke. 

“Go on; I’m still here. Better luck next time.” 

The forenoon passed on. Somewhere a. clock rang the 
quarter hours, but saving this there was no other sound in 
the house. Simon’s activity below stairs had ceased long 
since, but a murmur of voices reached her at intervals 


=i A 
‘ta 


SARTORIS 201 


. from somewhere, murmurously indistinguishable. The leaves 
on the branch beyond the window did not stir, and upon 
the hot air myriad noises blended in a drowsy monotone— 
the Negroes’ voices, sounds of animals in the barnyard, the 
rhythmic groaning of the water pump, a sudden cacophony 
of fowls in the garden beneath the window, interspersed with 
Isom’s meaningless cries as he drove them out. 

Bayard was asleep now, and as she realized this she 
- tealized also that she did not know just when she had 
stopped reading. And she sat with the page open on her 
knees, a page whose words left no echoes whatever in her 
mind, looking at his calm face. It was again like a bronze 
mask, purged by illness of the heat of its violence, yet with 
the violence still slumbering there and only refined a little. 
. . . She looked away and sat with the book open, her hands 
lying motionless on the page, gazing out the window. The 
curtains hung without motion. On the branch athwart the 
window the leaves hung motionless beneath the intermittent 
fingers of the sun, and she sat also without life, the fabric 
of her dress unstirred by her imperceptible breathing, think- 
ing that there would be peace for her only in a world 
where there were no men at all. 

The clock rang twelve times. Immediately after, preceded 
by stertorous breathing and surreptitious sounds as of a 
huge rat, and yet other furtive ratlike sounds in the hall, 
Simon thrust his head around the door, like the grandfather 
of all apes. 

“Ts he ’sleep yit?” he said in a rasping whisper. 

“Sbhhhbh,” Narcissa said, lifting her hand. Simon entered 
on tiptoe, breathing heavily, scraping his feet on the floor. 
“Hush,” Narcissa said quickly, “you'll wake him.” 

“Dinner ready,” Simon said, still in that rasping whisper. 

“You can keep his warm until he wakes up, can’t you?” 
Narcissa whispered. “Simon!” she whispered. She rose, but he 
had already crossed to the table, where he fumbled clumsily at 
the stack of books and contrived at last to topple it to the 
floor in a random crash. Bayard opened his eyes. 

“Good God,” he said, “are you here again?” 

“Well, now,” Simon exclaimed with ready dismay, “ef 
me en Miss Benbow ain’t waked him up.” 

“Why you can’t bear to see anybody lying on their back 


202 WILLIAM FAULKNER . 


with their eyes closed, I can’t see,” Bayard said. “Thank God | 
you were not born in a drove, like mosquitoes.” 

“Jes lissen at ’im,” Simon said. “Go to sleep quoilin’ en. 
wake up quoilin’. Elnora got dinner ready fer yall.” 

“Why didn’t you bring it up, then?” Bayard said. “Miss 
Benbow’s too. Unless you’d rather go down?” he added. 

In all his movements Simon was a caricature of himself. 
He now assumed an attitude of shocked reproof. “Dinin’- 
room de place fer comp’ny,” he said. 

“No,” Narcissa said, “I’ll go down. I won’t put Simon to | 
that trouble.” — 

“°Taint no trouble,” Simon disclaimed. “Only hit ain’t © 
io———— 

“Pll come down,” Narcissa said. “You go on and see to 
Mr. Bayard’s tray.” 

“Yes’m,” Simon said. He moved toward the door. “You 
kin walk right down. Elnora have hit on de table time you 
git dar.” He went out. 

“T tried to keep ” Narcissa began. 

“T know,” Bayard interrupted, “he won’t let anybody sleep 
through mealtime. And you’d better go and have yours, or 
he'll carry everything back to the kitchen. And you don’t 
have to hurry back just on my account,” he added. 

“Don’t have to hurry back?” She paused at the door and 
looked back at him. “What do you mean?” 

“I thought you might be tired of reading.” 

“Oh,” she said, and looked away and stood for a moment 
clothed in her grave despair. 

“Look here,” he said suddenly. “Are you sick or any- 
thing? Had you rather go home?” 

“No,” she answered. She moved again. “I’ll be back soon.” 

She had her meal in lonely state in the somber dining- 
room while Simon, having dispatched Bayard’s tray by Isom, 
moved about the table and pressed dishes upon her with 
bland insistence or leaned against the sideboard and con- 
ducted a rambling monologue that seemed to have had no 
beginning and held no prospect of any end. It still flowed 
easily behind her as she went up the hall; when she stood 
in the front door it was still going on, volitionless, as 
though entranced with its own existence and feeding on its 
Own momentum. 


Beyond the porch the salvia bed lay in an unbearable 


SARTORIS 203 


glare of white light, in clamorous splashes. Beyond it the 
drive shimmered with heat until, arched over with locust 
and oak, it descended in a cool green tunnel to the gates 
and the sultry ribbon of the highroad. Beyond the road 
fields spread away shimmering, broken here and there by 
motionless clumps of wood, on to the hills dissolving bluely 
in the July haze. 

She leaned for a while against the door, in her white dress, 
her cheek against the cool, smooth plane of the jamb, in a 
faint draft that came steadily from somewhere though no 
leaf stirred. Simon had finished in the dining-room and a 
drowsy murmur of voices came up the hall from the kitchen, 
borne upon that thin stirring of air too warm to be called 
a breeze. 

At last she heard a movement from above stairs and she 
remembered Isom with Bayard’s tray, and she turned and 
slid the parlor doors ajar and entered. The shades were 
drawn closely, and the crack of light that followed her but 
deepened the gloom. She found the piano and _ stood 
beside it for a while, touching its dusty surface, thinking of 
Miss Jenny erect and indomitable in her chair beside it. She 
heard Isom descend the stairs; soon his footsteps died away 
down the hall, and she drew out the bench and sat down and 
laid her arms along the closed lid. 

Simon entered the dining-room again, mumbling to him- 
self and followed presently by Elnora, and they clashed 
dishes and talked with a mellow rise and fall of consonant- 
less and indistinguishable words. Then they went away, but 
still she sat with her arms along the cool wood, in the dark, 
quiet room where even time stagnated a little. 

The clock rang again and she moved. “I’ve been crying,” 
she thought. “I’ve been crying,” she said in a sad whisper 
that savored its own loneliness and its sorrow. At the tafl 
mirror beside the parlor door she stood and peered at her 
dim reflection, touching her eyes with her finger tips. Then 
she went on, but paused again at the stairs, listening. Ther 
she mounted briskly and entered Miss Jenny’s room and 
went on to her bathroom and bathed her face. 

Bayard lay as she had left him. He was smoking a cigarette 
now. Between puffs he dabbed it casually at a saucer on the 
bed beside him. “Well?” he said. 

“You're going to set the house on fire, that way,” she 


204 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


told him, removing the saucer. “You know Miss Jenny 
wouldn’t let you do that.” 

“I know it,” he agreed, a little sheepishly, and she dragged 
the table up and set the saucer upon it. 

“Can you reach it now?” . 

“Yes, thanks. Did they give you enough to eat?” 

“Oh, yes. Simon’s very insistent, you know. Shall I read 
some more, or had you rather sleep?” 

“Read, if you don’t mind. I think I'll stay awake, this time.” 

“Ts that a threat?” 

He looked at her quickly as she seated herself and picked 
up the book. “Say, what happened to you?” he demanded. 
“You acted like you were all in, before dinner. Simon give 
you a drink, or what?” 

“No, not that bad.” And she laughed, a little wildly, and 
opened the book. “I forgot to mark the place,” she said, 
turning the leaves swiftly. “Do you remember No, you 
were asleep, weren’t you? Shall I go. back to where you 
stopped listening?” 

“No. Just read anywhere. It’s all about alike, I guess. If 
you'll move a little nearer, I believe I can stay awake.” 

“Sleep if you want to. I don’t mind.” 

“Meaning you won't come any nearer?” he asked, watch- 
ing her with his bleak gaze. She moved her chair nearer 
and opened the book again and turned the pages on. 

“IT think it was about here,” she said, with indecision. 
“Yes.” She read to herself for a line or two, then she began 
aloud, read to the end of the page, where her voice trailed 
off in grave consternation. She turned the next page, then 
flipped it back. “I read this once; I remember it now.” She 
turned the leaves on, her serene brow puckered a little. “I 
must have been asleep too,” she said, and she glanced at 
him with friendly bewilderment. “I seem to have read pages 
and pages...” 

“Oh, begin anywhere,” he repeated. 

“No: wait; here it is.” She read again and picked up the 
thread of the story, Once or twice she raised her eyes swiftly 
and found him watching her, bleakly but quietly. After 
a time he was no longer watching her, and at last, find- 
ing that his eyes were closed, she thought he slept. She 
finished the chapter and stopped. 

“No,” he said drowsily, “not yet.” Then, when she failed 


-SARTORIS 205 


to resume, he opened his eyes and asked for a cigarette. She 
laid the book aside and struck the match for him, and 
picked up the book again. 

The afternoon wore away. The Negroes had gone, and 
there was no sound about the house save her voice, and the 
clock at quarter-hour intervals; outside, the shadows 
slanted more and more, peaceful harbingers of evening. He 
was asleep now, despite his contrary conviction, and after 
a while she stopped and laid the book away. The long shape 
of him lay stiffly in its cast beneath the sheet, and she sat 
and looked at his bold, still face and the broken travesty of 
him and her tranquil sorrow overflowed in pity for him. He 
Was so utterly without any affection for anything at all; so— 
so... hard... No, that’s not the word. But “cold” eluded 
her; she could comprehend hardness, but not coldness. ... 

Afternoon drew on; evening was finding itself. She sat 
musing and still and quiet, gazing out of the window where 
no wind yet stirred the leaves, as though she were wait- 
ing for some one to tell her what to do next, and she had 
lost all account of time other than as a dark unhurrying 
stream into which she gazed until the mesmerism of water 
conjured the water itself away. 

He made an indescribable sound, and she turned her head 
quickly and saw his body straining terrifically in its cast 
and his clenched hands and his teeth beneath his lifted lip, 
and as she sat blanched and incapable of further movement 
he made the sound again. His breath hissed between his 
teeth and he screamed, a wordless sound that merged into 
a rush of profanity, and when she rose at last and stood 
over him with her hands against her mouth, his body re- 
laxed and from beneath his sweating brow he watched her 
with wide intent eyes in which terror lurked, and mad, cold 
fury, and despair. 

“He damn near got me, then,” he said in a dry, light voice, 
still watching her from beyond the fading agony in his 
wide eyes. “There was a sort of loop of ’em around my 
chest, and every time he fired, he twisted the loop a little 
tighter. . . .” He fumbled at the sheet and tried to draw it 
up to his face. “Can you get me a handkerchief? Some 
in that top drawer there.” 

“Yes,” she said, “yes,” and she went to the chest of draw- 
ers and held her shaking body upright by clinging to it, 


206 WILLIAM FAULKNER } 
and found a handkerchief and brought it to him. She tried | 


to dry his brow and face, but at last he took the handker- - 


chief from her and did it himself. “You scared me,” she: 
moaned. “You scared me so bad. I thought. . .” 

“Sorry,” he answered shortly. “I don’t do that on purpose. . 
I want a cigarette.” 

She gave it to him and struck the match, and again he 
had to grasp her hand to hold the flame steady, and still 
holding her wrist, he drew deeply several times. She tried | 
to free her wrist, but his fingers were like steel, and her 
trembling body betrayed her and she sank into her chair 
again, staring at him with terror and dread. He consumed the 
cigarette in deep swift draughts, and still holding her wrist 


he began to talk of his dead brother, without preamble, — 


brutally. It was a brutal tale, without beginning, and crassly 
and uselessly violent and at times profane and gross, though 
its very wildness robbed it of offensiveness, just as its gross- 
ness kept it from obscenity. And beneath it all, the bitter 
struggling of his false and stubborn pride and she sitting 


with her arm taut in his grasp and her other hand pressed — 


against her mouth, watching him with terrified fascination. 
“He was zigzagging: that was why I couldn’t get on the 


Hun. Every time I got my sights on the Hun, John’d barge in | 


between us again, and then I’d have to hoick away before 


one of the others got on me. Then he quit zigzagging. Soon | 
as I saw him sideslip I knew it was all over. Then I saw the — 


fire streaking out along his wing, and he was looking back. 
He wasn’t looking at the Hun at all; he was looking at me. 


The Hun stopped shooting then, and all of us sort of just — 
sat there for a while. I couldn’t tell what John was up to 


until I saw him swing his feet out. Then he thumbed his 


nose at me like he was always doing and flipped his hand © 
at the Hun and kicked his machine out of the way and | 


jumped. He jumped feet first. You can’t fall far feet first, | 


you know, and pretty soon he sprawled out flat. There was 
a bunch of cloud right under us and he smacked on it 
right on his belly, like what we used to call gut-busters in 
swimming. But I never could pick him up below the cloud. 
I know I got down before he could have come out, be- 
cause after I was down there his machine came diving out 
right at me, burning good. I pulled away from it, but the 
damn thing zoomed past and did a split-turn and came at 


wr 


SARTORIS 207 


me again, and I had to dodge. And so I never could pick 
him up when he came out of the cloud. I went down fast, 
until I knew I was below him, and looked again. But I 
couldn’t find him and then I thought that maybe I hadn’t 


» gone far enough, so I dived again. I saw the machine crash 


about three miles away, but I never could pick John up 
again. And then they started shooting at me from the 


_-ground = 


He talked on and her hand came away from her mouth 
and slid down her other arm and tugged at his fingers. 

“Please,” she whispered. “Please!” He ceased then and 
looked at her and his fingers shifted, and just as she thought 
she was free they clamped again, and now both of her 
wrists were prisoners. She struggled, staring at him dread- 
fully, but he grinned his teeth at her and pressed her 
crossed arms down upon the bed beside him. 

“Please, please,” she implored, struggling; she could feel 
the flesh of her wrists, feel the bones turn in it as a loose 
garment, could see his bleak eyes and the fixed derision of 
his teeth, and suddenly she swayed forward in her chair 
and her head dropped between her prisoned arms and she 
wept with hopeless and dreadful hysteria. 


After a while there was no sound in the room again, 
and he moved his head and looked at the dark crown of 
her head. He lifted his hand and saw the bruised discolora- 
tions where he had gripped her wrists. But she did not stir 
even then, and he dropped his hand upon her wrists again 
and lay quietly, and after a while even her shuddering and 
trembling had ceased. 

“Tm sorry,” he said. “I won’t do it again.” 

He could see only the top of her dark head, and her hands 
lay passive beneath his. 

“I’m sorry,” he repeated. “I won’t do it any more.” 

“You won’t drive that car fast any more?” she asked, 
without moving; her voice was muffled. 

“What?” 

She made no answer, and with infinite small pains and 
slowly he turned himself, cast and all, by degrees on to his 
side, chewing his lip and swearing under his breath, and laid 


his other hand on her hair. 


208 WILLIAM FAULKNER . 
“What are you doing?” she asked, still without raising ; 


her head. “You'll break your ribs again.” 
“Yes,” he agreed, stroking her hair awkwardly. + 
“That’s the trouble, right there,” she said. “That’s the way 
you act: doing things that—that 
yourself just to worry people. You don’t get any fun out of 
doing them.” 


“No,” he agreed, and he lay with his chest full of hot 


You do things to hurt | 


needles, stroking her dark head with his hard, awkward | 


hand. Far above him now the peak among the black and 
savage stars, and about him the valleys of tranquillity and 
of peace. It was later still; already shadows were growing in 
the room and losing themselves in shadow, and beyond the 
window sunlight was a diffused radiance, sourceless yet 
palpable. From somewhere cows lowed one to another, moody 
and mournful. At last she sat up, touching her face and her 
hair. 

“You're all twisted. You'll never get well if you don’t 
behave yourself. Turn on your back, now.” He obeyed, slowly 
and painfully, his lip between his teeth and faint beads on 
his forehead, while she watched him with grave anxiety. 
“Does it hurt?” 

“No,” he answered, and his hand shut again on her wrists 
that made no effort to withdraw. The sun was gone, and 
twilight, foster dam of quietude and peace, filled the fading 
room, and evening had found itself. 

“And you won’t drive that car fast any more?” she per- 
sisted from the dusk. 

“No,” he answered. 


8 


Meanwhile she had received another letter from her anony- 
mous correspondent. Horace, when he came in one night, 
had brought it in to her as she lay in bed with a book; tapped 
at her door and opened it and stood for a moment diffident- 
ly, and for a while they looked at one another across the 
barrier of their estrangement and their stubborn pride. 
“Excuse me for disturbing you,” he said stiffly. She lay 


} SARTORIS 209 


beneath the shaded light, with the dark splash of her hair 
on the pillow, and only her eyes moved as he crossed the 
room and stood above her where she lay with her lowered 
book, watching him with sober interrogation. 

“What are you reading?” he asked.-For reply she shut the 
book on her finger, with the jacket and its colored legend 
upward. But he did not look at it. His shirt was open be- 
neath his silk dressing-gown and his thin hand moved among 
the objects on the table beside the bed; picked up another 


' book. “I never knew you to read so much.” 


“J have more time for reading, now,” she answered. 

“Yes.” His hand still moved about the table, touching 
things here and there. 

She lay waiting for him to speak. But he did not, and 


she said, “What is it, Horace?” 


He came and sat on the edge of the bed. But still her 


| eyes were antagonistic and interrogatory and the shadow 
' of her mouth was stubbornly cold. “Narcy?” he said. She 
_ lowered her eyes to the book, and he added: “First, I want 


to apologize for leaving you alone so often at night.” 

Ses! . 

He laid his hand on her knee. “Look at me.” She raised 
her face, and the antagonism of her eyes. “I want to apolo- 
gize for leaving you alone at night,” he repeated. 

“Does that mean you aren’t going to do it any more, or 
that you’re not coming in at all?” 

For a while he sat brooding on the wild repose of his 


_ hand lying on her covered knee. Then he rose and stood 
beside the table again, touching the objects there; then he 


returned and sat on the bed. She was reading again, and he 
tried to take the book from her hand. She resisted. 

“What do you want, Horace?” she asked impatiently. 

He mused again while she watched his face. He looked 
up. “Belle and I are going to be married,” he blurted. 

“Why tell me? Harry is the one to tell. Unless you and 
Belle are going to dispense with the formality of divorce.” 

“Yes,” he said. “He knows it.” He laid his hand on her 
knee again, stroking it through the cover. “You aren’t even 
surprised, are you?” 

“I’m surprised at you, but not at Belle. Belle has a back- 
Stairs nature.” 

“Yes,” he agreed; then: “Who said that to you? You didn’t 


210 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


think of that yourself.” She lay with her book half raised, © 
watching him. He took her hand roughly; she tried to free 
it, but vainly. “Who was it?” he demanded. 

“Nobody told me. Don’t, Horace.” : 
He released her hand. “I know who it was. It was Mrs. 
Du Pre.” 

“It wasn’t anybody,” she repeated. “Go away and leave 
me alone, Horace.” And behind the antagonism her eyes 
were hopeless and desperate. “Don’t you see that talking ~ 
doesn’t help any?” | 

“Yes,” he said wearily, but he sat for a while yet, stroking 
her knee. Then he rose and thrust his hands into his gown, 
but turning he paused again and drew forth an envelope 
from his pocket. “Here’s a letter for you. I forgot it this 
afternoon. Sorry.” 

She was reading again. “Put it on the table,” she said, 
without raising her eyes. He laid the letter on the table and 
quitted the room. At the door he looked back, but her head 
was bent over her book. 

As he removed his clothes it did seem that that heavy 
fading odor of Belle’s body clung to them, and to his hands 
even after he was in bed; and clinging, shaped in the dark- 
ness beside him Belle’s rich voluptuousness until within that 
warm, not-yet-sleeping region where dwells the mother of 
dreams, Belle grew palpable in ratio as his own body slipped 
away from him. And Harry too, with his dogged inarticulate- 
ness and his hurt groping which was partly damaged vanity 
and shock, yet mostly a boy’s sincere bewilderment that 
freed itself terrifically in the form of movie subtitles. Just be- 
fore he slept, his mind, with the mind’s uncanny attribute for 
irrelevant recapitulation, reproduced with the startling ghost- 
liness of a dictaphone an incident which at the time he had 
considered trivial. Belle had freed her mouth, and for a mo- 
ment, her body still against his, she held his face in her two 
hands and stared at him with intent, questioning eyes. “Have 
you plenty of money, Horace?” And “Yes,” he had answered 
immediately, “of course I have.” And then Belle again, en- 
veloping him like a rich and fatal drug, like a motionless 
and cloying sea in which he watched himself drown. 


The letter lay on the table that night, forgotten; it was 


_ SARTORIS 211 


not until the next morning that she discovered it and opened 
tit. 

“I am trying to forget you I cannot forget you Your big 
eyes your black hair how white your black hair make you 
look. And how you walk I am watching you a smell you give 
of iike a flowr. Your eyes shine with mistry and how you 
walk makes me sick like a fevver all night thinking how you 
' walk. I could touch you you would not know it. Every day 
But I can not I must pore out on paper must talk You do not 
know who. Your lips like cupids bow when the day comes 
when I press it to mine. Like I dreamed in a fevver from 
_ heaven to Hell. I know what you do I know more than you 
think I see men Visit you with bitter twangs. Be care full I am 
a desprate man Nothing any more to me now If you unholy 
love a man I will kill him. 

“You do not anser. I know you got it I saw one in your 
| hand bag. You better anser soon I am desprate man eat up 
with fevver I can not sleep for. I will not hurt you but I am 
_desprate. Do not forget I will not hurt you but I am a des- 
| prate man.” 


Meanwhile the days accumulated. Not sad days nor lone- 
| ly: they were too feverish to be sorrowful, what with her 
nature torn in two directions and the walls of her serene 
- garden cast down and she herself like a night animal or bird 
caught in a beam of light and trying vainly to escape. Horace 
| had definitely gone his way, and like two strangers they fol- 
lowed the routine of their physical days, in an unbending 
estrangement of long affection and similar pride beneath a 

shallow veneer of trivialities. She sat with Bayard almost 
| every day now, but at a discreet distance of two yards. 

At first he had tried to override her with bluster, then 
with cajolery. But she was firm, and at last he desisted and 
lay gazing quietly out the window or sleeping while she read. 
From time to time Miss Jenny would come to the door and 
look in at them and go away. Her shrinking, her sense of an- 
ticipation and dread while with him, was gone now, and at 
times instead of reading they talked, quietly and impersonally, 
with the ghost of that other afternoon between them, though 
neither ever referred to it. Miss Jenny had been a little curious 
about that day, but Narcissa was gravely and demurely non- 
committal about it, nor had Bayard ever talked of it. And 


= 


212 WILLIAM FAULKNEE) 


so there was another bond between them, but unirksomes 
Miss Jenny had heard gossip about Horace and Belle, buy 
on this subject also Narcissa had nothing to say. 

“Have it your own way,” Miss Jenny said tartly; “T car 
draw my own conclusions. I imagine Belle and Horace car 
produce quite a mess together. And I’m glad of it. That mari 
is making an old maid out of you. It isn’t too late now, but 
if he’d waited five years later to play the fool, there wouldn™ 
have been anything left for ye except to give music lessons: 
But you can get married, now.’ 

“Would you advise me to marry?” Narcissa asked. 

“T wouldn’t advise anybody to marry. You won’t be happy.’ 
but then, women haven’t got civilized enough yet to be happy 
unmarried, so you might as well try it. We can stand any~ 
thing, anyhow. And change is good for folks. They say it is, 
at least.” 

But Narcissa didn’t believe that. “I shall never marry,” she 
told herself. Men .. . that was where unhappiness lay, get- 
ting men into your life. “And if I couldn’t keep Horace, 
loving him as I did .. .” Bayard slept. She picked up the book 
and read on to herself, about antic people in an antic world 
where things happened as they should happen. The shadows 
lengthened eastward. She read on, lost from mutable things. 

After a while Bayard waked, and she fetched him a ciga~ 
rette and a match. “You won’t have to do this any more,” 
he said. “I reckon you're sorry.” 

His cast would come off tomorrow, he meant, and he lay 
smoking his cigarette and talking of what he would do when 
he was about again. He would see about getting his car re- 
paired first thing; have to take it in to Memphis, probably. 
And he planned a trip for the three of them—Miss Jenny, 
Narcissa and himself—while the car was in the shop. “It'll 
take about a week,” he added. “She must be in pretty bad 
shape. Hope I didn’t hurt her guts any.” 

“But you aren’t going to drive it fast any more,” she re- 
minded him. He lay still, his cigarette burning in his fingers. 
“You promised,” she insisted. 

“When did I promise?” 

“Don’t you remember? That . . . afternoon, when they 
WETC one. 


“When I scared you?” She sat watching him with hel 


SARTORIS 213 


grave, troubled eyes. “Come here,” he said. She rose and went 
‘to the bed and he took her hand. 

“You won't drive it fast again?” she persisted. 

“No,” he answered, “I promise.” And they were still so, her 
hand in his. The curtains stirred in the breeze, and the leaves 
on the branch beyond the window twinkled and turned and 
lisped against one another. Sunset was not far away. The 
breeze would cease then. He moved. 

“Narcissa,” he said. She looked at him. “Lean your face. 
down here.” 

She looked away, and for a while there was no movement, 
no sound between them. 

“T must go,” she said at last, quietly, and he released her 

hand. 


His cast was gone, and he was up and about again, moving 
a little gingerly, to be sure, but already Miss Jenny was be- 

ginning to contemplate him a little anxiously. “If we could 
just arrange to have one of his minor bones broken every 
month or so, just enough to keep him in the house... .” 

“That won’t be necessary,” Narcissa told her. “He’s going 
to behave from now on.” 

“How do you know?” Miss Jenny demanded. “What in the 
world makes you think that?” 

“He promised he would.” 

“He'll promise anything when he’s flat on his back,” Miss 
Jenny retorted. “They all will; always have. But what makes 
you think he'll keep it?” 

“He promised me he would,” Narcissa replied serenely. 


His first act was to see about his car. It had been pulled 
into town and patched up after a fashion until it would run 
under its own power, but it would be necessary to take it to 
Memphis to have the frame straightened and the body re- 
paired. Bayard was all for doing this himself, fresh-knit ribs 
and all, but Miss Jenny put her foot down, and after a furious 
half hour he was vanquished. And so the car was driven in to 
Memphis by a youth who hung around one of the garages 
in town. “Narcissa’ll take you driving in her car, if you must 
ride,” Miss Jenny told him. 

“In that little peanut-parcher?” Bayard said derisively. 
“It won’t do better than twenty-one miles.” 


214 WILLIAM FAULKN 


“No, thank God,” Miss Jenny answered. “And I’ve writtenr 
to Memphis and asked ’em to fix yours so it’ll run just like; 
that, too.” 

Bayard stared at her with humorless bleakness. “Did you 
do any such damn thing as that?” 

“Oh, take him away, Narcissa,” Miss Jenny exclaimed.! 
“Get him out of my sight. I’m so tired looking at you.” 

But he wouldn’t ride in Narcissa’s car at first. He missed! 
no opportunity to speak of it with heavy, facetious disparage-- 
ment, but he wouldn’t ride in it. Dr. Alford had evolved aj 
tight elastic bandage for his chest so that he could ride hisé 
horse, but he had developed an astonishing propensity for: 
lounging about the house when Narcissa was there. Andi 
Narcissa came quite often. Miss Jenny thought it was ont 
Bayard’s account and pinned the guest down in her forth-- 
right way; whereupon Narcissa told her about Horace and! 
Belle while Miss Jenny sat indomitably erect on her straight : 
chair beside the piano. 

“Poor child,” she said, and: “Lord, ain’t they fools?” And | 
then: “Well, you’re right; I wouldn’t marry one of ’em. 
either.” 

“I’m not,” Narcissa answered. “I wish there weren’t any of © 
them in the world.” 

Miss Jenny said “Hmph.” 

And then one afternoon they were in Narcissa’s car and 
Bayard was driving, over her protest at first. But he was 
behaving himself quite sensibly, and at last she relaxed. 
They drove down the valley road and turned into the hills 
and she asked where they were going, but his answer was 
vague. So she sat quietly beside him and the road mounted 
presently in long curves among dark pines in the slanting 
afternoon. The road wound on, with changing sun-shot vistas 
of the valley and the opposite hills at every turn, and always 
the somber pines and their faint, exhilarating odor. After a 
time they topped a hill and Bayard slowed the car. Beneath 
them the road sank, then flattened away toward a line of 
willows, crossed a stone bridge, and rose again, curving red- 
ly from sight among the dark trees. 

“There’s the place,” he said. 

“The place?” she repeated dreamily; then as the car rolled 
forward again, gaining speed, she roused herself and under- 
stood what he meant. “You promised!” she cried, but he 


-SARTORIS 215 


jerked the throttle down the ratchet, and she clutched him 


' and tried to scream. But she could make no sound, nor could 
_ she close her eyes as the narrow bridge hurtled dancing to- 


ward them. And then her breath stopped and her heart as 
they flashed, with a sharp reverberation like hail on a tin 
roof, between willows and a crashing glint of water and shot 
on up the next hill. The small car swayed on the curve, 
lost its footing and went into the ditch, bounded out and 


_ hurled across the road. Then Bayard straightened it out and 


with diminishing speed it rocked on up the hill, and stopped. 
She sat beside him, her bloodless mouth open, beseeching 
him with her wide, hopeless eyes. Then she caught her 
breath, wailing. 

“T didn’t mean: ” he began awkwardly. “I just wanted 


to see if I could do it,” and he put his arms around her and 


she clung to him, moving her hands crazily about his shoul- 
ders. “I didn’t mean ”’ he essayed again, and then her 


_ crazed hands were on his face and she was sobbing wildly 


against his mouth. 


9 


All the forenoon he bent over his ledgers, watching his hand 


pen the neat figures into the ruled columns with a sort of 


astonishment. After his sleepless night he labored in a kind 
of stupor, his mind too spent even to contemplate the coiling 
images of his lust, thwarted now for all time, save with a dull 
astonishment that the images no longer filled his blood with 


_ fury and despair, so that it was some time before his dulled 


nerves reacted to a fresh threat and caused him to raise his 
head. Virgil Beard was just entering the door. 

He slid hurriedly from his stool and slipped around the 
corner and darted through the door of old Bayard’s office. 
He crouched within the door, heard the boy ask politely 
for him, heard the cashier say that he was there a minute 
ago but that he reckoned he had stepped out; heard the boy 
say, well, he reckoned he’d wait for him. And he crouched 
within the door, wiping his drooling mouth with his hand- 
kerchief. 

After a while he opened the door cautiously. The boy 


216 WILLIAM FAULKNER ?t 


squatted patiently and blandly on his heels against the wall, , 
and Snopes stood again with his clenched and trembling ; 
hands. He did not curse: his desperate fury was beyond | 
words, but his breath came and went with a swift ah-ah-ah . 
sound in his throat and it seemed to him that his eyeballs 

were being drawn back into his skull, turning further and | 
further until the cords that drew them reached the snap- 

ping point. He opened the door. 

“Hi, Mr. Snopes,” the boy said genially, rising. Snopes | 
strode on and entered the grille and approached the cashier. © 
“Res,” he said in a voice scarcely articulate, “gimme five 

dollars.” 

“What?” 

“Gimme five dollars,” he repeated hoarsely. The cashier 
did so, and scribbled a notation and speared it on the file 
beside him. The boy had come up to the window, but Snopes 
went on and he followed the man back to the office, his bare 
feet hissing on the linoleum floor. 

“I tried to find you last night,” he explained. “But you 
wasn’t to home.” Then he looked up and saw Snopes’ face, 
and after a moment he screamed and broke his trance and 
turned to flee. But the man caught him by his overalls, and 
he writhed and twisted, screaming with utter terror as the 
man dragged him across the office and opened the door that 
gave upon the vacant lot. Snopes was trying to say something 
in his mad, shaking voice, but the boy screamed steadily, 
hanging limp from the other’s hand as he tried to thrust 
the bill into his pocket. At last he succeeded and released 
the boy, who staggered away, found his legs and fled. 

“What were you whuppin’ that boy, for?” the cashier 
asked curiously, when Snopes returned to his desk. 

“For not minding his own business,” he snapped, open- 
ing his ledger again. 


As he crossed the now empty square he looked up at 
the lighted face of the clock. It was ten minutes past eleven. 
There was no sign of life save the lonely figure of the 
night marshal in the door of the lighted post-office lobby. 

He left the square and entered a street and went steadily 
beneath the arc lights, having the street to himself and the 
regular recapitulation of his striding shadow dogging him 
out of the darkness, through the pool of the light and into 


ev —_ 


| SARTORIS | 217 


darkness again. He turned a corner and followed a yet quieter 
street and turned presently from it into a lane between 
massed banks of honeysuckle higher than his head and sweet 
on the night air. The lane was dark and he increased his pace. 
On either hand the upper stories of houses rose above the 
honeysuckle, with now and then a lighted window among 
the dark trees. He kept close to the wall and went swiftly 
on, passing now between back premises. After a while another 
house loomed, and a serried row of cedars against the paler 
sky, and he stole beside a stone wall and so came opposite the 
garage. He stopped here and sought in the lush grass be- 
neath the wall and stooped and picked up a pole, which he 
leaned against the wall. With the aid of the pole he mounted 
on to the wall and thence to the garage roof. 

The house was dark, and presently he slid to the ground 
and stole across the lawn and stopped beneath a window. 
There was a light somewhere toward the front, but no sound, 
no movement; and he stood for a time listening, darting his 
eyes this way and that, covert and ceaseless as a cornered 
animal. 

The screen responded easily to his knife, and he raised 


| it and listened again. Then with a single scrambling motion 


he was in the room, crouching. Still no sound save the thud- 
ding of his heart, and the whole house gave off that unmis- 
takable emanation of temporary desertion. He drew out his 
handkerchief and wiped his mouth. 

The light was in the next room, and he went on. The 
stairs rose from the end of this room and he scuttled silently 
across it and mounted swiftly into the upper darkness and 
groped forward until he touched a wall, then a door. The 
knob turned in his fingers. 

It was the right room; he knew that at once. Her presence 
was all about him, and for a time his heart thudded and 
thudded in his throat and fury and lust and despair shook 
him. He pulled himself together; he must get out quickly, and 
he groped his way across to the bed and lay face down on it, 
his head buried in the pillows, writhing and making smoth- 
ered, animal-like moanings. But he must get out, and he got 
up and groped across the room again. What little light there 
was was behind him now, and instead of finding the door, 
he blundered into a chest of drawers, and stood there a mo- 
ment, learning its shape with his hands. Then he opened one 


218 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


of the drawers and fumbled in it. It was filled with a faint- 
ly-scented fragility of garments, but he could not distinguish _ 
one from another with his hands. 

He found a match in his pocket and struck it beneath the 
shelter of his palm, and by its light he chose one of the soft 
garments, discovering as the match died a packet of letters _ 
in the corner of the drawer. He recognized them at once, 
dropped the dead match to the floor and took the packet from 
the drawer and put it in his pocket, and placed the letter he 
had just written in the drawer, and he stood for a time with 


the garment crushed against his face; remained so for some — 


time before a sound caused him to jerk his head up, listen- 
ing. A car was entering the drive, and as he sprang to the 
window its lights swept beneath him and fell full upon the 
open garage, and he crouched at the window in a panic. 
Then he sped to the door and stopped again, crouching, 
panting and snarling with indecision. 

He ran back to the window. The garage was dark, and 
two dark figures were approaching the house, and he 
crouched beside the window until they had passed from 
sight. Then, still clutching the garment, he climbed out 
the window and swung from the sill a moment by his hands, 
and closed his eyes and dropped. 

A crash of glass, and he sprawled numbed by shock amid 
lesser crashes and a burst of stale, dry dust. He had fallen 
into a shallow flower-pit and he scrambled out and tried to 
stand and fell again, while nausea swirled in him. It was his 
knee, and he lay sick and with drawn, gasping lips while his 
trouser leg sopped slowly and warmly, clutching the gar- 
ment and staring at the dark sky with wide, mad eyes. He 
heard voices in the house, and a light came on behind the 
window above him and he turned crawling, and at a scram- 
bling hobble he crossed the lawn and plunged into the shadow 
of the cedars beside the garage, where he lay watching the 
window in which a man leaned, peering out; and he moaned 
a little while his blood ran between his clasped fingers. He 
drove himself onward again and dragged his bleeding leg up 
on to the wall, and dropped into the lane and cast the pole 
down. A hundred yards further he stopped and drew his 
torn trousers aside and tried to bandage the gash in his leg. 
But the handkerchief stained over almost at once and still 
blood ran and ran down his leg and into his shoe. 


os 


| SARTORIS 219 


Once in the back room of the bank he rolled his trouser 
leg up and removed the handkerchief and bathed the gash at 
the lavatory. It still bled, and the sight of his own blood 
sickened him, and he swayed against the wall, watching his 
blood. Then he removed his shirt and bound it as tightly as 
he could about his leg. He still felt nausea, and he drank 
long of the tepid water from the tap. Immediately it welled 
salinely within him and he clung to the lavatory, sweating, 

trying not to vomit, until the spell passed. His leg felt numb 
and dead, and he was weak and he wished to lie down, but 
he dared not. 

He entered the grille, his left heel showing a red print 
at each step. The vault door opened soundlessly; without a 
light he found the key to the cash box and opened it. He 
took only bank notes, but he took all he could find. Then he 
closed the vault and locked it, returned to the lavatory and 
wetted a towel and removed his heel prints from the linoleum 
floor. Then he passed out the back door, threw the latch so it 
would lock behind him. The clock on the courthouse rang 
midnight. 

: In an alley between two Negro stores a Negro man sat in 
a battered Ford, waiting. He gave the Negro a bill and the 
Negro cranked the engine and came and stared curiously at 
the bloody cloth beneath his torn trousers. “Whut happened, 
boss? Y’ain’t hurt, is you?” 

“Run into some wire,” he answered shortly. “She’s got 
plenty gas, ain’t she?” The Negro said yes, and he drove on. 
As he crossed the square the marshal, Buck, stood beneath 
the light before the post office, and Snopes cursed him with 
silent and bitter derision. He drove on and entered another 
street and passed from view, and presently the sound of his 
going had died away. 


PART FOUR 


IT wAs A SUNNY SUNDAY afternoon in October. Narcissa and 
Bayard had driven off soon after dinner and Miss Jenny and 
old Bayard were sitting on the sunny end of the veranda 
when, preceded by Simon, the deputation came solemnly 
around the corner of the house from the rear. It consisted of 
six Negroes in a catholic variety of Sunday raiment and it 
was headed by a huge, bull-necked Negro in a hind-side- 
before collar and a Prince Albert coat, with an orotund air 
and a wild, compelling eye. 

“Yere dey is, Cunnel,” Simon said, and without pausing 
he mounted the steps and turned about, leaving no doubt 
in any one’s mind as to which side he considered himself 
aligned with. The deputation halted and milled a little, sol- 
emnly decorous. 

“What’s this?” Miss Jenny asked. “That you, Uncle Bird?” 

“Yessum, Miss Jenny.” One of the committee uncovered 
his grizzled wool and bowed. “How you gittin’ on?” The 
others shuffled their feet, and one by one they removed their 
hats. The leader clasped his across his chest like a Congress- 
man being photographed. 

“Here, Simon,” old Bayard demanded, “what’s this? What 
did you bring these niggers around here for?” 

“Dey come fer dey money,” Simon explained. 

“What?” 

“Money?” Miss Jenny repeated with interest. “What 
money, Simon?” 

“Dey come fer dat money you promised ’um,” Simon 
shouted. 

“I told you I wasn’t going to pay that money,” old Bayard 

220 


~ SARTORIS 221 


said. “Did Simon tell you I was going to pay it?” he de- 
manded of the deputation. 

“What money?” Miss Jenny repeated. “What are you talk- 
ing about, Simon?” The leader of the committee was shaping 
his face for words, but Simon forestalled him. 

“Why, Cunnel, you tole me yo’self to tell dem niggers 
you wuz gwine pay ’um.” 

“I didn’t do any such thing,” old Bayard answered 
violently. “I told you that if they wanted to put you in jail, 
to go ahead and do it. That’s what I told you.” 

“Why, Cunnel. You said it jes’ ez plain. You jes’ fergot 
erbout it. I kin prove it by Miss Jenny you tole me a 

“Not by me,” Miss Jenny interrupted. “This is the first I 
_ heard about it. Whose money is it, Simon?” 

Simon gave her a pained, reproachful look. “He tole me 
to tell °um he wuz gwine pay it.” 

“Tm damned if I did,” old Bayard shouted. “I told you 
I wouldn’t pay a damn cent of it. And I told you that if you 
let *em worry me about it, I’d skin you alive, sir.” 

“T ain’t gwine let °um worry you,” Simon answered, sooth- 
ingly. “Dat’s whut I’m fixin’ now. You jes’ give ‘um dey 
money, en me en you kin fix it up later.” 

“Tll be eternally damned if I will; if I let a lazy nigger that 
' ain’t worth his keep——” 

“But somebody got to pay ’um,” Simon pointed out pa- 
tiently. “Ain’t dat right, Miss Jenny?” 

“That’s right,” Miss Jenny agreed. “But I ain’t the one.” 

“Yessuh, dey ain’t no argument dat somebody got to pay 
’um. Ef somebody don’t quiet ’um down, dey’ll put me in 
de jail. And den whut’ll y’all do, widout nobody to keep dem 
hosses fed en clean, en to clean de house en wait on de 
table? Co’se I don’t mine gwine to jail, even ef dem stone flo’s 
-ain’t gwine do my mis’ry no good.” And he drew a long and 
affecting picture, of high, grail-like principles and of patient 
abnegation. Old Bayard slammed his feet to the floor. 

“How much is it?” 

The leader swelled within his Prince Albert. “Brudder Mo’,” 
he said, “will you read out de total emoluments owed to de 
pupposed Secon’ Baptis’ Church by de late Deacon Strother 
in his capacity ez treasurer of de church boa’d?” 

Brother Moore created a mild disturbance in the rear of 
the group, emerging presently by the agency of sundry will- 


222 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


ing hands—a small, reluctant ebon Negro in somber, over- 
large black—where the parson majestically made room for 
him, contriving by some means to focus attention on him. 
He laid his hat on the ground at his feet and from the right- 
hand pocket of his coat he produced in order a red bandana 
handkerchief, a shoe-horn, a plug of chewing-tobacco, and 
holding these in his free hand he delved again, with an 
expression of mildly conscientious alarm. Then he replaced — 
the objects, and from his left pocket he produced a pocket 
knife, a stick on which was wound a length of soiled 
twine, a short piece of leather strap attached to a rusty and | 
apparently idle buckle, and lastly a greasy, dog-eared note- — 
book. He crammed the other things back into his pocket, drop- — 
ping the strap, which he stooped and recovered; then he and 
the parson held a brief whispered conversation. He opened 
the notebook and fumbled at the leaves, fumbled at them 
until the parson leaned over his shoulder and found the © 
proper page and laid his finger on it. 

“How much is it, reverend?” old Bayard asked impa- 
tiently. 

“Brudder Mo’ will now read out de amount,” the parson 
intoned. Brother Moore looked at the page with his tranced 
gaze and mumbled something in a practically indistinguish- 
able voice. 

“What?” old Bayard demanded, cupping his ear. ; 

“Make ’im talk out,” Simon said. “Can’t nobody tell whut 
he sayin’.” 

“Louder,” the parson rumbled, with just a trace of im- 
patience, 

“Sixty-sevum dollars en fawty cents,” Brother Moore 
enunciated at last. Old Bayard slammed back in his chair 
and swore for a long minute while Simon watched him with 
covert anxiety. Then he rose and tramped up the veranda and 
into the house, still swearing. Simon sighed and relaxed. 
The deputation milled again, and Brother Moore faded 
briskly into the rear of it. The parson, however, still re- 
tained his former attitude of fateful and impressive pro- 
fundity. 

“What became of that money, Simon?” Miss Jenny asked 
curiously. “You had it, didn’t you?” 

“Dat’s whut dey claims,” Simon answered. 

“What did you do with it?” 


& 
we 


Z 
‘SARTORIS 223 

“Hit’s all right,” Simon assured her. “I jes’ put it out, 
sort of.” 

“I bet you did,” she agreed drily. “I bet it never even 
' got cool while you had it. They deserve to lose it for ever 
giving it to you in the first place. Who did you put it out 
to?” 

“Oh, me en Cunnel done fix dat up,” Simon said easily, 
“long time ago.” Old Bayard tramped in the hall again and 
emerged, flapping a check in his hand. 

- “Here,” he commanded, and the parson approached the 
Tailing and took it and folded it away in his pocket. “And 
' if you folks are fools enough to turn any more money over 
to him, don’t come to me for it, you hear?” He glared at the 
deputation a moment; then he glared at Simon. “And the 
‘next time you steal money and come to me to pay it back, 
_Tm going to have you arrested and prosecute you myself. 
Get those niggers out of here.” 
| The deputation had already stirred with a concerted move- 
' ment, but the parson halted them with a commanding hand. 
He faced Simon again. “Deacon Strother,” he said, “ez aw- 
_dained minister of de late Fust Baptis’ Church, en recalled 
| minister of de pupposed Secon’ Baptis’ Church, en chairman 
of dis committee, I hereby reinfests you wid yo’ fawmer 
'_ capacities of deacon in de said pupposed Secon’ Baptis’ 
Church. Amen. Cunnel Sartoris and ma’am, good day.” 
Then he turned and herded his committee from the scene. 
“Thank de Lawd, we got dat offen our mind,” Simon said, 
and he came and lowered himself to the top step, groaning 
pleasurably. 
“And you remember what I said,” old Bayard warned him. 
“One more time, now ee 
But Simon was craning his head in the direction the church 
board had taken. “Dar, now,” he said, “whut you reckon dey 
wants now?” For the committee had returned and it now 
peered diffidently around the corner of the house. 

“Well?” old Bayard demanded. “What is it now?” 

They were trying to thrust Brother Moore forward again, 

but he won, this time. At last the parson spoke. 

“You fergot de fawty cents, white folks.” 

“What?” 

“He says, you lef’ out de extry fawty cents,” Simon 

shouted. Old Bayard exploded; Miss Jenny clapped her hands 


224 WILLIAM FAULKNER } 


to her ears and the committee rolled its eyes in fearsome » 
admiration while he soared to magnificent heights, alighting ; 
finally on Simon. 

“You give him that forty cents, and get ’em out of here,” ’ 


old Bayard stormed. “And if you ever let °em come back | 
here again, I’ll take a horsewhip to the whole passel of you!” | 
“Lawd, Cunnel, I ain’t got no fawty cents, en you knows it. | 
Can’t dey do widout dat, after gittin’ de balance of it?” | 
“Yes, you have, Simon,” Miss Jenny said. “You had a half | 


a dollar left after I ordered those shoes for you last night.” | 


Again Simon looked at her with pained astonishment.  ~ | 
“Give it to ’em,” old Bayard commanded. Slowly Simon | 
reached into his pocket and produced a half dollar and — 


turned it slowly in his palm. 

“I mought need dis money, Cunnel,” he protested. “Seems 
like dey mought leave me dis.” 

“Give ’em that money!” old Bayard thundered. “I reckon 
you can pay forty cents of it, at least.” Simon rose re- 
luctantly, and the parson approached. 

“Whar’s my dime change?” Simon demanded, nor woule 
he surrender the coin until two nickels were in his hand. 
Then the committee departed. 

“Now,” old Bayard said, “I want to know what you did 
with that money.” 

“Well, suh,” Simon began readily, “it wuz like dis. I put 
dat money out.” Miss Jenny rose. 

“My Lord, are you all going over that again?” And she 
left them. In her room, where she sat in a sunny window, 
she could still hear them—old Bayard’s stormy rage and 
Simon’s bland and plausible evasion, rising and falling on 
the drowsy Sabbath air. 


There was a rose, a single remaining rose. Through the 
sad, dead days of late summer it had continued to bloom, 
and now though persimmons had long swung their miniature 
suns among the caterpillar-festooned branches, and gum 
and maple and hickory had flaunted two gold and scarlet 
weeks, and the grass, where grandfathers of grasshoppers 
squatted sluggishly like sullen octogenarians, had been 
penciled twice delicately with frost, and the sunny noons 
were scented with sassafras, it still bloomed—overripe now, 
and a little gallantly blowsy, like a fading burlesque star. 


SARTORIS 225 


Miss Jenny worked in a sweater these days, and her trowel 
glinted in her earthy glove. 

“It’s like some women I’ve known,” she said. “It just don’t 
) know how to give up gracefully and be a grandmamma.” 

“Let it have the summer out,” Narcissa in her dark 
woolen dress protested. She had a trowel too, and she 
pottered serenely after Miss Jenny’s scolding and brisk impa- 
tience, accomplishing nothing. Worse than nothing, worse 
' than Isom even, because she demoralized Isom, who had im- 
mediately given his unspoken allegiance to the left, or passive, 
wing. “It’s entitled to its summer.” 

“Some folks don’t know when summer’s over,” Miss Jenny 
Tejoined. “Indian summer’s no excuse for senile adolescence.” 

“Tt isn’t senility, either.” 

“All right. You'll see, some day.” 

“Oh, some day. I’m not quite prepared to be a grand- 
“mother, yet.” 

“You're doing pretty well.” Miss Jenny troweled a tulip 
bulb carefully and expertly up and removed the clotted 
earth from its roots. “We seem to have pretty well worn out 
Bayard, for the time being,” she continued. “I reckon we'd 
better name him John this time.” 

“Yes?” 

“Yes,” Miss Jenny repeated. “We'll name him John. You, 
Isom!” 


The gin had been running steadily for a month, now, 
what with the Sartoris cotton and that of other planters 
further up the valley, and of smaller croppers with their 
tilted fields among the hills. The Sartoris place was farmed 
on shares. Most of the tenants had picked their cotton, and 
gathered the late corn; and of late afternoons, with Indian 
summer on the land and an ancient sadness sharp as 
wood-smoke on the windless air, Bayard and Narcissa would 
drive out where, beside a spring on the edge of the woods, 
the Negroes brought their cane and made their communal 
winter sorghum molasses. One of the Negroes, a sort of 
patriarch among the tenants, owned the mill and the mule 
that furnished the motive power. He did the grinding and 
superintended the cooking of the sap for a tithe, and when 
Bayard and Narcissa arrived the mule would be plodding in 
its monotonous and patient circle, its feet rustling in the 


226 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


dried cane-pith, while one of the patriarch’s grandsons fed 
the cane into the crusher. 

Round and round the mule went, setting its narrow, deer- 
like feet delicately down in the hissing cane-pith, its neck 
bobbing limber as-a section of rubber hose in the collar, 
with its trace-galled flanks and flopping, lifeless ears and 
its half-closed eyes drowsing venomously behind pale lids, 
apparently asleep with the monotony of its own motion, — 
Some Homer of the cotton fields should sing the saga of the 
mule and of his place in the South. He it was, more than any 
other one creature or thing, who, steadfast to the land when 
all else faltered before the hopeless juggernaut of cir- 
cumstance, impervious to conditions that broke men’s 
hearts because of his venomous and patient preoccupation 
with the immediate present, won the prone South from be- 
neath the iron heel of Reconstruction and taught it pride 
again through humility, and courage through adversity 
overcome; who accomplished the well-nigh impossible de- 
spite hopeless odds, by sheer and vindictive patience. Father 
and mother he does not resemble, sons and daughters he 
will never have; vindictive and patient (it is a known fact 
that he will labor ten years willingly and patiently for you, 
for the privilege of kicking you once); solitary but without 
pride, self-sufficient but without vanity; his voice is his own 
derision. Outcast and pariah, he has neither friend, wife, 
mistress, nor sweetheart; celibate, he is unscarred, possesses 
neither pillar nor desert cave, he is not assaulted by tempta- 
tions nor flagellated by dreams nor assuaged by vision; faith, 
hope and charity are not his. Misanthropic, he labors six 
days without reward for one creature whom he hates, bound 
with chains to another whom he despises, and spends the 
seventh day kicking or being kicked by his fellows. Mis- 
understood even by that creature, the nigger who drives him, 
whose impulses and mental processes most closely resemble 
his, he performs alien actions in alien surroundings; he finds 
bread not only for a race, but for an entire form of behavior; 
meek, his inheritance is cooked away from him along with 
his soul in a glue factory. Ugly, untiring and perverse, he 
can be moved neither by reason, flattery, nor promise of 
reward; he performs his humble monotonous duties without 
complaint, and his meed is blows. Alive, he is haled through 
the world, an object of general derision; unwept, unhonored 


) SARTORIS 227. 


and unsung, he bleaches his awkward accusing bones 
among rusting cans and broken crockery and worn-out au- 
tomobile tires on lonely hillsides while his flesh soars un- 
awares against the blue in the craws of buzzards. 

As they approached, the groaning and creaking of the 
mill would be the first intimation, unless the wind happened 
to blow toward them; then it would be the sharp, subtly ex- 
citing odor of fermentation and of boiling molasses. Bayard 
‘liked the smell of it and they would drive up and stop for 
a time while the boy rolled his eyes covertly at them as he 
fed cane into the mill, while they watched the patient mule 
and the old man stooped over the simmering pot. Some- 
times Bayard got out and went over and talked to him, 
/ leaving Narcissa in the car, lapped in the ripe odors of 

the failing year and all its rich, vague sadness, her gaze 
brooding on Bayard and the old Negro—the one lean and 
tall and fatally young and the other stooped with time, 
and her spirit went out in serene and steady waves, sur- 
_ rounding him unawares. 

_ Then he would return and get in beside her and she would 
touch his rough clothing, but so lightly that he was not 
- conscious of it, and they would drive back along the faint, 


uneven road, beside the flaunting woods, and soon, above 
turning locusts and oaks, the white house simple and huge 
and steadfast, and the orange disk of the harvest moon get- 
ting above the ultimate hills, ripe as cheese. 

Sometimes they went back after dark. The mill was still 
then, its long arm motionless across the firelit scene. The 
mule was munching in stable, or stamping and nuzzling its 
empty manger, or asleep standing, boding not of tomorrow; 
and against the firelight many shadows moved. The Negroes 
had gathered now: old men and women sitting on crackling 
cushions of cane about the blaze which one of their num- 
ber fed with pressed stalks until its incense-laden fury 
swirled licking at the boughs overhead, making more golden 
still the twinkling golden leaves; and young men and girls, 
and children squatting and still as animals, staring into the 
fire. Sometimes they sang—quavering, wordless chords in 
which plaintive minors blent with mellow bass in immemorial 
and sad suspense, their grave dark faces bent to the flames 
and with no motion of lips. 

But when the white folks arrived the singing ceased, and 


228 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


they sat or lay about the fire on which the blackened pot 
simmered, talking in broken, murmurous overtones ready . 
with sorrowful mirth, while in shadowy beds among the 
dry whispering cane-stalks youths and girls murmured and 
giggled. ‘ 

Always one of them, and sometimes both, stopped in the 
office where old Bayard and Miss Jenny were. There was a 
fire of logs on the hearth now and they would sit in the glow — 
of it—Miss Jenny beneath the light with her lurid daily paper; 
old Bayard with his slippered feet propped against the fire- — 
place, his head wreathed in smoke and the old setter dream- | 
ing fitfully beside his chair, reliving proud and ancient 
stands perhaps, or further back still, the lean, gawky days of 
his young doghood, when the world was full of scents that 
maddened the blood in him and pride had not taught him — 
self-restraint; Narcissa and Bayard between them—Narcissa 
dreaming too in the firelight, grave and tranquil, and young 
Bayard smoking his cigarettes in his leashed and moody 
repose. 

At last old Bayard would throw his cigar into the fire and 
drop his feet to the floor, and the dog would wake and 
raise its head and blink and yawn with such gaping de- 
liberation that Narcissa, watching him, invariably yawned 
also. 

“Well, Jenny?” 

Miss Jenny would lay her paper aside and rise. “Let me,” 
Narcissa would say. “Let me go.” But Miss Jenny never 
would, and presently she would return with a tray and three 
glasses, and old Bayard would unlock his desk and fetch the 
silver-stoppered decanter and compound three toddies with 
ritualistic care. 

Once Bayard persuaded her into khaki and boots and 
carried her ’possum-hunting. Caspey with a streaked lan- 
tern and a cow’s horn slung over his shoulder, and Isom with 
a gunny sack and an ax and four shadowy, restless hounds 
waited for them at the lot gate and they set off among 
ghostly shocks of corn, where every day Bayard kicked up 
a covey of quail, toward the woods. 

“Where we going to start tonight, Caspey?” Bayard asked. 

“Back of Unc’ Henry’s. Dey’s one in dat grapevine behine 
de cotton house. Blue treed ’im down dar las’ night.” 


SARTORIS 229 


“How do you know he’s there tonight, Caspey?” Narcissa 
: asked. 

“He be back,” Caspey answered confidently. “He right dar 
now, watchin’ dis lantern wid his eyes scrooched up, lis- 
_ tenin’ to hear ef de dawgs wid us.” 

They climbed through a fence and Caspey stooped and 
set the lantern down. The dogs moiled and tugged about his 
legs with sniffings and throaty growls at one another as he 
unleashed them. “You, Ruby! Stan’ still, dar. Hole up here, 
you potlickin’ fool.” They whimpered and surged, their eyes 

melting in fluid brief gleams; then they faded soundlessly 
- and swiftly into the darkness. “Give ’um a little time,” Caspey 

said; “let um see ef he dar yit.” From the darkness ahead 
a dog yapped three times on a high note. “Dat’s dat young 
dog,” Caspey said. “Jes’ showin’ off. He ain’t smelt nothin’.” 
Overhead the stars swam vaguely in the hazy sky; the air was 
not yet chill, the earth still warm to the touch. They stood 
in a steady oasis of lantern light in a world of but one 
dimension, a vague cistern of darkness filled with meager 
light and topped with an edgeless canopy of ragged stars. 
- The lantern was smoking and emanating a faint odor of 
- heat. Caspey raised it and turned the wick down and set it 
at his feet again. Then from the darkness there came a single 
note, resonant and low and grave. 

“Dar he,” Isom said. 

“Hit’s Ruby,” Caspey agreed, picking up the lantern. “She 
got ’im.” The young dog yapped again, with fierce hysteria; 
then the single low cry chimed. Narcissa slid her arm through 
Bayard’s. “’Tain’t no rush,” Caspey told her. “Dey ain’t 
treed yit. Whooy. H’mawn, dawg.” The young dog had 
ceased its yapping, but still at intervals the other one bayed 
her single timbrous note, and they followed it. “H’mawn, 
dawg!” 

They stumbled a little over fading plow scars, after 
Caspey’s bobbing lantern, and the darkness went suddenly 

_crescendo with short, steady cries in four keys. “Dey got 
im,” Isom said. 

“Dat’s right,” Caspey agreed. “Le’s go. Hold ’im, dawg!” 
They trotted now, Narcissa clinging to Bayard’s arm, and 
plunged through rank grass and over another fence and 
so among trees. Eyes gleamed fleetingly from the dark- 
ness ahead; another gust of barking interspersed with tense, 


230 WILLIAM FAULKNER} 


eager whimperings, and among stumbling half-lit shadows: 
dogs surged about them. “He up dar,” Caspey said. “Ole: 
Blue sees ’im.” 

“Dar Unc’ Henry’s dawg, too,” Isom said. 

Caspey grunted. “I knowed he’d be here. He can’t kee t 
up wid a ’possum no mo’, buf jes let a dawg tree whar he: 
kin hear ’im . . .” He set the lantern on his head and peered! 
up into the vine-matted sapling, and Bayard drew a flashi 
light from his pocket and turned its beam into the tree. The: 
three older hounds and Uncle Henry’s ancient, moth-eaten } 
beast sat in a tense circle about the tree, whimpering or” 
barking in short spaced gusts, but the young one yapped | 
steadily in mad, hysterical rushes. “Kick dat puppy still,” ° 
Caspey commanded. 

“You, Ginger, hush yo’ mouf,” Isom shouted. He laid his : 
ax and sack down and caught the puppy and held it between | 
his knees. Caspey and Bayard moved slowly about the tree, 
among the eager dogs. Narcissa followed them. 

“Dem vines is so thick up dar . . .” Caspey said. 

“Here he is,’ Bayard said suddenly. “I’ve got ’im.” He 
steadied his light and Caspey moved behind him and looked 
over his shoulder. 

“Where?” Narcissa asked. “Can you see it?” 

“Dat’s right,” Caspey agreed. “Dar he is. Ruby don’t lie. 
When she say he dar, he dar.” 

“Where is he, Bayard?” Narcissa repeated. He drew her 
before him and trained the light over her head, into the 
tree, and presently from the massed vines two reddish points 
of fire not a match-breadth apart gleamed at her, winked out, 
then shone again. 

“He movin’,” Caspey said. “Young possum. Git up dar 
and shake ’im out, Isom.” Bayard held his light on the 
creature’s eyes and Caspey set his lantern down and herded 
the dogs together at his knees. Isom scrambled up into the 
tree and vanished in the mass of vine, but they could follow 
his progress by the shaking branches and his panting 
ejaculations as he threatened the animal with a mixture of 
cajolery and adjuration. 

“Hah,” he grunted, “ain’t gwine hurt you. Ain’t gwine 
do nothin’ ter you but th’ow you in de cook-pot. Look out, 
mister, I’se comin’ up dar.” More commotion; it ceased, they 


SARTORIS 231 


could hear him moving the branches cautiously. “Here he,” 
he called suddenly. “Hole dem dawgs, now.” 

“Little ’un, ain’t he?’ Caspey asked. 

“Can't tell. Can’t see nothin’ but his face. Watch dem 
dawgs.” The upper part of the sapling burst into violent 
and sustained fury; Isom whooped louder and louder as 
he shook the branches. “Whooy, here he comes,” he shouted, 
and something dropped sluggishly and reluctantly from 
branch to invisible branch, stopped; and the dogs set up 
a straining clamor. The thing fell again, and Bayard’s light 
| followed a lumpy object that plumped with a resounding 
thud to the ground and vanished immediately beneath a 
swirl of hounds. 

Caspey and Bayard leaped among them with shouts and 
| at last succeeded in dragging them clear, and Narcissa saw 
| the creature in the pool of the flash light, lying on its side in 
-a grinning curve, its eyes closed and its pink, babylike hands 
' doubled against its breast. She looked at the motionless thing 
with pity and distinct loathing—such a paradox, its vulpine, 
| skull-like grin and those tiny, human-looking hands, and 
the long ratlike tail of it. Isom dropped from the tree and 
_-Caspey turned the three straining clamorous dogs he held 
over to his nephew and picked up the ax, and while Nar- 
cissa watched in shrinking curiosity, he laid the ax across 
| the thing’s neck and put his foot on either end of the helve, 
and grasped the animal’s tail. . . . She turned and fled, her 
hand to her mouth. 

But the wall of darkness stopped her and she stood trem- 
_ bling and a little sick, watching them as they moved about 
the lantern. Then Caspey drove the dogs away, giving Uncle 
Henry’s octogenarian a hearty and resounding kick that sent 
him homeward with blood-curdling and astonished wails, and 
Isom swung the lumpy sack to his shoulder and Bayard 
turned and looked for her. “Narcissa?” 

“Here,” she answered. He came to her. 

“That’s one. We ought to get a dozen, tonight.” 

“Oh, no,” she shuddered. “No.” He peered at her; then 
he snapped his flash light full on her face. She lifted her 
hand and put it aside. 

“What’s the matter? Not tired already, are you?” 

“No.” She went on, “I just .. . Come on: they’re leaving 


29 
° 


us 


232, WILLIAM FAULKNER 


Caspey led them on into the woods. They walked now 
in a dry sibilance of leaves and crackling undergrowth. 
Trees loomed into the lantern light; above them, among the 
thinning branches, stars swam in the hushed, vague sky. The 
dogs were on ahead, and they went on among the looming 
tree trunks, sliding down into ditches where sand gleamed in 
the lantern’s pool and where the scissoring shadow of 
Caspey’s legs was enormous, struggled through snatching © 
briers and up the other bank. 

“We better head away fum de creek bottom,” Caspey sug- . 
gested. “Dey mought strike a ’coon, and den dey won’t git 
home ’fo’ day.” He bore away toward the open again; they 
emerged from the woods and crossed a field of sedge, 
odorous of sun and dust, in which the lantern was lightly 
nimbused. “H’mawn, dawg.” 

. They entered the woods again. Narcissa was beginning to 
tire, but Bayard strode on with a fine obliviousness of that 
possibility, and she followed without complaint. At last, from 
some distance away, came that single ringing cry. Caspey 
stopped. “Le’s see which way he gwine.” They stood in the 
darkness, in the sad, faintly chill decline of the year, among 
the dying trees, listening. “Whooy,” Caspey shouted mellowly. 
“Go git ’im.” 

The dog replied, and they moved again, slowly, pausing at 
intervals to listen again. The hound bayed; there were two 
voices now, and they seemed to be moving in a circle across 
their path. “Whooy,” Caspey called, his voice ebbing in 
falling echoes among the trees. They went on. Again the 
dogs gave tongue, half the circle away from where the 
first cry had come. “He ca’yin’ ’um right back whar he come 
fum,” Caspey said. “We better wait “twell dey gits *im 
straightened out.” He set the lantern down and squatted 
beside it, and Isom sloughed his burden and squatted also, and 
Bayard sat against a tree trunk and drew Narcissa down 
beside him. The dogs bayed. again, nearer. Caspey stared off 
into the darkness toward the sound. 

“T believe hit’s a ’coon dey got,” Isom said. 

“Mought be. Hill ’coon.” 

“Headin’ fer dat holler tree, ain’t he?” 

“Soun’ like it.” They listened, motionless. “We have a job, 
den,” Caspey added. “Whooy.” There was a faint chill in 
the air now, as the day’s sunlight cooled from the ground, 


SARTORIS 233 


' and Narcissa moved closer to Bayard. He took a packet of 
} cigarettes from his jacket and gave Caspey one and lit one 
for himself. Isom squatted on his heels, his eyes rolling 
_ whitely in the lantern light. 

“Gimme one, please, suh,” he said. 

“You ain’t got no business smokin’, boy,” Caspey told him. 
But Bayard gave him one, and he squatted leanly on his 
_ haunches, holding the white tube in his black diffident hand. 
There was a scurrying noise in the leaves behind them and a 

tense whimpering, and the young dog came into the light and 
slid with squeaking whimpers, and the diffident, fleeting 
- phosphorus of its eyes against Caspey’s leg. “Whut you want?” 
Caspey said, dropping his hand on its head. “Somethin’ skeer 
you out dar?” The puppy genuflected its gawky young body 
and nuzzled whimpering at Caspey’s hand. “He mus’ ’a’ 
foun’ a bear down yonder,” Caspey said. “Wouldn’t dem 
other dawgs he’p you ketch ’im?” 
“Poor little fellow,” Narcissa said. “Did he really get 
scared, Caspey? Come here, puppy.” 
_ ‘De other dawgs jes’ went off and lef ’im,” Caspey 
answered. The puppy moiled diffidently about Caspey’s knees; 
- then it scrambied up and licked his face. 

“Git down fum here!” Caspey exclaimed, and he flung 
the puppy away. It flopped awkwardly in the dry leaves and 
scrambled to its feet, and at that moment the hounds bayed 
again, mellow and chiming and timbrous in the darkness, 
and the puppy whirled and sped yapping shrilly toward the 
sound. The dogs bayed again; Isom and Caspey listened. 
“Yes, suh,” Caspey repeated, “he headin’ fer dat down 
Aree. 

“You know this country like you do the back yard, don’t 
you, Caspey?” Narcissa said. 

“Yessum, I ought to. I been over it a hund’ed times 
since I wuz bawn. Mist’ Bayard knows hit, too. He been 
huntin’ it long ez I is, pretty near. Him and Mist’ Johnny 
bofe. Miss Jenny send me wid ’um when dey had dey fust 
gun; me and dat ’ere single bar’l gun I use ter have ter tie 
together wid a string. You ’member dat ole single bar’, 
Mist’ Bayard? But hit would shoot. Many’s de fox squir’l 
we shot in dese woods. Rabbits, too.” Bayard was leaning 
back against the tree. He was gazing off into the treetops 
and the soft sky beyond, his cigarette burning slowly in his 


234 WILLIAM FAULKNER | 


hand. She looked at his bleak profile against the lantern glow ' 
and moved closer against him. But he did not respond, and! 
she slid her hand in his. But it too was cold, and again he: 
had left her for the lonely heights of his despair. Caspey ’ 
was speaking again, in his slow, consonantless voice with its | 
overtones of mellow sadness. “Mist? Johnny, now, he sho’ 
could shoot. You ’member dat time me and you and him 
wuz——” . 

Bayard rose. He dropped his cigarette and crushed it care- | 
fully with his heel. “Let’s go,” he said. “They ain’t going to © 
tree.” He drew Narcissa to her feet and turned and went on. 
Caspey got up and unslung his horn and put it to his lips. 
The sound swelled about them, grave and clear and pro- 
longed; then it died into echoes and so into silence again, 
leaving no ripple in the still darkness. 

It was near midnight when they left Caspey and Isom at 
their cabin and followed the lane toward the house. The 
barn loomed presently beside them, and the house among its 
thinning trees, against the hazy sky. He opened the gate and 
she passed through and he followed and closed it, and turn- 
ing he found her beside him, and stopped. “Bayard?” she 
whispered, leaning against him, and he put his arms around 
her and stood so, gazing above her head into the sky. She 
took his face between her palms and drew it down, but 
his lips were cold and upon them she tasted fatality and 
doom, and she clung to him for a time, her head bowed 
against his chest. 

After that she would not go with him again. So he went 
alone, returning anywhere between midnight and dawn, rip- 
ping his clothing off quietly in the darkness and sliding 
cautiously into bed. But when he was still she would touch 
him and speak his name in the dark beside him, and turn 
to him warm and soft with sleep. And they would lie so, hold- 
ing to one another in the darkness and the temporary abey- 
ance of his despair and the isolation of that doom he could 
not escape. 


RET 


2 


“Well,” Miss Jenny said briskly, above the soup, “your girl’s 
gone and left you, and now you can find time to come out 
and see your kinfolks, can’t you?” 

Horace grinned a little. “To tell the truth, I came out to 
get something to eat. I don’t think that one woman in ten 

has any aptitude for housekeeping, but my place is certainly 
not in the home.” 

“You mean,” Miss Jenny corrected, “that not one man in 
ten has sense enough to marry a decent cook.” 

“Maybe they have more sense and consideration for others 
than to spoil decent cooks,” he suggested. 

“Yes,” young Bayard said, “even a cook’ll quit work when 
she gets married.” 

“Dat’s de troof,” Simon, propped in a slightly florid attitude 
against the sideboard, in a collarless boiled shirt and his 
Sunday pants (it is Thanksgiving Day) and reeking a little of 
whisky in addition to his normal odors, agreed. “I had to 
fin’ Euphrony fo’ new cookin’ places de fust two mont’ we 
wuz ma’ied.” 

Dr. Peabody said, “Simon must have married somebody 
else’s cook.” 

“Td rather marry somebody else’s cook than somebody 
else’s wife,” Miss Jenny snapped. 

“Miss Jenny!” Narcissa reproved. “You hush.” 

“T’m sorry,” Miss Jenny said immediately. “I wasn’t saying 
that at you, Horace; it just popped into my head. I was talking 
to you, Loosh Peabody. You think, just because you’ve eaten 
off of us Thanksgiving and Christmas for sixty years, that 
you can come into my own house and laugh at me, don’t 
you?” 

“Hush, Miss Jenny!” Narcissa repeated. Horace put down 
his spoon, and Narcissa’s hand found his beneath the table. 

“What’s that?” Old Bayard, his napkin tucked into his 
waistcoat, lowered his spoon and cupped his hand to his ear. 

“Nothing,” young Bayard told him. “Aunt Jenny and Doc 
fighting again. Come alive, Simon.” Simon stirred and re- 


AA L 


236 WILLIAM FAULKNER | 


moved the soup plates, but laggardly, still giving his in--: 
terested attention to the altercation. 

“Yes,” Miss Jenny rushed on, “just because that old fool . 
of a Will Falls put axle grease on a little bump on his face 
without killing him, you have to go around swelled up like 
a poisoned dog. What did you have to do with it? You | 
certainly didn’t take it off. Maybe you conjured. it on his face 
to begin with?” 

“Haven't you got a piece of bread or something Miss — 
Jenny can put in her mouth, Simon?” Dr. Peabody asked © 
mildly. Miss Jenny glared at him a moment; then she flopped — 
back in her chair. | 

“You, Simon! Are you dead?” Simon removed the plates 
and bore them out, and the guests sat avoiding one another’s 
eyes a little while Miss Jenny, behind her barricade of cups 
and urns and jugs and things, continued to breathe fire and 
brimstone. 

“Will Falls,” old Bayard repeated. “Jenny, tell Simon, when 
he fixes that basket, to come to my office; I’ve got something 
to go in it.” This was the pint flask of whisky which he in- 
cluded in old man Falls’ Thanksgiving and Christmas basket 
and which the old fellow divided out by spoonfuls as far 
as it would go among his ancient and homeless cronies on 
those days; and invariably old Bayard reminded her to tell 
Simon of something which neither of them had overlooked. 

“All right,” she returned. Simon reappeared, with a huge 
silver coffee-urn, set it beside Miss Jenny, and retreated to 
the kitchen. 

“How many of you want coffee now?” she asked gen- 
erally. “Bayard will no more sit down to a meal without 
his coffee than he’d fly. Will you, Horace?” He declined, 
and without looking at Dr. Peabody she said, “I reckon 
you'll have to have some, won’t you?” 

“If it’s no trouble,” he answered mildly. He winked at 
Narcissa and assumed an expression of lugubrious diffidence. 
Miss Jenny drew two cups, and Simon appeared with a 
huge platter borne gallantly and precariously aloft and set it 
before old Bayard with a magnificent flourish. 

“My God, Simon,” young Bayard said, “where did you get 
a whale this time of year?” 

“Dat’s a fish in dis worl’, mon,” Simon agreed. And it was 
a fish. It was a yard long and broad as a saddle blanket; it 


) il 


SARTORIS 237. 


‘was a jolly red color and it lay gaping on the platter with an 
air of dashing and rollicking joviality. 
“Dammit, Jenny,” old Bayard said pettishly, “what did you 


want to have this thing for? Who wants to clutter his 
_ stomach up with fish in November, with a kitchen full of 


*possum and turkey and squirrel?” 
“There are other people to eat here besides you,” she 
tetorted. “If you don’t want any, don’t eat it. We always 


| had a fish course at home,” she added. “But you can’t wean 


these Mississippi country folks away from bread and meat 
to save your life. Here, Simon.” Simon set a stack of plates 
before old Bayard and he now came with his tray and 


| Miss Jenny put two coffee cups on it and he served them to 


old Bayard and Dr. Peabody. Miss Jenny drew a cup for 
herself, and Simon passed sugar and cream. Old Bayard, still 


grumbling heavily, carved the fish. 


“T ain't ever found anything wrong with fish at any 
time of year,” Dr. Peabody said. 
“You wouldn’t,” Miss Jenny snapped. Again he winked 


| heavily at Narcissa. 


“Only,” he continued, “I like to catch my own, out of 


| my own pond. Mine have mo’ food value.” 


“Still got your pond, Doc?” young Bayard asked. 
“Yes. But the fishin’ ain’t been so good, this year. Abe 


had the flu last winter, and ever since he’s been goin’ to sleep 
_ on me, and J have to sit there and wait until he wakes up to 
_ take the fish off and bait the hook again. But finally I thought 


about tyin’ a cord to his leg and the other end of it to the 
bench, and now when I get a bite, I just reach around and 
give the string a yank and wake ’im up. You'll have to bring 
yo’ wife out some day, Bayard. She ain’t neve, seen my 
pond.” 

“You haven’t?” Bayard asked Narcissa. She had not. “He’s 
got benches all around it, with footrests, and a railing just 
high enough to prop your pole on, and a nigger to every 
fisherman to bait his hook and take the fish off. I don’t see 
why you feed all those niggers, Doc.” 

“Well, I’ve had ’em around so long I don’t know how to 
get shut of ’em, “less I drown ’em. Feedin’ ’em is the main 
trouble, though. Takes everything I can make. If it wasn’t 
for them, I'd ’a’ quit practicin’ long ago. That’s the reason I 


238 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


dine out whenever I can: every time I get a free meal, it’s 
the same as a half holiday to a workin’ man.” 

“How many have you got, Doctor?” Narcissa asked. 

“I don’t rightly know,” he answered. “I got six or seven 
registered ones, but I don’t know how many scrubs I 
have. I see a new yearlin’ every day or so.” Simon was 
watching him with rapt interest. > 4 

“You ain’t got no extry room out dar, is you, Doctuh?” 
he asked. “Here I slaves all de livelong day, keepin’ ’um 
in vittles en sech.” ; 

“Can you eat cold fish and greens every day?” Dr. Peabody 
asked him solemnly. 

“Well, suh,” Simon answered doubtfully, “I ain’t so sho’ 
erbout dat. I burnt out on fish once, when I wuz a young 
man, en I ain’t had no right stomach fer it since.” 

“Well, that’s all we have to eat, out home.” 

“All right, Simon,” Miss Jenny said. Simon was propped 
Statically against the sideboard, watching Dr. Peabody 
with musing astonishment. 

“En you keeps yo’ size on cole fish en greens? Gen- 
tlemun, I’d be a bone-rack on dem kine o’ vittles in two 
weeks, I sholy would.” 

“Simon!” Miss Jenny raised her voice sharply. “Why won’t 
you let him alone, Loosh, so he can ’tend to his business?” 
Simon came abruptly untranced and removed the fish. Be- 
neath the table Narcissa slipped her hand in Horace’s again. 

“Lay off of Doc, Aunt Jenny,” young Bayard said. He 
touched his grandfather’s arm. “Can’t you make her let Doc 
alone?” 

“What’s he doing, Jenny?” old Bayard asked. ““Won’t he eat 
his dinner?” 

“None of us’ll get anything to eat if he sits there and 
talks to Simon about cold fish and turnip greens,” Miss Jenny 
replied. 

“I think you’re mean, to treat him like you do, Miss 
Jenny,” Narcissa said. 

“Well, it gives me something to be thankful for,” Dr. 
Peabody answered, “that you never took me when you had 
the chance. I went and proposed to Jenny once,” he told 
them. 

“You old gray-headed liar,” Miss Jenny said, “you never 
did any such a thing!” 


os 


SARTORIS 239 


“Oh, yes, I did. Only I did it on John Sartoris’ account. 
He said he was havin’ mo’ trouble than he could stand with 
politics outside his home. And, do you know é 
“Loosh Peabody, you’re the biggest liar in the world!” 
“—_T pretty near had her persuaded for a while? It was that 
first spring them weeds she brought out here from Ca’lina 
bloomed, and there was a moon and we were in the garden 
and there was a mockin’-bird eZ 
“No such thing!” Miss Jenny shouted. “There never 
was z 
“Look at her face, if you believe I’m lyin’,” Dr. Pea- 
| body said. 
| “Look at her face,” young Bayard echoed rudely. “She’s 
| blushing!” 
And she was blushing, but her cheeks were like banners, 
'and her head was still high amid the gibing laughter. 
| Narcissa rose and came to her and laid her arm about 
| her trim erect. shoulders. “You all hush this minute,” she 
| said. “You’d better consider yourselves lucky that any of us 
| ever marry you, and flattered even when we refuse.” 
“J am flattered,” Dr. Peabody rejoined, “or I wouldn’t be 
a widower now.” 
“Who wouldn’t be a widower, the size of a hogshead and 
living on cold fish and turnip greens?” Miss Jenny said. 
“Sit down, honey. I ain’t scared of any man alive.” 
Narcissa resumed her seat, and Simon appeared again, with 
Isom in procession now, and for the next few minutes they 
- moved steadily between kitchen and dining-room with a roast 
turkey and a smoked ham and a dish of quail and another 
of squirrels, and a baked ’possum in a bed of sweet potatoes 
and squash and pickled beets, and sweet potatoes and Irish 
potatoes, and rice and hominy, and hot biscuit and beaten 
biscuit and delicate long sticks of cornbread, and strawberry 
and pear preserves, and quince and apple jelly, and stewed 
cranberries and pickled peaches. 

Then they ceased talking for a while and really ate, glanc- 
ing now and then across the table at one another in a rosy 
glow of amicability and steamy odors. From time to time 
Isom entered with hot bread, while Simon stood overlooking 
the field somewhat as Caesar must have stood looking down 
into Gaul, once it was well in hand, or the Lord God Him- 


240 WILLIAM FAULKNER | 


self when He contemplated his latest chemical experiment : 
and saw that it was good. 

“After this, Simon,” Dr. Peabody said, and he sighed a. 
little, “I reckon I can take you on and find you a little 
side meat now and then.” : 

“I ’speck you kin,” Simon agreed, watching them like an 
eagle-eyed general who rushes reserves to the threatened | 
points, pressing more food upon them as they faltered. But | 
even Dr. Peabody allowed himself vanquished after a time, | 
and then Simon brought in pies of three kinds, and a small, © 
deadly plum pudding, and a cake baked cunningly with — 
whisky and nuts and fruits and ravishing as odors of heaven 
and treacherous and fatal as sin; and at last, with an air 
sibylline and solemnly profound, a bottle of port. The sun lay — 
hazily in the glowing west, falling levelly through the win- 
dows and on the silver arrayed on the sideboard, dream- 
ing in mellow gleams among its placid rotundities and on the 
colored panes in the fanlight high in the western wall. 


But that was November, the season of hazy, languorous 
days, when the first flush of autumn is over and winter 
beneath the sere horizon breathes yet a spell—November, 
when like a shawled matron among her children, the year 
dies peacefully, without pain and of no disease. Early in 
December the rains set in and the year turned gray beneath 
the season of dissolution and of death. All night long and 
all-day it whispered on the roof and along the eaves. The 
trees shed their final stubborn leaves in it and gestured their 
black and sorrowful branches against ceaseless vistas; only a 
lone hickory at the foot of the park kept its leaves, gleam- 
ing like a sodden flame on the eternal azure, and beyond 
the valley the hills were hidden by a swaddling of rain. 

Almost daily, despite Miss Jenny’s strictures and commands 
and the grave protest in Narcissa’s eyes, Bayard went forth 
with a shotgun and the two dogs, to return just before 
dark, wet to the skin. And cold; his lips would be chill on 
hers and his eyes bleak and haunted, and in the yellow 
firelight of their room she would cling to him, or lie crying 
quietly in the darkness beside his rigid body, with a ghost be- 
tween them. 

“Look here,” Miss Jenny said, coming on her as she sat 
brooding before the fire in old Bayard’s den, “you spend 


SARTORIS 241 


too much time this way; you’re getting moony. Stop worrying 

_ about him; he’s spent half his life soaking wet, yet neither 
one of ’em ever had-a cold even, that I can remember.” 

“Hasn’t he?” she answered listlessly. Miss Jenny stood 
beside her chair, watching her keenly. Then she laid her 
hand on Narcissa’s head, quite gently for a Sartoris. 

“Are you worrying because maybe he don’t love you like 
you think he ought to?” 

“Tt isn’t that,” she answered. “He doesn’t love anybody. He 
won’t even love the baby. He doesn’t seem to be glad, or 
sorry, or anything.” 

“No,” Miss Jenny agreed. The fire crackled and leaped 
among the resinous logs. Beyond the gray window the day 
dissolved endlessly. “Listen,” Miss Jenny said abruptly. “Don’t 
you ride in that car with him any more. You hear?” 

“No. It won’t make him drive slowly. Nothing will.” 

“Of course not. Nobody believes it will, not even his 
grandfather. He goes along for the same reason that boy 
himself does. Sartoris. It’s in the blood. Savages, every one 
of ’em. No earthly use to anybody.” Together they gazed 
into the leaping flames, Miss Jenny’s hand still lying on 
Narcissa’s head. “I’m sorry I got you into this.” 

“You didn’t do it. Nobody got me into it. I did it myself.” 

“H’m,” Miss Jenny said. And then: “Would you do it over 
again?” The other did not reply, and she repeated the ques- 
tion. “Would you?” 

“Yes,” Narcissa answered. “Don’t you know I would?” 
Again there was silence between them, in which without 
words they sealed their hopeless pact with that fine and pas- 
Sive courage of women. Narcissa rose. 

“I believe I'll go in and spend the day with Horace, if you 
don’t mind,” she said. 

“All right,” Miss Jenny agreed. “I believe I would, too. 
Horace probably needs a little looking after, by now. 
He leoked sort of gaunt when he was out here last week. 
Like he wasn’t getting proper food.” 


When she entered the kitchen door Eunice, the cook, 
turned from the bread board and lifted her hands in a 
soft, dark gesture. “Well, Miss Narcy,” she said, “we ain’t 
seed you in a mont’. Is you come all de way in de rain?” 

“I came in the carriage. It was too wet for the car.” She 


242 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


came into the room. Eunice watched her with grave pleas- 
ure. “How are you all getting along?” 

“He gits enough to eat,” Eunice answered; “I sees to dat. 
But I has to make him eat it. He needs you back here.” ~ 

“I’m here, for the day, anyhow. What have you got for 
dinner?” Together they lifted lids and peered into the sim- 
mering vessels on the stove and in the oven. “Oh, chocolate | 
pie!” : 

“I has to toll ’im wid dat,” Eunice explained. “He’ll eat | 
anything, ef I jes’ makes ’im a chocolate pie,’ she added | 
proudly. ; 

“I bet he does,” Narcissa agreed. “Nobody can make 
chocolate pies like yours.” 

“Dis one ain’t turnt out so well,” Eunice said, deprecatory. 
“T ain’t so pleased wid it.” 

“Why, Eunice! It’s perfect.” 

“No’m, it ain’t up to de mark,” Eunice insisted. But she 
beanied, gravely diffident, and for a few minutes the two of 
them talked amicably while Narcissa pried into cupboards 
and boxes. 

Then she returned to the house and mounted to her room. 
The dressing-table was bare of its intimate silver and crystal, 
and the drawers were empty, and the entire room, with its 
air of still and fading desolation, reproached her. Chill too; 
there had been no fire in the grate since last spring, and on 
the table beside the bed, forgotten and withered and dead, 
was a small bunch of flowers in a blue vase. Touching them, 
they crumbled in her fingers, leaving a stain, and the water in 
the vase smelled of rank decay. She opened the window and 
threw them out. 

The room was too chill to stop in long, and she decided 
to ask Eunice to build a fire on the hearth for the comfort 
of that part of her which still lingered here, soberly and a 
little sorrowful in the chill and reproachful desolation. At 
her chest of drawers she paused again and remembered 
those letters, fretfully and with a little musing alarm, dep- 
recating anew her carelessness in not destroying them. But 
maybe she had, and so she entered again into the closed 
circle of her bewilderment and first fear, trying to remember 
what she had done with them. But she was certain that she ~ 
had left them in the drawer with her under things, positive 
that she had put them there. Yet she had never been able 


. SARTORIS 243 


to find them, nor had Eunice nor Horace seen them. The day 
she had missed them was the day before her wedding, when 
she had packed her things. That day she had missed them, 
finding in their stead one in a different handwriting, which 
she did not remember having received. The gist of it was 
plain enough, although she had not understood some of it 
literally. But on that day she had read it with tranquil de- 
tachment: it and all it brought to mind was definitely behind 
'-her now. And lacking even this, she would not have been 
shocked if she had comprehended it. Curious a little, per- 
haps, at some of the words, but that is all. 

But what she had done with those other letters she could 
not remember, and not being able to gave her moments of 
definite fear when she considered the possibility that people 
might learn that some one had had such thoughts about her 
' and put them into words. Well, they were gone; there was 
nothing to do save hope that she had destroyed them as she 
had the last one, or if she had not, to trust that they would 
never be found. Yet that brought back the original distaste 
and dread: the possibility that the intactness of her deep and 
heretofore inviolate serenity might be the sport of cir- 
| cumstance; that she must trust to chance against the eventual- 
| ity of a stranger casually picking a stray bit of paper from 
the ground.... 

But she would put this firmly aside, for the time being, 
at least. This should be Horace’s day, and her own too— 
a surcease from that ghost-ridden dream to which she clung, 
_ waking. She descended the stairs. There was a fire in the 
living-room. It had burned down to embers, however, and 
she put coal on it and punched it to a blaze. That would 
be the first thing he’d see when he entered; perhaps he’d 
wonder, perhaps he’d know before he entered, having 
sensed her presence. She considered telephoning him, and 
she mused indecisively for a moment before the fire, then 
decided to let it be a surprise. But supposing he didn’t come 
home to dinner because of the rain. She considered this, and 
pictured him walking along a street in the rain, and im- 
mediately and with instinctive foreknowledge, she went to 
the closet beneath the stairs and opened the door. It was as 
she had known; his overcoat and his raincoat both hung 
there, and the chances were he didn’t even have an umbrella; 
and again irritation and exasperation and untroubled af- 


244 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


fection welled within her and it was as it had been of old 
again, and all that had since come between them rolled away . 
like clouds. 

Heretofore her piano had always been rolled into the 
living-room when cold weather came. But now it stood yet in 
the smaller alcove. There was a fireplace here, but no fire had 
been lighted yet, and the room was chilly. Beneath her hands 
the cold keys gave forth a sluggish chord, accusing, reproving © 
too, and she returned to the fire and stood where she could — 
see, through the window, the drive beneath its somber, drip- _ 
ping cedars. The small clock on the mantel behind her chimed 
twelve, and she went to the window and stood with her nose 
touching the chill glass and her breath frosting it over. Soon, 
now: he was erratic in his hours, but never tardy, and every 
time an umbrella came into sight her heart leaped a little. 
But it was not he, and she followed the bearer’s plodding 
passage until he shifted the umbrella enough for her to rec- 
ognize him, and so she did not see Horace until he was half- 
way up the drive. His hat was turned down about his face 
and his coat collar was hunched to his ears, and as she had 
known, he didn’t even have an umbrella. 

“Oh, you idiot,” she said and ran to the door and through 
the curtained glass she saw his shadowy shape come leaping 
up the steps. He flung the door open and entered, whipping 
his sodden hat against his leg, and so did not see her until — 
she stepped forth. “You idiot,” she said, “where’s your rain- 
coat?” 

For a moment he stared at her with his wild and diffident 
unrepose; then he said “Narcy!” and his face lighted and he 
swept her into his wet arms. 

“Don’t,” she cried, “You’re wet!” But he swung her from 
the floor, against his sopping chest, repeating ““Narcy, Narcy”; 
then his cold nose was against her face and she tasted rain. 

“Narcy,” he said again, hugging her, and she ceased re- 
sisting and clung to him. Then abruptly he released her and 
jerked his head up and stared at her with sober intensity. 
“Narcy,” he said, still staring at her, “has that surly black- 
guar 9? 

“No, of course not,” she amswered sharply. “Have you 
gone crazy?” Then she clung to him again, wet clothes and 
all, as though she would never let him go. “Oh, Horry,” 
she said, “I’ve been a beast to you!” 


3 


This time it was a Ford car, and Bayard saw its wild skid 
as the driver tried to jerk it across the treacherous, thawing 
— road, and in the flashing moment and with swift amusement, 
he saw, between the driver’s cravatless collar and the wom- 
an’s stocking bound around his head beneath his hat and 
tied under his chin, his Adam’s apple like a scared puppy in 
a tow sack. This flashed on and behind, and Bayard wrenched 
the wheel. The stalled Ford swam sickeningly into view again 
as the big car slewed on the greasy surface, its declutched 
engine roaring. Then the Ford swam from sight again as he 
wrenched the wheel over and slammed the clutch in for more 
stability; and once more that sickening, unhurried rush as 
the car refused to regain its feet and the frosty December 


world swept laterally across his vision. Old Bayard lurched 


against him; from the corner of his eye he could see the 
old fellow’s hand clutching the top of the door. Now they 
were facing the bluff on which the cemetery lay; directly 
above them John Sartoris’ effigy lifted its florid stone gesture 
and from amid motionless cedars gazed out on the valley 
where for two miles the railroad he had built ran beneath his 
carven eyes. Bayard wrenched the wheel once more. 

On the other side of the road a precipice dropped sheer 
away, among scrub cedars and corroded ridges skeletoned 
brittlely with frost and muddy ice where the sun had not 
yet reached. The rear end of the car hung timelessly over 
this before it swung again, with the power full on, swung on 
until its nose pointed downhill again, with never a slackening 
of its speed. But still it would not come into the ruts, and it 

had lost the crown of the road, and although they had al- 
- most reached the foot of the hill, Bayard saw that they 
would not make it. Just before they slipped off he wrenched 
the steering-wheel over and swung the nose straight over 
the bank, and the car poised lazily for a moment, as though 
taking breath. “Hang on,” he shouted to his grandfather; 
then they plunged. 

An interval utterly without sound, in which all sensation 


245 


246 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


of motion was lost. Then scrub cedar burst crackling about 
them and whipping branches of it exploded on the radiator _ 
and slapped viciously at them as they leaned with braced 
feet, and the car slewed in a long bounce. Another vacuum- 
like interval, then a shock that banged the wheel into Bay- 
ard’s chest and jerked it in his tight hands, wrenching his 
arm-sockets. Beside him his grandfather lurched forward and 
Bayard threw out his arm just in time to keep the other © 
from crashing through the windshield. “Hang on,” he shouted. 
The car had never faltered and he dragged the leaping wheel — 
over and swung it down the ravine and opened the engine, 
and with the engine and the momentum of the plunge, they 
rocked and crashed on down the ditch and turned and heaved 
up the now shallow bank and on to the road again. Bayard 
brought it to a stop. 

He sat motionless for a moment. “Whew,” he said. And 
then, “Great God in the mountain.” His grandfather sat 
motionless beside him, his hand still clutching the door and 
his head bent a little. “Think I’ll have a cigarette after that,” 
Bayard added. He dug one from his pocket, and a match; 
his hands were shaking. “I thought of that damn concrete 
bridge again, just as we went over,” he explained, apologet- 
ically. He took a deep draught at his cigarette and glanced at 
his grandfather. “Y’all right?’ Old Bayard made no reply, 
and with his cigarette poised Bayard looked at him. He sat ~ 
as before, his head bent a little and his hand on the door. 
“Grandfather?” Bayard said sharply. Still old Bayard didn’t 
move, even when his grandson flung the cigarette away and 
shook him roughly. 


4 


Up the last hill the tireless pony bore him and in the low 
December sun their shadow fell long across the ridge and 
into the valley beyond, from which the high shrill yapping 
of the dogs came on the frosty, windless air. Young dogs, 
Bayard told himself, and he sat his horse in the faint scar of 
the road, listening as the high-pitched hysteria of them swept 
echoing across his aural field. Motionless, he could feel frost 


SARTORIS 247 


in the air. Above him the pines, though there was no wind 
in them, made a continuous dry, wild sound, as though the 
frost in the air had found voice; above them, against the 
high evening blue, a shallow V of geese slid. ‘““There’ll be ice 
tonight,” he thought, watching them and thinking of black 
backwaters where they would come to rest, of rank bayonets 
of dead grass about which water would shrink soon in fixed 
glassy ripples in the brittle darkness. Behind him the earth 


rolled away ridge on ridge blue as wood-smoke, on into a 
| sky like thin congealed blood. He turned in his saddle and 


stared unwinking into the sun that spread like a crimson egg 


| broken on the ultimate hills. That meant weather; he snuffed 
the still, tingling air, hoping he smelled snow. 


The pony snorted and tossed his head experimentally and 


-found the reins slack and lowered his nose and snorted again 


into the dead leaves and delicate sere needles of pine beneath 
his feet. “Come up, Perry,” Bayard said, jerking the reins. 


| Perry raised his head and broke into a stiff, jolting trot, but 
_ Bayard lifted him smartly out of it and into his steady fox 
| trot again. 


He had not gone far when the dogs broke again into 


' clamorous uproar to his left and suddenly near, and as he 
' Teined Perry back and peered ahead along the fading scar 


of the road, he saw the fox trotting sedately toward him in 


| the middle of it. Perry saw it at the same time and laid his 
_ fine ears back and rolled his young eyes. But the animal 


came on unawares at its steady, unhurried trot, glancing back 


| Over its shoulder from time to time. “Well, I'll be damned,” 


Bayard whispered, holding Perry rigid between his knees. 

The fox was not forty yards away; still it came on, seemingly 

utterly unaware of the horseman. Then Bayard shouted. 
The animal glanced at him; the level sun swam redly and 


| fleetingly in its eyes; then with a single modest flash of brown 


it was gone. Bayard expelled his breath: his heart was thump- 


ing against his ribs. “Whooy,” he yelled. “Come on, dogs!” 


The din of them swelled to a shrill pandemonium and the 
pack boiled into the road in a chaos of spotted hides and 


flapping tongues and ears. None of them was more than 


half grown, and ignoring the horse and rider they surged 
still clamoring into the undergrowth where the fox had van- 
ished and shrieked frantically on; and as Bayard stood in his 
stirrups and gazed after them, preceded by yapping in a still 


248 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


higher and more frantic key, two even smaller puppies — 
swarmed out of the woods and galloped past him on their» 
short legs with whimpering cries and expressions of ludi- 
crous and mad concern. Then the clamor died into hysterical 
echoes and so away. 

He rode on. On either hand was a ridge: the one darklise 
like a bronze bastion, on the other the final rays of the sun | 
lying redly. The air crackled and tingled in his nostrils and 
seared his lungs with exhilarating needles. The road followed 
the valley. But half the sun now showed above the western | 
wall, and among intermittent trees he rode stirrup-deep in 
shadow like cold water. He would just about reach the house — 
before dark, and he shook Perry up a little. The clamor of the - 
dogs swelled again ahead of him, approaching the road, and — 
he lifted Perry into a canter. 

Presently before him lay a glade—an old field, sage- 
grown, its plow scars long healed over. The sun filled it with — 
dying gold and he pulled Perry short upstanding; there, at — 
the corner of the field beside the road, sat the fox. It sat 
there on its haunches like a dog, watching the trees across — 
the glade, and Bayard sent Perry forward again. The fox | 
turned its head and looked at him with a covert, fleeting 
glance, but without alarm, and Bayard halted Perry in in- 
tense astonishment. The clamor of the dogs swept nearer 
through the woods; yet the fox sat on its haunches, watching 
the man with covert stolen glances, paying the dogs no heed. 
It revealed no alarm whatever, not even when the puppies 
burst yapping madly into the glade. They moiled at the 
wood’s edge for a time while the fox divided its attention 
between them and the man. 

At last the largest puppy, evidently the leader, saw the 
quarry. Immediately they stopped their noise and trotted 
across the glade and squatted in a circle facing the fox, their 
tongues lolling. Then with one accord they turned about and 
faced the darkening woods, from which, and nearer and 
nearer, came that spent, frantic yapping in a higher key. 
The largest dog barked once; the yapping among the trees 
swelled with frantic relief and the two smaller puppies ap- 
peared and burrowed like moles through the sedge and came 
up. Then the fox rose and cast another quick, furtive glance 
at the horseman, and surrounded by the amicable weary 
calico of the puppies, trotted up the road and vanished 


hae 
me 
er 

Cad 


j SARTORIS 249 


- among the trees. “Well, I’ll be damned,” Bayard said, gazing 
after them. “Come up, Perry.” 
At last a pale and windless plume of smoke stood above 
_ the trees ahead, and he emerged from the woods and in the 
rambling wall of the house a window glowed with ruddy in- 
| Vitation across the twilight. Dogs had already set up a reso- 
nant, bell-like uproar; above it Bayard could distinguish the 
clear tenor of puppies and a voice shouting at them, and as 
-he halted Perry in the yard, the fox was vanishing diffidently 
but without haste beneath the house. A lean figure faced him 
_in the dusk, with an ax in one hand and an armful of wood, 
_ and Bayard said: 
_ “What the devil’s that thing, Buddy? That fox?” 
_ “That’s Ellen,’ Buddy answered. He put the wood down 
deliberately, and the ax, and he came and shook Bayard’s 
_ hand once limply, in the country fashion, but his hand was 
hard and firm. “How you?” 
_ “All right,” Bayard answered. “I came out to get that old 
| fox Rafe was telling me about.” 
_ “Sure,” Buddy agreed in his slow, infrequent voice. We 
been expectin’ you. Git down and lemme take yo’ pony.” 
| “No, Till do it. You take the wood on in; ll put Perry 
up.” But Buddy was firm, without insistence or rudeness, and 
_Bayard surrendered the horse to him. 
__ “Henry,” Buddy shouted at the house, “Henry.” A door 
opened on jolly leaping flames; a figure stood squatly in it. 
_“Here’s Bayard,” he said. “Go on in and warm,” he added, 
leading Perry away. Dogs surrounded Bayard; he picked up 
_ the wood and the ax and went on toward the house in a ghost- 
ly, spotted surge of dogs, and the figure stood in the lighted 
doorway while he mounted the veranda and leaned the ax 
against the wall. 
“How you?” Henry said, and again the handshake was 
limp, again the hand firm and kind; flabbier though than 
_Buddy’s hard young flesh. He relieved Bayard of the wood 
and they entered the house. The walls of the room were of 
-chinked logs. On them hung two or three outdated calendars 
and a patent medicine lithograph in colors. The floor was 
bare, of hand-trimmed boards scuffed with heavy boots and 
polished by the pads of generations of dogs; two men could 
lie side by side in the fireplace. In it now four-foot logs 
blazed against the clay fireback, swirling in wild plumes 


250 WILLIAM FAULKNERE 


into the chimney’s dark maw, and in silhouette against it, 
his head haloed by the shaggy silver disorder of his hair,: 
Virginius MacCallum sat. “Hyer’s Bayard Sartoris, Pappy, 2h 
Henry said. 

The old man turned in his chair with grave, leonine delibed 
eration and extended his hand without rising. In 1861 hes 
was sixteen and he had walked to Lexington, Virginia, and= 
enlisted, served four years in the Stonewall brigade andi 
walked back to Mississippi and built himself a house and gotii 
married. His wife’s dot was a clock and a dressed hog; his! 
own father gave them a mule. His wife was dead these many; 
years, and her successor was dead, but he sat now before: 
the fireplace at which that hog had been cooked, beneath the: 
roof he had built in °66, and on the mantel above him the: 
clock sat, deriding that time whose servant it once had been. . 
“Well, boy?” he said. “You took yo’ time about comin’. 
How’s yo’ folks?” 

“Pretty well, sir,” Bayard answered. He looked at the: 
old man’s hale, ruddy face intently and sharply. No, they* 
hadn’t heard yet. 

“We been expectin’ you ever since Rafe seen you in town! 
last spring. Henry, tell Mandy to set another plate.” 

Four dogs had followed him into the room. Three of them | 
watched him gravely with glowing eyes; the other one, a blue- + 
ticked hound with an expression of majestic gravity, came : 
and touched its cold nose to his hand. “Hi, Gen’ral,” he said, , 
rubbing its ears, whereupon the other dogs approached and | 
thrust their noses against his hands. 

“Pull up a cheer,” Mr. MacCallum said. He squared his : 
own chair around and Bayard obeyed. The dogs followed - 
him, surging with blundering decorum about his knees. “I | 
keep sendin’ word in to git yo’ granpappy out hyer,” the old . 
man continued, “but he’s too ’tarnal proud, or too damn lazy 
to come. Hyer, Gen’ral! Git away from thar. Kick ’em away, 
Bayard. Henry!” he shouted. Henry appeared. “Drive these | 
damn dogs out of hyer till after supper.” 

Henry drove the dogs from the room. Mr. MacCallum | 
picked up a long sliver of pine from the hearth and fired it 
and lit his pipe, and smothered the sliver in the ashes and 
laid it on the hearth again. “Rafe and Lee air in town today,” 
he said. “You could have come out with them in a waggin. 
But I reckon you’d ruther have yo’ own hoss.” 


ay 


' SARTORIS 251 


“Yes, sir,’ he answered quietly. Then they would know. 
' He stared into the fire for a time, rubbing his hands slowly 
- on his knees, and for an instant he saw the recent months of 
his life coldly in all their headlong and heedless wasteful- 
ness; saw its entirety like the swift unrolling of a film, cul- 
| Minating in that which he had been warned against and that 
any fool might have foreseen. Well, damn it, suppose it had: 
“was he to blame? Had he insisted that his grandfather ride 
with him? Had he given the old fellow a bum heart? and 
‘then, coldly: You were afraid to go home. You made a nigger 
sneak your horse out to you. You, who deliberately do things 
your judgment tells you may not be successful, even possible, 
are afraid to face the consequences of your own acts. Then 
again something bitter and deep and sleepless in him blazed 
out in vindication and justification and accusation; what, he 
knew not, blazing out at what, Whom, he did not know: You 
did it! You caused it all; you killed Johnny. 

Henry had drawn a chair up to the fire, and after a while 
the old man tapped his clay pipe carefully out against his 
palm and drew a huge, turnip-shaped silver watch from his 
corduroy vest. “Half after five,” he said. “Ain’t them boys 
got in yet?” 

“They're here,” Henry answered briefly. “Heard ’em takin’ 
out when I put out the dawgs.” 

“Git the jug, then,” his father ordered. Henry rose and 
departed again, and presently feet clumped heavily on the 
porch and Bayard turned in his chair and stared bleakly at 
the door. It opened and Rafe and Lee entered. 

“Well, well,” Rafe said, and his lean, dark face lighted a 
little. “Got here at last, did you?’ He shook Bayard’s hand, 
and Lee followed him. Lee’s face, like all of them, was a dark, 
saturnine mask. He was not so stocky as Rafe, and least talk- 
ative of them all. His eyes were black and restless; behind 
them lurked something wild and sad. He shook Bayard’s hand 
without a word. 

But Bayard was watching Rafe. There was nothing in 
Rafe’s face; no coldness, no questioning. Was it possible that 
he could have been to town, yet not heard? Or had Bayard 
himself dreamed it? But he remembered that unmistakable 
feel of his grandfather when he had touched him; remem- 
bered how he had slumped suddenly as though the very fiber 
of him, knit so erect and firm for so long by pride and the 


252 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


perverse necessity of his family doom, had given way all ati 
once, letting his skeleton rest at last. Mr. MacCallum spoke. 

“Did you git to the express office?” 

“We never got to town,” Rafe answered. “Axletree broke: 
just this side of Vernon. Had: to uncouple the wagon andi 
drive to Vernon and get it patched up. Too late to go ih, 4 
then. We got our supplies there and come on home.” 

“Well, hit don’t matter. You’ll be goin’ in next week, toe 
Christmas,” the old man said. Bayard drew a long breath | 
and lit a cigarette, and on a draft of vivid darkness Buddy’ 
entered and came and squatted leanly in the shadowy chim- « 
ney corner. 

“Got that fox you were telling me about hid out yet?” ‘ 
Bayard asked Rafe. 

“Sure. And we'll get him, this time. Maybe tomorrow. | 
Weather’s changin’.” 

“Snow?” 

“Might be. What’s it goin’ to do tonight, pappy?” 

“Rain,” the old man answered. “Tomorrow, too. Scent 
won't lay good till We’n’sday. Henry!” After a moment he 
shouted “Henry” again, and Henry entered with a black- | 
ened kettle trailing a faint plume of vapor and a stoneware © 
jug and a thick tumbler with a metal spoon in it. There was — 
something domestic, womanish, about Henry, with his squat, 
slightly tubby figure and his mild brown eyes and his capable, 
unhurried hands. He it was who superintended the kitchen 
(he was a better cook now than Mandy) and the house, where 
he could be found most of the time, pottering soberly at some 
endless task. He visited town almost as infrequently as his 
father; he cared little for hunting, and his sole relaxation 
was making whisky, good whisky and for family consump- 
tion alone, in a secret fastness known only to his father and 
the Negro who assisted him, after a recipe handed down from 
lost generations of his usquebaugh-bred forebears. He set the 
kettle and the jug and the tumbler on the hearth and took the 
clay pipe from his father’s hand and put it on the mantel and 
reached down a cracked cup of sugar and seven tumblers, 
each with a spoon in it. The old man leaned forward into 
the firelight and made the toddies one by one, with tedious 
and solemn deliberation. When he had made one around, 
there were two glasses left. “Ain’t them other boys come in 


> 
p 


i 
SARTORIS 253 


yet?” he asked. Nobody answered, and he corked the jug. 
‘Henry set the two glasses back on the mantel. 

Mandy came to the door presently, filling it with her 
homely calico expanse. “Y’all kin come on in now,” she 
said, and as she turned, waddling, Bayard spoke to her and 
she stopped as the men rose and trooped from the room. The 
old man was straight as an Indian, and with the exception 
of Buddy’s lean and fluid length, he towered above his sons 
by a head. Mandy waited beside the door and gave Bayard 
her hand. “You ain't been out in a long while, now,” she 
said. “And I bet you ain’t fergot Mandy, neither.” 

“Sure I haven’t,” Bayard answered. But he had. Money, 
‘to Mandy, did not compensate for some trinket of no value 
which John never forgot to bring her when he came. He 
followed the others into the frosty darkness. Beneath his feet 
the ground was already stiffening; overhead the sky was bril- 
liant with stars. He stumbled a little behind the crowding 
‘backs until Rafe opened a door into a separate building and 
‘stood aside until they had entered. This room was filled with 
‘warmth and a thin blue haze pungent with cooking odors, 
‘in which a kerosene lamp burned steadily on a long table. At 
one end of the table was a single chair; the other three sides 
were paralleled by backless wooden benches. Against the 
further wall was the stove, and a huge cupboard of split 
planks, and a woodbox. Behind the stove two Negro men and 
a half-grown boy sat, their faces shining with heat and their 
eyeballs rolling whitely; about their feet five puppies snarled 
with mock savageness at one another or chewed damply at the 
Negroes’ motionless ankles or prowled about beneath the 
stove and the adjacent floor with blundering, aimless inquisi- 
tiveness. 

“Howdy, boys,” Bayard said, calling them by name, and 
they bobbed their heads at him with diffident flashes of teeth 
and polite murmurs. 

“Put dem puppies up, Richud,’ Mandy ordered. The Ne- 
groes gathered the puppies up one by one and tumbled them 
into a smaller box behind the stove, where they continued to 
move about with sundry scratchings and bumpings and an 
occasional smothered protest. From time to time during the 
meal a head would appear, staring above the rim of the box 
with blinking and solemn curiosity, then vanish with an 
abrupt scuffling thump and more protests, and the moiling, 


254 WILLIAM FAULKNER[ 


infantlike noises rose again. “Hush up, dawgs! G’wan to sleep: 
now,” Richard would say, rapping on the box with hiss 
knuckles. After a while the noises ceased. 

The old man took the lone chair, his sons around him and] 
the guest; some coatless, all collarless, with their dark, sat-- 
urnine faces all stamped clearly from the same die. They? 
ate—sausage and spare ribs, and a dish of hominy and one * 
of fried sweet potatoes, and corn bread and a molasses jug; 
of sorghum, and Mandy poured coffee from a huge enamel- - 
ware pot. In the middle of the meal the two missing ones | 
came in—Jackson, the eldest, a man of fifty-two, with a_ 
broad, high forehead and thick brows and an expression at 
once dreamy and intense—a sort of shy and impractical 
Cincinnatus; and Stuart, forty-four and Rafe’s twin. Al- | 
though they were twins, there was no closer resemblance be- 
tween them than between any two of the others, as though 
the die were too certain and made too clean an imprint to be 
either hurried or altered, even by nature. Stuart had none of | 
Rafe’s easy manner (Rafe was the only one of them that, by © 
any stretch of the imagination, could have been called loqua- 
cious); on the other hand, he had much of Henry’s placidity. 
He was a good farmer and a canny trader, and he had a 
respectable bank account of his own. Henry, fifty, was the — 
second son. | 

They ate with silent and steady decorum, with only the 
barest essential words, but amicably. Mandy moved back and 
forth between table and stove. 

Before they had finished a sudden bell-like uproar of dogs 
floated up from the night and seeped through the tight walls 
into the room. “Dar, now.” The Negro Richard cocked his 
head. Buddy poised his coffee cup. 

“Where are they, Dick?” 

“Right back of de spring-house. Dey got ’im, too.” Buddy 
rose and slid leanly from his corner. 

“Tll go with you,” Bayard said, rising also. The others 
ate steadily. Richard got a lantern down from the top of 
the cupboard and lit it, and the three of them passed out of 
the room and into the chill darkness, across which the baying 
of the dogs came in musical gusts, ringing as frosty glass. It 
was chill and dark. The house loomed, its rambling low wall 
broken only by the ruddy glow of the window. “Ground’s 
about hard already,” Bayard remarked. 


SARTORIS 255 


“°Twon’t freeze tonight,” Buddy answered. “Will it, Dick?” 
- “Naw, suh. Gwine rain.” 

“Go on,” Bayard said. “I don’t believe it.” 
. “Pappy said so,” Buddy replied. “Warmer’n ’twas at sun- 
down.” 

“Don’t feel like it, to me,” Bayard insisted. They passed 
the wagon, motionless in the starlight, its tires glinting like 
Satin ribbons; and the long rambling stable, from which 
‘placid munchings came and an occasional snuffing snort as 
‘the lantern passed. Then the lantern twinkled among tree 
‘trunks as the path descended. The clamor of the dogs swelled 
just beneath them and the ghostly shapes of them shifted in 
‘the faint glow, and in a sapling just behind the spring-house 
they found the ’possum curled motionless and with its eyes 
tightly shut, in a fork not six feet from the ground. Buddy 
difted it down by the tail, unresisting. “Hell,” Bayard said. 

Buddy called the dogs away, and they mounted the path 
again. In a disused shed behind the kitchen what seemed like 
at least fifty eyes gleamed in matched red points as Buddy 
swung the lantern in and flashed it on to a cage screened 
with chicken wire, from which rose a rank, warm odor and 
in which grizzled, furry bodies moved sluggishly or swung 
sharp, skull-like faces into the light. He opened the door and 
dumped his latest captive in among its fellows and gave the 
lantern to Richard. They emerged. Already the sky was 
hazed over a little, losing some of its brittle scintillation. 

The others sat in a semicircle before the blazing fire; at 
the old man’s feet the blue-ticked hound dozed. They made 
room for Bayard, and Buddy squatted again in the chimney 
corner. 

“Git ’im?’’ Mr. MacCallum asked. 

“Yes, sir,” Bayard answered. “Like lifting your hat off a 
nail in the wall.” 

The old man puffed at his pipe. “We'll give you a sho’ 
*nough hunt befo’ you leave.” 

Rafe said, “How many you got now, Buddy?” 

“Ain’t got but fo’teen,” Buddy answered. 

“Fo’teen?” Henry repeated. “We won’t never eat fo’teen 
*possums.” 

“Turn ’em loose and run ’em again, then,” Buddy an- 
swered. The old man puffed slowly at his pipe. The others 


256 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


smoked or chewed also, and Bayard produced his cigarettes) 
and offered them to Buddy. Buddy shook his head. 

“Buddy ain’t never started yet,” Rafe said. 

“You haven’t?” Bayard asked. “What’s the matter, Buddy?” 

“Don’t know,” Buddy answered, from his shadow. “Justi 
ain’t had time to learn, I reckon.” 

The fire crackled and swirled; from time to time Stuart, ; 
nearest the woodbox, put another log on. The dog at the: 
old man’s feet dreamed, snuffed; soft ashes swirled on thes 
hearth at its nose and it sneezed, waking itself, and raised 
its head and blinked up at the old man’s face, then dozedi 
again. They sat without words and with very little move-- 
ment, their grave, aquiline faces as though carved by the: 
firelight out of the shadowy darkness, shaped by a single‘ 
thought and smoothed and colored by the same hand. The : 
old man tapped his pipe out carefully on his palm and con- 
sulted his fat silver watch. Eight o’clock. 

“We ’uns gits up at fo’ o’clock, Bayard,” he said. “But / 
you don’t have to git up till daylight. Henry, git the jug.” 


“Four o'clock,” Bayard repeated, as he and Buddy un- : 
dressed in the lamplit chill of the lean-to room in which, in | 
a huge wooden bed with a faded patchwork quilt, Buddy : 
slept. “I don’t see why you bother to go to bed at all.” As 
he spoke his breath vaporized in the chill air. 

“Yes,” Buddy agreed, ripping his shirt over his head and 
kicking his lean, race-horse shanks out of his shabby khaki 
pants. “Don’t take long to spend the night at our house. 
You're comp’ny, though,” he added, and in his voice was just 
a trace of envy and of longing. Never again after twenty-five 
will sleep in the morning be so golden. His preparations for 
slumber were simple; he removed his boots and pants and 
shirt and went to bed in his woolen underwear, and he now 
lay with only his round head in view, watching Bayard, who 
stood in a sleeveless jersey and short thin trunks. “You ain’t 
goin’ to sleep warm that-a-way,” Buddy said. “You want one 
o’ my heavy ’uns?” 

“T’'ll sleep warm, I guess,” Bayard answered. He blew 
the lamp out and groped his way to the bed, his toes curling 
away from the icy floor, and got in. The mattress was filled 
with corn shucks: it rattled beneath him, drily sibilant, and 
whenever he or Buddy moved at all or took a deep breath 


SARTORIS 257 


even, the shucks shifted with small ticking sounds. 
“Git that ’ere quilt tucked in good over there,” Buddy ad- 
vised from the darkness, expelling his breath in a short ex- 
plosive sound of relaxation. He yawned, audible but invisi- 
ble. “Ain’t seen you in a long while,” he suggested. 
“That’s right. Let’s see, when was it? Two—three years, 
't it?” 
eo. fifteen,” Buddy answered, “last time you and 
...? Then he added quietly “I seen in a paper when it 
happened. The name. Kind of knowed right off ’twas him. It 
‘was a limey paper.” 
You did? Where were you?” 
! “Up there,” Buddy answered, “where them limeys was. 

Where they sent us. Flat country. Don’t see how they ever git 
bs drained enough to make a crop, with all that rain.’ 

__ “Yes.” Bayard’s nose was like a lump of ice. He could 
feel his breath warming his nose a little, could almost see 
the pale smoke of it as he breathed; could feel the in- 
halation chilling his nostrils again. It seemed to him that 
be could feel the planks of the ceiling as they sloped down 
to the low wall on Buddy’s side, could feel the atmosphere 
packed into the low corner, bitter and chill and thick, too 
‘thick for breathing, like invisible slush, and he lay beneath 
it. . . . He was aware of the dry ticking of shucks be- 
neath him and discovered, so, that he was breathing in 
‘deep, troubled drafts and he wished dreadfully to be up, 
‘moving, before a fire, light; anywhere, anywhere. Buddy 
lay beside him in the oppressive, half-congealed solidity of 
the chill, talking in his slow, inarticulate idiom of the war. 
It was a vague, dreamy sort of tale, without beginning or 
end and filled with stumbling references to places wretchedly 
mispronounced—you got an impression of people, creatures 
without initiative or background or future, caught timelessly 
in a maze of solitary conflicting preoccupations, like 
bumping tops, against an imminent but incomprehensible 
nightmare. : 

“How’d you like the army, Buddy?” Bayard asked. 

' “Not much,” Buddy answered. “Ain’t enough to do. Good 
life for a lazy man.” He mused a moment. “They gimme a 
charm,” he added in a burst of shy, diffident confidence and 
sober pleasure. 

_ “A charm?” Bayard repeated. 


258 WILLIAM FAULKNER: 


“Uhuh. One of them brass gimcracks on to a colored riba 
bon. I aimed to show it to you, but I fergot. Do it tomorrow.) 
That ’ere flo’s too dang cold to tech till I have to. I'll watel 
a chance tomorrow when pappy’s outen the house.” — 

“Why? Don’t he know you got it?” | 

“He knows,” Buddy answered. “Only he don’t like it be 
cause he claims it’s a Yankee charm. Rafe says pappy ee 
Stonewall Jackson ain’t never surrendered.” 

“Yes,” Bayard repeated. Buddy ceased talking and pres~ 
ently he sighed again, emptying his body for sleep. Buty 
Bayard lay rigidly on his back, his eyes wide open. It was 
like being drunk; whenever you close your eyes, the roomr 
starts going round and round, and so you lie rigid in the: 
dark with your eyes wide open, not to get sick. Buddy hadi 
ceased talking and his breathing had become longer, steady‘ 
and regular. The shucks shifted with sibilant complaint as 
Bayard turned slowly on to his side. 

Buddy breathed on in the darkness, steadily and peace-- 
fully. Bayard could hear his own breathing also, but above: 
it, all around it, enclosing him, that other breathing. As 
though he were one thing breathing with restrained, la- - 
boring pants, within himself breathing with Buddy’s breath- - 
ing; using up all the air so that the lesser thing must pant : 
for it. Meanwhile the greater thing breathed deeply and 
steadily and unawares, asleep, remote; ay, perhaps dead. Per- » 
haps he was dead, and he recalled that morning, relived it — 
with strained attention from the time he had seen the first 
tracer-smoke until, from his steep bank, he watched the 
flame burst like the gay flapping of an orange pennon from 
the nose of John’s Camel and saw his brother’s familiar 
gesture and the sudden awkward sprawl of his plunging 
body as it lost equilibrium in mid-air; relived it again as_ 
you might run over a printed, oft-read tale, trying to re-_ 
member, feel, a bullet going into his own body or head. 
that might have slain him at the same instant. That would | 
account for it, would explain so much; that he too was dead | 
and this was hell, through which he moved for ever and 
ever with an illusion of quickness, seeking his brother who 
in turn was somewhere seeking him, never the two to meet. 
He turned on to his back again; the shucks whispered be- 
neath him with dry derision. 

The house was full of noises; to his sharpened senses the 


\RTORIS 259 


ilence was myriad: the dry agony of wood in the black 
frost; the ticking of shucks as he breathed; the very at- 
mosphere itself like slush ice in the vise of the cold, op- 
pressing his lungs. His feet were cold, his limbs sweated with 
it, and about his hot heart his body was rigid and shivering, 

d-he raised his naked arms above the covers and lay for 

time with the cold like a leaden cast on them. And all 
he while Buddy’s steady breathing and his own restrained 
and panting breath, both sourceless yet involved one with 

e other. 

_ Beneath the covers again his arms were cold across his 
chest and his hands were like ice on his ribs, and he moved 
with infinite caution while the chill encroached from his 
shoulders downward and the hidden shucks chattered at 
him, and swung his legs to the floor. He knew where the 
door was and he groped his way to it on curling toes. It 
was fastened by a wooden bar, smooth as ice, and fumbling 
at it he touched something else beside it, something chill 
and tubular and upright, and his hand slid down it and 
then he stood for a moment in the icy pitch darkness with 
the shotgun in his hands, and as he stood so, his numb 
fingers fumbling at the breech, he remembered the box of 
shells on the wooden box on which the lamp sat. A mo- 
ment longer he stood so, his head bent a little and the gun 
in his numb hands; then he leaned it again in the corner 
and lifted the wooden bar from its slots carefully and without 
noise. The door sagged from the hinges, and after the first 
jarring scrape, he grasped the edge of it and lifted it back, 
and stood in the door. 

In the sky no star showed, and the sky was the sagging 
corpse of itself. It lay on the earth like a deflated balloon; 
into it the dark shape of the kitchen rose without depth, 
and the trees beyond, and homely shapes like sad ghosts in 
the chill corpse-light—-the wood-pile; a farming tool; a barrel 
beside the broken stoop at the kitchen door where he had 
stumbled, supperward. The gray chill seeped into him like 
water into sand, with short trickling runs; halting, groping 
about an obstruction, then on again, trickling at last along 
his unimpeded bones. He was shaking slowly and steadily 
with cold; beneath his hands his flesh was rough and without 
sensation; yet still it jerked and jerked as though something 
within the dead envelope of him strove to free itself. Above 


a 
{ 


260 WILLIAM FAULKNER \ 


his head, on the plank roof, there sounded a single light | 
tap, and as though at a signal the gray silence began to dis- - 
solve. He shut the door silently and returned to bed. 

In the bed he lay shaking more than ever, to the colt [ 
derision of the shucks beneath. him, and he lay quietly on \ 
his back, hearing the winter rain whispering on the roof. : 
There was no drumming, as when summer rain falls through . 
the buoyant air, but a whisper of unemphatic sound, as | 
though the atmosphere lying heavily on the roof dissolved | 
there and dripped sluggishly and steadily from the eaves. | 
His blood ran again, and the covers felt like iron or like | 
ice; while he lay motionless beneath the rain his blood | 
warmed yet more, until at last his body ceased trembling and | 
he lay presently in something like a tortured and fitful doze, 
surrounded by coiling images and shapes of stubborn de- © 
spair and the ceaseless striving for . . . not vindication so 
much as comprehension; a hand, no matter whose, to touch 
him out of his black chaos. He would spurn it, of course, but 
it would restore his cold sufficiency again. 

The rain dripped on, dripped and dripped; beside him | 
Buddy breathed placidly and steadily: he had not even — 
changed his position. At times Bayard dozed fitfully: doz | 
ing, he was wide awake; waking, he lay in a hazy state filled 
with improbable moiling, in which there was neither relief 
nor rest: drop by drop the rain wore the night away, wore 
time away. But it was so long, so damn long. His spent — 
blood, wearied with struggling, moved through his body in 
slow beats, like the rain, wearing his flesh away. It comes to ~ 
all... Bible . . . some preacher, anyway. Maybe he knew. 
Sleep. It comes to all. 

At last, through the walls, he heard movement. It was 
indistinguishable; yet he knew it was of human origin, made | 
by people whose names and faces he knew, waking again | 
into the world he had not been able even temporarily to. 
lose; people to whom he was . .. and he was comforted. 
The sounds continued; unmistakably he heard a door, and 
a voice which, with a slight effort of concentration, he 
knew he could name; and best of all, knew that now he 
could rise and go where they were gathered about a crackling 
fire, where light was, and warmth. And he lay, at ease at 
last, intending to rise and go to them the next moment, 
putting it off a little longer while his blood beat slowly 


ARTORIS 261 


‘through his body and his heart was quieted. Buddy 
breathed steadily beside him, and his own breath was un- 
troubled now as Buddy’s while the human sounds came 
jmurmurously into the cold room with grave and homely 
\reassurance. It comes to all, it comes to all, his tired heart 
comforted him, and at last he slept. 

- He waked in the gray morning, his body weary and heavy 
and dull; his sleep had not rested him. Buddy was gone, 
and it still rained, though now it was a definite, purposeful 
sound on the roof and the air was warmer, with a rawness 
that probed to the very bones of him; and in his stockings 
and carrying his boots in his hand, he crossed the cold room 
where Lee and Rafe and Stuart slept, and found Rafe and 
Jackson before the living-room fire. 

__ “We let you sleep,” Rafe said; then he said, “Good Lord, 
‘boy, you look like a ha’nt. Didn’t you sleep last night?” 

_ “Yes, I slept all right,” Bayard answered. He sat down and 
‘stamped into his boots and buckled the thongs below his 
‘Knees. Jackson sat at one side of the hearth. In the shadowy 
‘corner near his feet a number of small, living creatures 
‘moiled silently, and still bent over his boots, Bayard said: 
_ “What you got there, Jackson? What sort of puppies are 
them?” 

_ “New breed I’m tryin’,” Jackson answered. Rafe returned 
with a half a tumbler of Henry’s pale amber whisky. 

_ “Them’s Ellen’s pups,” he said. “Git Jackson to tell you 
about ’em after you eat. Here, drink this. You look all wore 
out. Buddy must ’a’ kept you awake talkin’,” he added 
with dry irony. 

Bayard drank the whisky and lit a cigarette. “Mandy’s 
got yo’ breakfast on the stove,” Rafe said. 

“Ellen?” Bayard repeated. “Oh, that fox. I aimed to ask 
about her, last night. Y’all raise her?” 

“Yes. She growed up with last year’s batch of puppies. 

Buddy caught her. And now Jackson aims to revolutionize 
the huntin’ business with her. Aims to raise a breed of ani- 
mals with a hound’s wind and bottom and a fox’s smartness 
and speed.” 
_ Bayard approached the corner and examined the small 
creatures with interest and curiosity. “I never saw many 
fox pups,” he said at last, “but I never saw anything that 
looked like them.” 


262 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


“That’s what Gen’ral seems to think,” Rafe answered. 

Jackson spat into the fire and stooped over the creatures. 
They knew his hands, and the moiling of them became 
more intense, and Bayard then noticed that they made nog 
sound at all, not even puppy .whimperings. “Hit’s a experi-i 
ment,” Jackson explained. “The boys makes fun of ’em, bE 
they hain’t no more’n weaned, yit. You wait and see.” — 

“Don’t know what you'll do with ’em,” Rafe said brutally. 
“They won’t be big enough for work stock. Better 8 
git yo’ breakfast, Bayard.” 

“You wait and see,” Jackson repeated. He touched thes 
scramble of small bodies with his hands in a gentle, pro-- 
tective gesture. “You can’t tell nothin’ “bout a dawg: 
*twell hit’s at least two months old, can you?” he appealed = 
to Bayard, looking up at him with his vague, intense gaze: 
from beneath his shaggy brows. 

“Go git yo’ beealsoe’ Bayard,” Rafe insisted. “Buddy's! 
done gone and left you.” 

He bathed his face with icy water in a tin pan on the: 
porch, and ate his breakfast—ham and eggs and flapjacks: 
and sorghum-—while Mandy talked to him about his brother... 
When he returned to the house old Mr. MacCallum was there. . 
The puppies moiled inextricably in their corner, and the: 
old man sat with his hands on his knees, watching thems 
with bluff and ribald enjoyment, while Jackson sat near by‘ 
in a sort of hovering concern, like a hen. 

“Come hyer, boy,” the old man ordered when Bayard ap-- 
peared. “Hyer, Rafe, git me that ’ere bait line.” Rafe went! 
out, returning presently with a bit of pork rind on the: 
end of a string. The old man took it and hauled: the: 
puppies ungently into the light, where they crouched ab-- 
jectly—as strange a litter as Bayard had ever seen. No} 
two of them looked alike, and none of them looked like; 
any other living creature—neither fox nor hound, partaking} 
of both, yet neither; and despite their soft infancy there was} 
about them something monstrous and contradictory and| 
obscene, here: a fox’s keen, cruel muzzle between the melting, | 
sad eyes of a hound and its mild ears, there limp ears tried| 
valiantly to stand erect and failed ignobly in flapping points; 
and limp, brief tails brushed over with a faint golden fuzz 
like the insides of chestnut burrs. As regards color, they 
ranged from reddish brown through an indiscriminate 


“SARTORIS 263 
‘brindle to pure ticked beneath a faint dun cast, and one of 
them had, feature for feature, old General’s face in comical 
Miniature, even to his expression of sad and dignified disil- 
lusion. “Watch ’em now,” the old man directed. 

He got them all facing forward; then he dangled the 

meat directly behind them. Not one became aware of its 
presence; he swept it back and forth just above their heads; 
‘not one looked up. Then he swung it directly before their 
‘eyes; still they crouched diffidently on their young, un- 
steady legs and gazed at the meat with curiosity but without 
‘any personal interest whatever, and fell again to moiling 
‘soundlessly among themselves. 
“You can’t tell nothin’ about dawgs 
‘His father interrupted him. 
— “Now, watch.” He held the puppies with one hand and 
‘with the other he forced the meat into their mouths. Im- 
‘mediately they surged clumsily and eagerly over his hand, 
but he moved the meat away and at the length of the string 
he dragged it along the floor just ahead of them until they 
had attained a sort of scrambling lope. Then in mid-floor he 
flicked the meat slightly aside, but without swerving the 
puppies blundered on and into a shadowy corner, where the 
wall stopped them and from which there rose presently the 
patient, voiceless confusion of them. Jackson crossed the floor 
and picked them up and brought them back to the fire. 

“Now, what do you think of them, fer a pack of huntin’ 
dawgs?” the old man demanded. “Can’t smell, can’t bark, and 
damn ef I believe they kin see.” 

“You can’t tell nothin’ about a dawg ” Jackson es- 
sayed patiently. 

“Gen’ral kin,” his father interrupted. “Hyer, Rafe, call 
Gen’ral in hyer.” 

Rafe went to the door and called, and presently General 
entered, his claws hissing a little on the bare floor and his 
ticked coat beaded with rain, and he stood and looked into ~ 
the old man’s face with grave inquiry. “Come hyer,” Mr. 
MacCallum said, and the dog moved again, with slow 
dignity. At that moment he saw the puppies beneath Jackson’s 
chair. He paused in mid stride and for a moment he stood 
looking at them with fascination and bafflement and a sort 
of grave horror; then he gave his master one hurt, re- 
proachful look and turned and departed, his tail between his 


”? Jackson began. 


264 WILLIAM FAULKNERI 


legs. Mr. MacCallum sat down and rumbled heavily within: 
himself. 

“You can’t tell about dawgs ”” Jackson repeated. Het 
stooped and gathered up his charges, and rose. 

Mr. MacCallum continued to rumble and shake. “Well, Tl 
don’t blame the old feller,” he said. “Ef I had to look around? 
on a passel of chaps like them and say to myself, ‘Them’ss 
my boys’ But Jackson was gone. The old man sat andi 
rumbled again, with heavy enjoyment. “Yes, suh, I reckoni 
I'd feel *bout as proud as Gen’ral does. Rafe, han’ me downi 


my pipe.” 


All that day it rained, and the following day and the one: 
after that. The dogs lurked about the house all morning, , 
underfoot, or made brief excursions into the weather, re-- 
turning to sprawl before the fire drowsing and malodorous : 
and steaming until Henry came along and drove them out; . 
twice from the door Bayard saw the fox, Ellen, fading ; 
with brisk diffidence across the yard. With the exception of | 
Henry and Jackson, who had a touch of rheumatism, the | 
others were somewhere out in the rain most of the day. But 
at mealtime they gathered again, shucking their wet outer 
garments on the porch and stamping in to thrust their 
muddy, smoking boots to the fire while Henry fetched the 
kettle and the jug. And last of all, Buddy, soaking wet. 

Buddy had a way of getting his lean length up from his 
niche beside the chimney at any hour of the day and de- 
parting without a word, to return in two hours or six or 
twelve or forty-eight, during which periods and despite the 
presence of Jackson and Henry and usually Lee, the place 
had a vague air of desertion, until Bayard realized that the 
majority of the dogs were absent also. Hunting, they told 
him, when Buddy had been missing since breakfast. 

“Why didn’t he let me know?” Bayard demanded. 

“Maybe he thought you wouldn’t keer to be out in the 
weather,” Jackson suggested. 

“Buddy don’t mind weather,” Henry explained. “One day’s 
like another to him.” 

“Nothin’ ain’t anything to Buddy,” Lee said, in his bitter, 
passionate voice. He sat brooding over the fire, his womanish 
hands moving restlessly on his knees. “He’d spend his whole 
life in that ’ere river bottom, with a hunk of cold cawn bread 


7 


ie 


<a 


= SARTORIS 265 


3 


2 
. 
fe 


to eat and a passel of dawgs fer comp’ny.” He rose abruptly 
and quitted the room. Lee was in the late thirties. As a child 
he had been sickly. He had a good tenor voice and was much 
in demand at Sunday singings. He was supposed to be keep- 


ing company with a young woman living in the hamlet of 


_ Mount Vernon, six miles away. He spent much of his time 


_tramping moodily and alone about the countryside. 


_— Henry spat into the fire and jerked his head after the de- 
{: 


parting brother. “He been to Vernon lately?” 
“Him and Rafe was there two days ago,” Jackson answered. 
Bayard said, “Well, I won’t melt. I wonder if I could catch 
up with him now?” 
They pondered for a while, spitting gravely into the fire. 


- “T misdoubt it,’ Jackson said at last. ““Buddy’s liable to be 
ten mile away by now. You ketch ’im next time befo’ he 


Starts out.” 


After that Bayard did so, and he and Buddy tried for 
birds in the skeletoned fields in the rain in which the guns 


made a flat, mournful sound that lingered in the streaming 


air like a spreading stain, or tried the stagnant backwaters 
along the river channel for duck and geese; or, accompanied 


now and then by Rafe, hunted ’coon and wildcat in the 


bottom. At times and far away, they would hear the shrill 
yapping of the young dogs in mad career. “There goes 
Ellen,” Buddy would remark. Then toward the end of the 
week the weather cleared, and in a twilight imminent with 
frost and while the scent lay well on the wet earth, old 
General started the red fox that had baffled him so many 
times. 

All through the night the ringing, bell-like tones quavered 
and swelled and echoed among the hills, and all of them save 
Henry followed on horseback, guided by the cries of the 
hounds but mostly by the old man’s and Buddy’s uncanny 
and seemingly clairvoyant skill in anticipating the course 
of the race. Occasionally they stopped while Buddy and his 
father wrangled about where the quarry would head next, 
but usually they agreed, apparently anticipating the animal’s 
movements before it knew them itself; and once and again 
they halted their mounts on a hill and sat in the frosty 


starlight until the dogs’ voices welled out of the darkness 


mournful and chiming, swelled louder and nearer and swept 
invisibly past, not half a mile away; faded diminishing and 


266 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


with a falling suspense, as of bells, into the silence again. 

“Thar, now!” the old man exclaimed, shapeless in his over- © 
coat, on his white horse. “Ain’t that music fer a man, now?” 

“I hope they git ’im this time,” Jackson said. “Hit hurts — 
Gen’ral’s. conceit so much ever’ time he fools ’im.” | 

“They won't git ’im,” Buddy said. “Soon’s he gits tired, — 
he’ll hole up in them rocks.” = 

“I reckon we'll have to wait till them pups of Jackson’s | 
gits big enough,” the old man agreed, “unless they'll refuse 
to run they own granddaddy. They done refused ever’thing © 
else except vittles.” 

“You jest wait,” Jackson repeated, indefatigable. “When 
them puppies gits old enough to——” 

“Listen.” 

The talking ceased. Again across the night the dogs’ voices 
rang among the hills, long, ringing cries fading, falling with 
a quavering suspense, like touched bells or strings, repeated 
and sustained; by bell-like echoes repeated and dying among 
the dark hills beneath the stars, lingering yet in the ears 
crystal-clear, mournful and valiant and a little sad. 

“Too bad Johnny ain’t here,” Stuart said quietly. “He'd 
enjoy this race.” 

“He was a feller fer huntin’, now,” Jackson agreed. “He’d 
keep up with Buddy, even.” 

“John was a fine boy,” the old man said. 

“Yes, suh,” Jackson repeated, “a right warm-hearted boy. | 
Henry says he never come out hyer withouten he brung 
Mandy and the boys a little sto’-bought somethin’.” 

“He never sulled on a hunt,” Stuart said. “No matter how 
cold and wet it was, even when he was a little chap, with 
that ’ere single bar’l he bought with his own money, that 
kicked ’im so hard ever’ time he shot it. And yit he’d tote it 
around, instead of that ’ere sixteen old Colonel give ’im, jest 
because he saved up his own money and bought it hisself.” 

“Yes,” Jackson agreed, “ef a feller gits into somethin’ 
on his own accord, he’d ought to go through with hit cheer- 
ful.” 

“He was sho’ a feller fer singin’ and shoutin’,” Mr. Mac- 
Callum said. “Skeer all the game in ten mile. I mind that 
night he up and headed off a race down at Samson’s bridge, 
and the next we knowed, here him and the fox come afloatin’ 


Yo 


_ SARTORIS 267 
down river on that ’ere drift lawg, and him singin’ away 
' loud as he could yell.” 
: “That ’uz Johnny, all over,” Jackson agreed. “Gittin’ a 
-whoppin’ big time outen ever’thing that come up.” 
_ “He was a fine boy,” Mr. MacCallum said again. 

“Listen.” 

Again the hounds gave tongue in the darkness below 
them. The sound floated up on the chill air, died into 
_ echoes that repeated the sound again until its source was 
lost and the very earth itself might have found voice, 
grave and sad, and wild with all regret. 


Christmas was two days away, and they sat again about 
the fire after supper; again old General dozed at his master’s 
feet. Tomorrow was Christmas Eve and the wagon was 
going into town, and although with that grave and unfail- 
ing hospitality of theirs, no word had been said to Bayard 
about his departure, he believed that in all their minds 
it was taken for granted that he would return home the 
following day for Christmas; and, since he had not men- 
tioned it himself, a little curiosity and quiet speculation also. 

It was cold again, with a vivid chill that caused the 
blazing logs to pop and crackle with vicious sparks and small 
embers that leaped out on the floor, to be crushed out by a 
lazy boot, and Bayard sat drowsily, his tired muscles re- 
laxed in cumulate waves of heat as in a warm bath and his 
stubborn, wakeful heart glozed over too, for the time 
being. Time enough tomorrow to decide whether to go or 
not. Perhaps he’d just stay on, without even offering that 

explanation which would never be demanded of him. Then 
he realized that Rafe, Lee, whoever went, would talk to 
people, would learn about that which he had not the 
courage to tell them. 

Buddy had come out of his shadowy niche and he now 
squatted in the center of the semicircle, his back to the fire 
and his arms around his knees, with his motionless and seem- 
ingly tireless ability for sitting timelessly on his heels. He 
was the baby, twenty years old. His mother had been the old 
man’s second wife, and his hazel eyes and the reddish thatch 
cropped close to his round head was a noticeable contrast to 
his brothers’ brown eyes and black hair. But the old man 
had stamped Buddy’s face as clearly as any one of the other 


268 : WILLIAM FAULKNER 


boys’, and despite its youth it too was like the others—aquiline 
and spare, reserved and grave, though a trifle ruddy with 
his fresh coloring and finer skin. 

The others were of medium height or under, ranging frame 
Jackson’s faded, vaguely ineffectual lankness, through Henry’s 
placid rotundity and Rafe’s—Raphael Semmes he was— | 
and Stuart’s poised and stocky muscularity, to Lee’s thin and _ 
fiery restlessness; but Buddy with his saplinglike leanness — 
stood eye to eye with that father who wore his seventy-seven 
years as though they were a thin coat. “Long, spindlin’ 
scoundrel,” the old man would say, with bluff derogation. | 
“Keeps hisself wore to a shadder totin’ around all that grub © 
he eats.” And they would sit in silence, looking at Buddy’s 
jack-knifed length with the same identical thought; a thought — 
which each believed peculiar to himself and which none ever 
divulged—that some day Buddy would marry and perpetuate 
the name. 

Buddy also bore his father’s name, though it is doubt- 
ful if any one outside the family and the War Department 
knew it. He had run away at seventeen and enlisted; at 
the infantry concentration camp in Arkansas to which he 
had been sent, a fellow recruit called him Virge and Buddy 
had fought him steadily and without anger for seven min- 
utes; at the New Jersey embarkation depot another man had 
done the same thing, and Buddy had fought him, again 
steadily and thoroughly and without anger. In Europe, still 
following the deep but uncomplex compulsions of his nature, 
he had contrived, unwittingly perhaps, to perpetrate some- 
thing which was later ascertained by Authority to have 
severely annoyed the enemy, for which Buddy had received 
his charm, as he called it. What it was he did, he could never 
be brought to say, and the gaud not only failing to placate 
his father’s anger over the fact that a son of his had joined 
the Federal army, but on the contrary adding fuel to it, the 
bauble languished among Buddy’s sparse effects, and his 
military career was never mentioned in the family circle; 
and now as usual Buddy squatted among them, his back to 
the fire and his arms around his knees, while they sat about 
the hearth with their bedtime toddies, talking of Christ- 
mas. 

“Turkey,” the old man was saying, with fine and rum- 
bling disgust. “With a pen full of ’possums, and a river 


|< 


b 


. 
“ 


4 
“< 
—_ 
a 


x 
ae 
“3 


" SARTORIS ; 269 


bottom full of squir’l and ducks, and a smokehouse full of 
_hawg meat, you damn boys have got to go clean to town and 
buy a turkey fer Christmas dinner.” 

“Christmas ain’t Christmas lessen a feller has a little some- 


thin’ different from ever’ day,” Jackson pointed out mildly. 


“You boys jest wants a excuse to git to town and loaf 
all day and spend money,” the old man retorted. “I’ve seen 
a sight mo’ Christmases than you have, boy, and ef hit’s got 


~ to be sto’ bought, hit ain’t Christmas.” 


“How ’bout townfolks?” Rafe asked. “You ain’t allowin’ 
_ them no Christmas a-tall.” 
_ “Don’t deserve none,” the old man snapped, “livin’ on 
a little two-by-fo’ lot, jam right up again’ the next feller’s 
_-back do’, eatin’ outen tin cans.” 
“°Sposin’ they all broke up in town,” Stuart said, “and 
moved out here and took up land; you’d hear pappy cussin’ 


- town then. You couldn’t git along without town to keep folks 


bottled up in, pappy, and you know it.” 
“Buyin’ turkeys,” Mr. MacCallum repeated with savage dis- 
gust. “Buyin’ ’em. I mind the time when I could take a gun 
and step out that ’ere do’ and git a gobbler in thutty 
minutes. And a ven’son ham in a hour mo’. Why, you 
fellers don’t know nothin’ about Christmas. All you knows is 
sto’ winders full of cocoanuts and Yankee popguns and sich.” 

“Yes, suh,” Rafe said, and he winked at Bayard. “That 
was the biggest mistake the world ever made, when Lee sur- 
tendered. The country ain’t never got over it.” 

The old man snorted. “I be damned ef I ain’t raised the 
damnedest, smartest set of boys in the world. Can’t tell ’°em 
nothin’, can’t learn ’em nothin’, can’t even set in front of my 
own fire fer the whole passel of ’em tellin’ me how to run 
the whole damn country. Hyer, you boys, git on to bed.” 

Next morning Jackson and Rafe and Stuart and Lee left for 
town at sunup in the wagon. Still none of them had made any 
sign, expressed any curiosity as to whether they would find 
him there when they returned that night or whether it 
would be another three years before they saw him again. And 


_ Bayard stood on the frost-whitened porch, smoking a ciga- 
 rette in the chill, vivid sunrise, and looked after the wagon 


with its four muffled figures and wondered if it would be 
three years again, or ever. The hounds came and nuzzled 
about him and he dropped his hand among their icy noses 


270 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


and the warm flicking of their tongues, gazing at the trees 
from beyond which the dry rattling of the wagon came un- 
impeded upon the clear and soundless morning. 

“Ready to go?” Buddy said behind him, and he turned and 
picked up his shotgun where it leaned against the wall. The 
hounds surged about them with eager whimperings and frosty 
breaths and Buddy led them across to their pen and huddled | 
them inside and fastened the door on their astonished pro- — 
tests. From another kennel he unleashed the young pointer, | 
Dan. Behind them the hounds continued to lift their © 
baffled and mellow expostulations. 

Until noon they hunted the ragged, fallow fields and 
woods-edges in the warming air. The frost was soon gone, 
and the air warmed to a windless languor, and twice in 
brier thickets they saw redbirds darting like arrows of scarlet 
flame. At last Bayard lifted his eyes unwinking into the sun. 

“T’ve got to go back, Buddy,” he said. “I’m going home this 
afternoon.” 

“All right,” Buddy agreed without protest, and he called 
the dog in. “You come back next month.” 

Mandy got them some cold food and they ate, and while 
Buddy was saddling Perry, Bayard went into the house, 
where he found Henry laboriously soling a pair of boots and 
the old man reading a week-old newspaper through steel- 
bowed spectacles. 

“I reckon yo’ folks will be lookin’ fer you,” Mr. Mac- 
Callum agreed, removing his spectacles. “We'll be expectin’ 
you back next month though, to git that ’ere fox. Ef we 
don’t git im soon, Gen’ral won’t be able to hold up his haid 
befo’ them puppies.” 

“Yes, sir,’ Bayard answered, “I will.” 

“And try to git yo’ grandpappy to come out with you. He 
kin lay around hyer and eat his haid off well as he kin in 
town thar.” 

“Yes, sir, I will.” 

Buddy led the pony up, and the old man extended his 
hand without rising. Henry put aside his cobbling and fol- 
lowed him on to the porch. “Come out again,” he said 
diffidently, giving Bayard’s hand a single pump-handle shake, 
and from a slobbering inquisitive surging of half-grown - 
hounds Buddy reached up his hand. 

“Be lookin’ fer you,” he said briefly, and Bayard wheeled 


_ SARTORIS LAE 
ad away, and when he looked back they lifted their hands 


_ gravely. Then Buddy shouted after him and he reined 
_ Perry about and returned. Henry had vanished, and he reap- 
peared with a weighted tow sack. 

“J nigh fergot it,” he said. “Jug of cawn pappy’s sendin’ 
in to yo’ granddaddy. You won’t git no better’n this in 
Looeyvul ner nowhar else, neither,” he added with quiet 


- pride. Bayard thanked him and Buddy fastened the sack to 


the pommel, where it lay solidly against his leg. 
“There. That'll ride.” 
“Yes, that'll ride. Much obliged.” 
“So long.” 
“So long.” 
Perry moved on, and he looked back. They still stood 


- there, quiet and grave and steadfast. Beside the kitchen 
door the fox, Ellen, sat, watching him covertly; near her 


the half-grown puppies rolled and played in the sunlight. 
The sun was an hour high above the western hills; the road 
wound on into the trees. He looked back again. The house 
sprawled its rambling length in the wintry afternoon, its 
smoke like a balanced plume on the windless sky. The door 
was empty, and he shook Perry into his easy, tireless fox 
trot, the jug of whisky jouncing a little against his knee. 


3. 


Where the dim, infrequent road to MacCallum’s left the 
main road, rising, he halted Perry and sat for a while 
in the sunset. Jefferson, 14 miles. Rafe and the other boys 
would not be along for some time yet, what with Christmas 
Eve in town and the slow, festive gathering of the county. 
Still, they may have left town early, so as to get home by 
dark; might not be an hour away. The sun’s rays, slanting, 
released the chill they had held prisoned in the ground 
during the perpendicular hours and it rose slowly about 
him as he sat Perry in the middle of the road, and slowly 
his blood cooled with the cessation of Perry’s motion. He 
turned the pony’s head away from town and shook him 
into his fox trot again. 


272 WILLIAM FAULKNER. 


Darkness overtook him soon, but he rode on beneath the 
leafless trees, along the pale road in the gathering star- — 
light. Already Perry was thinking of stable and supper and 
he went on with tentative, inquiring tossings of his head,~ 
but obediently and without slackening his gait, knowing not 
where they were going nor why, save that it was away from> 
home, and a little dubious, though trustfully. The chill grew — 
in the silence and the loneliness and the monotony. Bayard — 
reined Perry to a halt and untied the jug and drank, and 
fastened it to the saddle again. 

The hills rose wild and black about them. No sign 
of any habitation, no trace of man’s hand did they en- 
counter. On all sides the hills rolled blackly away in the star- 
light, or when the road dipped into valleys where the ruts 
were already stiffening into ironlike shards that clattered be- 
neath Perry’s hooves, they stood darkly towering and sinis- 
ter overhead, lifting their leafless trees against the spangled 
sky. Where a stream of winter seepage trickled across the 
toad Perry’s feet crackled brittlely in thin ice and Bayard 
slacked the reins while the pony snuffed at the water. He 
drank from the jug again. 

He fumbled a match clumsily in his numb fingers and 
lit a cigarette, and pushed his sleeve back from his wrist. 
Eleven-thirty. “Well, Perry,” his voice sounded loud and 
sudden in the stillness and the darkness and the cold, “I 
reckon we better look for a place to hole up till morning.” 
Perry raised his head and snorted, as though he understood 
the words, as though he would enter the bleak loneliness in 
which his rider moved if he could. They went on, mounting 
again. 

The darkness spread away, lessening a little presently where 
occasional fields lay in the vague starlight, breaking the 
monotony of trees; and after a time during which he rode 
with the reins slack on Perry’s neck and his hands in his 
pockets, seeking warmth between leather and groin, a cotton 
house squatted beside the road, its roof dusted over with a 
frosty sheen as of silver. Not long, he told himself, leaning 
forward and laying his hand on Perry’s neck, feeling the 
warm, tireless blood there. “House soon, Perry, if we look 
sharp.” 

Again Perry whinnied a little, as though he understood, 
and presently he swerved from the road, and as Bayard 


» SARTORIS 273 


‘reined him back, he too saw the faint wagon trail leading 
‘away toward a low vague clump of trees. “Good boy, 
Perry,” he said, slackening the reins again. 
_ The house was a cabin. It was dark, but a hound came 
' gauntly from beneath it and bayed at him and continued its 
uproar while he reined Perry to the door and knocked on it 
with his numb hand. From within the house at last a voice, 
and he shouted “Hello” again. Then he added, “I’m lost. Open 
the door.” The hound bellowed at him indefatigably. After 
: a moment the door cracked on a dying glow of embers, emit- 
ting a rank odor of Negroes, and against the crack of 
warmth, a head. 

“You, Jule,” the head commanded, “hush yo’ mouf.” The 
‘hound ceased obediently and retired beneath the house, 
“though still growling. “Who dar?” 

_ “Pm lost,” Bayard repeated. “Can I stay in your barn to- 
“night?” 

“Ain’t got no barn,” the Negro answered. “Dey’s anud- 

der house down de road a piece.” 

“Tll pay you,” Bayard said. He fumbled in his pocket with 
his numb hand. “My horse is tired out.” The Negro’s head 
peered around the door, against the crack of firelight. “Come 

on, Uncle,” Bayard added impatiently. “Don’t keep a man 
standing in the cold.” 

“Who is you, white folks?” 

“Bayard Sartoris, from Jefferson. Here.” He extended his 
hand. The Negro made no effort to take it. 

“Banker Sartoris’s folks?” 

“Yes. Here.” 

“Wait a minute.” The door closed. But Bayard tightened 
the reins and Perry moved readily and circled the house 
confidently and went on among frost-stiffened cotton stalks 
that clattered drily about his knees. As Bayard dismounted 
on to frozen rutted earth beneath a gaping doorway, a lan- 
tern appeared from the cabin, swung low among the bitten 
stalks and the shadowy scissoring of the man’s legs, and the 
Negro came up with a shapeless bundle under his arm and 
held the lantern while Bayard stripped the saddle and bridle 
off. 

“How you manage to git so fur fum home dis time 0’ 
night, white folks?” he asked curiously. 


274 WILLIAM FAULKNERI 


“Lost,” Bayard answered briefly. “Where can I put my} 
horse?” 

The Negro swung the lantern into a stall. Perry steppe 
carefully over the sill and turned into the lantern light, his« 
eyes rolling in phosphorescent gleams, and Bayard followed= 
and rubbed him down with thé dry side of the saddle blan-- 
ket. The Negro had vanished; he now appeared with a few i 
ears of corn and shucked them into Perry’s manger beside: 
the pony’s eager nuzzling. “You gwine be keerful about fini 
ain’t you, white folks?” he asked. | 

“Sure. I won’t strike any matches at all.” 7-1 

“I got all my stock and tools and feed in here,” the Negror 
explained. “I can’t affo’d to git burnt out. Insu’ance don’t | 
reach dis fur fum town.” 

“Sure,” Bayard repeated. He shut Perry’s stall and while: 
the Negro watched him he drew the sack forth from where : 
he had set it against the wall, and produced the jug. “Got a. 
cup here?” The Negro vanished again; Bayard could see the | 
lantern through the cracks in the crib in the opposite wall; 
then he emerged with a rusty can from which he blew a 
bursting puff of chaff. They drank. Behind them Perry 
munched his corn. The Negro showed him the ladder to the 
loft. 

“You won't fergit about dat fire, white folks?” he repeated 
anxiously. 

“Sure,” Bayard said. “Good night.” He laid his hand on 
the ladder, and the Negro stopped him and handed him the 
shapeless bundle he had brought out with him. 

“Ain’t got but one to spare, but itll help some. You 
gwine sleep cole, tonight.” It was a quilt, ragged and filthy 
to the touch, and impregnated with that unmistakable odor 
of Negroes. 

“Thanks,” Bayard answered. “Much obliged to you. Good 
night.” 

“Good night, white folks.” 

The lantern winked away, to the criss-crossing of the 
Negro’s legs, and Bayard mounted into darkness and the 
dry, pungent scent of hay. Here, in the darkness, he made 
himself a nest of it and crawled into it and rolled himself 
into the quilt, filth and odor and all, and thrust his icy 
hands inside his shirt, against his flinching chest. After a 
time and slowly his hands began to warm, tingling a little, 


a 


“Es 


‘SARTORIS 275 


‘but still his body lay shivering and jerking with weariness 
and with cold. Below him Perry munched steadily and peace- 
‘fully in the darkness, occasionally he stamped, and grad- 
mally the jerking of Bayard’s body ceased. Before he slept 
she uncovered his arm and looked at the luminous dial on his 
wrist. One o’clock. It was already Christmas. 


The sun waked him, falling in red bars through the cracks 
in the wall, and he lay for a while in his hard bed, with chill, 
bright air on his face like icy water, wondering where he was. 
‘Then he remembered, and moving, found that he was stiff 
with stale cold and that his blood began to move through his 
limbs in small pellets like bird-shot. He dragged his legs 
from his odorous bed, but within his boots his feet were 
dead, and he sat flexing his knees and ankles for some time 
before his feet waked as with stinging needles. 

His movements were stiff and awkward and he descended 
the ladder slowly and gingerly into the red sun that fell 
like a blare of trumpets into the hallway. The sun was just 
above the horizon, huge and red, and housetop, fenceposts, 
the casual farming tools rusting about the barnyard and 
the dead cotton stalks where the Negro had farmed his land 
right up to his back door, were dusted over with frost which 
the sun changed to a scintillant tosy icing like that of a 
festive cake. Perry thrust his slender muzzle across the 
stall door and whinnied at his master with vaporous saluta- 
tion, and Bayard spoke to him and touched his cold nose. 
Then he untied the sack and drank from the jug. The Negro 
with a milk pail appeared in the door. 

“Chris’mus’ gif’, white folks,” he said, eying the jug. 
Bayard gave him a drink. “Thanky, suh. You g’awn to 
de house to de fire. I'll feed yo’ hawss. De ole woman got 
yo’ breakfast ready.” Bayard picked up the sack; at the well 
behind the cabin he drew a pail of icy water and splashed his 
face. 

A fire burned on the broken hearth, amid ashes and 
charred wood-ends and a litter of cooking-vessels. Bayard 
shut the door behind him on the bright cold, and warmth 
and rich, stale rankness enveloped him like a drug. A woman, 
bent over the hearth, replied to his greeting diffidently. Three 
pickaninnies became utterly still in a corner and watched 
him with rolling eyes. One of them was a girl, in greasy 


Pu 


276 WILLIAM FAULKNERI 


nondescript garments, her wool twisted into tight knots of) 
soiled wisps of colored cloth. The second one might haves 
been either or anything. The third one was practically helpless 
in a garment made from a man’s suit of woolen underclothes.; 
It was too small to walk and it crawled about the floor in az 
sort of intent purposelessness,‘a glazed path running frome 
either nostril to its chin, as though snails had crawled there.:’ 

The woman placed a chair before the fire with a dark.’ 
effacing gesture. Bayard seated himself and thrust his chilled: 
feet to the fire. “Had your Christmas dram yet, aunty?” he: 
asked. 

“Naw, suh. Ain’t got none dis year,” she answered from; 
somewhere behind him. He swung the sack toward her voice.. 

“Help yourself. Plenty there.” The three children squattedi 
against the wall, watching him steadily, without movementi 
and without sound. “Christmas come yet, chillen?” he asked § 
them. But they only stared at him with the watchful gravity: 
of animals until the woman returned and spoke to them in a 
chiding tone. 

“Show de white folks yo’ Sandy Claus,” she prompts. : 
“Thanky, suh,” she added, putting a tin plate on his knees? 
and setting a cracked china cup on the hearth at his feet.. 
“Show ’im,” she repeated. “You want folks to think Sandy: 
Claus don’t know whar you lives at?” 

The children moved then and from the shadow behind | 
them, where they had hidden them when he entered, they’ 
produced a small tin automobile, a string of colored wooden: 
beads, a small mirror and a huge stick of peppermint candy ' 
to which trash adhered and which they immediately fell to: 
licking solemnly, turn and turn about. The woman filled! 
the cup from the coffee-pot set among the embers, and she 
uncovered an iron skillet and forked a thick slab of sizzling 
meat on to his plate, and raked a grayish object from the 
ashes and broke it in two and dusted it off and put that too. 
on the plate. Bayard ate his side meat and hoecake and drank 
the thin, tasteless liquid. The children now played quietly 
with their Christmas, but from time to time he found them 
watching him steadily and covertly. The man entered with 
his pail of milk. 

“Ole ’oman give you a snack?” he asked. 

“Yes. What’s the nearest town on the railroad?” The Negro 
told him—eight miles away. “Can you drive me over there 


E 


_ SARTORIS 277. 


this morning and take my horse back to Mr. MacCallum’s 
some day this week?” 
_ “My brudder-in-law bor’d my mules,” the Negro replied 
-Teadily. “I ain’t got but de one span, and he done bor’d dem.” 
_ “Tl pay you five dollars.” 
| The Negro set the pail down and the woman came and 
got it. He scratched his head slowly. “Five dollars,” Bayard 
Tepeated. 
- “You’s in a pow’ful rush fer Chris’mus, white folks.” 

- “Ten dollars,” Bayard said impatiently. “Can’t you get 
your mules back from your brother-in-law?” 

“I reckon so. I reckon he'll bring ’em back by dinner- 
time. We kin go den.” "4 
_ “Why can’t you get ’°em now? Take my horse and go get 
*em. I want to catch a train.” 

“I ain’t had no Chris’mus yit, white folks. Feller work- 
in’ ev’y day of de year wants a little Chris’mus.” 

.. Bayard swore shortly and bleakly, but he said: “All right, 
then. Right after dinner. But you see your brother-in-law 
has ’em back in plenty of time.” 

_ “Dey’ll be here; don’t you worry about dat.” 

“All right. You and aunty help yourselves to the jug.” 

“Thanky, suh.” 

The stale, air-tight room dulled him; the warmth was in- 
sidious to his bones, wearied and stiff after the chill night. 
The Negroes moved about the single room, the woman busy 
at the hearth with her cooking, the pickaninnies with their 
frugal and sorry gewgaws and filthy candy. Bayard sat in 
_his hard chair and dozed the morning away—not asleep, 
but time was lost in a timeless region where he lingered 
unawake and into which he realized after a long while 
that something was trying to penetrate; watched its vain at- 
tempts with peaceful detachment. But at last it succeeded and 
teached him: a voice. “Dinner ready.” 

The Negroes drank with him, amicably, a little diffi- 
| dently—two opposed concepts antipathetic by race, blood, 
; mature and environment, touching for a moment and fused 
{ within an illusion—humankind forgetting its lust and coward- 
ice and greed for a day. “Chris’mus,” the woman murmured 
shyly. “Thanky, suh.” 

, Then dinner: ’possum with yams, more gray ash cake, 
, the dead and tasteless liquid in the coffee-pot; a dozen ba- 


278 WILLIAM FAULKNE 


nanas and jagged shards of cocoanut, the children crawling 
about his feet like animals, scenting the food. He realized ati 
last that they were holding back until he had done, but hes 
overrode them and they dined together; and at last (thei 
mules having been miraculously returned by a yet incorporeah 
brother-in-law), with his depleted jug between his feet in th 
wagon bed, he looked once back at the cabin, at th 
woman standing in the door and a pale, windless drift of 
smoke above its chimney. 

Against the mules’ gaunt ribs the broken harness rattled: 
and jingled. The air was warm, yet laced too with a thine 
distillation of chill that darkness would increase. The road! 
went on across the bright land. From time to time acrossi 
the shining sedge or from beyond brown and leafless woods,, 
came the flat reports of guns; occasionally they passed other! 
teams or horsemen or pedestrians who lifted dark, restful! 
hands to the Negro buttoned into an army overcoat, with t 
brief covert glances for the white man on the seat beside: 
him. “Heyo, Chris’mus!” Beyond the yellow sedge and brownt 
tidges the ultimate hills stood bluely against the plumbless : 
sky. “Heyo.” 

They stopped and drank, and Bayard gave his companion | 
a cigarette. The sun behind them now; no cloud, no: 
wind, no bird in the serene pale cobalt. “Shawt days! Fo’ ’ 
mile mo’. Come up, mules.” Between motionless willows, stub- : 
bornly green, a dry clatter of loose planks above water in 
murmurous flashes. The road lifted redly; pines stood against 
the sky in jagged bastions. They crested this, and a plateau 
rolled away before them with its pattern of burnished sedge 
and fallow, dark fields and brown woodland and now and 
then a house, on into shimmering azure haze, and low down 
on the horizon, smoke. “Two mile, now.” Behind them the 
sun was a copper balloon tethered an hour up the sky. cs | 
drank again. 

It had touched the horizon when they looked down into 
the final valley where the railroad’s shining threads vanished 
among roofs and trees, and along the air to them distantly 
came a slow, heavy explosion. “Still celebratin’,” the Negro 
said. 

Out of the sun they descended into violet shadow where 
windows gleamed behind wreaths and paper bells, across 
stoops littered with spent firecrackers. Along the streets chil- 


TORIS 279 


dren in bright sweaters and jackets sped on shiny coasters 
and skates and wagons. Again a heavy explosion in the dusk 
ahead, and they debouched on to the square with its Sabbath 
‘calm, littered too with shattered scraps of paper. It looked 
the same way at home, he knew, with men and youths he 
had known from boyhood lounging the holiday away, drink- 
ing a little and shooting fireworks and giving nickels and 
dimes and quarters to Negro lads who shouted “Chris’mus 
gif! Chris’mus gif’!” as they passed. And out home the tree 
in the parlor and the bowl of eggnog before the fire, and 
‘Simon entering his and Johnny’s room on tense and clumsy 
‘tiptoe and holding his breath above the bed where they lay 
feigning sleep until his tenseness relaxed, whereupon they 
both roared “Christmas gift!” at him, to his pained disgust. 
“Well, I'll de-clare, ef dey ain’t done caught me ag’in!” But 
by mid-morning he would be recovered, by dinnertime he 
would be in a state of affable and useless loquacity, and by 
nightfall completely hors de combat, with Aunt Jenny storm- 
ing about the house and swearing that never again should it 
be turned into a barroom for trifling niggers as long as she 
had her strength, so help her Jupiter. And after dark, some- 
where a dance, with holly and mistletoe and paper streamers, 
and the girls he had always known with their new bracelets 
and watches and fans amid lights and music and glittering 
laughter. ... 

- A small group stood on a corner, and as the wagon passed 
and preceded by an abrupt scurrying, yellow flame was 
stenciled on the twilight and the heavy explosion reverberated 
in sluggish echoes between the silent walls. The mules quick- 
ened against the collars and the wagon rattled on. Through 
the dusk now, from lighted doorways where bells and 
wreaths hung, voices called with mellow insistence; children’s 
voices replied, expostulant, reluctantly regretful. Then the 
station, where a ’bus and four or five cars stood, and Bayard 
descended and the Negro lifted down the sack. 

“Much obliged,” Bayard said. “Good-bye.” 

“Good-bye, white folks.” 

In the waiting-room a stove glowed red hot, and about 
the room stood cheerful groups in sleek furs and overcoats, 
but he did not enter. He set the sack against the wall and 
tramped up and down the platform, warming his blood 
again. In both directions along the tracks green switch-lights 


OD ed 


280 WILLIAM FAULKNERI 


were steady in the dusk; a hands-breadth above the westernr 
trees the evening star was like an electric bulb in a glass wall.! 
He tramped back and forth, glancing into the ruddy win-» 
dows, into the waiting-room where the cheerful groups in: 
their furs and overcoats gesticulated with festive and sound-- 
less animation, and into the colored waiting-room, whose oc-- 
cupants sat patiently and murmurously about the stove int 
the dingy light. As he turned here a voice spoke diffidently\ 
from the shadow beside the door. “Chris’mus gif’, boss.” He: 
took a coin from his pocket without stopping. Again from) 
the square a. firecracker exploded heavily, and above the: 
trees a rocket arced, hung for a moment, then opened! 
like a fist, spreading its golden and fading fingers on the: 
tranquil indigo sky without a sound. 

Then the train came and brought its lighted windows to a! 
jarring halt, and he picked up his sack again and in the midst! 
of a cheerful throng shouting good-byes and holiday greetings: 
and messages to absent ones, he got aboard. Unshaven, in his‘ 
scarred boots and stained khaki pants, and his shabby, smoke-: 
colored tweed jacket and his disreputable felt hat, he found a: 
vacant seat and stowed the jug away beneath his legs. 


;. 
ie 
= PART FIVE 

E 

, 

| . . and since the essence of spring is loneliness and a 
_ little sadness and a sense of mild frustration, I suppose you 


_— 


_ do get a keener purification when a little nostalgia is added 
_ in for good measure. At home I always found myself remem- 
_ bering apple trees or green lanes or the color of the sea in 
__ other places, and I’d be sad that I couldn’t be everywhere at 
/ once, or that all the spring couldn’t be one spring, like 
; Byron’s ladies’ mouths. But now I seem to be unified and 
| projected upon one single and very definite object, which is 
something to be said for me, after all.” Horace’s pen 
_ ceased and he gazed at the sheet scrawled over with his 
' practically illegible script, while the words he had just writ- 
_ ten echoed yet in his mind with a little gallant and whimsical 
_ sadness, and for the time being he had quitted the desk and 
the room and the town and all the crude and blatant newness 
into which his destiny had brought him, and again that wild 
and fantastic futility of his roamed unchallenged through the 
lonely region into which it had at last concentrated its con- 
flicting parts. Already the thick cables along the veranda 
eaves would be budding into small lilac match-points, and 
_ with no effort at all he could see the lawn below the cedars, 
splashed with random narcissi among random jonquils, and 
_gladioli waiting in turn to bloom. 

But his body sat motionless, its hand with the arrested pen 
lying on the scrawled sheet. The paper lay on the yellow 
varnished surface of his new desk. The chair in which he sat 

_ was new too, as was the room with its dead white walls and 
imitation oak woodwork. All day long the sun fell on it, un- 
tempered by any shade. In the days of early spring it had 
been pleasant, falling as it now did through his western win- 
ze 281 


% 


282 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


dow and across the desk where a white hyacinth bloomed in a 


bowl of glazed maroon pottery. But as he sat musing, gazing _ 


out the window where, beyond a tarred roof that drank heat 
like a sponge and radiated it, against a brick wall a clump of 
ragged trees of heaven lifted shabby, diffident bloom, he 


dreaded the long, hot summer days of sunlight on the roof — 
directly over him; remembered his dim and musty office at | 
home, in which a breeze seemed always to move, with its | 


serried rows of books dusty and undisturbed that seemed to 
emanate coolness and quietude even on the hottest days. And 


thinking of this, he was lost again from the harsh newness — 


in which his body sat. The pen moved again. 


“Perhaps fortitude is a sorry imitation of something worth — 


while, after all, to the so many who burrow along like 
moles in the dark, or like owls, to whom a candle-flame is a 
surfeit. But not to those who carry peace along with them as 
the candle-flame carries light. I have always been ordered by 
words, but it seems that I can even restore assurance to my 
own cowardice by cozening it a little. I dare say you cannot 
read this, as usual, or reading it, it will not mean anything 
to you. But you will have served your purpose anyway, thou 
still unravished bride of quietness.”—“Thou wast happier in 
thy cage, happier?” Horace thought, reading the words he had 
written and in which, as usual, he was washing one woman’s 
linen in the house of another. A thin breeze blew suddenly 
into the room; there was locust on it, faintly sweet, and be- 
neath it the paper stirred on the desk, rousing him, and sud- 
denly, as a man waking, he looked at his watch and replaced 
it and wrote rapidly: 

“We are glad to have little Belle with us. She likes it here; 
there is a whole family of little girls next door; stair-steps of 


tow pigtails before whom, it must be confessed, little Belle 


preens just a little; patronizes them, as is her birthright. Chil- 
dren make all the difference in the world about a house. 
Too bad agents are not wise enough to provide rented houses 
with them. Particularly one like little Belle, so grave and shin- 
ing and sort of irrelevantly and intensely mature, you know. 
But then, you don’t know her very well, do you? But we are 
both very glad to have her with us. I believe that Harry’—— 
The pen ceased, and still poised, he sought the words that so 
rarely eluded him, realizing as he did so that, though one 
can lie about others with ready and extemporaneous prompti- 


exh ‘ 


us 


care 


SARTORIS 283 


: 4 tude, to lie about oneself requires deliberation and a careful 


chee 


choice of expression. Then he glanced again at his watch 


and crossed that out and wrote: “Belle sends love, O Serene,” 
_ and blotted it and folded it swiftly into an envelope and 
_ addressed and stamped it, and rose and took his hat. By 


_ running he could get it on the four o’clock train. 


zo 


In January his aunt received a post card from Bayard mailed 


at Tampico; a month later, from Mexico City, a wire for 


- money. And that was the last intimation he gave that he 


contemplated being at any given place long enough for a 
communication to reach him, although from time to time he 
indicated by gaudy postals where he had been, after the bleak 
and brutal way of him. In April the card came from Rio, 


_ followed by an interval during which he seemed to have 


completely vanished and which Miss Jenny and Narcissa 
passed quietly at home, their days centered placidly about the 


expected child which Miss Jenny had already named John. 


Miss Jenny felt that old Bayard had somehow flouted them 
all, had committed lese majesty toward his ancestors and the 
lusty glamour of the family doom by dying, as she put it, 
practically from the “inside out.” Thus he was in something 
like bad odor with her, and as young Bayard was in more or 
less abeyance, neither flesh nor fowl, she fell to talking more 
and more of John. Soon after old Bayard’s death, in a sud- 
den burst of rummaging and prowling which she called win- 


ter cleaning, she had found among his mother’s relics a min- 


jature of John done by a New Orleans painter when John - 
and Bayard were about eight. Miss Jenny remembered that 
there had been one of each and it seemed to her that she 
could remember putting them both away together when their 
mother died. But the other she could not find. So she left 


Simon to gather up the litter she had made and brought the 


miniature downstairs to where Narcissa sat in the office, and 
together they examined it. 

The hair even at that early time was of a rich tawny shade, 
and rather long. “I remember that first. day,” Miss Jenny 


284 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


said, “when they came home from school. Bloody as hogs, 
both of ’em, from fighting other boys who said they 
looked like girls. Their mother washed ’em and petted ’em, — 
but they were too busy bragging to Simon and Bayard about — 
the slaughter they had done to mind it much. ‘You ought > 
to seen the others,’ Johnny kept,saying. Bayard blew up, of 
course; said it was a damn shame to send a boy out on the — 


street with curls down his back, and finally he bullied the — 


poor woman into agreeing to let Simon barber ’em. And do © 
you know what? Neither of ’em would let his hair be touched. _ 
It seems there were still a few they hadn’t licked yet, and they ~ 
were going to make the whole school admit that they could 
wear hair down to their heels if they wanted to. And I 
reckon they did, because after two or three more bloody days 
they came home once without any fresh wounds and then 
they let Simon cut it off while their mother sat behind the 
piano in the parlor and cried. And that was the last of it as 
long as they were in school here. I don’t know what they kept 
on fighting folks about after they went away to school, but 
they found some reason. That was why we finally had to 
separate ’°em while they were at Virginia and send Johnny to 
Princeton. They shot dice or something to see which one 
would be expelled, I think, and when Johnny lost they used to” 
meet in New York every month or so. I found some letters 
in Bayard’s desk that the chief of police in New York wrote 
to the professors at Princeton and Virginia, asking ’em not 
to let Bayard and Johnny come back there any more, that 
the professors sent on to us. And one time Bayard had to pay 
fifteen hundred dollars for something they did to a po- 
liceman or a waiter or something.” 

Miss Jenny talked on, but Narcissa was not listening. 
She was examining the painted face in the miniature. It was a 
child’s face that looked at her, and it was Bayard’s too, yet 
there was already in it, not that bleak arrogance she had 
come to know in Bayard’s, but a sort of frank spontaneity, 
warm and ready and generous; and as Narcissa held the small 
oval in her hand while the steady blue eyes looked quietly 
back at her and from the whole face among its tawny curls, 
with its smooth skin and child’s mouth, there shone like a 
warm radiance something sweet and merry and wild, she 
realized as she never had before the blind tragedy of human 
events. And while she sat motionless with the medallion in 


i 3 SARTORIS 285 

eer hand and Miss Jenny thought she was looking at it, she 
was cherishing the child under her own heart with all the 
& aroused constancy of her nature: it was as though already 
_ she could discern the dark shape of that doom which she 
__had incurred, Standing beside her chair, waiting and biding its 
_ time. “No, no,” she whispered with passionate protest, 
E surrounding her child with wave after wave of that 


strength which welled so abundantly within her as the days 
— accumulated, manning her walls with invincible garrisons. 
She was even glad Miss Jenny had shown her the thing: 
she was now forewarned as well as forearmed. 
-_ Meanwhile Miss Jenny continued to talk about the child 
as Johnny and to recall anecdotes of that other John’s child- 
hood, until at last Narcissa realized that Miss Jenny was get- 
' ting the two confused; and with a sort of shock she knew 
- that Miss Jenny was getting old, that at last even her indom- 
ss itable old heart was growing a little tired. It was a shock, for 
- she had never associated senility with Miss Jenny, who was 
sO spare and erect and brusque and uncompromising and 
_ kind, looking after the place which was not hers and to 
~ which she had been transplanted when her own alien roots in 
_a far-away place, where customs and manners and even the 
very climate itself were different, had been severed violently; 
_ running it with tireless efficiency and with the assistance of 
only a doddering old Negro as irresponsible as a child. 

But run the place she did, just as though old Bayard 
and young Bayard were there. But at night, when they sat 
before the fire in the office, while the year drew on and the 
night air drifted in again heavy with locust and with the song 

_ of mocking-birds and with all the renewed and timeless 

_ mischief of spring and at last even Miss Jenny admitted that 
they no longer needed a fire; when at these times she talked, 
Narcissa noticed that she no longer talked of her far-off girl- 
hood and of Jeb Stuart with his crimson sash and his gar- 
landed bay and his mandolin, but always of a time no 

- further back than Bayard’s and John’s childhood. As though 
her life were closing, not into the future, but out of the past, 
like a spool being rewound. 

And Narcissa would sit, serene again behind her fore- 
warned bastions, listening, admiring more than ever that 
indomitable spirit that, born with a woman’s body into a 
heritage of rash and heedless men and seemingly for the sole 


286 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


purpose of cherishing those men to their early and violent 
ends, and this over a period of history which had seen — 
brothers and husband slain in the same useless mischancing 
of human affairs; had seen, as in a nightmare not to be 
healed by either waking or sleep, the foundations of her life 
swept away and had her roots.torn bodily from that, soil. — 
where her forefathers slept trusting in the integrity of man- — 
kind—a period at which the men themselves, for all their | 
headlong and scornful rashness, would have quailed had their | 
parts been passive parts and their doom been waiting. And she 
thought how much finer that gallantry which never lowered — 
blade to foes no sword could find; that uncomplaining stead-— 
fastness of those unsung (ay, unwept too) women than the 
fustian and useless glamour of the men that obscured it. 
“And now she is trying to make me one of them; to make 
of my child just another rocket to glare for a moment in the 
sky, then die away.” 

But she was serene again, and her days centered more 
and more as her time drew nearer, and Miss Jenny’s voice - 
was only a sound, comforting but without significance. Each 
week she received a whimsical, gallantly humorous letter 
from Horace: these too she read with tranquil detachment— 
what she could decipher, that is. She had always found 
Horace’s writing difficult, and parts that she could decipher 
meant nothing to her. But she knew that he expected that. 

Then it was definitely spring again. Miss Jenny’s and Isom’s 
annual vernal altercation began, pursued its violent but harm- 
less course in the garden beneath her window. They brought 
the tulip bulbs up from the cellar and set them out, Narcissa 
helping, and spaded up the other beds and unswaddled the 
roses and the transplanted jasmine. Narcissa drove into town, 
saw the first jonquils on the deserted lawn blooming as 
though she and Horace were still there, and she sent Horace 
a box of them, and later, of narcissi. But when the gladioli 
bloomed she was not going out any more save in the late — 
afternoon or early evening, when with Miss Jenny she walked 
in the garden among burgeoning bloom and mocking-birds 
and belated thrushes where the long avenues of gloaming 
twilight reluctant leaned, Miss Jenny still talking of Johnny, 
confusing the unborn with the dead. 

Early in June they received a request for money from Bay- 
ard in San Francisco, where he had at last succeeded in 


_SARTORIS 287 


_ being robbed. Miss Jenny sent it. “You come on home,” she 
wired him, not telling Narcissa. “He’ll come home, now,” she 
| did tell her; “you see if he don’t. If for nothing else than to 
- worry us for a while.” 
But a week later he still had not come home, and Miss_ 
Ps ‘Jenny wired him again, a night letter. But when the wire 
was dispatched he was in Chicago, and when it reached San 
Francisco he was sitting among saxophones and painted la- 
~ dies and middle-aged husbands at a table littered with soiled 
- glasses and stained with cigarette ash and spilt liquor, accom- 
| panied by two men and a girl. One of the men wore whip- 
cord, with an army pilot’s wings on his breast. The other was 
a stocky man in shabby serge, with gray temples and intense, 
visionary eyes. The girl was a slim long thing, mostly legs ap- 
_ parently, with a bold red mouth and cold eyes, in an ultra- 
smart dancing-frock, and when the other two men came 
across the room and spoke to Bayard she was cajoling him to 
_ drink with thinly concealed insistence. She and the aviator 
now danced together, and from time to time she looked 
back to where Bayard sat drinking steadily while the shabby 
man talked to him. She was saying, “I’m scared of him.” 
- The shabby man was talking with leashed excitability, 
using two napkins folded lengthwise into narrow strips to il- 
lustrate something, his voice hoarse and importunate against 
the meaningless pandemonium of horns and drums. For a 
while Bayard had half listened, staring at the man with his 
cold eyes, but now he was watching something or some one 
across the room, letting the man talk on unheeded. He was 
_ drinking whisky and soda steadily, with the bottle beside him. 
_ His hand was steady enough, but his face was dead white and 
he was quite drunk; and looking across at him from time to 
time, the girl was saying to her partner: “I’m scared, I tell 
you. God, I didn’t know what to do when you and your friend 
came over. Promise you won’t go and leave us.” 

“You scared?” the aviator repeated in a jeering tone, but 
he too glanced back at Bayard’s white, arrogant face. “I bet 
you don’t even need a horse.” 

“You don’t know him,” the girl rejoined, and she clutched 
his hand and struck her body shivering against him, and 

_ though his arm tightened and his hand slid down her back a 
little, it was under cover of the shuffling throng in which they 
were wedged, and a little warily, and he said quickly: 


288 WILLIAM FAULKNER 
“Rase off, sister; he’s looking this way. I saw him knock 


two teeth out of an Australian captain that just tried to speak _ 


to a girl he was with in a London dive two years ago.” They 


moved on until the band was across the floor from them. | 
“What're you scared of? He’s not an Indian; he won’t hurt | 
you as long as you mind your step. He’s all right. ’'ve known | 
him a long time, in places where you had to be good, be- ‘| 


lieve me.” 
“You don’t know,” she repeated. “TI 


The music crashed to a stop; in the sudden silence the ] 
shabby man’s voice rose from the near-by table: “———could | 


just get one of these damn yellow-livered pilots to——” 


His voice was drowned again in a surge of noise: drunken — 


voices and shrill woman-laughter and scraping chairs, but 
as they approached the table the shabby man still talked 
with leashed insistent gestures while Bayard stared across 
the room at whatever it was he watched, lifting his glass 
steadily to his lips. The girl clutched her partner’s arm. 

“You’ve got to help me pass him out,” she begged swiftly. 
“I’m scared to leave with him, I tell you.” 

“Pass Sartoris out? The man don’t wear hair, nor the 


woman neither. Run back to kindergarden, sister.” Then, 
struck with her utter sincerity, he said, “Say, what’s he 


done to you, anyway?” 

“IT don’t know. He’ll do anything. He threw an empty 
bottle at a traffic cop as we were driving out here. You’ve 
got 


room. 


“Brother-in-law over there,” he said, speaking slowly and 
carefully. “Don’t speak to family. Mad at us. Beat him out of 


his wife.” They turned and looked. 


“Where?” the aviator asked. He heckoned” a waiter. “Here, — 


Jack.” 

“Man with diamond headlight,” Bayard said. “Brave man. 
Can’t speak to him, though. Might hit me. Friend with him, 
anyhow.” 


The aviator looked again. “Looks like his grandmother,” he 


said. He called the waiter again, then to the girl: “Another 
cocktail?” He picked up the bottle and filled his glass and 


“Hush it,” he commanded. The shabby man ceased talk- 
ing and looked up impatiently. Bayard still gazed across the 


_ SARTORIS 289 


renewed Bayard’s and turned to the shabby man. “Where’s 


_ yours?” 


The shabby man waved it impatiently aside. “Look,” he 


_ picked up the napkins again. “Dihedral increases in ratio to 
air pressure. By speed up to a certain point, see? Now, what 
_ I want to find out——” 


“Tell it to the Marines, buddy,” the aviator interrupted. “I 
heard a couple of years ago they got a airyplane. Here, 
waiter!” Bayard was now watching the shabby man bleakly. 

“You aren’t drinking,” the girl said. She touched the avia- 
tor beneath the table. 

_ “No,” Bayard agreed. “Why don’t you fly his coffin for 


__ him, Monaghan?” 


“Me?” The aviator set his glass down. “Like hell. My leave 


comes due next month.” He raised his glass again. “Here’s to 


wind-up,” he said, “and no heeltaps.” 

“Yes,” Bayard agreed, not touching his glass. His face was 
pale and rigid, a metal mask again. 

“T tell you there’s no danger at all, as long as you keep the 


_ speed below a point I'll give you,” the shabby man said with 


heat. “I’ve tested the wings with weights, and proved the lift 


and checked all my figures; all you have to——” 


“Won’t you drink with us?” the girl insisted. 

“Sure he will,” the aviator said. “Say, you remember that 
night in Amiens when that big Irish devil, Comyn, wrecked 
the Cloche-Clos by blowing that A.P.M.’s whistle at the 
door?” The shabby man sat smoothing the folded napkins on 


~ the table before him. Then he burst forth again, his voice 


hoarse and mad with the intensity of his frustration: 
“T’ve worked and slaved, and begged and borrowed, and 


é _now when I’ve got the machine and a government inspector, 


I can’t get a test because you damn yellow-livered pilots won’t - 
take it up. A service full of you, drawing flying pay for sitting 
on hotel roofs swilling alcohol. You overseas pilots talking 
about your guts! No wonder the Germans eS 

“Shut up,” Bayard told him without heat, in his cold, 
careful voice. 

“You're not drinking,” the girl repeated. “Won’t you?” 
She picked up his glass and touched her lips to it and ex- 
tended it to him. Taking it, he caught her hand too and 
held her so. But again he was staring across the room. 

“Not brother-in-law,” he said, “husband-in-law. No. Wife’s 


290 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


brother's husband-in-law. Wife used to be wife’s brother’s 
girl. Married now. Fat woman. He’s lucky.” } 

“What're you talking about?” the aviator demanded. “Come 
on, lets eee a drink.* 


with brief and terrified coqueiry. He held her wrist in 
hard fingers, and while she stared at him widely he drew her® 
steadily toward him. “Tum me loose,” she whispered. 
“Don't.” And she set her glass down and with the other hand” 
she tried to unclasp his fingers. The shabby man was brood-— | 
ing over his folded napkins; the aviator was carefully occu- 
pied with his drink. “Don't,” she whispered again. Her body 
was twisted in her chair and she put out her hand quickly, 
lest she be dragged out of it, and for a moment they stared 
at one another—she with wide, mute terror; he bleakly, 
with the cold mask of his face. thet be eee ee 
thrust his chair back. > 

“Come on, you,” he said to the shabby man. He drew a _ 
wad of bills from his pocket and laid one beside her on the 
table. “That'll get you home,” he said. But she sat nursing the — 
wrist he had held, watching him without a sound. The avia- 3 
tor was discreetly interested in the bottom of his glass. “Come ~ 
on,” Bayard repeated to the shabby man, and the other rose 
and followed him. 

In a small alcove Harry Mitchell sat. On his table too 
were bottles and glasses, and he now sat slumped in his — 
chair, his eyes closed and his bald head rosy with perspiration — 
in the glow of an electric candle. Beside him was a woman 
who turned and looked at Bayard with blazing and harried — 
desperation. Above them stood a waiter with a head like a ~ 
monk’s and as Bayard passed he saw that the diamond wang 
missing from Harry’s tie, and he heard their bitter suppressed 
voices as their hands struggled over something on the table 3 
beyond the discreet shelter of their bodies. As he and his i 
companion reached the exit the woman's voice rose with a — 
burst of filthy rage into a shrill, hysterical scream cut sharply ~ 
off, as if some one had clapped a hand over her mouth, 


The next day Miss Jenny drove into town and wired him 3 
again. But when this wire was dispatched Bayard was sitting — 
in an airplane on the tarmac of the government field at Day- 


| ‘ SARTORIS 291 


ton, while the shabby man hovered and darted here and there 


t 
2 
a 


> 


= 


Ts 
i 
’ 
) 


: 


: 


in a frenzied manner and a group of army pilots stood near 


ee: by, soberly noncommittal. The machine looked like any 


other biplane, save that there were no visible cables between 
the planes, which were braced from within by wires on a sys- 
tem of springs; hence, motionless on the ground, dihedral 
Was negative. The theory was that while in level flight,, di- 
-hedral would be eliminated for speed, and when the ma- 
_ chine was banked, side pressure would automatically increase 
dihedral for maneuverability. The cockpit was set well back 
toward the fin. 
“So you can see the wings when they buckle,” the man 
who lent him helmet and goggles said drily. “It’s an old pair,” 
_he added. Bayard glanced at him, coldly humorless. “Look 


here, Sartoris,” the other said, “let that crate alone. These 


_ birds show up here every week with something that will revo- 
_ lutionize flying, some new kind of mantrap that flies fine—on 


_ paper. If the C.O. won’t give him a pilot (and you know we 


_ try anything here that has a prop on it) you can gamble it’s a 


_ washout.” 


| 
| 
7 
: 
| 
é 


But Bayard took the helmet and goggles and went on to- 
ward the hangar. The group followed him and stood quietly 
about with their bleak, wind-gnawed faces while the engine 
Was warming up. But when Bayard got in and settled his 

_ goggles, the man who had lent them to him approached and 
put something in his lap. “Here,” he said brusquely. “Take 
this.” It was a woman’s garter, and Bayard picked it up and 
gave it back to him. 

“I won’t need it,” he said. “Thanks just the same.” 

“Well. You know your own business. But if you ever let her 
get her nose down, you're going to lose everything but the 
wheels.” 

“I know,” Bayard answered. “T'll keep her up.” The shabby 
man rushed up again, still talking. “Yes, yes,” Bayard replied 
impatiently. “You told me all that before. Contact.” A me- 


- chanic spun the propeller, and as the machine moved out to- 


ward mid-field the shabby man still clung to the cockpit rim 
and shouted at him. Soon he was running to keep up and still 
shouting, and Bayard lifted his hands off the cowling and 
opened the throttle. When he reached the end of the field and 
turned into the wind the man was running toward him and 
waving his arm. Bayard opened the throttle full and the ma- 


292 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


chine lurched forward, and when he passed the man in mid- 
field the tail was high and the plane rushed on in long — 
bounds, and he had a fleeting glimpse of the man’s wild arms — 
and his open mouth as the bounding ceased. : 

From the V strut out each wing tipped and swayed, and. ; 
he jockeyed the thing carefully on, gaining height. He real-_ | 
ized that there was a certain point beyond which his own 
speed was likely to rob him of lifting surface. He had about _ 
two thousand feet now and he turned, and in doing so he | 
found that aileron pressure utterly negatived the inner — 
plane’s dihedral and doubled that of the outer one, and he | 
found himself in the wildest skid he had seen since his Hun 
days. The machine not only skidded; it flung its tail up like a 
diving whale and the air speed indicator leaped thirty miles 
past the dead line the inventor had given him. He was headed 
back toward the field now, in a shallow dive, and he pulled 
the stick back. 

The wing-tips buckled sharply; he flung the stick forward 
just before they ripped completely off, and he knew that only 
the speed of the dive kept him from falling like an inside-out 
umbrella. And the speed was increasing; already he had 
overshot the field, under a thousand feet high. He pulled 
the stick back again; again the wing-tips buckled, and he 
slapped the stick over and kicked again into that wild skid to — 
check his speed. Again the machine swung its tail in a soar- 
ing arc, but this time the wings came off and he ducked 
his head automatically as one of them slapped viciously past 
it and crashed into the tail, shearing that too away. 


3 


That day Narcissa’s child was born, and the following day 
Simon drove Miss Jenny into town and sat her down before - 
the telegraph office and held the horses champing and toss- 
ing with gallant restiveness by a slight and surreptitious 
tightening of the reins, while beneath the top hat and the 
voluminous duster he contrived by some means to actually 
strut sitting down. Dr. Peabody found him so when he came 


SARTORIS 293 


_ along the street in the June sunlight, in his slovenly alpaca 


coat, carrying a newspaper. 

“You look like a frog, Simon,” he said. “Where’s Miss 
Jenny?” 

“Yessuh,” Simon agreed, “yessuh. Dey’s swellin’ en re- 
joicin’ now. De little marster done arrive. Yessuh, de little 
marster done arrive en de ole times comin’ back.” 

“Where’s Miss Jenny?” Dr. Peabody repeated impatiently. 

“She in dar, tellygraftin’ dat boy ter come on back here 
whar he belong at.” 

Dr. Peabody turned away and Simon watched him, a little 
fretted at his apathy in the face of the event. “Takes it jes’ 
like trash,” Simon mused aloud, with annoyed disparage- 
ment. “Nummine; we gwine wake ’um all up, now. Yessuh, 
de olden times comin’ back ergain, sho’. Like in Mars’ John’s 
time, when de Cunnel wuz de young marster en de niggers 
fum de quawters gethered on de front lawn, wishin’ Mistis 
en de little marster well.” And he watched Dr. Peabody enter 
the door, and through the plate-glass window he saw him 
approach Miss Jenny as she stood at the counter with her 
message. 

“Come home you fool and see your family or I will have 
you arrested,” the message read in her firm, lucid script. 
“It’s more than ten words,” she told the operator, “but that 
don’t matter this time. He’ll come now; you watch. Or Ill 
send the sheriff after him, sure as his name’s Sartoris.” 

“Yes, ma’am,” the operator said. He was apparently havy- 
ing trouble reading it, and he looked up after a moment 
and was about to speak, when Miss Jenny remarked his dis- 
traction and repeated the message briskly. 

“And make it stronger than that, if you want to,” she 
added. 

“Yes, ma’am,” he said again, and he ducked down behind 
his desk, and presently and with a little mounting curiosity 
and impatience Miss Jenny leaned across the counter with a 
silver dollar in her fingers and watched him count the words 
three times in a sort of painful flurry. 

“What's the matter, young man?’ she demanded. “The 
government don’t forbid the mentioning of a day-old child 


- in a telegram, does it?” 


The operator looked up. “Yes, ma’am, it’s all right,” he said 
at last, and she gave him the dollar and as he sat holding it 


294 WILLIAM FAULKNER © 


in his hand and Miss Jenny watched him with yet more im- _ 


patience, Dr. Peabody came in and touched her arm. 
“Come away, Jenny,” he said. 


“Good morning,” she said, turning at his voice. “Well, it’s — 
about time you took notice. This is the first Sartoris you’ve © 


been a day late on in how many‘years, Loosh? And soon as ~ 
I get that fool boy home, it'll be like old times again, as — 


Simon says.” 
“Yes. Simon told me. Come along here.” 


“Let me get my change.” She turned to the counter, where { 
the operator stood with the message in one hand and the | 


coin in the other. “Well, young man? Ain’t a dollar enough?” 


“Yes, ma’am,” he repeated, turning on Dr. Peabody his 
dumb, distracted eyes. Dr. Peabody reached fatly and took — 


the message and the coin from him. 

“Come along, Jenny,” he said again. Miss Jenny stood 
motionless for a moment, in her black silk dress and her 
black bonnet set squarely on her head, staring at him with 
her piercing old eyes that saw so much and so truly. Then 


she walked steadily to the door and stepped into the street — 


and waited until he joined her, and her hand was steady too 


as she took the folded paper he offered. MISSISSIPPI AVIATOR ; 


it said in discreet capitals, and she returned it to him imme- 


diately and from her waist she took a small sheer handker- 


chief and wiped her fingers lightly. 
“I don’t have to read it,” she said. “They never get into 


the papers but one way. And I know that he was somewhere ~ 
he had no business being, doing something that wasn’t any — 


affair of his.” 
“Yes,” Dr. Peabody said. He followed her to the carriage 
and put his hands clumsily on her as she mounted. 
“Don’t paw me, Loosh,” she snapped; “I’m not a cripple.” 


But he supported her elbow with his huge, gentle hand until — 


she was seated; then he stood with his hat off while Simon 
laid the linen robe across her knees. 


“Here,” he said, extending her the silver dollar. She re- | 


turned it to her bag and clicked it shut and wiped her fingers 
again on her handkerchief. 

“Well,” she said. Then: “Thank God that’s the last one. 
For a while, anyway. Home, Simon.” 

Simon sat magnificently, but under the occasion he unbent 


E 


_ SARTORIS 295 
j a little. “When you gwine come out en see de young marster, 
~ Doctuh?” 


“Soon, Simon,” he answered, and Simon clucked to the 


c horses and wheeled away with a flourish, his hat tilted and 
the whip caught smartly back. Dr. Peabody stood in the 


street, a shapeless hogshead of a man in a shabby alpaca 


_ coat, his hat in one hand and the folded newspaper and the 
_ yellow unsent message in the other, until Miss Jenny’s 
- straight slender back and the square indomitable angle of her 


bonnet had passed from sight. 


But that was not the last one. One morning a week later, 


_ Simon was found in a Negro cabin in town, his grizzled head 
- crushed in by a blunt instrument anonymously wielded. 


“In whose house?” Miss Jenny demanded into the tele- 


phone. In that of a woman named Meloney Harris, the 


2 voice told her. Meloney ... Mel... Belle Mitchell’s face 


flashed before her mind, and she remembered: the mulatto 
- girl whose smart cap and apron and lean, shining shanks had 
lent such an air to Belle’s parties, and who had quit Belle 
in order to set up a beauty parlor. Miss Jenny thanked the 


~ voice and hung up the receiver. 


“The old gray-headed reprobate,” she said, and she went 
into old Bayard’s office and sat down. “So that’s where that 
church money went that he ‘put out.’ I wondered. .. .” 


_ She sat stiffly and uncompromisingly erect in her chair, her 


hands idle on her lap. “Well, that is the last one of ’em,” 
-she thought. But no, he was hardly a Sartoris: he had at least 
some shadow of a reason, while the others .. . “I think,” 
Miss Jenny said, who had not spent a day in bed since she 
was forty years old, “that I'll be sick for a while.” 

And she did just exactly that. Went to bed, where she 
lay propped on pillows in a frivolous lace cap, and would 
permit no doctor to see her save Dr. Peabody, who called 
once informally and sat sheepishly for thirty minutes while 
Miss Jenny vented her invalid’s spleen and the recurred 
anger of the salve fiasco on him. And here she held daily 
councils with Isom and Elnora, and at the most unexpected 
moments she would storm with unimpaired vigor from her 
window at Isom and Caspey in the yard beneath. 

The child and the placid, gaily turbaned mountain who 
superintended his hours, spent most of the day in this room, 


296 WILLIAM FAULKNER 


and presently Narcissa herself; and the three of them would — 
sit for rapt, murmurous hours in a sort of choral debauch ~ 
of abnegation while the object of it slept digesting, waked, — 
stoked himself anew, and slept again. es. 
“He’s a Sartoris, all right,” Miss Jenny said, “but an im- + 
proved model. He hasn’t got that’ wild look of ’em. I believe | 
it was the name. Bayard. We did well to name him Johnny.” | 
“Yes,” Narcissa said, watching her sleeping son with — 
grave and tranquil serenity. 


And there Miss Jenny stayed until her while was up. 
Three weeks it was. She set the date before she went to bed 
and held to it stubbornly, refusing even to rise and attend 
the christening. That day fell on Sunday. It was late in June © 
and jasmine drifted into the house in steady waves. Narcissa 
and the nurse, in an even more gaudy turban, had brought 
the baby, bathed and garnished and scented in his ceremonial 
robes, in to her, and later she heard them drive away in the 
carriage, and then the house was still again. The curtains. 
stirred peacefully at the windows, and all the peaceful scents 
of summer came up on the sunny breeze, and sounds—birds, 
somewhere a Sabbath bell, and Elnora’s voice, chastened a 
little by her recent bereavement but still rich and mellow as — 
she went about getting dinner. She sang sadly and endlessly 
and without words as she moved about the kitchen, but she 
broke off short when she looked around and saw Miss Jenny, — 
looking a little frail but dressed and erect as ever, in the 
door. ; 

“Miss Jenny! Whut in de worl’! You git on back to yo’ 
bed. Here, lemme he’p you back.” But Miss Jenny came ~ 
firmly on. 

“Where’s Isom?” she demanded. 

“He at de barn. You come on back to bed. I’m gwine tell 
Miss Narcissa on you.” 

“Get away,” Miss Jenny said. “I’m tired of staying in the 
house. I’m going to town. Call Isom.” Elnora protested still, 
but Miss Jenny insisted coldly, and Elnora went to the door — 
and called Isom and returned, portentous with pessimistic 
warnings, and presently Isom entered. 

“Here,” Miss Jenny said, handing him the keys. “Get the 
car out.” Isom departed and Miss Jenny followed more 
slowly. Elnora would have followed too, darkly solicitous, — 


_ SARTORIS 297 


put Miss Jenny sent her back to her kitchen; and she crossed 
the yard and got in beside Isom. “And you drive this thing 
careful, boy,” she told him, “or I'll get over there and do it 
myself.” 
When they reached town, from slender spires rising among 
_ trees, against the puffy clouds of summer, bells were ringing 
lazily. At the edge of town Miss Jenny bade Isom turn into 
a grassy lane and they followed this and stopped presently 
Phefore the iron gates to the cemetery. “I want to see if they 
fixed Simon all right,” she explained. “I’m not going to 
church today: I’ve been shut up between walls long enough.” 
Just from the prospect she got a mild exhilaration, like that 
of a small boy playing out of school. 
_ The Negro burying-ground lay beyond the cemetery proper, 
and Isom led her to Simon’s grave. Simon’s burying society 
had taken care of him, and after three weeks the mound was - 
~still heaped with floral designs from which the blooms had 
fallen, leaving a rank, lean mass of stems and peacefully 
_ rusting wire skeletons. Elnora, some one, had been before 
her, and the grave was bordered with tedious rows of broken 
_ gaudy bits of crockery and of colored glass. “I reckon he’ll 
_ have to have a headstone too,’ Miss Jenny said aloud, and 
turning, saw Isom hauling his overalled legs into a tree about 
| which two catbirds whirled and darted in scolding circles. 
“You, Isom.” 

“Yessum.” Isom dropped obediently to the ground and 
the birds threatened him with a final burst of hysterical 
_ profanity. They entered the white folks’ section and passed 

now between marble shapes bearing names that she knew 
well, and dates in stark and peaceful simplicity in the im- 
pervious stone. Now and then they were surmounted by 
-symbolical urns and doves and surrounded by clipped, 
tended sward green against the blanched marble and the 
blue dappled sky and the black cedars from amid which 
‘doves crooned, endlessly reiterant. Here and there bright 
-unfaded flowers lay in random bursts against the pattern of 
white and green, and presently John Sartoris lifted his stone 
back and his fulsome gesture amid a clump of cedars beyond 
which the bluff sheared sharply away into the valley. 

Bayard’s grave too was a shapeless mass of withered flow- 
ers, and Miss Jenny had Isom clear them off and carry them 
away. The masons were preparing to lay the curbing around 


298 WILLIAM FAULKN: 


it, and the headstone itself sat near by beneath a canvas 
covering. She lifted the canvas and read the clean, new let~ 
tering: Bayard Sartoris. March 16, 1893—June 11, 1920. 
That was better. Simple: no Sartoris man to invent bombast) 
to put on it. Can’t even lie dead in the ground without strut-i 
ting and swaggering. Beside the grave was a second head-. 
stone, like the other save for the inscription. But the Sartoris 
touch was here, despite the fact that there was no grave tor 
accompany it; and the whole thing was like a boastful voice: 
in an empty church. Yet withal there was something else, ase 
though the merry wild spirit of him who had laughed away \ 
so much of his heritage of humorless and fustian vainglory | 
managed somehow even yet, though his bones lay in ant 
anonymous grave beyond seas, to soften the arrogant gesture : 
with which they had bade him farewell: 


LIEUT. JOHN SARTORIS, R.A.F. 
Killed in action, July 5, 1918 


‘I bare him on eagles’ wings 
and brought him unto Me’ 


A faint breeze soughed in the cedars like a long sigh, and 
the branches moved gravely in it. Across the spaced tran- 
quillity of the marble shapes the doves crooned their end- 
less rising inflections. Isom returned for another armful of 
withered flowers and bore it away. 

Old Bayard’s headstone was simple too, having been born, 
as he had, too late for one war and too soon for the next, 
and she thought what a joke They had played on him—for- 
bidding him opportunities for swashbuckling and then deny- 
ing him the privilege of being buried by men, who would have 
invented vainglory for him. The cedars had almost overgrown 
his son John’s and John’s wife’s graves. Sunlight reached 
them only in splashes, dappling the weathered stone with fit- 
ful stipplings; only with difficulty could the inscription have 
been deciphered. But she knew what it would be, what with 
the virus, the inspiration and example of that one which 
dominated them all, which gave the whole place, in which 
weary people were supposed to be resting, an orotund solem- 
nity having no more to do with mortality than the bindings 


= 


SARTORIS 299 


of books have to do with their characters, and beneath which 
‘the headstones of the wives whom they had dragged into their 
fatrogant orbits were, despite their pompous genealogical 
references, modest and effacing as the song of thrushes be- 
neath the eyrie of an eagle. 
_ He stood on a stone pedestal, in his frock coat and bare- 
headed, one leg slightly advanced and one hand resting 
lightly on the stone pylon beside him. His head was lifted a 
ittle in that gesture of haughty pride which repeated itself 
generation after generation with a fateful fidelity, his back 
‘to the world and his carven eyes gazing out across the valley 
where his railroad ran, and the blue changeless hills beyond, 
and beyond that, the ramparts of infinity itself. The pedestal 
and effigy were mottled with seasons of rain and sun and with 
drippings from the cedar branches, and the bold carving of 
‘the letters was bleared with mold, yet still decipherable: 


COLONEL JOHN SARTORIS, C.S.A. 
1823 1876 
Soldier, Statesman, Citizen of the World 


For man’s enlightenment he lived 
By man’s ingratitude he died 


Pause here, son of sorrow; remember death 


This inscription had caused some furore on the part of 
the slayer’s family, and a formal protest had followed. But 
in complying with popular opinion, old Bayard had had his 
Tevenge: he caused the line “By man’s ingratitude he died” 
to be chiseled crudely out, and added beneath it: “Fell at 
the hand of Redlaw, Sept. 4, 1876.” 

: Miss Jenny stood for a time, musing, a slender, erect 
figure in black silk and a small, uncompromising black bon- 
net. The wind drew among the cedars in long sighs, and 
steadily as pulses the sad hopeless reiteration of the doves 
came along the sunny air. Isom returned for the last armful 
of dead flowers, and looking out across the marble vistas 
where the shadows of noon moved, she watched a group of 
children playing quietly and a little stiffly in their bright Sun- 
day finery, among the tranquil dead. Well, it was the last one, 
at last, gathered in solemn conclave about the dying rever- 


300 WILLIAM FAULKNE 


beration of their arrogant lusts, their dust moldering quietly) 
beneath the pagan symbols of their vainglory and the carve 
gestures of it in enduring stone; and she remembered som 
thing Narcissa had said once, about a world without men 
and wondered if therein lay peaceful avenues and dwelt 
thatched with quiet; and she ‘didn’t know. 

Isom returned, and as they moved away Dr. Peabody called: 
her name. He was dressed as usual in his shabby broadcloth? 
trousers and his shiny alpaca coat and floppy Panama hat,: 
and his son was with him. 

“Well, boy,” Miss Jenny said, giving young Loosh hari 
hand. His face was big-boned and roughly molded. He hadi 
a thatch of straight, stiff black hair and his eyes were steady | 
and brown and his mouth was large, and in all his ugly' 
face there was reliability and gentleness and humor. He was 
raw-boned and he wore his clothing awkwardly, and his‘ 
hands were large and bony and with them he performed 
delicate surgical operations with the deftness of a hunter 
skinning a squirrel and with the celerity of a prestidigitator. 
He lived in New York, where he was associated with a 
surgeon whose name was a household word, and once a year 
and sometimes twice he rode thirty-six hours on the train, 
spent twenty hours with his father (which they passed walk- 
ing about town or riding about the countryside in the sagging 
buckboard all day and sitting on the veranda or before the 
fire all night, talking) and took the train again and, ninety- 
two hours later, was back at his clinic. He was thirty years 
old, only child of the woman Dr. Peabody had courted for 
fourteen years before he was able to marry her. The court- 
ship was during the days when he physicked and amputated 
the whole county by buckboard; often after a year’s separa- 
tion he would drive forty miles to see her, to be intercepted 
on the way and deflected to a childbed or a mangled limb, 
with only a scribbled message to assuage the interval of an- 
other year. “So you’re home again, are you?” Miss Jenny 
asked. 

“Yes, ma’am. And find you as spry and handsome as ever.” 

“Jenny’s too bad-tempered to ever do anything but dry up 
and blow away,” Dr. Peabody said. 

“You'll remember I never let you wait on me when I’m not 
well,” she retorted. “I reckon you'll be tearing off again on 
the next train, won’t you?” she asked young Loosh. 


| SARTORIS 301 
ye “Yessum, I’m afraid so. My vacation hasn’t come. due, 
: yet.” 


_ “Well, at this rate you'll spend it in an old men’s home 
» somewhere. Why don’t you all come out and have dinner, 
| so he can see the boy?” 
- “Td like to,” young Loosh answered, “but I don’t have 
| time to do all the things I want to, so I just make up my 
| mind not to do any of ’em. Besides, [ll have to spend this 
afternoon fishing,” he added. 
_ “Yes,” his father put in, “and choppin’ up good fish with 
a pocket knife just to see what makes ’em go. Lemme tell 
_ you what he did this mawnin’: he grabbed up that dawg that 
Abe shot last winter and laid its leg open and untangled 
' them ligaments so quick that Abe not only didn’t know what 
_ he was up to, but even the dawg didn’t know it ’til it was too 
late to holler. Only you forgot to dig a little further for his 
“soul,” he added to his son. 
— “You don’t know if he hasn’t got one,” young Loosh said, 
_unruffled. “Dr. Straud has been experimenting with electric- 
ity; he says he believes the soul 
__. “Fiddlesticks,” Miss Jenny interrupted. “You’d better get 
him a jar of Will Falls’ salve to carry back to his doctor, 
~Loosh. Well”—she glanced at the sun——“I’d better be going. 
_If you won’t come out to dinner ” 
“Thank you, ma’am,” young Loosh answered. 
His father said: “I brought him in to show him that col- 
lection of yours. We didn’t know we looked that underfed.” 
“Help yourself,” Miss Jenny answered. She went on, and 
they stood and watched her trim back until she passed out of 
sight beyond the cedars. 
_ “And now there’s another one,” young Loosh said musing- 
ly. “Another one to grow up and keep his folks in a stew 
until he finally succeeds in doing what they all expect him to 
do. Well, maybe that Benbow blood will sort of hold him 
down. They’re quiet folks, that girl; and Horace sort of ... 
and just women to raise him. . .” 
His father grunted. “He’s got Sartoris blood in him, too.” 


Miss Jenny arrived home, looking a little spent, and Nar- 
-cissa scolded her and at last prevailed on her to lie down 
after dinner. And here she had dozed while the drowsy after- 
noon wore away, and waked to lengthening shadows and a 


302 WILLIAM FAULKNER? 


sound of piano keys touched softly below stairs. “I’ve sleptt 
all afternoon,” she told herself, in a sort of consternation; yet t 
she lay for a time yet while the curtains stirred faintly att 
the windows and the sound of the piano came up mingled i 
with the jasmine from the garden and with the garrulous; 
evensong of sparrows from thé mulberry trees in the back 
yard. She rose and crossed the hall and entered Narcissa’s 
room, where the child slept in its crib. Beside him the nurse : 
dozed placidly. Miss Jenny tiptoed out and descended the : 
stairs and entered the parlor and drew her chair out frome 

behind the piano. Narcissa stopped playing. 

“Do you feel rested?” she asked. “You shouldn’t have 
done that this morning.” | 

“Fiddlesticks,” Miss Jenny rejoined. “It always does me 
good to see all those fool pompous men lying there with © 
their marble mottoes and things. Thank the Lord, none of 
’em will have a chance at me. I reckon the Lord knows His 
business, but I declare, sometimes . . . Play something.” 

Narcissa obeyed, touching the keys softly, and Miss Jenny 
sat listening for a while. The evening drew subtly onward; 
the shadows in the room grew more and more palpable. 
Outside the sparrows gossiped in shrill clouds. From the 
garden jasmine came in to them steady as breathing, and 
presently Miss Jenny roused and began to talk of the child. 
Narcissa played quietly on, her white dress with its black 
tibbon at the waist vaguely luminous in the dusk, with a 
hushed sheen like wax. Jasmine drifted and drifted; the spar- 
rows were still now, and Miss Jenny talked on in the twilight 
about little Johnny while Narcissa played with rapt inatten- 
tion, as though she were not listening. Then, without Sic 
and without turning her head, she said: 

“He isn’t John. He’s Benbow Sartoris.” 

“What?” 

“His name is Benbow Sartoris,” she repeated. 

Miss Jenny sat quite still for a moment. In the next room 
Elnora moved about, laying the table for supper. “And do 
you think that'll do any good?” Miss Jenny demanded. “Do 
you think you can change one of ’em with a name?” 

The music went on in the dusk softly; the dusk was peopled 
with ghosts of glamorous and old disastrous things. And if 
they were just glamorous enough, there was sure to be a 
Sartoris in them, and then they were sure to be disastrous. 


Ss 303 
"Pawns, But the Player, and the game He plays . . . He 
‘must have a name for His pawns, though. But perhaps Sar- 
*toris is the game itseli—a game outmoded and played with 
pawns shaped too late and to an old dead pattern, and of 
‘which the Player Himself is a little wearied. For there is 
death in the sound of it, and a glamorous fatality, like silver 
| pennons downrushing at sunset, or a dying fall of horns along 
the road to Roncevaux. 

~ “Do you think,” Miss Jenny repeated, “that because his 
fame is Benbow, he’ll be any less a Sartoris and a scoundrel 
and a fool?” 

| Narcissa played on as though she were not listening. 
Then she turned her head and without stopping her hands 
"she smiled at Miss Jenny quietly, a little dreamily, with 
"serene, fond detachment. Beyond Miss Jenny’s trim, fading 
head the maroon curtains hung motionless; beyond the win- 
‘dow evening was a windless lilac dream, foster dam of quie- 
¥ and peace. 


AFTERWORD 


“Thou still unravish’d bride of quietness, 
Thou foster-child of silence and slow time .. .” 


Anyone who has just finished reading the last sentence — 
of Sartoris may still be puzzling over it. Is there any signifi- - 
cance in Faulkner’s way of concluding this narrative by dis- - 
torting the first two lines from Keats’s famous “Ode on a 
Grecian Urn”—the two lines quoted above? Perhaps not. But 
the tantalizing effect of that distortion does cause us to re- 
member that many other echoes from the same ode per- 
vade Sartoris. All the romantic characters in this novel are 
treated in an ambivalent manner by Faulkner, whose atti- 
tude toward them is at once sympathetic, critical, ironic; 
but, more than that, Faulkner’s various uses of irony here 
provide him with his most important artistic controls of 
underlying meanings. Perhaps, then, a glance at some earlier 
uses of irony in Sartoris may throw light on that final 
puzzling discrepancy. 

Remember that the Sartorises themselves are represented 
as romantically idealizing, glorifying, and glamorizing into 
“Attic shapes” and “fair attitudes” all the tableau postures 
of generations past and present in their family history. 
Remember that rhetoric, or rather the ironic Faulknerian 
representation of what might be called Sartoris-rhetoric, 
heightens our impression that a great many embroideries 
in this Sartoris “brede” of marble men and maidens are 
(so to speak) “overwrought.” By analogy, there is equal 
significance in remembering that Horace and Narcissa Ben- 
bow, who play opposite the immediate Sartorises as foils 
in this dramatic narrative, are also represented as having 
their own romantic and rhetorical ways of glamorizing ex- 
perience. Horace, idealistically loving his sister, Narcissa, 
and returning to her as to a stainless bride after the close 

304 


__ AFTERWORD - 305 


of the war, seems to be telling himself something like what 
- Keats told the ardent youth on the tableau freize of the 
urn: “For ever wilt thou love, and she be fair!” It is an 
~ unnatural relationship, which does not last. But later, in a 
~ letter to Narcissa, Horace addresses her as “thou still un- 
_ ravished bride of quietness.” Absurdly romantic dreamer that 
_ he is, Horace lies on his bed in reverie, “while that wild, 
_ fantastic futility of his voyaged in lonely regions of its own 
beyond the moon, about meadows nailed with firmamented 


stars to the ultimate roof of things, where unicorns filled 
the neighing air with galloping, or grazed or lay supine in 
golden-hoofed repose.” Again the reader is expected to no- 


_ tice that this rhetoric is Horace’s, and that Faulkner merely 
lends it to him for purposes of characterization; again the 
_ dramatic ironies. 

_ The major difference between Horace’s romantic idealism 
~ and that of his opposite, young Bayard Sartoris, is that 
- Horace glorifies quietism as a form of defense against his 


Own cowardice, whereas young Bayard glorifies courageous 


and violent action (performed with equally “fantastic fu- 
tility”) for self-pitying purposes of melodramatic exhibition- 
~ ism. Although both of these young men belong to the “lost 


generation” of the First World War, Faulkner probes deep 


_ enough below the surface of their motives to keep the reader 


from assuming that the villain, this time, is The War. By 
analogy other wars, such as the Civil and the Spanish 
American, are represented as having given earlier genera- 


_ tions of Sartorises the very excuses they sought for acting 


out equally violent, courageous, and fantastically futile -melo- 


~ dramas. 


But these preliminary reminders concerning Faulkner’s uses 


of dramatic irony have been made here merely to suggest 


larger problems of interpretation. Because many readers and 


critics of Sartoris have misunderstood Faulkner’s early and 


still-faltering ways of artistically ordering and controlling 


meanings in Sartoris, this Afterword may be a good place 


for some broader reconsiderations of artistic strengths and 


_ weaknesses in this matrix of all the chronicles of Yoknapa- 


tawpha County. Then we will be in a better position to 


understand what may or may not be poe on in that final 
oe sentence. 


306 AFTERWORD 


Most of us are familiar with the circumstances under 


which Faulkner wrote Sartoris—and Robert Cantwell’s essay, 
written for an earlier Signet edition, has long served as a 


valuable landmark in Faulkner scholarship. We are familiar 
with the significance of the dedication to Sherwood Ander-~ 


son, who had previously said té young Faulkner, down in. | 
New Orleans, “You're a country boy, and all you know is 
that little patch up there in Mississippi where you started — 
from; but that’s all right too.” We are also familiar with — 
the extent to which Faulkner thus came to rediscover the _ 


inexhaustible storehouse of raw materials for fiction in the 
factual-legendary-mythical history and genealogy of his 
own land and family. All‘ these raw materials had been™ 
made available to him throughout his youth. Daily talk and — 


conversation intermingled history, folklore, gossip, and tall” : 


tales—and even salted them with wry wit. 

But by the time Sherwood Anderson sent him home, after. 
the manner of the prodigal son, Faulkner had acquired a 
new perspective on his heritage. He had suffered through 
at least the peripheral experiences of the First World War 


while completing his training as an aviator. After the war, 


Be | 
i: 


he had also suffered through the familiar disillusionments — 
of the returning soldier and had found that he was unable — 
to settle down in his hometown of Oxford, Mississippi. Al-— 
most desperately, he had tried to establish himself where he — 


did not belong, among the Bohemian writers and painters 


in New Orleans. Still desperately, he had given up that life 


to work and loaf for a time in New York City. Then he 


had gotten the wanderlust out of his system by working his — 


passage to Europe aboard a freighter, had tasted life in 


Rome, and had even looked in on Left-Bank writers in 
Paris. These experiences not only provided him with an in- — 


creasingly detached and critical perspective on his native 


South but also heightened his passionate love for his Southern — 


heritage. Only when he began writing Sartoris, however, did — 
he come to grips with and explore the problem of how he — 


might, could, would, should, give artistic treatment to nar- 


rative materials so intimately associated with his past and — 


present. 


It is not unfair to view Sartoris as Faulkner’s third ap- — 


prentice-novel, similar in its uncertainties and weaknesses 
to Soldiers’ Pay and Mosquitoes, save that this time his 


Ptecnetes sath 


& 
; 


E _AFTERWORD 307 


viewpoint more clearly recognizes the inseparability of hu- 


S _™man weaknesses and strengths, of positives and negatives, 
of good and evil. In his first two novels his primary goal 
__ was to vent spleen through harsh uses of satire and sarcasm 


for purposes of negation. But when he turned to a fictional 
handling of his own family history, his own regional his- 


E tory, perhaps he felt the need for interweaving implied 


f 


affirmations with negations. If by this time he had acquired 


— enough perspective to realize that good and evil are always 


inextricably bound up with what he later called “the prob- 
-lems of the human heart in conflict with itself,’ so much 
the better for his art. But any reader who is troubled by 


__ the many artistic flaws and weaknesses in Sartoris may well 


— 
his trying to crowd in too many disparate elements; too 
_ many pieces of characterization, scene, event, incident, epi- 


imagine that some of Faulkner’s difficulties were caused by 


_-sode. Some of the pieces, thrown together in helter-skelter 
- fashion like remainders of an uncompleted jigsaw puzzle, 


simply do not fit. Perhaps Sartoris became the matrix nar- 
tative for the chronicles of Yoknapatawpha County partly 
because it contained, even after Faulkner’s patient revisions, 


$0 many leftovers; so many pieces of unfinished business. 


Consider, for example, a few parts of Sartoris that are 
insufficiently assimilated. Remember the entire sequence of 
events involving the wen on old Bayard Sartoris’ face, and 


- the consternation of at least three professional doctors over 


the success with which the wen was removed by the magical 
salve of old man Falls. It is an amusing anecdote, but 
that is all that may be said for it. By contrast the sustained 
episode involving young Bayard Sartoris’ visit of several days 
with the McCallum family is partially interlocked with the 
central action. But even here the pastoral occupations of 
the McCallums divert Faulkner so strongly that he neither 
justifies the disproportionate length of the digression nor 
manages to articulate it sufficiently. Different in kind, and 
yet once again inadequately fitted as parts within the whole, 
are the scattered episodes involving the one-sided love affair 
of Byron Snopes. Faulkner later seemed to grant the in- 
adequacy of that handling when he returned to Byron and 
Narcissa for purposes of making out of the same materials 
an important short story entitled “There Was a Queen.” 
Similarly, Horace Benbow’s involvement with Belle Mitchell 


z } 
7 
. 


4 
308 AFTERWORD > 


stood as a matter of unfinished business until Faulkner — 
tended to it with sardonic-sarcastic-satiric force by permit- — 
ting Horace’s mixture of well-intended idealism and under-_ 
mining cowardice to achieve tragic fulfillment in Sanctuary. 
Equally indicative of Faulkner’s uncertain groping for di- i 
rection and focus while writing Sartoris is his treatment of ! 
Negro characters. They are handled too largely as low- | 
comedy stereotypes. Their picturesque actions and conversa- — 
tions are so weakly subsumed by major elements of plot 
and theme that they are largely wasted. A good example of | 
a Negro subplot wasted is the amusing predicament caused — 
by Simon’s lascivious investment of money entrusted to him 
for rebuilding a Negro church that had burned down, and ~ 
the “financial ’rangements” made by old Bayard Sartoris for — 
purposes of paying Simon’s debt. Different in kind, but also — 
wasted, is the description of the ritualistic ceremony con- — 
ducted when the Negroes bring their sugarcane to make — 
their communal winter sorghum molasses. But if these in- — 
adequate uses of Negro characters serve merely as further 
reminders of Faulkner’s apprentice attempt to crowd too 
much into Sartoris, they at least foreshadow the success 
with which he later built some of his most penetrating plots 
and themes around unstereotyped delineations of Negroes, — 
dramatically cast in dignified roles, as for example in Go 
Down, Moses, or The Sound and the Fury. : 
We may now look past these weaknesses in Sartoris, the 
better to understand meanings that are indirectly illumi-— 
nated by centrally organized characterizations and events. 
Quite obviously, the major plot is structured into five parts, 
which are primarily concerned with the violently self-in-— 
juring antics of young Bayard Sartoris during the year fol- — 
lowing his return from the war, one event of which was — 
the death of his twin brother, John. Even in the plot, how- 
ever, there is a major flaw: the unfolding of events is made — 
in a too nearly disconnected sequence rather than through ~ 
circumstances that interlock cause and effect. This can be 
shown easily by noticing that the five parts are constructed 
out of 1. the details of young Bayard’s homecoming; 2. — 
his ways of terrorizing the countryside with rude perform- 
ances in his newly purchased car, and his mad attempt 
to ride bareback on an untrained stallion; 3. his breaking — 
his ribs in an automobile accident, and his ruthless court- — 


‘ 


: AFTERWORD 309 


ship of Narcissa Benbow while she is attending him dur- 
ing his convalescence; 4. his brief attempt to settle down 
after his marriage to Narcissa, his return to his old ways, 


the wild ride during which the boy’s grandfather dies of 
_ heart failure, and young Bayard’s consequent flight; 5. fi- 
_ nally, his suicidal death while he is testing a crackpot’s 
_ newly designed airplane. The best unifying element here is 


not plot but theme; a theme that is illuminated through 


- Faulkner’s artistic process of placing young Bayard’s dis- 


connected actions within the historical-genealogical frame- 
work provided by the lives and times of his immediate 
ancestors. As soon as analogies are thus established between 
past and present, the Faulknerian ironies are invoked to 
heighten our awareness and understanding of implied mean- 


_ ings. 


_ For example, in the very first chapter of Part One, a 


— touchstone or yardstick for evaluating analogous actions of 


the twin brothers is implied by introducing that earlier pair 
of brothers, also named John and Bayard. Of that earlier 
pair, John is the great-grandfather of the twins, and Bayard 
is the picturesque daredevil whose raid behind Federal 


_ lines resulted in his futile death. The story of that raid is 


repeatedly told by old Miss Jenny Sartoris Du Pre, the 
widowed sister of those earlier daredevils. But remember 


' that it is still in the first chapter of Part One that Faulkner 


makes the following wry comment on Miss Jenny’s romantic 
distillations: 


She had told the story many times . .. and as she grew older 
the tale itself grew richer and richer, taking on a mellow splendor 
like wine; until what had been a harebrained prank of two heed- 
less and reckless boys [the other “boy” being young General 
“Jeb” Stuart] wild with their own youth had become a gallant 
and finely tragical focal point to which the history of the race 


had been raised from out the old miasmic swamps of spiritual 


sloth by two angels valiantly fallen and strayed, altering the 
course of human events and purging the souls of men. 


Notice the tone of this passage, and notice that here 
Faulkner spells out the irony. It is a sarcastic way of point- 
ing up the discrepancy between the actual and the apparent; 
the distance between the facts and the myth romantically 
made out of the facts. The explicit details in this passage 


310 AFTERWORD é) 


ought to help any reader recognize other and later ironies — 
that are closely related but only implied. For example, 
Miss Jenny has this much in common with old man Falls: 
each one tells and retells different stories about “hare-— 
brained” pranks or even crimes committed by the Sartoris — 
brothers during and after the War Between the States, tells — 
and retells until even the darkest facts become glamorous 
legends and myths. To them it does not matter whether 
the facts involve breaking through enemy lines in quest of 
coffee and anchovies or bursting into a boardinghouse to 
shoot and kill two carpetbaggers who are trying to control 
the Negro vote. 

Once again the immediate point for readers of Sartoris 
to remember is that the “romance” thus attached to the his- 
tory of the gallant Sartorises—and by extension to the en- — 
tire history of the South—is represented by Faulkner as an 
element mistakenly added through the rhetoric of retellings. 
Faulkner, sadly understanding these romantic transforma- 
tions of facts into myths—and even admiring courage as 
courage no matter how grossly misused—permits the play — 
of his ironies to assign values that are predominantly cor- — 
rective; values that handle, antiromantically, those details 
that the Sartorises have romanticized. 

Just as soon as the reader begins to understand and pay 
careful attention to these controlling Faulknerian ironies, it © 
is possible to appreciate that many other analogous elements — 
of “romance” are also brought under antiromantic considera- 
tion in such ways that they extend Faulkner’s thematic con- 
cerns. Although Miss Jenny is endowed by her creator with — 
her own fondness for ironies so that she may at times serve 
Faulkner as mouthpiece, or persona, she is not permitted 
to recognize her own capacities for romanticizing. Honoring 
her as the strongest character in this narrative, Faulkner 
still finds room for being amused by the variations in her 
peculiar searches for romance. Remember, for instance, this 
passage: 


my 


eee 


She enjoyed humanity in its more colorful mutations, prefer- 
ring lively romance to the most impeccable of dun fact, so she 


took in the more lurid afternoon paper . .. and read with 
cold avidity accounts of arson and murder and violent dissolu- 
tion and adultery . .. [and, a few years later] diversion in 


the form of bootleggers’ wars.... 


| AFTERWORD 311 


. 
; 
: 


feelings of others, until (and even after) Miss Jenny is 


1 


| - 


Similar tendencies run in the family. Romantic young 


_ Bayard, returning from another kind of war, asserts the 


traditional Sartoris capacity by rhetorically romanticizing 
the many kinds of “violent dissolution” he saw in France, 
including the foolhardy death of his twin brother, John. 


_ Now Bayard is represented as agonizing over his delusion 
_ that he himself somehow caused his brother’s death. He 


luxuriates in self-pity, with little or no concern for the 


permitted to speak for Faulkner, in an utterance in which 


her own rhetoric reflects her own capacity for mingling 
_ irony with love and sarcasm: 


You and your stiff-necked, sullen ways. Helling around the coun- ~ 


try in that car just because you think there may be somebody 


~ who cares a whoop whether or not you break your worthless 
neck... . Just because you went to a war. Do you think you’re 
the only person in the world that ever went to a war? 


In the Sartoris mansion there is another soldier newly 


returned from the war and equally anxious to romanticize 


his experiences: the Negro boy, Caspey. He bears, we are 


— told, “two honorable wounds incurred in a razor-hedged crap 


game.” By analogy his romantic and mythical accounts of 
all the violence in which he participated are played off 


ironically against Bayard’s “recounting violence and speed 


and death.” Equally romantic, but analogous in other ways, 
is the returned soldier Horace Benbow, who preferred to 
serve as a Y.M.C.A. officer rather than to fight. He brought 
back with him from Italy a glass-blowing kit, which now 
helps him associate his war experiences pleasurably with the 
fascinating game of creating Italianesque vases—his Grecian 
urns. 

Romance of another kind is antiromantically handled in 
Faulkner’s describing various love affairs in Sartoris. We 
have already noticed the lover appropriately named Byron, 
whose expressions of importunate love for Narcissa are 
couched in indecent love letters, which she nevertheless keeps 
in a drawer with her lingerie. By contrast romance comes 
into brother Horace’s life when he weakly yields to the 
seductiveness of Belle Mitchell, wife of Horace’s good friend 
and neighbor Harry. Belle clearly deserves the sarcastic 
treatment given her by Faulkner, but the ironies are finest 


sete mee 


312 AFTERWORD | 


when Belle and Horace are entangled in each other’s arms 
lip-lapping love words: ec 


| 
She said, “Come here,” and he went to her, and in the dusk 
she was again tragic and young and familiar with a haunting 
sense of loss, and he knew the sad fecundity of the world and 
time’s hopeful unillusion that fools itself. “I want to have your 
child, Horace,” she said, and then her own child came up the ; 
alheeres By: 


Narcissa’s romantic love for the dead brother of young | 
Bayard is not. easily transferred to Bayard, who repels 
Narcissa more than he attracts. But given the choice be- — 
tween loving Byron Snopes or Dr. Alford, after she has” 
lost Horace to Belle, Narcissa likes the romantic sense of 
inevitability, which seems to elevate her to the tragical 
position of a self-sacrificial martyr and mother of more 
Sartorises. 

Another element of romance is interwoven more subtly’ 
here because it involves a delicate target for satire: the 
convenient manner in which the Sartorises assume that what- — 
ever happens to them is somehow a part of their fate, some- — 
how an expression of God’s will. Faulkner’s quietly ironic 
handling of human self-excusings that dodge responsibilities — 
through invoking such words as “fate” and “doom” and — 
“God” has caused many readers and critics to assume, mis- 
takenly, that Faulkner himself must have been a fatalist. 
It would be nearer the truth to say that Faulkner consistently — 
represents human beings as meeting crises at the confluence © 
of two opposed forces; that there are times when individuals, — 
thus tested, can and do control their immediate situations 
through conscious choices; that there are other times when ~ 
the same individuals are victimized by forces beyond their 
control. Through his imaginative manipulations of character 
and circumstance, in his fictions, Faulkner intermingles com- 
edy, tragedy, and tragicomedy; but in Sartoris (as in all the — 
sequels to Sartoris) he is primarily concerned with choices 
that are made (or not made) from a full consciousness of 
moral responsibility. The tragic flaw in the Sartorises is 
pure Greek: self-pitying hubris, or arrogance resulting from 
excessive pride, But none of these characters ever becomes 
sufficiently tragic, in the literary sense of the term, to arrive 
at a self-recognition scene; not even Miss Jenny. Her at- — 


exon 313 


titude i in these matters runs the gamut from preaching moral 
‘Tesponsibility to falling back on fate. Thus the Faulknerian 
‘ironies are brought to bear on her whenever she makes 
the quick jump. For example, just after she has been scold- 
ing both of the living Bayards for sharing reckless and ir- 
Tesponsible drives through the countryside, Miss Jenny turns 
to Narcissa and says of old Bayard’s suicidal tendencies, 
“He goes along for the same reason that boy himself does. 
‘Sartoris. It’s in the blood.” Fate! Her further remarks sug- 
gest that there must also be a tendency in the Sartoris 
blood to be religiously fatalistic when entering into any of 
these suicidal and “hare-brained” antics. 
_ Various romantic confusions concerning religion and fate 
ee handled ironically by Faulkner as soon as they begin to 
spear in the first chapter of Part One—and they are still 
“appearing in the last chapter of Part Five. At the outset 
we are told that the first Bayard once hunted a pack of 
fox hounds through a Methodist revival meeting and then 
-Teturned to ride his horse into the ensuing indignation meet- 
ing: “In a spirit of fun, purely: he believed too firmly in 
Providence, as all his actions clearly showed, to have any 
4 ‘Teligious convictions whatever.” If the ironic tone and mean- 
ing in that observation is not clearly understood, the reader 
as to wait only a few pages before it is given clarification. 
Implying similarities in these matters between that first 
‘Bayard and his brother John, Faulkner describes the latter 
‘as sleeping in the Jefferson graveyard “among martial cheru- 
-bim and the useless vainglory of whatever God he did not 
scorn to recognize.” 
_ An echo may be heard there of a phrase of Swinburne’s: 
.. . We thank with brief thanksgiving/Whatever gods may 
be...” Faulkner, not too long before he wrote Sartoris, 
had been an ardent admirer and reader of pagan Swinburne, 
and throughout his life he remained quite scornful of cer- 
tain Christian postures and doctrines. But as soon as he 
began to combine with his paganism a homemade theism, 
he did it in such a peculiar way that any good Christian 
should easily recognize the heterodox nature of his belief. 
Here in Sartoris his ironic treatments of confusions between 
religion and fate are supplemented by his permitting Miss 
Jenny to keep questioning the Deity, romantically, for his 
shortcomings as Supervisor of the Sartorises: “Providence 


314 AFTERWO 


doesn’t seem to have any judgment at all.” Again, “I reckont 
the Lord knows his business, but I declare, sometimes . . .” 

In his ironic handling of certain religious conventions int 
Sartoris, Faulkner saves his best for the description of Missi 
Jenny’s final visit to the graveyard. She examines the grave~: 
less stone erected in memory of young Bayard’s aviator? 
twin brother—who had profanely cursed his way through? 
life to his vainglorious death—and observes that the epitaph! 
drawn from Exodus 19:4 and chiseled on his stone adds? 
another typically romantic and impertinent Sartoris touch:: 


I bare him on eagles’ wings | 
and brought him unto Me. | 


Faulkner, who did not believe in the Christian concept of! 
an afterlife in heaven or hell, continues the narration by\ 
describing this tombstone inscription as being “like a boast-- 
ful voice in an empty church.” Later, he lets Miss Jenny' 
wrap up the religious romanticism of the Sartorises in the! 
following passage: 


. . . the dusk was peopled with ghosts of glamorous and old' 
disastrous things. And if they were just glamorous enough, there | 
was sure to be a Sartoris in them, and then they were sure to 
be disastrous. Pawns. But the Player, and the game He plays 
. . - He must have a name for His pawns, though. But perhaps 
Sartoris is the game itselfi—a game outmoded and played with 
pawns shaped too late and to an old dead pattern, and of which 
the Player Himself is a little wearied. 


The thoughts in this passage would seem to be those of 
Miss Jenny, who can even handle irony romantically. But 
there is double irony here because Faulkner’s larger context 
implicitly undercuts whatever is romantically and fatalisti- 
cally religious. The larger context also controls meanings 
in the sentence that rounds out this passage; a sentence 
wherein many readers have failed to hear the ambivalent 
Faulknerian tone, predominantly antiromantic: “For there is 
death in the sound of it [Sartoris], and a glamorous 
fatality, like silver pennons downrushing at sunset, or a 
dying fall of horns along the road to Roncevaux.” 

Remember that Roland’s trouble, in the valley of Ronce- 
vaux, was also partly caused by excessive pride. All that is 
needed here to bring this sentence into proper focus is to 
place it alongside other passages we have considered in which 


315 


literary echoes are invoked—including Horace’s reverie of 
“unicorns who fill the air with galloping, and Horace’s praise 
of Narcissa as an urnlike and unravished bride of quiet- 
_ 

With so much of the larger context now in mind, we 
“may return with more confidence to the initial question: is 
| there any ironic meaning in Faulkner’s final twist of Keats? 
Remember that the concluding scene represents Miss Jenny 
si itting in the ghost-haunted parlor, intermittently talking 
with Narcissa while Narcissa plays softly at the piano. Re- 
‘member that the subject under discussion is what name 
Should be given the child recently born to Narcissa. Al- 
though Miss Jenny had previously assumed that the tradition- 
-al other name, John, would descend fittingly to this son 
“of young Bayard, now dead, Narcissa says, “He isn’t John. 
_He’s Benbow Sartoris.” But, Miss Jenny asks with her char- 
-acteristically unflattering way of choosing epithets for those 
she loves, can that name make the child “any less a Sartoris 
and a scoundrel and a fool?” Understanding Miss Jenny’s 
‘Thetoric, Narcissa merely turns and smiles “a little dreamily, 
with serene, fond detachment.” Then comes the final sen- 
‘tence, and at first glance it seems to imply that Narcissa’s 
calm self-assurance is approved and blessed by Mother 
Nature; the serenity of the spring evening, visible through 
‘the parlor window, seems to be at one with the young 
‘mother’s serenity: “Beyond Miss Jenny’s trim, fading head 
the maroon curtains hung motionless; beyond the window 
evening was a windless lilac dream, foster dam of quietude 
‘and peace.” 

But there is no “quietude and peace” ahead for Narcissa, 
either in the sequel entitled Sanctuary or in the sequel en- 
‘titled “There Was a Queen.” Both of these narratives un- 
flatteringly represent Narcissa as being motivated by the fa- 
‘miliar Sartoris mannerism of self-pitying and excessive pride, 
as she offers to pay any price that will enable her to find 
false sanctuaries in illusory appearances and in self-decep- 
tions. Perhaps Faulkner assumed that the cumulative con- 
text of Sartoris would endow with appropriately ironic sig- 
nificance the final “quietude and peace” of Narcissa here, 
and perhaps the final echo and twist of Keats was merely 
calculated to blend with that meaning provided by the con- 
text. As further evidence, it is pertinent to remember that 


316 AFTERWO 


throughout Sartoris the moods of Mother Nature are not 
only indifferent to the moods of men and women but also 
and often at odds with them. The epithet “foster dam,” 
here made to displace the “foster-child” of Keats, may fur- 
ther hint that an unflattering value is frequently implie 
when the antique word “dam” is substituted for the words 
“mother”—and that a foster-mother is not always as loving 
solicitous, and reliable as one might wish. ; 

If these possibilities of meaning are thought to be im~: 
plicitly operative in that final twist—or even if they ares 
not—the reader should at least find that Narcissa’s romantic: 
dreaming in the curtain scene is also made meaningful byj 
all the ironies in the larger context. As we remember Faulk-- 
ner’s ambivalent and antiromantic handling of the Sartorises, 
we may finally remember that the name Narcissa is bor-« 
rowed from an “Attic” character who was and still is the: 
classical symbol of self-destructive self-love. 


LAWRANCE THOMPSON 


WILLIAM FAULKNER: A CHECKLIST 


_ The Marble Faun, 1924 Poems 
ings ‘Soldiers’ Pay, 1926 Novel 
~ Mosquitoes, 1927 Novel 
_ Sartoris, January, 1929 Novel 
The Sound and the Fury, October, 1929 Novel 
__ As I Lay Dying, 1930 Novel 
_ Sanctuary, February, 1931 Novel 
hese 13, September, 1931 Stories 
_ Light in August, 1932 Novel 
fae. Green Bough, 1933 Poems 
bes ~ Doctor Martino and Other Stories; 1934 
_ Pylon, 1935 Novel 
Absalom, Absalom! 1936 Novel 
The Unvanquished, 1938 Novel (Signet CD9) 
_ Ihe Wild Palms, 1939 Novel 
- The Hamlet, 1940 Novel 
‘Go Down, Moses, and Other Stories, 1942 
Intruder in the Dust, 1948 Novel 
Knight's Gambit, 1949 Stories 
€ Collected Stories, 1950 
iS aeem for a Nun, 1951 Drama 
_A Fable, 1954 Novel 
- The Town, 1957 Novel 
_ The Mansion, 1959 Novel 
The Reivers, 1962 Novel 


317 


. 


SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY 
OF CRITICAL AND SCHOLARLY STUDIES 


Brooks, Cleanth. William Faulkner: The Yoknapatawpha Country. 
New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1963. 


Campbell, H. M., and Foster, R. E. William Faulkner:.A Critical 
Appraisal. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1951. 


Cullen, J. B. Old Times in the Faulkner Country. Chapel Hill: 
University of North Carolina Press, 1961. 


Gwynn, F. L., and Blotner, J. L. (eds.). Faulkner in the Univer- 
sity: Class Conferences at the University of Virginia, 1957— 
1958. Charlottesville: The University Press of Virginia, 1959. 


Hoffman, F. J. William Faulkner. New York: Twayne Publishers, 
Inc., 1961. ¢ 


Hoffman, F. J., and Vickery, O. W. (eds.). William Faulkner: 
Three Decades of Criticism. East Lansing: Michigan Siate 
University Press, 1960. 


Howe, Irving. William Faulkner: A Critical Study. 2nd ed. rev. 
& enl. New York: Random House, Inc. (Vintage Books), 
1962. 


Kirk, R. W., and Klotz, M. Faulkner's People: A Complete 
Guide and Index to the Characters in Faulkner. Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 1964. 


O’Connor, William Van. The Tangled Fire of William Faulkner. 
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press; London: Oxford 
University Press, 1954. 


Malin, I. William Faulkner; an Interpretation. Stanford, Calif.: 
Stanford University Press; London: Oxford University Press, 
1957. 


Meriwether, J. B. The Literary Career of William Faulkner. 
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Library, 1961. 


Miner, W. L. World of William Faulkner. Durham, N.C.: Duke 
318 


CTED BIBLIOGRAPHY 319 


"University Press, 1952; London: Cambridge University 
_ Press, 1953. 

mpson, Lawrance. William Faulkner: An Introduction and 
Interpretation. New York: Barnes & Noble, Inc., 1963. 


ckery, O. W. The Novels of William Faulkner. Baton Rouge: 
~ Louisiana State University Press, 1959. 


Waggoner, H. H. William Faulkner: From Jefferson to the World. 
_ Lexington: University of Kentucky Press, 1959. 


Other SIGNET CLASSICS 


APPOINTMENT IN SAMARRA by John O’Harai 
Three days in the life of a man destroyed by his inability) 
to cope with his personality. Afterword by Arthurt 
Mizener. (#CP177—60¢) ) 

GEORGIA BOY by Erskine Caldwell! 
The famous story of a Southern youth by the world’s best-. 
selling fiction writer. Afterword by Robert Cantwell. — — 

(#CDS7—S0¢) | 

OLD CREOLE DAYS by George W. Cable: 
Colorful stories of New Orleans at the turn of the 19th) 
century. Foreword by Shirley Ann Grau. (##CP84—60¢) ! 


IN THE MIDST OF LIFE and Other Tales 
by Ambrose Bierce: 
Renowned stories of Civil War soldiers and civilians.. 
Afterword by Marcus Cunliffe. (# CP60—60¢) » 


SPECIMEN DAYS by Walt Whitman! 
A complete collection of Whitman’s jottings over a 20-: 
year period, including his experiences during the Civil| 
War. Foreword by Richard Chase. (#CP104—60¢) 


LEAVES OF GRASS by Walt Whitman | 
Whitman’s enduring testament to a land whose vitality was 
the touchstone of his genius. A complete edition with an 
Introduction by Gay Wilson Allen. (#CT23—75¢) 


PUDD’NHEAD WILSON by Mark Twain 
A unique mystery and social satire involving switched 
identities between a child born free and a child born slave. 
Foreword by Wright Morris. (#CD184—50¢) 


To Our Reapers: If your dealer does not have the SIGNET and 
MENTOR books you want, you may order them by mail, enclos- 
ing the list price plus 10¢ a copy to cover mailing. (New York 
City residents add 5% Sales Tax. Other New York State resi- 
dents add 2% plus any local sales or use taxes.) If you would 
like our free catalog, please request it by postcard. The New 
American Library, Inc., P. O. Box 2310, Grand Central 
Station, New York, N. Y. 10017. 


WILLIAM 
FAULKNER 


SARTORIS 


The specter of an heroit past is ever present — 
in Sartoris, casting its ironic light upon the ~~ 
novel’s protagonists. Heirs to the aristocratic ~~ 
traditions of the Old South, they have been _ 
left with only romantic rhetoric, pride, and 
self-pity to face a world that no longer mir- 
rors their self-image. Bayard Sartoris seeks 
refuge in compulsive acts of physical cour- 
age; Horace Benbow, ina bloodless aestheti- 
cism; and Narcissa Benbow, in a desperate _~ 
clinging to appearances. But for them there 
is to be no escape—only ultimate futility, 
whether in the form of violent self-destruc- 
tion, or a living death in a fragile world of 
dreams. A brilliant dissection of a decaying 
social class, and a vivid evocation of both 
the physical landscape and psychological 
climate of the South, Sartoris introduces 
many of the key themes, places, and charac- 
ters of the Faulkner canon) By itseli ies 
stands as his first memorable projection of a 
vision that, as Lawrance Thompson writes, 
“recognizes the inseparability of human 
weaknesses and strengths, of positives and 
negatives, of good and evil... what [Faulk- - 
ner] later called ‘the problems of the human 
heart in conflict with itself.’ ” 
Foreword by Robert Cantwell 
Afterword by Lawrance Thompson 


PUBLISHED BY THE NEW AMERICAN LIBRARY
