Christian Healing (Charles Fillmore, 1909)
==========================================================
Fillmore's 1909 Christian Healing — the Unity co-founder's metaphysical lessons; the textbook of the Unity movement. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

‘UTE


icocr.
ISSEY


LIBRARY


CHRISTIAN HEALING


in 2024


4 pA! LY
a Wo"


CHRISTIAN HEALING


THE_ SCIENCE OF BEING


CHARLES FILLMORE
TENTH EDITION


UNITY SCHOOL OF CHRISTIANITY
Z Kansas City, Mo.
1922


NORBTHEASTERIN Bul


se, SHOR ARY
ESSEX F


EW JERSEY

THE MASTER'S COLLEGE
POWELL LIBRARY

SANTA CLARITA, CA 9132}


7 N


PREFACE


These are not simply lectures; they are,
rather, lessons. They are not to be merely
read; they are to be studied and applied as
one studies and applies mathematical rules.

When a suggestion is made to “hold a
thought,”’ or to affirm or deny a certain prop-
osition, the student should stop reading, and,
both audibly and mentally, do as bidden.
This will set us new thought currents in
mind and body, and make way for the spir-
itual illumination which will follow in all
who are faithful to these instructions.

The statements following each lesson
should be used for mental discipline. Write
these statements down, and apply them daily
while studying the lesson to which they cor-
respond. Any one can do mind healing who
will use the simple rules of denials and affir-
mations here set forth. If you wish to heal
another, hold him in mind and mentally re-
peat the denials and affirmations; this will
raise the consciousness to spiritual reality,
where all healing power originates. If you
wish to heal yourself, talk to your mentality
and body as you would talk to a patient.


CONTENTS


LESSON ONE
ae: i tue Character. of Beme. fo  S oh ie en 8S 9
Statements for the Realization of Divine Mind...... 18
LESSON TWO
eeera Wreriect Idea. 0-8 at oi oe Sooo re ena 19
Statements for the Reakestos of the Son of God..... 29
; LESSON THREE
Ee Ae les te aE Ng hog oc Me ae 30
SEM CANT ANOS. os Fe ls Pe eos bo pie ee 38
LESSON FOUR
The Formative Power of Thought................ 39
Affirmations for Right Thinking.................. 47
LESSON FIVE
Pipertc< ontrol 1 mets on nk sO ke ee 48
Cleansing and Purifying Statements............... 57
LESSON SIX
NN OR os oa IP oo ome ws ta bie c 58
0S eI Ba UES, I a aa en a a ie 66
LESSON SEVEN
Spirituality; or, Prayer and Praise............... 68
Living Words to Quicken Spirituality.............. 77
Establishing the Perfect Substance................ 78
LESSON EIGHT
RE eh ERD sregersins ca Sawai ksns-Dherole,<,.9. 2 on. wpe 0,2 79


LESSON NINE


Imagination. 2. 2 6:0 eso one eam ee ee ee 89
Perfection in Form Established...........----+-++> 98
LESSON TEN
Will and Understanding... .......0- 2-2-0 ceees 99
The Establishment of Will and Understanding. ..... 108
LESSON ELEVEN
Judgment and Justices. e625 2 ole ass oie ee 110
Judgment and Justice Statements...........------ 119
LESSON TWELVE
Lieve, cho Se ia 8 POA Sea ae eee 120
Love: Demonstrated. sci.cc: ssa oases oe eee 129
TALKS ON TRUTH
How Microbes Are Made.............-00200005 135
"Ehe LAM anelts: Kinedom?).\j....06 oa seo eee 148
How Shall the Dead Be Raised?................ 158
The Development of Divine Love................ 170
‘che: Ministry ofthe) Words... sss. «sc04 oko oe eee 184
Ye:Must. Be: Born Again :; “aici tae ok ee ee 192
Obedience sre Ae ace cna Fa oo oie ee 205
The Churchvof- Christ 522.0 ss Ge ei 217
MUNG oLsord 84 DOOYAs s5u50 aie eee aloe, Gor hee 230
The Restoration of God’s Kingdom.............. 23/7
How Mental Healing Is Done.................. 247
Sample. Preatments as./s: cs. re eee ee ee a 248
Six Days’ “Treatment sscec:.! o) scien oie eee 251


Index Lod


oF 10) 9°: 8 eG" 0: es 0° Nis! en ieee fe) a: o> iii “ole eSBs) bo. eilel eu 6! feria) eo eae,


THE TRUE CHARACTER OF BEING
LESSON ONE


“There is a spirit in man, And the breath of the
Almighty giveth them understanding.” The Sci-
ence which is here set forth, is founded upon Spirit.
It does not conform to intellectual standards, but it is,
nevertheless, scientific. The facts of Spirit are of a
spiritual character, and, when understood in their
right relation, they are orderly. Orderliness is law,
and is the test of true science.

The lawful truths of Spirit are more scientific
than the constantly shifting opinions of intellectual
standards. ‘The only real science is the science of
Spirit. It never changes. It is universally accepted
by all who are in the Spirit, but it is necessary to be
“tn the Spirit” before it can be understood. The
mind of the Spirit must become active in those who
would grasp the orderly science of Being which
these lessons proclaim.

It is not absolutely necessary that the spiritual
part of man’s nature be active in the beginning of his
study of this science. The primal object of the
lessons is to quicken the spiritual realm of conscious-
ness, and bring about the “inspiration of the Al-
mighty” that gives understanding.

So let it be understood that we are teaching the
science of Spirit, and that those who are receptive
will be inspired to spiritual consciousness. It is
not a difficult matter to accomplish, this inspiration of


9


10 Lesson One


the Spirit. We are all inspired by the Spirit in cer-
tain states of consciousness. The understanding of
the laws governing the realm of Spirit will make it
possible to aitain this consciousness and receive this
inspiration whenever the requirements are met.

The starting point in spiritual realization is a
right understanding of that One designated as the
Almighty. It is strictly logical and scientific to as-
sume that man comes forth from this One, who is
named variously, but who, all agree, is the origin of
everything. Since man is the offspring of the Al-
mighty, he must have the character of his Parent. If
the earthly child resembles its parents, how much
more should the heavenly child. The truth that God
is the Father of man does away with the oft-pro-
claimed presumption that it is impossible for the finite
to understand the Infinite. God must be in his
universe as everywhere intelligent power, or it would
fall to pieces. God is in the universe as its constant
inspiration; hence, it is only necessary to find the
point of contact, in order to understand that One in
whom we all “‘live, and move, and have our being.”

Logic is a fundamental constituent of man’s be-
ing, and all minds acquiesce in statements of logical
sequence. We all see the relation and unity of
cause and effect, mentally stated, but because the
realm of forms does not carry out our premise, we
fall away from the true standard, and try to convince
ourselves that our logic is, somehow, defective. The
one important thing which the student of spiritual
science must learn, is to trust the logic of the mind.
If appearances are out of harmony with your mental
premise, do not let them unseat your logic. “Judge


The True Character of Being 11


not according to appearance, but judge righteous
judgment.” You would not take the mixed figures
of a child working a problem in mathematics as an
example of the trueness of the principle; nor could
you detect the error in the problem, unless you were
somewhat familiar with the rules of mathematics.
Mental propositions are the standards and governing
principles in all sciences used by man. In the sci-
ence of creation the same rule holds good. You
may rest in the assurance that the principles which
you mentally perceive as true of God, are inviolate,
and if there seems to be error in their outworking, it
is because of some misapplication on the part of the
demonstrator. By holding to the principle and in-
sisting upon its accuracy, you open the way to a
fuller understanding of it; you will also be shown
the cause of the errors in the demonstration.
Then, if you have been in confusion mentally in
the contemplation of a world both good and evil,
and have, in consequence, gotten into skeptical ways,
the only true remedy is to stand by the pure reason of
your spiritual perception, and let it clear up the prop-
osition for you. Dismiss all prejudices based upon
the mixed perception; make your mind receptive to
the clearer understanding which will surely appear
when you have taken sides with Spirit, when you
look to it alone for the outworking of the problem.
This is not blind belief; it is an acquiescence in
the superconsciousness of the logic of Being. ‘The
superconscious is man’s only sure guide in the mazes
of the creative processes. By trusting to the infalli-
bility of this guide, man opens himself to the ispi-
ration of the Almighty. Spirituality may be culti-


12 Lesson One


vated, and the deep things of God may be revealed
to any one who will mentally proclaim and affirm the
logical perception of the goodness and truth of
Being. }

The central proposition in the inspiration of the

Spirit is that God, or Primal Cause, is good. It
does not make any great difference what you name
this Primal Cause; the important consideration is a
right concept of its character. The Hindu calls it
Brahm, a being of such stupendous proportions that
man shrinks into nothingness in contemplating it.
Although this greatness of absolute Being is true,
there is also another point of view—the smallness of
that same Being, as evidenced in the presence of its
life in the most insignificant creations. So, in order
to get at the very heart of Being, it is necessary to
realize that it is manifesting in the least as well as in
the greatest, and that in the bringing forth of a uni-
verse, not one idea could be taken away without un-
balancing the whole. This brings us to a fuller real-
ization of our importance in the universe, and to the
necessity of finding our right places. It also puts us
into very close touch with the Father of all, the one
omnipresent Intelligence pervading everything.
___ The Father within you, so lovingly and famil-
iarly revealed by Jesus, is not far away in a place
called “heaven.” His abode is in the spiritual
realms which underlie all creative forces. As Jesus
realized and taught, “The kingdom of God is within
you.” Spirit is the seat of power; its abode is on the
invisible side of man’s nature.

This revelation of God immanent in the universe
was clearly set forth by Paul: “Over all, and


The True Character of Being 13


through all, and in all.” The inspired ministers of
all times have proclaimed the same.

The Power that creates and sustains the uni-
verse includes the creating and the sustaining of man.
The desire for a fuller understanding of this Power
has awakened a great inquiry into the character of
the all-pervading One. On every hand men are
earnestly seeking to know about God, seeking to
come into harmonious relations with him. Some are
succeeding, while others seem to make but little
progress. ‘The diversity of results obtained is caused
by the various ways of approaching the one Mind,
for such God is. Mind is the key to the whole
situation, and when man clearly discerns the science
of Mind, he will solve easily all the mysteries of
creation.

The dictionary definitions of mind and spirit are
nearly identical, and with this analogy we much
more easily get in touch with God. If spirit and
mind are synonymous, we readily perceive that there
is no great mystery about spiritual things, nor are
they far removed from our daily thoughts and ex-
periences. ““Ye are a temple of God, and. . . the
Spirit of God dwelleth in you,” simply means that
God dwells in us as our minds dwell in our bodies.
Thus we see that God creates and moves creation
through the power of mind. The vehicles of mind
are thoughts, and it is through our minds in thought
action that we shall find God and do his will.

There are mental laws which investigators are
discoverng, observing, and tabulating as never be-
fore in the world’s history: Man is comprehensive
enough to see the various factors entering into


rd


14 Lesson One


creative processes of mind, and he is, through the
study of mental laws, perceiving and accepting the
science in ideas, thoughts, and words. But the in-
vestigators of nature and her laws, from the intel-
lectual and physical viewpoint, fall short of com-
plete understanding, because they fail to trace back
to the Causing Mind the multitudinous symbols
which make up the visible universe. The material
forms that we see about us are the chalk marks of a
mighty problem being outworked by the one Mind.
To comprehend that problem, and to catch a slight
glimpse of its meaning, we must grasp the ideas
which the chalk marks represent. This is what we
mean by studying Mind back of nature. Man is
mind and he is capable of comprehending the plan
and detailed ideas of the Supreme Mind.

Divine Ideas are man’s inheritance; they are
pregnant with all possibility, because ideas are the
foundation and cause of all that man desires.

With this understanding as a foundation, we
easily perceive how “all. . . mine are thine.” All
the ideas contained in the one Father-Mind are at
the mental command of its offspring. Get behind
the thing into the mental realm where it exists as an
inexhaustible idea, and you can draw upon it per-
petually and never deplete the source.

With this understanding of the potentiality of
Primal Cause, we find it a simple matter to work the
problem of life—the key to the situation being ideas.
Thus life in expression is activity; in Being it is an
idea of activity. To make life appear on the visible
plane, we have but to open our minds and thoughts
to the Divine Idea of life and activity, and lo! all!


The True Character of Being 15


visibility is obedient to us. It is through this under-
standing, and its cultivation in various degrees, that
men have acquired the ability to raise dead bodies.
Jesus understood this realm of supreme ideas, or,
as he termed it, “the kingdom of God within.”
When he raised Lazarus he invoked this power.
When Martha talked about a future resurrection, he
said, “I am the resurrection, and the life; he that
believeth on me, though he die, yet shall he live.”
One who identifies his whole mind with omnipresent
Mind becomes so at-one with it that he can over-
come death.

The real of the universe is held in the Mind of
Being as ideas of life, love, substance, intelligence,
truth, etc. These ideas may be combined in a mul-
titude of ways, producing infinite variety in the
realm of forms. ‘There is a right combination,
which constitutes the Divine Order, the kingdom of
heaven on earth. ‘This right relation of ideas and
the science of right thought, is practical Christianity.

The student in the science of Being should start
all his investigations and mental processes from this
one Mind foundation. If you are skeptical about
the existence of God, or if you are an abstract be-
liever without having had any experience or con-
scious mental awakening that has given you proof,
you should be very industrious in prayer, affirmation,
and invocation. Remember, God is not a king who
can force his presence upon you whether you will or
not, but an omnipresent Mind infolding and inter-
penetrating all! things.

There is goodness everlasting and joy beyond
expression in a perfect union between your mind


16 Lesson One


and this perfect Mind. The point of contact is a
willingness and a seeking on your part. “Seek, and
ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto
you.”
This question naturally presents itself: If we
are offsprings of this Divine Mind, why are we not
naturally conscious of its presence? ‘The answer
to this is: In using the privilege of our inheritance
—the power to make ideas visible as things—we
have created a realm that separates us in conscious-
ness from the Father-Mind. This is the teaching of
Jesus in the parable of the prodigal son. When we
are weary of the sense consciousness, we have only
to turn the face (intelligence) toward the parent’s
house; there we shall meet a loving welcome.

The understanding that God is not in a distant
heaven, nor located in any way geographically,
gives us a feeling of nearness and unity with the
parent Mind. ‘This intercommunion of the man
consciousness with the omnipresent spiritual force
of the universe, was beautifully exemplified by Jesus.
God was closer to him than hands or feet. He re-
ferred all things to this loving Father, who was in
constant communion and cooperation with the Son;
yet there was, even in his case, this independent
personal consciousness that beset him when he sought
to be free from mortal limitations. So we should
not be discouraged or cast down, if we do not
quickly find the kingdom of God within us. Jesus
spent whole nights in prayer; we should not be
weary with a few moments each day. A daily half-
hour of meditation will open up the mind to a con-


The True Character of Being 17


sciousness of the inner One, and will reveal many
things that are hidden from the natural man.

The fact is, Truth cannot be imparted—it must
- be individually experienced. The presence of the
Divine Mind in the soul cannot be told in words;
it can be hinted at, and referred to in parable, and
likened unto this and unto that, but it can never be
described as it is. The ability of the individual
mind to combine the ideas of Divine Mind in a con-
sciousness of its own, makes each of us the “only
begotten Son,” a particular and special creation.
No two individuals in all the universe are exactly
alike, because there is always diversity in the ideas
appropriated from Divine Mind.

The truth is, then:

That God is Principle, Law, Being, Mind,
Spirit, All-Good, omnipotent, omniscient, omni-
present, unchangeable, Creator, Father, Cause, and
Source of all that is;

That God is individually formed in conscious-
ness in each of us, and is known to us as “Father,”
when we recognize him within us as our Creator, as
our mind, as our life, as our very being;

That mind has ideas; ideas have expression.
All manifestation in our world is the result of the
ideas we are holding in mind and are expressing;

That to bring forth or to manifest the harmony of
Divine Mind, or the “kingdom of heaven,” all our
ideas must be one with Divine Ideas, and must be
expressed in the Divine Order of Divine Mind.


18 Lesson One


STATEMENTS FOR THE REALIZATION OF DIVINE
MIND


(To be used in connection with Lesson One.)


There is one Presence, one Intelligence, one
Substance, one Life: the Good omnipotent.

God is the name of the everywhere present Prin-
ciple, in whom I live, move, and have my being.

God is the name of my Good.

In you all, and through you all, and above you
all, God Almighty.

Thy name is Spirit. I know Thee as the One,
the all-seeing Mind.

Our Father which art in heaven—the every-
where present inner harmony; hallowed be thy name
—wholeness manifests thy character.

Thou art always with me as indwelling Wisdom
and Love.

Thy law is now the standard of my life, and I
am at peace.

I in Thee and Thou in me.

Thou art never absent from me—lI now see
Thee face to face.

I think Thy thoughts after Thee.

I dwell in Thee and share Thy omnipotence.

In Thee is my perfection.


BEING’S PERFECT IDEA
LESSON TWO


The foundation of our science is Spirit, and
there must be a spiritual Truth. This spiritual
Truth is God thinking out creation. God is the
original Mind in which all real ideas exist. The
one original Mind creates by thought. This is
stated in the first chapter of John:

In the beginning was the Word [Logos—Thought-


peta , and the Word was with God, and the Word was
od.


The same was in the beginning with God.

All things were made through him; and without him
was not any thing made that hath been made.

Eadie’s Biblical Cyclopzedia says, ““The term,
Logos, means thought expressed, either as an idea
in mind or as vocal speech.”

An understanding of the Logos reveals to us the
law under which all things are brought forth—the
law of mind action. Creation takes place through
the operation of the Logos. God is thinking the
universe into manifestation right now. Even he can-
not create without law. The law of the Divine
Creation is the order and harmony of perfect thought.

God-Mind expresses its thoughts so perfectly
that there is no occasion for change, hence all prayers
and supplications for the change of God's will to
conform to human desires are futile. God does not
change his mind, nor trim his thought, to meet the


19


NORTHEASTERS
ES@


20 Lesson Two


conflicting opinions of mankind. Understanding
the perfection of God thoughts, man must conform
to them: then he will discover that there is never
necessity for any change of the will of God in human
affairs.

A key to God-Mind is with every one—t is the
action of the individual mind. Man is created in the
“image and likeness” of God; he is therefore a
phase of God-Mind, and his mind must act like the
original Mind. Study your own mind, and through
it you will find God-Mind. In no other way can
you get a complete understanding of yourself, of
the universe, and of the law under which it is being
brought forth. When you see the Creator thinking
out his universe, as the mathematician thinks out
his problem, you will understand the necessity of the
very apparent effort that nature makes to express
itself. You will also understand why the impulse
within your soul for higher things keeps welling up.
God-Mind is thinking in you; it is pushing your
mind to grasp true ideas and carry them into ex-
pression.

It is therefore true, in logic and in inspiration,
that man and the universe are within God-Mind as
living, acting thoughts. God-Mind is giving itself
to its creations, and those creations are evolving an
independence which has the power to codperate
with, or to oppose the original Will. It is then of
vital importance to study the mind and understand
its laws, because the starting point of every form in
the universe is an idea.

Every man asks the question at some time,


“What am I>” God-Understanding answers,


Being’s Perfect Idea 21


“Spiritually, you are my Idea of Myself as I see
Myself in the ideal; physically, you are the law of
my mind executing that Idea.”’ “‘Great is the mys-
tery of godliness,” said Paul. A little learning is a
dangerous thing in the study of Being. To separate
oneself from the Whole and then attempt to find
out the great mystery, is like dissecting inanimate
flesh to find the sources of life.

If you would know the mystery of Being, see
yourself in Being. Know yourself as an integral
idea in the Divine Mind, and all other ideas will
recognize you as their fellow worker. “Throw your-
self out of the Holy Trinity, and you become an
onlooker. Throw yourself into the Trinity, and
you become its avenue of expression. The Trinity
is known commonly as Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit; metaphysically, it is known as Mind, Idea,
Expression. These three are One. E.ach sees itself
as including the other two, yet in creation separate.
Jesus, the type man, placed himself in the God-
head, and said, “He that hath seen me hath seen the
Father.” But recognizing the supremacy of the
spiritual Principle which he was demonstrating, he
said, ““The Father is greater than I.”

Reducing the Trinity to simple numbers takes
away much of its mystery. When we say that there
is one Being with three attitudes of mind, we have
stated in plain terms ail that is involved in the intri-
cate theological doctrine of the Trinity. ‘The priest-
hood has always found it profitable to make com-
plex that which is simple. When religion becomes
an industry it has its trade secrets, and they seem
very great to the uninitiated. Modern investigation


22 Lesson Two


of the character and constituency of the mind is
taking away all the mysteries of Egyptian, Hindu,
Hebrew, and the many other religious and mystical
systems of the past. Advocates of these systems are
attempting to perpetuate their so-called secret knowl-
edge through the occult societies springmg up on
every side in our day, but they meet with indifferent
success. The modern Truth seeker takes very little
on trust. Unless the claimant to occult lore can
demonstrate his power in the world of affairs, people
are suspicious of him. Religious awe for the priest-
hood, which is so prevalent in Oriental countries, is
lacking in the majority of western people. In India,
a yellow-robed holy man is regarded with reverence
by both adults and children; while in this country
adults stare, and small boys throw rocks, until he
seeks the protection of the police. This seems ir-
reverent, almost heathenish, yet it is the expression
of an innate repudiation of everything that seeks to
establish itself on any other foundation than that of
practical demonstration.

The mind of God is spirit, soul, body; that is,
mind, idea, expression. The mind of man is spirit,
soul, body—not separate from God-Mind, but
existing in it, and making it manifest in an identity
peculiar to the individual. Every man is building
into his consciousness the three departments of God-
Mind, and his success in the process is evidenced
by the harmony in his consciousness of Spirit, soul,
and body. If he is all body, he is but one third
expressed. If to body he has added soul, he is
two thirds man, and if to these two he is adding
Spirit, he is on the way to the perfect manhood which


Being’s Perfect Idea 23


God designed. Man has neither spirit, soul, nor
body of his own—he has identity only. He can
say, “I.”” He uses God-Spirit, God-Soul, and God-
Body, as his “‘I”’ elects. If he uses them with the
idea that they belong to him, he develops selfishness,
which limits his capacity and dwarfs his product.

In his right relation, man is the inlet and the out-
let of an everywhere present life, substance, and
intelligence. When his “‘I’”’ recognizes this fact and
adjusts itself to the invisible expressions of the one
Mind, man’s mind becomes harmonious; his life,
vigorous and perpetual; his body, healthy. It is
imperative that the individual understand this rela-
tion in order to grow naturally. It must not only
be understood as an abstract proposition, but it is
necessary to consciously blend our life with God-
Life, our intelligence with God-Intelligence, and
our body with the “Lord’s Body.” Conscious iden-
tification must prevail in the whole man, before he
can be in right relation. This involves not only a
recognition of the universal Intelligence, Life, and
Substance, but also their various combinations in
man’s consciousness. [hese combinations are, in
the individual world, dependent for perfect expres-
sion upon man’s recognition of, and his loyalty to
his origin—God-Mind. Man is in God-Mind as a
perfect Idea. God-Mind is constantly trymg to
express in every man its perfect Idea, the real and
only man.

The perfect Man-Idea in God-Mind is known
under various names in the many religious systems.
The Krishna of the Hindu is the same as the Christos
of the Greeks, the same as the Messiah of the He-


24 Lesson Two


brews. All the great religions of the world are
founded upon spiritual science, but not all of that
science is understood by their followers. The He-
brews had been told again and again, by the spirit-
ually wise, that a Messiah, or Christ Man, would be
born in their midst, but when he came, they did not
recognize him, because of their lack of understand-
ing. They understood only the letter of their re-
ligion. A similar lack of understanding prevails
generally today. The Christ Man, or perfect Idea
of God-Mind, is now being expressed and demon-
strated by men and women as never before in the
history of the race. Let those who claim to be fol-
lowers of the true religion, beware of putting the
perfect Idea out of their synagogues, as the Jews did
with Jesus the Christ. The ancient Pharisees asked
Jesus, ““By what authority doest thou these things >?”
And the modern Pharisees are repeating the same
question. The substance of Jesus’ answer was, “By
their fruits ye shall know them.” (Read Matthew
21 :23-46.)

This perfect Idea of God-Man is your true
self. God-Mind is, under the law of thought, con-
stantly seeking to express its perfection in you. It
1s your spirit, and when you ask for its guidance,
and place yourself, by prayer and affirmation, in
mental touch with it, there is a great increase in its
manifestation in your life. It has back of it all the
powers of Being, and there is nothing that it can-
not do if you give it full sway, and make your
thought strong enough to carry out the great forces
which it is seeking to express in you.


A most important part of the law of mind action


Being’s Perfect Idea 25


is the fact of thought unity. It is absolutely neces-
sary to understand the nature of this fact, before one
can demonstrate the power of the superconscious
mind. Among our associates, we like, and are at-
tracted to those who understand and sympathize
with our thought. The same law holds good in
Divine Mind—its thoughts are drawn to, and find
expression in the minds of those who raise them-


selves to its thought standard. This means that |
we must think of ourselves as God thinks of us, in.


order to appreciate and to receive his thoughts and
to bring forth the fruits. If you think of yourself as
anything less than the perfect child of the perfect


Parent, you lower the thought standard of your)


mind and cut off the influx of thought from the;
Divine Mind. Jesus referred to this law when hd
said, “Ye therefore shall be perfect, as your heavenly
Father is perfect.”

When we go forth in the understanding of man’s
perfect nature, we find a new state of consciousness
forming in us; we think and do many things not ac-
cording to the established custom, and the old men-
tality rises up and says, “By what authority?” We
have so long looked for manmade authority in re-
ligious matters that we feel we are treading on dan-
gerous ground, if we dare to think beyond prescribed
doctrines. Right here we should appeal to the
supreme reason of the Spirit, and proclaim what
we perceive as the highest truth, regardless of prec-
edent or tradition, mental ignorance or physical lim-
itation: I AM is the “image and likeness of God,”
the “‘only begotten Son’’ (the expressed, or pressed
out Mind) of the Most High. This is my true


THE MASTER'S COLLEGE


POWEL
SANTA mi a LL LIBRARY


26 Lesson Two


estate, and I shall never realize it until I enter into
it in mind, because there it is, and nowhere else.

It is only through the superconscious mind that
we can behold and commune with God. “No man
hath seen God at any time; the only begotten Son,
who is in the bosom of the Father, he hath declared
him” (John 1:18). It is taught that Jesus was
exclusively the “only begotten Son,” but he himself
said, “Is it not written in your law, I said, Ye are
gods?” He proclaimed the unity of all men in the
Father. “I am the light of the world.” “Ye are
the light of the world.” Paul says, “As many as
are led by the Spirit of God, these are sons of God.”
We are “heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ”
(Rom. 8:14, 17).

We should not overlook one important point in
this matter of sonship; that point is the difference be-
tween those who perceive their sonship as a possi-
bility, and those who have demonstrated it in their
lives. ““Ye must be born anew,” was the proclama-
tion of Jesus. The first birth is the human—the
consciousness of man as an intellectual and physical
being; the second birth “anew,” is the transforma-
tion and translation of the human to a higher plane
of consciousness.

The second birth is “putting on Christ.” It is a
process of mental adjustment and body transmuta-
tion that takes place right here on earth. ‘‘Have
this mind in you, which was also in Christ
Jesus,” is an epitome of a mental and physical change
which may require years to work out. But all men
must go through this change before they can enter
into the eternal life and be as Jesus Christ is.


Being’s Perfect Idea 27


This being “born again,” or “born from above,”
Is not a miraculous change that takes place in man;
it is the establishment in his consciousness of that
which has always existed as the Man Idea in Divine
Mind. God created man in his “image and like-
ness. God being Spirit, the man he creates is
spiritual. Therefore, it follows as a logical sequence
that man on the positive, formative, creative side of
his nature, is the direct emanation of his Maker; that
he is just like his Maker; that he is endowed with
creative power, and that he has an inexhaustible re-
source from which to draw, in his creative work. It
is to this spiritual man that the Father says, “All
things that are mine are thine.”

Understanding the status of all men in the Di-
vine Mind gives us a new light upon the life of
Jesus of Nazareth, and makes plain many of his
seemingly mysterious statements. ‘The spiritual con-
sciousness, or Christ Mind, was quickened in him,
and through it he realized his relation to First Cause.
When asked to show the Father, whom he con-
stantly talked to as if he were personally present, he
said, “He that hath seen me hath seen the Father.”
Personality had been merged into the universal.
The Mind of Being and the Thought of Being were
joined, and there was no consciousness of separation
or apartness.

Everything about man presages the Higher
Man. Foremost of these prophecies is the almost
universal desire for the freedom which spiritual life
promises, freedom from material limitations. ‘The
mortal perception spurs man on to invent mechanical
devices which will carry him above limitations. For


28 Lesson Two


example, he flies by means external. In his spiritual
nature he is provided with the ability to overcome
gravity; when this power is developed, it will be
common to see men and women passing to and fro
in the air, without wings or mechanical appliances of
any description.

The human organism has a world of latent en-
ergies waiting to be brought into manifestation. Dis-
tributed throughout the body are many nerve centers
whose offices are as yet but vaguely understood.
In the New Testament, which is a work on spiritual
physiology, these centers are referred to as “cities”
and “rooms.” The “upper room” is the very top of
the head. Jesus was in this “upper room” of his
mind when Nicodemus came to see him “‘by night”
—meaning the ignorance of sense consciousness. It
was to this “upper room” that Jesus told his fol-
lowers to go on the day of Pentecost, and to pray
until the Holy Spirit should come upon them. The
superconsciousness, or Christ Mind, finds its first
entrance into the natural mind through this higher
brain center. By thought, speech, and deed, this
mind is brought into manifestation. The new birth
is symbolically described in the history of Jesus
Christ.

“Verily I say unto you, that many prophets and
righteous men desired to see the things which ye see,
and saw them not; and to hear the things which ye


hear, and heard them not” (Matt. 13:17).


Being’s Perfect Idea 29


STATEMENTS FOR THE REALIZATION OF THE
Son oF Gop


(To be used in connection with Lesson Two.)


I am the Son of God, and the Spirit of the Most
High dwells in me.

I am the only begotten Son, dwelling in the
bosom of the Father.

I am the Lord of my mentality, and the ruler of
all its thought people.

I am the Christ of God.

Through Christ I have dominion over every
thought and word.

I am the beloved Son in whom the Father is
well pleased.

Of a truth I am the Son of God.

All that the Father hath is mine.

He who hath seen me hath seen the Father.

I and my Father are one.

My highest ideal is a perfect man.

My next highest ideal is that I am that perfect
man.

I am the image and likeness of God, in whom
is my perfection.

It is written in the law of the Lord, “Ye are
gods, And. . . sons of the Most High.”

This is written that ye may believe that Jesus is
the Christ, the Son of God; and that believing, ye
may have life in his name.


MANIFESTATION
LESSON THREE


As a tule, religious people are not scientific.
They think that religion and science are separated
by a gulf, and that the scientific mind is dangerous.
Science, to them, is associated with Darwin, Huxley,
and other students of natural law, who have been
skeptical about the scientific accuracy of the Bible,
and who, because of their skepticism, are branded as
infidels. Hence it has come to be almost heresy for
a good Christian to think about his religion as having
a scientific side.

By science we mean the systematic and orderly
arrangement of knowledge. This definition does
not confine science to the material world. ‘There is
a science in Christianity, and it is only through the
understanding of this science as a fundamental of
Christianity that the latter can be fully demonstrated
in the life of man. ‘To fail to understand the sci-
ence upon which Spirit rests, is to fail in nearly every
demonstration of its power. Paul says in I Cor.
14:15, “I will pray with the spirit, and I will pray
with the understanding also.”

There is a gulf between the high spiritual and
the material manifestation. It is only by bridging
this gulf that science and religion can be reconciled.
The bridge needed is the structure which thought
builds. When Christians understand the science of
thinking, the power of thought to manifest itself, and


30


Manifestation 31


how the manifestation of thought is accomplished,
they will no longer fear material science. Also,
when material scientists have fathomed the real na-
ture of that living force which they discern as ever
active in all of nature’s structures, they will have
more respect for religion.

Both the religionist and the physicist incorrectly
hold that the Bible is a historical description of
man’s creation. Beginning with the very first
chapter of Genesis, the Bible is an allegory. It is so
regarded by the majority of Hebrew scholars, and
they certainly ought to know the character of their
own scriptures. Paul was a Hebrew, and thor-
oughly versed in the occultism of spiritual writings;
he said, referring to the story of Abraham and
Sarah, “Which things contain an allegory.” He-
brews almost universally claim that the story of the
Garden of Eden, Adam, Eve, and the serpent, is
symbology.

In the face of these facts, it seems strange that
orthodox Christianity should insist that the Bible is
a literal history. It is this way of looking at it which
has stood in the way of the true spiritual understand-
ing. Read in the light of the Spirit, the first
chapter of Genesis is a description in symbol, of the
creative action of universal Mind in the realm of
ideas. It does not pertain to the manifest universe
any more than the history of the inventor’s idea per-
tains to the machine which he afterwards builds.
First, the problem is thought out, and afterwards the
structure is produced. So God builds his universe.
This is explained in the second chapter of Genesis,
which says that God “rested... . from all his


52 Lesson Three


work,” and yet there were no plants of the field,
‘‘and there was not a man to till the ground.” “And
Jehovah God formed man of the dust of the ground,
and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and
man became a living soul.”

Only through the perception of the mental law
by which ideas manifest from the formless to the
formed, can we understand and reconcile these two
apparently contradictory chapters. In the light of
true understanding, everything is made plain, and we
discern just how the Divine Mind is creating man
and the universe; first the ideal concept, then the
manifestation.

The six-days’ creation, as described in the first
chapter of Genesis, represents six great ideal pro-
jections from Divine Mind, each more comprehen-
sive than its predecessor. The final climax is reached
in the sixth degree, when that phase of being called
man, appears, having dominion over everything, or
every idea, that has gone before. This ideal man,
who is the “image and likeness” of “Elohim,” is the
epitome and focal center around which all creation
revolves. Hence, the one important study of man is
the mind of man. It is the key to all mysteries, both
religious and material. When we know how mind
manifests from the ideal to the so-called real, we
are no longer in the dark, but have that truth which
Jesus said would make us free.

There is but one Man. On the spiritual side of
his being, every man in the universe has access to
that Man, eternally existing in Divine Mind as a
perfect Man Idea. When man appreciates this
mighty truth and applies it in his conscious thinking,


Manifestation 33


all manifestation becomes harmonious and orderly
to him, and he sees God everywhere.

A right understanding of the Divine Law of cre-
ation makes man a necessary faculty in God’s great
work. ‘Through man, God is forming or manifest-
ing outwardly that which exists in the ideal. In
order, then, that the creation shall go on and be
fulfilled as God has designed, man must not only
understand the law of mind action in his individual
thought, but he must also understand his relation to
the universal Thought. Not only must he under-
stand it, but he must consciously codperate in every
thought with Divine Ideals. Jesus Christ under-
stood this law, and repeatedly claimed that he was
sent of God to carry out the Divine Will in the
world. ‘This commission is given to every man, and
no one will have satisfaction in life until he recog-
nizes this universal law; until he becomes an obe-
dient, willing worker with Divine Mind.

Spiritual man is I AM; manifest man is / Will.
I AM is the Lord God of Scripture, and J Will the
Adam. It is the 1 AM man that forms and breathes
into the / Will man the “breath of life.” When we
are in the realm of the ideal, we are I AM; when we
are expressing ideals in thought and act, we are /
Will. When the / Will gets so absorbed in its
realm of expression that it loses sight of the ideal
and centers all its attention in the manifest, it is
Adam listening to the serpent and hiding from the
Lord God. ‘This breaks the connection between
Spirit and manifestation, and man loses that con-
sciousness which is his under Divine Law. In this
state of mind, the real source of supply is cut off,


34 Lesson Three


and there is a drawing upon the reserve forces of the
organism, the tree of life. It is in this experience that
man is described as being driven out of the Garden
of Eden, or the paradise of Being.

Every idea projects form. The physical body
is the projection of man’s idea; we carry the body
inthe mind. The body is the fruit of the tree of life
which grows in the midst of the garden of mind. If
the body-idea is grounded and rooted in Divine
Mind, the body will be filled with a perpetual life
flow which will repair all its waste and heal all its
diseases.

When man realizes that there is but one body,
and that the conditions in his body express the char-
acter of his thought, he has the key to bodily perfec-
tion and immortality in the flesh. But “flesh and
blood” cannot inherit the kingdom of God. The
“flesh and blood” here referred to, is the corruptible
body-idea which men carry in mind. When we get
the right idea of the origin and character of the
body, the corruptible will put on incorruption, and
our bodies will be raised from the dead, as was the
body of Jesus. “Neither was he left unto Hades,
nor did his flesh see corruption” (Acts 2:31).

‘The resurrection of our bodies from the dead,
begins in our minds. We must change our ideas
about the body, and hold to the Truth of its origin
and destiny as conceived by God, in whose Mind
its real being exists. The spiritual body of man is
the conception of Divine Mind, the creation of Spirit
for us. Our work is to make this body manifest.

When we have the right understanding of cre-
ation, and, with its help, begin the redemption of the


Manifestation 35


body, the Spirit of God quickens the inner life of the
whole organism, and we know that the promise in
Acts 2:17 is being fulfilled in us: “In the last days,
saith God, I will pour forth of my Spirit upon all
flesh.”

The problem before man in the present race con-
sciousness is how to get back to the “‘Father’s house,”
in which is inexhaustible abundance. As it is by
an exercise of the free will inherent in us that we sep-
arate ourselves from the Father, so it must be through
that same faculty that we again make a conscious
union with him. We must realize the foolishness of
living in that most external realm where only the |
husks of things are, and upon which we would fain |
satisfy ourselves, but cannot. Then let us turn our /
attention within, and by traveling for a season in |
that direction, we shall find the source and substance |
of life.

This turning within, after one has for a long time
been looking without, is no easy matter. The mind
that has been trained to the standards of the formed
universe, is often slow to grasp the formless. But
there is a state of consciousness in the soul that has,
through ages of experience, learned about this form-
less world and is at home in it. Our dreams, visions,
and spiritual experiences, of which we seldom speak,
come from this inner realm. So it is found that
we have a household waiting for us on the subjective
side of our being, and its welcome is worth all the
effort of the journey. “We seek a country from
which we came forth,’ Paul said in substance.

Individualize yourself in the highest by affirming
that in Spirit and in Truth you are all that God is.


36 Lesson Three


This is true of man’s spiritual nature, and he must
claim the supreme inheritance before he can enter
into the mighty mental and spiritual forces which
proceed from the kingdom of God. No one enters
into the kingdom of God within, sits upon the throne
and abides there, until he has the courage and fear-
lessness to proclaim himself joint heir with Jesus
Christ. Then he must prove his dominion by his
purity of motive, unselfish devotion to Truth uni-
versal, and a steady industry and patience in over-
coming the limitations of his own sense consciousness.

Man’s true identity is in Divine Mind. ‘The
Idea has no mind separate from the one universal
realm of ideas. Man must establish himself in the
one and only Mind. He came forth from it, and
his whole existence depends upon it; then why should
he not consciously make the mental connection that
will establish the harmony and order upon which all
existence depends ?

_ Nearly all religious systems aim to bring about
this unity between God and man, and many of them
are quite successful in their methods. We owe
much to the church, to the education and helps
which we have received directly and indirectly
through the efforts of spiritually minded people in
all ages. The Truth has pressed upon them, and
they have demonstrated it up to their highest under-
standing. We are now in a fuller degree of en-
ligntenment concerning the mental laws governing
man and the universe, and consequently we can more
definitely and scientifically apply the methods for
spiritual development, which, in the religious systems,


Manifestation 37


are usually followed through faith. To your faith
add understanding.

Getting back into the Garden of Eden, or tak-
ing possession of the Promised Land, is a conscious
entering into the subjective part of one’s own being.
In Divine Order the will acts upon the body center
from within; in the average person this action is
through reflection from without. In practice we live
outside our bodies instead of within them. This
gives us a very slender hold upon them, and they are
im consequence weak and apt to slip away from us
on very slight pretexts.

Man should constantly affirm, “I AM, and /
Will manifest the perfection of the Mind within.”
The first part of the statement is abstract truth; the
second part is concrete identification. We must
learn the law of expression from the abstract to the
concrete—from the formless to the formed. Every
idea makes a structure after its own image and like-
ness, and all such ideas and structures are grouped
and associated according to their offices.

All ideas pertaining to power, group themselves
about structures impregnated with power. Such
ideas are not attracted to ideas of love. Love has
its group, and it builds its structures in a place by
themselves. We have observed certain of the mani-
fest centers in our bodies; we have recognized and
named them as the seat of emotions, as the expression
of characteristics supposed to exist in the soul. Love
is universally recognized as expressing itself through
the heart, and intelligence through the head.

In the study of Mind and Spimit, these inner cen-
ters of consciousness are concentrated upon, until


38 Lesson Three


they respond to the / Will and become obedient to
it. By this method, man finds that he can control
and direct every function of his organism, and per-
petuate its life and existence indefinitely.

This is the “regeneration” of the New Testa-
ment, a process of body refinement to the point of
physical immortality. Jesus said of this estate:
“The regeneration when the Son of man shall sit
on the throne of his glory.”


I Am REALIZATIONS
(To be used in connection with Lesson Three.)


I AM that I AM.

I Am Identity demonstrated.

I am that I AM, and there is no other besides
me.

I AM one with Almightiness.

I am the Substance of Being made manifest.

I Am formed in the perfection of the Divine
Ideal Man, Christ Jesus.

My body is not material; it is spiritual and per-
fect in all its Being.

Centered and established in the one Mind, I
am not disturbed by the falsities without.
; My identity is in God, and my work is to estab-
lish his kingdom within me.

I can do nothing of myself, but the Father
dweliing in me, he doeth the works.

am striving in all my thoughts and ways to

make the “image and likeness of God” manifest.


My life is hid with Christ in God.


THE FORMATIVE POWER OF THOUGHT
LESSON FOUR


That the body is moved by thought, is univer-
sally accepted; but that thought is also the builder of
the body, is not so widely admitted. We know that
thought moves the various members of the body, be-
cause we have constantly before us the close sym-
pathy between thought and act. Before I run, I
think I will run, and my legs begin to move swiftly
in imagination before I begin the action outwardly.
It was found by a system of experiments made at
Harvard University, that the thought of running
throws the blood into the legs. A man was put flat
on his back on a balanced beam, which was adjusted
so that the least weight at head or foot registered on
the index. When a perfect balance was attained,
the man was given a problem in mathematics to solve.
Immediately the index showed increased weight at
the head, indicating that thought had called the
blood there. Then he was told to imagine that he
was running, and the index showed the weight grad-
ually shifting to the feet.

Here is proof that thought not only moves the
external members of the body, but that it controls
the fluids flowing within the body. If thought so
readily moves the blood from place to place, who
shall say that it does not more quickly move the
nerve fluid, or that still more volatile substance, the
magnetic force that pervades all organisms? We


39


40 Lesson Four


affirm that it does, and that it not only moves these
various elements of the body, but that it also forms
and organizes their activities in the body.

Medical authorities of the highest repute tell us
that certain organs of the body are self-renewing,
and that it is a puzzle to them how these parts ever
wear out. If you had a sewing machine that con-
stantly replaced the little particles worn away by
friction, can you imagine a time when that machine
would be destroyed? In health, man’s body has
this power, and when it is in harmony, it never wears
out. The harmony referred to, is adjustment to
the law of Being, to the law of Divine Nature, to
the law of God. It does not matter what you call
this fundamental Principle underlying all life—the
important thing is to understand it, and put oneself
in harmony with it.

We have always been told that we should be
healthy if we conformed to the laws of nature, but
no one has been able to tell us just what these laws
are. Some have said that this conformity consists in
eating the right kind of food, or in drinking the right
kind of water in the right sort of way, or in breathing
pure air, and in wearing suitable clothes. We have
done all these things, and there is yet something
lacking. It is quite evident that we have not, by
observing these external adjustments, gotten at the
underlying principle of nature. Nature works in-
telligently, and we shall never be able to conform to
her laws until we approach her as we would a wise
and loving mother, who, we know, gladly gives
us what we want when we use it wisely. Nature is
not a blind force working in darkness and ignorance.


The Formative Power of Thought 4


All her works indicate intelligence—mind in action.
This being true, we perceive that we cannot con-
form to the laws of nature until we recognize the
Mind through which she works.

Those who have not thought about this propo-
sition, those who have not tried to know and under-
stand the mental side of life, are like men walking
in broad daylight with their eyes closed. The mind
has eyes, and we can see (perceive) the inner intel-
ligence if we look with mind. But those who look
wholly with the physical eye are really blind—
“having eyes, see ye not.”” Mlan’s salvation from
sin, sickness, pain, and death comes by understand-
ing and conforming to the orderly Mind back of
all existence. ““Ye shall know the truth, and the
truth shall make you free.”

Man is an epitome of Being. Material science
says that his body contains a portion of all the ele-
ments in the earth and air. Psychology finds his
soul responding to all the emotions, sensations, and
vibrations of the sentient world about him, and spir-
itual science discerns that his superconsciousness is
inspired with all ideas fundamental in Divine Mind.
Man, then, is the key to God and the universe, and
he may know all things by studying his own con-
stitution. Supreme in this constitution is mind. Man
must base all his researches upon mind, because mind
is the starting point of every thought and act.

Some metaphysicians teach that man makes him-
self, others teach that God makes him, and still
others hold that the creative process is a cooperation
of God and man. ‘The latter is proved true by those
who have had the deepest spiritual experiences.


42 Lesson Four


Jesus recognized this dual creative process, as is
shown in many statements relative to his work and
the Father’s work. ‘‘My Father worketh even until
now, and I work” (John 5:17). God creates in
the ideal, and man carries out in the manifest what
God has idealized. Jesus treats of this relation be-
tween the Father and the Son in the fifth chapter of
John: “The Son can do nothing of himself, but
what he seeth the Father doing: for what things
soever he doeth, these the Son also doeth in like
manner.”

Thought is the creative power through which
man builds a mentality and body of perfection.
Man understandingly uses his creative thought power
by mentally perceiving the right relation of ideas,
“what he seeth the Father doing,” as stated by
Jesus. “Thus we see the necessity not only of think-
ing right thoughts, but also of having a right basis
for our thinking. We must think from Principle.
The successful mathematician bases all his calcula-
tions on the rules of mathematical science; so the
successful metaphysician bases his creative thinking
on the unlimited ideas of the one Mind. Chris-
tiamity is a science because it is governed by scien-
tific principles of mind. These principles are really
the foundation of all the various sciences, but they
are secondary, while divine science is primary.

The physical scientist does not go back of the
elecizon, or molecule, or cell, in his analysis of forms.
He postulates that atoms have an existence, but he
has never seen one. He assumes that the realm be-
yond the ken of physical perception is not possible of
investigation. ‘Ihe metaphysician delves into the


The Formative Power of Thought 43


realm where atoms, molecules, and cells are formed,
and he not only sees how they are made, but he ac-
quires the ability to make them. He finds that they
are all dependent upon ideas; and that by using right
ideas he can make manifest any form or shape he
may desire. For example, what is named externally
substance, has its source in a mental idea of form and
shape. What is termed life has its source in an
idea of action. What is termed intelligence has its
source in an idea of knowing. All the manifesta-
tions which we see about us are produced in the same
way; they have their source in some idea in mind,
and they can be formed and transformed at will by
one who understands and uses this mind power.

A study of the mind and its manifold manifes-
tations reveals a difference between the thing and the
mind in which the thing has its original impetus as
an idea. Life in Divine Mind is unlimited as an
idea back of perpetual, omnipresent action, but by
thought it may be subjected to many limitations.
Substance in Divine Mind is an idea of perfection
in form, but thought invariably caricatures it. In-
telligence in Divine Mind is All-Knowing, but
thought has said that there is ignorance, and it has
been so demonstrated. It is not true, therefore, that
all manifestation is good because the originating idea
came from Divine Mind. All ideas have their foun-
dation in Divine Mind, but man has put the limita-
tion of his thought upon them, and sees them “‘in a
mirror, darkly.”

Applying this to individual consciousness, we
find just how man thinks his body into disease. In-
stead of basing his thought upon what is true in the


44 Lesson Four


absolute of Being, he bases it on conditions as they
appear in the formed realm about him, and the re-
sult is bodily discord in multitudinous shapes. There
is a universal thought substance pervading all Nature
that is more sensitive than the phonographic record.
These mechanical records receive and preserve every
vibration of sound, but the thought substance does"
better than this; it transcribes not only all sounds,
but even the slightest vibration of thought. The
telephone system of a large city is a good illus-
tration of the manner in which thought works on the
organism. ‘The nerves are the wires and the nerve
fluids are the electricity. The ganglionic aggrega-
tions throughout the body are the substations. The
presiding intelligence sends its thought from the
head; “‘Central,’’) at the solar plexus, receives the
message and makes connection with the part of the
body designated. You think of your stomach; in-
stantly the connection is made with that center and
the presiding thought stationed there takes your mes-
sage and carries it into effect. If the message is,

You are weak,” weakness is recorded. If the
word comes, “You are strong, vigorous, fearless,
spinitual, intelligence, life, and substance,” that mes-
sage is transcribed and carried into action.

Every part of the body is connected with this
great solar plexus central station, which is very obe-
dient in carrying out instructions received from the
presiding intelligence in the head. There are several
great subcenters and innumerable minor centers per-
vading the organism. These centers of thought are
the formed ideas of mind which have an affinity for
one another, based upon the attractive power of


The Formative Power of Thought 45


love, the binding factor of the organism. Physical
science calls this binding energy the centripetal
power, but all forces of whatever character are men-
tal, and they must be reduced to ideas, thoughts,
and words, to be understood.

All ideas pertaining to life expression have their
center of action in that part of the body called the
generative system; whatever thought we think or
express in words about life, is immediately sent to
this generative ganglion and registered there. These
thoughts are not only registered, but man has, by
repeated thinking, built up an ego, or identity, at
that center. The dominant thought of this identity
is life action in its various phases. The life center is
divine, and should be thought about and used in the
purest, highest way. This will lead to the perfect
manifestation of life in the whole body. All
thoughts about the loss of life, or the weakness of
life, or the impurity of life, should be persistently
denied out of mind, and the strongest kind of af-
firmation made of what life is in God. In this way
we connect the life center with its spiritual source,
and it is restored to Divine Harmony.

A majority of the ills that afflict the body have
their origin in erroneous thoughts about life, and in
misuse of the life function. In Genesis, the life cen-
ter is compared to a tree—its roots are in the ground
and its branches reach up to the heavens. All the
pleasant sensations in the organism are produced
by union with the forces emanating from this center.
Along the nerves, or branches, it sends its currents
of life to the very extremities of the body, and even
beyond, into the finer ethers of the soul. It is


46 Lesson Four


spiritual, but its vibrations are so subtle (serpentlike)
that man is tempted to eat its fruits, to consume in
its pleasant sensations the reserve forces of his organ-
ism here stored. His indulgence unfrocks him—
takes away his robe of power and mastery and
dominion over the physical forces that environ him.
Instead of abiding at the center of his body and
consciously ruling it and the world of nature without,
he is cast out of the garden.

By a right understanding and by the right
thoughts and words, man will regain the kingdom
within and will be reinstated in the Garden of Eden.
This process of man’s taking up power and dominion
again, is now being carried out in all those who are
seeking the righteousness of the Christ Con-
sciousness. In this higher thought realm, all ideas
pertaining to the life of man are in harmonious re-
lation, and when we ask in silent thought for this
knowledge, our minds are flooded with its light. We
apprehend only according to the receptivity, stead-
fastness, understanding, and persistent faith of our
minds. But we grow in faith and understanding,
and no matter how slow we seem to be progressing
we should never be discouraged nor give up. E-very
one is heir to this higher thought consciousness, and
all must eventually attain it. When the beauty of
this spiritual realm is spread before us we should
express gratitude—give thanks to the great Soul of
the universe. When the astronomer, Kepler, real-
ized the grandeur of the laws that were revealed to
him, he exclaimed, “I thank thee, God, that I think
thy thoughts after thee.”


The Formative Power of Thought 47


AFFIRMATIONS FOR RIGHT THINKING
(To be used in connection with Lesson Four.)


“As he thinketh within himself, so is he.”

My heart is righteous toward God.

Where my thoughts are gathered together in my
Christ Name, there I Am in the midst of them.

I will think no evil, for Thou art always with


e.
The thoughts of God are his angels: “‘He shall
give his angels charge concerning thee.”

The thought of foolishness is sin.—Prov. 24:9.
re ues thoughts of the righteous are just.—Prov.

Commit thy works unto Jehovah, And thy pur-
poses shall be established.—Prov. 16:3.

I know the thoughts that I think toward you,
saith Jehovah, thoughts of peace, and not of evil.—
Jer. 29:11.

How precious also are thy thoughts unto me, O
God!——Psalm 139:17.

Search me, O God, and know my heart: Try
me, and know my thoughts—Psalm 139:23.

Bringing every thought into captivity to the
obedience of Christ.—II Cor. 10:5.

Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are true,
whatsoever things are honorable, whatsoever things
are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever
things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good re-
port; if there be any virtue, and if there be any
praise, think on these things.—Phil. 4:8.


m


HOW TO CONTROL THOUGHT
LESSON FIVE


The thoughts of mind are identities that have a
central ego. By this we mean that every thought
has a center around which all its elements revolve,
and to which it is obedient when no higher power
is in evidence. Thoughts are capable of expressing
themselves—they think. Man thinks, and he thinks
into his thoughts all that he is, hence man’s thoughts
must be endowed with secondary power of thought.

There is, however, a difference between the
original thinker and the secondary thought. One
has its animating center in Spirit, the other in thought.
One is Son of God; the other is son of man.

The one essential fact to understand is, that
there can be no manifestation without intelligence as
a fundamental factor and constituent part. E,very
form in the universe, every function, all action, all
substance—all these have a thinking part which is
receptive to and controllable by man. Material
science has observed that every molecule has three
things: intelligence, substance, and action. It knows
where it wants to go, it has form, and it moves.

This intelligent principle in all things is the key
to the metaphysician’s work. He does not concern
himself with the action and reaction of the chemistry
of matter, nor does he need to know all the intricate
laws of electricity and magnetism in order to get the
very highest use of them. They are susceptible to


48


How to Control Thought 49


thought through the knowing factor in their construc-
tion, and to this susceptibility he appeals. It is
through this all-pervading intelligence that man ex-
ercises his highest dominion. The Scriptural state-
ment of man’s power and dominion over all things is
true only when he is estimated mentally.

It is the testimony of all philosophers that every
thing is in a state of construction or destruction.
These two states are all-pervading, and they are ap- ©
parently essential in building the universe. The
metaphysician discerns the cause of these two move-
ments to be the “Yes” and the “No” of mind.
These dual attributes of mind are in evidence every-
where, but they are not understood by those who ob-
serve the form instead of the Spirit. The positive
and negative poles of the magnet are states of men-
tal affirmation and denial. In acid and alkali, sour
and sweet, chemistry is proclaiming, “Yes” and
“No.” Night and day, heat and cold, sunshine and
shadow, intelligence and ignorance, good and evil,
saint and sinner, all are the reflections of mental
affirmations and denials. Thus the determining
factor in all manifestation is “Yes” or “‘No.”

It is found that, by the use of these mind forces,
man can dissolve things by denying their existence,
and that he can build them up by affirming their
presence. ‘This is a simple statement, but when it is
applied in all the intricate thought forms of the uni-
verse, it becomes complex. The law of mental
denial! and affirmation will prove its truth to all those
who persistently use it.

The power of the mind to build or destroy is ex-
emplified most strikingly in the human body. What-


50 ; Lesson Five


ever we affirm as true of us, manifests itself in due
season somewhere in the organism. Whatever we
deny is taken away, when the law has had time to
work itself out.

The body is made of cells; some in a radiant
state, some crystallized into form. The visibility
of these radiant thought forms is the result of an
affirmation of the ponderability of substance, or, it
is the belief in man’s mind that his body is material
instead of spiritual. The affirmative state of mind
is a binding, holding process; it involves all thoughts
and all thought manifestations that come within its
scone. If man affirms his unity with the life, sub-
stance, and intelligence of God, he lays hold of these
spiritual qualities; if he affirms the reality of matter
and the physical body he forms a material picture
that works itself out in flesh.

Affirmations do not have to be made in set
terms, like, “I affirm my body to be material;’’ the
general trend of the mind, the sum total of thought
in all its aspects, aggregate the affirmation that fixes
and crystallizes thoughts into forms. The universal
desire and striving of men and women for material
possessions is the strongest kind of affirmation, affect-
ing both mind and body in a marked degree. Stom-
ach troubles and constipation are common complaints
with those who are financially grasping. The tense
state of mind which this affirmation sets up, extends
throughout the body; all the muscles, nerves, and
organs become fixed and almost immovable. This
was forcibly illustrated in a certain banker who was
so grasping that his right hand closed so rigidly that
he could not open it. Again, a set ambition and in-


How to Control Thought 51


tense desire to excel in some chosen field of work
will produce like results. A dominating will fixed
in any direction is a form of affirmation, and it
affects the life action in the organism according to
its intensity. Inactivity, congestion, stiffness, rigid-
ity, may all be traced to excessive affirmation.
The metaphysical remedy for this selfish state
of mind is denial. Jesus said that man must “Deny
himself . . . and follow me.” The “me” here
referred to is the higher self, the Christ, and the
“himself” is personality. Denial is putting away the


mental error, and an entering into conscious relax- |


ation of both mind and body. ‘The healer does not


tell the patient that his constipation is caused by |
grasping, stingy states of mind. Instead, he men- |


tally denies these habits and holds the patient open
and receptive to the great unselfish Mind of the
universe.. People do not realize how they are bound


\


|
i
;
/
|


by their selfishness, and it is not wise to tell them \


openly, until they understand the difference between
their real being and the mortal personality.

Where the “No” phase of mind is too much in
evidence, the whole consciousness is in relaxation.
This excessive negation makes the thought indefinite
and vacillating, the body weak and flabby. Pro-
lapsus, dropsy, certain forms of kidney complaints,
nearly all relaxations in body and functions are the
result of the “I can’t” state of mind. For example,
a business man who has for years been intent on
money making, who meets with a large loss and
mourns over it, will have kidney trouble of some
kind. He believes that he has lost his substance,
and a void thought begins its dissipation of the very


52 Lesson Five


tissues of his body. One who has been very am-
bitious for the attainment of some office or position,
and who has been defeated in that ambition, will
usually ‘“‘let go” the positive mental pole and drop
to the negative. The result is bodily weakness some-
where. We speak of such people as having “‘lost
their grip.” This is exactly what they have done—
their mental relaxation has loosened their grasp upon
the organism, and it is in a condition of dissolution.
Physicians have marveled that so many public men
have diabetes and Bright’s disease. It is because,
through defeat, they have dropped from success to
discouragement. The “failure” state of mind
throws the whole organism into a panic, and its func-
tions are weakened in their life action. Instead of
the tonic of aspiration and hope, there is the ener-
vation of discouragement and despair.

These are conditions that come to those who
trust in the arm of flesh. When the mind of man is
set on high, he never gives us nor allows defeat to
thwart his righteous ambitions. His thought is not
set on selfish attainment, consequently he does not
experience a mental vacuum when he meets with
loss. ‘To one in spiritual understanding, there is no
loss. The going and coming of material and intel-
lectual things are but changes in the panorama of
life. _ Changes are constantly taking place, and will
continue as long as we live in the consciousness of
duality, the “Yes” and “No” state of existence,
which is mortality.

The object of man’s existence is to demonstrate
the Truth of Being. This demonstration takes place
through experience; but there are two ways of work.


How to Control Thought 53


ing out experience. The first is by knowing the
law underlying every process, and the second is by
blindly testing the process without understanding
the law.

The race to which we belong, made a choice
when a certain stage of discretion was attained. An
illustration of this choice is the allegory of the Gar-
den of Eden. Adam represents generic man. In
his early stages he was under the Law of Divine
Knowing—the Lord God was his guide and instruc-
tor; he made no mistakes, but lived consciously in
Divine Understanding.

All experience develops personal identity—the
consciousness of the powers of Being in the self.
This is the bringing forth of the free will which is
inherent in all. In the course of his demonstrations
of Being, man arrives at this place where he feels his
ewn capacity, and he knows he can exercise it with-
out restraint. ‘“‘Satan”’ is the personal mind that
tempts man to try experience without knowledge. In
Divine Illumination man does not enter consciously
into that dual condition typified by the tree of the
knowledge of good and evil. Good is all; evil is
that which might be if man forsook his guiding light.
In the serene Mind of God there is no duality, no
good and bad, no day and night, no understanding
and ignorance. ‘The brilliancy of the All-Knowing
dissolves all shadows, all negations.

It is man’s privilege to abide in the Light, to
know how to work out the problem of existence as
accurately as the mathematician who follows, with-
out deviation, the rules of his science. The Lord ad-
monishes the unfolding Adam not to “eat,” not to


54 Lesson Five


incorporate into his consciousness the knowledge of
duality—good and evil. But like the child who
refuses to take the advice of one who knows, man
falls into the sense of pleasure and excess. ‘The re-
action of sense is pain. Through these experiences,
man comes into a consciousness of an opposite to the
good. The dual mentality naturally sets up positive
and negative forces in his mind, and these opposing
forces are reflected into his body. The commotion
is so great that the soul is forced out of its temple—
man is put out of the garden, and in time forgets his
former E:denic state.

Some metaphysicians argue that eating the fruit
of the tree of knowledge was a necessary step in
man’s evolution; that by experience we learn all
truth, and that without experience we would always
remain infants. Here is the difference between the
Christian and the Gentile: the one seeks the guiding
light of the Spirit in all his ways, while the other
ignores that light, and works out his character like
Adam, by the sweat of his face. Hard experiences
come into our lives because we do not know the law
of harmonious thinking. If we think that evil exists
as a power in the world, that it is working in our lives
and in the lives of those about us, we make it an
active force, and it appears to be all that we imagine
it. The poet truly discerned, “There is nothing
either good or bad, but thinking makes it so.”

Some metaphysicians claim that it is not wise to
make denials; that the affirmation includes all the
mental movement necessary to man’s perfect devel-
opment. This position would be tenable if we had
built up our consciousness according to Divine Law.


How to Control Thought 55


The student who has carried his mathematical prob-
lem forward without making an error does not find
it necessary to erase. But if he sees where he has
made a wrong computation, what then? Nothing
but an erasure, followed by a right computation,
will bring the correct answer. We have all fallen
short of Divine Ideals; we must cross out our errors,
and insert the truths, until our characters are brought
up to the Jesus Christ standard.

Repentance is a form of denial. The forgive-
ness of sin is an erasure of mortal thoughts from
consciousness. [he joy which comes to the con-
verted Christian is the inflow of Divine Love after
the mind has been cleansed by denial of sin. This
is a real experience which may be repeated again
and again by one who understands the law of Holy
Spirit baptism, until the whole man is sanctified and
freed from sin. Christians think of the joyous exal-
tation that marked their conversion as a special sign
from the Lord in recognition of their change of
heart. They look back upon it as an experience that
comes but once in a lifetime. But metaphysicians
who have studied the law of mind, who have prac-
ticed denials and afhrmations as a science, find that
they can throw themselves into this ecstatic state at
will.

The mortal self is the ego around which revolve
all thoughts that bind us to error. We cannot cross
all out at once, but little by little we cast out the
specific thoughts which have accumulated and built
up that false state of consciousness termed Judas.
In the life of Jesus, Judas represents the false ego
which error thought has generated. This “son of


56 Lesson Five


perdition” is so interwoven into the consciousness
that to kill him at one fell swoop, would destroy the
mentality, so he must be counted as one of the twelve,
while we know that he “hath a devil.”

In the symbology of Jesus’ life, Judas is repre-
sented as the treasurer; he “‘carried the bag.” This
means that this ego has possession of the sex, or life
center, in the organism and is using it for its own
selfish ends. Judas was a “thief.” The selfish use
of the life and vitality of the organism for the grati-
fication of sense pleasure, robs the higher nature,
and the spiritual man is not built up. This is the
betrayal of Christ, and it is constantly taking place
in those who live to fleshly, selfish ends.

A time comes, however, when Judas must be
eliminated from consciousness. The agony of mind
and final crucifixion of Jesus represent the crossing
out wholly of the false ego, Judas.

“T die daily,” said Paul. The “I” that dies
daily is personal consciousness, formed of fear, ig-
norance, disease, the lust for material possessions,
pride, anger, and the legion of demons that cluster
about the personal ego. The only Savior of this
one is Jesus Christ, the spiritual ego, or supercon-
sciousness. We cannot, in our own strength, solve
the great purifying problem, but by giving ourselves
wholly to Christ, and constantly denying the de-
mands of the personal self, we grow into the Divine


Image. This is the process by which we “awake,
with beholding thy form.”


How to Control Thought 57


CLEANSING AND PuRIFYING STATEMENTS
(To be used in connection with Lesson Five.)


God is good and God is all, therefore I refuse
to believe in the reality of devil, or in evil in any of
its forms.

God is life and God is all; therefore I refuse to
believe in the reality of loss of life, or death.

God is power and strength and God is all; there-
fore I refuse to believe in inefficiency and weakness.

I am in authority. I say to this thought, Go,
and he goeth; to another, Come, and he cometh.
(Read Matt. 8:5-13.)

God is wisdom and God is all; therefore I refuse
to believe in ignorance.

God is spiritual substance and God is all; there-
fore there is no reality in the limitations of matter.

God is inexhaustible resource and God is all;
therefore I refuse to believe in the reality of lack or
poverty.

God is love and God 1s all; therefore I refuse to
believe in hate or revenge.

He that is slow to anger is better than the
mighty; And he that ruleth his spirit, than he that
taketh a city.—Prov. 16:32.


THE WORD
LESSON SIX


In pure metaphysics there is but one word, the
word of God. This is the original creative Word,
or thought of Being. It is the “God said” of
Genesis. It is referred to in the first chapter of John
as the Logos. It cannot be adequately translated
into English. In the original it includes wisdom,
judgment, power, and in fact, all the inherent po-
tentialities of Being. This Divine Logos was and
always is in God; in fact, it is God as creative
Power. The Divine Mind creates under law; that
is, mental law. Man may get a comprehension of
the creative process of Being by analyzing the ac-
tion of his own mind. First is mind, then the idea in
mind of what the act shall be, then the act itself. In
Divine Mind the idea is referred to as the Word.

According to Genesis and all other mystical
writings bearing upon creation, the Divine Mind ex-
presses its Word, and through the activity of that
Word, the universe is brought forth. Man is the
consummation of the Word, and his spirit has within
it the concentration of all that is contained within
the Word. Jesus is called the Word of God.
“The Word became flesh, and dwelt among us (and
we beheld his glory, glory as of the only begotten
from the Father).”” God being perfect, his idea,
thought, word must be perfect. The perfect One of
God is spiritual man. It is through spiritual man, or


58


The Word 59


Word of God, that all things are made, are brought
into manifestation. ‘And without him was not any-
thing made that hath been made.” The Word is
the “only begotten” of God, because there is but one
idea of man in Divine Mind, and that idea is man’s
perfect pattern.

In the first chapter of John it is implied that there
are things made that are not after divine ideals,
consequently not real. The creations of the Word
of God are permanent and incorruptible. As an
imitator of Divine Mind, man has the power to form
and make manifest whatsoever he idealizes; but un-
less his thought is unified with Divine Mind and
guided in its operations by Infinite Wisdom, his
thought forms are perishable.

Mental processes enter into all creations. Phys-
ical science has discovered that every atom has sub-
stance, force, and intelligence; these are the three
constituent parts of mind. Mind is the one and only
creative power, and all attempts to account for cre-
ation from any other standpoint are futile. The cre-
ative processes of mind are continuously operative;
creation is going on all the time, but the original
plan, the design in Divine Mind is finished.

Man cannot know how the thought, or Word,
works except through his own consciousness; con-
sequently, he must understand, control, and put in
order his own word, for through it he comprehends
the Word of God. Our most important study, then,
is our own consciousness. The old Greeks recog-
nized this and wrote over their temple, ““Man, know
thyself.”” The self of man is spiritual, and when in
direct conscious unity with the parent Mind, it has


60 Lesson Six


permanent formative power. Even in his ignorant
use of thought, man’s mind is forming conditions,
even to the changing of the face of nature itself.
Every thought that goes forth from the brain, sends
vibrations into the surrounding atmosphere, and the
realm of things is moved to action. The effect is in
proportion to the ability of the thinker to concentrate
his mental forces. The average thought vibration
produces but temporary results, but under intense
activity conditions more or less permanent are im-
pressed upon the sensitive plate of the universal
ether, and through it, they are brought into physical
manifestation.

Every idea originating in Divine Mind is ex-
pressed in the mind of man; through the thought of
man, the Divine Mind idea is brought to the outer
plane of consciousness. In the organism itself are
centers that respond to the divine ideas, as a musical
instrument sympathetically responds to musical vi-
brations. Then through another movement on what
is termed the conscious, or most outer plane of
action, the thought takes expression as the spoken
word. ‘There is in the formed conscious man, or
body, a point of concentration for this word; and
through this point, the word is expressed in invisible
vibrations. For example, at the root of the tongue
is a brain center, and through it the mind controls
the larynx, the tongue, and all the organs used in
forming words. Following the creative law from the
formless to the formed, we can see how an idea fun-
damental in Divine Mind is grasped by the man ego,
how it takes form in his thought, and how it is later
expressed through his spoken word. If, in each step


The Word 61


of this process, he conformed to the Divine Creative
Law, man’s word would make things instantly, as
Jesus made the loaves and fishes. But having lost,
in a measure, the steps in this creative process from
the within to the without, there are many breaks and
abnormal conditions, more failures than successes
in the products. |

However, every word has its effect, though un-
seen and unrecognized. Jesus said a man should be
held accountable for “‘every idle word,” and a close
observation of the power of mind in the affairs of the
individual, proves this to be true. What we think,
we usually express in words; and our words bring
about in our lives and affairs whatever we put into
them. A weak thought in the mind is followed by
words of weakness. ‘Through the law of expression
and form, words of weakness change the character
of everything that receives them.

The nerves are the wires that transmit the mes-
sages to all parts of the body, and these parts being
thought formations, they carry out, in their turn, the
word that has been spoken into them. Talking
about nervousness and weakness will produce those
conditions in the body; while on the other hand, .
sending forth the word of strength, and affirming
nerve poise, will bring about the desired strength and
poise. Talking about a weak stomach will make
your stomach weak. Talking about how bad your
liver is, will fix that idea in your liver. The usual
conversation among people creates ill instead of good
health, because of wrong words. If the words are of
disease as a reality, a vibration of disintegrating


62 Lesson Six


forces is set into action, and this, in the end, shatters
the strongest organism.

As an example:of the vibratory power of the
spoken word, a vocalist can shatter a wine glass by
concentrating upon it certain tones. Every time we
speak we cause the atoms of the body to tremble and
change their places. Not only do we cause the
atoms of our own bodies to change their locality, but
we raise or lower the rate of vibration, and other-
wise affect the bodies of others with whom we come
in contact. By telling the little child that it looks
sick and tired, the mother produces these conditions
in its mentality and body. If the mother addresses
words of health, life, and strength to the child, these
will set its bodily functions into activity, and they
will in turn express the harmony of the dominant
thought.

Thus every word brings forth after its kind.
The “‘seed” is the creative idea inherent in the word,
the nature which it inherits from its parent source—
God. The enthusiast in floral culture, who hovers
over and talks in loving tones to her flowers, always
has success with them, while her neighbor, who is
cold and indifferent, fails. It is the mental emana-
tion and the creative Word that stimulate the recep-
tive mentality of nature, and although the enthusiast
may know nothing of the law of mind, she is using it
in its most effective mode, the creative Word. In
like manner, the mind healer mentally and audibly
speaks to the same all-pervading receptacle, and it
responds by building up wasted tissues and weak-
ened functions.


Mind is everywhere, and its avenues of expres-


The Word | 63


sion, like the ether of wireless telegraphy, are strung
in every direction. The wonderful discovery that
messages can be sent around the earth without visible
wires, should forever silence those who have been
incredulous when thought transference through a
like ether is claimed. But there is an even more
rapid and subtle transmitter of ideas than mental
vibrations, and that is unity with Supreme Mind.
This Mind exists as the Absolute—the Unlimited.
In its consciousness there-is no apartness, no sepa-
ration, and whoever puts himself into its conscious-
ness, can accomplish things instantly.

When the centurion said to Jesus, “Only say
the word, and my servant shall be healed,” the
Master said he had not found so great faith in all
Israel, and his healing word was, “‘As thou hast
believed, so be it done unto thee.” We must have a
certain amount of faith in the substance of the in-
visible, and in its ability to do our will. When Peter
recognized in Jesus that inner principle called Christ,
the Son of God, the response was, “Flesh and blood
hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father who
is in heaven.” The Father must have been present
to Peter as he was to Jesus, and the “heaven,” in
which Jesus said he was, must also have been there.
The fact is, Being is always present. Mortal igno-
rance and lack of faith prevent our realization of
this truth. The more we believe in the wisdom,
power, substance, love, and life of the one Mind, the
greater is its activity in us and our affairs. Not only
should we have faith in the All-Presence, but we
should also develop our understanding to the end
that we may know why it manifests through us.


64 Lesson Six


Physical science is today in advance of religion in
its recognition of a universal life substance and intel-
ligence. Religion is looking for this mighty Creator
away off in some distant heaven, right in the face of
the distinct teaching of Jesus Christ that God is
Spirit, and that his kingdom is within man.

But physical science falls short in that it fails to
recognize the unity between the everywhere Intelli-
gence and the knowing principle in man. It is seek-
ing to know intellectually, or from the plane of
forms and shapes, that which is of the mind. Phys-
ical science has recognized the presence of the cre-
ative forces, but it does not know the power that
moves them. Divine metaphysics has discovered
the moving power to be the thought and word of
man, and is proving the truth through results in a
multitude of directions.

The spoken word carries vibrations through the
universal ether, and also moves the intelligence in-
herent in every form, animate or inanimate. It has
been discovered that even rocks and all minerals
have life. This is proof of the omnipresence of the
one animating Substance. Man, being the highest
emanation of Divine Mind, has great directive
power, and is really codperator with God in form-
ing the universe. We should be speaking words of
truth to everything, not only to mankind, but to the
mineral, vegetable, and animal kingdoms. The fine
discernment of the poet reveals that “‘the very stones
cry out,” where a tragedy has occurred. The all-
penetrating ethers receive our thoughts and words,
like the wax cylinder of the phonograph, only a thou-
sand times more accurately; it preserves them and


The Word 65


echoes them back to us in continuous vibrations.
There are no secrets and no concealments. What
you think and speak in the inner chamber, is pro-
claimed from the housetops, said Jesus, and now we
know why this is so. The very walls of your
room, aye, even the substance of the atmosphere in
that room is proclaiming over and over the words you
have spoken there, whether you are present or not.
For example, a lady rented a room in a certain city.
Several nights in succession, just as she fell asleep,
she heard a man talking incoherently about the grain
market. ‘This continued for some time, and she men-
tioned it to the landlady, who informed her that the
room had been last occupied by a dealer on the
board of trade.

This power of the Word is given man to use.
The better he understands the character of God and
his own relation to humanity, the more unselfishly
will he exercise this power. Some are using it in
selfish ways, but this should not deter others who
have a better understanding of the law, from using
it in righteous ways. “If ye shal! ask anything of the
Father, he will give it you in my name,” is a promise
none should ignore. If we need things, and if they
are necessary to our happiness, it is not sacrilegious to
set into action this higher law in attaining them.

The curses of the witch, and the blessings of the
priest have always been believed in by so-called
ignorant and credulous people. In the light of
modern revelation, the charge of ignorance should be
shifted to the unbelieving. The word of one in au-
thority carries weight and produces far-reaching
effects. The fiat of the physician that a certain dis-


66 Lesson Six


ease must result disastrously to the patient, will,
when believed, act as a foil to all the healing forces
of nature. A pin scratch has resulted in blood
poison, because there was no proper denial that such
a result might follow.

Man has the power to deny and dissolve all dis-
integrating, discordant, and disease-forming words.
Knowledge of this fact is the greatest discovery of
all ages. No other revelation from God to man is
to be compared with it. You can make yourself a
new creature, and you can build the world about you
to your highest ideals. Do not fear, but speak to
the Law Supreme the desires of your heart. If
your word is selfish, that which comes to you through
its use will be unsatisfactory, but you will profit by
the experience, and thus learn to speak words of
righteousness only. But it is your duty as expresser
of the Divine Law to speak forth the Logos, the
very Word of God, and cause the Garden of Eden,
the everywhere present Mind-Substance, to mani-
fest its innate perfection.


THE Power or Worps
(To be used in connection with Lesson Six.)
Death and life are in the power of the tongue.
—Prov. 18:21.
The tongue of the wise is health—Prov. 12:18.


He that guardeth his mouth keepeth his life.—
Prov. 13:3.


Whoso keepeth his mouth and his tongue Keep-
eth his soul from troubles.—Prov. 21:23.


The Word 67


A fool’s mouth is his destruction, And his lips
are the snare of his soul.—Prov. 18:7.

-Seest thou a man that is hasty in his words?
There is more hope of a fool than of him.—Prov.
29:20.

Pleasant words are as a honeycomb, Sweet to
the soul, and health to the bones.—Prov. 16:24.

ie lips of the wise shall preserve them.—Prov.


Put away from thee a wayward mouth, And
perverse lips put far from thee.—Prov. 4:24.

Shun profane babblings: for they will proceed
further in ungodliness, and their word will eat as
doth a gangrene.—II Tim. 2:16-17.

He that would love life, And see good days,
Let him refrain his tongue from evil, And his lips
that they speak no guile.—I Peter 3:10.

To him that ordereth his way aright Will I show
the salvation of God.—Psalm 50:23.

I will take heed to my ways, That I sin not
with my tongue: I will keep my mouth with a bridle,
While the wicked is before me.—Psalm 39:1.

What man is he that desireth life, And loveth
many days, that he may see good? Keep thy tongue
from evil, And thy lips from speaking guile—Psalm
34:12-13.

Every idle word that men shall speak, they shall
give account thereof in the day of judgment.—


Matt. 12:36.


SPIRITUALITY; OR, PRAYER AND
PRAISE


LESSON SEVEN


By the employment of many symbols, the Bible
describes man in his wholeness—Spirit, soul, and
body. The symbols used are men, places, tents,
temples, etc. The name of every person mentioned
in the Bible has a meaning representative of that
person’s character. The twelve sons of Jacob rep-
resent the twelve foundation faculties of man. The
name of each of these sons, correctly interpreted,
gives the development and office of its particular
faculty in triune association; that is, its relation to
consciousness in Spirit, in soul, and in body. For
example, when the sons of Jacob were born, their
mothers revealed the character of the faculty which
they represented. This is set forth in the 29th and
30th chapters of Genesis.

It is written of the birth of Reuben, “Leah con-
ceived, and bare a son, and she called his name
Reuben: for she said, Because Jehovah hath looked
upon my affliction.” The emphasis is upon the
word “looked,” and by referring to the Concord-
ance, we find that the meaning of the name Reuben
is, “One who sees; vision of the sun.” It is clear
that this refers to the bringing forth of sight.

“And she conceived again, and bare a son: and
said, Because Jehovah hath heard that I am hated.”


Here the emphasis is upon the word “heard,” and
68


Spirituality; or Prayer and Praise 69


we find that Simeon means, ““That hears or obeys;
that is, heard.”” This is the bringing forth of hearing.

““And she conceived again, and bare a son; and
said, Now this time will my husband be joined unto
me.” In this case the emphasis is upon the word
*Soined.”” Levi means unity, which in body is feel-
ing, In soul, sympathy, and in Spirit, love. So each
of these twelve faculties in the complete man func-
tions in this threefold degree.

What is here described as the twelve sons of
Jacob is the first, or natural bringing forth of the
faculties. A higher expression of the faculties is
attained in the twelve disciples of Jesus Christ.
Simon Peter is hearing and faith united. John is
feeling and love joined. When we believe what we
hear, there is formed in us the Substance of the
Word, which is Peter, a rock, a sure foundation.
“Belief cometh of hearing, and hearing by the word
of Christ.”

The Bible is a very wonderful book; as man
develops in spiritual understanding it reveals itself
to him, and he sees why it has been reverenced and
called holy by the people. It is a deep exposition of
mental! laws, and it is also a treatise on the true
physiological estate of the body. It shows that the
human organism is mind in action, rather than an
aggregation of purely material functions. But
above all, the Bible explains the spiritual character
of man and the laws governing his relation to God.
These are symbolically set forth as states of con-
sciousness, illustrated by parables and allegories.
Paul says, referring to the history of Sarah and
Abraham, “Which things contain an allegory” (Ga-


70 Lesson Seven


latians 4:24). It is written of Jesus Christ, “And
without a parable spake he nothing unto them: that
it might be fulfilled which was spoken through the
prophet, saying, I will open my mouth in parables;
I will utter things hidden from the foundation of the
world.” Jesus Christ was himself a parable; his
life was an allegory of the experiences that man
passes through in development from natural to spir-
itual consciousness. Hence, the Bible and the
prophets can be understood only by those who arrive
mentally at the same place that the writers were
when they gave forth their messages. It requires the
same inspiration to read the Scriptures that it re-
quired originally to receive and write them.

In the 29th chapter of Genesis we read of
Jacob’s wife Leah, ““And she conceived again, and
bare a son: and she said, This time will I praise Je-
hovah: therefore she called his name Judah.” The
Hebrew meaning of the word “Judah” is praise.
In the Spirit, praise, or prayer, the Judah faculty,
accumulates ideas. In sense consciousness this fac-
ulty is called acquisitiveness; it accumulates material
things and when self is dominant, “hath a devil.”
This is Judas.

Each of the twelve faculties has a center and a
definite place of expression in the body. Physiology
has designated these faculty locations as brain and
nerve centers. Spiritual perception reveals them to
be aggregations of ideas, thoughts, and words.
Thoughts make cells, and thoughts of like character
are drawn together in the body by the same law
that draws into assemblies and communities, people
of kindred ideas. The intellectual man centers in


Spirituality; or Prayer and Praise 7\


the head; the affectional man lives in the heart; the
sensual man expresses through the abdomen. The
activities of these indicated regions are subdivided
into a multitude of functions, all of which are neces-
sary to the building up of manifest man as he is
idealized in Divine Mind.

At the very apex of the brain is a ganglionic
center, which we may term the throne of reverence


Ny


or spirituality. It is here that man holds converse |


with the intelligence of Divine Mind. ‘This center |
is the place or “upper room”’ of a spiritual conscious- |


ness designated i in Scripture as Judah. Its office is to,
pray and praise. The Judah faculty opens the,
portal of that mysterious realm called the super-
conscious, where thought is impregnated with an
uplifting, transcendent quality. A\ll lofty ideals, all


the inspiration that elevates and idealizes in religion, |


poetry, and art originate here. It is the kingdom of
the true and real in all things.

The importance of Judah is indicated by his
place in the family of Jacob and Leah. Jacob,
supplanter, was betrothed to Rachel, ewe. At the
time of the espousal, the father of Rachel substituted
his elder daughter Leah, for the covenanted bride.
Leah means weary. ‘The first son of Leah was
sight; weariness saw the light of Spirit. The second
son was hearing; she was able to receive the Word.
The third son was union; she merged with the Limit-
less. The fourth son was praise. After the birth
of Judah, Leah “‘left off bearing.’’ Praise is the
complement of sight, hearing, and unity. It is the
redemption of weariness, and from it issues Messiah,


the Anointed One, Savior of the world. Instead of


72 Lesson Seven


a supplication, prayer should be a jubilant thanks-
giving. This method of prayer quickens the mind
miraculously, and, like a mighty magnet, it draws out
those spiritual qualities which transform the whole
man when they are given expression in mind, body,
and affairs.

Spirituality is one of the foundation faculties of
the mind. It is that consciousness which relates man
directly to the Father-Mind. It is quickened and
enlarged through prayer, and through other forms of
religious thought and worship. When we pray we
_ look up from within, not because God is off in the
sky, but because this spiritual center in the top of
\the head becomes active, and our attention is nat-
urally drawn to it.

Prayer is natural to man, and it should be culti-
vated in order to round out his character. Prayer is
the language of spirituality; when developed, it
makes man master in the realm of creative ideas.
In order to get results from the use of this faculty,
right thinking should be observed here as well as
elsewhere. To pray believing that the prayer may
or may not be answered at the will of God, is miss-
ing the mark. It is a law of mind that every idea is
fulfilled as soon as conceived. This law holds true
in the spiritual realm. “All things whatsoever ye
pray and ask for, believe that ye receive them, and
ye shall have them.” In the light of mind action,
the law expressed in these words is clear. More-
over the faith implied is absolutely necessary to the
unfailing answer to prayer. If we pray asking for

future fulfillment, we form that kind of thought
structure in consciousness, and our prayers are al-


Spirituality; or Prayer and Praise 73


ways waiting for that future fulfillment which we
have idealized. If we pray thinking that we do not |
deserve the things for which we ask, these untrue |
and indefinite thoughts carry themselves out, and we |
grow to look upon prayer with doubt and suspicion.
This is called the prayer of blind faith, but it is not
the kind that Jesus used, because his prayers were
answered.

It should not be inferred that the will of Divine
Mind is to be set aside in prayer; we are to pray that
the will of God enter into us and become a moving
factor in our lives. “‘Not my will, but thine, be
done,” prayed Jesus. The Father does not take our
wills from us. Rather, he gives us the utmost free-
dom in the exercise of the will faculty, and he also
imparts an understanding of the law through which
we can make any condition that we desire. “*What-
soever ye shall ask in my name, that will I do,”
becomes our assurance.

One of the offices of spirituality is to aggregate
ideas, and through this action man draws absolutely
true ideas from the universal Mind. ‘Thus prayer
is cumulative; it accumulates spiritual Substance,
Life, Intelligence; it accumulates everything neces-
sary to man’s highest expression. When we pray in
spiritual understanding, this highest realm of man’s
mind contacts universal, impersonal Mind; the very
mind of God is joined to the mind of man. God
answers our prayers in ideas, thoughts, words;
these are translated into the realms without, in time
and condition. It is, therefore, important that we
pray with understanding of the law, important that
we always give thanks that our prayers have been


a


etree


74 Lesson Seven


answered and fulfilled, regardless of appearances.
When Jesus multiplied the loaves and fishes, he
prayed, blessed, and gave thanks. With under-
standing and realization of the relation between the
idea and the fulfillment of the idea, he overcame the
slow processes of nature, and the loaves and fishes
were increased quickly. We may not be able to at-
tain at once this speedy use of the law, but we shall
approximate it, and we shall accelerate the natural
processes, the nearer we hold our idea to the per-
fection of the realm of ideas.

Praise is closely related to prayer; it is one of
the avenues through which spirituality expresses
itself. Through an inherent law of mind, we in-
crease whatever we praise. [he whole creation re-
sponds to praise, and is glad. Animal trainers pet
and reward their charges with delicacies for acts of
obedience; children glow with joy and gladness
when they are praised. E:ven vegetation grows
better for those who love it. We can praise our own
ability, and the very brain cells will expand and in-
crease In capacity and intelligence, when we speak
words of encouragement and appreciation to them.

‘“What is seen hath not been made out of things
which appear.” There is an invisible thought-stuff
on which the mind acts, making things through a law
not yet fully understood. Every thought moves
upon this invisible substance in increasing or dimin-
ishing degree. When we praise the richness and
opulence of our God, this thought-stuff is tremend-
ously increased in our mental atmosphere; it reflects
into everything our minds and hands touch. When
the common things are impregnated with our con-


Spirituality; or Prayer and Praise 75


sciousness of Divine Substance, they are trans-
formed according to our ideals. Through persistent
application of the Judah faculty, a failing business
proposition can be praised into a successful one.
Even inanimate things seem to receive the word of
praise, responding in orderly obedience when, before,
they had seemed to be unmanageable. A lady used
the law on her sewing machine which she had been
affirming was in bad order. She says it gave her no
trouble afterward. A linotype operator testified
that he received a certain spiritual treatment given
him by a healer at a certain hour, and that his lino-
type, which had been acting badly, immediately fell
into harmonious ways. A lady living in a country
town had a rag carpet on her parlor floor; she had
for years hoped that this carpet might be replaced
by a better one. She heard of the law and began
praising the old carpet. Inside of two weeks,
greatly to her surprise, she was given a new carpet,
from an unexpected source. These are a few simple
illustrations of the possibilities latent in praise.
Whether the changes were in the inanimate things or
in the individuals dealing with them, does not matter,
so long as the desired end was attained.

Turn the batteries of praise upon whatever you
wish to increase. Give thanks that it is now fulfill-
ing your ideal. The faithful Jaw, faithfully ob-
served, will reward you. You can praise yourself
from weakness to strength; from ignorance to intel-
ligence; from poverty to affluence; from sickness to
health. The little lad with a few loaves and fishes
furnished the seed that, through the prayer and


76 Lesson Seven


thanksgiving of Jesus, increased sufficiently to feed
five thousand people. *

If we do not receive answers to our prayers, It Is
because we have not fully complied with the law.
“Ye ask, and receive not, because ye ask amiss.”
This does not mean that we ask of the Lord things
we do not need; it means that we miss the mark in
the method of asking—our relation to Divine Mind
is not in harmony with the law; the failure is not in
God, but in us. We should, therefore, never be dis-
couraged, but like Elijah, we should persist until our
prayers are answered.

All causes that bring about permanent results
originate in Spirit. Spirituality, faith, and love are
God-given faculties, and when we are raised in con-
sciousness to their plane, they act naturally under a
spiritual law which we may not comprehend.
There is a law of prayer, which man will eventually
recognize and apply, as he now does the laws of
mathematics or music.

Jesus said, “Whatsoever ye shall ask in my
name, that will I do.” We ask “‘in his name’” when
we pray in the Jesus consciousness of universal
Spirit. He attained unity with Divine Mind, and
realized that his thoughts and words were not from
himself, but from God. When we pray in his name,
we enter into his unity with the Father, and attain
the same consciousness.

God is the always present, indwelling Mind.
To realize God, we must quiet our outer thoughts
and enter into the stillness, peace, and harmony of
Spirit. ‘When thou prayest, enter into thine inner
chamber, and having shut thy door [outer conscious-


Spirituality; or Prayer and Praise 77


ness], pray to thy Father who is in secret, and thy
Father who seeth in secret shall recompense thee.”
If we make proper connection with Divine Mind in
this kingdom of heaven within us, the Father will
surely answer our prayers. No good thing will he
withhold from us if we comply with the law of right-
eous asking. “Be still, and know that I am God.”


Livinc WorpDs To QUICKEN SPIRITUALITY
“Tt is the spirit that giveth life; the flesh profit-
eth nothing.”

“The letter killeth, but the spirit giveth life.”

“The words that I have spoken unto you are
spirit, and are life.”

Ye must be born from above.

“T am the light of the world;” “‘ye are the light
of the world.”

“Let your light shine before men; that they may
see your good works, and glorify your Father who
is in heaven.”

I am the Light that lighteth every man that
cometh into the world.

My understanding is illumined by the Spirit. |
am the light of my consciousness.

I acknowledge God at all times as the one
Source of my understanding.

“Arise, shine; for thy light is come, and the glory
of Jehovah is risen upon thee.”

The glory of the Lord is risen upon me, and
I walk in the light of life.

My body is the temple of the living God, and
the glory of the Lord fills the temple.

Christ within me is my glory. The brightness of


78 Lesson Seven


his presence casts out all the darkness of error, and
my whole body is full of light.

He that loveth his brother abideth in the light,
and there is no occasion of stumbling in him.

The Lord is my light and my salvation; whom
shall I fear? The Lord is the strength of my life;
of whom shall I be afraid?

Thy light shall break forth as the morning, and
thy health shall spring forth speedily.


EsTABLISHING THE PERFECT SUBSTANCE
(To be used in connection with Lesson Seven. )

And God created man in his own image, in the
image of God created he him; male and female cre-
ated he them.—Gen. 1:27.

My perfection is now established in Divine
Mind.

Ye therefore shall be perfect, as your heavenly
Father is perfect.—Matt. 5:48.

By seeing perfection in all things I help to make
it manifest. “I must be in my Father’s house.”

The corruptible flesh is changed into incorrup-
tion by seeing it perfect and pure in Christ.

I see in mind that perfect character which I de-
sire to be, and thus plant the seed-thought that brings
forth the perfect man.

But we all, with unveiled face beholding as in a
mirror the glory of the Lord, are transformed into
the same image from glory to glory, even as from the
Lord the Spirit.—II Cor. 3:18.

When Christ, who is our life, shall be mani-
fested, then shall ye also with him be manifested in
glory.—Col. 3:4.


FAITH
LESSON EIGHT


Faith is assurance of things hoped for, a con-
viction of things not seen. . . . By faith we under-
stand that the worlds have been framed by the
word of God, so that what is seen hath not been
made out of things which appear.—Heb. 11:1, 3.

In the 11th chapter of Hebrews, Paul piles the
achievements of faith mountain high. “By faith
Enoch was translated that he should not see death.
. . . By faith Noah, . . . prepared an ark to the
saving of his house. . . . By faith Abraham, being
tried, offered up Isaac. . . . By faith Moses, when
he was born, was hid three months by his parents.
. . . By faith the walls of Jericho fell down. . .
And what shall I more say ? for the time will fail me
if I tell of Gideon, Barak, Samson, Jephthah; of
David and Samuel and the prophets: who through
faith subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, ob-
tained promises, stopped the mouths of lions,
quenched the power of fire, escaped the edge of the
sword, from weakness were made strong, waxed
mighty in war, turned to flight armies of aliens.
Women received their dead by a resurrection.”

The idea that faith is something that has to do
only with one’s religious experience, is incorrect.
Faith is a faculty of the mind which finds its most
perfect expression in the spiritual nature, but in order
to bring out the whole character it should be devel-


79


80 Lesson Eight


oped in all its phases. That it is a power is self-
evident. People who have faith in themselves
achieve far more than those who do not believe in
their own ability. We call this self-faith innate con-
fiaenve, but confidence is only a form of faith. Be-
lief is another of faith’s expressions. Jesus appar-
ently made no distinction between faith and belief.
He said, ‘Believe ye that I am able to do this?” and
“Whosoever . . . shall not doubt in his heart, but
shall believe that what he saith cometh to pass; he
shall have it.” In an analysis of the constituent
parts of man’s consciousness, we locate belief in the
mentality, working in the thought realm without
contact with the more interior substance of the Spirit,
upon which true faith is founded.

In Spirit, faith is related to what Paul calls sub-
stance or assurance. Jesus Christ used the same
illustration when he referred to Peter, a type of
faith, as a Rock upon which he founded his church.
Here is proof that faith is closely allied to the endur-
ing, firm, unyielding forms of earth substance. But
free faith has the power to do, and to bring about
results in the affairs of those who cultivate it.

Like the other faculties, faith has a center
through which it acts and expresses outwardly its
spiritual powers. Physiologists call this center the
pineal gland, and they locate it in the upper brain.
By meditation man lights up the inner mind, and
he receives more than he can put into words. Only
those who have strengthened these interior faculties
can appreciate the wonderful, undeveloped possi-
bilities in man. The physiologist sees the faculties as
brain cells; the psychologist views them as thought


Faith SI


combinations, but the spiritually minded beholds
them as pure ideas, unrelated, free, all-potential.

Faith can be extended in consciousness in every
direction. It will accomplish wonderful things if
quickened and allowed free expression in its native
realm. When Jesus said, “If ye have faith as a
grain of mustard seed, ye shall say unto this moun-
tain, Remove hence to yonder place; and it shall re-
move; and nothing shall be impossible unto you,” he
referred to faith working-in spiritual consciousness.
Such results are possible only to the faith that co-
Operates with creative Law. Where faith is planted
in outer things, the results are not worthy of men-
tion. Men have named them luck, accident, chance,
etc. [They seem to work for a little while, then
suddenly change, showing that they are not under

any enduring law.

. When faith is reflected in the intellectual realm,
the results are usually profitable to the man of
brains. If he has faith in his art, or his science, or
his philosophy, it answers his purpose, for a time, at
least. But here it never gets beyond the traditions
and experiences of precedent. Intellectual people
do no miracles through faith because they always
limit it to what the intellect says is law. It is when
faith is exercised deep in spiritual consciousness that
it finds its right place, and here under Divine Law,
without variation or disappointment, it brings results
seemingly miraculous.

Faith has always had a very large place in the
experiences of religious people because they have
given it free scope, expecting great things through
it from the Lord. But nearly all faith demonstra-


82 Lesson Eight


tions have been the result of a sort of blind conf-
dence that God would carry out whatever was
asked of him. Sometimes the petitioner was disap-
pointed, and a series of disappointments usually led
to doubt and to the conclusion that God had in some
way changed his law. The early Christians were
taught by Jesus and his disciples to have faith in
God, and they did wonderful, so-called muiracu-
lous works. Ass time went on and their attention
was more and more drawn to worldly things, the
Christians of a later day became separated from the
spiritual forces within and their faith lost its energy.
Then they began teaching that miracles were no
longer necessary; that God had given them to the
early Christians because they did not have the Bible
nor an organized church. ‘They also taught that
the miracles were given to prove that Jesus was the
Son of God.

Now we have a fuller understanding of the law
of God, and we know that whatever has been done
once can be done again under like conditions. If
Jesus and his disciples, and the early Christians did
marvelous things through the prayer of faith, we can
do them. All that is required is persistence in our
use of faith until we make connection with the
higher realms of consciousness, where, as Jesus said,
though our faith be as small as the smallest of seeds,
it will spring forth and demonstrate its power to
carry out every desire that we put into it. ‘‘Noth-
ing shall be impossible unto you,’ "af your faith is in
Spirit, and if your work is in harmony with Divine


Mind.


The Christian religion has been a great factor


Faith 83


in the development of faith in the inner realms of
man’s being. “Blessed are they that have not seen,
and yet have believed.” The power to see in Spirit
is peculiar to faith. In its outer expression this
power is sight; interiorly it is that which perceives
the reality of substance of Spirit. Mental seeing is
knowing; when we perceive the truth of a propo-
sition, we say, ‘I see, I see,” meaning that we men-
tally discern.

Faith in the reality of things spiritual develops
the faith center in the brain, called the pineal gland.
When this embryo eye is illuminated with spiritual
faith, it sheds a radiance like a halo around the
head, and extends in lessening degree throughout the
whole body. ““When thine eye is single, thy whole
body also is full of light.” The halo which the
early artists painted around the heads of saints was
not imaginary, but real. ‘This illuminating power of
faith covers the whole constitution of man, making
him master of all the forces centering about spiritual
consciousness. Faith and prayer go hand in hand.

“The faith which thou hast, have thou to thy-
self before God. Happy is he that judgeth not him-
self in that which he approveth.”” Have faith in


what you do, and after it is done do not condemn |
yourself. We are all seeking happiness, content- |


ment, and we know by experience that we are happy
when we are in tune with our environment. ‘There
is a great variety of ideas which cause us inharmony.
We think that if we have money and friends, we can
be happy; but it is not things that make happiness.
It is our mental attitude toward things that fixes our
relation to them, and the better we understand the


84 Lesson Eight


innate substance of the world about us, the more do
we appreciate it.

Faith is ever active, and it should be made the
true substance of every idea. We must have faith in
our own power, capacity, and ability, and to have
this faith our thoughts must be centered in the great
universal Mind. Success lies in God. Whatsoever
is not of faith is sin; then whatsoever is of faith is
not sin. This is the new standard of righteousness
for the man who is putting on Christ. It is his
breastplate, his protection while he is coming up into
knowledge of the absolute Good. Sin is missing
the mark, and we miss it by not having faith.

Faith in the reality, power, and willingness of the
mental and spiritual forces, is absolutely necessary to
one who expects to succeed in demonstrating the
higher law. Jesus was the herald of a set of laws
which will revolutionize the whole civilization of this
world and which will produce a new and higher type
of man. He called this new condition for the uplift
of the race, the “kingdom of heaven,” and he said it
must be built upon the foundation typified by Peter
(a rock), which is faith. The development of the
faith faculty in the mind is as necessary to the worker
in spiritual principles as is the development of the
mathematical faculty in the worker of mathematics.
Neither of these faculties comes at a bound fully
formed into consciousness, but both grow by culti-
vation. “‘Increase our faith,” said the disciples, and
Jesus answered, ““Have faith in God.”

All readers of Scripture recognize Peter as a
type of faith. By studying his experiences, we may
get suggestions on the development of that faculty


Faith 85


in ourselves. The fluctuating allegiance of Peter to
Jesus illustrates the growth of faith in one who has
had no development of that faculty. Faith and
doubt contend for the supremacy in Peter, and we
wonder why Jesus would choose as his chief disciple
this vacillating, weak, and cowardly fisherman. But
we observe that Peter was enthusiastic, bold at
times, receptive and patient under reproof. He had
never walked on the water, but when Jesus said,
““Come,”” he boldly went out to meet him. Doubt
entered his mind, and he sank; but the helping hand
was extended to him and he was made stronger
by the experience. This and many other illustra-
tions in the history of Peter, show how faith grows
in the mind, and we should not be discouraged if
our first efforts fall short of the desired end.

A very little faith often produces surprising re-
sults. [he forces invisible are much closer than we
think, and when we turn our attention in their direc-
tion the response is usually so pronounced and so
swift that we cannot but feel that a miracle has been
performed. A more intimate acquaintance with the
Divine Law convinces us that under it all things are
possible if we only believe, and if we at the same
time conform our thoughts to its principle.

Peter (faith), James (judgment), and John
(love) were the three disciples who were very close
to Jesus, and they are more prominent in his history
than all the others. ‘This indicates that these three
faculties are developed in advance of the others, also
that they are closely associated. Understanding re-
veals to us that God is a Mind-Principle whose
foundation is ideas. When this character of the


86 Lesson Eight


creative Principle dawns upon us, we see how easy
it is to commune with God. Through this com-
munion we almost unconsciously strengthen faith,
and we find that one faculty helps another to grow.
But there must be room in which to grow, and room
is made by love. Selfishness is limitation; it binds
man in a little prison called personality. “The only
way to enlarge the character and give play to all the
faculties is through love. Love enlarges the field of
consciousness by leveling the thoughts of enmity and
opposition. Make friends with all your adversaries
quickly, whether they be persons, thoughts, or things.

We are constantly making conditions through
our thoughts. Some people declare that everything
is against them. If they miss a car, they say, “It is
always the way,” and they build up a state of mind
in which everything seems contrary to them.

In all of our lives we should condemn nothing
that comes to us and nothing that we do. We know
the law; let us keep it, and not set up any adverse
conditions by our thoughts of condemnation. What-
ever you are doing, be happy in it. If you are get-
ting wrong results, do not believe in an angry God.
You are getting the result of your acts, according to
your faith. Be wise; pronounce nothing evil, and
only good will come. Shall we call everything
good? Yes. If the savage knew this law he could
lift himself to a higher consciousness by it. We get
out of savagery by seeing good.

Have faith in the innate goodness of all men
and all conditions. Do not condemn, no matter
how great the provocation. What you think, you
create In your own consciousness. Enlarge your


Faith 87


range of vision, and you may see good in what now
seems evil. God is good and God is all, hence
there can be no real condition but the good. Why
should we waste our time fighting evil? If we
build our character upon faith, understanding, and
love, with the great I AM as the focal center, we
shall become pillars in the temple of God.


FalTtH AFFIRMATIONS
(To be used in connection with Lesson Ejght.)


“Now faith is assurance of things hoped for, a
conviction of things not seen.”

Holding continuously to the reality of things
spiritual establishes them in mind—they become
mental substance.

I believe in the presence and power of the one
Mind, and it is to me substantial Intelligence.

“According to your faith be it done unto you.”

My doubts and fears are dissolved and dissi-
pated; in confidence and peace I rest in thy un-
changeable Law.

“Great is thy faith: be it done unto thee even as
thou wilt.”

With my mind’s eye, I see more and more the
reality of the true Ideas ever existing in Divine Prin-
ciple.

“T believe; help thou mine unbelief.”

Jesus said, “Have faith in God.”

I am saved from pain and sorrow through my
unswerving faith in the protection and care of God.

“Lord, Increase our faith.”’

My faith grows greater day by day, because it


88 Lesson Eight


is planted in Truth, and through it all the mountains
of mortal error are moved into the sea of nothingness.
The understanding of Spirit clarifies my faith.
“T know him whom I have believed.” I am per-
suaded that he is able, that he is willing, that he is
desirous of giving me whatsoever I ask.
My faith comprehends the beauty of wholeness.
My faith is of God and in God.
““Go thy way; thy faith hath made thee whole.”


IMAGINATION
LESSON NINE


The teachings about the things of the Spirit are
said to be mystical. We have found them so be-
cause we have not come into consciousness of the
many faculties necessary to comprehend Spirit.
Victor Hugo said, “There are no occult or hidden
truths; everything is luminous with mind.” So we
find in the study of Truth that what is called mys-
terious and occult is simply a range of facts that man
has not yet explored. When he expands his mind
and takes in a larger horizon, he sees the relation of
a multitude of hitherto unknown laws, which, from
his former viewpoint, seemed mysterious.

Mind manifests through faculties; in order to
comprehend increasingly, there must be an increase
of these avenues. That man has latent possibilities
goes without argument, and that there is a limit to
the ability of the mind is unthinkable. What a man
imagines he can do, that he can do. It is a question
of getting about it in the right way. To allow the
imagination to drift in daydreams never brings any-
thing to pass. Ideas must be worked up into living,
breathing, thinking things. Man can compress into
visibility his vagrant ideas as the chemist liquefies and
makes visible the invisible atmosphere; but to do
this, he must, like the chemist, have the machinery.

Physiology says that to think, man must have
brains. However, thinking is not limited to material


89


90 Lesson Nine


cells, but, like everything else in the universe, has a
wide range of expression. There are brains within
brains, and cells within cells. All through the body
are brain centers whose offices have not yet been
determined. Psychology shows that these nerve
centers are acted upon by invisible forces. Psychol-
ogy teaches that man has what is called a subcon-
scious mind, and that it transcends the conscious
mind in knowledge and in ability. Jesus Christ
gives us this still higher teaching concerning our men- \
tal powers: Man has a mind called the Lord, ’
transcending both the conscious and the ayy |
scious. Yet the harmonious working in unity of /
these seemingly three minds is necessary to the bring-.
ing forth of the latent possibilities of the man. —~
In Truth there is but one Mind, in which all
things exist. Accurately speaking, man does not
have three minds, nor does he have even one mind;
but he expresses Mind in a multitude of ways. To
believe in the possession of a mind, and that it is
necessary to store up knowledge, makes living bur-
densome. ‘This is why very intellectual people are
often unpractical and unsuccessful; they have ac-
cumulated more knowledge than they have wisdom
and power to apply. Like the miser who starves
surrounded by his gold, these perish for lack of real
understanding. “Through thinking of their stored-up
knowledge as a personal possession, they have insu-
lated it from the original fount of wisdom and life,
and it has consequently become stale and forceless.
There is in man that which, when opened, will
place him in direct contact with universal Knowl-
edge, and he can instantly and continuously draw


Imagination 91


for anything he may wish to know. God is our
fount of wisdom, even as he is our source of supply.
The understanding of the Christ Mind reveals that
man of himself knows nothing. Jesus, who devel-
oped this higher consciousness, claimed that all his
knowledge and power came direct from the Father
—‘T can of myself do nothing: . . . the Father
abiding in me doeth his works.”’

All that man really needs is the quickening: and
rounding out of the thinking centers in his conscious-
ness; then the Divine Mind will think through him.
Ths supreme Mind holds man at its center, a per-
fect instrument through which to express its possi-
bilities. The writer of the first chapter of Genesis
says that man is the “image and likeness’ of God.
He is the /-am-age, or the identical I Am of God-
Mind in expression. God looks into the mirror of
the universe and sees himself as man; he gives him-
self to man, and man in his highest is God manifest.
““He that hath seen me hath seen the Father.”
Thus God gives to his image the power to express all
that he is. This not only includes man’s ability to
think, but also the power to shape and form thought.
This formative power of thought requires a distinc-
tive faculty, which is called the “imagination.”
The mind makes its forms in a way similar to that in
which women make biscuits. First is the gathering
of the materials, then the mixing, then the biscuit
cutting, which gives shape to the substance. In
thinking, man accumulates a mass of ideas about
substance and life, and with his imagination he
makes them into forms.

Whatever we mirror in our minds becomes a


92 Lesson Nine


living, active thing, and through it we are connected
with the world about us. Through the work of the
imaging faculty, every thought makes a form, and
a multitude of thoughts make a multitude of forms.
These crowd in upon each other around the central
[-am-age, and appear in what is called body. Phys-
iology says that all the organs of the body are made
up of cells, and that every cell bears the form and
character of its particular organ. The liver is made
of a multitude of little livers, the heart of little hearts,
etc. The starting point is an idea, and through
the mechanism of the mind (often erroneously called
the mechanism of the body) man forms his organ-
ism. With this key one can unlock the door of his
temple, and in mind visit all its various rooms and
set the furniture in order.

The imagination has its center of action in the
front brain; it uses what phrenology calls the per-
ceptive faculties. It is really the author of these
faculties; size, weight, form, color, etc., are its
children. When it flashes its light into the cells that
make up these organs, they at once respond to the
thought, and out of the invisible ether they create
forms which correspond to the idea held in the imag-
ination. If the idea originates in Spirit, the creation
is harmonious and according to the Law. These
centers are so sensitive and receptive to thought that
they take impressions from without, and make in the
ether those forms which correspond to the impres-
sions received. ‘This is an inversion of the creative
Law, which is that all creations shall have their pat-
terns in the mind. When man allows his imagina-
tion to run on in a lawless way, he brings about such


Imagination 93


discord in mind and body that the flood of error
thought submerges his understanding and he is
drowned in it. “And Jehovah saw that the wicked-
ness of man was great in the earth, and that every
imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only
evil continually”’ (Gen. 6:5).

“And I, behold, I do bring the flood of waters
upon the earth, to destroy all flesh’’ (Gen. 6:17).

All things, including the mind, work from center
to circumference. A knowledge of this fact puts
man on his guard, and he directs that his imagination
shall not create things in his mind which have been
impressed upon him from without. This does not
imply that the world without is all error, or that all
appearance is the creation of mortal mind; it means
that the outer is not the safe pattern from which to
make the members of the body. When Moses was
instructed by the Lord to furnish the tabernacle, the
command was, “See . . . that thou make all things
according to the pattern that was showed thee in the
mount.” ‘“The mount” is the place of high under-
standing in Mind, which Jesus called the kingdom
of God within. The wise metaphysician resolves
into idea each mental picture, each form and shape
seen in visions, dreams, etc. ‘he idea is the founda-
tion, the real; when understood and molded by the
power of the word, it creates or re-creates the form
at the direction of the individual | aM. This simple
law developed to a certain degree, makes man an
adept or master. Through handling the cause of
things he attains the mastery over things, and instead
of giving up to his emotions and feelings, he controls
them. Instead of letting his imagination run riot,


94 Lesson Nine


conjuring up all sorts of situations, he holds it steady
to a certain set of ideas which he wants brought
forth. ‘‘Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace, whose
imagination is stayed on thee” (Isaiah 26:3,
margin).

As man develops in understanding, his imagina-
tion is the first of the latent faculties to quicken.
Esau represents the natural man, and Jacob a new
and higher concept of man supplanting him. Hence
Jacob is called the ‘‘Supplanter.” Historically, he
seems a trickster, taking advantage of those of less
wisdom, but this is merely to show how the higher
principle appropriates the good everywhere. Im-
agination was the leading faculty in Jacob’s mind.
He dreamed of a ladder reaching from earth to
heaven, the angels of God ascending and descending
upon it. ‘This is prophecy of union between the
ideal and its manifestations, between Spirit and
body; the union is made by pure thoughts of the
Absolute—the angels of Jacob’s dream. Farther
along in his development Jacob awakened all of his
faculties, represented by his twelve sons. Joseph
was a dreamer and an interpreter of dreams. He
was the favorite son of Jacob, the I AM, who gave
him a coat of many colors. This is all representa-
tive of the imaging faculty which Joseph typifies.

The history of Joseph is the history of every
man’s imagination when developed under the Di-
vine Law. His dreams were messages from God,
and God interpreted them for him; his life is the
most interesting and fascinating romance in the
Bible. Att its inception, the way of Joseph was
thorny, but through his obedience to the Spirit he


Imagination 95


reached the highest place in the king’s domain.
This shows that man begins the development of the
imagination in the darkness of materiality and in the
depths of ignorance, represented by Joseph cast into
the pit and sold into Egypt. Through spiritual un-
derstanding, the “dreamer” becomes the most prac-
tical son of the family; by following his dream inter-
pretations, multitudes are saved from starvation.
The individual application of this is: Having our
attention fixed on Spirit, we discern the ebb and
flow of the forces in the organism, and we know how
to conserve and husband our resources.

Instead of treating the visions of the night as
idle dreams, we should inquire into them, seeking
to know the cause and the meaning of every mental
picture. Every dream has origin in thought, and
every thought makes a mind picture. The study of
dreams and visions is an important one, because it is
through these mental pictures that the Lord com-
municates with man in a certain stage of his unfold-
ment. Solomon was instructed in dreams. “In
Gibeon Jehovah appeared to Solomon in a dream
by night; and God said, Ask what I shall give
thee.” In Job 33:15, 16, we read, “In a dream, in
a vision of the night, When deep sleep falleth upon
men, In slumberings upon the bed; Then he openeth
the ears of men, And sealeth their instruction.”
“Then was the secret revealed unto Daniel in a vis-
ion of the night.” Joseph, the father of Jesus, was
told in a dream to take the young child and go down
into Egypt. Peter was shown his intolerance in a
vision, and Paul was obedient to the “heavenly
vision.” All the great and wise in every age have


96 Lesson Nine


been instructed by God in dreams and visions.
‘Where there is no vision, the people cast off re-
straint” (Prov. 29:18).

Every form and thing, whether in the ether or on
the earth, represents some idea or mental attitude.
The idea is first projected into the invisible ether,
and afterward formed in consciousness. The mind
of man sees all things through thought forms made
by the imagination. The lover idealizes the object
of his affection, and is often disappointed on close
acquaintance. We are always creating ideals that
have existence in our minds alone. A true story is
told of a sailor who went on a long voyage and left
his affanced behind. He thought of her continu-
ously, and often saw her in his dreams. Finally he
began to see and talk to her in his waking state, and
she told him many remarkable things. She said it
was her soul that visited him; that her body was in
her English home, awaiting his return. After some
twenty years he arrived at home, expecting a wel-
come from his loved one. He was dumbfounded to
learn that she was married, had a family, and had
forgotten him. Out of his own mind substance he
had created the object of his affection, and she had
faithfully reflected all his thoughts about her.

Through the power of the imagination we im-
press upon the body the concepts of the mind.
Birthmarks have long been recognized as the effect
of the mother’s mind, and this mental sympathy does
not end with birth. Here are actual occurrences:
A lady watched her little daughter pass through a
heavy iron gate. The gate swung shut and the
mother imagined that it caught and crushed the little


Imagination 97


one’s fingers. But the child had withdrawn her fin-
gers before the gate struck. The mother felt the
pain in her own hand, and the next day she found a
dark streak across her fingers where she imagined the
child’s were crushed. In a certain secret society ini-
tiation, the candidate was told that the word ““Cow-
ard” was to be branded upon his back with a red-hot
iron. A piece of ice was used instead, but the prom-
ised brand arose in blistered letters.

We could cite cases without number to prove
the power of the imagination in forming and trans-
forming the body. Also, one mind can suggest to
another and produce any desired condition, if there
be mental receptivity. This can be done most ef-
fectively through the hypnotic state, but hypnosis is
not always necessary. Experiments prove that we
are constantly suggesting all sorts of things to one
another, and getting results according to the inten-
sity of the imagination. ‘Thus disease is reflected
into susceptible minds by people merely talking
about disease as an awful reality.

A man can imagine he has some evil condition
in body or affairs, and through the imaging law he
builds it up until it becomes manifest. On the other
hand, he can use the same power to make good ap-
pear on every side. ‘The marks of old age can be
erased from the body by mentally seeing it youthful.
If you want to be healthy, do not imagine so vain a
thing as weakness and decrepitude. Make your
body perfect by seeing perfection in it. The tran-
sient patching up with lotions and external appli-
cations is foolish; the work must be a mental trans-


98 Lesson Nine


formation. ‘‘Be ye transformed by the renewing of
your mind.”

The highest and best work of the imagination is
the transformation it works in character. Imagine
that you are one with the Principle of Good and you
will become good. To imagine oneself perfect fixes
the idea of perfection in the invisible mind substance,
and the mental forces at once begin the work of
bringing forth perfection.

Paul saw this wonderful law at work in character
forming through imitating Christ, “But we all, with
unveiled face beholding as in a mirror the glory of
the Lord, are transformed into the same image from
glory to glory, even as from the Lord the Spirit.”


PERFECTION IN ForRM ESTABLISHED

(To be used in connection with Lesson Nine.)

I see my countenance in its divine perfection.

Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace whose im-
agination is stayed on Thee.

I see perfection in all forms and shapes.

His Son is the brightness of His glory, and the
express image of His person.

I see the light of the Christ Consciousness al-
ways.

I am formed anew every day in my mind and
body.

Be ye renewed in the spirit of your mind.

My spirit is quickened in Christ.

In a dream, in a vision of the night . . . he
openeth the ears of men, And sealeth their instruc-
tion.— Job 33:15, 16.

I know the reality back of the shadows.


WILL AND UNDERSTANDING
LESSON TEN


“Tf any man willeth to do his will, he shall know
of the teaching” (John 7:17).

Man manifests that which exists eternally in
Being. We talk about the faculties of man’s mind
as if they belong to the individual and have origin
in him. Man exists in the one invisible Mind. He
may assume to have a mind of his own, but his origin
and destiny are in the original Mind.

Primal causes are complete, finished, absolute.
All that man manifests has its origin in a Cause
which we name Divine Mind, Spirit, God. This
being true in logic and intuition, it is not a difficult
matter to arrive at the conclusion that the manifes-
tation proves the character of the cause. In dealing
with the faculties of man, the relation between them
and the one Mind should not be lost sight of.
There is but one Mind, and that Mind cannot be
separated or divided, because, like the principle of
mathematics, it is indivisible. All that we can say
of the one Mind is that it is absolute, and that all
its manifestations are in essence like unto itself. This
brings us to the true estimate of man, and when we
speak of spiritual man, or Christ Man, or the Son
of God, we refer to this original expression of Di-
vine Mind.


In analyzing these faculties and in establishing
99


100 Lesson Ten


their relation in the individual consciousness, we
should clearly understand that they are never sepa-
rated from their Principle, the Divine Mind. In the
text quoted above, Jesus refers to two of the powers
of man, and brings out a certain phase of their re-
lation. “Will” and “know” designate what we
term the will and the understanding faculties of
mind. Through appropriation, through expansion
and growth in consciousness, will and understand-
ing would seem to have their source in individual
man. But however adapted by man, they can never
be divorced from the Mind of Being in which they
exist as essential members of its wholeness.
Self-consciousness is like an eddy in the ocean—
all the elements that are found in the ocean are also
found in the eddy, and every eddy may, in due
course, receive and give forth all that is in the ocean.
As the will of God, man represents I AM identity.
This is self-consciousness, freedom to act without
dictation of any kind, selfhood without conscious-
ness of cause, the power to make or break without
limitation, constructive and destructive ability with a
universe of workable potentialities. The will is the
man. Without absolute freedom of will, man
would be an automaton. If his will were restricted
"in the least degree on any side, he would not be per-
fectly free. But we know that God is the Great
Unlimited, and man, his “image and likeness,” must
be of the same character; consequently man has the
same freedom that God has to act in the fulfillment
of desire. God does not dictate man’s acts, although
he may instruct and draw him through love away
from error. The idea that God makes man do cer-


Will and Understanding 101


tain things cannot be true in a single instance, be-
cause if it were, man would not be a free agent. If
God interfered with man’s will in some things, it
would follow that he could interfere in any and all
things. Logic and observation clearly reveal the
freedom of man in everything.

Creative thought uses the will to build up indi-
vidual consciousness. The Lord God, or Jehovah
of Genesis, is the original “I will be what I will to
be.”” In mind, both Jehovah and Jesus mean I Am.
I AM is man’s self-identity. I AM is the center
around which man’s system revolves. When the I
AM Is established in a certain understanding of its
Principle, it is guided in its acts, and they are in har-
mony with Divine Law. This is the union of will
and understanding. In the Scripture, these are des-
ignated as Ephraim and Manasseh, sons of Joseph.
Their allotment in the Promised Land was joined,
indicating that these faculties work in the body from
a single brain center. ‘This center is in the fore-
head.

The will should never be retarded in its devel-
opment, but should be strengthened along all lines.
The idea of breaking the will of children is wholly
erroneous. The perfect man is produced by round-
ing out the will and joining it to the understanding.
The idea of giving up the will should not include the
thought of weakening it, or causing it to become in
any way less; it properly means that the will is being
instructed how to act for the best. Do not act until
you know how to act. “Look before you leap.”
This does not imply that one shall be inactive and
indefinite, waiting for understanding, as do many


102 Lesson Ten


people who are afraid to act because they may possi-
bly do the wrong thing; it means that understanding
will be quickened and the will strengthened by the
confidence which comes to it as a result of knowl-
edge.

To strengthen the will, and at the same time dis-
cipline it along right lines, requires an understanding
nothing less than divine. But man can balance his
will and his understanding; when he does this he
will always do the right thing at the right time.
Nearly every mistake is the result of will acting with-
out the codperation of its brother, understanding.
When the will is permitted to act on its own account,
man becomes emotional and willful. These states
of consciousness lead to all kinds of bodily discords.
Willfulness makes tenseness, and a tense mind ties
knots in the nerves, muscles, and tendons of the whole
organism. ‘The metaphysician, observing these con-
ditions, treats for relaxation of will and for a gen-
eral letting go of the whole system. The universal
treatment for this condition given by Jesus Christ is,
“Not my will, but thine, be done.”” This surrender
causes personal will to “let go,”” and a unification of
man’s will with God’s will takes place. When this
is accomplished, all goes well.

Willful people often complain of a feeling like
that produced by a tight band around the head.
This is the pressure of thought substance which the
will has laid hold of and is clinging to with centrip-
etal force. In all such cases, and, in fact, in every
sense of pressure, treat against personal willfulness
and affirm the divine freedom.

Every organ of the body is affected by the action


Will and Understanding 103


of the will, and when this faculty becomes fixed in a
certain attitude, it holds the whole body to its central
affirmation. The determination to have one’s own
way regardless of the rights of others, stops the free
action of the heart, and the stomach is sympathetic-
ally affected. Persons affected in these ways sel-
dom realize that they have a set determination as to
how things shall be done in their lives, and they are
sometimes slow in accepting the higher understand-
ing which is necessary to the untangling of mistakes
made by the ignorant will. Contrariness is another
name for perverted will. An idea of self and its
needs takes possession of the mind, and the will is
used to carry out this short-sighted policy. The re-
sult is a belittling of the whole man. People who
are contentious for their personal rights, place them-
selves in bondage to material conditions and stop
spiritual growth.

How shall we bring to bear the Divine Will?
By understanding; by universal Wisdom; by af-
firming, ‘““Not my will, but thine, be done.” God is
potential, unformed will; man is manifest God-Will,
or good-will. When man links his will with the
principle of force he has superior executive capac-
ity. He swiftly brings forth faculties which, under
the slow action of mortality, would take ages to
develop.

There is a knowing quality in Divine Mind.
God is Supreme Knowing. ‘That which compre-
hends in man is Understanding; it knows and com-
pares in Wisdom. Its comparisons are not made in
the realm of form, but in the realm of ideas. It
knows how to accomplish things. We may know


104 Lesson Ten


without experience. The human family has learned
by hard knocks that experience is a severe school-
master. In the allegory of Adam and Eve, we have
a picture of man falling under the sway of the ser-
pent and choosing to learn by experience. One of
the esoteric meanings of the serpent is ““experience.”’
All the bitter lessons that come through blundering
ignorance can be evaded when men declare their
Divine Understanding and in it follow the Divine
Guidance.

For all willfulness, the treatment should be af-
firmations of spiritual understanding The will is
not to be broken but disciplined. The absolute
freedom of the individual must be maintained at all
hazards. God is the one Principle; we are all as
free to use God as we are free to use the principles
of mathematics and music. ‘The principle never in-
terferes, but if it is to be rightly applied we must de-
velop uderstanding. Freedom leads to many errors,
but since it is a part of Being, man must learn to
use it properly; he must learn that the freedom of
the law means control and conservation, not lust
and license.

We should be careful not to enter into any heal-
ing system which interferes with freedom. Hypno-
tism is not real healing. Any system that suppresses
the will is radically wrong. It is the work of the
true healer to instruct the patient, to show cause and
remedy from the viewpoint of spiritual understand-
ing. A\ll other methods are temporary. The old
states of mind will come again into action unless the
causing thought is uncovered and removed. A man
may have a paralyzed arm through selfish desire for


Will and Understanding 105


money, and though he may find temporary relief in
mere mental suggestions of health, or hypnotism, he
will never get permanent healing until he under-
stands the Divine Law governing possessions, and
conforms thereto.

There are people who claim they are being spir-
itually developed through mediumship. This is
error. If you believe that you are under the control
of another will, if you give up to another will, your
own will is gradually weakened. If you continue
to submit to the domination of another, you will
finally lose control of your own life. The will must
be strengthened by being constantly used in Divine
Understanding. Mesmerism weakens the will.
Spiritual understanding quickens and makes alive.
God never puts any one to sleep. “Awake, thou
that sleepest,. . . and Christ shall shine upon thee.”

Never say, “I don’t know;” “I don’t under-
stand.”’ Claim your Christ understanding at all
times, and declare, “I am not under any spell of
human ignorance. I am one with Infinite Under-
standing.” The accumulation of ignorance through
association with ignorant minds can be dissolved by
the Word. You may know by simply holding that
you know. This is not egotism, but spiritual know-
ing. When you declare Divine Understanding, you
sometimes meet your old line of thought and are dis-
appointed. Right then continue to hold for hnow-
ing. Judge not by appearances. Do not act until
you get the assurance; and if you keep in the Spirit
by affirmation, the assurance will come. Will it
come by voice? No; you know through the faculty
of intuition. Divine Knowing is direct influx of


106 Lesson Ten


mind of God with mind of man. Sometimes we are
taught by symbols, visions, etc., but this is only one
way the Divine Mind has of expressing itself.
When the mind deals with God ideals it asks for
no symbols, visible or invisible, but rests on pure
knowing. It was in this consciousness that Jesus
said: ‘Father, I thank thee that thou heardest
me. And I knew that thou hearest me always.”

A very practical application of the Truth about
the will can be made in the matter of self-control.
Those who try to get control through the personal
will fall short. We should be free to express all
that we are. If you are afraid of any force within
you, your fear leads to suppression. In the true self-
control, the will and the understanding both play a
part. The feelings and appetites and passions must
be disciplined. They are not merely to be held in
check by the will, but they are to be lifted up and.
developed through the Christ Mind.

The problem of self-control is never settled until
all that man is comes into touch with the Divine
Will and Understanding. We must understand all
of our forces before we can establish them in har-
mony. ‘This overcoming is easy if you go about it in
the right way. But if you try to take dominion
through will force and suppression, you will find it
hard and will never accomplish any permanent re-
sults. Get your I AM centered in God, and from that
place of Truth speak true words. In this way you
will gain real spiritual mastery and raise your will
consciousness from the human to the Divine.

The will plays the leading part in all systems
of thought concentration. The simple statement, “I


Will and Understanding 107


will to be well,” gathers the forces of mind and body
about the central idea of wholeness, and the will
holds the center just as long as the I AM continues its
affirmation. No one ever died until he let go his
will, and thousands live on and on through the force
of a determined will.

The “devil” which we are to overcome is the
adverse will which seeks to master man in the with-
out. This ‘‘adversary”’ troubles us because we strive
to maintain personal freedom instead of submitting
to Divine Guidance. Self-confidence is a virtue
when founded on the Truth of Being, but when it
arises from the personal consciousness it keeps man
from his dominion. Are you trying just from your-
self to be free from the traditions of the outer world,
or are you resting in the understanding and asssur-
ance that you are a son of God? ‘To know yourself
as a son of God is to overcome the “‘devil’’—the
personal self. “The “devil” makes you believe that
you are the son of the flesh. To overcome, say, “I
put Satan behind me by the realization that God 1s
my Father. I am centered in Him, and all things
are under His dominion. [I live in the Infinite Power
that produces all self-control. I have no necessity
for controlling people. Events and people are con-
trolled by law. There is an eternal law of justice.
I am one with that law and I rest in it.”

Among the disciples of Jesus, Matthew repre-
sents the will, and Thomas, the understanding.
Matthew was the tax-gatherer who sat at the gate,
representing the executive part of the government;
so the will is the executive faculty of the mind, and
carries out the edicts of the I AM. All thoughts


108 Lessson Ten


that go in or out of man’s consciousness pass the gate
at which sits the will, and if that will understands
its office, the character and value of every thought
is inquired into, and a certain tribute exacted for the
benefit of the whole man.

Thomas, the understanding, is represented as
under discipline; that is, not yet in the light of the
Spirit. The understanding, in its first steps in Truth,
wants its lessons and accompanying demonstrations
to be couched in terms like those in the world with-
out. When the Christ showed himself to Thomas,
the latter said that he would not believe unless he
could see the print of the nails and feel the wound
in the side of the Lord. This double proof was
given him, and Jesus said, “Be not faithless, but be-
lieving.” Thomas was then spiritually awakened
and he made the acknowledgment: “‘My Lord and
my God.”

Those people who are being educated in Truth
through the written and spoken word will finally
arrive at that place where the true light from the
Spirit will dawn upon them, and they will, like
Thomas, see with spiritual understanding, and have
proof of the reality of the Christ Mind.


THE EsTABLISHMENT OF WILL AND UNDER-
STANDING
(To be used in connection with Lesson Ten.)
My understanding is established in Divine Mind.
“You shall know the truth, and the truth shall


make you free.”


The will of God is ever uppermost in my con-
sciousness.


Will and Understanding 109


“Not my will, but thine, be done.”

I firmly believe in the Guiding Intelligence
directing all my thoughts.

“There is a spirit in man, And the breath of the
Almighty giveth them understanding.”

The willfulness and stubbornness of the flesh
have no power in me. I am obedient unto the Spirit
and receptive to all its secret thoughts.


“Not . . . of the will of the flesh, nor of the
will of man, but of God.”

I am willing to change my mind.

“Be ye transformed by the renewing of your
mind.”

The Christ of God is born in my consciousness
and I am glorified in my understanding.


JUDGMENT AND JUSTICE


LESSON ELEVEN


Judge not, that ye be not judged. For with what judg-
ment ye judge, ye shall be judged: and with what measure
ye mete, it shall be measured unto you.—Matt. 7:1, 2.

And thou shalt put in the breastplate of judgment the
Urim and the Thummim; and they shall be upon Aaron’s
heart, when he goeth in before Jehovah: and Aaron shall
bear the judgment of the children of Israel upon his heart
before Jehovah continually.—Exodus 28:30.

Urim and Thummim (Lights and Perfections). These
were the sacred symbols (worn upon the breastplate of the
High Priest, upon his heart) by which God gave oracular
responses for the guidance of his people in temporal matters.
What they were, is unknown; they are introduced in Exodus
without explanation, as if familiar to the Israelites of that
day. Modern Egyptology supplies us with a clue; it tells
us that Egyptian high priests in every town, who are also its
magistrates, wore round their necks a jeweled gem bearing
on one side the image of Truth, and on the other sometimes
that of Justice, sometimes that of Light. When the accused
was acquitted, the judge held out the image for him to kiss.
In the final judgment, Osiris wears around his neck the
jeweled Justice and Truth. The LXX. translates Urim
and Thummin by “Light and Truth.’ Some scholars sup-
pose that they were the twelve stones of the breastplate;
others that they were two additional stones concealed in its
fold. Josephus adds to these the two sardonyx buttons,
worn on the shoulders, which he says emitted luminous rays
when the response was favorable; but the precise mode in
which the oracles were given is lost in obscurity.—Bible
Glossary of Antiquities.


The law as given by Moses, is for guidance of
110


A dg nest ands lactice , 11


man in the evolution of his faculties. The figures,
personalities, and symbols represent potentialities de-
veloped and undeveloped on various planes of con-
sciousness. The High Priest stands for spiritual
man officiating between God and mortal man. The
breastplate in an armor protects the most vital part,
the heart. The heart is love, the affectional con-
sciousness in man; it may be subject to the force of
weak sympathy, unless balanced by another power in
which is discrimination, or judgment.

The breastplate had on it twelve precious stones,
representing the twelve tribes of Israel. This
clearly means that the twelve faculties of the mind
must be massed at the great brain center called the
solar plexus. It means that all the intelligence of
man’s faculties must be brought into play in the
final judgments of the mind. The Urim and Thum-
mim (Lights and Perfections), under the Egyptian
symbology, “Truth and Justice,” are the oracular
edicts of Divine Mind which are intuitively ex-
pressed as a logical sequence of the Divine Prin-
ciple, Truth and Justice.

modern metaphysician would interpret all
this as the omnipresence of Divine Mind in its per-
fect idea, Christ. The Truth is ready at all times
to give judgment and justice. As God is Love, so
God is Justice. These are in Divine Mind in unity,
but are made manifest in man’s consciousness too
often in diversity. It is through the Christ Mind in
the heart that they are unified. When justice and
love meet at the heart center, there is balance, poise,
and righteousness. When judgment is divorced from
love, and works from the head alone, there goes


EZ Lesson Eleven


forth the human cry for justice. In his mere human
judgment, man is hard and heartless; punishment
is meted out without consideration of motive or
cause, and justice goes awry.

Good judgment, like every other faculty of the
mind, is developed from Principle. In its perfection
it is expressed through man’s mind, with all its abso-
lute relations uncurtailed. Man has the right con-
cept of judgment, and ideally the judges of our
courts have that unbiased and unprejudiced dis-
crimination which ever exists in the Absolute. A
prejudiced judge is abhorred, and one who allows
himself to be moved by his sympathies is not con-
sidered safe.

The metaphysician finds it necessary to place his
judgment in the Absolute in order to demonstrate its
supreme power. ‘This is accomplished by first de-
claring that one’s judgment is spiritual and not ma-
terial; that its origin is in God; that all its con-
clusions are based in Truth, and that they are abso-
lutely free from prejudice, false sympathy, or mortal
ignorance. This gives a working center from which
the ego or I AM begins to set in order its own
thought world. The habit of judging others, even
in the most insignificant matters of daily life, must
be discontinued. “Judge not, that ye be not judged,”
said Jesus. The law of judgment works out in
a multitude of directions, and if we do not observe
it in small things, we shall find ourselves failing in
large.

Judging from the plane of the mortal, leads into
condemnation, and condemnation is always followed
by affixing a penalty. We see faults in others, and


Judgment and Justice 113


pass judgment upon them without considering mo-
tives or circumstances. Our judgment is often
biased and prejudiced; yet we do not hesitate to
think of some form of punishment to be meted out
to the guilty one. He may be guilty or not guilty;
his guilt or innocence rests in the Divine Law, and
we have no right to pass judgment. In our igno-
rance, we are creating thought forces that will react
upon us, “With what judgment ye judge, ye shall
be judged.”’ “With what measure ye mete, it shall
be measured unto you.”” Whatever thought you send
out, will come back to you. This is an unchange-
able law of thought action. A man may be just in
all his dealings, yet if he condemns others for their
injustice, that thought action will bring him into un-
just conditions; so it is not safe to judge except in
the Absolute. Jesus said that he judged no man on
his own account, but in the Father; that is, he
judged in the Principle. This is the stand which
every one must take—resting judgment of others in
the Absolute. When this is done the tendency to
condemn will grow less and less, until man, seeing his
fellow man as God sees him, will leave him to the
law of the Absolute in all cases where he seems
unjust.

The great judgment day of Scripture indicates
a time of separation between the true and the false.
There is no warrant for the belief that God sends
man to everlasting punishment. Modern interpreters
of the Scripture say that the “hellfire’’ referred to
by Jesus means simply a state in which purification
is taking place.

The word “‘hell’’ is not translated with clearness


114 Lesson Eleven


sufficient to represent the various meanings of the
word in the original language. There are three
words from which “hell” is derived: sheol, “the un-
seen state;” hades, “the unseen world; and ge-
henna, “valley of Hinnom.” These are used in the
various relations, nearly all of them allegorical. Ina
sermon, Archdeacon Farrar said: ‘“There would be
the proper teaching about hell, if we calmly and de-
liberately erased from our English Bibles the three
words, ‘damnation,’ ‘hell,’ and ‘everlasting.’ I say
—unhesitatingly I say, claiming the fullest right to
speak with the authority of knowledge—that not
one of those words ought to stand any longer in our
English Bible, for in our present acceptation of
them, they are simply mistranslations.”” ‘This cor-
roborates the metaphysical interpretation of Scrip-
ture, and sustains the truth that hell is a figure of
speech which represents a corrective state of mind.
When error has reached its limit, the retroactive
law asserts itself, and judgment, being part of that
law, brings the penalty upon the transgressor. This
penalty is not punishment, but discipline, and if the
transgressor 1s repentant and obedient, he is forgiven.

Under our civil law, criminals are confined in
penitentiaries where order, regular habits, and indus-
try are inculcated, and that which seems punishment,
proves to be educational. Men are everywhere call-
ing for broader educational methods in our prisons,
and this demand is an acknowledgment of the neces-
sity of purification through discipline and training in
morals. ‘This purifying process is the penalty taught
by Jesus—the judgment passed upon sinners—the
fire of hell. When it is received in the right spirit,


Judgment and Justice 115


this fire burns up the dross in character and purifies
mind and body.

Metaphysicians have discovered that there is a
certain relation between the functions and organs of
the body and the ideas in the mind. The liver seems —
to be connected with mental discrimination, and
whenever man gets very active along the line of
judgment, especially where condemnation enters in,
there is disturbance of some kind in that part of the
organism. A habit of judging others with severity
and fixing in one’s mind what the punishment should
be, causes the liver to become torpid and to cease its
natural action; the complexion becomes muddy as a
result. ““There is therefore now no condemnation
to them that are in Christ Jesus,. . . who walk not
after the flesh, but after the Spirit.” This statement
held in mind, and carried out in thought and act,
will heal that kind of liver complaint. Another
form of thought related to judgment is the vacillating
mind which never seems to know definitely what is
the proper thing to do. “A double-minded man,
unstable in all his ways.”” There must be singleness
of mind and loyalty to true ideas. Every one
should have definite ideas of what is just and right,
and stand by them. This stimulates the action of
the liver, and often gives so-called bad people good
health, because they are not under self-condemna-
tion. Condemnation in any of its forms retards free-
dom of action in the discriminative faculty. When
we hold ourselves in guilt and condemnation, the
natural energies of the mind are weakened and the
whole body becomes inert.

The remedy for all that appears unjust is denial


116 Lesson Eleven


of condemnation of others, or of self, and affirmation
of the great universal Spirit of justice, through which
all unequal and unrighteous conditions are finally
adjusted.

Observing the conditions that exist in the world,
the just man would have them righted according to
what he perceives to be the equitable law. Unless
such a one has spiritual understanding, he is very apt
to bring upon himself physical disabilities in his
efforts to reform men. If his feelings come to a
point of “righteous indignation,” and he “boils’”’ with
anger over the evils of the world, he will cook the
corpuscles of his blood. Jesus gave this treatment
for such a mental condition: “‘For neither doth the
Father judge any man, but he hath given all judg-
ment unto the Son.” ‘This Son is the Christ, uni-
versal Cosmos; to its equity, man should commit
the justice which he wishes to see brought into hu-
man affairs. Put all the burdens of the world upon
the one supreme Judge and hold every man, and all
the conditions in which men are involved, amenable
to the law of God. By so doing, you will set into
action mind forces powerful and far-reaching.

If you think that you are unjustly treated by
your friends, your employers, your government, or
those with whom you do business, simply declare the
activity of the almighty Mind, and you will set
into action mental forces that will find expression in
the executors of the law. This is the most lasting
reform to which man can apply himself. It is much
more effective than legislation or any attempt to
control unjust men by mortal ways.

Jealousy is a form of mental bias that blinds the


Judgment and Justice 117


judgment and causes one to act without weighing
the consequences. The effect of this state of mind
upon the liver is violent action one day and torpidity
the next, finally resulting in a “jaundiced eye” and
yellow skin. We speak of one “blinded by jeal-
ousy,” or “blinded by prejudice.” We do not
mean by this that the physical eyes have been put
out, but that the understanding has been darkened.
Whatever darkens the understanding interferes in
some way with the action of the purifying functions
of the organism, and the fluids and pigments are
congested and the skin becomes darkened in con-
sequence.

The remedy for all this is a dismissal of that
poor judgment which causes one to be jealous, and
a fuller trust in the great all-adjusting Justice. In
this there should be active trust, which is a form of
prayer. The disturbing elements that come into life
should be definitely placed in the hands of God.
This is much more than mere doubtful trust, or neg-
ative expectancy that things will be made right.
The Spirit of justice should be appealed to and
prayed to with the persistency of an Elijah, or of the
Gentile woman whose importunity was rewarded.
When the metaphysician sits by his patient with
closed eyes he is not asleep, but very much awake to
the reality and mental visibility of forces that enter
into and make the conditions of the body. ‘This
spiritual activity is necessary to the demonstration of
the law.

Success in the world is largely dependent upon
good judgment. A prominent business man was
once asked what he considered the most valuable


118 Lesson Eleven


trait of mind in an employee, and he replied, “Good
judgment.”” Everywhere business men are looking
for people who have judgment equal to the making
of quick decisions on the spur of the moment.
Many years ago a station agent at a little town in
Texas, where the wreck of a passenger train took
place, showed his good judgment by settling, right
on the spot, with the injured. He did this without
authority from headquarters, but he showed such
excellent judgment that his ability was recognized
and he was rapidly advanced until he became presi-
dent of one of the largest railroad systems in the
United States.

The ability of the mind to arrive at quick and
right conclusions can be cultivated by clearing up the
understanding, and acknowledging the one supreme
Mind in which is all discrimination. Take the stand
that it is your inheritance from God to judge wisely
and quickly, and do not depart therefrom by state-
ments of inefficiency in matters of judgment. When
you are in doubt as to the right thing to do in at-
taining justice in worldly affairs, ask that this eternal
Spirit of justice shall go forth in your behalf and
bring about and restore to you that which is your
very own. Do not ask for anything but your very
own under the righteous law. Some people uncon-
sciously overreach in their desire for possessions.
When they put the matter into the hands of the
Spirit, and things do not turn out just as they had
fixed them in their mortal way, they are disappointed
and rebellious. This will not do under the spiritual
law which requires that man shall be satisfied with
justice and accept the results, whatever they may be.


Judgment and Justice 119


“There is a divinity that shapes our ends,” and it can
be codperated with by one who believes in things
spiritual, and all the voyage of life will thereby be
made prosperous and happy.


JUDGMENT AND JUSTICE STATEMENTS


(To be used in connection with Lesson Eleven.)


Teach me thy way, O Jehovah; And lead me
in a plain path.— Psalm 27:11.

The righteousness of the Divine Law is active
in all my affairs and I am protected.

Stand therefore, having girded your loins with
truth, and having put on the breastplate of right-
eousness.—E,ph. 6:14.

The meek will he guide in justice.—Psalm 25 :9.

I will sing of lovingkindness and justice.—Psalm
101:1.

My judgment is just; because I seek not mine
own will, but the will of the Father.

Judge not, lest ye be judged.

Behold now, I have set my cause in order; I
know that I am righteous ——Job 13:18.

I believe in the Divine Law of justice, and I
trust it to set right every transaction that comes into
my life.

There is now no condemnation to them that are
in Christ Jesus.

I no longer condemn, criticize, censure, or find
fault with my associates. Neither do I belittle nor
condemn myself.


| BIBLE INSIJUTE. LIBRARY


vad TIVE ASTERN Ri B| }

PIMA TCA. Fee }
ESSEX FELLS, NEW JERSEY
hs ~ AB


LOVE


LESSON TWELVE


Behold what manner of love the Father hath bestowed
upon us, that we should be called children of God: and
such we are.—I John 3:1.

He that abideth in love abideth in God, and God abid-
eth in him.—I John 4:16.

He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he
it is that loveth me: and he that loveth me shall be loved of
my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest myself


unto him.—John 14:21.


Love, in Divine Mind, is the idea of universal
unity. In expression, love is the power that joins
and binds in Divine Harmony the universe and
everything in it.

Among the faculties of the mind, love is pivotal.
Its center of mentation in the body is the solar plexus.
The physical representative of love is the heart, the
office of which is to equalize the circulation of the
blood in the body. A\s the heart equalizes the life- »
flow in the body, so love harmonizes the thought of
the mind.

We have found that the twelve sons of Jacob
represent the twelve faculties of mind. When Levi
(love) was brought forth by the human soul
(Leah), his mother said, ‘Now this time will my
husband be joined unto me.” We connect our soul
forces with whatever we center our love upon. If
we love the things of sense or materiality, we are
joined or attached to them through a fixed law of


120


Love 121


Being. In the Divine Order of being, the soul, or
thinking part of man is joined to its spiritual ego. If
it allows itself to become joined to the outer, or
sense consciousness, it makes personal images which
are limitations. The Lord commanded Moses to
make all things after the pattern shown in the mount.
This “mount”’ is the place of high understanding, or
spiritual consciousness, whose center of action is in
the very apex of the brain.

In the regeneration, our love goes through a
transformation which broadens, strengthens, and
deepens it. We no longer confine love to family,
friends, and personal relations, but expand it to in-
clude all things. The denial of human relationships
seems at first glance to be a repudiation of the family
group, but it is merely a cleansing of the mind from
limited ideas of love when this faculty would satisfy
itself solely by means of human kinship. If God is
the Father of all, then men and women are brothers
and sisters in a universal family, and one who sees
spiritually should open his heart and cultivate that
inclusive love which God has given as the unifying
element in the human family. Just to the extent that
we separate ourselves into families, cliques, and re-
ligious factions, do we put away God’s love. Unless
there is a specific denial along every line of human
thought bondage, one will still be under the law of
sense. A direct affirmation of spiritual unity based
upon obedience, should be made by every one who
desires to realize this true relation. Jesus said,
“Who is my mother? and who are my brethren?
And he stretched forth his hand towards his dis-
ciples, and said, Behold, my mother and my breth-


122 Lesson Twelve


ren! For whosoever shall do the will of my Father
who is in heaven, he is my brother, and sister, and
mother.”

Among the disciples of Jesus Christ, John rep-
resents love—he laid his head on the Master’s
bosom. When this disciple is called, love is quick-
ened in consciousness. ‘The calling of this disciple
consists in bringing to consciousness a right under-
standing of the true character of love, also its exer-
cise in all the relations of life. One should make it
a practice to meditate regularly upon the love idea
in universal Mind, with the prayer, “Divine Love,
manifest thyself in me.” Then there should be
periods of mental concentration upon the love center
in the solar plexus, near the heart. It is not neces-
sary to know the exact location of this aggregation
of love cells. Think about love with the attention
drawn within the breast, and a quickening will fol-
low; all the ideas that go to make up love, will be set
into rapid motion. ‘This produces a positive love
current, which, when sent forth with power, will
break up opposing thoughts of hate, and render them
null and void. These thoughts of hate will be dis-
solved, not only in the mind of the thinker, but in the
minds of those with whom he comes in contact in
mind or body. The love current is not a projection
of the will; it is a setting free of a natural, equaliz-
ing, harmonizing force which in most people has been
dammed up by human limitations. The ordinary
man Is not aware that he possesses this mighty power
which will turn away every shaft of hate that is
aimed at him. We know that ‘‘a soft answer turneth
away wrath,” but here is a faculty native to man,


Love 123


existent in every soul, which may be used at all times
to bring about harmony and unity among those who
have been disunited through misunderstandings, con-
tentions, and selfishness.

Henry Drummond says that Paul’s 13th chap-
ter of I Corinthians is the greatest love poem ever
written. In his book based upon this chapter, ““Love,
the Supreme Gift,’’ Professor Drummond analyzes
love and portrays its various activities. We quote as
follows:


THE SPECTRUM OF Love. “Love is a compound
thing,” Paul tells us. It is like light. As you have seen a
man of science take a beam of light and pass it through a
crystal prism, as you have seen it come out on the other side
of the prism broken up into its component colors—red and
blue and yellow and orange, and all the colors of the rain-
bow—so Paul passes this thing, love, through the magnif-
cent prism of his inspired intellect, and it comes out on the
other side broken up into its elements. And in these few
words we have what one might call the Spectrum of Love,
the analysis of love. Will you observe what its elements
are? Will you notice that they have common names; that
they are virtues which we hear about every day; that they
are things that can be practiced by every man in every
place in life; and how, by a multitude of small things and
ordinary virtues, the supreme thing, the summum bonum, is
made up? The Spectrum of Love has nine ingredients, viz. :

Patience—“‘Love suffereth long.”” Kindness—‘“‘and is
kind.”” Generosity—‘“Love envieth not.”  Humility—
*‘Love vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up.’” Courtesy—
“Doth not behave itself unseemly.’’ Unselfishness—‘‘Seek-
eth not her own.” Good Temper—‘‘Is not easily pro-
voked.”’ Guilelessness—‘‘Thinketh no evil.’ Sincerity—
“‘Rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in the truth.”’


Professor Drummond, in his address upon this
chapter to Mr. Moody’s students gathered at North-


124 Lesson Twelve


field, Mass., said: ‘How many of you will join
me in reading this chapter once a week for the next
three months? A man did that once and it changed
his whole life. Will you do it? Will you?”

Love is more than mere affection, and all our
words protesting our love are not of value unless
we have this inner current, which is real substance.
Though we have the eloquence of men and of
angels, and have not this deeper feeling, it profits us
nothing. We should deny the mere conventional,
surface affection, and set our minds on the very sub-
stance of love.

Charity is not love. You may be kind-hearted,
and give to the poor and needy until you are im-
poverished, yet not acquire love. You may be a
martyr to the cause of Truth and consume your
vitality in good works, yet be far from love. Love
is a force that runs in the mind and body like molten
gold in a furnace. It does not mix with the baser
metals—it has no affinity for anything less than it-
self. Love is patient; it never gets weary nor dis-
couraged. Love is always kind and gentle. It does
not envy; jealousy has no place in its world. Love
never becomes puffed up with human pride, and
does not brag about itself. It is love that makes the
refinement of the natural gentleman or lady, although
he or she may be ignorant of the world’s standards
of culture. Love does not seek its own—its own
comes to it without seeking.

_ Jesus Christ came proclaiming the spiritual re-
lationship of the human family. His teaching was
always of gentleness, nonresistance, love. ‘“‘] say
unto you, Love your enemies, and pray for them that


Love 125


persecute you.” To do this, one must be established
in the consciousness of Divine Love, and it requires
discipline of the mental nature to preserve such a
high standard. The Divine Law is founded in the
eternal unity of all things, and “love therefore is
the fulfilment of the law.’’ Physical science has
discovered that everything can be reduced to a few
primal elements, and that if the universe were de-
stroyed it could be built up again from a single cell.
So this law of harmony, which has its origin in love,
is established in the midst of every individual. “I
will put my law in their inward parts, and in their
heart will I write it.” But before this fixed inward
principle can be brought to the surface, man must
open the way by having faith in the power of love
to accomplish all that Jesus claimed for it.

“The love of money is a root of all kinds of:
evil.”” This says that the love of money, not money
itself, is the root of all kinds of evil. Money is a
convenience that saves men many burdens in the ex-
change of values. Primitive civilization used the
cumbersome custom of trading products without a
money representative, while modern progress uses
money more and more as a medium of exchange.
Money is therefore good to the man of sense; but
when he allows himself to become enamored of it
and hoards it, he makes it his god. The erasure
of this idea from human consciousness is part of the
metaphysician’s work. Trusting in God, we have
faith in him as our Resource and he becomes a per-
petual spiritual supply and support; but having faith
in the power of material riches, our trust is weaned
from God and established in this transitory substance


126 Lesson Twelve


of rust and corruption. This point is not clearly
understood by those who are hypnotized by the
money idea. When the metaphysician affirms God
to be his opulent supply and support, and declares
that he has money in abundance, the assumption is
that he loves money and depends upon it in the same
way that the devotees of mammon do. The differ-
ence is that one trusts in the law of God while the
other trusts in the ways of mammon. The man who
blindly gives himself up to money getting acquires a
love for it, and finally becomes its slave. “The wise
metaphysician deals with the money idea, and mas-
ters it.

When Jesus said, “I have overcome the world,”
he meant that by the use of certain words he
had dissolved all adverse states of consciousness in
materiality, appetite, and selfishness. Christ is the
Word, the Logos. Because the word is the mind
seed from which springs every condition, great stress
is laid upon the power of the word, both in the
Scriptures and in the metaphysical interpretations of
the Scriptures. The word is the most enduring
thing in existence. “Heaven and earth shall pass
away, but my words shall not pass away.” All
metaphysicians recognize that certain words, used
persistently, mold and transform conditions in mind,
body, and affairs. The word love overcomes hate,
resistance, opposition, obstinacy, anger, jealousy,
and all states of consciousness where there is mental
or physical friction. Words make cells, and these
cells are adjusted one to the other through associated
ideas. When Divine Love enters into the thought
process, every cell is poised and balanced in space,


Love 27


in mathematical order as to weight and relative
distance. Law and order rule in the molecules of
the body with the exactness which characterizes
their action in the worlds of a planetary system.

Divine Love and human love should not be con-
founded, because one is as broad as the universe and
is always governed by undeviating laws, while the
other is fickle, selfish, and lawless. It was to this
personal aspect of the love center in man that Jesus
referred when he said, “Out of the heart of men,
evil thoughts proceed.”” But in the regeneration all
this is changed; the heart is cleansed and becomes
the standard of right relation between all men. “By
this shall men know that ye are my disciples, if ye
have love one to another.”” We cannot enter fully
into the Jesus Christ consciousness so long as we have
a grudge against any one. The mind is so consti-
tuted that a single thought of a discordant character
tinges the whole consciousness; so we must cast out
all evil and resisting thoughts, before we can know
the love of God in its fullness. “If therefore thou
art offering thy gift at the altar, and there remember-
est that thy brother hath aught against thee, leave
there thy gift before the altar, and go thy way, first
be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer
thy gift.”

Divine Love in the heart establishes one in fear-
lessness and indomitable courage. “‘God gave us
not a spirit of fearfulness; but of power and love
and discipline.” A woman who understands this
law was attacked by a tramp. She looked him
steadily in the eye and said, “God loves you.” He
released his hold upon her, and slunk away. An-


128 Lesson Twelve


other woman saw a man beating a horse that could
not pull a load up a hill. She silently said to the
man, “The love of God fills your heart, and you are
tender and kind.”’ He unhitched the horse; the
grateful animal walked directly over to the house
where the woman was, and put his nose against the
window behind which she stood. A young girl sang
“Jesus Lover of My Soul,” to a calloused criminal ;
the man’s heart was softened, and he was reformed.

The new heaven and the new earth which are
now being established between men and nations the
world over, are based upon love. When men under-
stand each other, love increases. ‘This is true, not
only among men, but among men and the animal
world, and even the vegetable world. In Yellow-
stone Park, where protection of animals has been
commanded by our government, grizzly bears come
to the house doors and eat scraps from the table, and
wild animals of all kinds are tame and friendly.
“The wolf shall dwell with the lamb, and the
leopard shall lie down with the kid; and the calf
and the young lion and the fatling together; and a
little child shall lead them. . .. They shall not
hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain; for the
earth shall be full of the knowledge of Jehovah, as


the waters cover the sea.”


Beloved, let us love one another: for love is of God;
and every one that loveth is begotten of God, and knoweth
God, He that loveth not knoweth not God; for God is
love. Herein was the love of God manifested in us, that
God hath sent his only begotten Son into the world that we
might live through him. Herein is love, not that we loved
God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the pro-
pitiation for our sins. Beloved, if God so loved us, we also


Love 129
ought to love one another. No man hath beheld God at


any time: if we love one another, God abideth in us, and his
love is perfected in us: hereby we know that we abide in
him and he in us, because he hath given us of his Spirit.
And we have beheld and bear witness that the Father hath
sent the Son to be the Saviour of the world. Whosoever
shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God abideth in
him, and he in God. And we know and have believed the
love which God hath in us. God is love; and he that abid-
eth in love abideth in God, and God abideth in him. Herein
is love made perfect with us, that we may have boldness in
the day of judgment; because as he is, even so are we in this
world. There is no fear in love: but perfect love casteth out
fear, because fear hath punishment; and he that feareth is
not made perfect in love. We love, because he first loved
us. If aman say, I love God, and hateth his brother, he
is a liar: for he that loveth not his brother whom he hath
seen, cannot love God whom he hath not seen. And this
commandment have we from him, that he who loveth God


love his brother also.—I John 4:7-21.


Love DEMONSTRATED


(To be used in connection with Lesson Twelve.)


God is Love, and he that dwelleth in love,
dwelleth in God.

I dwell consciously in the very presence of In-
finite Love.

God is Love, and every one that loveth is born of
God.

I am born of love.

Love is the fulfilling of the law.

I love everybody and everything.

Faith worketh by love.

I have faith in the supreme power of love.


130 Lesson Twelve


God hath not given us the spirit of fear, but of
power and of love, and of a sound mind.

I am fearless, powerful, and wise in God’s love.

Behold, what manner of love the Father hath
bestowed upon us, that we should be called the sons
of God.
I love the Lord my God with all my heart, and
with all my mind, and with all my soul, and with
all my strength.

But now abideth faith, hope, love, these three;
and the greatest of these is love—I Cor. 13:13.


whee affles


HOW MICROBES ARE MADE


And out of the ground Jehovah God formed every
beast of the field, and every bird of the heavens; and
brought them unto the man to see what he would call them:
and whatsoever the man called every living creature, that
was the name thereof.—Gen. 2:19.

He that overcometh, I will give to him to sit down with
me in my throne.—Rev. 3:2


The author of Genesis was evidently a great
metaphysician. He described Being as God, Je-
hovah God, and Adam. We would express the
same truth in the terms, Mind, Idea, and Manifesta-
tion. The manifestation is always the self-conscious,
hence the limited. This is Adam. But Mind, Idea,
and Manifestation are one. Manifestation rests
upon and is sustained by the Idea, and the Idea is
encompassed by the Mind that conceives it; therefore '
the real of Adam is Jehovah God, and the omni-
present Fount of Jehovah God is the one God. This
being true, man has no permanent existence while he
is wholly in the consciousness of the personal estate.
The Adam condition is not all of his being; it is
merely a part. His being is summed up in a con-:
sciousness of God, Jehovah God, and Adam. These
three are not separated, but are omnipresent in every
one. The only walls of separation are those built by
consciousness of separation. When wisdom is found
and its conditions complied with, the consciousness
of the omnipresence of the Three in One is pro-
claimed: “Believest thou not that I am in the Father,


135


136 Talks on Truth


and the Father in me? the words that I say unto you
I speak not from myself: but the Father abiding in
me doeth his works” (John 14:10).

Adam is perfectly legitimate in his right place,
and that place is the consciousness of the omnipres-
ence of the Father; here he is back again in the
Garden of Eden. Adam has a very important place
in creation in that he is the factor in the manifesta-
tion of Being that “names” or gives character ‘to
its potentialities.

Man is not Adam; Adam is a part of man’s
consciousness. Adam is your intellect, but you
transcend the intellect. You form your intellect
from the “dust of the ground;” that is, from the
omnipresent substance, and through it as a kind of
reflecting lens, you give character to your surround-
ings.

Those familiar with the study of the operations
of the intellect, tell us that it is constantly making
images of the ideas that float into its surroundings.
It is when we know this, that we are astonished at
the metaphysical depth of Genesis. Jehovah God
is described as bringing “‘every beast of the field, and
every bird of the heavens” to Adam “‘to see what he
would call them.”

The beasts of the field are the ideas in Being
pertaining to organized life, and the “birds of the
heavens” are ideas of spiritual life. It is the Adam,
or intellect, that gives character to both ideal con-
ditions; it is through him that man makes his heaven
or his hell. Among the disciples of Jesus, Peter
represented one aspect of the 1 AM. He had been
in a measure opened to the light of Spirit, and his


How Microbes Are Made 137


power over ideas recognized. “I will give unto thee
the keys of the kingdom of heaven: and whatsoever
thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven;
and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be
loosed in heaven’”” (Matt. 16:19). This is a repe-
tition on a higher plane of the allegory of Jehovah
God bringing to. Adam the beasts of the field and
fowls of the heavens to see what he would call them.

He who studies Mind may know how to “‘dis-
cern the signs of the times.”” He becomes familiar
with -certain underlying principles and he recognizes
them in their different masks in the whirligig of time.
Under the veil of historical symbology the Scrip-
tures portray the movements of Mind in its different
cycles of progress. These cycles repeat themselves
over and over again, but each time on a little higher
plane. Thus the sphere or circle is a type of the
complete Mind, but in manifestation the circles are
piled one on top of another in an infinite spiral.

We, today, are repeating the mental circle of
two thousand years ago. The descent of the Spirit
into the earth consciousness, as symbolized by the
life and death of Jesus Christ, is being again enacted
in our age. [he idea of a personal Messiah has
been raised to include Messiahship for all who wiil
drink of the waters of life now being poured out
upon mankind; it includes all who will dwell in the
fadeless, immanent Light, the Christ of God.

But principles do not change—man makes his
heaven or his hell just as he did two thousand or two
million years ago. In the days of Moses, the Egyp-
tians refused to give freedom to the Israelites (their
spiritual ideas), and they saw frogs, lice, locusts, and


138 Talks on Truth


blood in earth, air, and water. Today those who
contend for the Egyptian darkness of the intellect,
see in the same earth, air, and water, disease germs,
death microbes, and destructive animalcules.

It is now almost universally accepted by phy-
sicians that the majority of diseases are caused by
minute forms of life, commonly called “‘microbes’’ or
disease germs. Cancer, consumption, diphtheria,
croup, etc., each has its specific microbe, which is the
invisible yet active agent. These microbes may be
seen with very strong microscopes, and the form and
character of the different varieties are fully de-
scribed by experts like Pasteur and Koch, whose
antidotes for these destructive little animals have
been widely advertised. “Their remedy consists in
destroying the microbe—they do not attempt to ex-
plain his origin. “They find the little worker busy in
the bodies of mankind, and they seek to put him
out of action, not asking where he came from nor
whither he may go.

The reflective mind is not satisfied with this
superficial way of dealing with such destructive
agents. It asks their cause, but no answer is vouch-
safed on the part of those who study microbes.
Only the students of mind can answer the question
of the origin of microbes and disease germs, and
only from the mental point of observation can there
come a rational explanation of these minute life
forms.

‘The Adam-man, the intellect, is responsible for
all the microbes. He gives character to all the
ideas that exist—he “names” them. This process is
intricate, and it may be explained and understood in


How Microbes Are Made 139


its details only by metaphysicians of the deepest
mental insight, but it is summed up in what is com-
monly called “thinking.”

Many factors enter into the process of “think-
ing.” ‘The capacity of the thinker to form thoughts,
to give them substance and force is the great factor.
The understanding of right and wrong, truth and
error, substance and shadow, is also important.
Many other significant conditions enter into that
mental process loosely termed “‘thinking.”

But we should not be ignorant of the fact that
every mental process is generative, that from thinking
is evolved what is called living. “Thinking is forma-
tive—every thought clothes itself in a life form ac-
cording to the character given it by the thinker. This
being true, it must follow that thoughts of health
will produce microbes whose office is to build up
healthy organisms, that thoughts of disease will pro-
duce microbes of disorder and destruction. Here
we have the connecting link between materia medica
and metaphysics. The physician observes the rav-
ages of the disease microbe, but is at a loss to ac-
count for its source; the metaphysician stands in the
factory of Mind and sees thoughts poured into vis-
ibility as microbes. ‘This opens up a field of causes
unlimited in extent. E-very thought that flits through
the mind of every man, woman, and child in the
universe, produces a living organism, a microbe of
character like its producing thought. There is no
escape from this conclusion, no escape from the
mighty possibilities of good and ill that rest with
the thinker.


Take an illustration by observing the various


140 Talks on Truth


stages of the law in the case of diphtheria. A child
is attacked; the doctor is called, and from symptoms,
he detects the disease. He communicates his fears
to the family, and in addition to the diphtheria mi-
crobe, another of more deadly character commences
its inroads upon the nerve centers of the whole
family, including the weakened, and _ therefore
doubly susceptible patient; this is the microbe of
fear, which paralyzes life throughout the body.
When these microbes have done their work up to a
certain point, still another is created to complete it
—the microbe of death.

This may seem an exaggeration, but we have the
authority of Dr. Parker, a physician of New York,
who states that he has discovered the microbe of
death and experimented with it. A newspaper arti-
cle, describing his discovery, says:


Death is caused by a certain specific microbe, that can
be recognized and bred, just as the microbes of various dis-
eases have been discovered and propagated by Koch,
Pasteur, and other bacteriologists. The labors of these
great men have made further discovery possible, and it was
through the study of their achievements that Dr. Parker
conceived the idea that, inasmuch as disease was caused by
these infinitesimal derangers of the human system, the culmi-
nation of disease must have its own specific microbe to put
the finish to the work of dissolution, without which the vari-
ous organs of the body, distempered and degraded from
their pristine purity and vital activity, would remain a puru-
lent mass of living corruption, unable to resolve itself into its
primal elements and to form other combinations, a process
which we see taking place every day as defunct animal
matter sinks into the earth, or vanishes into the air to afford
food for new and active organisms.


This is not at all improbable, but the discovery


How Microbes Are Made 141


might properly have been anticipated by the meta-
physician. If thought is creative, it must cover every
phase of life; every thought must form its microbe;
every life expression must have originated in some
thought. These propositions are axiomatic, and
when one familiar with mind, discovers a microbe,
he should know just what idea in the Adam con-
sciousness, or intellect, gave it form and name.

Anger, jealousy, malice, avarice, lust, ambition,
selfishness, and in fact all of the detestable ideas
that mankind harbors, produce living organisms after
their kind. If we had microscopes strong enough, we
would find our bodies to be composed of living mi-
crobes, doing to the best of their ability the tasks
which intellect has set before them.

If you have said, “I hate you,” there have been
created in your atmosphere hate germs that will do
the work for which you created them. If one’s
enemies alone were attacked by these microbes of
thought, the law would not be so severe, but they
have no respect of person, and are apt to turn upon
the body of their creator and tear it down.

Doctors are especially industrious in creating mi-
crobes in their particular line. They make a new
disease every day, or rename an old one, and each
is endued with its specific microbe that gives it stand-
ing among the people who believe in such things,
and its inventor goes down in medical history as a
benefactor of the race.

So the fears, the doubts, the poverty, sin, sick-
ness, the thousand erroneous states of consciousness
have their microbes. These organisms whose office
it is to make men miserable, do their work to the


142 Talks on Truth


very best of their ability. “They are not responsible
for their existence; they are the formed vehicles of
thought, and the servants of those who gave them
life. So it is not to the microbes that the wise regu-
lator of affairs should look, but to those who are
creating them, and thereby bringing into existence
discord and disease.

Remedies beyond number are advertised for
microbes, but they are guaranteed to kill the little
wiggler only. What is needed is a medicine that
will prevent his appearance. To apply the remedy
to the poor little microbe is like trying to stop the
manufacture of counterfeit money by destroying all
that is found in circulation.

All counterfeit thought comes from the intellect,
which alone originates the disease germ and the
destructive microbe. We need go no farther than
this disobedient Adam to find the cause of all the ills
to which humanity has become slave.

Wisdom is not an attribute of the intellect. The
assumption of wisdom is the one thing against which
the Lord God especially warned Adam. “But of
the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou
shalt not eat of it: for in the day that thou eatest
thereof thou shalt surely die.”

This very clearly indicates the inability of the
intellect, on its own account, to set up a standard of
knowledge of good and evil; it also declares the end
to which Adam will come if he disregards the pro-
hibition specified.

That there is something wrong in the standard
of good is evidenced by the variety of opinions in
the world as to what is good and what is evil. There


How Microbes Are Made 143


should be no question on such vitally important
points, and there would not be if the intellect would
relinquish its claim to a knowledge of good and evil,
and relegate to the Spirit the offices of wisdom and
understanding.

The intellect is the formative, character-giving
mechanism in the man; it draws its substance and
intelligence from the Spirit. Like the prism through
which the ray of white light is passed, it shows the
potentialities of the Spirit. If it looks within and
seeks the guidance of the Spirit, it reflects Divine
Ideas upon the screen of visibility. “This is the plan
which the Lord has for it, and it is building accord-
ing to that plan only when it admits that there is a
higher source of wisdom than itself, when it submits
to wisdom all its own ideas.

The manifestation of life is through the Adam
consciousness, and he is, in a way, attached to and
responsible for the forms thus made visible. Hence
the reform—the transformation—of existing con-
ditions must be made from the standpoint of Adam
as an important factor.

To ignore Adam is to slight one of the estab-
lished creations of Jehovah God. If Adam was
not a part of the Divine Plan, why was he formed
from the dust of the earth, the breath of life breathed
into him, and a living soul capacity given to him?

No, we are not to erase Adam, but we are to
transform him. He is not a safe guide in anything—
his conclusions are derived from observation of con-
ditions as he sees them in the external world. He
judges according to appearance, which is but one
side of the whole. Appearances say that microbes


144 Talks on Truth


are dangerous and destructive, but one who is fa-
miliar with their origin is not alarmed, because he
knows that there is a power and wisdom stronger
and wiser than the ignorant intellect.

It is to this power that we are compelled to go
before we can right the wrongs that now dominate
the minds of men. There is but one fount of wis-
dom, and that is Wisdom itself.

The belief that wisdom is attained through the
study of things, is an error prevalent in this age.
They who wait upon the Lord shall be wise. That
the wisdom of health can be evolved from the study
of disease microbes is a concept of the intellect in its
tendency to look without instead of withn. The
without, the universe of things formed, is not and
never can be a source of wisdom. ‘The things
formed are the results of efforts to combine wisdom
and love, and their character indicates the success
or failure of the undertaking. When wisdom and
love have been invoked, and their harmony made
manifest in the thing formed, God is manifest.

We love to give “names” or character to the
ideas of Jehovah God, because it is our office in the
grand plan of creation to do so. The glory of the
Father is thus made manifest through the Son. In
no other way can the ideas in Being be made mani-
fest, and man should rise to the dignity of his office
and formulate according to the plans of Divine
Mind.

Disease germs and microbes would quickly dis-
appear from the earth, if men would consult God
before passing judgment upon his creations. It is
not man’s province to formulate anything but what


How Microbes Are Made 145


will be a pleasure in God’s eye. If he makes
microbes, it is because he thinks microbe thoughts.
When he thinks God thoughts he will form only the
beauties of nature and mankind, and there will no
longer be anything in all his world that will cause a
fear or pang of pain. God is not the author of this
condition of so-called “‘progress from matter to
mind;’’ God is the one source from which and of
which man makes his existence.

There is a law of unfoldment in Being, a law
as exact as the progressive steps in a mathematical
problem in which no error is made, a law as har-
monious as that which governs a musical production
where discord has found no place. But microbes
and disease germs are not a part of this Divine Law.
They are as far removed from it as would be error
in the steady, careful steps in the progressive unfold-
ment of numbers, or false notes in symphony or song.

It does not require labored arguments or hard
thinking to see how easily the problems of life would
be made orderly and divine if men would let the
Lord into their minds. Jesus said the yoke was easy
and the burden light. He was victor over all the
hard conditions to which men and women think
themselves yoked, and he made light of sin, disease,
and poverty, by annulling them and preaching
boldly in the face of an adverse theology that it
was the prerogative of the Son of man to blot these
errors from the world of mankind.

There is a royal road for every man—a road in
which he will be conscious of that dominion which
is his by divine right. That road, Jesus said, leads
out from the I AM. As Moses delivered the chil-


146 : Talks on Truth


dren of Israel from the Egyptian darkness of their
ignorance by affirming in their ears the power of the
I AM, so Jesus gives us a series of affirmations that
will deliver us from the wilderness of ignorance.
His command is, “Keep my word.” ‘Then his
words are set before us: “I am the way, and the
truth, and the life;’’ “I am the resurrection, and the
life; “I am the light of the world;” ‘‘I am meek
and lowly in heart;” “Before Abraham was born,
eam

I aM is the polar star around which all the
thoughts of man revolve. Even the little, narrow
concept of the personal “I am” may be led out into
the consciousness of the great and only I Am by
filling its thought sphere with ideas of Infinite Wis-
dom, Life, and Love.

“Hitch your wagon to a star,” said Emerson.
Your wagon is that which carries you along. Your
“T AM” is that which carries you up or down, to
heaven or to hell, according to the idea to which
you have attached it. Then hitch it to a star and
let it carry you to the broad expanse of heaven.
There is room a-plenty—you will not knock elbows
with any one if you get out of the surging crowd
and hitch your “I AM” to the star of spiritual under-
standing.

Cease making disease microbes, and turn your at-
tention to higher things. Make love alive by think-
ing love. Make wisdom the light of the world by
affirming God’s omnipresent intelligence. See in
mind the pure substance of God, and it will surely
appear. This is the way to destroy microbes—this
is the antidote for disease germs. ‘The real, the en-


How Microbes Are Made | 147


during things of God are to be brought into visibil-
ity in just this simple way. This is the way the
I AM makes itself manifest. The method is so easy
that the man of great intellect passes it by; it is so
plain that a simpleton may understand it. A college
education is not necessary. You do not have to
know about anything whatsoever except God. How
easy it is, how light the burden! No long, tedious
years of study; no delving into depths of intricate
theories and speculations about molecules, atoms,
and ethers, but just a simple, childlike attention
directed to the everywhere Spirit, and a heart filled
with love and goodness for everything. “I thank
thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that
thou didst hide these things from the wise and un-
derstanding, and didst reveal them unto babes.”

“The soul of things is sweet, the heart of Being
is celestial rest; stronger than woe is will; that which
was Good doth pass to Better, Best.

“Ye suffer from yourselves. None else com-
pels, none other holds you that ye live and die, and
whirl upon the wheel, and hug and kiss its spokes of
agony, its tire of tears, its nave of nothingness. Be-
hold, I show you truth! Lower than hell, higher
than heaven, outside the utmost stars, farther than
Brahm doth dwell, before beginning and without
an end, as space eternal and as surety sure, is fixed
a Power Divine which moves to Good; only its laws
endure.”


THE I AM IN ITS KINGDOM


Why, man, he doth bestride the narrow world
Like a Colossus, and we petty men

Walk under his huge legs, and peep about

To find ourselves dishonorable graves.

Men at some times are masters of their fates;
The fault, dear Brutus, is not in our stars,

But in ourselves, that we are underlings.


—Shakespeare.


Ideas are hinged—they swing in and they swing
out. Not every one has observed this. But every
one must observe it, and note also the swing of his
particular ideas. An idea that swings in has a mis-
sion. It is of the Spirit, and has power to do far be-
yond an idea that swings out and dissipates its forces
in the whirl at the periphery. On the inner side,
ideas behold the great Wisdom and attach them-
selves to it; then they lose their identity as limited
things and take on the Unlimited.

A single idea born of Wisdom is irresistible.
No one can estimate the power for good of an idea
generated in the center of the home of ideas, the
Christ within. When an idea comes from that great
galaxy of supreme ideas it goes forth in strength and
harmony. It is a perfect sphere with no point liable
to friction or collision.

A man once conceived the idea of building a
ship, water-tight above and below. He put his
idea into visibility and sent the ship forth on the
waves. Att first it rode the sea with comparative


148


The I Am in Its Kingdom 149


safety ; but storms came on, the waves dashed against
it, and it went down. Why? Because he had not
ballasted it. It was secure above and below from
the elements, but it was not equalized in the rolling
waves.

You are daily, hourly conceiving ideal ships
and sending them out upon the waves of the angry
sea of human thoughts. They are apparently water-
tight ; they carry your highest aspirations and de-
sires. You look longingly for their return, but they
do not come. Why is it? They were staunchly
built according to human plans. But something was
lacking. You failed to put your soul into them.
They were shells, without depth of hold or cargo of
love.

All the mental ships which you send out upon
the turbulent seas of human thought must be bal-
lasted with your heart’s love or they will eventually
founder. They may float safely for a season, but
the reefs wait for them in the distance, and you may
watch in vain for their return.

I AM expresses through / Will; it is the business
of I AM to know when the / Will activities are
ideally true. Knowing is a part of Being which I
AM appropriates to the end that the works of J Will
may accord with the spiritual universe.

The I AM is not in itself power, wisdom, love;
it is simply the vehicle to which these realities har-
ness themselves.

In its mght relation in Being, I AM never pos-
sesses or owns anything. AIll things in the universe
are its to use, but it must not claim them as personal


property.


150 Talks on Truth


If the wheel that rests in the water and communi-
cates energy to the machinery of the mill, should
suddenly become possessed with conscious volition
and proceed to dip out a portion of the stream as its
individual property, it would well represent the po-
sition of the I Am that attempts to separate its
powers and capacities from the universal.

The I Am is pure Spirit, without parts, passions,
or members, of any description. It is the prism
through which the white light of Being is focused
and refracted on the screen of visibility in multi-
color.

But the I AM is not inertia—it is ever spurred
on by an original impulse to know. To know is not
a simple process when a single factor of Being is left
out by him who seeks to know.

The I Am has its being in heaven; its home is
in the realm of perfect ideals, the Christ within, but
it has its freedom. It loves to be. To be is to en-
joy. To enjoy is, for the time, to be that which we
enjoy. When you are absorbed in the recital of
an interesting story, you are lost to all else. The
I AM is for the moment identified with that which
it enjoys. Here is the solution of a great mystery—
how the I AM ever came to separate itself from its
sphere of wisdom.

But it is wonderfully simple when you under-
stand it. You are demonstrating the so-called fall
of man every time you lose yourself in the whirl of
sense pleasure. “The mission of the I AM is happi-
ness. It seeks joy and bliss; they are set before it in
unstinted measure, and it revels in their intoxicating


The I AM in Its Kingdom 151


draughts, but the mastery of the higher mind should
ever be maintained.

But sensations of pleasure originate in and de-
pend for their vitality upon the Center, and when
the I Am follows off the things and forgets the
source, it eventually finds the pleasure waning. The
impetus grows less and less until that which in the
beginning was pleasure becomes so slow of action
that its mertia leaves the impression of pain.

“Life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness” are
the inherent birthright of every one of us. We exist
to that end, and by our constant effort to attain per-
petual joy we recognize it as our natural state.

That our efforts are not always crowned with
success should cause us to pause and consider. Have
we not left out some factor necessary to happiness,
and if so, what is it?

We think of heaven as a place of unending hap-
piness, and we have been taught that it is some-
where in the skies. But in the geography of the
universe, heaven has not been authoritatively marked.
Jesus Christ, of all those claiming intimate acquaint-
ance with spiritual things, gave heaven definite lo-
cation. He often referred to the Father dwelling
in him; he also told others that the Spirit of God
dwelt in them. As a climax he definitely located
heaven “within you.”

This has always been looked upon by the
world’s people as a figure of speech, and even meta-
physicians who have delved into the abstractions of
mind, have had vague ideas about there being such a
place as heaven within them. They have said it
was a state, a condition.


152 Talks on Truth


So it is, but it is also a place. It is not outside
of your body today, and inside of it tomorrow, nor
is it possible for heaven to exist anywhere but right
at the center of what seems to you to be the physical.

This insistence upon the location of heaven is a


-startling proposition to those who have postulated


mind as universal, without bounds or limitations.

We are seeking to get into the kingdom of
heaven where all things shall be added unto us, and
it is proper that we should know where that kingdom
is. All that we really know about ourselves at
present comes to us through comparison with the
“things that do appear.”” We have a body, which
we clearly perceive is moved by an invisible prin-
ciple called mind. We have never seen this mind,
nor felt it nor sensed it in any way.

We know that certain combinations of thought
produce effects upon the sense of man. ‘The action
takes place from our center of consciousness, our
physical body. Then, so far as we are concerned,
the mystery of Being is wrapped up in and around
that which we are wont to call clay. Do not mistake
the proposition and assume that the physical man as
he now appears to your comprehension is the sum-
mum bonum of existence. This is not the claim.
The claim is that to your consciousness the corporeal
man surrounds and gives definite place to that which
you seek—“‘the kingdom of God within you.”

The argument is frequently brought forward
that the “lesser cannot contain the greater.” This
is but a play upon words, so far as the relations of
mind are concerned. We know that in Being there
can be no greater and no lesser. Mind is not a


The I AM in Its Kingdom 155


thing; Mind is. It is that which, through orderly
process, produces the thing. This orderly process,
we have learned by observation, is from an invisible
center to a visible circumference. So if anywhere in
the universe you behold a form, you may know that
within that form there is a potential center from
which spring all its qualities. That the invisible
cause is or is not confined to that form, is not essential
to the proposition. So far as the sentient identity of
the form itself is concerned its source of intelligence
and life is always within, and it can never know any-
thing about its cause except from that center.
When an astronomer sees a system of planets
describing mathematical circles, he knows without
looking that there is at the center of those circles a
power which holds them in place. Every atom in
the human body is a miniature planet revolving
about its own invisible center, and all the atoms
revolve about a great center within. I have dis-
covered this to be an absolute fact in my own expe-
rience. I have, by persistent practice, learned to
drop my attention from the head to a point under
the heart. This is separating the I AM from the
personal, or limited consciousness, and connecting
it with the universal, or spiritual consciousness, with
which it forms a union at the point mentioned.
When my I AM touches this inner center there
springs into its consciousness a wonderful vibration,
and to every part of the body strong currents of
energy are transmitted. Att this point I seem to be
in touch with all creation; the barriers of form are
as nothing; there is only a great sea of throbbing


hfe.


154 Talks on Truth


I am but a novice in this inner exploration, but
I have penetrated far enough to know that it is the
undiscovered country for which we are all seeking.
I have not only found the invisible center of my con-
sciousness, but many subcenters, and so many mar-
velous things in connection therewith that I cannot,
for lack of comparisons, describe them, even if I
knew a language that would convey to the natural
man a conception of their marvels and the joy and
satisfaction they give to the soul.

I have proved to my own satisfaction that when
Jesus said, “The kingdom of God is within you,”
he meant it literally and not figuratively. There is
within every one a place—a conscious sphere of
mind, having all the attractions described or im-
agined as belonging to heaven. My most exalted
ideas of the joys of heaven never anticipated the
ecstatic thrill that suffuses my whole being while I
rest in Spirit at this center within. In the redemption
of man from sin, the outer thoughts are made to con-
form to the inner ideas. This is regeneration, in
which man is saved from his evil thoughts—Satan—
and permanently united with his good thoughts—
Christ. This is my work and your work—to con-
form to the within.

It seems marvelous that we should be so totally
unconscious of this undiscovered country right under
our hearts. When I drop down there and feel its
sweetness and light, and the inner voice tells me that
this exists in every one just as it does in me, I cannot
comprehend how we have been so long ignorant of
it. Yet I know that before the discovery of the
circulation of the blood, men knew nothing about the


The | AM in Its Kingdom 155


intricate canal system within their own bodies. Then
why should it be improbable that still deeper within
exists another realm on a different plane?

But this kingdom within is not material—it is
spiritual. In it is the seat of the King, and when
we become sufficiently acquainted with it, we shall
be able to reign from the throne which was prepared
for us from the beginning.

This inner country is the domain of that su-
perior wisdom which we term the Christ. Jesus
called this place of wisdom the Father within him,
and to it he ascribed all his power and wisdom.

It is not created for our especial benefit, nor do
we evolve it through thinking; it is that Word which
was in the beginning with God, which is with God,
which is God; we simply recognize it, and through
that recognition, we realize its presence.

The theory that we are progressing from a lower
to a higher state, is not tenable when viewed from
this inner place of understanding. When we touch
its shining shore, we suddenly seem to know that
we are at home again; that there had somehow been
a departure, a separation of the I AM from its
rightful place in the bosom of the Father.

That man has wandered away from and lost
consciousness of his wisdom sphere, is claimed by all
ancient teachers of inner truths. The banishment of
Adam from the garden of Eden is an allegory
based upon this truth, and the four Gospels reiterate
again and again that the mission of Jesus of Naza-
reth was to find that which was lost; not that the real
man is lost nor in condemnation, but the I, the man


156 Talks on Truth


identity, has gone “into a far country” and is lost
to his spiritual consciousness.

That this sphere of wisdom is present in what
has come to be known as the subjective conscious-
ness of man, is demonstrated in a certain measure
in hypnotic experiments. The I of the hypnotized
subject is temporarily separated from the external
and thrown onto the internal plane, where is func-
tions in marvelous manner in matters pertaming to
mental action. This has given rise to the theory of
two egos, the subjective and the objective.

The fact is that there is but one ego, one I, and
its domain of consciousness is not limited to the
things of sense, but is meant to range all creation
from the within to the without. Instead of these
sporadic cases of a higher sense in man being con-
sidered abnormal, it is time for us to know that they
are normal, and that the limitations and ignorance of
the five sense man is the abnormal.

The regaining of this lost consciousness is a mat-
ter that rests between man and God. We cannot
get into this “kingdom”’ through such artificial means
as mesmerism, hypnotism, mediumship, or any of
the so-called short cuts to spirituality.

The I Am can never be coerced or robbed of
its perfect freedom, and all attempts to do so will
meet with final disaster. When we have once de-
cided to return to the Father’s house, to regain this
lost estate within, it is an easy road. It may seem
hard at the start, because we have to throw away so
much baggage, but it gets easier as we get closer
and closer to the great heart of the loving Father.
A Helper has been provided, the “Spirit of Truth


The I AM in Its Kingdom 157


. . . Shall guide you into all the truth;” all we have
to do is to seek honestly and sincerely to enter in.
“Seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be


opened unto you.” ‘This promise is to every one.


HOW SHALL THE DEAD BE RAISED


As disciples of Jesus Christ, we are commanded
to “ raise the dead.” To clearly understand this
part of our mission, we should acquaint ourselves
with the philosophy of death; we should know what
it is and how it came about.

Death is defined by Webster as “permanent
cessation of all the vital functions.” This, like all
definitions derived from sense observation, is quite
incomplete. It gives us no idea of the relation which
death bears to its polar opposite, life, nor of the
process through which life passes in order to appear
absent in that which has “cessation of the vital func-
tions.” Following this to a final analysis, we find
that we must understand about life before we can
apprehend that appearance of its absence in a form
called dead.

In this, as in every other investigation of Truth,
from the correct premise, we find that we can never
get at its right relation by examining the negative
side. One could not correct the errors in a mathe-
matical calculation without first understanding the
rules governing numbers. Some people think they
can learn how to be healthy by studying disease;
but they get further and further into disease when
they study it as an entity. The study of health as
a real principle involved in the being of man, leads
to the discovery of its foundation—mental harmony.

In metaphysics we find the early students in-


158


How Shall the Dead Be Raised 159


sisting upon having explained to them all about evil
—how it originated, and why it has place in exist-
ence, when good is the origin of all that is. They
worry and stew and manipulate their thoughts over
this question, until in sheer desperation they, as a
rule, give it up. The tangle of a good God and a
bad devil will not straighten itself out from their
plane of perception. The trouble is that they do not
know enough about the good. They want to know
all about the evil without first being acquainted with
the positive side of the question. They are like
children who know nothing about the harmony of
music, yet insist upon a full explanation of discords
before they will go on with their lessons. To know
about evil, we must first become thoroughly fa-
miliar with the good.

We find in our investigation of the character and
place of death, that studying it by itself we can
get no starting point for even a single fact. It has
no foundation in itself. Every definition that we can
frame, implies death to be the absence of something,
and we are forced to inquire into that which is absent
before we can know the meaning of the condition
which that absence appears to bring about.

When we have made ourselves familiar with
life, we shall know all about death without study-
ing it at all. We shall know it from its true stand-
point—absolute negation—that which might be if
life were not all. “Those who worry over the cause
of evil always find, when they drop their investiga-
tions from the negative standpoint and go over to
the positive and make themselves familiar with the
Good, that all their questions are answered by the


160 Talks on Truth


Good itself, because it, and it only, can explain all
the vagaries that arise in the consciousness where it
is not permanent.

A study of life reveals it to be an expression of
Being that gives rise to animation, vivacity, vigor,
energy. We learn that life may appear in a form in
superabundance, accompanied by but little intelli-
gence. We perceive that the character of life is de-
termined by the intelligence it exercises. We find
that the life expressed in and through our own bodies
requires the husbanding, directing power of our in-
telligence. Life gives animation and vigor to the
animal man, stimulating the lower as well as the
higher faculties. Right here many people do not
exercise wisdom in their living. They think that
because life stimulates the faculties these should
all be gratified in the way in which their desire indi-
cates. [he desires of the animal man are thus al-
lowed their full exercise, and the share of life force
which should go to the intellectual and spiritual man
is wasted, and he is robbed of his sustenance because
he does not understand the law of his being.

We find that life is a principle; that it is in-
herent in Being, everywhere present at all times;
that it is manifest to consciousness through vehicles;
that these vehicles are animated by life according to
their capacity or power to express it; that that ca-
pacity or power of expression is governed by the
idea of life which is infused into it by the generative
energy of the I AM.

Electricity, for illustration, is everywhere as in-
visible potentiality. It may be brought into expres-
sion and use through a motor. Some people think


How Shall the Dead Be Raised 161


that the size of an electric motor is the measure of
its power. ‘This is not true. It is the character of
the coiled wires within that measures it capacity.
Fine wire closely wound gives power to the motor.
So a fine, intense, high perception of life, accom-
panied by a burning desire to express it in its purity,
marks the highest form of the animated vehicle of
God’s vitality.

Man is the highest expression of God; he mani-
fests God’s life through an external vehicle called
the body. Physiologists long ago discovered that it
is not the size of the body nor its beauty, that de-
termines its vitality.

Life in the body is governed by the hold the
I AM has upon the idea of life. Its character is also
tempered by the conservation which judgment and
discretion exercise over the other factors of expres-
sion. But let the idea of life be firmly grasped and
put into practical use through thought and word,
and the other factors fall into line.

The energy generated by an electric motor is
expressed through action, and a suitable medium for
its exercise must be provided. We find a parallel
to this in our own lives. Thinking and speaking are
our methods of creating energy, and our bodies are
the vehicles acted upon by the energy developed.
We must think life into the living. Jesus, at the rais-
ing of Lazarus, first “lifted up his eyes.” He thus,
through mental dynamics, connected his idea of the
universality of life with the universal Life itself,
and he was able to say, “I thank thee that thou
heardest me.”


162 Talks on Truth


“And when he had thus spoken, he cried with a
loud voice, Lazarus, come forth.”

This event shows that we are to do more than
merely perceive the omnipresence of life; to fulfill
the whole law of manifestation we must speak life
into visibility.

Yet again, we may perceive the truth that life
is everywhere waiting to be spoken into all forms,
and with a clear understanding of this truth, we may
speak the words of life and yet not get the antici-
pated results. What is the reason?

Going deeper into the factors constituting Being,
we discover that life or energy must have substance
through which to make itself manifest to conscious-
ness. If we have wasted our substance in riotous
living, our word is made fruitless because of lack of
material upon which to work.

We should be just as careful of the stored-up
substance of the consciousness, of which the body is
the lower stratum, as we are of the thoughts and
words we express. If our substance is being wasted
in the lusts of the flesh, our word will lack in life-
giving quality. Jesus cast out of his consciousness
the limitations of matter; he mastered the appetites
and passions of the animal man and dissolved all
fear of evil.

Jesus demonstrated the law of God, and his
word was with power. He became the word of
God incarnate, because he fulfilled all the require-
ments of the law.

This is the privilege of every man. Whoever
dedicates his whole life to the supreme Good, and
by devotion, right thinking, right doing, right acting,


How Shall the Dead Be Raised 163


pure living, and pure speaking, fulfills the law, may
have all the power of Jesus. God is no respecter of
persons, but he requires an exact observance of the
law to the least jot and tittle.

So we say that death cannot be explained with-
out first having an acquaintance with life, an ac-
quaintance with life that carries with it an acquaint-
ance with God. We find that, every time we seek
to know the origin of an effect, we must go back to
the supreme Cause before we can get a complete ex-
planation.

In the matter of life, we discover, by following
all the clues given us in our own experiences, that
they point to intelligence as well as to force. In
other words, life falls far short of its mission if it is
not equalized by intelligence. Yet thousands who
are seeking health, which means more life, have no
especial desire to become acquainted with God.
Many think that health and fullness of life may be
had without him, and when asking the help of a
metaphysician, they often stipulate that they shall
not be given any religious doctrines with the treat-
ments. They might with like consistency engage a
locomotive without an engineer. All the ills and dis-
cords of humanity may be traced to one error—the
indiscriminate and thoughtless use of life separated
from intelligence.

What men need above all else in this day is more
wisdom—more discretion in the use of the life they
have. More life with the same old destructive ig-
norance in using it, would but add to their misery.

Yet God does not dictate what shall be man’s
choice in this or in any other act. If man finds the


164 Talks on Truth


law through which life is made manifest in his con-
sciousness, he may use it blindly and ignorantly if he
so elects. But he must also abide by the results, and
this is where man sets up his wail of sorrow; he does
not like to reap his sowing.

Death came into our world through the igno-
rant use of life, and death can be put out only by a
wise use of life. Death is the result of a wrong
concept of life and its use. In the beginning of
man’s experiments with the powers of Being, he had
no concept of death. His consciousness was intact
and his unfoldment in wisdom was gradual and or-
derly. But his desire to experiment predominated.
Sensation was sweet and enticing; it absorbed so
much of his attention that he forgot wisdom—he
“hid” from his Lord—and the result is an absence
from his Eden, or the Divine Harmony of the law.

When there is disorder in the working parts of
a machine, it breaks down or flies to pieces. That
is just what occurred in man’s body. When intelli-
gence was no longer present in its full complement
in his consciousness, there was lack of harmony, and
this resulted in such disorder that the parts flew
asunder—soul and body separated, and man named
this dissolution death. Then in its train, the fear
and horror caused by this dissolution was imaged
into man’s mind and he made it a secondary cause—
so we find the mere belief of death in the world
today slaying its thousands.

In raising the dead there are, then, two factors
to deal with. The idea of the reality of death and
the fear of death have both become destructive be-
liefs in the race consciousness, and they must be taken


How Shall the Dead Be Raised 165


up and dissolved. The total unreality of death must
be portrayed to the deluded consciousness. The
omnipresence and omnipotence of life is beyond dis-
pute, and there can be no question but that death
is a condition set up in human consciousness alone.
God is not dead; he does not recognize or counte-
nance death; neither does man, when freed from its
delusion. Jesus said, “Follow me; and leave the
dead to bury their own dead.”

The first step in demonstrating over death is to
get the belief entirely out of the mind that it is God-
ordained, or that it is of force or effect anywhere in
the realm of pure Being.

The next step is to live so harmoniously that the
whole consciousness will be not only resurrected
from its belief in death, but also so vivified and ener-
gized with the idea of undying life that it cannot
dissolve or separate.

We regard the apostle’s words, ““Dead through
your trespasses and sins,” as metaphorical. But an
analysis of man in the supermundane part of his
being, reveals that sin or departure from Divine Law
in the use of a faculty, actually results in its death.
That is, after violent exercise of a power there is
such reaction that it goes into a comatose state or
“sleep of death.” Death is the failure on the part
of man to sustain harmonious life in the body.

Death and sleep are brothers in a metaphysical
sense. ‘The life action is never wholly withdrawn
from all parts of a form, but there is such cessation
of vitality that dissolution of the outer shell takes
place in the experience named death. But Jesus
pronounced death to be sleep, and said that the


166 Talks on Truth


sleeper could be awakened when the vitality was re-
stored in Divine Order. Jesus said Lazarus was
asleep, and “I go, that I may awake him out of
sleep.”

But his disciples did not see deeply, and took
for granted that Lazarus had merely fallen into a
trance or prolonged sleep, and said, “Lord, if he
is fallen asleep, he will recover.”

“Then Jesus therefore said unto them plainly,
Lazarus is dead.”

Paul frequently referred to those who had dis-
solved the body as brethren who had “fallen
asleep.”

The Lord told Daniel, ‘““But go thou thy way
till the end be; for thou shalt rest, and shalt stand in
thy lot, at the end of the days” (Dan. 12:13).

Our poets in their inspired moments have caught
this truth, and our literature is replete with refer-
ences to the “sleep of death.” Hamlet, in his oft-
quoted soliloquy, opens to us in a remarkable way
the metaphysics of death:


To die, to sleep;
To sleep? Perchance to dream! Ay, there’s the rub;
For in that sleep of death what dreams may come,
When we have shuffled off this mortal coil,


Must give us pause. . .


We are not afraid to go to sleep at night, yet
every time we lie down and fall into unconscious-
ness of the body, we are enacting in a small way the
sleep of death. In one case the soul leaves the
body for a few hours and again takes it up—in the
other the soul leaves the body to mortal dissolution:


How Shall the Dead Be Raised 167


yet it does not fail to return in due time and take
up a body—so long as it believes in the limitations
of sense. In the sleep of a single night, the one with
a clear conscience rests peacefully and is strength-
ened for another day’s experience. But the guilty,
anxious, worried sleeper is haunted by dreams.

The experience of the death-sleeper is similar.
If the life of such a one has been according to the
golden rule, he “‘wraps the drapery of his couch
about him and lies down to pleasant dreams.” His
soul basks in the sunshine of a world Elysian and his
hope of heaven is for a season fulfilled.

This, however, is but the rest that prepares him
for another day’s experience in the workshop of
Being, and like Daniel, he must again “‘stand in
thy lot, at the end of the days.” This process is re-
peated again and again, until man discovers that
there is a law of living that obviates this oft-repeated
“sleep of death.”” That law is revealed to all who
seek to do the will of God and thereby to fulfill the
law of life.

Here is where we find ourselves today. We
know this law of life is based in mind action, and
that, through the mind, we may resurrect ourselves
from the dead.

As we explore the mental realm, which is our
causative thought, we find it filled with a whole
legion of narrow beliefs, foolish, ignorant beliefs,
selfish beliefs, and discordant beliefs. These we
have lumped together and denominated “‘mortal
mind,” or “‘carnal mind.”

It is here we first do our “raising of the dead.”
Each of these beliefs of mortality is a sin. The


168 Talks on Truth


meaning of “‘sin” is “‘missing the mark,” and these
sense limitations miss the mark of Divine Truth.
The light of Truth must be turned into our con-
sciousness and each of these sleepers awakened.
Some of them may seem for a time beyond our
power to resurrect, and our most sanguine thoughts
lack faith at the prospect, and cry out, “Lord, by
this time the body decayeth.”

But the Christ power is with us. “Said I not
unto thee, that, if thou believedst, thou shouldst
see the glory of God?”

All things are possible to them that believe in
the power of God within, waiting to be made mani-
fest at their word. Then send forth that word and
say to every sleeping belief of sense, “Lazarus, come
forth!”

If you do not believe in the power of the Spirit
to resurrect your consciousness from its tomb of
earthly superstitions, of course you may make no
effort to do it. But if you have faith that it can be
done, you can do it.

Mental beliefs of every kind do take up their
abode in the consciousness and make a home there.
If you believe in old age and bodily decrepitude
and decay, you will find that all the little cells
throughout your organism are carrying in their
depths just such pictures, as the clear waters of the
lake reflect the trees and the clouds. If you want
these obedient little cells of your soul and body to
reflect pictures of health and vigor undying, hold
before them, in the sky of your mind, clear images of
these perfect states. Not only hold such images be-
fore them, but demand that they shall express them


How Shall the Dead Be Raised 169


perfectly. And do not forget to conserve your
bodily energies by pure, careful thinking and living,
in order that you may have the transparent substance
in which your true thought images may be planted,
and, in their course, brought to fruitage.

Many who are faithful in holding right mental
images do not get results, because they lack a re-
ceptacle—they let the lusts of the flesh dissipate all
the clear water of life, and their good thoughts and
words are returned unto them void. Guard all the
powers of your being, if you would resurrect them
from the dead. They do not stand alone, but are
dependent one on another, and must all be brought
into subjection to the Christ of God.

Paul said, “Every man that striveth in the
games exerciseth self-control in all things.”

The resurrection of the dead is the sure and cer-
tain work of the true Christian.

We know that Jesus Christ is the example which
we are to follow, and we say with Paul, “If the
dead are not raised, neither hath Christ been raised:

‘And if Christ hath not been raised, your faith
is vain; ye are yet in your sins. Then they also that
are fallen asleep in Christ have perished :

*“But now hath Christ been raised from the dead,
the first-fruits of them that are asleep.

“For since by man came death, by man came
also the resurrection of the dead.

“For as in Adam all die, so also in Christ shall
all be made alive.” And

“The last enemy that shall be abolished ts
death.”


THE DEVELOPMENT OF DIVINE LOVE


O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that killeth the prophets, and
stoneth them that are sent unto her! how often would
have gathered thy children together, even as a hen gathereth
her chickens under her wings, and ye would not!


Jesus weeping over Jerusalem is the picture of
a great love welling up in the heart and flowing out
unto all the ends of the earth—the love of the good
Father for his erring and willful children.

Such is the love of Christ for his own; such is
the love of God through Christ for all creation.

We may talk about the wisdom of God, but
the love of God must be felt in the heart. It can-
not be described, and one who has not felt it can
have no concept of it from the descriptions of others.
But the more we talk about love, the stronger it
grows in the consciousness, and if we persist in think-
ing loving thoughts and speaking loving words, we
are sure to bring into our experience the feeling of
that great love that is beyond description—the very
love of God.

It is popularly taught and believed that there is
but one love—that God is Love and that all love
is from him, hence all love is God’s love.

Love is a Divine Principle and can be known
in its purity by touching it at its fountainhead.
There it is not tinged in any way by man’s forma-
tive thought, but flows forth a pure, pellucid stream
of infinite ecstasy. It has no consciousness of good
or evil, pure or impure, but pours itself out in great


170


The Development of Divine Love 171


oceans of living magnetic power, to be used by
whosoever will.

Man has a faculty through which he receives
love from Being; this faculty is commonly called
the heart. The heart, however, is but the visible
expression of an invisible center of consciousness.
The sense man sees the heart, but the soul sees an
inner faculty in man through which he may express
an attribute of Being. By his word, man calls his
powers into activity that through them he may mani-
fest God.

Jesus was the orderly man of God, manifesting
under Divine Law the attributes of Being, Jesus
*‘called unto him his disciples;” that is, by his word
he spiritually quickened and educated his twelve
faculties. Peter, faith active in the thinking faculty,
ts the first disciple called. Peter is the rock founda-
tion of that consciousness which is the church of
Christ. You will find that the character of your
whole consciousness depends upon how you think.
You may have great love, but unless you guide it
with right thoughts it will not build up a harmonious
consciousness. love poured through the heart of
a mother who has fear in her thought, shatters the
body of a delicate child. The thinker must be
strong and sure in his grasp upon right thoughts.
The second disciple is Andrew, brother to Peter;
he represents strength. James represents judgment,
discrimination, the faculty that chooses the good and
eschews the evil. This faculty must be brought out
before love in its fullness is safe in the life of man.
Love has not will and volition, except as they are
infused into it by the other faculties. John is love,


172 Talks on Truth


and he leaned on the Master’s bosom. ‘This is to
symbolize the innocence, tenderness, and dependence
of love. Peter is bold, impetuous, executive—af-
firms his undying allegiance to the Master one mo-
ment and denies him the next; but the loyalty and
constancy of love were dominant in the character of
John.

We find that these four faculties, evenly bal-
anced, will form the foundation of a harmonious
body and mind.

You must think, and think with faith in both
God and yourself—that is Peter.

You must think with strength and power—that
is Andrew.

You must think with judgment and discretion—
that is James.

You must center all your thought, your strength,
your judgment in love—that is John.

To Peter (the faithful thinker), is given the key
to the kingdom of heaven, but he can never open the
gate until he has reconciled all the other faculties.
Many people in this day have found how much de
pends upon right thinking, and they are counting on
getting into the kingdom of health and harmony,
by holding good thoughts only. They have not
always taken into consideration that the think-
ing faculty is merely the executive power in the
consciousness, and that it depends upon many other
faculties for the material out of which its thoughts
are formed.

To think without strength is to bring forth
weakly—without effect.

To think without judgment is to bring forth


The Development of Divine Love 173


malformed mental creations, good and evil, spirit
and matter, sickness and health, life and death, and
the thousand other Babylonish conditions found in
the world.

To think without love is to bring forth hate, dis-
cord, and inharmony.

So it is not thought alone that opens the way
into the kingdom, but a right use of all the powers
of mind and body centered in thought.

Thinking gives color, tone, shape, character, to
all creation, but the essences or materials of creation
are drawn from the realms of Spirit.

In the world we find love so turned awry by
wrong thinking that it does not represent God. In
its beginning it came forth from God, but it has been
taken into the “far country” of error thought and
there wasted in riotous living.

Error thought has put greed into love, and we
have the “‘root of all evil,” the love of money.

Error thought has said to love, “We are flesh
and blood; this is my child, this is my husband, my
father, my mother, my sister, my brother. We are
separate from others.’ Thus error thought has
made love to serve it in family selfishness.

““And he stretched forth his hand towards his
disciples, and said, Behold, my mother and my
brethren! For whosoever shall do the will of my
Father who is in heaven, he is my brother, and
sister, and mother.” ‘This is the love of God in its
purity, fresh from the fountainhead.

Wherever love is tainted with selfishness, we
may know that error thought has made muddy its


174 Talks on Truth


clear stream, so that it no longer represents the purity
of its Source.

Love is the drawing power of mind. It is the
magnet of the universe, and about it may be clus-
tered all the attributes of Being, by one who thinks
in Divine Order.

Many who have found the law of true thinking
and its effect, wonder why supply does not come to
them after months and years of holding thoughts of
bounty. It is because they have not developed love.
They have formed the right image in mind, but
the magnet that draws the substance from the store-
house of Being has not been set into action.

To demonstrate supply, we must think supply,
and thus form it in the consciousness. We must
conserve all the ideas of substance in the mind—
and also the fluids of the body, their representatives
—because we must have a base for our form. We
must vibrate the love center in thought, word, and
act. Then there will come to us on the wings of
invisibility that which will satisfy every need. This
is the secret of demonstrating plenty from the invis-
ible ethers.

“Love . . . taketh not account of evil.”

Love never sees anything wrong in that which
it loves. If it did, it would not be pure love. Pure
love is without discriminating power. It simply
pours itself out upon the object of its affection, and
takes no account of the result. By so doing, love
sometimes casts its pearls before swine, but its power
is so great that it transforms all it touches.

Do not be afraid to pour out your love upon
all the so-called evil in the world. Deny the ap-


The Development of Divine Love 175


pearance of evil, and affirm the all-power and every-
where presence of Love and Goodness. Take no
account of the evil.that appears in your life and
affairs. Refuse to see it as evil. Declare that what
seems evil has somewhere a good side, which shall,
through your persistent affirmation of its presence,
be made visible. By this creative power of your
own thought, you change that which seemed evil into
good, and Divine Love will pour its healing balm
over all.

Sickness is not good, because it is not of God;
but if, through past ignorance in thought or act, one
finds himself in its grasp, he can hasten his deliver-
ance by affirming the experience to be a good lesson
. which he will take to heart and profit by. If he
wails and bemoans his sad fate, he throws the
shadow of gloom into the healing waters of love,
thereby corrupting them and weakening their restor-
ative action for him.

Always remember that love is the great mag-
net of God. It is, of itself, neither good nor evil.
These are qualities given to it by the thinking fac-
ulty inman. Whatever you see for your love, that
it will draw to you, because as a magnet it attracts
whatever you set your desire upon. To focus your
love about self and selfish aims, will cause it to draw
around you the limited things of personality and
the hollow shams of the sense life. To focus love
upon money and the possessions of the material
world, will make you the slave of mammon, and
your life will be a failure and a disappointment.
To focus your love upon anything less than the All-
Good will eventually prove short of your highest


176 Talks on Truth


aspiration, and you will find yourself outside the
kingdom of heaven.

“Love suffereth long, and is kind.”

Love does not resent injuries. It does not take
affront and insult into account. Pure love does
not recognize personality; hence when one is in the
consciousness of love, he cannot be hurt nor suffer
at what may be said to him or about him. “A soft
answer turneth away wrath’’ is ever on the lips of
love, and whoever makes this his thought-focus will
be able to reduce to peace and harmony the tides of
impatience and anger that may be surging about him.

One with strong love and the right focal idea,
may control turbulent multitudes by his silent thought
alone.

When we speak of the power of love, it should
be understood that we mean power exercised
through love. Power is a faculty of mind. It
associates itself with some other faculty, and in con-
junction with it, is made manifest. In the relation of
man’s faculties in Divine Mind, power and love
are associated in action, but in man’s present con-
cept of relations he has associated intellect and
power. From this wrong relation arise the tyranny
and oppression so evident in the world.

Power should never be exercised except through
love. Whoever associates his power and intellect
and attempts in a blind way to force his desire to ful-
fillment, will always bring about discord and un-
righteous oppression.

Power cannot be used successfully through in-
tellect, because intellect lacks wisdom. Wisdom
associates itself with love, and can be found in its


The Development of Divine Love 177


purity only at the heart center, hence we speak of
the “‘still, small voice within.” Elijah found that
the voice of God was not in the wind, not in the
earthquake or the fire—these being of the intellect—
but in the “‘still, small voice.”

Intellect is not wise. Wisdom is not its office.
Intellect is the executive officer of wisdom, and can
do right only when faithfully carrying out the in-
structions of its principle.

We see how dangerous to the welfare of man
it is for intellect to assume knowledge and to call
upon power to help it in carrying out its unsubstantial
ideas. Power is the faculty in mind that propels out-
wardly, and must necessarily have balance in some
other faculty, in order to hold its equilibrium. There
is but one other faculty that has opposite action, and
that is love, whose office is attraction. When power
and love are associated, the centrifugal and the cen-
tripetal forces of Being are equalized; man unifies
all the work given him to do by the Lord God, and
his dominion over the forces of Being is exercised in
peace and harmony. Peace and harmony are the
focalizing ideas that chord with the divine nature of
love, and when they are associated in the mind
there is no limit to man’s power. It is said, by those
who know the power of spiritual forces, that one
man developed large enough in love, might dissolve
this planet with his word. But one so developed
would never do anything to interfere in any way
with the life and rights of another. Love does not
take offense, and surely its very last thought should
be to offend.


Among a certain class of Hindu mystics are


178 Talks on Truth
those called Bhakti, or Disciples of Love. They


know the power of love to protect and care for
them, and they cultivate it until all nature is in love
with and befriends them. Thousands of the*com-
mon people of India are killed annually by serpents
and wild animals, yet these mystics have so brought
forth the power of love in themselves that serpents
and savage animals do not injure them. ‘They live
in the wildest jungles; during periods of silent de-
votion, lasting sometimes weeks and even months,
the open forest is their home. It is recorded that
birds have built their nests in the hair of such
sleeping devotees during their periods of silence.
They respect the rights of the tiniest insects, and
under no circumstances kill anything or interfere with
it, in any way. This is putting love to practical test,
and it always proves its divine origin and power.
You may trust love to get you out of your
difficulties. “There is nothing too hard for it, if you
put your confidence in it and act without dissimula-
tion. But do not talk love, and in your heart feel
resentment. ‘This will bring discord to your mem-
bers and rottenness to your bones. Love is candor
and frankness. Deception is no part of love, and he
who tries to use it in that sort of company, will prove
himself a liar, and love will desert him in the end.
There is no envy in love. Love is satisfaction in
itself. Not that satisfaction with personal self, its
possessions and attractions which is vanity, but an
inner satisfaction that sees good everywhere and in
everybody. It insists that all is good, and by refus-
ing to see anything but good, that quality finally ap-
pears uppermost in itself and in all things. When


The Development of Divine Love 179


only good is seen and felt, how can there be any-
thing but satisfaction?

The one who has made union with Divine Love
through his inner consciousness, and who lets it pour
its healing currents into his soul and body, is fortu-
nate beyond all description. Instead of envying an-
other, the desire is to show others the great joy
which may be theirs when they have opened out the
floodgates of their love nature.

Truly, “Love envieth not.”

Yet with all these glorious possessions, beyond
the power of man to describe, ‘Love vaunteth not
itself, is not puffed up.” Love does not brag about
its demonstrations. It simply lives the life, and lets
its works speak for it.

Love does not seek its own. It does not make
external effort to get anything, not even that which
intellect claims belongs to it. It is here that love
proves itself to be the invisible magnet that draws
to man whatever he needs. But instead of leaving
this department of the work to love, intellect sees
what it wants, and, in its blundering way, goes
about getting it. Thus the real begetting power in
man has been ignored until its true office has been
forgotten and its power suppressed.

When love, the universal magnet, is brought
into action in the consciousness of our race, it will
change all our methods of support and supply. It
will harmonize all the forces of nature, and the dis-
cords that now infest earth and air will disappear.
It will control the elements until they obey man
and bring forth that which will supply all his needs,
without that labor which is called the sweat of


180 Talks on Truth


his face. This earth shall yet be made paradise
by the power of love.

That condition will begin to set in for each one
of us just as soon as we develop the love nature in
ourselves.

When love has begun its silent pulsations at
our solar center, no one can keep us in want or pov-
erty. From the invisible currents of the inner ether,
love will draw to us all that belongs to us; and all
belongs to us that is required to make us happy and
contented.

This mighty magnet is a quality of God that 1s
expressed through man, and it cannot be suppressed
by any outside force. No environment or external
condition can keep back love, when once you have
firmly decided in mind to give it expression. The
present unloving condition of the world is no bar to
your exercise of love; in fact, it is an incentive.
You will know, as you begin to make love manifest,
how great a sinner you have been, how far you have
fallen short of making yourself the man or woman
of God. This will show you by comparison how
greatly you have missed the mark of the high call-
ing which is yours in Christ.

We have all been taught the beauties of love
and its great power in the world, but no one else has
explained that it has a center of action in the body,
that was designed by the Creator to do a specific
work. The man or woman who has not developed
the love center is abnormal, is living in only partial
exercise of consciousness. The love center has its
nerves and muscles in the body, which, through
neglect, have become atrophied in nearly the whole


The Development of Divine Love 181


race. But they are just as necessary to the perfect
man as are legs and arms; and more so, because
with the love center active, one might live happily
and successfully without legs or arms. He might
even grow new legs and arms in an adherence to the
completeness of life in which love proves to be the
fulfillment of the law of perfection.

The body is the instrument of the mind, and
no one has ever seen his real body as it is in the sight
of God, except through the mind. ‘The body of
flesh, bones, and blood that the eye of sense beholds,
is not the true body any more than the heart of flesh
is the true organ of love.

The true body is an ethereal body, an inde-
structible body; the body of flesh is the grosser
vibration which the sense consciousness beholds.
The Spirit-body is not absent or dead, but simply
inactive. When, through purification of his ideas
and acceleration of his mental energies, man comes
into sight of the real forces of Being, his whole body
is quickened into new life, and the body of flesh
responds to its vibrations. ‘This is done through the
mind—by thinking right thoughts and doing right
things also, because man is, in ultimate, a unit, and
the thinking and doing cannot be separated.

To develop the love center, commence by affirm-
ing, “From this time forth and forevermore I shall
know no man after the flesh. I shall not see men
and women as body and mortal thought. I shall
always behold them with the eye of love, which
sees only perfection.” Ask daily that love be made
alive in you; that she take up her abode at your


182 Talks on Truth


magnetic center and make it alive with her strong,
steady pulsations of spiritual energy.

Let your attention rest for a few moments every
day at the heart center in your body, the solar plexus,
while you declare silently:

“You are the abode of Love. You are filled
and thrilled with the mighty magnetic forces which
she uses in doing her work. You are powerful and
active to do only good, and you see only goodness
and purity everywhere.”

Many people say that they cannot see love in
others who are not so manifesting—that they do not
feel loving themselves, and cannot therefore exercise
love. But this development of your own love cen-
ter will make you see it, just as the eye sees light.
It is difficult to feel love with a dormant love organ,
but exceedingly easy when that organ commences
to exercise its inherent potentialities.

Love is in the world in a diluted form as affec-
tion between husband and wife, parents and chil-
dren, friend and friend, but it can be made manifest
in its original strength and purity by each man and
woman opening the fountainhead and letting its
mighty currents stream forth.

Sex lust has diverted the vital forces in the
body away from the love center, the solar plexus,
which is almost dormant in many men. When a
pure minded woman sends forth her desire for love,
such men interpret it sexually and are excited to
lust. Love is disappointed, and loathing of the ig-
cred animal eventually follows. Love is not sex
ust.


The love of God for his children is beyond de-


The Development of Divine Love 183


scription—a love so tender and so deep that it cannot
be mentioned in the same breath with the ordinary
love as known by the world.

The great love of Being is deeper and wider
than the thoughts and words of man have compassed
since the beginning of language. It can be known
only on its own plane, and man must awaken within
himself the capacity to feel a mighty love before he
can comprehend how great is the love of God.

But only the meek and lowly in heart may know
the depths of the Father’s love. It is not revealed
to the self-sufficient, because they do not open the
way through their own childlike, innocent hearts.

The Father yearns to have his love felt by every
one of us. He has given us the capacity to feel it,
and he waits until we develop it and open our souls
to the flood of good that he will pour out to us
through his all-sufficient love.

Father, Almighty! We. bow before thy good-
ness, and invoke in prayer and supplication thy silent
presence as Love. May its steady currents of power
draw us into thy mighty arms, where we shall rest
secure from all the buffets of the world. We come
as little children into the sacred precincts of thy
Love, knowing full well that no hand of force ever
finds a welcome here.

Open to us the inner peace and harmony which
are born of Love. Let all fear depart from our
minds as the shadows at morning light. Let us bask
forever in the sunshine of perpetual Love! thy Love
—thy never-failing Love!


THE MINISTRY OF THE WORD


The question of the Word of God, its character
and office, its relation to man, is one widely dis-
cussed by the theological world.

The statement made by John at the opening of
his gospel is of deep metaphysical import; it has
always been a stumblingblock to believers in a per-
sonal God. Only one who understands mind, its
laws and inherencies, can grasp the relation between
God and his Word as here presented by John.

It is interpreted to mean Jesus Christ of Naz-
areth; and so it does, in a free application of a uni-
versal consciousness manifesting through an indi-
vidual. But this is a limited view of the question,
and does not touch the vital points of the Word and
its relation to man and all other aspects of creation.

John says: “All things were made through him;
and without him was not anything made that hath
been made.”” But this does not cover the point; it
omits to state that there is a vital connection still
existing between the things made and the maker.

This is where theology has wandered away
from the very present sentient and vitally active
Spirit permeating all things, man not excepted.

It is here also that the very essence of the pure
metaphysical doctrine, propounded and demon-
strated by Jesus Christ, has its greatest virtue.

It is not a doctrine of “has been,” not a state-
ment of creation on post mortem grounds, but its


184


The Ministry of the Word 185


vitality is in it. It lives with a life and vigor that is
in no wise lost in the recital of what occurred in the
misty past, that cannot be defeated by speculations
of what may occur in the problematical future.

Jesus Christ was imbued with a spirit purely his
own. He did not borrow his mission, nor his words,
nor his precepts from E:gypt, Persia, or India. He
was a genius that burned with his own wick and oil.
He was not a child of tradition, nor did he allow
the muggy thought of Jewry to befog his midday
mind. He was not a Son of God by proxy, but ap-
peared in person and presented his heavenly cre-
dentials. There was not in his whole history and
ministry a single loophole for the belief in absence
or apartness of God. Herein lies the appropriate-
ness of our claim to him as a forerunner of the doc-
trine we advocate. Hle is our elder brother, and
to him we are indebted for the clearest presentation
of spiritual science that has ever been given to the
world.

It is of vital importance how a doctrine is pre-
sented. Some people think it is only necessary to
talk religion in flowing words and heavenly tones.
This is one way, but Jesus did not adopt it. His
presentation is peculiar in that it carries with it, and
illustrates by its works, a basis more enduring than
mere metaphysical presumption.

The imagination will carry out any idea or set
of ideas that the I AM reflects into it, hence theories
are not to be trusted. There must be evidence in
works. To produce works, there must be a working
power. ‘This is exactly what the Word is—the
working power of God.


186 Talks on Truth


Every process that we know anything about, has
its regular advancing steps from inception to con-
clusion, and these steps are taken according to rec-
ognized principles.

The student of languages must have intelligence
as a base of operation; next, he must have ideality;
and next, expression. To leave out one of these
factors, is to thwart the end sought.

Who can learn a language without the ideal
upon which to form his concepts? Then who can
express that language without the word through
which to convey to the listening ear the inner ideal ?

Herein is the Word of God prototyped. It is
that which conveys to the world the concepts of the
Most High. It is not the Most High in his whole-
ness, but it carries with it the power behind the
throne, because “‘these three are one’—the Father
(Principle), the Son (the Ideal), and the Holy
Ghost (the Formative Word).

These three are also minimized in each indi-
vidual, and through every ego is being poured all
the power of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost just to
the extent that the ego recognizes, acknowledges,
and appropriates them. They are in the world as
omnipresent Principle, having an abiding place
everywhere, because they are as ubiquitous as the
air. No man lives a moment without them, yet few
men recognize them—*“The light shineth in the dark-
ness; and the darkness apprehended it not.”

“There came a man, sent from God, whose
name was John.” ‘This is a step from darkness to
light. John is the illumined intellect turned toward
the creative light. It is not that light itself, but bears


The Ministry of the Word 187


witness of that light—recognizes it, and proceeds to
clear the way; tears down the walls of darkness that
shut that light from the view of the purblind ego,
blinded not from choice, but by its own conceits.
This is the darkness into which the light shines, and
where it is not comprehended.

But John bore witness of the Light. Whoso-
ever testifies in the favor of Truth, though he be
far removed from its brightness, is its friend, and is
making straight the way for its full blaze into his
consciousness. E

Light in the Scriptures always means intelli-
gence; hence that which shines into the conscious-
ness, and is not comprehended by it, is the clear re-
vealing on the plane of Spirit of that higher truth
which Spirit alone comprehends.

To catch this light in his understanding, man
must rise out of the sense state into the realm of free
ideas. Here is where the Word does its work; here
it is that ““All things were made through him; and
without him was not anything made that hath been
made.”

Outside of pure metaphysics (and by pure meta-
physics is meant a clear understanding of the realm
of ideas and their legitimate expression), there can
be no correct interpretation of this peculiar state-
ment: ‘Without him was not anything made that
hath been made.”” This implies that there is a mak-
ing which is not legitimate—not in accordance with
principle inherent in Being.

Those who have made a study of Mind from an
independent standpoint, those who have opened
themselves to the influx of original ideas from Spirit,


188 Talks on Truth


have discovered, in manner inexplicable to mortal
sense, that there are apparent creations which are not
creations at all, being but transitory formations that
lose their cohesion and dissolve when their mental
sustenance is withdrawn.

These formations are produced by the mentality
working independently of its wisdom sphere. They
are not permanent because they lack in that which
is essential to the permanent—harmony. There can
be no creation without a creator; there being but one
Creator, there can be but one creation.

God is the origin of all, and from him, in orderly
steps through his Perfect Idea (Son) and Wise
Builder (Holy Ghost), all creation proceeds.

The Son (man) looks to the Father for all in-
struction, and the Father responds to the son’s de-
mands by sending forth the Holy Spirit equipped
with wisdom and power necessary to perform the
work.

Man stands in the Godhead as the imaging fac-
ulty. He gives form, outline, condition, relation to
the infinite possibilities of the formless; but the form-
less knows how it should be formed to be enduring,
and this knowledge is communicated to man, along
with the power to form, when he looks for it and
acknowledges it. His failure to ask for this wisdom
does not nullify his formative powers, however, be-
cause he is by nature the formative faculty of Being.

Hence, when man ignores the wisdom of the
Spirit and proceeds to build his world independ-
ently, he seems to make many states and conditions
which are not made at all; they are merely malfor-


The Ministry of the Word 189


mations, and must of necessity fall to pieces of their
own disproportion.

All states are mental states. There is nothing
else in all the universe, visible or invisible. Who-
ever imagines anything else is throwing on the screen
of his universe the crude pictures on an uninspired
mentality. Such pictures last for a season, but their
own discords are their final destruction.

So in the very nature of things, a way must exist
whereby man may form his consciousness in har-
mony and consequent permanency. ‘That way is
in and through his acknowledgment of the Holy
Spirit, the Word of God.

Mind is that quality of Being that knows. It is
pure knowing, and he who cultivates it becomes so
filled with understanding that he intuitively per-
ceives the right of every question or proposition sub-
mitted to him. He does not have to study books
nor have experience in the realm of things:

Jesus of Nazareth was an enigma to the worldly
wise of Judzea. They wondered where he got his
understanding, never having studied letters. But he
did not claim to have wisdom of himself; he recog-
nized its true source in the Father—“The word
which ye hear is not mine, but the Father’s who
sent me.”

Every one coming into conscious recognition of
the Mind of Spirit, knows that he knows, without
having learned through any of the avenues recog-
nized as necessary by the intellectual man. It is
not a system of reasoning from premise to conclu-
sion, but a direct summing up of the whole case in
omnipresent Knowing.


190 Talks on Truth


The why and wherefore of this may be ex-
plained to those who have, in even a small measure,
disentangled the ego from the sense mind. It re-
quires a degree of familiarity with principles. If
you can comprehend a state where pure Mind exists
free from the limitations of time, space, and con-
dition, you can grasp, in a degree, the working field
of pure knowing.

There is within every man such a place—the
“secret place of the Most High.” When man
finds this place and accepts its privileges as his, he
is let into the realm of pure metaphysics, where
Mind alone with all its transcendent powers holds
free, untrammeled sway. ‘This is the point in every
man where God joins hands with him, and where the
Word of God finds entrance into his mentality. It
is here that man understands what it is to be inspired
by the Spirit to say and do those things extraordi-
nary in the sight of the world.

Simon Magus tried to buy the secret of this su-
perior magic, but found that he could not. It is not
for sale for money consideration. It can only be
had for love and obedience.

He who would have fruit from the tree of life,
must reach up and get it. He must aspire to it first,
and then in prayer and true word, act as if he had
already received it; he must go right ahead preaching
the gospel, healing the sick and doing the other
commandments of the Master, exactly as if he were
already filled with the Holy Ghost.

When the disciples of Jesus wanted to forbid
those who were doing works in his name, he said,
‘Forbid them not.” So every one who goes ahead


The Ministry of the Word 19]


and does the very best he knows in the name of the
Most High Good, will by virtue of his works draw
down upon himself the baptism of the Holy Ghost
—the Word of God.

In the Scriptures, the Word of God is usually
personified, indicating self-consciousness. He who
acknowledges the self-conscious character of the
Word is led as by One who knows all the affairs of
his life—aye, his most secret thoughts.

Thus this Word of God is the revelation to man
of the powers and possibilities of his own being. It
is the light that brings to his notice the inner mech-
anism of his soul and body. Where he externally
sees only flesh, blood, and bones, the searchlight of
this Word discloses the presence of secret springs
and living streams of energy and life. Man
awakens from his dream of sense and begins to visit
the different rooms in the temple he has lived in, but
knows so little about. This he is permitted to do
through the “light which lighteth every man, com-
ing into the world.”

When man’s consciousness is lifted up by this
wisdom Word, he finds himself master of the powers
and privileges of Infinity. He then says with Jesus,
‘All authority hath been given unto me in heaven
and on earth.” These are the privileges of the sons
of God, and every man is a son of God.

But to be or not to be, rests upon the immutable
law of the Word of God, for only by the light
which it sheds, can man see and appropriate the
privileges which are his by original birth. It is only
those who receive him who become in fact the sons


of God.


YE MUST BE BORN AGAIN


And no one has ascended into the heaven, save he who
out of the heaven descended—the Son of Man.—John
3:13. (Rotherham translation.)


Jesus said, “Except one be born of water and
the Spirit,” and, “That which is born of the flesh is
flesh; and that which is born of the Spirit is spirit.”
Who and what is this that is subject to so many
births >

This important invisibility that takes on these
protean forms is man, according to Jesus. But what
is man?

Plato told his students that a good description
of man was a “biped without feathers.” Diogenes
learned of this definition, procured a chicken, and
after plucking its feathers, turned it loose before
Plato’s class with the words, ““Behold Plato’s man!”
This is a peculiarly fitting illustration of the ignoble
end of all definitions that circumscribe man to form.

Jesus evidently referred to an invisible some-
thing that was first born of flesh, then born of the
Spirit. The inference is that this something is capa-
ble of an infinite number of experiences in birth and
rebirth.

What is this invisible something that says, ““Be-
fore Abraham was born, I am”? Who are you,
born into this round of experiences that you are now
passing through, and where did you come from?
What is it that says “I am’’?


When your voice says “I am,”’ does it do so on
192


Ye Must Be Born Again 193


its own responsibility, or is it moved by an invisible
One? Who is this invisible One, and what is his
relation to the voice through which he speaks?
These are the most important questions that were
ever put to any school on earth. When we begin
to consider them, in even the most primary way, we
are entering the realm of the gods.

Over the entrance to the Greek temple was writ-
ten, “Know thyself,”’ and it is always written over
every door that opens from ignorance to wisdom.
“Know thyself; know who and what you are,
where you came from, what you are doing here, and
where you are going. If you want to know all this,
meditate upon the I am.

Your mind reverts to Moses and Jehovah—you
think of a mighty I AM away back in history. You
do not connect that far-away I AM which inspired
Moses, with your own little everyday “I am” that
struggles in the “brawl for bread.” Yet there is but
one I AM. It cannot be cut up into parts; it is Prin-
ciple. That which says “I am’’ in all men, women,
and children is identical. It is like the mathematical
one. All the combinations of figures that were ever
conceived are but the repetitions of this digit. It is
the son of the principle, mathematics. It is inspired
by its principle and all the possibilities of that prin-
ciple are open to it.

Your I AM is the Son of the God Idea, and all
the possibilities of the Principle through that Idea,
are open to you. To “know thyself” is to know that
you are | AM, and not flesh and blood.

It is this | AM that is born of flesh and born of
Spirit. It is not flesh, neither is it Spirit, if by Spirit


194 Talks on Truth


is meant a state of consciousness. It is just I AM,
the center from which all states of consciousness are
generated. Speaking definitely, it is never born
into any state of consciousness, because it always
transcends all conditions. It is the supreme Dic-
tator that determines the state of consciousness in
and through which it will function. “‘I will be what
I will to be,”’ is its dictum.

It may choose to be born into the flesh, and it
may choose to be born into the Spirit. By its de-
cision it sets into motion the machinery of the uni-
verse to carry out its will. “‘Legions of angels”’
hasten to obey its call when it knows who and what
It Is.

It is evident that we have, at some time, chosen to
be born into the flesh or we would not be in it. If
we have had enough of the flesh, it is our privilege
to drop it out of our minds and be born of the Spirit.
_“*That which is born of the flesh is flesh; and that
which is born of the Spirit is spirit.” The ““flesh”’ is
a state of consciousness; the “‘Spirit”’ is a state of
consciousness.

The ego, or I AM, functions in these states of
consciousness, according to its desire. The moving
factor of the I AM is desire. It desires a certain
experience—on the wings of that desire it carries
itself where it can be fulfilled. In the process of
fulfillment, the ego may forget chat it has ever so
desired, but the law never forgets.

If you are functioning in the flesh, you may be
sure that you somewhere, sometime, desired an ex-
perience to which this answers.

There are no accidents in the laws of Being.


Ye Must Be Born Again 195


““Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap,”
is another way of saying that for every cause there
is an adequate effect. This law of sequence is the
balance wheel of the universe. Like all other laws
that inhere in Being, it is good.

The ego can have any experience that it wills
to have. If it wills to revel in sensation, a state
where sensation holds high carnival is provided. If
its appetite for sensation is satiated, other states are
open to it; it may be “born of the Spirit.”

But before journeying hence, the tangled ends
of this experience must be straightened out. “‘Let
all things be done decently and in order,”’ is written
over the door of all of God’s playhouses.

If you choose to function in the realm of sensa-
tion—if, through any cause you have brought about
disorder, you cannot leave until harmony is restored.

If you lack wisdom, there is a way provided to
get it— “The Spirit of truth,. . . he shall guide you
into all the truth.”

Your real self is that which says I AM. It can-
not be described, because description is limitation,
and it is unlimited in its capacity to be. It is the
Ail-Possibility, yet it is ignorant of the states of
consciousness into which it is ushered until it has
experienced them. In the flesh consciousness it is
will. In the spiritual consciousness it is love. Both
are blind unless will is married to intelligence and
wisdom to love.

There are people who have had enough fleshly
experience, and who now desire to be born into the
Spirit. That desire will open the door into the
Spirit. You have only to desire to be, and you will


196 Talks on Truth


surely find the way to be that which you desire.
There is no exception to this inherent principle of
Being. You have sometime polarized your desire
in the direction of the flesh, or you would not be
having the experience of the flesh.

Do not condemn the flesh nor bewail your lot.
The flesh is an obedient servant, and now expresses
your idea of what form should be. In its virgin
purity, it is the immaculate substance of Being. If
it appears corrupt or subject to corruption, human-
ity has made it so through ignorance, and humanity
must again purify it by restoring it to the heaven of
its consciousness, when it will cease to be flesh. That
which the world conceives to be flesh has no existence
in Being whatever. It is a malformation of the sub-
stance idea of Being, and must be transformed by
right conception of the Divine Perfection, before
the mortal can put on the immortal.

Thus all things are right here, ready for our
using, to function through, in the fulfillment of our
desire to experience sensation. If we have failed to
get satisfaction, the fault lies not in the substance
but in our use of the substance. Now that we wish
to transfer our experiences to the realm of the Spirit,
to light instead of sensation, we have but to comply
with the conditions of that realm to do so.

There is a Primal Substance, and all states of
consciousness are in it. We do not have to go any-
where to find it; it is here. We are basing our pres-
ent experiences upon it and calling it flesh. If we
desire to see it as Spirit, we must so call it, and must
seek to know the mental attitude on our part neces-
sary to make it show forth the conditions of Spirit.


| Ye Must Be Born Again 197


“The kingdom of God is within you.” It is
not afar, nor is it hard to find, if your desire has
headed you in its direction.

The question is, Do you really want to be born
into the Spirit ?

The majority of people would answer this query
in the affirmative without a moment’s thought. But
this is mere impulse, and not a careful consideration
of the most important matter that was ever presented
to the I AM.

To be born into the Spirit is to come into an en-
tirely new and different state of consciousness. This
has a mighty meaning back of it. What makes up
your present consciousness? Is it not largely the
things of sense?

Analyze your surroundings and see if they are
not all based upon the perception of the five senses.
You swing in your little orbit of family ties. You
believe that you were born into the world through a
chain of fleshly ancestors to whom you are bound
by a filial love which to your present understanding is
inviolable. Yet he who has passed from the flesh
consciousness into the Spirit, looked back and said,
“Call no man your father on the earth: for one is
your Father, even he who is in heaven.”

So the I am that desires to function on the
spiritual plane must drop all belief of fleshly parent-
age. It must count as rubbish all pride of ancestry
and “blue blood.” It must forever cease to talk
about the social prestige of “our family;’ it must
not bolster up the mortal man by considering an-
cestral reputation of any weight. This form of hv-
man pride must all be denied away as a dream of the


198 Talks on Truth


night, because it is one of the strong cords that bind
the I AM to the flesh.

Every tie of earthly relationship must be recog-
nized as the passing condition of a brief fleshly ex-
perience. Your children are not yours as you have
looked upon them. They are egos like yourself,
who, through some similarity of desire, have been at-
tracted to your mental stratum. They may be older
than you in experience and wisdom. Do not let
your affections throw both them and you into a little
vortex of family selfishness. You will love them
with a love that will help to lift them into the eternal
heaven when you know that they are not your chil-
dren, your brothers and sisters, your fathers and
mothers, but that all men and women compose one
great common family with God as the Father-
Mother. “For whosoever shall do the will of my
Father who is in Heaven, he is my brother, and sister,
and mother.”

The I AM was born into the flesh through de-
sire, and it is desire that keeps it in the consciousness
of the flesh. The five senses are simply avenues of
one great central desire—Sensation. The I Am
desired experience in sensation, and the five senses
are the five formulated avenues through which it
enjoys that experience.

Sensation is not an evil, except when you choose
to let it crawl on its belly through the fleshly ave-
nues. It is the serpent that beguiles man when he
turns it outward into mere seeming—hearing, seeing,
feeling, tasting, and smelling. In the wilderness of


sense, Moses lifted it up. Moses was the law which
the I Am sent forth.


Ye Must Be Born Again 199


You must make a law for this serpent that is
holding you in the sensations of the flesh. You de-
sire to be born into the Spirit, but you cannot rise
out of the flesh. Something binds you down. Like
a captive balloon, you are tugging at the guy ropes
that fasten you to earth.

Mind is the only causative power. By the power
of the word, it makes and unmakes all laws. The I
AM floats in mind and formulates the words that set
mind into motion.

If you are bound to the flesh, the cords that hold
you are concreted words. If you want to be un-
bound, it must be accomplished by words. The
cords are states of consciousness that you must dis-
solve. This dissolving process is accomplished by
words that express denial—negations.

The denial looses the bond. In cutting yourself
free from the chains of Egypt (ignorance), your I
AM must go forth and make laws of denial, the
dominant idea of which is negation—‘Thou shalt
not.”

“Thou shalt not commit adultery,” is a denial
that regulates the animal consciousness and helps it
along the path to higher things; but Jesus said, “Ye
have heard that it was said, Thou shalt not commit
adultery: but I say unto you, that every one that
looketh on a woman to lust after her hath committed
adultery with her already in his heart.”

He was laying down the law of the spiritual
consciousness—instructing those who wanted to be
born out of the flesh into the Spirit. In that realm,
the flesh man with his carnal sensations has no part.
“And Jesus said unto them, The sons of this world


200 Talks on Truth


marry, and are given in marriage; but they that are
accounted worthy to attain to that world, and the
resurrection from the dead, neither marry, nor are
given in marriage.”

Do not be deluded by those who cry, “All is
good, therefore all the desires of the flesh are good
and should be indulged.” Jesus plainly said, ““That
which is born of the flesh is flesh; and that which is
born of the Spirit is spirit,” definitely indicating two
states of consciousness.

The I AM is always the same. Your identity
is preserved wherever you are, in the flesh or in the
Spirit; but the two states are as distinct as America
and Europe. When you are in Europe, you come
into relation with people and surroundings quite dif-
ferent from those in America. So he who has let go
the bonds of the flesh and come into the Spirit, finds
himself in a different country.

In the flesh, his sensation was turned outward
through feeling, and man was bound to the eternally
rolling wheels of birth and death by physical gen-
eration. When he is born into the Spirit, he cuts off
the indulgence of the external, and is delighted to
learn that sensation finds an interior faculty, through
which it expresses itself in perpetual ecstasy. Had
he continued to indulge the desires of the flesh in the
external, he would never have discovered the en-
during faculty of the internal.

Jesus said, “In my Father’s house are many
mansions; that is, there are many states of con-
sciousness. FE,ach state is good for him who enjoys
it. Therefore we should not condemn the flesh con-
sciousness, nor those who prefer to remain in it.


Ye Must Be Born Again 201


Neither should we who are satiated with the flesh,
continue to bow down and worship it, nor believe
the subtle argument that it is Spirit because it came
forth from mind.

In claiming your unity with Spirit, you must be
willing to conform to the conditions of Spirit. If
you are not sincere in your conformity, you will be
torn in the conflict. You cannot worship two
masters.

When you have renounced the fleshly conscious-
ness and have resolved to live in the Spirit, you have
made a covenant with the Most High to leave the
domain of the flesh forever. You have entered into
an agreement with your invisible self, which is far
more binding than any manmade contract could
possibly be.

If you agreed to go to California and remain
there for a consideration to be paid by your em-
ployer, you would in honor be bound to carry out
your contract. You would arrange to leave the
things of this region behind you; you would faith-
fully seek to prepare yourself for the new require-
ments in that country. ‘This is exactly the attitude
you should take when you have agreed with the
Father to do his will and be born into the Spirit.

You are going into a country entirely new to
you, and your experiences will be strange and won-
derful. The customs that prevail in the flesh con-
sciousness will not fit the spiritual consciousness.

Paul says, “The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy,
peace, longsuffering, kindness, goodness, faithful-
ness, meekness, self-control; against such there is no


202 Talks on Truth


law... . If we live by the Spirit, by the Spirit let
us also walk.”

Are you bringing forth this kind of fruit? If
not, you may know that you are not being born of
the Spirit, for “by their fruits ye shall know them.”

A large number of students of Truth are at this
time complaining because they are having trials.
They say, ““We have denied and affirmed for years.
We have studied science and understand it. We are
faithful to the hours of meditation and are staunch
defenders of the Truth, yet we do not demonstrate.
Why is it?”

“Tf we live by the Spirit, by the Spirit let us also
walk.” Here is the key that will open the door of
causes for you. Do you also walk by the Spirit?

How about the habits of the flesh conscious-
ness? Do you still give them rein?

Remember that you cannot perform a single act
without putting your consciousness into it. All
things are sustained by your conscious thought pro-
jection. E,very time you indulge in any of the sen-
sations of the flesh, you are binding the I AM to the
fleshly consciousness.

Spiritual thinking is the pioneer that opens the
way into the new birth, but it must be followed by
spiritual acting on the part of every faculty. ‘“‘Pre-
sent your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable
to God, which is your spiritual service.”

In the Sermon on the Mount, Jesus laid down
the law for those who desire to follow him into the
regeneration—to be born again. If you seek this
spiritual birth, examine your daily life, and see if
you are conforming to its requirements.


Ye Must Be Born Again 203


If you are angry with your brother, you will be
in danger of the judgment.

““Agree with thine adversary quickly.” Does
this allow the intervention of the courts to settle your
disputes? Did you ever know a man who went to
law, to agree with his adversary quickly >

Judicial courts are not known in the Spirit,
and you can never be born again nor expect
the help. of the Spirit in your affairs as long as you
believe in securing your rights through such con-
tentious channels. If you are sincere in your desire
to be born into the Spirit, shun all the entanglements
of the world’s legal machinery. It is a snare and a
delusion. Your triumphs through its methods will
in the end turn to dust and ashes. “If any man
would go to law with thee, and take away thy coat,
let him have thy cloak also.”” Trust the defense of
your rights to the law of Spirit, and you will be victor
in every instance. You may appear to lose both
your coat and your cloak, but do not worry. Your
judge is the Almighty Equilibrium of the universe,
and all men and all things are obedient to it in its
“day of judgment.”

Do you love your enemies? Do you bless them
that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and
pray for them which despitefully use you and perse-
cute you? ‘This is required of one who seeks the
new birth.

Are you laying up treasures for yourself upon
earth, “where moth and rust consume, and where
thieves break through and steal” > If so, remember
the primal law of thought generation—the gluing of
the ego to those things which it consciously seeks;


204 Talks on Truth


‘for where thy treasure is, there will thy heart be
also.” You cannot float out into the ethereal sub-
stance of the Spirit, with bags of gold in each hand.

Do you allow your mind to drift with the cur-
rent criticism of the world, magnifying the error and
minimizing the good? ‘This mental habit of the
ignorant flesh is carnal judgment—darkness and ig-
norance seeing themselves reflected in all the uni-
verse. Beware of this subtle adversary who goes
forth ostensibly to reform the world.

According to Rotherham, Jesus said to such:
“Why, moreover, beholdest thou the mote that is in
the eye of thy brother, while the beam in thine eye
thou dost not consider? Or wilt thou say to thy ©
brother, Allow I may cast out the mote out of thine
eye; and, behold! the beam is in thine eye? Hypo-
crite! Cast out first, out of thine eye, the beam;
and then shalt thou clearly see to cast out the mote
out of the eye of thy brother.”

O Son of God and Son of man! realize what
and who you are. Know consciously what Jesus
so succinctly stated: ‘‘No one hath ascended into
heaven, but he that descended out of heaven, even
the Son of man,” the one having his being in heaven.

Your being is in heaven—the spiritual conscious-
ness. You descended from that high estate; by right
you belong there now. You are there now if you
will but realize it and will but comply with the laws
of heaven. God is here now in our very midst. The
Spint is here, taking account of our every thought.
The Father loves us with his infinite love. We are
his in truth, and must be his in fact.


OBEDIENCE


Before the descent of the Holy Spirit upon us,
we live in the intellect, and our little world is
rounded by the thinking faculty. What our an-
cestors thought is the pattern after which we cut our
thinking. To any one who claims a higher fount of
wisdom we say, ‘Art thou greater than our father
Jacob, who gave us the well, and drank thereof
himself, and his sons, and his cattle >”’

Thinking is a process in mind. All processes
come to an end. Every thought has its premise, its
stage of action as a reasonable proposition, and its
conclusion. So the I AM that lets the sphere of its ex-
istence be encompassed by the limited thinking fac-
ulty, follows the process of the syllogism; it believes
birth, life, and death to be the major, minor, and con-
clusion of existence. Instead of recognizing the
power to think as simply a faculty of mind, it as-
sumes it to be the whole of mind and all of itself.
This identification of the free I AM with its creations
brings about a world ef illusions. Instead of ac-
complishment through an equilibrium of faith and
works, it sees no way of reaching the goal except
through violent and continued action. ‘To such, ex-
istence is not the joyous dominion over many obedi-
ent powers, but the rebellious slave of one.

To be ushered into life, blindly toil a few years
through its fitful maze, and then go out in darkness
is surely not the method of wise design. Life must
mean more than this, and it does mean more. Man


206 Talks on Truth


is the builder, and to him is given all the materials
out of which to construct the temple in which he
dwells. He builds in wisdom or ignorance, accord-
ing to his obedience—his receptivity to the sphere
of intelligence within him.

Simon, the first disciple of Jesus, represents a
receptive attitude of mind. Simon means hearing—
listening for the inner voice and obedience to it,
when it says, ‘Put out into the deep, and let down
your nets for a draught.”” When the thinking fac-
ulty is obedient and does what it is told, it is always
rewarded with a great ‘‘multitude of fishes,” or new
ideas. It is then counted worthy to be a disciple of
the Master and its name is changed to Peter. Faith,
the substance of thought, then becomes the rock upon
which the body temple is built. If you are living in
your thinking faculty intellectually, if you believe in
birth and death, you must come out of that belief.
You are not exercising your rightful dominion, but
are subject to error thought.

You are Spirit, the Son of God, and your place
is at the right hand of the Father. To realize this
is to call down upon yourself the baptism of the
Holy Spirit, after which baptism you no longer labor
as a carpenter, or fisher, but begin to gather together
your disciples—powers of mind. This gathering to-
gether of your powers is an orderly process, and you
will find that it proceeds right along the lines laid
down in the choosing of his disciples by Jesus, as
recorded in Matt. 4:18 and Mark 1:16. Your
first power is the hearing faculty, Simon, and with
him is strength, “his brother Andrew.” You dis-
cover that hearing gives direction to your thinking


Obedience 207


faculty and that obedience increases your power to
control your thoughts and to make your world con-
form to your ideas. Then you disentangle the I AM
from the thinking faculty; you take control of the
thinking and direct its power according to your wis-
dom. But wisdom is of the Spirit. “There is a
spirit in man, And the breath of the Almighty giveth
them understanding.”

After you have separated your I AM from the
thinking faculty, you are no better off than before
unless you recognize that all wisdom is from the
Spirit. You can get flashes of understanding at any
time, but the clear light of the Supreme will shine
steadily upon you only when you are obedient and
receptive to its monitions. ‘The record states that
Jesus prayed often; that he sought in every way to do
the Father’s will, even to suffering the utmost igno-
miny in order to carry out the message which he had
for humanity. He always listened for the “inner
voice,” and was obedient to it in his meek and lowly
work among the humblest class of men. “To do
the will of the Father was his highest aim, because
his success depended entirely upon knowing that will.
“T do nothing of myself,” and “All authority hath
been given unto me in heaven and on earth,” seem
contradictory statements, but when carefully an-
alyzed they corroborate the premise that all wisdom
and power come from the Spirit—and the Spirit
is “given” to man. The highest development of
spiritual discernment sees the [ AM possessed of
nothing as its own, but the user of all things that the
Father has.


The relation between God and man is very sim-


208 Talks on Truth


ilar to that existing between a codperative colony
and its members. A\ll that the colony owns, is for
the use of each member to the full extent of his
ability to use wisely, but he must not attempt to
hoard the belongings of the colony nor claim them as
his exclusive property. To know how to establish
this relation between Father and Son is the object of
every man, for only through its establishment can
come happiness. After the I AM has come into an
understanding that it is given charge of various
powers, its first need is to know how properly to de-
velop those powers. When this knowledge comes,
the I AM must faithfully use all its resources in for-
warding the grand scheme of creation.

Here comes up an extremely intricate and in-
teresting point. Can it nghtly be said that man pos-
sesses any powers? We say that we have judg-
ment, love, etc., but is it not true that these belong to
God, and are merely ours to use in the attainment of
an object in the plan of creation, which is not yet
revealed by the Father> This must be the conclu-
sion of a logical consideration of the matter. Man
is given “dominion” over all things, but possession is
not conveyed. ‘Thus you do not possess your body
even—it belongs to God. If it is sick or discordant
in any way, the condition must be in your idea of the
body and not in the real body itself. All of God’s
creations are perfect; your body as it appears to him
must also be perfect, and if you will stand aside and
let his Spirit shine through it, you will see that it is
perfect in every part.

Some of the most miraculous cures ever made
have been where the healer simply saw perfection


ObeTicnce | 209


in the patient. He saw with the eye of Spirit that
which really exists, and the shadow conformed to
his seeing just to the extent of his realization of that
spiritual reality. The Father lets you use his sub-
stance and intelligence to build shadows about the
real, but that they are shadows you learn by experi-
ence, when you might know by a shorter way. That
shorter way is the way of obedience to the Spirit.
Obedience comes from a meek and lowly heart—
a heart that is willing to serve all and sacrifice its
mortal pride on the altar of spiritual Truth. Jesus
washed his disciples’ feet, the most humble office.
He told them, “He that is greatest among you shall
be your servant. And whosoever shall exalt himself
shall be humbled; and whosoever shall humble him-
self shall be exalted.”’ This erasing of the personal °
man is the short cut into the kingdom of heaven. It
is not a denial of oneself as a “worm of the dust,”
“‘a sinner against God,” and other misconceptions of
the relation of the I AM to the Father. It is a letting
go of pride, ignorance, selfishness, ambition, and the
thousand and one dense ideas that make the soul
opaque to the eye of the Spirit.

A man’s burdens are always the things he has
laid claim to as his personal property, and which are
thereby deprived of the sustaining ability of the All-
Powerful. “Come unto me, all ye that labor and
are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.” Lay
your burdens upon the Spirit. Say unto them, “I
let you go gladly.” You have no right whatever to
take upon yourself any burden. ‘To do so is to
contradict squarely the universal law of Good.
There is no such thing as a burden in God’s scheme


210 Talks on Truth


of creation, and if you are bearing one, it is because
you do not understand who and what you are and
your relation in the great Whole.

When you carefully sift your burdens you will
find that they arise from some idea of possession.
You think, for instance, that you have those de-
pendent upon you who must be provided with the
necessities of life. Your idea of their claim upon
you arises from your belief that they have no other
protector. When you recognize an_all-caring
Father, who heeds even the sparrow’s fall, you re-
linquish that idea of your responsibility, and you
are relieved. Then through the mental freedom
which your mind recognizes, there flows to you and
those in whom you are interested greater resources
from unlooked-for directions. We do not abandon
our friends and withdraw all interest in them, but
we recognize their equality with ourselves in the
supreme Mind, and by that recognition they are
freed from a mental dependency with which we
have unconsciously bound them. ‘They begin to
assert their inherent capacities; they step forth with
the work which the Spirit within them has chosen.

People who pose before the world as benefac-
tors and dispensers of charity, should rightly be
counted enemies of mankind. He who dispenses
charity tickles his own idea of benevolence, but he
is not a friend of the race. Thousands are held in
bondage to the belief that they must be helped,
when the blessing would be to make them see that
their salvation lies in helping themselves. The most
prolific burden producer is that idea that provision
must be made for the needs of the future. The


Obedience 211


childless scrimp and strive to provide a competency
for old age; those with children pursue the same
methods, providing for the future of their children.
This fear of a future day of want has become a
race belief so absorbing that the old, the young, and
the middle-aged are its victims under the guise of
life insurance.

If you are obedient to the Spirit you will not
suffer these burdens to be loaded upon you. You
will live in the present; do your highest duty every
day; forget the past, and let the future take care
of itself. “To trust the Spirit, you must know of its
guidance by experience. To those who have not
learned the guidance of the Spirit, that experience
must be acquired. God does not require you to
follow his leading on blind trust always. You may
look over all creation first and see the evidence of
the invisible intelligence pervading everything, even
your own body. ‘Then from analogy you can ar-
rive at a solution of the question whether or not that
same Spirit pervades your consciousness. If you
decide that it does, and you have made up your
mind to cultivate its acquaintance, you may rest in
the assurance that the proof will be forthcoming.
The Spirit is modest; its voice is silent in a turmoil
of argument about its existence. It is not found on
the housetops proclaiming its presence. It is Spirit.
Spirit is the omnipotent, silent principle pervading
Being. You are Spirit, and must find yourself be-
fore you can communicate with the universal Spirit.

The thinking faculty is the gate through which
the I AM comes forth from the invisible to the visible,
and it is through this gate you must go to get into


212 Talks on Truth


the presence of the Spirit. Hence, we take words
and go unto our God. We came out from his pres-
ence through that gate, and we must return the same
way. On the inner side is the garden of Eden, but
the cherubim stand there, and the flaming sword
that turns “every way, to keep the way of the tree of
life.” That flaming sword is the inner motive that
rules our thoughts and acts. It turns every way
to guard the tree of life, because that tree is the
precious substance of the Father. .

Disobedience to the Spirit is refusal to do right
at all hazards. We all know the right, but we do
not always do it, because it seems to foil immediate
attainment of the object we seek. We want quick
returns, forgetting that “the mills of the gods grind
slow, but they grind exceeding small.” We want
instantaneous healing of our diseases, but are loath to
sacrifice the mental habits that cause them. The
mind of the flesh knows that its existence depends
upon keeping the I Am in its bonds, and it begs that
the discord which its ignorance has produced in the
body may be quickly erased without disturbing its
dominion. Hence, the cry goes up from all over
the land, “Heal me! heal me! as Jesus of Nazareth
did those who came to him, but don’t ask me to
change my ideas.”

Moses stands for the progressive law of the
mind, working out its salvation through obedience
to the Spirit. In the Egyptian darkness of its mortal
state, the mind does not see its way out, nor indeed
can it see, except through the eye of spiritual percep-
tion. Some people mistake spiritual perception for
the reality, and refuse to take the second step of


Obedience 213


science, which is organic realization of the truths per-
ceived in mind. This second step is one of intricate
building, stone by stone, of a living temple in which
the Spirit resides forever. No one can undertake
this structure of a spiritual body, until he has cove-
nanted to follow the directions of the Spirit as re-
vealed to him from day to day. If he depends upon
teachers, healers, books, or the experience of others,
he is like the contractor who starts to build after the
design furnished by his architect, and instead of con-
sulting that design and its author at each step, looks
here and there and everywhere for advice as to what
to do.

The image and likeness of our spiritual body is
as thoroughly defined in us as is the tree in the
acorn. Does the acorn consult anything outside of
itself as to how it should bring forth a tree? Cer-
tainly not. It simply rests in the Spirit and unfolds
from moment to moment, as moved by the impulse
_ within. Exactly the same law is operative in bring-
ing forth the God-Man. ‘The external, striving,
wandering will must stop its restless seeking without,
and repose at the center. It must be obedient to that
center, and learn the language of the Spirit. Moses
was forty years a tender of sheep before he was
competent to lead his people out of servitude. He
learned the language of the Father in his hours of
solitude, and he knew without doubting when he
was called to go forth. So we must, every one,
find the Father consciously in our own inner temples.
We must go there day after day and ask for guid-
ance. Mere denials and affirmations will not do it.
God is Spirit. Spirit is Mind, and Mind knows.


214 Talks on Truth


It is not an abstraction that dwells in a vacuum to be
invoked by some magic formula, but is must be culti-
vated and communed with as a child with its parent.

Thus the reality of living is to live as Jesus of
Nazareth lived—one with the Father. Our ideas
should be what we have realized in and of ourselves,
not what we have learned from books. “He that
loveth father or mother more than me is not worthy
of me; and he that loveth son or daughter more than
me is not worthy of me.” We must know him as
nearer, dearer, and closer in consciousness than fa-
ther, mother, wife, husband, or friend. He must be
to us the indwelling love and intelligence that leaps
forth at every word we speak, every thought we
think. He is at our right hand and at our left. He
is within us and without us. He dwells in a halo
about our heads. His thought vibrates upon the
tympanum of our minds, and we speak the divine
words of health and hope to all worlds.

God is our Father-Mother, the one inspiration
of all we do, all that we are. Why for a moment
ignore this one All-Power? Why look to the in-
sipid without when the inspired within forever
sparkles with the vintage of eternal youth, health,
wisdom, life?

God is. Man is. We are now in the presence
of that eternal Is-ness—Osiris and Isis are now our
Father-Mother as fully as they were of old Egypt.
The mighty works of those men of antiquity are
possible to us, when we acquaint ourselves, as they
did, with the power within. Let us not look abroad
for power or wisdom, but seek at home. There in
the silent recesses of our own souls we will find the


Obedience 215


pearl of great price. The well of living water must
spring up within us. We are his beloved, and
nothing short of his opulence will satisfy us. Let us
no longer stay in that far country and tend the
swine, but let us come home to the Father’s house.
We will be thrice welcome. Our lives will spring up
with new vigor, and the blush of youth will return to
our cheeks, when we know that the eternal fount of
life forever bubbles up within our souls.

It is your mission to express all that you can
imagine God to be. Let this be your standard of
achievement; never lower it, nor allow yourself to
be belittled by the cry of sacrilege. You may attain
to everything you can imagine. If you imagine it
is possible to God, it is also possible to you. What-
ever possibility your mind conceives, that is for you
to attain. This is the law—let none belittle himself,
nor dwarf the Supreme by trying to annul it. “All
things that are mine are thine, and thine are mine.”

God is, and we are. Let us live in his world—
not a world to be tomorrow, next month, next year,
or next century, but here and now. God’s beautiful
universe is all about us, only awaiting our acknowl-
edgment of its presence. Let us know God and
live—live with love and joy, health and peace, here
evermore.


Thou art, O God, the life and light
Of alli this wondrous world we see;

Its glow by day, its smile by night,
Are but reflections caught from thee.

Where’er we turn thy glories shine,


And all things fair and bright are thine.


216 Talks on Truth


When day, with farewell beam, delays
Among the opening clouds of even,
And we can almost think we gaze
Through golden vistas into heaven—
Those hues that make the sun’s decline
So soft, so radiant, Lord! are thine.


When night with wings of starry gloom
O’ershadows all the earth and skies,

Like some dark, beauteous bird, whose plume
Is sparkling with unnumbered eyes,

That sacred gloom, those fires divine,

So grand, so countless, Lord! are thine.


THE CHURCH OF CHRIST


He came unto his own, and they that were his own
received him not.—John 1:11.


The pure doctrine of Jesus Christ has never been
popular with those who like formality and rites in
religion.

The disciples of Jesus Christ were from the
ranks of the common people, unlearned in the lore
of the scribes and without reputation, religiously or
otherwise. They, in their turn, became filled with
the Holy Spirit, and did unusual works in healing
and teaching, yet their converts were not largely
from orthodox circles. It was the “common people”’
who gladly heard them and their Master. The
aristocracy and the organized church opposed them
at every turn. They were stoned, quartered, and
burned, and their doctrines never became the pop-
ular religion. Pure Christianity was literally killed
in less than three hundred years after the cruci-
fixion. What is called Christianity is a combination
of paganism, Israelitism, and the letter of Jesus’ doc-
trine without the spirit.

This heterogenous mass became acceptable be-
cause it was sanctioned by kings and enforced as the
church of the state. Ais it had a little from all the
religions, it offered balm to the forced worshipers
from each sect, and thus became quickly popular.

It is not the doctrine of Jesus Christ, however,
and never has been, in any of its many forms and


sects. Here and there a gleam of truth has come to
cid


218 Talks on Truth


spiritually awakened devotees, and they have broken
away from the institution and formed newer and
higher standards of truth; but all have been far short
of the original doctrine set forth by Jesus and his
disciples.

Jesus Christ never organized a church on earth,
nor did he authorize any one else to do so. He said
to Peter, “Upon this rock I will build my church.”
He did not tell Peter that he was to be the head of
the church, with a line of popes to follow. He said,
“T will build my church.” Jesus Christ is still the
head of his church, and its only organization is in
Spirit. Whoever attempts to organize it on earth
with creeds, tenets, or textbooks of any kind or de-
scription as authority, is in direct opposition to his
word and example. He gave but one guide, one
source from which his followers should receive their
inspiration—‘“The Holy Spirit, whom the Father
will send in my name, he shall teach you all things,
and bring to your remembrance all that I said unto
you.

The puerile claim that this promise was for his
immediate disciples only, is hardly worth consider-
ing, because of so many texts in which he plainly
states that his ministry and words are for the world.
In the same chapter with this he said, ‘“‘He that hath
my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that
loveth me: and he that loveth me shall be loved of
my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest
myself unto him.”

It was this same Spirit of Truth in Peter that
perceived the Christ, and of which he said, ‘Flesh
and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my


The Church of Christ 219


Father who is in heaven.” This revealment of
Truth direct from the Spirit, is the rock upon which
the one and only church of Jesus Christ is built. All
other authorities are spurious.

That the one and only true church of Christ is
without authority or head on earth, is evident from
the accepted words of Jesus himself. He never
authorized the history of his life as recorded in the
Gospels, so far as known; yet, accepting them as
such history, on their face they bear out the claim
of a spiritual church, with only the Holy Ghost as
mediator between man and God. It is evident that
Jesus saw the tendency among men to make idols of
the Scriptures, and it was his aim to do away with
that sort of idolatry. Instead of a command to
“search the scriptures,’ Jesus reprimanded the Phar-
isees in John 5:39, in these words: “Ye search the
scriptures, because ye think that in them ye have
eternal life; and these are they which bear witness
of me.”

It is the eternal binding of the thoughts to some
external authority in book, creed, or tradition that
keeps men in bondage to the lower world. When
the mind is perfectly free to search out the higher
truths of existence, there flows into the conscious-
ness a vigor and virility that set in motion all the
crystallized thoughts, and fresh life stirs the whole
man. Instead of confining the Infinite God in the
little being of parts and passions conceived by some
good but ignorant “church father’’ of bygone ages,
the open mind flows forth in its own native freedom,
and its God is a whole universe, larger in every way
than was his of the limited concept. So it is with all


220 Talks on Truth


the questions of doctrine that form the stock in trade
of hereditary religion. What our forefathers dis-
cussed a life time, fought bitter battles over and left
undecided, the free minded man sees through in a
moment’s consideration. He sees through it with
unerring accuracy, because his point of view is far
removed from the narrow bigotry engrafted by
creeds and dogmas into the susceptible mind of the
infant churchman.

The mind of man is like a clear stream which
flows from some lofty mountain. It has nothing at
its point of origin to corrupt or distort it, but as it
flows out into the plain of experience, it meets the
obstruction of doubt and fear. It is here that dams
are built, and its course turned in many ways.

Whoever formulates a creed, whoever writes a
book claiming to be an infallible guide for mankind;
whoever organizes a church in which it is attempted,
by rules and tenets, to save men from their evil ways;
whoever attempts to offer, in any way, a substitute for
the one omnipresent Spirit of God dwelling in each
of us, is an obstructor of the soul’s progress.

But those very things are the first attempted by
the mentality that is not in constant openness to the
influx from the Father. Man is by nature an organ-
izer. It is his function in the Godhead to formulate
the potentialities of the Principle. It is through
man’s conscious ego that the Father makes himself
manifest to him as Infinite Externality. The within
and without are one, only when man recognizes that
he draws all his life, substance, and intelligence from
Infinite Spirit welling up within him.

Many have caught sight of the fact that the true


The Church of Christ 221


church of Christ is a state of consciousness in man,
but few have gone so far in the realization as to
know that a temple is also constructed in the very
body of each man and woman, in which the Christ
holds religious services at all times. “Ye are a
temple of God,”’ was not symbolical appellation, but
a statement of architectural truth. Under the direc-
tion of the Christ, a new body is constructed by the
thinking faculty in man; the materials entering into
this superior structure are the spiritualized organic
substances, and the new creation is the temple, or
body of Spirit. It breathes an atmosphere and is
thrilled with a life energy more real than that of the
external form. When one who has come into the
church of Christ in this ultimate, feels the stirring
within him of this body of the Spirit, he knows what
Paul meant when he said, “There is a natural body,
there is also a spiritual body.”

Most of the opposition to the church of Christ
comes from those who have never felt the stirring
within them of this spiritual body, and they refuse to
believe the experiences of those who have. They
live in the intellectual-spiritual, and when the Holy
Spirit proceeds to organize an abiding place within
them, they refuse it recognition, and call it “‘mortal
mind,” “the devil,”’ or “‘an unclean spirit.”

It is this blasphemy against the Holy Ghost that
Jesus said could not be forgiven. Everything that
a man does or has done, the Father freely forgives
except the cursing of his Holy Spirit by calling it
an unclean spirit. He who understands the law of
mental action, can easily see why this cannot be for-
given. Mind organizes its states of consciousness


222 Talks on Truth


according to methods inherent in Being. First is
the idea, which is the center in which the form is
generated. This form is projected from that center
to a circumference, and in its line of structure in the
consciousness of man, it proceeds to occupy the place
of preéxisting forms. The idea of perfection held
in the mind, will build a body having for its attri-
butes all the harmony possible to the organism in
which it is born. ‘‘God giveth it a body even as it
pleased him, and to each seed a body of its own.”
That ‘“‘seed’’ is the true idea held on your mind,
through which the Holy Spirit nourishes and grows
in you the new body.

If you refuse to receive the sensible ministrations
of this Holy Spirit, you, of course, cut off the builder
of the eternal temple in which God makes his perma-
nent dwelling place in you.

When you refuse to receive this baptism of the
Holy Ghost, your flesh is not quickened, and it must
eventually go back to dust. In such a case, you are
again sent to school to learn the lesson in another
earthly experience.

This is the law. Let him who hath ears, hear
the law; let him not oppose the construction of the
temple which Spirit builds in obedience to the
thought held by the mind, and his body shall become
an enduring, deathless habitation of the living God.
Let us, each one of us, see to it that this opposition
to Christ and his methods is not found within us.

If our teaching has been such as to disparage
the entertainment of the new sensations in the body,
when in prayer or in the silence, let us cast those
ideas out of our minds and throw ourselves wholly


The Church of Christ 223


into the care of the Spirit. The mind of the flesh
vigorously opposes this newcomer in its domain, and
if you side with it and ignorantly cast out the Spirit,
you will find yourself eventually without a body.
You have sinned against the Holy Ghost, and are
homeless in consequence.

Pronounce every experience good, and of God,
and by that mental attitude you will call forth only
the good. What seemed error will disappear, and
only the good will remain. This is the law, and no
one can break it. The adversary always flees be-
fore the mind that is fixed on the pure, the just, and
the upright. There is no error in all the universe
that can stand for one moment in the presence of the
innocent mind. Innocence is its own defense, and
he who invokes the Father with pure motive and up-
right heart, need not fear any experience. God has
not forgotten his world nor the children of light. It
is his will to build in you his eternal habitation, and
he will do it in a manner so attractive that you will
be delighted with the process, after the first few
moves have been made. It is not always pleasant to
tear down old brick and mortar, but when the new
structure commences to go up, there is rejoicing.

So you will find in your experience with the
work of the Holy Spirit in reconstructing your or-
ganism that the present structure must be literally
torn down atom by atom. It is in its present state
temporary, and without the conscious life of the in-
dwelling Spirit. You, with the race, have separated
yourself from God in consciousness; that separation
extends to the body, which is the most remote plane
of your consciousness.


224 Talks on Truth


In returning, the Father, the innermost of you,
the Spirit which is and ever has been pure, first rec-
ognizes its true estate. This recognition is on the
plane of causes, the ideal, and may remain there for
a long time. But the law of seed time and harvest
prevails here, as in the natural world, and the idea
is the ‘‘seed”’ which will spring forth from its subjec-
tive realm. This, when watered by the Holy Spirit
through your receptive thought, grows a new organ-
ism which will be a permanent battery from which
you will radiate the transcendent powers of the
Spirit forever and forever.

When this is done, creation is a perfect, homo-
geneous symphony of life, light, and love. Discord
is eliminated; sin, sorrow, and everything that in any
way interferes with the highest ideal of existence are
dissolved, and man realizes that his dominion is to
be the obedient outlet of the inexhaustible inlet.
Herein is God glorified, that his inexhaustible re-
sources are not limited by man, but allowed full and
free flow into a universe without height or depth,
without beginning or ending.

The true church of Christ is never organized
upon the earth, because the minute that man organ-
izes his religion, he ceases to be guided wholly by the
free Spirit of Truth, and to that extent he falls away
from the true church.

Many of the Protestant sects were, in their in-
cipiency, very close to the original church. Wesley
was led by the Spirit, and his ministry was charac-
terized by a spiritual glow and power that was felt
all over the religious world. He was free; he had
the freedom of Jesus Christ back of him, yet he and


The Church of Christ 275


his followers were despised by the organized church,
and it was a stinging epithet to be called a “Meth-
odist.””

The church of Jesus Christ still waits for a min-
istry that will represent it as it is—an organization
in heaven without a head on earth, without a creed,
without a line of written authority. This church
exists, and must be set up in its rightful place—the
minds and hearts of men. It can never be confined
to any external organization, and whoever attempts
such movement, by that act ceases to represent the
true church of Christ.

There is need of such a church, and it is im-
perative that it be set up. Whoever advocates such
a setting up, may for a season expect the opposition
of the organized institutions on every hand, but the
final outcome must be victorious.

There can be but one leader for man in his
search for God—the Spirit within him. When he
unreservedly gives himself up to this Spirit he finds
that the old world of forms and their limitations are
no longer of interest. A new world is opened to his
vision. What was the goal of his human life, be-
comes a mere toy to his expanded concepts of God
and the destiny of man.

He finds that the church of Jesus Christ is not a
church at all, under the new definition. He has
looked upon his religion as having to do with the
salvation of his soul—a sort of school in which he is
coached in catechism and creed, that he may be pre-
pared to go to a place called “heaven,” after death.

When the true church is revealed to his soul, all
this illusion of the animal man is dissolved. He


226 . Talks on Truth ~
finds that the church of Jesus Christ has to do with


the world right here and now; that it is not a religion,
as he has been accustomed to regard religion; that
it is an organic principle in nature working along
definite lines of growth in the building up of a state
of consciousness for the whole human race.

Thus the church of Jesus Christ is an exact sci-
ence. It has its part in the economy of Being, as the
organizer of the unorganized. It does not refer to
things abstract, but to things concrete. Whoever
looks upon it as an abstraction has wholly miscon-
ceived it.

God never performs miracles, if by this is meant
a departure from universal law. Whatever the
prophets did, was done by the operation of laws in-
herent in Being, and open to the discovery of every
man.
Whatever Jesus of Nazareth did, it is likewise
the privilege of every man to do. The ability to do
such works as he did, is simply a question of discern-
ment. Discernment comes through the functioning
of an orderly organic structure in the soul of every
man. It is first a state of consciousness, a perception
of what is in the potential; this then formulates itself
into a working structure that becomes in every man
the permanent church of Christ.

The church of Christ covers every department of
man’s existence, and enters into every fiber of his
being. He carries it with him day and night, seven
days of the week. He lives in it as a fish lives in
water; as he becomes conscious of its enveloping
presence, he is transformed into a new creature. Life


The Church of Christ 22d


becomes an ecstasy, and his cup is full to over-
flowing.

The burdens of the human drop out of sight just
as fast as the organic church is constructed. The
construction of this church is orderly, definite, and
exact. It is not done in a moment, but, brick by
brick, the man is built from the within to the without,
a new creature in consciousness and in body.

This means that your body will be so trans-
formed within and even without, that it will never go
through the change called death. It will be a resur-
rected body, becoming more and more refined as
you catch sight of the free truths of Being until it
will literally disappear from the sight of those who
see with the eye of sense.

This is the way in which the last enemy, ““death,”
is to be overcome. ‘The corruptible shall put on in-
corruption right here and now. Be careful not to
defer this change to some future state, some “day of
judgment, ” some sound of a “‘last trump,” but recog-
nize it in the light of an organic change going on in
and through your body, from day to day, until you
literally shine with the glory of the noonday sun.

This is the promised New Jerusalem, a city in
which neither the sun nor the moon is necessary.
This is the city of God within you, and your body
shall become so illuminated by the brilliancy of
your mind that the light streaming forth will be
brighter than that of the sun. This is not a fancy
sketch, but a statement of facts based upon spiritual
dynamics, of which the body is part.

Metaphysicians in this age have caught sight of
these possibilities of man when he consciously rec-


228 Talks on Truth


ognizes his relation to God and proceeds to carry
out in thought, and to act right here, that which he
perceives to be true in Spirit; but many of them are
not wise in their methods of attaining the ultimate or-
ganic building. They have made connection with
the realm of ideas, but are loath to comply with the
requirements of organic growth from the generative
idea, to its concrete structure. This growth is the
construction of the church of Jesus Christ in each
one of us, and it is a most delicate and intricate
process. No external architect is here allowed; only
the Spirit can tell what is necessary from day to
day, and the Spirit can be heard only by the atten-
tive ego.

If you have any ideas of your own as to how
this new body is to be constructed, drop them im-
mediately. If you have been before the public as
a teacher of Divine Science, and have set up in con-
sciousness abstract theories as to the unreality of the
body and its sensations, you must be willing to give
them all up, before you can be received into the re-
generation. Although you may have served the
Truth long and faithfully, do not be rebellious if all
your labors seem as “‘dust and ashes.” The rebel-
lious Israelites never got into the Promised Land.
You must be obedient. You must be willing to give
up all your plans, your hopes, and your ambitions.
The Spirit wants your attention only. If you have
done good, you will be rewarded in the process, but
you must not claim your good as a merit card which
gives you any preference in the regeneration. You
must be willing to become as nothing in the sight of
men—literally crucified for your good works. Then


The Church of Christ 229


the personal mentality loses its center, the atoms of
your being swiftly change their polarization from
the material to the spiritual plane, and you come
forth from the tomb of sense with a body of light.


THE LORD'S BODY


The teaching of Christianity is that the human
race was originally in a beautiful garden, a state of
consciousness described as Paradise. Here were
placed before the race two ways of attaining knowl-
edge—one through experience, the other through the
inspiration and guidance of God; and they chose the
diverse, or hard way. They followed Satan, think-
ing that, through experience, they would get wisdom
and pleasure. In their ignorance, they fell short
of the law. They did not know how to take ad-
vantage of the forces of mind, and the result was
the death of their bodies.

But there was promise of restoration; that men
should come back into that paradise or place where
eternal joy and satisfaction exist; that, through Jesus
Christ, the original life of man should be restored.
Jesus Christ understood the law of God, and came
to show us the way to live our lives, to resurrect our-
selves out of sin and death into immortality. He
resurrected his body and promised that those who —
keep his sayings and follow his law shall likewise
resurrect their bodies; and yet nearly two thousand
years have passed and no man has demonstrated the
resurrection, so far as we know. ‘The teaching has
been sidetracked and misunderstood. The popular
Christianity of the day tells us that resurrection
is of the soul! that it is to take place after death, or
in some future time, and that everybody must die.


230


The Lord’s Body 231


Now a new consciousness, a new understanding
of this great teaching of Jesus Christ is needed.
We are beginning to understand it scientifically.
Our physical scientists are showing us in their labo»
ratories that life should be continuous. ‘They tell
us that the functions cf our bodies are self-perpetu-
ating if rightly directed. There is no reason why
they should be destroyed. All about us are the
forces that enter into these bodies, and the elements
that are found in chemistry, are also in the body of
flesh.

The inner intelligence is able to reconstruct the
body; the elements for rebuilding are around us and
in us. All conditions join to make possible the de-
velopment of an immortal structure which shall ex-
press man in his true nature. ‘The intuitions of the
soul emphasize the point that deathless life here and
now is the life which God has appointed us to recall
and develop. Not until we have done this, can it be
said that we have availed ourselves of the Jesus
Christ redemption, or that we have our abiding place
in the Lord’s Body.

Why have we failed for these two thousand
years? Because we have not understood and ap-
plied the Divine Law. ‘The early disciples evi-
dently caught sight of the great truth that man has
within himself this resurrecting power to overcome
disease and sickness, but they did not fasten it
strongly enough in the race experience, and man has
gotten back into the old adverse thought.

We must first reduce our religion to facts.
What do we know about it? Verily, “‘by their fruits
ye shall know them.”” The fruit of your thought is


Vio Vs Talks on Truth


your body, and you can judge your thought by the
character of your body. So also you can change
your body by changing your thoughts. “Then here
is the key to the situation: To resurrect this body
we must change our thoughts. Every thought must
be in accord with absolute Truth, and there must be
no adverse thought. We must separate ourselves
from all thought of sickness, weakness, and death.
They must have no part in the consciousness of the
one who would follow Jesus Christ.

Divine metaphysicians take special care that
they are logical in their reasoning. They hold that
all truth has its origin in Divine Mind. Whatever
we can conceive as being true, must work itself out
in creation, and if the creation seems to fall short of
the Divine Perfection in any way, it is a fault on our
part; either we are not seeing the whole, or we are
lacking in understanding. And if we hold to our
logic that the Good can create nothing but good, it
will bring us to the right conclusion, and the mani-
festation will always prove itself. Holding to this
logic of the mind, and the conclusions of the mind,
we find that there are two creations—Divine Mind
idealizes that which it afterward brings forth, just
as a man works out in his mind his invention before
he makes the model. God is the all-potential Mind.
God creates first in thought; his idea of creation is
perfect, and that idea exists as a perfect model upon
which all manifestation rests. The body of man
must rest upon a Divine Body Idea in Divine Mind,
and it logically follows that the inner life, substance,
and intelligence of all flesh are perfect. But you
say, I have not a perfect body; my body is not the


The Lord’s Body 259


perfect idea, because I can see it is material.” It
may be that you do not understand; that you do not
discern the “Lord’s Body,” which lack, Paul said,
was the cause of weakness and sickness and death.

We have a perfect body in mind, and that per-
fect mind-body is expressing itself through our I
AM, or the Lord God in us; it is bringing itself
into manifestation just as fast as we will let it, just
as fast as we perceive God in the flesh. Do you not
see how closely you must follow and hold yourself
in the true logic? Plato said, “Pure reason is the
highest faculty of the mind.”’ Many people wander
away from pure reason because it does not seem to
agree with the sight of sense. They say that there is
evil and error everywhere; that it cannot be, then,
that good is the reality of God, man, and the uni-
verse. [he creative law makes man responsible for
the bringing forth of the divine perfection. God
finished his work in the ideal, and we are making it
manifest. If your body is not perfect, it is because
you have not let into your consciousness all of these
perfections which exist for you in Divine Mind, and
which would be fully expressed through you as they
were in Jesus Christ, if you would discern the truth of
the real ideal body, called the Lord’s Body.

Then if I want to see the real expression of Di-
vine Mind in my body, all I have to do is to image it
mentally. I must put my I Am identity into it and
affirm that the perfect body, as idealized by God,
is now manifest im my hands, in my feet, in my
heart, and in every part of my organism. Is that
good logic? Of course it is. Will it work? Of
course it will. This is the real secret of metaphysical


234 Talks on Truth


healing. In the beginning the Word was God, but
the Word became flesh and dwelt among men and
they saw his body, his glory, and his perfection.
Then Jesus Christ was the Word or Idea of Divine
Mind made manifest in form. Jesus saved his body
from dissolution, and raised it up to the heavenly
estate, which is substance so pure that no disinte-
grating force can be found in it. This gives an im-
portance to the body beyond the usual estimate.
People think that soul salvation is the object of the
Christian life, but Jesus and Paul laid great stress
on the ability of man to “lay it down, .. . and
take it again,” even this “temple of God.”

Can we save our bodies from death> Yes; by
seeing them as the very temples of God; and that
means more than looking at them as if you were
looking through a telescope. You must see the
body with your mind. See it with something more
than the intellectual mind. See it with Jehovah, the
Lord God within you.

When the Perfect Man is conceived in pure
reason, the reason of Spirit, and man sees himself as
he is in God’s mind, the Lord’s body begins at once
to appear. We can all see our bodies with the
“single eye” that Jesus spoke of, and through this
faith in the reality of the invisible body regenerate
the flesh. The body is wonderfully obedient to the
I AM mind. It hastens to do its bidding, and is re-
newed and transformed by a thought. But so many
of us see the body as it appears to mortal sense, and
by thus seeing it, we put it under the laws governing


that kind of body.


The real continues; the seeming passes away.


The Lord’s Body 235


We know that we are healed by right thought, that
we can and do raise these sick bodies and restore
them to health. Where is the limit to that healing?
There is none. Can you not go right on and perfect
the manifestation of the Body Idea as it is conceived
in Divine Mind> That is where pure reason and
logic sustain us. It does not make any difference
how many people have died or how many are going
to die, the logic is good if it proves the healing of a
single ill. It is a real pleasure to know that there
is somebody behind this universe; that there is a real
God; that life is something more than the mere piling
up of material things; that we can become the real
man and that all the pure ideals can be fulfilled here
and now.

The real body of God is a live body. It knows.
It is a living body. Above all it is a beautiful body.
And God himself is to be in that temple, and it will
not be necessary to have any external light, for the
Light celestial will illuminate the redeemed body
in which God takes up an eternal habitation. It is
wonderful how quickly the body responds to thoughts
of life and health, and how you can get a flow
of health instantly, if you hold the right thoughts.
Just closing the outer sense and holding the thought
that you are the perfect manifestation of Divine
Mind will often heal the body of its ills. We
see the disease and cling to it, when it is trying to
get away, all the time. Disease is not natural, and
it knows it. Then relax a little and let the Spirit
carry on its perfect work in you, and all at once evil
or sick conditions will disappear and you will be
whole. All good healers will tell you that their


236 Talks on Truth


best work is done by simply letting go and realizing
that there is but one universal Mind, and that that
Mind makes a perfect body for every man.

We see this law proved again and again in the
healing power of nature. All doctors admit that the
body is naturally restored to health; that neither
they nor their drugs do the healing. What causes
this restoration? The Divine Idea of perfection.
So our bodies really are the temples of the living
God. These so-called material bodies have within
them and about them the divine perfection. Do not
make any separation. Hold that your body is spir-
itual, and do not hold anything less. It does not
make any difference how much your flesh cries out.
It may be that flesh and blood and bones can be
expressed in a larger and better way; that is for you
to determine—but insist upon the truth. Carry out
that living, true Word which every one of us knows
to be the offspring of Divine Mind. ‘And the


Word became flesh, and dwelt among us.”


THE RESTORATION OF GOD'S KING-
DOM


Once to every man and nation comes the moment to decide,

In the strife of Truth with Falsehood, for the good or evil
side ;

Some great cause, God’s new Messiah, offering each the
bloom or blight,

Parts the goats upon the left hand, and the sheep upon the
right,

And the choice goes on forever ’twixt that darkness and
that light.

—Lowell.


The promise that the garden of Eden will be
restored on earth, is older than the Bible. Other
bibles of other peoples far antedating the Hebrews,
prophesy a time when man shall possess the earth
in peace and plenty; a time when the elements shall
be subdued, disease and death eliminated, and im-
mortal life in the body be again set up. It should
be observed that all prophecies to this end that come
through mystical channels, say that this is a state to
be regained. They do not hint at evolution, as
understood in modern thought. But the students of
physical science arrive through their deductions at
virtually the same conclusions as to the ultimate
condition of humanity.

They also agree that this condition of peace and
happiness will be brought about through causes
originating largely with man and his acts. In other
words, its consummation will depend upon the wis-


237


238 Talks on Truth


dom and energy with which men act at certain crises
in history. These prophets, both ancient and mod-
ern, say that we are now at one of the most vital
turning points in our experience. They get at it ina
variety of ways, and they differ widely in minor
points, but they are unanimous in their conclusions
that now is the time foretold by prophets of old, and
reiterated by prophets new.

But it does not require the prophet’s perception
to discern the signs of these times. The dissolution
of the old and the birth of the new are manifest in
every walk of life. For instance, the thought that
has been held inviolate for thousands of years about
the opaqueness of matter has recently been shat-
tered. The materialist and his world are no more.
This, however, is only a minor example of the as-
tounding swiftness with which the material sense of
things has been dissolved in recent years. The past
half-century has witnessed more of this than the
history of all the world records before. The past
ten years have accelerated this dissolution at a tre-
mendous pace, and a prominent scientist says that
the changes have been so many that the textbooks
of nearly every science will have to be re-written.
Yet those who are watching the mental realm know
that still greater changes are going on there. The
religious world of a few years ago does not exist
today. ‘There is but one sect in all Christendom
that stands by its creed and carries forward its work
in the old lines. A\ll the others are shaken to their
foundations. Their creeds and dogmas are skel-
etons in their closets, which they do not care to
talk about.


The Restoration of God’s Kingdom 239


In politics and in government the same upheavals
are at work. ‘The rights of men are no longer
theories; they are about to become real conditions
in the world of affairs. So from any plane of ob-
servation which may be chosen, we can assert with
the conviction of truth that a crisis is here. Some-
thing is happening. All along the line are evidences
of the birth of the Prince of Peace. A higher state
of consciousness is bursting full blown upon the
whole race. It is everywhere; and those who are
most open to its influx are being rewarded. The
power is abroad in the earth, and it calls to men and
nations, “Come up higher.”

All this presages a new state of consciousness
for the whole race. It is the beginning of the visible
reign of the Christ, whose seed-man was Jesus of
Nazareth. Every state of consciousness is first
planted as a seed-idea by some one man or woman.
So Jesus of Nazareth planted the seed-thoughts that
are now springing up in so many forms and shapes.
He it was who went into all the domains of thought
and formulated ideas that have waited for a people
who could comprehend and utilize them. We are
that people. “The dawn of the millennium is in our
keeping. We possess the keys that open the gates
of the New Jerusalem.

It should not be assumed that this refers to any
particular sect or class, but to all people of this great
time who are open to spiritual understanding. The
keys are presented to those who come into a percep-
tion that all is mind, and that all things and con-
ditions are representative states of consciousness,
produced through the free action of the I Am in


240 Talks on Truth


every man and woman. This is the key which is be-
ing intrusted to many in this great day of the Lord.

But the possession of this key is not all. A key
is for use. We may know all about the way mind
formulates states of consciousness, and all about our
relation to God, but unless we have made a change
in our consciousness and realized, in a measure at
least, the presence of God in our minds, we are not
using the key. Theory is one thing; practice is an-
other.

The balanced mind no longer seeks to do evil,
and the factor of evil no longer enters into its prob-
lem; but a proper discrimination between the endur-
ing, permanent things of existence, and the transient
and evanescent is not so common. To choose wisely
in this respect requires wisdom and spiritual per-
ception. Those who are unconsciously building on
the shifting sands of the material world are many.
They try to perpetuate the existing state of things
by calling them spiritual, and their ideals are but
little removed from the materialistic. The “new
heaven and the new earth” are not to be darkened
nor cumbered by any conditions that exist today.
All things are to be made new. This is the promise
of all the prophets of all the ages. There is to be
RO more war, Nor sorrow, nor crying, nor pain;
hence, all conditions that cause these must be de-
stroyed.

Our ideal world must be formed in mind on a
very high plane. We may choose to build it from
the standpoint of the most transcendent dreams of
humanity’s perfection. Nothing less will answer,
and all attempts to bring forth the new civilization


The Restoration of God’s Kingdom 241


upon any lower plane, will mean failure to the true
metaphysician of the Jesus Christ school. Jesus
Christ has a distinct school. He has his ideals;
they have been sown in the minds of men, and will
surely come to fruitage. He saw a people here on
earth with all the powers of the gods, but he did not
look to governments, nor churches, nor industrial
movements to bring about the civilization he planned.

His kingdom is now ready to be set up. The
conditions are ripe for it. It is open to all, but only
those may come in who are willing to give up all
their ideas of earthly possessions for it. “Seek ye
first his kingdom, and his righteousness; and all these
things shall be added unto you.” This admonition
still holds good, and its fulfillment is capable of visi-
ble realization by those who are willing to accept
the conditions. But it is not to be attained in the
Ananias and Sapphira way. There can be no reser-
vation. Every earthly link must be broken, every
mortal love crucified. This was the way by which
Jesus of Nazareth got into this kingdom, and his way
is the way we must employ.

It is not for us to quarrel with the conditions of
the world, nor take upon ourselves the burden of
righting them. ‘That is a long, circuitous route into
the kingdom, and those who are choosing it have
many weary years of waiting before them. We are
to accept that which is now prepared for us. The
feast is ready, and the invitations are out. This is
no longer a parable, but an exact statement of that
which really exists in the very atmosphere of this
planet. There is a state of consciousness, which
can be attained and is being attained by men, where


242 Talks on Truth


all things are provided to fulfill the desires of the re-
generated souls. It is not removed to some problem-
atical heaven, nor is it on some distant planet; but
right here in our midst are the form and substance of
that condition promised by Jesus Christ.

The day is not distant when this kingdom will
have its place in the geography of this people, and
those who have chosen it, will be known to exist
under laws and through means beyond the ken of
the Adam man. The way into this kingdom 1s
through the mind, and its doors all open in response
to words.

If the “kingdom of heaven” which Jesus so often
referred to, is a city with golden streets, in the skies,
he could easily have located it; but he did nothing of
the kind. On the contrary, he again and again gave
illustrations to show his listeners that it is a desirable
condition which can be brought about among them
by the power of the Spirit. He did not speak of it
as situated anywhere in particular, or say that it
could be attained quickly. For instance, in Luke
13, “Unto what is the kingdom of God like? and
whereunto shall I liken it? It is like unto a grain of
mustard seed, which a man took, and cast into his
own garden; and it grew, and became a tree; and
the birds of the heaven lodged in the branches there-
of.” And again, “It is like unto leaven, which a
woman took and hid in three measures of meal, till
it was all leavened.”

It is a great mystery how these comparisons of
heaven ever came to be construed to refer in any
way to a locality in the skies. What relation to a
city with streets of gold has a mustard seed, planted


The Restoration of God’s Kingdom 243


in the earth and springing forth into a tree? or a
little cake of yeast fermenting a baking of bread?

A remarkably strange lot of comparisons this
wise one used, if he had in mind a place where the
good were to go after death!

But he never pretended to represent any such
thing. His command to his disciples fully carries
out his idea of the kingdom of heaven. It was a
condition to be brought about in the affairs of men.
It was to grow from small beginnings, like the mus-
tard seed or yeast cake. His disciples were sent
forth to sow this seed in a definite way, by carrying
into the midst of men the signs that evidence the
power of the Spirit through which the kingdom of
heaven is to be established right here on this planet.
There is no basis for any other view. A\ll the vision-
ary theories about a place called “heaven,” are
founded on John’s symbolical description of the
New Jerusalem, which was a picture in imagination
of the fulfillment on earth of the very movement in-
augurated by Jesus, and by him described as having
such small beginnings. The city which John saw,
was among men. “Behold, the tabernacle of God
is with men, and he shall dwell with them, and they
shall be his peoples, and God himself shall be with
them, and be their God: and he shall wipe away
every tear from their eyes; and death shall be no
more; neither shall there be mourning, nor crying,
nor pain, any more: the first things are passed away.”
This all describes what is to take place here among
us. No reference is made to its being among angels,
nor that it was established at the time that John saw


244 Talks on Truth


the vision. It means that heaven is to be consum-
mated in new conditions on earth.

If the kingdom taught by Jesus is in the skies,
why did he direct his disciples to pray, “Thy king-
dom come. Thy will be done, as in heaven, so on
earth.”

The fact that the kingdom of heaven is at hand
and ‘‘within you,” the sense man totally ignores.
He does not see beyond the range of the three limi-
tations of space, hence cannot cognize that which
lies within and is interlaced on another plane of phe-
nomena. ‘The kingdom of heaven is not only an
ideal realm in which all possibility is freely trans-
formed into externality, but it also has its exter-
nality, as tangible to the higher faculties as are the
aspects of nature to the sense man. It has its work-
ing plans, and it executes them with a fidelity and an
accuracy not comprehended by the lax methods of
the lower plane. So you who have looked at the
kingdom of heaven as a potentiality to be made by
the power of your word, should change your base
and see it as it is—a real place already formed, and
waiting for you, as a bride adorned for her husband.

It is here all about you; the knowledge of its
presence only awaits the opening of your interior
eye, the “single eye” which Jesus taught. When
you look with this eye your whole body is made full
of the light which is neither of the sun nor the moon,
but of the Father.

As a disciple, it is not necessary that any one
should know all the intricacies of the metaphysical
law; he has simply to act on his inspiration. He
needs only to preach the kingdom of heaven at hand,


The Restoration of God’s Kingdom 245


and it will so manifest itself. Electricians do not
know what electricity is, nor have they compassed its
laws. They have found that an unknown principle
in nature, is made manifest when they observe cer-
tain conditions. They simply make the mechanical
apparatus, set it in motion, and the invisible unknown
becomes visible.

In the world of ideas, the metaphysician has dis-
covered that there is a realm having potentialities
whose depths he has not sounded. ‘This realm is to
him the greatest storehouse of Wisdom and Life,
and he finds that his own center of consciousness is
like unto it. He is essentially one with it. His
thinking faculty represents the mechanical device
through which this All-Principle is made manifest.
His word sets the machinery in motion, and results
follow in the realm of ideas in manner parallel with
those in the realm of dynamics. When you know
this, you have the working plan upon which is based
discipleship. ‘Then go forth and preach, “The king-
dom of heaven is at hand.”’ As to defining what
that kingdom is like, you must be guided by the
Spirit of Truth alone.

The great Master could not describe it to men
on the sense plane except in symbols. He said it
was like a pearl of great price, to possess which the
discoverer sold all that he had. He compared its
growth in the mind to a small seed or a little leaven.
He summed it all up in these words, “The kingdom
of God is within you.”

You cannot understand mathematics until you
have studied mathematics; neither can you under-
stand what the kingdom of heaven is like, until you


246 Talks on Truth


have studied that kingdom on its own spiritual plane.

Awake! thou that sleepest in the sense mind!
Rouse yourself, for the kingdom of heaven is at
hand. You areaking! Bestir yourself; the Christ
of God is born in you, and the hour of your reign
is at hand!


HOW MENTAL HEALING IS DONE


From a study of the foregoing lessons, you
should be convinced that man and the universe are
under the direct creative power of a supreme Be-
ing—name it what you will; and that man needs but
to conform to the laws of creative Power to
be healthy, happy, and wise. It logically occurs
to you that all healing methods, whether applied to
self or others, consist in making a unity between the
individual and the universal Consciousness. No
man heals himself or another; the supreme Mind
does the work. “The Father abiding in me doeth
his works,” said Jesus. ‘This is the testimony of all
the truly wise.

The first move in all healing is a recognition on
your part and on the part of your patient, that God
is present as an all-powerful Mind, equal to the
healing of every disease, no matter how bad it may
appear. “With God all things are possible.”” The
best way to make this unity with the Father-Mind,
is by prayer. “God is Spirit,” and he has a king-
dom or ruling center in every soul. Do not look up
or out for God, but “pray to thy Father who is in
secret’ —silently within your own soul—‘and he
will reward you openly.”” Many healers use the
Lord’s Prayer at the beginning of every treatment.
Talk to the Father as if he were a present identity.
He is visible to your soul, and when you have at-
tained that certain inner confidence called faith, you


247


248 Talks on Truth


will realize his presence as clearly as you realize
visible things. When you have stilled the outer
senses and are quiet, you are in the mental realm
where thoughts are obedient to the Word. Exror
thoughts must be told to go, and true thoughts must
be called to take their places.

Thought causes are so complex that it is im-
possible to point out in all cases the specific thought
that causes a certain disease; but twelve fundamen-
tal mind activities lie at the base of all existence,
and when any one of these is sounded all the others
give attention.

Nearly all sick people lack vital force, hence the
Life treatment is good for all. Hate, anger, jeal-
ousy, malice, etc., are almost universal in human
consciousness, and a treatment for Love will prove a
healing balm. Fear of poverty burdens most people,
and the Prosperity treatment will be effective. Do
not be afraid to use the statements in healing, as a
whole or in part; they will always help and never
hurt any one. Remember the object of all treat-
ment is to raise the mind to the Christ Consciousness,
through which all true healing is accomplished.


SAMPLE TREATMENTS
FEAR, ANXIETY, WORRY, DREAD, AND SUSPENSE


These thoughts cause the mind to become tense,
thus shutting away the great Helper, the Spirit of
Truth. Say silently, “I am now free from fear,
anxiety, worry, dread, and suspense. I have faith
in and trust the Holy Spirit to protect me, to pro-
vide for me, and to bring all my affairs into Divine


Order.”


How Mental Healing Is Done 249


NERVOUSNESS ;
The mind sends its messages along the nerves;
the nerves, themselves, being a form of mind, get
into a chronic cross-current condition from repeated
anxious, worried, fearful thoughts, and the many
forms of “nervousness” result. This idea must be
specifically denied and the Truth affirmed. Say
silently, “I am not subject to any kind of nervous-
ness. My nerves are harmonized, peaceful, and
poised in Spirit and in Truth.”
NotE—Deny the mental cause first, then the
physical appearance. “Nervousness” is produced
y worry, anxiety, etc. These mental conditions
should first be healed, then the secondary state which
they have produced in the body must be wiped out,
and the perfect condition affirmed.


COLDS, GRIPPE, AND INFLUENZAS


Affirm: “Spirit is not subject to heat nor cold.
I am Spirit. I am the positive force of Being, and I
put out of my consciousness all negative thoughts.
I do not believe in that thing called ‘a cold,’ nor do
I admit for a moment that it has any power over me.
I am Spirit, free-flowing life, and my circulation is
equalized in God.”


INDIGESTION, DYSPEPSIA, AND STOMACH TROUBLES


Treatment: “My understanding is established
in Spirit. I know the relation between mind and
body, between thought and substance. I agree
with what I eat, and what I eat agrees with me. [
am at peace with all men and all things. I do not
resist nor antagonize anybody or anything. My


250 Talks on Truth


stomach is strong, wise, and energetic, and I always
think and speak of it as in every way capable of
doing the work given it to do. I do not impose
upon my stomach by overloading it. I am guided
by Divine Wisdom in eating and drinking, and I fol-
low its dictates, instead of sense appetite. I am no
longer anxious about what I shall eat or what I shall
drink. I am not hurried nor worried, but rest after
each meal from all the cares of life, and give my
stomach opportunity to do its perfect work under
the Divine Law.”


ALL LIVER TROUBLES


Treatment: “I am not misjudged nor do I
misjudge others. I do not criticize nor condemn. I
do not hold bitter, revengeful thoughts against
others. I do not think that I have been unjustly
treated. God-Mind is my supreme Arbiter, and I
rest all judgment in the Divine Law of justice.

“The quick, swift energy of Spirit now pene-
trates and permeates every atom of my liver, and it
is free to do its perfect work.”


KIDNEY, BLADDER, AND URINAL DISORDERS


“God is the strength of my life. I do not be-
lieve in exhaustion of strength. Strength is always
present in its supreme completeness, and I am eter-
nally strong. Spirit is the strength of my loins, and
my back is free from all thought of burdens.

“My life is divinely ordered, and I am not afraid
of weakness, old age, or death. A\ll the issues of my
life are from God, and he is a well of living water
within me.


How Mental Healing Is Done 251


“Lustful passions no longer separate me from
the pure, spiritual life. My life is lifted up by the
Christ Mind, and I am resurrected from the dead.
My life is hid with Christ in God.”


ALL THROAT AFFECTIONS


Treatment: “All power is given unto me, in
heaven (mind) and on earth (body). Dominion,
control, mastery, are mine by divine right, and |
refuse to believe in failure or discouragement.

“T am free, and the inspiration of Spirit is
poured into my soul. I am quickened by the Spirit,
and the flesh is obedient. I rejoice and am glad be-
cause the joy of Christ is mine. I am filled with
Spirit-energy, and every cell in my organism is alight
with God. I am the resurrection and the life.”


SIX DAYS’ TREATMENT


It is found that the mind establishes permanent
consciousness through six steps or degrees, called in
Genesis “days.”

First, the mind perceives and affirms Truth to
be a universal Principle. Second, faith in the work-
ing power of Truth is born to consciousness. “Third,
Truth takes definite form in mind. Fourth, the will
carries Truth into acts. Fifth, discrimination is
guickened and the difference between Truth and
error discerned. Sixth, every thought and word is
expressed in harmony with Truth.

The seventh day is a peaceful confidence and
rest in the fulfillment of the Divine Law.

By the use of these denials and affirmations
for one week, a new and more orderly basis of


252 Talks on Truth


thought is established in mind, and the whole man
is harmonized and vitalized. This process often
heals obstinate cases, and the six-days’ course is
recommended in conjunction with the special treat-
ments.

Make your “denials” as if you were gently
sweeping away cobwebs, and your “affirmations”
with strong, bold, vehement, positive mind.

Each day’s treatment, and the whole course if
necessary, is to be repeated over and over until it
manifests its living presence and potency in con-
sciousness.

If you desire to help another who will not try,
or who cannot himself successfully bring his mind
into harmonious relations with this Principle, think
of that one when you hold the daily thought, and the
Spirit will cause your word to manifest both in you
and in your patient.


INVOCATION


(To precede each day’s treatment. )


I acknowledge thy presence and power, O
blessed Spirit, and in thy Divine Wisdom now
erase my mortal limitations, and from thy pure sub-
stance of Love, bring into manifestation my world,
according to thy perfect law.


MONDAY


[ DENy ]—I am no longer foolish nor ignorant,
and the foolishness and ignorance of ancestry can
no longer be visited upon me.


I am free from the foolishness and ignorance of


How Mental Healing Is Done 253


the race and those with whom I associate. The
foolishness and ignorance which may have been
treasured up by my own understanding, are now
erased.

[AFFIRM |—I am wise with the wisdom of In-
finite Mind, and have knowledge of all things. I
know that I am pure intelligence, and I hereby claim
my divine right to light, life, and liberty, in all good-
ness, wisdom, love, and purity. Let the light of
Wisdom appear and the ignorance of human thought
vanish.


TUESDAY
[DENy]—I deny the belief that I have in-


herited disease, sickness, ignorance, or any mental
limitations whatsoever. I deny all belief in evil, for
God made all that really is, and pronounced it good.
Therefore, no such deception as belief in evil can
darken my clear understanding of Truth. Those
with whom I associate can no longer deceive me
with their words of consideration and sympathy.
I can no longer deceive myself with such weakness.

Perish from my world these silly beliefs of dark-
ened ignorance. I am now free from them all, and
by my powerful word hereby destroy them wholly.

[ AFFIRM ]|—God’s life is my life, and I vibrate
with harmony and wholeness. I am free with the
knowledge that all is good; I am, therefore, per-
fectly whole and well.


WEDNESDAY
[Deny ]—-I deny the belief that I am a child


of the flesh and must suffer the sins of my forefathers


254 Talks on Truth


“even unto the third and fourth generation.” Per-
ish all such ignorant claims.

I deny that I inherited from my ancestors lustful
passions and sensual appetites.

I deny the belief that the race can reflect upon
me lustful passions and sensual appetites. I deny
the belief that those with whom I associate can re-
flect upon me lustful passions or sensual appetites. I
deny my own ignorant belief in such erroneous ideas.

[ AFFIRM]—God is Spirit, and I—the Divine
Image—am Spirit. I am born of God. God is
too pure to behold iniquity, and I am, therefore,
pure Being, without a tinge of lust or passion.


THURSDAY


[DENyY]—I deny that the sins and omissions
of my ancestors can reflect upon me in any way.
Selfishness, envy, malice, jealousy, pride, avarice,
arrogance, cruelty, hyprocrisy, obstinacy, and re-
venge are no part of my present understanding, and
I deny all such beliefs in the race, in those with
whom I associate, and in my own mind.

[ AFFIRM]—I am at peace with all mankind.
I truly and unselfishly love all men and women. I
now acknowledge the perfect law of justice and
equality. I know that “God is no respecter of
persons,’ and that every man and woman is my
equal in the sight of the Father.

I do love my neighbor as myself, and I will do
unto others as I would have them do unto me.


FRIDAY
[DENyY]—I deny that I have inherited the con-


How Mental Healing Is Done 255


sequences of fear from my ancestors, or that the
race can reflect its fears upon me. ‘The fears of
those with whom I associate can no longer hold me
in sickness or want, and my own understanding is
now fully rid of these illusions.

There is not and cannot hereafter be any fear
in or about my bold world.

[ AFFIRM |—I am brave and bold with the
knowledge that I am Spirit, and therefore not sub-
ject to any opposing power.

Plenty and prosperity are mine by inheritance
from God, and I now, by my steady, persistent
word, bring them into manifestation.


SATURDAY


[ DENy ]—I deny that I inherit any belief that
in any way limits me in health, virtue, intelligence,
or power to do good.

Those with whom I associate, can no longer
make me believe that I am a “poor worm of the
dust.” The race belief that “nature dominates man”
no longer holds me in bondage, and I am now free
from every belief that might in any way interfere
with my perfect expression of health, wealth, peace,
prosperity, and perfect satisfaction in every depart-
ment of life.

I now, in the sight and presence of Almighty
God, unformulate and destroy by my all-powerful
word, every foolish and ignorant assumption that
may impede my march to perfection. My word is
the measure of my power. [ have spoken, and it
shall be so.

[ AFFiRM]—I am unlimited in my power, and


256 Talks on Truth


have increasing health, strength, life, love, wisdom,
boldness, freedom, charity, and meekness, now and
forever.

I am now in harmony with the Father, and
stronger than any mortal law. I know my birth-
right in pure Being, and boldly assert my perfect
freedom. In this knowledge I am enduring, pure,
peaceful, and happy.

I am dignified and definite, yet meek and lowly,
in all that I think and do.

I am at-one with and now fully manifest vigor-
ous life, wisdom, and spiritual understanding.

I am one with and now fully manifest love,
charity, justice, kindness, and generosity.

I am one with and now fully manifest infinite
goodness and mercy.

Peace floweth like a river through my mind, and


I thank thee, O God, that I am one with thee!
SUNDAY
“Be still, and know that I am God.”


INDEX


Absolute Mind Transmits Thought—62, 63.
Adam Is To Be Transformed—143, 144.
Affirmations:

Cleansing and Purifying—57.

Divine Mind Realizations—18.

Faith—87, 88.

I Am Realizations—38.

Judgment and Justice—1 19.

Love Demonstrated—129, 130.

Perfect Substance, Establishing The—78.

Perfection In Form Established—98.

Power of Words—66, 67.

Right Thinking—47.

Son of God Realizations—29.

To Quicken Spirituality— 77.

Will and Understanding, Establishment of —108, 109.
Affirmations and Denials, Remedial Effects of —115, 116.
Attitude, Mental, Fixes Our Relation to Things—83, 84.
Authority, External, Keeps Men in Bondage—219, 220.
Being, Powers of, Guard—169.

Being, Your, Is in Heaven—204.
Benefactors, False—210, 211.

Bible Glossary of Antiquities Quoted—1 10.
Bible References and Quotations:

Acts 2:17—35; 2:31—34.

Col. 3:4—78.

I Cor. 13:13—130; 14:15—30; 15—169.

II Cor. 3:18-—78; 10:5—-47.

Dan. 12:13—166.


Eph. 6:14—119.
Ex. 28:30-——-110.
Gal. 4:24—69.


Gen 1227— 7/8; 2:19—135* 6:5-——93;. 6:17—93:


Paral 26: 3 (margin) 94;


INDEX


Jer. 29:11—47.

Job 13:18—119; 33:15—98; 33:15, 16—98.

John 1—19; 1:11—217; 1:18—26; 3:13 (Roth-
erham)—192; 5:17—42; 5:39—219; 7:17—99;

14:10—135, 136; 14:21—120.

I John 3:1—120; 4:7-21—128, 129; 4:16—120.

Luke 13—242.

Mark 1:16—206.

Matt. 4:18—206; 5:48—78; 7:1, 2—110; 8:5-13

57: 12:36—67; 13:17—29; 16:19—137; 21:23-
46—24.

I Peter 3:10—67.

Phil. 4:8—47.

Prov. 4:24—67; 12:5—47; 12:18—66; 13:3—66;

14:3—67; 16:3—47; 16:24—67; 16:32—5/7;
18:7;—67; 18:21—66; 21:23—-66; 24:9—47;

29:18—96; 29:20—6/7.

Psa. 25:9—I119; 27:11—119; 34:12, 13—67; 39:
1—67; 50:23—67; 101:1I—119; 139:17—47;
139 :23—47.

Rey. 3:Z21-—135:

Rom. 8:14, 17, 26.

II Timothy 2:16, |17—67.

Se Against Holy Ghost Explained—221, 222,

225


Bodily Orcas and Functions Related to Ideas—1 15.


Body Atom a Miniature Planet—153.


Can Be Saved From Death—234.

Poe : Body, How Brought into Appearance—234,
Of God Defined; Responsiveness-—2 35.

The Deathless—227.

The Instrument of Mind—181.

The True—181.

Burdens, No, In God’s Creative Scheme—209, 210.


“By What Authority ?’’—25.


Centers of Consciousness:


Body Brain-Centers—90.
Body Center, Action of Will On—37.


Consciousness, Invisible Center of —154.


INDEX ii


Faculties—70, 71.

Faith—80.

Heart; Wisdom in Purity Found at—176, 177.

iagmation: Author of Faculties—92, 93.

Life; Nature; Treatment Requred- 45.

Love—37, 120, 171, 180, 181.

Reverence—7 |.

Superconsciousness—26, 28.

Thought—48, 91.

Will and Understanding—101.

Word—58.

Changes Immanent—238.

Christ, The Word—126. -

Christianity and Science—30, 31.

Is a Science—42.

So-Called, a Combination—2 17.

Church of Christ a State of Consciousness—220, 221.
An Organic Principle—225, 226.

Awaits Representative Ministry—225.

Covers All of Life—226, 227.

Is Never Organized——224.

Concept and Manifestation—32.

Condemnation to be Avoided—86, 87.

Creations, Apparent; How Produced—-187, 188.
Of God’s Word Enduring —59.

Two, Explained —2Z32.

Death and Sleep Compared—-165, 166, 167.
Has No Foundation in Itself —159, 160.
How Explained—1 63.

Origin; How to be Vanquished—1 64.
Denials and Affirmations Both Necessary —54.
Desire and I am—197, 198, 202.

Opens All Doors—195.

“Devil,” The, Defined; How Overcome—107.

Disciple Acts on Thspiration2-2 44:

Disciples of Jesus Christ; Estate and Experience-—217.

Disease Germs, Origin Best 30. 139:

Not Natural—235.

Disobedience Defined——2 1 2.

Divine Idea of Pex£ection Heals—236.


iv INDEX


Ideas Man’s Inheritance—1 4.
Law, Departure From, Brings Death—165.
Mind as Life, Substance, Intelligence—43.
Will, Bring to Bear—103.
Dreams; Origin and Value—94, 95, 96.
Eden, Promised Restoration of —237, 238.
Ego, There is But One—156.
Evil Transformed by Thought—174, 175.
Existence, Man’s, Object of —52, 53.
Expression is From Abstract to Concrete—37.
Faculty, Imaging, Produces Forms—91, 92.
Faith Brings Realization—63.
Is Related to Substance—80.
Necessary in Demonstrating Higher Law—84.
Results of—79, 80, 81.
Righteousness of —84.
Should be Developed—79, 80.
Farrar, Archdeacon, Quoted on Meaning of “‘Hell”’—
4


114.

Father, The, Abides in Spiritual Realms—1 2.

Flesh, The, Nature of—196.

Forgiveness of Sin, Effects of —55.

God and Man, Relation Between—33, 207, 208.
Defined; Variously Named—12, 17, 19.
Does Not Change His Mind—19.

Does Not Dictate Man’s Choice—163.
Inspiration of Universe—10.

Is—2 14.

Is, a Mind Principle—85.

Ongin of All—188.

Our Fount of Wisdom—90, 91.
Supreme Knowing—103.

The All-Potential Mind—232.

The Father-Mother—2 14.

God-Mind, Key to—20.

God’s Nearness—1 6.

Good and Bad, Perplexing Question of —159.
The, Calling Forth—223.

Goodness and Joy in Union With Perfect Mind—15.

Guidance, Our, Sure—105, 106.


INDEX v


Healing, How Done—247, 248.
Systems, What, to be Avoided—104, 105.
Through Seeing Perfection—208, 209.
Health, Study of, Leads to Mental Harmony—158.
Heaven; What and Where It Is—151, 152.
Higher Consciousness, Every one an Heir to—46.
Hie aay Baptism, How Gained—190, 191.
I aM and Desire—197, 198, 202.
And / Will—149.
Center of Man’s System—101.
ces Nature, Work—192, 193, 194, 195, 199,
Illustrated and Explained—150, 151.
Perfect Mind-Body Expresses Through—233, 234.
Spiritual Man—33.
The, of Jesus—1 46.
Work of—146, 147, 199.
Work of In Denial—199.
Idea Born of Wisdom Irresistible—1 48.
Creative, in Word—62.
Projects Form—34.
Ideas Key to Life Problem—1 4.
Their Swing—148.
World of, a Storehouse—245.
Identity Never Lost—200.
Imagination; Its Highest, Best Work—98.
Power of —96, 97.
Intellect, Character-Giving Mechanism— 143.
Executive Officer of Wisdom—177.
Wisdom Not an Attribute of —142, 143.
I Will and I am—149.
T Will, Manifest Man—33.
Jealousy; Nature, Effect, Cure-—116, 117.
Jesus Christ a Parable—70.
Doctrine, Nature, Mission—184, 185.
Redemption; How Gained—231, 232.
Stull the Head of His Church—218, 219.
Jesus Christ’s Teaching Concerning Love-—1I24, 125.
Jesus, I aM Affirmations of-—145, 146.


vi INDEX


Jesus’ Lament Over Jerusalem—l1 70.
Jesus Merged Personal Into Universal—27.
Methods of—207.
Of Nazareth the Seed-Man—239.
Secret of His Character—189.
Jesus’ Source of Power over Death—I61, 162, 163,
165, 166.
Judge, The One Supreme, Adjusts Inequalities—I 16.
Judging From Mortal Plane Leads to Condemnation—1 12.
Judgment Day, Meaning of—113.
How Developed—1 12.
Kingdom of God Within You, Literally—154.
‘Kingdom of Heaven,” Illustrated—242, 243.
Kingdom of Heaven, The, Is All About Us—244.
Of Jesus Christ Ready; Requirements—241.
The, How Regained—156.
The, Within, Nature of —155.
Knowledge Through Study of Mind—137.
Law of Unfoldment; Its Nature—145.
Life an Expression of Being—160.
In the Body; How Governed—1 61.
Is a Principle—1 60.
Law of, Based on Mind Action—167, 168.
“Life, Liberty and the Pursuit of Happiness’’—151.
Living, The Reality of —214.
Logic of Mind, Student Must Trust—10, I 1.
Logos Defned—19.
Lord, The, Establishes Order—145.
Love, a Divine Principle; How Known—170.
A Magnet—175, 179.
And Power to be Associated—1 77.
Action of —174.
Center, to Develop—181, 182.
Defined—174, 182.
Divine and Human, Distinguished—127.
Divine Power of—127.
Drummond Quoted—1 23.
God’s For His Children—182.
Idea of Universal Unity—1 20.
In the Regeneration—121.


INDEX vil


Invocation—1 83.
More Than Affection—124.
Of God Must be Felt—170.
Of Money—125.
Power of—122, 176, 177, 178.
Power of the Word—126.
Teachings of Jesus Christ Concerning—124.
Work of Developing—122.
Loyalty to Spirit Necessary —201.
Man an Emanation of His Maker—27
An Epitome of Being—41.
An Inlet and Outlet—23.
And God, Relation Between, Illustrated—Z07, 208.
But One—32.
By Nature an Organizer—220.
Does Not Possess Anything—208.
How, Becomes Master—93, 94.
In God-Mind as Perfect Idea—23.
Is—2 14.
Is Mind—14.
Is the Builder—205, 206.
Manifests That Which Exists—99.
The Highest Expression of God—161.
The Image of God-Mind—91.
The Imaging Faculty—1 88.
Thinks His Body Into Disease—43, 44.
What Is—192.
Man-lIdea, Perfect, Has Many Names—23.
Man’s Return to the Within—35, 36, 37.
Man’s True Identity—36, 37.
Meditation Lights Up Inner Mind—80.
Mental Confusion, Remedy For—! 1.
Laws, Knowledge of—13.
Processes Are Generative—139, 140, 141, 142.
Ships Must be Ballasted—-149.
Messiahship, The Real—137.
Mind Ability Not Limited—89.
Activities, Twelve Fundamental-——248.
And Ideas—1 7.
And Spirit Synonymous—1 3.


vill INDEX
Defined—1 89.
Is; It Produces—153.
Of God and Mind of Man Compared—22.
Of Man Likened to a Clear Stream—220.
Of Spirit Knows in Man—189.
Science of, Solves Mysteries of Universe—1 3.
The Only Creative Power—59.
Mind-Body, Perfect, Expresses Through I am—233, 234.
Mind’s Three Phases—89, 90.
Mission, Your, To Express God—215.
Miracles Explained—226.
Molecule, The, Characteristics of —48.
Mysteries, Religious, Cleared—22.
Naming Faculty, Exercise of —144, 145.
New Jerusalem, Keys to—239.
Obedience; How Learned—211.
Spiritual Body Built Through—2 1 3.
The Way of Attainment—228
Whence It Comes—209.
Occult, The, Is the Unexplored—89.
One Mind, Foundation of Investigations—15.
Organism, Must be Reconstructed—223, 224.
Paradise, Teachings Concerning—230.
Perfect Idea Is the True Self—24.
Physical Science and Metaphysics Compared —64.
Power a Faculty In Mind—1 76.
Power and Love to Be Associated—1 77.
Practical Christianity Defined—15.
Praise, Increase Through—/74.
Prayer, Law of—76.
Nature, and Action—72, 73.
Persist In—76.
Primal Substance and Consciousness—196.
Principle, Intelligent, Key to Metaphysician’s Work—48.
Principles Do Not Change—1 37, 138.
Processes Work According to Principle—186.
Prophecies Pointing to the Higher Man—27.
“*Raise the Dead’’—158.
Raising the Dead; Factors Involved—1 64.
Relationships, Earthy: Nature of —198.


INDEX


Repentance a Form of Denial—55.

Restoration, Promises of —230.

Resurrection, The, Begins In Our Minds—34.

Road, Royal, For Every Man—145, 146.

Sample Treatments—248-251.

Colds, Grippe and Influenzas—249.

Fear, Anxiety, Worry, Dread, Suspense—248.
Indigestion, Dyspepsia, Stomach Troubles—249.
Kidney, Bladder, Urinal Disorders—250.
Liver Troubles, All—250.

Nervousness—2 49.

Throat Affections, All—251.

Savior, The, of Personal Consciousness—56.

Science Defined—30.

Science of Spirit The Only Real Science—9.

Second Birth, The, Defined; Explained—26, 27.

“Secret Place;’” Where Found—190.

Self-Consciousness Like an Eddy in Ocean—100.

Sermon On The Mount, Applying—202, 203, 204.

Sin, Forgiveness of; Effects—55.

Six Days’ Creation, The—32.

Six Days’ Treatment—25 1-256.

Friday—254.

Invocation To Precede Treatment—255.
Monday—252.

Saturday—255

Thursday—254.

Tuesday—253.

Wednesday—253.

Son of God—191.

Spirit, Inspiration of; How Attained—9, 10.
Of Justice, Leave All To—i18.

The Gate To—211.
The One Leader—225.
You Are—206.

Spiritual Body Built Through Obedience—21 3.
Body, Nature of, Illustrated—213, 214.
Physiology—28.

Thinking Followed By Spiritual Acting—202.

Spirituality Draws Ideas From Universal Mind—73.


x INDEX


Spirituality; Importance and Development—72.
Statements To Be Avoided—105.
States, All, Are Mental—189.
States of Consciousness, Two—194, 200, 201.
Success Depends Upon Good Judgment—1 17.
Superconscious Mind Contacts God—26.
Superconsciousness, Only Sure Guide—11, 12.
Supreme Mind Heals—247.
Symbology of Biblical Terms:

Adam and Eve—104.

Adam Listening To The Serpent—34, 35.

Adam; Place; Definition; Work—1 36.

Bible, The, An Allegory—35.

Bible, The, Exposition of Mental Laws—68, 69.

Creation—135, 136.

“Days” of, Genesis—25 1.

Disciples of Jesus—171.

Eden—66, 155.

Egyptians and Israelites—137, 138.

Ephraim and Manasseh—101.

Garden of Eden—34, 37, 53, 54.

Hell; Meaning of—113, 114.

I am—101.

Jesus Christ-—56, 69, 70.

John—122, 186, 187.

Judas—55, 56.

Law Given By Moses—110, 111.

Matthew—107.

Moses—145, 146, 198, 212.

“Mount, The’—93.

New Jerusalem—227, 243.

New Testament—28.

Peter—80, 84, 85, 136, 137.

Regeneration—38.

Simon and Andrew—206.

Simon Peter—69.

Son of God—63.

Sons of Jacob—68, 69, 70, 71, 94, 95, 120, 121.

Thomas—107, 108.

Word, The—58, 186.


INDEX


Teaching, Metaphysical, Concerning Creation—41.
“Temple of God,” An Architectural Truth—221].


Things, All, To Be Made New—240.
Thinking, A Process In Mind—205.

Factors of —1 39.

Power of—173.

When Effective For Good—172, 173.
Thought Action—61, 62.

Action, Compared—44,

Builds the Body—39.

Can Transform Evil—174, 175.

Counterfeit Comes From Intellect-—142.

Error, Corrupts Love—1 73.

How, Works—59, 60.

Is the Creative Power—42, 43.

Makes Conditions—86.

Moves the Body—39.

Unity—24, 25.
Trinity—The, Explained—21.
Truth Must Be Individually Experienced—| 7.
Understanding and Will In Self-Control—106.
Understanding and Will, Source of-—99, 100.
Understanding Comprehends—1 03.


We Have Separated Ourselves From Father-Mind—16.


“What Am I>” Answered—20, 21.
Willfulness, How Overcome—102, 103, 104.
Will and Understanding, Source of —99, 100.
Will, Man Has Freedom of—100.
Will, The, To Be Instructed—101, 102.
Wisdom; How Attained—1 44.
Wisdom Not An Attribute of Intellect—1 42.
Word of God Defined—186, 191.

of God; Its Work—184, 187.

of God; The, Character, Office—-! 84.

Spoken, Power of —64, 65.

The, Effects of—-65, 66.

The, Nature of —126.

The Synonyms and Office—58.
Words, I AM Formulates—199.


“Yes” and ““No;’’ Character and Use—49, 50, 51,


D2:


4164


Fillmore, Charles
Christian healing


DATE DUE


\


THE MASTER'S COLLEGE
POWEL! | IRRApy


SANTA fa ULAR: . aa, CA 9] 32]
