Lectures on Revivals of Religion (Charles G. Finney, 1835)
==========================================================
Finney's 1835 Lectures on Revivals — the manual of the Second Great Awakening; revivalism as science and method. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

LECTURES


ON


REVIVALS OF RELIGION


WORKS BY


Charles G. Finney


“A wonderful man he truly was. He prob-
ably led more souls to Jesus than any man of his
century.” —Dr. Theodore L. Cuyler.


Charles G. Finneys Autobiog-
raphy. 2mo,cloth.......


« The most fascinating religious biographyaI
have ever read.” —Rev. Lyman Abbott, D. D.


“It fully justifies the high expectations we


have, from time to time, expressed concerning
it” — The Independent,


Revival Lectures. New edition. 12m0,
cloth, . Lore yee


eA, Ore ea


Lectures to JE CRSaE tS


12mo, cloth .


Gospel Themes. 24 sermons. 12mo,
cloth... ee yet iia oe


CTR we ae.


Lectures on Revivals
of Religion


By
CHARLES G. FINNEY


Aathor of “ Lectures to Professing Christians,”
§* Sermons on Gospel Themes,” ete.


New YORK CHICAGO TORONTO
Fleming H. Revell Company
LONDON AND EDINBURGH


REBRASKA CHRISTIAN COLLEGE LIBRARY


Entered according to Act of Congress in the year 1888, 37
E. J. GOODRICH,


im the Clerk’s Uffice of the District Court of the United States for the Nortiex..
District of Ohio.


Printed in the United States of America


THE LECTURER’S PREFACE


Let tt be remembered, that these Lectures were delivered to my own
congregation. They were entered upon, without my having previously
marked out any plan or outline of them, and have been pursued, from
week to week, as one subject naturally introduced another, and as, from
one lecture to another, I saw the state of our people seemed to require.

I consented to have the Editor of the Hoangelist report them, upon
his own responsibility, because he thought that it might excite a deeper
interest in, and extend the usefulness of, his paper. And as I am now
a Pastor, and have not sufficient health to labor as an Evangelist, and
as it has pleased the Head of the Church to give me some experience
in revivals of religion, I thought it possible that, while I was doing the
work of a Pastor in my own church, I might, in this way, be of some
little service to the churches abroad.

I found g particular inducement to this course, in the fact that on my
return from the Mediterranean, | learned, with pain, that the spirit of
revival had greatly declined in the United States, and that a spirit of
jangling and controversy alarmingly prevailed.

The peculiar circumstances of the church, and the state of revivals,
was such, as wnavoidably to lead me to the discussion of some points
that I would gladly have avoided, had the omission been consistent
with my main design, to reach and arouse the church, when she was
fast settling down upon her lees.

I am far from setting up the claim of infallibility upon this or any
other subject. I have given my own views, so far as I have gone, with-
out pretending to have exhausted the subject, or to have spoken in the
best possible manner upon the points I kave discussed.

1 am too well acquainted with the state of the church, and especially
with the state of some of its ministers, to expect to escape without
censure. I have felt obliged to say some things that I fear will not, in
all instances, be received as kindly as they were intended, But what-
ever may be the result of saying the truth as it respects some, I have
reason to believe, that the great body of praying people will receive
and be benefited by what I have said.

What I have said upon the subject of prayer, will not, I am web
aware, be understood and received by a certain portion of the church
and all I can say is, “ He that hath an ear to hear, let him hear,”

(iii)


iv THE LECTURER’S PREFACE.


I had not the most distant idea until recently, that these Lectures, im
this, or any other form, would ever grow into a book; but the urgent
call for their publication, in a volume, and the fact that I have had re
peated assurances that the reading of them in the Heangeist, has been
owned and blessed, to the quickening of individuals and churches, and
has resulted in the conversion of many sinners, have led me to consent
to their publication in this imperfect form.

The Reporter has succeeded, in general, in giving an outline of the
Lectures, as they were delivered. His report, however, would, in gen-
eral, make no more than a full skeleton of what was said on the subject
at the time. In justice to the Reporter, I would say, that on reading
his reports, in his paper, although there were some mistakes and mis-
apprehensions, yet I have been surprised that, without stenography, he
could so nearly report my meaning.

As for literary merit, they have none; nor do they lay claim to any
It was no part of my design to deliver elegant Lectures. They were
my most familiar Friday evening discourses ; and my great, and I may
add my only object, was to have them understood and felt.

In correcting the Lectures for a volume, I have not had time, nor was
it thought advisable to remodel them, and change the style in which
they had been reported. I have, in some few instances, changed the
phraseology, when a thought had been very awkwardly expressed, or
when the true idea had not been given. But I have, in nearly every
instance, left the sentences as they were reported when the thought
was perspicuously expressed, although the style might have been im-
proved by emendation. They were the editor’s reports, and as such
they must go before the public, with such little additions and altera-
tions, as I have had time to make. Could I have written them out in
full, I doubt not but they might have been more acceptable to many
readers. But this was impossible, and the only alternative was, to let
the public have them as they are, or refuse to let them go out in the
form of a volume at all. I am sorry they are not better Lectures, and in
a more attracting form ; but I have done what I could under the circum-
stances ; and, as it isthe wish of many whom I love, and delight to please
and honor, to have them, although in this imperfect form, they must
have them.


C. @. FINNEY.


By perusing the above Preface, the reader will get a elue to the time
and ctroumstances that led to the delivery and publication of these Lec
tures. In revising them for a new edition, I have done little more than
correct the phraseology in a few instances, add a few foot-notes, and
replace the last two Lectures by newly-written ones on the same terts,


THE LECTURER’S PREFACK, Vv


and prepared especially for this edition. These Lectures are distinct
from the course I deliver to my theological class upon the same subject.
That course I may publish before my death. These Lectures have been
translated in the Welsh and French languages, and have been very
extensively circulated wherever the English or either of those lan-
guages is understood. One house in London published 80,000 copies
in English. They are still in type and in market in Europe, and I
have the great satisfaction of knowing that they have been made a
great blessing to thousands of souls. Consequently, I have not thought
it wise to recast them for the sake of giving them a more attractive
form. God has owned and blessed the reading of them as they have
been, and with the exceptions above noticed, I have given them to the
present and coming generations. If the reader will peruse and remem-
ber the foregoing preface, he will understand what I said of the church
and some of the ministers, and why I said it. I beseech my brethren
not to take amiss what I have said, but rather to be assured that every
sentence has been spoken in love, and often with a sorrowful hearr,
May God continue to add His blessing to the reading of these Lectures.


THE AUTHOR.
OBERLIN COLLEGE, Oct. 22, 1368.


ADVERTISEMENT BY THE REPORTER.


IHE work of reporting these Lectures was undertaken for the pur
pose of increasing the interest and usefulness of the New York Huan
gelist. The Reporter is wholly unacquainted with short-hand, and has,
therefore, only aimed to give a sketch of the leading thoughts of the
discourse. It is hardly necessary to mention that Mr. Finney never
writes his sermons, but guides his course of argument by a skeleton,
or brief, carefully prepared, and so compact, that it can be written on
one side of a card, about half as large as one of these printed pages.
His manner is direct, and his language colloquial and Saxon, and his
illustrations are drawn from the commonest incidents and maxims of
life. The Reporter has aimed to preserve, as much as he could, the
style of the speaker, and is thought to have been in some degree suc
cessful. If, in any cases, by letting his language run in a colloquial
strain, he has made the copy more simple and homely than the original,
he hopes to be pardoned easily for a fault by no means prevalent.

If any one should attempt to criticise the style of these Reports, he
will assuredly lose his labor ; forthe only ambition of the Reporter has
been, to make such a use of language as should fully convey the mean-
ing, and fairly exhibit the manner, of the Lecturer. When words have
done this, they have done their great work. The notes were taken
with a pencil, and transcribed in great haste, and sent to the printer
without revision. In preparing them for republication, in this form,
Mr. Finney has reviewed them with reference only to this point—the
correct expression of the sentiment. The style of an offhand sketch
has been preserved, partly of choice, and partly from necessity. There
was no time to remodel the work, and the public voice seemed to be,
that it was more attractive and more useful in its present condensed
form. Mr. Finney has, therefore, done little more than to amend where
the Reporter misapprehended the meaning, or did not express it with
sufficient distinctness. He has enlarged in a few places where the
illustrations, as given by the Reporter, seemed to be incomplete.

My labor with these sketches is now done; and its results are sent
forth in this permanent form, with the prayer, that God would employ
the book, as he has already done the newspaper edition, to rouse, and
teach, and strengthen his people, and to guide, unite, and encourage
zealous Christians of all classes, in the great duty of saving sinners.


J. L.


D


CONTENTS.


LECTURE L
PAGE
WHAT A REVIVAL OF RELIGION I8......-.....0. seeee ceoces 9
LECTURE IL
WHEN A REVIVAL IS TO BE EXPECTED.........000000 coves 22
LECTURE II.
How TO PROMOTE A REVIVAL... 12... ccc cece sce ccerccserernes 35
LECTURE IV.
PREVAILING PRAYER: «sich lato dts s bN eh adena sce dese be wie cares 48
LECTURE V.
PETE RAVER (OF FAITH Ar Ra Ea aee sosa eeek eo ya s 67
LECTURE VI.
MPRII OP. PRAYER en cae elec ole a s nore oie a basin ee aS 83
LECTURE VIL
Be FILLED WITH THE SPIRIT........ WO hee ciaidis oe Saia 101
LECTURE VII
MENTING FOR PRA VIR rh koe cd, cp clei cleclde coe ever aaan s 118
LECTURE IX.
MEANS TO BE USED WITH SINNERS......-.- cere creer eserve Reine |
LECTURE X.
To WIN SOULS REQUIRES WISDOM.........ccresereseeseuce 149
LECTURE XI.
A Wisp MINISTER WILL BE SUCCESSFUL... 0-06... cece eee ne 166


vill CONTENTS.


LECTURE XIL
How To PREAOH THE GOSPEL .........cce cece c cece ccceoereee 188


LECTURE XIL
How CHURCHES CAN HELP MINISTERS...........cerececeves 213


LECTURE XIV.


MEASURES TO PROMOTE REVIVALS... ......ccceccecce es eeeee: 238
LECTURE XV.
HINDERANCES TO REVIVAUB.c c+... ccce ccwas swonceceneanane 268


LECTURE XVL
NECESSITY AND EFFECT OF UMNION........0. eee eccccceeeeces 204


LECTURE XVIL
FALSE COMFORTS FOR SINNERS.... 2.0... cc cece cece cece ec ccee: 817


LECTURE XVUL
DIRECTIONS TO SINNERS..........--ceee cee saa soea es CARE . 3


LECTURE XIX.


INSTRUCTIONS TO CONVERTS........ccccecccccccccccececs 364
LECTURE XX.

INSTRUCTION oF YouNG CONVERTS..... eo astenn 802
LECTURE XXL

BACKSLIDERS IN HBART.............0cc0ee Nien EAR RS o 413


LECTURE XXIL
GROWTH IN GRACB.....ccccccacccccccccs PAE PTA .... 488


LECTURES.


LECTURE I.


WHAT A REVIVAL OF RELIGION I8.


Text.—O Lord, revive thy work in the midst of the years, in the midst of the
vars made known; in wrath remember mercy.—Hab. ili. 2.


Ir is supposed that the prophet Habakkuk was contempo
vary with Jeremiah, and that this prophecy was uttered in an-
ticipation of the Babylonish captivity. Looking at the judg-
ments which were speedily to come upon his nation, the soul
of the prophet was wrought up to an agony, and he cries out
in his distress, “O Lord, revive thy work.” As if he had
said, “O Lord, grant that thy judgments may not make Israel
desolate. In the midst of these awful years, let the judg-
ments of God be made the means of reviving religion among
us. In wrath remember mercy.”

Rdigion is the work of man. It is something for man to do.
It consists in obeying God with and from the heart. It is
man’s duty. It is true, God induces him to do it. He influ-
ences him by his Spirit, because of his great wickedness and
reluctance to obey. If it were not necessary for God to in-
fluence men—if men were disposed to obey God, there would
be no occasion to pray, “O Lord, revive thy work.” The
ground of necessity for such a prayer is, that men are wholly
indisposed to obey ; and unless God interpose the influence
of his Spirit, not a man on earth will ever obey the commands
of God.

A “Revival of Religion” presupposes a declension. Al
most all the religion in the world has been produced by revi-
vals, God has fonnd it necessary to take advantage of the

1* (9)


10 WHAT A REVIVAL OF RELIGION IS.


excitability there is in mankind, to produce powerful excite
ments among them, before he can lead them to obey. Men
are so spiritually sluggish, there are so many things to lead
their minds off from religion, and to oppose the influence of
the Gospel, that it is necessary to raise an excitement among
them, till the tide rises so high as to sweep away the opposing
obstacles. They must be so excited that they will break over
these counteracting influences, before they will obey God. Not
that excited feeling is religion, for it is not ; but it is excited
desire, appetite and feeling that prevents religion. The will
is, ina sense, enslaved by the carnal and worldly desires.
Hence it is necessary to awaken men to a sense of guilt and
danger, and thus produce an excitement of counter feeling
and desire which will break the power of carnal and worldly
desire and leave the will free to obey God.

Look back at the history of the Jews, and you will see that
God used to maintain religion among them by special occa-
sions, when there would be a great excitement, and people
would turn to the Lord. And after they had been thus re-
vived, it would be but a short time before there would be so
many counteracting influences brought to bear upon them,
that religion would decline, and keep on declining, till God
could have time—so to speak—to convict them of sin by his
Spirit and rebuke them by his providence, and thus so gain
the attention of the masses to the great subject of salvation,
as to produce a widespread awakening of religious interest,and
consequently a revival of religion. Then the counteracting
causes would again operate, and religion would decline, and
the nation would be swept away in the vortex of luxury, idol-
atry, and pride.

There is so little principle in the church, so little firmness
and stability of purpose, that unless the religious feelings are
awakened and kept excited, counter worldly feeling and excite
ment will prevail, and men will not obey God. They have so
little knowledge, and their principles are so weak, that unless
they are exoited, they will go back from the path of duty, and
do nothing to promote the glory of God. The state of the
world is still such, and probably will be till the millennium is
fully come, that religion must be mainly promoted by means
of revivals. How long and how often has the experiment
been tried, to bring the church to act steadily for God, with-
out these periodical excitements. Many good men have sup-
posed, and. still suppose, that the best way to promote reli-
gion, is to go along uniformly, and gather in the ungodly grae.
wally, and without excitement. But however sound such rea


WHAT A REVIVAL OF RELIGION I8. 11


soning may appear in the abstract, facts demonstrate its futili-
ty. If the church were far enough advanced in knowledge,
and had stability of principle enough to keep awake, such &
course would do ; but the church is so little enlightened, and
there are so many counteracting causes, that she will not go
steadily to work without a special interest being awakened. As
the millennium advances, it is probable that these periodical
excitements will be unknown. Then the church will be en-
lightened, and the counteracting causes removed, and the en-
tire church will be in a state of habitual and steady obedi-
ence to God. The entire church will stand and take the in.
fant mind, and cultivate it for God. Children will be trained
up in the way they should go, and there will be no such tor-
rents of worldliness, and fashion, and covetousness, to bear
away the piety of the church, as soon as the excitement of a
revival is withdrawn.

It is very desirable it should be so. Itis very desirable that
the church should go on steadily in a course of obedience
without these excitements. Such excitements are liable to in-
jure the health. Our nervous system is so strung that any
powerful excitement, if long continued, injures our health and
unfits us for duty. If religion is ever to have a pervading in-
fluence in the world, it cannot be so ; this spasmodic religion
must be done away. Then it will be uncalled for. Chris-
tians will not sleep the greater part of the time, and once in
a while wake up, and rub their eyes, and bluster about, and
vociferate a little while, and then go to sleep again. Then
there will be no need that ministers should wear themselves
out, and kill themselves, by their efforts to roll back the flood
of worldly influence that sets in upon the church. But as
yet the state of the Christian world is such, that to expect to
promote religion without excitements is unphilosophical and
absurd. The great political, and other worldly excitements
that agitate Christendom, are all unfriendly to religion, and
divert the mind from the interests of the soul. Now these
excitements can only be counteracted by religious excitements.
And until there is religious principle in the world to put down
irreligious excitements, it is vain to try to promote religion,
except by counteracting excitements, This is true in philos-
ophy, and it is a historical fact.

It is altogether improbable that religion will ever make pro-
gress among heathen nations except through the influence of
revivals. The attempt is now making to do it by education,
and other cautious and gradual improvements. But so long
as the laws of mind remain what they are, it cannot be done


13 WHAT A REVIVAL OF RELIGION I8.


in this way. There must be excitement sufficient to wake up
the dormant moral powers, and roll back the tide of degrada-
tion and sin. And precisely so far as our own land approxi
mates to heathenism, it is impossible for God or man to pro-
mote religion in such a state of things but by powerful ex-
citements. This is evident from the fact that this has always
been the way in which God has done it. God does not cre
ate these excitements, and choose this method to promote re-
ligion for nothing or without reason. Where mankind are so
reluctant to obey God, they will not act until they are excited.
For instance, how many there are who know that they ought
to be religious, but they are afraid if they become pious they
shall be laughed at by their companions. Many are wedded
to idols, others are procrastinating repentance, until they are
settled in life, or until they have secured some favorite world-
ly interest. Such persons will never give up their false shame,
or relinquish their ambitious schemes, till they are so excited
by a sense of guilt and danger that they cannot contain them.
selves any longer.

These remarks are designed only as an introduction to the
discourse. I shall now proceed with the main design, to show,

L What a revival of religion is not ;

IL What it is; and,

UL The agencies employed in promoting it.


L A REVIVAL OF RELIGION IS NOT A MIRACLE


1. A miracle has been generally defined to be, a Divine in
terference, setting aside or suspending the laws of nature. It
is not a miracle in this sense. All the laws of matter and
mind remain in force. They are neither suspended nor set
aside in a revival.

2. It is not a miracle according to another definition of the
term miracle—something above the powers of nature. There is
nothing in religion beyond the ordinary powers of nature. It
consists entirely in the right exercise of the powers of nature.
It is just that, and nothing else. When mankind become re
ligious, they are not enabled to put forth exertions which they
were unable before to put forth. They only exert the powers
ee nee before in a different way, and use them for the glory
o

3. It is nota miracle, or dependent on a miracle, in an
sense. It is a purely philosophical result of the right use o
the constituted means—as much so as any other effect produced
by the application of means. There may be a aei among


WHAT A REVIVAL OF RELIGION I8, 13


its antecedent causes, or there may not. The apostles em-
ployed miracles, simply as means by which they arrested at-
tention to their message, and established its divine authority
But the miracle was not the revival. The miracle was one
thing ; the revival that followed it was quite another thing.
The revivals in the apostles’ days were connected with mira
cles, but they were not miracles.

I said that a revival is the result of the right use of the ap-
propriate means. The means which God has enjoined for
the production of a revival, doubtless have a natural tendency
to produce a revival. Otherwise God would not have enjoin-
ed them. But means will not produce a revival, we all know,
without the blessing of God. No more will grain, when it is
sowed, produce a crop without the blessing of God. It isim-
possible for us to say that there is not as direct an mfluence
or agency from God, to produce a crop of grain, as there is
to produce a revival. What are the laws of nature according
to which it is supposed that grain yields a crop? They are
nothing but the constituted manner of the operations of God.
In the Bible, the word of God is compared to grain, and
preaching is compared to sowing seed, and the results to the
springing up and growth of the crop. And the result is just
as philosophical in the one case, as in the other, and is as nat-
urally connected with the cause ; or, more correctly, a revival is
as naturally a result of the use of the appropriate means as a
crop is of the use of its appropriate means. It is true that
religion does not properly belong to the categary of cause and
effect ; but although it is not caused by means, yet it has its
occasion, and may as naturally and certainly result from its
occasion as a crop does from its cause.

I wish this idea to be impressed on all your minds, for there
has long been an idea prevalent that promoting religion has
something very peculiar in it, not to be judged of by the or
dinary rules of cause and effect ; in short, that there is no
connection of the means with the result, and no tendency in
the means to produce the effect. No doctrine is more dan-
gerous than this to the prosperity of the church, and nothing
more absurd.

Suppose a man were to go and preach this doctrine among
farmers, about their sowing grain. Let him tell them that
God is a sovereign, and will give them a crop only when it
pleases him, and that for them to plow and plant and labor
as if they expected to raise a crop is very wrong, and taking
the work out of the hands of God, that it interferes with his
sovereignty, and is going on in their own strength : and that


14 WHAT A REVIVAL OF RELIGION IB.


there is no connection between the means and the result on
which they can depend. And now, suppose the farmers
should believe such doctrine. Why, they would starve the
world to death.

Just such results will follow from the church’s being per-
suaded that promoting religion is somehow so mysteriously a
subject of Divine sovereignty, that there is no natural con-
nection between the means and the end. What are the re
sults? Why, generation after generation has gone down to
hell. No doubt more than five thousand millions have gone
down to hell, while the church has been dreaming, and wait
ing for God to save them without the use of means. It has
been the devil’s most successful means of destroying souls.
The connection is as clear in religion as it is when the farmer
sows his grain.

There is one fact under the government of God, worthy of
universal notice, and of everlasting remembrance ; which is,
that the most useful and important things are most easily and
certainly obtained by the use of the appropriate means. This
is evidently a principle in the Divine administration. Hence,
all the necessaries of life are obtained with great certainty by
the use of the simplest means. The luxuries are more diff.
cult to obtain ; the means to procure them are more intricate
and less certain in their results ; while things absolutely hurt-
ful and poisonous, such as alcohol and the like, are often ob-
tained only by torturing nature, and making use of a kind of
infernal sorcery to procure the death-dealing abomination.
This principle holds true in moral government, and as spirit-
ual blessings are of surpassing importance, we should expect
their attainment to be connected with great certainty with the
use of the appropriate means ; and such we find to be the fact;
and I fully believe that could facts be known, it would be found
that when the appointed means have been rightly used, spirit
ual blessings have been obtained with greater uniformity thar
temporal ones.


I. I AM TO SHOW WHAT A REVIVAL IS.


It is the renewal of the first love of Christians, resulting in
the awakening and conversion of sinners to God. In the pop-
ular sense, a revival of religion in a community is the arous-
ing, quickening, and reclaiming of the more or less backslid-
den church and the more or less general awakening of all
classes, and insuring attention to the claims of God.

Tt presupposes that the church is sunk down in a backslid


WHAT A REVIVAL OF RELIGION IS. 15


den state, and a revival consists in the return of a church from
her backslidings, and in the conversion of sinners.

1. A revival always includes conviction of sin on the part
of the church. Backslidden professors cannot wake up and
begin right away in the service of God, without deep search-
ings of heart. The fountains of sin need to be broken up.
In a true revival, Christians are always brought under such
convictions ; they see their sins in such a light, that often they
find it impossible to maintain a hope of their acceptance with
God. It does not always go to that extent ; but there are al-
ways, in a genuine revival, deep convictions of sin, and often
cases of abandoning all hope.

2. Backslidden Christians will be brought to repentance.
A revival is nothing else than a new beginning of obedience
to God. Just as in the case of a converted sinner, the first
step is a deep repentance, a breaking down of heart, a getting
= down into the dust before God, with deep humility, and for
saking of sin.

3. Christians will have their faith renewed. While they
are in their backslidden state they are blind to the state of sin-
vers. Their hearts are as hard as marble. The truths of the
Bible only appear like a dream. They admit it to be all true;
their conscience and their judgment assent to it; but their
faith does not see it standing out in bold relief, in all the
burning realities of eternity. But when they enter into a re
vival, they no longer see men as trees walking, but they see
things in that strong light which will renew the love of God
in their hearts. This will lead them to labor zealously te
bring others to him. They will feel grieved that others do
not love God, when they love him so much. And they will
set themselves feelingly to persuade their neighbors to give
him their hearts. So their love to men will be renewed. They
will be filled with a tender and burning love for souls. They
will have a longing desire for the salvation of the whole world.
They will be in an agony for individuals whom they want to have
saved—their friends, relations, enemies. They will not only
be urging them to give their hearts to God, but they will carry
them to God in the arms of faith, and with strong crying and
tears beseech God to have mercy on them, and save their souls
from endless burnings.

4, A revival breaks the power of the world and of sin over
Christians. It brings them to such vantage ground that they
get a fresh impulse towards heaven. They have a new fore-
taste of heaven, and new desires after union with God; and
the charm cf the worldis broken, and t} power of sin overcome.


1a WHAT A REVIVAL OF RELIGION IS.


d. When the churches are thus awakened and reformed,
the reformation and salvation of sinners will follow, going
through the same stages of conviction, repentance, and refor-
mation. Their hearts will be broken down and changed.
Very often the most abandoned profligates are among the
subjects. Harlots, and drunkards, and infidels, and all sorts
of abandoned characters, are awakened and converted. The
worst among human beings are softened, and reclaimed, and
made to appear as lovely specimens of the beauty of holiness.


mL I AM TO CONSIDER THE AGENCIES EMPLOYED IN CARRYING
FORWARD A REVIVAL OF RELIGION.


Ordinarily, there are three agents employed in the work of
conversion, and one instrument. The agents are God,—some
person who brings the truth to bear on the mind,—and the
sinner himself. The instrument is the truth. There are al
ways fwo agents, God and the sinner, employed and active in
every case of genuine conversion.

1. The agency of God is two-fold; by his Providence and
by his Spirit.

(1.) By his previdential government, he so arranges events
as to bring the simner’s mind and the truth in contact. He
brings the sinner where the truth reaches his ears or his eyes.
It is often interesting to trace the manner in which God ar
ranges events so as to bring this about, and how he some
times makes every thing seem to favor a revival. The state
of the weather, and of the public health, and other circum-
stances concur to make every thing just right to favor the ap-

ication of truth with the greatest possible efficacy. How
he sometimes sends a minister along, just at the time he is
wanted! How he brings outa particular truth, just at the
mance’ time when the individual it is fitted to reach is in

e way to hear!

(2.) God’s special agency by his Holy Spirit. Having di
rect access to the mind, and knowing infinitely well the whole
history and state of each individual sinner, he employs that
truth which is best adapted to his particular case, and then
sets it home with Divine power. He gives it such vividness,
strength, and power, that the sinner quails, and throws down
his weapons of rebellion, and turns to the Lord. Under his
influence, the truth burns and cuts its way like fire. He makes
the truth stand out in such aspects, that it crushes the proud-
est man down with the weight of a mountain. If men were
disposed to oboy God, the truth is given with sufficient clear


WHAT A REVIVAL OF RELIGION I8. 14


ness in the Bible ; and from preaching they could learn all
that is necessary for them to know. But because they are
wholly disinclined to obey it, God clears it up before their
minds, and pours in a blaze of convincing light upon their
souls, which they cannot withstand, and they yield to it, and
obey God, and are saved.

2. The agency of men is commonly employed. Men are
not mere instruments in the hands of God. Truth is the in-
strument. The preacher is a moral agent in the work ; he
acts ; he is not a mere passive instrument ; he is voluntary in
promoting the conversion of sinners.

3. The agency of the sinner himself. The conversion of a
sinner consists in his obeying the truth. Itis therefore im-
possible it should take place without his agency, for it consists
in his acting right. He is influenced to this by the agency of
God, and by the agency of men. Men act on their fellow-men,
not only by language, but by their looks, their tears, their daily
deportment. See that impenitent man there, who has a pious
wife. Her very looks, her tenderness, her solemn, compassion-
ste dignity, softened and moulded into the image of Christ are
a sermon to him all the time. He has to turn his mind away,

~ause it is such a reproach to him. He feels a sermon ring-
4g in his ears all day long.

Mankind are accustomed to read the countenances of their
aeighbors. Sinners often read the state of a Christian’s mind
in his eyes. If his eyes are full of levity, or worldly anxiety
and contrivance, sinners read it. If they are full of the Spirit
of God, sinners read it ; and they are often led to conviction
by barely seeing the countenance of Christians.

An individual once went into a manufactory to see the ma-
chinery. His mind was solemn, as he had been where there
was arevival. The people who labored there all knew him
by sight, and knew who he was. A young lady who was at
work saw him, and whispered some foolish remark to her com:
panion, and laughed. The person stopped and looked at her
with a feeling of grief. She stopped, her thread broke, and
she was so much agitated she could not join it. She looked
out at the window to compose herself, and then tried again ;

ain and again she.strove to recover her self-command. At
length she sat down, overcome with her feelings. The person
then approached and spoke with her ; she soon manifested a
deep sense of sin. The feeling spread through the establish-
ment like fire, and in a few hours almost every person em-
ployed there was under conviction, so much so, that the
owner, though a worldly man, was astounded, and requested


18 WHAT A REVIVAL OF BELIGION IS.


to have the works stop and have a prayer meeting; for he
said it was a great deal more important to have these people
converted than to have the works go on. And in a few days,
the owner and nearly every person employed in the establish-
ment were hopefully converted. The eye of this individual,
his solemn countenance, his compassionate feeling, rebuked
the levity of the young woman, and brought her under con-
viction of sin : and this whole revival followed, probably in a
great measure, from so small an incident. ig

If Christians have deep feeling on the subject of religion
themselves, they will produce deep feeling wherever they go.
And if they are cold, or light and trifling, they inevitably de
stroy all deep feeling, even in awakened sinners.

I knew a case, once, of an individual who was very anxious,
but one day I was grieved to find that her convictions seemed
to be all gone. I asked her what she had been doing. She
told me she had been spending the afternoon at such a place,
among some professors of religion, not thinking that it would
dissipate her convictions to spend an afternoon with profess-
ors of religion. But they were trifling and vain, and thus
her convictions were lost. And no doubt those professors of
religion, by their folly, destroyed a soul, for her convictions
did not return.

The church is required to use the means for the conversion
of sinners. Sinners cannot properly be said to use the means
for their own conversion. e church uses the means. What
sinners do is to submit to the truth, or to resistit. Itis a
mistake of sinners, to think they are using means for their
own conversion. The whole drift of a revival, and every thing
about it, is designed to present the truth fo your mind, for
your obedience or resistance.


REMARKS.


1. Revivals were formerly regarded as miracles. And it
has been so by some even in our day. And others have ideas
on the subject so loose and unsatisfactory, that if they would
only think, they would see their absurdity. For a long time,
it was supposed by the church, that a revival was a miracle,
an interposition of Divine power which they had nothing to
do with, and which they had no more agency in producing,
than they had in producing thunder, or a storm of hail, or
an earthquake. It is only within a few years that ministers
generally have supposed revivals were to be promoted, by the
use of means designed and adapted specially to that object.


WHAT A REVIVAL OF RELIGION IS. 19


Even in New England, it has been supposed that revivals came
just as showers do, sometimes in one town, and sometimes in
another, and that ministers and churches could do nothing
more to produce them than they could to make showers of
rain come on their own town,when they were falling on a neigh-
boring town.

It used to be supposed that a revival would come about
once in fifteen years, and all would be converted that God in-
tended to save, and then they must wait until another crop
came forward on the stage of life. Finally, the time got short-
ened down to five years, and they supposed there might be a
revival about as often as that.

I have heard a fact in relation to one of these pastors, who
supposed revivals might come about once in five years. There
had been a revival in his congregation. The next year, there
was a revival in a neighboring town, and he went there to
preach, and staid several days, till he got his soul all engaged
in the work. He returned home on Saturday, and went into
his study to prepare for the Sabbath. And his soul was in an
agony. He thought how many adult persons there were in
his congregation at enmity with God—so many still unconver-
ted—so many persons die yearly——such a portion of them un-
converted—if a revival does not come under five years, so
many adult heads of families will be in hell. He put down
his calculations on paper, and embodied them in his sermon
for the next day, with his heart bleeding at the dreadful pic
ture. As I understood it, he did not do this with any expec-
tation of a revival, but he felt deeply, and poured out his heart
to his people. And that sermon awakened forty heads of fam-
dies, and a powerful revival followed ; and so his theory about
a revival once in five years was all exploded.

Thus God has overthrown, generally, the theory that revi
vals are miracles.

2, Mistaken notions concerning the sovereignty of God have
greatly hindered revivals.

Many people have supposed God’s sovereignty to be some
thing very different from what itis. They have supposed it tc
be such an arbitrary disposal of events, and particularly oj
the gift of his Spirit, as precluded a rational employment of
means for promoting a revival of religion. But there is no
evidence from the Bible that God exercises any such sover
eignty as that. There are no facts to prove it. But every
thing goes to show that God has connected means with the
end through all the departments of his government—in nature
and in grace. There is no natural eventin which his owp


Ihde


20 WHAT A REVIVAL OF RELIG ON IS.


agency is not concerned. He has not built the creation like
a vast machine that will go on alone without his further care.
He has not retired from the universe, to let it work for itself.
This is mere atheism. He exercises a universal superintend-
ence and control. And yet every event in nature has been
brought about by means. He neither administers providence
nor grace with that sort of sovereignty that dispenses with
the use of means. There is no more sovereignty in one than
in the other.

And yet some people are terribly alarmed at all direct efforts
to promote a revival, and they cry out, “You are trying to
get up a revival in your own strength. Take care, you are in-
terfering with the sovereignty of God. Better keep along in
the usual course, and let God give a revival when he thinks it
is best. God is a sovereign, and it is very wrong for you to
attempt to get up a revival, just because you think a revival is
needed.” This is just such preaching as the devil wants. And
men cannot do the devil’s work more effectually than by
preaching up the sovereignty of God, as a reason why we
should not put forth efforts to produce a revival.

3. You see the error of those who are beginning to think
bat religion can be better promoted in the world without re-
vivals, and who are disposed to give up all efforts to produce
religious awakenings. Because there are evils arising in some
instances out of great excitements on the subject of religion,
they are of opinion that it is best to dispense with them alto-
gether. This cannot, and must not be. True, there is dan-
ger of abuses. In cases of great religous as well as all other
excitements, more or less incidental evils may be expected of
course. But this is no reason why they should be given up.
The best things are always liable to abuses. Great and man-
ifold evils have originated in the providential and moral gov-
ernments of God. But these foreseen perversions and evil
were not considered a sufficient reason for giving them up.
For the establishment of these governments was on the whole
the best that could be done for the production of the greatest
amount of happiness. So in revivals of religion, it is found
by experience, that in the present state of the world, religion
cannot be promoted to any considerable extent without them.
The evils which are sometimes complained of, when they are
real, are incidental, and of small importance when compared
with the amount of good produced by revivals. The senti-
ment should not be admitted by the church for a moment,
that revivals may be given up. It is fraught with all that is
dangerous to the interests of Zion, is death to the cause of


WHAT A REVIVAL OF RELIGION IA. 2i


missions, and brings in its train the damnation of the
world
Finatty.—I have a proposal to make to you who are here
present. I have not commenced this course of Lectures on
Revivals to get up a curious theory of my own on the sub-
ject. I would not spend my time and strength merely to
give you instructions, to gratify your curiosity, and furnish
you something to talk about. I have no idea of preaching
about revivals. It is not my design to preach so as to have
you able to say at the close, “ We understand all about revi-
vals now,” while you do nothing. But I wish to ask you a
question. What do you hear lectures on revivals for? Do
you mean that whenever you are convinced what your duty
is in promoting a revival, you will go to work and practise it?
Wil you follow the instructions I shall give you from the
Word of God, and put them in practise in your own lives?
Will you bring them to bear upon your families, your acquain
tance, neighbors, and through the city? Or will you spend
the winter in learning about revivals, and do nothing for them ?
I want you, as fast as you learn any thing on the subject of
revivals, to put it in practice, and go to work and see if you
cannot promote a revival among sinners here. If you will
not do this, I wish you to let me know at the beginning, so
that I need not waste my strength. You ought to decide now
whether you will do this or not. You know that we call sin-
ners to decide on the spot whether they will obey the Gospel.
And we have no more authority to let you take time to delib-
erate whether you will obey God, than we have to let sinners
do so. We call on you to unite now ina solemn pledge to
God, that you will do your duty as fast as you learn what it
is, and to pray that He will pour out his Spirit upon this church
aud upon all the city this winter.


LECTURE Ií.


WHEN A REVIVAL IS TO BE EXPECTED.


Texr.—Wilt thou vot revive us again; that thy people may rejoice n thes —
Paun lxxxv. 6.


Tms Psalm seems to have been written soon after the re
turn of the people of Israel from the Babylonish captivity ;
as you will easily see from the language at the commence
ment of it. The Psalmist felt that God had been very fa
vorable to the people, and while contemplating the goodness
of the Lord in bringing them back from the land where they
had been carried away captive, and while looking at the pros-
pects before them, he breaks out into a prayer for a Revival
of Religion. “ Wilt thou not revive us again, that thy peo-
ple may rejoice in thee?” Since God in his providence had
re-established the ordinances of his house among them, he
prays that there may be also a revival of religion, to crown
the work.

Last Friday evening I attempted to show what a Revival of
Religion is not; what a Revival is; and the agencies to be
empioyed in promoting it. The topics to which I wish to call
your attention to-night, are,

L When a Revival of Religion is needed.
IL The importance of a Revival when it is needed.

UL. When a Revival of Religion may be expected.


L WHEN IS A REVIVAL OF RELIGION NEEDED?


1. When there is a want of brotherly love and Christian
confidence among professors of religion, then a revival is need-
ed. Then there is a loud call for God to revive his work.
When Christians have sunk down into a low and backslidden
state, they neither have, nor ought to have, nor is there rea-
son to have, the same love and confidence toward each ¢ ther,
as when they are all alive, and active, and living holy lives
The love of benevolence may be the same, but not the love of
complacency. God loves all men with the love of benevo-
lence, but he does not feel the love of complacency toward
any but those who live holy. Christians do not and cannot


love each other with the love of complacency, only in provor.
(22)


WHEN A REVIVAL IS TO BE EXPECTED, 28


tion to their holiness. If Christian love is the love of the im-
age of Christ in his people, then it never can be exercised only
where that image really or apparently exists. A person must
reflect the image of Christ, and show the spirit of Christ, be-
fore other Christians can love him with the love of complacen-
cy. Itisin vain to call on Christians to love one another with
the love of complacency, as Christians, when they are sunk
down in stupidity. They see nothing in each other to produce
this love. Itis next to impossible that they should feel other
wise tuward each other, than they do toward sinners. Merely
knowing that they beiong to the church, or seeing them occa-
sionally at the communion table, will not produce Christian
love, unless they see the image of Christ.

ù. When there are dissensions, and jealousies, and evil
speukings among professors of religion, then there is great
need of a revival. These things show that Christians have

ot far from God, and it is time to think earnestly of a revival.
ligion cannot prosper with such things in the church, and
wthing can put an end to them like a revival.

3. When there is a worldly spirit in the church. It is man-
ifest that the church is sunk down into a low and backslidden
state, when you see Christians conform to the world in dress,
equipage, parties, seeking worldly amusements, reading nov-
els, and other books such as the world read. It shows that
Joey are far from God, and that there is great need of a Revi-
val of Religion.

4, When the church finds its members falling into gross and
scandalous sins, then it is time for the church to awake and
ery to God for a Revival of Religion. When such things aro
taking place, as give the enemies of religion an occasion for
reproach, it is time for the church to ask of God, “ What will
become of thy great name?”

5. When there is a spirit of controversy in the church or in
tho land, a revival is needful. The spirit of religion is not the
spirit of controversy. There can be no prosperity in religion
where the spirit of controversy prevails.

6. When the wicked triumph over the church, and revile
them, it is time to seek for a Revival of Religion.

7. When sinners are careless and stupid, and sinking into
hell unconcerned, it is time the church should bestir themselves.
Ft is as much the duty of the church to awake, as it is of the
firemen to awake when a fire breaks out in the night in a great
city. The church ought to put out the fires of hell which are
Yaying hold of the wicked. Sleep! Should the firemen sleep,
and let the whole city burn down ; what would be thought of


24 WHEN A BEVIVAL IS TO BE EXPECTED.


such firemen? And yet their guilt would not compare with
the guilt of Christians who sleep while sinners around them
are sinking stupid into the fires of hell.


IL I AM TO SHOW THE IMPORTANCE OF A REVIVAL OF RELIGION
IN SUCH CIRCUMSTANCES.


1. A Revival of Religion is the only possible thing that can
vipe away the reproach which covers the church, and restore
religion to the place it ought to have in the estimation of the
public. Without a revival, this reproach will cover the church
more and more, until it is overwhelmed with universal con-
tempt. You may do any thing else you please, and you can
change the aspects of society in some respects, but you will
do no real good ; you only make it worse without a Revival
of Religion. You may go and build a splendid new house of
worship, and line your seats with damask, put up a costly pul-
pit, and get a magnificent organ, and every thing of that kind,
to make a show and dash, and in that way you may procure
a sort of respect for religion among the wicked, but it does
no good in reality. It rather does hurt. It misleads them as
to the real nature of religion ; and so far from converting
them, it carries them farther away from salvation. Look
wherever they have surrounded the altar of Christianity
with splendor, and you will find that the impression produc
ed is contrary to the true nature of religion. There must
be a waking up of energy, on the part of Christians, and an
outpouring of God’s Spirit, or the world will laugh at the
church.

2. Nothing else will restore Christian love and coniidence
among church members. Nothing but a Revival of Religion
can restore it, and nothing else ought to restore it. There is
no other way to wake up that love of Christians for one an
other, which is sometimes felt, when they have such love as
they cannot express. You cannot have such love without con-
fidence ; and you cannot restore confidence without such evi-
dence of piety as is seen in a revival. If a minister finds he
has lost in any degree the confidence of his people, he ought
to labor for a revival as the only means of regaining their
confidence. Ido not mean that this should be his mofive in
laboring for a revival, to regain the confidence of his people,
but that a revival through his instrumentality, and ordinair
ily nothing else, will restore to him the confidence of the
praying part of his people. So if an elder or private mem-
ber of the church finds his brethren cold towards him, there


WHEN A REVIVAL is TO BE EXPECTED. 26


is but one way to remedy it. It is by being revived himself,
and pouring out from his eyes and from his life the splendor
of the image of Christ. This spirit will catch and spread in
the church, and confidence will be renewed, and brotherly love
prevail again.

3. At such a time a Revival of Religion is indispensable to
avert the judgments of God from the church. This would
be strange preaching, if revivals are only miracles, and if the
church has no more agency in producing them, than it has in
making a thunder storm. To say to the church, that unless
there is a revival you may expect judgments, would then be
as ridiculous as to say, If you do not have a thunder storm,
you may expect judgments. The fact is, that Christians, are
more to blame for not being revived, than sinners are for not
being converted. And if.they are not awakened, they may
know assuredly that God will visit them with his judgments.
How often God visited the Jewish church with judgments.
because they would not repent and be revived at the call of
his prophets! How often have we seen churches, and even
whole denominations, cursed with a curse, because they would
not wake up and seek the Lord, and pray, “ Wilt thou not
revive us again, that thy people may rejoice in thee?”

4. Nothing but a Revival of Religion can preserve such a
church from annihilation. A church declining in this way
cannot continue to exist without a revival. If it receives new
members, they will, for the most part, be made up of ungodly
persons. Without revivals there will not ordinarily be as
many persons converted as will die off in a year. There
have been churches in this country where the members have
died off, and there were no revivals to convert others in their
place, till the church has run out, and the organization has
been dissolved. ch ‘

A minister told me that he once labored as a missionary in
Virginia, on the ground where such 2 man as Samuel Davies
once flashed and shone like a flaming torch; and that Davies’s
ehurch was so reduced as to have but one male member, and
he, if I remember right, was a colored man. The church had

ot proud, and was all run out. I have heard of a church in
Phe vania, that was formerly flourishing, but neglected re-
vivals, and it became so reduced that the pastor had to send
to a neighboring church for a ruling elder when he adminis
tered the communion.*


$ Why not, in such a case, let any member of the church, male or female, distrt
tute the elements? Is it indispensable to have an elder ?
2


26 WHEN A REVIVAL IS TO BE EXPECTED.


b. nothing but a Revival of Religion can prevent the means
of grace from doing a great injury to the ungodly. Without
a revival, they will grow harder and harder under preaching,
and will experience a more horrible damnation than they
would if they had never heard the Gospel. Your children and
your friends will go down to a much more horrible fate in hell,
in consequence of the means of grace, if there are no revivals
to convert them to God. Better were it for them if there
were no means of grace, no sanctuary, no Bible, no preaching,
and if they had never heard the Gospel, than to live and die
where there is no revival. The Gospel is the savor of death
unto death, if it is not made a savor of life unto life.

6. There is no other way in which a church can be sancti-
fied, grow in grace, and be fitted for heaven. What is grow-
ing in grace? Is it hearing sermons and getting some new
notions about religion? No—no such thing. The Christian
who does this, and nothing more, is getting worse and worse,
more and more hardened, and every week it is more difficult
to rouse him up to duty.


OL I AM TO SHOW WHEN A REVIVAL OF RELIGION MAY BE EX-
PECTED.


1. When the providence of God indicates that a revival is
at hand. The indications of God’s providence are sometimes
so plain as to amount to a revelation of his will. There is a
conspiring of events to open the way, a preparation of cir-
cumstances to favor a revival, so that those who are looking
out can see that a revival is at hand, just as plainly as if it had
been revealed from Heaven. Cases have occurred in this
country, where the providential manifestations were so plain,
that those who are careful observers, felt no hesitation in say-
ing that God was coming to pour out his Spirit, and grant a
revival of religion. There are various ways for God to indi-
cate his will to a people—sometimes by giving them peculiar
means, sometimes by peculiar and alarming events, sometimes
by remarkably favoring the employment of means, by the
weather, health, etc.

2. When the wickedness of the wicked grieves and hum-
bles and distresses Christians. Sometimes Christians do not
feem to mind any thing about the wickedness around them.
Or if they talk about it, it is in a cold, and callous, and unfeel-
ing way, as if they despaired of a reformation: they are dis-

nosed to scold at sinners—not to feel the compassion of the

n of God for them. But sometimes the conduct of the


WHEN A REVIVAL IS TO BE EXPECTED. 27


wicked drives Christians to prayer, and breaks them down,
and makes them sorrowful and tender-hearted, so that they
can weep day and night, and instead of scolding and reproach-
ing them, they pray earnestly for them. Then you may ex-
pect a revival. Indeed this is a revival begun already. Some-
times the wicked will get up an opposition to religion. And
when this drives Christians to their knees in prayer to God,
with strong crying and tears, you may be certain there is
going to be a revival. The prevalence of wickedness is no
evidence at all that there is not going to be a revival. That
is often God’s time to work. When the enemy cometh in
like a flood, the Spirit of the Lord lifts up a standard against
him. Often the first indication of a revival, is the devil’s get-
ting up something new in opposition. In will invariably have
one of two effects. It will either drive Christians to God, or
it will drive them farther away from God, to some carnal pol-
icy or other that will only make things worse. Frequently
the most outrageous wickedness of the ungodly is followed
by arevival If Christians are made to feel that they have
‘no hope but in God, and if they have sufficient feeling left to
care for the honor of God and the salvation of the souls of
the impenitent, there will certainly be a revival. Let hell
boil over if it will, and spew out as many devils as there are
stones in the pavements, if it only drives Christians to God
in prayer—they cannot hinder a revival. Let Satan get up a
row, and sound his horn as loud as he pleases ; if Christians
will only be humbled and pray, they shall soon see God’s
naked arm in a revival of religion. I have known instances
where a revival has broken in upon the ranks of the enemy,
almost as suddenly as a clap of thunder, and scattered them—
taken the very ringleaders as trophies, and broken up their
party in an instant.

3. A revival may be expected when Christians have a spirit
of prayer for a revival. That is, when they pray as if their
hearts were set upon a revival. Sometimes Christians are
not engaged in prayer for a revival, not even when they are
warm in prayer. Their minds are upon something else ; they
are praying for something else—the salvation of the heathen
and the like—and not for a revival among themselves. But
when they feel the want of a revival, they pray for it; they
feel for their own families and neighborhoods, and pray for
them as if they could not be denied. What constitutes a
spirit of prayer? Is it many prayers and warm words? No.
Prayer is the state of the heart. The spirit of prayer is a
state of continual desire and anxiety of mind for the salvation


28 WHEN A REVIVAL I8 TO BE EXPECTED.


of sinners. It is something that weighs them down. It è
the same, so far as the philosophy of the mind is concerned,
as when a man is anxious for some worldly interest. A Chris
tian who has this spirit of prayer feels anxious for souls. It
is the subject of his thoughts all the time, and makes him
look and act as if he had a load on his mind He thinks of
it by day, and dreams of it by night. This is properly pray-
ing without ceasing. The man’s prayers seem to flow from
his heart liquid as water—“ O Lord, revive thy work.” Some
times this feeling is very deep; persons have been bowed
down, so that they could neither stand nor sit. I can name
men in this State, of firm nerves, who stand high in charac
ter, who have been absolutely crushed with grief for the state
of sinners. They have had an actual travail of soul for sin-
ners, till they were as helpless as children. The feeling 1s
not always so great as this, but such things are much more
common than is supposed. In the great revivals in 1826, they
were common. This is by no means enthusiasm. It is just
what Paul felt, when he says, “ My little children, of whom I
travail in birth.” I heard of a person in this State, who prayed
for sinners, and finally got into such a state of mind, that she
could not live without prayer. She could not rest day nor
night, unless there was somebody praying. Then she would
be at ease ; but if they ceased, she would shriek in agony till
there was prayer again. And this continued for two days,
until she prevailed in prayer, and her soul was relieved. This
travail of soul, is that deep agony, which persons feel when
they lay hold on God for such a blessing, and will not let him
go till they receive it. I do not mean to be understood that
it is essential to a spirit of prayer, that the distress should be
so great as this. But this deep, continual, earnest desire for
the salvation of sinners, is what constitutes the spirit of pray-
er for a revival. It is a revival begun so far as this spirit of
prayer extends.

When this feeling exists in a church, unless the Spirit is
grieved away by sin, there will infallibly be a revival of
Christians generally, and it will involve the conversion of sin:
ners to God. This anxiety and distress increases till the
revival commences. A clergyman in W n told me of a
revival among his people, which commenced with a zealous
and devoted woman in the church. She became anxious
about sinners, and went to praying for them; she prayed
and her distress increased; and she finally came to her
minister, and talked with him, and asked him to appoint an
anxious meeting, for she felt that one was needed. The min


WHEN A REVIVAL IS TO BE EXPECTED, 29


ister put her off, for he felt nothing of it. The next week she
came again, and besought him to appoint an anxious meet-
ing ; she knew there would be somebody to come, for she felt
as if God was going to pour out his Spirit. He put her off
again. And finally she said to him, “If you do not appoint
an anxious meeting I shall die, for there is certainly going to
be a revival.” The next Sabbath he appointed a meeting,
and said that if there were any who wished to converse with
him about the salvation of their souls, he would meet them
on such an evening. He did not know of one, but when he
went to the place, to his astonishment he found a large num-
ber of anxious inquirers. Now do not you think that woman
knew there was going to be a revival? Call it what you
please, a new revelation, or an old revelation, or any thing
else. I say it was the Spirit of God that taught that praying
woman there was going to bea revival “The secret of the
Lord” was with her, and she knew it. She knew God had
been in her heart, and filled it so full that she could contain
no longer.
Sometimes ministers have had this distress about their con-
DEIRA so that they felt as if they could not live unless
ey could see a revival Sometimes elders and deacons, or
private members of the church, men or women, have the spirit
of prayer for a revival of religion, so that they will hold on
and prevail with God, till he pours out his Spirit. The first
ray of light that broke in upon the midnight which rested on
the churches in Oneida county, in the fall of 1825, was from
a woman in feeble health, who, I believe, had never been in a
werful revival. Her soul was exercised about sinners.
he was in an agony for the land. She did not know what
ailed her, but she kept praying more and more, till it seemed
as if her agony would destroy her body. At length she
became full of joy, and exclaimed, “God has come! God
has come! There is no mistake about it, the work is begun,
and is going over all the region.” And sure enough, the
work began, and her family were almost all converted, and
the work spread all over that part of the country. Now, do
ou think that woman was deceived? I tell you, no. She
base she had prevailed with God in prayer. She had trav-
ailed in birth for souls, and she knew it. This was not the
only instance, by many, that I knew in that region. _
Generally, there are but few professors of religion that
know any thing about this spirit of prayer which prevails
with God. I have been amazed to see such accounts as are
eften published about revivals, as if the revival had come


80 WHEN A REVIVAL IS TO BE EXPECTED.


without any cause—nobody knew why or wherefore. I have
sometimes inquired into such cases ; when it had been given
out that nobody knew any thing about it until one Sabbath
they saw in the face of the congregation that God was there,
or they saw it in their conference room, or prayer meeting,
and were astonished at the mysterious sovereignty of God, in
bringing in a revival without any apparent connection with
means. Now mark me. Go and inquire among the obscure
members of the church, and you will always find that some
body had been praying for a revival, and was expecting it—
some man or woman had been agonizing in prayer, for the
salvation of sinners, until they gained the blessing. It may
have found the minister and the body of the church fast
«sleep, and they would wake up all of a sudden, like a man
just rubbing his eyes open, and running round the room
pushing things over, and wondering where all this excitement
came from. But though few knew it, you may be sure there
has been somebody on the watch-tower ; constant in prayer
till the blessing came. Generally, a revival is more or less
extensive, as there are more or less persons who have the
spirit of prayer. But I will not dwell on this subject any fur-
ther at present, as the subject of prayer will come up again in
this course of lectures.

4, Another sign that a revival may be expected, is when
the attention of ministers is especially directed to this partio-
ular object, and when their preaching and other efforts are
aimed particularly at the conversion of sinners. Most of the
time the labors of ministers are, it would seem, directed to
other objects. They seem to preach and labor with no par-
ticular design to effect the immediate conversion of sinners.
And then it need not be expected that there will be a revival
under their preaching. There never will be a revival till
somebody makes particular efforts for this end. But when the
attention of a minister is directed to the state of the families
in his congregation, and his heart is full of feeling of the ne-
cessity of a revival, and when he puts forth the proper efforts
for this end, then you may be prepared to expect a revival.
As I explained last week, the connection between the right
use of means for a revival, and a revival, is as philosophically
sure as between the right use of means to raise grain, and a
crop of wheat. I believe, in fact, it is more certain, and that
there are fewer instances of failure. The effect is more cer
tain to follow. The paramount importance of spiritual
things makes it reasonable that it should be so. Take the
Bible, the nature of the case, and the history of the church,


WHEN A REVIVAL IS TO BE EXPECTED. $1


a.J together, and you will find fewer failures in the use of
means for a revival, than in farming, or any other worldly
business. In worldly business there are sometimes cases
where counteracting causes annihilate alla man can do. In
raising grain, for instance, there are cases which are beyond
the control of man, such as drought, hard winter, worms, and
sv on. So in laboring to promote a revival, there may
things occur to counteract it, something or other turning up
to divert the public attention from religion, which may baffle
every effort. But I believe there are fewer such cases in the
moral than in the natural world. I have seldom seen an in-
divixual fail, when he used the means for promoting a revival
in earnest, in the manner pointed out in the word of God. I
believe a man may enter on the work of promoting a revival,
with as reasonable an expectation of success, as he can enter
on any other work with an’ expectation of success ; with the
same expectation as the farmer has of a crop when he sows
his grain. I have sometimes seen this tried and succeed un:
der circumstances the most forbidding that can be conceived.
The great revival in Rochester began under the most dis
advantageous circumstances that could well be imagined
It seemed as though Satan had interposed every possible ob-
stacle to a revival. The three churches were at variance; one
had no minister, one was divided and about to dismiss their
minister. An elder of the third Presbyterian church had
brought a charge of unchristian conduct against the pastor
of the first ckurch, and they were just going to have a trial
before the presbytery. After the work began, one of the first
things was, the great stone church gave way, and created a
panic. Then one of the churches went on and dismissed
their minister right in the midst of it. Another church
nearly broke down. Many other things occurred, so that
it seemed as if the devil was determined to divert the public
attention from the subject of religion. But there were a few
remarkable cases of the spirit of prayer, which assured us
that God was there, and we went on: and the more Satan
opposed, the Spirit of the Lord lifted up the standard higher
and higher, till finally a wave of salvation rolled over the
lace.

P 5. A revival of religion may be expected when Christians
begin to confess their sins to one another. At other times,
they confess in a general manner, as if they were only half in
earnest. They may do it in eloquent language, but it does
not mean any thing. But when there is an ingenuous break-
ing down, and a pouring out of the heart in making æ con:


3 WHEN A REVIVAL IS TO BE EXPECT=E


fossion af their sins, the flood-gates will soon burst open, and
salvation will flow over the place. E

& A revival may be expected whenever Christians are
found willing to make the sacrifice necessary to carry it on.
They must be willing to sacrifice their gs, their business,
their time, to help forward the work. ist must be
wiling to lay out their strength, and to pard their
health and hfe. They must be willing to a the im
penitent by plain and faithful dealing, and perhaps offend
many members of the church who will not come up to the
work. They must take a decided stand with the revival,
be the consequences what they may. They must be pre-
pared to go on with the work, even though y should lose
the affections of all the impenitent, and of all the cold part
ef the church. The minister must be prepared, if it is the
will of God, to be driven away from the place. He must be
determined to go straight forward, and leave the entire event
with God

IT knew a minister who had a young man laboring with him
im arevival The young man preached pretty plain, and the
wicked did not like him. They said, We hke our minister,
and we wish to have him preach. They finally said so much
that the minister told the young man, “Mr. Such-a-one, that
gives so much towards my support, says so and so. Mr. A.
Says so, and Mr. B says so. They think it will break up the
society if you continue to preach, and I think you had better
not preach any more.” The young man went away, but the
Spint of God immediately withdrew from the place, and the
revival stopped short. The minister, by yielding to the wicked
desires of the wicked, drove him away. He was afraid the
devil would drive Atm away from his people, and by undertak-
ing to satisfy the devil, he offended God. And God so ordered —
events, that in a short time he had to leave his people after _
all. He undertook to go between the devil and God, and God
dismissed him.

The people, also, must be willing to have a revival, let the _
sacrifice be what it may. It will not do for them to say, “We |
are willi + en many niinn eee |
any more. Or, “We are willing to have a revival if it wil _


months, if it is necessary to carry on a revival. I


WHEN A REVIVAL IS TO BE EXPECTED. 33


mean to say any such thing is called for, or that it is their
duty to do so. But if there should be such a state of feeling
as to call for it, then it would be their duty, and they ought
to be willing to doit. They ought to be willing to do it if
God calls, and he can easily burn down their stores if they
do not. In fact, I should not be sorry to see such a revival
in New York, as would make every merchant in the city lock
up his store till spring, and say he had sold goods enough, and
now he would give up his whole time to lead sinners to Christ.

7. A revival may be expected when ministers and profes
sors are willing to have God promote it by what instruments
he pleases. Sometimes ministers are not willing to have a
revival unless they can have the mangement of it, or unless
their agency can be conspicuous in promoting it. They wish
to prescribe to God what he shall direct and bless, and what
men he shall put forward. ` They will have no new measures.
They cannot have any of this new-light preaching, or of these
evangelists that go about the country preaching. They have
a great deal to say about God’s being a sovereign, and that
he will have revivals come in his own way and time. But
then he must choose to have it just in their way, or they will
have nothing to do with it. Such men will sleep on till the
are awakened by the judgment trumpet, without a aa |
unless they are willing that God should come in his own way
—unless they are willing to have any thing or any body em-
ployed, that will do the most good.

8. Strictly I should say that when the foregoing things oc-
cur, a revival, to the same extent, already exists. In truth a
revival should be expected whenever it is needed. If we need
to be revived it is our duty to be revived. If it is duty it is
possible, and we should set about being revived ourselves,
and, relying on the promise of Christ to be with us in making
disciples always and everywhere, we ought to labor to revive
Christians and convert sinners, with confident expectation of
success. Therefore, whenever the church needs reviving they
ought and may expect to be revived, and to see sinners con-
verted to Christ. When those things are seen which are
named under the foregoing heads, let Christians and minis
ters be encouraged and know that a good work is already be
gun. Follow it up.


REMARKS,


1. Brethren, you can tell from our subject, whether you
need a revival here or not, in this church, and in this city
Q*


$4 WHEN A REVIVAL IS TO BE EXPECTED.


and whether you are going to have one or not. Elders œ%
the church, men, women, any of you, and all of you—what de
you say ?

Do you need a revival here?

Do you expect to have one?

Have you any reason to expect one?

You need not make any mist about it; for you know, or
can know if you will, whether you have any reason to look
for a revival here.

2. You see why you have not a revival. It is only because
you do not want one. Because you are not praying for it;
nor anxious for it, nor putting forth efforts for it. I appeal
to your own consciences. Are you making these efforts now,
to promote a revival? You know, brethren, what the truth
is about iù Will you stand up and say that you have made
the efforts for a revival and been disappointed—that you have
ont God, “ Wilt thou not revive us ?” and God would not

it

3. Do you wish for a revival? Will you have one? If God
should ask you this moment, by an audible voice from heaven,
“Do you want a revival?” would you dare to say, Yes? “Are
you willing to make the sacrifices?” would you answer, Yes ?
“When shall it begin ?” would you answer, Let it begin to-
night—let it begin here—let it begin in my heart NOW?
Would you dare tc say so to God, if you should hear his voice


tonight ?


LECTURE III.


HOW TO PROMOTE A REVIVAL


Txxt.—Break up your fallow ground; for it is time to seek the Lord, till he come
gad rain righteousness upon you.—HosxEa x. 12.


Tue Jews were a nation of farmers, and it is therefore a
common thing in the Scriptures to refer for illustrations to
their occupation, and to the scenes with which farmers and
shepherds are familiar. The prophet Hosea addresses them
as a nation of backsliders, and reproves them for their idola-
try, and threatens them with the judgments of God. I have
showed you in my first lecture what a revival is not—what it
is—and the agencies to be employed in promoting it; and in
my second, when it is needed—its importance—and when it
may be expected. My design in this lecture is to show,


HOW A REVIVAL IS TO BE PROMOTED.


A revival consists of two parts ; as it respects the church,
and as it respects the ungodly. I shall speak to-night of a
revival] in the church. Fallow ground is ground which has
once been tilled, but which now lies waste, and needs to be
bzoken up and mellowed, before it is suited to receive grain.
I shall show, as it respects a revival in the church,

1. What it is to break up the fallow ground, in the sense
of the text.

2. How it is to be performed.


L WHAT IS IT TO BREAK UP THE FALLOW GROUND?


To break up the fallow ground, is to break up your hearts—
to prepare your minds to bring forth fruit unto God. The
mind of man is often compared in the Bible to ground, and
the word of God to seed sown in it, and the fruit represents
the actions and affections of those who receive it. To break
up the fallow ground, therefore, is to bring the mind into
such a state, that it is fitted to receive the word of God.
Sometimes your hearts get matted down hard and dry, and
all run to waste, till there is no such thing as getting fruit
from them till they are all broken up, and mellowed down, and
fitted to receive the word of God. It is me ns of the


36 HOW TO PROMOTE A REVIVAL.


heart, so as to make it feel the truth, which the prophet calls
breaking up your fallow ground.


IL HOW IS THE FALLOW GROUND TO BE BROKEN UP?


1. It is not by any direct efforts to feel. People run into a
mistake on this subject, from not making the laws of mind
the object of thought. There are great errors on the subject
of the laws which govern the mind. People taik about religi-
ous feeling, as if they thought they could, by direct effort, call
forth religious affection. But this is not the way the mind
acts. No man can make himself feelin this way, merely by
trying to feel The feelings of the mind are not directly under
our control. We cannot by willing, or by direct volition, call
forth religious feelings. We might as well think to call
spirits up from the deep. They are purely involuntary states
of mind. They naturally and necessarily exist in the mind
under certain circumstances calculated to excite them. But
they can be controlled indirectly. Otherwise there would be
no moral character in our feelings, if there were not a way to
control them. We cannot say, “ Now I will feel so and so to-
wards such an object.” But we can command our attention to
it, and look at it intently, till the involuntary affections arise.
Let a man who is away from his family, bring them up before


his mind, and will he not feel? Butit is not by saying to . ©


himself, “Now I will feel deeply for my family.” A man can
direct his attention to any object, about which he ought to
feel and wishes to feel, and in that way he will call into ex-
istence the proper emotions. Let a man call up his enemy
before his mind, and his feelings of enmity will rise. So if a
man thinks of God, and fastens his mind on any parts of
God’s character, he will feel—emotions will come up, by the
very laws of mind. Tf he is a friend of God, let him contem-
plate God as a gracious and holy being, and he will have emo-
tions of friendship kindled up in his mind. [If he is an enemy
of God, only let him get the true character of God before his
mind, and look at it, and fasten his attention on it, and his
enmity will rise against God, or he will break down and give
his heart to God.

If you wish to break up the fallow ground of your hearts,
and make your minds feel on the subject of religion, you must
goto work just as you would to feel on any other subject. Instead
of keeping your thoughts on every thing else, and then ima-
gine that by going to a few meetings you will get your feelings
enlisted, go the common sense way to work, as you would on


HOW TO PROMOTE A REVIVAL» 37


any other subject. It is just as easy to make your minds feel
on the subject of religion as it is on any other subject. God

has put these states of mind under your control. If people
were as unphilosophical about moving their limbs, as they are
about regulating their emotions, you would never have got
here to meeting to-night.

If you mean to break the fallow ground of your hearts,
you must begin by looking at your hearts—examine and note
the state of your minds, and see where you are. Many never
seem to think about this. They pay no attention to their own
hearts, and never know whether they are doing well in reli-
gion or not—whether they are gaining ground or going back
—whether they are fruitful, or lying waste like the fallow
ground. Now you must draw off your attention from other
things, and look into this. Make a business of it. Do not
be in a hurry. Examine thoroughly the state of your hearts,
and see where you are—whether you are walking with God
every day, or walking with the devil—whether you are serv-
ing God or serving the devil most—whether you are under
the deminion of the prince of darkness, or of the Lord Jesus
Christ.

To do all this, you must set yourselves at work to consider
your sins. You must examine yourselves. And by this I do
not mean, that you must stop and look directly within to
see what is the present state of your feelings. That is the
very way to put a stop to all feeling. This is just as
absurd as it would be for a man to shut his eyes on the lamp,
and try to turn his eyes inward to find out whether there was
any image painted on the retina. The man complains that he
does not see anything! And why? Because he has turned his
eyes away from the objects of sight. The truth is, our moral
feelings are as much an object of consciousness as our sensa-
tions. And the way to excite them is to go on acting, and
employing our minds, Then we can tell our moral feelings
by consciousness, just as I could tell my natural feelings by
consciousness, if I should put my hand in the fire.

Self-examination consists in looking at your lives, in consi-
dering your actions, in calling up the past, and learning its
true character. Look back over your past history. Take up
your individual sins one by one, and look at them. I do not
mean that you should just cast a glance at your past life, and
see that it has been full of sins, and then go to God and make
a sort of general confession, and ask for pardon. That is not
the way. You must take them up one by one. It will be a
good thing to take a pen and paper, as you go over them, and


88 HOW TO PROMOTE A REVIVAL.


write them down as they occur to you. Go over tnem as
carefully as a merchant goes over his books ; and as often as
a sin comes before your memory, add it to the list. General
confessions of sin will never do. Your sims were committed
one by one; and as far as you can come at them, they ought
to be reviewed and repented of one by one. Now begin ;
and take up first what are commonly, but improperly, called
your


SINS OF OMISSION.


1. Ingratitude. Take this sin, for instance, and write down
under it all the instances you can remember, wherein you
have received favors from God, for which you have never ex-
ercised gratitude. How many cases can you remember?
Some remarkable providence, some wonderful turn of events,
that saved you from ruin. Set down the instances of God’s
goodness to you when you were in sin, before your conver-
sion. Then the mercy of God in the circumstances of your
conversion, for which you have never been half thankful
enough. The numerous mercies you have received since.
How long the catalogue of instances, where your ingratitude
is so black that you are forced to hide your face in confusion!
Now go on your knees, and confess them one by one to God,
and ask forgiveness. ‘The very act of confession, by the laws
of suggestion, will bring up others to your memory. Put
down these. Go over these three or four times in this way,
and you will find an astonishing amount of mercies, for which
you have never thanked God. Then take another sin. Let
it be,

2. Want of love to God. Write that down, and go over all
the instances you can remember, when you did not give to
the blessed God that hearty love which you ought.

Think how grieved and alarmed you would be, if you dis-
covered any flagging of affection for you in your wife, hus
band, or children ; if you saw somebody else engrossing their
hearts, and thoughts, and time. Perhaps, in such a case, you
would well nigh die with a just and virtuous jealousy. Now,
God styles himself a jealous God ; and have you not given
your heart to other loves: played the harlot, and infinitely
offended him ?

3. Neglect of the Bible. Put down the cases, when for days,
and perhaps for weeks—yea, it may be, even for months to-
gether, you had no pleasure in God’s word. Perhaps you did
not read a chapter, or if you read it, it was in a way that was


HOW TO PROMOTE A REVIVAL 39


still more displeasing to God. Many people read over a whole
chapter in such a way, that if they were put under oath when
they have done, they could not tell what they have been read-
ing. With so litle attention do they read, that they cannot
remember where tiey Lave read from morning till evening,
unless they put in a string or turn down a leaf. This demon-
strates that they did not lay to heart what they read, that
they did not make it a subject of reflection. If you were
reading a novel, or any other piece of intelligence that greatly
interested you, would you not remember what you read last ?
And the fact that you fold a leaf or put in a string, demon-
strates that you read rather as a task, than from love or rev-
erence for the word of God. The word of God is the rule of
your duty. And do you pay so little regard to it as not to
remember what you read? If so, no wonder that you live
so at random, and that your religion is such a miserable
failure.

4. Unbelief. Instances in which you have virtually charged
‘we God of truth with lying, by your unbelief of his express

mises and declarations. God has promised to give the
fay Spirit to them that ask him. Now, have you believed
this? Have you expected him to answer? Have you not
virtually said in your hearts, when you prayed for the Holy
Spirit, “I do not believe that I shall receive it?” If you have
not believed nor expected you should receive the blessing,
which God has expressly promised, you have charged him
with lying.

5. Neglect of prayer. Times when you omitted secret prayer,
family prayer, and prayer meetings, or have prayed in such a
way as more grievously to offend God, than to have neglected
it altogether.

6. Neglect of the means of grace. When you have suffered
trifling excuses to prevent your attending meetings, have neg-
lected and poured contempt upon the means of salvation,
merely from disrelish of spiritual duties.

7. The manner in which you have performed those duties—
want of feeling—want of faith—worldly frame of mind—se
that your words were nothing but the mere chattering of a
wretch, that did not deserve that God should feel the least
garo for him. When you have fallen down upon your knees,
and said your prayers, in such an unfecling and careless man-
ner, that if you had been put under oath five n“*nutes after
you left your closet, you could not have told what you had
been praying for.

8. Your want of love for the souls of your fellowmen. Lonk


40 HOW TO PROMOTE A REVIVAL


round upon your friends and relations, and remember how
little compassion you have felt for them. You have stood b
and seen them going right to hell, and it seems as thoug
you did not care if they did. How many days have there
been, in which you did not make their condition the subject
of a single fervent prayer, or even an ardent desire for their
salvation ?

9. Your want of care for the heathen. Perhaps you have not
eared enough for them to attempt to learn their condition ;
perhaps not even to take a Missionary paper. Look at this,
and see how much you do really care for the heathen, and set
down honestly the real amount of your feelings for them,
and your desire for their salvation. Measure your desire for
their salvation by the self-denial you practise, in giving of
your substance to send them the Gospel. Do you deny your-
self even the hurtful superfluities of life, such as tea, coffee,
and tobacco? Do you retrench your style of living, and really
subject yourself to any inconvenience to save them? Do you
daily pray for them in your closet? Do you statedly attend
the monthly concert? Are you from month to month laying
by something to put into the treasury of the Lord, when you
go up to pray? If you are not doing these things, and if
your soul is not agonized for the poor benighted heathen,
why are you such a hypocrite as to pretend to be a Christian ?
Why, your profession is an insult to Jesus Christ!

10. Your neglect of family duties. How you have lived be
fore them, how you have prayed, what an example you have
set before them. What direct efforts do you habitually make
for their spiritual good? What duty have you not neglected ?

11. Neglect of social duties,

12. Neglect of watchfulness over your own life. Instances in
which you have hurried over your private duties, and not
taken yourself to task, nor honestly made up your accounts
with God. Where you have entirely neglected to watch your
conduct, and have been off your guard, and have sinned be-
fore the world, and before the church, and before God.

13. Neglect to watch over your brethren. How often have you
broken your covenant, that you would watch over them in
the Lord! How little do you know or care about the state
of their souls! And yet you are under a solemn oath to watch
over them. What have you done to make yourself acquainted
with them? How many of them have you interested yourself
for, to know their spiritual state? Go over the list, and wher-
ever you find there has been a neglect, write it down. How
many times have you seen your brethren growing cold in reli


HOW TO PROMOTE A REVIVAL. 4}


gion, and have not spoken to them about it? You have seen
them beginning to neglect one duty after another, and you did
not reprove them in a brotherly way. You have seen them
falling into sin, and you let them go on. And yet you pretend
to love them. What a hypocrite! Would you see your wife
or child going into disgrace, or into the fire, and hold your
peace? No, you would not. What do you think of yourself,
then, to pretend to love Christians, and to love Christ, while
A ies poe see them going into disgrace, and say nothing to

em

14. Neglect of self-denial. There are many professors who
are willing to do almost any thing in religion, that does not
require self-denial. But when they are called to do any thing
that requires them to deny themselves, Oh! that is too much.
They think they are doing a great deal for God, and doing
about as much as he ought to ask in reason, if they are only
doing what they can do about as well as not; but they are
not willing to deny themselves any comfort or convenience
whatever, for the sake of serving the Lord. They will not
willingly suffer reproach for the name of Christ. Nor will
they deny themselves the luxuries of life, to save a world
from hell. So far are they from remembering that self-
denial is a condition of discipleship, that they do not know what
self-denial is. They never have really denied themselves a
riband or a pin for Christ, and for the Gospel. Oh, how soon
such professors will be in hell! Some are giving of their
abundance, and are giving much, and are ready to complain
that others don’t give more ; when, in truth, they do not give
any thing that they need, any thing that they could enjoy, if
they kept it. They only give of their surplus wealth ; and
perhaps that poor woman, who puts in twelve and a-half
cents at the monthly concert, has exercised more self-denial,
than they have in giving thousands.

From these we turn to


SINS OF OUMMISSION.


1. Worldly mindedness. What has been the state of your
heart in regard to your worldly possessions? Have you
looked at them as really yours—as if you had a right to dis-
pose of them as your own, according to your own will? If
you have, write that down. If you have loved property, and
sought after it for its own sake, or to gratify lust or ambition,
or a worldly spirit, or to lay it up for your families, you have
sinned, and must repent.


42 SOW TO PROMOTE. VIVAL


2 Pride Recollect all the instances you can, in which
have detected yourself in the exercise of pride. Vanity
is a particular form of pride. How many times have you de-
tected yourself in consulting vanity, about your dress and ap-
pearance? How many times have you thought more, and
taken more pains, and spent more time, about decorating
your body to go to church, than you have about preparing
your mind for the worship of God? You have gone to the
of God caring more how you appear outwardly in the
sight of mortal men, than how your soul appears in the sight
of the heart-searching God. You have in fact set up your
self to be worshipped by them, rather than prepared to wor-
ship God beant 5 You came to divide the worship of God’s
house, to draw off the attention of God’s people to look at
your pretty appearance. It is in vain to pretend now, that
you don’t care any thing about having people look at you.
Be honest about it, Would you take all this pains about
your looks if every body was blind?

3. Envy. Look at the cases in which you were envious at
those who you thought were above you in any respect. Or
perhaps you have envied those who have been more talented
or more useful than yourself Have you not so envied sorie,
that you have been pained to hear them praised? It has
been more agreeable to you to dwell upon their faults, than
upon their virtues, upon their failures, than upon their suc
cess Be honest with yourself, and if you have harbored this
spirit of hell, repent deeply before God, or he will never for-
give you.

4. Censoriousness. Instances in which you have had a
bitter spirit, and spoken of Christians in a manner entirely
devoid of charity and love—charity, which requires you al-
ways to hope the best the case will admit, and to put the best
construction upon any ambiguous conduct.

5. Slender. The times you have spoken behind people’s
backs of their faults, real or supposed, of members of the
church or others, unnecessarily or without good reason. This
is slander. You need not lie to be guilty of slander;—to tell
the truth with the design to injure, is slander.

©. Levy How often have you trifled before God, as you
would not have dared to trifle in the presence of an earthly
sovereign? You have either been an Atheist, and forgotten
that there was a God, or have had less respect for him, and
his presence, than you would have had for an earthly judge.

T. Laing. Und rstand now what lying is. Any species of
designed dacepti for a selfish reason is lying. If the de


HOW TO PROMOTE A REVIVAL. 43


ception is not a design it is not lying. But if you design to
make an impression contrary to the naked truth, you lie
Put down all those cases you can recollect. Don’t call them
by any soft name. God calls them LIES, and charges you
with LYING, and you had better charge yourself correctly.

How innumerable are the falsehoods perpetrated every day
in business, and in social intercourse, by words, and looks,
and actions—designed to make an impression on others con-
trary to the truth for selfish reasons.

8. Cheating. Set down all the cases in which you have
dealt with an individual, and done to him that which you
would not like to have done to you. That is cheating. God
has laid down a rule in the case; “All things whatsover ye
would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them.”
That is the rule; and now if you have not done so you are
a cheat. Mind, the rule is not that you should do what you
might reasonably expect them to do to you. That is a rule
which would admit of every degree of wickedness. But it is
“ As ye WOULD they should do to you.”

9. Hypocrisy. For instance, in your prayers and confessions
to God. Set down the instances in which you have prayed
for things you did not really want. And the evidence is,
that when you have done praying, you could not tell what you
had prayed for. How many times have you confessed sins
that you did not mean to break off, and when you had no
solemn purpose not to repeat them? Yes, have confessed
sins when you knew you as much expected to go and repeat
them as you expected to live.

10. Robbing God. Instances in which you have misspent
your time, and squandered hours which God gave you to serve
him and save souls, in vain amusements or foolish conversa-
tion, reading novels, or doing nothing ; cases where you have
misapplied your talents and powers of mind ; where you have
squandered money on your lusts, or spent it for things you did
not need, and which neither contributed to your health, com-
fort or usefulness. Perhaps some of you who are here to-
night have laid out God’s money for TOBACCO. I will not
speak of rum, for I presume there is no professor of religion
here to-night that would drink rum. I hope there is no one
that uses the filthy poison, tobacco. Think of a professor of
religion, using God’s money to poison himself with tobacco!

11. Bad temper. Perhaps you have abused your wife, or

our children, or your family, or servants, or neighbors
Write it all down.
12. Hindering others from being useful. Perhaps you have


ve HOW TO PROMOTE A REVIVAL.


weakened their influence by insinuations against them. You
have not only robbed God of your own talents, but tied the
hands of somebody else. What a wicked servant is he that
loiters himself, and hinders the rest! This isdone sometimes
by taking their time needlessly ; sometimes by destroying
Christian confidence in them. Thus you have played into the
hands of Satan, and not only showed yourself an idle vag
bond, but prevented others from working.

If you find you have committed a fault against an individual,
and that individual is within your reach, go and confess it im-
mediately, and get that out of the way. If the individual you
have injured is too far off for you to go and see him, sit down
and write him a letter, and confess the injury, pay the postage,
and put it into the mail immediately. I say, pay the postage,
or otherwise you will only make the matter worse. You will
add to the former injury, by making him a bill of expense.
The man that writes a letter on his own business, and sends it
to another without paying the postage, is dishonest, and hag
cheated him out of so much. And if he would cheat a man
out of a sixpence or shilling, when the temptation is so small,
what would he not do were the temptation greater, if he
had the prospect of impunity? If you have defrauded any
body, send the money, the full amount and the interest.

Go thoroughly to work in all this. Go now. Don’t put it
off ; that will only make the matter worse. Confess to God
those sins that have been committed against God, and to man
those sins that have been committed against man. Don’t
think of getting off by going round the stumbling blocks.
Take them up out of the way. In breaking up your fallow
ground, you must remove every obstruction. Things may be
left that you may think little things, and you may wonder
why you do not feel as you wish to in religion, when the rea-
son is that your proud and carnal mind has covered up some-
thing which God required you to confess and remove. Break
up all the ground and turn it over. Do not balk it, as the
farmers say; do not turn aside for little difficulties ; drive the
plow right through them, beam deep, and turn the ground
all up, so that it may all be mellow and soft, and fit to re-
ceive the seed and bear fruit a hundred fold.

When you have gone over your whole history in this way,
thoroughly, if you will then go over the ground the second
time, and give your solemn and fixed attention to it, you will
find that the things you have put down will suggest other
things of which you have been guilty, connected with them,
or near them. Then go over it a third time, and you wil:


wow TO PROMOTE A REVIVAL. 45


recollect other things connected with these. And you will
find in the end that you can remember an amount of your
history, and particular actions, even in this life, which you
did not think you should remember in eternity. Unless you
do take up your sins in this way, and consider them in detail,
one by one, you can form no idea of the amount of your sins.
You should go over it as thoroughly and as carefully, and as
solemnly, as you would if you were just preparing yourself
for the judgment.

As you go over the catalogue of your sins, be sure to resolve
upon present and entire reformation. Wherever you find any
thing wrong, resolve at once, in the strength of God, to sin no
more in that way. It will be of no benefit to examine your-
self, unless you determine to amend in every particular that
you find wrong in heart, temper, or conduct.

If you find, as you go ön with this duty, that your mind is
still all dark, cast about you, and you will find there is some
reason for the Spirit of God to depart from you. You have
not been faithful and thorough. In the progress of such a
work you have got to do violence to yourself, and bring your-
self as a rational being up to this work, with the Bible before
you, and try your heart till you do feel. You need not expect
that God will work a miracle for you to break up your fallow
ground. Itisto be done by means. Fasten your attention
to the subject of your sins. You cannot look at your sins long
and thoroughly, and see how bad they are, without feeling,
and feeling deeply. Experience abundantly proves the benefit
of going over our history in this way. Set yourself to the
work now ; resolve that you never will stop till you find you
can pray. You never will have the spirit of prayer, till you
examine yourself, and confess your sins, and break up your
fallow ground. You never will have the Spirit of God dwell-
ing in you, till you have unraveled this whole mystery of in-
iquity, and spread out your sins before God. Let there be this
deep work of repentance, and full confession, this breaking
down before God, and you will have as much of the spirit of

rayer as your body can bear up under. The reason why so
key Christians know any thing about the spirit of prayer, is
because they never would take the pains to examine themselves
properly, and so never knew what it was to have their hearts
all broken up in this way.

You see I have only begun to lay open this subject to-night.
I want to lay it out before you, in the course of these lectures,
so that if you will begin and go on to do as I say, the results
will be just as certain as they are when the farmer breaks ur


46 HOW TO PROMOTE A REVIVA


a fallow field, and mellows it, and sows his grain. It will be
so, if you will only begin in this way, and hold on till all your
hardened and callous hearts break up.


REMARKS.


1. It will do no good to preach to you while your hearts are
in this hardened, and waste, and fallow state. The farmet
might just as well sow his grain on the rock. It will bring
forth no fruit. This is the reason why there are so many
fruitless professors in the church, and why there is so much
outside machinery, and so little deep-toned feeling in the
church. Look at the Sabbath-school for instance, and see how
much machinery there is, and how little of the power of godli-
ness. If you go on in this way, the word of God will continue
to harden you, and you will grow worse and worse, just as the
rain and snow on an old fallow field makes the turf thicker,
and the clods stronger.

2. See why so much preaching is wasted, and worse than
wasted. It is because the church will not break up their fal-
low ground. A preacher may wear out his life, and do very
little good, while there are so many stony-ground hearers, who
have never had their fallow ground broken up. They are only
half converted, and their religion is rather a change of opinion
than a change of the feeling of their hearts. There is mechani-
cal religion enough, but very little that looks like deep heart-
work.

3. Professors of religion should never satisfy themselves, or
expect a revival, just by starting out of their slumbers, and
blustering about, and making a noise, and talking to sinners.
They must get their fallow ground broken up. It is utterly
unphilosophical to think of getting engaged in religion in this
way. If your fallow ground is broken up, then the way to get
more feeling, is to go out and see sinners on the road to hell,
and talk to them, and guide inquiring souls, and you will get
more feeling. You may get into an excitement without this
breaking up; you may show a kind of zeal, but it will not
last long, and it will not take hold of sinners, unless your
hearts are broken up. The reason is, that you go about it
mechanically, and have not broken up your fallow ground.

«. And now, finally, will you break up your fallow ground ?
Will you enter upon the course now pointed out, and perse-
vere till you are thoroughly awake? If you fail here, if you
do not do this, and get prepared, you can go no further with
me in this course of lectures. I have gone with you as far as


HOW TO PROMOTE A REVIVAL. 47


it is of any use to go, until your fallow ground is broken up.
Now, you must make thorough work upon this point, or all I
have further to say will do you little good. Nay, it will only
harden and make you worse. If, when next Friday night ar.
rives, it finds you with unbroken hearts, you need not expect
to be benefited by what I shall say. If you do not set about
this work immediately, I shall take it for granted that you do
not mean to be revived, that you have forsaken your minister,
and mean to let him go up to battle alone. If you do not do
this, I charge you with having forsaken Christ, with —
to repent and do your first work. But if you will be prepare
to enter upon the work, I propose, God willing, next Friday
evening, to lead you into the work of saving sinners.


LECTURE IV.


PREVAILING PRAYER.


Taxr.—The effectual, fervent prayer of a righteous man ayaileth much ~
JANES v. 16.


Tm last lecture referred principally to the confession of sin.
To-night my remarks will be chiefly confined to the subject of
intercession, or prayer. There are two kinds of means requi-
site to promote a revival ; one to influence men, the other to
influence God. The truth is employed to influence men, and
prayer to move God. When I speak of moving God, I do not
mean that God’s mind is changed by prayer, or that his dis-
position or character is changed. But prayer produces such
a change in us and fulfils such conditions as renders it consis-
tent for God to do as it would not be consistent for him to do
otherwise. When a sinner repents, that state of mind makes
it proper for God to forgive him. God has always been ready
to forgive him on that condition, so that when the sinner
changes his mind towards God, it requires no change of feel-
ing in God to pardon him. It is the sinner’s repentance that
renders his forgiveness proper, and is the occasion of God’s
acting as he does. So when Christians offer effectual prayer,
their state of mind renders it proper for God to answer them.
He was always ready to bestow the blessing, on the condition
that they felt right, and offered the right kind of prayer.
Whenever this change takes place in them, and they offer the
right kind of prayer, then God, without any change in him-
self, can answer them. When we offer effectual fervent prayer
for others, the fact that we offer such prayer renders it con-
sistent for him to do what we pray Ha when otherwise it
would not have been consistent.

Prayer is an essential link in the chain of causes that lead
to a revival; as much so as truth is. Some have zealously
used truth to convert men, and laid very little stress on prayer.
They have preached, and talked, and distributed tracts with
ee zeal, and then wondered that they had so tittle success.

d the reason was, that they forgot to use the other branch
of the means, effectual prayer. They overlooked the fact, that
truth by itself "i nover produce the effect, without the Spirit


PREVAILING PRAYER. 49


of God, and that the Spirit is given in answer to earnest
prayer.

Sometimes it happens that those who are the most engaged
in employing truth, are not the most engaged in prayer. This
is always unhappy.—For unless they, or somebody else have
the spirit of prayer, the truth by itself will do nothing but
harden men in impenitence. Probably in the day of judg-
ment it will be found that nothing is ever done by the truth,
ased ever so zealously, unless there is a spirit of prayer some-
where in connection with the presentation of truth.

Others err on the other side. Not that they lay too much
stress on prayer. But they overlook the fact that prayer
might be offered for ever, by itself, and nothing would be
done. Because sinners are not converted by direct contact
of the Holy Ghost, but by the truth, employed as a means.
To expect the conversion of sinners by prayer alone, without
the employment of truth, is to tempt God.

The subject of discourse this evening, is


PREVAILING PRAYER.


L I propose to show what is effectual or prevailing prayer.

IL State some of the most essential attributes of prevail
ing prayer.

IIL Give some reasons why God requires this kind of

ayer.

IV. Show that such prayer will avail much.

L I proceed to show what is prevailing prayer.

1. Effectual, prevailing prayer, does not consist in benevo-
lent desires merely. Benevolent desires are doubtless pleas
ing to God. Such desires pervade heaven, and are found in
all holy beings. But they are not prayer. Men may have
these desires as the angels and glorified spirits have them.
But this is not the effectual, prevailing prayer, spoken of in
the text. Prevailing prayer is something more than this.

2. Prevailing, or effectual prayer, is that prayer which ob-
tains the blessing that it seeks. It is that prayer which ef-
fectually moves God. The very idea of effectual prayer is, that
it effects its object.

II. I will state some of the most essential attributes of pre-
vailing prayer. I cannot detail in full all the things that go
to make up prevailing prayer. But I will mention some
things that are essential to it ; some things which a person
must do in order to prevail in prayer.

1. He must pray for a definite object, He need not expect

B


50 PREVAILING PRAYER.


to offer such prayer, if he prays at random, without any dis
tinct or definite object. He must have an object distinctly be-
fore his mind. I speak now of secret prayer. Many people
go away into their closets, because they must say their prayers.
The time has come that they are in the habit of going by
themselves for prayer, in the morning, or at noon, or at what-
ever time of day it may be. And instead of having any thing
to say, any definite object before their mind, they fall down
on their knees, and pray for just what comes into their minds,
for everything that floats in their imagination at the time,
and when they have done, they can not tell hardly a word
of what they have been praying for. This is not effectual
prayer. What should we think of any body who should try
to move a legislature so, and should say, “ Now it is winter,
and the legislature is in session, and it is time to send up
petitions,” and should go up to the legislature and petition
at random, without any definite object? Do you think such
petitions would move the legislature ?

Aman must have some definite object before his mind.
He cannot pray effectually for a variety of objects at once.
The mind of man is so constituted that it cannot fasten its
desires intensely upon many things at the same time All
the instances of effectual prayer recorded in the Bible were
of this kind. Wherever you see that the blessing sought for
in prayer was attained, you will find that the prayer which
was offered was prayer for that definite object.

2. Prayer, to be effectual, must be in accordance with the
revealed will of God. To pray for things contrary to the
revealed will of God, is to tempt God. There are three ways
in which God’s will is revealed to men for their guidance in
prayer.

(1.) By express promises or predictions in the Bible, that
he will give or do certain things. Either by express prom-
ises in regard to particular things, or promises in general
terms, so that we may apply them to particular things. For
instance, there is this promise : “‘ Whatsoever things ye de
sire, when ye pray, believe that ye receive them, and ye shall
have them.”

(2.) Sometimes God reveals his will by his providence.
When he makes it clear that such and such events are about
to take place, it is as much a revelation asif he had written it
in his word. It would be impossible to reveal every thing in
the Bible. But God often makes it clear to those who have
spiritual discernment, that it is his will to grant such and
such blessings,


PREVAILING PRAYER. 51


(3.) By his Spirit. When God’s people are at a loss what
to pray for, agreeable to his will, his Spirit often instructs
them. Where there is no particular revelation, and provi-
dence leaves it dark, and we know not what to pray for as we
ought, we are expressly told, that “the Spirit also helpeth
our infirmities,” and “the Spirit itself maketh intercession for
us with groanings that cannot be uttered.” A great deal has
been said on the subject of praying in faith for things not re
vealed. It is objected, that this doctrine implies a new reve
lation. I answer, that, new or old, it is the very revelation
that Jehovah says he makes. It is just as plain here, as if it
were now revealed by a voice from heaven, that the Spirit of
God helps the people of God to pray according to the will of
God, when they themselves know not what things they ought
to pray for. “And he that searcheth the heart knoweth the
mind of the Spirit,” because he maketh intercession for the
saints according to the will of God, and he leads Chris-
tians to pray for just those things, with groanings that
cannot be uttered. When neither the word nor providence
enables them to decide, then let them be filled with the Spirit,
as God commands them to be. He says, “Be ye filled with
the Spirit.” And He will lead their minds to such things as
God is willing to grant.

3. To pray effectually, you must pray with submission to
the will of God. Do not confound submission with indiffer-
ence. No two things are more unlike. I once knew an indi-
vidual come where there was a revival. He himself was
cold, and did not enter into the spirit of it, and had no
spirit of prayer ; and when he heard the brethren pray as if
they could not be denied, he was shocked at their bold-
ness, and kept all the time insisting on the importance of
praying with submission ; when it was as plain as any thing
could be, that he confounded submission with indifference.

So again, do not confound submission in prayer with a
genera] confidence that God will do what is right It is
„zoper to have this confidence that God will do what is right
in all things. But this is a different thing from submission.
What I mean by submission in prayer, is, acquiescence in the
revealed will of God. To submit to any command of God is
to obey it. Submission to some supposable or possible, but
secret decree of God, is not submission. To submit to any
dispensation of Providence is impossible till it comes. For
we never can know what the event is to be, till it takes

e. Take a case: David, when his child was sick, was
istressed, and agonized in prayer, and refused to be com


5 PENYVANING PRAYER.


Ged, and so he Asied and prayed, and said, “ Who can tell


thing on whieh È imed whether the was to hve or
moi He thought that if he humbled himself and entreated
Ged ws Ged would spare bim this blew. But as soon
as


Ta the case of am impenitent the very condi-
Gen en whieh he ò t be sx from hell, n ; be the ferrem


ete a an Se ee ee


PREVAILING PRAYER. &8


importunity in prayer is improper. A Christian may eome
up, as it were, and take hold of the hand of God. e the
case of Jacob, when he exclaimed, in an agony of desire, “I
will not let thee go, except thou bless me.” Was God dis-
leased with his boldness and importunity? Not at all; but
e granted him the very thing he prayed for. So in the cage
of Moses. God said to Moses, “Let me alone, that I may
destroy them, and blot out their name from under heaven,
and I will make of thee a nation mightier and greater than
they.” What did Moses do? Did he stand aside and let
God do as he said? No, his mind runs back to the Egyp-
tians, and he thinks how they will triumph. ‘“ Wherefore
should the Egyptians say, For mischief did he bring them
out.” It seemed as if he took hold of the uplifted hand of
God, to avert the blow. Did God rebuke him for his inter-
ference, and tell him he had no business to interfere? No;
it seemed as if he was unable to deny any thing to such im-
portunity, and so Moses stood in the gap, and prevailed with
God.

It is said of Xavier, the missionary, that he was once ealled
to pray for a man who was sick, and he prayed so fervently
that he seemed as it were to do violence to heaven—so the
writer expresses it. And he prevailed, and the man recov-
ered.

Such prayer is often offered in the present day, when
Christians have been wrought up to such a pitch of impor-
tunity and such a holy boldness, that afterwards, when they
looked back upon it, they were frightened and amazed at
themselves, to think they should dare to exercise such impor-
tunity with God. And yet these prayers have prevailed, and
obtained the blessing. And many of these persons, that I
am acquainted with, are among the holiest persons I know in
the world.

5. Prayer, to be effectual, must be offered from right mo-
tives. Prayer should not be selfish, but dictated by a su-
preme regard for the glory of God. A great deal of prayer is
offered from pure selfishness. Women sometimes pray
for their husbands, that they may be converted, because they
zay, “It would be so much more pleasant to have my hus-
band go to meeting with me,” and all that. And they seem
never to lift up their thoughts above self at all. ey do
not seem to think how their husbands are dishonoring God
by their sins, and how God would be glorified in their com
version. So it is with parents very often. They can not
bear to think that their children should be lost. They pray


54 PEEVAILING PRAYER.


for them very earnestly indeed. But if you go to talk with
them, they are very tender, and tell you how good their chil
dren are, how they respect religion, and they think they are
almost Christians now; and so they talk as if they were
afraid you would hurt their children if you should tell them the
truth. They do not think how such amiable and lovely chil-
dren are dishonoring God by their sins ; they are only think
ing what a dreadful thing it will be for them to go to hell.
Ah! unless their thoughts rise higher than this, their prayers
will never prevail with a holy God. The temptation to selfish
motives is so strong, that there is reason to fear a great many
parental prayers never rise above the yearnings of parental
tenderness. And that is the reason why so many prayers
are not heard, and why so many pious, praying parents have
ungodly children. Much of the prayer for the heathen world
seems to be based on no higher principle than sympathy.
Missionary agents, and others, are dwelling almost exclu-
sively upon the six hundred millions of heathens going to
hell, while little is said of their dishonoring God. This is a
great evil; and until the church have higher motives for
prayer and missionary effort than sympathy for the heathen,
their prayers and efforts will never amount to much.

6. Prayer, to be effectual, must be by the intercession of the
Spirit. You never can expect to offer prayer according to the
will of God without the Spirit. In the first two cases, it is
not because Christians are unable to offer such prayer, where
the will of God is revealed in his word, or indicated by his
Spec They are able to do it, just as they are able to be

oly. But the fact is, that they are so wicked, that they never
do offer such prayer, unless they are influenced by the Spirit
of God. There must be a faith, such as is produced by the
effectual operation of the Holy Ghost.

7. It must be persevering prayer. As a general thing,
Christians who have backslidden and lost the spirit of prayer,
will not get at once into the halit of persevering prayer. Their
minds are not in a right state, and they cannot fix their minds,
and hold on tiil the blessing comes. If their minds were in that
state, that they would persevere till the answer comes, effectual
prayer might be offered at once, as well as after praying ever
so many times for an object. But they have to pray again and
again, because their thoughts are so apt to wander away, and
are so easily diverted from the object to something else. Until
their minds get imbued with the spirit of prayer, they will not
keep fixed to one point, and push their petition to an issue on
the spot. Do not think you are prepared to offer prevailing


PREVAILING PRAYER. 5S


prayer, if your feelings will let you pray once for an object,
and then leave it. Most Christians come up to prevailing
prayer by a protracted process. Their minds gradually be-
come filled with anxiety about an object, so that they will even
go about their business, sighing out their desires to God.
Just as the mother whose child is sick, goes round her house,
sighing as if her heart would break. And if she is a praying
mother, her sighs are breathed out to God all the day long.
If she goes out of the room where her child is, her mind is
still on it; and if she is asleep, still her thoughts are on it,
and she starts in her dreams, thinking it is dying. Her whole
mind is absorbed in that sick child. This is the state of mind
in which Christians offer prevailing prayer.

What was the reason that Jacob wrestled all night in prayer
with God? He knew that he had done his brother Esau a great
injury, in getting away the birthright along time ago. And now
he was informed that his injured brother was coming to meet
him, with an armed force altogether too powerful for him to con-
tend against. And there was great reason to suppose he was
coming with a purpose of revenge. There were two reasons
then why he should be distressed. The first was, that he had
done this great injury, and had never made any reparation. The
other was, that Hsau was coming with a force sufficient to
crush him. Now, what does he do? Why, he first arranges
everything in the best manner he can to meet his brother, send-
ing his present first, then his property, then his family, putting
those he loved most farthest behind. And by this time his mind
was so exercised that he could not contain himself. He goes
away alone over the brook, and pours out his very soul in an
agony of prayer all night. And just as the day was breaking,
the angel of the covenant said, “Let me go;” and his whole
being was, as it were, agonized at the thought of giving up,
and he cried out, “TI will not let thee go except thou bless me.”
His soul was wrought up into an agony, and he obtained the
blessing, but he always bore the marks of it, and showed that
his body had been greatly affected by this mental struggle.
This is prevailing prayer.

Now, do not deceive yourselves with thinking that you offex
effectual prayer, unless you have this intense desire for the
blessing. Ido not believe in it. Prayer is not effectual unless
it is offered up with an agony of desire. The apostle Paul
speaks of it as a travail of the soul. Jesus Christ, when he
was praying in the garden, was in such an agony, that he
sweat as it were great drops of blood falling down to the
ground. I have never known a person sweat blood ; but J


56 PREVAILING PRAYER.


have known a person pray till the blood started from the nosa
And I have known persons pray till they were all wet with
perspiration, in the coldest weather in winter. I have known
persons pray for hours, till their strength was all exhausted
with the agony of their minds. Such prayers prevailed with
God.


This agony in prayer was prevalent in President Edwards’
day, in the revivals that then took place. It was one of the
great stumbling blocks in those days, to persons who were op-
posed to the revival, that e used to pray till their bodies
were overpowered with their feeli I will read a paragraph
of what President Edwards says on the subject, to let you see
that this is not a new thing in the Church, but has always

revailed wherever revivals prevailed with power. It is from
bis Thoughts on Revivals.

“We cannot determine that God never shall give any
son so much of a discovery of himself, not only as to wea.
their bodies, but to take away their lives It is supposed by
very learned and judicious divines, that Moses’ life was taken
away after this manner ; and this has also been supposed to
be the case with some other saints. Yea, I do not see an
solid, sure grounds any have to determine, that God shail
never make such strong impressions on the mind by his Spirit,
that shall be an occasion of so impairing the frame of the
body, and particularly that part of the body, the brain, that

ns shall be deprived of the use of reason. As I said be
ee it is too much for us to determine, that God will not
bring an outward calamity in bestowing spiritual and eternal
blessings : so it is too much for us to determine, how great
an outward calamity he will bring. If God give a great in-
crease of discoveries of himself, and of love to him, the be-
nefit is infinitely greater than the calamity, though the life
should presently after be taken away ; yea, though the soul
should not immediately be taken to heaven, but should lie
some years in a deep sleep, and then be taken to heaven ; or,
which is much the same thing, if it be deprived of the use of
its faculties, and be inactive and unserviceable, as if it lay in
a deep sleep for some years, and then should pass into glory.
We cannot determine how great a calamity distraction is,
when considered with all its consequences, and all that might
bave been consequent, if the distraction had not happened ;
nor indeed whether (thus considered) it be any calamity at
all, or whether it be not a mercy, by preventing some great
sin, or some more dreadful thing, if it had not been. It
were a great fault in us to limit a sovereign, all-wise God,


PREVAILING PRAYER 5?


whose judgments are a great deep, and his ways past finding
out, where he has not limited himself, and in things concern
ing which he has not told us what his way shall be. It is
remarkable, considering in what multitudes of instances, and
to how great a degree, the frame of the body has been
overpowered of late, that persons’ lives have, notwithstand-
ing, been preserved, and that the instances of those that have
been deprived of reason, have been so very few, and those,
perhaps all of them, persons under the peculiar disadvantage
of a weak, vapory habit of body. A merciful and careful
Divine hand is very manifest in it, that in so many instances
where the ship has begun to sink, yet it has been upheld, and
has not totally sunk. The instances of such as have been
deprived of reason are so few, that certainly they are not
enough to cause us to bein any fright, as though this work
that has been carried on in the country was like to be of
baneful influence ; unless we are disposed to gather up all
that we can to darken it, and set it forth in frightful colors.

“ There is one particular kind of exercise and concern of
mind, that many have been overpowered by, that has been
especially stumbling to some ; and that is, the deep concern
and distress that they have been in for the souls of others.
I am sorry that any put us to the trouble of doing that which
seems so needless, as defending such a thing as this. It
seems like mere trifling, in so plain a case, to enter into a for-
mal and particular debate, in order to determine whether
there be anything in the greatness and importance of the
case that will answer and bear a proportion to the greatnese
of the concern that some have manifested Men may be al-
lowed, from no higher a principle than common ingenuity and
humanity, to be very deeply concerned and greatly exercised
in mind at seeing others in great danger of no greater a ca
lamity than drowning, or being burnt up in a house on fire.
And if so, then doubtless it will be allowed to be equally
reasonable, if they saw them in danger of a calamity ten
times greater, to be still much more concerned ; and so much
more stall, if the calamity was still vastly greater. And why,
then, should it be thought unreasonable, and looked upon
with a very suspicious eye, as if it must come from some bad
cause, when persons are extremely concerned at seeing others
in very great danger of suffering the fierceness and wrath of
Almighty God to all eternity? And, besides, it will doubt
less be allowed that those that have very great degrees of the
Spirit of God, that is, a spirit of love, may well be supposed
to have vastly more of love and compassion to their fellow

*


58 PREVAILING PRAY


ereatures, than those that are influenced only by common
humanity. Why should it be thought strange that those
that are full of the Spirit of Christ should be proportionably,
in their love to souls, like to Christ ? who had so strong a love
to them and concern for them as to be willing to drink the
dregs of the cup of God’s fury for them; and at the same
time that he offered up his blood for souls, offered up also,
as their high priest, strong crying and tears, with an extreme
agony, when the soul of Christ was, as it were, in travail for
the souls of the elect ; and, therefore, in saving them, he is
said to see of the travail of his soul. As such a spirit of love
to and concern for souls was the spirit of Christ, so it is the
spirit of the church ; and, therefore, the church, in desiring
and seeking that Christ might be brought forth in the world
and in the souls of men, is represented, Rev. xii., as ‘a
woman crying, travailing in birth, and pained to be delivered.’
The spirit of those that have been in distress for the souls of
others, so far as I can discern, seems not to be different from
that of the apostle, who travailed for souls, and was ready to
wish himself accursed from Christ for others. And that of
the Psalmist, Psalm exix. 53, ‘Horror hath taken hold upon
me, because of the wicked that forsake thy law.’ And v. 136,
‘Rivers of waters run down mine eyes, because they keep not
thy law.’ And that of the prophet Jeremiah, Jer. iv. 19,
‘My bowels! my bowels! I am pained at my very heart;
My heart maketh a noise in me: I cannot hold my peace,
because thou has heard, O my soul, the sound of the trum-
pet, the alarm of war!’ And so, chap. ix. 1, and xiii. 17, and
Isa. xxii. 4. We read of Mordecai, when he saw his people
in danger of being destroyed with a temporal destruction,
Esther iv. 1, that he ‘rent, his clothes, and put on sackcloth
and ashes, and went out into the midst of the city, and cried
with a loud and bitter cry. And why, then, should persons
be thought to be distracted, when they cannot forbear crying
out at the consideration of the misery of those that are going
to eternal destruction ?” *

I have read this to show that this thing was common in
the great revivals of those days. It has always been so in
all great revivals, and has been more or less common in pro-
portion to the greatness, and extent, and depth of the work.
it was so in the great revivals in Scotland, and multitudes
used to be overpowered, and some almost died, by the depth
of their agony


—


* Edwards’ Works, vol. iv. p. 85, New York edition.


PREVAILING PRAYER. be


9. If you mean to pray effectually, you must pray a great

deal. It was said of the apostle Ta that atten bo wai
dead it was found his knees were callous like a camel’s knees,
by praying so much. Ah! here was the secret of the success
of those primitive ministers. They had callous knees.
_ 10. If you intend prayer to be effectual, it must be offered
in the name of Christ. You cannot come to God in your own
name. You cannot plead your own merits. But you can
come in a name that is always acceptable. You all know
what it is to use the name of a man. [If you should go to the
bank with a draft or note, endorsed by John Jacob Astor,
that would be giving you his name, and you know you could
get the money from the bank just as well as he could himself.
Now, Jesus Christ gives you the use of his name. And when
you pray in the name of Christ, the meaning of it is, that
you can prevail just as well as he could himself, and receive
just as much as God’s well-beloved Son would if he were to
pray himself for the same things. But you must pray in
aith. His name has all the virtue in your lips that it has in
his own, and God is just as free to bestow blessings upon you,
when you ask in the name of Christ, and in faith, as he would
be to bestow them upon Christ, if he should ask.

11. You cannot prevail in prayer, without renouncing all
your sins. You must not only recall them to mind, but you
must actually renounce them, and leave them off, and in the
purpose of your heart renounce them all for ever.

12. You must pray in faith. You must expect to obtain
the things you ask for. You need not look for an answer to
prayer, if you pray without any expectation of obtaining it.
You are not to form such expectations without any reason for
them. In the cases I have supposed, there is a reason for the
expectation. In case the thing is revealed in God’s word, if
you pray without an expectatian of receiving the blessings,

ou just make God a liar. If the will of God is indicated by
his providence, you ought to depend on it, according to the
clearness of the indication, so far as to expect the blessing il
you pray for it. And if you are led by his Spirit to pray for
certain things, you have just as much reason to expect the
thing to be done as if God had revealed it in his word.

But some say, “ Will not this view of the leadings of the
aia of God lead people into fanaticism?” I answer, that
I know not but many may deceive themselves in respect to
this matter. Multitudes have deceived themselves in regard
to all the other points of religion. And if some people should
think they are led by the Spirit of God, when it is nothing


60 PREVAILING PRAYER.


but their own imagination, is that any reason why those whe
know that they are led by the Spirit should not follow? Many

eople suppose themselves to be converted when they are not.

s that any reason why we should not cleave to the Lord Je
sus Christ? Suppose some people are deceived in thinking
they love God, is that any reason why the pious saint whe
knows he has the love of God shed abroad in his heart, should
not give vent to his feelings in songs of praise? So I sup
pose some may deceive themselves in thinking they are led by
the Spirit of God. But there is no need of being deceived.
If people follow impulses, it is their own fault I do not
want you to follow impulses. I want you to be sober mind-
ed, and follow the sober, rational leadings of the Spirit of
God. There are those who understand what I mean, and who
know very well what it is to give themselves up to the Spirit
of God in prayer.

III. I will state some of the reasons why these things are
essential to effectual prayer. Why does God require such
prayer, such strong desires, such agonizing supplications ?

1. These strong desires strongly illustrate the strength of
God’s feelings. They are like the real feelings of God for im-
penitent sinners. When I have seen, as I sometimes have,
the amazing strengtn of love for souls that has been felt by
Christians, I have been wonderfully impressed with the amaz-
ing love of God, and his desires for their salvation. The case
of a certain woman, of whom I read, in a revival, made the
greatest impression on my mind. She had such an unutter
able compassion and love for souls, that she actually panted
for breath almost to suffocation. What must be the strength
of the desire which God feels, when his Spirit produces in
Christians such amazing agony, such throes of soul, such tra-
vail—God has chosen the best word to express it—it is travail
—travail of the soul.

I have seen a man of as much strength of intellect and
muscle as any man in the community, fall down prostrate,
absolutely overpowered by his unutterable desires for sinners.
I know this is a stumbling block to many ; and it always will
be as long as there remain in the church so many blind and
stupid professors of religion. But I cannot doubt that these
things are the work of the Spirit of God. Oh that the whole
church could be so filled with the Spirit as to travail in pray-
er, till a nation should be born in a day!

It is said in the word of God, that as soon “as Zion travail:
ed, she brought forth.” What does that mean? I asked a
professor of religion this question once. He was making ex-


PREVAILING PRAYER. $1


eeptions about our ideas of effectual prayer, and I asked him
what he supposed was meant by Zion’s travailing. “Oh,” said
he, “it means that as soon as the church walk together in the
fellowship of the Gospel, then it will be said that Zion travels /
This walking together is called travelling.” Not the same term,
you see. So much he knew.

2. These strong desires that I have described, are the nat
ural results of great benevolence and clear views of the dan-

er of sinners. It is perfectly reasonable that it should be so.
the women who are in this house should look up there, and
see a family burning to death in the fire, and hear their shrieks,
and behold their agony, they would feel distressed, and it is
very likely that many of them would faint away with agony.
And nobody would wonder at it, or say they were fools or
erazy to feel so much distressed at such an awful sight. They
would think it strange if there were not some expressions of
powerful feeling. Why is it any wonder, then, if Christians
should feel as I have described, when they have clear views
of the state of sinners, and the awful danger they are in?
The fact is, that those individuals who never have felt so, have
never had much real benevolence, and their piety must be of
-& very superficial character. I do not mean to judge harshly,
or to speak unkindly. But I state it as a simple matter of
fact ; and people may talk about it as they please, but I know
that such piety is superficial. This is not censoriousness, but
plain truth.

People sometimes wonder at Christians having such feel-
ings. Wonder at what? Why, at the natural, and philosoph-
ical, and necessary results of deep piety towards God, and
deep benevolence towards man, in view of the great danger
they see sinners to be in.

3. The soul of a Christian, when it is thus burdened, must
have relief. God rolls this weight upon the soul of a Chris-
tian, for the purpose of bringing him near to himself. Chris
tians are often so unbelieving, that they will not exercise prop-
ex faith in God, till he rolls this burden upon them, so heavy
that they cannot live under it, and then they must go to God
for relief. Itis like the case of many a convicted sinner. God
is willing to receive him at once, if he will come right to him,
with faith in Jesus Christ. But the sinner will not come. He
hangs back, and struggles, and groans under the burden of
his sins, and will not throw himself upon God, till his burden
of conviction becomes so great that he can live no longer ;
and when he is driven to desperation, as it were, and feels as
if he was ready to sink into hell, he makes a miahty nlunge,


82 PREVAILING PRATER.


and throws himself upon God’s mercy as his only hope. It
was his duty to come before. God had no delight in his dis
tress, for its own sake. It was only the sinner’s obstinacy
that created the necessity for all this distress. He would not
zome without it. So when professors of religion get loaded
down with the weight of souls, they often pray again and
again, and yet the burden is not gone, nor their distress abat-
ed, because they have never thrown it all upon God in faith
But they cannot get rid of the burden. So long as their beney
olence continues it will remain and increase, and unless they
resist and quench the Holy Ghost they can get no relief, until
at length, when they are driven to extremity, they make a des
perate effort, roll the burden off upon the Lord Jesus Christ,
and exercise a child-like confidence in him. Then they feel
relieved ; then they feel as if the soul they were praying for
would be saved. The burden is gone, and God seems in
kindness to sooth down the mind to feel a sweet assurance
that the blessing will be granted. Often, after a Christian
has had this struggle, this agony in prayer, and has obtained
relief in this way, you will find the sweetest and most heav-
enly affections flow out—the soul rests sweetly and glori-
ously in God, and rejoices, “ with joy unspeakable and full of
glory.”

Do any of you think now, that there are no such things in
the experience of believers? I tell you, if I had time, I could
show you from President Edwards, and other approved
writers, cases and descriptions just like this. Do you ask why
we never have such things here in New York? I tell you, it
is not at all because you are so much wiser than Christians
are in the country, or because you have so much more intelli-
gence or more enlarged views of the nature of religion, or a
more stable and well regulated piety. I tell you, no; instead
of priding yourselves in being free from such extravagances,
you ought to hide your heads, because Christians in New York
are so worldly, and have so much starch, and pride, and fash-
ion, that they cannot come down to such spirituality as this.
I wish it could be so. Oh that there might be such a spirit
in this city, and in this church! I know it would make a
noise, if we had such things done here. But I would not care
for that. Let them say, if they please, that the folks in Chat-
ham Chapel are getting deranged. We need not be afraid of
that, if we could live near enough to God te enjoy his Spirit
in the manner I have described.

4. These effects of the spirit of prayer upon the body are
themselves no part of religion. It is only that the body is


PREVAILING PRAYER. 63


often sc weak that the feelings of the soul overpower it
These bodily effects are not at all essential to prevailing
prayer, but only a natural or physical result of highly excited
emotions of the mind. It is not at all unusual for the body
to be weakened and even overcome by any powerful emotion
of the mind, on other subjects beside religion. The door-keeper
of Congress in the time of the revolution, fell down dead on
the reception of some highly cheering intelligence. I knew a
woman in Rochester, who was in a great agony of prayer for
the conversion of her son-in-law. One morning he was at an
anxious meeting, and she remained at home praying for him.
At the close of the meeting, he came home a convert, and she
was so rejoiced that she fell down and died on the spot. It
is no more strange that these effects should be produced by
religion than by strong feeling on any other subject. It is
not essential to prayer, but the natural result of great effort
of the mind.

5. Doubtless one great reason why God requires the exer-
cise of this agonizing prayer is, that it forms such a bond of
union between Christ and the Church. It creates such asym-
pathy between them. It is as if Christ came and poured the
overflowings of his own benevolent heart into his church, and
led them to sympathize and to co-operate with him, as they
never do in any other way. They feel just as Christ feels—so
full of compassion for sinners that they cannot contain them-
selves. Thus it isoften with those ministers who are distin-

ished for their success in preaching to sinners ; they often

ave such compassion, such overflowing desires for their sgal-
vation, that it shows itself in their speaking, and their preach-
ing, just as though Jesus Christ spoke through them. The
words come from their lips fresh and warm, as if from the
very heart of Christ. I do not mean that he dictates their
words ; but he excites the feelings that give utterance to them.
Then you see a movement in the hearers, as if Christ himself
spoke through lips of clay.

6. This travailing in birth for souls creates also a remarka
ble bond of union between warm-hearted Christians and the
young converts. Those who are converted appear very dear
to the hearts that have had this spirit of prayer for them.
The feeling is like that of a mother for her first-born. Paul
expresses it beautifully, when he says, “ My little children!”
His heart was warm and tender to them. “My little chil-
dren, of whom I travail in birth again.” They had backslidden,
and he has all the agonies of a parent over a wandering child.
“T travail in birth again, till Christ be formed in you, the hope


64 PREVAILING PRAYER.


of glory.” In a revival, I have often noticed how those whe
have had the spirit of prayer, love the young converts. I
know this is all algebra to those who have never felt it. But
to those who have experienced the agony of wrestling, pre
vailing prayer, for the conversion of a soul, you may depend
upon it, that soul, after it is converted, appears as dear as a
child is to the mother who has brought it forth with pam. He
has agonized for it, and received it in answer to prayer, and
ean present it before the Lord Jesus Christ, saying, “ Here,
Lord, am I, and the children thou hast given me.”

7. Another reason why God requires this sort of prayer is,
that iż is the only way in which the church can be properly
prepared to receive great blessings without being injured by
them. When the church is thus prostrated in the dust before
God, and is in the depth of agony in prayer, the blessing does
them good. While at the same time, if they had received the
blessing without this deep prostration of soul, it would have
puffed them up with pride. But as it is, it increases their
holinass, their love, their humility.

IV. Iam to show that such prayer as I have described
will avail much. But time fails me to go into a particular de
tail of the evidence which I intended to bring forward under
this head.

Elijah the prophet mourned over the declensions of the
house of Israel, and when he saw that no other means were
likely to be effectual, to prevent a perpetual going away into
idolatry, he prayed that the judgments of God might come
upon the goilty nation. He prayed that it might not rain,
and God shut up the heavens for three years and six months,
till the people were driven to the last extremity. And when
he saw that it was time to relent, what does he do? See him
go up to the mountain and bow down in prayer. He wished
to be alone ; and he told his servant to go seven times, while
he was agonizing in prayer. The las time, the servant told
him there was a little cloud appeared, like a man’s hand, and
he instantly arose from his knees—the blessing was obtained.
The time had come for the calamity to be turned back. “Ah,
but,” bs say, “Elijah was a prophet.” Now do not make
this objection. They made it in the apostle’s days, and what
does the apostle say? Why he brought forward this very
instance, and the fact that Elijah was a man of like passions
with ourselves, as a case of prevailing prayer, and insisted
that they should pray so too.

John Knox was a man famous for his power in prayer, so
that bloody Queen Mary used to say she feard his prayers


PREVAILING PRAYER, 66


more than all the armies of Europe. And events showed that
she had reason to do it. He used to be in such an agony for
the deliverence of his country that he could not sleep. He
had a place in his garden where he used to go to pray. One
night he and several friends were praying together, and as
they prayed, Knox spoke and said that deliverance had come.
He could not tell what had happened, but he felt that some
thing had taken place, for God had heard their prayers.
What was it? Why the next news they had was, that Mary
was dead !

Take a fact which was related, in my hearing, by a minister.
He said, that in a certain town there had been no revival fcr
many years ; the church was nearly run out, the youth were
all unconverted, and desolation reigned unbroken. There
lived in a retired part of the town, an aged man, a blacksmith
by trade, and of so stammering a tongue, that it was painful
to hear him speak. On one Friday, as he was at work in his
shop, alone, his mind became greatly exercised about the state
of the church, and of the impenitent. His agony became so
great, that he was induced to lay by his work, lock the shop
door, and spend the afternoon in prayer.

He prevailed, and on the Sabbath called on the minister,
and desired him to appoint a conference meeting. After some
hesitation, the minister consented, observing, however, that
he feared but few would attend. He appointed it the same
evening, at a large private house. When evening came, more
assembled than could be accommodated in the house. All
was silent for a time, until one sinner broke out in tears, and
said, if any one could pray, he begged him to pray for him.
Another followed, and another, and still another, until it was
found that persons from every quarter of the town were
under deep conviction. And what was remarkable was, that
they all dated their conviction at the hour when the old man
was praying in his shop. A powerful revival followed. Thus
this old stammering man prevailed, and, as a prince, had

ower with God. I could name multitudes of similar cases,
ut, for want of time, must conclude with a few.


REMARKS.


1. A great deal of prayer is lost, and many people never
revail in prayer, because, when they have desires for particu-
blessings, they do not follow them up. They may have
had desires, benevolent and pure, which were excited by the
Spirit of God; and when they have them, they should per


66 PREVAILING PRAYER.


severe in prayer, for if they turn off their attention to other
objects, they will quench the Spirit. We tell sinners not to
turn off their minds from the one object, but to keep their
attention fixed there, till they are saved. When you find
these holy desires in your minds, take care of two things :

(1.) Do not quench the Spirit.

(2.) Do not be diverted to other objects.

follow the leadings of the Spirit, till you have offered that
effectual fervent prayer that availeth much.

2. Without the spirit of prayer, ministers will do but little
good. A minister need not expect much success, unless he
prays for it. Sometimes others may have the spirit of prayer,
and obtain a blessing on his labors. Generally, however,
those preachers are the most successful who have the most of
a spirit of prayer themselves.

8. Not only must ministers have the spirit of prayer, but
it is necessary that the church should unite in offering that
effectual fervent prayer which can prevail with God. You
need not expect a blessing, unless you ask for it. “For all
ce things will I be inquired of by the house of Israel, to

o it”

Now, my brethren, I have only to ask you, in regard to
what I have preached to-night, “ Wil you as it ?” Have you
done what I preached to you last Friday evening? Have you
gone over with your sins, and confessed them, and got them
all out of the way? Can you pray now? And will you join
and offer prevailing prayer, that the Spirit of God may come
down here?


LECTURE Y.


THE PRAYER OF FAITH.


‘uxt.-—“ Therefore I say unto you, What things soever ye desire when ye prey,
walieve that ye receive them, and ye shall have them.” —MARK xi. 24.


Tuesz words have been by some supposed to refer exclu-
sively to the faith of miracles. But there is not the least evi
dence of this. That the text was not designed by our Sa
viour to refer exclusively to the faith of miracles, is proved
by the connection in which it stands. If you read the chap
ter, you will see that Christ and his apostles were at this time
very much engaged in their work, and very prayerful; and
as they returned from their places of retirement in the morn-
ing, faint and hungry, they saw a fig-tree at a little distance.
It looked very beautiful, and doubtless gave soe of having
fruit on it; but when they came nigh, they found nothing
on it but leaves. And Jesus said, “ No man eat fruit of thee
hereafter for ever.

“ And in the morning, as they passed by, they saw the fig-
tree dried up from the roots.

“And Peter, calling to remembrance, saith unto him, Mas-
ter, behold the fig-tree which thou cursedst is withered away.

“ And Jesus answering, saith unto them, have faith in God.

“For verily I say unto you, that whosoever shall say unto
this mountain, Be thou removed, and be thou cast into the
sea ; and shall not doubt in his heart, but shall believe that
those things which he saith shall come to pass ; he shall have
whatsoever he saith.”

Then follow the words of the text :

“Therefore I say unto you, What things soever ye desire
when ye pray, believe that ye receive them, and ye shall have
them.”

Our Saviour was desirous of giving his disciples instructions
respecting the nature and power of prayer, and the necessity
of strong faith in God. He therefore stated a very strong
case, a miracle—one so great as the removal of a mountain
into the sea. And he tells them, that if they exercise a proper
faith in God, they might do such things. But his remarks
are not to be limited to faith merely in regard to working mir


acles, for he goes on to say,
(67)


88 THE PRAYER OF FAITH.


“And when ye stand praying, forgive, if ye have aught
against any, that your Father also which isin heaven may
forgive you your trespasses. : : i

“ But if ye do not forgive, neither will your Father which
‘s in heaven forgive you your TO

Does that relate to miracles ? en you pray, you must
forgive. Is that required only when a man wishes to work a
miracle? There are many other promises in the Bible nearl
related to this, and speaking nearly the same language, whic
have been all disposed of in this shorthanded way, as refer-
ring to the faith employed in miracles. Just asif the faith of
miracles was something different from faith in God! 19

In my last lecture, I dwelt upon the subject of “prevailing
prayer ;” and you will recollect that I passed over the subject
of faith in prayer very briefly, because I wished to reserve it
for a separate discussion. The subject to-night is,


THE PRAYER OF FAITH.


I propose,
ITa show that faith is an indispensable condition of pre
vailing prayer.

IL Show what it is that we are to believe when we pray.

LL Show when we are bound to exercise this faith, or to
believe that we shall receive the thing that we ask for.

IV. That this kind of faith in prayer always does obtain the
blessing sought.

V. Explain how we are to come into a state of mind, in
which we can exercise such faith,

VI Answer several objections, which are sometimes alleged
wT Thee ih oa eee ailing
L t faith is an indi ble condition of prevaili
prayer, will not be seriously doubted. There is sinh a thing
as offering benevolent desires, which are acceptable to God as
such, that do not include the exercise of faith in regard to
the actual reception of those blessings. But such desires are
not prevailing prayer, the prayer of faith. God may see fit
to grant the things desired, as an act of kindness and love,
but it would not be properly in answer to prayer. I am speak-
ing now of the kind of faith that insures the blessing. Do
not understand me as saying that there is nothing in prayer
that is acceptable to God, or that even obtains the mS

sometimes, without this kind of faith. But I am speaking
the faith which secures the very blessing it seeks. 'To prove
that faith is indispensable to prevailing prayer, it is only ne-


THE PRAYER OF FAITH. 68


zessary to repeat what the apostle James expressly tells us :
“Tf any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to
all men liberally, and upbraideth not ; and it shall be given him.
But let him ask in faith, nothing wavering. For he that waver-
eth is like a wave of the sea, driven with the wind and tossed.”

IL We are to inquire what we are to believe when we pray.

1. We are to believe in the existence of God—‘ He that
cometh to God must believe that he is”—and in his willing-
ness to answer prayer—“ that heis, and that he is the reward-
er of them that diligently seek him.” There are many who
believe in the existence of God, and do not believe in the effi-
cacy of prayer. They profess to believe in God, but deny the
necessity or influence of prayer.

2. We are to believe that we shall receive—something—what ?
Not something, or anything, as it happens, but some particu-
lar thing we ask for. Weare not to think that God is such
a being, that if we ask a fish, he will give us a serpent, or if
we ask bread, he will give usa stone. But he says, “ What

mgs soever ye desire, when ye pray, believe that ye receive
them, and ye shall have them.” With respect to the faith of
miracles, itis plain that they were bound to believe they
should receive just what they asked for—that the very thing
itself should come to pass. That is what they were to be-
lieve. Now what ought men to believe in regard to other
blessings? Is it a mere loose idea, that if a man prays for a
specific blessing, God will by some mysterious sovereignty give
something or other to him, or cece te somebody else,
somewhere? When aman prays for his children’s conversion,
is he to believe that either his children will be converted, or
somebody’s else children, and it is altogether uncertain which?
All this is utter nonsense, and highly dishonorable to God.
No, we are to believe that we shall receive the very things that
we ask for.

IIL When are we bound to make this prayer? When
are we bound to believe that we shall have the very things we
pray for? I answer, When we have evidence of it. Faith
must always have evidence. A man cannot believe a thing,
anless he sees something which he supposes to be evidence.
He is under no obligation to believe, and has no right to be
lieve, a thing will be done, unless he has evidence. Tt is the
height of fanaticism to believe without evidence. The kinds
of evidence a man may have are the following :

1. Suppose that God has especially promised the thing. As
for instance, God says he is more ready to give his Holy
Spirit to them that ask him, than parents are to give bread


70 THE PRAYER OF FAITH.


to their children. Here we are bound to believe that we shall
receive it when we pray for it. You have no right to put in
an if, and say, “Lord, if i be thy wül, give us thy Holy
Spirit.” This is to insult God. To put an if into God’s
promise, where God has put none, is tantamount to char
God with being insincere. It is like saying, “O God, if thou
art in earnest in making these promises, grant us the blessing
we pray for.”

I heard of a case where a young convert was the means of
teaching a minister a solemn truth on the subject of prayer.
She was from a very wicked family, and went to live with a
minister. While there, she was hopefully converted, and ap-

eared well One day she came to the minister's study, while
ka was in it—a thing she was not in the habit of doing ; and
he thought there must be something the matter. So he asked
her to sit down, and kindly inquired into the state of her
religious feelings; she said, she was distressed at the man-
ner in which the old church members prayed for the Spirit.
They would pray for the Holy Spirit to come, and would
seem to be very much in earnest, and plead the promises of
God, and then say, “O Lord, if i be thy will, grant us these
blessings for Christ’s sake.” She thought that saying, “if it
be thy will,” when God has expressly promised it, was ques-
tioning whether God was sincere in his promises. The min-
ister tried to reason her out of it, and of course he succeeded
in confounding her. But she was distressed and filled with
grief, and said, “I cannot argue the point with you, sir, but
it is impressed on my mind that it is wrong, and dishonoring
God.” And she went away weeping with anguish. The
minister saw she was not satisfied, and it led him to look at
the matter again, and finally he saw that it was putting in
an if where God had put none, and where he had revealed his
will expressly, and that it was an insult to God. And he went
and told his church they were bound to believe that God waa
in earnest when he made them a promise. And the spirit of
prayer came down upon that church, and a most powerful
revival followed.

2. Where there is a general promise in the Scriptures which
Si may reasonably apply to the particular case before you.

its real meaning includes the particular thing for which you
pray, or if you can reasonably apply the principle of the
promise to the case, there you have evidence. For instance,
suppose it is a time when wickedness prevails greatly, and
pa are led to pray for God’s interference? What promise

ave you? Why, this one: “When the enemy come


THE PRAYER OF FAITH. 7i


in like a flood, the Spirit of the Lord shall lift up a standard
against him.” Here you see is a general promise laying down
a principle of God’s administration, which you may apply to
the case before you, as a warrant for exercising faith in prayer.
And if the case come up, to inquire as to the time in which God
will grant blessings in answer to prayer, you have this prom-
ise: “ While they are yet speaking, I will hear.”

There is a vast amount of general promises and principles
laid down in the Bible, which Christians might make use of,
if they would only think. Whenever you are in circumstances
to which the promises or principles apply, there you are to
use them. A parent finds this promise: “The mercy of the
Lord is from everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear
him, and his righteousness unto children’s children, to such as
keep his covenant, and to those that remember his com-
mandments to do them.”: Now, here is 4 promise made to
those that possess a certain character. If any parent is con-
scious that this is his character, he has a rightful ground to
apply it to himself and his family. If you have this character,

ou are bound to make use of this promise in prayer, and be-
jeve it, even to your children’s children.

If I had time to-night, I could go from one end of the Bible
to the other, and produce an astonishing variety of texts that
are applicable as promises ; enough to prove, that in what
ever circumstances a child of God may be placed, God has
provided in the Bible some promise, either general or partic
ular, which he can apply, that is precisely suited to his case,
Many of God’s promises are very broad on purpose to cover
much ground. What can be broader than the promise in
the text: “ Whatsoever things ye desire when ye pray?”
What praying Christian is there who has not been surprised
at the length, and breadth, and fullness, of the promises of
God, when the Spirit has applied them to his heart? Who
that lives a life of prayer, has not wondered at his own blind-
ness, in not having before seen and felt the extent of meaning
and richness of those promises, when viewed under the light
of the Spirit of God? At such times he has been astonished
at his own ignorance, and found the Spirit applying the

romises and declarations of the Bible in a sense in which he
[sa never dreamed of their being applicable before. The
manner in which the apostles applied the promises, and
prophecies, and declarations of the Old Testament, places in
a strong light the breadth of meaning, and fullness, and rich-
ness of the word of God. He that walks in the light of God’s
countenance, and is filled with the Spirit of God as he ought


72 THE PRAYER OF FAITH.


to be, will often make an appropriation of promises to him
self, and an application of them to his own circumstances, and
the circumstances of those for whom he prays, that a blind
professor of religion would never dream of

3. Where there is any prophetic declaration, that the thing

rayed for is agreeable to the will of God. When it is plain
Be prophecy that the event is certainly to come, you are
bound to believe it, and to make it the ground for your spe-
cial faith in prayer. If the time is not specified in the Bible,
and there is no evidence from other sources, you are not
bound to believe that it shall take place now, or immediately.
But if the time is specified, or if the time may be learned
from the study of the prophecies, and it appears to have ar-
rived, then Christians are under obligations to understand and
apply it, by offering the prayer of faith. For instance, take
the case of Daniel, n regard to the return of the Jews from
captivity. What does he say? “I Daniel understood by
books the number of the years whereof the word of the Lord
came to Jeremish the prophet, that he would accomplish
seventy years in the desolations of Jerusalem.” Here he
learned from books, that is, he studied his Bible, and in that
way understood that the length of the captivity was to be
valor years. What does he do then? Does he sit down
upon the promise, and say, “God has pledged himself to put
an end to the captivity in seventy years, and the time has ex-
pired, and there ıs no need of doing any thing?’ Oh no; he
says, “And I set my face unto the Lord God, to seek by
prayer and supplications, with fasting, and sackcloth, and
ashes.” He set himself at once to pray that the thing might
be accomplished. He prayed in faith. But what was he to
believe? What he hod learned from prophecy. There are
many prophecies yet unfulfilled, in the Bible, which Chris-
tians are bound to understand, as far as they are capable of
understanding them, and then make them the basis of be
leving prayer. Do not think, as some seem to, that be ©
cause a thing is foretold in prophecy it is not necessary te
pray for it, or that it will come whether Christians pray for it
or not. There is no truth in this, God says, in regard to
this very class of events, which are revealed in prophecy,
“Nevertheless, for all these things will I be inquired of by
the house of Israel to do it for them.”

4. When the signs of the times, or the providence of God,
indicate that a particular blessing is about to be bestowed,
we are bound to believe it. The Lord Jesus Christ blamed
the Jews, and called them hypocrites, because they did not


- THE PRAYER OF FAITH, 73


understand the indications of Providence. They could am
derstand the signs of the weather, and see when it was about
to rain, and when it would be fair weather ; but they could
not see, from the signs of the times, that the time had come
for the Messiah to appear, and build up the house of God.
There are many professors of religion who are always stum-
bling and hanging back, whenever any thing is proposed te
be done. They always say, The time has not come—the
time has not come; when there are others who pay atten-
tion to the signs of the times, and who have spiritual discern-
ment to understand them. These pray in faith for the
blessing, and it comes.

5. When the Spirit of God is upon you, and excites strong
desires for any blessing, you are bound to pray for it in faith.
You are bound to infer, ih the fact that you find yourself
drawn to desire such a thing while in the exercise of such
holy affections as the Spirit of God produces, that these de
sires are the work of tho Spirit. People are not apt to desire
with the right kind of desires, unless they are excited by the
Spirit of God. The apostle refers to these desires, excited by
the Spirit, in his epistle to the Romans, where he says—
“ Likewise the Spirit also helpeth our infirmities, for we know
not what we should pray for as we ought; but the Spirit it
self maketh intercession for us with groanings which cannot
be uttered. And he that searcheth the heart knoweth what
is the mind of the Spirit, because he maketh intercession for
the saints, according to the will of God.” Here, then, if you
find yourself strongly drawn to desire a blessing, you are to
understand it as an intimation that God is willing to bestow
that particular blessing, and so you are bound to believe
it. dod does not trifle with his children. He does not go
and excite in them a desire for one blessing, to turn them
off with something else. But he excites the very desires he is
paling to gratify. And when they feel such desires, they are
bound to follow them out till they get'the blessing.

IV. I will proceed to show that this kind of faith always ob
tains the object. The text is plain here, to show that you shall
receive the very thing prayed for. It does not say, “ Believe
that ye shall receive, and ye shall either have that or some
thing else equivalent to it.” To prove that this faith obtains
the very blessing asked, I observe,

1. That otherwise we could never know whether our pray-
ers were answered. And we might continue praying and

ying, long after the prayer was answered by some other
lessing equivalent to the one we ask for.
4


NEBRASKA CHRISTIAN COLLEGE {iRpaepy


74 THE PRAYER OF FAITH.


2. If we are not bound to expect the very thing we ask for,
it must be that the Spirit of God deceives us. Why should
he excite us to desire a certain blessing, when he means te
grant something else ?

3. What is the meaning of this passage, “If a man ask
bread, will he give him a stone?” Does not our Saviour re
buke the idea that prayer may be answered by giving some
thing else? What encouragement have we to pray for any
thing in particular, if we are to ask for one thing and receive
another? Supposea Christian should pray for a revival here
—he would be answered by a revival in China. Or he might
pray for a revival, and God would send the cholera, or an
earthquake. All the history of the church shows that when
God answers prayer, he gives his people the very thing for
which their prayers are offered. God confers other blessings,
on both saints and sinners, which they do not pray for at all
He sends his rain both upon the just and the unjust. But
when he answers prayer, it is by domg what they ask him to
do. To be sure, he often more than answers prayer. He
grants them not only what they ask, but often connects other
blessings with it.

4. Perhaps you may feel a difficulty here about the prayers
of Jesus Christ. People may often ask, “Did not he pray in
the garden for the cup to be removed, and was his prayer
answered?” I answer that this is no difficulty at all, for the
ot was answered. The cup he prayed to be delivered

om was removed. This is what the apostle refers to, when
he says—“ Who in the days of his flesh, when he had offered
up prayers and supplications with strong crying and tears
unto him that was able to save him from death, was heard in
that he feared.” Now I ask, On what occasion was he saved
from death, if not on this? Was it the death of the cross
he prayed to be delivered from? Not at all But the case
was this. A short time before he was betrayed, we hear him
saying to his disciples, “My soul is exceedingly sorrowful,
even unto death.” Anguish of mind came rolling in upon
him, till he was just ready to die, and he went out into a gar-
den to pray, and told his disciples to watch, and then he went
by himself and prayed ; “O my Father,” said he, “if it be
gaa let this cup pass from me ; nevertheless not as I will,

ut as thou wilt.” In his agony he rose from his knees, and
walked the garden, till he came where his disciples were, and
there he saw them fast asleep. He awaked them and said,
“What, could ye not watch with me one hour?” And then
he went again, for he was in such distress that he could not


THE PRAYER OP FAITH. 75


stand still, and again he poured out his soul. And the third
time he goes away and prays, “Father, if thou be willing,
remove this cup from me ; nevertheless, not my will, but thine
be done.” And now the third time of praying, there appear-
ed an angel unto him from heaven, strengthening him. And
his mind became composed, and calm, and the cup was gone.
Till then, he had been in such an agony that his sweat was as
it were great drops of blood, but now it was all over.

Some have supposed that he was praying against the cross,
and begging to be delivered from dying on the cross! Did
Christ ever shrink from the cross? Never. He came into
the world on purpose to die on the cross, and he never shrunk
from it. But he was afraid he should die in the garden be-
fore he came to the cross. The burden on his soul was so
great, and produced such an agony, that he felt as if he was
on the point of dying. His soul was sorrowful even unto
death. But after the angel appeared unto him, we hear no
more of his agony of soul He had prayed for relief from
that cup, and his prayer was answered. He became calm,
and had no more mental suffering till just as he expired.
This case, therefore, is no exception. He received the very
thing for which he asked, as he says, “I knew thou always
hearest me.”

But there is another case often brought up, where the apos
tle Paul prayed against the thorn in the flesh. He says, “I
besought the Lord thrice, that it might depart from me.”
And God answered him, “ My grace is sufficient for thee.”
It is the opinion of Dr. Clarke and others, that Paul’s prayer
was answered in the very thing for which he prayed. That
“the thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan,” of which
he speaks, was a false apostle who had distracted and per-
verted the church at Corinth. That Paul prayed against his
influence, and the Lord answered him by assuring him, “ My
grace is sufficient for thee.” Who does not know that it was,
and that Paul’s influence ultimately triumphed ?

But admitting that Paul’s prayer was not answered by
granting the particular thing for which he prayed, in order
to make out this case as an exception to the prayer of faith,
they are obliged to assume the very thing to be proved ; and
that is, that the apostle prayed in faith. There is no reason to
suppose that Paul would always pray in faith, any more than
that any other Christian does. The very manner in which
God answered him shows that it was not in faith. He virtu-
ally tells him, “That thorn is necessary for your sanctifica
tion, and to keep you from being exalted above measure. 3


76 THE PRAYER OF FAITH.


sent it upon you in love, and in faithfulness, and you have
no business to pray that I should take it away.—LET IT
ALONE.” siwa

There is not only no evidence that he prayed in faith, but
a strong presumption that he did not. om the history it
is evident that he had nothing on which to repose faith.
There was no express promise, no general promise, that could
be applicable, no providence of God, no prophecy, no teach-
ing of the Spirit that God would remove this thorn ; but the
presumption was that God would not remove it. He had
given it to him for a particular purpose. His prayer appears
to have been selfish, or at least praying against a mere per
sonal influence. This was not any personal suffering that re
tarded his usefulness, but on the contrary it was given him
to increase his usefulness by keeping him humble; and be
cause on some account he found it inconvenient and mortify-
ing, he set himself to pray out of his own heart, evidently
without being led to t by the Spirit of God. But did Paul
pray in faith without the Spirit of God, any more than any
other man? And will any one undertake to say that the
Spirit of God led him to pray that this might be removed,
when God himself had given it for a particular purpose, which
purpose could not be answered only as the thorn continued
with him?

Why then is this made an exception to the general rule
laid down in the text, that a man shall receive whatsoever he
asks in faith? I was once amazed and grieved at a public
examination at a Theological Seminary, to hear them darken
counsel by words without knowledge on this subject. This
case of Paul, and that of Christ just adverted to, were both
of them cited as instances to prove to their students that the

rayer of faith would not be answered in the particular thing
or which they prayed. Now to teach such sentiments as these
in or out of a Theological Seminary, is to trifle with the word
of God, and to break the power of the Christian ministry.
Has it come to this, that our grave doctors in our seminaries,
are employed to instruct Zion’s watchmen, to believe and
teach that it is not to be expected that the prayer of faith is
to be answered in granting the object for which we pray? Oh,
tell it not in Gath, nor let the sound reach Askelon! What is
to become of the church while such are the views of its grav-
eat and most influential ministers? I would not be unkind
nor censorious, but as one of the ministers of Jesus Christ, 1
feel bound to bear testimony against such a perversion of the
word of God.


THE PRAYEE OF Falta. 74


5. It is evident that the prayer of faith will obtain the
ee from the fact that our faith rests on evidence that to
grant ‘iat thing is the will of God. Not evidence that some-
thing else will be granted, but that this particular thing will
be. But how, then, can we have evidence that this thing will
be granted, if another thing is to be granted? People often
receive more than they pray for. Solomon prayed for wisdom,
and God granted him riches and honor in addition. So a
wife sometimes prays for the conversion of her husband, and
if she offers the prayer, of faith, God may not only grant that
blessing, but convert her child, and her whole family. Bless
ings sometimes seem to hang together, so that if a Christian
gains one he gets them all.

V. I am to show how we are to come into this state of
mind, in which we can offer such prayer. People sometimes
ask, “How shall I offer such prayer? Shall I say, Now I
will pray in faith for such and such a blessing?” No, the
human mind is not moved in this way. You might just as
well say, “ Now I will call up a spirit from the bottomless pit.”
I answer,

1. You must first obtain evidence that God will bestow the
blessing. How did Daniel make out to offer the prayer of
faith? He searched the Scriptures.) Now, you need not let
your Bible lie on a shelf, and expect God to reveal his prom-
ises to you. Search the Scriptures, and see where you can get
either a general or special promise, or a prophecy, on which
you can plant your feet when you pray. Go through the
Bible, and you will find it full of such things—precious prom-
ises, which you may plead in faith. You never need to want
for objects of prayer, if you will do as Daniel did. Persons
are staggered on this subject, because they never make a prop-
er use of the Bible.

A curious case occurred in one of the towns in the western
part of this State. There was a revival there. A certain cler-
gyman came to visit the place, and heard a great deal said
about the Prayer of Faith. He was staggered at what they
said, for he had never regarded the subject in the light they
did. He inquired about it of the minister that was laboring
there. The minister requested him, in a kind spirit, to go
home, and take his Testament, look out the passages that re
fer to prayer, and go round to his most praying people, and
ask them how they understood these passages. He said he
would do it, for though these views were new to him, he was
willing to learn. He did it, and went to his praying men and
womea, and read the passages without note or comment, and


78 THE PRAYER OF FAITH.


asked what they thought. He found their plain common
sense had led them to understand these passages, and to be
lieve that they mean just as they say. This affected him, and
then the fact of his going round and presenting the promises
before their minds awakened the spirit of prayer in them, and
a revival followed.

I could name many individuals who have set themselves te
examine the Bible on this subject, and before they got half
through with it have been filled with the spirit of prayer.
They found that God meant by his promises just what a plain,
common sense man would understand them to mean. I ad
vise you to try it. You have Bibles; look them over, and
whenever you find a promise that you can use, fasten it in
your mind before you go on; and I venture to predict you
will not get through the book without finding out that God’s
promises mean just what they say.

2. Cherish the good desires you have. Christians very often
lose their good desires by not attending to this; and then
their prayers are mere words, without any desire or earnest
ness at all The least longing of desire must be cherished.
If your body was likely to freeze, and you had even the least
spark of fire, how you would cherish it! So if you have the
least desire for a blessing, let it be ever so small, don’t trifle
it away. Do not grieve the Spirit. Do not be diverted. Do
not lose good desires by levity, by censoriousness, by worldly-
mindedness. Watch and pray, and follow it up, or you will
never pray the prayer of faith.

2. Entire consecration to God is indispensable to the prayer of
faith. You must live a holy life, and consecrate all to God—
one time, talents, influence—all you have, and all you are, to

o his entirely. Read the lives of pious men, and you will be
struck with this fact: that they used to set apart times to re
new their covenant, and dedicate themselves anew to God;
and whenever they have done so, a blessing has always fol
lowed immediately. If I had Edwards here to-night, I could
read passages showing how it was in his days.

4. You must persevere. You are not to pray for a thing
once, and then cease, and call that the prayer of faith. Look
at Daniel. He prayed twenty-one days, and did not cease till
he had obtained the blessing. He set his heart and his face
unto the Lord, to seek by prayer and supplications, with fast
mg, and sackcloth, and ashes: and he held on three weeks,
and then the answer came. And why did not it come before?
God sent an Archangel to bear the message, but the devil
hindered him all this time. See what Christ says in the par


THE PRAYER OF FAITH. 79


able of the unjust judge, and the parable of the loaves. What
does he teach us by them? Why, that God will grant an-
swers to prayer when it is importunate. “Shall not God
avenge his own elect, who cry day and night unto him?” `

5. If you would pray in faith, be sure to walk every day with
God. If you do, he will tell you what to pray for. Be filled
with his Spirit, and he will give you objects enough to pray
for. He will give you as much of the spirit of prayer as you
have strength of body to bear.

Said a good man to me, “Oh, I am dying for the want of
strength to pray. My body is crushed, the world is on me,
and how can I forbear praying!” I have known that man go
to bed absolutely sick, for weakness and faintness, under the
Segre And I have known him pray as if he would do vio-

ence to heaven, and then seen the blessing come as plainly
in answer to his prayer as if it was revealed, so that no person
would doubt it any more than if God had spoken from heaven.
Shall I tell you how he died? He prayed more and more,
and he used to take the map of the world before him and
pray, and look over the different countries and pray for them,
till he absolutely expired in his room praying. Blessed man!
He was the reproach of the ungodly and of carnal, unbeliev-
ing professors, but he was the favorite of heaven, and a pre
vailing prince in prayer.

VL I will refer to some objections which are brought for
ward against this doctrine.

1. “It leads to fanaticism and amounts to a new revela-
tion.” Why should this be a stumbling block? They must
have evidence to believe before they can offer the prayer of
faith, And if God gives other evidence besides the senses,
where is the objection? True, there is a sense in which this
is a new revelation ; it is making known a thing by his Spirit.
But it is the very revelation which God has promised to give.
It is just the one we are to expect, if the Bible is true ; that
when we know not what we ought to pray for, according to
the will of God, his Spirit helps our infirmities, and teaches
us the very thing to pray for. Shall we deny the teaching of
the Spirit ?

2. It is often asked, “Is it our duty to pray the prayer of
faith for the salvation of all men?” I answer, No; for that
is not a thing according to the will of God. It is directly
contrary to his revealed will We have no evidence that all
will be saved. We should feel benevolently to all, and, in
itself considered, desire their salvation. But God has revealed
it to us that many of the human race shall be damned. And


80 THE PRAYER OF FAITH.


it cannot be a duty to believe that they shall all be saved, in
the face of a revelation to the contrary. In Christ’s prayer,
in the seventeenth chapter of John, he expressly said, “I pray
not for the world but for those thou hast given me.”

8. But say some, “If we were to offer this prayer for all
men, would not all men be saved?” I answer, Yes, and so
they would be saved, if they would all repent. But they will
not. Neither will Christians offer the prayer of faith for all,
because there is no evidence on which to ground a belief that
God intends to save all men.

4, But you ask, “For whom are we to offer this prayer?
We want to know in what cases, for what Peete and places,
and at what times, etc., we are to make the prayer of faith.”
I answer, as I have already answered, When you have evi-
dence, from promises, or prophecies, or ponta or the
Aae of the Spirit, that God will do the things you pray
or.

5. “How is it that so many prayers of pious parents for
their children are not answered? Did you not say there was
a promise which pious parents may apply to their children ?

y is it, then, that so many pious praying parents have had
impenitent children, that died in their sins?” Granted that
it is so, what does it prove? Let God be true, but every man
a liar. Which shall we believe, that God’s promise has failed,
or that these parents did not do their duty? Perhaps they
did not believe the promise, or did not believe there was any
such thing as the prayer of faith. Wherever you find a pro-
fessor that does not believe in any such prayer, you find, as a
general thing, that he has children and domestics yet in their
sins. And no wonder, unless they are converted in answer
to the prayers of somebody else.

6. “ Will not these views lead to fanaticism? Will not
many people think they are offering the prayer of faith
when they are not?” That is the same objection that the
Unitarians make against the doctrine of regeneration—that
many people think they have been born again when they have
not. Itis an argument against all spiritual religion whatever.
Some think they have it when they have not, and are fanatica
But there are those who know what the prayer of faith is, just
as there are those who know what spiritual experience is,
though it may stumble cold-hearted professors who know it
not. Even ministers often lay themselves open to the rebuke
which Christ gave to Nicodemus: “ Art thou a master in Is
rael, and knowest not these things ”


THE PRAYER OF FAITE. él


REMARKS.


L Persons who have not known by experience what this is
have great reason to doubt their piety. This is by no means
uncharitable. Let them examine themselves. It is to be
feared that they understand prayer as Nicodemus did the
new birth. They have not walked with God, and you cannot
describe it to them, any more than you can describe a beauti-
fal painting to a blind man who cannot see colors. Many
professors can understand about the prayer of faith just as
much as a blind man does of colors.

2. There is reason to believe millions are in hell because
eian have not offered the prayer of faith. When they

d promises under their eye, they have not had faith enough
to use them. Thus parents let their children, and even bap
tized children, go down to hell because they would not believe
the promises of God. Doubtless many women’s husbands
have gone to hell, when they might have prevailed with God
in prayer and saved them. The signs of the times and the
indications of Providence were favorable, perhaps, and the
Spirit of God prompted desires for their salvation, and they
had evidence enough to believe that God was ready to grant
a blessing, and if they had only prayed in faith, God would
have granted it ; but God turned it away because they would
not discern the signs of the times.

3. You say, “This leaves the church under a great load of
guilt.” True, it does so ; and no doubt multitudes will stand
up before God covered all over with the blood of souls that
have been lost through their want of faith, The promises of
God, accumulated in their Bibles, will stare them in the face
and weigh them down to hell.

4. Many professors of religion live so far from God that to
talk to them about the prayer of faith is all unintelligible.
Very often the greatest offence possible to them is to preach
about this kind of prayer.

5. I want to ask the professors who are here a few ques
tions. Do you know what it is to pray in faith? Did you
ever pray in this way? Have you ever prayed till your mind
was assured the blessing would come—till you felt that rest
in God, that confidence, as perfect as if you saw God come
down from heaven to give it to you? If not, you ought to
examine your foundation. How can you live without praying
in faith at all? How do you live in view of your children,
while you have no assurance whatever that they will be con

4*


83 THE PRAYER OF FAITH.


verted? One would think you would go deranged. I knew
a father at the West ; he was a good man, but he had erro
neous views respecting the prayer of faith ; and his whole
family of children were grown up and not one of them con-
verted. At length his son sickened and seemed about to die.
The father prayed, but the son grew worse and seemed sink-
ing into the grave without hope. The father prayed till his
anguish was unutterable. He went at last and prayed—(there
seemed no prospect of his son’s life)—but he poured out his
soul as if he would not be denied, till at length he got an as
surance that his son would not only live, but be converted ;
and not only this one, but his whole family, would be converted
to God. He came into the house and told his family his son
would not die. They were astonished at him. “TI tell you,”
says he, “he won’t die. And no child of mine will ever die
in his sins.” That man’s children were all converted years


ago.

What do you think of that? Was that fanaticism? If you
believe so, it is because you know nothing about the matter.
Do you pray so? Do you live in such a manner that you can
offer such prayer for your children? I know that the chil-
dren of professors may sometimes be converted in answer to
the prayers of somebody else. But ought you to live so?
Dare you trust to the prayers of others when God calls you
to sustain this most important relation to your children ?

Finally—See what combined effort is made to dispose of
the Bible. The wicked are for throwing away the threaten-
ings of the Bible, and the church the promises. And what is
there left? Between them, they leave the Bible a blank. I
say it in love: What are our Bibles good for if we do not lay
hold on their precious promises, and use them as the ground
of our faith when we pray for the blessing of God? You had
better send your Bibles to the heathen, where they will do
some good, if you are not going to believe and use them. I
have no evidence that there is much of this prayer now in this
church or in this city. And what will become of it? What
will become of your children? your neighbors? the wicked ?


LECTURE VI.


SPIRIT OF PRAYER.


TzxtT.—Likewlse the Spirit also helpeth our infirmities: for we know not what we
ehould pray for as we ought; but the Spirit itself maketh intercession for us with
groanings which cannot be uttered. And he that searcheth the hearts knoweth what
fs the mind of the Spirit, because he maketh intercession for the saints, according to
the will of God.— Romans viii. 26, 27.


My last lecture but one was on the subject of Effectual
Prayer ; in which I observed that one of the most important
attributes of effectual or prevailing prayeris Farra. This was
so extensive a subject that I reserved it for a separate discus-
sion. And accordingly, I lectured last Friday evening on the
subject of Faith in Prayer, or, as it is termed, the Prayer of
Faith. It was my intention to discuss the subject in a single
lecture. But as I was under the necessity of condensing so
much on some points, it occurred to me, and was mentioned
by others, that there might be some questions which people
would ask, that ought to be answered more fully, especially
as the subject is one on which there is so much darkness.
One grand design in preaching is to exhibit the truth in such
a way as to answer the questions which would naturally arise
in the minds of those who read the Bible with attention, and
who want to know what it means, so that they can put it in
practice. In explaining the text, I propose to show,

L What Spirit is here spoken of, “The Spirit also helpeth
our infirmities.”

IL What that Spirit does for us.

IIL Why he does what the text declares him to do.

IV. How he accomplishes it. .

V. The degree in which he influences the minds of those
who are under his influence.

VL How his influences are to be distinguished from the
influences of evil spirits, or from the suggestions of our own
minds. r

VIL. How we are to obtain this agency of the Holy Spirit.

VIL Who have a right to expect to enjoy his influences in
this matter—or for whom the Spirit does the things spoken
of in the text.

L What Spirit is it that is spoken of in ir ia

( A]


ee SPIRIT OF PRAYER.


Some have supposed that the Spirit of n the text
means our own spirit—our own mind t a little attention
te the text will show plainly that this is not the meaning.
“The Spirit helpeth our i ities” would then read, “Our
own sprit helpeth the infirmities of our own spirit,"—and
“Qur own spirit likewise maketh intercession for our own

init.” You see you can make no sense of it on that suppo
sition. It is evident from the manner in which the text is


Ged For ye have not received the spirit of bondage again


ians to pray ing to the will of God, or for the things


È}

should pray far as we ought. We are so ignorant both of
the will of God, revealed ım the Bible, and of his unrevealed
will, as we ought to learn it from his providence. Mankind
are vastly ignorant both of the promises and prophecies of
the DAR nd bind in tha providence of Get? Andee
are sill more in the dark about those points of which
hak wall mag Dik hy thes beatings GF at iri
eoleet that I named these four sources of evi on which
t ground faith in ises, prophecies, providences,.
and the Hoty Spirit When all other means fail of leading
on te in Rawal at eine i

2S VS

TV. How does he make intercession for the saints? In
what mode does he operate, so as to help our infirmities?

Not by superseding the use of our faculties. It is not by
praying for us, while we do nothing, He prays for us, by ex-

: : me


qiting our own faculties Not that he suggests
we words, or guides our l But he enlightens our
minds, and the truth take of our souls He leads


as to consider the state of the church and the condition of


SPIRIT OF PRAYER. 8b


sinners around us. The manner in which he brings the truth
before the mind, and keeps it there till it produces its effeet,
we cannot tell. But we can know as much as this—that he
leads us to a deep consideration of the state of things; and
the result of this, the natural and philosophical result, is,
deep feeling. When the Spirit brings the truth up before a
man’s mind, there is only one way in which he can keep from
deep feeling. That is, by turning away his thoughts, and
leading his mind to think of other things. Sinners, when
the Spirit of God brings the truth before them, must feel
They feel wrong, as long as they remain impenitent. So, if
a man is a Christian, and the Holy Spirit brings a subject
into warm contact with his heart, it is just as impossible he
should not feel, as it is that your hand should not feel if you
put it into the fire. If the Spirit of God leads him to dwell
on things calculated to excite warm and overpowering feel-
ings, and he is not excited by them, it proves that he has no
love for souls, nothing of the Spirit of Christ, and knows
nothing about Christian experience.

2. The Spirit makes the Christian feel the value of souls,
and the guilt and danger of sinners in their present condition.
It is amazing how dark and stupid Christians often are about
this. Even Christian parents let their children go right
down to hell before their eyes, and scarcely seem to exereise
a single feeling, or put forth an effort to save them. And
why? Because they are so blind to what hell is, so unbeliev:
ing about the Bible, so ignorant of the precious promises
which God has made to faithful parents. They grieve the
Spirit of God away, and it is in vain to try to make them
pray for their children, while the Spirit of God is away from
them.

3. He leads Christians to understand and apply the prom-
ises of Scripture. It is wonderful that in no age have I
tians been able fully to apply the promises of Scripture to
the events of life, as they go along. This is not because the
promises themselves are obscure. The promises themselves
are plain enough. But there has always been a wonderful
disposition to overlook the fy a as a source of light
respecting the passing events of life. How astonished the
apostles were at Christ’s application of so many prophecies
to himself! They seemed to be continually ready to exclaim,
“ Astonishing! Can it be so? We never understood it be
fore.” Who, that has witnessed the manner in which the
apostles, influenced and inspired by the Holy Ghost, applied
passages of the Old Testament to gospel times, has not been


SPIRIT OF PRAYER.


amazed at the richness of meaning which they found in the
Scriptures? So it has been with many a Christian ; while
deeply engaged in prayer, he has seen that passages of
Scripture are appropriate which he never thought of before,
as having any such application.

I once knew an individual who was in great spiritual dark-
ness. He had retired for prayer, resolved that he would not
desist till he had found the Lord. He kneeled down and
tried to pray. All was dark, and he could not pray. He
rose from his knees, and stood a while, but he could not give
it up, for he had promised that he would not let the sun go
down before he had given himself to God. He knelt again,
but it was all dark, and his heart was hard as before. He
was nearly in despair, and said in agony, “I have grieved
the Spirit of God away, and there is no promise forme. I
am shut out from the presence of God.” But his resolution
was formed not to give over, and again he knelt down. He
had said but a few words, when this passage came into his
mind as fresh as if he had just read it ; it seemed as if he
had just been reading the words, “ Ye shall seek me, and find
me, when ye shall search for me with all your heart.” Jer.
xxix. 13. ‘Though this promise was in the Old Testament,
and was addressed to the Jews, it was still as applicable to
him as to them. And it broke his heart, like the hammer of
the Lord, im a moment. He prayed, and rose up, happy in
God. ‘Thus it often happens when professors of religion are
praying for their children. Sometimes they pray, and are in
darkness and doubt, feeling as if there was no foundation for
faith, and no special promises for the children of believers.
But while they are pieading, God has shown them the fall
meaning of some promise, and their soul has rested on it as
on the mighty arm of God. I once heard of a widow who
was greatly exercised about her children, till this passage
was brought powerfully to her mind: “ Leave thy fatherless
children with me, I will preserve them alive.” She saw it
had an extended meaning, and she was enabled to lay hold
on it, as it were, with her hands; and then she prevailed in
prayer, and her children were converted. The Holy Spirit
was sent into the world by the Saviour, to guide his people and
instruct them, and bring things to their remembrance, as well
as to convince the world of sin.

4. The Spirit leads Christians to desire and pray for things
of which nothing is specifically said in the word of God.
Take the case of an individual That God is willing to save
is a general truth. So it is a general truth that he is willing


SPIRIT CF PRAYER. 87


to answer prayer. But how shall I know the will of God
respecting that individual, whether I can pray in faith accord
ing to the will of God for the conversion and salvation of
that individual, or not? Here the agency of the Spirit comes
in, to lead the minds of God’s people to pray for those in-
dividuals, and at those times, when God is prepared to bless
them. When we know not what to pray for, the Holy Spirit
leads the mind to dwell on some object, to consider its situa
tion, to realize its value, and to feel for it, and pray, and
travail in birth, till the object is attained. This sort of expe
rience I know is less common in cities than it is in some parts
of the country, because of the infinite number of things to
divert the attention and grieve the Spirit in cities. I have
had much opportunity to know how it has been in some
sections. I was acquainted with an individual who used to
keep a list of persons that he was specially concerned for ;
and I have had the opportunity to know a multitude of per
sons for whom he became thus interested, who were imme
diately converted. Ihave seen him pray for persons on his
list, when he was literally in an agony for them; and have
sometimes known him call on some other person to help him
pray for sucha one. I have known his mind to fasten on an
individual of hardened, abandoned character, and who could
not be reached in any ordinary way. In a town in the north
part of this State, where there was a revival, there was a cer
tain individual who was a most violent and outrageous op-
poser. He kept a tavern, and used to delight in swearing at
a desperate rate, whenever there were Christians within hear
ing, on purpose to hurt their feelings. He was so bad, that
one man said he believed he should have to sell his place, or
give it away, and move out of town, for he could not live near
a man that swore so. This good man, that I was speaking
of, was passing through the town, and heard of the case,
and was very much grieved and distressed for the individual
He took him on his praying list. The case weighed on his
mind, when he was asleep and when he was awake. He
kept thinking about him, and praying for him for days
And the first we knew of it, this ungodly man came into a
meeting, and got up and confessed his sins, and poured out
his soul His bar-room immediately became the place where
they held prayer meetings. In this manner the Spirit of God
leads individual Christians to pray for things which they would
not pray for, unless they were led by the Spirit. And thus
they pray for things according to the will of God.

By some, this may be said to be a reveletion from God. I


88 SPIRIT OF PRAYER.


do not doubt that great evil has been done by saying that
this kind of influence amounts to a new revelation. And
many people will be afraid of it if they hear it called a new
revelation, so that they will not stop to inquire what it means,
or whether the Scriptures teach it or not. They suppose it
to be a complete answer to the idea. But the plain truth of
the matter is, that the Spirit leads a man to pray. And if
God leads a man to pray for an individual, the inference from
the Bible is, that God designs to save that individual. If we
find by comparing our state of mind with the Bible, that we
are led by the Spirit to pray for an individual, we have good
evidence to believe that God is prepared to bless him.

6. By giving to Christians a spiritual discernment respect-
ing the movements and developments of Providence. De
voted, praying Christians often see these things so clearly,
and look so far ahead, as greatly to stumble others. They
sometimes almost seem to prophesy. No doubt persons may
be deluded, and sometimes are so, by leaning to their own
understanding when they think they are led by the Spirit.
But there is no doubt that a Christian may be made to see
and to discern clearly the signs of the times, so as to under-
stand, by providence, what to expect, and thus to pray for it
in faith. Thus they are often led to expect a revival, and to
pray for it in faith, when nobody else can see the least signs of it.

There was a woman in New Jersey, in a place where there
had been a revival. She was very positive there was going to
be another. She insisted upon it that they had had the for
mer rain, and were now going to have the latter rain. She
wanted to have conference meetings appointed. But the
minister and elders saw nothing to encourage it, and would
do nothing. She saw they were blind, and so she went for-
ward and got a carpenter to make seats for her, for she said
she would have meetings in her own house. There was cer-
tainly going to be a revival. She had scarcely opened her
doors for meetings, before the Spirit of God came down in
great power. And these sleepy church members found them-
selves surrounded all at once with convicted sinners, And
they could only say, “Surely the Lord was in this place, and
we knew it not.” The reason why such persons understand
the indication of God's will is not because of the superior
wisdom that is in them, but because the Spirit of God
leads them to see the signs of the times. And this, not
by revelation; but they are led to see that converging of
vidences to a single point, which produces in them a confident
expectation of a certain result.


SPIRIT OF PRAYER, 89


V. In what degree are we to expect the Spirit of God to
affect the minds of believers? The text says, “The Spirit
maketh intercession with groanings that cannot be uttered.”
The meaning of this I understand to be, that the Spirit ex-
cites desires too great to be uttered except by groans. Some
thing that language cannot utter—making the soul too full to
utter its feelings by words, where the person can only groan
them out to God, who understands the language of the heart.

VL How are we to know whether it is the Spirit of God
that influences our minds or not?

1. Not by feeling that some external influence or agency is
applied to us. We are not to expect to feel our minds in di-
rect physical contact with God. If such a thing can be, we
know of no way in which it can be made sensible. We know
that we exercise our minds freely, and that our thoughts are
exercised on something that excites our feelings. But we
are not to expect a miracle to be wrought, as if we were led
by the hand, sensibly, or like something whispered in the ear,
or any miraculous manifestation of the will of God. People
often grieve the Spirit away, because they do not harbor him
and cherish his el nent Sinners often do this ignorantly.
They suppose that if they were under conviction by the Spirit,
they should have such and such mysterious feelings, a shock
would come upon them, which they could not mistake. Many
Christians are so ignorant of the Spirit’s influences, and have
thought so little about having his assistance in prayer, that
when they have them they do not know it, and so do not
cherish, and yield to them, and preserve them. We are con-
scious of nothing in the case, only the movement of our own
minds. There is nothing else that can be felt. We are mere-
ly aware that our thoughts are intensely employed on a cer-
tain subject. Christians are often unnecessarily misled and
distressed on this point, for fear they have not the Spirit of
God They feel intensely, but they know not what makes
them feel. They are distressed about sinners; but why
should they not be distressed, when they think of their condi-
tion ? They keep thinking about them all the time, and why
shouldn’t they be distressed? Now, the truth is, that the
very fact that you are thinking upon them is evidence that the
Spirit of God is leading you. Do you not know that the
greater part of the time these things do not affect you so?
The greater part of the time you do not think much about
the case of sinners. You know that their salvation is always
equally important. But at other times, even when you are
quite at leisure, your mind is entirely dark, and vacant of any


90 SPIRIT OF PRAYER.


feeling for them. But now, although you may be busy about
other things, you think, you pray, and feel intensely for
them, even while you are about business that at other times
would occupy all your thoughts. Now, almost every thought
you have is, “God have mercy on them.” Why is this? y,
their case is placed in a strong light before your mind. Do
ou ask what it is that leads your mind to exercise benevo-
fines for sinners, and to agonize in prayer for them? What
ean it be but the Spirit of God? There are no devils that
would lead you so. If your feelings are truly benevolent, you
are to consider it as the Holy Spirit leading you to pray for
things according to the will of God. i
2. Try the spirits by the Bible. People are sometimes
led away by strange fantasies and crazy impulses. If you
eompare them faithfully with the Bible, you never need be
led astray. You can always know whether your feelings are
produced by the Spirit’s influences, by comparing your de
sires with the spirit and temper of religion as described in
the Bible. The Bible commands you to try the spirits.
“ Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits, whether
they be of God.” Observe not only your feelings in regard to
your fellow-men, but also, and more especially, the teachings
of the Spirit within you respecting our Lord Jesus Christ.
“Hereby know ye the Spirit of God. Every spirit that con-
fesseth that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is of God. And
every spirit that confesseth not that Jesus Christ is come in
the flesh is not of God; and this is that spirit of Antichrist
whereof ye have heard that it shall come; and even now
already it is in the world.”
VIL How shall we get this influence of the Spirit of God ?
1. It must be sought by fervent, believing prayer. Christ
says, “If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts to
your children, how much more shall your heavenly Father
give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him!” Does any one
say, I have prayed for him, and he does not come? It is be
cause you do not pray aright “Ye ask and receive not, be-
eause ye ask amiss, that ye may consume it upon your lusts.”
You do not pray from right motives. A professor of re-
ligion, and a principal member in a church, once asked a min-
ister what he thought of his case ; he had been praying week
after week for the Spirit, and had not received him. The
minister asked him what his motive was in praying. He said
he wanted to be happy. He knew those who had the Spirit
were happy, and he wanted to enjoy his mind as they did
Why, the devil himself might pray so. That is mere selfish


SPIRIT OF PRAYER. 9i


ness. The man turned away in anger. He saw that he had
never known what it was to pray. Hoe was convinced he was
a hypocrite, and that his prayers were all selfish, dictated only
by a desire for his own happiness. David prayed that God
would uphold him by his free Spirit, that he might teach
transgressors and turn sinners to God. A Christian’ should
pray for the Spirit that he may be the more useful and
s God more ; not that he himself may be more happy.

is man saw clearly where he had been in error, and he
was converted. Perhaps many here have been just so.
You ought to examine and see if all your prayers are not
selfish.

2. Use the means adapted to stir up your minds on the
subject, and to keep your attention fixed there. If a man
prays for the Spirit, and then diverts his mind to other ob-
jects ; uses no other means, but goes right away to worldly
objects ; he tempts God, he swings loose from his object, and
it would be a miracle if he should get what he prays for.
How is a sinner to get conviction? Why, by thinking of his
sins. That is the way for a Christian to obtain deep feeling,
by thinking on the object. God is not going to pour these
things on you without any effort of your own. You must
cherish the slightest impressions. Take the Bible, and go
over the passages that show the condition and prospects of
the world. Look at the world, look at your children, and
your neighbors, and see their condition while they remain in
sin, and persevere in prayer and effort till you chtain the
blessing of the Spirit of God to dwell in you. This was the
way, doubtless, that Dr. Watts came to have the feelings which
he has described in the second Hymn of the second Book,
which you would do well to read after you go home.


My thoughts on awful subjects roll,
Damnation and the dead: ,

What horrors seize the guilty soul
Upon a dying bed.


Lingering about these mortal shores,
She makes a long delay,

Till, like a flood, with rapid force
Death sweeps the wretch away.


Then, swift and dreadful, she descends
Down to the fiery coast,

Amongst abominable fiends,
Herself a frighted ghost,


Ee ee mmeg Paree


feg ujen


Hay iti J ip
aft
JH) iui jt
pinh ae ay
Ay day HEL 4
gia AHN gigi
mafian
fH fe
AY 5 l
HAIT HNT


PrO PP net aaea Aat tii


oF j


f
A‘


SPIRIT OF PRAYER. 838


saints, for any who are saints. “Likewise the Spirit alse
helpeth our infirmities: for we know not what we should pray
for as we ought ; but the Spirit itself maketh intercession for
us with groanings which cannot be uttered. And he that
searcheth the hearts knoweth what is the mind of the Spirit,
because he maketh intercession for the saints according t
the will of God.” —Rom. viii 26, 27.


REMARKS.


1. Why do you suppose it is, that so little stress is laid on
the influences of the Spirit in prayer, when so much is said
about his influences in conversion? Many people are amaz
ingly afraid the Spirit’s influences will be bi out. They lay
eee stress on the Spirit’s influences in converting sinners.

ut how little is said, how little is printed, about his influence
in prayer! How little complaining that people do not make
enough of the Spirit’s influences in leading Christians to pray
according to the will of God! Let it never be forgotten, that
no Christian ever prays aright, unless led by the Spirit. He
has natural power to pray, and so far as the will of God is
revealed, is able to do it ; but he never does, unless the Spirit
of God influences him. Just as sinners are able to repent,
but never do, unless influenced by the Spirit.

2. This subject lays open the foundation of the difficulty felt
by many persons on the subject of the Prayer of Faith. The
koat to the idea that faith in prayer is a belief that we
receive the very things for olid we ask; and insist that there
can be no foundation or evidence upon which to rest such a
belief. In a sermon published a few years since, upon this
subject, the writer brings forward this difficulty, and presents
it in its full strength I have, says he, no evidence that the
thing prayed for will be granted, unéid I have prayed in faith ;
because, praying in faith is the condition upon which it is pro-
mised. And of course I cannot claim' the promise, until I
have fulfilled the condition. Now, if the condition is, that I
am to believe I shall receive the very blessing for which I ask,
it is evident that the promise is given upon the performance
of an impossible condition, and is of course a mere nullity.
The promise would amount to just this: You shall have what-
soever you ask, upon the condition that you first believe that
you shall receive it. Now, I must fulfil the condition before
I can claim the promise. But I can have no evidence that I
shall receive it until I have believed that I shall receive it.
This reduces me to the necessity of believing that I shall re


94 SPIRIT OF PRAYER.


ceive it before I have any evidence that I shall receive it—
which is impossible.

The whole force of this objection arises out of the fact, that
the Spirit's influences are entirely overlooked, which he exerts
in leading an individual to the exercise of faith. It has been
supposed that the passage in Mark xi. 22 and 24, with other
kindred promises on the subject of the Prayer of Faith, relate
exclusively to miracles. But suppose this were true. I would
ask, What were the apostles to believe, when they prayed for
a miracle? Were they to believe that the precise miracle
would be performed for which they prayed? It is evident that
they were. In the verses just alluded to, Christ says, “For
verily I say unto you, that whosoever shall say unto this
mountain, Be thou removed, and be thou cast into the sea,
and shall not doubt in his heart, but SHALL BELIEVE
THAT THESE THINGS WHICH HE SAITH SHALL
COME TO PASS, he shall have whatsoever he saith. There-
fore I say unto you, what things soever ye desire, when ye

ray, BELIEVE THAT YE RECEIVE THEM, and ye shall have them.”

ere it is evident, that the thing to be believed, and which
they were not to doubt in their heart, was, that they should
have the very blessing for which they prayed. Now the ob-
jection above stated, lies in all its force against this kind of
bith, when praying for the performance of a miracle. If it
be impossible to believe this in praying for any other blessing,
it was equally so in praying for a miracle. I might ask, Could
an apostle believe that the miracle would be wrought, before
he had fulfilled the condition? inasmuch as the condition was,
that he should believe that he should receive that for which
he prayed. Either the promise is a nullity and a deception,
or there is a possibility of performing the condition.

Now, as I have said, the whole difficulty lies in the fact that
the Spirit’s influences are entirely overlooked, and that faith
which is of the operation of God, is left out of the question. If
the objection is good against praying for any object, it is as
good against praying in faith for the performance of a miracle.
The fact is, that the Spirit of God could give evidence, on
which to believe that any particular miracle would be granted;
could lead the mind to a firm reliance upon God, and trust
that the blessing sought would be obtained. And so at the
present day he can give the same assurance, in praying for
any blessing that we need. Neither in the one case nor the
other, are the influences of the Spirit miraculous. Praying is
the same thing, whether you pray for the conversion of a soul,
or fora miracle. Faith is the same thing in the one case as


SPIRIT OF PRAYER 25


in the other ; it only terminates on a different object ; in the
one case on the conversion of a soul, and in the other on the
performance of a miracle. Nor is faith exercised in the one
more than in the other, without reference to a promise ; and
a general promise may with the same propriety be applied to
the conversion of a soul as to the performance of a miracle.
And it is equally true in the one case as the other, that no
man ever prays in faith without being influenced by the Spirit
of God. And if the Spirit could lead the mind of an apostle
to exercise faith in regard to a miracle, he can lead the mind
of another Christian to exercise faith in regard to receiving
any other blessing, by a reference to the same general
promise.

Should any one ask, “ When are we under an obligation te
believe that we shall receive the blessing for which we ask?’
I answer : j

(1.) When there is a particular promise, specifying the par
ticular blessing : as where we pray for the Holy Spirit. This
blessing is particularly named in the promise, and here we
have evidence, and are bound to believe, whether we have any
Divine influence or not ; just as sinners are bound to repent
whether the Spirit strives with them or not. Their obligation
rests, not upon the Spirit’s influences, but upon the powers
of moral agency which they possess ; upon their ability to do
their duty. And while it is true that not one of them ever
will repent without the influences of the Spirit, still they have
power to do so, and are under obligation to do so, whether
the Spirit strives with them or not. So with the Christian.
He is bound to believe where he has evidence. And although
he never does believe, even where he has an express promise,
without the Spirit of God, yet his obligation to do so rests
upon his ability, and not upon the Divine influence.

(2.) Where God makes a revelation by his providence, we
are bound to believe in proportion to the clearness of the pro-
vidential indication.

(3.) So where there is a prophecy, we are bound also to
believe. But in neither of these cases do we, in fact, believe,
without the Spirit of God.

But where there is neither promise, providence, nor pro-
phecy, on which to repose our faith, we are under no obliga-
tion to believe, unless, as I have shown in this discourse, the
Spirt gives us evidence, by creating desires, and by leading us
to pray for a particular object. In the case of those promises
of a general nature, where we are honestly at a loss to know
in what particular cases to apply them, it may be considered


96 SPIRIT OF PRAYER.


rather as our privilege than as our duty, in many instances,
to apply them to particular cases ; but whenever the Spirit
of God leads us to apply them to a particular object, then it
becomes our duty so to apply them. In this case, God ex-

lains his own promise, and shows how he designed it should
5 applied And then our obligation to make this application,
and to believe in reference to this particular object, remains
in full force.

3. Some have supposed that Paul prayed in faith for the
removal of the thorn in the flesh, and that it was not granted.
But they cannot prove that Paul prayed in faith, The pre
sumption is all on the other side, as I have shown in a former
lecture. He had neither promise, nor prophecy, nor provi
dence, nor the Spirit of God, to lead him to believe. The
whole objection goes on the ground that the apostle might
pray in faith without being led by the Spirit. This is truly a
shorthand method of disposing of the Spirit’s influences in
prayer. Certainly, to assume that he prayed in faith, is to
assume either that he prayed in faith without being led by
the Spirit, or that the Spirit of God led him to pray for that
which was not according to the will of God.

I have dwelt the more on this object, because I want to
have it made so plain, that you will all be careful not to grieve
the Spirit. I want you to have high ideas of the Holy Ghost,
and to feel that nothing good will be done without his infiu-
ences. No praying or preaching will be of any avail without
him. If Jesus Christ were to come down here and preach
to sinners, not one would be converted without the Spirit.
Be careful then not to grieve him away, by slighting or
neglecting his heavenly influences when he invites you to
pray.

4, In praying for an object, it is necessary to persevere till
you obtain it. Oh, with what eagerness Christians sometimes
pursue a sinner in their prayers, when the Spirit of God has
fixed their desires on him! No miser pursues his gold with
so a a determination.

. The fear of being led by impulses has done inj
by not being duly considered. A person’s mer be led
by an ignis fatuus. But we do wrong if we let the fear of
impulses lead us to resist the good impulses of the Holy
Ghost. No wonder Christians do not have the spirit of
prayer, if they are unwilling to take the trouble to distinguish ;
and so reject or resist all impulses and all leadings of
invisible agents. A great deal has been said about fanati-
usm, that is very unguarded, and that causes many minds


SPIRIT OF PR. TER. 97


to reject the leadings of the Spirit of God. “As many as
are the sons of God are led by the Spirit of God.” And itis
our duty to try the Spirits whether they be of God We
should insist on a close scrutiny and an accurate discrimina-
tion. There must be such a thing as being led by the Spirit.
And when we are convinced it is of God, we should be sure to
follow—follow on, with full confidence that he will not lead us
wrong.

6. We see from this subject the absurdity of using forms
of prayer. The very idea of using a form rejects, of course,
the leadings of the Spirit Nothing is more calculated to
destroy the spirit of prayer, and entirely to darken and con-
fuse the mind, as to what constitutes prayer, than to use
forms. Forms of prayer are not only absurd in themselves,
but they are the very device of the devil to destroy the spirit
and break the power of prayer. It is of no use to say the
form is a good one. Prayer does not consist in words. And
it matters not what the words are, if the heart is not led by
the Spirit of God. If the desire is not enkindled, the
thoughts directed, and the whole current of feeling produced
and led by the Spirit of God, itis not prayer. And set forms
are, of all things, best calculated to keep an individual from
praying as he ought.

7. The subject furnishes a test of character. The Spirit
maketh intercession—for whom? For the saints. ose
who are saints are thus exercised. If you are saints, you
know by experience what it is to be thus exercised, or it is
because you have grieved the Spirit of God, so that he will
not lead you. You live in such a manner that this Holy
Comforter will not dwell with you, nor give you the spirit of
prayer. If this isso, you must repent. Whether you are a
Christian or not, do not stop to settle that, but repent, as if
you never had repented. Do your first works. Don’t take
it for granted that you are a Christian, -ut go like a humble
sinner, and pour out your heart unto the Lord You never
can have the spirit of prayer in any other way.

8. The importance of understanding this subject.

(1.) In order to be useful. Without this spirit there can
be no such sympathy between you and God that you can

either walk with God or work with God. You need to have
a strong beating of your heart with his, or you need not ex
pect to be greatly useful.

(2.) As important to your sanctification. Without such
a spirit you will not be sanctified, you will not understand the
Bible, you will not know how to apply it to your casa I

5


98 SPIRIT OF PRAYER.


want you to feel the importance of having God with you ail
the time. If you live as you ought, he says he will come unto
you, and make his abode with you, and sup with you, and
you with him.

9. If people know not the spirit of prayer, they are very
apt to be unbelieving in regard to the results of prayer.
They do not see what takes place, or do not see the connection,
or do not see the evidence. They are not expecting spiritual
blessings. When sinners are convicted, they think they are
only frightened by such terrible preaching. And when people
are converted, they feel no confidence, and only say, “ We'll
see how they turn out.”

10. Those who have the spirit of prayer know when the
blessing comes. It was just so when Jesus Christ appeared
These ungodly doctors did not know him. Why? Because
they were not praying for the redemption of Israel. But
Simeon and Anna knew him. How was that? Mark what they
said, how they prayed and how they lived They were pray-
ing in faith, and so they were not surprised when he came.
So it is with such Christians. If sinners are convicted or
converted, they are not surprised at it. They were expecting
just such things. They know God when he comes, because
they were looking out for his visits.

11. There are three classes of persons in the church who
are liable to error, or have left the truth out of view, on this
subject.

(1.) Those who place great reliance on prayer, and use no
other means. They are alarmed at any special means, and
talk about your “getting up a revival.”

(2.) Over against these are those who use means, and pray,
but never think about the influences of the Spirit in prayer,
They talk about prayer for the Spirit, and feel the import-
ance of the Spirit in the conversion of sinners, but do not
realize the importance of the Spirit in prayer. And their
prayers are all cold talk, nothing that any body can feel, or
that can take hold of God. “ee wy

(3.) Those who have certain strange notions about the
aovereignty of God, and are waiting for God to convert the
world without prayer or means.

There must be in the shurch a deeper sense of the need of
the spirit of prayer. Tue fact is that, generally,, those who
use means most assiduously, and make the most strenuous
efforts for the salvation of men, and who have the most cor-
rect notions of the manner in which means should be used
for converting sinners, also pray most for the Spirit of God,


|
|


SPIRIT OF PRAYER. os


and wrestle most with God for his blessing. And what is the
result? Let facts speak, and say whether these persons do
or do not pray, and whether the Spirit of God does not tes
tify to their prayers, and follow their labors with his power.
12. A spirit very different from the spirit of prayer appears
to prevail in certain portions of the Presbyterian church at
the present time. Nothing will produce an excitement and
opposition so quick as the spirit of prayer. If any person
should feel burdened with the case of sinners, in prayer, so
as to groan in his prayer, why, the women are nervous, and
he is visited at once with rebuke and opposition. From my
soul I abhor all affectation of feeling where there is none,
and all attempts to work one’s self up into feeling by groans.
But I feel bound to defend the position that there is such a
thing as being in a state of mind in which there is but one
way to keep from groaning; and that is, by resisting the
Holy Ghost. I was once present where this subject was dis-
cussed. It was said that groaning ought to be discounte
nanced. The question was asked, whether God could not
produce such a state of feeling that to abstain from groaning
was impossible? and the answer was, “Yes, but he never
does.” Then the apostle Paul was egregiously deceived when
he wrote about groanings that cannot be uttered. Edwards
was deceived when he wrote his book upon revivals. Re
vivals are all in the dark. Now, no man who reviews the
history of the church will adopt such a sentiment. I do not
like this attempt to shut out, or stifle, or keep down, or limit
the spirit of prayer. I would sooner cut off my right hand
than rebuke the spirit of prayer, as I have heard of its being
done by saying, “ Don’t let me hear any more groaning.”
But then, I hardly know where toconclude this subject. I
should like to discuss it a month, and till the whole church
could understand it, so as to pray the prayer of faith, Be
loved, I want to ask you if you believe all this? Ordo you
wonder that I should talk so? Perhaps some of you have
had some glimpses of these things. Now, will you give your-
selves up to prayer, and live so as to have the spirit of
prayer, and have the spirit with you all the time? Oh, for a
praying church! I once knew a minister who had a revival four-
teen winters in succession. I did not know how to account for it
till I saw one of his members get up in a prayer meeting and
make a confession. “ Brethren,” said he, “I have been long
in the habit of praying every Saturday night till after mid-
night, for the descent of the Holy Ghost among us. And
now, brethren,” and he began to weep, “I confess that T


1909 SPIRIT OF PRAYER.


have neglected it for two or three weeks.” The secret was
out. That minister had a praying church. Brethren, in my
present state of health, I find it impossible to pray as much
as I have been in the habit of doing, and continue to preach.
It overcomes my strength. Now, shall I give myself up to
prayer, and stop preaching? That will not do. Now, will
not you, who are in health, throw yourselves into this work,
and bear this burden, and lay yourselves out in prayer, till
God will pour out his blessing upon us?


LECTURE VIL


BE FILLED WITH THE SPIRIT,


Text.—Be filled with the Spirit.—Hem. y. 18.


Sxverat of my last lectures have been on the subject of
peren and the importance of having the spirit of prayer, ef

e intercession of the Holy Ghost. Whenever the necessity
and importance of the Spirit’s influences are held forth, there
can be no doubt that persons are in danger of abusing the
doctrine, and perverting it to their own injury. For instance,
when you tell sinners that without the Holy Spirit they never
will repent, they are very liable to pervert the truth, and tm-
derstand by it that they cannot repent, and therefore are under
no obligation to do it until they feel the Spirit. It is often
difficult to make them see that all the “cannot” consists in
their unwillingness, and not in their inability. So again,
when we tell Christians that they need the Spirit’s aid in pray-
er, they are very apt to think they are under no obligation to
pray the prayer of faith, until they feel the influences of
the Spirit. They overlook their obligation to be filled with
the Spirit and wait for the spirit of prayer to come upon them
without asking, and thus tempt God.

Before we come to consider the other department of means
for promoting a revival, that is, the means to be used with sin-
ners, I wish to show you, that if you live without the Spirit,
you are without excuse. Obligation to perform duty never
rests on the condition, that we shall first have the influence
of the Spirit, but on the powers of moral agency. Wa, as
moral agents, have the power to obey God, and are perfeetly
bound to obey, and the reason we do not is, that we are un-
willing. The influences of the Spirit are wholly a matter of
igrace. If they were indispensable to enable us to perform

uty, the bestowment of them would not be a gracious act,
but a mere matter of common justice. Sinners are not bound
to repent because they have the Spirit’s influence, or becatise
they can obtain it, but because they are moral agents, and
have the powers which God requires them to exercise. Soin
the case of Christians. They are not bound to pray in faith
because they have the Spirit, (except in those | cases where his

(101)


102 BE FILLED WITH THE SPIRIT.


influences in begetting desire constitute the evidenee that if
is God’s will to grant the object of desire,) but because they
have evidence. They are not bound to pray in faith at all,
except when they have evidence as the foundation of their
faith. They must have evidence from promises, or principle,
or prophecy, or providence. And where they have evidence
independent of his influences, they are bound to exercise faith,
whether they have the Spirit’s influence or not. They are
bound to see the evidence, and to believe. The Spirit is given
not to enable them to see or believe, but because without it
they will not look, nor feel, nor act, as they ought. I purpose
this evening to show from the text,

L That Christians may be filled with the Spirit of God.

IL That it is their duty to be filled with the Spirit.

Il. Why they are not filled with the Spirit.

IV. The guilt of those who have not the Spirit of God, to
lead their minds in duty and prayer.

YV. The consequences that will follow if they are filled with
the Spirit.

VL The consequences if they are not.

I. Iam to show you that you may have the Spirit. Not
because it is a matter of justice for God to give you his Spir
it, but because he has promised to give it to those that ask
“If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts to your
children, how much more shall your Father which is in heaven
give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him?” If you ask the
Holy Spirit, God has promised to give it.

But again, God has commanded you to have it. He says
in the text, “Be filled with the Spirit.” When God com-
mands us to doa thing, it is the highest possible evidence
that we can doit. For God to command, is equivalent to
an oath that we can doit. He has no right to command,
unless we have power to obey. There is no stopping short
of the conclusion that God is an infinite tyrant, if he com
mands that which is impracticable.

IL I am to show, secondly, that it is your duty.

1. Because you have a promise of it.

A oe God has commanded it.

t is essential to your own growth in grace that you
should be filled with the Spirit FS tr

4. It is as important as it is that you should be sanctified.

5. It is as necessary as it is that you should be useful and
do good in the world.

„6. If you do not have the Spirit of God in you, you will
dishonor God, disgrace the church, and die and go to hell


BE FILLED WITH THE SPIRIT. 108


LIL Why many do not have the Spirit. There are some,
even professors of religion, who will say, “I do not know any
thing about this ; I never had any such experience ; either
it is not true or I am all wrong.” No doubt you are all wrong,
if you know nothing about the influence of the Spirit. I want
to present you with a few of the reasons that may prevent
you from being filled with the Spirit.

1. It may be that you live a hypocritical life. Your pray-
ers are not earnest and sincere. Not only is your religion a
mere outside show, without any heart, but you are insincere
in your intercourse with others. Thus you do many things
to grieve the Spirit, so that he cannot dwell with you.

A minister was once boarding in a certain family, and the
lady of the house was constantly complaining that she did
not enjoy her mind, and nothing seemed to help her. One
day some ladies called to see her, and she protested that she
was very much offended because they had not called before,
and pressed them to stay and spend the day, and declared
she could not consent to let them go. They excused them-
selves, however, and left the house, and as soon as they were
gone, she said to her servant, she wondered these people had
so little sense as to be always troubling her, and taking up
her time. The minister heard it, and immediately rebuked
her, and told her she could now see why she did not enjoy
religion. It was because she was in the daily habit of insin-
cerity that amounted to downright lying. And the Spirit of
truth could not dwell in such a heart.

2. Others have so much levity that the Spirit will not dwell
with them. The Spirit of God is solemn, and serious, and
will not dwell with those who give way to thoughtless levity.

3. Others are so proud that they cannot have the Spirit.
They are so fond of dress, high life, equipage, fashion, etc.,
that it is no wonder they are not filled with the Spirit. And
yet such persons will pretend to be at a loss to know why it
is that they do not enjoy religion!

4, Some are so worldly-minded, love property so well, and
are trying so hard to get rich, that they cannot have the Spir-
it. How can he dwell with them, when their thoughts are all
on things of the world, and all their powers absorbed in pro-
curing wealth? And they hold on toit when they get it, and
they are pained if pressed by conscience to do something for
the conversion of the world. They show how much they
love the world, in all their intercourse with others. Little
things show it. They will screw down a poor man, who is
doing a little piece of work for them, to the lcwest penny. If


104 BE FILLED WITH THE SPIRII


they are dealing on a large scale, very likely they will be lib-
eral and fair, because it is for their advantage. But if it is a
person they care not about, a laborer, or a mechanic, or a
servant, they will grind him down to the last fraction, no
matter what it is really worth ; and they actually pretend to
make conscience of it, that they cannot possibly give any
more. Now they would be ashamed to deal so with people
of their own rank, because it would be known and injure
their reputation. But God knows it, and has it all written
down, that they are covetous and unfair in their dealings,
and will not do right, only when it is for their interest. Now
how can such professors have the Spirit of God? It is im-
possible.

There are a multitude of such things, by which the Spirit
of God is grieved. People call them little sins, but God will
not call them little. I was struck with this thought, when I
saw a little notice in the Evangelist. The publishers stated
that they had many thousand dollars in the hands of subscrib-
ers, which was justly due, and that it would cost them as
much as it was worth to send an agent to collect it. I sup
pose it is so with all the other religious papers, that subscrib-
ers either put the publisher to the trouble and expense of
sending an agent to collect his due, or else they cheat him out
of it. There are doubtless, I do not know how many, thous-
ands of dollars held back in this way by professors of religion,
just because it is in such small sums, or they are so far off
that they cannot be sued. And yet these people will pray,
and appear very pious, and wonder why they cannot enjoy
religion, and have the Spirit of God! It is this looseness of
moral principle, this want of conscience about little matters,
prevailing in the church, that grieves away the Holy Ghost.
Why, it would be disgraceful to God to dwell and have com-
munion with such persons, who will take an advantage and
cheat their neighbor out of his dues, because they can do it
and not be disgraced.

5. Others do not fully confess and forsake their sins, and so
cannot enjoy the Spirit’s presence. They will confess their
sins in general terms, perhaps, and are ready always to ac
knowledge that they are sinners. Or they will confess par-
tially some particular sins. But they do it reservedly, proud:
ly, guardedly, as if they were afraid they should say a little
more than is necessary ; that is, when they confess to men
the injuries done to them. They do it in a way which shows
that, instead of bursting forth from an ingenuous heart, the
confession is wrung from them, by the hand of conscience


BE FILLED WITH THE SPIBIT. 108


gripping them. If they have injured any one, they will make
a partial recantation, which is hard-hearted, cruel, and hypo-
critical, and then they will ask, “ Now, brother, are you satis-
fied?” And you know it would be very difficult for a person
to say that he was not satisfied, even if the confession is cold
and heartless. But I tell you God is not satisfied. He knows
whether you have gone the full length of honest confession,
and taken all the blame that belongs to you. If your con-
fessions have been constrained and wrung from you, do you
suppose you can cheat God? “He that covereth his sins
shali not prosper, but whoso confesseth and forsaketh shall
find mercy.” “He that humbleth himself shall be exalted.”
Unless you come quite down, and confess your sins honestly,
and remunerate where you have done injury, you have no
right to expect the spirit of prayer.

6. Others are neglecting some known duty, and that is the
reason why they have not the Spirit. One does not pray in
his family, though he knows he ought to do it, and yet he is
trying to get the spirit of prayer ! There is many a young man
who feels in his heart that he ought to prepare for the ministry,
and he has not the spirit of prayer because he has some
worldly object in view, which prevents his devoting himself to
the work. He has known his duty, and refuses to do it, and
now he is praying for direction from the Spirit of God. He
cannot have it. One has neglected to make a profession of
religion. He knows his duty, but he refuses to join the church.
He once had the spirit of prayer, but neglecting his duty, he
grieved the Spirit away. And now he thinks, if he could once
more enjoy the light of God’s countenance, and have his evi-
dences renewed, he would do his duty, and join the church.
And so he is praying for it again, and trying to bring God
over to his terms, to grant him his presence. You need not
expect it. You will live and die in darkness, unless you are
willing first to do your duty, before God manifests himself as
reconciled to you. It is in vain to say, you will come forward
if God will firs show you the light of his countenance. He
never will do it as long as you live; he will let you die with-
out it, if you refuse to do your duty.

I have known women who felt that they ought to talk to
their unconverted husbands, and pray with them, but they
have neglected it, and so they get into the dark. They knew
their duty and refused to do it; they went round it, and there
they lost the spirit of prayer.

tt you have neglected any known duty, and thus lost the
spirit of prayer, you must yield first. God has a controversy

Ke


106 BE FILLED WITH THE SPIRIT.


with you ; you have refused obedience to God, and you must
retract it. You may have forgotten it, but God has not, and
you must set yourself to recall it to mind, and repent. God
never will yield nor grant you his Spirit, till you repent. Had
I an omniscient eye now, I could call the names of the indi
viduals in this congregation, who had neglected some known
duty, or committed some sin, that they have not repented of,
and now they are praying for the spirit of prayer, but they
cannot succeed in obtaining it.

To illustrate this I will relate a case. A good man in the
western part of this State, had been a long time an engaged
Christian, and he used to talk to the sleepy church with which
he was connected. By-and-by the church was offended and
got out of patience, and many told him they wished he would
let them alone, they did not think he could do them any good.
He took them at their word, and they all went to sleep to
gether, and remained so two or three years. By-and-by a
minister came among them and a revival commenced, but this
elder seemed to have lost his spirituality. He used to be for-
ward in a good work, but now he held back. Everybody
thought it unaccountable. Finally, as he was going home one
night, the truth of his situation flashed upon his mind, and he
went into absolute despair for a few minutes. At length his
thoughts were directed back to that sinful resolution to let the
church alone in their sins. He felt that no language could
describe the blackness of that sin. He realized that moment
what it was to be lost, and to find that God had a controversy
with him. He saw that it was a bad spirit which caused the
resolution: the same that caused Moses to say, “ You rebels.”
He humbled himself on the spot, and God poured out his
Spirit on him. Perhaps some of you that hear me are in just
this situation. You have said something provoking or un-
kind to some person. Perhaps it was peevishness to a servant
that was a Christian. Or perhaps it was speaking censorious-
ly of a minister or some other person. Perhaps you have
been angry because your opinions have not been taken, or
your dignity has been encroached upon. Search thoroughly,
and see if you cannot find out the sin. Perhaps you have
forgotten it. But God has not forgotten it, and never will
forgive your unchristian conduct until you repent. God can-
not overlook it. It would do no good if he should. What
ean “tare it do to forgive, while the sin 18 rankling in your

e .

7. Perhaps you have resisted the Spirit of God. Perhaps
you are in the habit of resisting the Spirit. You resist convie


BE FILLED WITH THE SPIRIT. 107


tion. In preaching, when something has been said taat
reached your case, your heart has risen up against it and re
sisted. Many are willing to hear plain and searching preach-
ing so long as they can apply it all to others; a misanthropic
spirit makes them take a satisfaction in hearing others searched
and rebuked ; but if the truth touch them, they directly cry
out that it is personal and abusive. Is this your case?

8. The fact is that you do not on the whole desire the Spirit
This is true in every case in which you do not have the Spirit.
Let me not be mistaken here. I want you should carefully
discriminate. Nothing is more common than for people to
desire a thing on some accounts, which they do not choose on
the whole. A person may see an article in a store which he
desires to purchase, and he goes in and asks the price, and
thinks of it a little, and on the whole concludes not to pur-
chase it. He desires the article, but does not like the price,
or does not like to be at the expense, so that, upon the whole,
he prefers not to purchase it. That is the reason why he does
not purchase it. So persons may desire the Spirit of God on
some accounts ; from a regard to the comfort and joy of heart
which it brings. If you know what it is by former experience
to commune with God, and how sweet it is to dissolve in peni-
tence and to be filled with the Spirit, you cannot but desire a
return of those joys. And you may set yourself to pray
earnestly for it, and to pray for a revival of religion. But on
the whole you are unwilling it should come. You have so
much to do that you cannot attend toit. Or it will require
so many sacrifices, that you cannot bear to have it. There
are some things you are not willing to give up. You find that
if you wish to have the Spirit of God dwell with you, you must
lead a different life, you must give up the world, you must
make sacrifices, you must break off from your worldly associ-
ates, and make confession of your sins. And so on the whole
you do not choose to have him come, unless he will consent
to dwell with you and let you live as you please. But that he
never will do.

9. Perhaps you do not pray for the Spirit ; or you pray and
use no other means, or pray and do not act consistently with
your prayers. Or you use means calculated to resist them.
Or you ask, and as soon as he comes and begins to affect
your mind, you grieve him right away, and will not walk
with him. f A

IV. I am to show the great guilt of not having the Spirit
of God.

1. Your guilt is just as great as the authority of God is


108 BE FILLED WITH THE SPIRIT.


great, which commands you to be filled with the Spirit. God
commands it, and it is just as much a disobedience of God’s
commands, as it is to swear profanely, or steal, or commit
adultery, or break the Sabbath. Think of that. And yet there
are many people who do not blame themselves at all for not
baving the Spirit. They even think themselves quite pious
Christians, because they go to prayer meetings, and partake
of the sacrament, and all that, though they live year after year
without the Spirit of God. Now, you see that the same God
who says, “ Do not get drunk,” says also, “ Be filled with the
Spirit.” You all say, if a man is an habitual murderer, or a
thief, he is no Christian. Why? Because he lives in habitual
disobedience of God. So if he swears, you have no charity
for him. You will not allow him to plead that his heart is
right, and words are nothing. God does not care anything
about words. You would think it outrageous to have such a
man in church, or to have a company of snch people pretend
to call themselves a church of Christ. And yet they are nov
a whit more absolutely living in disobedience to God than you
are, who live without the spirit of prayer, and without the pre
sence of God.

2. Your guilt is equal to all the good you might do if you
had the Spirit of God in as great a measure as it is your duty
to have it, and as you might have it. You, elders of this
church! how much good you might do, if you had the Spirit.
And you, Sunday-school teachers, how much good you might
do ; and you, church-members, too, if you were filled with the
Spirit, you might do vast good, infinite good. Well, your
guilt is just as great. Here is a blessing promised, and
you can have it by doing your duty. You are entirely re
sponsible to the church and to God for all this good that
you wight do. A man is responsible for all the good he
can do.

3. Your guilt is farther measured by all the evil which you
do in consequence of not having the Spirit. You area dis
honor to religion. You are a stumbling block to the church,
and to the world. And your guilt is enhanced by all the va
rious influences you exert. And it will prove so in the day of
judgement.

V. The consequences of having the Spirit.

1. You will be called eccentric ; and probably you will de
serve it. Probably you will really be eccentric. I never knew
a person who was filled with the Spirit, that was not called eo
centric. And the reason is, that they are unlike other people.
This is always a term of comparison. There is therefore the


e


BE FILLED WITH THE SPIRIT, 109


best of reasons why such persons should appear eccentric.
They act under different influences, take different views, are
moved by different motives, led by a different spirit. You are
to expect such remarks. How often I have heard the remark
respecting such and such persons, “ He is a very good man—
but he is rather eccentric.” I have sometimes asked for the
particulars ; in what does his eccentricity consist? I hear
the catalogue, and the amount is, that he is spiritual Make
up your mind for this, to be eccentric. There is such a thing
as affected eccentricity. Horrible! But there is such a thing
as being so deeply imbued with the Spirit of God, that you
must and will act so as to appear strange and eccentric, to
noe who cannot understand the reasons of your con
uct.

2. If you have much of the spirit of God, it is not unlikely
you will be thought deranged, by many, We judge men to
be deranged when they act differently from what we think to
be prudent and according to common sense, and when they
come to conclusions for which we can see no good reasons.
Paul was accused of being deranged by those who did not
understand the views of things under which he acted. No
doubt Festus thought the man was crazy, and that much
learning had made him mad. But Paul said, “ I am not mad,
most noble Festus.” His conduct was so strange, so novel,
that Festus thought it must be insanity. But the truth was,
he only saw the subject so clearly that he threw his whole
soul into it, They were entirely in the dark in respect to the
motive by which he was actuated This is by no means un-
common. Maultitudes have appeared to those who had no
spirituality as if they were deranged. Yet they saw good
reasons for doing as they did. God was leading their minds
to act in such a way that those who were not spiritual could
not see the reasons. You must make up your mind to this,
and so much the more, as you live more above the world and
walk with God.

3. If you have the Spirit of God, you must expect to feel
great distress in view of the church and the world. Some
spiritual epicures ask for the Spirit because they think it will
make them so perfectly happy. Some people think that
spiritual Christians are always very happy and free from
sorrow.

There never was a greater mistake. Read your Bibles, and
see how the prophets and apostles were always groaning and
distressed in view of the state of the church and the world.
The apostle Paul says he was always bearing about in his


110 BE FILLED WITH THE SPIRIT.


body the dying of the Lord Jesus. I protest, says he, that 1
die daily. You will know what it is to sympathize with the
Lord Jesus Christ, and be baptized with the baptism that he
was baptized with. Oh how he agonized in view of the state
of sinners! how he travailed in soul for their salvation! The
more you have of his Spirit, the more clearly you will see the
state of sinners, and the more deeply you will be distressed
about them. Many times you will feel as if you could not
live in view of their situation ; your distress will be unutter-
able. Paul says, Rom. ix : 1-3 : “I say the truth in Christ,
I lie not, my conscience also bearing me witness in the Holy
(host, that I have great heaviness and continual sorrow in
my heart. For I could wish that myself were accursed
from Christ for my brethren, my kinsmen according to the
flesh.”

4. You will be often grieved with the state of the ministry.
Some years since I met a woman belonging to one of the
churches in this city. I inquired of her the state of religion
here. She seemed unwilling to say much about it, made some
general remarks, and then choked, and her eyes filled, and
she said, “Oh, our minister’s mind seems to be very dark.’
Spiritual Christians often feel like this, and often weep over
it. I have seen much of it, and often found Christians who
wept and groaned in secret, to see the darkness on the minds
of ministers in regard to religion, their earthliness and fear
of man ; but they dared not speak of it, lest they should be
denounced and threatened, and perhaps turned out of the
church. I do not say these things censoriously, to reproach
my brethren, but because they are true. And ministers
ought to know that nothing is more common than for spirit-
ual Christians to feel burdened and distressed at the state of
the ministry. I would not wake up any wrong feelings
towards ministers, but it is time it should be known that
Christians do often get spiritual views of things, and their
souls are kindled up, and then they find that their minister
does not enter into their feelings, that he is far below the
standard of what he ought to be, and im spirituality far be
low some of the members of his church. This is one of the
most prominent and deeply to be deplored evils of the
present day. The piety of the ministry, though real, is so
superficial, in many instances, that the spiritual part of the
church feel that ministers cannot, do not, sympathize with
them. Their preaching does not meet their wants, it does
not feed them, it does not meet their experience. The min-
ister has not depth enough of religious experience to know


BE FILLED WITH THE SPYRIT. iil


how to search and wake up the church ; to help those under
temptation, to support the weak, to direct the strong, and
lead them through all the labyrinths and mazes with which
their path may be beset. When a minister has gone with a
church as far as his experience in spiritual exercise goes, there
he stops ; and until he has a renewed experience, until he is
reconverted, his heart broken up afresh, and he set forward
in the divine life and Christian experience, he will help them
no more. He may preach sound doctrine, and so may an un-
converted minister ; but, after all, his preaching will want
that searching pungency, that practical bearing, that unction
which alone will reach the case of a spiritually-minded
Christian. It is a fact over which the church is groaning,
that the piety of young men suffers so much in the course of
their education, that when they enter the ministry, however
much intellectual furniture they may possess, they are in a
state of spiritual babyhood. They want nursing, and need
rather to be fed, than to undertake to feed the Church ef
God.
6. If you have much of the Spirit of God, you must make
up your mind to have much opposition, both in the church
and the world. Very likely the leading men in the church
will oppose you. There has always been opposition in the
church. Soit was when Christ was on earth. If you are far
above their state of feeling, church members will oppose you.
If any man will live godly in Christ Jesus, he must expect
persecution. Often the elders, and even the minister, will
oppose you, if you are filled with the Spirit of God.

6. You must expect very frequent and agonizing conflicts
with Satan. Satan has very little trouble with those Chris-
tians who are not spiritual, but lukewarm, and slothful, and
worldly-minded. And such do not understand what is said
about spiritual conflicts. Perhaps they will smile when such
things are mentioned. And so the devil lets them alone.
They don’t disturb him, nor he them. ‘But spiritual Chris
tians, he understands very well, are doing him a vast injury,
and, therefore, he sets himself againstthem. Such Christians
often have terrible conflicts. They have temptations that
they never thought of before, blasphemous thoughts, atheism,
suggestions to do deeds of wickedness, to destroy their own
lives, and the like. And if you are spiritual, you may expect
these terrible conflicts.

7. You will have greater conflicts with yourself than you
ever thought of. You will sometimes find your own corrup
tions maling strange headway against the Spirit. “'The flesh


112 BE FILIED WITH THE SPIRIT.


lusteth against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh.”
Such a Christian is often thrown into consternation at the

wer of his own corruptions. One of the Commodores in the
United States was, as I have been told, a spiritual man ; and
his pastor told me he had known that man lie on the floor and
groan a great part of the night, in conflict with his own
corruptions, and to cry to God in agony that he would
break the power of the temptation. It seemed as if the devil
was determined to ruin him ; and his own feelings, for the
time being, were almost in league with the devil

8. But you will have peace with God. If the church, and
sinners, and the devil oppose you, there will be one with
whom you will have peace. Let those who are called to these
trials, and conflicts, and temptations, and who groan, and
pray, and weep, and break your hearts, remember this con-
sideration : your peace, so far as your feelings towards God
are concerned, will flow like a river.

9. You will likewise have peace of conscience, if you are
led by the Spirit. You will not be constantly goaded and
kept on the rack hy a guilty conscience. Your conscience
will be calm and quiet, unrufiled as the summer’s lake.

10. If filled with the Spirit, you will be useful You cannot
help being useful. Even if you were sick and unable to go
out of your room, or to converse, and saw nobody, you would
be ten times more useful than a hundred of those common
sort of Christians who have no spirituality. To give you an
idea of this, I will relate an anecdote. A pious man in the
Western part of this State was sick with a consumption. He
was a poor man, and sick for years. An unconverted mer-
chant in the place had a kind heart, and used to send him
now and then something for his comfort, or for his family.
He felt grateful for the kindness, but could make no return,
as he wanted to do. At length he determined that the best
return he could make would be to pray for his salvation ; he
began to pray, and his soul kindled, and he got hold of God.
There was no revival there, but by and by, to the astonish-
ment of every body, this merchant came right out on the
Lord’s side. The fire kindled all over the place, and a pew-
erful revival followed, and multitudes were converted.

This poor man lingered in this way for several years, and
died. After his death, I visited the place, and his widow
put into my hands his diary. Among other things, he says
in his diary : “I am acquainted with about thirty ministers
and churches.” He then goes on to set apart certain hours
in the day and week to pray for each of these ministers


BE FILLED WITH THE SPIRIT, 118


and churches, and also certain seasons for praying for
the different missionary stations. Then followed, under
different dates, such facts as these: “To-day,” naming the
date, “I have been enabled to offer what I call the prayer of
faith for the outpouring of the Spirit on church, and
I trust in God there will soon be a revival there.” Under
another date, “I have to-day been able to offer what I call
the prayer of faith for such a church, and trust there will
soon be a revival there.” Thus he had gone over a great num-
ber of churches, recording the fact that he had prayed for
them in faith thata revival might soon prevail among them.
Of the missionary stations, if I recollect right, he mentions
in particular the mission at Ceylon. I believe the last place
mentioned in his diary, for which he offered the prayer of
faith, was the place in which he lived. Not long after noting
these facts in his diary, the revival commenced, and went over
the region of country, nearly, I believe, if not quite, in the
order in which they had been mentioned in his diary ; and in
due time news came from Ceylon that there was a revival of
religion there. The revival in his own town did not com-
mence till after his death. Its commencement was at the
time when his widow put into my hands the document to
which I have referred. She told me that he was so exercised
in prayer during his sickness that she often feared he would
pray himself to death. The revival was exceedingly great
and powerful in all the region ; and the fact that it was about
to prevail had not been hidden from this servant of the Lord.
According to his word, the secret of the Lord is with them
that fear him. Thus this man, too feeble in his body to go
out of his house, was yet more useful to the world and the
church of God than all the heartless professors of the coun-
try. Standing between God and the desolations of Zion,
and pouring out his heart in believing prayer, as a prince he
had power with God, and prevailed.

11. If you are filled with the Spirit, you will not find your-
selves distressed, and galled, and worried, when people speak
against you. When I find people irritated and fretting at any
little thing that touches them, T am sure they have not the
Spirit of Christ. Jesus Christ sould have everything said
against him that malice could invent, and yet not be in the
least disturbed by it. If you mean to be meek under perse-
cution, and exemplify the temper of the Saviour, and honor
religion in this way, you need to be filled with the Spirit.

12. You will be wise in using means for the conversion of
sinners. If the Spirit of God is in you, he will lead you to


114 BE FILLED WITH THE SPIRIT.


use means wisely, in a way adapted to the end, and to avoid
doing hurt. No ase who ve not filled with the Spirit of God,
is fit to be employed in directing the measures adopted in a
revival Their hands will be all thumbs, unable to take hold,
and they will act as if they had not common sense. Buta
man who is led by the Spirit of God, will know to time his
measures right, and how to apportion Divine truth, so as to
make it tell to the best advantage.

13. You will be calm under affliction ; not thrown into con-
fusion or consternation when you see the storm coming over
you. People around will be astonished at your calmness and
cheerfulness under heavy trials, not knowing the inward sup-
ports of those who are filled with the Spirit.

14. You will be resigned in death; you will always feel
prepared to die, and not afraid to die, and after death you will
be proportionably more happy for ever in heaven.

VL Consequences of not being filled with the Spirit.

1. You will often doubt, and reasonably doubt, whether you
are Christians. You will have doubts, and you ought to have
them. The sons of God are led by the Spirit of God. And
if you are not led by the Spirit what reason have you to think
you are sons? You will try to make a little evidence go a
great way to bolster up your hopes, but you cannot do it, un-
less your conscience is seared as with a hot iron. You cannot
help being plunged often into painful doubt and uncertainty
about your state. Rom. viii. 9.— But ye are not in the flesh,
but in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwell in you.
Now, if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of
his.” 2. Cor. xiii. 5.—“ Examine yourselves whether ye be in
the faith ; prove your own selves: know ye not your own
ebb how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be repro-

ates?”

2. You will always be unsettled in your views about the
prayer of faith. The prayer of faith is something so spiritual,
so much a matter of experience and not of speculation, that
unless you are spiritual yourselves, you will not understand it
fully. You may talk a great deal about the prayer of faith,
and for the time get thoroughly convinced of it. But you
will never feel so settled on it as to retain the same position
of mind concerning it, and in a little while you will be all un-
certainty. I knew a curious instance in a brother minister.
He told me, “When I have the Spirit of God, and enjoy his
Beeuess I believe firmly in the prayer of faith ; but when I

ave it not, I find myself doubting whether there is any such
thing, and my mind offering objections,” I know, from my


BE FILLED WITH THE SPIRIT. 118
~ own experience, what this is, and when I hear persons raising
objections to that view of prayer which I have presented in
these lectures, I understand very well what their difficulty is,
and have often found it impossible to satisfy their minds,
while so far from God; when at the same time they would
understand it themselves, without argument, whenever they
had experienced it.

3. If you have not the Spirit, you will be very apt to stum-
ble at those who have. You will doubt the propriety of their
conduct. If they seem to feel a good deal more than your-

- self, you will be likely to call it animal feeling. You will
perhaps doubt their sincerity when they say they have
such feelings. You will say, “I do not know what to make
of brother such-a-one ; he seems to be very pious, but I do
not understand him, I think he has a great deal of animal
feeling.” Thus you will be ‘trying to censure them, for the
purpose of justifying yourself.

4, You will be had in reputation with the impenitent, and
with carnal professors. They will praise you, as a rational,
orthodox, consistent Christian. You will be just in the frame
of mind to walk with them, because you are agreed.

5. You will be much troubled with fears about fanaticism.
Whenever there are revivals, you will see in them a strong
tendency to fanaticism, and will be full of fears and anxiety,
or rather of opposition to them.

6. You will be much disturbed by the measures that are
used in revivals. ; If any measures are adopted, that are de
cided and direct, you will think they are all “new,” and will
be stumbled at them just in proportion to your want of spix
ituality. You do not see their appropriateness. You will
stand and cavil at the measures, because you are so blind that
you cannot see their adaptedness, while all heaven is rejoic
ing in them as the means of saving souls. i

7. You will be a reproach to religion. The impenitent

will sometimes praise you because you are so much like them-
selves, and sometimes laugh about you because you are such
a hypocrite.

8. You will know but little about the Bible.

_ 9. If you die without the Spirit, you will fall into hell.
There can be no doubt of this. Without the Spirit you will
never be prepared for heaven.


REMARKS.


1. Christians are as guilty for not having the Spirit, as sin
ners are for not repenting.


116 BE FILLED WITH THE SPIRIT,


2. They are even more so. As they have more light, they
are so much the more guilty.

3. All beings have a right to complain of Christians who
are not filled with the Spirit. You are not doing work for
God, and he has a right to complain. He has placed his
Spirit at your disposal, and if you have it not, he has a right
to look to you and to hold you responsible for all the good
you might do, did you possess it. You are sinning against all
heaven, for you ought to be adding to their happy ranks.
Sinners, the church, ministers, have a right to complain.

4. You are right in the way of the work of the Lord. It
is in vain for a minister to try to work over your head. Min-
isters often groan and struggle, and wear themselves out in
vain, trying to do good where there is a church who live so
that they do not have the Spirit of God. If the Spirit is
poured out at any time, the church will grieve him right
away. Thus you may tie the hands and break the heart of
your minister, and break him down, and perhaps kill him,
because you will not be filled with the Spirit.

5. You see the reason why Christians need the Spirit, and
the degree of their dependence. This cannot be too strongly
exhibited.

6. Do not tempt God, by waiting for his Spirit, while using
no means to procure his presence.

7. If you mean to have the Spirit, you must be childlike,
and yield to his influences—just as yielding as air. If he is
drawing you to prayer, you must quit everything to yield to
his gentle strivings) No doubt you have sometimes felt a
desire to pray for some object, and you have put it off and
resisted, and God left you. If you wish him to remain, you
must yield to his softest and gentlest motions, and watch to learn
what he would have you do, and yield yourself up to his guidance.

8. Christians ought to be willing to make any sacrifice to
enjoy the presence of the Spirit. Said a woman in high life,
a professor of religion, “I must either give up hearing such a
minister (naming him) preach, or I must give up my gay com-
pany.” She gave up the preaching and staid away. How
different from another case!

A woman in the same rank of life heard the same minister
preach, and went home resolved to abandon her gay and
worldly manner of life—dismissed most of her attendants—
changed her whole mode of dress, of equipage, of living, and
of conversation ; so that her gay and worldly friends were
soon willing to leave her to the enjoyment of communion with
God. and free to spend her time in doing good.


BE FILLED WITH THE SPIRIT. 114


9. You see from this, that it must be very difficult for those
in fashionable life to go to heaven. What a calamity to be
in such circles! Who can enjoy the presence of God im
them ?

10. See how crazy those are who are scrambling to get up
to these circles, enlarging their houses, changing their style of
living, furniture, etc. It is like climbing up mast-head to be
thrown off into the ocean. To enjoy God, you must come
down, not go up there. God is not there, among all the starch
and flattery of high life.

11. Many professors of religion are as ignorant of spiritual-
ity as Nicodemus was uf the new birth. They are ignorant,
and I fear unconverted. If any body talks to them about the
spirit of prayer, it is all algebra to them. The case of such
professors is awful How different was the character of the
apostles! Read the history of their lives, read their letters,
and you will see that they were always spiritual, and walked
daily with God. But now how little is there of such religion!
“When the Son of Man cometh, will he find faith on the
earth?” Set some of these professors to work in a revival,
and they do not know what to do, have no energy, no skill, and
make no impression. When will professors of religion set
themselves to work, filled with the Spirit? If I could see this
church filled with the Spirit, I would ask nothing more to
move this whole mighty mass of minds. Not two weeks would
pass before the revival would spread all over this city.


LECTURE VIII.


MEETINGS FOR PRAYER.


Text.—“‘Again I say unto you, That if two of you shall agree on earth as touch ng
any thing that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of my Father which is in
heaven.” —MATTHEW xviii. 10.


Hrruerto, in treating of the subject of Prayer, I have con-
fined my remarks to secret prayer. I am now to speak of
social prayer, or prayer offered in company, where two or
more are united in praying. Such meetings have been com-
mon from the time of Christ, and even hundreds of years
before. And it is probable that God’s people have always
been in the habit of making united supplication, whenever
they had the privilege. The propriety of the practice will not
be questioned here. I need not dwell now on the duty of
social prayer. Nor is it my design to diseuss the question,
whether any two Christians agreeing to ask any blessing, will
be sure to obtain it. My object is to make some remarks on


MEETINGS FOR PRAYER.


L The design of Prayer Meetings.
IL The manner of conducting them.
IIL Mention several things that will defeat the design of
holding them.


L THE DESIGN OF PRAYER MEETINGS.


1. One design of assembling several persons together for
united prayer, is to promote union among Christians. Noth-
ing tends more to cement the hearts of Christians than pray-
ing together. Never do they love one another so well as when
they witness the outpouring of each other’s hearts in prayer.
Their spirituality begets a feeling of union and confidence,
highly important to the prosperity of the church. It is
doubtful whether Christians can ever be otherwise than
united, if they are in the habit of really praying together
And where they have had hard feelings and differences


among sneer they are all done away, by uniting in


_ MEETINGS FOR PRAYER. 119


prayer. The great object is gained, if you can bring them
really to unite in prayer. If this can be done, the difficulties
vanish.

2. To extend the spirit of prayer. God has so constituted
us, and such is the economy of his grace, that we are sympa-
thetic beings, and communicate our feelings to each other.
A minister, for instance, will often as it were breathe his own
feelings into his congregation. The Spirit of God that in-
spires his soul, makes use of his feelings to influence his hear
ers, just as much as he makes use of the words he preaches.
So he makes use of the feelings of Christians. Nothing is
more calculated to beget a spirit of prayer, than to unite in
social prayer, with one who has the spirit himself; unless
this one should be so far ahead that his prayer will repel the
rest. His prayer will awaken them, if they are not so far be-
hind as to revolt at it and‘resist it. If they are anywhere
near the standard of his feelings, his spirit will kindle, and
burn, and spread all around. One individual in a church, that
obtains a spirit of prayer, will often arouse a whole church,
and extend the same spirit through the whole, and a general
revival follows.

3. Another grand design of social prayer, is to move God.
Not that it changes the mind and feelings of God. When
we speak of moving God, as I have said in a former lecture,
we do not mean that it alters the will of God. But when
the right kind of prayer is offered by Christians, they are in
such a state of mind, that it becomes proper for God to .
bestow a blessing. They are then prepared to receive it,
and he gives because he is always the same, and always
ready and happy to show mercy. When Christians are
united, and praying as they ought, God opens the windows
of heaven, and pours out his blessings till there is not room
to receive them.

4. Another important design of prayer meetings is the con-
viction and conversion of sinners. When properly conducted,
they are eminently calculated to produce this effect. Sinners
are apt to be solemn when they hear Christians pray. Where
there is a spirit of prayer, sinners must feel An ungodly
man, a Universalist, once said respecting a certain minister,
“I can bear his preaching very well, but when he prays, I feel
awfully ; I feel as if God was coming down upon me.” Sin-
ners are often convicted by hearing prayer. A young man
of distinguished talents, known to many of you, said concern-
ing a certain minister to whom before his conversion he had
been very much opposed, “As soon as he began to pray, I


130 MESTINGS FOR PRAYER


began to be convicted, and if he had continued to much
ieu [chock at kave been shin fs eosin meat Just


TK. TSE MANNES OF CONDUCTING PRAYER MEETINGS


1. Its often well to a prayer meeting by reading a
short portien of the of God ; especially if the


to bring Christians to the point to pray for a ite object.
Wandering over a large field, hinders and destroys this


design.


the nature of prayer, and the encouragements we have to
Pay And io bring Ae abject te be prayed for directly before the


>


Ee


ing, should therefore see to this, by bringing
minda the object they came to pray for. eame to
cow (svt Jeet he can do this. And if they asd not
ad better go hame Tt is of no use to stay there and


|
;
j


MEETINGS FOR PRAYER. 192


God, by pretending to pray, when they have nothing on earth
to pray for.

After stating the object, be should bring up some promise
or some principle, as the ground of encouragement to expect
an answer to their prayers. If there is any indication of
Providence, or any promise, or any principle in the Divine
government that affords a ground of faith, let him call it te
mind, and not let them be talking out of their own hearts at
random, without knowing any solid reason to expect an an-
Bwer. One reason why prayer meetings mostly accomplish/


so little, is because there is so little common sense exercised”?


about them. Instead cf looking round for some solid footing
on which to repose their faith, they just come together and
pour forth their words, and neither know nor care whether
they have any reason to expect an answer. If they are going
to pray about anything cohcerning which there can be any
doubt or any mistake, in regard to the ground of faith,
they should be shown the reason there is for believing that
their prayers will be heard and answered. It is easy to see,
that unless something like this is done, three-fourths of
them will have no idea of what they are doing, or of the
ground on which they should expect to receive what they
pray for.

3. In calling on persons to pray, it is always desirable to let
things take their own course wherever it is safe. If it can be
left so with safety, let those pray who are most inclined to
pray. It sometimes happens that even those who are ordina-
rily the most spiritual, and most proper to be called on, are
not at the time in a suitable frame ; they may be cold and
worldly, and only freeze the meeting. But if you let those
pray who desire to pray, you avoid this. But often this can-
not be done with safety, especially in large cities, where a

rayer meeting might be liable to be interrupted by those who
L no business to pray ; some fanatic or crazy person, some
hypocrite or enemy, who would only make a noise. In most
places, however, this course may be taken with perfect safety.
Give up the meeting to the Spirit of God. Those who desire
to pray, let them pray. If the leader sees any thing that
needs to be set right, let him remark, freely and kindly, and
put it right, and thes go on again. Only, he should be careful
to time his remarks, so as not to interrupt the flow of feeling, or
to chill the meeting, or turn off the minds from the proper subject.

4. If itis necessary to name the individuals who are to pray,
it is best to call on those who are most spiritual first. And
if you do not know who they are, then those whom you would

é


ta ry fash} A


haapt Aoi


122 MEETINGS FOR PRAYER.


naturally suppose to be most alive. If they pray at the out
set, they will be likely to spread the spirit of prayer through
the meeting, and elevate the tone of the whole. Otherwise, if
you call on those who are cold and lifeless at the beginning,
they will be likely to diffuse a chill throughout the meeting.
The only hope of having an efficient prayer meeting is when
at least a part of the church is spiritual, and they infuse their
spirit into the rest. This is the very reason why it is often
best to let things take their course, for then those who have
the most feeling are apt to pray first, and give character to
the meeting. :

5. The prayers should always be very short. When individ-
uals suffer themselves to pray long, they forget where they
are, that they are only the mouth of the congregation, and that
the congregation cannot be expected to sympathise with them,
so as to go along and feel united in prayer, if they are long
and tedious, and go all around the world and pray for every
thing they can think of. Commonly, those who pray long in
meeting, do it not because they have the spirit of prayer, but
because they have not. And they go round and round, not
because they are full of prayer. Some men will spin outa
long prayer in telling God who and what he is, or they exhort
God to do so and so. Some pray out a whole system of di-
vinity. Some preach, some exhort the people, till every body
wishes they would stop, and God wishes so too, undoubtedly.
They should keep to the point, and pray for what they came
to pray for, and not follow the imagination of their own foolish
hearts all over the universe.

6. Each one should pray for some one object. It is well for
every individual to have one object for prayer : two or more
may pray for the same thing, or each a separate object. If
the meeting is convened to pray for some specific thing, let
them all pray for that. If its object is more general, let them
select their subjects, according as they feel interested in them.
If one feels particularly disposed to pray for the church, let
him do it. If the next feels disposed to pray for the church,
he may do so too. Perhaps the next will feel inclined to pray
for sinners ; for the youth ; to confess sin ; let him do it, and
as soon as he has got through let him stop. Whenever a man
has deep feeling, he always feels on some particular point,
and if he prays for that he will speak out of the abundance of
his heart, and then he will naturally stop when he is done.
Those who feel most, will be most ready to confine their
prayers to that point, and stop when they have done and not
pray all over the world.


MEETINGS FOR PRAYER. 123


7. If in the progress of the meeting it becomes necessary to
change the object of prayer, let the man who leads state the
fact, and explain it in a few words. If the object is to pray
for the church, or for backsliders, or sinners, or the heathen,
let him state it plainly, and then turn it over and hold it up
before them till he brings them to think and feel deeply be-
fore they pray. Then state to them the grounds on which
they may repose their faith in regard to obtaining the bless
ings they pray for, if any such statement is needed, and so
lead them right up to the throne, and let them take hold of
the hand of God. This is according to the philosophy of the
mind. People always do it for themselves when they pray in
secret, if they really mean to pray to any purpose, And so it
should be in prayer meetings.

8. It is important that the time should be fully occupied, so
as not to leave long seasons of silence. This always makes a
bad impression and chills the meeting. I know that some-
times churches have seasons of silent prayer. But in those
cases they should be specially requested to pray in silence, so
that all may know why they are silent. This often hasa
most powerful effect, where a few moments are spent by a
whole congregation in silence, while all lift up their thoughts
to God. This is very different from having long intervals of
silence because there is nobody to pray. Every one feels that
such a silence is like the cold damp of death over the meeting.

9. It is exceedingly important that he who leads the meet-
ing should press sinners who may be present to immediate
repentance. He should crowd this hard, and urge the Chris-
tians present to pray in such a way as to make sinners feel
that they are expected to repent immediately. This tends to
inspire Christians with compassion and love for souls. The
remarks made to sinners are often like pouring fire upon the
hearts of Christians, to awaken them to prayer and effort for
their conversion. Let them see and feel the guilt and danger
of sinners right among them, and then they will pray.

II. I am to mention several things which may defeat the
design of a prayer meeting.

1. When there is an unhappy want of confidence in the
leader, there is no hope of any good. Whatever the cause
may be, whether he is to blame or not, the very fact that he
leads the meeting will cast a damp over it and prevent all

ood. I have witnessed it in churches, where there was some
offensive elder or deacon, perhaps justly offensive, and per-
haps not, set to lead the prayer meeting, and the meeting
would all die under his influence. If there is a want of confi-


134 MEETINGS FOR PRAYER.


dence in regard to his piety, or in his ability, or in his judg
ment, or in anything connected with the meeting, everything
he says or does will fall to the ground. The same thing often
takes place where the church have lost confidence in the min
ister.

2. Where the leader lacks spirituality, there will be a dryness
and coldness in his remarks and prayers, and every thing
will indicate his want of unction, and his whole influence will
be the very reverse of what it ought to be. I have known
churches where a prayer meeting could not be sustained, and
the reason was not obvious, but those who understood the
state of things knew that the leader was so notorious for hic
waut of spirituality, that he would inevitably freeze a prayer
meeting to death. In many Presbyterian churches the elders
are so far from being spiritual men that they always freeze a

rayer meeting. And then they are often amazingly jealous
for their dignity, and cannot bear to have any body else lead
the meeting. And if any member that is spiritual takes the
lead of a prayer meeting, they will take him to task for it:
“Why, you are not an elder, and ought not to lead a prayer
meeting in presence of an elder.” And thus they stand in the
way, while the whole church is suffering under their blighting
influence.

A man who knows he is not in a spiritual frame of mind
has no business to conduct a prayer meeting ; he will kill it
There are two reasons: First, he will have no spiritual discern-
ment, and will not know what to do, or when to do it A per
son who is spiritual can see the movements of Providence,
and can feel the Spirit of God, and understand what he is
leading them to pray for, so as to time his subjects, and take
advantage of the state of feeling among Christians. He will
not overthrow all the feeling in a meeting by introducing other
things that are incongruous or ill-timed. He has spiritual
discernment to understand the leadings of the Spirit, and his
workings in those who pray, aud to follow on as the Spirit
leads. Suppose an individual leads who is not spiritual, and
there are two or three prayers, and the spirit of prayer rises,
but the leader has no spiritual discernment to see it, and he
makes some remarks on another point, or reads a piece out
of some beok, that is as far from the feeling of the meeting as
the north pole. It may be just as evident to others what they
are called to pray for, as if the Son of God himself had come
into the meeting and named the subject ; but the leader will
overthrow it all, because he is so stupid that he does not know
the indications of the meeting.


MEETINGS FOR PRAYER, 125


And then, if the leader is not spiritual, he will very likel

be dull and dry in his remarks sal in all his TEA He
will read a long hymn in a dreamy manner, and then read a
long passage of Scripture, in a tone so cold and wintry that
he will spread a wintry pall over the meeting, and it will be
dull as long as his cold heart is placed up in front of the
whole thing.
_ 3. A want of suitable talents in the leader. If he is wanting
in that kind of talents which are fitted to make a meeting use-
ful, he will injure the meeting. If he can say nothing, or if
his remarks are so out of the way as to produce levity or con-
tempt, or if they have nothing in them that will impress the
mind, or are not guided by good sense, or not appropriate, he
will injure the meeting. A man may be pious, but so weak
that his prayers do not edify, but rather disgust, the people
present. When this is so, he had better keep silence.

4. Sometimes the benefit of a prayer-meeting is defeated
by a bad spirit in the leader. For instance when there is a
revival, and a great opposition, if a leader gets up in a prayer
meeting and speaks of instances of opposition, and comments
upon them, and thus diverts the meeting away from the ob-
ject they come to pray for, he knows not what spirit he is of.
Its effect is always ruinous to a prayer meeting. Let a min
ister in a revival come out and preach against the opposition,
and he will infallibly destroy the revival, and turn the hearts
of Christians away from their proper object. Let the man
who is set to lead the church be careful to guard his own
spirit, lest he should mislead the church, and diffuse a wrong
temper. The same will be true, if any one who is called upon
to speak or pray, introduces in his remarks or prayers any-
thing controversial, impertinent, unreasonable, unscriptural,
ridiculous orirrelevant. Any of these things will quench the ten-
der breathings of the spirit of prayer, and destroy the meeting.

5. Persons coming laie to the meeting. This is a very great
hindrance to a prayer meeting. When people have begun to
pray, and their attention is fixed, and they have shut their eyes
and closed their ears, to keep out everything from their minds,
in the midst of a prayer somebody will come bolting in and
walk up through the room. Some will look up, and all have
their minds interrupted for the moment. Then they all get
fixed again, and another comes in, and soon. Why, I sup
pose the devil wout 1 not care how many Christians went to a

rayer-meeting, if they will only go after the meeting is begun.

ə would be glad to have ever so many go scattering along
so, and dodging in very piously after the meeting is begun.


126 MEETINGS FOR PEAYER.


6. When persons make cold prayers, and cold confessions
of sin, they are sure to quench the spirit of prayer. When
the influences of the Spirit are enjoyed, in the midst of the
warm expressions that are flowing forth, let an individual
come in who is cold, and pour his cold breath out, like the
damp of death, and it will make every Christian that has any
feeling want to get out of the meeting.

7. In some places it is common to begin a prayer meeting
by reading a long portion of Scripture. Then the deacon or
elder gives out a long hymn. Next, they sing it Then he
prays a long prayer, praying for the Jews and the fullness of
the Gentiles, and many other objects that have nothing to do
with the occasion of the meeting. After that perhaps he reads
a long extract from some book or magazine. Then they have
another long hymn and another long prayer, and then they
go home. I once heard ar elder say, they had kept up a
prayer meeting so many years, and yet there had been no re-
vival in the place. The truth was, that the officers of the
church had been accustomed to carry on the meetings in just
such a dignified way, and their dignity would not allow any-
thing to be altered. No wonder there was no revival Such
prayer meetings are enough to hinder a revival. And if ever so
many revivals should commence, the prayer meeting would
destroy them. There was a prayer meeting once in this city,
as I have been told, where there appeared to be some feeling,
and some one proposed that they should have two or three
prayers in succession, without rising from their knees. One
dignified man present opposed it, and said that they never
had done so, and he hoped there would be no innovations.
He did not approve of innovations. And that was the last
of the revival. Such persons have their prayer meetings
stereotyped, and they are determined not to turn out of their
track, whether they have the blessing or not. To allow any
such thing would be a new measure, and they never like new
measures.

8. A great deal of singing often injures a prayer meeting.
The agonizing spirit of prayer does not lead people to sing.
There is a time for everything ; a time to sing, and a time to
pray. But if I know what it is to traval in birth for souls,
Christians never feel less like singing, than when they have the
spirit of prayer for sinners. Singing is the natural expression
of feelings that are joyful and cheerful The spirit of prayer
is not a spirit of joy. Itisa spirit of travail, and agony of
soul, supplicating and pleading with God with strong cryings,
and groanings that cannot be uttered. This is more like amy


MEETINGS FOR PRAYER, 127


thing else than it is like singing. I have known states of


feeling, where you could not distress the people of God more
than to begin to sing. It would be so entirely different from
their feelings. Why, if you knew your house was on fire,
would you first stop and sing a hymn before you put it out?
How would it look here in New York, when a building was
on fire, and the firemen are all collected, for the foreman to
stop and sing a hymn? Itis just about as natural for the
people to sing when exercised with a spirit of prayer. When
ee feel like pulling men out of the fire, they do not feel

e singing. I never knew a singing revival amount to much.
Its tendency is to do away all deep feeling. It is true
that singing a hymn has sometimes produced a powerful
effect upon sinners who are convicted, but in general it is the
perfect contrast there is between their feelings and those of
the happy souls who sing that produces the effect. If the
hymn be of a joyful character it is not directly calculated to
benefit sinners, and is highly fitted to relieve the mental an-
guish of the Christian, so as to destroy that travail of soul
which is indispensable to his prevailing in prayer.

When singing is introduced in a prayer-meeting, the hymns
should be short, and so selected as to bring out something
solemn ; some striking words, such as the Judgment Hymn,
and others calculated to produce an effect on sinners; or
something that will produce a deep impression on the minds


_ of Christians ; but not that joyful kind of singing, that makes


every body feel comfortable, and turns off the mind from the
object of the prayer meeting.

I once heard a celebrated organist produce a remarkable
effect in a protracted meeting. The organ was a T ale
one, and the double bass pipes were like thunder. e hymn
was given out that has these lines :


See the storm of vengeance gathering
O’er the path you dare to tread ;

“Hear the awful thunder rolling,
Loud and louder o’er your head.”


When he came to these words, we first heard the distant roar
of thunder, then it grew nearer and louder, till at the word
“louder,” there was a crash that seemed almost to overpower
the whole congregation.

Such things in their proper place do good. But common
singing dissipates feeling. It should always be such as not to
take away feeling, but to deepen it.

Often a prayer meeting is injured by calling on the ycung


128 MEETINGS FOR PRAYER,


converts to sing joyful hymns. This is highly improper in 4
prayer Aae Ti areh for them to let feeling flow
away in joyful singing, while so many sinners around them,
and their own former companions, are going down to hell
A revival is often put down by the church and minister all
giving themselves up to singing with young converts. Thus
by stopping to rejoice, when they ought to feel more and more
deeply for sinners, they grieve away the Spirit of God, and
they soon find that their agony and travail of soul are all gone.

9. Introducing subjects of controversy into prayer will defeat
a prayer meeting. Nothing of a controversial nature should
be introduced into prayer, unless it is the object of the meet
ing to setile that thing. Otherwise, let Christians come together
in their prayer-meetings, on the broad ground of offering
united prayer for a common object. And let controversies be
settled somewhere else.

10. Great pains should be taken, both by the leader and
others, to watch narrowly the motions of the Spirit of God. Let
them not pray without the Spirit, but follow his leadings. Be
sure not to quench the Spirit for the sake of praying accord-
ing to the regular custom. Avoid everything calculated to
divert attention away from the object. All affectation of feel-
ing that is not real, should be particularly guarded against.
If there is an affectation of feeling, most commonly others see
and feel that it is affectation, not reality. At any rate, the
Spirit of God knows it, and will be grieved, and leave the
place. On the other hand, all resistance to the Spirit will
equally destroy the meeting. Not unfrequently it happens,
that there are some so cold that if any one should break out
in the spirit of prayer, they would call it fanaticism, and per
haps break out in opposition.

11. If individuals refuse to pray when they are called on it
injures a prayermeeting. There are some people, who al-
ways pretend they have no gifts Women sometimes refuse
to take their turn in prayer, and pretend they have not ability
to pray. Butifany one else should say so, they would be offend-
3d. Suppose they should know that any other person had made
such a remark as this, “Do not ask her to pray ; she cannot
pray ; she has not talents enough ;” would they like it? So
with a man who pretends he has no gifts, let any one else re-
port that he has not talents enough to make a decent prayer,
and see if he will like it, The pretence is not sincere ; it is all
a sham.

Some say they cannet in their families, they have no
gift. But a person could not offend them more than to say


ey,
—


MEETINGS FOR PRAYER 128


they cannot pray a decent prayer before their own families
They would say, “ Why, the man talks as if he thought no
body else had any gifts but himself.” People are not apt to
have such a low opinion of themselves. I have often seen the
curse of God follow such professors. They have no excuse.
God will take none. The man has got a tongue to talk to his
neighbors, and he can talk to God if he has any heart for it.
You will see their children unconverted, their son a curse,
their daughter—tongue cannot tell. God says he will pour
out his fury on the families that call not on his name. If I


_had time, I could mention a host of facts to show that God


MARKS those individuals with his disapprobation and curse
who refuse to pray when they ought. Until professors of
religion will repent of this sin and take up the cross (if they
choose to call praying a cross /) and do their duty, they need
not expect a blessing. :

12. Prayer meetings are often too long. They should al-
ways be dismissed while Christians have feeling, and not be
spun out until all feeling is exhausted, and the Spirit is gone.

13. Heartless confessions. People confess their sins and
do not forsake them. Every week they will make the same
confession over again. A long, cold, dull, stupid confession
this week, and then the next week another just like it, without
forsaking any sins. Why, they have no intention to forsake
their sins! It shows plainly that they do not mean to reform.
All their religion consists in these confessions. Instead of
getting a blessing from God by such confessions they will get
only a curse.

14. When Christians spend all the time in praying for them-
selves. They should have done this in their closets. When
they come to a prayer meeting, they should be prepared to
offer effectual intercessions for others. If Christians pray in
their closets as they ought, they will feel like praying for sin-
ners. If they pray exclusively in their closets for themselves,
they will not get the spirit of prayer. I have known men
shut themselves up for days to pray for themselves, and never
get any life, because their prayers are all selfish. But if they
will just forget themselves, and throw their hearts abroad, and
pray for others, it will wake up such a feeling, that they can
pour forth their hearts. And then they can go to work for
souls. I knew an individual in a revival, who shut himself
up seventeen days, and prayed as if he would have God come
to his terms, but it would not do, and then he went out to
work, and immediately he had the Spirit of God in his soul.
It is well for Christians to pray for themselves, and coniess

RE


130 MEETINGS FOR PRAYER.


their sins, and then throw their hearts abroad, till they feel
as they ought.

15. Prayer meetings are often defeated by the want of ap
propriate remarks. The things are not said which are calcu-
lated to lead them to pray. Perhaps the leader has not pre-
pared himself; or perhaps he has not the requisite talents,
to lead the church out in prayer, or he does not lead their
minds to dwell on the appropriate topics of prayer.

16. When individuals who are justly obnoxious for any
cause, are forward in speaking and praying. Such p rsons
are sometimes very much set upon taking a part. They say
it is their duty to get up and testify for God on all occasions.
They will say, they know they are not able to edify the church,
but nobody else can do their duty, and they wish to testify.
Perhaps the only place they ever did testify for God was in a
prayer meeting ; all their lives, out of the meeting, testify
against God. They had better keep still.

17. Where persons take a part who are so illiterate that it
is impossible persons of taste should not be disgusted. Per-
sons of intelligence cannot follow them, and their minds are
unavoidably diverted. Ido not mean that it is necessary a
person should have a liberal education in order to lead in
prayer. AU persons of common education, especially if they
are in the habit of praying, can lead in prayer, if they have
the spirit of prayer. But there are some persons who use such
absurd and illiterate expressions, as cannot but disgust every
intelligent mind. They cannot help being disgusted. The
feeling of disgust is an involuntary thing, and when a dis
gusting object is before the mind, the feeling is irresistible.
Piety will not keep a person from feeling it. The only wa
is to take away the object. If such persons mean to do fats
they had better remain silent. Some of them may feel griev-
ed at not being called to take a part. But it is better that
they should be kindly told the reason than to have the prayer
meeting regularly injured, and rendered ridiculous by their
performances.

18. A want of union in prayer. When one leads the others
do not follow, but are thinking of something else. Their
hearts do not unite, do not say, Amen. It is as bad as if one
should make a petition and another remonstrate against it.
One asks God to do a thing, and the others ask him not to do
it, or to do something else.

_ 19. Neglect of secret prayer. Christians who do not pra:
in secret, cannot unite with power in a prayer meeting, ad
cannot have the spirit of prayer.


/
—_—ee


MEETINGS FOR PRAYER. 181


REMARKS.


1. An illy conducted prayer meeting often does more hur
than good. In many churches, the general manner of con-
ducting prayer meetings is such that Christians have not the
least idea of the design or the power of such meetings. It
is such as tends to keep down rather than to promote pious
feeling and the spirit of prayer.

_ 2. A prayer meeting is an index to the state of religion in

achurch. If the church neglect the prayer meetings, or come
and have not the spirit of prayer, you know of course that
religion is low. Let me go into the prayer meeting, and I
can always see the state of religion there.

3. Every minister ought to know that if the prayer meet-
ings are neglected, all his labors are in vain. Unless he can
get Christians to attend the prayer meetings, all he can do
will not bring up the state of religion.

4. A great responsibility rests on him who leads a prayer
meeting. If the prayer meeting be not what it ought to be,
if it does not elevate the state of religion, he should go se
riously to work and see what is the matter, and get the spirit
of prayer, and prepare himself to make such remarks as are
calculated to do good and set things right. A leader has no
business to lead prayer meetings, if he is not prepared, both
in head and heart, to do this. I wish you, who lead the dis-
trict prayer meetings of this church, to notice this point.

5. Prayer meetings are the most difficult meetings to sus-
tain as they ought to be. They are so spiritual, that unless
the leader be peculiarly prepared, both in heart and mind,
they will dwindle. It is in vain for the leader to complain
that members of the church do not attend. In nine cases
out of ten, it is the leader’s fault, that they do not attend. If
he felt as he ought, they would find the meetings so interest-
ing, that they would attend of course. If he is so cold, and
dull, and without spirituality, as to freeze every thing, no
wonder people do not come to the meeting. Church officers
often complain and scold because people do not come to the
prayer meeting, when the truth is, they themselves are so
cold that they freeze every body to death that comes.

6. Prayer meetings are most important meetings for the
church. It is highly important for Christians to sustain the
prayer meetings :—
iy To promote union.

2) To increase brotherly love


132 MEETINGS FOR PRAYES.


3.) To cultivate Christian confidence.

4.) To promote their own growth in grace.

5.) To cherish and advance spirituality.

7. Prayer meetings should be so numerous in the church,
and be so arranged, as to exercise the gifts of every individ.
ual member of the church—male and female. Every one
should have the opportunity to pray, and to express the
feelings of his heart, if he has any. The sectional prayer
meetings of this church are designed to do this. And if
they are too large for this, let them be divided, so as to
bring the entire mass into the work, to exercise all gifts,
and diffuse union, confidence, and brotherly love through the
whole.

8. It is important that impenitent sinners should always at-
tend prayer meetings. If none come of their own accord, go
out and invite them. Christians ought to take great pains to
induce their impenitent friends and neighbors to come to
prayer meetings. They can pray better for impenitent sin-
ners when they have them right before their eyes. I have
known female prayer meetings exclude sinners from the meet-
ing. And the reason was, they were so proud they were
ashamed to pray before sinners. Whata spirit! Such pray-
ers will do no good. They insult God. You have not done
enough, by any means, when you have gone to the prayer
meeting yourself. You cannot pray, if you have invited no
sinner to go. If all the church have neglected their duty so,
and have gone to the prayer meeting, and taken no sinners
One with them, no subjects of prayer—what have they come
or

9. The great object of all the means of grace is to aim di-
rectly at the conversion of sinners. You should pray that
they may be converted there. Not pray that they may be
awakened and convicted, but pray that they may be conver-
ted on the spot. No one should either pray or make any re-
marks, as if he expected a single sinner would go away with-
out giving his heart to God. You should all make the im-
pression on his mind, that NOW he must submit. And if you
do this, while you are yet speaking God will hear. If
Christians make it manifest that they have really set their
hearts on the conversion of sinners, and are bent upon it, and
pray as they ought, there would rarely be a prayer meeting

eld without souls being converted, and sometimes every sin-
ner in the room. That is the very time, if ever, that sinners
should be converted in answer to those prayers. I do not
doubt but that you may have sinners cuuverted in every sec


ee a


MEETINGS FOR PRAYER 386


tional prayer meeting, if you do your duty. Take them there,
_ take your families, your friends, or your neighbors there with
that design, give them the proper instruction, if they need
instruction, and pray for them as you ought, and you will
save their souls. Rely upon it, if you do your duty, in a
right manner, God will not keep back his blessing, and the
work will be done.


LECTURE IX.


MEANS TO BE USED WITH SINNEBS.


fuxr.—Ye are my witnesses, saith the Lord, and my servant whom I have
thosen.—Isarau xliii: 10.


In the text it is affirmed of the children of God, that they
are his witnesses. In several preceding lectures I have been
dwelling on the subject of Prayer, or that department of
means for the promotion of a revival, which is intended to
move God to pour out his Spirit. I am now to commence
the other department :


MEANS TO BE USED FOR THE OCONVIOTION AND CONVERSION OF
SINNERS.


It is true, in general, that persons are affected by the sub-
ject of religion, in proportion to their conviction of its truth.

attention to religion is the great reason why so little is felt
concerning it. No bemg can look at the great truths of relig-
ion, as truths, and not feel deeply concerning them. The devil
cannot. He believes and trembles. Angels in heaven feel in
view of these things. God feels. An intellectual conviction
of truth is always accompanied with feeling of some kind.

One grand design of God in leaving Christians in the world
after their conversion, is that they may be witnesses for God.
It is that they may call the attention of the thoughtless mul-
titude to the subject, and make them see the difference in the
character and destiny of those who believe and those who re-
ject the Gospel. This inattention is the grand difficulty in the
way of promoting religion. And what the Spirit of God does
is to awaken the attention of men to the subject of their sin
and the plan of salvation. Miracles have sometimes been
employed to arrest the attention of sinners. And in this way,
miracles may become instrumental in conversion, although
conversion is not itself a miracle, nor do miracles themselves
ever convert any body. They may be the means of awaken-
ing. Miracles are not always effectual even in that. And if
continued or made common, they would soon lose their power.


What is wanted in the world is something that can be a sort
(184)


MEANS TO BE USED WITH SINNERS 138


of omnipresent miracle, able not only to arrest attention but
to fix it, and keep the mind in warm contact with the truth,
till it yields.

Hence we see why God has scattered his children every-
where, in families and among the nations. He never would
suffer them to be alltogether in one place, however agreeable
it might be to their feelings. He wishes them scattered.
When the church at Jerusalem herded together, neglecting to
go forth as Christ had commanded, to spread the Gospel all
over the world, God let loose a persecution upon them and
scattered them abroad, and then “they went everywhere
preaching the Gospel.” In examining the text, I propose to
inquire.

a To what particular points Christians are to testify for

o


II. The manner in which they are to testify.

A p To what points are the children of God required to tes-
ify

Generally, they are to testify to the truth of the Bible. They
are competent witnesses to this, for they have experience of
its truth. The experimental Christian has no more need of
external evidence to prove the truth of the Bible to his mind,
than he has to prove his own existence. The whole plan
of salvation is so fully spread out and settled in his convic-
tion, that to undertake to reason him out of his belief in the
Bible would be a thing as impracticable as to reason him out
of the belief in his own existence. Men have tried to awaken
a doubt of the existence of the material world. But they can-
not succeed. No man can doubt the existence of a material
world. To doubt it, is against his own consciousness. You
may use arguments that he cannot answer, and may puzzle
and perplex him, and shut up his mouth ; he may be no logi-
cian or philosopher, and unable to detect your fallacies. But
what he knows he knows.

So it is in religion. The Christian is conscious that the
Bible is true. The veriest child in religion knows by his ex-
perience the truth of the Bible. He may hear objections from
infidels, that he never thought of, and that he cannot answer,
and he may be confounded, but he cannot be driven from his
ground. He will say, “I cannot answer you, but I know the
Bible is true.”

As if a man should look in a mirror, and say, “ That’s my
face.” How do you know it is your face? “ Why, by its
looks.” So when a Christian sees himself drawn and pictured
forth in the Bible, he sees the likeness to be so exact, that he


136 MEANS TO BE USED WITH SINNEBS.
knows it is true. But more particularly, Christians are te


1. To the immortality of the soul. This is clearly revealed
in the Bible.

2. The vanity and unsatisfying nature of all earthly good

3. The satisfying nature and glorious sufficiency of religion.

4. The guilt and danger of sinners. On this point they can
speak from experience as well as the word of God. They have
seen their own sins, and they understand more of the nature
of sin, and the guilt and danger of sinners.

5. The reality of hell, as a place of eternal punishment for
the wicked.

6. The love of Christ for sinners.

7. The necessity of a holy life, if we think of ever getting
to heaven.

8. The necessity of self-denial, and living above the world.

9. The necessity of meekness, heavenly-mindedness, humil
ity, and integrity.

10. The necessity of an entire renovation of character and
life, for all who would enter heaven. These are the subjects
on which they are to be witnesses for God. And they are
bound to testify in such a way as to constrain men to believe
the truth.

IL How are they to testify ?

By precept and example, on every proper occasion, by their
lips, but mainly by their lives. Christians have no right to be
silent with their lips ; they should rebuke, exhort, and entreat
with all long-suffering and doctrine. But their main influence
as witnesses is by their example.

They are required to be witnesses in this way, because ex-
ample teaches with so much greater force than precept. This
is universally known. Actions speak louder than words. But
where both precept and example are brought to bear, it brings
the greatest amount of influence to bear upon the mind. As
to the manner in which they are to testify ; the way in which
they should bear witness to the truth of the points specified ;
in general—they should live in their daily walk and conversa-
tion, as if they believed the Bible.

1. Asif they believed the soul to be immortal, and as if they
believed that death was not the termination of their existence,
but the entrance into an unchanging state. They ought to live
so as to make this impression full upon all around them. Itis
easy to see that precept without example on this point will do
no good. All the arguments in the world will not convince
mankind that you really believe this, unless you live as if you


eo


MEANS TO BE USED WITH SINNERS. 137


believed it. Your reasoning may be unanswerable, but if you
do not live accordingly, your practice will defeat your argu
ments. They will say you are an ingenious sophist, or an
acute reasoner, and perhaps admit that they cannot answer
you ; but then they will say, it is evident that your reasoning
is all false, and that you know it is false, because your life con-
tradicts your theory. Or that, if it is true, you do not believe
it, at any rate. And so all the influence of your testimony
goes to the other side.

2. The vanity and unsatisfying nature of the things of this
world. You are to testify this by your life. The failure in
this is the great stumbling block in the way of mankind.
Here the testimony of God’s children is needed more than any-
where else. Men are so struck with the objects of sense, and
so constantly occupied with them, that they are very apt to shut
out eternity from their minds. A small object, that is held
close to the eye, may shut out the distant ocean. So the things
of the world, that are near, magnify so in their minds, that
they overlook every thing else. One important design in keep-
ing Christians in the world is to teach people on this point,
practically, not to labor for the meat that perisheth. But sup-
pose professors of religion teach the vanity of earthly things
by precept, and contradict it in practice. Suppose the women
are just as fond of dress, and just as particular in observing
all the fashions, and the men as eager to have fine houses and
equipage, as the people of the world. Who does not see that
it would be quite ridiculous for them to testify with their lips,
that this world is all vanity, and its joys uusatisfying and
empty? People feel this absurdity, and it is this that shuts
up the lips of Christians. They are ashamed to speak to their
neighbors, while they cumber themselves with these gewgaws,
because their daily conduct testifies to every body the very
reverse. How it would look for some of the church members
in this city, male or female, to go about among the common
people, and talk to them about the vanity of the world! Who
would believe what they say ? Pa

3. The satisfying nature of religion. Christians are bound
to show by their conduct, that they are actually satisfied with
the enjoyments of religion, without the pomps and vanities of
the world ; that the joys of religion and communion with God
keep them above the world. They are to manifest that this
world is not their home. Their profession is, that heaven is a
reality, and that they expect to dwell there forever. But sup-
pose they contradict this by their conduct, and live in such a
way as to prove that they cannot be happy unless they have a


138 MEANS TO BE USED WITH SINNERS.


full share of the fashion and show of the world, and that ms
for going to heaven, they had much rather remain on eartn,
than to die and go there! What do the world think, when
they see a professor of religion just as much afraid to die as
an infidel? Such Christians perjure themselves—they swear
to a lie, for they testify that there is nothing in religion for
which a person can afford to live above the world.

4. The guilt and danger of sinners. Christians are bound
to warn sinners of their awful condition, and exhort them to
flee from the wrath to come, and lay hold on everlasting life.
But who does not know that the manner of doing thisis every-
thing? Sinners are often struck under conviction by the
very manner of doing a thing. There was a man once very
much opposed to a certain preacher. On being asked to
specify some reason, he replied, “I can’t bear to hear him,
for he says the word HELL in such a way that it rings in
my ears a long time afterwards.” He was displeased with
the very thing that constituted the power of speaking that
one word. The manner may be such as to convey an idea
directly opposite to the meaning of the words. A man may
tell you that your house is on fire in such a way as to make
directly the opposite impression, and you will take for granted
that it is not your house that is on fire. The watchman might
sing out FIRE, FIRE, in such a way that every body would think
he was either asleep or drunk. A certain manner is so usu-
ally connected with the announcement of certain things that
they cannot be expressed without that manner. The words
themselves never alone convey the meaning, because the idea
can only be fully expressed by a particular manner of speak
ing. Go to a sinner, and talk with him about his guilt and
danger ; and if in your manner you make an impression that
does not correspond, you in effect bear testimouy the other
way, and tell him he is in no danger of hell. If the sinner
beheves at all that he is in danger of hell, it is wholly on
other grounds than your saying so. If you live in such a
way as to show that you do not feel compassion for sinners
around you; if you show no tenderness, by your eyes, your
features, your voice ; if your manner is not solemn and earn-
est, how can they believe you are sincere ?

Woman, suppose you tell your unconverted husband, in an
easy, laughing way, “My dear, I believe you are going to
hell ;” will he believe you? If your life is gay and trifling,
you show that either you do not believe there is a hell, or that
you wish to have him go there, and are trying to keep off
every serious impression from his mind. Have you children


ee a a T


MEANS TO BE USED WITH SINNEES, 136


that are unconverted? Suppose you never say any thing to
them about religion, or when aed talk to thom it. ince:
a cold, hard, dry way as shows you have no feeling ; do you
suppose they believe you? They don’t see the same coldness
in you in regard to other things. They are in the habit of
seeing all the mother in your eye, and in the tones of your
voice, your emphasis, and the like, and feeling the warmth of
a mother’s heart as it flows out from your lips on all that
concerns them. If, then, when you talk to them on the sub-
ject of religion, you are cold and trifling, can they suppose
you believe it? If your deportment holds up before your
child this careless, heartless, prayerless spirit, and then you
talk to him about the importance of religion, the child will go
away and laugh, to think you should try to persuade him
there is a hell.
5. The love of Christ. You are to bear witness to the re
ality of the love of Christ, by the regard you show for his
recepts, his honor, his kingdom. You should act as if you
lieved that he died for the the sins of the whole world, and
as if you blamed sinners for rejecting his great salvation
This is the only legitimate way in which you can impress sin-
ners with the love of Christ. Christians, instead of this,
often live so as to make the impression on sinners that
Christ is so compassionate that they have very little to fear
from him. I have been amazed to see how a certain class of
professors want ministers to be always preaching about the
love of Christ. If a minister preaches up duty, and urges
Christians to be holy, and to labor for Christ, they call it all
legal preaching. They say they want to hear the Gospel.
Well, suppose you present the love of Christ. How will they
bear testimony in their lives? How will they show that they
believe it? Why, by conformity to the world, they will testify
point blank, that they do not believe a word of it, and that they
care nothing at all for the love of Christ, only to have it for
a cloak, that they can talk about it, and so cover up their
sins. They have no sympathy with his compassion, and no
belief in it as a reality, and no concern for the feelings of
of Christ, which fill his mind when he sees the condition of
sinners.

6. The necessity of holiness in order to enter heaven. It
will not do to depend on talking about this. They must live
holy, and thus testify that men need not expect to be saved,
unless they are holy. The idea has so long prevailed that we
cannot be perfect here, that many professors do not so much as
seriously aim at a sinless life. They cannot honestly say that


140 MEANS TO BE USED WITH SINNEEBS.


they ever so much as really meant to live without sin.

drift along before the tide, in a loose, sinful, unhappy and
abominable manner, at which, doubtless, the devil laughs,
because it is, of all others, the surest way to hell

7. The necessity of self-denial, humility, and heayenly-mind-
edness. Christians ought to show by their own example what
the religion is which is expected of men. That is the most
powerful preaching, after all, and the most likely to have in-
fluence on the impenitent, by showing them the great differ-
ence between them and Christians. Many people are trying
to make men Christians by a different course, by copying as
near as possible their present manner of life, and conforming
to them as much as will possibly do. They seem to think they
can make men fall in with religion best by bringing religion
down to their standard. As if the nearer you bring religion
to the world, the more likely the world would be to embrace
it. Now all this is as wide as the poles from the true phil-
osophy of making Christians. But it is always the policy of
carnal professors. And they think they are displaying won-
derful sagacity and prudence by taking so much pains not to
scare people at the mighty strictness and holiness of the Gos-
pel. They argue that if you exhibit religion to mankind as
requiring such a great change in their manner of life, such
innovations upon their habits, such a separation from their
old associates, why, you will drive them all away. This seems
asian at first sight. But it is not true. Let professors
ive in this lax and easy way, and sinners say, “ Why, I do
not see but I am about right, or at least so near right, that it
is impossible God should send me to hell for the difference
between me and these professors. It is true, they do a little
more than I do, they go the communion table, and pray in
their families, and a few such like little things, but they can
not make any such great difference as heaven and hell.”
No, the true way is, to exhibit religion and the world in strong
contrast, or you never can make sinners feel the necessity of
a change. Until the necessity of this fundamental change is
embodied and held forth in a strong light by example, how
can you make men believe they are going to be sent to hell
if they are not wholly transformed in heart and life ?

This is not only true in philosophy, but it has been proved
by the history of the world. Look at the missions of the
Jesuits in Japan, by Francis Xavier and his associates. How
they lived, what a contrast they showed between their reli
gion and the heathen, and what results followed! Now I
was reading a letter from one of our missionaries in the East.


MEANS TO BE USED WITH SINNEES. 141


who writes, I believe, to this effect, that a missionary must be
able to rank with the English nobility, and so recommend his
religion to the respect of the natives. He must get away up
above them, so as to show a superiority, and thus impress
them with respect! Is this philosophy? Is this the way to
convert the world. You can no more convert the world in
this way than by blowing a ram’s horn. It has no tendency
that way. What did the Jesuits do? They went about
among the people in the daily practice of self-denial before
their eyes, teaching, and preaching, and praying, and labor-
ing, unwearied and unawed, mingling with every caste and
grade, bringing down their instructions to the capacity of
every individual And in that way the mission carried idola-
try before it like a wave of the sea, and all at once their re-
ligion spread over the vast empire of Japan. And if they
had not meddled with politics and brought themselves in
needless collision with the government, no doubt they would
have held their ground till this day. I am not saying any-
thing in regard to the religion they taught, for I am not sure
how much truth they preached with it. I speak only of their
following the true policy of missions, by showing, by their
lives, the religion they taught in wide contrast with a worldly
spirit and the fooleries of idolatry. This one feature of their
policy so commended itself to the consciences of the people
that it was irresistible. If Christians contradict this one
point, and attempt to accommodate their religion to the world-
liness of men, they render the salvation of the world impos-
sible. How can you make people believe that self-denial and
Lethon from the world are necessary, unless you practise
them ?

8. Meekness, humility, and heavenly-mindedness. The
people of God should always show a temper like the Son of
God, who when he was reviled, reviled not again. If a pro
fessor of religion is irritable, and ready to resent an injury,
and fly in a passion, and take the same measures as the world
do to get redress, by going to law and the like, how is he to
make people believe there is any reality in a change of heart?
They cannot recommend religion while they have such a
spirit. If you are in the habit of resenting injurious conduct ;
if you do not bear it meekly, and put the best construction
that can be on it, you contradict the Gospel Some people
always show a bad spirit, ever ready to put the worst construc-
tion on what is done, and take fire at any little thing. This
shows a great want of that charity which “hopeth all things,
believeth all things, endureth all things.” But if a man ab


143 MEANS TO BE USED WITH SINNER.


ways shows meekness under injuries, it will confound gain
saying. Nothing makes so solemn an impression upon sim
ners, and bears down with such a tremendous weight on their
consciences, as to see a Christian, Christ-like bearing affronts
and injuries with the meekness of a lamb. It cuts like a
two-edged sword.

I will mention a case to show this. A young man abused
a minister to his face, and reviled him in an unprecedented
manner. The minister possessed his soul in patience, and
spoke mildly in reply, telling him the truth pointedly, but
yet in a very kind manner. This only made him the more
angry, and at length he went away in a rage, declaring that
he was not going to stay and bear this vituperation. As if it
was the minister, instead of himself, that had been scolding.
The sinner went away, but with the arrows of the Almighty
in his heart, and in less than half an hour he followed the
minister to his lodgings in intolerable agony, wept, and
begged forgiveness, and broke down before God, and yielded
up his heart to Christ. This calm and mild manner was
more overwhelming to him than a thousand arguments.
Now if that minister had been thrown off his guard, and an-
swered harshly, no doubt he would have ruined the soul of
that young man. How many of you have defeated every
future effort you may make with your impenitent friends or
neighbors, in some such way as this. On some occasion you
have showed yourself so irascible, that you have sealed up
your own lips, and laid a stumbling block over which that
sinner will stumble into hell. If you have done it in any in-
stance, do not sleep till you have done all you can to retrieve
the mischief ; till you have confessed the sin and done every
thing to counteract it as far as possible.

9. The necessity of entire honesty in a Christian. Oh what
a field opens here for remark! But I cannot go over it fully
now. It extends to all the departments of ie Christiana
need to show the strictest regard to integrity in every depart-
ment of business, and in all their intercourse with their fel-
low-men. If every Christian would pay a scrupulous regard
to honesty, and always be conscientious to do exactly right, it
would make a powerful impression on the minds of people of
the reality of religious principle.

A lady was once buying some eggs in a store, and the clerk
made a miscount and gave her one more than the number.
She saw it at the time, but said nothing, and after she got
home it troubled her. She felt that she had acted wrong,
soon hurried back to the young man and confessed it and


ee ee ee ee ee oe ee ee


MEANS TO BE USED WITH SINNERB. 143


paid the difference. The impression of her conscientious in-
tegrity went to his heart like a sword. It was a great sin in
her to conceal the miscount, because the temptation was
so small ; for if she would cheat him out of an egg, it showed
that she would cheat him out of his whole store, if she could
do it and not be found out. But her prompt and humble con-
fession showed an honest conscience.

Iam happy to say, there are some men who deal on this
gue de of integrity. And the wicked hate them for it.

ey rail against them, and vociferate in bar-rooms, that they
never will buy goods of such and such individuals, that such
a hypocrite shall never touch a dollar of their money, and all
that, and then they will go right away and buy of them, be
cause they know they shall be honestly dealt with. This isa
testimony to the truth of religion, that is heard from Georgia
to Maine. Suppose all Christians did so, what would be the
consequence? Christians would run away with the business
of the city. The Christians would soon do the business of
the world. The great argument which some Christians urge,
that if they do not do business upon the common principle,
of stating one price and taking another, they cannot com-
pete with men of the world, is all false—false in philosophy
and false in history. Only make it your invariable rule to
do right, and do business upon principle, and you control the
market. The ungodly will be obliged to conform to your
standard. It is perfectly in the power of the church to regu
late the commerce of the world, if they only themselves main-
tain perfect integrity.

And if Christians will do the same in politics, they will
sway the destinies of nations, without involving themselves at
all in the base and corrupting strife of parties. Only let
Christians generally determine to vote for no man for any
office, that is not an honest man and a man of pure morals,
and let it be known that Christians are united in this, what
ever may be their difference in political sentiments, and no
man would be put up who is not such a character. In three
years it would be talked about in taverns and published ix
newspapers, when any man is set up as a candidate for office,
“What a good man he is, how moral, how pious!” and the
like. And any political party would no more set up a known
Sabbath-breaker, or a gambler, or a profane swearer, or a
whoremonger, or a rum-seller, as their candidate for office,
than they would set up the devil himself for president. The
carnal policy of many professors, who undertake to correct
politics * such means as wicked men employ, and who are


144 MEANS TO BE USED WITH SINNERS


determined to vote with a party, let the candidate be ever 90
rofligate, is all wrong—wrong in principle, contrary to phi-
oly and common sense, and ruinous to the best interests
of mankind. The dishonesty of the church is cursing the
world. Iam not going to preach a political sermon, I assure
you. But I want to show you, that if you mean to impress
men favorably to your religion by your lives, you must be
honest, strictly honest, m business, politics, and every
thing you do. What do you suppose those ungodly politi-
cians, who know themselves to be playing a dishonest game in
carrying an election, think of your religion when they see you
uniting with them? They know you are a hypocrite!


REMARKS,


1. Itis unreasonable for professors of religion to wonder
at the thoughtlessness of sinners.—Every thing considered,
the carelessness of sinners is not wonderful. We are affected
by testimony, and only by that testimony which is received
by our minds. Sinners are so taken up with business, plea-
sure, and the things of the world, that they will not examine
the Bible to find out what religion is. Their feelings are ex-
cited only on worldly subjects, because these only are brought
into warm contact with their minds. The things of the
world make therefore a strong impression. But there is so
little to make an impression on their minds in respect to
eternity, and to bring religion home to them, that they do
not feel on the subject, If they examined the subject they
would feel But they do not examine it, nor think upon it,
nor care for it. And they never will, unless God’s witnesses
rise up and testify. But inasmuch as the great body of
Christians in fact live so as to testify on the other side by their
conduct, how can we expect that sinners will feel right on the
subject ? Nearly all the testimony and all the influence that
comes to their minds tends to make them feel the other way.
God has left his cause here before the human race, and left
his witnesses to testify in his behalf, and behold, they turn
round and testify the other way! Is it any wonder that sin-
ners are careless ?

2. We see why it is that preaching does so little good ;
and how it is that so many sinners get gospel-hardened.
Sinners that live under the Gospel are often supposed to be
gospel-hardened ; but only let the church wake up, and
act consistently, and they will feel If the church were to
live only one week as if they believed the Bible, sinners


MEANS TO BE USED WITH SINNEBS. 145


would melt down before them. Suppose I were a lawyer,
and should go into court and spread out my client’s case, the
issue is joined, and I make my statements, and tell what I
expect to prove, and then call in my witnesses. The first
witness takes his oath, and then rises up and contradicts me
to my face. What good will all my pleading do? I might
address the jury a month, and be as eloquent as Cicero, but
so long as my witnesses contradicted me, all my pleading
would do no good. Just so it is with a minister who is
preaching in the midst of a cold, stupid, and God-dishonoring
church. In vain does he hold up to view the great truths of
religion, when every member of the church is ready to swear
he lies. Why, in such a church, their very manner of going
out of the aisles contradicts the sermon. They press out as
cheerful and as easy, bowing to one and another, and whis-
pering together, as if nothing was the matter. Let the min-
ister warn every man daily with tears, it will produce no
effect. If the devil should come in and see the state of
things, he would think he could not better the business for
his interest.

Yet there are ministers who will go on in this way for
yeurs, preaching over the heads of such a people, that by
their lives contradict every word they say, and they think it
their duty to do so. Duty! To preach to a church that are
undoing all his wors, and contradicting all his testimony,
and that will not alter! No. Let him shake off the dust
from his feet for a testimony, and go to the heathen, or to
the new settlements. The man is wasting his energies, and
wearing out his life, and just rocking the cradle for a sleepy
church, all testifying to sinners, there is no danger. Their
whole lives are a practical testimony that the Bible is not
true. Shall ministers continue to wear themselves out so?
Probably not less than ninety-nine-hundredths of the
preaching in this country is lost, because it is contradicted

y the church. Not one truth in a hundred that is preached
takes effect, because the lives of professors testify that it is
not so.

3. It is evident that the standard of Christian living must
be raised, or the world will never be converted. If we had as
many church members now as there are families, and scat-
tered all over the world, and a minister to every five hundred
souls, and every child in a Sabbath-school, and every young
person in a Bible-class, you would have all the machinery you
want, but if the church contradict the truth by their lives, it
never would produce a revival

7


146 MEANS TO BE USED WITH SINNERS.


They never will have a revival in any place while the
whole church in effect testify agains‘ the minister. Often it
is the case that where there is the most preaching, there is
the least religion, because the church contradict the preach-
ing. I never knew means fail of a revival where Christians
lived consistently. One of the first things is to raise the
standard of religion, so as to embody and hang out in the
sight of all men, the truth of the Gospel. Unless ministers
can get the church to wake up and act as if religion was true,
and back their testimony by their lives, in vain will they at-
tempt to promote a revival.

Many churches are depending on their minister to do
everything. When he preaches, they will say, “ What a
great sermon that was. He’s an excellent minister. Such
preaching must do good. We shall have a revival soon, I
do not doubt.” And all the while they are contradicting
the preaching by their lives. I tell you, if they are depend-
ing on preaching alone to carry on the work, they must fail.
If Jesus Christ were to come and preach, and the church con-
tradict it, he would fail. It has been tried once. Let an
apostle rise from the dead, or an angel come down from
heaven and preach, without the church to witness for God,
and it would have no effect. The novelty might produce a
certain kind of effect for a time, but as soon as the novelty
was gone, the preaching would have no saving effect, while
contradicted by the witnesses.

4. Every Christian makes an impression by his conduct,
and witnesses either for one side or the other. His looks,
dress, whole demeanor, make a constant impression on one
side or the other. He cannot help testifying for or against
religion. He is either gathering with Christ, or scattering
abroad. Every step you take, you tread on chords that will
vibrate to all eternity. Every time you move, you touch keys
whose sound will re-echo over all the hills and dales in heav-
en, and through all the dark caverns and vaults of hell. Every
moment of your lives, you are exerting a tremendous in-
fluence, that will tell on the immortal interests of souls all
around you. Are you asleep, while all your conduct is exert-
ing such an influence ?

Are you going to walk in the street? Take care how you
dress. What is that on your head? What does that gaudy
ribbon, and those ornaments upon your dress, say to eve
one that meets you? It makes the impression that you Sink
to be thought pretty. Take care! You might just as well
write on your clothes, “NO TRUTH IN RELIGION.” It


MEANS TO BE USED WITH SINNERS. 147


“GIVE ME DRESS, GIVE ME FASHION, GIVE
ME FLATTERY, ANDI AM HAPPY.” The world under-
stand this testimony as you walk the streets. You are “ liv-
ing epistles, known and read of all men.” If you show pride,
levity, bad temper, and the like, it is like tearing open the
wounds of the Saviour. How Christ might weep to see pro-
fessors of religion going about hanging up his cause to con-
tempt at the corners of streets. Only “let the women adorn
themselves in modest apparel, with shamefacedness and sobri-
ety, not with broidered hair, or gold, or pearls, or costly ar-
ray, but (which becometh women professing godliness) with
good works ;” only let them act consistently, and their con-
duct will tell on the world, heaven will rejoice and hell groan
at their influence. But oh, let them display vanity, try to be
pretty, bow down to the goddess of fashion, fill their ears
with ornaments, and their fingers with rings. Let them put
feathers in their hats, and clasps upon their arms, lace them-
selves up till they can hardly breathe. Let them put on their
“round tires and walk mincing as they go,” and their influ-
ence is reversed. Heaven puts on the robes of mourning, and
hell may hold a jubilee.

5. It is easy to see why revivals do not prevail in a great
city. How can they? Just look at God’s witnesses, and see
what they are testifying to. They seem to be agreed togeth-
er to tempt the Spirit of the Lord, and lie to the Holy Ghost.
They make their vows to God, to consecrate themselves
wholly to him, and then go bowing down at the shrine of
fashion, and then wonder there are no revivals. It would be
more than a miracle to have a revival under such circumstan-
ces. How can a revival prevail in this church? Do yousup-
pose I have such a vain imagination of my own ability, as to,
think I can promote a revival by preaching over your heads,
while you live on as some of you do? Do you not know
that so far as your influence goes, many of you are right in
the way of arevival? Your spirit and deportment produce
an influence on the world against religion. How shall the
world believe religion, when the witnesses are not agreed
among themselves? You contradict yourselves, you con-
tradict one another, and you contradict your minister, and
the sum of the whole testimony is, there is no need of being

ious.
F Do you believe the things I have been preaching are true,
or are they the ravings of a disturbed mind? If they are
true, do you recognize the fact that they have reference to
you? You say, perhaps, “I wish some of the rich churches


{48 MEANS TO BE USED WITH SINNERS.


could hear it!” Why, I am not preaching to them, I am
preaching to you. My responsibility is to you, and my fruits
must come from you. Now are you contradicting it? What
is the testimony on the leaf of the record that is now sealed
for the judgment concerning this day? Have you manifested
a sympathy with the Son of God, when his heart is bleeding
in view of the desolations of Zion? Have your children,
clerks, servants, seen it to be so? Have they seen a solem-
nity on your countenance, and tears in your eyes, in view of
perishing souls ?

Frvatty.—I must close by remarking, that God and all
moral beings have great reason to complain of this false testi-
mony. There is ground to complain that God’s witnesses
turn and testify point-blank against him. They declare by
their conduct that there is no truth in the Gospel. Heaven
might weep and hell rejoice to see this. Oh, how guilty! Here
you are, going to the judgment, red all over with blood.
Sinners are to meet you there, those who have seen how you
live, many of them already dead, and many others you will
never see again. What an influence you have exerted! Per-
haps hundreds of souls will meet you in the judgment, and
curse you (if they are allowed to speak) for leading them to
hell, by practically denying the truth of the Gospel. What
will become of this city, and ef the world, when the church
is united in practically testifying that God is a liar? They
testify by their lives, that if they make a profession and live
a moral life, that is religion enough. Oh, what a doctrine cf
devils is that! Enough to ruin the whole race


LECTURE X


TO WIN SOULS REQUIRES WISDOM.


Text -He that winneth souls is wise.—PROVERBS. xi. $0.


Tar most common definition of wisdom is, that it is the
choice of the best end and the selection of the most appropriate
means for the accomplishment of that end—the best adapta-
tion of means to secure a desired end. “He that winneth
souls,” God says, “is wise.” The object of this evening’s
lecture is to direct Christians in the use of means for accom-
plishing their infinitely desirable end, the salvation of souls.
To-night I shall confine my attention to the private efforts of
individuals for the conversion and salvation of men. On an-
other occasion, perhaps I shall use the same text in speaking
of what is wise in the public preaching of the Gospel, and
the labors of ministers. In giving some directions to aid pri-
vate Christians in this work, I propose,

L To show Christians how they should deal with careless
sinners.

IL How they should deal with awakened sinners.

IIL How they should deal with convicted sinners.

I. The manner of dealing with careless sinners.

1. In regard to the time. It is important that you should
select a proper time to try to make a serious impression on the
mind of a careless sinner. Much depends on timing your
efforts right. For if you fail of selecting the most proper
time, very probably you will be defeated. True, you may say,
it is your duty at all times to warn sinners, and try to awaken
them to think of their souls. And so it is; yet if you do not
pay due regard to the time and opportunity, your hope of
success may be very doubtful.

(1.) It is desirable, if possible, to address a person that is
careless, when he is disengaged from other employments. In pro-
portion as his attention is taken up with something else, it
will be difficult to awaken him to religion. People who are
careless and indifferent to religion are often offended, rather
than benefited, by being called off from important and lawful
business. For instance, a minister perhaps goes to visit the
family of a merchant, or mechanic, or wane and finds the


150 TO WIN SOULS REQUIRES WISDOM.


man aosorbed in his business ; perhaps he calls him off from
nis work when it is urgent, and the man is uneasy and irri
table, and feels as if it was an intrusion. In such a case,
there is little room to expect any good. Notwithstanding it
is true that religion is infinitely more important than all his
worldly business, and he ought to postpone everything to the
salvation of his soul, yet he does not feel it, for if he did he
would no longer be a careless sinner, and therefore he regards
it as unjustifiable, and gets offended. You must take him as

ou find him, a careless, impenitent sinner, and deal with
hin accordingly. He is absorbed in other things, and very
apt to be offended if you take such a time to interfere and
call his attention to religion.

(2.) It is important to take a person, if possible, at a time
when he is not strongly excited with any other subject. If that
is the case, he is in an unfit frame to be addressed on the sub-
ject of religion. In proportion to the strength of that excite
ment, would be the probability that you would do no good.
You may possibly reach him ; persons have had their minds
arrested and turned to religion in the midst of a powerful ex-
citement on other subjects. But it is not likely.

(3.) Be sure that the person is perfectly sober. It used to
be more common than it is now for people to drink spirits
every day, and become more or less intoxicated. Precisely in
proportion as they are so, they are rendered unfit to be ap-
proached on the subject of religion. If they have been drink-
ing beer, or cider, or wine, so that you can smell their breath,
you may know there is but little chance of producing any last
ing effect on them. I have had professors of religion bring
persons to me, pretending they were under conviction ; for
you know that people in liquor are often very fond of talking
upon religion ; but as soon as I came near them, so as to
smell their breath, I have asked, Why do you bring this
drunken man to me? Why, they say, he is not drunk, he has
only drank a little Well, that little has made him a little
drunk. He ts drunk if you can smell his breath. The cases
are exceedingly rare where a person has been truly convicted,
who had any intoxicating liquor in him.

(4.) If possible, where you wish to converse with a man on
the subject of salvation, take him when he is in a good temper.
If you find him out of humor, very probably he will get
and abuse you. Better let him alone for that time, or yous
be likely to quench the Spirit. It is possible you may be able
to talk in such a way as to cool his temper, but it is not likely.
The truth is, men hate God, and though their hatred may be


.
i
,
;


|


TO WIN SOULS REQUIRES WISDOM. 161


dormant, it is easily excited, and if you bring God fully before
their minds when they are already excited with anger, it will
be so much the easier to arouse their enmity to open violence

(5.) If possible, always take an opportunity to converse
with careless sinners when they are alone. Most men are too
proud to be conversed with freely respecting themselves in the
presence of others, even their own family. A man in such
circumstances will brace up all his powers to defend himself,
while if he was alone he would melt down under the truth.
He will resist the truth, or try to laugh it off, for fear that if
he should manifest any feeling somebody will go and report
that he is serious.

In visiting families, instead of calling the family together
at the same time to be talked to, the better way is to see them
all, one at a time. There was a case of this kind. Several
young ladies, of a proud, gay, and fashionable character, lived
together in a fashionable family. Two men were strongly de
sirous to get the subject of religion before them, but were at a
loss how to accomplish it, for fear they would all combine,
and counteract or resist every serious impression. At length
they took this course. They called and sent up their card to
one of the young ladies by name. She came down and they
conversed with her on the subject of her salvation, and as she
was alone, she not only treated them politely, but seemed to
receive the truth with seriousness. A day or two after, they
called in like manner on another, and then another, and so
on, till they had conversed with every one separately. Ina
little time they were all, I believe, every one, hopefully con-
verted. This was as it should be, for then they could not
keep each other in countenance. And then the impression
made on one was followed up with the others, so that one was
not left to exert a bad influence over the rest.

There was a pious woman who kept a boarding house for
young gentlemen ; she had twenty-one or two of them in her
family, and at length she became very anxious for their salva-
tion ; she made it a subject of prayer, but saw no seriousness
among them. At length she saw that there must be some
thing done besides praying, and yet she did not know what
to do. One morning after breakfast, as they were retiring,
she asked one of them to stop a few minutes. She took him
to her room, and conversed with him tenderly on the subject
of religion, and prayed with him. She followed up the im-

ression made, and pretty soon he was hopefully converted.
Phen there were two, and they addressed another, and prayed
with him, and soon he was prepared to join them. Then an


152 TO WIN SOULS REQUIRES WISDOM.


other, and so on, taking one at a time, and letting none of the
rest know what was going on, so as not to alarm them, till
every one of these young men was converted to God. Now
if she had brought the subject before the whole of them to-
gether, very likely they would have turned it all into ridicule ;
or perhaps they would have been offended and left the house,
and then she could have had no further influence over them.
But taking one alone, and treating him respectfully and kindly,
he had no such motive for resistance as arises out of the pres-
ence of others.

(6.) Try to seize an opportunity to converse with a careless
sinner, when the events of Providence seem to favor your design.
If any particular event should occur, calculated to make a se
rious impression, be sure to improve the occasion faithfully.

(7.) Seize the earliest opportunity to converse with those
around you who are careless. Do not put it off from day to
day, thinking a better opportunity will come. You must seek
an opportunity, and if none offers make one. Appoint a time
and place, and get an interview with your friend and neighbor,
where you can speak to him freely. Send him a note, go to
him on purpose, make it look like a matter of business, as if
you were in earnest in endeavoring to promote his soul’s sal-
vation. Then he will feel that it is a matter of importance, at
least in your eyes. Follow it up till you succeed, or become
convinced nothing can now be done.

(8.) If you have any feeling for a particular individual, take
an opportunity to converse with that individual while this feed-
ing continues. Tf it is truly a benevolent feeling, you have rea-
son to believe the Spirit of God is moving you to desire the sal-
vation of his soul, and that God is ready to bless your efforts
for his conversion. In such a case, make it the subject of
special and importunate prayer, and seek an early opportu-
nity to pour out all your heart to him and bring him to
Christ.

2. In regard to the manner of doing all this.

(1.) When you approach a careless individual to endeavor
to awaken him to his gsoul’s concerns, be sure to treat him
kindly. Let him see that you address him, not because you
seek a quarrel with him, but because you love his soul, and
desire his best good in time and eternity. If you are harsh
and overbearing in your manner, you will probably offend
him and drive him farther off from the way of life.

(2.) Be solemn. Avoid all lightness of manner or la
Levity will produce any thing but a right impression. You
ought to feel that you are engaged in a very solemn work,


TO WIN SOULS REQUIRES WISDOM. 153


which is going to affect the character of your friend or neigh-
bor, and probably determine his destiny for eternity. Who
could trifle and use levity in such circumstances if his heart
was sincere ?

(3.) Be respectful. Some seem to suppose it necessary to
be abrupt, aud rude, and coarse in their intercourse with the
careless and impenitent. Nothing can be a greater mistake.
The Apostle Paul has given us a better rule on the subject,
where he says, “Be pitiful, be courteous, not rendering evil
for evil, or railing for railing, but contrariwise blessing.” A
rude and coarse address is only calculated to give an unfavor-
able opinion both of you and your religion.

(4.) Be sure to be very plain. Do not suffer yourself to


cover up any circumstance of the person’s character, and his


relations to God. Lay it all open, not for the purpose of
offending or wounding him, but because it is necessary. Be
fore you can cure a wound, you must probe it to the bottom.
pee back none of the truth, but let it come out plainly before


(5.) Be sure to address his conscience. In public addresses,
ministers often get hold of the feelings only, and thus awaken
the mind. But in private conversation you cannot do so.
You cannot pour out the truth in an impassioned and rousing
manner. And unless you address the conscience pointedly,
you get no hold of the mind at all.

(6.) Bring the great and fundamental truths to bear upon the
person’s mind. Sinners are very apt to run off upon some
pretext or some subordinate point, especially some point of
sectarianism. For instance, if the man is a Presbyterian, he
will try to turn the conversation on the points of difference
between Presbyterians and Methodists. Or he will fall foul
of old school divinity. Do not yield to him, or talk with him
on any such point ; it will do more hurt than good. Tell him
the present business is to save his soul, and not to settle con-
troverted questions in theology. Hold him to the great fun-
damental points, by which he must be saved or lost.

(7.) Be very patient. Tf he has a real difficulty in his mind,
be very patient till you find out what it is, and then clear it
up. If what he alleges is a mere cavil, make him see that it
is a cavil Do not try to answer it by argument, but show
him that he is not sincere in advancing it. It is not worth
while to spend your time in arguing against a cavil, but make
him fee] that he is committing sin to plead it, and thus enlist
his conscience on your side.

(8.) Be say to guard your own spirt. There are many


154 TO WIN SOULS REQUIRES WISDOM.


people who have not good temper enough to converse witk
those who are much opposed to religion. And such a persor
wants no better triumph than to see you angry. He will go
away exulting because he has made one of these saints mad.

(9.) If the sinner is inclined to intrench himself against
God, be careful not to take his part in anything. Tf he says he
cannot do his duty, do not take sides with him, or say any-
thing to countenance his falsehood. Do not tell him he can-
not, or help him maintain himself in the controversy against
his Maker. Sometimes a careless sinner will go to finding
fault with Christians. Do not take his part or side with him
against Christians. Just tell him he has not got their sins to
answer for, and he had better see to his own concerns. If
you fall in with him, he feels that he has you on his side.
Show him that it is a censorious and wicked spirit that
prompts him to make these remarks, and not a regard for
the honor of religion or the laws of Jesus Christ.

(10.) Bring up the individual’s particular sins. Talking in
general terms against sin will produce no results. You must
make a man feel that you mean him. A minister who cannot
make his hearers feel that he means them, cannot expect to
accomplish much. Some people are very careful to avoid
mentioning the particular sins of which they know the indi-
vidual to be guilty, for fear of hurting his feelings. This is
wrong. If you know his history, bring up his particular sins,
kindly but plainly, not to give offence, but to awaken con.
science, and give full force to the truth.

(11.) It is generally best to be short, and not spin out what
we have to say. Get the attention as soon as you can to the
very point, say a few things and press them home, and brin
the matter to an issue. If possible, get them to repent ane
give themselves to Christ at the time. This is the proper
issue. Carefully avoid making an impression that you do not
expect them to repent NOW.

(12.) If possible, when you converse with sinners, be sure
to pray with them. If you converse with them, and leave
them without praying, you leave your work undone.

If. The manner of dealing with awakened sinners.

1. You should be careful to distinguish between an
awakened sinner, and one who is under conviction. When
you find a person who feels a little on the subject of religion,
do not take it for granted that he is convicted of sin, and thus
omit to use means to show him his sin. Persons are often
awakened by some providential circumstance, as sickness, a
thunderstorm, pestilence, death in the family, disappoint


—e«-


|


;


|


TO WIN SOULS REQUIRES WISDOM. 154


ment, or the like, or by the Spirit of God, so that their ears
are open, and they are ready to hear on the subject of re-
ligion with attention and seriousness, and some feeling. If
you find a person awakened, no matter by what means, lose
no time in pouring light upon his mind. Do not be afraid, but


show him the breadth of the Divine law, and the exceeding


strictness of its precepts. Make him see how it condemns
his thoughts and life. Search out his heart, find what is
there, and bring it up before his mind, as far as you can. If
possible, melt him down on the spot. When once you have
got a sinner’s attention, very often his conviction and con-
version is the work of a few moments. You can sometimes
do more in five minutes, than in years or a whole life while
he is careless or indifferent.

I have been amazed at the conduct of those cruel parents,
and other heads of families, who will let an awakened sinner
be in their families for days and weeks, and not say a word
to him on the subject. Why, they say, if the Spirit of God
has begun a work in him, he will certainly carry iton! Per
haps the person is anxious to converse, and puts himself in
the way of Christians, as often as possible, expecting they
will converse with him, and they do not say a word. Amaz
ing! Such a person ought to be looked out immediately, as
soon as he is awakened, and let a blaze of light be poured into
his mind without delay. Whenever you have reason to believe
that a person within your reach is awakened, do not sleep
till you have poured in the light upon his mind, and tried to
bring him to immediate repentance. Then is the time to

ress the subject with effect. If that favorable moment is
ost, it can never be recovered.

I have often seen Christians in revivals, who were con-
stantly on the look-out to see if any persons appeared to be
awakened. And as soon as they saw any one begin to mant
fest feeling under preaching, they would mark him, and as
soon as the meeting was out, invite hirn to a room and con-
verse and pray with him, and if possible not leave him till he
was converted. A remarkable case of this kind occurred in
a town at the West. A merchant came to the place from a
distance to buy goods. It was a time of powerful revival,
but he was determined to keep out of its influence, and so he
would not go to any meeting at all. At length he found
everybody so much engaged in religion that it met him at
every turn, and he got vexed, and swore he would go home.
There was so much religion there, he said, he could not do
any business, and he would not stay. Accordingly he took


156 TO WIN SOULS REQUIRES WISDOM.


his seat for the stage, which was to leave at four o’clock the
next morning. As he spoke of going away, a gentleman be
longing to the house, who was one of the young converts,
asked him if he would not go to a meeting once before he
left town. He finally consented, and went to the meeting.
The sermon took hold of his mind, but not with sufficient
power to bring him into the kingdom. He returned to his
lodgings, and called the landlord to pay his bill. The land-
lord, who had himself recently experienced religion, saw that
he was agitated. He accordingly spoke to him on the subject
of religion, and the man burst into tears. The landlord im-
mediately called in three or four young converts, and they
prayed and exhorted him, and at four o’clock in the morning,
when the stage called, he went on his way rejoicing in God !
When he got home, he called his family together, confessed
to them his past sins, and avowed his determination to live
differently, and prayed with them for the first time. It was
so unexpected that it was soon noised abroad, people began
to inquire, and a revival broke out in the place. Now, sup-
pose these Christians had done as some do, been careless,
and let the man go off, slightly impressed? It is not prob-
able he ever could have been saved. Such opportunities are
often lost for ever, when once the favorable moment is passed.

IL The manner of dealing with convicted sinners.

By a convicted sinner I mean one who feels himself con-
demned by the law of God, as a guilty sinner. He has so
much instruction as to understand something of the extent
of God’s law, and he sees and feels his guilty state, and
knows what his remedy is. To deal with these often requires
great wisdom. There are some most trying cases occur,
when it is extremely difficult to know what to do with them.

1. When a person is convicted and not converted, but re-
mains in an anxious state, there is generally some specific
reason for it. In such cases, it does no good to exhort him
to repent, or to explain the law to him. He knows all that,
he understands all these general points. But still he does
not repent. Now there must be some particular difficulty to
overcome. You may preach and pray, and exhort till dooms
day, and not gain anything.

You must then set yourself to inquire what is that parti-
cular difficulty. A physician, when he is called to a patient,
and finds him sick with a particular disease, first administers
the general remedies that are applicable to that disease. If
they produce no effect, and the disease still continues, he
must examine the case, and learn the constitution of the in-


TO WIN SOULS REQUIRES WISDOM. 15;


dividual, and his habits, diet, manner of living, ete, and see
what the matter is that the medicine does not take effect.
So it is with the case of a sinner convicted but not converted.
If your ordinary instructions and exhortations fail, there
must be a difficulty. The particular difficulty is often known
to the individual himself, though he keeps it concealed.
Sometimes it is something that has escaped even his own
observation.
_ _(1.) Sometimes the individual has some idol, something
which he loves more than God, which prevents him from giv-
ing himself up. You must search out and see what it is that
he will not give up. Perhaps it is wealth, perhaps some
earthly friend, perhaps gay dress, or gay company, or some
favorite amusement. At any rate there is something on
which his heart is so set that he will not yield to God.

(2.) Perhaps he has done an injury to some individual,
that calls for redress, and he is unwilling to confess it or to
make a just recompense. Now, until he will confess and for-
sake this sin, he can find no mercy. If he has injured the
person in property, or character, or has abused him, he must
make it up. If you can find it out, tell him plainly and
frankly, that there is no hope for him till he is willing to
confess it, and to do what is right.

(3.) Sometimes there is some particular sin, which he will
not forsake. He pretends it is only a small one, or tries to
persuade himself it is no sin. No matter how small it is, he
can never get into the kingdom of God till he gives it up.
Sometimes an individual has seen it to be a sin to use tobacco,
and he never can find true peace till he gives it up. Perhaps
he is looking upon it as a small sin.

But God knows nothing about small sins in such a case.
What is the sin? Why it is injuring your health, setting a
bad example, and taking God’s money, which you are bound
to employ in his service, and spending it for tobacco. What
would a merchant say, if he found one of his clerks in the
habit of going to the money drawer, and taking money
enough to keep him in cigars? Would he call it a small
offence? No, he would say he deserved to be sent to the
State prison. I mention this particular sin, because I have
found it to be one of the things to which men who are con-
victed will hold on when they know it is wrong, and then
wonder why they do not find peace. .

(4.) See if there is not some work of remuneration, which
he is bound to do. Perhaps he has defrauded somebody in
trade, or taken some unfair advantage, contrary to the aalder


158 TO WIN SOULS REQUIRES WISDOM.


rule of doing as rou would be done by, and is unwilling te
make satisfaction. This is a very common sin among mer:
chants and men of business. I have known many melancholy
instances, where men have grieved away the Spirit of God,
or else have been driven well nigh to absolute despair because
they were unwilling to give satisfaction where they had done
such things. Now it is plain that such persons never can
have forgiveness until they do it.

(5.) They may have intrenched themselves somewhere, and
fortified their minds in regard to some particular point, which
they are determined not to yield. For instance, they may
have taken strong ground that they will not do a particular
thing. I knew a man who was determined not to go into a
certain grove to pray. Several other persons during the re
vival had gone into the grove, and there, by prayer and medi-
tation, given themselves to God. His own clerk had been
converted there. The lawyer himself was awakened, but he
was determined that he would not go into the grove. He had
powerful convictions, and went on for weeks in this way, with
no relief. He tried to make God believe that it was not pride
that kept him from Christ ; and so, when he was going home
from meeting, he would kneel down in the street and pray.
And not only that, but he would look round for a mud-puddle
in the street, in which he might kneel, to show that he was
not proud. He once prayed all night in his parlor, but he
would not go into the grove. His distress was so great, and
he was so angry with God, that he was strongly tempted to
make way with himself, and actually threw away his knife for
fear he should cut his throat. At length he concluded he
would go into the grove and pray, and as soon as he got there
be was converted, and went and poured out his full heart te

od.

So individuals are sometimes intrenched in a determination
that they will not go to a particular meeting, perhaps the in-
quiry meeting, or some prayer meeting, or they will not have
a certain person pray with them, or they will not take a par
ticular seat, such as the anxious seat. They say that they can
be converted just as well without yielding this point, for relig-
ion does not consist in this, going to a particular meeting, or
taking a particular attitude in prayer, or a particular seat
This is true, but by taking this ground they make it the mate
rial point. And so long as they are intrenched there, and
determined to bring God to their terms, they nevor can be
converted. Sinners will often yield any thing else, and do
any thing in the world, but yield the point upon which they


TO WIN SOULS REQUIRES WISDOM. 15t


have committed themselves, and taken a stand against God.
They cannot be humbled until they yield this point, whatever
itis. And if without yielding it they get a hope, it will be a
false hope.

(6.) Perhaps he has a prejudice against some one, a mem-
ber of the church perhaps, on account of some faithful dealing
with his soul, or something in his business that he did not
like, and he hangs on this and will never be converted till he

_ gives it up. Whatever it be, you should search it out and tell
him the truth plainly and faithfully.

7.) He may feel ill will towards some one, or be angry,
and cherish strong feelings of resentment, which prevent him
from obtaining mercy from God. “And when ye stand pray-
ing, forgive, if ye have aught against any: that your Father
also which is in heaven may forgive you your trespasses.
But, if ye do not forgive, neither will your Father which is ir
heaven forgive your trespasses.”

(8.) Perhaps he entertains some errors in doctrine, or some
wrong notions respecting the thing to be done, or the way of
doing it, which may be keeping him out of the kingdom. Per
haps he is waiting for God. He is convinced that he deserves
to go to hell, and that unless he is converted he must go there,
but he is waiting for God to do something to him before he
submits. He is in fact waiting for God to do for him what he
has required the sinner to do.

He may be waiting for more conviction. People often do
not know what conviction is, and think they are not under
conviction, when in fact they are under powerful conviction.
They often think nothing is conviction unless they have great
fears of hell. But the fact is, individuals often have strong
convictions, who have yery little fear of hell. Show them
what is the truth, and let them see they have no need to wait.

Perhaps he may be waiting for certain feelings, which some-
body else has had before he obtained mercy. This is very
common in revivals, where some one of the first converts has
told of remarkable experiences. Others who are awakened
are very apt to think they must wait for just such feelings. I
knew a young man thus awakened ; his companion had been
converted in a remarkable way, and this one was waiting for
just such feelings, He said he was using the means, and
praying for them, but finally found that he was a Christian,
although he had not been through the course of feeling he
expected.

Sinners often lay out a plan of the way they expect to feel,
and how they expect to be converted, and in fact lay out the


160 TO WIN SOULS REQUIRES WISDOM.


work for God, determined that they will go in that path or
not at all. Tell them this is all wrong, they must not lay out
any such path beforehand, but let God lead them as he sees
to be best. God always leads the blind by a way they know
not. There never was a sinner brought into the kingdom
through such a course of feeling as he expected. Very often
they are amazed to find that they are in, and have had no
such exercises as they expected.

It is very common for persons to be waiting to be made
subjects of prayer, or for some particular means to be used,
or to see if they cannot make themselves better. They are
so wicked, they say, that they can not come to Christ. They
want to try, by humiliation, and suffering, and prayer, to fit
themselves to come. You will have to hunt them out of all
these refuges. It is astonishing into how many corners they
will often run before they will go to Christ. I have known
persons almost deranged for the want of a little correct in-
struction.

Sometimes such people think their sins are too great to be
forgiven, or that they have grieved the Spirit of God away,
when that Spirit is all the while convicting them. They pre-
tend their sins are greater than Christ’s mercies, thus actually
insulting the Lord Jesus Christ.

Sometimes sinners get the idea that they are given up of
God, and that now they cannot be saved. It is often very
difficult to beat persons off from this ground. Many of the
most distressing cases I have ever met with have been of this
character, where persons would insist upon it they were given
up and nothing would change them.

In a place where I was laboring in a revival I went one
day into the meeting, and before the exercises commenced I
heard a low moaning, distressing, unearthly noise. I looked
and saw several women gathered round the person who made
it. They said it was a woman in despair. She had been a
long time in that state. Her husband was a drunkard. He
had brought her to meeting and gone himself to the tavern.
I conversed with her and saw her state, and that it was very
difficult to reach her case. As I was going away to commence
the exercises she said she must go out, for she could not hear
praying or singing. I told her she must not go, and told the

adies to detain her, if necessary, by force. I felt that if the
devil had hold of her, God was stronger than the devil, and
could deliver her. The exercises began, and she made some
noise at first. But by and by she looked up. The subject
was chosen with special reference to her case, and as it pre


TC WIN SOULS REQUIRES WISDOM. 16]


ceeded, her attention was gained, her eyes were fixed—I never
shall forget how she looked—her eyes and mouth open, her
head up, and she almost rose from her seat as the truth poured
in upon her mind. Finally, as the truth knocked away every
foundation on which her despair had rested, she shrieked out,
put her head down, and sat perfectly still till the meeting was
out. I went to her, and found her perfectly calm and happy
in God. I saw her long afterwards, and she remained so.
Thus Providence threw her where she never expected to be,
and compelled her to hear instruction adapted to her case.
You may often do incalculable good by finding out precisely
where the difficulty lies, and then bring the truth to bear right
on that point.

Sometimes persons will strenuously maintain that they have
committed the unpardonable sin. When they get that idea
into their minds, they will turn every thing you say against
themselves. In some such cases, it is a good way to take
them on their own ground, and reason with them in this way;
“Suppose you have committed the unpardonable sin, what
then? Itis reasonable that you should submit to God, and
be sorry for your sins, and break off from them, and do all
the good you can, even if God will not forgive you. Even if
you go to hell, you ought to do this.” Press this thought and
turn it over until you find they understand and consent to it.

It is common for persons in such cases to keep their eyes
on themselves ; they will shut themselves up and keep look-
ing at their own darkness, instead of looking away to Christ.
Now if you can take their minds off from themselves, and get
them to think of Christ, you may draw them away from brood-
ing over their own present feelings, and get them to lay hold
on the hope set before them in the Gospel.

2. Be careful, in conversing with convicted sinners, not to
make any compromise with them on any point where they
have a difficulty. If you do, they will be sure to take advan-
tage of it, and thus get a false hope. Convicted sinners often
get into a difficulty, in regard to giving up some darling sin,
or yielding some point where conscience and the Holy Ghost
are at war with them. And if they come across an individual
who will yield the point, they feel better and are happy, and
think they are converted. The young man who came to
Christ was of this character. He had one difficulty, and Jesus
Christ knew just what it was. He knew he loved his money,
and instead of compromising the matter and thus trying to
comfort him, he just put his finger on the very place and told
him, “Go sell all that thou hast, and give to the poor, and


162 TO WIN SOULS REQUIRES WISDOM.


and come follow me.” What was the effect? Why the y
man went away sorrowful. Very likely, if Christ had told
him to do any thing else, he would have felt relieved, and
would have got a hope ; would have professed himself a dis-
ciple, joined the church, and gone to hell. 5

People are often amazingly anxious to make a compromise.
They will ask such questions as this, Whether you do not
think a person may be a Christian and yet do such and such
things ; or if he may not be a Christian and not do such and
such things? Now, do not yield an inch to any such ques-
tions. These questions themselves may often show you the
very point that is laboring in their minds. They will show

ou that it is pride, or love of the world, or something of the
iid, which prevents their becoming Christians.

Be careful to make thorough work on this point, the love
of the world. I believe there have been more false hopes
built on wrong instructions here, than in any other way. I
once heard a Doctor of Divinity trying to persuade his hearers
to give up the world ; and he told them “if they would only
give it up, God would give it right back to them again. He
is willing you should enjoy the world.” Miserable! God
never gives back the world to the Christian, in the same
sense that he requires a convicted sinner to give it up. He
requires us to give up the ownership of everything to him, so
that we shall never again for a moment consider it as our own.
A man must not think he has a right to judge for himself
how much of his property he shall lay out for God. One
man thinks he may spend twenty thousand dollars a year ta
support his family ; he has a right to do it, because he hag
the means of his own. Another thinks he may lay up five
hundred thousand dollars. One man said the other day, that
he had promised he never would give any of his property to
educate young men for the ministry. When he is applied to,
he just answers, “I have said I never will give to any such
object, and I never will” Man! did Jesus Christ ever tell
you to do so with his money? Has he laid down any such
rule? Remember it is his money you are talking about, and
if he wants it to educate ministers, you withhold it at your

eril. That man has yet to learn the first principle of re-
ligion, that he is not his own, and that the money which he
possesses is Jesus Christ’s.

Here is the great reason why the church is go full of false
hopes. Men have been left to suppose they could be Chris-
tians while holding on to their money. And this has served
as a clog to every enterprise. It is an undoubted fact that


TO WIN SCULS REQUIRES WISDOM, 163


the church has funds enough to supply the world with Bibles,
and tracts, and missionaries, immediately. But the truth is,
that professors of religion do not believe that the “earth is
the Lord’s, and the fullness thereof.” Every man supposes
he has a right to decide what appropriation he shall make of
his own money. And they have no idea that Jesus Christ
shall dictate to them on the subject.

Be sure to deal thoroughly on this point. The church is
now filled up with hypocrites, because they were never made
to give up the world. They never were made to see that un-
less they made an entire consecration of all to Christ, all
their time, all their talents, all their influence, all their pos-
sessions, they would never get to heaven. Many think they
can be Christians, and yet dream along through life, and use
all their time and property for themselves, only giving a little
now and then, to save appearances, when they can do it
with perfect convenience. But it is a sad mistake, and they
will find it so, if they do not employ their energies for God.
And when they die, instead of finding heaven at the end of
the path they are pursuing, they will find hell there.

In dealing with a convicted sinner, be sure to drive him
away from every refuge, and not leave him an inch of ground
to stand on, so long as he resists God. This need not take
a long time to do. When the Spirit of God is at work striv-
ing with a sinner, it is easy to drive him from his refuges.
You will find the truth will be like a hammer, crushing where-
ever it strikes. Make clean work with it, so that he shall
give up all for God.

Make the sinner see clearly the nature and extent of the
Divine law, and press the main question of entire submission
to God. Bear down on that point as soon as you have made
him clearly understand what you aim at, and do not turn off
upon anything else.

Be careful in illustrating the subject, not to mislead the
mind so as to leave the impression that a selfish submission
will answer, or a selfish acceptance ‘of the atonement, or a
selfish giving up to Christ and receiving him, as if a man
was making a good bargain, giving up his sins and receiving
salvation in exchange. This is mere barter, and not submis-
sion to God. Leave no ground in your explanations or itus-
trations, for such a view of the matter. Man’s selfish heart
will eagerly seize such a view of religion, if it be presented,
and very likely close in with it, and thus get a false hope.

Another time I shall call your attention to certain things
that are to be avoided in dealing with sinners.


164 TO WIN SOULS REQUIRES WISDOM.


REMARKS,


1. Make it an object of constant study and of daly reflection
and prayer, to learn how to deal with sinners, so as to pro
mote their conversion. It is the great business on earth of
every Christian, to save souls. People often complain that
they do not know how to take hold of this matter. Why, the
reason is plain enough ; they have never studied it. They
never took the proper pains to qualify themselves for the
work of saving souls. If people made it no more a matter
of attention and thought to qualify themselves for their
worldly business, than they do to save souls, how do you
think they would succeed? Now, if you are thus neglecting
the main business of life, what are you living for? If you
do not make it a matter of study, how you may most success-
fully act in building up the kingdom of Christ, you are act-
ing a very wicked and absurd part as a Christian.

2. Many professors of religion do more hurt than good, when
they attempt to talk to impenitent sinners. They have so
little knowledge and skill, that their remarks rather divert
attention than increase it.

3. Be careful to find the point where the Sprit of God 18
pressing @ sinner, and press the same point in all your re-
marks. If you divert his attention from that point, you will
be in great danger of destroying his convictions. Take pains
to learn the state of his mind, what he is thinking of, how he
feels, and what he feels most deeply upon, and then press
that thoroughly, and do not divert his mind by talking about
anything else. Do not fear to press that point, for fear of
driving him to distraction. Some people fear to press a point
to which the mind is tremblingly alive, lest they should injure
the mind, notwithstanding the Spirit of God is evidently de-
bating that point with the sinner. This is an attempt to be
wiser than God. You should clear up the point, throw the
light of truth all around it, and bring the soul to yield, and
then the mind is at rest.

4. Great evils have arisen, and many false hopes have been
created by not discriminating between an awakened and a con-
victed sinner. For the want of this, persons who are only
awakened are immediately pressed to submit ; “ you must re-
pent,” “submit to God,” when they are not in fact convinced
of their guilt, nor instructed so far as even to know what
submission means. This is one way in which revivals have
been greatly injured by indiscriminate exhortations to repent,
mnaccompanied with proper instruction.


TO WIN SOuLe ÆQUIRES WISDOM. 166


§. Anxious sinners are to be regarded as being in a very
solemn and critical state. They have in fact come to a turni
point. It is a time when their destiny is likely to be settled
for ever. The Spirit of God will not strive always. Chris-
tians ought to feel deeply for them. In many respects their
circumstances are more solemn than the judgment day. Here
their destiny is settled. The judgment day reveals it. And
the particular time when it is done is when the Spirit is striv-
ing with them. Christians should remember their awful re-
sponsibility at such times. The physician, if he knows any-
thing of his duty, sometimes feels himself under a very solemn
responsibility. His patient is in a critical state, where a little
error will destroy life, and he hangs quivering between life
and death. If such responsibility is felt in relation to the
body, what awful responsibility should be felt in relation to the
soul, when it is seen to hang trembling on a point, and its
destiny is now to be decided, One false impression, one in-
discreet remark, one sentence misunderstood, a slight diver-
sion of mind may wear him the wrong way, and his soul is
lost. Never was an angel employed in a more solemn work
than that of dealing with sinners who are under conviction.
How solemnly and carefully then should Christians walk,
how wisely and skillfully work, if they do not mean to be the
means of damning a soul!

Fuvatty.—Iff there is a sinner in this house, let me say to
him, Abandon all your excuses. You have been told to
night that they are all vain. To-night it will be told in hell,
and told in heaven, and echoed from the ends of the uni-
verse, what you decide to do. This very hour may seal your
eternal destiny. Will you submit to God to-night—-now ?


LECTURE XL


4 WISE MINISTER WILL BE SUCCESSFUL


TzxT.—He that winneth souls is wise.—ProvErss xi. 30.


I preacuep last Friday evening from the same text, on the
method of dealing with sinners by private Christians. My
object at this time is to take up the more public means of
grace, with particular reference to the


DUTIES OF MINISTERS.


As I observed in my last lecture, wisdom is the choice and
pursuit of the best end by the most appropriate means. The
great end for which the Christian Ministry was appointed, is
to glorify God in the salvation of souls. In speaking on this
subject I propose to show,

L That a right discharge of the duties of a minister requires
great wisdom.

II. That the amount of success in the discharge of his đu-
ties (other things being equal) decides the amount of wisdom
employed vy him in the exercise of his office.

L iam to show that a right discharge of the duties of a
minister requires great wisdom.

1. On acconnt of the opposition it encounters. The very end
for which the ministry is appointed is one against which is
arrayed the most powerful opposition of sinners themselves.
If men were willing to receive the Gospel, and there were
nothing needed to be done but to tell the story of redemption,
a child might convey the news. But men are opposed to the
Gospel. They are opposed to their own salvation, in this way.
Their opposition is often violent and determined. I once saw
a maniac who had formed designs against his own life, and
he would exercise the utmost sagacity and cunning to effeet
his purpose. He would be as artful and make his keepers
believe he had no such design, that he had given it all up,
and would appear as mild and sober, and at the instant the
keeper was off his guard he would lay hands on himself. So
sinners often ae great cunning in evading all the efforta


A WISE MINISTER WILL BE SUCCESSFUL. 167


that are made to save them. And to meet this dreadful cun-
ning, and overcome it so as to save men, ministers need a
great amount of wisdom.

2. The particular means appointed to be employed in the
work show the necessity of great wisdom in ministers. If
men were converted by an act of physical omnipotence, ere-
ating some new taste, or something like that, and if sanctifi-
eation were nothing but the same physical omnipotence root-
ing out the remaining roots of sin from the soul, it would not
require so much sagacity and skill to win souls. Nor would
there then be any meaning in the text. But the truth is that
regeneration and sanctification are to be effected by moral
means—by argument and not by force. There never was and
never will be any one saved by any thing but truth as the
means. Truth is the outward means, the outward motive,
presented first by man and then by the Holy Spirit Take
into view the opposition of the sinner himself, and you see
that nothing, after all, short of the wisdom of God and the
moral power of the Holy Spirit, can break down this opposi-
tion, and bring him to submit to God. Still the means are to
be used by men, and means adapted to the end, skillfully used.
God has provided that the work of conversion and sanctifica-
tion shall in all cases be done by means of that kind of truth,
applied in that connection and relation, which is fitted to pro-
duce such a result.

3. He has the powers of earth and hell to overcome, and
that calls for wisdom. The devil is constantly at work, trying
to prevent the success of ministers, laboring to divert the at-
tention from the subject of religion, and to get the sinner
away from God and lead him down to hell. The whole frame-
work of society, almost, is hostile to religion. Nearly all the
influences which surround a man from his cradle to his grave,
in the present state of society, are calculated to defeat the de-
sign of the ministry. Does not a minister then need great
wisdom to conflict with the powers of darkness, and the whole
influence of the world, in addition to‘ the sinner’s own oppo-
sition ?

4. The same is seen from the infinite importance of the end
itself. The end of the ministry is the salvation of the soul.
When we consider the importance of the end, and the difficul-
ties of the work, who will not sav with the apostle, “ Who is
sufficient for these things ;

5. He must understand how to wake up the church, ak
get them out of the way of the conversion of sinners. This is
often the most difficult part of a minister’s work, and requires


168 A WISE MINISTER WILL BE SUCCESSFUL,


more wisdom and patience than any thing else. Indeed, to
do this successfully, is a most rare qualification in the Chris
tian ministry. It is a point where almost all ministers fail.
They know not how to wake up the church, and raise the tone
of piety to a high standard, and thus clear the way for the
work of conversion. Many ministers can preach to sinners
very well, but gain little success, while the counteracting in-
fluence of the church resists it all, and they have not skill
enough to remove the difficulty. There is only here and there
a minister in the country who knows how to probe the church
when they are in a cold, backslidden state, so as effectually to
wake them up and keep them awake. The members of the
church sin against such light, that when they become cold it
is very difficult to rouse them up. They have a form of piety
which wards off the truth, while at the same time it is just
shat kind of piety which nas no power nor efficiency. Such
professors are the most difficult individuals to arouse from
their slumbers. I do not mean that they are always more
wicked then the impenitent. They are often employed about
the machinery of religion, and pass for very good Christians,
but are of no use in a revival

I know ministers are sometimes amazed to hear it said that
churches are not awake. No wonder such ministers do not
know how to wake a sleeping church. There was a young
licentiate heard brother Foote the other day, in this city, pour-
ing out truth, and trying to wake up the churches, and he
knew so little about it that he thought it was abusing the
churches. So perfectly blind was he that he really thought
the churches in New York were all awake on the subject of
religion. So some years ago there was a great controversy
and opposition raised, because so much was said about the
churches being asleep. It was all truth, yet many ministers
knew nothing about it, and were astonished to hear such things
said about the churches. When it has come to this, that min-
isters do not know when the church is asleep, no wonder that
we have no revivals. I was invited once to preach at a certain’
place. I asked the minister what was the state of the church.
“Oh,” says he, “to a man they are awake.” I was delighted
at the idea of laboring in such a church, for it was a sight I
aad never yet seen, to see every single member awake in a
revival. But when I got there I found the church sleepy and
eu, and TOO whether one of them was awake.

ere 18 the great difficulty in keeping up revivals, to kee

the church thoroughly poe and pete y It is one thine
for a church to get up in their sleep and bluster about and


A WISE MINISTER WILL BE SUCCESSFUL. 169


run over each other, and a widely different thing for them to
have their eyes open, and their senses about them, and be
wide awake, so as to know how to find God and how to work
for Christ.

5. He must know how to set the church to work when they are
awake. If a minister attempts to go to work alone, calculating
to do it all himself, it is like attempting to roll a great stone
up a hill alone. The church can do much to help forward a
revival. Churches have sometimes had powerful revivals
without any minister. But when a minister has a church who
are awake, and knows how to set them to work, and how to
sit at the helm and guide them, he may feel strong, and often-
times may find that they do more than he does himself, in the
conversion of sinners.

6. In order to be successful, a minister needs great wisdom
to know how to keep the church to the work. Often the church
seem just like children. ` You set children to work, and they
appear to be all engaged, but as soon as your back is turned
they will stop and go to play. The great difficulty in continw
ing a revival lies here. And to meet it requires great wisdom.
To know how to break them down again, when their heart
vets lifted up because they have had such a great revival ; to
wake them up afresh when their zeal begins to flag ; to keep
their hearts full of zeal for the work; these are some of the
most difficult things in the world. Yet if a minister would
be successful in winning souls, he must know when they first
begin to grow proud, or to lose the spirit of prayer, and when
to probe them and how to search them over again, how to
keep the church in the field gathering the harvest of the Lord.

7. He must understand the Gospel. But you will ask, Do not
all ministers understand the Gospel? I answer, that they
certainly do not all understand it alike, for they do not all
preach alike.

8. He must know how to divide it, so as to bring forward
the particular truths, in that order, and to make them bear
upon those points and at such times ‘as are calculated to pro-
duce a given result. A minister should understand the phi-
losophy of the human mind, so as to know how to plan and
arrange his labors wisely. Truth, when brought to bear upon
the mind, is in itself calculated to produce corresponding feel-
ings. The minister must know what feelings he wishes to
produce, and how to bring such truth to bear as is calculated
to produce these feelings. He must know how to present
truth calculated to humble Christians, or to make them feel
for sinners, or to awaken sinners, or to convert them

g


~


170 A WISE MINISTER WILL BE SUCCESSFUL.


Often, when sinners are awakened, the ground is lost for
the want of wisdom in following up the blow. Perhaps a
rousing sermon is preached, Christians are moved, and sin-
ners begin to feel, and the next Sabbath something will be
brought forward that has no comnection with the state of feel-
ing in the congregation, and that is not calculated to lead the
mind on to the exercise of repentance, faith or love. It shows
how important it is that a minister should understand how to
produce a given impression, at what time it may and should
be done, and by what truth, and how to follow it up, till the
sinner is broken down and brought in.

A great many good sermons preached are all lost for the
want of a little wisdom here. They are good sermons, and
calculated, if well timed, to do great good; but they have so
little connection with the actual state of feeling in the con-
gregation, that it would be more than a miracle if they should
produce a revival. A minister may preach in this random
way till he has preached himself to death, and never produce
any great results. He may convert here and there a scatter-
ing soul; but he will not move the mass of the congregation
unless he knows how to follow up his impressions, to carry
out a plan of operations and execute it, so as to carry on the
work when it is begun. He must not only be able to blow
the trumpet so loud as to start the sinner from his lethargy,
but when he is waked, he must lead him by the shortest way
to Jesus Christ. And not as soon as sinners are roused by
a sermon, immediately begin to preach about some remote
subject that has no tendency to carry on the work.

10. To reach different classes of sinners successfully requires
great wisdom on the part of a minister. For instance, a ser-
mon on a particular subject may start a particular class of
persons among his hearers. Perhaps they will begin to look
serious, or perhaps talk about it, or perhaps they will begin
to cavil about it. Now, if the minister is wise, he will know
how to observe those indications, and to follow right on with
sermons adapted to this class, until he leads them into the
kingdom of God. Then let him go back and take another
class, find out where they are hid, break down their refuges,
and follow them up, till he leads them into the kingdom of
God. He should thus beat about every bush where sinners
hide themselves, as the voice of God followed Adam in the
garden—“ ADAM, WHERE ART THOU?” till one class of hearers
after another are brought in, and so the whole communi
converted. Now a minister must be very wise to do this,
never will be done so till a minister sets himself to hunt out


A WISE MINISTER WILL BE SUCCESSFUL. 171


and bring in every class of sinners in his congregation, the
old and young, male and female, rich and poor.

11. A minister needs great wisdom to get sinners away
from their present refuges of lies, without forming new hiding
places for them. I once sat under the ministry of a man who
had contracted a great alarm about heresies, and was con-
stantly employed in confuting them. And he used to bring
up many such heresies as his people never heard of. He got
his ideas chiefly from books, and mingled very little among
the people to know what they thought. And the result of
his labors often was, that the people would be taken with the
heresy, more than with the argument against it. The novelty
of the error attracted their attention so much that they
forgot the answer. And in that way he gave many of his
people new objections against religion, such as they never
thought of before. If a man does not mingle enough with
mankind to know how people think now-a-days he cannot ex-
pect to be wise to meet their objections and difficulties.

I have heard a great deal of preaching against Universal-
ists, that did more hurt than good, because the preachers
did not understand how Universalists of the present day
reason. They have never mingled with Universalists, and
know not what they believe and how they argue, now, but
have got all they know of Universalism from books that were
written long ago, and are now out of date among Universal-
ists themselves. And the consequence is that when they at-
tempt to preach against Universalism they oppose a man of
straw, and not Universalist sentiments as they are now found
in the community. And people either laugh at them, or say
it is all lies, for they know Universalists do not hold such
sentiments as are ascribed to them by the preacher.

When ministers undertake to oppose a present heresy, they
ought to know what it is at present. For instance, almost
all those who write and preach against Universalism think
they are called upon to oppose the idea that God is all mercy.
They suppose Universalists hold the ‘doctrine that God is all
mercy, and that when they have refuted this doctrine, they have

ot Universalists down. But this is not true. They do not

old such doctrine. They deny it altogether. They reject
the idea of mercy in the salvation of men, for they hold that
every man is punished in full according to his just deserts.
Of what use is it, then, to argue against Universalists, that
God is a God of justice and not a God all mercy, when they
hold to the justice of God alone as the ground of salvation,
and do not admit the idea of mercy at all? In like manner,


WZ A WISE MINISTER WILL BE SUCCESSFUL.


I have heard men preach against the idea that men are saved
in their sins, and they supposed they were preaching down
Universalist doctrine. Universalists believe no such thing.
They believe that all men will be made holy and saved in that
way. This shows the importance of knowing what people
actually hold, before you try to reason them out of their
errors. It is of no use to misrepresent a man’s doctrines to
his face, and then try to reason him out of them. You must
state his doctrine just as he holds t, and state his arguments
fairly. Otherwise, if you state them wrong, you either make
nim angry, or he laughs in his sleeve at the advantage you
give him. He will say, That man cannot argue with me on
fair grounds ; he has to misrepresent our doctrines in order
to confute me. Great hurt is done in this way. Ministers
do not intend to misrepresent their opponents ; but the effect
of it is, that the poor miserable creatures who hold these
errors go to hell because ministers do not take care to inform
themselves what are their real errors. Errors are never torn
away by such a process. I mention these cases to show how
much wisdom a minister must have to meet the cases that
occur. He must be acquainted with the real views of men
in order to meet them, and do away their errors and mis-
takes.

12. Ministers ought to know what measures are best calcu-
lated to aid in accomplishing the great end of their office,
the salvation of souls. Some measures are plainly necessary.
By measures, I mean what things should be done to get the
attention of the people and bring them to listen to the truth.
Building houses for worship, and visiting from house to
house, etc., are all “measures,” the object of which is to get
the attention of people to the Gospel. Much wisdom is
requisite to devise and carry forward all the various measures
that are adapted to favor the success of the Gospel.

What do the politicians do? They get up meetings; circu-
late handbills and pamphlets ; blaze away in the newspapers ;
send their ships about the streets on wheels with flags and
sailors ; send coaches all over town, with handbills, to bring
people up to the polls—all to gain attention to their cause
and elect their candidate. All these are their “ measures,”
and for their end they are wisely calculated. The object is to
get up an excitement, and bring the people out. They know
that unless there can be an excitement it is in vain to pusk
their end. Ido not mean to say that their measures are
pious, or right, but only that they are wise, in the sense that
bhey are the appropriate application of means to the end.


A WISE MINISTER WILL BE SUCCESSFUL, 173


The object of the ministry is to get all the people to feel
that the devil has no right to rule this world, but that they
ought all to give themselves to God, and vote in the Lord
Jesus Christ as the governor of the universe. Now what
shall be done? What measures shall we take? Says one,
“ Be sure and have nothing that is new.” Strange! The
object of our measures is to gain attention, and you must have
something new. As sure as the effect of a measure becomes
stereotyped, it ceases to gain attention, and then you must
try something new. You need not make innovations in
everything. But whenever the state of things is such that
anything more is needed, it must be something new, other-
wise it will fail. A minister should never introduce innova-
tions that are not called for. If he does they will embarrass
him. He cannot alter the Gospel ; that remains the same.
But new measures are necessary, from time to time, to
awaken attention and bring the Gospel to bear upon the pub-
lic mind. And then a minister ought to know how to intro-
duce new things, so as to create the least possible resistance
or reaction. Mankind are fond of formin religion. They
love to have their religious duties stereotyped, so as to leave
them at ease; and they are therefore inclined to resist any
new movement designed to rouse them up to action and
feeling. Hence it is all-important to introduce new things
wisely, so as not to give needless occasion or apology for
resistance.

13. Not a little wisdom is sometimes needed by a minister
to know when to put a stop to new measures. When a measure
has novelty enough to secure attention to the truth, ordinarily
no other new measure should be introduced. You have se
cured the great object of novelty. Anything more will be in
danger of diverting the public mind away from the great
object, and fixing it on the measures themselves. And then,
if you introduce novelties when they are not called for, you
will go over so large a field, that by and by when you really
want something new, you will have nothing else to introduce,
without doing something that will give too great a shock to
the public mind. The Bible has laid down no specific course
of measures to promote revivals of religion, but has left it
to ministers to adopt such as are wisely calculated to secure
the end. And the more sparing we are of our new things,
the longer we can use them, to keep public attention awake
to the great subject of religion. By a wise course this may
undoubtedly be done for a long series of years, until our pre-
sent measures will by and by have sufficient novelty in them


`


174 A WISE MINISTER WILL BE SUCEHSSFUL.


again to attract and fix public attention. And so we shall
never want for something new.

13. A minister, to win souls, must know how to deal with
careless, with awakened, and with anxious sinners, so as to
lead them right to Christ in the shortest and most direct
way. Itis amazing to see how many ministers there are who
do not know how to deal with sinners, or what to say to them
in their various states of mind. A good woman im Albany
told me, that when she was under concern she went to her
minister and asked him to tell her what she must do to get
relief. And he said God had not given him much experience
on the subject, and advised her to go to such a deacon, who

erhaps could tell her what todo. The truth was, he did not
ba what to say to a sinner under conviction, although
there was nothing peculiar in her case. Now if you think
this minister a rare case, you are quite deceived. There are
many ministers who do not know what to say to sinners.

A minister once appointed an anxious meeting, and went
to attend it, and instead of going round to the individuals,
he began to ask them the catechism, “ Wherein doth Christ
execute the office of a priest? About as much in point to
a great many of their minds as anything else.

I know a minister who held an anxious meeting, and went
to attend it with a written discourse which he had prepared
for the occasion. Just as wise as it would be if a physician,
going out to visit his patients, should sit down at leisure and
write all the prescriptions before he had seen them. A min-
ister needs to know the state of mind of the individuals,
before he can know what truth will be proper and useful to
administer. I say these things, not because I love to do it,
but because truth, and the object before me, requires them
to be said. And such instances as I have mentioned are by
no means rare.

A minister should know how to apply truth to all the situa
tions in which he may find dying sinners going down to hell.
He should know how to preach, how to pray, how to con-
duct prayer-meetings, and how to use all the means for bring-
ing the truth of God to bear upon the kingdom of darkness.
Does not this require wisdom? And who is sufficient for
these things ?

IL The amount of a minister’s success in winning souls
Jake things being equal) invariably decides the amount of wis

om he has exercised in the discharge of his office.

1. This is plainly asserted in the text. “He that winneth
souls is wise.” That is, if a man wins souls, he does skill


A WISE MINISTER WILL BE SUCCESSFUL, 178


fully adapt means to the end, which is, to exercise wisdom.
He is the more wise, by how much the greater is the number
of sinners that he saves. A blockhead may, indeed, now
and then stumble on such truth or such a manner of exhibit
ing it, as to save a soul. It would be a wonder indeed if
any minister did not sometimes have something in his ser
mons that would meet the case of some individual. But the
amount of wisdom is to be decided, “other things being
equal,” by the number of cases in which he is successful in
converting sinners.

Take the case of a physician. The greatest quack in New
York may now and then stumble upon a remarkable cure,
and so get his name up with the ignorant. But sober and
judicious people judge of the skill of a physician by the
uniformity of his success in overcoming disease, the variety of
diseases he can manage, and the number of cases in which he
is successful in saving his patients. The most skillful saves
the most. This is common sense. It is truth. And it is
just as true in regard to success in saving souls, and true in
just the same sense.

2. This principle is not only asserted in the text, but it is
a matter of fact, a historical truth, that “ He that winneth souls
is wise.” He has actually employed means adapted to the
end, in such a way as to secure the end.

3. Success in saving souls is evidence that a man under
stands the Gospel, and understands human nature, that he
knows how to adapt means to his end, that he has common
sense, and that he has that kind of tact, that practical discern-
ment, to know how to get at people. And if his success is
extensive, it shows that he knows how to deal with a great
variety of characters, in a great variety of circumstances,
who are yet all the enemies of God, and to bring them to
Christ. To do this requires great wisdom. And the minister
who does it shows that he is wise.

4. Success in winning souls shows that a minister not only
knows how to labor wisely for that ond, but also that he knows
where his dependence is. You know that fears are often ex:
pressed respecting those ministers who are aiming most
directly and earnestly at the conversion of sinners. People
say, “ Why, this man is going to work in his own strength
one would imagine he thinks he can convert souls himself.”
How often has the event showed that the man knows what
he is about, very well, and knows where his strength is too.
He went to work to convert sinners so earnestly, just as if he
oguld do it all himself ; but that was the very way he should


176 A WISE MINISTER WILL BE SUCOESSFUL.


do. He ought to reason with sinners, and plead with them,
as faithfully and fully as if he did not expect any interposi-
tion of the Spirit of God, or as if he knew there was no Holy
Ghost. But whenever a man does this successfully, it shows
that, after all, he knows he must depend on the Spirit of God
alone for success. 7

Oxsection.—There are many who feel an objection against
this subject, arising out of the view they have taken of the
ministry of Jesus Christ. They ask us, “ What will you say
about the ministry of Jesus Christ, was not he wise?’ I
answer, Yes, infinitely wise. But in regard to his alleged
want of success in the conversion of sinners, you will ob
serve the following things :

(1.) That his ministry was vastly more successful than is
generally supposed. We read in one of the sacred writers,
that after his resurrection and before his ascension “he was
seen by about five hundred brethren at once.” If so many
as five hundred brethern were found assembled together at
one place, we see there must have been a vast number of
them scattered over the country.

(2.) Another circumstance to be observed is, that his pub-
lic ministry was very short, less than three years.

(3.) Consider the peculiar design of his ministry. His
main object was to make atonement for the sins of the world.
It was not aimed so much at promoting revivals. The “ dis
pensation of the Spirit” was not yet given. He did not
preach the Gospel so fully as his apostles did afterwards. The
prejudices of the people were so fixed and violent that they
would not bear it. That he did not, is plain from the fact
that even his apostles, who were constantly with him, did not
understand the atonement. They did not get the idea that
he was going to die, and consequently, when they heard he
was actually dead, they were driven to despair, and thought
the thing was all gone by, and their hopes blown to the winds.
The fact was, that he had another object in view, to which
every thing else was made to yield, and the perverted state
of the public mind, and the obstinate prejudices prevailing,
showed why results were not seen any more in the conver-
sion of sinners. The state of public opinion was such, that
they finally murdered him for what he did preach.

Many ministers who have little or no success, are hidi
themselves behind the ministry of Jesus Christ, as if he waa
an unsuccessful preacher. Whereas, in fact, he was eminent-
ly successful, considering the circumstances in which he labor-
ed. This is the last place in all the world where a minister
who has no success should think of hiding himself.


à WISE MINISTER WILL BE SUCCESSFUL 177


REMARKS,


1. A minister may be very learned and not wise. 'There are
many ministers possessed of great learning ; they understand
all the sciences, physical, moral, and theological ; they may
know the dead languages, and possess all learning, and yet
not be wise, in relation to the great end about which they are
ehiefly employed. Facts clearly demonstrate this. “He that
winneth souls is wise.”

2. An unsuccessful minister may be pious as well as learned,
and yet not wise. Itis unfair to infer because a minister is
unsuccessful, that therefore he is a hypocrite. There may be
something defective in his education, or in his mode of view-
ing a subject, or of exhibiting it, or such a want of common
sense, as will defeat his labors, and prevent his success in win-
ning souls, while he himself may be saved—“ yet so as by
fire.” $

3. A minister may be very wise, though he is not learned.
He may not understand the dead languages, or theology in
its common acceptation ; and yet he may know just what a
minister of the Gospel wants most to know, without knowing
many other things. A learned minister and a wise minister
are different things. Facts in the history of the church in
all ages prove this. It is very common for churches, when
looking out for a minister, to aim at getting a very learned
man. Do not understand me to disparage learning. The
more learning the better, if he is also wise in the great mat-
ter he is employed about. If a minister knows how to win
souls, the more learning he has the better. But if he has
any other kind of learning, and not this, he will infallibly fail
of the end of his ministry.

4. Want of success in a minister (other things being equal
proves, (1.) either that he was never called to preach, an
has taken it up out of his own head; or (2.) that he was
badly educated, and was never taught the very things he
wants most to know; or (3.) if he was called to preach, and
knows how to do his duty, he is too indolent and too wicked
to do it.

5. Those are the best educated ministers, who win the most
souls. Ministers are sometimes looked down upon, and
called very ignorant, because they do not know sciences and
languages ; although they are very far from being ignorant
of the great thing for which the ministry is appointed. This
is wrong. Learning is important, and always useful But
after all, a minister may know how to win souls to Christ.

gx


178 A WISE MINISTER WILL BE SUCCESSFUL


without learning, and he has the best education for a
Bee tis can win the most souls to Christ.

6. There is evidently a great defect in the present mode of
educating ministers. This is a SOLEMN FAOT, to which
the attention of the whole church should be distinctly called ;
that the great mass of young ministers who are educated ac
complish very little. suh

When young men come out from the seminaries, are they
fit to go into a revival? Look ata place where there has
been a revival in progress, and a minister is wanted. Let
them send to a theological seminary for a minister. Will he
enter into the work, and sustain it, and carry it on? Seldom.
Like David with Saul’s armor, he comes in with such a load
ot theological trumpery, that he knows nothing what to do.
Leave him there for two weeks, and the revival is at an end.
The churches know and feel, that the greater part of these

oung men do not know how to do anything that needs to
be done for a revival, and they are complaining that the
young ministers are so far behind the church. You may send
all over the United States, to theological seminaries, and find
but few young ministers fitted to carry forward the work.
What a state of things!

There is a grand defect in educating ministers. Education
ought to be such, as to prepare young men for the peculiar
work to which they are destined. But instead of this, they are
educated for any thing else. The grand mistake is this.
They direct the mind too much to irrelevant matters, which are
not necessary to be attended to. In their courses of study,
they carry the mind over too wide a field, which diverts their
attention from the main thing, and so they get cold in religion,
and when they get through, instead of being fitted for their
work, they are unjitted for it. Under pretence of disciplining
the mind, they in fact scatter the attention, so that when they
come to their work, they are awkward, and know nothing
how to take hold, or how to act, to win souls. This is not
universally the case, but too often it is so.

It is common for people to talk loudly and largely about
an educated ministry. God forbid that I should say a word
against an educated ministry. But what do we mean by an
education for the ministry? Do we mean that they should
be so educated, as to be fitted for the work? If they are so
educated, the more education the better. Let education be
of the right kind, teaching a young man the things he needs
to know, and not the very things he does not need to know.
Let them be educated for the work. Do not let education be


A WISE MINISTER WILL BE SUCCESSFUL. 179


such, that when young men come out, after spending six,
eight, or ten years in study, they are not worth half as much
as they were before they went. I have known young men
come out after what they call “a thorough course,” who were
not fit to take charge of a prayer meeting, and who could not
manage a prayer meeting, so as to make it profitable or in-
teresting. An elder of a church in a neighboring city, in-
formed me recently of a case in point. A young man, before
he went to the seminary, had labored as a layman with them,
conducted their prayer meetings, and had been exceedingly
aseful among them. After he had been to the seminary, they
sent for him and desired his help ; but oh, how changed! he
was so completely transformed, that he made no impression ;
the church soon began to complain that they should die un
der his influences, and he left, because he was not prepared
for the work.

It is common for those ministers who have been to the
seminaries, and are now useful, to affirm that their course of
studies there did them little or no good, and that they had
to unlearn what they had there learned, before they could effect
much. I do not say this censoriously, but it is a solemn fact,
and I must say it in love.

Suppose you were going to make a man a surgeon in the
navy. Instead of sending him to the medical school to learn
surgery, would you send him to the nautical school to learn
navigation? In this way, you might qualify him to navigate
a ship, but he is no surgeon. Ministers should be educated
to know what the Bible is, and what the human mind is, and
know how to bring one to bear on the other. They should
be brought into contact with mind, and made familiar with
all the aspects of society. They should have the Bible in one
hand, and the map of the human mind in the other, and
know how to use the truth for the salvation of men.

7. A want of common sense often defeats the ends of the
Christian ministry. There are many good men in the minis-
try, who have learning, and talents of a certain sort, but
they have no common sense to. win souls.

8. We see one great defect in our theological schools.—
Young men are shut up in their schools, confined to books
and shut out from intercourse with the common people, or
contact with the common mind. Hence they are not familiar
with the mode in which common people think. This accounts
for the fact that some plain men, that have been brought up
to business, and acquainted with human nature, are ten
times better qualified to win souls than those who are edu-


180 A WISE MINISTER WILL BE SUCCESSFUL


cated on the present principle, and are in fact ten times as
well acquainted with the proper business of the ministry.
These are called “uneducated men.” This is a grand mis-
take. They are not learned in science, but they are learned
in the very things which they need to know as ministers.
They are not ignorant ministers, for they know exactly how
to reach the mind with truth. They understand the minds
of men, and how to adapt the gospel to their case. They
are better furnished for their work, than if they had all the
machinery of the schools.

I wish to be understood. Ido not say that I would not
have a young man go to school. Nor would I discourage

im from going over the field of science. The more the bet-
ter, if together with it he learns also the things that the min-
ister needs to know, in order to win souls—if he understands
his Bible, and understands human nature, and knows how to
bring the truth to bear, and how to guide and manage minds,
and to lead them away from sin and lead them to God.

9. The success of any measure designed to promote a re-
vival of religion, demonstrates its wisdom with the follow-
ing exceptions :

(1.) A measure may be introduced for effect to produce
excitement, and be such that when it is looked back upon
afterwards, it will look nonsensical, and appear to have been
a mere trick. In that case, it will react, and its introduction
will do more hurt than good.

(2.) Measures may be introduced, and the revival be very
powerful, and the success be attributed to the measures, when
in fact other things made the revival powerful, and these very
measures may have been a hinderance. The prayers of
Christians, and the preaching, and other things may have
been so well calculated to carry on the work, that it has suo
ceded in spite of these measures.

But when the blessing evidently follows the introduction of
the measure itself, the proof is unanswerable, that the measure
is wise. It is profane to say that such a measure will do
more hurt than good. God knows about that. His object
is, to do the greatest amount of good possible. And of course
he will not add his blessing to a measure that will do more
hurt than good. He may sometimes withhold his blessing
from „a measure that is calculated to do some good because
it will be at the expense of a greater good. But he
never will bless a pernicious proceeding. There is no such
thing as deceiving God in the matter. He knows whether a
given measure is, on the whole, wise, or not. He may bless


A WISE MINISTER WILL BE SUCCESSFUL. 181


a eourse of labours notwithstanding some unwise or injurious
measures. But if he blesses the measure itself, it is rebuking
God to pronounce it unwise. He who undertakes to do this,
let him look to the matter.

10. It is evident that much fault has been found with meas-
ures, which have been pre-eminently and continually blessed
of God for the promotion of revivals. We know it is said
that the horrid oaths of a profane swearer have been the
means of awakening another less hardened sinner. But this
is a rare case. God does not usually make such a use of pro-
fanity. But if a measure is continually or usually blessed, let
the man who thinks he is wiser than God, call it in question.
TAKE CARE how you find fault with God!

11. Christians should pray for ministers. Brethren, if you
felt how much ministers need wisdom to perform the duties
of their great office with success, and how ignorant they all
are, and how insufficient they are of themselves, to think any-
thing as of themselves, you would pray for them a great deal
more than you do ; that is, if you cared anything for the suc
cess of their labors. People often find fault with ministers,
when they do not pray for them. Brethren, this is tempting
God, for you ought not to expect any better ministers, unless
you pray for them. And you ought not to expect a blessing
on the labors of your minister, or to have your families con-
verted by his preaching, where you do not pray for him. And
so for others, the waste places, and the heathen, instead of
praying all the time, only that God would send out more

borers, you have need to pray that God would make min-
isters wise to win souls, and that those he sends out may be
properly educated, so that they shall be scribes well instructed
in the kingdom of God.

12. Those laymen in the church who know how to win
souls are to be counted wise. They should not be called
“ ignorant laymen.” And those church members who do not
know how to convert sinners, and who cannot win souls,
should not be called wise—as Christians. They are not wise
Christians ; only “he that winneth souls is wise.” They may
be learned in politics, in all sciences, or they may be skilled
in the management of business, or other things, and they may
look down on those who win souls, as nothing but plain,
simple-hearted and ignorant men. If any of you are inclined
tc do this, and to undervalue those brethren who win souls,
as being not so wise and cunning as you are, you deceive

urselves. They may not know some things which you
now But they know those things which a Christian is
most concerned to know, and you do not.


182 A WISH MINISTER WILL BE SUCCESSFUL


It may be illustrated by the case of a minister that goes te
sea. He may be learned in science, but he knows nothing
how to sail a ship. And he begins to ask the sailors abou*
this thing and that, and what is this rope for, and the like.
“Why,” say the sailors, “these are not ropes, we have only
one rope in a ship, these are the rigging, the man talks like a
fool” And so this learned man becomes a laughing-stock,
perhaps, to the sailors, because he does not know how to sail
a ship. But if he were to tell them one half of what he
knows about science, perhaps they would think him a con-
juror, to know so much. So that learned students may
understand their hic, hac, hoc, very well, and may laugh at
the humble Christian, and call him ignorant, although he
may know how to win more souls than five hundred of them.

I was once distressed and grieved at hearing a minister
bearing down upon a young preacher, who had been com
verted under remarkable circumstances, and who was licensed
to preach without pursuing a regular course of study. This
minister, who was never, or at least very rarely, known to
convert a soul, bore down upon the young man in a very
lordly, censorious manner, depreciating him because he had
not had the advantage of a liberal education, when in fact he
was instrumental in converting more souls than any five hun-
dred ministers like himself.

I would say nothing to undervalue, or lead you to under
value a thorough education for ministers. But I do not call
that a thorough education, which they get in our colleges and
seminaries. It does not fit them for their work. I appeal to
all experience, whether our young men in seminaries are
thoroughly educated for the purpose of winning souls. Do
THEY po rr? Everybody knows they do not. Look at the
reports of the Home Missionary Society. If I recollect right,
in 1830, the number of conversions in connection with the
labors of the missionaries of that society did not exceed five
to each missionary. I believe the number has increased
since, but is still exceedingly small to what it would have
been had they been fitted by a right course of training for
their work. J do not say this to reproach them, for from my
heart I pity them, and I pity the church for being under the
necessity of supporting ministers so trained, or none at all.
They are the best men the Missionary Society can obtain
I suppose, of course, that I shall be reproached for saying
this. But it is too true and too painful to be concealed.
Those fathers who have the training of our young ministers
are good men, but they are ancient men, men of another age


A WISE MINISTER WILL BE SUCCESSFUL, 188


and stamp, from what is needed in these days of excitement,
when the church and world are rising to new thought and
action. Those dear fathers will not, I suppose, see this ; and
will perhaps think hard of me for saying it; but it is the
cause of Christ. Some of them are getting back toward
second childhood, and ought to resign, and give place to
younger men, who are not rendered physically incapable, by
age, of keeping pace with the onward movements of the
church. And here I would say, that to my own mind, it ap-
pears evident, that unless our theological professors preach a
good deal, mingle much with the church, and sympathize
with her in all her movements, it is morally, if not naturally,
impossible, that they should succeed in training young men to
the spirit of the age. It is a shame and a sin, that theolog-
ical professors, who preach but seldom, who are withdrawn
from the active duties of the ministry, should sit in their
studies and write their letters, advisory, or dictatorial, to
ministers and churches who are in the field, and who are in
circumstances to judge what needs to be done. The men
who spend all or at least a portion of their time in the active
duties of the ministry, are the only men who are able to
judge of what is expedient or inexpedient, prudent or im-
prudent, as to measures from time to time. It is as danger-
ous and ridiculous for our theological professors, who are
withdrawn from the field of conflict, to be allowed to dictate,
in regard to the measures and movements of the church, as
it would be for a general to sit in his bed-chamber and at
tempt to order a battle.*

Two ministers were one day conversing about another min
ister whose labors were greatly blessed in the conversion of
some thousands of souls. One of them said, “That man
ought not to preach any more ; he should stop and go to”
a particular theological seminary which he named, “ and go
through a regular course of study.” He said the man had
“a good mind, and if he was thoroughly educated, he ‘might
be very useful.” The other replied, “ Do you think he would
be more useful for going to that seminary? I challenge you
to show by facts that any are more useful who have been
there. No, sir, the fact is, that since this man has been in
the ministry, he has been instrumental in converting more
souls than all the young men who have come from that semin-
ary in the time.” This is logic! Stop, and go to a seminary,


een


# This was said in 1833.


184 A WISE MINISTER WILL BE SUCCESSFUL.


to prepare himself for converting souls, when he is now con
verting more than all who come from the seminary !

Finatty.—I wish to ask you, before I sit down, who among
you can lay any claim to the possession of this Divine wis-
dom? Who among you, laymen? Who among you, minis
ters? Can any of you? Can I? Are we at work, wisely,
to win souls? Or are we trying to make ourselves believe
that success is no criterion of wisdom? Jt is a criterion. It
is a safe criterion for every minister to try himself by. The
amount of his success, other things being equal, measures the
amount of wisdom he has exercised in the discharge of his
office.

How few of you have ever had wisdom enough to convert
so much as a smgle sinner!

Do not say now, “I cannot convert sinners ; how can I con-
vert sinners? God alone can convert sinners.” Look at the
text, “ He that winneth souls is wise,” and do not think you
can escape the sentence. It is true that God converts sinners
But there is a sense, too, in which ministers convert them.
And you have something to do ; something that requires wis-
dom ; something which, if you do it wisely, will insure the
conversion of sinners in proportion to the wisdom employed.
If you never have done this, it is high time to think about
yourselves, and see whether you have wisdom enough to save
even your own souls.

Men—women—you are bound to be wise in winning souls.
Perhaps already souls have perished ; perhaps a friend, or a
child is in hell, because you have not put forth the wisdom
which you might, in saving them. The city is going to hell
Yes, the world is going to hell, and must go on, till the church
finds out what to do, to win souls. Politicians are wise. The
children of this world are wise, they know what to do to ac
complish their ends, while we are prosing about, not know
ing what to do, or where to take hold of the work, and sin
ners are going to hell.


LECTURE XI.


HOW TO PREACH THE GOSPEL.


Tuxr.—He that winneth souls is wise.—PROVERBS xi. 30.


One of the last remarks in my last lecture, was this, that
the text ascribes conversion to men. ‘Winning souls is con-
verting men. This evening I design to show,

L That several passages of Scripture ascribe conversion to
men.

IL That this is consistent with other passages which ascribe
conversion to God. ‘

IIL I propose to discuss several further particulars which
are deemed important, in regard to the preaching of the
Gospel, and which show that great practical wisdom is neces-
sary to win souls to Christ.

I. I am to show that the Bible ascribes conversion to men.

There are many passages which represent the conversion
of sinners as the work of men. In Daniel, xii. 3, it is said,
“ And they that be wise, shall shine as the brightness of the
firmanent ; and they that turn many to righteousness as stars
for ever and ever.” Here the work is ascribed to men. So
also in 1 Cor. iv. 15. “For though ye have ten thousand in-
structors in Christ, yet have ye not many fathers: for in
Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel.” Here
the apostle explicitly tells the Corinthians that he made them
Christians, with the Gospel or truth which he preached.
Again, in James, v. 19, 20, we are taught the same thing.
“Brethren, if any of you do err from the truth, and one con-
vect him ; let him know that he which converteth the sinner
from the error of his way shall seve a soul from death, and
shall hide a multitude of sins.” I might quote many other

assages, equally explicit. But these are sufficient abundant-
y to establish the fact, that the Bible does actually ascribe
conversion to men.

IL I proceed to show that this is not inconsistent with
those passages in which conversion is ascribed to God.

And here let me remark, that to my mind it often appears
very strange that men should ever suppose there was an in-
consistency here, or that they should eee overlooked


186 HOW TO PREACH THE GOSPEL


the plain common sense of the matter. How easy it is to see,
that there is a sense in which God converts them, and another
sense in which men convert them.

The Scriptures ascribe the conversion of a sinner to four dif-
ferent agencies—to men, to God, to the truth, and to the sinner
himself. The passages which ascribe it to the truth are the
largest class. That men should ever have overlooked this dis-
tinction, and should have regarded conversion as a work per-
formed exclusively by God,is surprising. So it is that any diffi-
culty should ever have been felt on the subject, or that peo-
ple should ever have professed themselves unable to reconcile
these several classes of passages.

Why, the Bible speaks on this subject, precisely as we
speak on common subjects. There is a man who has been
very sick. How natural it is for him to say of his physician,
“That man saved my life.” Does he mean to say that the
physician saved his life without reference to God? Certainly
not, unless he is an infidel. God made the physician, and he
made the medicine too. And it never can be shown but that
the agency of God is just as truly concerned in making the
medicine take effect to save life, as it is in making the truth
take effect to save a soul To afirm the contrary is down-
right atheism. It is true then, that the physician saved him,
and itis also true that God saved him. It is equally true
that the medicine saved his life, and that he saved his own
life by taking the medicine ; for the medicine would have done
no good if he had not voluntarily taken it, or yielded his body
to its power.

In the conversion of a sinner, it is true that God gives the
truth efficiency to turn the sinner to God. He is an active,
voluntary, powerful agent in changing the mind. But he is
not the only agent. The one that brings the truth to his no
tice is also an agent. We are apt to speak of ministers and
other men as only instruments in converting sinners. This is
not exactly correct. Man is something more than an instru-
ment. ‘Truth is the mere unconscious instrument. But man
is more, he is a voluntary, responsible agent in the business.
In my printed sermon, No. 1., which some of you may have
seen, I have illustrated this idea by the case of an individual
standing on the banks of Niagara.

“Suppose yourself to be standing on the banks of the Falls
of Niagara, As you stand upon the verge of the precipice,
you behold a man lost in deep reverie, approaching its verge
unconscious of his danger. He approaches nearer and nearer,
until he actually lifts his foot to take the final step that shall


HOW TO PREACH THE GOSPEL 187


Plunge him in destruction. At this moment you lift tes
warning voice above the roar of the foaming waters, an cry
out, Stop. The voice pierces his ear, and breaks the charm
that binds him ; he turns instantly upon his heel ; all pale and
aghast he retires, quivering, from the verge of death. He
reels and almost swoons with horror ; turns and walks slowly
to the public house ; you follow him ; the manifest agitation
in his countenance calls numbers around him ; and 6n your
approach, he points to you, and says, That man saved my
life. Here he ascribes the work to you; and certainly there
is a sense in which you had saved him. But, on being further
questioned, he says, Stop/ how that word rings in my ears.
Oh, that was to me the word of life! Here he ascribes it to
the word that aroused him, and caused him to turn. But, on
conversing still further, he says, Had I not turned at that in-
stant, I should have been a dead man. Here he speaks of it,
and truly, as his own act ; but directly you hear him say, Oh
the mercy of God! if God had not interposed, I should have
been lost. Now the only defect in this illustration is this:
In the case supposed, the only interference on the part of
God, was a providential one ; and the only sense in which the
saving of the man’s life is ascribed to him, is in a providential
sense. But in the conversion of a sinner, there is something
more than the providence of God employed ; for here not
only does the providence of God so order it, that the preacher
cries, Stop, but the Spirit of God urges the truth home upon
him with such tremendous power as to induce him to
turn.”

Not only does the preacher cry, Stop, but through the liv-
ing voice of the preacher, the Spirit cries, Stop. The preacher
cries, “ Turn ye, why will ye die.” The Spirit pours the ex-
postulation home with such power, that the sinner turns.
Now in speaking of this change, it is perfectly proper to say,
that the Spirit turned him, just as you would say of a man,
who had persuaded another to change his mind on the sub-
ject of politics, that he had converted him, and brought him
over. It is also proper to say that the truth converted him ;
as in a case when the political sentiments of a man were
changed by a certain argument, we should say that argument
brought him over. So also with perfect propriety may we
ascribe the change to the living preacher, or to him who
had presented the motives ; just as we should say of a law-
yer who had prevailed in his argument with a jury ; he has
got his case, he has converted the jury. It is also with the
same propriety ascribed to the individual himself whose heart


188 HOW TO PREACH THE GOSPEL.


is changed ; we should say he had changed his mind, he has
come over, he has repented. Now it is strictly true, and trua
in the most absolute and highest sense; the act is his own
act, the turning is his own turning, while God by the truth
has induced him to turn ; still it is strictly true that he has
turned and has done it himself. Thus you see the sense in
which it is the work of God, and also the sense in which
it is the sinner’s own work. The Spirit of God, by the
truth, influences the sinner to change, and in this sense is the
efficient cause of the change. But the sinner actually changes,
and is therefore himself, in the most proper sense, the author
of the change. There are some who, on reading their Bibles,
fasten their eyes upon those passages that ascribe the work
to the Spirit of God, and seem to overlook those that ascribe
it to man, and speak of it as the sinners own act. When
they have quoted Scripture to prove it is the work of God,
they seem to think they have proved that it is that in which
man is passive, and that it can in no sense be the work of
man. Some months since a tract was written, the title of
which was, “ Regeneration, the effect of Divine Power.” The
writer goes on to prove that the work is wrought by the
Spirit of God, and there stops. Now it had been just as
true, just as philosophical, and just as scriptural, if he had said,
that conversion was the work of man. It was easy to prove
that it was the work of God, in the sense in which I have ex-
plained it. The writer, therefore, tells the truth, so far as he
goes ; but he has told only half the truth. For while there
is a sense in which it is the work of God, as he has shown,
there is also a sense in which it is the work of man, as we
have just seen. The very title to this tract is a stumbling
block. It tells the truth, but it does not tell the whole truth.
And a tract might be written upon this proposition, that
“ Conversion or regeneration is the work of man ;? which would
be just as true, just as scriptural, and just as philosophical,
as the one to which I have alluded. Thus the writer, in his
zeal to recognise and honor God as concerned in this work,
by leaving out the fact that a change of heart is the sinner’s
own act, has left the sinner strongly intrenched, with his
weapons in his rebellious hands, stoutly resisting the claims
of his Maker, and waiting passively for God to make him a
new heart. Thus you see the consistency between the re
quirement of the text, and the declared fact that God is the
author of the new heart. God commands you to make you
a new heart, expects you to do it, and if it ever is done, you
must do it.”

And let me tell you, sinner, if you do not do it you will go


HOW TO PREACH THE GOSPEL 189


to hell, and to all eternity you will feel that you deserved to
be sent there for not having done it.

IL As proposed, I shall now advert to several important
particulars growing out of this subject, as connected with
preaching the Gospel, and which show that great practical
wisdom is indispensable to win souls to Christ.

And ris, in regard to the MATTER OF PREACHING.

1. All preaching should be practical.

The proper end of all doctrine is practice. An
brought forward as doctrine, which cannot be made use
of as practical, is not preaching the Gospel. There is none
of that sort of preaching in the Bible. That is all practical.
“All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for in-
struction in righteousness: that the man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works.” A
vast deal of preaching ‘in the present day, as well as in
past ages, is called doctrinal, as opposed to practical preach-
ing. The very idea of making this distinction is a device
of the devil. And a more abominable device Satan him-
self never devised. You sometimes hear certain men tell
a wonderful deal about the necessity of “ indoctrinating
the people.” By which they mean something different
from practical preaching ; teaching them certain doctrines,
as abstract truths, without any particular reference to prac
tice. And I have known a minister in the midst of a revival,
while surrounded with anxious sinners, leave off laboring
to convert souls, for the purpose of “indoctrinating” the
young converts, for fear somebody else should indoctrinate
them before him. And there the revival stops! Either
his doctrine was not true, or it was not preached in the
right way. To preach doctrines in an abstract way, and
not in reference to practice, is absurd. God always brings
in doctrine to regulate practice. To bring forward doc-
trinal views for any other object is not only nonsense, but it
is wicked, l

Some people are cpposed to doctrinal preaching. If they
have been used to near doctrines preached in a cold, ab-
stract way, no wonder they are opposed to it They ought
to be opposed to such preaching. But what can a man
preach, who preaches no doctrine? If he preaches no doc
trine, he preaches no gospel. And if he does not preach it
in a practical way, he does not preach the Gospel. All
preaching should be doctrinal, and all preaching should
be practical The very design of doctrine ia ta neanlata


190 HOW TO PREACH THE GOSPEL


practice. Any preaching that has not this tendency is not
the Gospel À loose, exhortatory style of preaching may at
fect the passions, and may produce excitement, but will
never sufficiently instruct the people to secure sound conver-
sions. On the other hand, preaching doctrine in an abstract
manner, may fill the head with notions, but will never sanctify
the heart or life.

2. Preaching should be direct. The Gospel should be
preached fo men, and not about them. The minister must
address his hearers. He must preach to them about themselves,
and not leave the impression that he is preaching to them
about others. He will never do them any good, farther than
he succeeds in convincing each individual that he means him.
Many preachers seem very much afraid of making the im-
eression that they mean anybody in particular. They are
preaching against certain sins, not that have anything to do
with the sinner. Itis the sin, and not the sinner, that they
are rebuking ; and they would by no means speak as if they
supposed any of their hearers were guilty of these abominable
practices. Now this is anything but preaching the Gospel.
Thus did not the prophets, nor Christ, nor the apostles. Nor
do those ministers do this, who are successful in winning
souls to Christ.

3. Another very important thing to be regarded in preach-
ing is, that the minister should hunt after sinners and
Christians, wherever they may have intrenched themselves
in inaction. It is not the design of preaching, to make men
easy and quiet, but to make them ACT. It is not the design
of calling in a physician to have him give opiates, and so
cover up the disease and let it run on till it works death; but
to search out the disease wherever it may be hidden, and to
remove it. So if a professor of religion has backslidden, and
is full of doubts and fears, it is not the minister’s duty to
quiet him in his sins, and comfort him, but to hunt him
out of his errors and backslidings, and show him just where
= stands, and what it is that makes him full of doubts and
ears.

A minister ought to know the religious opinions of every
sinner in his congregation. Indeed, a minister in the country is
generally inexcusable if he does not. He has no excuse for not
knowing the religious views of all his congregation, and of
all that may come under his influence if he has had oppor:
tunity to know them. How otherwise can he preach to
them? How can he know how to bring forth things new
and old, and adapt truth to their case? How can he hut


HOW TO PREACH THE GOSPEL. 191


them out unless he knows where they hide themselves? He
may ring changes on a few fundamental doctrines, Repent
ance and Faith, and Faith and Repentance, till the day of
judgment, and never make any impression on many minds.
Every sinner has some hiding-place, some intrenchment
where he lingers. He is in possession of some darling LIK,
with which he is quieting himself Let the minister find it
out and get it away, either in the pulpit or in private, or the
man will go to hell in his sins, and his blood will be found in
the minister’s skirts.

4. Another important thing to observe is, that a minister
should dwell most on those particular points which are most
needed. I will explain what I mean.

Sometimes he may find a people who have been led tc
place great reliance on their own resolutions. They think
they can consult their own convenience, and by and by they
will repent, when they get ready, without any concern about
the Spirit of God. Let him take up these notions, and
show that they are entirely contrary to the Scriptures. Let
him show that if the Spirit of God is grieved away, however
able he may be, it is certain he never will repent, and that
by and by, when it shall be convenient for him to do it, he
will have no inclination, The minister who finds these errors
prevailing, should expose them. He should hunt them out,
and understand just how they are held, and then preach the
class of truths which will show the fallacy, the folly, and the
danger of these notions.

So on the other hand. He may find a people who have
got such views of Election and Sovereignty, as to think they
have nothing to do but to wait for the moving of the waters.
Let him go right over against them, and crowd upon them
their ability to obey God, and. show their obligation and
duty, and press them with that until he brings them to sub-
mit and be saved. They have got behind a perverted view
of these doctrines, and there is no way to drive them out
of the hiding-place but to set them right on these points.
Wherever a sinner is intrenched, unless you pour light upon
him there, you will never move him. Itis of no use to press
him with those truths which he admits, however plainly
they may in fact contradict his wrong notions. He supposes
them to be perfectly consistent, and does not see the incon-
sistency, and therefore it will not move him, or bring him to
repentance.

I have been informed of a minister in New England, who
wag settled in a congregation which had long enjoyed little


189 HOW TO PREACH THE GOSPEL.


else than Arminian preaching, and the congregation them
selves were chiefly Arminians. Well, this minister, in his
preaching, strongly insisted on the opposite points, the
doctrine of election, Divine sovereignty, predestination, ete
The consequence was, as might have been expected where
this was done with ability, there was a powerful revival
Some time afterwards this same minister was called to labor —
in another field, in this State, where the peo le were all on
the other side, and strongly tinctured with Antinomianism.
They had got such perverted views of election, and Divine
sovereignty, that they were continually saying they had no
power to do anything, but must wait God’s time. Now,
what does this minister do but immediately go to preaching
the doctrine of election. And when he was asked, how he
could think of preaching the doctrine of election so much to
that people, when it was the very thing that lulled them to a
deeper slumber, he replied “Why, that’s the very class of
truths by which I had such a great revival in ;? not
considering the difference in the views of the people. And
if I am correctly informed, there he is to this day, preaching
away at the doctrine of election, and wondering that it does
not produce as powerful a revival as it did in the other place.
Probably those sinners never will be converted. You must
take things as they are, find out where sinners lie, and pour
in truth upon them there, and START THEM OUT from
their refuges of lies. It is of vast importance that a minister
should find out where the congregation are, and preach ac
cordingly.

I have been in many places in times of revival, and I have
never been able to employ precisely the same course of preach-
ing in one as in another. Some are intrenched behind one
refuge, and some behind another. In one place, the church
will need to be instructed, in another, smners. In one place,
one set of truths, in another, another set. A minister must
find out where they are, and preach accordingly. I believe
this is the experience of all preachers who are called to labor
from field to field.

5. If a minister means to promote a revival, he should be
very careful not to introduce controversy. He will grieve
away the Spirit of God. In this way probably more revivals
are put down, than in any other. aul ake upon the history
of the church from the beginning, and you will see that minis-
fers are generally responsiole for grieving away the Spirit and
causing declensions by controversy It is the ministers who
bring forward controversial subjecta for discussion, and by


HOW TO PREACH THE GOSPEL. 193


and by they get very zealous on the subject, and then get the
church into a controversial spirit, and so the Spirit of God is
grieved away.

If I had time to go over the history of the church from the
days of the Apostles, I could show that all the controversies
that have taken place, and all the great declensions in religion,
too, were chargeable upon ministers. I believe the ministers
of the present day are responsible for the present state of the
church, and it will be seen to be true at the judgment. Who
does not know that ministers have been crying out “ Heresy,”
and “New Measures,” and talking about the “Evils of Revi-
vals,” until they have got the church all in confusion? Look
at the poor Presbyterian church, and see ministers getting up
their Act and Testimony, and keeping up a continual war!
O God, have mercy on ministers. They talk about their days
of fasting and prayer, but are these the men to call on others
to fast and pray? They ought to fast and pray themselves.
It is time that ministers should assemble together, and fast
and pray over the evil of controversy, for they have caused
it. The church itself never would get into a controversial
spirit unless led into it by ministers. The body of the church
are always averse to controversy, and will keep out of it, only
as they are dragged into it by ministers. When Christians
are revived they are not inclined to meddle with controversy,
either to read or hear it. But they may be told of such and
such “damnable heresies,” that are afloat, till they get their
feelings enlisted in controversy, and then farewell to the revi-
val. If a minister, in preaching, finds it necessary to discuss

articular points, about which Christians differ in opinion, let
ioe BY ALL MEANS avoid a controversial spirit and manner
of doing it.*

6. The Gospel should be preached in those proportions, that
the whole Gospel may be brought before the minds of the peo-
ple, and produce its proper influence. If too much stress is
laid on one class of truths, the Christian character will not
have its due proportions. Its symmetry will not be perfect. If
that class of truths be almost exclusively dwelt upon, that re-
quires great exertion of intellect, without being brought home
to the heart and conscience, it will be found that the church
will be indoctrinated in those views, will have their heads filled
with notions, but will not be awake, and active, and efficient
in the promotion of religion. If, on the other hand, the
preaching be loose, indefinite, exhortatory, and highly impas


* This was said with pain in 1893--4.
9


194 HOW TO PREACH THE GOSPEL,


sioned, the church will be like a ship, with too much sail for
her ballast. It will be in danger of being swept away by a
tempest of feeling, where there is not sufficient knowledge to
prevent their being carried away with every wind of doctrine.
If election and sovereignty are too much preached, there will
be Antinomianism in the church, and sinners will hide them-
selves behind the delusion that they can do nothing. If the
other doctrines of ability and obligation are too prominent,
they will produce Arminianism in the church, and sinners will
be blustering and self-confident.

When I entered the ministry, there had been so much said
about the doctrine of election and sovereignty, that I found
it was the universal hiding place, both of sinners and of the
church, that they could not do anything, or could not obey the
Gospel. And wherever I went, I found it indispensable to de-
molish these refuges of lies. And a revival would in no way
be produced or carried on, but by dwelling on that class of
truths, which holds up man’s ability, and obligation, and re-
sponsibility. This was the only class of truths that would
bring sinners to submission.

It was not so in the days when President Edwards and
Whitefield labored. Then the churches in New England had
enjoyed little else than Arminian preaching, and were all rest-
ing in themselves and their own strength. These bold and
devoted servants of God came out and declared those particu-
lar doctrines of grace, Divine sovereignty, and election, and
they were greatly blessed. They did not dwell on these doc
trines exclusively, but they preached them very fully. The
consequence was, that because in those circumstances revivals
followed from such preaching, the ministers who followed,
continued to preach these doctrines ulmost exclusively. And they
dwelt on them so long, that the church and the world got in-
trenched behind them, waiting for God to come and do what
he required them to do, and so revivals ceased for many years.

Now, and for years past, ministers have been engaged in
hunting them out from these refuges. And here it is all im-
portant for the ministers of this day to bear in mind, that if
they dwell exclusively on ability and obligation, they will get
their hearers back on the old Arminian ground, and then
they will cease to promote revivals. Here are a body of min-
isters who have preached a great deal of truth, and have had
great revivals, under God. Now let it be known and remarked,
that the reason is, they have hunted sinners out from their
hiding places. But if they continue to dwell on the same
class of truths till sinners hide themselves behind their preach


HOW TO PREACH THE GOSPEL, 108


ing, another class of truths must be preached. And then if
they do not change their mode, another pall will hang over
the church, until another class of ministers shall arise and
hunt sinners out of those new retreats.

A right view of both classes of truths, election and free
agency, will do no hurt. They are eminently calculated to
convert sinners and strengthen saints. It is a perverted view
which chills the heart of the church, and closes the eyes of
sinners in sleep, till they sink down to hell. If I had time I
would remark on the manner in which I have sometimes
heard the doctrines of Divine sovereignty, election, and ability
preached. They have been exhibited in irreconcilable con-
tradiction, the one against the other. Such exhibitions are
anything but the Gospel, and are calculated to make a
roa ae eel anything else rather than his responsibility to

od.

By preaching truth in proper proportions, I do not mean
mingling all things together in the same sermon, in such a
way that sinners will not see their connection or consistency.
A minister once asked another, Why do you not preach the
doctrine of election? Because, said the other, I find sinners
here are intrenched behind inability. The first then said he
once knew a minister who used to preach election in the fore-
noon, and repentance in the afternoon. Marvellous grace it
must be, that would produce a revival under such preaching
What connection is there in this? Instead of exhibiting to the
sinner his sins in the morning, and then and in the afternoon
calling on him to repent, he is first turned to the doctrine of
election, and then commanded to repent. What is he to re-
pent of? The doctrine of election? This is not what I mean
by preaching truth in its proportion. Bringing things to-
gether, that only confound the sinner’s mind, and overwhelm
him with a fog of metaphysics, is not wise preaching. When
talking of election, the preacher is not talking of the sinner’s
duty. It has no relation to the sinner’s duty. Election be-
longs to the government of God. It is a part of the exceed-
ing richness of the grace of God. It shows the love of God,
not the duty of the sinner. And to bring election and repent-
ance together in this way is diverting the sinner’s mind away
from his duty. It has been customary, in many places, for a
long time, to bring the doctrine of election into every sermon.
Sinners have been commanded to repent, and told that they
could not repent, in the same sermon. A great deal of inge
nuity has been exercised in endeavoring to reconcile a sinner’s
“inability” with his obligation to obey God. Election, pre


196 HOW TO PREACH THE GOSPEL


destination, free-agency, inability, and duty, have all been
thrown together in one promiscuous jumble. And with regard
to many sermons, it has been too true, as has been objected,
that ministers have preached, “You can and you can't,
you shall and you sha’n’t, you will and you won't, and
youll be damned if you don’t.” Such a mixture of truth
and error, of light and darkness, has confounded the congre-
gation, and been the fruitful source of Universalism and every
species of infidelity and error.

7. It is of great importance that the sinner should be made
to feel his guilt, and not left to the impression that he is un-
fortunate. I think this is a very prevailing fault, particularly
with printed books on the subject. They are calculated to
make the sinner think more of his sorrows than of his sins,
and feel that his state is rather unfortunate than criminal.
Perhaps most of you have seen a very lovely little book re
cently published, entitled “Todd’s Lectures to Children.” It
is very fine, exquisitely fine, and happy in some of its illustra-
tions of truth. But it has one very serious fault. Many of
its illustrations, I may say most of them, are not calculated
to make a correct impression respecting the guili of sinners,
or to make them feel how much they have been to blame.
This is very unfortunate. If the writer had guarded his illus-
trations on this point, so as to make them impress sinners
with a sense of their guilt, I do not see hôw a child could
read through that book and not be converted.

Multitudes of the books written for children, and for adults
too, within the last twenty years, have run into this mistake
to an alarming degree. Mrs. Sherwood’s writings have this
fault standing out upon almost every page. They are not cal-
culated to make the sinner blame and condemn himself. Un-
til you can do this, the Gospel will never take effect.

8. A prime object with the preacher must be to make pres-
ent obligation felt. I have talked, I suppose, with many thou-
sands of anxious sinners. And I have found that they had
never before felt the pressure of present obligation. The im-
pression is not commonly made by ministers in their preach-
ing that sinners are expected to repent NOW. And if minis
ters suppose they make this impression, they deceive them-
selves. Most commonly any other impression is made upon
the minds of sinners by the preacher, than that they are ex-

ected now to submit. Bat what sort of a gospel is this?
oes God authorize such an impression? Is this according
to the preaching of Jesus Christ? Does the Holy Spirit,
when striving with the sinner, make the impression upon hig


HOW TO PREACH THE GOSPEL. 19


mind that he is not expected to obey now ?—Was any such
impression produced by the preaching of the apostles? How
does it happen that so many ministers now preach, so as in
fact to make an impression on their hearers, that they are not
expected to repent now? Until the sinner’s conscience is
reached on this subject, you preach to him in vain. And until
ministers learn how to preach so as to make the right impres
sion, the world never can be converted. Oh, to what an alarm-
ing extent does the impression now prevail among the impeni-
tent, that they are not expected to repent now, but must wait
God’s time!

9. Sinners ought to be made to feel that they have some
thing to do, and that is to repent ; that it is something which
no other being can do for them, neither God nor man, and
something which they can do, and do now. Religion is some-
thing to do, not something to wait for. And they must do it
now, or they are in danger of eternal death.

10. Ministers should never rest satisfied, until they have
ANNIHILATED every excuse of sinners. The plea of “ in-
ability” is the worst of all excuses. It slanders God so, charg-
ing him with infinite tyranny, in commanding men to do that
which they have no power to do. Make the sinner see and
feel that this is the very nature of his excuse. Make the sin-
ner see that all pleas in excuse for not submitting to God, are
an act of rebellion against him. Tear away the last LIE
which he grasps in his hand, and make him feel that he is
absolutely condemned before God.

11. Sinners should be made to feel that if they now grieve
away the Spirit of God, it is very probable that they will be
wst for ever. There is infinite danger of this. They should
be made to understand why they are dependent on the Spirit,
and that it is not because they cannot do what God commands,
but because they are unwilling ; but that they are so unwilling
that it is just as certain they will not repent without the Holy
Ghost, as if they were now in hell, or as if they were actually
unable. They are so opposed and so unwilling, that they
never will repent in the world, unless God sends his Holy
Spirit upon them.

Show them, too, that a sinner under the Gospel, who hears
the truth preached, if converted at all, is generally converted
young. And if not converted while young, he is commonly
given up of God. Where the truth is preached, sinners are
either gospel-hardened or converted. I know some old sin-
ners are converted, but they are rather exceptions, and by no
means common.


198 HOW TO PREACH THE GOSPEL.


I wish now, szconpLy, to make a few remarks on the MANNES
OF PREACHING.

1. It should be conversational. Preaching, to be under
stood, should be colloquial in its style. A minister must
preach just as he would talk, if he wishes to be fully under-
stood. Nothing is more calculated to make a sinner feel that
religion is some mysterious thing that he cannot understand,
than this mouthing, formal, lofty style of speaking, so gener-
ally employed in the pulpit. The minister ought to do as the
lawyer does when he wants to make a jury understand him
perfectly. He uses a style perfectly colloquial. This lofty,
swelling style will do no good. The Gospel will never pro
duce any great effects, until ministers talk to their hearers, in
the pulpit, as they talk in private conversation.

2. It must be in the language of common life. Not only
should it be colloquial in its style, but the words should be
such as are in common use. Otherwise they will not be
understood. In the New Testament you will observe that
Jesus Christ invariably uses words of the most common kind.
You scarcely find a word of his instructions, that any child
cannot understand. The language of the gospels is the plain-
est, simplest, and most easily understood of any language in
the world.

For a minister to neglect this principle, is wicked. Some
ministers use language that is purely ¿echnical in preaching.
They think to avoid the mischief by explaining the meaning
fully at the outset ; but this will not answer. It will not effect
the object in making the people understand what he means.
If he uses a word that is not in common use, and that people
do not understand, his explanation may be very full, but the
difficalty is that people will forget his explanations and then
his words are all Greek to them. Or if he uses a word in
common use, but employs it in an uncommon sense, giving his
special explanations, it is no better ; for the people will soon
forget his special explanations, and then the impression actu-
ally conveyed to their minds will be according to their common
understanding of the word. And thus he will never convey
the right idea to his congregation. It is amazing how many
men of thinking minds there are in congregations, who do
not understand the most common technical expressions em-
ployed by ministers, such as regeneration, sanctification, ete.

Use words that can be perfectly understood. Do not, for
fear of appearing unlearned, use language half Latin and half
Greek, which the people do not understand. The apostle
says the man is a barbarian, who uses language that the peo


HOW TO PREACH THE GOSPEL. 199


pfe do not understand. And “if the trumpet give an uncer-
tain sound, who shall prepare himself for the battle?” In
the apostles’ days there were some preachers, who were mar
vellously proud of displaying their command of language,
and showing off the variety of tongues they could speak,
which the common people could not understand. The apostle
rebukes this spirit sharply, and says, “I had rather speak five
words with my understanding, that by my voice I might
teach others also, than ten thousand words in an unknown
tongue.”

I have sometimes heard ministers preach, even when there
was a revival, when I have wondered what that part of the
congregation would do, who had no dictionary. So many
phrases were brought in, manifestly to adorn the discourse,
rather than to instruct the people, that I have felt as if I
wanted to tell the man, “ Sit down, and not confound the peo-
ple’s minds with your barbarian preaching, that they cannot
understand.” s

3. Preaching should be parabolical. That is, illustrations
should be constantly used, drawn from incidents, real or sup-
posed. Jesus Christ constantly illustrated his instructions in
this way. He would either advance a principle and then illus-
trate it by a parable, that is, a short story of some event real
or imaginary, or else he would bring out the principle in the
- parable. There are millions of facts that can be used to ad-
vantage, and yet very few ministers dare to use them, for fear
somebody will reproach them. “Oh,” says somebody, “he
tells stories.” Tells stories! Why, that is the way Jesus
Christ preached. And it is the only way to preach. Facts,
real or supposed, should be used to show the truth. Truths
not illustrated, are generally just as well calculated to convert
sinners as a mathematical demonstration. Is it always to be
so? Shall it always be matter of reproach, that ministerg
follow the example of Jesus Christ, in Wustrating truths by
facts? Let them do it, and let fools reproach them as story-
telling ministers. They have Jesus Christ and common sense
on their side.

4. The illustrations should be drawn from common life, and
the common business of society. I once heard a minister
illustrate his ideas by the manner in which merchants trane-
act business in their stores. Another minister who was pres-
ent made some remarks to him afterwards. He objected to
this illustration particularly, because, he said, it was too fami-
liar, and was letting down the dignity of the pulpit. He said
all illustration in preaching should be drawn from ancient


200 HOW TO PREACH THE GOSPEL


history, or from some elevated source, that would keep up the
dignity of the pulpit. Dignity indeed! Just the language of
the devil. He rejoices in it. Why, the object of an illustra-
tion is, to make people see the truth, not to bolster up pulpit
dignity. A minister whose heart is in the work, does not use
an illustration to make people stare, but to make them see the
truth. If he brought forward his illustrations from ancient
history, it could not make the people see, it would not illus-
trate anything. The novelty of the thing might awaken their
attention, but then they would lose the truth itself. For if
the illustration itself be a novelty, the attention will be direct-
ed to this fact as a matter of history, and the truth itself,
which it was designed to illustrate, will be lost sight of. The
illustration should, if possible, be a matter of common occur-
rence, and the more common the occurrence the more sure it
will be, not to fix attention upon itself, but it serves as a
medium through which the truth is conveyed. I have been
pained at the very heart, at hearing illustrations drawn from
ancient history, of which not one in a hundred of the congre-
gation had ever heard. The very manner in which they were
adverted to, was strongly tinctured, to say the least, with the
appearance of vanity, and an attempt to surprise the people
with an exhibition of learning.

The Saviour always illustrated his instructions by things
that were taking place among the people to whom he preached,
and with which their minds were familiar. He descended
often very far below what is now supposed to be essential to
support the dignity of the pulpit. He talked about the hens
and chickens, and children in market-places, and sheep and
lambs, shepherds and farmers, and husbandmen and mer-
chants. And when he talked about kings, as in the marriage
of the king’s son, and the nobleman that went into a far
country to receive a kingdom, he had reference to historical
facts, that were well known among the people at the time.
The illustration should always be drawn from things so com-
mon that the illustration itself will not attract attention away
from the subject, but that people may see through it the truth
illustrated.

5. Preaching should be repetitious. If a minister wishes
to preach with effect, he must not be afraid of repeating
whatever he sees is not perfectly understood by his hearers.
Here is the evil of using notes. The preacher preaches
right along just as he has it written down, and cannot ob-
serve whether he is understood or not. If he interrupts hig
reading, and attempts to catch the countenances of his audi-


HOW TO PREACH THE GOSPEL 201


ence, and to explain where he sees they do not understand,
he gets lost and confused, and gives it up. If a minister has
his eyes on on the people he is preaching to, he can com
monly tell by their looks whether they understand him. And
if he sees they do not understand any particular point, let
him stop and illustrate it. If they do not understand one
illustration, let him give another, and make it all clear to
their minds, before he goes on. But those who write their
sermons go right on, in a regular consecutive train, just as
in an essay or a book, and do not repeat their thoughts till
the audience fully comprehend them.

I was conversing with one of the first advocates in this
eountry. He said the difficulty which preachers find in mak-
ing themselves understood, is, that they do not repeat enough.
Says he, “In addressing a jury, I always expect that what-
ever I wish to impress upon their minds, I shall have to re-
peat at least twice, and often I repeat it three or four times,
and even as many times as there are jurymen before me.
Otherwise, I do not carry their minds along with me, so that
they can feel the force of what comes afterwards.” If a
jury under oath, called to decide on the common affairs of
this world, cannot apprehend an argument. unless there is so
much repetition, how is it to be expected that men will un:

derstand the preaching of the Gospel without it.

-~ In like manner the minister ought to turn an important
thought over and over before his audience, till even the chil-
dren understand it perfectly. Do not say that.so much repe-
tition will create disgust in cultivated minds. It will not
disgust. This is not what disgusts thinking men. They are
not weary of the efforts a minister makes to be understood,
The fact is, the more simple a preacher’s illustrations are,
und the more plain he makes everything, the more men of
mind are interested. I kn-w that men of the first minds
often get ideas they never had before, from illustrations which
were designed to bring the Gospel down to the comprehension
of a child. Such, men are commonly so occupied with the
affairs of this world, that they do not think much on the sub-
ject of religion, and they therefore need the plainest preach-
ing, and they will like it.

16. A minister should always feel deeply his subject, and
then he will suit the action to the word and the word to the
action, so as to make the full impression which the truth is
calculated to make. He should be in solemn earnest in what
he says. I heard lately a most judicious criticism on this
subject. “ How important it is that a minister should feel

9


202 HOW TO PREACH THE GOSPEL,


what he says. Then his actions will of course correspond te
his words. If he undertakes to make gestures, his arms may
go like a windmill, and yet make no impression.” It requires
the utmost stretch of art on the stage for the actors to make
their hearers feel. The design of elocution is to teach this
skill. But if a man feels his subject fully, he will naturally
do it. He will naturally do the very thing that elocution
laboriously teaches. See any common man in the streets,
who is earnest in talking. See with what force he gestures.
See a woman or a child in earnest. How natural To ges
ture with their hands is as natural as it is to move their
tongue and lips. It is the perfection of eloquence.

Let a minister, then, only feel what he says, and not be tied
to his notes, to read an essay, or to speak a piece, like a school-
boy, first on one foot and then on the other, put out first one
hand and then the other. Let him speak as he feels, and
act as he feels, and he will be eloquent.

No wonder that a great deal of preaching produces so
little effect. Gestures are of more importance than is gener
ally supposed. Mere words will never express the full mean:
ing of the Gospel. The manner of saying it is almost every-
thing. Suppose one of you, that is a mother, goes home to-
night, and as soon as you get into the door, the nurse comes
rushing up to you, with her whole soul in her countenance,
and tells you that your child is burnt to death. You would
believe it, and you would feel it too, at once. But suppose
she comes and tells it in a cold and careless manner. Would
that arouse you? No. Itis the earnestness of her manner,
and the distress of her looks, that tells the story. You know
something 1s the matter before she speaks a word.

T once heard a remark made, respecting a young minister’s
preaching, which was instructive. He was uneducated, in the
common sense of the term, but well calculated to win souls.
It was said of him, “The manner in which he comes in, and
sits in the pulpit, and rises to speak, is a sermon of itself.
It shows that he has something to say that is important and
solemn.” That man’s manner of saying some things I have
known to move the feelings of a whole congregation, when
the same things said in a prosing way would have produced
no effect at all.

A fact which was stated by one of the most distinguished
professors of elocution in the United States, ought to impress
ministers on this subject. That man was an infidel He said,
“ I have been fourteen years employed in teaching elocution
to ministers, and I know they do not believe the Christian


HOW TO PREACH THE GOSPEL. 208


ion. The Bible may be true. I do not pretend to know
as to that, but I know these ministers do not believe it I
can demonstrate that they do not. The perfection of my art
is to teach them to speak naturally on this subject. I go
to their studies, and converse with them, and they speak elo-
quently. I say to them, Gentlemen, if you will preach just
as you yourselves naturally speak on any other subject, in
which you are interested, you do not need to be taught. That
is just what I am trying to teach you. I hear you talk on
other subjects with admirable force and eloquence. I see
you go into the pulpit, and you speak and act as if you did
not believe what you are saying. RER told them, again and
again, to talk in the pulpit as they naturally talk to me.
And I cannot make them do it, and so I know they do not be-
lieve the Christian religion.”

I have mentioned this to show how universal it is, that men
will gesture right if they feel right. The only thing in the
way of ministers being natural speakers is, that they do not
DEEPLY FEEL. How can they be natural in elocution,
when they do not feel ?

7. A minister should aim to convert his congregation. But
you will ask, Does not all preaching aim at this? No. A
minister always has some aim in preaching, but most sermons
were never aimed at converting sinners. And if sinners
were converted under them, the preacher himself would be
amazed. I once heard a fact on this point. There were
two young ministers who had entered the ministry at the
same time. One of them had great success in converting
sinners, the other none. The latter inquired of the other, one
day, what was the reason of this difference. “ Why,” replied
the other, “the reason is, that I aim at a different end from
you, in preaching. My object is to convert sinners, but you
aim at no such thing. And then you go and lay it to sov-
ereignty in God, that you do not produce the same effect,
when you never aim at it. Here, take one of my sermons,
and preach it to your people, and see what the effect will be.”
The man did so, and preached the sermon, and it did pro-
duce effect. He was frightened when sinners began to weep ;
and when one came to him after meeting to ask what be
should do, the minister apologized to him, and said, “I did
not aim to wound you, I am sorry if I have hurt your feel-
ings.” Oh, horrible!

8. A minister must anticipate the objections of sinners, and
answer them. What does the lawyer do when pleading be
fore a jury? Oh, how differently is the cause of Jesus Christ


204 HOW TO PREACH THE GOSPEL.


pleaded from human causes! It was remarked by a lawyer,
that the cause of Jesus Christ had the fewest able advocates
of any cause in the world. And I partly believe it. Does a
lawyer go along in his argument in a regular train, and not
explain anything obscure, or anticipate the arguments of
his antagonist? If he did so, he would lose his case to a
certainty. But, no. The lawyer, who is pleading for money,
anticipates every objection, which may be made by his antag-
onist, and carefully removes or explains them, so as to leave
the ground all clear as he goes along, that the jury may be
settled on every point. But ministers often leave one diffi-
culty and another untouched. Sinners who hear them feel
the difficulty, and it is never got over in their minds, and
they never know how to remove it, and perhaps the minister
never takes the trouble to know that such difficulties exist,
and yet he wonders why his congregation is not converted,
and why there is no revival. How can he wonder at it, when
he has never hunted up the difficulties and objections that
sinners feel, and removed them ?

9. If a minister means to preach the Gospel with effect he
must be sure not to be monotonous. If he preaches in a mo-
notonous way, he will preach the people to sleep. Any mo-
notonous sound, great or small, if continued, disposes people
to sleep. The falls of Niagara, the roaring of the ocean, or
any sound ever so great or small, has this effect naturally on
the nervous system. You never hear this monotonous man-
ner from people in conversation. And a minister cannot be
monotonous in preaching, if he feels what he says.

10. A minister should address the feelings enough to secure
attention, and then deal with the conscience, and probe to the
quick. Appeals to the feelings alone will never convert sin-
ners. If the preacher deals too much in these, he may get up
an excitement, and have wave after wave of feeling flow over
the congregation, and people may be carried away as with a
flood, and rest in false hopes. The only way to secure sownd con-
versions is to deal faithfully with the conscience. If attention
flags at any time, appeal to the feelings again, and rouse it up ;
but do your work with conscience.

11. If he can, it is desirable that a minister should learn
the effect of one sermon, before he preaches another. Let him
learn if it is understood, if it has produced any impression,
if any difficulties are felt in regard to the subject which need
clearing up, if any objections are raised, and the ike. When
he knows it all, then he knows what to preach next. What
would be thought of the physician who should give medicine


HOW TO PREACH THE GOSPEL 205


to his patient, and then give it again and again, without try-
ing to learn the effect of the first, or whether it had produced
any effect or not? A minister never will be able to deal with
inners as he ought, till he can find out whether his instruc-
tion has been received and understood, and whether the dif-
ficulties in sinners’ minds are cleared away, and their path
open to the Saviour, so that they need not stumble and stum-
ble till their souls are lost.

I had designed to notice several other points, but time does
not admit. I wish to close with a few


REMARKS,


1. We see why so few of the leading minds in many com-
munities are converted.

Until the late revivals, professional men were rarely reached
by preaching, and they were almost all infidels at heart. Peo-
ple almost understood the Bible to warrant the idea, that they
could not be converted. The reason is obvious. The Gospel
had not been commended to the consciences of such men.
Ministers had not grappled with mind, and reasoned so as to
make that class of mind see the truth of the Gospel, and feel
its power, and consequently such persons had come to regard
religion as something unworthy their notice.

But of late years the case is altered, and in some places
there have been more of this class of persons converted, in
proportion to their numbers, than of any others. That is
because they were made to understand the claims of the Gos-
pel. The preacher grappled with their minds, and showed
them the reasonableness of religion. And when this is done,
it is found that that class of minds are more easily converted
than any other. They have so much better capacity to re
ceive an argument, and are so much more in the habit of
yielding to the force of reason, that as soon as the Gospel
gets a fair hold of their minds, it breaks them right down,
and melts them at the feet of Christ.

2. Before the Gospel can take general effect, we must have
a class of extempore preachers, for the following reasons :

(1.) No set of men can stand the labor of writing sermons
and doing all the preaching which will be requisite.

(2.) Written preaching is not calculated to produce the
requisite effect. Such preaching does not present truth in
the right shape.

(3.) It is impossible for a man who writes his sermons to
arrange his matter, and turn and choose his thoughta so as


206 HOW TO PREACH THE GOSPEL.


to produce the same effect as when he addresses the people
directly, and makes them feel that he means them. Writing
sermons had its origin in times of political difficulty. The
practice was unknown in the apostles’ days. No doubt writ-
ten sermons have done a great deal of good, but they can
never give to the Gospel its great power. Perhaps many
ministers have been so long trained in the use of notes, that
they had better not throw them away. Perhaps they would
make bad work without them. The difficulty would not be
for the want of mind, but from wrong training. The bad
habit is begun with the school boy, who is called to “speak
his piece.” Instead of being set to express his own thoughts
ind feelings in his own language, and with his own natural
manner, such as nature herself prompts, he is made to com-
mit another person’s writing to memory, and then mouths it
out in a stiff and formal way. And so when he goes to col-
lege, and to the seminary, instead of being trained to exiem-
pore speaking, he is set to writing his piece, and commit
it to memory. I would pursue the opposite course from the
beginning. I would give him a subject, and let him first
think, and then speak his thoughts. Perhaps he will make
mistakes. Very well, that is to be expected—in a beginner.
But he will learn. Suppose he is not eloquent, at first. Very
well, he can improve. And he is in the very way to improve.
This kind of training alone will ever raise up a class of min-
isters who can convert the world.

But it is objected to extemporaneous preaching, that if
ministers do not write, they will not think. This objection
will have weight with those men whose habit has always been
to write down their thoughts. But to a man of a different
habit, it will have no weight at all Writing is not thinking.
And if I should judge from many of the written ser
mons I have heard preached, the makers of them had
been doing anything rather than thinking. The mechanical
labor of writing is really a hinderance to close and rapid
thought. It is true that some extempore preachers have not
been men of thought. And so it is true that many men who
write sermons, are not men of thought. A man whose habits
have always been such, that he has thought only when he has
put his mind on the end of his pen, will of course, if he lays
aside his pen, at first find it difficult to think; and if he
attempts to preach without writing, will, until his habits are
thoroughly changed, find it difficult to throw into his sermons
the same amount of thought, as if he conformed to his old
habits of writing. But it should be remembered that this ia


HOW TO PREACH THE GOSPEL, 207


only on account of his having been trained to write, and hav-
ing always habituated himself to it. It is the training and
habit that renders it so difficult for him to think without
writing. Will any body pretend to say that lawyers are not
men of thought? That their arguments before a courtand jury,
are not profound and well digested? And yet every one knows
that they do not write their speeches. It should be under
stood, too, that in college, they have the same training with
ministers, and have the same disadvantage of having been
trained to write their thoughts ; and it is only after they en-
ter upon their profession, that they change their habit. Were
they educated, as they should be, to extempore habits in the
schools, they would be vastly more eloquent and powerful in
argument than they are.

I have heard much of this objection to extempore preach-
ing ever since I entered the ministry. It was often said to
me then, in answer to my views of extempore preaching, that
ministers who preached ‘extemporaneously, would not enstruct
the churches, that there would be a great deal of sameness in
their preaching, and they would soon become insipid and
repetitious for want of thought. But every year’s experience
has ripened the conviction on my mind, that the reverse of
this objection is true. The man who writes least may, if he
pleases, think most, and will say what he does think in a man-
ner that will be better understood than if it were written ;
and that, just in the proportion that he lays aside the labor
of writing, his body will be left free to exercise, and his mind
to vigorous and consecutive thought.

The great reason why it is supposed that extempore preach-
ers more frequently repeat the same thoughts in their preach-
ing, is because what they say is, in a general way, more per-
fectly remembered by the congregation, than if it had been
read. I have often known preachers, who could repeat their
written sermons once in a few months, without its being re-
cognised by the congregation. But the manner in which ex
tempore sermons are generally delivered is so much more
impressive, that the thoughts cannot in general be soon re
peated, without being remembered. We shall never have a
set of men in our halls of legislation, in our courts of justice,
and in our pulpits, that are powerful and overwhelming
speakers, and can carry the world before them, till our sys
tem of education teaches them to think, closely, rapidly, con-
secutively, and till all their habits of speaking in the schools
are extemporaneous. The very style of communicating
thought, in what is commonly called a good style of writing


208 HOW TO PREACH THE GOSPEL.


is not calculated to leave a deep impression on the mind, o
to communicate thought in a clear and impressive manner.
It is not laconic, direct, pertinent. It is not the language of
nature. It is impossible that gestures should be suized to the
common style of writing. And consequently, when they at-
tempt to gesture in reading an essay, or delivering a written
sermon, their gestures are a burlesque upon all public speak-
ing.
oh delivering a sermon in this essay style of writing, it is
impossible that nearly all the fire of meaning and power of
gesture, and looks, and attitude, and emphasis should not be
lost. We can never havé the full meaning of the Gospel, till
we throw away our notes.

3. A minister’s course of study and training for his work
should be exclusively theological.

I mean just as I say. Iam not now going to discuss the
question whether all education ought not to be theological.
But I say education for the ministry should be exclusively so.
But you will ask, Should not a minister understand science?
T would answer, Yes, the more the better. I would that
ministers might understand all science. But it should all be
in connection with theology. Studying science is studying
the works of God. And studying theology is studying God.

Let a scholar be asked, for instance, this question : “Is
there a God?” To answer it, let him ransack the universe,
let him go out into every department of science, to find the
pies of design, and in this way to learn the existence of

od. Let him next inquire how many gods there are, and
let him again ransack creation to see whether there is such a
unity of design as evinces that there is one God. In like
manner, let him inquire concerning the attributes of God,
and his character. He will learn science here, but will learn
it as a part of theology. Let him search every field of
knowledge, to bring forward his proofs. What was the de
sign of this plan? What was the end of that arrangement?
See whether everything you find in the universe is not calcu-
lated to produce happiness, unless perverted.

Would the student’s heart get hard and cold in study, as
cold and hard as the college walls, if science was pursued in
this way? Every lesson brings him right up before God, and
is in fact communion with God, and warms his heart, and
makes him more pious, more solemn, more holy. The very
distinction between classical and theological study is a curse
to the church, and a curse to the world. The student spends
four years in college at classical studies, and no God in them,


HOW TO PREACH THE GOSPEL. 209


and then three years in the seminary, at theological studies ;
and what then? Poor young man. Set him to work, and
i will find that he is not educated for the ministry at all.

he church groans under his preaching, because he does not
preach with unction, nor with power. Hoe has been spoiled
in training.

4. We learn what is revival preaching. All ministers should
be revival ministers, and all preaching should be revival
preaching ; that is, it should be calculated to promote holiness.
People say, “ It is very well to have some men in the church,
who are revival preachers, and who can go about aud promote
revivals ; but then you must have others to indoctrinate the
church.” Strange! Do they not know that a revival indoc
trinates the church faster than anything else? And a minis-
ter will never produce a revival, if he does not indoctrinate
his hearers. The preaching I have described, is full of doc-
trine, but it is doctrine to be practised. And that is revival
preaching. ;

5. There are two objections sometimes brought against the
kind of preaching which I haye recommended.

(1.) That it is letting down the dignity of the pulpit to preach
in this colloquial, lawyer-like style. They are shocked at it.
But it is only on account of its novelty, and not for any im-
propriety there is in the thing itself. I heard a remark made
by a leading layman in the centre of this State, in regard to
the preaching of a certain minister. He said it was the first
preaching he ever heard, that he understood, and the first
minister he ever heard that spoke as if he believed his own
doctrine, or meant what he said. And when he first heard
him preach as if he was saying something that he meant, he
thought he was crazy. But eventually, he was made to see
that it was all true, and he submitted to the truth, as the
power of God for the salvation of his soul.

What is the dignity of the pulpit? To see a minister go
into the pulpit to sustain its tay Alas, alas! During my
foreign tour, I heard an English missionary preach exactly in
that way. I believe he was a good man, and out of the pul-
pit he would talk like a man that meant what he said. But
no sooner was he in the pulpit, than he appeared like a per-
fect automaton—swelling, mouthing, and singing, enough to
put all the people to sleep. And the difficulty seemed to be,
that he wanted to maintain the dignity of the pulpit.

(2.) It is objected that this preaching is theatrical. The
bishop of London once asked Garrick, the celebrated play-
actor, why it was that actors, in representing a mere fiction,


210 HOW TO PREACH THE GOSPEL


should move an assembly, even to tears, while ministers, in
representing the most solemn realities, could scarcely obtain
a hearing. The philosophical Garrick well replied, “It is be
cause we represent fiction as reality, and you represent reality
as a fiction.” This is telling the whole story. Now what is
the design of the actor in a theatrical representation? It is
so to throw himself into the spirit and meaning of the writer,
as to adopt his sentiments, make them his own, feel them,
embody them, throw them out upon the audience as living
reality. And now, what is the objection to all this in preach-
ing? The actor suits the action to the word, and the word
to the action. His looks, his hands, his attitudes, and every-
thing are designed to express the full meaning of the writer.
Now this should be the aim of the preacher. And if by
“theatrical” be meant the strongest possible representation of
the sentiments expressed, then the more theatrical a sermon
is, the better. And if ministers are too stiff, and the people
too fastidious, to learn even from an actor, or from the stage,
the best method of swaying mind, of enforcing sentiment,
and diffusing the warmth of burning thought over a congre
gation, then they must go on with their prosing, and reading,
and sanctimonious starch. But let them remember, that
while they are thus turning away and decrying the art of the
actor, and attempting to support “the dignity of the pulpit,”
the theatres can be thronged every night. The common-sense
people will be entertained with that manner of speaking, and
sinners will go down to hell

6. A congregation may learn how to choose a minister.

When a vacant church are looking out for a minister, there
are two leading points on which they commonly fix their atten-
tion, (1.) That he should be popular. (2.) That he should
be learned, That is very well. But this point should be the
first in their inquiries—‘ Is he wise to win souls?” No matter
how eloquent a minister is, or how learned. No matter how
pleasing and popular in his manners. If it is a matter of fact
that sinners are not converted under his preaching, it shows
that he has not ¢h’s wisdom, and your children and neighbors
will go down to hell under his preaching.

_ Tam happy to know that many churches will ask this ques-
tion about ministers. And if they find that a minister is des
titute of this vital quality, they will not have him. And if
ministers can be found who are wise to win souls, the churches
will have such ministers. It is in vain to contend against it,
or to pretend that they are not well educated, or not learned,
or the like. It is in vain for the schools to try to force down


HOW TO PREACH THE GOSPEL 211


the throats of the churches a race of ministers who are learned
in everything but what they most need to know. The churches
have pronounced them not made right, and they will not sus-
tain that which is notoriously so inadequate as the present
system of theological education.

It is very difficult to say what needs to be said on this sub-
ject, without being in danger of begetting a wrong spirit in
the church, towards ministers. Many professors of religion
are ready to find fault with ministers when they have no rea-
son ; insomuch, that it becomes very difficult to say of min-
isters what is true, and what needs to be said, without its
being perverted and abused by this class of professors. I
would not for the world say anything to injure the influence
of a minister of Christ, who is really endeavoring to do good.
I would that they deserved a hundred times more influence
than they now deserve or have. But, to tell the truth will not
injure the influence of those ministers, who by their lives and
preaching give evidence to the church, that their object is to
do good, and win souls to Christ. This class of ministers will
recognise the truth of all that I have said, or wish to say.
They see it all, and deplore it. But if there be ministers who
are doing no good, who are feeding themselves and not the
flock, such ministers deserve no influence. If they are doing
no good, it is time for them to betake themselves to some
other profession. They are but leeches on the very vitals of
the church, sucking out its heart’s blood. They are useless,
and worse than useless. And the sooner they are laid aside,
and their places filled with those who will ezert themselves for
Christ the better.

Frarty—It is the duty of the church to pray for us, min-
isters. Not one of us is such as we ought to be. Like Paul,
we can say, “ Who is sufficient for these things?” But who
of us is like Paul? Where will you find such a minister as
Paul? They are not here. We have been wrongly educated,
all of us. Pray for the schools, and colleges, and seminaries.
And pray for young men who are preparing for the ministry.
Pray for ministers, that God would give them this wisdom to
win souls. And pray that God would bestow upon the church
the wisdom and the means to educate a generation of minis-
ters who will go forward and convert the world. The church
must ¢ravail in prayer, and groan and agonize for this. This
is now the pearl of price to the church, to have a supply of
the right sort of ministers. The coming of the millennium de
pends on having a different sort of ministers, who are more
thoroughly educated for their work, And this we shall have se


212 HOW TO PREACH THE GOSPEL.


sure as the promise of the Lord holds good. Such a minte

try as is now in the church will never convert the world. But

the world is to be converted, and therefore God intends te

have ministers who will do it. “Pray ye, therefore, the Lord

A the harvest, that he would send forth laborers into his
arvest,”


LECTURE XIL


HOW OHUROHES OAN HELP MINISTERS.


f'aar.—And it came to pass, when Moses held up his hand, that Israel prevailed
and when he let down his hand, Amalek prevailed. Bnt Moses’s hands were heavy :
and they took a stone, and put it under him, and he sat thereon: and Aaron and
Hur stayed up his hands, the one on the one side and the other on the other side;
and his hands were steady until the going down of the sun. And Joshua discom-
fited Amalek and his people with the edge of the sword.—Exopvus xvii. 11-13,


You who read your Bibles will recollect the connection in
which these verses stand. The people of God in subduing
their enemies came to battle against the Amalekites, and
these incidents took place. It is difficult to conceive why im-
portance should be attached to the circumstance of Moses
holding up his hands, unless the expression is understood
to denote the attitude of prayer. And then his holding up
his hands, and the success attending it, will teach us the im
portance of prayer to God, for his aid in all our conflicts
with the enemies of God. The co-operation and support of
Aaron and Hur have been generally understood to represent
the duty of churches to sustain and assist ministers in their
work, and the importance of this co-operation to the success
of the preached Gospel. I shall make this use of it on the
present occasion. As I have spoken of the duty of ministers
to labor for revivals, I shall now consider,


THE IMPORTANCE OF THE CO-OPERATION OF THE CHURCH IN
PRODUCING AND OARRBYING ON A REVIVAL.


There are a number of things whose importance in promot-
ing a revival has not been duly considered by churches and
ministers, which if not attended to will make it impossible
that revivals should extend, or even continue for any consid-
erable time. In my last two lectures, I have been dwelling
on the duties of ministers, as it was impossible for me to
preach a course of lectures on revivals without entering more
or less extensively into that department of means. I have
not done with that part of the subject, but have thought it
important here to step aside and discuss some points iu
which the church must stand by and arer minister, if


214 HOW CHURCHES CAN HELP MINISTEES,


they expect to enjoy a revival. In discussing the subject, I
opose,

MiTo mention several things which Christians must avoid,

if they would support ministers.

I. Some things to which they must attend.

L Iam to mention several things that must be avoided.

1. By all means keep clear of the idea, both in theory and
practice, that a minister is to promote revivals alone. Many
people are inclined to take a passive attitude on this subject,
and feel as if they had nothing todo. They have employed
a minister and paid him, to feed them with instruction and
comfort, and now they have nothing to do but to sit and
swallow the food he gives. They are to pay his salary, and
attend on his preaching, and they think that is doing a great
deal. And he on his part is expected to preach good, sound,
comfortable doctrine, to bolster them up, and make them feel
comfortable, and so they expect to go to heaven. I tell you,
THEY WILL GO TO HELL, if this is their religion.
That is not the way to heaven.

Rest assured that where this spirit prevails in the church,
however good the minister may be, the church have taken
the course to prevent a revival. If he is ever so faithful,
ever so much engaged, ever so talented and eloquent, he
may wear himself out, and perhaps destroy his life, but he
will have little or no revival.

Where there is no church, or very few members in the
church, a revival may be promoted without any organized
effort of the church, because it is not there, and in such a
case, God accommodates his grace to the circumstances, as
he did when the apostles went out, single-handed, to plant
the Gospel in the world. I have seen instances of powerful
revivals where such was the case. But where there are means,
God will have them used. I had rather have no church in a
place, than attempt to promote a revival in a place where
there is a church which will not work. God will be inquired
of by his people to bestow blessings. The counteracting in-
fluence of a church that will not work is worse than infidelity.
There is no possibility of occupying neutral ground, in re-
gard to a revival, though some professors imagine they are
neutral. If a professor will not lay himself out in the work,
he opposes it. Let such a one attempt to take middle ground,
and say he is going to wait and see how they come out—
why, that is the very ground the devil wants him to
take. Professors can in this way do his work a great deal
more effectually than by open opposition. Tf they take


HOW CHURCHES CAN HELP MINISTERS, 216


open ground in opposition, everybody will say they have no
religion. But by this middle course they retain their influ-
ence, and thus do the devil’s work more effectually.

In employing a minister, a church must remember that
they have only employed a leader to lead them on to action
in the cause of Christ. People would think it strange if any-
body should propose to support a general and then let him
go and fight alone! This is no more absurd, or destructive,
than for a minister to attempt to go forward alone. The
church misconceive the design of the ministry, if they leave
their minister to work alone. It is not enough that they
should hear the sermons. That is only the word of com-
mand, which the church are bound to follow.

2. Do not complain of your minister because there is no re
vival, if you are not doing your duty. It is of no use to com-
plain of there being no revival, if you are not doing your
duty. That alone is a sufficient reason why there should be
no revival. It is a most cruel and abominable thing for a
church to complain of their minister, when they themselves
are fast asleep. It is very common for professors of religion
to take great credit to themselves, and quiet their own con-
sciences by complaining of their ministers. And when the
importance of ministers being awake is spoken of, this sort
of people are ready to say, We never shall have a revival
with such a minister, when the fact is that their minister is
much more awake than they are themselves.

Another thing is true in regard to this point, and worthy
of notice. When the church is sunk down in a low state,
professors of religion are very apt to complain of the church,
and of the low state of religion among them. That intan-
gible and irresponsible being, the “church,” is greatly com-
plained of by them, for being asleep. Their complaints of
the low state of religion, and of the coldness of the church or
of the minister, are poured out dolefully, without their seeming
to realize that the church is composed of individuals, and that
until each one will take kis own case in hand, complain of
himself, and humble himself before God, and repent, and
wake up, the church can never have any efficiency, and there
never can be a revival. If instead of complaining of your
minister, or of the church, you would wake up as individuals,
and not complain of him or them until you can say you are
pure from the blood of all men, and are doing your duty to
save sinners, he would be apt to feel the justice of your com-
plaints, and if he would not, God would, and would either
wake him up or remove him.


216 HOW CHURCHES CAN HELP MINISTERS.


3. Do not let your minister kill himself by attempting to
carry on the work alone, while you refuse to help him. It some
times happens that a minister finds the ark of the Lord will not
move unless he lays out his utmost strength, and he has been
so desirous of a revival that he has done this, and has died.
And he was willing to die for it. I could mention some cases
in this State, where ministers have died, and no doubt in con-
sequence of their labors to promote a revival where the church
hung back from the work. :

I will mention one case. A minister, some years since, Was
laboring where there was a revival ; and was visited by an el-
der of a church at some distance who wanted him to go and
preach there. There was no revival there, and never had
been, and the elder complained about their state, said they
had had two excellent ministers, one had worn himself com-
pletely out and died, and the other had exhausted himself, and
got discouraged, and left them, and they were a poor and fee-
ble church, and their prospects very dark unless they could
have a revival, and so he begged this minister to go and help
them. He seemed to be very sorrowful, and the minister
heard his whining, and at last replied by asking, Why did
you never have a revival? I don’t know said the elder. Our
minister labored hard, but the church did not seem to wake
up, and somehow there seemed to be no revival ‘“ Well,
now,” said the minister, “I see what you want ; you have kill-
ed one of God’s ministers, and broken down another so that
he had to leave you, and now you want to get another there
and kill him, and the devil has sent you here to get me to go
and rock your cradle for you. You had one good minister to
preach to you, but you slept on, and he exerted himself till he
absolutely died in the work. Then the Lord let you have an
other, and still you lay and slept, and would not wake up to
your duty. And now you have come here in despair, and want
another minister, do you? God forbid that you should ever
have another while you do as you have done. God forbid that
you should ever have a minister, till the church will wake up
to duty.” The elder was affected, for he wasa goodman. The
tears came in his eyes, and he said it was no more than they
deserved. “And now,” said the minister, “will you be faithful,
and go home and tell the church what I say? If you will, and
they will be faithful and wake up to duty, they shall have a
minister, I will warrant them that.” The elder said he would,
and he was true to his word; he went home and told the
church how cruel it was for them to ask another minister to
come among them, unless they would wake up. They felt it,


HOW CHURCHES CAN HELP MINISTERS, 217


and confessed their sins, and waked up to duty, and a minister
was sent to them, and a precious and powerful revival followed.

Churches do not realize how often their coldness and back-
wardness may be absolutely the cause of the death of ministers.
The state of the people, and of sinners, rests upon their
mind, they travail in soul night and day, and they labor in
season and out of season, beyond the power of the human
constitution to bear, till they wear out and die. The church
know not the agony of a minister’s heart, when he travails
for souls, and labors to wake up the church to help, and still
sees them in the slumbers of death. Perhaps sometimes they
will rouse up to spasmodic effort for a few days, and then all
is cold again. And so many a faithful minister wears himself
out and dies, and then these heartless professors are the first
to blame him for doing so much.

I recollect a case of a good minister, who went to a place
where there was a revival, and while there heard a pointed
sermon to ministers. He received it like a man of God;
he did not rebel against God’s truth, but he vowed to God
that he never would rest until he saw a revival among his
people. He returned home and went to work; the church
would not wake up, except a few members, and the Lord
blessed ¢hem, and poured out his Spirit, but the minister
laid himself down on his bed and died, in the midst of the
revival

4, Be careful not to complain of plain, pointed preaching,
even when its reprocfs fasten on yourselves. Churches are apt
to forget that a minister is responsible only to God. They
want to make rules for a minister to preach by, so as not to
have it fit them. If he bears down on the church, and ex-
poses the sing that prevail among them, they call it personal,
and rebel against the truth. Or they say, he should not
preach so plainly te the church before the world ; it exposes
religion, they say, and he ought to take them by themselves
and preach to the church alone, and not tell sinners how bad
Christians are. But there are cases where a minister can do
no less than to show the house of Jacob their sins. If you
ask, Why not do it when we are by ourselves? I answer, Just
as if sinners did not know you did wrong. I will preach to
you by yourselves, about your own sins, when you will get to-
gether by yourselves to sin. But as the Lord liveth, if you
sin before the world, you shall be rebuked before the world.
Is it not a fact that sinners do know how you live, and that
they stumble over you into hell? Then do not blame min
isters, when they see it their duty to rebuke the church

10


218 HOW CHURCHES CAN HELP MINISTERS.


openly before the world. If you are so proud you cannot
bear this, you need not expect a revival. Do not call preach-
ing too plain because it exposes the faults of the church.
There is no such thing as preaching too plain. she

5. Sometimes professors take alarm, lest the minister
should offend the ungodly by plain preaching. And they will
begin to caution him against it, and ask him if he had not
better alter a little to avoid giving offence, and the like. This
fear is excited especially if some of the more wealthy and in-
fiuential members of the congregation are offended, lest they
should withdraw their support from the church, and no
longer give their money to help to pay the minister’s salary,
and so the burden will come the heavier on the church.
They never can have a revival in such a church. Why, the
church ought to pray, above all things, that the truth may
come on the ungodly like fire. What if they are offended ?
Christ can get along very well without their money. Do
not blame your minister, nor ask him to change his mode
of preaching to please and conciliate the ungodly. Itis of
no use for a minister to preach to the impenitent, unless he
can preach the truth to them. And it will do no good for
them to pay for the support of the Gospel, \mless it is
adr eG in such a way that they may be sewched and
Ba

Sometimes church members will talk among theu:selves
about the minister’s imprudence, and create a party, axd get
into a very wrong spirit, because the wicked are cdsphased.
There was a place where there was a powerful revivas and
great opposition. The church were alarmed, for fear that if
the minister was not less plain and pointed, some of the im-
penitent would go and join some other congregation. And
one of the leading men in the church was appointed to go to
the minister and ask him not to preach quite so hard, for if
he continued to do so, such and such persons would leave the
congregation. The minister asked, Is not the preaching
true? “Yes.” Does not God bless it? “Yes.” Did you
ever see the like of this work before in this place? “No, I
never did.” “Get thee behind me, Satan, the devil has
sent you here on this errand; you see God is blessing the
reaching the work is going on, and sinners are converted
every day, and now you come to get me to let down the tone
of preaching, so as to ease the minds of the ungodly.” The
man felt the rebuke, and took it like a Christian ; he saw na
error and submitted, and never again was heard to find fault


with the plainness of preaching.


HOW CHURCHES CAN HELP MINISTERS, 218


In another town, where there was a revival, a woman who
had some influence (not pious), complained very much about
plain, pointed, personal preaching, as she called it. But by
and by she herself became a subject of the work. After this
some of her impenitent friends reminded her of what she
used to say against the preacher for “preaching it out so
hot.” She now said her views were altered, and she did not
care how hot the truth was preached, if it was red hot.

6. Do not take part with the wicked in any way. If you do
it at all, you will strengthen their hands. If the wicked ac
cuse the minister of being imprudent, or of being personal,
and if the church members, without admitting that the minis-
ter does so, only admit that personal preaching is wrong,
and talk about the impropriety of personal preaching, the
wicked will feel themselves strengthened by such remarks.
Do not unite with them at all, for they will feel that they
have you on their side against their minister. You adopt
their principles, and use ‘their language, and are understood
as sympathizing with them. What is personal preaching?
No individual is ever benefited by preaching unless he is
made to feel that it means him. Now such preaching is al-
ways personal. It often appears so personal, to wicked men,
that they feel as if they were just going to be called out
by name before the congregation. A minister was once
preaching to a congregation, and when describing certain
characters, he said, “If I was omniscient, I could call out
by name the very persons that answer to this picture.” A
man cried out, “Name me!” and he looked as if he was
going to sink into thé earth. He afterwards said that he had
no idea of speaking out, but the minister described him so
perfectly, that he really thought he was going to call him by
name. The minister did not know there was such a man in
the world. It is common for men to think their own con-
duct is described, and they complain, “ Who has been telling
him about me? Somebody has been talking to him about
me, and getting him to preach at me.” I suppose I have
heard of five hundred or a thousand just such cases. Now if
the church members will just admit that it is wrong fora
minister to mean anybody in his preaching, how can he do
any good. If you are not willing your minister should mean
anybody, or preach to anybody, you had better dismiss him.
Whom must he preach to, if not to the persons, the individ-
uals before him? And how can he preach to them, when he
does not mean them ?

7. If you wish to stand by your minister in promoting a


220 HOW CHURCHES CAN HELP MINISTERS,


revival, do not by your lives contradict his preaching. If he
preaches that sinners are going to hell, do not give the lie to
it, and smile it all away, by your levity and unconcern. I
have heard sinners speak of the effect produced on their
minds by levity in Christians, after a solemn and searching
discourse. They feel solemn and tender, and begin to be
alarmed at their condition, and they see these professors, in-
stead of weeping over them, all light and easy, as much as to
say, “Do not be afraid, sinners, it is not so bad, after all ;
keep cool and you will do well; do you think we would laugh
and joke if you were going to hell so fast? We should not
laugh if only your house was on fire, still less if we saw you
burning in it.” Of what use is it for a minister to preach to
sinners in such a state of things?

8. Do not needlessly take up the time of your minister.
Ministers often lose a great deal of time by individuals call-
ing on them to talk, when they have nothing of importance
to talk about, and no particular errand. The minister of
course is glad to see his friends, and often too willing to
spend time in conversation with his people, as he loves
and esteems them. Professors of religion should remember
that a minister’s time is worth more than gold, for it can be
employed in that which gold can never buy. If the minister
is kept from his knees, or from his Bible, or his study, that
they may indulge themselves in his conversation, they do a
great injury. When you have a good reason for it, you should
never be backward to call on him, and even take up all the
time that is necessary. But if you have nothing in particular
to say that is important, keep away. I knew a man in one
of our cities, who was out of business, and he used to take
up months of the minister’s time. He would come to his
study, and sit for three hours at a time, and talk, because he
had nothing else to do, till finally, the minister had to rebuke
him plainly, and tell him how much sin he was committing.

9. Be sure not to sanction anything that is calculated to
divert public attention from the subject of religion. Often
when it comes the time of year to work, when the evenings
are long, and business is light, and the very time to make an
extra effort, at-this moment, somebody in the church will give
a party, and invite some Christian friends, so as to have it a
religious party. And then some other family must do the
same, to return the compliment. Then another and another,
till it grows into an organized system of parties, that con-
sume the whole winter. Abominable! This is the grand
device of the devil, because it appears so innocent, and so


HOW CHURCHES CAN HELP MINISTERS, 221


proper, to promote good feeling, and increase the acquaintance
of Christians with each other. And so, instead of prayer
meetings they will have these parties.

The evils of these parties are very great. They are often
got up at great expense, and the most abominable gluttony is
practised in them. Itis said that the expense is from one
hundred to two thousand dollars. I have been told that in
some instances, professed Christians have given great parties,
and made great entertainments, and excused their ungodly
prodigality in the use of Jesus Christ’s money, by giving what
was left, after the feast was ended, to the poor! Thus making
it a virtue to feast and riot, even to surfeiting, on the bounties
of God’s providence, under pretence of benefiting the poor.
This is the same in principle, with a splendid ball which was
given some years since, in a neighboring city. The ball was
got up for the benefit of the poor, and each gentleman was
to pay a certain sum, and after the ball was ended, whatever
remained of the funds thus raised, was to be given to the
poor. Truly this is strange charity, to eat and drink and
dance, and when they have rioted and feasted until they can
enjoy it no longer, they deal out to the poor the crumbs that
have fallen from the table. I do not see why such a ball is
not quite as pious as such Christian parties. The evil of
balls does not consist simply in the exercise of dancing, but
in the dissipation, and surfeiting, and temptations connected
with them.

But it is said they are Christian parties, and that they are
all, or nearly all, professors of religion who attend them.
And furthermore, that they are concluded, often, with
prayer. Now I regard this as one of the worst features
about them ; that after the waste of time and money, the
excess in eating and drinking, the vain conversation, and
nameless fooleries, with which such a season is filled up, an
attempt should be made to sanctify it, and palm it off upon
God, by concluling it with prayer. Say what you will, it
would not be more absurd or incongruous, or impious, to
close a ball, or a theatre, or a card party with prayer.

Has it come to this, that professors of religion, professing
to desire the salvation of the world, when such calls are
made upon them, from the four winds of heaven, to send the
Gospel, to furnish Bibles, and tracts, and missionaries, to
save the world from death, that they should spend hundreds
of dollars in an evening, and then go to the monthly concert
and pray for the heathen !

Tn some instances, I have been told, they find a salvo for


222 HOW CHURCHES CAN HELP MINISTERS.


their consciences, in the fact that their minister attends their
parties. This, of course, would give weight to such an exam
ple, and if one professor of religion made a party and invited
their minister, others must do the same. The next step they
take may be for each to give a ball, and appoint their minis
ter a manager! Why not? And perhaps, by and by, he
will do them the favor to play the fiddle. In my estimation
he might quite as well do it, as to go and conclude such a
party with prayer. y

I faye heard with pain, that a circle of parties, I know not
to what extent, has been held in Rocuesrer—that place so
highly favored of the Lord. í know not through whose influ-
ence they have been got up, or by what particular persons they
have been patronized and attended. But I should advise any
congregation who are calculating to have a circle of parties,
in the mean time to dismiss their minister, and let him go
and preach where the people would be ready to receive the
word and profit by it, and not have him stay and be dis-
tressed, and grieved, and killed, by attempting to promote
religion among them, while they are engaged heart and hand
in the service of the devil.

Professors of religion should never get up anything that
may divert public attention from religion, without first having
consulted their minister, and made it a subject of special
prayer. Andif they find it will have this effect, they ought
never to do it. Subjects will often come up before the public
which have this tendency ; some course of lectures, or show,
or the like. Professors ought to be wise, and understand
what they are about, and not give countenance to any such
thing, until they see what influence it will have, and whether
it will hinder a revival. If it will do that, let them have
nothing to do with it. Every such thing should be estimated
by its bearing upon Christ’s kingdom.

In relation to parties, say what you please about their being
an innocent recreation, I appeal to any of you who have ever
attended them, to say whether they fit you for prayer, or in-
crease your spirituality, or whether sinners are ever converted
in them, or Christians made to agonize in prayer for souls?

IL I am to mention several things which churches must
DO, if they would promote a revival and aid their minister.

1. They must attend to his temporal wants. A minister,
who gives himself wholly to the work, cannot be engaged in
worldly employments, and of course is entirely dependent on
his people for the supply of his temporal wants, including the
support of his family. I need not argue this point here, for


HOW CHURCHES CAN HELP MINISTERS. 223


you all understand this perfectly. Itis the command of God,
that “ they which preach the Gospel should live of the Gos
pel.” But now look around and see how many churches do
in this matter. For instance, when they want a minister,
they will cast about and see how cheap they can get one.
They will calculate to a farthing how much his salt will cost,
and how much his meal, and then set his salary so low as to
subject him to extreme inconvenience to get along and keep
his family. A minister must have his mind at ease, to study
and labor with effect, and he cannot screw down prices, and
banter, and look out for the best chances to buy to advan-
tage what he needs. If he is obliged to do this, his mind is
embarrassed. Unless his temporal wants are so supplied,
that his thoughts may be abstracted from them, how can he
do his duty?

2. Be honest with your minister.

Do not measure out and calculate with how much salt and
how many bushels of grain he can possibly get along. Re
member, you are dealing with Christ. And he calls you to
place his ministers in such a situation that with ordinary pru-
dence temporal embarrassment is out of the question.

3. Be punctual with him.

Sometimes churches, when they are about settling a min- .
ister, have a great deal of pride about giving a salary, and
they will get up a subscription, and make out an amount
which they never pay, and very likely never expected to pay.
And so, after one, two, three or four years, the society gets
three or four hundred dollars in arrears to their minister, and
then they expect he will give it to them. And all the while
they wonder why there is no revival! ‘This may be the very
reason, because the church have LIED ; they have faithfully
promised to pay so much, and have not done it. God cannot
consistently pour out his Spirit on such a church.

4. Pay him his salary without asking.

Nothing is se embarrassing, often, to a minister as to be
obliged to dun his people for his salary. Often he gets ene-
mies, and gives offence, by being obliged to call, and call, and
call for his money, and then not get it as they promised.
They would have paid it if their credit had been at stake, but
when it is nothing but conscience and the blessing of God,
they let itlie along. If any one of them had a note at the
bank, you would see him careful and prompt to be on the
ground before three o’clock. That is because the note will
be protested, and they shall lose their character. But they
know the minister will not sue them for his salary, and they


224 HOW CHUBCHES CAN HELP MINISTERS.


are careless and let it run along, and he must suffer the in-
convenience. This is notso common in the city as it is in
the country. But in the country, I have known some heart-
rending cases of distress and misery, by the negligence and
cruelty of congregations in WITHHOLDING that which is due.
Churches live in habitual lying and cheating, and then
wonder why they have no revival. How can they wonder ?

5. Pray for your minister.

I mean something by this. And what do you suppose I
mean? Even the apostles used to urge the churches to pray
for them. This is more important than you imagine. Min-
isters do not ask people to pray for them simply as men, nor
that they may be filled with an abundance of the Spirit’s in-
fluences, merely to promote their personal enjoyment. But
they know that unless the church greatly desires a blessi
upon the labors of a minister, itis tempting God for him
to expect it. How often does a minister go into his pulpit,
feeling that his heart is ready to break for the blessing of
God, while he also feels that there is no room to expect it, for
there is no reason to believe the church desire it! Perhaps
he has been two hours on his knees in supplication, and yet
because that the church do not desire a blessing, he feels as
if his words would bound back in his face.

I have seen Christians who would be in an agony, when the
minister was going into the pulpit, for fear his mind should
be in a cloud, or his heart cold, or he should have no unction,
and so a blessing should not come. I have labored with a
man of this sort. He would pray until he got an assurance
in his mind that God would be with me in preaching, and
sometimes he would pray himself sick. I have known the
time, when he has been in darkness for a season, while the
eon were gathering, and his mind was full of anxiety, and

e would go again and again to pray, till finally he would
come into the room with a placid face, and say, “The Lord
has come, and he will be with us.” And I do not know that
I ever found him mistaken.

I have known a church bear their minister on their arms in
prayer from day to day, and watch with anxiety unutterable,
to see that he has the Holy Ghost with him in his labors!
When they feel and pray thus, oh, what feelings and what
looks are manifest in the congregation! They have felt
anxiety unutterable to have the word come with power, and
take effect, and when they see their prayer answered, and
they hear a word or a sentence come WARM from the heart,
and taking effect among the people, you can see their whole


HOW CHURCHES CAN HELP MINISTERS. 225


gouls look out of their eyes. How different is the case, where
the church feel that the mmster is praying, and so there is no
need of their praying! They are mistaken. The church
must desire and pray for the blessing. God says he will be
inquired of by the house of Israel. I wish you to feel that
there can be no substitute for this.

I have seen cases in revivals, where the church was kept in
the back ground in regard to prayer, and persons from abroad
were called on to pray in all the meetings. This is always
anhappy, even if there should be a revival, for the revival
must be less powerful and less salutary in its influences upon
the church. Ido not know but I have sometimes offended
Christians and ministers from abroad, by continuing to call
on members of the church in the place to pray, and not on
those from abroad. It was not from any disrespect to them,
but because the object was to get that church which was
chiefly concerned, to desire, and pray, and agonize for a
blessing. `

In a certain place, a protracted meeting was held, with no
good results, and great evils produced. I was led to make
inquiry for the reason. And it came out, that in all their meet-
ings, not one member of their own church was called on to
pray, but all the prayers were made by persons from abroad.
No wonder there was no good done. The church was not
interested. The leader of the meeting meant well, but he
undertook to promote a revival without getting the church
there into the work. He let a lazy church lie still and do
nothing, and so there could be no good.

Churches should pray for ministers as the agents of break-
ing down sinners with the word of truth. Prayer for a min
ister is often done in a set and formal way, and confined to
the prayer meetings. They will say their prayers in the old
way, as they have always done: “Lord, bless thy ministeri
servant, whom thou hast stationed on this part of Zion’s walls,
and so on, and it amounts to nothing, because there is no
heart in it. And the proof often is, that they never thought
of praying for him in secret, they never have agonized in their
closets for a blessing on his labors. They may not omit it
wholly in their meetings. If they do that, it is evident that
they care very little indeed about the labors of their minister.
But that is not the most important place. The way to present
effectual prayer for your minister is to take it to your closet,
and when you are in secret, wrestle with God for success to
attend his labors.

I knew a case of a minister in ill health, who became de

10*


226 HOW CHURCHES CAN HELP “MINISTERS.


pressed and sunk down in his mind, and was very much in
darkness, so that he did not feel as if he could preach any
longer. An individual of the church was waked up to feel
for the minister’s situation, and to pray that he might have
the Holy Ghost to attend his preaching. One Sabbath morn-
ing, this person’s mind was very much exercised, and he be-
gan to pray as soon as it was light, and prayed again and
again for a blessing that day. And the Lord in some way
directed the minister within hearing of his prayer. The per-
son was telling the Lord just what he thought of the minis-
ter’s situation and state of mind, and pleading, as if he would
not be denied, for a blessing. The minister went into the
pulpit and preached, and the light broke in upon him, and
the word was with power, and a revival commenced that very
day.

& A minister should be provided for by the church, and his
support guarranteed, irrespective of the ungodly. Otherwise
he may be obliged either to starve his family, or to keep back
a part of the truth so as to not offend sinners. I once expos-
tulated with a minister who I found was afraid to come out
fully with the truth. I told him I was surprised he did not
bear down on certain points. He told me he was so situated
that he must please certain men, who would be touched there.
It was the ungodly that chiefly supported him, and that made
him dependent and temporizing. And yet perhaps that very
church which left their minister dependent on the ungodly
for his bread, will turn round and abuse him for his want of
faith, and his fear of men. The church ought always to say
to their minister, “We will support you; go to work; let
the truth pour down on the people, and we will stand by you.”

7. See that everything is so arranged, that people can sit
comfortably in meeting. If people do not sit easy, it is difficult
to get or to keep their attention. And if they are not attentive,
they can not be converted. They have come to hear for their
lives, and they ought to be so situated that they can hear with
all their souls, and have nothing in their bodily position to call
for attention. Churches do not realize how important it is
that the place of meeting should be made comfortable. I do
not mean słowy. All your glare and glory of rich chandeliers,
and rich carpets, and splendid pulpits, is the opposite extreme,
and takes off the attention just as badly, and defeats every
object for which a sinner should come to meeting. You need
fot expect a revival there.

8. See that the house of God is kept cleanly. The house of
God should be kept as clean as you would want your own


HOW CHURCHES CAN HELP MINISTERS. 227


house to be kept. Churches are often kept excessively slovenly.
I have seen them, where people used so much tobacco, and
took so little care about neatness, that it was impossible to
preach with comfort. Once in a protracted meeting, the
thing was charged upon the church, and they had to acknowl-
edge it, that they paid more money for tobacco than they did
for the cause of missions. They could not kneel in their pews,
and ladies could not sit without all the time watching their
clothes, and they had to be careful where they stepped, be
cause the house was so dirty, and there was so much tobacco
juice running all about the floor. If people cannot go where
they can hear without being annoyed with offensive sights and
smells, and where they can kneel in prayer, what good will a
protracted meeting do? There is an importance in these
things, which is not realized. See that man! What is he
doing? I am preaching to him about eternal life, and he is
thinking about the dirty pew. And that woman is asking for
a footstool to keep her feet out of the tobacco juice. Shame!

9. It is important that the house should be just warm enough,
and not too warm. Suppose a minister comes into a house, and
finds it cold ; he sees as soon as he gets in, that he might as well
have staid at home ; the people are shivering, their feet cold,
they feel as if they should take cold, they are uneasy, and he
wishes he was at home, for he knows he cannot do anything,
but he must preach, or they will be disappointed.

Or he may find the house too warm, and the people, instead
of listening to the truth, are fanning, and panting for breath,
and by and by a woman faints, and makes a stir, and the train
of thought and feeling is all lost, and so a whole sermon is
wasted to no good end. These little things take off the atten-
tion of people from the words of eternal life. And very often
it is so, that if you drop a single link in the chain of argument,
you lose the whole, and the people are damned, just because
the careless church do not see to the proper regulation of
these little matters.

10. The house should be well ventilated. Of all houses, a
church should be the most perfectly ventilated. If there is no
change of the air, it passes through so many lungs it becomes
bad, and its vitality is exhausted, and the people pant, they
know not why, and feel an almost irresistible desire to sleep,
and the minister preaches in vain. The sermon is lost, and
worse than lost. I have often wondered that this matter should
be so little the subject of thought. The elders and trustees
will sit and hear a whole sermon, while the people are all but
ready to die for the want of air, and the minister is wasting


228 HOW CHURCHES CAN HELP MINISTERS.


his stre in preaching where the room is just like an ex
Ueto Rooter kan there they sit and never think to do any-
thing to help the matter. They should take it upon them-
selves to see that this is regulated right, that the house is just
warm enough, and the air kept pure. How important it is
that the church should be awake to this subject, that the min-
ister may labor to the best advantage, and the people give
their undivided attention to the truth, which is to save their
souls.

It is very common, when things are wrong, to have it all
laid to ae sexton. This is rot so. Often the sexton is not
to blame. If the house is cold and uncomfortable, very often
it is because the fuel is not good, or the stoves not suitable,
or the house is so open it cannot be warmed. If it is too
warm, perhaps somebody has intermeddled when he was out,
and heaped on fuel without discretion. Or, if the sexton is in
fault, perhaps it is because the church do not pay him enough
for his services, and he cannot afford to give the attention
necessary to keep the church in order. Churches sometimes
screw down the sexton’s salary, to the lowest point, so that
he is obliged to slight his work. Or they will select one who
is incompetent, for the sake of getting him cheap, and then
the thing is not done. The fault is in the church. Let them
give an adequate compensation for the work, and it can be
done, and done faithfully. If one sexton will not do right,
another will, and the church are bound to see it done right,
or else let them dismiss their minister, and not keep him, and
at the same time have other things in a state so out of order
that he loses all his work. What economy! To pay the min-
ister’s salary, and then for the want of fifty dollars added to
the sexton’s wages, everything is so out of order that the min-
ister’s labors are all lost, souls are lost, and your children and
neighbors go down to hell!

Sometimes this uncleanliness, and negligence, and confusion
are chargeable to the minister. Perhaps he uses tobacco, and
sets the example of defiling the house of God. Perhaps the
pulpit will be the filthiest place in the house. I have some-
times been in pulpits that were too loathesome to be occupied
by human beings. If a minister has no more piety and de-
cency than this, no wonder things are at loose ends in the
congregation. And generally it is even so.

11. People should leave their dogs, and very young child-
ren at home. I have often known contentions arise among
dogs, and children to cry, just at that stage of the services,
that would most effectually destroy the effect of the meeting


HOW OHURCHES CAN HELP MINISTERS. 229


If children are present and weep, they should instantly be re-
moved. I have sometimes known a mother or a nurse sit and
toss her child, while its cries were diverting the attention of
the whole congregation. This is cruel. And as for dogs, they
had infinitely better be dead, than to divert attention from the
word of God. See that deacon ; perhaps his dog has in this
way destroyed more souls than the deacon will ever be instru-
mental in saving.

12. The members of the church should aid the minister by
visiting from house to house, and trying to save souls, Do not
leave all this to the minister. It is impossible he should do
it, even if he gives all his time, and neglects his study and his
closet. Church members should take pains and qualify them-
selves for this duty, so that they can be useful in it.

13. They should hold Bidle classes. Suitable individuals
should be selected to hold Bible classes, for the instruction of
the young people, and where those who are awakened or
affected by the preaching, can be received and be converted.
As soon as any one is seen to be touched, let them be in-
vited to join the Bible class, where they will be properly
treated, and probably they will be converted. The church
should select the best men for this service, and should all be
on the look out to fill up the Bible classes. It has been done
in this congregation, and it is a very common thing, when
persons are impressed, that they are observed by somebody,
and invited to join the Bible class, and they will do it, and
there they are converted. Ido not mean that we are doing
all we ought to do in this way, or all we might do. We want
more teachers, able and willing to take charge of such classes.

14. Churches should sustain Sabbath schools, and in this
way aid their ministers in saving souls. How can a minister
attend to this and preach? Unless the church will take off
these responsibilities, and cares, and labors, he must either
neglect them, or be crushed. Let the church be WIDE
AWAKE, watch and bring in children to the school, and
teach them faithfully, and lay themselves out to promote a
revival in the school.

15. They should watch over the members of the church.
They should visit each other, in order to stir each other up,
know each other’s spiritual state, and provoke one another to
love and good works. The minister cannot do it, he has not
time ; it is impossible he should study and prepare sermons,
and at the same time visit every member of the church as
often as it needs to be done to keep them advancing. The
church are bound to do it. They are under oath to


230 HOW CHURCHES CAN HELP MINISTERS.


watch over each other’s spiritual welfare. But how is this
done? Many do not know each other. They meet and pass
each other as strangers, and never ask about their spiritual
condition. But if they hear anything bad of one, they go
and tell it to others. Instead of watching over each other
for their good, they watch for their halting. How can they
watch for good when they are not even acquainted with each
other ?

16. The church should watch for the effect of preaching. If
they are praying for the success of the preached word, they
will watch for it of course. They should keep a look out,
and when any in the congregation give evidence that the
word of God has taken hold of them, they should follow it
up. Wherever there are any exhibitions of feeling, those
persons should be attended to instantly, and not left till their
impressions wear off. They should talk to them, or get them
visited, or get them into the anxious meeting, or into the
Bible class, or bring them to the minister. If the members
of the church do not attend to this, they neglect their duty.
If they attend to it, they may do incalculable good.

There was a pious young woman who lived in a very cold
and wicked place. She alone had the spirit of prayer, and
she had been praying for a blessing upon the word. At
length she saw one individual in the congregation who seemed
to be affected by the preaching, and as soon as the minister
came from the pulpit, she came forward, agitated and trem-
bling, and begged him to go and converse with the person
immediately. He did so, and the individual was soon con-
verted, and a revival followed. Now one of your stupid pro-
fessors would not have seen that individual awakened, and
would have stumbled over half a dozen of them without no-
tice, and let them go to hell. Professors should watch every
sermon, and see how it affects the congregation. Ido not
mean that they should be stretching their necks and stari
wout the house, but they should observe, as they may, ae
if they find any person affected by preaching, throw them-
selves in his way, and guide him to the Saviour.

17. Beware and not give away all the preaching to others.
If you do not take your portion, you will starve, and become
like spiritual skeletons. Christians should take their portion
to themselves. If the word should be quite searching to
them, they should make the honest application, and lay it
along side their heart and practise it, and live by it Other
wise preaching will do them no good.

18 Be ready to aid your minister in effecting his plans for


HOW CHURCHES CAN HELP MINISTERS, 231


doing good. When the minister is wise to devise plans for
usefulness, and the church ready to execute them, they may
carry all before them. But when the church hang back from
every enterprise until they are actually dragged into it, when
they are opposing every proposal, because it will cost some-
thing, they are a dead weight upon a minister. If stoves are
needed, oh, no, they will cost something. If lamps are called
for, to prevent preaching in the dark, oh, no, they will cost
something. And so they will stick up candles on the posts,
or do without evening meetings altogether. If they stick up
candles, it soon comes to pass that they either give no light,
or some one must run round and snuff them. And so the
whole congregation are disturbed by the candle-snuffer, their
attention taken off, and the sermon lost.

I was once attending a protracted meeting, where we were
embarrassed because there were no lamps to the house. I
urged the people to get them, but they thought it would cost
too much. I then proposed to get them myself, and was
about to do it, but found it would give offence, and we went
on without. But the blessing did not come, to any great ex-
tent. How could it? The church began by calculating to a
cent how much it would cost, and they would not go beyond,
to save souls from hell.

So where a minister appoints a meeting, such people cannot
have it, because it will cost something. If they can offer
unto the Lord that which costs nothing, they will do it.
Miserable helpers they are! Such a church can have no re
vival A minister might as well have a millstone about his
neck as such a church. He had better leave them, if he can-
not teach them better, and go where he will not be so
hampered.

19. Church members should make it a point to attend prayer
meetings, and attend in time. Some church members will always
attend on preaching, because there they have nothing to do,
but to sit and hear, and be entertained, but they will not at
tend prayer meetings, for fear they shall be called on to do
something. Such members tie up the hands of the minister,
and discourage his heart. Why do they employ a minister?
Is it to amuse them by preaching? or is it that he may teach
them the will of God that they may do it?

20. Church members ought to study and inquire what they
can do, and then do it. Christians should be trained like a
band of soldiers. It is the duty and office of a minister to
train them for usefulness, to teach them and direct them, and
lead them on in such a way az to produce the greatest amount


232 HOW CHURCHES CAN HELP MINISTERS.


of moral influence. And then they should stand their ground
and do their duty, otherwise they will be right in the way.

There are many other points which I noted, and intended
to touch upon, but there is not time. I could write a book as
big as this Bible, in detailing the various particulars that
ought to be attended to. I must close with a few


REMARKS.


1. You see that a minister’s want of success may not be
wholly on account of a want of wisdom in the exercise of his
office. Iam not going to plead for negligent ministers. I
never will spare ministers from the naked truth, nor apply
fiattering titles to men. If they are blameworthy, let them
be blamed. And no doubt they are always more or less to
blame when the word produces no effect. But it is far from
being true that they are always the principal persons tr
blame. Sometimes the church is much more to blame than
the minister, and if an apostle or an angel from heaven were
to preach, he could not produce a revival of religion in that
church. Perhaps they are dishonest to their minister, or
covetous, or careless about the conveniences of public wor-
ship. Alas! what a state many country churches are in,
where, for the want of a hundred dollars, everything is in-
convenient and uncomfortable, and the labors of the preacher
are lost. They live in ceiled houses themselves, and let the
house of God lie waste. Or the church counteract all the in-
fluence of preaching by their ungodly lives. Or perhaps their
parties, their worldly show, as in most of the churches in this
city, annihilate the influence of the Gospel

2. Churches should remember that they are exceedingly
guilty to employ a minister, and then not aid him in his work.
The Lord Jesus Christ has sent an ambassador to sinners, to
turn them from their evil ways, and he fails of his errand, be-
cause the church refuse to do their duty. Instead of recom-
mending his message, and seconding his entreaties, and hold-
ing up his hands in all the ways that are proper, they stand
right in the way, and contradict his message, and counteract
his influence, and souls perish. No doubt in most of the
congregations in the United States, the minister is often hin-
dered so much that he might as well be on a foreign mission
a great part of the time, as to be there, for any effect of his
preaching in the conversion of sinners, while he has to preach
over the heads of an inactive, stupid church.

And yet these very churches are not willing to have their


HOW CHURCHES CAN HELP MINISTERS. 233


minister absent a few days to attend a protracted meeting.
“We cannot spare him ; why he is our minister, and we like
to have our minister here ;” while at the same time they hin-
der all he can do. If he could, he would tear himself right
away, and go where there is no minister, and where the
people would be willing to receive the Gospel. But there he
must stay, though he cannot get the church into a state to
have a revival once in three years, to last three months at a
time. It might be well for him to say to the church, “ When-
ever youare determined to take one of these long naps, I
wish you to let me know it, so that I can go and labor some-
where else in the meantime, till you are ready to wake
gin.”

3. Many churches cannot be blessed with a revival, because
they are spunging out of other churches, and out of the treas-
ury of the Lord for the support of their minister, when they
are abundantly able to support him themselves. Perhaps
they are depending on the Home Missionary Society, or on
other churches, while they are not exercising any self-denial
for the sake of the Gospel. I have been amazed to see how
some churches live. One church that I was acquainted with
actually confessed that they spent more money for tobacco
than they gave for missions. And yet they had no minister,
because they were not able to support one. And they have none
now. And yet there is one man in that church who is able to
support a minister. And still they have no minister, and no
preaching.

The churches have not been instructed in their duty on this
subject. I stopped in one place last summer, where there
was no preaching. I inquired of an elder in the church why
it was so, and he said it was because they were so poor. I
asked him how much he was worth. He did not give me a
direct answer, but said that another elder’s income was about
$5,000 a year, and I finally found out that this man’s was
about the same. Here, said I, are two elders, each of you
able to support a minister, and because you cannot get help
from abroad, you have no preaching. Why, if you had
preaching, it would not be blessed, while you were thus
spunging out of the Lord’s treasury. Finally, he confessed
that he was able to support a minister, and the two together
agreed that they would do it.

It is common for churches to ask help, when in fact they
do not need any help, and when it would be a great deal bet-
ter for them to support their own minister. If they get funds
from the Home Missionary Society, when they ought to raise


234 HOW CHURCHES CAN HELP MINISTERS.


them themselves, they may expect the curse of the Lord upon
them, and this will be a sufficient reason for the Gospel’s
proving to them a curse rather than a blessing. Of how
many churches might it be said, “Ye have robbed God, even
this whole church.”

I know a church who employed a minister but half the
time, and felt unable to pay his salary for that. A female
working society in a neighboring town appropriated their
funds to this object, and assisted this church in paying their
minister's salary. The result was as might be expected. He
did them little or no good. They had no revival under his
preaching, nor could they ever expect any, while acting on
such a principle. There was one man in that congregation
who could support a minister all the time. I was informed
by a member that the church members were supposed to be
worth Two HUNDRED THOUSAND DOLLARS. Now if this is true,
here is a church with an income, at seven per cent., of $14,000
a year, who felt themselves too poor to pay $200 for support
of a minister to preach half the time, and would suffer the
females of a neighboring town to work with their own hands
to aid them in paying this sum. Among the elders of this
church, I found that several of them used tobacco, and two
of them who lived together signed a covenant written on the
blank leaf of their Bible, in which they pledged themselves to
abandon that sin for ever.

It was in a great measure for want of right instruction
that this church was pursuing such a course. For when the
subject was taken up, and their duty laid before them, the
wealthy man of whom I am speaking said that he would pay the
whole salary himself, if he thought it would not be resented
by the congregation, and do more hurt than good ; and that
if the church would procure a minister, and go ahead and
raise a part of his salary, he would make up the remainder.
They can now not only support a minister half the time, but
all the time, and pay his salary themselves. And they will
find it good and profitable to do so.

As I have gone from place to place laboring in revivals, 1
have always found that churches were blessed in proportion
to their liberality. Whore they have manifested a disposition
to support the Gospel, and to pour their substance liberally
into the treasury of the Lord, they have been blessed both in
spiritual and in temporal things. But where they have been
parsimonious, and let the minister preach for them for little
or nothing, these churches have been cursed instead of
blessed. And as a general thing, in revivals of religion, J


HOW CHURCHES CAN HELP MINISTERS. 238


have found it to be true that young converts are most in
clined to join those churches which are most liberal in mak
ing efforts to support the Gospel.

The churches are very much in the dark on this subject.
They have not been taught their duty. I have, in many in
stances, found an exceeding readiness to do it when the sub-
ject was laid before them. I knew an elder in a church who
was talking about getting a minister for half the time, be
cause the church were poor, although his own income was
considerable. I asked him if his income was not sufficient to
support a minister all the time himself. He said it was.
And on being asked what other use he could make of the
Lord’s money which he possessed, that would prove so bene
ficial to the interests of Christ’s kingdom, as to employ a
minister not only half but all the time in his own town, he
concluded to set himself about it. A minister has been ac
cordingly obtained, and I believe they find no difficulty in
paying him his full salary.

The fact is, that a minister can do but little by preaching
only half the time. If on one Sabbath an impression is
made, it is lost before a fortnight comes round. As a mat-
ter of economy, a church should lay themselves out to sup-
port the Gospel all the time. If they get the right sort of a
minister, and keep him steadily at work, they may have a re-
vival, and thus the ungodly will be converted and come in and
help them, And thus in one year they may have a great ac
cession to their strength. But if they employ a minister but
half the time, year after year may roll away, while sinners
are going to hell, and no accession is made to their strength
from the ranks of the ungodly.

The fact is, that professors of religion have not been made
to feel that all their possessions are the Lord’s. Hence they
have talked about giving their property for the support of the
Gospel. As if the Lord Jesus Christ was a beggar, and they
ealled upon to support his Gospel as an act of almsgiving!
A merchant in one of the towns in this State, was paying
a large part of his minister’s salary. One of the members
of the church was relating the fact to a minister from
abroad, and speaking of the sacrifice which this merchant was
making. At this moment the merchant came in. “ Brother,”
said the minister, “you are a merchant. Suppose you em-
ploy a clerk to sell goods, and a schoolmaster to teach your
children. You order your clerk to pay your schoolmaster
out of the store such an amount, for his services in teaching.
Now suppose your clerk should give out that he had to pay


236 HOW CHURCHES CAN HELP MINISTERS,


this schoolmaster his salary, and should speak of the sacri-
fices that he was making to do it, what would you say to
this?” “Why,” said the merchant, “I should say it was
ridiculous.” “Well,” says the minister, “God employs you
to sell goods as his clerk, and your minister he employs to
teach his children, and requires you to pay his salary out of
the income of the store. Now, do you call this your sacrifice,
and say that you are making a great sacrifice, to pay this
minister’s salary? No, you are just as much bound to sell
goods for God as he is to preach for God. You have no
more right to sell goods for the purpose of laying up money,
than he has to preach the Gospel for the same purpose. You
are bound to be just as pious, and to aim as singly at the
glory of God, in selling goods, as he is in preaching the
Gospel. And thus you are as absolutely to give up your
whole time for the service of God as he does. You and your
family may lawfully live out of the avails of the store, and so
may the minister and his family, just as lawfully. If you sell
goods from these motives, selling goods is just as much serv
ing God as preaching. And a man who sells goods upon
these principles, and acts in conformity to them, is just as
pious, just as much in the service of God, as he is who preaches
the Gospel. Every man is bound to serve God in his calling,
the minister by teaching, the merchant by selling goods, the
farmer by tilling his fields, the lawyer and physician by plying
the duties of their profession.

“Tt is equally unlawful for any one of these to labor for
the meat that perisheth. All they do is to be for God, and
all they can earn, after comfortably supporting their fami-
lies, is to be dedicated to the spread of the Gospel and the
salvation of the world.”

It has long enough been supposed that ministers must be
more pious than other men, that they must not love the world,
that they must labor for God: they must live as frugally as
possible, and lay out their whole time, and health, and
strength, and life, to build up the kingdom of Jesus Christ.
This is true. But although other men are not called to
labor in the same field, and to give up their time to public
instruction, yet they are just as absolutely bound to consider
their whole time as God’s, and have no more right to love
the world, or accumulate wealth, or lay it up for their chik
dren, or spend it upor their lusts, than ministers have.

It is high time the church was acquainted with these prin-
ciples ; and the Home Missionary Society may labor till the
day of judgment to convert the people, and they will never


HOW BHUBCHES CAN HELP MINISTERS. 237


aneceed, till the churches are led to understand and feel
their duty in this respect. Why, the very fact that they are
asking and receiving aid in supporting their minister from
the Home Missionary Society while they are able to support
him themselves, is probably the very reason why his labors
among them are not more blessed.

I would that the American Home Missionary Society pos-
sessed a hundred times the means that it now does, of aid-
ing feeble churches, that are unable to help themselves. But
it is neither good economy nor piety to give their funds to
those who are able but unwilling to support the Gospel. For
it is in vain to attempt to help them, while they are able but
unwilling to help themselves.

If the Missionary Society had a ton of gold, it would be
no charity to give it to such a church. But let the church
bring in all the tithes to God’s storehouse, and God will open
the windows of heaven and pour down a blessing. But let
the churches know assuredly that if they are unwilling to
help themselves to the extent of their ability, they will know
the reason why such small success attends the labors of their
ministers. Here they are spunging their support from the
Lord’s treasury. How many churches are laying out their
money for tea and coffee and tobacco, and then come and
ask aid from the Home Missionary Society! I will protest
against aiding a church who use tea and tobacco, and live
without the least self-denial, and who want to offer God only
that which costs nothing.

Finarty.—If they mean to be blessed, let them do their
duty, do all their duty, put shoulder to the wheel, gird on
the Gospel armor, and come up to the work. Then, if the
church is in the field, the car of salvation will move on, though
all hell oppose, and sinners will be converted and saved. But
if a church will give up all the labor to the minister, and sit
still and look on, while he is laboring, and themselves do
nothing but complain of him, they will not only fail of a re-
vival of religion, but if they continue slothful and censorious,
will by and by find themselves in hell for their disobedience
and unprofitableness in the service of Christ.


LECTURE XIV


MEASURES TO PROMOTE REVIVALS.


Text.—These men, being Jews, do exceedingly trouble our city, and teach caw
wms which are not lawful for us to receive, neither to observe, being Romans.—
Acts xvi. 20, 21.


“ Turse men,” here spoken of, were Paul and Silas, wha
went to Philippi to preach the Gospel, and very much dis-
turbed the people of that city, because they supposed the
preaching would interfere with their worldly gains. And so
they arraigned the preachers of the Gospel before the magis
trates of the city, as culprits, and charged them with teach-
ing doctrines, and especially employing measures, that were
not lawful.

In discoursing from these words I design to show,

L That under the Gospel dispensation, God has established
no particular system of measures to be employed and invariably
adhered to in promoting religion.

Il. To show that our present forms of public worship, and
everything, so far as measures are concerned, have been arrived
at by degrees, and by a succession of New Measures.

L Iam to show that under the Gospel, God has established
no particular measures to be used.

Under the Jewish dispensation, there were particular forms
enjoined and prescribed by God himself, from which it was
not lawful to depart. But these forms were all typical, and
were designed to shadow forth Christ, or something con-
nected with the new dispensation that Christ was to intro
duce. And therefore they were fixed, and all their details
particularly prescribed by Divine authority. But it was never
so under the Gospel. When Christ came, the ceremonial or
typical dispensation was abrogated, because the design of
those forms was fulfilled, and therefore themselves of no
further use. He, being the antitype, the types were of course
done away at his coming. THE GOSPEL was then preached
as the appointed means of promoting religion ; and it was
left to the discretion of the church to determine, from time
to time, what measures shall be adopted, and what forms pur
sued, in giving the Gospel its power. We are left in the


MEASUEES TO PROMOTE REVIVALS. 239


dark as to the measures which were pursued by the apostles
and primitive preachers, except so far as we can gather it
trom occasional hints in the book of Acts. We do not know
how many times they sung and how many times they prayed
in public worship, nor even whether they sung or prayed at
all in their ordinary meetings for preaching. When Jesus
Christ was on earth, laboring among his disciples, he had no-
thing to do with forms or measures He did from time to
time in this respect just as it would be natural for any man
to do in such cases, without anything like a set form or mode
of doing it. The Jews accused him of disregarding their
forms. His object was to preach and teach mankind the
true religion. And when the apostles preached afterwards,
with the Holy Ghost sent down from heaven, we hear nothing
about their having a particular system of measures to carry
on their work, or one apostle doing a thing in a particular .
way because others did it in that way. Their commission
was, “Go and preach the Gospel, and disciple all nations.”
It did not prescribe any forms. It did not admit any. No
person can pretend to get any set of forms or particular direc
tions as to measures, out of this commission. Do it—the
best way you can—ask wisdom from God—use the faculties
he has given you—seek the direction of the Holy Ghost—go
forward and do it. This was their commission. And their
object was to make known the Gospel in the most effectual
way, to make the truth stand out strikingly, so as to obtain
the attention and secure the obedience of the greatest num-
ber possible. No person can find any form of doing this
laid down in the Bible. It is preaching the Gospel that stands
out prominently there as the great thing. The form is left
out of the question.

It is manifest, that, in preaching the Gospel, there must be
some kind of measures adopted. The Gospel must be gotten
before the minds of the people, and measures must be taken
so that they can hear it, and to induce them to attend to it.
This is done by building churches, holding stated or other
meetings, and so on. Without some measures, it can never
be made to take effect among men. `

IL I am to show that our present forms of public worship,
and everything, so far as measures are concerned, have been
arrived at by degrees, and by a succession of New Measures,

1. I will mention some things in regard to the ministry.

Many years ago, ministers were accustomed to wear a pecu-
lwar habit. It is so now in Catholic countries. It used to be
so here. Ministers had a peculiar dress as much as soldiers.


240 MEASURES TO PROMOTE REVIVALS.


They used to wear a cocked hat, and bands instead of a
cravat or stock, and small clothes, and a wig. No matter
how much hair a man had on his head, he must cut it off and
wear a wig. And then he must wear a gown. All these
things were customary, and every clergyman was held bound
to wear them, and it was not considered proper for him to
officiate without them. All these had doubtless been intro-
duced by a succession of innovations, for we have no good
reason for believing that the apostles and primitive ministers
dressed differently from other men.

But now all these things have been given up, one by one,
by a succession of innovations or new measures, until now in
many churches a minister can go into the pulpit and preach
without being noticed, although dressed like any other man.
And when it was done in regard to each one of them, the
church complained as much as if it had been a Divine insti-
tution given up. It was denounced as an innovation. When
ministers began to lay aside their cocked hats, and wear hats
like other men, it grieved the elderly people very much ; it
looked so “undignified,” they said, for a minister to wear a
round hat. When, in 1827 I wore a fur cap, a minister said,
“that was too bad for a minister.”

When ministers first began, a few years since, to wear white
hats, it was thought by many to be a sad and very undignified
innovation. And even now, they are so bigoted in some
places, that a clergyman told me but a few days since, in
travelling through New England last summer with a white
hat, he could perceive that it injured his influence. This
spirit should not be looked upon as harmless ; I have good
reason to know that it is not harmless. Thinking men see it
to be mere bigotry, and are exceedingly in danger of viewing
everything about religion in the same light on this account.
This has been the result in many instances, There is at
this day scarcely a minister in the land who does not feel
himself obliged to wear a black coat, as much as if it were a
divine institution. The church is yet filled with a kind of
superstitious reverence for such things. This is a great
stumbling block to many minds.

So, in ike manner, when ministers laid aside their bands,
and wore cravats or stocks, it was said they were becomi
secular, and many found fault. Even now, in some places, a
minister would not dare not be seen in the pulpit in a cravat
or stock. The people would feel as if they had no clergyman,
if he had no bands. A minister in this city asked another,
but a few days since, if it would do to wear a black stock in


MEASURES TO PROMOTE REVIVALS, 241


the pulpit. He wore one in his ordinary intercourse with his
people, but doubted whether it would do to wear it in the
pulpit.

So in regard to short clothes ; they used to be thought
essential to the ministerial character. Even now, in Catholic
countries, every priest wears small clothes. Even the little
boys there, who are training for the priest’s office, wear their
cocked hats, and black stockings, and small clothes. This
woukl look ridiculous amongst us. But it used to be prac-
tised in this country. The time was when good people
would have been shocked if a minister had gone into the
pulpit with pantaloons on. They would have thought he was
certainly going to ruin the church by his innovations. I
have been told that some years ago, in New England, a cer
tain elderly clergyman was so opposed to the new measure
of a minister’s wearing pantaloons, that he would on no ac
count allow them in his pulpit. A young man was going to
preach for him, who had no small clothes, and the old minis-
ter would not let him officiate in pantaloons. “ Why,” said
he, “my people would think I had brought a fop into the pul-
pit, to see a man there with pantaloons on, and it would produce
an excitement among them.” And so, finally, the young man
was obliged to borrow a pair of the old gentleman’s clothes,
and they were too short for him, and made a ridiculous figure
enough. But anything was better than such a terrible inno-
vation as preaching in pantaloons. But reason has triumphed.

Just so it was in regard to wigs. I remember one minister,
who, though quite a young man, used to wear an enormous
white wig. And the people talked as if there was a divine
night about it, and it was as hard to give it up, almost, as to
give up the Bible itself Gowns also were considered essential
to the ministerial character. And even now, in many congre-
gations in this country, the people will not tolerate a minister
in the pulpit, unless he has a flowing silk gown, with enor-
mous sleeves as big as his body. Even in some of the Con-
gregational Churches in New England, they cannot bear to
give it up. Now, how came people to suppose a minister
must have a gown or a wig, in order to preach with effect?
Why wasit that every clergyman was held obliged to use these
things? How is it that not one of these things have been

iven up in the churches, without producing a shock among

them? They have all been given up, one by one, and many

congregations have been distracted for a time by the inno-

vation.. But will any one pretend that the cause of religion

has been injured by it? People felt as if they could hardly
11


2492 MEASURES TO PROMOTE REVIVALS.


worship God without them, but plainly their attachment te
them was no part of their religion, that is, no part of the
Christian religion. It was mere superstition. And when
these things were taken away they complained, as Micah did,
“Ye have taken away my gods.” But no doubt their religious
character was improved, by removing these objects of super-
stitious reverence. So that the church, on the whole, has
been greatly the gainer by the innovations. Thus you see that
the present mode of a minister’s dress has been gained by a
series of new measures.

2. In regard to the order of public worship.

The same difficulties have been met in effecting ev
change, because the church have felt as if God had establish-
ed just the mode which they were used to.

(1.) Psalm Books. Formerly it was customary to sing
David’s Psalms. By-and-by there was introduced a version
of the Psalms in rhyme. This was very bad, to be sure.
When ministers tried to introduce them, the churches were
distracted, people violently opposed, and great trouble was
created by the innovation. But the new measure triumphed.

Afterwards another version was brought forward in a bet-
ter style of poetry, and its introduction was opposed with
much contention, as a new measure. And finally Watts’s ver
sion, which is stillopposed in many churches. No longer ago
than 1828, when I was in Philadelphia, I was told that a
minister there was preaching a course of lectures on psalmody
to his congregation, for the purpose of bringing them to use
a better version of psalms and hymns than the one they were
accustomed to. And even now, in a great many congrega-
tions, there are people who will go out of church, if a psalm
or hymn is given out from a new book. And if Watts’s
Psalms should be adopted, they would secede and form a new
congregation, rather than tolerate such an innovation. The
same sort of feeling has been excited by introducing the
‘Village Hymns” in prayer meetings. In one Presbyterian
congregation in this city, within a few years, the minister’s
wife wished to introduce the Village Hymns into the female
prayer meetings, not daring to go any further. She thought
she was going to succeed. But some of the careful souls
found out that it was made in New England, and refused to
admit it. “It is a Hopkinsian thing, I dare say.”

(2.) Lining the Hymns. Formerly, when there were but
few books, it was the custom to line the hymns, as it was
called. The deacon used to stand up before the pulpit, and
read off the psalm or hymn, a line at a time, or two lines ata


MEASURES TO PROMOTE REVIVALS. 248


time, and then sing, and the rest would all fall in. By-and-by,
they began to introduce books, and let every one sing from
his book. And what an innovation! Alas, what confusion
and disorder it made! How could the good people worship
God in singing, without having the deacon to line off the
hymn in his holy tone, for the holiness of it seemed to con-
sist very much in the tone, which was such that you could
hardly tell whether he was reading or singing.

(3.) Choirs. Afterwards another innovation was carried.
It was thought best to have a select choir of singers sit by
themselves and sing, so as to give an opportunity to improve
the music. But this was bitterly opposed. Oh how many con
gregations were torn and rent in sunder, by the desire of min-
isters and some leading individuals to bring about an improve
ment in the cultivation of music, by forming choirs of singers.
People talked about innovations and new measures, and
thought great evils were coming to the churches, because the
singers were seated by themselves, and cultivated music, and
learned new tunes that the old people could not sing. It did
not use to be so when they were young, and they would not
tolerate such new lights and novelties in the church.

(4.) Pitchpipes. When music was cultivated, and choirs
seated together, then the singers wanted a pitchpipe. For-
merly, when the lines were given out by the deacon or clerk,
he would strike off into the tune, and the rest would follow as
well as they could. But when the leaders of choirs begun to
use pitchpipes for the purpose of pitching all their voices on
precisely the same key, what vast confusion it made! I heard
a clergyman say that an elder in the town where he used to
live, would get up and leave the house whenever he heard the
chorister blow his pipe. “Away with your whistle,” said he.
‘What! whistle in the house of God!” He thought it a
profanation.

(5.) Instrumental Music. By and by, in some congregations,
various instruments were introduced for the purpose of aid-
ing the singers, and improving the music. When the bass
viol was first introduced, it made a great commotion. People
insisted they might just as well have a fiddle in the house of
God. “ Why, ù is a fiddle, it is made just like a fiddle, only a
little larger, and who can worship where there is a fiddle?
By and by you will want to dance in the meeting house.”
Who has not heard these things talked of, as matters of the
most vital importance to the cause of religion and the purity
ef the church? Ministers, in grave ecclesiastical assemblies,
wave spent days in discussing them. In a synod in the Pres


244 MEASURES TO PROMOTE REVIVAIS,


byterian church, only a few years ago, it was seriously talked
of by some, as a matter worthy of discipline in a certain
thurch, that they had an organ in the house of God. This
within a few years. And there are many churches now who
would not tolerate an organ. They would not be half so much
excited to be told that sinners are going to hell, as to be told
that there is going to be an organ in the meeting house. Oh,
in how many places can you get the church to do anything
else, easier than to come along in an easy and natural way to
do what is needed, and wisest, and best, for promoting relig-
ion and saving souls. They act as if they had a “Thus saith
the Lord ” for every custom and practice that has been hand-
ed down to them, or that they have long followed themselves,
however absurd or injurious.

(6.) Extemporary Prayers. How many people are there, who
talk just as if the Prayer Book was of divine institution! And
I suppose multitudes believe it is. And in some parts of the
church a man would not be allowed to pray without his book
before him.

(7.) Preaching without notes. A few years since, a lady in
Philadelphia was invited to hear a certain minister preach,
and she refused, because he did not read his sermons. She
seemed to think it would be profane for a man to go into the
pulpit and talk, just as if he was talking to the people about
some interesting and important subject. As if God had
enjoined the use of notes and written sermons. They do not
know that notes themselves are an innovation, and a modern
one too. They were introduced in a time of political difficul-
ties in England. The ministers were afraid they should be
accused of preaching something against the government, un-
less they could show what they had preached, by having all
written down beforehand. And with a time-serving spirit,
they yielded to political considerations, and imposed a yoke
of bondage upon the church. And, now in many places, they
cannot tolerate extempore preachi

(8.) Kneeling in Prayer. This has made a great disturbance
in many parts of the country. The time has been in the Con-
gregational churches in New England, when a man or woman
would be ashamed to be seen kneeling at a prayer meeting,
for fear of being taken for a Methodist, I have prayed in
families where I was the only person that would kneel. The
others all stood, lest they should imitate the Methodists, I
suppose, and thus countenance innovations upon the estab-
lished form. Others, again, talk as if there was no other pos
ture but knecling, that could be acceptable in prayer.


MEASURES TO PROMOTE REVIVALS. 246


3. Labors of La

(1.) Lay Prayers. Much objection was formerly made
against allowing any man to pray or to take a part in manag-
ing a prayer meeting, unless he was a clergyman. It used to
be said that for a layman to pray in public, was interfering
with the dignity of ministers, and was not to be tolerated. A
minister in Pennsylvania told me that, a few years ago, he ap-
pointed a prayer meeting in the church, and the elders oppos-
ed it and turned it out of the house. They said they would
not have such work, they had hired a minister to do the pray-
ing, and he should do it, and they were not going to have
common men praying.

Ministers and many others have very extensively objected
to a layman’s praying in public, and especially in the pres-
ence of a mimster. That would let down the authority of the
clergy, and was not to be tolerated. At a synod held in this State,
there was a synodical prayer meeting appointed. The com-
mittee of arrangements, as it was to be a formal thing, desig-
nated beforehand the persons who were to take a part, and
named two clergymen and one layman. ‘The layman was a
man of talents and information equal to most ministers. But
one doctor of divinity got up and seriously objected to a lay-
man’s being asked to pray before that synod. It was not
usual, he said ; it infringed upon the rights of the clergy, and
he wished no innovations. What a state of things!

(2.) Lay exhortation. This has been made a question of
vast importance, one which has agitated all New England,
and many other parts of the country, whether laymen ought
to be allowed to exhort in public meetings. Many ministers
have labored to shut up the mouths of laymen entirely. The
overlooked the practice of the primitive churches. So muc
opposition was made to this practice nearly a hundred years
ago, that President Edwards actually had to take up the sub-
ject, and write a labored defence of the rights and duties of
laymen. But the opposition has not entirely ceased to this
day. “What! A man that is not a minister, to talk in pub-
lic! it will create confusion, it will let down the ministry ;
what will people think of us, ministers, if we allow common
men to do the same things that we do?” Astonishing!

But now, all these things are gone by, in most places, and
laymen can pray and exhort without the least objection. The
evils that were feared, from the labors of laymen, have not
been realized, and many ministers are glad to have them ex-
ercise their gifts in doing good.

8. Femaie Prayer Meetings. Within the last few years,


246 MEASURES TO PROMOTE REVIVALS,


e prayer meetings have been extensively opposed in this
Sate What Bes w things! A minister, now dead, said that
when he first attempted to establish these meetings, he had
all the clergy around opposed to him. “Set women to pray-
ing? Why, the next thing, I suppose, will be to set them to
preaching.” And serious apprehensions were entertained for
the safety of Zion, if women should be allowed to get together
to pray. And even now, they are not tolerated in some
churches. :

So it has been in regard to all the active movements of the
church. Missions, Sunday Schools, and everything of the
kind, have been opposed, and have gained their present hold
in the church only by a succession of struggles and a series
of innovations. A Baptist Association in Pennsylvania, some
years since, disclaimed all fellowship with any minister that
had been liberally educated, or that supported Missions, Bible
Societies, Sabbath Schools, Temperance Societies, ete. All
these were denounced as New Measures, not found in the
Bible, and that would necessarily lead to distraction and con-
fusion in the churches. The same thing has been done by
some among the German churches. And in many Presbyter
ian churches, there are found those who will take the same
ground, and denounce all these things, with the exception,
perhaps, of an educated ministry, as innovations, new meas-
ures, new lights, going in their own strength, and the like, and
as calculated to do great evil.

5. I will mention several men who have in Divine providence
been set forward as prominent in introducing these innova-
tions.

(1.) The apostles were great innovators, as you all know.
After the resurrection, and after the Holy Spirit was poured
out upon them, they set out to remodel the church. They
broke down the Jewish system of measures and rooted it out,
so as to leave scarcely a vestige.

(2.) Luther and the Reformers. You all know what difficul-
ties they had to contend with, and the reason was, that they
were trying to introduce new measures—new modes of per
forming the public duties of religion, and new expedients to
bring the Gospel with power to the hearts of men. All the
strange and ridiculous things of the Roman Catholics were
held to in the church with pertinacious obstinacy, as if they
were of Divine authority. And such an excitement was raised
by the attempt to change them, as well nigh involved all Eu
rope in blood.


(3.) Wesley and his coadjutors. Wesley did not at first tear


MEASURES TO PROMOTE REVIVALS. 24)


off from the Established Church in England, but formed little
classes everywhere, that grew into a church within a church.
He remained in the Episcopal church, but he introduced so
much of new measures, as to fill all England with excitement
and uproar and opposition, and he was everywhere denounced
as an innovator and a stirrer up of sedition, and a teacher of
new things which it was not lawful to receive.

Whitefield was a man of the same school, and like Wesley
was an innovator. I believe he and several individuals of his
associates were expelled from college for getting up such a new
measure, as a social prayer meeting. They would pray to-
gether and expound the Scriptures, and this was such a dar-
ing novelty that it could not be borne. When Whitefield came
to this country, what an astonishing opposition was raised!
Often he well nigh lost his life, and barely escaped by the skin
of his teeth. Now everybody looks upon him as the glory of
the age in which he lived. And many of our own denomina-
tion have so far divested themselves of prejudice as to think
Wesley not only a good but a wise and pre-eminently useful
man. Then almost the entire church viewed him with ani-
mosity, fearing that the innovations he introduced would
destroy the church.

(4.) President Edwards. This great man was famous in

his day for new measures. Among other innovations, he
refused to baptize the children of impenitent parents. The
practice of baptizing the children of the ungodly had been
introduced in the New England churches in the preceding
century, and had become nearly universal. President Ed-
wards saw that the practice was wrong, and he refused to do
it, and the refusal shook all the churches of New England.
A hundred ministers joined and determined to put him
down. He wrote a book on the subject, and defeated
them all. It produced one of the greatest excitements there
ever was in New England. Nothing, unless it was the Revo-
lutionary War, ever produced an equal excitement.
_ The General Association of Connecticut refused to counte-
nance Whitefield, he was such an innovator. ‘ Why, he will
preach out of doors, and anywhere!” Awful! What a terri-
ble thing, that a man should preach in the fields or in the
streets. Cast him out.

All these were devoted men, seeking out ways to do good and
save souls. And precisely the same kind of opposition was ex-
perienced by all the ecclesiastical bodies, obstructing their path
and trying to destroy their character and influence, A book, now
extant, was written in President Edwards’ time, by a doctor of


246 MEASURES TO PROMOTE REVIVALS.


divinity, and signed by a multitude of ministers, against
Whitefield and Edwards, their associates and their measures.
A letter was published in this city by a minister against
Whitefield, which brought up the same objections against
innovations that we hear now. In the time of the late oppo-
sition to revivals in the State of New York, a copy of this
letter was taken to the editor of a religious periodical with a
request that he would publish it. He refused, and gave for a
reason, that if published, many would apply it to the contro-
versy that is going on now. I mention it merely to show
how identical is the opposition that is raised in different
ages against all new measures designed to advance the cause
of religion.

6. In the present generation, many things have been in-
troduced which have proved useful, but have been opposed
on the ground that they were innovations. And as many are
still unsettled in regard to them, I have thought it best to
make some remarks concerning them. There are three
things in particular which have chiefly attracted remark, and
therefore I shall speak of them. They are Anxious Meetings,
Protracted Meetings, and the Anxious Seat. These are all op-
posed, and are called new measures.

(1.) Anxious Meetings. The first that I ever heard of under
that name, was in New England, where they were appointed
for the purpose of holding personal conversation with anxious
sinners, and to adapt instruction to the cases of individuals,
so as to lead them immediately to Christ. The design of
them is evidently philosophical, but they have been opposed
because they were new. There are two modes of conducting
an anxious meeting, either of which may effect the object of
them.

(a.) By spending a few moments in personal conversation and
learning the state of mind of each individual, and then in an
address to the whole, take up all their errors and remove
their difficulties together.

(b.) By going round to each, and taking up each individual
case, and going over the whole ground with each one sep-
arately, and getting them to promise to give up their hearts to
God. Either way they are important, and have been found
most successful in practice. But multitudes have objected
to them because they were new.

(2.) Protracted Meetings. These are not new, but have al-
ways been practised, in some form or other, ever since there
was a church on earth. The Jewish festivals were nothing
else but protracted meetings. In regard to the manner, they


MEASURES TO PROMOTE REVIVALS, 249


were conducted differently from what they are now. But the
design was the same, to devote a series of days to religious
services, in order to make a more powerful impression of di-
vine things upon the minds of the people. All denominations
of Christians, when religion prospers among them, hold pro-
tracted meetings. In Scotland they used to begin on Thurs-
day at all their communion seasons, and continue until after
the Sabbath. The Episcopalians, Baptists, and Methodists
all hold protracted meetings. Yet now in our day they have
been opposed, particularly among Presbyterians, and called
new measures, and regarded as fraught with all manner of
evil, notwithstanding they have been so manifestly and so ex-
tensively blessed. I will suggest a few things that ought to
be considered in regard to them.

(a.) In appointing them, regard should be had to the cir-
cumstances of the people ; whether the church are able to give
their attention and devote their time to carry on the meeting.
In some instances this rule has been neglected. Some have
thought it right to break in upon the necessary business of
the community. In the country, they would appoint the
meeting in harvest time, and in the city in the height of the
business season, when all the men were necessarily occupied
and pressed with their temporal labors. In defence of this
course it is said that our business should always be made to
yield to God’s business? that eternal things are of so much
more importance than temporal things, that worldly business
of any kind, and at any time, should be made to yield and give
place to a protracted meeting. But the worldly business in
which we are engaged is not our business. It is as much
God’s business, and as much our duty, as our prayers and
protracted meetings are. If we do not consider our business
in this light, we have not yet taken the first lesson in re-
ligion ; we have not learned to do all things to the glory of
God. With this view of the subject, separating our business
from religion, we are living six days for ourselves, and the
seventh for God. REAL DUTIES NEVER INTERFERE WITH EACH
OTHER. Week days have their appropriate duties, and the
Sabbath is appropriate duties, and we are to be equally
pious on every day in the week, and in the performance
of the duties of every day. We are to plough, and sow, and
sell our goods, and attend to our various callings, with the
same singleness of view to the glory of God, that we go to
church on the Sabbath, and pray in our families, and read
our Bibles. This is a first principle in religion. He that
does not know and act on this principle has not learned the

117


250 MEASURES TO PROMOTE REVIVALS.


A BC of piety as yet. Now there are particular seasons of
the year in which God in his providence calls upon men te
attend to business, because worldly business at the time is
particularly urgent, and must be done at that season, if done
at all; seed time and harvest for the farmer, and the busi-
ness seasons for the merchant. And we have no right to
say, in those particular seasons, that we will quit our business
and have a protracted meeting. ‘The fact is, the business is
not ours. And unless God, by some special indication of his
providence, shows it to be his pleasure that we should turn
aside and have a protracted meeting at such times, I look upon
it as tempting God to appoint them. It is saying, “ O God,
this worldly business is our business, and we are willing to lay
it aside for ‘hy business.” Unless God has indicated it to be
his pleasure to pour out his Spirit, and revive his work at
such a season, and has thus called upon his people to quit, for
the time being, their ordinary employments, and attend espe-
cially to a protracted meeting, it appears to me that God
might say to us in such circumstances, “ Who hath required
this of your hand ?”

God has a right to dispose of our time as he pleases, to re-
quire us to give up any portion of our time, or all our time,
to duties of instruction and devotion. And when circum-
stances plainly call for it, it is our duty to lay aside every
other business, and make direct and continuous efforts for
the salvation of souls. If we transact our business upon
right principles, and from right motives, and wholly for the
glory of God, we shall never object to go aside to attend a
protracted meeting whenever there appears to be a call for it
in the providence of God. A man who considers himself a
steward or a clerk, does not consider it a hardship to rest
from his labors on the Sabbath, but a privilege. The selfish
owner may feel unwilling to suspend his business on the
Sabbath. But the clerk, who transacts business not for him-
self but for his employer, considers it a privilege to rest upon
the Sabbath. So we, if we do our business for God, shall not
think it hard if he makes it our duty to suspend our worldly
business and attend a protracted meeting. We should rather
sonsider it in the light of a holiday. enever, therefore,
you hear a man pleading that he cannot leave his business to
attend a protracted meeting—that it is his duty to attend to
business, there is reason to fear that he considers the business
as his own, and the meeting as God’s business. If he felt
that the business of the store or farm was as much God’a
business as attending a protracted meeting, he would doubt


MEASURES TO PROMOTE REVIVALS 251


less be very willing to rest from his worldly toils, and go up
to the house of God and be refreshed whenever there was an
indication, on the part of God, that the community was called
to that work. It is highly worthy of remark, that the Jew-
ish festivals were appointed at those seasons of the year
when there was the least pressure of indispensable worldly
business.

In some instances, such meetings have been appointed in
the very pressure of the business seasons, and have been fol-
lowed with no good results, evidently for the want of atten-
tion to the rule here laid down. In other cases, meetings
have been appointed in seasons when there was a great
pressure of worldly business, and have been signally blessed.
But in those cases the blessing followed because the meet-
ing was appointed in obedience to the indications of the will
of God, by those who had spiritual discernment, and under-
stood the signs of the times. And in many cases, doubt-
less, individuals have attended who really supposed them-
selves to be giving up their own business, to attend to God's
business, and in such cases they made what they supposed
to be a real sacrifice, and God in mercy granted them the
blessing.

(b.) Ordinarily, a protracted meeting should be conducted
through, and the labor chiefly performed by, the same minister,
if possible. Sometimes protracted meetings have been held
and dependence placed on ministers coming in from day to
day. And they would have no blessing. And the reason
was obvious. They did not come in a state of mind to enter
into the work, and they did not know the state of people’s
minds, so as to know what to preach. Suppose a person who
was sick should call in a different physician every day. He
would not know what the symptoms had been, nor what
was the course of the disease or of the treatment, nor what
remedies had been tried, nor what the patient could bear.
Why, he would certainly kill the patient. Just so in a pro
tracted meeting, carried on by a succession of ministers.
None of them get into the spirit of it, and generally they do
more hurt than good.

A protracted meeting should not, ordinarily, be appointed,
unless they can secure the right kind of help, and get a min-
ister or two who will agree to stay on the ground till the
meeting is done, Then they will probably secure a rich
blessing. i ;

(c.) There should not be so many public meetings as to iw
terfere with the duties of the closet and of the family. Other


252 MEASURES TO PROMOTE REVIVALS.


wise Christians will lose their spirituality and let go their hold
of God, and the meeting will run down. ;

(d.) Fumilies should not put themselves out so much in
entertaining strangers as to neglect prayer and other duties. It
is often the case that when a protracted meeting is held, some
of the principal families in the church, I mean those who are
principally relied on to sustain the meetings, do not get imto
the work at all And the reason is, that they are encumbered
with much serving. They often take needless trouble to pro-
vide for guests who come from a distance to the meeting, and
lay themselves out very foolishly to make an entertainment,
not only comfortable but sumptuous. It should always be
understood that it is the duty of families to have as little
working and parade as possible, and to get along with their
hospitality in the easiest way, so that they may all have time
to pray, and go to the meeting, and to attend to the things
of the kingdom.

(e.) By all means guard against unnecessarily keeping late
hours. If people keep late hours, night after night, they will
inevitably wear out the body, and their health will fail, and
there will be a reaction. They sometimes allow themselves
to get so excited as to lose their sleep, and become irregular
in their meals, till they break down, and a reaction must
come. Unless there is the greatest pains taken to keep regu-
lar, the excitement will get so great that nature will give way,
and they run down, and the work stops.

(f.) All sectarianism should be carefully avoided. If a
sectarian spirit breaks out, either in the preaching, or pray-
ing, or conversation, it will counteract all the good of the
meeting.

(g.) Be watchful against placing dependence on a protracted
meeting, as if that of itself would produce a revival. This ig
a point of great danger, and has always been so. This is
the great reason why the church in successive generations
has always had to give up her measures—because Christians
had come to rely on them for success. So it has been in some
paca in regard to Protracted Meetings. They have been so

lessed that in some places the people have thought that if
they should only have a protracted meeting, they would have
a blessing, and sinners would be converted of course. And
so they have appointed their meeting, without any prepar-
ation in the church, and just sent abroad for some minister
of note, and set him to preaching, as if that would convert
sinners. It is obvious that the blessing would be withheld
from a meeting got up in this way.


MEASURES TO PROMOTE REVIVALS. 253


(h.) Avoid adopting the idea that a revival cannot be en
joyed without a Protracted Meeting. Some churches have got
into a morbid state of feeling on this subject. Their zeal
has become all spasmodic and feverish, so that they never
think of doing anything to promote a revival, only in thai
way. When a protracted meeting is held, they will seem to
be wonderfully zealous, and then sink down to a torpid state
till another protracted meeting produces another spasm. And
now multitudes in the church think it is necessary to give up
protracted meetings because they are abused in this way.
This ought to be guarded against, in every church, so that
they may not be driven to give them up, and lose all the bene-
fits that protracted meetings are calculated to produce.


(3.) The Anxious Seat.

By this I mean the appointment of some particular seat in
the place of meeting, where the anxious may come and be
addressed particularly, and be made subjects of prayer, and
sometimes be conversed with individually. Of late this
measure has met with more opposition than any of the
others. What is the great objection? I cannot see it. The
design of the anxious seat is undoubtedly philosophical, and
according to the laws of mind. It has two bearings :

1. When a person is seriously troubled in mind, every-
body knows that there is a powerful tendency to conceal
it. When a person is borne down with a sense of his
condition, if you can get him willing to have it known, if
you can get him to break away from the chains of pride,
you have gained an important point towards his conver-
sion. This is agreeable to the philosophy of the human
mind. And how many thousands are there who will bless
God to eternity, that when pressed by the truth they were
ever brought to take this step, by which they threw off the
idea that it was a dreadful thing to have anybody know that
they were serious about their souls.

2. Another bearing of the anxious seat is to detect decep-
tion and delusion, and thus prevent false hopes. It has been
opposed on the ground, that it was calculated to create delu-
sion and false hopes. But this objection is unreasonable.
The truth is the other way. Suppose I were preaching on
the subject of Temperance, and that I should first show the
evils of intemperance, and bring up the drunkard and his
family, and show the various evils produced, till every heart


254 MEASURES TO PROMOTE REVIVALS.


is beating with emotion. Then I portray the great danger
of moderate drinking, and show how it leads to intoxication
and ruin, and that there is no safety but in TOTAL ABSTI
NENCE, till a hundred hearts are ready to say, “I will
never drink another drop of ardent spirit in the world; if I
do, I shall expect to find a drunkard’s grave.” Now, I stop
short, and let the pledge be circulated, and everyone that is
fully resolved is ready to sign it. But how many will begin
to draw back and hesitate when you begin to call on them to
sign a pledge of total abstinence. One says to himself,
“Shall I sign it or not? I thought my, mind was made up,
but this signing a pledge never to drink again, I do not know
about that.” Thus you see that when a person is called upon
to give a pledge, if he is found not to be decided, he makes it
manifest that he was not sincere. That is, he never came to
that resolution on the subject, which could be relied on to
control his future life. Just so with the awakened sinner.
Preach to him, and at the moment he thinks he is willing to
do anything ; he thinks he is determined to serve the Lord ;
but bring him to the test, call on him to do one thing, to take
one step that shall identify him with the people of God, or
cross his pride—his pride comes up, and he refuses ; his delu-
sion is brought out, and he finds himself a lost sinner still ;
whereas, if you had not done it, he might have gone away
flattering himself that he was a Christian. If you say to
him, “ There is the anxious seat, come out and avow your
determination to be on the Lord’s side,” and if he is not
willing to do so small a thing as that, then he is not willing
to do anything, and there he is, brought out before his own
conscience. It uncovers the delusion of the human heart,
and prevents a great many spurious conversions, by showing
those who might otherwise imagine themselves willing to do
anything for Christ, that in fact they are willing to do
nothing.

The church has always felt it necessary to have something
of the kind to answer this very purpose. In the days of the
apostles baptism answered this purpose. The Gospel was
eke oe to the people, and then all those who were willing to

on the side of Christ were called on to be baptized. It
held the precise place that the anxious seat does now, as a
public manifestation of their determination to be Christians.
And in modern times, those who have been violently opposed
to the anxious seat have been obliged to adopt some substi-
tute, or they could not get along in promoting a revival. Some
have adopted the expedient of inviting the people who wera


MEASURES TO PROMOTE REVIVALS. 255


anxious for their souls to stay for conversation after the rest
of the congregation had retired. But what is the differ-
ence? This is as much setting up a test as the other.
Others, who would be much ashamed to employ the anxious
seat, have asked those who have any feeling on the subject to
sit still in their seats when the rest retire. Others have called
the anxious to retire into the lecture room. The object of
all these is the same, and the principle is the same, to bring
people out from the refuge of false shame. One man I heard
of who was very far gone in his opposition to new measures,
In one of his meetings he requested all those who were willing
to submit to God, or desired to be made subjects of prayer,
to signify it by leaning forward and putting their heads down
upon the pew before them. Who does not see that this was
a mere evasion of the anxious seat, and that it was designed
to answer the purpose in its place, and he adopted this be-
cause he felt that something of the kind was important?

Now what objection is there against taking a particular
seat, or rising up, or going into the lectureroom? They all
mean the same thing, when properly conducted. And they
are not novelties in principle at all. The thing has always
been done in substance. In Joshua’s day, he called on the
people to decide what they would do, and they spoke right
out in the meeting, “ We will serve the Lord ; the Lord our
God wili we serve, and his voice will we obey.”


REMARKS.


1. If we examine the history of the church we shall find
that there never has been an extensive reformation, except
by new measures. Whenever the churches get settled down
into a form of doing things, they soon get to rely upon the
outward doing of it, and so retain the form of religion while
they lose the substance. And then it has always been found
impossible to arouse them so as to bring about a reformation
of the evils, and produce a revival of religion, by simply pur-
suing that established form. Perhaps it is not too much to
say, that it is impossible for God himself to bring about re-
formations but by new measures. At least, it is a fact that
God has always chosen this way, as the wisest and best that
he could devise or adopt. And although it has always been
the case, that the very measures which God has chosen to
employ, and which he has blessed in reviving his work, have
been opposed as new measures, and have been denounced,
yet he has continued to act upon the same principle. When


258 MEASURES TO PROMOTE REVIVALS.


he has fourd that a certain mode has lost its influence by
having become a form, he brings up some new measure,
which wil BREAK IN upon their lazy habits, and WAKE
UP a slumbering church. And great good has resulted.

2. The same distinctions, in substance, that now exist,
have always existed, in all seasons of reformation and re-
vival of religion. There have always been those who par
ticularly adhered to their forms and notions, and precise
way of doing things, as if they had a “Thus saith the

Lord” for every one of them. They have called those that
differed from them, who were trying to roll the ark of sal-
vation forward, Methodists, New Lights, Radicals, New
School, New Divinity, and various other opprobrious names.
And the declensions that have followed have been uni-
formly owing to two causes, which should by no means be
overlooked by the church.

(1.) The Old School, or Old Measure party, have perse-
vered in their opposition, and eagerly seized hold of any real
or apparent indiscretion in the friends of the work.

In such cases, the churches have gradually lost their confi-
dence in the opposition to new measures, and the cry of
“New Divinity,” and “Innovation” has ceased to alarm
them. They see that the blessing of God is with those that
are thus accused of new measures and innovation, and the
continued opposition of the Old School, together with the
continued success of the New School, have destroyed their
confidence in the opposition, and they get tired of hearing
the incessant cry of “ New Lights,” and “ New Divinity,” and
“New Measures.” Thus the scale has turned, and the
churches have pronounced a verdict in favor of the New
School, and of condemnation against the Old School.

(2.) But now, mark me : right here in this state of things,
the devil has, again and again, taken the advantage, and in-
dividuals have risen up, and being sustained by the confi-
dence of the churches in the New Measure party, and finding-
them sick of opposition, and ready to do anything that would
promote the interests of Christ’s kingdom, they have driven
headlong themselves, and in some instances have carried the
churches into the very vortex of those difficulties which have
been predicted by their opposers. Thus, when the battle
had been fought, and the victory gained, the rash zeal of some
well-meaning but headlong individuals, has brought about a
reaction that has spread a pall over the churches for years.
This was the case, as is well known, in the days of President
Edwards. Here is a rock, upon which a light-house is nor


MEASURES TO PROMOTE BEVIVALS, 257


built, and upon which if the church now run aground,
both parties are entirely without excuse. It is now well
known, or ought to be known, that the declension which fol-
lowed the revivals in those days, together with the declen
sions which have repeatedly occurred, were owing to the
combined influence of the continued and pertinacious oppo-
sition of the Old School, and the ultimate bad spirit and
recklessness of some individuals of the New School.

And here the note of alarm should be distinctly sounded
to both parties, lest the devil should prevail against us, at
the very point, and under the very circumstances, where he
has so often prevailed. Shall the church never learn wis
dom from experience? How often, oh, how often must these
scenes be acted over before the millennium shall come! When
will it once be, that the church may be revived, and religion
prevail, without exciting such opposition in the church, as
eventually to bring about a reaction.

3. The present cry against new measures is highly ridicu-
lous, when we consider the quarter from which it comes, and
all the circumstances in the case. It is truly astonishing that
grave ministers should really feel alarmed at the new meas-
ures of the present day, as if new measures were something
new under the sun, and asif the present form and manner
of doing things had descended from the apostles, and were
established by a “ Thus saith the Lord :” when the truth is,
that every step of the church’s advance from the gross dark-
ness of Popery, has been through the introduction of one
new measure after another. e now look with astonish-
ment, and are inclined to look almost with contempt, upon
the ery of “ Innovation,” that has preceded our day ; and as
we review the fears that multitudes in the church have enter-
tained in by-gone days with respect to innovation, we find it
difficult to account for what appear to us the groundless and
absurd, at least, if not ridiculous objections and difficulties
which they made. But, my hearers, is it not wonderful, that
at this late day, after the church has had so much experience
in these matters, that grave and pious ‘men should seriously
feel alarmed at the introduction of the simple, the philoso-
phical, and greatly prospered measures of the last ten years?
As if new measures were something not to be tolerated, of
highly disastrous tendency, and that should wake the notes
and echoes of alarm in every nook and corner of the church.

4. We seo why it is that those who have been making the
edo about new measures have not been successful in promoting


veanvals,


268 MEASURES TO PROMOTE REVIVALS.


They have been taken up with the evils, real or imaginary
which have attended this great and blessed work of God.
That there have been evils, no one will pretend to deny. But
I do believe, that no revival ever existed since the world be
gan, of so great power and extent as the one that has pre
vailed for the last ten years, which has not been attended
with as great or greater evils. Still a large portion of the
church have been frightening themselves and others, by giv-
ing constant attention to the evils of revivals. One of the
professors in a Presbyterian Theological Seminary, felt it his
duty to write a series of letters to Presbyterians, which were
extensively circulated, the object of which seemed to be to
sound the note of alarm throughout all the borders of the
church, in regard to the evils attending revivals While men
are taken up with the evils instead of the excellencies of a
blessed work of God, how can it be expected that they will
be useful in promoting it? I would sey all this in great
kindness, but still it is a point upon which I must not be
silent.

5. Without new measures it is impossible that the church
should succeed in gaining the attention of the world to re
ligion. There are so many exciting subjects constantly
brought before the public mind, such a running to and
fro, so many that cry “Lo here,” and “Lo there,” that the
church cannot maintain her ground, cannot command atten-
tion, without very exciting preaching, and sufficient novelty
in measures, to get the public ear. The measures of politi-
cians, of infidels and heretics, the scrambling after wealth,
the increase of luxury, and the ten thousand exciting and
counteracting influences that bear upon the church and upon
the world, will gain their attention and turn all men away
from the sanctuary and from the altars of the Lord, unless
we increase in wisdom and piety, and wisely adopt such new
measures as are calculated to get the attention of men to the
Gospel of Christ. I have already said, in the course of these
lectures, that novelties should be introduced no faster than
they are really called for. They should be introduced with
‘he greatest wisdom, and caution, and prayerfulness, and in
a manner calculated to excite as littl opposition as possible.
But new measures we must have. And may God prevent the
church from settling down in any set of forms, and getting
the present or any other edition of her measures stereotyped.
_ 6. It is evident that we must have more exciting preach-
ing, to meet the character and wants of the age. Ministers
are generally beginning to find this out. And some of them


MEASURES TO PROMOTE REVIVALS 259


eomplain of it, and suppose it to be owing to new measures,
as they call them. They say that such ministers as our
fathers would have been glad to hear, now cannot be heard,
cannot get a settlement, nor collect an audience. And they
think that new measures have perverted the taste of the
people. But this is not the difficulty. The character of the
age is changed, and these men have not conformed to it, but
retain the same stiff, dry, prosing style of preaching that
answered half a century ago.

Look at the Methodists. Many of their ministers are
unlearned, in the common sense of the term, many of them
taken right from the shop or the farm, and yet they have
gathered congregations, and pushed their way, and won souls
everywhere. Wherever the Methodists have gone, their plain,
pointed and simple, but warm and animated mode of preach-
ing has always gathered congregations. Few Presbyterian
ministers have gathered so large assemblies, or won so many
souls. Now are we to be told that we must pursue the same
old, formal mode of doing things, amidst all these changes?
As well might the North River be rolled back, as the world
converted under such preaching. Those who adopt a dif-
ferent style of preaching, as the Methodists have done, will
run away from us. The world will escape from under the
influence of this old fashioned or rather new fashioned minis-
try. It is impossible that the public mind should be held
by such preaching. We must have exciting, powerful preach-
ing, or the devil will have the people, except what the Meth-
odists can save. It is impossible that our ministers should
continue to do good, unless we have innovations in regard
to the style of preaching. Many ministers are finding it
out already, that a Methodist preacher, without the advant-
ages of a liberal education, will draw a congregation around
him which a Presbyterian minister, with perhaps ten times
as much learning, cannot equal, because he has not the
earnest manner of the other, and does not pour out fire upon
his hearers when he preaches.

7. We see the importance of having young ministers obtain
right views of revivals. In a multitude of cases, I have seen
that great pains are taken to frighten our young men, who are
preparing for the ministry, about the evils of revivals, new
measures, and the like. Young men in some theological
seminaries are taught to look upon new measures as if they
were the very inventions of the devil How can such men
have revivals. So when they come out, they look about, and
watch, and start. as if the devil was there. Some young men


260 MHASURES TO PROMOTH EREVIVAIA


in Princeton, a few years ago, came out with an essay upon

the “evils of revivals.” I should like to know, now, how

many of those young men have enjoyed revivals among their

le, since they have been in the ministry; and if any

ve, I should like to know whether they have not repented
of that piece about the evils of revivals. i

If I had a voice so loud as to be heard at Princeton, I
would speak to those young men on this subject. It is high
time to talk plainly on this point. The church is groaning in
all her borders for the want of suitable ministers. Good
men are laboring and are willing to labor night and day to
assist in educating young men for the ministry, to promote
revivals of religion ; and when they come out of the semi-
nary, some of them are as shy of all the measures that God
blesses as they are of popery itself.

Shall it be so always? Must we educate young men for the
ministry, and have them come out frightened to death about
new measures, as if there had never been any such thing as
new measures. They ought to know that new measures are
no new thing in the church. Let them GO ALONG, and
keep at work themselves, and not be frightened about new
measures. I have been pained to see that some men, in giv-
ing accounts of revivals, have evidently felt themselves
obliged to be particular in detailing the measures used, to
avoid the inference that new measures were introduced ; evi-
dently feeling that even the church would undervalue the re-
vival unless it appeared to have been promoted without new
measures. Besides, this caution in detailing the measures to
demonstrate that there was nothing new, looks like admitting
that new measures are wrong because they are new, and that
a revival is more valuable because it was not promoted by
new measures. In this way, I apprehend that much evil has
been done, already, and if the practice is to continue, it must
come to this, that a revival must be judged of, by the fact
that it occurred in connection with new or old measures. I
never will countenance such a spirit, nor condescend to guard
an account of a revival against the imputation of new or old
measures. I believe new measures are right, that is, that it
is no objection to a measure that it is new or old.

Let a minister enter fully into his work, and pour out his
heart to God for a blessing, and whenever he sees the want
of any measure to bring the truth more powerfully before
the minds of the people, let him adopt it and not be afraid,
and God will not withhold his blessing. If ministers will
not go forward, and will not preach the Gospel with power


MEASURES TO PROMOTE REVIVALA. 261


and earnestness, and will not turn out of their tracks to do
anything new for the purpose of saving souls, they will grieve
the Holy Spirit away, and God will visit them with his curse,
and raise up other ministers to do his work in the world.

8. It is the right and duty of ministers to adopt new measures
for promoting revivals. In some places the church have op-
posed their minister when he has attempted to employ those
measures which God has blessed for a revival, and have gone
so far as to give up their prayer meetings, and give up labor
ing to save souls, and stand aloof from everything, because
their minister has adopted what they call new measures. No
matter how reasonable the measures are in themselves, nor
how seasonable, nor how much God may bless them. It is
enough that they are called new measures, and they will not
have anything to do with new measures, nor tolerate them
among the people. And thus they fall out by the way, and
grieve away the Spirit of God, and put a stop to the revival,
when the world around them is going to hell.

Fivatty.—This zealous adherence to particular forms and
modes of doing things, which has led the charch to resist in-
noyations in measures, savors strongly of fanaticism. And what
is not a little singular, is that fanatics of this stamp are al-
ways the first to cry out “fanaticism,” What is that but
fanaticism in the Roman Catholic Church, that causes them
to adhere with such pertinacity to their particular modes, and
forms, and ceremonies, and fooleries? They act as if all
these things were established by divine authority ; as if there
were a “ Thus saith the Lord” for every one of them. Now
we justly style this a spirit of fanaticism, and esteem it worthy
of rekake. But it is just as absolutely fanatical, for the Pres-
byterian Church, or any other church, to be sticklish for her
particular forms, and to act as if they were established by di-
vine authority. The fact is, that God has established, in no
church, any particular form, or manner of worship, for pro-
moting the interests of religion. The Scriptures are entirely
silent on these subjects, under the Gospel dispensation, and
the church is left to exercise her own discretion in relation to
all such matters. And I hope it will not be thought unkind,
when I say again, that to me it appears, that the unkind,
angry zeal for a certain mode and manner of doing things,
and the overbearing, exterminating cry against new measures,
SAVORS STRONGLY OF FANATICISM.

The only thing insisted upon under the Gospel dispensa-
tion, in regard to measures, is that there should be decency
and order, “Let all things be done decently and in order.”


262 MEASURES TO PROMOTE BEVIVAIA


We are required to guard against all confusion and disorder
ly conduct. But what is decency and order? Will it be pre
tended that an anxious meeting, or a protracted meeting, or
an anxious seat, is inconsistent with decency and order? 1
should most sincerely deprecate, and most firmly resist what-
ever was indecent and disorderly in the worship of God’s
house. But I do not suppose that by “order” we are to un-
derstand any particular set mode, in which any church may
have been accustomed to perform their service.


LECTURE XV.
HINDERANCES TO REVIVALS.


TEET.—I am doing a great work, so that I cannot come down. Why should the
work cease, whilet I leave it, and come down to you.—NEHEMIAH Vi. 8.


Tms servant of God had come down from Babylon to re.
build the temple and re-establish the worship of God at
Jerusalem, the city of his fathers’ sepulchres. When it was
discovered by Sanbaliat and certain individuals, his allies,
who had long enjoyed the desolations of Zion, that now the
temple, and the holy city were about to be rebuilt, they raised
a great opposition. Sanballat and the other leaders tried in
several ways to divert Nehemiah and his friends, and prevent
them from going forward in their work ; at one time they
threatened them, and then complained that they were going
to rebel against the king. Again, they insisted that their de-
sign was not pious but political, to which Nehemiah replied
by a simple and prompt denial, “ There are no such things
done as thou sayest, but thou feignest them out of thine own
heart.” Finally, Sanballat sent a message to Nehemiah, re-
questing him to meet in the plain of Ono, to discuss the
whole matter amicably and have the difficulty adjusted, but
designed to do him mischief. They had found that they
could not frighten Nehemiah, and now they wanted to come
round him by artifice and fraud, and draw him off from the
vigorous prosecution of his work. But he replied, “I am
doing a great work, so that I cannot come down: why should
the work cease, whilst I come down to you?”

It has always been the case, whenever any of the servants
of God do anything in his cause, and there appears to be a
probability that that they will succeed, that Satan by his
agents regularly attempts to divert their minds and nullify
their labors. So it has been during the last ten years, in
which there have been such remarkable revivals through the
length and breadth of the land. These revivals have been
very great and powerful, and extensive. It has been esti-
mated that not less than TWO HUNDRED THOUSAND persons have
been converted to God in that time.

And the devil has been busy in his devices to divert and


(263)


264 HINDERANCES TO REVIVALS.


distract the people of God, and turn off their energies from
pushing forward the great work of salvation. In remarking
on the subject, I propose to show,

L That a Revival of Religion is a great work. ;

IL To mention several things which may put a stop to it.

IL Endeavor to show what must be done for the continu-
ance of this great revival. ý

L Iam to show that a Revival of Religion is a great work.

It is a great work, because in it are great interests involved.
In a Revival of Religion are involved both the glory of God,
so far as it respects the government of this world, and the sal-
vation of men. Two things that are of infinite importance are
involved in it The greatness of a work is to be estimated by
the greatness of the consequences depending on it. And this
is the measure of its importance.

IL I am to mention several things which may put a stop to
a revival,

Some have talked very foolishly on this subject, as if
nothing could injure a genuine revival. They say, “If your
revival is a work of God, it cannot be stopped; can any
created being stop God?” Now I ask if this is common
sense? Formerly, it used to be the established belief that a
revival could not be stopped, because it was the work of God
And so they supposed it would go on, whatever might be
done to hinder it, in the church or out of it. But the farmer
might just as well reason so, and think he could go and cut
down his wheat and not hurt the crop, because it is God that
makes grain grow. A revival is the work of God, and so isa
crop of wheat ; and God is as much dependent on the use of
means in one case as the other. And therefore a revival is as
liable to be injured as a wheat-field.

1, A revival will stop whenever the church believe tt is going
to cease. The church are the instruments with which God
carries on this work, and they are to work in it voluntarily
and with their hearts. Nothing is more fatal to a revival
than for its friends to predict that it is going to stop. No
matter what the enemies of the work may say about it, pre.
licting that it will all run out and come to nothing, and the
fke. They cannot stop it in this way; but the friends must
abor and pray in faith to carryit on. It is a contradiction to
say they are laboring and praying in faith to carry on the
work, and yet believe that it is going to stop. If they lose
their Lee it yrs ies of course. Whenever the friends of
revivals begin to prophesy that the revival is going to stop,
they should be instantly rebuked, in the name ohn Lad


HINDERANCES TO REVIVALS, 265


If the idea once begins to prevail, and if you cannot counter
act it and root it out, the revival will infallibly cease ; for it is
indispensable to the work, that Christians should labor and
pray in faith to promote it, and it is a contradiction to say
that they can labor in faith for its continuance, while they be
lieve that it is about to cease.

2. A revival will cease when Christians consent that it should
cease. Sometimes Christians sec that the revival is in danger
of ceasing, and that if something effectual is not done, it will
come to a stand. If this fact distresses them, and drives
them to prayer, and to fresh efforts, the work will not cease.
When Christians love the work of God and the salvation of
souls so well that they are distressed at the mere apprehen-
sion of a decline, it will drive them to an agony of prayer and
effort. If it does not drive them to agony and effort to pre
vent its ceasing ; if they see the danger, and do not try to
avert it, or to renew the work, THEY CONSENT THAT IT SHOULD
stop. There are at this time many people, all over the coun-
try, who see revivals declining, and that they are in great
danger of ceasing altogether, and yet they manifest but little
distress, and seem to care but little about it. Whole churcher
see their condition, and see what is coming unless there car
be a waking up, and yet they are at ease, and do not groan
and agonize in prayer, that God would revive his work. Some
are even predicting that there is now going to be a great re
action, and a great dearth come over the church, as there
did after Whitefield’s and Edwards’ day. And yet they are
not startled at their own forebodings ; they are cool about
it, and turn directly off to other things. THEY CON-
SENT TO IT. It seems as if they were the devil’s trum-
peters, sent out to scatter dismay throughout the ranks of
God’s elect.

3. A revival will cease whenever Christians become mechan
ical in their attempts to promote it. When their faith is strong,
and their hearts are warm and mellow, and their prayers full
of holy emotion, and their words with power, then the work
goes on. But when their prayers begin to be cold and with-
out emotion, and their deep-toned feeling is gone, and they
begin to labor mechanically, and to use words without feeling,
then the revival will cease.

4. The revival will cease whenever Christians get the idea
that the work will go on without their aid. The church are co-
workers with God in promoting a revival, and the work can
be carried on just as far as the church will carry it on, and
po farther. God has been for one thousand eight hundred

12


266 HINDERANCES TO REVIVALS.


years trying to get the church into the work He has been
calling and urging, commanding, entreating, pressing and
encouraging, to get them to take hold. He has stood all this
while ready to make bare his arm to carry on the work with
them. But the church have been unwilling to do their part.
They seem determined to leave it to God alone to convert the
world, and say, “ If he wants the world converted, let him do
it.” They ought to know that this is impossible. So far as
we know, neither God nor man can convert the world with-
out the co-operation of the church. Sinners cannot be con-
verted without their own agency, for conversion consists in
their voluntary turning to God. No more ean sinners be
converted without the appropriate moral influences to turn
them ; that is, without truth and the reality of thi
brought full before their minds either by direct revelation
or by men. God cannot convert the world by physical om-
nipotence, but he is dependent on the moral influence of the
church.

5. The work will cease when the church prefer to attend to
their own concerns rather than God’s business, I do not ad-
mit that men have any business which is properly their own,
but they think so, and in fact prefer what they consider as
their own, rather than to work for God. They begin to think
they cannot afford sufficient time from their worldly employ-
ments to carry on a revival. And they pretend they are
obliged to give up attending to religion, and let their hearts
go out again after the world. And the work must cease, of
course.

6. When Christians get proud of their great revival, it wil)
cease. I mean those Christians who have before been instru
mental in promoting it. It is almost always the case in a re-
vival, that a part of the church are too proud or too worldly
to take any part in the work. They are determined to stand
aloof, and wait, and see what it will come to, and see how it
will come out. The pride of this part of the church cannot
stop the revival, for the revival never rested on them. It be
gun without them, and it can go on without them. They
may fold their arms and do nothing but look on and find
fault ; and still the work may go on. But when that part of
the church who work, begin to think what a great revival they
have had, and how they have labored and prayed, and how
bold and how zealous they have been, and how much good
they have done, then the work will be likely to decline. Per-
haps it has been published in the papers what a revival there
has been in that church, and how much engaged the mem


HINDERANCES TO REVIVALS, 267


bers have been, and they think how high they shall stand in
the estimation of other churches, all over the land, because
they have had such a great revival. And so they get puffed
up, and vain, and then they can no longer enjoy the presence
of God, and the Spirit withdraws from them, and the revival
ceases.

7. The revival will stop when the church gets exhausted by
labor. Multitudes of Christians commit a great mistake here
in time of revival. They are so thoughtless, and have so little
judgment, that they will break up all their habits of living,
neglect to eat and sleep at the proper hours, and let the ex-
citement run away with them, so that they overdo their
bodies, and are so imprudent that they soon become ex
hausted, and it is impossible for them to continue in the
work. Revivals often cease, and declension follows, from
negligence and imprudence, in this respect, on the part of
those engaged in carrying them on.

8. A revival will cease when the church begins to speculate
about abstract doctrines, which have nothing to do with prac-
tice, If the church turn off their attention from the things of
salvation, and go to studying or disputing about abstract
points, the revival will cease, of course.

9. When Christians begin to proselyte. When the Baptists
are so opposed to the Presbyterians, or the Presbyterians to
the Baptists, or both against the Methodists, or Episcopalians
against the rest, that they begin to make efforts to get the
converts to join their church, you soon see the last of the re-
vival. Perhaps a revival will go on for a time, and all secta-
rian difficulties are banished, till somebody circulates a book,
privately, to gain proselytes. Perhaps some over-zealous dea-
con, or some mischief-making woman, or some proselyting
minister, can not keep still any longer, and begins to work
the work of the devil, by attempting to gain proselytes, and
so stirs up bitterness, and raising a selfish strife, grieves
away the Spirit, and drives Christians all into parties. No
more revival there.

10. When Christians refuse to render to the Lord according
to tne benefits received. This is a fruitful source of religious
declensions. God has opened the windows of heaven to a
church, and poured them out a blessing, and then he reason-
ably expects them to bring in the tithes into his store-house,
and devise and execute liberal things for Zion ; and lo! they
have refused ; they have not laid themselves out accordingly
to promote the cause of Christ, and so the Spirit has been
grieved and the blessing withdrawn, and in some instances a


268 HINDERANCES TO REVIVALS.


great reaction has taken place because the church would not
be liberal, when God has been so bountiful I have known
churches who were evidently cursed with barrenness for
such a course. They had a glorious revival, and afterwards
perhaps their meeting-house needed repairing, or something
else was needed which would cost a little money, and they
refused to do it, and so for their niggardly spirit God gave
Mae the church, the Holy Spirit

11. When the church, in any way, grieve Y opr.

(1.) When they do not feel their dependence on the Spirit.
Whenever Christians get strong in their own strength, God
curses their blessings. In many instances, Christians sin
against their own mercies, because they get lifted up with
their success, and take the credit to themselves, and do not
give to God all the glory. As he says, “If ye will not hear,
and if ye will not lay it to heart, to give glory unto my name,
saith the Lord of hosts, I will even send a curse upon you,
and, I will curse your blessings : yea, I have cursed them al.
ready, because ye do not lay it to heart.” There has been a
great deal of this in this country, undoubtedly. I have seen
many things that looked like it, in the papers, where there
seemed a disposition in men to take credit for success in pro-
moting revivals. There is doubtless a great temptation to
this, and it requires the utmost watchfulness, on the part of
ministers and churches, to guard against it, and not grieve
the Spirit away by vain-glorying in men.

(2.) The Spirit may be grieved by a spirit of boasting of the
revival. Sometimes, as soon as a revival commences, you will
see it blazed out in the newspapers. And most commonly this
will kill the revival. There was a case in a neighboring State,
where a revival commenced, and instantly there came out a
letter from the pastor, telling that he had a revival. I saw
the letter and said to myself, That is the last we shall hear of
this revival. And so it was. Ina few days, the work totally
ceased. And such things are not uncommon. I could men-
tion cases and places, where persons have published such
things as to puff up the church, and make them so proud that
little or nothing more could be done for the revival.

Some, under pretence of publishing things to the praise and
glory of God, have published things that savored so strongly
of a disposition to exalt themselves, have made their own
agency to stand out so conspicuously, as was evidently calcu-
lated to make an unhappy impression. At the protracted
meeting held in this church, a year ago last fall, there were
five hundred hopefully converted, whose names and places of


“INDERANCES TO BEVIVALA 269


residence we knew. A considerable number of them joined
this church. Many of them united with other churches.
Nothing was said of this in the papers. I have several times
been asked why we were so silent upon the subject. I could
only reply, that there was such a tendency to self-exaltation
in the churches, that I was afraid to publish anything on the
subject. Perhaps I erred. But I have so often seen mischief
done by premature publications, that I thought it best to say
nothing about it. In the revival in this city, four years ago,
so much was said in the papers, that appeared like self-exalta-
tion, that I was afraid to publish. I am not speaking against
the practice itself, of publishing accounts of revivals. But the
manner of doing it is of vast importance. If it is done so as
to excite vanity, it is always fatal to the revival.

(8.) So the Spirit is grieved by saying or publishing things
that are calculated to undervalue the work of God. When a
blessed work of God is spoken lightly of, not rendering to God
the glory due to his name, the Spirit is grieved. If anything
is said about a revival, give.only the plain and naked facts just
as they are, and let them pass for what they are worth.

12. A revival may be expected to cease, when Christians lose
the spirit of brotherly love. Jesus Christ will not continue with
people in a revival any longer than they continue in the exer-
cise of brotherly love. When Christians are in the spirit of a
revival, they feel this love, and then you will hear them call
each other brother and sister, very affectionately. But when
they begin to get cold, they lose this warmth and glow of affec-
tion for one another, and then this calling brother and sister
will seem silly and contemptible and they will leave it off In
some churches they never call each other so, but where there
is a revival, Christians naturally do it. I never saw a revival,
and probably there never was one, in which they did not do
it. But as soon as this begins to cease, the Spirit of God is
grieved, and departs from among them.

13. A revival will decline and cease, unless Christians are
frequently re-converted. By this I mean, that Christians, in
order to keep in the spirit of a revival, commonly need to be
frequently convicted, and humbled, and broken down before
God, and re-converted. This is something which many do not
understand, when we talk about a Christians being recon-
verted. But the fact is that in a revival the Christian’s heart
is liable to get crusted over, and lose its exquisite relish for
divine things; his unction and prevalence in prayer abates,
and then he must be converted over again. It is impossible
to keep him in such a state as not to do injury to the work,


270 HINDERANCES TO REVIVALS.


unless he pass through such a process every few days. I have
never labored in revivals in company with any one wko would
keep in the work and be fit to manage a revival continually,
who did not pass through this process of breaking down as
often as once in two or three weeks. Revivals decline, com-
monly, because it is found impossible to make the church feel
their guilt and their dependence, so as to break down before
God. It is important that ministers should understand this,
and learn how to break down the church, and break down
themselves when they need it, or else Christians will soon be-
come mechanical in their work, and lose their fervor and their
power of prevailing with God. This was the process through
which Peter passed, when he had denied the Saviour, and by
which breaking down, the Lord prepared him for the great
work on the day of Pentecost. I was surprised, a few years
since, to find that the phrase “breaking down” was a stumbling
block to certain ministers and professors of religion. They laid
themselves open to the rebuke administered to Nicodemus,
“ Art thou a master in Israel and knowest not these things ? *
I am confident that until some of them know what it is to be
“broken down,” they will never do much more for the cause
of revivals.

14. A revival cannot continue when Christians will not prac-
tice self-denial. When the church have enjoyed a revival and
begin to grow fat upon it, and run into self-indulgence, the
revival will soon cease. Unless they sympathize with the Son
of God, who gave up all to save sinners ; unless they are will-
ing to give up their luxuries, and their ease, and lay them-
selves out in the work, they need not expect the Spirit of God
will be poured out upon them. ‘This is undoubtedly one of
the principal causes of personal declension. Let Christiang
in a revival BEWARE, when they first find an inclina-
tion creeping upon them, to shrink from self-denial, and to
give in to one form of seliindulgence after another. It is
the device of Satan, to bait them off from the work of God,
and make them dull and gross, and lazy, and fearful, and use-
less, and sensual, and drive away the Spirit and destroy the
revival.

15. A revival will be stopped by controversies about new mea
sures. Nothing is more certain to overthrow a revival than
this. But as my last lecture was on the subject of new mea-
sures, I need not dwell longer on the subject now.

16. Revivals can be put down by the continued opposition of
the Old School, combined with a bad spirit in the New School. {i
those who do nothing to promote revivals continue their op


HINDERANCES TO REVIVALS. 271


position, and if those who are laboring to promote them allow
themselves to get impatient, and get into a bad spirit, the revival
will cease. When the Old School write their letters in the news-
pean against revivals or revival men, and the New School write
etters back again, against them, in an angry, contentious, bitter
spirit, and get into a jangling controversy, revivals will cease.
LET THEM KEEP ABOUT THEIR WORK, and not talk
about the opposition, nor preach, nor print about it. If
others choose to publish their slang and stuff, let the Lord’s
servants keep to their work, and all the writing and slander
will not stop the revival, while those who are engaged in it
mind their business, and keep to their work. It is astonish-
ing how far this holds true in fact.

In one place where there was a revival, certain ministers
formed a combination against the pastor of the church, and a
plan was set on foot to ruin him, and they actually got him
prosecuted before his Presbytery, and had a trial that lasted
six weeks, right in the midst of the revival, and the work still
went on. The praying members of the church laid them-
selves out so in the work, that it continued triumphantly
throughout the whole scene. The pastor was called off, to
attend his trial, but there was another minister that labored
among the people, and the members did not even go to the
trial, generally, but kept praying and laboring for souls, and
the revival rode out the storm. In many other places, oppo-
sition has risen up in the church, but a few humble souls have
kept at their work, and a gracious God has stretched out his
naked arm and made the revival go forward in spite of all
opposition.

But whenever those who are actively engaged in promoting
a revival get excited at the unreasonableness and pertinacity
of the opposition, and feel as if they could not have it so, and
they lose their patience, and feel as if they must answer their
cavils and refute their slanders, then they get down into the

lains of Ono, and the work must cease.

17. Any diversion of the public mind will binder a revival.
Anything that succeeds in diverting public attention, will put
a stop to a revival In the case I have specified, where the
minister was put on trial before his Presbytery, the reason
why it did not ruin the revival was, that the praying mem-
bers of the church would not suffer themselves to be diverted.
They did not even attend the trial, but kept praying and
laboring for souls, and so public attention was kept to the
subject, in spite of all the efforts of the devil

But whenever he succeeds in absorbing public attention on


272 HINDERANCES TO REVIVALS.


any other subject, he will put an end to the revival. No mat
ter what the subject is. If an angel from heaven were to come
down, and preach, or pass about the streets, it might be the
worst thing in the world for a revival, for it would turn sin-
ners all off from their own sins, and turn the church off from
praying for souls, to follow this glorious being, and gaze upon
him, and the revival would cease.

18. Resistance to the Temperance Reformation will put a stop
to revivals ina church. The time has come that it can no
longer be innocent in a church to stand aloof from this glo-
rious reformation. The time was when this could be done
ignorantly. The time has been when ministers and Chris-
tians could enjoy revivals, notwithstanding ardent spirit was
used among them. But since light has been thrown upon
the subject, and it has been found that the use is only inju-
rious, no church member or minister can be innocent and
stand neutral in the cause. They must speak out and take
sides. And if they do not take ground on one side, their in-
fluence is on the other. Show me a minister that has taken
ground against the temperance reformation who has had a
revival Show me one who now stands aloof from it who
has a revival Show me one who now temporizes upon this
point who does not come out and take a stand in favor of
temperance who has a revival. It did not use to be so. But
now the subject has come up, and has been discussed, and is
understood, no man can shut his eyes upon the truth. The
man’s hands are RED WITH BLOOD who stands aloof
from the temperance cause. And can he have a revival ?

19. Revivals are hindered when ministers and churches take
wrong ground in regard to any question involving human rights.
Take the subject of SLAVERY, for instance. The time was
when this subject was not before the public mind. John
Newton continued in the slave trade after his conversion.
And so had his mind been perverted, and so completely was
his conscience seared, in regard to this most nefarious traffic,
that the sinfulness of it never occurred to his thoughts until
some time after he became a child of God. Had light been
poured upon his mind previously to his conversion, he never
could have been converted without previously abandoning
this sin. And after his conversion, when convinced of its in-
iquity, he could no longer enjoy the presence of God, with-
out abandoning the sin for ever. So, doubtless, many slave
dealers and slave holders in our own country have been con-
verted, notwithstanding their participation in this abominar
tion, because the sinfulness of it was not apparent to their


HINDERANCES TO REVIVALS. 278


minds. So ministers and churches, to a great extent through-
out the land, have held their peace, and borne no testimony
against this abominable abomination, existing in the church
and in the nation. But recently, the subject has come up for
discussion, and the providence of God has brought it dis
tinctly before the eyes of allmen. Light is now shed upon
this subject, as it has been upon the cause of temperance.
Facts are exhibited, and principles established, and light
thrown in upon the minds of men, and this monster is drag-
ed from his horrid den, and exhibited before the church, and
it is demanded of them, “IS THIS SIN?” Their testimony
„must. bo given on this subject. They are God’s-witnesses.
~-Ihboy are sworn to tell “the truth, the whole truth, and
nothing but the truth.” Tti impossible that their testimony
“~~“ghotild not be given, on one side or the other. Their silence
can no longer be accounted for upon the principle of igno
rance, and that they have never had their attention turned to
the subject. Consequently, the silence of Christians upon
the subject is virtually saying that they do not consider slavery
as asin. The truth is, it is a subject upon which they can-
not be silent without guilt. The time has come, in the prov-
idence of God, when every southern breeze is loaded down
with the cries of lamentation, mourning and wo. Twv mil
lions of degraded heathen in our own land stretch their
hands, all shackled and bleeding, and send forth to the church
of God the agonizing cry for help. And shall the church,
in her efforts to reclaim and save the world, deafen her ears
to this voice of agony and despair? God forbid. The church
cannot turn away from this question. It is a question for
the church and for the nation to decide, and God will push it
to a decision.

It is in vain for the churches to resist it for fear of distrac-
tion, contention, and strife. It is in vain to account it an
act of piety to turn away the ear from hearing this cry of
distress.

The church must testify, and testify “the truth, the whole
truth, and nothing but the truth,” on this subject, or she is
perjured, and the Spirit of God departs from her. She is under
oath to testify, and ministers and churches who do not pro-
nounce it sin bear false testimony for God. It is doubtless
true that one of the reasons for the low state of religion at
the present time is that many churches have taken the wrong
side on the subject of slavery, have suffered prejudice to pre
vail over principle, and have feared to call this abomination
by its true one


peste


274 HINDERANCES TO REVIVALS.


20. Another thing that hinders revivals is neglecting the
claims of missions. Tf Christians do not feel for the heathen,
neglect the monthly concert, and confine their attention to
their own church, do not even read the Missionary Herald,
or use aay other means to inform themselves on the subject
of the cl.ims of the world, and reject the light which God is
throwing before them, and will not do what God calls them
to do in this cause, the Spirit of God will depart from them.

21. When a church reject the calls of God upon them for
educating young men for the ministry, they will hinder and
destroy a revival. Look at the Presbyterian church, look at
the 200,000 souls converted within ten years, and means
enough to fill the world with ministers, and yet the ministry
is not increasing so fast as the population of our own coun-
try, and unless something more can be done to provide min-
isters, we shall become heathen ourselves. The churches do
not press upon young men the duty of going into the min-
i God pours his Spirit on the churches, and converts
hundreds of thousands of souls, and if then the laborers do
not come forth into the harvest, what can be expected but
that the curse of God will come upon the churches, and his
Spirit will be withdrawn, and revivals will cease. Upon
this subject no minister, no church should be silent or in-
active.

22. Slandering revivals will often put them down. The
great revival in the days of President Edwards suffered
greatly by the conduct of the church in this respect. It is to
be expected that the enemies of God will revile, misrepresent
and slander revivals. But when the church herself engages
in this work, and many of her most influential members are
aiding and avetting in calumniating and misrepresenting a
glorious work of God, it is reasonable that the Spirit should
be grieved away. It cannot be denied that this has been
done, to a grievous and God-dishonoring extent. It has been
estimated that in one year, since this revival commenced,
ONE HUNDRED THOUSAND SOULS were converted to God in the
United States. This was undoubtedly the greatest number
that were ever converted in one year, since the world began.*
It could not be expected that, in an excitement of this ex-
tent, among human beings, there should be nothing to de-


* This was in 1831. There have been more extensive revivals since.
In 1857-8 it was estimated that 50,000 conversions per week occurred
a six or eight weeks in succession in the northern part of the United

tates,


HINDERANCES TO REVIVALS. 976


plore. To expect perfection in such a work as this, of such
extent, and carried on by human instrumentality, is utterly
unreasonable and absurd. Evils doubtless did exist and have
existed. They were to be expected of course, and guarded
against, as far as possible. And Ido not believe the world’s
history can furnish one instance in which a revival, approach-
ing to this in extent and influence, has been attended with so
few evils, and so little that is honestly to be deplored.

But how has this blessed work of God been treated? Ad-
mitting all the evils complained of to be real, which is far
from being true, they would only be like spots upon the disc
of the glorious sun ; things hardly to be thought of, in com-
parison of the infinite greatness and excellence of the work.
And yet how have a great portion of the Presbyterian church
received and treated this blessed work of God? At the Gen-
eral Assembly, that grave body of men that represent the
Presbyterian Church, in the midst of this great work, instead
of appointing a day of thanksgiving, instead of praising and
glorifying God for the greatness of his work, we hear from
them the voice of rebuke. From the reports that were given
of the speeches made there, it appears that the house was
filled with complainings. Instead of devising measures to
forward the work, their attention seemed to be taken up with
the comparatively trifling evils that were incidental to it. And
after much complaining, they absolutely appointed a commit-
tee, and sent forth a “ Pastoral Letter” to the churches, cal-
culated to excite suspicions, quench the zeal of God’s people,
and turn them off from giving glory to God for the greatness
of the blessing, to finding fault and carping about the evils.
When I heard what was done at that General Assembly, when
I read their speeches, when I saw their pastoral letter, my
soul was sick, an unutterable feeling of distress came over my
mind, and I felt that God would “visit” the Presbyterian
church for conduct like this. And ever since, the glory has
been departing, and revivals have been becoming less and less
frequent—less and less powerful.*

And now I wish it could be known whether those ministers
who poured out those complainings on the floor of the Gen-
eral Assembly, and who were instrumental in getting up that
pastoral letter, have since been blessed in promoting revivals
of religion—whether the Spirit of God has been upon them,


* The strange opposition of such men as Dr. Lyman Beecher and
Mr. Nettleton had much to do with provoking and sustainng this


opposition.


276 HINDERANOCES TO REVIVALS.


and whether their churches can witness that they have an
unction from the Holy One.

23. Ecclesiastical difficulties are calculated to grieve away
the Spirit, and destroy revivals. It has always been the pol-
icy of the devil to turn off the attention of ministers from
the work of the Lord to disputes and ecclesiastical litigations.
President Edwards was obliged to be taken up for a long
time in disputes before ecclesiastical councils ; and in our
days, and in the midst of these great revivals of religion,
these difficulties have been alarmingly and shamefully multi-

lied. Some of the most efficient ministers in the church

have been called off from their direct efforts to win souls to
Christ, to attend day after day, and in some instances
week after week, to charges preferred against them, or
their fellow-laborers in the ministry, which could never be
sustained.

Look at Philadelphia : what endless and disgraceful jang-
lings have distracted and disgraced the church of God in that
city, and through the length and breadth of the land. And
in the Presbyterian church at large these ecclesiastical difi-
culties have produced evils enough to make creation weep.
Brother Beman was shamefully and wickedly called off from
promoting revivals, to attend a trial before his own presby-
tery, upon charges which, if true, were most of them ridicu-
lous, but which could never be sustained. And since that
time a great portion of his time has, it would seem necessa-
rily, been taken up with the adjustment of ecclesiastical dif-
ficulties. Brother Duffield, of Carlisle, Brother Barnes, of
Philadelphia, and others of God’s most successful ministers,
have been hindered a considerable part of their time for years
by these difficulties. Oh, tell it not in Gath! When will
those ministers and professors of religion who do little or
OE themselves, let others alone, and let them work for
¢

24. Another thing by which revivals may be hindered is
censoriousness on either side, and especially in those who have
been engaged in carrying forward a revival. It is to be ex-

that the opposers of the work will watch for the halt-
ing of its friends, and be sure to censure them for all that is
wrong, and not unfrequently for that which is right in their
conduct. Especially is it to be expected that many censo-
rious and unchristian remarks will be made about those that
are the most prominent instruments in promoting the work.
This censoriousness on the part of the opposers of the work,
whether in or out of the church, will not, however, of itself


HINDERANCES TO REVIVALS. 277


put a stop to the revival While its promoters keep humble,
and in a prayerful spirit, while they do not retaliate, but pos
sess their souls in patience, while they do not suffer them-
selves to be diverted, to recriminate, and grieve away the spirit
of prayer, the work will go forward ; as in the case referred
to, where a minister was on trial for six weeks in the midst
of arevival There the people kept in the dust, and prayed,
not so much for their minister, for they had left him with
God, but with strong crying and tears pleading with God
for sinners. And God heard and blessed them, and the work
went on. Censoriousness in those who are opposed to the
work is but little to be dreaded, for they have not the Spirit,
and nothing depends on them, and they can hinder the work
only just so far as they themselves have influence personally.
But the others have the power of the Holy Spirit, and the
work depends on their keeping in aright temper. If they
get wrong and grieve away the Spirit, there is no help, the
work must cease. Whatever provocation, therefore, the pro-
moters of this blessed work may have had, if it ceases, the
responsibility will be theirs. And one of the most alarming
facts, in regard to this matter, is that in many instances, those
who have been engaged in carrying forward the work, appear
to have lost the Spirit. They are becoming diverted, are be-
ginning to think that the opposition is no longer to be toler-
ated, and that they must come out and reply in the news-
papers to what they say. It should be known and univer-
sally understood, that whenever the friends and promoters of
this greatest of revivals suffer themselves to be called off to
newspaper janglings, to attempt to defend themselves, and
reply to those who write against them, the Spirit of Prayer
will be entirely grieved away, and the work will cease.
Nothing is more detrimental to revivals of religion, and so
tt has always been found, that for the promoters of them to lis-
ten to the opposition, and begin to reply, This was found to
be true in the days of President Edwards, as you who are
acquainted with his book on Revivals are well aware.

UL I proceed to mention some things which ought to be
done, to continue this great and glorious revival of religion,
which has been in progress for the last ten years.

1. There should be great and deep repentings on the part of
ministers. WE, my brethren, must humble ourselves before
God. It will not do for us to suppose that it is enough to
call on the people to repent. We must repent, we must take
the lead in repentance, and then call on the churches to
follow.


278 HINDERANCES TO REVIVALS.


Especially must those repent who have taken the lead in
producing the feelings of opposition and distrust in regard to
revivals. Some ministers have confined their opposition
against revivals and revival measures to their own congrega-
tions, and created such suspicions among their own people
as to prevent the work from spreading and prevailing among
them. Such ministers would do well to consider the remarks
of President Edwards on this subject.

“Tf ministers preach never so good doctrine, and are never
so painfnl and laborious in their work, yet, if at such a day
as this, they show to their people, that they are not well-
affected to this work, but are very doubtful and suspicious of
it, they will be very likely to do their people a great deal more
hurt than good ; for the very fame of such a great and ex-
traordinary work of God, if their people were suffered to be-
lieve it to be his work, and the example of other towns, to-
gether with what preaching they might hear occasionally,
would be likely to have a much greater influence upon the
minds of their people, to awaken and animate them in re
ligion, than all their labors with them; and besides their
minister’s opinion would not only beget in them a suspicion of
the work they hear of abroad, whereby the mighty hand of
God that appears in it, loses its influence upon their minds,
but it will also tend to create a suspicion of everything of
the like nature, that shall appear among themselves, as being
something of the same distemper that is to become so epi-
demical in the land, and that is, in effect, to create a suspi-
cion of all vital religion, and to put the people upon talking
against it, and discouraging it, wherever it appears, and
knocking it in the head as fast as it rises And we that are
ministers, by looking on this work, from year to year, with a
displeased countenance, shall effectually keep the sheep from
their pasture, instead of doing the part of shepherds to
them, by feeding them; and our people had a great deal
ey be without any settled minister at all at such a day as

Others have been more public, and aimed at exerting a
wider influence. Some have written pieces for the public
pi Some men in high standing in the church have cir

ted letters which never were printed. Others have had
their letters printed and circulated. There seems to have
been a system of letter-writing about the country calculated
to create distrust. In the days of President Edwards, sub-
stantially the same course was pursued, in view of which he
says in his work on revivals:


HINDERANCES TO REVIVALS, 279


“Great care should be taken that the press should be im-
dba to no purpose contrary to the interests of this work.

e read that when God fought against Sisera, for the de-
liverance of his oppressed church, they that handle the pen of
the writer came to the help of the Lord in that affair—Judges
v. 14. Whatever sort of men in Israel they were that were
intended, yet as the words were indited by a Spirit that had
a perfect view of all events to the end of the world, and had a
special eye in this song, to that great event of the deliver-
ance of God’s church, in the latter days, of which this de
liverance of Israel was a type, it is not unlikely that they
have respect to authors, those that should fight against the
kingdom of Satan with their pens. Those therefore that
publish pamphlets to the disadvantage of this work, and
tending either directly or indirectly to bring it under suspi-
cion, and to discourage or hinder it, would do well tho-
roughly to consider whether this be not indeed the work of
God, and whether, if it be, it is not likely that God will go
forth as fire, to consume:all that stand in his way, and so
burn up those pamphlets ; and whether there be not danger
that the fire that is kindled in them will scorch the authors.”

All these must’ repent. God never will forgive them, nor
will they ever enjoy his blessing on their preaching, or be
honored to labor in revivals till they repent. This duty
President Edwards pressed upon ministers in his day, in the
most forcible terms. There doubtless have been now, as
there were then, faults on both sides. And there must be
deep repentance, and mutual confessions of faults on both
sides.

“There must be a great deal done at confessing of faults,
on both sides; for undoubtedly many and great are the
faults that have been committed, in the jangling and confu-
sions, and mixtures of light and darkness, that have been of
late. There is hardly any duty more contrary to our corrupt
dispositions, and mortifying to the pride of man; but it
must be done. Repentance of faults is, in a peculiar man-
ner, @ proper duty, when the kingdom of heaven is at hand,
or when we especially expect or desire that it should come,
as appears by John the Baptist’s preaching. And if God
does now loudly call upon us to repent, then he also calls
upon us to to make proper manifestations of our repentance,
I am persuaded that those that have openly opposed this
work, or have from time to time spoken lightly of it, cannot
be excused in the sight of God, without openly confessing
their fault therein, especially if they be ministers. If they


280 HINDERANCES TO BEVIVALS.


have any way, either directly or indirectly, opposed the work,
or have so behaved in their public performances or privat

conversation, as has prejudiced the minds of their peoph
against the work, if hereafter they shall be convinced of the
goodness and divinity of what they have opposed, they ought
by no means to palliate the matter, and excuse themselves,
and pretend that they always thought so, and that it was
only such and such itoprudences that they objected against,
but they ought openly to declare their conviction, and con-
demn themselves for what they have done ; for it is Christ
that they have spoken against, in speaking lightly of, and
prejudicing others against this work ; yea, worse than that,
it is the Holy Ghost. And though they have done it igno-
rantly, and in unbelief, yet when they find out who it is that
they have opposed, undoubtedly God will hold them bound
publicly to confess it.

“ And on the other side, if those that have been zealous to
promote the work, have in any of the forementioned instances
openly gone much out of the way, and done that which is
contrary to Christian rules, whereby they have openly injured
others, or greatly violated good order, and so done that
which has wounded religion, they must publicly confess it,
and humble themselves, as they would gather out the stones,
and prepare the way of God’s people. They who have laid
great stumbling blocks in others’ way, by their open transgres-
sion, are bound to remove them, by their open repentance.”

There are ministers in our day, I say it not in unkindness
but in faithfulness, and I would that I had them all here be
fore me while I say it, who seem to have been engaged much
of their time for years in doing little else than acting and
talking and writing in such a way as to create suspicion in
regard to revivals. AndI cannot doubt that their churches
would, as President Edwards says, be better with no minis-
ter at all, unless they will repent, and regain his blessing.

2. Those churches which have opposed revivals must humble
themselves and repent. Churches which have stood aloof or
hindered the work must repent of their sin, or God will not
go with them. Look at those churches now, who have been
throwing suspicion upon revivals. Do they enjoy revivals?
Does the Holy Ghost descend upon them, to enlarge them
and build them up? There is one of the churches in this
city, where the session have been publishing in the news-
papers what they call their “ Act and Testimony,” calculated
to excite an unreasonable and groundless suspicion against
many ministers who are laboring successfully to promote re


HINDERANCES TO REVIVALS, 281


vivals. And what is the state of that church? Have they
had a revival? Why it appears from the official report to
the General Assembly, that it has dwindled in one year
twenty-seven per cent. And all such churches will continue
to dwindle, in spite of everything else that can be done, un-
less they repent and have a revival. They may pretend to
be mighty pious, and jealous for the honor of God, but God
will not believe they are sincere. And he will manifest his
displeasure, by not pouring out his Spirit. If I had a voice
loud enough, I should like to make every one of these
churches and ministers that have slandered revivals, hear me,
when I say, that I believe they have helped to bring the pall
of death over the church, and that the curse of God is on
them already, and will remain unless they repent. God has
already sent leanness into their souls, and many of them
know it.

3. Those who have been engaged in promoting the work must
also repent. Whatever they have done that was wrong must
be repented of, or revivals will not return as in days past.
Whenever a wrong spirit has been manifested, or they have
got irritated and provoked at the opposition, and lost their
temper, or mistaken Christian faithfulness for hard words
and a wrong spirit, they must repent. Those who are op-
posed could never stop a revival alone, unless those who pro-
mote it get wrong. So we must repent if we have said things
that were censorious, or proud, or arrogant, or severe. Such
a time as this is no time to stand justifying ourselves. Our
first call is to repent. Let each one repent of his own sins,
and not fall out, and quarrel about who is most to blame.

4, The church must take right ground in regard to politics. Do
not suppose, now, that I am going to preach a political ser
mon, or that I wish to have you join and get up a Christian
party in politics. No, I do not believe in that. But the time
has come that Christians must vote for honest men, and take
consistent ground in politics, or the Lord will curse them.
They must be honest men themselves, and instead of voting
for a man because he belongs to their party Bank or Anti-
Bank, Jackson, or Anti-Jackson, they must find out whether
he is honest and upright, and fit to be trusted. They must
let the world see that the church will uphold no man in
office, who is known to be a knave, or an adulterer, or a Sab-
bath-breaker, or a gambler, or a drunkard. Such is the
spread of intelligence and the facility of communication in
our country, that every man can know for whom he gives his
vote. And if ho will give his vote only for honest men, the


282 HINDERANCES TO REVIVALS.


country will be obliged to have upright rulers. All parties
will be compelled to put up honest men as candidates.
Christians have been exceedingly guilty in this matter. But
the time has come when they must act differently, or God
will curse the nation, and withdraw his spirit. As on the
subject of slavery and temperance, so on this subject, the
church must act right or the country will be ruined. God
cannot sustain this free and blessed country, which we love
and pray for, unless the church will take right ground. Pol-
ities are a part of religion in such a country as this, and
Christians must do their duty to the country as a part of their
duty to God. It seems sometimes as if the foundations of
the nation were becoming rotten, and Christians seem to act
as if they thought God did not see what they do in politics.
But I tell you, he does see it, and he will bless or curse this
nation, according to the course they take.

5. The churches must take right grounds on the subject of sla-
very. And here the question arises, what is right ground?
And Fimsr I will state some things that should be avoided.

(1.) First of all, a bad spirit should be avoided. Nothing
is more calculated to injure religion, and to injure the slaves
themselves, than for Christians to get into an angry contro-
versy on the subject. It is a subject upon which there needs
to be no angry controversy among Christians. Slave-holding

rofessors, like rum-selling professors, may endeavor to justi-
f themselves, and may be angry with those who press their
consciences, and call upon them to give up their sins. Those

roud professors of religion who think a man to blame, or
fhin k it is a shame to have a black skin, may allow their pre
judices so far to prevail, as to shut their ears, and be dis
pee to quarrel with those who urge the subject upon them.

ut I repeat it, the subject of slavery is a subject upon which
Christians, praying men, need not and must not differ.

(2.) Another thing to be avoided is an attempt to take neu-
tral ground on this subject. Christians can no more take
neutral ground on this subject, since it has come up for dis
cussion, than they can take neutral ground on the subject of
the sanctification of the Sabbath. It is a great national sin.
It is a sin of the church. The churches by their silence, and
by permitting slaveholders to belong to their communion,
have been consenting to it. All denominations have been
more or less guilty, although the Quakers have of late years
washed their hands of it. It is in vain for the churches to
pretend it is merely a political sin. I repeat it, it is the sin
of the church, to which all denominations have consented.


HINDERANCES TO BEVIVALS. 388


They have virtually declared that it is lawful. The very fact
of suffering slaveholders quietly to remain in good standing
in their churches, is the strongest and most public expression
of their views that it is not sin. For the church, therefore,
to pretend to take neutral ground on the subject, is perfectl
absurd. The fact is that she is not on neutral ground at
While she tolerates slaveholders in her communion SHE
JUSTIFIES THE PRACTICE. And as well might an ene-
my of God pretend that he was neither saint nor sinner, that
he was going to take neutral ground, and pray “good Lord
and good devil,” because he did not know which side would
be most popular.

(3.) Great care should be taken to avoid a censorious spirit
on both sides. It is a subject on which there has been, and
probably will be for some time to come, a difference of opinion
among Christians, as to the best method of disposing of the
question. And it ought to be treated with great forbearance
on both sides. A denunciatory spirit, impeaching each other’s
motives, is unchristian, calculated to grieve the Spirit of God,
and to put down revivals, and is alike injurious to the church,
and to the slaves themselves.

In the seconp place, I will mention several things, that in
my judgment the church are imperatively called upon to do,
on this subject :

(1.) Christians of all denominations, should lay aside pre-
judice and inform themselves on this subject, without any de-
ay. Vast multitudes of professors of religion have indulged

rejudice to such a degree, as to be unwilling to read and

eae and come to a right understanding of the subject. But
Christians cannot pray in this state of mind. I defy any one
to possess the spirit of prayer, while he is too prejudiced to
examine this, or any other question of duty. If the light did
not shine, Christians might remain in the dark upon this
point, and still possess the spirit of prayer. But if they re
Suse to come to the light, they cannot pray. Now I call upon
all you who are here present, and who have not examined
this subject because you were indisposed to examine it, to
say whether you have the spirit of prayer. Where ministers,
individual Christians, or whole churches, resist truth upon
this point now, when it is so extensively diffused and before
the public mind, I do not believe they will or can enjoy a re
vival of religion. eG l y

(2.) Writings, containing temperate and judicious discus-
gions on this subject, and such developments of facts as are
before the public, should be quietly and extensivelv circulated,


284 HINDERANOES TO REVIVALS.


and should be carefully and prayerfully examined by the
whole church. I do not mean by this, that the attention of
the church should be so absorbed by this, as to neglect the
main question, of saving souls in the midst of them. I de
not mean that such premature movements on this subject
should be made, as to astound the Christian community, and
involve them in a broil; but that praying men should act —
judiciously, and that, as soon as sufficient information can
be diffused through the community, the churches should
meekly, but rimmty take decided ground on the subject, and
express before the whole nation and the world, their abhor-
rence of this sin.

The anti-masonic excitement which prevailed a few years
since, made such desolations in the churches, and produced
for a time so much alienation of feeling and ill will among
ministers and people, and the first introduction of this sub-
ject has been attended with such commotions, that many
good ministers, who are themselves entirely opposed to slay-
ery, dread to introduce the subject among their people,
through fear that their churches have not religion enough to
take it up, and consider it calmly, and decide upon it in the
spirit of the Gospel. I know there is danger of this. But
still the subject must be presented to the churches. And if
introduced with discretion, and with great prayer, there are
very few churches that have enjoyed revivals, and that are at
the present time anywhere near a revival spirit, which may
not be brought to receive the truth on this subject. Let their
be no mistake here. William Morgan’s exposé of freemasonry
was published in 1826. The consequent excitement and dis-
cussion continued until 1830. In the mean time the churches
had very generally borne their testimony against freemasonry,
and resolved that they could not fellowship adhering masons.
As a consequence the Masonic Lodges generally disbanded
and gave up their charters. There was a general stampede
of professed Christians from the lodges. This prepared the
way, and in 1830, the greatest revival the world had then
ever seen commenced in the center of the anti-masonic region,
and spread over the whole field where the church action had
been taken until its converts numbered 100,000 souls.

Perhaps no church in this country has had a more gevere
trial upon this subject than this. They were a church of
young and for the most part inexperienced Christians. And
many circumstances conspired, in my absence, to produce con-
fusion and wrong feeling among them. But so far as I am
now acquainted with the state of feeling in this church, J


HINDERANCES TO REVIVALS, 285


know of no ill will among them on this subject. The Lord
has blessed us, the Spirit has been distilled upon us, and con-
siderable numbers added to our communion every month
since my return. There are doubtless in this church those
who feel on this subject in very different degrees. And yet I
can honestly say that I am not aware of the least difference
in sentiment among them. We have from the beginning, pre-
vous to my going on my foreign tour, taken the same
ground on the subject of slavery that we have on temper-
ance. We have excluded slaveholders and all concerned in
the traffic from our communion. By some out of this church
this course has been censured as unwarrantable and unchari-
table, and I would by no means make my own judgment, or
the example of this church, a rule for the government of
other ministers and churches. Still, I conscientiously believe
that the time is not far distant when the churches will be
united in this expression of abhorrence against this sin. If I
do not baptize slavery by some soft and Christian name, if I
call it SIN, both consistency and conscience conduct to the
inevitable conclusion, that while this sin is persevered in, its
perpetrators cannot be fit subjects for Christian communion
and fellowship.

To this it is objected, that there are many ministers in the
Presbyterian church who are slaveholders. And it is said to
be very inconsistent that we should refuse to suffer a slave
holder to come to our communion, and yet belong to the
same church with them, sit with them in ecclesiastical bodies,
and acknowledge them as ministers. To this I answer, that
I have not the power to deal with those ministers, and cer-
tainly I am not to withdraw from the church because some of
its ministers or members are slaveholders. My duty is to be
long to the church, even if the devil belong to it. Where I
have authority, I exclude slaveholders from the communion,
and I always will as long as I live. But where I have no au-
thority, if the table of Christ is spread, I will sit down to it,
in obedience to his commandment, whoever else may sit down
or stay away.

I do not mean, by any means, to denounce all those slave-
ie ministers and professors as hypocrites, and to say
that they are not Christians. But this I say, that while
they continue in that attitude, the cause of Christ and of
humanity demands, that they should not be recognized as
such, unless we mean to be partakers of other men’s sins.
It is no more inconsistent to exclude slaveholders because
they belong to the Presbyterian church, than it is to ex


236 HINDERANCES TO REVIVAIA,


elude persons who drink or sell ardent spirits. For there
are a great many rum-sellers belonging to the Presbyterian
church.

I believe the time has come, and although I am no prophet,
I believe it will be found to have come, that the revival in the
United States will continue and prevail, no farther and faster
than the church take right ground upon this subject. The -
church are God’s witnesses. The fact is that slavery is, pre
eminently, the sin of the church. It is the very fact that min-
isters and professors of religion of different denominations
hold slaves, which sanctifies the whole abomination, in the
eyes of ungodly men. Who does not know that on the
subject of temperance every drunkard in the land will skulk
behind some rum-selling deacon, or wine-drinking minister ?
It is the most common objection and refuge of the intem-
perate, and of moderate drinkers, that it is practised by pro-
fessors of religion. It is this that creates the imperious neces
sity for excluding traffickers in ardent spirit, and rum-drink-
ers from the communion. Let the churches of all denomina-
tions speak out on the subject of temperance ; let them close
their doors against all who have anything to do with the
death-dealing abomination, and the cause of temperance is tri-
umphant. A few years would annihilate the traffic. Just so
with slavery.

It is the church that mainly supports this sin. Her
united testimony upon this subject would settle the ques-
tion. Let Christians of all denominations meekly but firmly
come forth, and pronounce their verdict; let them clear
their communions, and wash their hands of this thing ; let
them give forth and write on the head and front of this
great abomination, SIN! and in three years a public senti-
ment would be formed that would carry all before it, and
there would not be a shackled slave, nor a bristling, cruel
slave-driver in this land.

Still it may be said, that in many churches, this subject
cannot be introduced without creating confusion and ill-will
This may be. It has been so upon the subject of temper
ance, and upon the subject of revivals too. In some
churches, neither temperance nor revivals can be introduced
without producing dissension. Sabbath-schools, and mis
sionary operations, and everything of the kind have been op
‘Seg and have produced dissensions in many churches.

ut is this a sufficient reason for excluding these subjects?
And where churches have excluded these subjects for fear of
contention, have they been blessed with revivals? Every


HINDERANCES TO REVIVALS, 284


bedy knows that they have not. But where churches have
taken firm ground on these subjects, although individuals and
sometimes numbers have opposed, still they have been
blessed with revivals. Where any of these subjects are
carefully and prayerfully introduced ; where they are brought
forward with a right spirit, and the true relative importance
is attached to each one of them; if in such cases, there are
those who will make disturbance and resist, let the blame fal
where t ought. There are some individuals, who are themselves
disposed to quarrel with this subject, who are always ready
to exclaim, “Do not introduce these things into the church,
they wiil create opposition.” And if the minister and pray-
ing people feel it their duty to bring the matter forward, they
will themselves create a disturbance, and then say, “There, I
told you so ; now see what your introducing this subject has
done ; it will tear the church all to pieces.” And while
they are themselves doing all they can to create division,
they are charging the division upon the subject, and not
upon themselves. There are some such people in many
of our churches. And neither Sabbath-schools, nor mis-
sions, nor revivals, nor anti-slavery, nor anything else that
honors God or benefits the souls of men, will be carried in
the churches, without these careful souls being offended
by it.

Paice things. however, have been introduced, and carried,
one by one, in some churches with more, and others with less
opposition, and perhaps in some churches with no opposition
at all And as true as God is the God of the church, as cer-
tain as that the world must be converted, this subject must
be considered and pronounced sin by the church. ‘There
might, infinitely better, be no church in the world, than that
she should attempt to remain neutral or give a false testi-
mony on a subject of such importance as slavery, especially
since the subject has come up, and it is impossible from the
nature of the case, that her testimony should not be in the
scale, on the one side or the other.

Do you ask, “ What shall be done—shall we make it the
all-absorbing topic of conversation, and divert attention from
the all-important subject of the salvation of souls in the
midst of us?” I answer, No. Let a church express her
opinion upon the subject, and be at peace. So far as |
know, we are entirely at peace upon this subject. We have
expressed our opinion ; we have closed our communion
against slaveholders, and are attending to other things. I
am not aware of the least unhealthy excitement among us


288 HINDERANCES TO REVIVALS,


on this subject. And where it has become an absorbing
topic of conversation in a place, in most instances I believe it
hes been owing to the pertinacious and unreasonable oppo
sition of a few individuals against even granting the subject a
hearing.

6. If the church wishes to promote revivals, she must sano-
tify the Sabbath. There is a vast deal of Sabbath-breaking in
the land. Merchants break it, travellers break it, the Govern-
ment breaks it. A few years ago an attempt was made in the
western part of this State, to establish and sustain a Sabbath-
keeping line of boats and stages. But it was found that the
church would not sustain the enterprise. Many professors of
religion would not travel in these stages, and would not have
their goods forwarded in canal-boats that would be detained
from travelling on the Sabbath. At one time, Christians
were much engaged in petitioning Congress to suspend the
Sabbath mails, and now they seem to be ashamed of it. But
one thing is most certain, that unless something is done, and
done speedily, and done effectually, to promote the sanctifi-
cation of the Sabbath by the church, the Sabbath will go by
the board, and we shall not only have our mails running on
the Sabbath, and post-offices open, but by and by our courts
of justice and halls of legislation will be kept open on the
Sabbath. And what can the church do, what will this nation
do, WITHOUT ANY SABBATH ?

7. The church must take right ground on the subject of
Temperance and Moral Reform, and all the subjects of prac
tical morality which come up for decision from time to time.

There are those in the churches who are standing aloof
from the subject of Moral Reform, and who are afraid to have
anything said in the pulpit against lewdness. On this sub-
ject the church need not expect to be permitted to take
neutral ground. In the providence of God, it is up for dis-
cussion. The evils have been exhibited, the call has been
made for reform. And what is to reform mankind but the
truth? And who shall present the truth if not the church
and the ministry? Away with the idea that Christians can
remain neutral and keep still, and yet enjoy the approbation
and blessing of God.

In all such cases, the minister who holds his peace is
counted among those on the other side. Everybody knows
that it is so in a revival. It is not necessary for a person to
rail out against the work. If he only keeps still and takes
neutral ground, the enemies of the revival will all consider
him as on their side. So on the subject of temperance. It


HINDERANCES TO REVIVALS. 289


8 not needful that a person should rail at the cold-water so
ciety, in order to be on the best terms with drunkards and
moderate drinkers. Only let him plead for the moderate use
of wine, only let him continue to drink it as a luxury, and all
the drunkards account him on their side. If he refuses to
give his influence to the temperance cause, he is claimed of
course by the other side as a friend. On all these subjects,
when they come up, the churches and ministers must take
the right ground, and take it openly and stand to it, and car
ry it through, if they expect to enjoy the blessing of God in
revivals. They must cast out from their communions such
members, as in contempt of the light that is shed upon them,
continue to drink or traffic in ardent spirits.

8. There must be more done for all the great objects of Chris
sian benevolence. There must be much greater efforts for the
cause of missions, and education, and the Bible, and all the
other branches of religious enterprise, or the church will dis-
please God. Look at it. .Think of the mercies we have re
ceived, of the wealth, numbers and prosperity of the church.
Have we rendered unto God according to the benefits we
have received, so as to show that the church is bountiful and
willing to give their money and to work for God? No. Far
from it. Have we multiplied our means and enlarged our
plans, in proportion as the church has increased? Is God
satisfied with what has been done, or has he reason to be?
Such a revival as has been enjoyed by the churches of America
for the last ten years! We ought to have done ten times as
much as we have for missions, Bibles, education, tracts, free
_ churches, and in all the ways designed to promote religion

and save souls. If the churches do not wake up on this sub-
ject, and lay themselves out on a larger scale, they may ex-
pect the revival in the United States will cease.

9. If Christians in the United States expect revivals to
spread, and prevail, till the world is converted, they must give
up writing letters and publishing pieces calculated to excite
suspicion and jealousy in regard to revivuls, and must take
hold of the work themselves. If the whole church as a body
had gone to work ten years ago, and continued it as a few
individuals, whom I could name, have done, there would not
now have been an impenitent sinner in the land. The mil
lennium would have fully come in the United States before this
day. Instead of standing still, and writing letters from Berk-
shire, let ministers who think we are going wrong, just buckle
on the harness and go forward, and show us a more exvellent
way. Let them teach us by their example how to do better.

18


290 HINDERANCES TO REVIVALS.


I do not deny that some may have made mistakes, and com
mitted errors. I do not deny that there are many things
which are wrong done in revivals by some persons. But is
that the way to correct them, brethren? So did not Paul
He corrected his brethren by telling them kindly that he would
show them a more excellent way. Let our brethren take hold
and go forward. Let us hear the cry from all their pulpits.
To raz work. Let them lead on, where the Lord will go with
them and make bare his arm, and I, for one, will follow.
Jnly let them GO ON, and let us have the United States con-
verted to God, and let all minor questions cease.

If not, and if revivals do cease in this land, the ministers
and churches will be guilty of all the blood of all the souls
that shall go to hell in consequence of it. There is no need
that the work should cease. If the church will do all her
duty, the millennium may come in this country in three years.
But if this writing letters is to be kept up, filling the country
with suspicions and jealousies, if it is to be always so, that
two-thirds of the church will hang back and do nothing but
find fault in time of revival, the curse of God will be on this
nation, and that before long.


REMARKS.


1. It is high time there should be great searchings of heart
among Christians and ministers. Brethren, this is no time to
resist the truth, or to cavil and find fault because the truth is
spoken out plainly. It is no time to recriminate or to strive,
but we must search our own hearts, and humble ourselves be-
fore God.

2. We must repent and forsake our sins, and amend our
ways and our doings, or the revival will cease. Our ecclesi-
astical difficulties MUST CEASE, and all minor differences
must be laid aside and given up, to unite in promoting the
great interests of religion. If not, revivals will cease from
wee us, and the blood of lost millions will be found in our
skirts.

If the church would do all her duty, she would soon com-
plete the triumph of religion in the world. But if this Act
and Testimony warfare is to be kept up, and this system of
espionage, and insinuation and denunciation, not only will
revivals cease, but the blood of millions who will go to hell
before the church will get over the shock, will be found in the
skirts of the men who have got up and carried on this dread
ful contention,


HINDERANCES TO REVIVALS. 291


4. Those who have circulated slanderous reports in regard
to revivals, must repent. A great deal has been said about
heresy, and about some men’s denying the Spirit’s influence,
which is wholly groundless, and has been made up out of
nothing. And those who have made up the reports, and those
who have circulated them against their brethren, must repent
and pray to God that they may receive his forgiveness.

5. We see the constant tendency there is in Christians to de
alension and backsliding. This is true in all converts of all
revivals. Look at the revival in President Edwards’ day.
The work went on till 30,000 souls had been converted, and
by this time so many ministers and Christians got in such a
state, by writing books and pamphlets, on one side and the
other, that they carried all by the board, and the reviva.
ceased. Those who had opposed the work grew obstinat«
and violent, and those who promoted it lost their meekness
and got ill-tempered, and were then driven into the very evile
that had been falsely charged upon them.

And now, what shall we do? This great and yiorious work
of God seems to be indicating a decline. The revival is not
dead—blessed be God for that—it is not dead! No, we hear
from all parts of the land that Christians are reading on the
subject and inquiring about the revival. In some places there
are now powerful revivals. And what shall we do, to lift up
the standard, to move this entire nation and turn all this
great people to the Lord? We must DO RIGHT. We must
all have a better spirit, we must get down in the dust, we
must act unitedly, we must take hold of this great work with
all our hearts, and then God will bless us, and the work will

o on.
j What is the condition of this nation? No doubt, God is
holding the rod of WAR over the heads of this nation. He
is waiting before he lets loose his judgments, to see whether
the church will do right. The nation is under his displeasure,
because the church has conducted in such a manner with re-
spect to revivals. And now suppose war should come, where
would be our revivals? How quickly would war swallow up
the revival spirit. The spirit of war is anything but the spirit
of revivals. Who will attend to the claims of religion, when
the public mind is engrossed by the all-absorbing topic of
war. See now, how this nation is, all at once, brought upon
the brink of war. God brandishes his blazing sword over
our heads. Will the church repent? It is THE CHURCH
that God chiefly has in view. How shall we avoid the curse
of war? Only by a reformation in the church. It is in vain


292 HINDERANCES TO REVIVALS,


to look to politicians to avert war. Perhaps they would ger
erally be in favor of war. Very likely the things they would
do to avert it would run us right into it. If the church will
not feel, will not awake, will not act, where shall we look for
help? If the church absolutely will not move, will not trem-
ble in view of the just judgments of God hanging over our
heads, we are certainly nigh unto cursing, as a nation.

6. Whatever is done must be done quickly. The scale is on
a poise. If we do not go forward, we must go back. Things
cannot remain as they are. If the church do not come up, if
we do not have a more powerful revival than we have had,
very soon we shall have none at al. We have had such a
great revival, that now small revivals do not interest the pub
lic mind. You must act as individuals. Do your own duty.
You have a responsibility. Repent quickly. Do not wait till
another year. Who but God knows what will be the state of
these churches, if things go on another year without a great
and general revival of religion ?

T. It is common, when things get all wrong in the church,
for each individual to find fault with the church, and with his
brethren, and overlook his own share of the blame. Do not
„et any one spend his time in finding fault with that abstract
thing, “The Church.” But as individual members of the
church of Christ, let each one act, and act right, and get
down in the dust, and never speak proudly, or censoriously.
GO FORWARD. Who would leave such'a work, and go tc
writing letters, and go down into the plain of Ono, and see if
all these petty disputes cannot be adjusted, and let the work
cease. Let us mind our work, and let the Lord take care of
the rest. Do our duty, and leave the issue to God.


Since these lectures were delivered great progress has been
made in all benevolent enterprises in this country. Time has
settled the question of the purity and inestimable value of
those revivals, against which so much mistaken Opposition ex-
isted in the Presbyterian church. Itis now known that the
great and disastrous reaction predicted by cpposers has not
been witnessed. It must now be admitted that the converts
of those revivals have composed the strength of the churches,
and that their Christian influence has been felt throughout
the land. No revivals have ever existed the power and purity
of which have been more thoroughly established by time and
experience, than that great and blessed work of God, against
which such a storm of opposition was raised. The opposi-
tion was evidently a great mistake. Let it not be said that


BINDERANCES TO REVIVALS. 293


the opposition was demanded by the great evils attending
that work, and that those evils and errors were arrested and
corrected by that opposition. The fact is that the supposed
errors and evils that were made the justification of the oppo-
sition, never existed to any such extent as to justify alarm or
opposition. I have written a narrative of those revivals, in
which I have considered this question more fully. The
churches did take hold of temperance and other branches of
reform to such an extent as to avoid those evils against which
they were warned. Upon the question of slavery the church
was too late in her testimony to avoid the war. But the
slaveholders were much alarmed and exasperated by the con-
stantly growing opposition to their institution throughout all
that region of the north where revival influences had been
felt. They took up arms to defend and perpetuate the
abomination, and by so doing abolished it.


LECTURE XVI.


THE NEOESSITY AND EFFECT OF UNION.


Text.—-Again I say unto you, That if two of you shall agree on earth, as teach
anything that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of my Father which is -n hes
ven.—_ MATTHEW xviii. 19.


Somz weeks since, I used this text, in preaching on the sub-
ject of prayer meetings. At present I design to enter more
into the spirit and meaning of the text. The evident d
of our Lord in this text was to teach the importance and in-
fluence of union in prayer and effort to promote religion. He
states the strongest possible case by taking the number two,
as the least number between whom there can be an agreement,
and says that “where two of you are agreed on earth, as
touching anything that they shall ask, it shall be done for
them of my Father which is in heaven.” It is the fact of
their agreement, upon which he lays the stress, and mention-
ing the number two, appears to have been designed merely
to afford encouragement to the smallest number between
whom there can be an agreement. But what are we to under-
stand by being “agreed as touching” the things we shall ask ?
I will answer this question under the two following heads :

I. By showing that we are to be “ agreed” in prayer.

IL We are to agree in everything that is essential to ob-
taining the blessing that we seek.

L In order to come within this promise, we are to be
Pre in prayer. This is particularly taught in the text.

hat is,

1. We should agree in our desires for the object. It is ne
cessary to have desires for the object, and to be agreed in those
desires. Very often individuals pray in words for the same
thing, when they are by no means agreed in desiring that
thing. Nay, perhaps some of them, in their hearts desire
the very opposite. People are called on to pray for an object,
and they all pray for it in words, but God knows they often
do not desire it, and perhaps he sees that the hearts of some
may, all the while, be resisting the prayer.


2. We must agree in the motive from which we desire the
(294)


THE NECESSITY AND EFFECT OF UNION, 298


object. It is not enough that our desires for an object should
be the same, but the reason why must be the same. An in-
dividual may desire a revival, for the glory of God and the
salvation of sinners. Another member of the church may
also desire a revival, but from very different motives. Some,
perhaps, desire a revival in order to have the congregation
built up and strengthened, so as to make it more easy for
them to pay their expenses in supporting the Gospel. Another
desires a revival for the sake of having the church increased
so as to be more numerous and more respectable. Others
desire a revival because they have been opposed or evil spoken
of, and they wish to have their enemies know that whatever
they may think or say, God blesses them. Sometimes people
desire a revival from mere natural affection, so as to have
their friends converted and saved. If they mean to be so
united in prayer as to obtain a blessing, they must not only
desire the blessing, and be agreed in desiring it, but they must
also agree in desiring it for the same reasons.

3. We must be agreed in desiring it for good reasons. These
desires must not only be united, and from the same motives,
but they must be from good motives. The supreme motive
must be to honor and glorify God. People may even desire
a revival, and agree in desiring it, and agree in the motives,
and yet if these motives are not good, God will not grant their
desires. ‘Thus parents may be agreed in prayer for the con-
version of their children, and may have the same feelings and
the same motives, and yet if they have no higher motives than
because they are their children, their prayers will not be
granted. They are agreed in the reason, but it is not the
right reason.

In like manner, any number of persons might be agreed in
their desires and motives, but if their motives are selfish, their
being agreed in them will only make them more offensive to
God. “How is it that ye have agreed together to tempt the
Spirit of the Lord?” I have seen a great deal of this, where
churches have been engaged in prayer for an object, and their
motives were evidently selfish. Sometimes they are engaged
in praying for a revival, and you would think by their earnest-
ness and union that they would certainly move God to grant
the blessing, till you find out the reason. And what is it?
Why, they see their congregation is about to be broken up,
unless something can be done. Or they see some other de
nomination gaining ground, and there is no way to counter
act them but by having a revival in their church. And al
their praying is only an attempt to get the Almighty in t


296 THE NECESSITY AND EFFECT OF UNION.


help them out of their difficulty, and is purely selfish and
offensive to God. A woman in Philadelphia, was invited to
attend a female prayer meeting at a certain place. She in-
quired what they met ¿here for, and for what they were going
to pray? She was answered that they were going to pray for
the outpouring of the Spirit upon the city. “Well,” said she,
“I shall not go; if they were going to pray for our congrega-
tion I would go, but I am not going there to pray for other
churches!” Oh, what a spirit!

I have had a multitude of letters and requests that I should
visit such and such places, and endeavor to promote a revival,
and many reasons have been urged why I should go, but when
I came to weigh their reasons, I have sometimes found every
one of them selfish. And God would look upon every one
with abhorrence.

In prayer meetings, how often do we hear people offer such
reasons why they desire such and such blessings, as are not
right in the sight of God. Such reasons, that if they are the
true ones, and if Christians are actually excited by those rea-
sons, it would render their prayers not acceptable to God,
because their motive was not right.

There are a great many things often said in favor of the
cause of missions, which are of this character, appealing to
wrong motives. How often are we told of six hundred mil-
lions of heathens, who are in danger of going to hell, and how
little is said of the guilt of six hundred millions engaged and
banded together as rebels against God, or of the dishonor and
contempt poured upon God our Maker by such a world of
outlaws. Now I know that God refers to those motives which
appeal to our mere natural sympathies, and compassion, and
uses them, but always in subordination to his glory. If these
lower motives are placed foremost, it must always produce a
defective piety and zeal, and a great deal that is false. Until
the church will look at the dishonor done to God, little will
be done. It is this which must be made to stand out before
the world, it is this which must be deeply felt by the church,
it is this which must be fully exhibited to sinners, before the
world can ever be converted.

Parents never agree in praying for the conversion of their
children in such a way as to have their prayers answered, un-
til they feel that their children are rebels, Parents often pray
very earnestly for their children because they wish God to
save them, and they almost think hard of God if he does not
save their children. But if they would have their prayers
prevail, they must come to take God's part against their chil


THE NECESSITY AND EFFECT Ob ONION. 297


dren, even though for their perverseness and incorrigible
wickedness he should be obliged to send them to hell I
knew a woman who was very anxious for the salvation of her
son, and she used to pray for him with agony, but still he re
mained impenitent, until at length she became convinced that
her prayers and agonies had been nothing but the fond yearn-
ings of parental feeling, and were not dictated at all by a just
view of her son’s character as a wilful and wicked rebel against
God. And there was never any impression made on his mind
until she was made to take strong ground against him as a
rebel, and to look on him as deserving to be sent to hell. And
then he was converted. The reason was, she never before
was influenced by the right motive in prayer, desiring his sal.
vation with a supreme regard to the glory of God.

4. If we would be so united as to prevail in prayer, we must
agree in faith, That is, we must concur in expecting the
blessing prayed for. We must understand the reason why it
is to be expected, we must’ see the evidence on which faith
ought to rest, and must absolutely believe that the blessing
will come, or we do not bring ourselves within the promise.
Faith is always understood as an indispensable condition of
prevailing prayer. If it is not expressed in any particular
case, it is always implied, for no prayer can be effectual but
that which is offered in faith. And in order that united prayer
may prevail, there must be united faith.

5. So, again, we must be agreed as to the time when we de-
sire the blessing to come. If two or more agree in desiring a
particular blessing, and one of them desires to have it come
now, while others are not ready to have it quite yet, it is plain
they are not agreed. They are not united in regard to one
essential point. If the blessing is to come in answer to their
united prayer, it must come as they prayed for it. And if it
comes, it must be at some time. But if they disagree as to
the time when they will have it, plainly it can never come in
answer to their prayer.

Suppose a church should undertake to pray for a revival,
and should be all agreed in desiring a revival, but not as to
the time when it shall be. Suppose some wish to have the
revival come now, and are all prepared, and their hearts
waiting for the Spirit of God to come down, and are willing
to give time and attention and labor to it NOW ; but others
are not quite ready, they have something else to attend to at
present, some worldly object which they want to accomplish,
some piece of business in hand and want just to finish this
thing, and then—but they cannot possibly find time to attend

13*


398 THE NECESSITY AND EFFECT OF UNION.


to it now, they are not prepared to humble themselves, tu
search their hearts and break up their fallow ground, and put
themselves in a posture to receive the blessing. Is it not plain
that here is no real union, for they are not agreed in that
which is essential? While one part are praying that the re
vival may come now, the others are praying with equal ear
nestness that it may not come now.

Suppose the question were now put to this church, whether
you are agreed in praying for a revival of religion here? Do
you all desire a revival, and would you all like to have it come
now? Would you be heartily agreed now to break down in
the dust, and open your hearts to the Holy Ghost if he
should come to-night? Ido not ask what you would say, if
I should propose the question. Perhaps if I should put it to
you now, you would all rise up and vote that you were agreed
in desiring a revival, and agreed to have it now. You know
how you ought to feel and what you ought to say, and you
know you ought to be ready for a revival now. But, I ask,
would GOD see it to be soin your hearts, that you are agreed
on this point? Has there been a time, since I came back
from the country, that this church were all agreed in desiring
and praying for a revival, and in wishing to have it come
now? Have any two of you agreed on this point, and prayed
accordingly? If not, when will you be agreed to pray for a
revival? And if this church cannot be agreed among your-
selves, how can you expect a revival? It is of no use for you
to take the outward attitude, and stand up here and say you
are agreed, when God reads the heart, and sees that you are
not agreed. Here is the promise—“ Again I say unto you,
That if two of you shall agree on earth, as touching anything
that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of my Father
which is in heaven.” Now this is either true, or it is false.
Which ground will you take? If it is true, then it is true
that you are not agreed, and never have been, except in those
cases where you have had a revival.

But we must agree not only upon a time, but it must be
the present time, or we are not agreed in everything essential
to the work. Unless we agree to have the revival now, we
shall not now use the means. But until the means are used,
it cannot come. It is plain, then, that we must be agreed
upon the present time, that is, we are not agreed in the sense
of the text, until we agree that now we will have the bless-
ing, and conduct accordingly. To agree upon a future time
is of no use, for when that future time comes, we must then
be agreed upon that present time, and use means accordingly,


THE NECESSITY AND EFFECT OF UNION. 299


so that you see you are never properly agreed until you
agree that now is the time.

II. We are to agree in everything that is essential to ob-
taining the blessing that we seek.

You see the language of the text, “If two of you shall
agree as touching anything that they shall ask.” Many people
seem to read it as if it referred merely to an agreement in
asking, and they understand it to promise, that whenever two
are agreed in asking for any blessing, it shall be given. But
Christ says there must be an agreement “as touching” the
thing prayed for. That is, the agreement or union must
comprise everything that is essential to the bestowment and
reception of the blessing.

1. If Christians would enjoy the benefits of this promise
in praying for a revival, they must be agreed in believing revi-
vals of religion to be a reality. There are many individuals,
sven in the church, who do not in their hearts believe that
the revivals which take place are the work of God. Some of
them may pray in words for an outpouring of the Spirit and
a revival of religion, while in their hearts they doubt whether
there are any such things known in modern times. In united
prayer there must be no hypocrisy.

2. They must agree in feeling the necessity of revivals.
There are some who believe in the reality of revivals, as a
work of God, while at the same time they are unsettled as to
the necessity of having them in order to the success of the
Gospel. They think there is a real work of God in revivals,
but after all, perhaps it is quite as well to have sinners con-
verted and brought into the church in a more quiet and
gradual way, and without so much excitement. Whenever
revivals are abroad in the land, and prevail, and are popular,
they may appear in favor of them, and may put up their cold
prayers for a revival, while at the same time they would be
sorry on the whole to have a revival come among them. They
think it so much safer and better to indoctrinate the people,
and spread the matter before them in a calm way, and so
bring them in gradually, and not run the risk of having
animal feeling or wild-fire in their congregations.

3. They must be agreed in regard to the importance of revi-
vals. Men are not blessed with revivals, in answer to prayers
that are not half in earnest. They must feel the infinite im-

ortance of a revival before they will pray so as to prevail
Misting of this kind are not granted but in answer to
such prayers as arise from a sense of their importance. As
I have shown before, when preaching on the subject of pre


800 THE NECESSITY AND EFFECT OF UNION.


vailing prayer, it is when men desire the blessing with UN.
UTTERABLE AGONY, that they offer such prayer as will
infallibly prevail with God. Those who feel less of the im-
portance of a revival may pray for it in words, but they will
never have the blessing. But when achurch has been united
in prayer, and really felt the importance of a revival, they
never have failed of having one. I do not believe a case can
be found of such a church being turned empty away. Such
an agreement, when sincere, will secure an agreement also on
all other subjects that are indispensable.

4. They must be agreed also in having correct scriptural no-
tions about several things connected with revivals.

(1.) The necessity of divine agency to produce a revival. It
is not enough that they all hold this in theory, and pray for
it in words, They must fully understand and deeply feel this
necessity, they must realize their entire dependence on the
Spirit of God, or the whole will fail.

(2.) Why divine agency is necessary. There must be an
agreement on correct principles in regard to the reason that
divine agency is so indispensable. If they get wrong ideas
on this point, they will be hindered. If Christians get the
idea that this necessity of divine influence lies in the inability
of sinners, or if they feel as if God was under obligation to
give the Holy Spirit, in order to make sinners able to obey
the Gospel, they insult God, and their prayers will not avail
For in that case they must feel that it is a mere matter of
common justice for God to pour out his Spirit, before be can
justly require Christians to work, or sinners to repent.

Suppose a church get the idea that sinners are poor, unfor-
tunate creatures, who come into the world with such a nature
that they can not help sinning, and that sinners are just as
unable to repent and believe the Gospel as they are to fly to
the moon, how can they feel that the sinner is a rebel against
God, and that he deserves to be sent to hell? How can they
feel that the sinner is zo blame? And how can they take God’s
part when they pray? If they do not take God’s part against
the sinner, they cannot expect God will regard their prayers,
for they do not pray with right motives. No doubt one great
reason why so many prayers are not answered, is that thos
who pray do in fact take the sinner’s part against God. The;

ray as if the sinner was a poor unfortunate being, to be pit
ied, rather than as if he was a guilty wretch, to be blamed
And the reason is that they do not believe sinners are able to
obey God. If a person does not believe that sinners are able
to obey their Maker, and really believes that the Spirit’s influ


THE NECESSITY AND EFFECT OF UNION. 801


ences are necessary to make him adie, it is impossible, with
these views, to offer acceptable and prevailing prayer for the
sinner, and it is not wonderful that persons with these views
should not prevail with God, and should doubt about the
efficacy of the prayer of faith.

How often do you hear people pray for sinners in this style,
“O Lord, help this poor soul to do what he is required to do—
O Lord, enable him to do so and so.” Now this language
implies that they take the sinner’s part, and not God’s. If it
was understood by those who use it, as it is sometimes ex-
plained, and if people meant by it what they ought to mean
when they plead for sinners, I would not find so much fault
with it. But the truth is, that when people use this language,
they often mean just what the language itself would be natu
rally at first sight, understood to mean, which is just as if
they should pray, “Lord, thou commandest these poor sin-
ners to repent, when, O Lord, thou knowest they cannot re-
pent unless thou givest them thy Spirit, to enable them to do
it, though thou hast declared that thou wilt send them to hell
if they do not, whether they ever receive the Spirit or not ;
and now, Lord, this seems very hard, and we pray thee to
have pity upon these poor creatures, and do not deal so hard-
ly with them, for Christ’s sake.” Who does not see that
such a prayer, or a prayer which means this, whatever lan-
guage it may be couched in, is an insult to God, charging him
with infinite injustice, if he continues to exact from sinners
a duty which they are unable to perform without that aid
which he will not grant. People may pray in this way till
the day of judgment, and never obtain a blessing, because
they take the sinners part against God. They cannot pray
successfully, until they understand that the sinner is a rebel,
and obstinate in his rebellion—so obstinate that he never will,
without the Holy Spirit, do what he might do as well as not,
instantly, and this obstinacy is the reason, and the only rea-
son, why he needs the influence of the Holy Spirit for his
conversion. The only ground on which the sinner needs
divine agency is to overcome his obstinacy, and make him
willing to do what he can do, and what God justly requires
him to do. And a church are never in an attitude in which
God will hear their united prayers, unless they are agreed in
so understanding their dependence on God, as to feel it in
perfect consistency with the sinner’s blame. [If it is the other
way, they are agreed in understanding it wrong, and their
prayers for divine help to the unfortunate instead of divine
fgvor to make a rebel submit, are wide of the mark, are an
insult to God, and they never will obtain favor in ‘eaver.


802 THE NECESSITY AND EFFECT OF UNION.


(3.) They must be agreed in understanding that revivals are
not miracles, but that they are brought about by the use of means
like other events. No wonder revivals formerly came so sel-
dom and continued so short a time, when people generally re
garded them as miracles, or like a mere shower of rain, that
will come on a place and continue a little while, and then blow
over ; that is, as something over which we have no control
For what can people do to get a shower of rain? Or how
can they make it rain any longer than it does rain? It is ne-
cessary that those who pray should be agreed in understand-
ing a revival as something to be brought about by means,
or they never will be agreed in using them

(4.) They must be agreed in understanding that human
agency is just as indispensable to a revival as divine agency.
Such a thing as a revival of religion, I venture to say, never
did occur without divine agency, and never did oceur without
human agency. How often do people say, “ God can, if he

leases, carry on the work without means.” But I have no

ith in it, for there is no evidence of it. What is religion?
Obedience to God’s law. But the law cannot be obeyed un-
less itis known. And how can God make sinners obey but
by making known his commandments? And how can he
make them known but by revealing them himself, or sending
them by others—that is, by bringing THE TRUTH to bear
upon the person’s mind till he obeys it. God never did and
never can convert a sinner except with the truth. What is
conversion? Obeying the truth, He may communicate it
himself, directly to the sinner. But then, the sinner’s own
agency is indispensable, for conversion consists in the right
employment of the sinner’s own agency. And ordinarily,
he employs the agency of others also, in printing, writing,
conversation, and preaching. God has put the Gospel treas-
ure in earthen vessels. He has seen fit to employ men in
preaching the word. That is, he has seen that human agency
is that which he can best employ in saving sinners. And if
there ever was a case, of which we have no evidence, there is
not one in a thousand, if one in a million, converted in any
other way than through the truth, made known and urged
by human instrumentality. And as the church must be
united in using those means, it is plainly necessary that they
should be united in understanding the true reason why
means are to be used, and the true principles on which they
are to be governed and applied.

5. It is important that there should be union in regard to
the measures essential to the promotion of a revival. Let indi


THE NECESSITY AND EFFECT OF UNION. 303


viduals agree to do anything whatever, and if they are not
agreed in their measures, they will run into confusion, and
counteract one another. Set them to sail a ship, and they
never can get along without agreement. If they attempt to
do business as merchants when they are not agreed in their
measures, what will they do? Why, they will only undo each
other’s work, and thwart the whole business of the concern.
All this is preeminently true in regard to the work of pro-
moting a revival Otherwise the members of the church will
counteract each other's influence, and they need not expect a
revival.

(1.) The church must be agreed in regard to the meetings
which are held, as to what meetings shall be held, and how
many, and where, and when they shall be held. Some people
always desire to multiply meetings in a revival, as if the
more meetings they had, the more religion. Others are
always opposed to any new meetings in a revival Some are
always for having a protracted meeting, and others are never
ready to hold a protracted meeting at all. Whatever differ-
ence there may be, it is essential that the church should come
to a good understanding on the subject, so that they can go
on together in harmony, and labor with zeal and effect.

(2.) They must be agreed as to the manner of conducting
meetings. Itis necessary that the church should be united
and cordial on this subject, if they expect to offer united
prayer with effect. Sometimes there are individuals who
want to adopt every new thing they can hear of or imagine,
while others are totally unwilling to have anything altered in
regard to the management of the meeting, but would have
everything done precisely as they are accustomed to. They
ought to be agreed in some way, either to have the meetings
altered, or to keep them on in the old way. The best pos
sible way is, for the church to agree in this, that they will
let the meetings go on and take their course, just as the Spirit
of God shapes them, and not even attempt to make two
meetings just alike. The church never will give the fullest
effect to the truth until they are agreed in this principle—
that in promoting a revival they will accommodate their
measures to circumstances, and not attempt to interrupt the
natural course which pious feeling and sound judgment in-
dicate, but cast themselves entirely upon the guidance and
direction of the Holy Spirit, introducing any measure, at any
time, that shall seem called for in the Providence of God,
without laying any stress upon its being new or old.

6 They must be agreed in the manner of dealing with ime


304 THE NECESSITY AND EFFECT OF UNION.


penitent sinners. This is a point immensely important, that
the church should be agreed in their treatment of sinners.
Suppose that they are not agreed, and one will tell a sinner
one thing and another another. What confusion! How can
they agree in prayer, when it is plain that they are not agreed
as to the things they shall pray for. Go among such a
church, and hear them pray for sinners. Attend a prayer
meeting and listen. Here is one man prays that the sinners
present may repent. Another prays that they may be con-
victed, and perhaps, if he is very much engaged, will go so
far as to pray that they may be deeply convicted. Another
prays that sinners may go home solemn, and pensive, and
silent, meditating upon the truths they have heard. Another
prays in such a manner, that you can see he is afraid to have
them converted now. Another prays very solemnly that they
may not attempt to do anything in their own strength. And
soon. How easy it is to see that the church are not agreed
as touching the things they ask for, and of course they have
no interest in the promise.

If you set them to talk with sinners, their courses would
be just as discordant, for it is plain that they are not agreed,
and have no clear views in regard to what a sinner must
do to be saved, or of what ought to be said to sinners, to
bring them to repent. And the consequence is, that sinners
who are awakened and anxious, presently get confounded,
and do not know what to do, and perhaps give it all up in
despair, or conclude there is in reality nothing rational or
consistent in religion. One will tell the sinner he must ;
immediately. Another will give him a book, Doddridge’s Rise
and Progress perhaps, and tell him to read that book. An-
other will tell him he must pray and persevere, and in God’s
time he will obtain the blessing. A revival can never go on
for any length of time amidst such difficulties. If it begi
it must soon run out; unless, perhaps, the body of the
church will keep still and say nothing at all, and let others
carry on the work. And there the work will suffer materially
for want of their co-operation and support. A church ought
to be agreed. Every Christian ought to have a clear under-
standing of this subject, and all speak the same thing, and
give the same directions. And then the sinner will find no
one to take his part, and can get no relief or comfort till he
repents.

T. They must be agreed in removing the impediments to a
revival. If a church expect a revival, they must take up
the stumbling blocks out of the way.


THE NECESS.TY AND EFFECT OF UNION. $05


(1.) In the exercise of discipline. If there are rotten mem
bers in the church, they should be removed, and the church
should all agree to cut them off. If they remain in the
church, they are such a reproach to religion, as to hinder a
revival. Sometimes when an attempt is made to cast them
out, this creates division, and thus the work is stopped.
Sometimes the offenders are persons of influence, or they
have family friends who will take their part, and make a
party, and thus create a bad spirit, and prevent a revival

(2.) In mutual confessions. Whenever wrong has been
done to any, there should be a full confession. I do not
mean a cold and forced acknowledgment, such as saying, “ Jf
I have done wrang, I am sorry for it.” But a hearty con-
fession, going the full length of the wrong, and showing that
it comes out of a broken heart.

(3.) Forgiveness of enemies. A great obstruction to revivals
is often found in the fact that active and leading individuals
harbor a revengeful and unforgiving spirit towards those who
have injured them, which destroys their spirituality, makes
them harsh and disagreeable in their manner, and prevents
them from enjoying either communion with God in prayer,
or the blessing of God to give twa success in labor. But
let the members of a church be truly agreed in breaking
down and confessing their own farlts, and in cherishing a
tender, merciful, forgiving, Christ-like spirit toward those who
they think have done them wrong, and then the Spirit will
come down upon them not by measure.

8. They must be agreed in making all the necessary prepara-
tions for a revival. They should be agreed in having all
necessary preparation made, and agreed in bearing their part
of the labor or expense of making it. There should be an
equality, and not let a few be burdened and the rest do little
or nothing, but every one his proportion, according to his
several ability. Then there will be no envying nor jealousy,
nor any of those mutual recriminations and altercations and
disrespectful remarks about one another, which are so incon-
sistent with brotherly love, and such a stumbling block in
the way of sinners.

9. They must be agreed in doing heartily whatever is neces-
sary to be done for the promotion of the revival. Sometimes a
slight disagreement about a very little thing will be allowed
to break in and destroy a revival. A minister told me that
he once went to labor in a place as an evangelist, and the
Spirit of God was evidently present, and sinners began to
inquire, and things looked quite favorable, until some of the


906 THE NECESSIFY AND EFFECT OF UNION.


members in the church began to agitate the inquiry how they
should pay him for his services. They said, “If he stays among
us any longer, he will expect we should give him something,”
and they did not see how they could afford to do it. And
they talked about it until the minds of the brethren got dis
tracted and divided, and the minister went away. Look at
it. There God stood in the door of that church, with his
hands full of mercies but these parsimonious and wicked pro-
fessors thought it would cost something to have a revival,
and their expenses were about as much as they felt willing
or able to bear. And so they let him depart and the work
ceased. The minister would not have left at the time, wheth-
er they gave him anything or not, for what he should re
ceive, or whether he should receive anything from them, was
a question about which he felt no concern. But the church
by their parsimonious spirit got into such a state as to grieve
the Spirit, and he saw that to stay longer with them would
do no good. Oh, how will those professors feel when they
meet sinners from that town in judgment, when it will all
come out, that God was ready and waiting to grant them
a blessing, but they allowed themselves to get agitated and
divided by inquiring how much they should have to pay!

10. They must be agreed in laboring to carry on the work.
It is not enough that they should agree to pray for a revival,
but they should agree also in laboring to promote it. They
should set themselves to it systematically, and as a matter
of business, to visit and converse and pray with their neigh-
bors ; to look out for opportunities of doing good ; to watch
the effect of the word, and watch the signs of the times, that
they may know when anything needs to be done, and do it.


1.) They should be agreed to labor,
2.) They should be agreed how to labor.
(3.) They should be agreed to live accordingly.


11. They must agree in a determination to persevere, It
will not answer for some members of the church to-day to be
gin to move and bluster about, and then, as soon as the least
thing turns up unfavorable, to get discouraged, and faint, and
one-half of them give over. They should be all united and
agree to persevere, and labor, and pray, and hold on, until
the blessing comes.

In a word, if Christians expect to unite in prayer and
effort, so as to prevail with God, they must be agreed in
speaking and doing the same things, in walking by the same
rule, and maintaining the same principles, and in perseverin
till they obtain the blessing, so as not to hinder or thwart


THE NECESSITY AND EFFECT OF UNION. $07


each other’s efforts. All this is evidently implied in being
agreed as touching the things for which they are praying.


REMARKS.


1. We see why it is that so many of the children of profess
ing parents are not converted.

It is because the parents have not been agreed as touching
the things they should pray for in behalf of their children.
Perhaps they never had any kind of agreement respecting
them. Perhaps they were never agreed even as to what was
the very best thing they could ask for them. Sometimes
parents are not agreed in anything, but their opinions clash,
and they are perpetually disagreeing, and their children see
it, and then no wonder they are not converted.

Or perhaps they may not be agreed as touching the salva-
tion of their children. Are they sincere in desiring it? Do
they agree to desire, and agree from right motives? Do
they agree in regard to the importance of it? Are they
agreed how their children ought to be dealt with, to effect
their conversion—-what shall be said to them—how it shall
be said—when—by whom. Alas! in how many cases is it
evident they are not agreed. Probably few cases will be
found, where children remain unconverted, but what it will
prove that the parents were never truly agreed as touching
the things they should ask for the salvation of their children.

Often there is such disagreement that we could not expect
any good to result, or anything but ruin to the children.
The husband and wife often disagree entirely and funda
mentally in regard to the manner of bringing up their chil-
dren. Perhaps the wife is fond of dress, and display, and
visiting, while the husband is plain and humble, and is
grieved and distressed, and mourns and prays to see how his
children are puffed up with vanity. Or it may be that the
father is ambitious, and wants to have his daughters fashion-
ably educated and make a display, and his sons become great
men, and so he will send his daughters to a polite boarding-
school, where they may learn anything but their duty to
God, and will be all the time pushing his sons forward, and
goading their ambition, while the mother grieves and weeps
in secret to see her dear children hurried on to destruction,
and all her own influence counteracted, and her sons and
daughters trained up to serve the god of this world, and go


to hell.
2. We see the hypocrisy of those who profess to be pray


$08 THE NECESSITY AND EFFECT OF UNION.


ing for a revival while they are doing nothing to promote it
There are many who appear to be very zealous in praying
for a revival, while they are not doing anything at all for one.
What do they mean? Are they agreed as touching the things
they ask for? Certainly not. They cannot be agreed in of
fering acceptable prayer for a revival until they are prepared
TO DO what God requires them to do to promote it. What
would you think of the farmer who should pray for a crop,
and not plough nor sow? Would you think such prayers
pious, or an insult to God?

3. We see why so many prayers offered in the church are
never answered. It is because those who offered them never
were agreed as touching the things they asked for. Perhaps
the minister never laid the subject before them, never ex-
plained what it is to be agreed, nor showed them its impor-
tance, nor set before them the great encouragement which
the promise before us affords to churches that will agree.
Perhaps the members of the church have never conferred to-
gether, and compared their views, to see whether they under-
stood the subject alike, whether they were agreed in regard to
the motives, grounds, and importance of being united in
prayer and labor for a revival. Suppose you were to go
through the churches in this city, and learn the precise views
and feelings of the members on this subject. How many
would you find who were agreed even in regard to the essen-
tial and indispensable things, concerning which it is neces
sary Christians should be agreed in order to unite in prevail-
ing prayer? Perhaps no two could be found who are agreed
and if two were found whose views and desires were alike,
it would probably be ascertained that they are unacquainted
with each other, and of course neither act nor pray together.

4. We see why it is that this text has been generally un-
derstood to mean something different from what it saya.
People have first read it wrong. They have read it as if it
was, “If any two of you shall agree to ask anything, it shall
be done.” And as they have often agreed to ask for things,
aud the things were not done, they have said, “The literal
meaning of the text cannot be true, for we have tried it and
know it is not true. How many prayer meetings have we
held, and how many petitions have we put up, in which we
have perfectly agreed in asking for blessings, and yet they
have not been granted?” Now the fact is, that they have
never yet understood what it is to be agreed as touching the
things they are to ask for. I am sure this is no strained
construction of the text, but is its true wd obvious meaning,


THE NECESSITY AND EFFECT OF UNION. 308


as ® plain, pious reader would understand it, if he inquired
seriously and earnestly the true import. They must be
agreed not only in asking, but in everything else that is in-
dispensable to the existence of the thing prayed for. Sup-
pose two of you were agreed in desiring to go to London to-
gether. If you are not agreed in regard to the means, what
route you shall take, and what ship you will go in, you will
never get there together. Just so in praying for a revival,
you must be agreed in regard to the means and circum-
stances, and everything essential to the existence and progress
of a revival.

5. We may ordinarily expect a revival of religion to pre
vail and extend among those without the church, just in
proportion to the union of prayer and effort within. If
there is a general union within the church, the revival will
be general. If the union continues, the revival will con-
tinue. If anything begins to break in upon this perfect
union in prayer and effort, it will begin to limit the revival.
How great and powerful would be the revival in this city,
if all the churches in the city were thus united in pro-
moting it!

There is another fact which I have witnessed, worthy of
notice. I have observed, that a revival will prevail out of
the church, among persons in that class of society, amongst
whom it prevails in the church. If the females in the church
are most awake and prayerful, the work may ordinarily be
expected to prevail mostly among females out of the church,
and more women will be converted than men. If the youth
of either, or of both sexes, in the church are most awake, the
work is most likely to prevail among youth, male or female,
or both, as the work may be in the church, in this respect.
If the heads of families and the principal men in the church
are awake, the revival is, I have observed, more likely to pre
vail among that class out of the church. I have known a re
vival mostly confined to females, and few males converted,
apparently because the male part of the church did not take
hold and work. Again I have repeatedly known the greatest
number of converts among men, owing apparently to the fact
that the male part of the church were most engaged. When
the revival does not reach a particular class of the impeni-
tent, pains should be taken to arouse that portion of the
church who are of their own age and standing, to make
more direct efforts for their conversion. There seems to be
s philosophy in this fact, which has often been witnessed.
Different classes of professors naturally feel a sympathy for


310 THE NECESSITY AND EFFECT OF UNION.


the impenitent of their oun sex and age and rank, and mors
naturally pray for them, and have more intercourse with
them, and more influence over them, and this seems to be at
least one of the reasons why revivals are apt to be the most
powerful and general in that class without the church, who
are the most awake in the church. Christians should under
stand this, and feel their responsibility. One great reason
why so few of the principal men are sometimes converted in
revivals, doubtless is, that that class in the church are often
so worldly, they cannot be aroused. The revival will gen-
erally prevail mostly in those families where the professors
belonging to them are awake, and the impenitent belonging
tc those families where the professors are not awake, are apt
to be left unconverted. One principal reason, obviously is,
that when the professors in a family or neighborhood are
awake, there is not only prayer offered for sinners in the
midst of them, but there are corresponding influences acting
upon the impenitent among them. If they are awake, their
looks and lives and warnings, all tend to promote the con-
version of their impenitent friends. But if they are asleep,
all their influences tend to prevent their conversion. Their
coldness grieves the Spirit, their worldliness contradicts
the Gospel, and all their intercourse with their impenitent
friends is in favor of impenitence, and calculated to perpetu-
ate it.

6. We see why different denominations have been suffered
=i spring up in the church, and under the government of

od.

Christians often see and deplore the evils that have arisen
to the church of God, from the division of his people into
jarring sects. And they have wondered and been perplex-
ed, to think that God should suffer it to be so. But in the
light of this subject we can see, that considermg what diver
sities of opinions and feelings and views actually exist in the
church, much good results from this division of sects. Con-
sidering this diversity of opinion, many would never agree to
pray and labor together, so as to do it with success, and so it
is better they should separate, and let those unite who are
agreed. In all cases where there cannot be a cordial agree-
ment in labor, it is better that each denomination should labor
by themselves, so long as this difference exists. I have some-
times seen revivals broken up by attempting to unite Chris
tians of different denominations in prayer and labor together,
while they were not agreed as to the principles or measures
by which the work was to be promoted. ey would then


THE NECESSITY AND EFFECT OF UNION. 3811


undo each other’s work, and destroy each other’s influence,
perplex the anxious, and give occasion to enemies to blas
pheme, and soon their feelings would get soured, and the
Spirit of God is grieved away, and the work stops, and per-
haps painful confusion and controversy follow.

7. We see why God sometimes suffers churches to be di-
vided. It is because he finds that the members are so much
at variance that they will not pray and labor together with
effect. Sometimes churches that are in such a state, will still
keep together from worldly considerations and worldly policy,
because it is so much easier for the whole to support public
worship. Perhaps both parties want to keep the meeting-
house, or both want to retain the minister, and they cannot
agree which shall go off, and so they continue along, jealous
and jangling for years, accomplishing little or nothing for the
salvation of sinners. In such cases, God has often let some-
thing turn up among them, that would tear them asunder,
and then each party would go to work in their own way, and
perhaps both would prosper. While they were in the same
church, they were always making each other trouble, as they
did not think nor feel alike, but as soon as they were separ
rated, every thing settled down in peace, and made it evident
that it was better they should diviie. I have known some
cases in this State, where this has been done with the happi
est results, and both churches have been speedily blessed with
revivals.

8. It is evident that many more churches need to be divided.
How many churches there are, that are holding together, and
yet are doing no good, for the simple reason that they are
not sufficiently agreed. They do not think alike nor feel
alike on the subjects connected with revivals, and while this is
so, they never can work together. Unless they can be
brought to such a change of views and feelings on the sub-
ject as will unite them, they are only a hindrance to each
other and to the work of God. In many cases they see and
feel that it is so, and yet they keep together, conscientiously,
for fear a division should dishonor religion, when in fact the
division that now exists may be making religion a by-word
and a reproach. Far better would it be if they would just
agree to divide amicably, like Abraham and Lot. “If thou
wilt take the left hand, I will go to the right; or if thou de
part to the right hand, then I will go to the left.” Let them
separate, and each work in his own way, and they may both
enjoy the blessing. ii

9. We see why a few individuals, who are perfectly united


812 THE NECESSITY AND EFFECT OF UNION.


may be successful in gathering and building up a new church,
and may do so much better than a much larger number who
are not agreed among themselves. If I were going to gather
a new church in this city, I should rather have five persons,
or three, or even two that were perfectly agreed as touching
the things they were to pray for, and the manner in which
they should labor for them, and in all that is essential to the
prosperity of a church, and who would stand by me, and
stand by each other, than to have a church to begin with, of
five hundred members who were not agreed.

10. We see what glorious things may be expected for Zion,
whenever the churches generally shall be agreed on these sub-
jects. When ministers shall lay aside their prene and
their misconstructions, and their jealousies, and shall see eye
to eye, and when the churches shall understand the Bible
alike, and see their duty alike, and pray alike, and shall be
“agreed as touching the things they shall ask for,” a nation
ahall be born in a day. Only let them feel as the heart of one
man, and be agreed as to what ought to be done for the sal-
vation of the world, and the millennium will come at once.

11. There is vast ignorance in the churches on the subject
of revivals. After all the revivals that have been enjoyed,
and all that has been sail and written and printed concern-
ing revivals, there are very few who have any real, consistent
knowledge on the subject. And when there is a revival, how
few are there who can take hold to labor and promote it as if
they understood what they were about. How few persons
are to be found, who have ever taken up revivals of religion
as a subject to be studied and understood. Every body
knows, that in a revival Christians must pray, and must do
some things which they have not been in the habit of doing.
But multitudes know nothing of the REASON WHY they
should do this, or why one thing is better than another, and
of course they have no principles to guide them, and when
anything occurs which they did not expect, they are all at
fault and know nothing what to do. If men should go to
work to build a house of worship, and know as little how to
pros as many ministers and professors know how to build

he spiritual temple of God, they never would get up a house
in the world. And yet people make themselves believe they
are building the church of God, when they know nothing at
all what they are about, and are utterly unable to give a rea-
son why they are doing as they do, or why one thing should
be done rather than another. There are multitudes in the
church who never seem to suppose that the werk of prome


THE NECESSITY AND EFIECT OF UNION. 313:


ting revivals of religion ıs one that requires study, and
thought, and knowledge of principles, and skill in applying
the werd of God, so as to give every one his portion in sea-
som And so they go on, generally doing little or nothing be-
cause they are attempting nothing, and if they ever do
awake, go headlong to work, without any system or plan, as
if God had left this part of our daty out of the reach of
sound judginent and good sense.

12. There is vast.ignorance among ministers upon this sub-
ject, and one great reason of this ignorance is, that many get
the idea that they already understand all about revivals, when
in reality they Imow next to nothing about them. T, once
knew # minister come in where therc, was a powerful revival,
and bluster about and find fault with many things, speaking
of his knowledge of revivals, that he had been in seventcen
of them and so on, when it was evident that he knew nothing
as he ought to know of revivals.

} 13. How important it is that the church should be trained

and instructed, so as to know what to do in a revival; They
should be trained and disciplined like an army ; each one
having a place to fill, and something to do, and knowing
where he belongs, and what he has to do, and how to do it.:
Instead of this, how often do you see a church im a time of

revival take hold of the work to promote it, just like a parcel
of chikdren taling-hold to build a house. How few are there
that really know how to do—what ?—Why, the very thing for
which God suffcrs Christians to live in this world, the very
thing for which ALONE he would ever let them remain away
from heaven a day, is the very thing of all others that they:
‘do not study and do not try to understand.

= 14. Wo see why revivals are often so short, and why they
‘80 often produce a reaction. It is because the church do not
understand the subject. Revivals are short, because pro-
fessors have been stirred up to a spasmodical kind of action.
They havo gone to work by impulse ratuer than from deliber-
ate eonviction of duty, and have been guided by their feel-
ings rather than by a sound understanding of what they
‘ought to do. The church did not know what to do, what
they éould do, aud what they could not, nor how to husband
their strength, nor what tho state of things would bear, and
‘perhaps their zeal led them into some indisoretions, and they
Jost their hold on God, and so the enemy prevailed. , The
church ought to bo so trained as to know what to do, so as
‘never to fail, and never to suffer defeat dr reaction, when
they attempt to prenrgge a revival «They should understand

$4;


A


314, THE NECESSITY AND EFFECT OF UNION.”


all the tactics of the devil, and know where to guard against
his devices, so that they may know him when they see him,
and not mistake him for an angel of light come to give them
lessons of wisdom in promoting the revival, and so they can
co-operate wisely with the minister, and with one another, and
with the Holy Ghost, in carrying on the work. No person
who has been conversant in revivals can overlook the fact,
that the ignorance of professors of religion concerning revi-
vals, and their stupid blunders are among the most common
things that put revivals down, and bring back a fearful re-
action upon the church. Brethren, How long shall this be
so? It ought not to be so, it need not be so, shall it always
be so?
' 15. We see that every church is justly responsible for the
souls that are among them. If God has given such a promise,
and if it is true that where so many as two are agreed, as
touching the things they ask for, it shall be done, then cer-
tainly Christians are responsible, and if sinners are lost, their
blood will be found upon the church. If the churches can
have what they ask, as soon as they are agreed as touching it, —
then certainly the damnation of the world will be required
at the hands of the church.
| 16. We see the guilt of ministers, in not informmg them-
selves, and rightly and speedily instructing the churches upon
this momentous subject. Why, what is the end of the Chris-
tian ministry? What have they to do, but to instruct and
marshal the sacramental host, and lead them on to conquest.
What! let the church remain in ignorance upon the very
subject, and the only point of duty, for the performance of
which they are in the world, the salvation of sinners. Some
ministers have acted as mysteriously about revivals, as if they
thought Christians were either incapable of understanding
how to promote them, or that it was of no importance that
they should know. But this is all wrong. No minister has
yet begun to understand, or do his duty, if he has neglected
to teach his church to work for God in the promotion of re-
vivals. What is he about? What does he mean? Why is
he a minister? To what end has he taken the sacred office ?
Is it that he “may eat a piece of bread?” l
17. We see that pious parents can render the salvation of
their children certain. Only let them pray in faith, and be
agreed as touching the things they shall ask for, and God
has promised them the desire of their hearts. Who can be
agreed so well as- parents? Let them be agreed in prayer,
and agreed what to do, and agreed in doing all their duty ;


THE NECESSITY AND EFFECT OF UNION, 315,


let tħem thus train up their children in the way they should
go, and when they are old, they will not depart from it.

And now, brethren, do you believe you are agreed, accord-
ing to the meaning of this promise? I know that where a
few individuals may be agrecd in some things, they may pro-
duce some etfect. But while the body of the church are not
agreed, there will always be so many things to counteract,
that they will accomplish but little. THE CHURCH MUST
BE AGREED. Ob, if we could find one church that were
perfectly and heartily agreed in all these points, so that they
could pray and labor together, all as one, what good would
be done! But now, while things are as they are, we see
colony after colony peopling hell, because the church are
not agreed. Oh, what do Chnstians think, how can they
keep still, when God has brought down his blessings so that
if any two were agreed, as‘ touching the things they ask for,
it would be done. Alas! alas! how bitter will be the re
membrance of these janglings in the church, when Chris-
tians come to see the crowds of lost souls that have gone
down to-hell, because we were not agreed to labor and pray
for their salvation.

Fovatty.—In the light cf this promise we see the awful
guilt of the church. God has given it to be the precious in
‘heritauce of his people at all times, and in all places. IE his
‘people agree, their prayers will be answered. We seo the
awful guut of this church, who come here and listen to lectures
about revivals and then go away and have no revival, and
also the guilt of members of other churcues who hear these
lectures and go home and refuse to do their duty. How can
you meet the thousands of impenitent sinners around you,
at the bar of God, and see them sink away into everlast-
ing burnings? Have you been united in heart to pray for
them? If you have not, why have you disagreed? Why
have you not prayed with this promise until you have pre-
vailed ?

You will now either be agreed, and pray for the Holy
Ghost, and receive him before you leave the house, or the
anger of the Lord will be upon you. Should you now agree
to pray in the sense of this promise, for the Spirit of God’ to
come down on this city, the heavenly dove would fly through
the city in the midst of the night and would rouse the cone
sciences and break up the guilty slumbers of the wicked.
What then is the crimson guilt of those professors of religion
who are sleeping in sight of sucha promise? They seem to
have skipped over, or to have entirely forgotten it. +, Multi


816 THE NECESSITY AND EFFECT OF UNION.

tudes of sinners going to hell in all directions, and yet this
blessed promise is neglected ; yea, more, is practically despised
by the church. There it stands in the solemn record, and the
church might take hold of it ın such a manner that vast num-
bers might be saved, but they are not agreed. Therefore
souls will perish And where is the responsibility? Who
can take this promise and look the perishing in the face at the
day of judgment? 5


These lectures were greatly instrumental: in revi Te
ligion the church to which they were preached, and their
publication in this country and in crepe bad been the means
of promoting revivals in very many places. To God belongs
all the glory. oh if i E


(LECTURE XVIL
FALSE COMFORTS FOR SINNERS.


j Tzxr.—How then comfort ye me in vain, seeing in your answers thero zemalneotb
@ilsehood.—Joz xxi. 34,

Jox’s three friends insisted on it that the afflictions which
he suffered were sent as a punishment for his sins, and were
evidence conclusive that he was a hypocrite, and not a good
man as he professed to be: A lengthy argument ensued; in
which Job referred to all past experience, to prove that men
are not dealt with in this world according to their character ;
that the distinction is not observed in the allotments of
Providence. His friends maintained the opposite, and inti-
mated that this World is also a place of rewards and punish-
ments, in which men receive good or evil, according to their
deeds. In this chapter, Job shows by appealing to common
sense and common observation, and experience, that this can-
not be true, because it is a matter of fact that the wicked are
often prosperous in the world and through life, and hence
infers that their judgment and punishment must be reserved
for a future state. ‘The wicked is reserved to the day of de-
struction,” and “they shall be brought forth to the day of
his wrath.” And inasmuch as his friends came to comfort
him, but being in the dark on this fundamental point, bad
not been able to understand his case, and so could not afford
him any comfort, but rather aggravated his grief, Job in-
sisted upon it that he would still look to a future state for
consolation, and rebukes them by exclaiming, in the bitter-
ness of his soul, “How then comfort ye me in vam, seeing in
your answers there remaineth falsehood ?”

- My present purpose is, to make some remarks upon the
‘various methods employed in comforting anxious sinners, and
I design:

L AA briefly the necessity and design of instructing
‘anxious sinners.

If. To show that anxious sinners are always seeking
comfort, _ Their supreme object is to get comfort in their
a


MD


318 FALSE COMFORTS FOR SINNERS.


IIL To notice some of the false comforts often adminis


tered. — m x

L The necessity and design of instructing. anxious sinners.

The very idea of anxiety implies some instruction. A sin-
‘ner would not be anxious at all about his future state, unless
he had light enough to know that he is a sinner, and that he
is in danger of punishment and needs forgiveness. But men
are to be converted, not by physical force, or by a ‘change
wrought in their nature or constitution by creative power,
bat by the truth made effectual by the Holy Spirit. Conver
sion is yielding to the trath. And therefore, the more trah
can be brought to bear upon the mind, other things being
egual; so much the more probable is it that the individual
will be converted. Unless the truth is brought to bear upon
him, it is certain he will not be converted. If it is brought to
bear, it is not absolutely certain that it will be effectual, but
the probability is in proportion to the extent to which the
truth is brought to bear. The great design of dealing with
an anxious sinner is to clear up all his difficulties and dark-
ness, and to do away all his errors, and sap the foundation
of his selérighteous hopes, and sweep away every vestige of
comfort that he could find in himself. There is often much
difficulty in this, and much instruction is required. Sinners
often cling with a death grasp to their false dependences,
The last place to which a smner ever betakes himself for re
lief is to Jesus Christ. Sinners had rather be saved in any
other way in the world. They had rather make any sacrifice,
go to any expense, or endure any suffering, than just to
throw themselves as guilty and lost rebels upon Christ alone
for salvation. ‘This is the very last way in which they are
ever willing to be saved. It cuts up all their self-righteous-
ness, and annihilates their pride and self-satisfaction so com-
pletely, that they are exceedingly unwilling to adopt it. But
it ıs as true ın philosophy as it ıs in fact, that this 1s, after all,
the only way in which a sinner could find relief. If God
should attempt to reheve sinners, and save them without
humbling thew pride and turning them from their sins, he
could not do it. Now the object of instructing an anxious
sinner should be to lead him by the shortest possible way to
do this. It ıs to brmg his mind, by the shortest route, to the
practical conclusion that there is, in fact, no other way in
which he can be relieved and saved, but to renounce himself
and rest m Christ alone. To do this with effect requires
great skill It requires a thorough knowledge of the human
heart, a clear understanding of the plan of salvation, and a


FALSE COMFORTS FOR SINNERS. 318


recise and definite’ idea of the very thing that a sinner

UST DO in order to be saved: To know how to do this
effectually is one of the rarest qualifications in the ministry
at the present day. ‘It is distressing to see how few minis
ters, and how few professors of relimon there are who have
in their own minds that distinct idea of the thing to be done,
that they can go to an anxious sinner and tell him exactly
what he has to do, and how to do it, and can show him clearly
that there is no possible way for him to be saved but by domg
that very thing which they can tell him, and make him feel
the certainty that he must do it, and that unless he does that
very thing, he will be damned.

I. I am jo show that anxious sinners are always seeking
comfort.

Sinners often imagine they are seeking Jesus Christ, and seek.
ing religion, but this is a mistake. No person ever sought re-
ligion, and yet remained irreligious. What is religion? It
is obeying God. Seeking religion is seeking to obey God.
The soul that hungers and thirsts after righteousness is the
soul of a Christian. To say that a person can seek to obey
God, and yet not obe; him, is absurd. For if he is seeking
religion he is not an impenitent sinner. To seek religion, im-
plies a willingness to obey God, and a willingness to obey
God is religion. It is a contradiction to say that an impeni-
tent sinner is seeking religion. It is the samé as to say, that
be seeks and actually longs to obey God, and God will not let
him, or that he longs to embrace Jesus Christ, and Christ will
not let him come. The fact is, the anxious sinner is seeking
a hope, he is seeking pardon, and comfort, and deliverance
from hell. He is anxiously looking for some one to comfort
him, and make him feel better, without being obliged to con-
form to such humiliating conditions as those of the Gospel.
And his anxiety and distress continue, only because he will
not yield to the terms. Unfortunately, anxious sinners find
comforters enough to their liking. Miserable comforters they
all are, too, “seeing in their answers there remaineth false-
hood.” No doubt, millions and millions are now in hell,
because there were those around them who gave them false
comfort, who had so much false pity, or were themselves so
much in the dark, that they would not let them remain in
anxiety till they had submitted their hearts to God, but ad-
ministered falsehood, and relieved their distress in this way,
and now their souls are lost. ;

OL Iam to notice several of the ways in which false com
fort is given to anxious sinners. ,


320 FALSE COMFORTS FOR SINNERS.


T might almost say, there is an endless variety. of ways in
which this is done. The more experience I have, and the
more I observe the ways in which even good people deal with
anxious sinners, the more I feel grieved at the endless fool-
eries and falsehoods with which they attempt to comfort their
anxious friends, and thus, in fact, deceive them and beguile
them out of their salvation. It, often reminds me of the man-
ner in which people act when any one is sick.- Let any one
of you be sick, with almost any disease in the world, and
you will find that every person you meet with has a remedy
for twat disorder, a certain cure, a specific, a panacea ;
and you will find such a world of quackery all around you,
that if you do not take care and SHUT IT ALL OUT,
you will certainly lose your life. A man must exercise his
own judgment, for he will find as many remedies as he
has friends, and each one is tenacious of his own medi-
cine, and perhaps will think hard if it is not taken, And
no doubt this miserable system of quackery kills a great
many peoplk.

This is true to no greater extent respecting the diseases of
the body thah respecting the diseases of the mind. _ People
have their specifics and their catholicons and their panaceas
to comfort distressed souls, and whenever they begin to talk
with an anxious sinner, they will bring in their false comforts,
so much that if he does not TAKE CARE, and mind the
word of God, he will infallibly be deceived to his own de
struction. I propose to mention a few of the falsehoods
that are often brought forward in attempting to comfort anx
ious sinners. Time would fail me, even to name them all. ~-

The direct object of many persons is to cpmfort sinners. and
they are often so intènt upon this that. they do not stick at
means or kind of comfort.’ They see their friends distressed,
and they pity them, they feel very compassionate, “Oh, oh, I
cannot bear to see, them so distressed, I must comfort them
somehow,” and so they try one way, and another, and all. to
comfort them! Now, God desires they should be comforted.
Ho is benevolent, and has kind feelings, and his heart yearns
over them, when he sees them so distressed. But he sees that
there is only ove way to give a sinner real comfort. He hag
more benevolence and compassion than all men, and wishes
to comfort them. But he has fixed the terms as unyieldi
as his throne, on which he will give a sinner relief. And he
will not alter. He knows that nothing else will do the sinner
effectual good; for nothing can make him happy, until he re
pents of his sins and forgakes them, and turns to God. Ang


PALSE COMFORTS FOR SINNERS. 1329|


therefore God will not yield. Our object should be the same
as that of God. We should feel compassion aid benevolence,
just as he does, and be as ready to give comfort, but be sure
that it be of the right kind. The fact is, our prime object
should be to induce the sinner to obey God. His comfort
ought to be with us, and with him, but a secondary object, and
while we are more anxious to relieve his distress than to have
him cease to abuse, and dishonor God, we are not likely, by
our instructions, to do him any real good. This is a fuhda-
mental distinetion, in dealing with anxious sinners, but it is
evidently overlooked by many, who seem to have no higher
motives, than sympathy or compassion. for the sinner If in
preaching the Gospel, or instructing the anxious, we are not
actuated by a high regard to the honor of God, and rise no
higher, than to desire to relieve the distressed ; this is going
no farther than a constititional sympathy, or compassion,
would carry us. Overlooking this principle, has often misled
rofessors of religion, and when they have heard others deal-
ing faithfully with anxious sinners, they have accused them of |
eruelty. I have often. had professors bring anxious sinners to
me, and beg me to comfort them, and, when I have probed
their consciences to the quick, they have shuddered, and
sometimes taken the sinners’ part, It is sometimes impossi |
ble to deal effectually with youth who are anxious, in the
presence of their parents, because they have so much more
compassion for their children, than regard to the honor of
God. This is all wrong, and with such views and feelings
you had better hold your tongue, than to say anything to the
anxious. j
1. One of the ways in which people give false comfort to
distressed sinners, is, by asking them “ What have you done?
you.are not so bad.” ‘They see them distressed, and cry out,
“Why, what have you done?” as if they had never done any-
thing wicked, and had in reality no oceasion to fecl distressed
at all. I have before mentmned. the case of a fashionable
lady, who was awakened in this_city, and was going to see a
minister to converse with.him, when she was met by a friend,
who turned her back, and drove off hér anxiety, by the cry,
“ What have you done, to make you feel so? I am snre
u have never committed any sin, that need to make you
feel so.” *
I have often met with cases of this kind. A mother will
tell her son, who is anxious, what an obedient child he has


+ 1
* } believe the reporter passed over and did no? mention this case, ’
) A CSa


‘822 FALSE COMFORTS FO" SINNERS


ways been, how good and how kind, and she begs’ him not
pi take on so. Soa husband will tell his wife, or a wife her
husband, how good they are, and ask, “ What have-you done ?”
When they see them in great distress, they begin to comfort
them, “Why you are not so bad. You have been to hear
that frightful minister, that frightens people, and you have
got excited. Be comforted, for I am sure you have not been
bad enough to feel so much distressed.” When the truth is,
they have been 2 great deal worse than they think they have.
No sinner ever had an idea that his sins were greater than
they are. No sinner ever had an adequate idea of how great
a sinner he is. Itis not probable that any man could live
under the full sight of his sins. God has, in mercy, spared
all his creatures on earth that worst of sights, a naked haman
heart. The sinner’s guilt is much more deep and damning
than he thinks, and his danger is much greater than he thinks
it is, and if he should sce them as they are, probably he would
not live a moment. A sinner may have some false notions on
the subject, that creates distress, which have no foundation.
He may think he has committed the unpardonable sin, or that
he has gneved away the Spirit, or sinned away his day of
grace. But to tell the most moral and naturally amiable per
son in the world that he is good enough, or that he is not so
bad as he thinks he is, is not giving him rational comfort, but
is deceiving him, and ruining his soul Let those who do it,
take care.

2. Others tell awakened sinners that Conyersion is a pro-
gressive work,” and in this way ease their anxiety. When a
man is distressed, because he sees himself to be such a sinner,
and that unless he turns to God, he will be damned ; it is a
great relief to have some friend hold out the idea that he can
get better by degrees, and that he is now coming on, by little
and little. They tell him, “Why you cannot expect to- get
along all at once ; Ido not believe in these sudden conver-
‘sions, you must wait and let it work, you have begun well,
and by and by you will get comfort.” All this is false as the
bottomless pit. The truth is, Regeneration, ar conversion, îs
not a progressive work. What is regeneration? What is it
but the beginning of obedience to God? And is the beginning
of a thing progressive? It is the first act of genuine obedi-
ence to God—the first voluntary action of the mind that is
what God approves, or that can be regarded as obedience to
God. ‘That is conversion. When persons talk about conver-
sion as a progressive work, it is absurd. They show that
they know just as much about regeneration or conversion, ag)


-FALSE COMFORTS FOR SINNERS s373


Nicodemus did. They know nothing about it, as they ought
to know, and are no more fit to conduct an anxious meet
ing, or to advise or instruct anxious simners, than Nicode
mus was.

3. Another way in which anxious sinners are deceived with
false comfort, is by being advised to dismiss the subject for the
present.

_ Men who are supposed to be wise and good, have a¢sumed
to be so much wiser than God, that when God is dealing with
a sinner, by his Spirit, and endeavoring to bring him to an
immediate decision ; they think God is crowding too hard, and
that it is necessary for them to interfere ; and they will advise
the person to take a ride, or go into company, or engage in
business, or something that will relieve his mind a little, at
least for the present. They might just as well say to God, in
plain words, “O God, you are too hard, you go too fast, you
wil] make him crazy, or kill him, he cannot stand it ; poor crea
ture, if he is so pressed, he will die.” Just so they take sides
against God, and do the same as to tell the sinner himself,
“God will make you crazy if you do not dismiss the subject,
and resist the Spirit, and drive him away from your mind.”

Such advice, if it be truly conviction of sin that distresses
the sinner, is in no case, either safe or lawful, The strivings of
the Spirit, to bring a sinner to himself, will never hurt him,
nor drive him crazy. He may make himself deranged by re-
sisting, but it is blasphemous, to think, that the blessed, wise
and benevolent Spirit of God; would ever conduct with so
little care, as to derange and destroy the soul he came to
sanctify and save. The proper course to take with a sinner,
when the striving of the Spirit throws him into distress, is, to
instruct him, to clear up his views, correct his mistakes, and
make the way of salvation so plain that he can see it right
before him. Not to dismiss the subject, but fall in with the
Spirit, and thus hush all those dreadful agonies which are
‘produced by resisting the Holy Ghost. REMEMBER, if an
awakened sinner voluntarily dismiss the subject once, proba:
bly. he will never take it up again.

4. Sometimes an awakened sinner is comforted by being
told -that religion does not consist in feeling bad. I once heard
of a Doctor of Divinity, giving an anxious sinner such coun:
sel, when he was actually writhing under the arrows of the
Almighty. Said he, “Religion is cheerful, religion is not
gloomy, do not be distressed, be comforted, dismiss your fears,
you should not feel so bad,” and such like miserable comforts,
when, in fact, the man had infinite reason to be distressed,


324 FALSE COMFORTS FOR SINNERS,


for he was resisting the Holy Ghost, and in danger of griew
ing him away for ever.

A is true, Telat does not consist in feeling bad. but the
sinner has reason to be dis‘ressea, because he has ho religion.
If b had religion, he would not feel so. Were be a Christian,
he woula rejoice. But to tell an impenitent sinner to be
cheerful! why, you might as well preach this doctrine in hell,
and tell them there, “Cheer up here, cheer up, do not feel so
bad.”

The sinner is on the very verge of hell, he is in rebellion
against God, and his danger is infinitely greater than he im-
agines. Oh, what a doctrine of devils! to tell a rebel against
heaven not to be distressed. What is all his distress but re-
belliun itself? He is not comforted, because he refuses to be
comforted. God is ready to comfort him. You need not think
to‘ be more compassionate than God. He will fill him with
comfort, in an instant, if he will subit. But there he stands,
struggling against God, and against the Holy Ghost, aud
against conscience, until he is distressed almost to death, and
still he will not yield ; and now some one comes in, “ Oh, I hate
to see you feel so bad, do not be so distressed, cheér up, cheer
up, religion does not consist in beg gloomy, be comforted.”

ornid!

5. Whatever involves the cubject of religion in mystery, is
calculated to give a sınner false comfort.

When a sinner is anxious on the subject of religion, very
often, if you becloud it in mystery, he will feel relieved. Th
sinner's distress arises from the pressure of present obligation.
Enlighten him on this point, and ciear it up, and if he will not
yield, it will only increase his distress. But tell him that re
generation is all a mystery, something he cannot understand ;
and feave him all in a fog of darkness; and you relieve his
‘anxiety. It is his clear view of the nature and duty of re-
pentance, that produces his distress. It i8 the light that
brings agony to his mind, while he refuses to obey. It is that,
which will make up the pains of bell. And if will almost
make hell in the sinner’s breast here, if only made clear
enough. But only cover up this light, and his anxiety will
immediately become far less acute and thrilling. But if you
lift up a certain and clear light, and flash it abroad upon his
soul, and if he will not yield, you kindle up the tortures of
hell in his bosom. |

- Whatever relieves the sinner from a sense of blame, is cal
culated to give him false rae S ; ae |

The more a man feels himself to blame, the deeper is hig _


FALSE COMFORTS FOR SINNERS. 325


distress. But anything that lessons his sense of blame, of
course lessons his distress, but if is a comfort full of: death.
If avything will help him divide the blame, and throw off a
part of it upon God, it will afford comfort. but it is a relief
that will destroy his soul.

7. To tell him of his inability, is false comfort. Tell an anx-
ious sinner “ What can you do? you are a poor, feeble crea
_ ture, you can do nothing.” You will make him feel a king of

despondency. Bat it is not that keen agony of remorse, with
‘which God wrings-the soul, when he is laboring to cut him
down ‘and bring him to repentance.

:` If you tell nim he is unable to comply with the Gospel, he
naturally falls m with it as a relief. He says to himself, “Yes,
I am unable, I am a poor, feeble creature, I cannot do this, and
certainly God cannot. send me to hell for not doing what I
cannot do.” Why, if I believed that the sinner was unable, I
would tell him plainly, “ Do not be afraid, you are not to blame
for not complying with the call of the Gospel: for you are
unable, and God will never send you to hell for not doing
what you have no strength to do. Will not the Judge of
wll the earth do right?” I lmow it is not common for those
who. talk about the sinner’s beiug unable, to be so consistent,
and carry out their theory. But the sinner infers all this, and
go he feels relieved. It is all false, and all the comfort đe-
rived from it, is only treasuring up wrath against the day of
‘wrath.

“ 8. Whatever makes the impression on a sinner’s mind thaf
the is to-be passive in religion, is calculated to give him false
‘comfort.

Give him the idea that he has nothing to do but to wait
God’s time ; tell him conversion is the work of God, and he
ought to leave it to him; and that he must be careful, not to
try to take the work out of God’s hand ; and he will inser, as
before, that he is not to blame, and will feel relieved. If he is
only to hold still, and let God do the work, just as a man
holds ‘still to have his arm amputated, he feels relieved. But
such instruction as this, is all wrong. If the sinner is thus to
hold still and let God do it, he instantly infers that he is not
to blame for not doing it himself. And the inference is not
only natural but legitimate, for he is not to blame.

It is true that there is a sense in which conversion is the
work of God. But it is false, as it is often represcnted. It
is also true that there is a sense, in which conversion is the
sinners own act. It is ridiculous, therefore, to say, that a
ginner is pagsive in regeneration, or passive in being convert


826 FALSE COMFORTS FOR SINNERS-


for conversion is his own act. The thing to be done is
ba which cannot be'done for him. It is something which he
must do, or it will never be done.

9. Telling a sinner to wait God’s time. __ é
. Some years ago, I mct a woman m Philadelphia, who was
anxious about her soul, and had been a long time in that
state. E conversed with her, and endeavored to learn her
staté. She told mea good many things, and finally-said she
knew she ought to be willing to wait on God as long as he
had waited upon her. She said, God had waited on her a
great many years, before she wonld give any attention to his
calls, and now she belicved it was her duty to wait God’s time
to show mercy and convert her soul. And she said, this was
the instruction she had received. She must be patient, and
wait God’s time, and by and by he would give her relief. Oh,
amazing folly!

Here is the sinner in rebellion. God comes with pardon in
one hand, and a sword in the other, and tells the sinner to
repent and receive pardon, or refuse and perish. And now
here comes a minister of the Gospel, and tells the sinner to
“wait God’s time.” Virtually he says, that God is not ready
to have him repent zow, and is not ready to pardon him xow,
and thus, in fact, throws off the blame of his impenitence
upon God. Instead of pointing out the sinner’s guilt, in not
submitting at once to God, he points out God’s insincerity in
making the offer, when, in fact, he was not ready to grant the
blessing.

I have often thought such teachers needed the rebuke of
Elijah when he met the priests of Baal. “Cry aloud, for he
is a God ; either he is talking, or he is pursuing, or he is in a
journey ; or peradventure he sleepeth, and must be awaked.”
The minister who ventures to intimate that God is not ready,
and that tells the sinner to wait God’s time, might almost as
well tell bim, that now God is gsleep, or gone on a journey,
and cannot attend to him at present. Miserable comforters
indeed! It is little less than outrageous blasphemy of God.
How many have gone to the judgment, red all over with the
blood of souls, that they have deceived and destroyed, by tell-
ing them God was not ready to save them, and they must
wait God’s time. No doubt, such a doctrine is exceedingly
calculated to afford present relief to an anxious sinner, It
warrants him to say, “Oh, yes, God is not ready, I must wait
God's time and so I can live in sin, and take it out a while
longer, till he gets ready to attend to me, and then I will get
religion.”


FALSE COMFORTS FOR SINNERS, 327


10. It is false comfort to tell an anxious sinner to do any
thing for relief, which he can do, and not submit his heart to
God.
= An anxious sinner is often willing to do anything else, but
the very thing which God requires him to do. He is willing
to go to the ends of the earth, or to pay his money, or to en-
dure suffering, or anything, but full and instantaneous sub-
mission to. God. Now, if you will compromise the matter
with him, and tell him of something else that he may do, and
yet evade that point, he will be very much comforted. He
likes that instruction. He says, “Oh, yes, I will do that, I like
that minister, he is not so severe as others, he seems to un-
derstand my particular case, and knows how to make allow-
ances.”

It often reminds me of the conduct of a patient who is
very sick, but has a great dislike for a certain physician and
a particular medicine, but that is the very physician who alone
understands treating his disease, and that the only remedy
for it. Now the patient is willing to do anything else, and
callin any other physician ; and he is anxious and in dis
tress, and is asking all his friends if they cannot tell him what
he shall do, and he will take all the nostrums and quack
medicines in the country, before he will submit to the only.
course that can bring him relief. By and by, after he has
tried everything without any benefit, if he does not die in the
experiment, he gives up his unreasonable opposition, calls in
the physician, takes the proper medicine, and is cured. Just
go itis with sinners. They will eagerly do anything, if you
will let them off from this intolerable pressure of prešent ob-
ligation to submit to God. I will mention a few of the
things which sinners are told to do.

(1.) Telling a sinner he must vse the means. Tell an anx-
ious sinner this—You must use the means, and he is relieved.
“ Oh, yes, I will do that, if that is all. I thought that God
required me to repent and submit to him now. But if using
the means will answer, I will do that with all my heart.”
‘He was distressed before, because he was cornered up, and
did not know which way to turn. Conscience had beset him,
like a wall of fire, and urged him to repent now. But this
relieves him at once, and he feels better, and is very thankful,
he says, that he found such a good adviser in his distress. But
he may use the means, as he calls it, till the day of judg-
ment, and not be a particle the better for it, but will only
basten his way to death. What is the sinne’s use of means,
bat rebellion against God?) God uses means. The eburch


328 FALSE COMFORTS FOR SINNEES.
tages means to convert and save sinners, to bear down upon
them, and bring them to submission. But what has the sim
ner to do with using means? Will you set him to use means
back upon God, and so make an offset in the matter? Or is
he to use means to make himself submit to God? How shall
he go to work with his means to make-himself submit? It is
just telling the sinner, “ You need not submit to God now,
but just use the means awhile, and see if you cannot melt
God’s heart down to you, so that he will yield this point of
unconditional submission.” It isa mere cavil to evade the
duty of immediate submission to God. It is true that sin-
ners, actuated by a regard to their own happiness, often give
attention to the subject of religion, attend meetings, and pray,
and read, and many such things. But in all this, they have
no regard to the honor of God, nor do they so much as mean
to obey him. Their design is not obedience, for if it were,
they would not be impenitent sinners. They are not, there-
fore, using means to be Christians, but to obtain pardon, and
a hope. It is absurd to say that an impenitent sinner is using
means to repent, for this is the same as to say that he is will-
ing tO repent, or, in other words, that he does repent, and is
not an impenitént sinner. So, to say that an unconverted
smner uses means with design to become a Christian, is a con-
tradiction, for 1 is saying that he is willing to be a Christian,
which 1s the same as to say that he is a Christian already.
(2.) Telling the sinner to pray for a new heart. E once
heard a celebrated Sunday-school teacher do this. He was
almost the father of Sunday-schools in this country. “He
called a little girl up to him, and began to talk to her. “My
little daughter, are you a Christian?” No,-sir. “ Well, you
cannot be a Christian yourself, can you?” No, sr. “No,
you cannot be a Christian, you eannot change your heart
yourself, but you must pray for a new heart, that is all you
can do, pray to God, God will give you a new heart.” He
was an`aged and venerable man, but I felt almost disposed to
rebuke him openly in the name of the Lord, I could not bear
to hear him deceive that child, telling her she could not be a
Christian. Does God say “Pray for a new heart?” Never:
He says, “Make you a new heart.” And the sinner is not to
be told to pray to God to do his duty for him, but to go and
do it himself. I know the Psalmist, @ good man, prayed,
Create m me a clean heart, and renew a right spirit within
me. He had fuih and prayed in faith. But that is a very
different thing from setting an obstinate rebel to pray for a


new heart. No doubt, an anxious sinner will ‘be delighted


'PAISS COMPORTS FOR SINNERS 329


with such instruction. Why, I knew I needed a new heart,
and that I ought to repent, but I thought I-must do it my-
self, I am very willing to ask God to.do it, I hated to do it
myself, but have no objection that God should do it, if he
will, and I will pray for’ it, if that‘is all that is required.”
(3.) Telling the sinner tw persevere. And suppose he does
persevere. He is as certain to be damned as if he had been:
m hell ever since the foundation of the world. His anxiety
arises only from his resistanee, and if he would submit, it
would cease. And now, will you tell him to persevere in the
very thing that causes his distress? Suppose my child
should, ın a fit of passion, throw a book or something on the
floor. F tell him “ Take it up,” and instead of minding what
I say, he runs off and plays. “Take it up!” He sees I am
in earnest, and begins to. look serious. > “Take it up, or I
shall get a rod” And I put up my arm to get the rod He
stands still. “Take it up, or you must be whipped.” He
comes slowly along to the place, and then begins to weep.
“Take it up, my child, or you will certainly be punished,”
Now he ıs m dissress, and sobs and sighs as if his bosom
would burst, but still remains as stubborn as if he knew I
could not punish him. Now I begin to press him with mo-
tives to submit and obey, but there he stands, in agony, and
at length bursts out, “Oh, father, I do feel so bad, I think I
am growing better.”. And now, suppose a neighbor to come
in, and see the child standing there, in all this agony of stub-
bornness. The neighbor asks him what he is standing there
for, and-what he ıs doing. “Oh, I am using means to pick
up that book.” If this neighbor should tell the child, “ Per-
severe, persevere, my boy, you will get it by and by,” what
should I do? Why, I would turn him out of the house.
What does he mean by encouraging my- child in his rebel-
lion.?
- Now, God calls the sinner to repent, he threatens him, he
draws the glittering sword, he persuades him, he uses mo-
tives, and the sinner is distressed to agony, for he sees him-
self driven to the dreadful alternative of giving up his sing
or going to hell. He ought instantly to lay down his weap-
ons, and break his heart at once. But he resists, and strug-
gles against conviction, and that creates his distress. Now
will you tell hun to persevere? Persevere in what? In strug-
gling against God! That is just the direction the devil would
give. Atl the devil wants ıs to see him persevere in just the
way he is going on, und his destruction is sure. Satan may


go to sleep.


330 FALSE COMFORTS FOR SINNERS,


(4.) Telling the sinner fo press forward.. That is, “ You
ere in a good way, only press forward, and you will get to
heaven.” This is on the supposition that his face is towards
heaven, when in fact his face is towards hell, and he is press
ing forwatd, and never more rapidly than. now, while he is
resisting the Holy Ghost. Often have I heard this direction
given, when the sinner was in as bad a way as he could be.
What you ought to tell him is, “STOP—sinner, stop, do not
take another step that way, it leads to hell.” God tells him
to stop, and because he does not wish to stop, he 1s distressed.
Now, why should you attempt to comfort him in this way?

* (5.) Tell osinner that he must try to repent and give his heart
to God, “Qh, yes,” says the sinner, “I am willing to try, I have
often tried to do it, and I will try again.” Ah, does God
tell you to try to repent? All the world would be willing
to try to repent, in their way. Giving this direction implies
that it is very difficult to repent, and perhaps impossible, and
that the best thing a sinner can do is to fry and sée whether
he can do it or not, What is this but substituting your own
commandment in the place of God's. God requires nothing
short of repentance and a holy heart. Anything short of
that is comforting him in vain, “ seeing in your answers there
remainéth falsehood.”

(6.) To tell him to pray for repentance. “Ob yes, I will
pray for repentance, if that is all. I was distressed because
I thought God required me to repent, but if he will do it, I
can wait.” And so he feels relieved, and is quite comfortable.
| (7.) To tell a sinner to pray for conviction, or pray for the
Holy Ghost to show him his sins, or to labor to gel mare light
on the subject of his guilt, in order to increase his convic

on.

» All this is just what the sinner wants, because it lets him
off from the pressure of present obligation. He wants just a


little more time. Anything that will defer that present pres


‘sure of obligation to repent immediately is a rehef. What
does he want more conviction for? Does God give any such
direction to an impenitent sinner? God takes it for granted
that he has conviction enough already. And so he has. Do
you say he cannot realize allhis sins? - If he can realize only
one of them, let him repent of that one, and he is a Chris
tian. Suppose he could sce them all, what reason is there to
think he would repent of them all, any more than that he
would repent of that one that he does see? All this is com
forting the sinner by setting him to do that which he can-do
and will not submit his heart to God


“PALSE COMFORTS ‘FOR SINNERS, 331
` IL Another way in which false comfort is givén to anx-
fous sinners, is to tell them God is trying their faith hy keep
ing them in the furnace, and they must wait patiently upon
the Lord. Just as if God was in fault, or stood in the way,
of his being a Christian. Or as if an impenitent sinner had
faith!, What an abomination! Suppose somebody should
tell my child, while he was standing by the book as I have de
scribed, “ Wait patiently, boy, your father is trying your
faith.” No. The sinner is trying the patience and forbear-
ance of God. God is not setting himself to torture a sinner,
and teach him a lesson of patience. But he is waiting upon
him, and laboring to bring hun a? once into such a state of
mind as will render it consistent to fill his soul with the
peace of heaven. And Shall the sinner be encouraged to re
sist by the idea that God is bantering? TAKE CARE. God
has said his Spirit shall not always strive.

12. Another false comfort is telling a sinner, Do your duty,

and leave your conversion with God,
- Lonce heard an elder of a church say to an anxious sin-
ner, “Do your duty, and leave your conversion to God, he
will do it in his own time and way.” That was just the same
as telling him that it was not lus duty to be converted now,
He did not say, Do your duty, and leave your salvation with
God. That would have been proper enough, for it would
have been simply telling him to subinit to God, and would
have included conversion as the first duty of al. But he
told him to leave his conversion to God. And this elder, that
gave such advice, was a man of liberal education too. How
absurd! Just as if he could do lis duty and not be con-
verted. Justas if God was going to convert a siner and
let the sinner sit calmly under it ın the use of means. Hor-
rible! No. God has required him to make him a new heart,
and do you beware how vou comfort hun with an answer of
falsehood.

13. Sometimes professors of religion will try to comfort a
sinner, by telling him, “ Do not be discouraged ; I was a long
time in this way before I found comfort.” They will tell him,
“I was under conviction so many weeks—or perhaps so many
roonths, or sometimes years, and have gone through with all
this, and know just how you feel, your experience 1s the same
with mine, precisely, and after so long a time I found rehef,
and I do not doubt you will find it by and by. Do not de
spair, God will comfort you soon.” Tell a sinner to take
courage in his rebellion! Ch, horrible! Such professors
ought to be ashamed. Suppose you were under conviction


$32 FALSE COMFORTS FOR SINNERS.


go many weeks, and afterwards found relief, it is the very last
thing you ought to tell to an anxious sinner. What is ib but
encouraging him to hold on, when his business is to submit.
Did you hold out so many weeks while the Spirit was striv-
ing with you? You only deserved so much the more to be
damned, for your obstinacy and stupidity.

Sinner! it ig no sign God will spare youso long, or that
his Spirit will remain with you to be resisted. And remem-
ber, if the Spirit is taken away, you will be sent to hell.

14. “I have faith to believe you will be converted.”

You have-faith to beleve! On what does your faith rest?
Ou the promise of God? On the influences of the Holy
Ghost? Then you are counteracting your own faith. The
very design and object of the Spirit of God, is, to tear"away-
from the sinner his last vestige of a hope, while remaining
in sin; to annihilate every crag and twig he may cling to.
And the object of your instruction should be the same. You
should fall in with the plan of God. It is only in this way
that you can ever do any good, by crowding him right up to
the work, to submit at once and leave his soul in the hands
‘of God. But when one that he thinks is a Christian tells
him, “I have faith to believe you will be eonverted,” it up
holds him in his false expectation. Instead of woe 2
away from his false hopes, and throwing him upon i
you just turn him off to hang upon your faith, and find com-
fort because you have faith for him: This is all false com-
fort, that worketh death.

15. “I will pray for you.” Sometimes professors of religion
try to comfort ah anxious sinner in this way, by te him,
“I will pray for you.” This is false comfort, for it leads the
sinner to trust in those prayers, instead of trusting in Christ.
The sinner says, “He is a good man, and God hears the
prayers of good men, no doubt bis prayers will prevail some
time, and I shall be converted, I do not think I shall be lost.”
And his anxiety, his agony, ìs all gone. A woman sad to a
minister, “I have no hope now, but I have faith in your
prayers.” Just such faith, this 21s, as the devil wants them
to have—faith in prayers instead of faith ın Chnst.

16. “IT rejoice to see you m this way, and I hope you will
be faithful, and hold out.” What is that but rejoicing to see
him in rebellion against God? For that is precisely the
ground on which he stands. He 1s resisting conviction, and
resistig conscience, and resisting the Holy Ghost, and yet
you rejoice to see him ın this way, and hope he will be faith-
ful and hold out. ‘There fe a sense, indeed, in which it may


FALSE COMFORTS FOR SINNERS. 839


be said that his situation is more hopeful than when he was
in stupidity. For God has convinced him, and may succeed
in turning and subduing him. But that ıs not the sense in
which the sinner himself will understand it. He will suppose
that you think him in a hopeful wav, because he is domg bet-
ter than formerly. When his guilt and danger are, ın fact,
greater than they ever were before. And instead of rejocing,
you ought to be distressed and in agony, to see him thus re
sisting the Holy Ghost, for every moment he does this, he is
in danger of being left of God, and given up to hardness of
heart and to despair.

17. “ You will have your pay for this, by and by, God will
reward you.” Yes, sinners, God will reward you, uf you con-
tinue in this way, he will put you ın the fires of hell. Re
ward for all this distress! Yes, if you are ever rewarded for‘
if; it will be in hell. I onee heard a sinner say, “I feel very
bad, I have strong hopes that I shall get my reward.” But
that individual afterwards said, “ Nowhere can there be found
so black a sinner as I am, and no sin of my life seems so
black, and damning as that expression.” He was overwhelmed
with contrition, that he should ever have had such an lea,
as to think God would reward him for suffering so much
distiexs, when he brought it all upon himself, needlessly, by
his wicked resistance to the truth. The truth is, what such
people want, is to comfort the sinner, and being all m the
dark themselves on the subject of religion, they of course
give him false comfort.

18. Another false comfort, is to tell the sinner he has not re-
pented enough. The truth is, he has not repented at all. ‘God
always comforts the sinner as soon as he repents. This direc-
tion implies that his feelings are right as far as they go. To
imply that he has any repentance, is to tell him a lie, and
cheat him out of his soul,

19. People sometimes comfort a sinner by telling him “If
you are elected, you will be brought in.” I once heard of a
case where a person under great distress of mind was sent to
converse with a neighboring minister. They conversed a
long time. As the person went away, the minister said to
him, “I should like to write a line by you, to your father.”
His father was a pious man. The minister wrote the letter,
and forgot to seal it. As the sinner was gomg home, he saw
that the letter was not sealed, and he thought to himself,
that probably the minister had written about lim, and his
curiosity at length led him to open and read it. And there
be found it written to this purport: “ Dear su. I tind yowu


334 FALSE COMFORTS FOR SINNERS.


son under conviction, and in great distress, and it seems not
easy to say anything to give him relief. But, if he is one of
the elect, he will surely be brought in.” He wanted to say
something to comfort the father. But now, mark. That
letter had well-nigh ruined his soul. He settled down
on the doctrine of election—“If I am elected, I shall be
brought in,” and his conviction was all gone. Years after.
wards he was awakened and converted, but only after a great
struggle, and never until that false impression was obhter-
ated from his mind, and he was made to see that he had no-
thing at all to do with the doctrine of election, but if he did
not repent, he would be damned.,

20. It is very common for some people to tell an awakened
sinner, “ You are in a very prosperous way, I am glad to sce
you so, and feel encouraged about you.” It sometimes seems
as if the church were in league with the devil to help sinners
yesist the Holy Ghost. The thing that the Holy Ghost wants
to make the sinner feel, is, that ail his ways are wrong, and
that they lead to hell. And everybody is conspiring to make
the opposite impression. The Spirit is trymg to discourage
him, and they are trying to encourage him ; the Spimt to
distress, by showing him he is all wrong, and they to comfort
‘him by saying he is doing well. Has it come to this, that
the worst counteraction to the truth, and the greatest obstacle
to the Spirit shall spring from the church? Sinner! Do
‘not believe any such thing. You are notin a hopeful way.
You are not doing well, but ill ; as ill as you can, while resist-
ing the Holy Ghost.

21. Another very fatal way in which false comfort is given
to sinners, is by,applying to them certain Scripture promises,
which were designed only for saints. This is a grand device
of the devil. It is much practised by the Universalists. But
Christians often do it. For example :

(1.) “Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be com-
forted.” How often has this passage been applied to anxious
sinners, who were in distress because they would not submit
to God ; blessed are ye that moprn. Indeed! That is true,
where they mourn with godly sorrow. But what is this sin-
ner mourning about? He is mourning because-God’s law
is holy and his terms of salvation so fixed that he cannot
bring them down to his mind. Tell such a rebel—Blessed
are they that mourn! You might just as well apply it to
those that are in hell. There is mourning there too. The
sinner is mourning because there is no other way of salvation,
because God is so holy that he requires him to give up all


FALSE COMFORTS FOR SINNERS. 335


his sins, and he feels, that the time has come, that he must
either give them up, or be damned. Shall we tell him, he
shall be comforted? Go and tell the devil, “ Poor devil, you
mourn now, but the Bible says you are blessed if you mourn,
and you shall be comforted by and by.

| (2.) “They that seek shall find.” This is said to sinners
lin such a way as to imply that the anxious sinner is seeking
religion. This promise was made in referenc» to Christians,
‚who ask in faith, and seek to do the will of God, and is not
applicable to those who are seeking hope or comfort, but to
‘holy seeking. To apply it to an impenitent sinner, is only to
deceive him, for his seeking is not of this character. To tell
him “You are seeking, are you? Well, seek, and you shall
find,” is to cherish a fatal delusion. While he remains im-
penitent, he has not a desire, which the devil might not have,
and remain a devil still.

__ If he had desire to do his duty, if he was seeking to do
the will of God, and give up his sins, he would be a Chris-
tian. But to comfort an impenitent sinner, with such a
promise, you might just as well comfort Satan.

(3.) “Be not weary in well doing, for in due time you
shall reap if you faint not.” To apply this to a sinner for
comfort, is absurd. Just as if he was doing something to
‘please God. He has never done well, and never has done
more ill, than now. Suppose my neighbor, who came in
while I was trying to subdue my child, should say to the.
child, “In due time you shall reap, if you faint not,” what
should I say? “Reap, yes, you shall reap, if you do not
give up your obstinacy, you shall reap indeed, for I will ap-
ply the rod.” So thé struggling sinner shall reap the dam-
nation of hell, if he does not give up his sins.
` 22. Some professors of religion, when they attempt to con-
verse with awakened sinners, are very fond of saying, “I
will tell you my experience.” ‘This is a dangerous snare, and
often gives the devil a handle to lead hin to hell, by trying to
copy your experience. If you tcll it to him, and he thinks it
is a Christian experience, he will almost infallibly be trying
to imitate it, and instead of following the Gospel, or the
leadings of the Spirit in his own soul, he is following your
‘example. This is absurd as well as dangerous. He never
will have just such feclings as you had. No two persons
were ever exercised just alike. Men’s experiences are as much
unlike as their countenances. Such a course is very likely to
mislead him. ‘he design is, often, nothing but to encour-
‘age hin, at the very puint where ho ought not to be encour,


336 ‘FALSE COMFORTS FOR SINNERS.


aged, before he has submitted to God. And it is calculated
to impede the work of God in his soul. ;

23. How many times will people tell an awakened sinner
that God has begun a good work in him, and he will carry it
on. I have known parents talk so with thew children, and as
soon as they saw their children awakened, give up all former
anxiety about them, and settle down at their ease, thinking
that now God had begun a good work in their children, he
would carry it on. It would be just as rational for a farmer
to say so about his grain, and as soon as it comes up out of
the ground, say, “ Well, God has begun. a good work in my
field, and he wil carry it on.” What would be thought of a
farmer who should neglect to put up his fence, because God
had begun the work of giving him a crop of grain? If you
tell a sinner so, and he believes you, it will certamly be his
destruction, for it will prevent bis doing that which is abso-
lutely indispensable to his being saved. If, as soon as the
sinner is awakened, he is tauzht that now God has begun a
good work, that only needs to be carried on, and that God
will surely carry it on, he sees that he has no further occa-
sion to be anxious, for, in fact, he has nothing more to do.
And so he will be relieved froin that intolerable pressure of
present obligation, to repent and submit to God. And if he
is relieved from his sense of obligation to do it, he will never do it.

24, Some will tell the sinner, “ Well, you have broken off
your sins, have you?” “Oh, yes,” says the smner. When
it is all false, he has never fursaken his sins for a moment, he
has only exchanged one form of sin for another ; only placed
himself in a new attitude of resistance. And to tell him, he
has broken them off, is to give him false comfort.

25. Sometumes,this direction is given for the purpose of re-
lieving the agony of an anxious sinner, “Do what you can,
and God will do the rest,” or “Do what you can, and God
will help you.” This is the’same as telling a sinner, “ You
cannot do what God requires you to do, but if you will do
what you can, God will help you, as to the rest.” Now sin-
ners often get the idea that they have done all they can, when,
in fact, they have done nothing at all, only resisted God
with all their might. Ihave often heard them bay, “I have
done all I can, and I get no relef, what can I do more?’
Now, you can see how comforting it must be to such a one to
have a professor of religion come in and say, “If you will do
what you can, God will help you.” It relieves all his keen
distress at once. He may be uneasy, and unhappy, but his
agony 1s gone,


FALSE COMFORTS FOR SINNERS. 337


26. Again they say, “ You should be thankful for what you
have, and hope foremore.” If the sinner is convicted, théy
tell him he should be thankful for conviction, and hope for
conversion. If he has auy feeling, he should be thankful for
what feelng he has, just as if his feeling was religious feeling,
when he has no more religion, than Satan. He has reason
to be thankful, indeed ; thankful that he is out of hell, and
thankful that God is yet waiting on him. But it is ridiculous
to tell him he should be thankful in regard tu the state of his
oak when he is all the while resisting his Maker with all lis
ight.


ERRORS IN PRAYING FOR SINNERS


1 will here mention a few errors in praying for sinners in
their. presence, by which an unhappy impression is made on
thew minds, in consequence of which, they often obtain false
comfort,in their distress.

1. People sometimes pray for sinners, as if they deserved
TO BE PITED more than BLamep. They pray for them as
mourners. “Lord help these pensive mourners,” as if they
were just mourning, like one that had lost a friend, or met
some other calamity, and they could not help it, and were
very sorry for it, but death would come, and so they were
greatly to be pitied, as they were sitting there, sad, pensive,
and sighing. The Bible never talks so. It pities sinners.
but it pities them as mad and guilty rebels, guilty, and de-
serving to go to hell, not as poor pensive mourners, that can-
not help it, that want to be relieved, but can do nothing but
sit and mourn. -

2. Praying for them as pour sinners. Does the Bible ever
use any such language as this? The Bible never speals of
them as “ poor smners,” as if they deserved tó be pitied more
than blamed. Christ pities sinners in his heart. And so does
God pity them. He feels in lus heart, all the gushings of
compassion for them, when he sees them going on, obstinate
and wilful in gratifying their own lusts, at the peril of his
eternal wrath. But he never lets an expression escape from‘
him, as if the sinner was just a “ poor creature” to be pitied,
as if he could not help ib T 10 idea that he is poor, rather
than wicked, unfortunate, rather than guilty, relieves the sin-
ner greatly. I have seen the sinner writhe with agony under
the .truth, n a meeting, until somebody: begun to pray for
him as a poor creature. And then he would gush out into
tears, and weep profusely, and think he was greatly bencfited

TAT i 2


338 FAISE COMFORTS FOR SINNERS.


by such a prayer. “Oh, what a good prayer that was. If
you go now and converse with that sinner, you will find he is
pitying himself as a poor unfortunate creature, perhaps weep-
ing over his unhappy condition, but his convictions oF sm, his
deep impressions of AWFUL GUILT, are all gone.

3. Prayirg that God would help the ‘sinner to repent. “O
Lord, enable this poor sinner to repent now.” This conveys
the idea to the sinner’s mind, that he is mow trying with all
his might to repent, and that he cannot do it, and therefore
Christians are calling on God to help him, and enable hfn to
do it. Most professors of religion pray for sinners, not that
God would make them wunne to repent, but that he would
ENABLE them, or make them able. No wonder their prayers
are not heard. They relieve the sinrer of his sense of re
sponsibility, and that relieves his distress. But it is an insult
to God, as if God had commanded a sinner fo -do what he
could not do.

4. People sometimes pray: “Lord, these sinners are seel»
ing thee, sorrowing.” This language is an allusion to what
took place at the time when Jesus was a little boy, and went
into the temple to talk with the rabbis and doctores His
parents, you recollect, went a day’s journey towards home,
before they missed him, and then they turned back, and after
looking all around, they found the little Jesus standing in the
temple and disputing with the. learned men, and his mother
said to him, “Son, why has thon thus dealt with us? behold,
thy father and I have sought thee sorrowing.” And so this
prayer represents sinners as seeking Jesus, and he hides him-
self from them, and they look all around, and hunt, and try
to find him, and wonder where Jesus is, and say, “Lord, we
have sought Jesus these three days sorrowing.” ` It is a LIE.
No sinner ever sought Jesus with all his heart three days, or
three minutes, and could not find him. There Jesus stands
at his door and knocks, there he is right before him pleading
with him, and facing him down with all his false pretences.
Seeking him! The sinner may whine and cry, “Oh, how I
am sorrowing, and seeking Jesus” It is no such thing ;
Jesus is seeking you. And yet how many oppressed con-
sciences are relieved and comforted by hearing one of these
prayers.

5. “Lord, have mercy on there sinners, who are seeking thy
low to know.” This is a favorite expression with many, aa if
sinners were seeking to know the Ìcve of Christ, and could
not. No such thing. They are nut seeking the love of
Christ, but seeking to get to heaven without Jesus Christ,


"PIEBE COMFORTS FOR SINNEES, 339


Just as if they were secking it, and he was sé hard-hearted
as he would not let them have it.

. “Lord, have mercy on these penitent souls ;” eallmg
eis sinners penitent souls. If they are penitent, they
are Christians. Yo make an impression on an uuconverted
sinner that he is penitent, is to make him belicvealie. But
it is very comfort:ng to the sinner, and he likes to take it up,
and pray it over again, “O Lord, I am a poor penitent soul,
I am very penitent, I am so distressed, Lord have mercy on
2 poor penitent.” Dreadful delusion!

7. Sometimes people pray for anxious sinners as {doable
‘souls. “QO Lord, these sinners have humbled themselves.”
Why, that is not true, they have not humbled themselves; if
‘they had, the Lord would have raised them up and comforted
them, as he has promised. There is a hymn of this character,
that has done great mischief. It begins,


æ Come HUMBLE sinner in whose breast
A thousand thoughts revolve.”


This hymn was once given by a minister to an awakened sin-
ner, as one applicable to his case.: He began to.read, ‘“ Come
humble sinner.” He stopped, “Humble : sinner, that is not
applicable to me, I am noia humble sinner.’ Ah, how well
was it for him that the Holy Ghost had taught him better
than the hymn. If the hymn had said, Come anxious sinner,
or guilty sinner, or trembling sinner, it would have becn well
enough, but to call Him a humble sinner would not do. There
are a vast many hymns of the same character. It is very
common to find sinners quoting the false sentiments of some
hymn, to excuse themselves in rebellion against God.

A minister told me he heard a prayer, quite lately, in these
‘words, “O Lord, these sinners have bumbled themselves, and
come to thee as ‘well as they know how. If they knew any
better, they would do better, but O Lord, as they have come
to thee, in the best manner they cap, we pray thee accept
them and shew mercy.” Horrible!

8. Many pray, “ Father, forgive them, they know not what
they do.” ‘This is the prayer which Christ made for hig mur-
derers. And, in that case, it was true, they did not know
what they were doing, for they did not believe that Jesus

Christ was the Messiah. But it cannot be said of sinners
under the Gospel, they do not know what they are doing.
They do know what they are doing. They do not sce the full
extent of it, but they do know that they arc sinning against


God, and rejecting Qbrist, and the difficulty is, that “they are


340" FALSE COMFORTS FOR SINNERS.


unwilling to submit to God. - But such a prayer is calculated
to make him feel relieved, and make him say, “ Lord, how can
“you blame me so, I am a poor ignorant creature, I do not
know how to’ do what is required of me. If I knew how, I
would do it.”

9. Another expression is, “ Lord, direct these sinners, who
are inquiring the way to Zion, with their faces thitherward.”
But this language is only applicable to Christians: Sinners
have not their faces towards Zion, their faces are set toward
hell And how can a sinner be said to be “inquiring the way”
to Zion, when he has no disposition to go there. The real
difficulty is, that he is unwilling to WALK in the way in
which he knows he ought to go.-

10. People pray that sinners may have more conviction. Or,
they pray that sinners may go home solemn and tender, and’
take the subject into consideration, instead of praying that
they may repent now. Or, they pray as if they supposed the
sinner was willing to do what is required. All such prayers,
are just such prayers as the devil wants. He wishes to have
such prayers, and I dare say he does not care how many such
are offered.

Sometimes I have seen m an anxious meeting, or when sin-
ners have been called to the anxious scats, and the minister has
made the way of salvation all plain to them, and taken away
all the stumbling blocks out of their path, and removed tho
darkness of their minds on the several points, and when they
are Just ready to YIELD, some one wil be called on to pray,
and instead of ‘praying that they may repent now, he begins
to pray, “O Lord, we pray, that these sinners may be solemn,
that they may have a decp seuse of their.sinfulness, that they
may go -home impressed with their lost condition, that they
may attempt nothing in their own strength, that they may not
lose their convictions, and that, in thine own time and way,
they may be brought out into the glorious light and liberty of
the sons of God.”

Instead of bringing them right up-to the point of MMEDIATE
submission, on the spot, it gives them time to breathe, it lets
off all the pressure of conviction, and he breathes freely again
aud feels relicved, and sits down at his case. Thus, when the
sinner is brought up, as it were, and stands at the gate of
heaven, such a prayer, instead of pushing him in, sets him
away back again,—“ There, poor thing, sit there till God helps
you.”

11. Christians sometimes pray in such a manner as to make
the impression that CHRIST Is THE SINNER’ FRIEND, ip a differ.


|
|


FALSE COMFORIS FOR SINNERS. 343


ent sense from what God the Fatheris. They pray to him,
“Oh, thou friend of sinners,” as if God was full of wrath, and
storn vengeance, Just going to crush the poor wretch, till Jesus
Christ comes im and takes his part, and delivers him. Now
this is all wrong. The Father and the Son are perfectly
agreed, their feelings are all the same, and both are equally
disposed to havo smners saved. And to make such an im-
pression, deceives the sinner, and leads to wrong feelings to-
wards God. To represent God the Father as standing over
him, with the sword of justice in his hand, eager to strike the
blow, till Christ interposes, is not true. The Father is as
much the sinner’s friend as the Son. His compassion is equal,
But if the sinner gets this unfavorable idea of God the Father,
how is he ever to love him with all his heart, so as to say,
“ Abba, Father.” ;

12. The impression is often madc by the manner of praying,

that you do not expect -sinners to repent Now, or that you ez-

God to do reer duty, or that you wish to encourage
them to trust in your prayers; And so, sinners are ruined.
Never pray so as to make the impression on sinners, that you
secretly hope they are Christians already, or that you feel a
Btrong confidence they will be, by and by, or that you half
believe they are converted now. This is ehh unhappy.
Multitudes are deceived with false comfort, in this way, and
prevented, just at the critical point, from making the final sur-
render of themselves to God.

Brethren, I find this field so broad that I cannot possibly
mention all I wished to say. There are many other things
that I intended to touch upon this evening, but the time ig
too far spent. I must close with a few brief


REMARKS.


1. Many persons who deal in this way with anxious sinners,


do it from false pity. They feel so much sympathy and com-
passion that they cannot bear to tell them the truth, which is
necessary to save them. As well might a surgeon, when be
secs that a man’s arm must be amputated, or he will die, in-
dulge this feeling of false pity, and just put on a plaster, and
give him an opiate. There is no benevoience in that. True
benevolence would lead the surgeon to hide his feelings, and
to be cool and calm, and with a keen knife, cut the limb off,
and save the life. It is false tenderness to do anything short
of that I once saw a woman under distress of mind, who
bad been well nigh driven to despair for months. Her friends


342 FALSE COMFORTS FOR SINNERS.


had tried all these false comforts without effect, and they
brought her to see a minister. She was emaciated, and worn
ont with agony. The minister sct his eye upon her, and poured
in the truth upon her mind, and rebuked her im a most point-
ed manner. The woman who was with her interfered, she
thought it cruel, and said, “Oh, do comfort her, she is so dis-
tressed, do not trouble her any more; she cannot bear it.” He
turned, and rebuked ker, dnd sent her away, ‘and then poured
in the truth upon the anxious sinner like fire, and im five
minutes she was converted, and went home full of joy. The
plain truth swept all her false notions away, and in a few mo
ments she was joyful in God.

2. This treatment of anxious sinners, administering their
false comfort, is, in fact cruelly. It is cruel as the grave, as
cruel as hell, for it is calculated to send the sinner down to
its burning abyss. Christians feel compassion for the anxious;
and so they ought. But the last thing they ought to do, is to
flinch just at the point where it comes to s crisis. They should
feel compassion, but they should show it just as the surgeon
does, when he deliberately gaes to work, in the right and best
way, and cuts off the man’s arm, and thus cures him and
saves his life. Just so Christians should let the sinner sec
their compassion and tenderness, but they should fake God’s
part, fully and decidedly. They should lay open to the sinner,
the worst of his case, expose his guilt and danger, and then,
lead him right up to the cross, and insist on instant submis-
sion. They must have firmness enough to do this work thor
oughly, and if they See the sinner distressed and in agony, |
still théy must press him right on, and not give way in the
least, however,much he may be in agony, but still press on
till he yield. í

To do this often requires nerve I have often been placed
in circumstances, to know this by experience. I have found
myself surrounded by anxious sinners, in such distress, as to
make every nerve tremble, some overcome with emotion and
lying on the floor, some applying camphor to prevent their
fainting, others shrieking out as if they were just going to hell.
Now, suppose any one should give false comfort in such a case
as this. Suppose he had not nerve enough to bring them’
right up to the point of instant and absolute submission.
How unfit is.such a man to be trusted in a case like this.

3. Sométimes sinners become deranged through despair
and anguish of mind. Where this is the-cass, it is almost
always because those who deal with them try to encourage
them with false comfort, and thus lead them to such a con:


“FALSE COMFORTS FOR SINNERS. 343


flict with the Holy Ghost. They try to hold them up, while
God is trying to break them down. And by and by, the sin-
ner’s mind gets confused with this contranety of influences,
and he either goes deranged, or ıs driven to despair.

4, [f you are going to deal with sinners, remember that yow
are soon to meet them in judgment, and be sure to treat them
in such a way that if they are lost, it will be their own fault.
Do not try to comfort them with false notions now, and have
them reproach you with it then. Better suppress vour false
sympathy, and let the naked truth cleave them asunder, joints
and marrow, than to sooth them with false comfort, and be-
guile them away from God.

4. Sinner! if you converse with any Christians, and they
tell you to do anything, first ask, “If I do ¢hut, shall I be
saved?” You may be anxious and not be saved. You may
pray, and not be saved. You may read your Bible, and not
be saved. You may use means, in your way, and not be
saved. Whatever tlicy tell you to do, 1f you can do it and not
be saved, do not attend to such instructions. They are cal-
culated to give you false comfort, and divert your attention
from the main thing to be done, and beguile you down to hell.
Do not follow any such directions, lest you should die while
doing it, and then there is no retrieve.

Finally, never tell a sinner anything, or give him any direc-
tion, that will lead him to stop short, or that does not include
absolute submission to God. To let hım stop at any point
short of this, is infinitely dangerous. Suppose you are at an
anxious meeting, or a prayer mecting, and tell a sinner to
pray, or to read a book, or anything short of saving repent-
ance, and he should full arid break his neck that might, of
whom would his blood be requred? A youth in New Eng-
land once met a minster in the street, and asked hun what
he should do to be saved. The mmister told him to go home
and go into his chamber, and kneel down and give his heart
to God. “Oh, sir,” said the boy, “I féel so bad, I am afraid
I shall not live to get home.” The muuster saw his error,
and felt the rebuke, thus unconsciously givén by a child, and
he told him, “ Well, then, give your heart to God here, and
go home to your chamber and tell him of it.”

Oh, it is enough to make one’s heart bleed, to see so many
miserable comforters for anxious sinners, in whose answers
there remaineth falsehood. What a vast amount of spiritual
quackery there is in this world, and how many “forgers of
lies” there are, “ physicians of no value,” who know no better
than to comfort sinners with false Hopes, and delude them


844 FALSE COMFORTS FOR SINNERS.


with their “old wives’ fables,* and nonsense, or who give way
to false tenderness and sympathy, till they have not firmness
enough to see.the sword of the Spirit applied, to cut men to
the soul, and lay open the sinner’s naked heart. Alas! that
so many are ever put into the ministry, who have not skill
enough to stand by and see the Spirit of God do its work, in
breaking up the old foundations, and erushing all the rotton
ahs: of a sinner, and breaking him all down at the feet
of Jesus.


LECTURE XVIIE
F DIRECTIONS 'TO SINNERS `


“Pext—What shall I do to be saved ?—Acts XYL 30.


/ Trst are the words of the jailor ot Philippi, the question
which he put to Paul and Silas, who were then under his care
as prisoners. Satan had, in many ways, opposed these ser-
vants of God in their work of preaching the Gospel, and hid
been as often defeated and disgraced. But here, at Philippi,
he devised a new and peculiar. project for frustrating their
labors. There was a certain woman at Philippi, who was pos-
sessed with a spirit of divination, or in other words, the spirit
of the devil, and brought her masters much gain by her sooth-
saying. The devil set this woman to follow Paul and Silas
about the streets, and as soon as they had begun to gain the
attention of the people, she would come in and cry, “These
men are the servants of the most high God, which show unto us
the way of salvation.” That is, she undertook to second the
exhortations of the preachers, and added her testimony, as if:
to give additional weight to their instructions, The effect of
it was just what Satan desired. The people all knew that
this was a wicked, base woman, and when they heard her at-
tempting to recommend this new preaching, they were dis-
gusted, and concluded it was all of a piece. The devil knew
that it would not do him any good, but would help their
cause, to set such a person to oppose the preaching of the
apostles, or to speak against it. The time had gone by, for
that to succeed. And, therefore, Ae comes round the other
way, and takes the opposite ground, and by setting her to
praise them as the servants of God, and to bear her polluted
testimony in favor of thcir instructions, he led, people to sup-
pose the apostles were of the same character with her, and
had the same spirit that she had, and thus all their cfforts
were defeated. Paul saw that if things went on so, he should
be totally batiled, and never succeed in establishing a chureh
at Philippi. And be turns round.to her, and commands the
foul spirit, in the name of Jesus Christ, to come out of her.

hen her rA saw that the hope of aere hee was gone,

16* (


346 DIKECTIONS TO SINNERS.


they raised a great persecution, and caught Paul and Silas,
and made a great ado, dnd-brought them before the magis
trates, and raised such a clamor that the magistrates shut
them up m prison, and made their feet fast in the stocks.

Thus, they thought they had put down the excitement. But
at midnight Paul and Silas prayed and sang praises, and the
prisoners heard them. This old prison that had so long
echoed to the voice of blasphemy and oaths, now resounded
with the praises of God, and these walls, that had stood so
firm, now trembled under the power of prayer. The stocks
were unloosed, the gates thrown open, and every one’s bands
broken. The jailor was aroused from his sleep, and when he
saw the prison doors opened, as he knew that if the prison-
ers had escaped he must pay for ıt with his life, he drew his
sword, and was about to kill himself. But Paul, who had no
notion of escaping clandestinely, cried out to him instantly,
“Do thyself no harm, for we are all here.” And the Jailor
‘called for a light, and sprang in, and came trembling, and
fell down before his pnsoners, Paul and Silas, and brought
them out, and said, “ Sırs, what must I do to be saved ?”

In my last lecture, I dwelt at some length on the false in-
structions given to sinners under conviction, and the false
comforts too often administered, and the erroneous instruc-
tions which such persons receive. It is my design, to-mght,
to show what are the instructiuns that should be given to anx-
ious sinners in order to their speedy and effectual conver-
sion. Or, in other words, to explain to you, what answer
should be given to those who make the inquiry, “ What must
I do to be saved?” In doing it, I propose,

L To show what is not a proper direction to be given to sin-
ners, when they make the inquiry in the text.

' IL Show what isa proper answer to the inquiry. And,

Il. To specify several errors, which anxious sinners are apt
to fall into.

L Iam to show what are not proper directions to be given
to anxious sinners.

No more important inquiry was ever madethan this, “ What
must I do to be saved?” Mankind are apt enough to inquire
“ What shall 'I eat, and what shall I drink,” and the question
may be answered in various ways, with little danger. But
when a sinner asks in earnest, “ What must I do to be saved?”
it 1s of intinite importance that he should receive the right
answer. Itis my demre, to-mght, to tell you, professors of
religion, what to answer to this inquiry, and to tell you, who
are sinners, what you must do to be saved


DIRECTIONS .TO SINNERS. 847


1. No direction should be given to a sinner, tnat will leave
him, still in Me gall of bitterness and the bonds of iniquity.
No answer is proper to be given, with which, if he com-
plies, he would not go to heaven, if he should die the next
moment.

2. No direction should “be given, that does not include a
change of heart, or a right heart, or hearty obedience to
Christ. In other words, nothing is proper, which does not
imply actually betoming a Christian. Any direction that
falls short of this, is of no use. It will not bring him
any nearer to the kingdom, it will do no good, but will only
lead him to defer the very thing which he must do, in order
to be saved. The sinner should be told plainly, at once, what
he must do, or die ; and he should be told nothing that does
not include a right state of heart. Whatever you may do,
sinner, that does not include a right heart, is sin. Whether
you read the Bible or nof, it is-sin, so long as you remain in
rebellion. Whether you go to meeting, or stay away, whether
you pray or not, it is nothing but rebellion, every moment.
It is surprising, that’a sinner should suppose himself doing
God’s services, when he prays, and réads his Bible. Should
a rebel against this government, read the statute book, while
he continues in rebellion, and has no design to obey ; should
he ask for pardon, while he holds on to his weapons of re
sistance and warfare, would you think him doing his cquntry
a service, and laying them under obligations to show him favor?
No, you would say that all his reading and praying, were only
an insult to the majesty both of the lawgiver and the law. So
you, sinner, while you remain in impenitence, are insulting
God and setting him at defiance, whether you read his word
and pray, or let it alone. No matter what place or what;
attitude your body is in, on your knees, or in the house of
God, so long as your heart is not nght, so long as you resist
the Holy Ghost, and reject Christ, you are a rebel against
your Maker. oe ee

IL I am to show what is a proper answer to this inquiry,
“What must I do to be saved?” Hh pe

And, generally, you may give the sinner any direction, or
tell him to do anything, that includes a right heart, and if
you make him understand it, and do it, he will be saved. The
Spirit of God, in striving with sinners, suits his strivings to
the state of mind in which he finds them. His great object
in striving with them, is, to dislodge them from their hiding-
places, and bring them to submit to God, at once, Now these
objections, and difficulties, and states of mind. are as varios


848 DIRECTIONS TX SINNEBS.


as the circumstances of mankird, as many as there are im
dividuals. The characters of individuals afford an endless
diversity. What is to be done with each one, and how he is
to be converted, depends on his particular errors. It is ne
cessary to ascertain his errors, to find out what he understands,
and what be needs to be taught more perfectly, to see what
points the Spirit of God is pressing upon his conscience,
and to press the same things and thus bring him to Christ.
The most common directions are the following :

1. It is generally in point, and a safe and suitable direction
to tell a sinner to repent. I say, generally. For sometimes
the Spirit of God seems not so much to direct the sinner’s
attention to his own sins as to some other thing. In the days
of the apostles, the minds of the people seém to have been
agitated mainly on the question, whether Jesus was the true
Messiah. And so the apostles directed much of their instruc-
tions to this point, to prove that he was the Christ. And
whenever anxious sinners askéd them what they must do,
they most commonly exhorted them to “Believe in the Lord
Jesus Christ.” They bore down on this point, because here
was where the Spirit of God was striving with them, and.
this was the subject that especially agitated people’s minds,
and, consequently, this would probably be the first thing a
person would do on submitting to God. It was the grand
point at issue between God and the Jew and Gentile of those
days, whether Jesus Christ was the son of God. It was the
point in dispute. To bring a sinner to yield this controverted
question, was the way the most effectually to humble him.

At other times, it will be found, that the Spirit of God is
dealing with sinners. chiefly in reference to their own sins.
Sometimes he deals_with them in regard to a particular duty,
as prayer, perhaps family prayer. The sinner will be found
to be contesting that point with God, whether it is right for
him to pray, or whether he ought to pray in his family. I
have known striking cases of this kind, where the individual
was struggling on this point, and as soon as he fell on his
knees to pray, he yielded his heart, showing that this was the
very point which the Spirit of (God was contesting, and the
Innge on which his controversy with God all turned. That
was conversion.

‘The direction *o repent is always proper, but will not al-
ways be effectual, for there may be some other thing that the
sinner needs to be told also. And where it is the pertineut
direction, sinners need not only to be told to repent, but to
have it explained to them what repentance is. Since there


DIRECTIONS TO SINNERS. 349


has been so much mysticism, and false philosophy and falsd
theology, thrown around the subject, it has hecome necessary,
to tel] sinners not only what you mean by repentance, but,
also to tell them what you do not mean. Words that used to
be plain and easily understood have now become so perverted
that they need to be explained to sinners, or thev will often
convey a wrorg impression to thew minds. This ıs tue case
with the word repentance. Many suppose that remorse, or a
sense of guilt, is repentance. Then hell 1s full of repentance,
for it is full of remorse, unutterable and eternal. Others feel
regret that they have done such a thing, and they call that
rcpenting of it. But they only regret that they have sinned,
because of the consequences, and not because they abhor sin.
This is not repentance. Others supposé that convictions of
sin and strong fears of hell are repentance. Others consider
the rernonstrances of conscience as repentance ; they say, “I
never do anything wrong but that I repent; that I always
feel sorry I did it.” Others regard repentance as a feeling of
sorrow for sin. But repentance is not an involuntary feeling
of any kind or degree. Sinners must be shown that all these
things are not repentance. They are not only consistent with
the utmost wickedness, but the devil might have them all, and
doubtiess has them all, and yet remains a devil. Repentance
is a change of mind, as regards God and toward sin itself. It
is not only a change of views, but a change of the ultimate
preference or choice of the soul. It is & voluntary change,
and by consequence involves a change of feeling and of ueliyu
toward God and toward sin. It is what is naturally understood
by a change of mind on any subject of interest and impor
tance. We hear that sucha man has changed his mind on
the subject of Abolition, for instance, or that he has changed
his views in politics. Everybody understands that he has un-
dergone a change in his views, his feelings, and his conduré.
This is repentance, on that subject, it is a change. of mind,
but not towards God. Evangelical repentance is a change of
willing, of feeling, und of life, in respect to God.

Repentance always implies abborrence of sin. It is willing
and feeling as God does in respect to sin. It of course in-
volves the love of God, and an abborrence of sin. It ab
ways implies forsaking sin. Sinners should be made to un-
derstand this. The sinner that repents does not feel as im-
penitent sinners think they should feel, at giving up their
sins if they should become religious. Impenitent sinners
look upon religion just like this, that if they become pious,
they shall be vbdiyed to stay away from balls and parties, and


850 DIRECTIONS TO SINNERS.


obliged to give up theatres, or gambling, or other things that
they now take delight in. And they see not how they could
ever enjoy themselves, if they should break off from all those
things. But this is very far from being a correct viow of the
matter.. Religion does not make them unhappy, by shutting
them out from things in which they delight, because the first
step in it is to repent, to change their mind in regard to all
these things. They do not seem to, realize that the person
who has repented hes no disposition for these things, he
has given them up, and turned his mind away from them.
Sinners feel as if they should want to go to such places, and
want to mingle in such,scenes, just as much as they do now,
and that it will be such’a continued sacrifice as to make them
unhappy ‘This is a great mistake.

I know there are some professors who would be very glad
to betake themselves to their former practices, were it not
that they feel constrained, by fear of losing their character,
or the like. Now, mark me. If they feel so, it is because
they have no religion, they do not hate sin. If they desire
their former ways, they have no religion, they have never re
pented, for repentance always consists in a change of choice
of views and feelings. If they were really converted, instead
of choosing such things, they would turn away from them
with loathing. Instead of lusting after the flesh-pots of
Egypt, and desiring to go into their former circles, parties,
aria and the like, they find their-highest pleasure in obeying

o

2. Sinners should be told to believe the Gospel. Here, also,
they need tọ have it explained to them, and to be told what
is not faith, and what is. Nothing is more common than for
a sinner, when told to believe the Gospel, to say, “I do be
lieve it.” The fact is, he has been brought up to admit the
fact, that the Gospel is true, but he does not believe it, he
knows nothing about the evidence of it, and all his faith is a
mere admission without evidence. He holds it to be true, in
a kind of loose, indefinite sense, so that he is always ready to
say, “I dobelieve the Bible.” It is strange they do not see
that they are deceived in thinking that they believe, for they
must see that they have never acted upon these truths, as
they do upon those things that they do believe. Yet it is
tis quite difficult to eonvince them that they do not

elieve.

But the fact is, that the caraless sinner does not believe


the Gospel at all The idea that the careless sinner is an


tulelleetual believer is abaurd. The devil is an iptellectna] he,


DIRECTIONS TO SINNERS. 35?


fiever, and that is what makes him tremble. What makes a
sinner anxious is, that he begins to be an imtellectual ` bo-
liever, and that makes him feel. No being in heaven, carth, or
hell, can intellec.ually believe the truths of the Gospel, and
not feel on the subject. The anxious sinner has faith of the
same kind with devils, but he has not so much of it, and,
therefore, he does not feel somuch.. The man that does not
feel nor act at all, on the subject of religion is an infidel, let
his professions be what they may. He that feels nothing,
and does nothing, believes nothing. This is a philosophical
fact.

= Faith does not consist in an intellectual conviction that
Christ died for you in particular, nor in a belief that you are
a Christian, or that you ever shall be, or that your sins are
forgiven, But faith is that trust or confidence in God, and
in Christ, that commits the-:whole soul to him in all his rela
tions tous: It is a volyntary trust in his person, his veracity,
his word. This was the faith of Abraham, He had that
confidence in what God said, which lcd him to act as if it were
true. This is the way the apostle illustrates it in the eleventh
of Hebrews. “ Faith is the substance of things hoped for,
the evidence of things not seen.” And he goes on to illus-
trate it by various examples. “Through faith we understand
that the worlds were made,” that is, we believe this, and act
accordingly. Take the case of Noah. Noah was warned of
God of things not seen as yet, that is, he was assured that
God wus going to drown the world, and he believed it, and
acted accordingly ; he prepared an ark to save his family, and
by so doing, he condemned the world that would not believe ;
his actions gave evidence that he was sincere. Abraham, too,
‘was called of God to leave his country, with the promise that
he should be the gainer by it, and he obeyed and went out,
without knowing where he should go. Read the whole chap-
ter and you will find many instances of the same kind. The
whole design of the chapter is to illustrate the nature of faith,
and to show that it invariably results in action. The sinner
should have it explained to him, and be made to see that the
faith which the Gospel requires is just that confidence in
Christ which leads him to act on what he says as a certain
fact. This is believing in Christ.

} 3. Another direction proper to he given to the sinner is that
he should give-his heart to God. .God says, “ My son, give me
thine heart.” But here also there needs to be explanation,
to make him understand what itis. It is amazing that there
should be any darlmess here. , It is the language of common


352 DIRECTIONS TO SINNERS.


life, in everybody’s mouth, and everybody understands just
what it means, when we use it in regard to anything else.
But when it comes to religion, they seem to be all in the dark.
Ask a sinner, no matter what may be his age, or education,
what it means to give the heart to God, and, strange as it
may appear, he is at a loss for an answer. Ask a woman what
it is to give her heart to her busband, or a man what it 1s to give
his heart to his wife, and they understand it. But then they
are totally blind as to giving their hearts to God. I suppose
I have asked more thar a thousand anxious sinners this ques-
tion. When Ihave told them they must give their hearts to
God, they would always say they were willing to do ìt, and,
sometimes, that they were anxious to do it, and even seem to
be in an agony of desire about it. . Then I have asked them
what they ‘understood to be giving their hearts to God, as
they were so willing to do it. And very seldom have I re
ceived a correct or rational answer from a sinner of any age.
I have sometimes had the strangest answers that can be
imagined—anything buc what they ought to say. Now, to
give your heart to God is the same thing as to give your heart
to anybody else ; the same as for a woman to give her heart
to her husband. Ask that woman if she understands, this?
“Oh, yes, that is plain enough, itis to place my affections on
him, and strive to please him in everything.” Very well, place
your affections on God, and strive to please him in everything.
But alas, when they come-to the subject of rehgion,, Ree
suppose there is some wonderful mystery about it. Some
talk as if they supposed it was to take this bundle of muscles,
or fleshy organ, in their bosom, and give it to God. Sinner,’
what God asks of you is, that you should love him supremely.

3. Submi to God, is also a proper direction to anxious sin~
ners. And, oh, how dark sinners are here tog. Searcely a
ginner can be found, who will not tell you he is willing te sub-
mit to God. But they do not understand it. They need to
be told what true submission is. Sometimes they think it
means that`they should be willing to be damned. Some
‘times they place themselves in this attitude, and call it sub-
mission ; they say, if they are elected, they shall be saved,
and if not, they shall be damned. This is not submission.
True submission, is yielding obedience to God. Suppose a —
rebel, in arms against the goverument, was called on to sub-
mit. What would he understand by it? Why, that he
should yield the point, and lay down his arms, and obey the,
jaws. That is just what it mcans, for a sinner to subinit to
God. He must cease his strife and conflict against his Maker,


_ DIRECTIONS TO SINNERR. (353


‘and take the attitude of a willing and obedient child, willing
to be and do whatever God requires. “Here, Lord, am I;
Lord, what wilt thou have me to do?”

Suppose a company of soldiers had rebelled, and Govern:
ment had raised an army to put them down, and had driven
them into a strong hold, where they were out of provisions,
and had no way-to escape, and they should not know what
to do. Suppose the rebels to have met in this extremity, to
consider what is to be done? and one rises up, and says,
“Well, comrades, I am convinced we are all wrong from the
beginning, and now the reward of our deeds is like to over-
take us, and we cannot escape, and as for remaining here to
die, I am resolved not to do it, I am ; ring to throw myself
on the mercy of the commander-in-chief.’ That man submits.
He ceases, from that moment, to be a rebel in his heart, just
as soon as he comesto this conclusion. So it is with the sin-
ner when he yields the point, and consents in his heart to do,
and be, whatever God shall require. The sinner may be in
doubt what to do, and may feel afraid to put himself in God’s
hands, thinking that if he does, perhaps God will send him
down to hell, as he deserves. But it is his business to leave
all that question with Cod, and not resist his Maker any
longer, but give all up to God, make no conditions, and trust
it wholly to God’s benevolence and wisdom to decide what
shall be done, and to appoint his future condition. Until you
do this, sinner, you have done nothing to the purpose.

& Another proper direction to be given to sinners, is to
confess-and forsuke your sins, This means that they should
both confess and forsake them. ‘They must confess te God
- their sins against God, and confess to men their sins against
men, and forsake them all. A man does not forsake his sins
till he has made all the reparation in his power. If he has
stolen money, or defrauded his neighbor out of property, he
does not forsake his sins by merely resolving not to steal any
more, or not to cheat again ; he must make reparation to the
extent of his power. So, if he has slandered any one, he
does not forsake his sin by merely saying he will not do so

ain. He must make reparation. So, in like manner, if he
has robbed Gad, as all sinners have, he must make reparation,
as far as he has the power. Suppose a man has.made money
in rebellion against God, and has withheld from him his
time, talents and service, has lived and rioted upon the boun-
ties of his providence, and refused to lay himself out for the
salvation of the world; he has robbed God. Now, if he
should die feeling that this money was his own, and should he


1354 DIRECTIONS TO SINNERS.


leave it to his heirs without consulting the will of God—why,


he is just as certain to go to hell as the highway robber. He
has never made any satisfaction to God. With all his whin-
ing and pious talk, he has never confessed HIS SiN to God,
nor forsaken his sin, for he has never felt nor acknowledged
himself to be the steward of God. If he refuses to hold the
property in his possession, as the steward of God: if he ac-
counts it his own, and as such gives it to his children, he
says, in effect, to God, “That property is not yours, it is
mine, and I will give it to my children.” He has continued
to persevere in his sin, for he does not relinquish the ownership
of that of which he has robbed God-

What would a merchant, think, if his hired clerk should
take all the- capital and set up a store of his own, and die


with it-in his hands? Will such a man go to heaven? “No,”


you say, every one of you, “If such a man does not go to
hell, there might just as well be no hell.” God would prove
himself infinitely unjust, to let such a character go unpunished.
What, then, shall we say of the man who has robbed God all
his life? Here God set him to be his clerk, to manage some
of his affairs, and he has gone and stolen all the money, and
says it is his, and he keeps it, and dies, and gives it to his
children, as if it was all his own lawful property. Is that
man going to heaven? Has that man forsaken sin? I tell
you, no. If he has not surrendered himself and all to God,
he has not taken the first step in the way to heaven.
6. Another proper direction to. be given to sinners fs,
“ Choose ye this day, whom ye will serve” Under the Old
Testament. dispensation, this or something equivalent to it,
was the most cammon: direction given. It was not common
to call on men to believe in Christ until the days of John the
Baptist. He baptized those who caine to him, with the bap-
tism of repentance, and directed them to believe on him who
should come after him. Under Joshua, the text was some
thing which the people.all understood more easily than they
would a call to believe on the distant Messiah ; it was “ Choose
ye, this day, whom ye will serve.” On another occasion,
oses said to them, “I call heaven and earth to record this
day against you, that I have set before you life and death,
vlessing and cursing: therefore choose life, that both thou
and thy seed may live.” . The dircction was accommodated to
the people’s knowledge. And it is good now, as it was then.
Sinners are called upon to chooseo—what? Whether they
will serve God or the world—whether they will follow hol
ness or sin. Let thera be made to understand what is meand


DIRECTIONS TO SINNERS 355


by choosirg, and what it is to be chosen, and then if the
thing is done from the heart, they will be saved.

Any of these directions, if complied with, will constitute

_ true conversion. The particular exercises may vary in differ.
ent cases. Sometimes the first exercise in conversion, is sub
mission to God, sometimes xepentance, sometimes faith, some
times.the choice of God and his service, in short, whatever
their thoughts are taken up with at the time. If their
thoughts are directed to Christ at the moment, the first exer.
cise will be faith. If to sin, the first exercise will be repent-
ance. If to their future course of life, it is choosing the ser
vice of God. If to the Divine goyernment, it is submission.
It is important to find ovt just where the Holy Spirit is press-
ing the sinner at the time, and then take care to push that
point. If it is in regard to Christ, press that; if it is in re
gard to his future course of life, push him right up to an im
mediate choice of obedience to God.

It is a great error to suppose that any one particular exer-
cise is always foremost im conversion, or, that every sinner
must have faith first, or submission first It is not true,
either in philosophy or im fact. There is a great variety in
people’s exercises. Whatever point is taken hold of, between
God and the sinner, when the sinner YIELDS that, he is
converted. Whatever the particular exerciso may be, if it in-

cludes obédiende of heart to- God on any point, it is true con-
version. When he yields one point fo God’s authority, he is
ready to yield all. When he changes his mind, and obeys in
one thing, because il is Gyd’s will, he will obey in other things,
so far-as le sees it to be God’s will Where there is this right
choice, then, whenever the mind is directed to any one point
of duty, he is-ready to follow. {t matters very little which
of these directions is given, if it is only made plain, and if it
is to the point, so ag to serve as a test of obedience ta Gud. If
it is to the point that the Spirit of God is debating with the
sinner’s mind, so as to fall in with the Spirit’s work, and not
to divert the sinner’s attention from the very point in contro-
versy, let it be made perfectly clear, and then pressed till the
sinner yields, and he will be saved.

III. I am to mention several errors which anxious sinners
arc apt to fall into, respecting this great inquiry.

1. The first error is, in supposing that they must make
themselves better, or prepare themselves, so as in some way
tu recommend themselves to the merey of God. Itis mu
velous, that sinners will not understand, that all they have to
do is to uccept salvation from God, all prepared to then


358 DIRECTIONS TO SINNERS.


el te
hands. But they all, learned or unlearned, at first, betake
themselves to a legal course to get relief, This is one princi
pal reason why they will not become Christians at once, just
as soon as they begin to attend to the subject. They imagine
that they must be, in some way or other, prepared to come,
They must change thcir dress, and make themselves look a
little better ; they are not willing to come just as they are, in
their rags and poverty. They must have something more
on, before they can approach to God They should be
shown, at once, that it is impossible they should be any bet-
ter, until they do what God requires. Every pulse that
beats, every breath they draw, they are growing worse, be
cause they are standing out in rebellion against so long
as they do nol do the very thing which God requires of them
as the first thing to be done.

2. Another error is, in supposing that they must suffer a
considerable time under conviction, 83 & kind of punishment, be-
fore they are ready properly to come to Christ. And so they
will pray for conviction. And they think, that if they are
ground down to the earth, with distress, for sufficient time,
then God will pity them, and be more ready to help them,
when he sees them so very miserable. They should be made
to understand clearly, that they are thus unhappy and miser-
able, merely because they refuse to accept the relief which God _
offers. Take the case of the stubborn child, when his parent
stands over him with the rod, and the child shudders and
screams. Should that child imagine he is gaining anything
by his agony? His distress arises from his conviction, and
shall he pray for more conviction? Does that make him any
better? Does his father pity him any more, because he
stands out? Who does not sce that he is all the while grow-
ing.worse ?

3. Sometimes sinners imagine that they must wait for different
feelings, before they submit to God. They say, “I do not
think I feel right yet, to accept of Christ ; I do not think I
am prepared to be converted yet.” They ought to be made
to see that what God requires of them is to will right. If
they obey and submit with the will, the feelings will adjust
themselves in due time. It is not a question of feeling, but
of willing and acting.

The feelings are involuntary, and bave no moral character
except what they derive from their action of the will, with —
which action they sympathize. Before the will is right, the
feelings will not be, of course. The sinner should come to
Christ by accepting him at once; and this he must do, not


“DIRECTIONS TO SINNEBS. $57


‘in obedience to his feelings, but in obedience to his conscience.
Obey, submit, trust. Give up all instantly, and your feelings
will come right. Do not wait for better feelings, but commit
your whole being to God at once, and this will soon result
in the feelings for which you are waiting. What God requires
of yon, is.the present act of your own mind, in turning from
sin to holiness, and from the service of Satan to the servico
of the living God.
» 4. Another error of sinners, is to suppose they must wait
tall their hearts are changed. “What?” say they, “am I to be-
lieve in Christ before my heart is changed? Do you mean
that Iam to repent before my heart is changed? ‘Now, the
simple answer to all this is, that the change of heart is the
very thing in question. God requires sinners: to’ love him.
That is to. change their heart. God requires the sinner to
believe the Gospel. That is to cliange his heart. God re-
aig hin to repent. That is to change bis heart. God
oeg not tell him to wait till his heart is changed, and then
repent and believe, and love God. The very word itself, re
pent, signifies 8 change of mind or heart. To do either of
these things, is te change your heart, and to make you a new
heart, just as God requires.

5. Sinners often get the idea that they are perfectly willing
to do what God requires. Tell them to do this thing, or
that, to repent, or believe, or give God their hearts, and they
say, “Oh, yes, I am perfectly willing to do that, I wish I
could do it, I would give anything if I could doit.” They
ought to understind, that, being truly willing is doing it, but
there is a difference between willing and desiring. People
often desire to be Clnistians, when they are wholly unudling
to be go. When we seo anything which appears to us to.
be a good, we are so constituted that we desire it We
necessarily desire it when it ig before our minds. Wé can-
not help desiring it in proportion‘as its goodness is presented
to our minds) But yet we may not be willing to have it,
under all the circumstances. It may be that we prefer, upon
‘the whole, that the present possessor should continue to pos-
„Bess it still. Or that we choose to have our friend or child

ssess it, instead of ourselves) A man may desire to go to

hiladelphia on many accounts, while, for still more weighty
reasons, he Swoses not to go there. So the sinner may de
sire to be a Christian. He may sep many good things in
being a Christian. He may see that if he-were a Christian
he would be a great deal more happy, and that he should
go to heaven when he dies, but yet he is not willing to be a


358 DIRECTIONS TO SINNERS.


Christian. WILLING to obey Christ is to be a Christian.
When an individual actually chooses to obey God, he is a
Christian. But all such desires, as do not imply actual
choice, are nothing.

6. The sinner will sometimes say, that he offers to give
God lus heart, but he intimates that God is unwilhng. But
this is absurd. What does Godask? Why, that you should
love hih. Now, for you to say you are willing to give God
your heart, but God is unwilling, ıs the same as _saymg that
you are willing to love God, but God is not willing to be
loved by you, and will not suffer you to love nim. It 18 un-
portant to clear up all these pots ın the sinner’s mmd, that
he may have no dark and mysterious corner to rest in, where
the truth will not reach him.

7. Sinncrs sometimes get the idea that they repent, when
they are only convicted. Whenever the, sinner 1s found
resting in any LIE, let the truth sweep it away, however
much it may pam and distress him. If he has any error of
this kmd, you must tear it away from him, if you do not
mean that he shall stumble into the depths of hell.

8. Sinners are often wholly taken up with looking at them-
selves, to gee if they cannot find something there, some kind
of feeling or other, that will recommend them to God. Evi-
dently, for want of proper mstruction, Dad Brainard was
a long time taken up with his sate of mind, looking for some
feelings that would recommend him to God. Sometimes he,
‘Imagined that he had such feelings. and would tell God in
prayer, that now he felt as he ought, to receive his mercy ;
and then he would see that he had been all wrong, and be
ashamed that he had told God that he felt right. 'Fhus, the
poor man, for went of correct instruction, was driven almost
to despair, and it is easy to see that his Christian exercises
through lifo were greatly modified, and his comfort and use-
fulness much impaired by the false-philosophy he had-adopted
on this point. You must.turn the sinner away from himself
to something else. Supppse he keeps poring over himself,
until he is going into a-state of despair, The proper course
then is, to turn off his attention from looking at himself,
and make hin look at some duty to be pelnai or make
him look at Christ, and, perhaps, before he is aware, he will
find that he has submitted to God. His attention was di-
verted away from himself, to contemplate the reasonableness
of God’s requirements, or the sufficiency of Chnst’s atone-
ment, or something of this kind, and as he dwelt upon it, he
just gave up his heart, and the agony was over.


DIRECTIONS TO SiNNERS. 359


REMARKS.


1. The labor of ministers is greatly increased, and the
difficulties in the way of salvation are greatly multiplied, by
tye false instructions that have been given. to sinners. The
consequence has been, that directions which used to be plain
are now obscure. People have been taught so long, that
there is something awfujly mysterious and unintelligible
about conversion, that they- do not try to understand it.
Smners have been taught these false notions, till now they
ure everywhere entrenched behind these sentiments, such as
“eannot repent,” “must wait for God,” and the like. It
was once Sufficient, as we learn from the Bible, to tell sinners
to repent, or to tell them to believe on the Lord Jesus Christ.
But now faith has been talked about as-a principle, instead
of an act, and repentance.as something put into the mind,
instead of an exercise of the mind, and sinners are per-
plexed. Ministers are charged with preaching heresy, be
cause they presume to’ teach that faith is an exercise, and not
a principle, and that sin is an act, and not a part of the con-
stitution of man. And sinners have become so sophisticated,
that you. have to. be at great pains in explaining not only
what you do-not mean, but what you do mean, otherwise
they will be dlinost.sure to misunderstand you, and either
gain a false relef from their anxiety, by throwing their duty
off upon God, or else run into despair from the supposed im-
practicability of doing what is requisite for-their salvation.
It 16 often the greatest difficulty to lead them out of these
‘theological labyrinths and mazes, into which they have been
‘deluded, and to lead them along the straight and simple way
of the Gospel. It seems as if the greatest ingenuity. had been
employed to mystify the minds of people and weave a most
subtle web of false philosophy, calculated to involve & sinner
in endless darkness.

Who,that has-been an revivals, has not encountered that
endless train of fooleries, which have been inculcated, till it
has become necessary to be as plain as A B C, and. the best
educated have to be talked to just like children. So mucl
has been done to mystify and befool people’s minds in the
plamest matters. Tell a sinner to believe, and he turns round
to you, and stares, “ Why, how you talk ; is not faith a prin-
ciple implanted in the soul, and how am I to believe until I
get this principle?” So, if a minister tells a sinner the very
words that the apostles used, in the great revival at the day
of pentécost, “ Repent and be converted, every one of you,


'960 DIRECTIONS TO-SINNERS.,


they -reply as they have been -taught “Ob, I guess you
Ee ca lth ; Ido not want any of your Arminian teach-
ing for me ; do not you deny the Spirit’s influences?” It is
enough to make humanity weep to see the fog and darkness
that have been thrown around the plain directions of the
Gospel, till many generations have been emptied into hell.

2. These false instructions to sinners are infinitely worse
than none. : The Lord Jesus Christ found it more difficult to
get the people to yield up their false notions of theology than
anything else. . This has been the great difficulty with the
Jews to this day, that they have received. false notions in
theology, have perverted the truth on certain points, and you
cannot .make them understand the plainest` points in the
Gospel. So it is with sinners, the most difficult thing to be
done is to get away these- refuges of lies, which they have
gotten from false theology. They are ‘so fond of holding on
to these refuges, because they are called: orthodox, and be
cause they excuse the sinner, and condemn God, that it-is
found to be the most perplexing, and difficult, and discourag-
ing part of -a minister’s labor to drive them away.

3. No wonder the Gospel has taken ‘so little effect, encum-
bered as it has been with these strange dogmas. . The truth
is, that very little of the Gospel has come out upon the world,
for these hundreds of years, without being clogged and ob-
scured by false theology... People have ‘been told that they
must repent, and, in the same breath, told that they could
not repent until the truth itself has been all mixed up with
error, so as to. produce the same practical effect with error,
and the Gospel that is preached has been another gospel, or
no gospel at all. :

_, & You can understand what. is meant by healing slightly
the hurt of the daughter of God’s people, and the danger of
doing it.: It is very easy when sinners are under conviction,
to say something that shall smooth over the case, and relieve
their anxiety, so that they will either get a false hope, or will
be converted with their views so obscure, that they will al-
ways be poor, feeble, wavering, doubting, inefficient Christians.
_ 5. Much depends on the manner in which a-person is dealt
with, when under conviction. Much of his future comfort
and usefulness depends on the clearness, and strength, and
firmness, with which the directions of the Gospel are given,
when he is under conviction. If those who deal with him are
afraid to use the probe thoroughly, he will always be a poor,
sickly, doubting’ Christian. . If converted at all, he will never
do much good. -Tho true “mode, is to deal, thoroughly and


DIRECTIONS TO SINNERS. 361


plainly with a sinner, to tear away every excuse he can get
up, and show him plainly what he is, and what he ought to
be, and he will bless God to all eternity, that he fell in with
those who would be so faithful to his soul. For the want of
this thorough and searching management, many are convert-
ed who seem to be stillborn. And the reason is, they never
were faithfully dealt with. We may charitably hope they are
Christians, but still it is uncertain and doubtful. Their con-
versio. seems rather a change of opinion, than a change of
heart. But if, when a sinner is under conviction, you pour in
the truth, put in the probe, break up the old foundations, and
sweep away his refuges of lies, and use the word of God, like
fire and like a hammer, you will find that they will come out
with clear views, and strong faith, and firm principles, not
doubting, halting, irresolute Christians, but such as follow the
Lord wholly. ‘That is thé way to make strong Christians.
This has been eminently the case in many revivals of modern
days. I have heard old Christians say of the converts, “ These
converts were born men and women, full grown, they never
were children, but have, at the very outset, all the clearness
of view, and strength of faith, of old Christians. They seem
to understand the doctrines of religion, and to know what to
do, and how to take hold, to promote revivals, better than
one in a hundred of the old members in the church.”

I once knew a young man who was converted, away from
home. The place where he lived had no minister, and no
preaching, and no religion. He went home in three days after
he was converted, and immediately set himself to work, to la-
bor for a revival. He set up meetings in his neighborhood,
and prayed and labored, and a revival broke out, of which he
had the principal management through a powerful work, which
converted most of the principal men of the place. ‘The truth
was, he had been so dealt with, that he knew what he was
about. He understood the subject, and knew where he stood
himself. He was not all the while troubled with doubts,
whether he was himself a Christian. He knew that he was
serving God, and that God was with him, and so he went
boldly and resolutely forward to his object. But if you un-
dertake to make converts, without cutting up all their errors,
and tearing away their false hopes, you may make a host of
hypocrites, or of puny, dwarfish Christians, always doubting,
and easily turned back from a revival spirit, and worth no-
thing. The way is, to bring them right out to the light.
When a man is converted in this way, you can depend on him,
ind know where to find him.

16


862 DIRECTIONS TO SINNERS.


7. Protracted seasons of conviction are generally owing te
defective instruction. Wherever clear and faithful instrue
tions are given to sinners, there you will generally find that
convictions are deep and pungent, but short.

8. Where clear and discriminating instructions are given to
convicted sinners, if they do not soon submit, their convic-
tions will generally leave them. Convictions in such cases
are generally short. Where sinners are deceived by false
views, they may be kept along for weeks, and perhaps months,
and sometimes for years, in a languishing state, and at last,
perhaps, be crowded into the kingdom and saved. But where
the truth is made perfectly clear to the sinner’s mind, and all
his errors are torn away, if he does not soon submit, his case is
hopeless. Where the truth is brought to bear upon his mind,
and he directly resists the very truth that must convert him,
there is nothing more to be done. The Spirit will soon leave
him, for the very weapons he uses are resisted. Where in-
structions are not clear, and are mixed up with errors, the
Spirit may strive even for years, in great mercy, to get sin-
ners through the fog of false instruction. But not so, where
their duty is clearly explained to them, and they are brought
right up to the single point of immediate submission, and
have all their false pretences exposed, and the path of duty
made perfectly plain. Then, if they do not submit, the
Spirit of God forsakes them, and their state is well nigh
hopeless.

If there be sinners in this house, and you see your duty
clearly, TAKE CARE how you delay. If you do not sub-
mit, you may expect the Spirit of God will forsake you, and
you are LOST.

8. A vast deal of the direction given to anxious sinners
amounts to little less than the popish doctrine of indulgences.
The pope used to sell indulgences to sin, and this led to the
reformation under Luther. Sometimes people would purchase
an indulgence to sin for a certain time, or to commit some
particular sin, or a number of sins. Now, there is a vast deal
in protestant churches, which is little less than the same thing.
What does it differ from this, to tell a sinner to wait? The
amount of it is, telling him to continue in sin a while longer,
while he is waiting for God to convert him. And what is that
but an indulgence to commit sin? Any direction given to
sinners that does not require them immediately to obey God,
is an indulgence to sin. It is in effect, giving them liberty to
continue in sin against God. Such directions are not only
wicked, but ruinous and cruel. If they do not destroy the


DIRECTIONS TO SINNERS. 863


soul, as no doubt they often do, they defer, at all events, the
sinner’s enjoyment of God and of Christ, and he stands a
great chance of being lost for ever, while listening to such in-
structions. Oh, how dangerous it is, to give a sinner reason
z sia he may wait a moment, before giving his heart to

o

9. So far as I have had opportunity to observe, those con-
versions which are most sudden have commonly turned out
to be the best Christians. I know the reverse of this has
often been held and maintained. But I am satisfied there is
no reason for it, although multitudes, even now, regard it as
a suspicious circumstance, if a man has been converted very
suddenly. But the Bible gives no warrant for this supposi-
tion. There is not a case of protracted conviction recorded
in the whole Bible. AH the conversions recorded there, are
sudden conversions. And I am persuaded there never would
have been such multitudes of tedious convictions, and often
ending in nothing after all, if it had not been for those theo-
logical perversions which have filled the world with cannot-sm.
In Bible days, they told sinners to repent, and they did it
then. Cannot-ism had not been broached in that day. It is
this speculation, about the inability of sinners to obey God,
that lays the foundation for all the protracted anguish and
distress, and perhaps ruin, through which so many are led.
Where a sinner is brought to see what he has to do, and he
takes his stand at once, AND DOES IT, he generally does so
afterwards, and you generally find that such a person will
hold out so, and prove a decided character. You will not find
him one of those that you always have to warp up to duty,
like a ship, against wind and tide. Look at those professors
who always have to be dragged forward in duty, and you will
generally find that they had not clear and consistent direc-
tions when they were converted, and most likely they will be
very much “afraid of these sudden conversions.”

Afraid of sudden conversions! Some of the best Christians
of my acquaintance were convicted and converted in the space
of a few minutes. In one quarter of the time that I have
been speaking, many of them were awakened, and came right
out on the Lord’s side, and have been shining lights in the
church ever since, and have generally manifested the same
decision of character in religion, that they did when they first
eame out and took a stand on the Lord’s side.


LECTURE XIX.


INSTRUCTIONS TC CONVERTS.


TExT.—Feed my lambs.—Joun xxi. 15.


You, who read your Bibles, recollect the connection in which
these words are found, and by whom they were spoken. They
were addressed by the Lord Jesus Christ to Peter, after he
had denied his Lord, and had professed repentance. Proba-
bly one of the designs which Christ had in view, in suffering
Peter to sin so awfully as to deny his master, was to produce
a deeper work of grace in him, and thus fit him for the pecu-
liar duty to which he intended to call him, in laying the foun-
dations of the Christian Church, and watching over the
spiritual interests of the converts. It needed a peculiar work
of grace in his soul, to fit him to lead others through those
scenes of trial and temptation to which the early Christians,
in particular, were exposed.

It is evident, that, though Peter had special natural qualifi-
cations for such a work, yet he was quite a superficial saint.
He was probably converted before this, but he was weak, and
there was left so much of his natural roughness and turbu-
lence of temper, that he was still ready to bristle up on any
occasion, and take offence at everything that crossed him, so
that he was still quite unfit for that particular work to which
he was destined. Christ designed him for such a peculiar
service, that it seems something was indispensable to fit him
for it, and make him such a saint, that future opposition
would not irritate him, nor difficulties dishearten him, nor
success and honor spoil him, by lifting up his heart with pride.
And, therefore, Christ takes the effectual method recorded
before us, of dealing with him once for all, to secure a thor-
ough work in his soul.

He asked him this question, to remind him, in an affecting
manner, at once of his sin and of the love of Christ, “Simon,
gon of Jona, lovest thou me more than these?” Strongly
implying a doubt whether he did love him. Peter answers,
“Yea, Lord, thou knowest that I love thee.” He said unto him,
“Feed my lambs.” He then repeated the question, as if he
would read his inmost soul, “Simon, son of J ona, lovest thou

(864)


INSTRUCTIONS TO YOUNG CONVERTS. 365


me?” Peter was still firm, and promptly answers again,
“ Yea, Lord, thou knowest that I love thee.” Jesus still asked
him the question again, the third time, emphatically. He
seemed to urge the point, as if he would search his inmost
thoughts, to see whether Peter would ever deny him again.
Peter was touched, he was grieved, it is said; he did not fly
into a passion—he did not boast, as he did on a former oc
casion, “ Though I should die with thee, yet would I not deny
thee,” but he was grieved, he was subdued, he spoke tenderly,
he appealed to the Saviour himself, as if he would implore
him not to doubt his sincerity any longer, “ Lord, thou know-
est all things, thou knowest that I love thee.” Christ then
gave him his final charge, “ Feed my sheep.”

By the terms sheep and lambs here, the Saviour undoubted-
ly designated Christians—members of his church ; the lambs
probably represent young converts, those that have but little
experience and but little knowledge of religion, and therefore,
need to have special attention and pains taken with them, to
guard from harm, and to train them for future usefulness.
And when our Saviour told Peter to feed his sheep, he doubt-
less referred to the important part which Peter was to perform
in watching over the newly formed churches in different parts
of the world, and in training the young converts, and leading
them along to usefulness and happiness.

My last lecture was on the subject of giving right instruc
tion to anxious sinners. And this naturally brings me along,
in this Course of Lectures, to consider the manner in which
young converts should be treated and the instructions that
should be given to them.


INSTRUCTIONS TO YOUNG CONVERTS.


In speaking on this subject, it is my design, ; i

L To state several things that ought to be considered, in
regard to the hopes of young converts. :

IL Several things respecting their making a profession of
religion, and joining the church. ;

IL The importance of having correct instruction given to
young converts.

IV. What should not be taught to young converts.

V. What particular things are specially necessary to be
taught to young converts.

VI. How young converts should be treated by church mem


366 INSTRUCTIONS TO YOUNG CONVERTS,


L Iam to state several matters in regard to the hopes of
young converts. 3

1. Nothing should be said to them to create a hope. No
thing should ordinarily be intimated to persons under com
viction, calculated to make them think they have experienced
religion, till they find it out themselves. I do not like this
term, “ experienced religion,” and I use it only because it is a
phrase in common use. It is an absurdity in itself. What
is religion? Obedience to God. Suppose you should hear a
good citizen say he had experienced obedience to the govern-
ment of the country. You see it is nonsense. Or suppose a
child should talk about experiencing obedience to his father.
If he knew what he was saying, he would say he had obeyed
his father, just as the apostle Paul says to the Roman believers,
“Ye have obeyed from the keart that form of doctrine which
was delivered you.”

What I mean to say is, that ordinarily, it is best to let their
hope or belief that they are converted spring up spontaneous-
ly in their own minds. Sometimes it will happen that per-
sons may be really converted, but owing to some notions
which they have been taught about religion, they do not re
alize it. Their views of what religion is, and its effect upon
the mind, are so entirely wide of the truth, that they do not
think that they have it. I will give you an illustration of this
point.

Some years since, I labored in a place where a revival was
in progress, and there was in the place a young lady from Bos-
ton. She had been brought up a Unitarian, she had consider-
able education, and was intelligent on many subjects, but on
the subject of religion she was very ignorant. At length she
was convicted of sin. She became awfully convinced of her
horrible enmity against God. She had been so educated as to
have a sense of propriety, but her enmity against God became
so great, and broke out so frightfully, that it was horrible to
hear her talk. She used to come to the anxious meetings,
where we conversed with each one separately. And her feel-
ings of opposition to God were such that she used to create
disturbance. By the time I came within two or three seats
from her, where she could hear what I said in a low voice to
others, she would begin to make remarks in reply, so that
they could be heard. And she would say the most bit-
ter things against God, and against his providence, and his
method of dealing with mankind, as if God was an infinite
tyrant. She would speak of him as the most unjust and
cruel being in the universe. I would try to hush her, and


INSTRUCTIONS TO YOUNG CONVERTS. 867


make her keep still, because she distracted the attention of
others. Sometimes she would stop and command her temper
awhile, and sometimes she would rise and go out. I have sel-
dom seen a case, where the enmity of the heart rose so high
a» inst God. One night at the anxious meeting, after she
ha been very restless, as I came towards her, she began as
ust. | to reply, but I hushed her, and told her I could not
con\ “se with her there, but invited her to my room the next
morn : g, and then I would talk with her. She promised to
come, but, says she, “God is unjust, he is infinitely unjust.
Is he not almighty? Why then has he never shown me my
enmity before? Why has he let me run on so long? Why
does he let my friends at Boston remain in this ignorance?
They are the enemies of God, as much as I am, and are go-
ing to hell. Why does he not show them the truth in regard
to their condition?” And in this temper she left the room.

The next morning she came to my room, as she had prom-
ised. I saw as soon as she came in that her countenance was
changed, but I said nothing about it. “Ch, said she, * a
have changed my mind, as to what I said last night about
God, I do not think he has done me any wrong, and I think
T shall get religion sometime, for now I love to think about
God. I have been all wrong ; the reason why I had never
known my enmity before, was, that I would not. I used to
read the Bible, but I always passed over the passages that
would make me feel as if I was a lost sinner, and those pas-
sages that spoke of Jesus Christ as God, I passed over with-
out consideration, and now I see that it was my fault, not
God’s fault, that I did not know any more about myself ; I
have changed my mind now.” She had no idea that this was
religion, but she was encouraged now to expect religion at
some future time, because she loved God so much. I said
nothing to make her imagine that I thought her a Christian,
but left her to find it out. And, for a time, her mind was so
entirely occupied with thinking about God, that she never
seemed to ask whether this is religion or not.

It is a great evil, ordinarily, to encourage persons to hope
they are Christians. Very likely you may judge prematurely.
Or if not, it is better they should find it out for themselves,
suppose they do not see it at once. They may break down
lower than ever, and then they will come out so clear and de-
cided, that they will know where they are.

2. When you see persons expressing a hope, and yet they
express doubts too, it is generally because the work is not
thorough If they are converted, they need breaking up


368 INSTRUCTIONS TO YOUNG CONVERTS.
They are still li around the world, or they have not
broken off effectually from their sins, and they need to be
pushed back, rather than urged forward. If you see reason
to doubt, or if you find that they have doubts, most proba-
bly there is some good reason to doubt. Sometimes persons
xpress a hope in Christ, and afterwards remember some sin,
that needs to be confessed to men, or some case where they
have slandered, or defrauded, where it is necessary to make
satisfaction, and where either their character, or their purse,
is so deeply implicated that they hesitate, and refuse to per
form their duty. This grieves the Spirit, brings darkness
over their minds of course, and justly leads them to doubt
whether they are truly converted. If a soul is truly convert-
ed, it will generally be found when there are doubts, that on
some point they are neglecting duty. They should be searched
as with a lighted candle, and brought up to the performance of
duty, and not suffered to hope until they do it. Ordinarily it
is proper just there to throw in some plain and searching
truth, that will go through them, something that will wither
their hopes like a moth. Do it while the Spirit of God is
dealing with them, and do it in the right way, and there is no
danger of its doing harm.

To illustrate this: I knew a person, who was a member of
the church, but an abominable hypocrite, proved to be so by
her conduct, and afterwards fully confessed to be so. In a
revival of religion she was awakened and deeply convicted,
and after a while she got a hope. She came to a minister to
talk with him about her hope, and he poured in the truth to
her mind in such a manner as to annihilate all her hopes.
She then remained under conviction many days, and at last
she broke out in hope again. The minister knew her temper-
ament, and knew what she needed, and he tore away her hope
again. And then she broke down, clear to the ground, so
that she could not stand or go. So deeply did the Spirit of
God PROB® her heart, that, for a time, it took away all her
bodily strength. And then she came out subdued. Before,
she had been one of the proudest rebels against God’s gov-
ernment that ever was, but now she became humbled, and
was one of the most modest, tender, lovely of Christians. No
doubt that was just the way to deal with her. It was just
the treatment that her case required.

It is often useful to deal with individuals in this way. Some
persons are naturally unamiable in their temper, and unlovely
in their deportment. And it is particularly important that
such persons should be dealt with most thoroughly whenever


INSTRUCTIONS TO YOUNG CONVERTS. 869


they first begin to express hope in Christ. Unless the work
with them, is, in the first place, uncommonly deep and thor-
ough, they will be vastly less useful, and interesting, and
happy, than they would have been, had the probe been thor-
oughly and skilfully applied to their hearts. If they are
encouraged at first, without being thoroughly dealt with, if
they are left to go right along, and not sufficiently probed
and broken down, these unlovely traits of character will remain
ansubdued, and will be always breaking out to the great in-
jary, both of their personal peace, and their general influence
and usefulness as Christians.

It is important to take advantage of such characters while
they are just in these peculiar circumstances, so that they can
be moulded into proper form. Do not spare, though it should
be a child, or a brother, or a husband, or a wife. Let it be
a thorough work. If they express a hope, and you find they
bear the image of Christ, they are Christians. But if that
appears doubtful—if they do not appear to be fully changed,
just tear away their hope, by searching them with the most
discriminating truth, and leave the Spirit to do the work more
deeply. If still the image is not perfect, do it again—break
them down into a child-like spirit, and then let them hope.
They will then be clear and thorough Christians. By such a
mode of treatment, I have often known people of the crook-
edest and hatefulest natural character, so transformed in a
few days, that they appear like different beings. You would
think the work of a whole life of Christian cultivation had
been done at once. Doubtless this was the intent of our
Saviour’s dealing with Peter. He had been converted, but
became puffed up with spiritual pride and self-confidence,
and then he fell. After that, Christ broke him down again,
by three times searching him with the inquiry, “Simon, son
of Jona, lovest thou me?” after which, he seems to have been
a stable and devoted saint the rest of his, days.

3. There is no need of young converts having or expressing
doubts as to their conversion. There is no more need of a per-
son doubting whether he is now in favor of God’s govern-
ment, than there is for a man to doubt whether he is in favor
of our government or another. It is, in fact, on the face of
it, absurd, for a person to talk of doubting on such a point,
if he is intelligent and understands what he is talking about.
It has long been supposed to be a virtue, and a mark of
humility, for a person to doubt whether he is a Christian, and
this notion that there is virtue in doubting is a device of the
devi. “I say, neighbor, are you in favor of our government,

16*


370 INSTRUCTIONS TO YOUNG CONVERTS.


or do you prefer that of Russia?” “Why, I have some hopes
that I love our own government, but I have many doubts.
Wonderful! ‘Woman, do you love your children?” “ Why,
sir, I sometimes have a trembling hope that I love them, but
you know the best have doubts.” “ Wife, do you love your
husband?” “I do not know—I sometimes think I do, but
you know the heart is deceitful, and we ought to be careful
and not be too confident.” Who would have such a wife?
“Man do you love your wife, do you love your family?” “Ah,
ou know we are poor creatures, we do not know our own
earts. I think I do love them, but perhaps I am deceived.”
Ridiculous! y l

Ordinarily, the very idea of a person’s expressing doubts,
renders his piety truly doubtful, A real Christian has no
need to doubt. And when one is full of doubts, ordinarily
you ought to doubt for him and help him doubt. Affection
to God is as much a matter of consciousness as any other af-
fection. A woman knows she loves her child How? By
consciousness. She is conscious of the exercise of this affec-
tion. And, then, she sees it carried out into action every day.
In the same way a Christian may know that he loves God, by
his consciousness of this affection, and by seeing that it in-
fluences his daily conduct.

In the case of young converts, truly such, these doubts
generally arise from their having been wrongly dealt with,
and not sufficiently taught, or not thoroughly humbled. In
any case, they should never be left in such a state, but should
be brought, if possible, to such a thorough change, that they
will doubt no longer. It is inconsistent with the greatest
usefulness, for a Christian to be always entertaining doubts.
It not only makes him gloomy, but it renders his religion a
stumbling block to sinners. What do sinners think of such
religion? They say, “These converts are always afraid to
think they have got any thing real. They are always trem-
bling, and doubting whether it is a reality, and they ought to
know whether there is anything in it or not; for if it is any-
thing, these people seem to have it, and I am inclined to think
it rather doubtful. At any rate, I will let it pass for the pre
sent ; for I do not believe God will damn me for not attending
to what appears so uncertain.” No, a cheerful, settled hope in
Christ, is indispensable to usefulness, and therefore you should
deal so with young converts, as to lead them to a consistent,
well-grounded, stable hope. Ordinarily this may be done, if
pursued wisely, at the proper time, and that is at the com-


mencement of their religious life And they should not be
left till it is done.


INSTRUCTIONS TO YOUNG CONVERTS. 87)


I know there are some exceptions; there are cases where
the best instructions will be ineffectual, but these generally
depend on the state of the health, and the condition of the
nervous system. Sometimes you find a person incapable of
reasoning on a certain topic, and so their errors will not yield
to instruction. But most commonly they mistake the state
of their own hearts, because they judge under the influence
of a physical disease. Sometimes persons under a nervous
depression will go almost into despair. I will not take time
now to show the connection, but persons who are acquainted
with physiology will easily explain the matter, and this will
make it plain that the only way to deal with such cases is
first to recruit their health, and get their nervous system in a
proper tone, and thus remove the physical cause of their
gloom and depression, and then they will be able to receive
and apply your instructions to the state of their minds. But
if you cannot remove their gloom and doubts and fears in this
way, you can at least avoid doing any positive harm, by giv-
ing them wrong instructions. I have known even experi-
enced Christians to have the error fastened upon them,
thinking it was necessary, or was virtuous, or a mark of humili-
ty to be always in doubt, and Satan would take advantage of
it, and of the state of their health, to drive them almost into
despair. You ought to guard against this, by avoiding the
error in teaching young converts. Teach them that instead
of there being any virtue in doubting, it is a sin to have any
reason to doubt, and a sin if they doubt without any reason,
and a sin to be gloomy, and disgust sinners with their des-
pondency. And if you teach them thoroughly what religion
is, and make them SEE CLEARLY what God wishes to have
them do, and lead them to do it promptly and decidedly, ordi-
narily they will not be harassed with doubts and fears, but
will be clear, open-hearted, cheerful and growing Christians, an
honor to the religion they profess, and a blessing to the church
and the world.

IL I proceed to mention some things worthy of considera
tion in regard to their making a profession of religion, or
joining the church.

1. Young converts should, ordinarily, offer themselves for
admission to some church of Christ immediately. By immedi-
ately, I mean that they should do it the first opportunity
they have. They should not wait. If they set out in re
ligion by waiting, most likely they will always be waiting,
and never do anything to much purpose. If they are
taught to wait under conviction, before they give them


372 INSTRUCTIONS TO YOUNG CONVERTS.


selves up to Christ, or if they are taught to wait after
conversion, before they give themselves publicly to God, by
joining the church, they will probably go halting and stum-
bling along through life. The first thing they should be taught,
always is, NEVER TO WAIT WHERE GOD HAS POINTED OUT YOUR
Dury. We profess to have given up the waiting system, let
us carry it through and be consistent.

While I say it is the duty of young converts to offer them-
selves to the church immediately, I do not say that they
should, in all cases, be received immediately. But the church
may, and have an undoubted right to assume the responsibil-
ity of receiving them immediately or not. If the church are
not satisfied m the case, they have the power to bid candi-
dates wait tili they can make inquiries, or in any other way
obtain satisfaction, as to their character and their sincerity.
This is more necessary in large cities than it is in the country,
because the church is liable to receive so many applications
from persons that are entire strangers, where it is necessary
to make inquiries before admitting them to communion. But
if the church think it necessary to postpone an applicant, the
responsibility is not his. He has not postponed obedience to
the dying command of Christ, and so he has not grieved the
Spirit away, and so he may not be essentially injured if he is
faithful in other respects. Whereas, if he had neglected the
duty voluntarily, he would soon get into the dark, and very
likely backslide.

If there is no particular reason for delay, ordinarily the
church ought to receive them when they apply. If they are
sutiiciently instructed on the subject of religion to know what
they are doing, and if their general character is such that
they can be trusted as to their sincerity and honesty in mak-
ing a profession, I see no reason why they should delay. But
if there are sufficient reasons, in view of the church, for mak-
ing them wait a reasonable time, let them do it, on their re
sponsibility to Jesus Christ. They should, however, remem-
ber, what is the responsibility they assume, and that if they
keep those out of the church who ought to be in it, they sin,
and grieve the Holy Spirit.

It is impossible to lay down particular rules on this subject,
applicable to all cases. There is so great a variety of reasons
which may warrant keeping persons back, that no general
rules can reach them all. Our practice, in this church, is te
Site persons for a month after they make application,

efore they are received to full communion. The reason of
this is, chat the Session may have opportunity to inquire re


INSTRUCTIONS TO YOUNG CONVERTS. 878


specting individuals who offer themselves, as so many of them
are strangers. But in the country, where there are regular
congregations, and all the people have been instructed from
their youth in the doctrines of religion, and where everybody
is perfectly known, the case is different, and ordinarily I see
no reason why persons of fair character should not be admit-
ted immediately. If a person has not been a drunkard, or
otherwise of bad character, let him be admitted at once, as
goon as he can give a rational and satisfactory account of the
hope that is in him.

That is evidently the way the apostles did. There is not
the least evidence in the New Testament, that they ever put
off a person that wanted to be baptized and join the church.
I know this does not satisfy some people, because they think
the case is different. But I do not see it so. They say the
apostles were inspired. That is true ; but it does not follow
that they were inspired to read the characters of men, so as to

revent their making mistakes in this matter. On the other
hand, we know they were not inspired in this way, for we know
they did make mistakes, just as ministers may do now, and,
therefore, it is not true that their being inspired men alters
the case on this point. Simon Magus was supposed to be
a Christian, and was baptised and admitted to the commu-
nion, and remained in good standing till he undertook to pur-
chase the Holy Ghost with money. The apostles used to admit
converts from Heathenism immediately, and without delay.
If they could receive persons who, perhaps, never heard more
than one Gospel sermon, and who never had a Bible, nor at-
tended a Sabbath-school or Bible-class in their lives, surely it
is not necessary to wake up such an outcry and alarm, if a
church thinks proper to receive persons of fair character who
have had the Bible all their lives, and been trained in the
Sabbath-school, and sat under the preaching of the Gospel,
and who, therefore, may be supposed to understand what they
are about, and not to profess what they do not feel.

I know it may be said that persons who make a profession
of religion now, are not obliged to make such sacrifices for
their religion as the early believers were, and, consequently,
people may be more ready to play the hypocrite. And, to
some extent, that is true. But then, on the other hand, it
should be remembered, that, with the instructions which they
have on the subject of religion, they are not so easily led to
deceive themselves, as those who were converted without the
previous advantages of a religious education. They may be
strongly tempted to deceive others, but I insist upon it, that,


374 INSTRUCTIONS TO YOUNG CONVERTS.


with the instructions which they have received, the converta
of these great revivals are not half so liable to deceive them-
selves, and take up with a false hope, as they were in the days
of the apostles. And on this ground I believe that those
churches who are faithful in dealing with young converts, and
who exhibit habitually the power of religion, are not likely to
receive so many unconverted persons, as the apostles did.

It is important that the churches should act wisely on this
point. Great evil has been done by this practice of keeping
persons out of the church a long time to see if they were
Christians. This is almost as absurd as it would be to throw
out a young child into the street, to see whether it will live
to say, if it lives and promises to be a healthy child, we wili
take care of it, when that is the very time it wants nursing,
and taking care of, at the moment when the scale is turning,
whether it shall live or die. Is that the way to deal with
young converts? Should the church throw her new-born
children out to the winds, and say, if they live there, let them
be raised ; but if they die, they ought to die. I have nota
doubt that thousands of converts, in consequence of this treat-
ment, have gone through life, and never have joined any
church, but have lingered along, full of doubts, and fears, and
darkness, and in this way have spent their days, and gone to
the grave without the comforts or the usefulness which they
might have enjoyed, simply because the church, in her folly,
has suffered them to wait outside of the pale, to see whether
they would grow and thrive, without those ordinances which
Jesus Christ established particularly for their benefit.

Jesus Christ says to his church, “Here, take these lambs,
and feed them, and shelter them and watch over them, and
protect them :” and what does the church do? Why, turn
them out alone upon the cold mountains, among the wild
beasts, to starve or perish, to see whether they are alive or not.
This whole system is as unphilosophical as it is unscriptural.
Did Jesus Christ tell his churches to do so? Did the God of
Abraham teach any such doctrine as this, in regard to the
children of Abraham? Never. He never taught us to treat
young converts in such a barbarous manner. Tt is the ve
best way that could be taken to render it doubtful whether
they are converts. The very way to lead them into doubts
and darkness, is to keep them away from the church, from ita
fellowship, and its ordinances.

I have understood there is a church, not very far from here,
who have passed a resolution that no young converts shall be
admitted till they have had a hope fur at least six months,


INSTRUCTIONS TO YOUNG CONVERTS. 375


Where did they get any such rule? Not from the Bible, nor
the example of the early churches.

3. In examining young converts for admission to the church,
their consciences should not be ensnared by examining them
too extensively or minutely on doctrinal points. From the man-
ner in which examinations are conducted in some churches,
it would seem as if they expected that young converts would
be all at once acquainted with the whole system of divinity,
and able to answer every puzzling question in theology. The
effect of it is, that young converts are perplexed and confused,
and give their assent to things they do not understand, and
thus their conscience is ensnared, and consequently weakened.
Why, one great design of receiving young converts into the
church, is to teach them doctrines, but if they are to be kept
out of the church till they understand the whole system of
doctrines, this end is defeated. Will you keep them out till
one main design of receiving them is accomplished by other
means? It is absurd. There are certain cardinal doctrines
oi Christianity, which are embraced in the experience of every
true convert. And these, young converts will testify to, on
their examination, if they are questioned in such a way as
to draw out their knowledge, and not in such a way as to
puzzle and confound them. The questions should be such, as
are calculated to draw out from them what they have learned
by experience, and not what they may have got in theory be-
fore or since their conversion. The object is, not to find out how
much they know, or how good scholars they are in divinity,
as you would examine a school, or a number of young men
striving for a premium. It is to find out whether they havea
change of heart, to learn whether they have experienced the
great truths of religion by their power in their own souls.
You see therefore how absurd, and injurious too, it must be,
to examine as is sometimes done, like a lawyer at the bar,
cross-examining a suspicious witness. It should rather be
like a faithful physician anxious to find out his patient’s true
condition, and therefore leading his mind, by inquiries and
hints, to disclose the real symptoms of his case.

You will always find, if you put your questions right, that
real converts will see clearly those great fundamental points,
the divine authority of the scriptures, the necessity of the in-
fluences of the Holy Spirit, the divinity of Christ, the doctrine
of total depravity and regeneration, the necessity of the atone-
ment, justification by faith, and the justice of the eternal pun-
ishment of the wicked. By a proper course of inquiries you
will find all these points come out, as a part of their experi-


876 INSTRUCTIONS TO YOUNG CONVERTS.


ence, if you put your questions in such a way that they un
derstand them. i

A church session in this city have, as we are informed,
passed a vote, that no person shall join that church till he
will give his assent to the whole Presbyterian Confession of
Faith, and adopt it as his “rule of faith and practice and
Christian obedience. That is, they must read the book
through, which is about three times as large as this hymn-
book, and must understand it, and agree to it all, before they
can be admitted to the church, before they can make a pro-
fession of religion, or obey the command of Christ. By what
authority does a church say that no one shall join their com-
munion till he understands all the points and technicalities
of this long confession of faith? Is that their charity, to cram
this whole confession of faith down the throat of a young con-
vert, before they let him so much as come to the communion?
He says, “I love the Lord Jesus Christ, and wish to obey his
command.” “Very well, but do you understand and adopt
the confession of faith?” He says, “I do not know, for I
never read that, but I have read the Bible, and I love that,
and wish to follow the directions in it, and to come to the
table of the Lord.” “Do you love the confession of faith? If
not YOU SHALL Nor COME,” is the reply of this charitable session,
“you shall not sit down at the Lord’s table, till you have
adopted all this confession of faith.” Did Jesus Christ ever
authorise a church session to say this—to tell that child of
God, who stands there with tears, and asks permission to
obey his Lord, and who understands the grounds of his faith,
and can give a satisfactory reason of his hope, to tell him he
cannot join the church till he understands the confession of
faith? No doubt, Jesus Christ is angry with such a church,
and he will show his displeasure in a way that admits of no
mistake, if they do not repent. Shut the door against yo
converts till they swallow the confession of faith! And wi
such a church prosper? Never.

No church on earth has a right to impose its extended con-
fession of faith on a young convert, who admits the funda-
mentals of religion. They may let the young convert know
their own faith on ever so many points, and they may exam-
ine him, if they think it necessary, as to his belief ; but sup-
pose he has doubts on some points not essential to Christian
experience, as the doctrine of Infant Baptism, or of Election,
or the Perseverance of the Saints, and suppose he honestly
and frankly tells you he has not made up his mind concerning
these points. Has any minister or church a right to say, he


INSTRUCTIONS TO YOUNG CONVERTS. 877


shall not come to the Lord’s table till he has finished all his
researches into these subjects? That he shall not obey Jesus
Christ till he has fully made up his mind on every such point
on which Christians, and devoted ones too, differ among them-
selves? I would sooner cut off my right hand than debar a
convert under such circumstances. I would teach a young
convert as well as I could in the time before he made his ap-
plication, and I would examine him candidly as to his views,
and after he was in the church, I would endeavor to make
him grow in knowledge as he grows in grace. And by just
as much confidence as I have that my own doctrines are the
doctrines of God, I should expect to make him adopt them,
if I could have a fair hearing before his mind. ButI never
would bid one, whom I charitably believed to be a child of
God, to stay away from his Father’s table, because he did not
see all I see, or believe all I believe, through the whole sys
tem of divinity. The thing is utterly irrational, ridiculous,
and wicked.

4. Sometimes persons who are known to entertain a hope
dure not make a profession of religion for fear they should be
deceived. I would always deal decidedly with such cases. A
hope that will not warrant a profession of religion is mani-
festly worse than no hope, and the sooner it is torn away the
better. Shall a man hope he loves God, and yet not dare
obey Jesus Christ? Preposterous! Such a hope had better
be given up at once.

5. Sometimes persons professing to be converts will make
an excuse for not joining the church, that they can enjoy re-
ligion just as well without it. This is always suspicious. I
should look out for such characiers. It is almost certain they
have no religion. Crdinarily, if a person does not desire to
be associated with the people of God, he is rotten at the bot-
tom. It is because he wants to keep out of the responsibili-
ties of a public profession. He has a feeling within him that
he had rather be free, so that he can by and by go back to the
world again if he likes, without the reproach of instability or
hypocrisy. Enjoy religion just as well without obeying Jesus
Christ! Itis false on the face of it. He overlooks the fact
that religion consists in obeying Jesus Christ.

Til. I am to consider the importance of giving right in-
struction to young converts.

Ordinarily, their Christian character through life is moulded
and fashioned according to the manner in which they are
dealt with when first converted. There are many who have
been poorly taught at first, but have been afterwards re-con-


878 INSTRUCTIONS TO YOUNG CONVERTS.


verted, and if they are then dealt with properly, they may ba
made something of. But the proper time to do this is when
they are first brought in, when their minds are soft and ten
der, and easily yield to the truth. Then they may be led with
a hair, if they think it is the truth of God. And whatever
notions in religion they get then they are apt to cleave to for
ever afterwards. It is almost impossible to get away a man’s
notions that he got when he was a young convert. You may
reason him down, but he cleaves to them. How often is it
the case where persons have been taught certain things when
first converted, that if they afterwards get a new minister,
who teaches somewhat differently, they will rise up against
him, as if he were going to subvert the faith and car
ry away the church into error, and throw everything into
confusion. Thus you see that young converts are thrown
into the hands of the church, and it depends on the church
to mould them, and form them into Christians of the right
stamp. Mauch of their future comfort and usefulness depends
on the manner in which they are instructed at the outset.
The future character of the church, the progress of revivals,
the coming of the millennium, depend on having right instruc
tion given, and a right direction of thought and life to those
who are young converts.

IV. I am to mention some things which should not be taught

to young converts.

1. “ You will not always feel as you do now.” When the
oung convert is rejoicing in his Saviour, and calculating to
ive for the glory of God and the good of mankind, how often

is he met with this reply, “You will not always feel so.”
Thus preparing his mind to expect that he shall backslide,
and not to be much surprised when he does. This is just the
way the devil wants young converts dealt with, to have old
Christians tell them, your feelings will not last, and that by
and by you will be as cold as we are. It has made my heart
bleed to see it. When the young convert has been pouring
out his warm heart to some old professor, and expecting to
meet the warm burstings of a kindred spirit responding to
his own, what does he meet with? This cold answer, coming
lke a northern blast over his soul, “You will not always feel
so.” SHAME! Just preparing the young convert to expect
that he shall backslide as a matter of course ; so that when
he begins to decline, as under the very influences of this in-
struction it is most likely he will, it produces no surprise or
alarm in his mind, but he looks at it just as a thing of course,
doing as everybody else does.


INSTRICTIONS TO YOUNG CONVERTS. 879


I have heard it preached as well as prayed, that seasons of
backsliding are necessary to test the church. They say,
“when it rains, you can find water anywhere ; it is only in
seasons of drought that you can tell where the deep springs
are.” Wonderful logic! And so you would teach that Chris-
tians must get cold and stupid, and backslide from God, and
for what reason? Why, forsooth, to show that they are not
hypocrites. Amazing! You would prove that they are hyp
ocrites in order to show that they are not. ;

Such doctrine as this is the very last that should be taught
to young converts. They should be told that now they have
only begun the Christian life, and that their religion is to con-
sist in going on in it, They should be taught to go forward
all the time, and grow in grace continually. Do not teach
them to taper off their religion, let it grow smaller and
smaller till it comes to a point. God says, “The path of the
just is as the shining light, that shineth more nnd more to
the perfect day.” Now whose path is that which grows dim-
mer and dimmer until the perfect night? They should be
brought to such a state of mind that the first indications of
decay in spirituality or zeal will alarm them and spur them
up to duty. There is noneed that young converts should
backslide as they do. Paul did not backslide. And I do
not doubt that this very doctrine, “ You will not always feel
g0,” is one of the grand devices of Satan to bring about the
result which it predicts.

2. “Learn to walk by faith and not by sight.” This is
sometimes said to young converts in reference to their con-
tinuing to exhibit the power of religion, and is a manifest per-
version of Scripture. If they begin to lose their faith and
zeal, and to get into darkness, some old professor will tell
them, “ Ah, you cannot expect to have the Saviour always
with you, you have been walking by sight, you must learn to
walk by faith and not by sight.” That is, you must learn to
get as cold as death, and then hang on to the doctrine of the
Saints’ Perseverance, as your only ground of hope that you
shall be saved. And that is walking by faith. Cease to per-
severe, and then held on to the doctrine of perseverance. “One
of guilt’s blunders, and the loudest laugh of hell.” And liv-
ing in the enjoyment of God’s favor and the comforts of the
Holy Ghost, they call walking by sight! Do you suppose

oung converts see the Saviour at the time they believe on
im? When they are so full of the enjoyments of heaven,
do you suppose they see heaven, and so walk by sight? It is
abszrd on the face of it. It is not faith, it is presumption,


880 INSTRUCTIONS TO YOUNG CONVERTS.


that makes a backslider hold on to the doctrine of persever
ance, as if that would save him, without any sensible exercise
of godliness in his soul. Those who attempt to walk by faith
in this way had better take care, or they will walk into hell
with their faith. Faith indeed! Faith without works is
dead. Can dead faith make the soul live?

3. “Wait till you see whether you can hold out.” When
a young convert feels zealous and warm-hearted, and wants
to lay himself out for God, some prudent old professor will
caution him not to go too fast. “ You had better not be too
forward in religion, till you see whether you can hold out;
for if you take this high ground and then fall, you will dis-
grace religion.” That is, in plain English, “Do not do any-
thing that constitutes religion, till you see whether you have
religion.” Religion consists in obeying God. Now these
wise teachers tell a young convert, “Do not obey God till
you see”—what ?—1ill you see whether you have obeyed him—
or, till you see whether you have gotten that substance, that
mysterious thing which they imagine is created and put into
a man, like a lump of new flesh, and called religion. This wait-
ing system is all alike, and all wrong. There is no Scripture
warrant for telling a person to wait, when the command of
God is upon him and the path of duty before him. Let him
go along.

Young converts should be fully taught that this is the only
consistent way to find out whether they have any religion.—
The only evidence they can have is to find that they are
heartily engaged in doing the will of God. To tell him to
wait, therefore, before he does these things, till he gets his evi-
dence, is reversing the matter, and is absurd.

4. “Wait till you get strength, before you take up the
cross.” This is applied to various religious duties. Some
times it is applied to prayer, just as if prayer was a cross,
But I have known young converts advised not to attempt te
pray in their families, or not to attempt quite yet to pray in


meetings and social circles. “Wait till you get strength.”


Just asif they would get strength without exercise. Strength
comes by exercise. You cannot get strength by lying still
Let a child lie in the cradle all his life, and he would never
have any strength, he might grow in size, but he never could
be any thing more than a great baby. This is a law of na
ture. There is no substitute for exercise in producing strength.
The body as every one knows, can be strengthened only by
exercise, It is so in the nature of things And it is just so
with the mind, It is so with the affections, so with the judg


INSTRUCTIONS TO YOUNG CONVERTS. ' 381


ment, so with conscience. All the powers of the soul are
strengthened by exercise. Ineed not now enter into the philoso-
phy of this. Every body knows it is so. If the mind is not
exercised, the brain will not grow, and the man will become
an idiot. If the affections are not exercised he will become a
stoic. To talk to a convert about neglecting Christian action
till he gets strength, is absurd. If he wants to gain strength,
let him go to work.

5. Young converts should not be made sectarian in their feel-
ings. They should not be taught to dwell upon sectarian dis-
tinctions, or to be sticklish about sectarian points. They
ought to examine these points, at a proper time, and ina
proper way, and make up their minds for themselves, accord-
ing to their importance. But they should not be taught to
dwell upon them, or to make much of them in the outset of
their religious life. Otherwise there is great danger that their
whole religion will run into sectarianism. I have seen some
most sad and melancholy exhibitions of the effects of this up-
on young converts. And whenever I see professed converts
taking a strong hold of sectarian peculiarities, no matter of
what denomination of Christians, I always feel in doubt
about them. When I hear them asking, “Do you believe in
the doctrine of election?” or, “Do you believe in sprink-
ling ?” or, “ Do you believe in plunging >” I feel sad. I never
knew such converts to be worth much. Their sectarian zeal
soon sours their feelings, eats out all the heart of their re-
ligion, and moulds their whole character into sinful sectarian
bigotry. They generally become mighty zealous for the tra-
ditions of the elders, and very little concerned for the salva-
tion of souls.

V. I proceed to mention some of the things which it is im-
portant should be taught to young converts.

1. One of the first things young converts should be taught is
to distinguish between emotion and principle in religion. Do
you understand me? I am going to explain what I mean, but
I want you to get hold of the words, and have them fixed in
your mind. What I want is to have you distinguish between
emotion and principle.

By emotion, I mean that state of mind of which we are
conscious, and which we call feeling, an involuntary state of
mind, that arises of course when we are in certain circun-
stances or under certain influences. There may be high
wrought feelings, or they may subside into tranquillity, or
disappear entirely. But these emotions should be carefully
distinguished from religious principle. By principle I do not


882 INSTRUCTIONS TO YOUNG CONVERTS.


mean any substance or root or seed or sprout implanted in
the soul. But I mean the voluntary decision of the mind, the
firm determination to act out duty and to obey the will of
God, by which a Christian should always be governed. When
a man is fully determined to obey God, because it is RIGHT
that he should obey God, I call that principle. Whether he
feels any lively religious emotion at the time or not, he will
do his duty cheerfully, and readily, and heartily, whatever
may be the state of his feelings. This is acting upon princi
ple, and not from emotion. Many young converts have mis-
taken views upon this subject, and depend almost entirely
upon the state of their feelings to go forward in duty. Some
will not lead in a prayer meeting, unless they feel as if they
could make an eloquent prayer. Multitudes are influenced
almost entirely by their emotions, and they give way to this,
as if they thought themselves under no obligation to duty un-
less urged on by some strong emotion. They will be very
zealous in religion when they feel like it, when their emotions
are warm and lively, but they will not act out religion con-
sistently, and carry it into all the concerns of life. They are
religious only as they are impelled by a gush of feeling. But |
this is not true religion.

Young converts should be carefully taught, when duty is
before them to do i. However dull their feelings may be, if —
duty calls, po rr. Do not wait for feeling, but DO IT. Most
likely the very emotions for which you would wait will be
called into exercise when you begin to do your duty. If the
duty is prayer, for instance, and you have not the feelings you
would wish, do not wait for emotions before you pray, but
pray, and open your mouth wide. And in doing it, you are
most likely to have the emotions for which you were inclined
to wait, and which constitute the conscious happiness of re

on.

EN Young converts should be taught that they have re
nounced the ownership of all their possessions, and of themselves, or
if they have not done this they are not Christians. They should
not be left to think that any thing is their own, their time,
property, influence, faculties, bodies or souls. “Ye are not
your own ;” all belongs to God ; and when they submitted to
God they made a free surrender of all to him, to be ruled and
disposed of at his pleasure. They have no right to spend
one hour as if their time was their own. No right to go any-
where, or do anything, for themselves, but should hold ail at
the disposal of God, and employ all for the glory of God. If
they do not, they ought not to call themselves Christians, fox


INSTRUCTIONS TO YOUNG CONVERTS. 383


the very idea of being a Christian is to renounce self and be
come entirely consecrated to God. A man has no more right
to withhold anything from God, than. he has to rob or steal.
It is robbery in the highest sense of the term. It is an in-
finitely higher crime than it would be for a clerk in a store to
go and take the money of his employer, and spend it on his
own lusts and pleasures. I mean, that for a man to withhold
from God, is a higher crime against mm, than a man can com-
mit against his fellow man, inasmuch as God is the owner of
all things in an infinitely higher sense than man can be the
owner of anything. If God calls on them to employ any-
thing they have, their money, or their time, or to give their
children, or to dedicate themselves, in advancing his king-
dom, and they refuse, because they want to use them in their
own way, or prefer to do something else, it is vastly more
blamable than for a clerk or-an agent to go and embezzle the
money that is intrusted to him by his employer, and spend it
for his family, or lay it out in bank stock or in speculation for
himself.
God is, in an infinitely higher sense, the owner of all, than
any employer can be said to be the owner of what he has.
And the church of Christ never will take high ground, never
will be disentangled from the world, never will be able to go
forward without these continual declensions and backslidings,
until Christians, and the churches generally, take the ground,
and hold to it, that it is just as much a matter of discipline
for a church member practically to deny his stewardship as to
deny the divinity of Christ, and that covetousness fairly
proved shall just as certainly exclude a man from communion
as adultery.
The church is mighty orthodox in nohons, but very hereti-
cal in practice, but the time must come when the church will
be just as vigilant in guarding orthodoxy in practice as or-
thodoxy in doctrine, and just as prompt to turn out heretics
in practice as heretics that corrupt the doctrines of the Gospel.
In fact, itis vastly moreimportant. The only design of doctrine
is to produce practice, and it does not seem to be understood
by the church, that true faith “works by love and purifies the
heart,” that heresy in practice, is proof conclusive of heresy
in sentiment. The church are very sticklish for correct doo-

trine and very careless about correct living. This is prepos-
terous. Has it come to this, that the church of Jesus Christ
is to be satisfied with correct notions on some abstract
points, and never reduce her orthodoxy to practice? Let it
peso no longer.


884 INSTRUCTIONS TO YOUNG CONVERTS.


It is high time these matters were set right And the only
way to set them right, is to begin right with those who are
just entering upon religion. Young converts must be told
that they are just as worthy of damnation, and that the
church cannot and will not hold fellowship with them, if they
show a covetous spirit, and turn a deaf ear when the whole
world is calling for help, as if they were living in adultery, or
in the daily worship of idols.

3. Teach them how to cultivate a tender conscience. I have
often been amazed to find how little conscience there is, even
among those who we hope are Christians. And here we see
the reason of it. Their consciences were never cultivated.
They never were taught and told how to cultivate a tender
conscience. They have not even a natural conscience. They
have dealt so rudely with their conscience, and resisted it so
often, that it has got blunted, and does not act. The useful-
ness of a Christian, greatly depends on his knowing how to
cultivate his conscience. Young converts should be taught
to keep their conscience just as tender as the apple of the
eye. They should watch their conduct and their motives,
and let their motives be so pure and their conduct so disin-
terested as not to offend or injure or stifle conscience. They
should maintain such a habit of listening to conscience, that
it will be always ready to give forth a stern verdict on all oc
casions. It is astonishing to see how much the conscience
may be cultivated by a proper course. If rightly attended
to, it made be made so pure, and so powerful, that it will al-
ways respond exactly to the word of God. Present any duty
to such a Christian, or any self-denial, or suffering, and only
show him the word of God and he will do it without a word.
In a few months, if properly taught and attended to, young
converts may have a conscience so delicately poised that the
weight of a feather will turn them. Only bring a “ Thus
said the Lord,” and they will be always ready to do that, be
it what it may.

4. Young converts should be taught to pray without ceasing.
That is, they should always keep up a watch over their
minds, and be all the time in a prayerful spirit. They should
be taught to pray always, whatever may take place. For
the want of right instruction on this point many young con
verts suffer loss and get far away from God. For instance,
sometimes it happens that a young convert will fall into
some sin, and then he feels as if he could not pray, and im-
stead of overcoming this he feels so distressed that he
waits for the keen edge of his distress to pass away. Ip


INSTRUCTIONS TO YOUNG CONVERTS. 385


siead of going right to Jesus in the midst of his agony, and
confessing his sin out of the fulness of his heart and getting
a renewed pardon and peace restored, he waits till all the
keenness of his feelings have subsided, and then his repent-
ance, if he does repent, is cold and half-hearted. Let me teil
you, beloved, never to do this, but when your conscience
presses you, go then right to Christ, confess your sin fully,
and pour out your heart to God.

Sometimes people will neglect to pray because they are in
the dark, and feel no desire to pray. But that is the very
time when they need prayer. That is the very reason why
they ought to pray. You should go right to God and con-
fess your coldness and darkness of mind. Tell him just how
you feel. Tell him, “O Lord, 1 have no desire to pray, but I
know I ought to pray.” And the first you will know, the
Spirit may come, and lead your heart out in prayer, and all
the dark clouds will pass away.

5. Young converts should be faithfully warned against
adopting a false standard in religion. They should not be left
to fall in behind old professors, and keep them before their
minds as a standard of holy living. They should always
look at Christ as their model. Not aim at being as good
Christians as the old church members, and not think they are
doing pretty well because they are as much awake as the
old members of the church. But they should aim at being
holy, and not rest satisfied till they are perfect as God. The
church has been greatly injured for the want of attention to
this matter. Young converts have come forward, and their
- hearts were warm and their zeal ardent enough to aim at a
high standard, but they were not directed properly, and so
they soon settle down into the notion that what is good
enough for others is good enough for them, and therefore
they never aim higher than those who are before them. And
in this way the church instead of rising with every revival,
higher and higher in holiness, is kept nearly stationary.

6. Young converts should be taught to do all their duty.
They should never make a compromise with duty, nor think
of saying, “I will do this as an offset for neglecting that.”
They should never rest satisfied till they have done their
duties of every kind, in relation to their families, the church
Sabbath Schools, the impenitent around them, the disposal
of their property, the conversion of the world. Let them
do their duty, as they feel it when there hearts are warm ;
and never attempt to piek and ehoose among the command-


ments of God.
17


386 INSTRUCLIONS TO YOUNG CONVERYS.


7. They should be made to feel that they have no separats
interest. It is time Christians were made actually to feel
that they have no interest whatever, separate from the in-
terest of Jesus Christ and his kingdom. They should under-
stand that they are incorporated into the family of Jesus
Christ, as members in full, so that their whole interest is
identified with his. They are embarked with him, they have
gone on board, and taken them all And henceforth they
have nothing to do, or nothing to say, except as it is cou-
nected with this interest and bears on the cause and kingdom
of Christ.

8. They should be taught to maintain singleness of motive.
Young converts should not begin to have a double mind, on
any subject, or let selfish motives mingle in with good mo-
tives in anything they do. But this can never be, so long
as Christians are allowed to hold a separate interest of their
own, distinct from the interest of Jesus Christ. If they feel
that they have a separate interest, it is impossible to keep them
from regarding it, and having an eye to it as well as to Christ’s
interest, in many things that they do. It is only by becom-
ing entirely consecrated to God, and giving up all to his ser
vice, that they can ever keep their eye single and their mo-
tives pure.

9. They should set out with a determination to aim at being
useful in the highest degree possible. They should not rest
satisfied with merely being useful, or remaining in a situation
where they can do some good. But if they see an oppor-
tunity where they can do more good, they must embrace it,
whatever may be the sacrifice to themselves. No matter
what it may cost them, no matter what danger or what suf
fering, no matter what change in their outward circumstances,
or habits, or employments it may lead to. If they are satis-
fied that they will on the whole do more good, they should
not even hesitate. How else can they be like God? How
can they think to bear the image of Jesus Christ, if they are
not prepared to do all the good that is in their power? When
& man is converted he comes into a new world, and should
consider himself as a new man. If he finds he can do the
most good by remaining in his old employment, let it be
so. But if he can do more good in some other way, he is
bound to change. It is for the want of attention to this sub-
ject, in the outset, that Christians have got such low ideas on
the subject of duty. And that is the reason why there ara
so many useless members in our churches.

10. They must be taught not to aim at comfort bur useful


INSTRUCTIONS TO YOUNG CONVERTS. 88%


ness in religion. There are a great many spiritual epicures
in the churches, who are all the while seeking to be happy
in religion, while they take very little pains to be useful.
They had much rather spend their time in singing joyful
hymns, and in pouring out their happy feelings in a gushing
tide of exultation and triumph, than to spend it in agoniz
ing prayer for sinners, or in going about and pulling dying
men out of the fire. They seem to feel as if they were born
to enjoy themselves. But I do not think such Christians
show such fruits as to make their example one to be imitated.
Such was not the temper of the apostles. They travailed
for souls, and laboured in weariness and painfulness, and in
deaths oft, to save sinners. Nor is it safe. Ordinarily, Chris
tians are not qualified to drink deep at the fountain of joy.
In ordinary cases, a deep agony of prayer for souls is more pro
fitable than high flights of joy. Let young converts be taught,
plainly, not to calculate upon a life of joy and triumph.
They may be called to go through fiery trials. Satan may
sift them like wheat. But they must go forward, not caleu-
lating so much to be happy as to be useful, not talking about
comfort but duty, not desiring flights of joy and triumph,
but hungering and thirsting afier righteousness, not studying
how to create new flights of rapture, but how to know the
will of God, and do it. They will be happy enough in heaven.
There they may sing the song of Moses and the Lamb. And
they will in fact enjoy a more solid and rational happiness
here, by thinking nothing about it, but patiently devoting
themselves to do the will of God.

11. They should be taught to have moral courage, and not
to be afraid of going forward in duty. The Bible insists
fully on Christian boldness and courage in action as a duty.
Ido not mean that they should indulge in their bravadoes,
like Peter, telling what they will do, and boasting of their
courage. The boaster is generally a coward at heart. But
I mean moral courage, a humble and fixed decision of pur
pose, that will go forward in any duty, unangered and un-
awed, with the meekness and firmness of the Son of God.

12. They should be so instructed as to be sownd in the
faith. That is, they should be early made, as far as possible,
eomplete and correct in regard to their doctrinal belief. As
soon as may be, without turning their minds off from their
practical duties, in promoting the glory of God and the sal-
vation of men, they should be taught fully and plainly, all
the leading doctrines of the Bible. Doctrinal knowledge is
indispensable to growth in grace. Knowledge is the food of


888 INSTRUCTIONS TO YOUNG CONVERTS,


the mind. “That the soul be without knowledge,” says the
Wise Man, “It is not good.” The mind cannot grow with-
out knowledge any more than the body without food And
therefore it is important that young converts should be thor-
oughly indoctrinated, and made to understand the Bible.
By indoctrinating I do not mean teaching the catechism, but
teaching them to draw knowledge from the fountain head.
Create in their minds such an appetite for knowledge that
they will eat the Bible up, will devour it, will love it and love
it all. AU scripture is profitable, that the man of God may
be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works.

13. Great pains should be taken to guard young converts
against censoriousness. Young converts, when they first come
out on the Lord’s side, and are all warm and zealous, some
times find old professors so cold and dead that they are
strongly tempted to be censorious. This should be corrected
immediately, otherwise the habit will poison their minds and
destroy their religion.

14. They must learn to say, No. This is a very difficult
lesson to many. See that young woman. Formerly she
loved the gay circle, and took delight in its pleasures. She
joined the church, and then found herself aloof from all her
old associates. They ask her not now to their balls and
panos because they know she will not join them, and per-

aps they keep entirely away for a time, for fear she should
converse with them about their souls. But by and by they
grow a little bold, and some of them venture to ask her just
to take a ride with a few friends. She does not like to say,
No. They are her old friends, only a few of them are going,
and surely a ride is so innocent a recreation, that she accepts
the invitation. But now she has begun to comply, the ice
is broken, and they have her again as one of them. It goes
on, and she begins to attend their social visits—“ only a few
friends,” you know, till by and by the carpet is taken up for
a dance, and the next thing, perhaps, she is gone to a sleigh
ride, on Saturday night, and comes home after midnight, and
then sleeps all the forenoon on the Sabbath to make up for
it, perhaps communion Sabbath too. All for the want of
learning to say, No.

See that young man. For a time he was always in his
place in the Sabbath School and in the prayer meeting. But
by and by his old friends begin to treat him with attention
again, and they draw him along step by step. Every one
seems a very small thing, and it would look like rudeness to
deny so small a thing. He reasons that if he refuses to ge


INSTRUCTIONS TO YOUNG CONVERTS. 888


with them in things that are innocent, he will lose his im
fluence with them. And so he goes on, till prayer meeting,
Bible class, and even Bible and closet are neglected. Ah,
young man, stop there! Go only a little farther without
learning to say No, and you are gone. If you do not
wish to hang up the cause of Christ to scorn and contempt,
learn to resist the beginnings of temptation. Otherwise it
will come upon you, by and by, like the letting out of water.

15. They should be taught what is and what is not Christian
experience. It is necessary, both for their comfort and
-heir usefulness, that they should understand this, so that
they need noi run themselves into needless distress for the
want of that which is by no means essential to Christian ex-
perience, nor flatter themselves that they have more religion
than roa really exercise. But I cannot dwell on this topic
to-night. :

16. Teach them not to count anything a sacrifice which
they do for God. Some persons are always telling about the
sacrifices they make in religion. I have no confidence in
such piety. Why keep telling about their sacrifices, as if
everything they did for God was a sacrifice. If they loved
God they would not talk so. If they considered their own
interests and the interest of Christ identical, they would not
talk of making sacrifices for Christ ; it would be like talking
of making sacrifices for themselves.

17. It is of great importance that young converts should
be taught to be strictly honest. I mean more by this than

erhaps you would think. It is a great thing to be strictly
Peat It is being very different from the world at large, and
very different even from the great body of professors of re-
ligion. The holiest man I ever knew, and one who had been
many years a Christian and a minister, once made the remark
to me, “ Brother, it is a great thing to be strictly honest, up-
right, straight in everything, so that God’s pure eye can see
that the mind is perfectly upright.” i

It is of the utmost importance that young converts should
understand what it is to be strictly honest in everything, so
that they can maintain a conscience void of offence, both
towards God and towards men. Alas, alas! how little con-
science there is. How little of that real honesty, that pure,
simple uprightness, which ought to mark the life of a child
of God How little do many regard even an express promise.
I heard the other day of a number of individuals who sub-
scribed to the Anti-Slavery Society, and not half of them will
pay their subscriptions. The plea is, that they signed when


890 INSTRUCTIONS TO YOUNG SONVERTS.


they were ander excitement, and they do not choose to pay.
Just as if their being excited released them from the obliga
tion to keep their promise. Why it is just as dishonest as it
would be to refuse payment of a note of hand. They prom-
ised, signed their names, did they, and now will not pay?
And they call that honesty ! ;

I have heard that there are a number of men in the city
who have signed hundreds of dollars for the Oneida Insti
tute, promising to pay the money when called on; and
when they were called on they refused to pay the money.
And the reason was, they had all turned abolitionists in the
Institute. Very well Suppose they have. Does that alter
your promise? Did you sign on the condition that if they
got Abolitionism introduced there you should be clear ?
If you did, then you are clear. But if you gave your prom-
ise without any condition, it is just as dishonest to refuse as
if you had given a note of hand. And yet some of you might
be almost angry if anybody should charge you with refusing
to pay money when you promised it.

Look at this seriously. Who does God say will go to
heaven? Read the 15th Psalm, and see. “He that sweareth
to his own hurt, and changeth not.” What do you think of
that? Ifa man has promised anything, except it be to commit
sin, let him keep his promise, if he means to be honest or to
go to heaven. But here these people will make promises, and
because they cannot be prosecuted, will break them as easily
as if they were nothing. They would not let a note be pro-
tested at the bank. Why? Because they would lose credit,
and would be sued. But the Oneida Institute, and the
Anti-Slavery Society, and other societies, will not sue for the
money, and therefore these people take some offence at some-
thing, and refuse to pay. Is this honest? Will such hon-
esty as this get them admitted to heaven? What? Break
your promises, and go up and carry a lie in your hand before
God! If you refuse or neglect to fulfill your promise you are
a liar, and if you persist in this, you shall have your part in the
lake that burns with fire and brimstone. I would not, for
ten thousand worlds, die with money in my hands, that I
had unrighteously withheld from any object to which I had
promised it. Such money will “eat like a canker.”

If you are not able to pay the money, that is a good excuse.
But then say so. But if you refuse to pay what you have
promised, because you have altered your mind, rely upon it,

ou are guilty. You cannot pray till you pay that money.
t will you pray? “O Lord, I promised to give that


INSTRUCTIONS TO YOUNG CONVERTS. 891


money, but I altered my mind, and broke my promise ; but
stil, O Lord, I pray thee to bless me, and forgive my sin, ai
though I keep my money, and make me happy in thy love.”
Will such prayers be heard? Never.

But, brethren, I find it impossible to touch upon all the
points I intended to speak upon, and so I will break off here,
and finish this subject another time.


LECTURE XX


ERSTBUOTION OF YOUNG OONVERTS.


TexrT.—Feed my lambs.—John xxi. 15.


I nemarkep on this text in my last lecture, and was obli
for want of time, to omit many of the points which I wished
to present in regard to the


INSTRUCTION OF YOUNG CONVERTS.


To-night I propose to continue the subject by noticing,

I. Several other points upon which young converts ought
to be instructed.

IL To show the manner in which young converts should
be treated by the church.

III. Mention some of the evils which naturally result from
defective instructions given in that stage of Christian expe-
rience.

L I shall pursue the subject, taking it up where I left off,
by mentioning some further instructions which it is impor
tant should be given to young converts.

1. It is of great importance that young converts should
early be made to understand what religion consists in. Per-
haps you will be surprised at my mentioning this. “ What!
Are they converts, and do they not know what religion con-
sists in?” I answer, They would know, if they had had no
instruction but such as is drawn from the Bible. But multi-
tudes of people have imbibed such notions about religion,
that not not only young converts, but a great part of the
church do not know what religion consists in, so as to have a
clear and distinct idea of it. There are many ministers who
do not. I do no not mean to say that they have no religion,
for it may be charitably believed they have ; but what I mean
is, that they do not discriminate as to what it consists in, and
cannot give a correct statement of what does and what does
not constitute real religion. It is important that young
sonverts should be lanati ği 2

Negatively, what religion does not consist in.


(1.) Not in aoina knowledge. Knowledge is essential to


r fiin
a ai 3


Tag


INSTRUCTION OF YOUNG CONVERTS 393


religion, but it is not religion. The devil has doctrinal
knowledge, but he has no religion. A man may have doc-
trinal knowledge to any extent without a particle of re
ligion. Yet some people have very strange ideas on this
subject, as though having doctrinal knowledge indicated an
increase of piety. I once heard a remark of this kind: in
a certain instance, where some young converts had made
rapid progress in doctrinal knowledge, a person who saw it
said, “How these young converts grow in grace.” Here
he confounded improvement in knowledge with improve-
ment in piety. The truth was, that he had no means of
judging of their growth in grace, and it was no evidence of it
because they were making progress in doctrinal knowledge.

(2.) They should be taught that religion is not a substance.
Lt is not any root, or sprout, or seed, or anything else in the
mind, asa part of the mind itself. Persons often speak of re-
ligion as if it was something that may be covered up in the
mind, just as a spark of fire may be covered up in the ashes,
which does not show itself, and which produces no effects, but
yet lives and is ready to act as soon as it is uncovered. And
in like manner they think they may have religion, as some-
thing remaining in them, although they do not manifest it by
obeying God. But they should be taught that this is not the
nature of religion. It is no part of the mind itself, or of the
body, nor is it a root, or seed, or spark, that can exist and
yet be hid and produce no effect.

(3.) Teach them that religion does not consist in raptures,
or ecstacies, or high flights of feeling. There may be a great
deal of these where there is religion. But it ought to be un
derstood that they are all involuntary emotions, and may ex-
ist in full power where there is no religion. They may be the
mere workings of the imagination, without any truly religious
affection at all Persons may have them to such a degree as
actually to swoon away with ecstacy, even on the subject of
religion, without having any religion. I have known one
person almost carried away with rapture, by a mere view of
the natural attributes of God, his power and wisdom, as dis

layed in the starry heavens, and yet the person had no re
fois: Religion is obedience to God, the voluntary submis
sion of the soul to the will of God.

(4) Neither does religion consist in going to meeting or
reading the Bible, or praying, or any other of what are com-
monly called religious duties. The very phrase, “ religious
duties,” ought to be striken out of the vocabulary of young
converts. They should be made to know that these acts are

17*


394 INSTRUCTION OF YOUNG CONVERTS.


not religion. Many become very strict in performing certain
things, which they call religious duties, and suppose that is be
ing religious ; while they are careless about the ordinary du
ties of life, which in fact constitute A LIFE OF PIETY.
Prayer may be an expression and an act of piety, or it may
not be. Going to church or to a prayer meeting, may be con
sidered either as a means, an act, or an expression of pious
sentiment ; but the performance of these does not constitute
a man a Christian, and there may be great strictness and zeal
in these, without a particle of religion. If young converts
are not taught to discriminate, they may be led to think there
is something peculiar in what are called religious duties, and
to imagine they have a great deal of religion because they
abound in certain actions that are commonly called religious
duties, although they may at the same time be very defi-
cient in honesty or faithfulness or punctuality, or temper
ance, or any other of what they choose to call their common
duties. They may be very punctilious in some things, may
tithe mint, anise and cummin, and yet neglect the weightier
matters of the law, justice and the love of God.

(5.) Religion does not consist in desires to do good actions.
Desires that do not result in choice and action are not virtu-
ous. Nor are such desires necessarily vicious. They may
arise involuntarily in the mind, in view of certain objects, but
while they produce no voluntary act, they are no more virtu-
ous or vicious than the beating of the pulse, except in cases
where we have indirectly willed them into existence, by volun-
tarily putting ourselves under circumstances to excite them.
The wickedest man on earth may have strong desires after
holiness. Did you ever think of that? He may see clearly
that holiness is the only and indispensable means of happi
ness. And the moment he apprehends holiness as a means of
happiness, he naturally desiresit. Itis to be feared, that multi
tudes are deceiving themselves with the supposition, that a
desire for holiness, as a means of happiness, is religion.
Many, doubtless, give themselves great credit for desires that
never result in choosing right. They feel desires to do their
duty, but do not choose to do it, because upon the whole
they have still stronger desires not to do it. In such desires,
there is no virtue. An action or desire to be virtuous in the
sight of God, must be an act of the wil. People often talk
most absurdly on this subject, as though their desires had any-
thing good, while they remain mere desires. “I think I de
sire to do so and so.’ But do you do it? “Oh, no, but I often
feel a desire to do it.” This is practical Atheism.


INSTRUCTION OF YOUNG CONVERTS. 395


Whatever desires a person may have, if they are not car
ried out into actual choice and action, they are not virtuous.
And no degree of desire is itself virtuous. If this idea could be
made prominent, and fully riveted in the minds of men, it
would probably annihilate the hopes of half the church, who
nv living on their good desires, while doing nothing for

od.

(6.) They should be made to understand that nothing
which is selfish, is religion. Whatever desires they may
have, and whatever choices and actions they may put forth,
if after all the reason of them is selfish, there is no religion
in them. A man may just as well commit sin in praying, or
reading the Bible, or going to meeting, as in anything else, if
his motive is selfish. Suppose a man prays simply with a
view to promote his own happiness. Is that religion? What
is it, but attempting to make God his almighty servant? It
is nothing else but to attempt a great speculation, and put the
universe, God and all, under contribution to make him happy.
It is the sublime degree of wickedness. It is so far from be-
ing piety, that it is in fact superlative wickedness.

(7.) Nothing is acceptable to God, as religion, unless it be
performed heartly, to please God. No outward action has
anything good, or anything that God approves, unless it is
performed from right motives, and from the heart.

(a) Young converts should be taught fully and positively
that all religion consists in obeying God from the heart. All
religion consists in voluntary action. All that is holy, all that
is lovely in the sight of God, all that is properly called religion,
consists in voluntary action, in voluntarily obeying the will of
God from the heart.

2. Young converts should be taught that the duty of self-
denial is one of the leading features of the Gospel. They
should uuderstand that they are not pious at all, any farther
than they are willing to take up the cross daily, and deny
themselves, for Christ. There is but very little self-denial in
the church, and the reason is, that the duty is so much lost
sight of, in giving instruction to young converts. How sel-
dom are they told that self-denial is the leading feature of
Christianity. In pleading for benevolent objects, how often
will you find, that ministers and agents do not even ask Chris-
tians to deny themselves for the sake of promoting the object.
They only ask them to give what they can spare as well as
not, or in other words, to offer unto the Lord that which costs
them nothing. What an abomination! They only ask for
the surplus, for what they do not want, for what they can give


896 INSTRUCTION OF YOUNG CONVERTS.


just as well as not. There is no religion in this kind of giv
ing. A man may give to a benevolent object, a hundred
thousand dollars, and there would be no religion in it, if he
could give it as well as not, and there was no self-denial in it.
Jesus Christ exercised self-denial to save sinners, So has
God the Father exercised self-denial in giving his Son to die
for us, and in sparing us, and in bearing with our perverse
ness. The Holy Ghost exercises self-denial, in condescending
to strive with such unholy beings to bring them to God. The
angels exercise self-denial, in watching over this world, The
apostles planted the Christian religion among the nations by
the exercise of self-denial. And are we to think of being re
lizious without any self-denial? Are we to call ourselves
Christians, the followers of Christ, the temples of the Holy
Ghost, and to claim fellowship with the apostles, when we
have never deprived ourselves of anything that would promote
our personal enjoyment for the sake of promoting Christ’s
kingdom? Young converts should be made to see that unless
they are willing to lay themselves out for God and ready to
sacrifice life and everything else for Christ, they have not the
Spirit of Christ, and are none of his.

3. They must be taught what sanctification is. “ What!”
you will say, “do not all who are Christians known what
sanctification is?” No, many do not. Multitudes would be
as much at a loss to tell intelligibly what sanctification is, as
they would be to tell what religion is. If the question were
asked of every professor of religion in this city, What is
sanctification? I doubt if one in ten would give a right an-
swer. They would blunder just as they do when they under-
take to tell what religion is, and speak of it as something dor
mant in the soul, something that is put in, and lies there,
something that may be practised or not, and still be in them.
So they speak of sanctification as if it were a sort of wash-
ing off of some defilement, or a purging out of some physical
mpurity. Or they will speak of it as if the faculties were
steeped in sin, and sanctification is taking out the stains,
This is the reason why some people will pray for sanctifica
tion, and practise sin, evidently supposing that sanctification
is something that precedes obedience. They should be taught
that sanctification is not something that precedes obedience,
some change in the nature or the constitution of the soul
But sanctification is obedience, and, as a progressive thing, —
consists in obeying God more and more perfectly and per
petually.


4. Young converts should be taught so as to understand


INSTRUCTION OF YOUNG CONVERTS, 397


what perseverance is. It is astonishing how people talk about
perseverance. As if the doctrine of perseverance was “Once
in grace, always in grace,” or “Once converted, sure to go to
heaven.” This is not the idea of perseverance. The true
idea is, that if a man is truly converted, nz waz CONTINUE
TO OBEY Gop. And as a consequence, he will surely go to
heaven. But if a person gets iis idea, that because he is
converted, therefore he will assuredly go to heaven, that man
will almost assuredly go to hell.

5. Young converts should be taught to be religious in every
thing. They should aim to be religious in every department
of life and in all that they do. If they do not aim at this,
they should understand that they have no religion at al. If
they do not intend and aim to keep all the commandments of
God, what pretence can they make to piety? Whosoever
shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one point, he is
guilty of all. He is justly subject to the whole penalty. If
he disobeys God habitually in one particular, he does not in
fact obey him in any particular. Obedience to God consists
in the state of the heart. It is being willing to obey God;
willing that God should rule in all things. But if a man
habitually disobeys God, in any one particular, he is in a state
of mind that renders obedience in anything else impossible.
To say that in some things a man obeys God, out of respect
to his authority, and that in some other things he refuses obe-
dience, is absurd. The fact is that obedience to God consists
in an obedient state of heart, a preference of God’s authority
and commandments to everything else. If, therefore, an in-
dividual appears to obey in some things, and yet perseveringly
and knowingly disobeys in any one thing, he is deceived. He
offends in one point, and this proves that he is guilty of all ;
in other words, that he does not, from the heart, obey at all.
A man may pray half of the time and have no religion ; if
he does not keep the commandments of God, his very prayers
will be hateful to God. “He that turneth away his ear from
hearing the law, even his prayer shall be abomination.” Do
you hear that? If a man refuses to obey God’s law, if he re-
fuses to comply with any one duty, he cannot pray, he has no
religion, his very devotions are hateful.

6. Young converts, by proper instructions, are easily
brought to be “ temperate in all things.” Yet this is a subject
greatly neglected in regard to young converts, and almost
lost sight of in the churches. There is a vast deal of intem-
perance in the churches. I do not mean intemperate drink-
ing, in particular, but intemperance in eating, and in living


398 INSTRUCTION OF YOUNG CONVERTS.


generally. There is in fact but little conscience about it in
the churches. And therefore the progress of reform in the
matter is so slow. Nothing but an enlightened conscience
can carry forward a permanent reform. Ten years ago, most
ministers used ardent spirit, and kept it in their houses to
treat their friends and their ministering brethren with. And
the great body of the members in the churches did the same.
Now there are but few of either, who are not actual drunk-
ards, that will do it. But still there are many that indulge
without scruple in the use of wine. There are some ministers,
and many professors, who will drink down wine that has as
much spirit in it as brandy and water. This is intemperance.
Chewing and smoking tobacco are mere acts of intemperance.
If they use these mere stimulants when there is no necessity
for it, what is that but intemperance? That is not being
temperate in all things. Until Christians shall have a con-
science on this subject, and be made to feel that they have no
right to be intemperate in anything, they will make but little
progress in religion. It is well known, or ought to be, that
TEA AND COFFEE have no nutriment in them. They are
mere stimulants. They go through the system without being
digested. The milk and sugar you put in them are nourish-
ing. And so they would be just as much so if you mixed
them with rum, and made milk punch. But the tea and the
coffee afford no nourishment. And yet I dare say, that a ma-
jority of the families in this city give more in a year for their
tea and coffee, than they do to save the world from hell
Probably this is true respecting entire churches. Even
agents of benevolent societies will dare to go through the
churches soliciting funds for the support of missionary and
other institutions, and yet use tea, coffee, and in some cases to
bacco. Strange! There is now in this city an agent em-
ployed in soliciting funds, who uses all three of these worse
than useless stimulants. And he is, moreover, a minister ot
the Gospel! No doubt many are giving jive times as much
for mere intemperance as they give for every effort to save
the world. If the church could be made to know how much
they spend for what are mere poisons, and nothing else, they
would be amazed. Sit down and talk with many persons,
and they will strenuously maintain that they cannot get along
without these stimulants, these poisons, and they cannot give
them up—no, not to redeem the world from eternal damna-
tion. And very often they will absolutely show anger if ar-
gued with, just as soon as the argument begins to pinch their
consciences. Oh, how long shall the church show her hypo


INSTRUCTION OF YOUNG CONVERTS. 399


eritical face at the Monthly Concert, and pray God to save
the world, while she is actually throwing away five times as
much for sheer intemperance, as she will give to save the
world. Some of you may think these are little things, and
that it is quite beneath the dignity of the pulpit to lecture
against tea and coffee. But I tell you it is a great mistake
of yours, if you think these are little things, when they make
the church odious in the sight of God, by exposing her hy-
pocrisy and lust. Here is an individual who pretends he has
given himself up to serve Jesus Christ, and yet he refuses to
deny himself any darling lust, and then he will go and pray,
“O Lord, save the world; O Lord, thy kingdom come.” I
tell you it is hypocrisy. Shall such prayers be heard? Un-
less men are willing to deny themselves, I would not give a
groat for the prayers of as many such professors as would
cover the whole United States.

These things must be taught to young converts. It must
come to this point in the church, that men shall not be called
Christians, unless they will cut off the right hand, and pluck
out the right eye, and deny themselves for Christ’s sake. A
little thing? See it poison the spirit of prayer! See it de
base and sensualize the soul! Is that a trifle beneath the
dignity of the pulpit? When these intemperate indulgences
of one kind and another, cost the church five times if not
fifty times more than all they do for the salvation of the world.

_An estimate has recently been made, showing that the
United States consume seven millions of dollars worth of
coffee yearly ; and who does not know that a great part of
this is consumed by the church. And yet, grave ministers and
members of Christian churches are not ashamed to be seen
eountenancing this enormous waste of money ; while, at the
same time, the poor heathen are sending upon every wind of
heaven their agonizing wail for help. Heaven calls from
above, “go preach the Gospel to every creature.” Hell
groans from beneath, and ten thousand voices cry out from
heaven, earth and hell, “ Do something to save the world!” Do
it now. Oh, now, or millions more are in hell through your
neglect. And oh, tell it not in Gath, the church, the ministry,
will not deny even their lusts to save a world. Is this Chris
tianity ? What business have you to use Christ’s money for
such a purpose? Are you a steward? Who gave you this
liberty? Look to it, lest it should be found at last that you
have preferred self-gratification to obedience, and made a
“ god of your belly.”

The time to teach these things with effect is when they are


400 INSTRUCTION OF YOUNG CONVERTS.


oung converts. If they are not properly taught then, if they
Hees wrong habit, and begin with an Eee self-indulgent mode
of living, it is rare that they are ever thoroughly refermed. I
have conversed with old professors on these subjects, and
have been astonished at their pertinacious obstinacy in ža-
dulging their lusts. And I am satisfied that the charch
never can rise out of this sloth until young converts are faith-
fully taught in the outset of their religious course to be tem-
perate in all things. : EER

7. They should be taught to have just as much religion in
all their business, as they have in prayer, or in going to meet-
ing. They should be just as holy, just as watchful, aim just
as singly at the glory of God, be just as sincere and solemn
in all their daily employments, as when they come to the
throne of grace. If they are not, their Sabbath perform-
ances will be an abomination.

8. They should be taught that it is necessary for them to
be just as holy as they think ministers ought to be. There has for
a long time been an idea that ministers are bound to be holy
and practise self-denial And so they are. But it is strange
they should suppose that ministers are bound to be any more
holy than other people. They would be shocked to see a
minister show levity, or running after the fashions, or getting
out of temper, or living in a fine house, or riding in a coach.
Oh, that is dreadful. It does not look well in a minister.
Indeed! For a minister’s wife to wear such a fine bonnet,
orsuch a silk shawl. Oh, no. But they think nothing of all
this in a layman or a layman’s wife. That is no offence at all.
I am not saying that these things do look well in a minister ;
I know they do not. But they look, in God’s eyes, just as
well in a minister as they do ina layman. You have no more
right to indulge in vanity and folly and pride than a minister.
Can you go to heaven without being sanctified? Can you be
holy without living for God, and doing all that you do to his
glory? I have heard professedly good men speak against
ministers having large salaries, and living in an expensive
style, when they themselves were actually spending a great
deal more money for the support of their families than any
ministers. What would be thought of a minister living in the
style in which many professors of religion and elders of
churches are living in this city? Why everybody would say
that they were hypocrites. But, it is just as much an evi-
dence of hypocrisy in a layman to spend God’s money to
gratify his lusts, or to please the world, or his family, as it is
for a minister to do the same. It is distressing to hear some


INSTRUCTION OF YOUNG CONVERTS. 401


of our foremost laymen talk of its being dishonorable to re
ligion to give ministers a large salary, and let them live in an
expensive style, when it is a fact that their own expenses are,
for the number of their families and the company they have
far above that of any minister. All this arises out of funda-
mentally wrong notions imbibed while they were young con-
verts. Young converts have been taught to expect that min-
isters will have all the religion, especially all the self-denial,
and so long as this continues there can be no hope that the
church will ever do much for the glory of God, or the conver-
sion of the world. There is nothing of all this in the Bible.
Where has God said, “ You, ministers, love God with all your
heart and soul and mind and strength,” or “ You, ministers,
do all that you do to the glory of God?” This is said to all
alike, and he who attempts to excuse himself from any duty
or self-denial, from any watchfulness or sobriety, by putting
it off upon ministers, or who ventures to adopt a lower scale
of holy living for himself than he thinks is proper for a min-
ister, is in great danger of proving himself a hypocrite, and
paying the forfeit of his foolishness in hell.

Much depends on the instructions given to young converts.
If they once get into the habit of supposing that they may in-
dulge in things which they would condemn in a minister, it is
ten to one if they ever get out of it.

8. They should aim at being perfect. Every young convert
should be taught that if it is not his purpose to live without
sin, he has not yet begun to be religious. What is religion,
but supreme love to God and a supreme purpose of heart or
disposition to obey God. If there is not this, there is no re-
ligion at all. Itis one thing to profess to be perfect, and an-
other thing to profess and feel that you ought to be perfect. It
is one thing to say that men ought to be perfect, and can be
if they are so disposed, and another thing to say that they are
perfect. If any are prepared to say that they are perfect, all
I have to say is, Let them prove it. If they are so, I hope
they will show it by their actions, otherwise we can never be
lieve they are perfect.

But it is the duty of all to be perfect and to purpose entire,
perpetual and universal obedience to God. It should be
their constant purpose to live wholly to God, and obey all his
commandments. They should live so that if they should sin
it would be an inconsistency, an exception, an individual case,
in which they act contrary to the fixed and general purpose
and tenor of their lives. They ought not to sin at all; they
are bound to be as holy as God is, and young converts should


402 INSTRUCTION OF YOUNG CONVERTS.


be taught to set out in the right course, or they will never be
ight.
sa They sould be taught to exhibit their light. A

If the young convert does not exhibit his light, and hold it
up to the world, it will go out. If he does not bestir himself,
and go forth and try to enlighten those around him, his light
will go out, and his own soul will soon be in darkness.
Sometimes young converts seem disposed to be still and not do
anything in public till they get a great deal of light, or a great
deal of religion. But this is not the way. Let the convert
use what he has; let him hold up his little twinkling rush-
light boldly and honestly, and then God will pour in the oil
and make him like a blazing torch. But God will not take
the trouble to keep a light burning that is hid. Why should
he? Where is the use ?

This is the reason why so many people enjoy so little in re-
ligion. They do not exert themselves to honor God. They
keep what little they do enjoy so entirely to themselves, that
there is no good reason why God should bestow blessings and
benefits on them.

10. They should be taught how to win souls to Christ.
Young converts should be taught particularly what to do for
this, and how to do it, and then taught to live for this end as
the great leading object of life. How strange has been the
course sometimes pursued. These persons have been con-
verted, and there they are. They get into the church, and
then they are left to go along in their business just as they
did before ; they do nothing and are taught to do nothing for
Christ, and the only change is that they go more regularly to
church on the Sabbath, and let the minister feed them, as it
is called. But suppose he does feed them, they do not grow
strong, for they cannot digest it, because they take no exer-
cise. They become spiritual dyspeptics. Now the great
object for which Christians are converted and left in this
world, is to pull sinners out of the fire. If they do not effect
this, they had better be dead. And young converts should
be taught this as soon as they are born into the kingdom.
The first thing they do should be to go to work for this end,
to save sinners.

IL I am to show how young converts should be treated by
the church.

1. Old professors ought to be able to give young converts a
great deal of instruction, and they ought to give it. The truth
is, however, that the great body of professors in the churches
do not know b-w to give good instruction to young converts,


INSTRUCTION OF YOUNG CONVERTS. 408


and if they attempt to give them instruction, give only that
which is false. The church ought to be able to teach her
children ; and when she receives them, she ought to be as
busy in training them to act, as mothers are in teaching their
little children such things as they will need to know and do
hereafter. But this is far enough from being the case gen-
erally. And we can never expect to see young converts ha
bitually taking right hold of duty, and going straight forward
without declension and backsliding, until young converts
shall be intelligently trained by the church.

2. Young converts should not be kept back behind the rest
of the church. How often is it found that the old professor
will keep the young converts back behind the rest of the
church, and prevent them from taking any active part in re
ligion, for fear they should become spiritually proud. Young
converts in such churches are rarely or never called on to
take a part in meetings, or set to any active duty, or the like,
for fear they should become lifted up with spiritual pride.
Thus the church become the modest keepers of their humility,
and teach them to file in behind the old, stiff, dry, cold mem-
bers and elders, for fear that if they are allowed to do any-
thing for Christ, it will make them proud. Whereas, the
very way to make young converts humble and keep them so,
is to put them to their work and keep them there. That is
the way to keep God with them, and as long as God is with
them, He will take care of their humility. Keep them con-
stantly engaged in religion, and then the Spirit of God will
dwell with them, and then they will be kept humble by the
most effectual process. But if young converts are left to fall
in behind the old professors, where they never can do any-
thing, they will never know what spirit they are of, and this
is the very way to run them into danger of the worst species
of spiritual pride.

3. They should be watched over by the church, and
warned of their dangers, just as a tender mother watches
over her young children. Young converts do not know at all
the dangers by which they are surrounded. The devices of
the devil, the temptations of the world, the power of their
own passions and habits, and the thousand forms of danger
they do not know; and if not properly watched and warned,
they will run right into danger. See that mother watching
her little child. Does she let it put its little hand in the can-
dle, or allow it to creep where it will fall, because its own
blindness and ignorance does not prevent it from desiring to
do so? The church should watch over and care for her


404 INSTRUCTION OF YOUNG CONVERTS.


young chiliren, just as mothers watch their little children in
this great city, for fear the carts may run over them, or they
may stray away and be lost; or as they watch them while
growing up, for fear they may be drawn into the whirlpools
of iniquity. The church should watch over all the interests
of her young members, know where they are, and what are
their habits, temptations, dangers, privileges, state of religion
in their hearts, spirit of prayer. Look at that anxious moth-
er, when she sees paleness gather round the little brow of her
child. “ What is the matter with you, my child? Have you
eaten something improper? Have you taken cold? What
ails you?” Oh, how different it is with the children of the
church, the lambs that the Saviour has committed to the care
of his churches. Alas! instead of restraining her children,
and taking care of them, the church lets them go anywhere,
and look out for themselves. What should we say of a
mother who should knowingly let her little child totter along
to the edge of a precipice? Should we not say she was
horribly guilty for doing so, and that if the child should fall
and be killed, its blood would rest on the mother’s head ?
What then is the guilt of the church, in knowingly neglecting
her young converts? I have known churches where young
converts were first totally neglected, and regarded with sus
picion and jealousy; nobody went near them to strengthen
or encourage or counsel them ; nothing was done to lead
them to usefulness, to teach them what to do, or how to do it,
or open to them a field of labor. And then—what then?
Why, when they find that young converts cannot stand every-
thing, and find them growing cold and backward under their
own treatment, they just turn round and abuse them because
they did not hold out.

4. Be tender in reproving them. When Ohristians find it
necessary to reprove young converts, they should be ex-
ceedingly careful of their manner in doing it. Young con-
verts should be faithfully watched over by the elder members
of the church, and when they begin to lose ground, or to
turn aside, they should be promptly admonished, and if
necessary, reproved. But to do it in a wrong manner is
worse than not to do it. It is sometimes done in a manner
that is abrupt, harsh, coarse, and apparently censorious,
more like scolding than like brotherly admonition. Such a
manner, instead of inspiring confidence, or leading to refor-
mation, is just calculated to harden the heart of the young
convert, and confirm him in his wrong courses, while at
the same time it closes his mind against the influence of


INSTRUCTION OF YOUNG CONVERTS. 403


such censorious guardians. The heart of a young convert
is tender, and easily grieved, and sometimes a single un-
kind look will set him into such a state of mind as will fas
ten his errors upon him and make him grow worse and
worse.

You who are parents know how important it is when you

reprove your children that they should see that you do it
from the best of motives, for their benefit, because you wish
them to be good, and not because you are angry. Otherwise
they will soon come to regard you as a tyrant, rather than a
friend. Just so with young converts. Kindness and tender-
hess, even in reproof, will win their confidence, and attach
them to you, and give an influence to your brotherly in-
structions and counsels, so that you can mould them into
finished Christians. Instead of this, if you are severe and
critical in your manner, that is the way to make them think
you wish to lord it over them. Many persons, under pre-
tence of being faithful, as they call it, often hurt young con-
verts in such a severe and overbearing manner as to drive
them away, or perhaps crush them into despondency and
apathy. Young converts have but little experience, and are
easily thrown down. They are just like a little child when it
first begins to walk. You see it tottering along, and there it
stumbles over a straw. You see the mother take up every-
thing from the floor when her little one is going to try to
walk. Just so with young converts. The church ought to
take up every stumbling block, and treat them in such a way
as to make them see that if they are reproved, Christ is in it,
and then they will receive it as it is meant, and it will do
them good.

5. Kindly point out things that are faulty in the young convert
which he does not see. He is but a child, and knows but lit-
tle about religion, and will of course have a great many things
that he needs to learn, and a great many that he ought to
mend, Whatever there is that is wrong in spirit, or unlovely
in his deportment, or uncultivated in manner, that will impede
his usefulness or impair his influence as a Christian, ought te
be kindly pointed out and corrected. ‘To do this in the right
way, however, requires great wisdom. Christians ought to
make it a subject of much prayer and reflection, that they may
do it right, so as not to do more hurt than good. If you re-
buke him merely for the things that he did not see, or did not
know to be improper, it will grieve and disgust him. Such
instruction should be carefully timed ; often it is well to take
the opportunity after you have been praying together, or afte


406 INSTRUCTION OF YOUNG CONVERTS.


a kind conversation on religious subjects, calculated to make
him feel that you love him, and seek his good, and earnestly
desire to promote his sanctification, his usefulness, and hig
happiness. Then a mere hint will often do the work. Just
suggest that “Such a thing in your prayer” or “ your conduct
so and so, did not strike me pleasantly. Had you not better
think of it, and perhaps you will judge better to avoid the same
thing again.” Do it right, and you will help and do him good.
Do it wrong and you will do ten times more hurt than good.
Often young converts will err, through ignorance ; their judg-
ment is unripe, and they need time to think and make up an
enlightened judgment, on some point that at first appears to
them doubtful. In such cases the church should treat them
with great kindness and forbearance. Should kindly instruct
them and not denounce them at once for not seeing, at first,
what perhaps they did not themselves understand, for years
after they were converted.

6. Do not speak of the faults of young converts, behind their
backs. This is quite too common among old professors, and
by and by they hear of it ; and what an influence it must have
to destroy the confidence of young converts in their elder
brethren, to grieve their hearts and discourage them, and per
haps drive them away from the good influence of the church.

IIL. I am to mention some of the evils of defective instruc
tion to young converts.

1. If not fully instructed, they never will be fully grounded
in right principles. If they have right fundamental principles,
this will lead them to adopt a right course of conduct in all
particular cases. In forming a Christian character, a great
deal depends on establishing those fundamental principles
which are correct on all subjects. If you look at the Bible
you will see there, that God teaches right principles which we
can carry out in detail in right conduct. If the education of
young converts is defective, either in kind or degree, you will
see it in their character all their lives. This is the philosophi-
cal result, just what might be expected, and must be always
so. It could be shown, if I had time, that almost all the
practical errors that have prevailed in the church, are the na-
tural results of certain false dogmas, which have been taught
to young converts, and which they have been made to swal
low as the truth of God. at a time when they were so igno
rant as not to know any better.

2. If the instruction given to young converts is not correct
and full, they will not grow in grace, but their religion will
dwindle away and decay. Their course instead of being like


INSTRUCTION OF YOUNG CONVERTS. 404


the path of the just, growing brighter and brighter to the per
fect day, will grow dimmer and dimmer, and decay and finally
perhaps go out in darkness. Wherever you see young con-
verts let their religion taper off till it comes to nothing, you
may understand that it is the proper result of defective in-
struction. The philosophical result of teaching young converts
the truth, and the whole truth, is that they grow stronger and
stronger. Truth is the food for the mind—it is what gives
the mind strength. And where religious character grows fee-
ble, rely upon it, in nine cases out of ten it is owing to their
being neglected, or falsely instructed, when they were young
converts.

3. They will be left justly in doubt whether they are Chris-
tians. If their early instruction is false, or defective, there
will be so much inconsistency in their lives, and so little real
evidence of real piety, that they themselves will finally doubt
whether they have any. Probably they will live and die in
doubt. You cannot make a little evidence go a great way.
If they do not see clearly they will not live consistently, if
they do not live consistently they can have but little evidence,
and if they have not evidence they must doubt, or live in pre-
sumption. ;

4. If young converts are rightly instructed and trained, it
will generally be seen that they will take the right side on all
great subjects that come before the church. Subjects are con-
tinually coming up before the churches, on which they have
to take ground, and on many of them there is often no little
ditficulty to make all the church take right ground. Take the
subject of Tracts, or Missions, or Sabbath schools, or Tem-
perance, for instance, and what cavils and objections, and re-
sistance, and opposition, have been encountered from mem-
bers of the church in different places. Go through the
churches, and where you find young converts have been well
taught, you never find them making difficulty, or raising ob-
jections, or putting forth cavils. I do not hesitate to charge
it upon pastors and older members of churches, that there are
so many who have to be dragged up to the right ground on all
such subjects. If they had grounded them well in the prin-
ciples of the Gospel at the outset, when they were first con-
verted, they would have seen the application of their principles
to all these things. It is curious to see, and I have had great
opportunity to see, how ready young converts are to take
right ground on any subject that may be proposed. See what
they are willing to do for the education of ministers, for mie
sions, for moral reform, for the slaves. If the great body o-


408 INSTRUCTION OF YOUNG CONVERTS.


young converts from the late revivals had been well grounded
in Gospel principles, you would have found in them, through-
out the church, but one heart and one sou in regard to every
question of duty that occurs. Let theic early education be
right, and you have got a body of O'-ristians that you can


depend on. If it had been genera’ in the church, oh, how ©


much more strength there would ave been in all her great
movements for the salvation of the world.

5. If young converts are not well instructed they will inevi-
tably backslide. If their instruction is defective, they will
probably live in such a way as to disgrace religion. The truth,
kept steadily before the mind of a young convert, in proper
proportions, has a natural tendency to make him grow up into
the fulness of the stature of a perfect man in Christ Jesus. If
any one point is made too prominent in the instruction given,
there will probably be just that disproportion in his charac-
ter. If he is fully instructed on some points and not in
others, you will find a corresponding defect in his life and
character.

If the instruction of young converts is greatly defective,
they will press on in religion no further than they are strongly
propelled by the emotions of their first conversion. As soon
as that is spent they will come to a stand, and then they will
decline and backslide. And ever after you will find that they
will go forward only when aroused by some powerful excite-
ment. These are your periodical Christians, that are so apt
to wake up in a time of revival, and bluster about as if they
had the zeal of an angel, a few days, and then die away as
dead and cold as a northern winter. Oh how desirable, how
infinitely important it is, that young converts should be so
taught, that their religion will not depend on impulses and
sect but that they will go steadily onward in the

istian course, advancing from strength to strength, givi
forth a clear and safe and steady light si around. in


REMARKS,


1. The church is verily guilty for her past neglect, in regard
to the instruction of peed Saori i rat

Instead of bringing up their young converts to be working
Christians, the churches have generally acted as if they did
not know how to employ young converts, or what use to


make of them. They have acted like a mother, who has a |


great family of daughters, and knows nothing how to set
them to work and so suffers them to grow up idle and un-


|


|
|
|


INSTRUCTION OF YOUNG CONVERTS. 409


taught, useless and despised, and to be the easy prey of every
designing villain.

Hf the church had only done her duty in training up young
converts to work, and labor for Christ, the world would have
oeen converted long ago. But instead of this, how many
churches even oppose young converts, when they attempt to
set themselves at work for Christ. Multitudes of old profes-
sors look with suspicion upon every movement of young con-
verts, and talk against them, and say, “They are too forward,
they ought not to put themselves forward, but wait for those
who are older.” There is waiting again. Instead of bidding
young converts “God speed,” and cheering them on when
they take hold with warm hearts and strong hands, very often
they hinder them and perhaps put them down. How often
have young converts been stopped from going forward, and
turned in behind a formal, lazy, inefficient church, till their
spirit is crushed, and their zeal extinguished, and after a few
ineffectual struggles to throw off the cords, they conclude to
sit down with the rest and WAIT. In many places, young
converts cannot even attempt to hold a prayer meeting by
themselves, but what the pastor, or some of the deacons, re-
buke them for being so forward, and charge them with spir-
itual pride. “Oh, ho! you are young converts, are you? and so
you want to get together and call all the neighbors together
to look at you, because you are young converts.” You had
better turn preachers at once. A celebrated Doctor of Divin-
ity in New England boasted at a public table of his success in
keeping all his converts still. He had great difficulty, he said,
for they were in a terrible fever to do something, to talk, or

prey, or get up meetings, but by the greatest vigilance he had
kept it all down, and now his church was just as quiet as it
was before the revival Wonderful achievement for a minis-
ber of Jesus Christ! Was that what the blessed Saviour
meant when he told Peter, “Feed my lambs?”

2. Young converts should be trained to labor, just as care-
fally as young recruits in an army are trained for war.

Suppose a captain in the army should get his company
enlisted, and then take no more pains to teach and train and
discipline them, than is taken by many pastors to train anc
lead forward their young converts. Why, the enemy would
laugh at such an army. Call them soldiers! Why, as to any
effective service, they are in a mere state of babyhood, they
know nothing what to do or how to do it, and if you bring
them up to the CHARGE, where are they? Such an army
youd resemble the church that does not train her young

16


410 INSTRUCTION OF YOUNG CONVERTS.


converts. Instead of being trained to stand shoulder ta
shoulder in the onset, they feel no practical confidence in
‘their leaders, no confidence in their neighbors, no confidence
in themselves, and they scatter at the first shock of battle.
Look at the church now. Ministers are not agreed as to
what shall be done, and many of them will turn and fight
back against their brethren, quarrelling about New Measures,
or the Act and Testimony, or something. And as to the
members, they cannot feel confidence when they see their
leaders so divided. And then if they attempt to do anything—
Alas! alas! what ignorance, what awkwardness, what discord,
what weakness, what miserable work they make of t. And
so it must continue, until the church shall train p young
converts to be be intelligent, singlehearted, self-denying,
working Christians. Here is an enterprise now gomg on in
this city, which I rejoice to see. I mean the Tract enter-
prise—a blessed work. And the plan is to train up a body
of devoted Christians to do—what?—why to do what all
the church ought to have been trained to do long ago, to
know how to pray, and how to converse with people about
their soul’s salvation, and how to attend anxious meetings,
and how to deal with inquirers, and how to SAVE SOULS.

3. The church has entirely mistaken the manner in which
she is to be sanctified.

The experiment has been carried on long enough, of trying
to sanctify the church, without finding anything for them to
do. But holiness consists in obeying God. And sanctifica
tion, as a process, means obeying him more and more per
fectly. And the way to promote it in the church, is to give
every one something to do. Look at these great churches,
where they have 500 or 700 members, and get a minister to
feed them from Sabbath to Sabbath, while there are so many
of them together that the greater part have nothing at all
to do, are never trained to make any direct efforts for the
salvation of souls. And in that way they are expecting to be
sanctified and prepared for heaven. They never will be sanc-
tified so. That is not the way God has appointed. Jesus
Christ has made his people co-workers with him in saving
sinners, for this very reason, because sanctification consists in
doing those things which are required to promote this work.
This is one reason why he has not employed angels in the
work, or carried it on by direct revelation of truth to the
minds of men. It is because it is necessary as a means of
sanctification, that the church should sympathize with Chrisi
in his feelings and his labors for the conversion of sinners


INSTRUCTION OF YOUNG CONVERTS, 411


And in this way the entire church must move, before the
world will be converted. When the day comes, that the whole
church shall realize that they are here on earth as a body of
missionaries, and shall live and labor accordingly, then will
the day of man’s redemption draw nigh.

Christian! if you cannot go abroad to labor, why are you
not a missionary in your own family? If you are too feeble
even to leave your room, be a missionary there in your bed-
chamber. How many unconverted servants have you in your
house? Call in your unconverted servants, and your uncon-
verted children, and be a missionary to them. Think of your
physician, perhaps, who is laying himself out to save your
body, while he is losing his own soul, and you receive his
kindness and never make him the greatest return in your
power.

It is necessary that the ‘church should take hold of her
young converts at the outset, and set them to work, and set
them to work right. The hope of the church is in the young
converts.

4. We see what a responsibility rests on ministers, and
elders, and all who have opportunity to assist in training
young converts. How distressing is the picture which often
forces itself upon the mind, where multitudes are converted,
and yet so little pains taken with the young converts, that in
a single year you cannot tell the young converts from the
rest of the church. And then to see the old church mem-
bers turn round and complain of these young converts, and
perhaps slander them, when in truth these old professors
themselves are most to blame. Oh, it is too bad. This reac
tion that people talk so much about after a revival, (as if re
action was the necessary effect of a revival,) would never
come, young converts never would backslide as they do, if
the church were prompt and faithful in attending to their
instruction. If they are truly converted, they can be made
thorough and energetic Christians. Andif they are not such,
Jesus Christ will require it at the hands of the church.


LECTURE XXL


BACKSLIDER IN HEART.


Text.—The backslider in heart shall be filled wlth his own ways.—Prov. xiv. 14.


I cannot conclude this course of lectures, without warnin,
converts against backsliding. In discussing this subject,
will state,

L What backsliding in heart is not.
IL What backsliding in heart is.
HI. What are evidences of backsliding in heart.
IV. Show what are consequences of backsliding in heart.
V. How to recover from this state.
L What backsliding in heart is noć.

1. It does not consist in the subsidence of highly excited
religious emotions. The subsidence of religious feeling may
be an evidence of a backslidden heart, but it does not consist
in the cooling off of religious feeling.

IL What backsliding in heart is.

1. It consists in taking back that consecration to God and
his service, that constitutes true conversion.

2. It is the leaving, by a Christian, of his first love.

3. It consists in the Christian’s withdrawing himself from
that state of entire and universal devotion to God, which con-
stitutes true religion, and coming again under the control of a
self-pleasing spirit. |

4. The text implies that there may be a backslidden heart,
when the form of religion and obedience to God are main-
tained. As we know from consciousness that men perform
the same, or similar acts from widely different, and often from
opposite motives, we are certain that men may keep up all the
outward forms and appearances of religion, when in fact, they |
are backslidden in heart. There is no doubt, that the most
intense selfishness often takes on a religious type, and there
are many considerations, that might lead a backslider in heart,
to keep up the forms, while he had lost the power of godli- |
ness in his soul.

IL What are evidences of a backslidden heart. |

1. Manifest EITO in religious exercises. A stereotyped,


BACKSLIDER IN HEART, 418


formal way of saying and doing things, that is clearly the re
sult of habit, rather than the outgushing of the religious life.
This formality will be emotionless and cold as an iceberg, and
will evince a total want of earnestness in the performance
of religious duty. In prayer and in religous exercises the
backslider in heart will pray or praise, or confess, or give
thanks with his lips, so that all can hear him, perhaps, but in
such a way that no one can feel him. Such a formality would
be impossible where there existed a present, living faith and
love, and religious zeal.

2. A want of religious enjoyment is evidence of a back-
slidden heart. We always enjoy the saying and doing of
those things that please those whom we most love ; further-
more, when the heart is not backslidden, communion with God
is kept up, and therefore all religious duties are not only per-
formed with pleasure, but the communion with God involved
in them, is a source of rich and continual enjoyment. If we
do not enjoy the service of God, it is because we do not truly
serve him. If we love Him supremely, it is impossible that
we should not enjoy His service at every step. Always re-
member then, whenever you lose your religious enjoyment, or
the enjoyment of serving God, you may know that you are
not serving Him right.

3. Religious bondage is another evidence of a backslidden
heart. God has no slaves. He does not accept the service
of bondmen, who serve him because they must. He accepts
none but a love service. A backslider in heart, finds his re-
ligious duties a burden to him, He has promised to serve
the Lord. He dare not wholly break off from the form of
service, and he tries to be dutiful, while he has no heart in
prayer, in praise, in worship, in closet duties, or in any of

‘those exercises which are so spontaneous and delightful,
where there is true love to God. The backslider in heart is
often like a dutiful, but unloving wife. She tries to do her duty
to her husband, but fails utterly because she does not love him.
Her painstaking to please her husband is constrained, not the
spontaneous outburst of a loving heart, and her relation, and
her duties, become the burden of her life. She goes about
complaining of the weight of care that is upon her, and will
not be likely to advise young ladies to marry. She is com-
mitted for life, and must therefore perform the duties of mar-
ried life, but oh, it is such a bondage! Just so with religious
bondage. The professor must perform his duty. He
Foniy about it, and you will hear him naturally sing
slider’s hymns,


4lé BACKSLIDER IN HBART.


Reason I hear, her counsels weigh,
And all her words approve ;

And yet I find it hard to obey,
And harder still, to love.”


4. An ungoverned temper. ,

While the heart is full of love, the temper will naturally be
chastened and sweet, or at any rate, the will will keep it un-
der, and not suffer it to break out in outrageous abuse, or if
at any time, it should so far escape from the control of the
will as to break loose in hateful words, it will soon be brought
under, and by no means suffered to take the control and
manifest itself to the annoyance of others. Especially will a
loving heart confess and break down, if at any time bad tem-
per gets the control Wherever, therefore, there is an irrita-
ble, uncontrolled temper allowed to manifest itself to those
around one, you may know there is a backslidden heart. _

5. A spirit of uncharitableness is evidence of a backslidden
heart. By this, I mean a want of that disposition that puts


the best construction upon every one’s conduct that can be ~


reasonable—a want of confidence in the good intentions and
professions of others. We naturally credit the good profes-
sions of those whom we love. We naturally attribute to
them right motives, and put the best allowable construction
upon their words and deeds. Where there is a want of this
there is evidence conclusive of a backslidden or unloving
heart.

6. A censorious spirit is conclusive evidence of a backslid-
den heart. This is a spirit of fault-finding, of impugning the
motives of others, when their conduct admits of a charitable
construction. It is a disposition to fasten blame upon others,
and judge them harshly. It is a spirit of distrust of Chris-
tian character and professions. It is a state of mind that re-
veals itself in harsh judgments, harsh sayings, and the mani-
festation of uncomfortable feelings toward individuals. This
state of mind is entirely incompatible with a loving heart,
and wherever a censorious spirit is manifested by a profes
sor of religion, you may know there is a backslidden heart.

7. A want of interest in God’s word, is also an evidence
of a backslidden heart. Perhaps nothing more conclusively
proves that a professor has a backslidden heart, than his los-
ing his interest in the Bible. While the heart is full of love,
no book in the world is so precious as the Bible. But when
the love is gone, the Bible becomes not only uninteresting but
nften repulsive. There is no faith to accept its promises, but


|
|


BACKSLIDER IN HEART. 415


sonviction enough left to dread its threatenings. But in gen:
eral the backslider in heart is apathetic as to the Bible. He
does not read it much, and when he does read it, he has not
- interest enough to understand it. Its pages become dark
and uninteresting, and therefore it is neglected.

- 8. A want of interest in secret prayer is also an evidence
of a backslidden heart.

Young Christian! If you find yourself losing your interest
in the Bible and in secret prayer, stop short, return to God,
and give yourself no rest, till you enjoy the light of his coun-
tenance. If you feel disinclined to pray, or read your Bible,
if when you pray and read your Bible,you have no heart in
it, no enjoyment, if you are inclined to make your secret de-
votions short, or, are easily induced to neglect them, if your
thoughts, affections and emotions wander, and your closet
duties become a burden, you may know that you are a back-
slider in heart, and your first business is, to break down, and
see that your love and zeal are renewed. .

9. A want of interest in the conversion of souls and in ef-
forts to promote revivals of religion. This of course reveals
a backslidden heart. There is nothing in which a loving
heart takes more interest than in the conversion of souls in
revivals of religion, and in efforts to promote them.

10. A want of interest in published accounts or narratives
of revivals of religion, is also an evidence of a backslidden
heart. While one retains his interest in the conversion of
souls, and in revivals of religion he will, of course, be interest-
ed in all accounts of revivals of religion anywhere. If you
find yourself, therefore, disinclined to read such accounts, or
find yourself not interested in them, take it for granted that
you are backslidden in heart.

11. The same is true of missions, and missionary work and
operations. If you lose your interest in the work, and in the
conversion of the heathen, and do not delight to read and
hear of the success of missions, you may know that you are
backslidden in heart.

12. The loss of interest in benevolent enterprises generally
is an evidence of a backslidden heart. I say the loss of in-
terest, for surely, if you were ever converted to Christ, you
have had an interest in all benevolent enterprises that came
within your knowledge. Religion consists in disinterested
benevolence. Of course, a converted soul takes the deepest
interest in all benevolent efforts to reform and save mankind.
In good government, in Christian education, in the cause of
temperance, in the abolition of slavery, in provisions for the


416 BACKSLIDER IN HEART.


poor, and in short, in every good word and work, just in pro
portion as you have lost your interest in these, you have evi-
dence that you are backslidden in heart. ae

13. The loss of interest in truly spiritual conversation is
another evidence of a backslidden heart. “Out of the abun-
dance of the heart the mouth speaketh.” This our Lord
Jesus Christ announced as a law of our nature. No conversa-
tion is so sweet to a truly loving heart, as that which relates
to Christ, and to our living Christian experience. If you find
yourself losing interest in conversing of heart religion, and
of the various and wonderful experiences of Christians, if
you ever knew what the true love of God is, you have fallen
from it, and are a backslider in heart.

14. A loss of interest in the conversation and society of
highly spiritual people, is an evidence of a backslidden heart.
We take the greatest delight in the society of those who are
most interested in the things that are most dear tous. Hence,
a loving Christian heart will always seek the society of those
who are most spiritually-minded, and whose conversation is
most evangelical and spiritual. If you find yourself wanting
in this respect, know for certain that you are backslidden in
heart.

15. The loss of interest in the question of sanctification is
an evidence of a backslidden heart. I say again, the loss of
interest, for, if you ever truly knew the love of God, you must
have had a great interest in the question of entire consecra-
tion to God, or of entire sanctification. If you are a Chris
tian, you have felt that sin was an abomination to your soul.
You have had inexpressible longings to be rid of it forever,
and everything that could throw light upon that question of
agonizing importance, was most intensely interesting to you.
If this question has been dismissed, and you no longer take
an interest in it, it is because you are backslidden in heart.

16. The loss of interest in those newly converted, is also
an evidence of a backslidden heart. The Psalmist says, “ All
who fear thee will be glad when they see me, because I have
hoped in thy word.” This he puts into the mouth of a con-
vert, and who does not know that this is true? Why, there
is joy in the presence of the angels of God, over one sinner
that repenteth, and is there not joy among the saints on
earth, over those that come to Christ, and are as babes newly
born into the kingdom of heaven. Show me a professor of
religion, who does not manifest an absorbing interest in con-
verts to Christ, and { will skow you a backslider in heart, an


a hypocrite : he professes religion, and has none


BACKSLIDER iN HEART, 414


17. An uncharitable state of mind in regard to protessed
eonverts, is also an evidence of a backslidden heart. Charity
or love, hopeth all things, and believeth all things, and is very
ready to judge kindly and favorably of those who profess to
be converted to Christ, will naturally watch over them with
interest, pray for them, instruct them, and have as much con
fidence in them as it is reasonable to have. A disposition,
therefore, to pick at, criticise, and censure them, is an evi
dence of a backslidden heart.

18. The want of the spirit of prayer is evidence of a back
slidden heart. While the love of Christ remains fresh in the
soul, the indwelling spirit of Christ will reveal himself as the
spirit of grace and supplication. He will beget strong desires
in the soul for the salvation of sinners and the sanctification
of saints. He will often make iniescessions in them, with
great longings, strong crying and tears, and with groanings
that cannot be uttered in words, for those things that are ac
cording to the will of God, or to express it in Scripture lan-
guage, according to Paul, Romans viii. 26 and 27, “ Likewise
the Spirit also helpeth our infirmities, for we know not what
we should pray for as we ought, but the Spirit itself, maketh
intercession for us, with groanings which cannot be uttered.
And he that searcheth the hearts knoweth the mind of the
Spirit, because he maketh intercession for the saints, accord-
ing to the will of God” If the spirit of prayer departs, it is
a sure indication of a backslidden heart, for while the first
love of a Christian continues he is sure to be drawn by the
Holy Spirit to wrestle much in prayer.

19. A backslidden heart often reveals itself by the manner
in which people pray. For example, praying as if one was
in a state of self-condemnation, or very much like a convicted
sinner, is an evidence of a backslidden heart, Such an one
will reveal the fact, that he is not at peace with God. His
confessions and self-accusations will show, to others what per-
haps he does not well understand himself. His manner of
praying will reveal the fact, that he has not communion with
God ; that instead of being filled with faith and love, he is
more or less convicted of sin, and conscious that he is not in
a state of acceptance with God. He will naturally pray more
like a convicted sinuer, than like a Christian. It will be seen
by his prayer that he is not ina state of Christian liberty—
that he is having a 7th of Romans experience, instead of that
which is described in the 8th of Romans.

20. A backslidden heart will further reveal itself in praying
alinost exclusively for self, and for those friends that are re

18


418 BACKSLIDER IN HEART.


garded as parts of self. It is often very striking and even
shocking to attend a backslider’s prayer meeting, and I am
very sorry to say that many prayer meetings of the church
are little else. Their prayers are timid and hesitating, and
reveal the fact that they have little or no faith. Instead of
surrounding the throne of grace and pouring their hearts out
for a blessing on those around them, they have to be urged up
to duty, to take up their cross. Their hearts do not, will not,
Spontaneously gush out to God in prayer. They have very
little concern for others, and when they do, as they say, take
up their cross and do their duty, and pretend to lead in


prayer, it will be observed that they pray just like a company


of convicted sinners, almost altogether for themselves. They
will pray for that, which, should they obtain it, would be re-
ligion, just as a convicted sinner would pray for a new heart,
and praying for religion as they do, manifests that they have
none, in their present state of mind. Ask them to pray for
the conversion of sinners, and they will either wholly forget
it, or just mention them in such a way as will show that they
have no heart to pray for them. I have known professed
Christian parents to get into such a state that they had no


heart to pray for the conversion of their own children, even —


when those children were under conviction. They would


keep up family prayer, and attend a weekly prayer meeting, —


and never get out of the old rut, of praying round and round
for themselves. A few years since, I was laboring in a revival
in a Presbyterian church. At the close of the evening ser-


mon, I found that the daughter of one of the elders of the —


church, was in great distress of mind. I observed her con-
victions were very deep. We had been holding a meeting
with inquirers in the vestry, and I had just dismissed the in-
quirers, when this young lady, came to me in great agitation,
and begged me to pray for her. The people had mostly gone,
except a few that were waiting in the body of the church for
those friends to be dismissed that had attended the meeting
of inquiry. I called the father of this young lady into the
vestry that he might see the very anxious state of his daugh-
ter’s mind. After a short personal conversation with her in
the presence of her father, I called on him to pray for her,
and said that I would follow him, and urged her to give her
heart to Christ. We all knelt, and he went through with his
prayer, kneeling by the side of his sobbing danghter, without
ever mentioning her case. His prayer revealed that he had
no more religion than she had, and that he was very much in
her state of mind—under an awful sense of condemnation,


BACKSLIDER IN HEART, = 419


He had kept up the appearance of religion. As an elder of
the church, he was obliged to keep up appearances. He had
gone round and round upon the tread-mill of his duties,
while his heart was utterly backslidden. It is often almost
nauseating to attend a prayer meeting of the backslidden in
heart. They will go round, round, one after the other, in
reality praying for their own conversion. They do not so ex-
press it, but that is the real import of their prayer. They
could not render it more evident that they are backsliders
in heart, if they were every one to take his oath of it.

21. Absence from stated prayer meetings for slight reasons
isa sure indication of a backslidden heart. No meeting is
more interesting to a wakeful Christian than the prayer meet-
ing, and while they have any heart to pray, they will not be
absent from prayer meeting unless prevented from attending
by the providence of God. ‘If a call from a friend at the
hour of meeting, can prevent their attendance, unless the call
be made under very peculiar circumstances, it is strong evi-
dence that they do not wish to attend, and hence, that they
are backsliders in heart. A call at such a time would not
prevent their attending a wedding, a party, a pic-nic, or an
amusing lecture. The fact is, it is hypocrisy for them to pre-
tend that they really want to go, while they can be kept away
for slight reasons. If it were any place where they much de-
sired to go, they would excuse themselves, and say, “I was
just going to ride,” or, “I was just going to such a place.”
and away they would go.

22. The same is true of the neglect of family prayer, for
slight reasons.

While the heart is engaged in religion, Christians will
not readily omit family devotions, and whenever they are
_ ready to find an excuse for the omission, it is a sure evidence
that they are backslidden in heart.

23. When secret prayer is regarded more as a duty than as
a privilege, it is because the heart is backslidden. It has al-
ways appeared to me almost ridiculous, to hear Christians
speak of prayer as a duty. It is one of the greatest of earthly
privileges. What should we think of a child’s coming to its
parent for its dinner, not because it was hungry, but as a
duty. How would it strike us to hear a beggar speak of the
duty of asking alms of us. Itis an infinite privilege to be
allowed to come to God, and ask for the supply of all our
wants. But to pray because we must, rather than be-
cause we may, seems unnatural. To ask for what we
want, and because we want it, and because God has en


420 BACKSLIDER IN HEART.


couraged us to ask, and has promised to answer our request,
is natural and reasonable. But to pray as a duty and as if
we were obliging God by our prayer, is quite ridiculous, and
is a certain indication of a backsldden heart.

24. Pleading for worldly amusements, is also an indication
of a backslidden heart. The most grateful amusements pos-
sible, to a truly spiritual mind, are those engagements that
bring the soul into the most direct communion with God.
While the heart is full of love and faith, an hour, or an even-
ing spent alone, in communion with God, is more delightful
than all the amusements which the world can offer. A loving
heart is jealous of everything that will break up or interfere
with its communion with God. For mere worldly amusements
it has no relish. When the soul does not find more delight
in God than in all worldly things, the heart is sadly back-
slidden.

25. Spiritual blindness is another evidence of a backslidden
heart. While the eye is single the whole body will be full of
spiritual light, but if the eye be evil, (which is a backslidden
heart) the whole body will be full of darkness.

Spiritual blindness reveals itself in a want of interest in
God’s word, and in religious truth generally. It will also
manifest a want of spiritual discrimination, and will be easily
imposed upon by the insinuations of Satan. A backslidden
heart will lead to the adoption of lax principles of morality.
It does not discern the spirituality of God’s law, and of His
requirements generally. When this spiritual blindness is
manifest it is a sure indication that the heart is back-
slidden.

26. Religious apathy, with worldly wakefulness and sensi-
bility, is a sure indication of a backslidden heart. We some-


times see persons who feel deeply and quickly on worldly —


subjects, but who cannot be made to feel deeply on religious
tt This clearly indicates a backslidden state of
min

27. A self-indulgent spirit is a sure indication of a back-
slidden heart. By self-indulgence, I mean a disposition to
gratify the appetites, passions and propensities, “ to fulfill the
desires of the flesh and of the mind.”

This, in the Bible, is represented as a state of spiritual
death. I am satisfied that the most common occasion of
backsliding in heart, is to be found in the clamor for indul
gence of the various appetites and propensities. The appe
tite for food is frequently, and perhaps more frequently than
any other, the occasion of backsliding. Few Christians, I


BACKSLIDER IN HEART, 421


fear, apprehend any danger in this direction. God’s injune
tion is, “ Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoeve: ve do, do
all to the glory of God.” Christians forget this, a1 eat
and drink to please themselves—consult their appetites, in-
stead of the laws of life and health. More persons are en-
snared by their tables than the church is aware of. The
table is a snare of death to multitudes that no man can num-
ber. A great many people who avoid alcoholic drinks alto-
gether, will indulge in tea and coffee, and even tobacco, and
in food, both in quantity and quality that violates every law
of health. They seem to have no other law, than that of ap-
petite, and this they so deprave by abuse that, to indulge
it, is to ruin body and soul together. Show me a gluttonous
professor, and I will show you a backslider.

28. A seared conscience is also an evidence of a backslidden
heart. While the soul is wakeful and loving, the conscience
is as tender as the apple of the eye. But when the heart is
backslidden, the conscience is silent and seared, on many sub-
jects. Such an one will tell you that he is not violating his
conscience, in eating or drinking, or in self-indulgence of any
kind. You will find a backslider has but little conscience.
The same will be true in regard to sins of omission very
generally. Muititudes of duties may be neglected and a seared
conscience will remain silent. Where conscience is not awake,
the heart is surely backslidden.

29. Loose moral principles are a sure indication of a back-
slidden heart. A backslider in heart, will write letters on the
Sabbath, engage in secular reading, and in much worldly
conversation. In business, such an one will take little advan-
tages, and play off business tricks, conform to the habits of
worldly business men, in the transaction of business, will be
guilty of deception and misrepresentation in making bargains,
will demand exorbitant interest, and take advantage of the
necessities of his fellow men.

30. Prevalence of the fear of man, is an evidence of a
backslidden heart. While the heart is full of the love of God,
God is feared, and not man. A desire for the applause of
men is kept down, and it is enough for such an one to please
God, whether men are pleased or displeased. But when the
love of God is abated, “the fear of man, that bringeth a

snare,” gets possession of man. To please man rather than
God, is then his aim. In such a state he will sooner offend
God than man.

31. A sticklishness about forms, ceremonies, and non-essen-

tials, is evidence of a backslidden heart. A loving heart, is


422 BACKSLIDER IN HEART.


particular only about the substance and power of religion, and
will not stickle about its forms. 7

32. A captiousness about measures in promoting revivals
of religion, is a sure evidence of a backslidden heart. Where
the heart is fully set upon the conversion of sinners, and the
sanctification of believers, it will naturally approach the sub-
ject in the most direct manner, and by means in the highest
degree calculated to accomplish the end. It will not object
to, and stumble at, measures that are evidently blessed of
God, but will exert its utmost sagacity in devising the
most suitable means to accomplish the great end on which
the heart is set.

IV. Show what are consequences of backsliding in heart.
The text says, that the backslider in heart shall be filled with
his own ways.

1. He shall be filled with his own works. But these are
dead works, they are not works of faith and love, which are
acceptable to God, but are the filthy rags of his own right
eousness. If they are performed as religious services, they
are but loathsome hypocrisy, and an abomination to God,
there is no heart in them, and to such a one, God says, “ Who
hath required this at your hands?” “ Ye are they that justify
yourselves before men, but God knoweth your hearts ; for
that which is highly esteemed among men, is an abomination
in the sight of God.” “TI know you, that you have not the
love of God in you.”

2. He shall be filled with his own feelings. Instead of that
sweet peace and rest, and joy in the Holy Ghost, that he once
experienced, he will find himself in a state of unrest, dissatis
fied with himself and everybody else, his feelings often painful,
humiliating, and as unpleasant and unlovely, as can be well
conceived. It is often very trying to live with a backslider.
They are often peevish, censorious, and irritating, in all their
ways. They have forsaken God, and in their feelings is more
of hell than heaven.

3. They will be filled with their own prejudices. Their
willingness to know and do the truth has gone. They will
very naturally commit themselves against any truth that bears —
hard upon their self-indulgent spirit. They will endeavor to
justify themselves, will neither read nor hear that which will
rebuke their backslidden state, and they will become deeply
prejudiced against everyone that shall cross their path. If
anyone reproves them, they account him as an enemy. They
hedge themselves in, and shut their eyes against the light,
stand on the defensive, and criticise everything that would
search them out.


BACKSLIDER IN HEART. 426


4, A backslider in heart will be filled with his own enmi
ties. Such an one will almost surely lay up things against
those with whom he has any business or other relations.
He will chafe in almost every relation of life, will allow him-
self to be vexed and angry, and get into such relations with
some, and perhaps many persons, that he cannot pray for
them honestly, and can hardly treat them with common civ-
ility. This is an almost certain result of a backslidden heart.

5. The backslider in heart will be full of his own mistakes.
He is not walking with God. He has fallen out of the Divine
order. He is not led by the Spirit, but is walking in spiritual
darkness. In this state he is sure to fall into many and
grievous mistakes, and may get entangled in such a way as to
mar his happiness, and, perhaps, destroy his usefulness for
life. Mistakes in business, mistakes in forming new relations
in life, mistakes in using his time, his tongue, his money, his
influence—all will go wrong with him as long as he remains
in a backslidden state.

6. The backslider in heart will be filled with his own lust-
ings. His appetites and passions, which had been kept under,
have now resumed their control, and having been so long
suppressed, they will seem to avenge themselves by becoming
more clamorous and despotic than ever. The animal appe-
tites and passions will burst forth, to the astonishment of the
backslider, and ten to one, if he does not find himself more
under their influence, and more enslaved by them than ever
before.

7. The backslider in heart will he filled with his own words.
While in that state, he will not, and cannot, control his tongue.
It will prove itself to be an unruly member, full of deadly poi-
son, will set on fire the course of nature, and is itself set on fire
of hell. By his words he will involve himself in many diffi-
culties and perplexities, from which he can never extricate
himself, until he comes back to God.

8. He will be full of his own triais.' Instead of keeping
out of temptation, he will run right into temptation. He will
bring upon himself multitudes of trials that he never would
have had, had he not departed from God. He will complain
of his trials, and yet constantly multiply them. A backslider
feels his trials keenly, and, while he complains of being so
tried by everything around him, he is constantly aggravating
them, and being the author of them, he seems industrious to
bring them upon himself, like an avalanche.

9. The backslider in heart shall be full of his own follies.
Weaving rejected the Divine guidance, he will evidently fal!


424 BACKSLIDER IN HELa ET.,


into the depths of his own foolishness. He will inevitably
say and do multitudes of foolish and ridiculous things. Being
a professor of religion, these things will be all the more
noticed, and of course bring him all the more into ridicule
ard contempt. A backslider is, indeed, the greatest fool in
the world. Having experimental knowledge of the true way
of life, he has the infinite folly to abandon it. Knowing the
fountain of living water, he has forsaken it, and hewed out
to himself cisterns—broken cisterns that can hold no water.
Having been guilty of this infinite folly, the whole course of
his backslidden life must be that of a fool, in the Bible sense
of the term.

10. The backslider in heart will be full of his own troubles.
God is against him, and he is against himself. He is not at
peace with God, with himself, with «+e church, or with the
world. He has no inward rest. Consciance condemns him.
God condemns him. All that know his state condemn him.
“There is no peace to the wicked, saith my Sod.” There is
no position in time or space in which he can be at rest.

11. The backslider in heart will be full of his own cares.
He has turned back to selfishness. He counts himself and his
possessions as his own. He has everything to care for. He
will not hold himself and his possessions as belonging to God,
and lay aside the responsibility of taking care of himself and
all that he possesses. He does not, will not, cast his care upon
the Lord, but undertakes to manage everything for himself,
and in his own wisdom, and for his own ends. Consequently,
his cares will be multiplied, and come upon him like a
deluge.

12. The backslider in heart will be full of his own perplexi-
ties. Having forsaken God, having fallen out of his order,
and into the darkness of his own folly, he will be filled with
perplexities and doubts in regard to what course he shall pursue
to accomplish his selfish ends. He is not walking with, but
contrary to God. Hence, the providence of God will con-
stantly cross his path, and baffle all his schemes. God will
frown darkness upon his path, and take pains to confound hia
projects, and blow his schemes to the winds.

13. The backslider in heart will be filled with his own anx-
ieties. He will be anxious about himself, about his business,
about his reputation, about everything. He has taken all
these things out of the hands of God, and claims them and
treats them as his own, and having faith in God no longer,
and being unable to control events, he must of necessity be
filled with anxiety with regard to the future. These anxieties


BACKSLIDER IN HEART. 425


aes the inevitable result of his madness and folly in forsaking

14. The backslider in heart will be filled with his own dis
Sarena Having forsaken God, and taken the attitude
of self-will before him, God will inevitably disappoint him in
pene his selfish ends. He will frame his ways to please

imself, without consulting God. Of course God will frame
his ways so as to disappoint him. Determined to have his
own way, he will be greatly disappointed if his plans are frus
trated, and the certain course of events under the government
of God must of course bring a series of disappointments
upon subjects that have rebelled against him.

15. The backslider in heart must be full of his own losses.
He regards his possessions as his own, his time as his own,
his influence as his own, his reputation as his own. The lose
of any of these he accounts as his own loss. Having for-
saken God, and being unable to control the events upon
which the continuance of those things is conditioned, he will
find himself suffering losses on every side. He loses his
peace. He loses his property. He loses much of his time.
He loses his Christian reputation. He loses his Christian in-
fluence, and if he persists he loses his soul.

16. The backslider in heart shall be full of his own crosses.
All religious duty will be irksome, and, therefore, a cross to
him. His state of mind will make multitudes of things crosses
that in a Christian state of mind would have been pleasant in
a high degree. Having lost all heart in religion, the perform-
ance of all religious duties are crossing to his feelings. There
is no help for him, unless he returns to God. The whole
course of Divine providence will run across his path, and his
whole life will be a series of crosses and trials. He cannot
have his own way. He cannot gratify himself by accomplish-
ing his own wishes and desires. He may beat and dash him-
self against the everlasting rocks of God’s will and God’s
way, but break through and carry all before him he cannot.
He must be crossed and recrossed, and crossed again, until he
will fall into the Divine order, and sink into the will of God.

17. The backslider in heart will be filled with his own tem-
pers. Having forsaken God, he will be sure to have much to
irritate him. In a backslidden state, he cannot possess his
soul in patience. The vexations of his backslidden life will
make him nervous and irritable ; his temper will become ex-
plosive and uncontrollable.

18. The backslider in heart shall be full of his own dis
graces. He is a professor of religion. The eyes of the world


426 BACKSLIDER IN HEART.


are upon him, and all his inconsistencies, worldly-mindednesa,
follies, bad tempers, and hateful words and deeds, disgrace
him in the estimation of all men who know him.

19. The backslider in heart will. be full of his own delusions
Having an evil eye, his whole body will be full of darkness.
He will almost certainly fall into delusions in regard to doc-
trines, and in regard to practices. Wandering on in darkness,
as he does, he will, very likely, swallow the grossest delusions.
Spiritism, Mormonism, Universalism, and every other ism
that is wide from the truth, will be very likely to gain posses-
sion of him. Who has not observed this of backsliders in
heart.

20. The backslider in heart will be filled with his own bond-
age. His profession of religion brings him into bondage to
the church. He has no heart to consult the interests of the
church, or to labor for its up-building, and yet he is under
covenant obligation to do so, and his reputation is at
stake. He must do something to sustain religious institu-
tions, but to do so, is a bondage. If he does it, it is because
he must and not because he may. Again, he is in bondage to
God. If he performs any, that he calls religious duty, it is
rather as a slave than as a freeman. He serves from fear or
hope, just like a slave, and not from love. Again, he is in
bondage to his own conscience. To avoid conviction and re
morse, he will do or omit many things, but it is all with re-
luctance, and not at allof his own cordial good will

21. The backslider in heart is full of his own self-condem-
nation. Having enjoyed the love of God, and forsaken him,
he feels condenined for everything. If he attempts religious
duty, he knows there is no heart in it, and hence condemns
himself. If he neglects religious duty, he of course condemns
himself. If he reads his Bible, it condemns him. Tf he does
not read it, he feels condemned. If he goes to meeting, the
services condemn him, and if he stays away, he is condemned.
If he prays in secret, in his family, or in public, he knows he
is not sincere, and feels condemned. If he neglects or refuses
to pray, he feels condemned Everything condemns him.
His conscience is up in arms against him, and the thunders
and lightnings of condemnation follow him, whithersoever he
goes.

V. How to recover from a state of backsliding.

1. Remember whence you are fallen. Take up the question
at once, and deliberately contrast your present state with that
in which you walked with God.

2. Take home the conviction of your true position. No


BAOCKSLIDER IN HEART. 437


longer delay to understand the exact situation between God
and your soul.

3. Repent at once, and do your first work over again.

4. Do not attempt to get back, by reforming your mere
outside conduct. Begin with your heart, and at once set
yourself right with God.

5. Do not act like a mere convicted sinner, and attempt to
recommend yourself to God, by any impenitent works or
prayers. Do not think that you must reform, and make your-
self better before you can come to Christ, but understand
distinctly, that coming to Christ, alone, can make you better.
However much distressed you may feel, know for a certainty
that until you repent ay accept his will, unconditionally,
you are no better, but are constantly growing worse. Until
you throw yourself upon his sovereign mercy, and thus return
to God, he will accept nothing at your hands.

6. Do not imagine yourself to bein a justified state, for you
know you are not. Your conscience condemns you, and you
know that God ought to condemn you, and if he justified you
in your present state, your conscience could not justify him.
Come, then, to Christ at once, like a guilty, condemned sinner,
as you are, own up, and take all the shame and blame to
yourself, and believe that notwithstanding all your wanderings
from God, he loves you still—that he has loved you with an
everlasting love, and, therefore, with loving kindness is draw


ing you.


LECTURE XXII.


GROWTH IN GRACE.


TzxtT—But grow in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus
Christ.—2 Pet. iii. 18.

I {musr conclude this Course of Lectures by giving con:
verts instructions on the subject of growth in grace. I shall
pursue the following method :

I. What is grace, as the term is here used ?

IL What the injunction “to grow in grace” does not
mean.

TL What it does mean.

IV. Conditions of growth in grace.

V. What is not proof ot growth in grace.
VL What is proof of growth in grace.

VII. How to grow in grace.

I. What is grace, as the term is here used ?

1. Grace isfavor. It is often used in the Bible to signify
a free gift. The grace of God is the favor of God, His free


IL What the injunction “to grow in grace” does not
mean.

1. It does not enjoin the gradual giving up of sin. Strange
to tell, it would seem that some have so understood it; but
we are nowhere in the Bible commanded to give up sin grad-
ually, we are everywhere commanded to give it up instantly
and wholly.

IM. What it does mean.

1. It enjoins upon us the duty of growing in the favor of
God, of growing in his esteem, in a worthiness of his favor,
and in his love of complacency in us.

IV. Conditions of growth ‘nu grace.

1. Growth or increase in «nything implies a beginning.
Growth in the favor of God impves that we have already found
favor in his sight, and that we ace already indebted for grace
received, and that we are already in grace, in the sense of
having a place among his favored ones.

2, Consequently, growth in grace implies that we have al-
ready repented of our sin, have actually and practically aban-
doned all reek siu. It cannot be that we are in favor with

(428)


GROWTH IN GRACH, 429


God if we are still indulging in known sin against him
Being in favor with God implies, of course, that we are par
doned and favored by him, for the sake of our Lord and
Saviour Jesus Christ. Pardon is favor, and implies the re-
nunciation of rebellion against God. The conditions of the
Divine favor, as revealed in the Bible, are repentance and
abandonment of all known sin, and faith in our Lord Jesus
Christ. I said, as a condition of growth in grace, we must
have the commencement of grace; in other words, we must
be already Christians, must be in a state of acceptance with
God, must have accepted Christ, so far as he is understood,
must be in a state of obedience to all the recognized will of
God. Without this, we cannot be in a state of grace, or in
the favor of God. But being in this state, there is room for
everlasting growth. As we know more of God, we shall be
capable of loving him more,-:of having a more universal and
implicit confidence in him. And there can be no end to this
while we have any being, either in this or any other world.
Our love and confidence in him may be complete, so far as
we know him. This love and confidence will secure his
favor ; but there will be no end to our growth in knowledge
of him, and, consequently, there is room for eternal growth
in grace. The more we love, the more we believe, the more
we know of God, if we conform to all this knowledge, the
more God must be pleased with us, the higher shall we stand
in his favor, and more and greater gifts he will continue to
bestow upon us.

3. Of course, growth in the knowledge of God is a condi-
tion of growth in his favor. We might grow in knowledge,
without growing in his favor, because we might not love and
trust him in accordance with this increased knowledge. But
we cannot love and trust bim more perfectly, unless we be-
come more perfectly acquainted with him. If our love and
faith keep pace with our growing knowledge, we must grow
in his favor. But growth in knowledge must be a condition
of growth in love and faith.

4, Growth in the knowledge of God, as revealed in Christ
Jesus, must be a condition of growth in his favor. It is in
and through Christ Jesus that God reveals himself to man.
It is in Christ Jesus that we get the true idea of the person-
ality of the infinite God. Hence, the text says, “Grow in
grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus
Christ.”’

5. Growth in grace is conditioned on increased knowledge


of what is involved in entire consecration to God.


430 GROWTH IN GRACE.


True conversion to God involves the consecration of our
selves and of all that we have to him, so far as we understand
what is implied in this But, at first, converts are by no
means aware of all that is involved in the highest forms of
consecration. They will soon learn that there are certain
things that they did not think of, and that they did not give
up to God. At first, perhaps, all that was in their thought
was, to lay their naked soul upon the altar, and give up their
whole heart to God. But soon they may learn that they did
not think of all their possessions and everything that was
dear to them, they did not surrender all, and leave not a hoof
behind. They surrendered all of which they thought at the
time, but they were not fully enlightened, they did not think,
nor could they think, at the time, of every appetite, passion,
propensity, of every desire and affection, of everything they
call their own, and which is dear to them, in the whole crea-
tion, to make a thorough surrender and delivery of them all
to God. To gain such knowledge is a work of time; and
growth in the favor of God is conditioned on making a full sur-
render and consecration to God of everything we are, and have,
and desire, and love, as fast as these objects are presented
to thought. As long as we exist, and knowledge increases,
there is no doubt that we shall be called upon to grow in
grace, by consecrating to God every new object of knowledge,
of desire, and of affection, that we may come to know, and
desire, and love, to all eternity. As you get new light, you
must enlarge your consecration from day to day, and from
hour to hour, or you will cease to grow in grace. Whenever
you stop short, and do not lay and leave everything that
you are, that you possess, or that you love, upon the altar of
consecration, that moment you cease to grow in grace. I
pray you let this saying sink deep into your hearts. |

6. Another condition of pret in grace is intense earnest-
ness and constancy in seeking increased religious light, by
the illumination of the Holy Spirit. You will gain no effectual _
religious light except by the inward showing and teaching of —
the Holy Spirit. This you will not obtain unless you continue —
in the true attitude of a disciple of Christ. Remember, he
says, “Except a man forsake all that he hath, he cannot
be my disciple.” He will not, by his Holy Spirit, be your |
Divine teacher unless you renounce self, and live in a state
of continual consecration to him. To obtain and preserve
the teachings of Christ, by his Holy Spirit, you must con-
tinually and earnestly pray for his Divine teaching, and watch
against resisting and grieving him.


GROWTH IN GRACH. 43)


7. Another condition of growth in grace is a constant con-
Puy to all i ates of the Holy Spirit, keeping up
with our convictions of duty, and with our growing knowledge
of the will of God. 4 a dg

8. A more and more implicit faith in God is a condition of
growth in grace. By implicit, I mean an unreasoning faith,
& confidence in God’s character so profound that we trust
him in the dark as well as in the light, as well when we do
not understand the reasons of His dealings with us, or of His
requirements, as when we do. A faith like that of Abraham,
that staggered not at a promise, through unbelief, though the
thing promised seemed most irrational and impossible. An
implicit faith is an unwavering, unquestioning faith, a state of
mind that will rest in God, in his promises, in his faithful-
ness, in his love, whatever appearances may be, and however
trying and apparently unreasonable his commands or provi-
dential dealings may be. Abraham’s faith is often commended
in the Bible. God had promised him a son, but did not give
him the promised seed until he was a hundred years old, and
Sarah was ninety. But notwithstanding Sarah was past age,
and he as good as dead, he believed that God was able to ful-
fill his promise, and when he had received his beloved son,
with the assurance that this was to be his heir, and that
through him the promise was to be fulfilled through all genera-
tions, God tried his faith severely, by commanding him to
offer his Isaac as a burnt sacrifice. He without the least hesi-
tation obeyed, believing that God was able to raise him from
the dead. He made all his arrangements to obey this trying
command, with such calmness that neither Sarah nor Isaac
suspected that any such thing was in contemplation. This
was an instance of the exercise of implicit faith. Growth in
grace, or in the favor of God, is conditioned upon growth in
implicit confidence in Him.

9. A more thoroughly sanctified sensibility is a condition
of growth in the favor of God. By the sensibility, I mean
that department of our nature that feels, desires, and to which
belongs all that we call desire, affection, emotion, feeling, ap-
petite, passion, propensity, lust. The sensibility is an mvol-
untary power, and moral actions and qualities cannot, with
strict propriety, be predicated of it. The states of the sensi-
bility have moral character only as they derive it directly or
indirectly from the action of the will The nature of man, as
® whole, in his depraved condition, is in a very unlovely state,
and although the will may be given up to God, the sensibility
may be in such a state as to be very unlovely in the sight of


4383 GROWTH IN GRACE


one that looks directly upon it, and knows perfectly evet;

excited desire, passion, propensity, lust It is through the
sensibility, mainly, that we are assailed with temptations It
is through this that the Christian warfare is kept up. The
Christian warfare consists in the battle of the will with these
various appetites, passions, propensities and lusts, to keep
them in subjection to the will of God. If the will maintains
its integrity, and cleaves to the will of God, the soul does not
sin in its battle with the excited states of the sensibility. But
these rebellious propensities embarrass the will in the service
it renders to God. To keep them under, occupies much time,
and thought, and strength. Hence the soul cannot render
to God so complete a service, while exerting the full strength
of the will to subjugate these propensities, as it otherwise
might and would render. These appetites, passions, and pro-
pensities, although not sinful in themselves, have been re
garded and spoken of as indwelling sin. Strictly, they cannot
be sin, because they are involuntary. But they are often a
great hindrance to our growth in the favor of God. “For
the flesh lusteth against the Spirit, and the Spirit lusteth
against the flesh, and these are contrary, the one to the other,
so that ye cannot do the things that ye would.” This means
that we cannot do for God what we otherwise would, because
we have to battle so much with the states of the sensibility,
to keep them under. As the sensibility becomes more and
more subdued and in harmony with the will’s devotion to God,
we are left free to render to a more unembarrassed ser-
vice. Therefore, the more thorough the sanctification of the
sensibility, the more thoroughly we are in favor with God.

10. A growing thoroughness and universality of consecra-
tion, of spirit, soul, and body, is the condition of more and
more growth in the favor of God. It is common, at first, for
the steadfastness of the will’s devotion to God to be overcome
by the clamor of the excited appetites, passions, and propen-
sities, or by the various states of the sensibility. Whenever
the will yields to these excited states, you sin. But, in such
eases, the sin is not willful, in the sense of being deliberate
and intentional; it is rather a slip, an inadvertency, a mo
mentary yielding under the pressure of highly excited feeling.
Nevertheless, this yielding is sin. However excited the states
of the sensibility may be, if the will does not yield, there is
strictly no sin. Still, while the will is steadfast, maintains its
consecration, its obedience to God, the appetites originati
in the body, and the various A nites: of the soul, whi
where in the sensibility, may be so ajar, in such confusion,


tt A Mpa hs


REO TP ere


tives $s tas


DAs Ltt a tye L tage ‘je te B IAAT] PEEP A ri rhini


jaer Aia |


pl pie oF


x


Pete Meret hed hoa


clung ee tit


GROWTH IN GRACH. 438


and in such a state of morbid development, that the soul
may be unfitted for the employments and enjoyments of
heaven.

11. Hence, the taking on of a greater fullness of the Divine
jature is a condition of growth in the favor of God. Both
the will and the sensibility of God must be in a state of ut
most perfection and accord. All of his desires and feeli
must be in perfect harmony with his intelligence and his
will, Not so with us, in our state of physical depravity. The
depravity of sensibility must be physical, because it is invol-
ontary. Still, it is depravity, it is a lapsed or fallen state of
the sensibility. This lapsed department of our nature must
be recovered, sanctified, or completely restored to harmony
with a consecrated will, and an enlightened intelligence, or
we are never fitted for heaven. As we become more and
more the partakers of the Divine nature, and of the Divine
holiness, we are more fully sanctified in spirit, soul, and body,
and of course grow more and more in the favor of God.

12. A greater and more all-pervading fullness of the Holy
Spirit’s residence is another condition of growth in the favor of
God. You cannot have it too thoroughly impressed upon you
that every step in the Christian life is to be taken under the
influence of the Holy Spirit. The thing to be attained is the
universal teaching and guidance of the Holy Spirit, so that in
all things you shall be led by the Spirit of God. “If ye are
led by the Spirit, ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh,” If
through the Spirit ye do mortify the deeds of the body, ye
shall live.” “To be spiritually minded is life and peace, but
to be carnally minded is death.” Always remember, there
fore, that to grow in grace, you must grow in the possession
of the fullness of the Holy Ghost in your heart.

13. A deeper personal acquaintance with the Lord Jesus
Christ, in all his official work and relations, is a condition of
growth in grace. His nature, work, and relations are the
theme of the Bible. The Bible presents him to usin a great
variety of relations. In my Systematic Theology I have con:
sidered some sixty or more of these official relations of Christ
to the human race, and these are presented rather as spect-
mens and illustrations than as covering the whole ground of
his relations to us. ~Now, it is one thing to know Christ sim

ly on paper, and as spoken of in the Bible, by reading ot

ae of Christ, and quite another thing to know him per

sonally, in these relations. The Bible is the medium of intro

duction to him personally. What is there said of him is de

siguod to lead us to seek after a personal acquaintance with
19


484 GROWTH IN GRACE.


him. It is by this personal acquaintance with him that we
are made like him. It is by direct, personal, individual inter
course with his Divine mind that we take on his image. “All
we, beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed
into the same image, from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit
of the Lord.” “Faith comes by hearing,” and faith secures
for us a personal acquaintance with Christ. Christ has pro-
misea to manifest himself personally to those who love and
obey him. Do not, my dear children, stop short of securing
this personal manifestation of Christ to your souls. Your
growth in grace will depend upon this. Think not of stop
ping short of personally knowing Christ, not only in all these
relations, but in the fullness of these relations. Do not over-
look the fact that the appropriation of Christ, in each of these
relations, is a personal act of faith. It is a putting on of the
Lord Jesus Christ, a taking of him as yours, in each of these
relations, as your wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption ; your prophet, to teach you, your king, to govern
you, your high priest, to atone for you, your mediator, your
advocate, your strength, your Saviour, your hiding-place, your
high tower, your captain and leader, your shield, your de
fence, your exceeding great reward. In each of these rele
tions, and in all other of his official relations, you need to ap
propriate him by faith so as to secure to you personal in-
tercourse with him in these relations. Growing in a per
sonal acquaintance with him, in these relations, remember,
is an indispensable condition of growth in his favor.
V. I am to notice some things that are not proof of growth
in grace.
1. Growth in knowledge is not conclusive evidence of growth
in grace. Some degree of knowledge is indispensable to our
being in favor with God; and growth in knowledge, as I
have shown, is a condition of growth in grace, but knowledge
is not grace, and growth in knowledge does not constitute
growth in grace. A person may grow ever so much in knowl
edge, and have no grace at all. In hell, they cannot but grow
in knowledge, as they grow in experience, and in the knowk
edge of God’s justice But there, their growth in knowledge
but aggravates the guilt and misery of hell. They know
more and more of God and his law, and their own guilt, and
the more they know, the more wretched they are. From their
increased knowledge they never learn piety.

2. It is not certain evidence that an individual grows in
grace, because he grows in gifts.

A professor of religion may increase in gifts, that is, he may —


- GROWTH IN GRACE, 435


become more fluent in prayer, and more eloquent in preach-
ing, or more pathetic in exhortation without being any more
holy. We naturally increase in that in which we exercise
ourselves. And if any person often exercises himself in ex
hortation, he will naturally, if he makes any effort or laya
himself out, increase in fluency and pungency. But he may
do all this, and yet have no grace at all. He may pray ever
so engagedly, and increase in fluency and apparent pathos,
and yet have no grace. People who have no grace often do
so. It is true, if ne has grace, and exercises himself in these
things, as he grows in grace, he will grow in gifts. No person
can exercise himself in obeying God, without improving in
those exercises. If he does not improve in gifts, it is a true
sign he does not grow in grace. But, on the other hand, it is
not sure evidence that he grows in grace because he im-
proves in certain exercises, for he will naturally improve by
practice, whether he is a Christian or a hypocrite.

3. It is not proof that a person grows in grace, because he
thinks he is doing so. One may be very favorably impressed
with regard to his own progress in religion, when it is evident
to others that he is not only making no progress, but is, in
fact, declining. An individual who is growing worse and
worse, is not ordinarily well aware of the fact. It is not un
common jor both impenitent sinners and Christians to think
- they are growing better, when they are growing no better
This results from the very nature of the case. If any person
is growing worse, his conscience will, for the time being, be
come more and more seared, and his mind more and more
dark, as he stifles conscience and resists the light. Then he
may think he is growing better, just because he has less sense
of sin, and while his conscience continues to sleep, he may
continue under a fatal delusion. A man will judge of his own
spiritual state as he compares himself with a high or low
standard. If he keeps Christ before him, in his fullness, as
his standard, he will doubtless always, at least in this state of
existence, have but a low estimate of his own attainments.
While atthe same time, if he sets before himself the church,
or any of the members of the church as a standard, he will
be very likely to form a high estimate of his progress in relig-
ion, and be very well satisfied with himself. This is the rea
gon why there is such a difference in people’s views of their
own state and of the state of the church. They compare them
selves and the state of the church with different standards.
Hence, one takes a very humbling view of his own state, and
complains of that of the church ; another thinks such com


436 GROWTH IN GRACE.


plaints of the church censorious. To him the church appears
to be doing very well. The reason why he does not th the
church cold, and in a low state, is that Christ is not his stand-
ard of comparison. If a man shuts his eyes, he will not see
the defilement on him, and may think he is clean, while to all
around he appears loathsome.

VL What is proof of growth in grace.

1. The manifestation of more implicit and universal trust
in God is an evidence of growth in grace. The exercise of
greater and more implicit confidence, as I have said, is the
condition of growing in the favor of God. Here, I say, that
the manifestation of this implicit and universal confidence is
proof that this growing confidence exists, and is, therefore,
satisfactory evidence of growth in the favor of God. If you
are conscious in your own soul that you do exercise more im-
plicit and universal confidence in God, this is conclusive proof
to you that you are growing in grace, and as you manifest in
your life, and temper, and spirit, this growing confidence, you

rove to yourself and to others thai you are growing in the
fiver of God. For as you grow in implicit confidence in him
you must grow in his favor.

2. Another evidence of growth in grace, is an increasing
weanedness from the world. The will may be in an attitude
of devotion to God, while the world’s seductive charms very
much embarrass the healthy action of the Christian life.
As the soul becomes crucified and dead to the world, it grows
in the favor of God.

3. Less reluctance of feeling, when called to the exercise of
self-denial, is an evidence of growth in grace. It shows that
the feelings are becoming less and less despotic, that the will
is getting more the mastery of them, that the sensibility is
getting more into harmony with the devotion of the will,
and the dictates of the intelligence.

4, Less temptation to sins of omission, is another evidence
of growth in grace, e. g., less temptation to shun the cross, to
neglect unpleasant duties, less temptation to indolence, less
temptation to shirk responsibility, less temptation to neglect
prayer, reading the Scriptures, private and family devotions,
in short, less and less temptation to shun the performance of
any duty, is evidence of growth in grace. These temptations
consist in the excited states of the sensibility. As these be
come less in strength and frequency, we learn that our sensi-
bility is becoming more completely subjugated to the law of
the intelligence, and the decisions of the will, and consequent
ly, that the work of the sanctification of the spirit, soul and


GROWTH IN GRAOE. 439


body is progressing, and that therefore we are growing in the
favor of God. ve

5. A growing intensity and steadiness of zeal in promotin
the cause of God, is evidence of growth in the favor of God
Sometimes Christian zeal is comparatively cool, at other times
deep and intense, sometimes it will be steady, at other times
fitful and evanescent. As Christians grow in piety, their zeal
becomes deep, intense and steady, and as you are conscious
of this, and in your life and spirit give evidence of it to
others, you have, and give proof, that you are growing in the
favor of God

6. Losing more and more the consciousness of self, and
respect to self, in every action of life, is an evidence of growth
in the favor of God. Some have so much consciousness of
self in everything, and so much respect to self in everything
they say and do, as to be embarrassed im all their Christian
life, whenever they attempt to act or speak in the presence of
others. As they lose this self-consciongness, and have less
respect to self, their service of God becomes more free and un-
embarrassed, and they are all the better servants by how much
less they think of self. Sonetimes young converts cannot
speak or pray, or perform any public duty, without being
either proud or ashamed, as they think themselves to have
performed those duties with more or leas acceptance to those
around them. While this is so, their piety is in a feeble
state. They must lose sight of their own glory, and have a
single eye to the glory of God, to find tance with him.
But as they lose sight of self, and set always before
them, having an eye single to his glory, they grow more and
more in his favor.

7. Consequently, a growing deadness to the flattery or the
censure of men, is an evidence of growth in grace. Paul had
grown in grace so much, that he counted ita li Peony) to
be judged of man, he only sought to commend himself to
God. As you find yourself growing im this state of deadness
to the flatteries or censures of men, you have evidence that
you grow in grace. ;

8. A growing cordiality in the acceptance of the whole will
of God, is evidence of growth in his favor. Some rebel
against his will as erated in his word, and in his provi-
dence. Others, under trying circumstances will barely tole
rate his will, as revealed in his word and in providence ; but
those who are growing in grace, find it more natural to them,
te embrace his whole revealed will, with greater and greater
cordiality,


438 GROWTH IN GRACE,


9. Growing calmness and quietness under great afflictions,
is an evidence of growth in the favor of God. This evinces
a broader and more implicit faith, a fuller and more cor-
dial acceptance of the will of God, as revealed in these afflic-
tions, and shows that the soul is more steadily and firmly at
anchor upon its rock, Christ. 3 ;

10. A growing tranquillity under sudden and crushing disas
ters and bereavements, is an evidence of growth in grace.
The more tranquil the soul can remain, when sudden storms
of providence come upon it, sweeping away its loved ones,
and blighting its earthly hopes, the greater is its evidence of
being under the particular favor of God. This tranquillity
is both a result and an evidence of the favor of God.

11. Growing patience under much provocation, is an evi-
dence of growth in the favor of God.

12. “Long suffering with joyfulness,” is an evidence of
growing in favor with God. When you find that you can,
not only tolerate, but accept the will of God, as revealed in
calling you to suffer, and especially, when you can accept
these sufferings, and endure them long and with joyfulness,
you have evidence that you are growing in the favor of God.

13. A growing cordiality and joyfulness under crosses and
disappointments, and severe pain, is evidence of growth in
the favor of God.

14. An increasing deadness to all that the world has to
one or to threaten, is an evidence of growth in the favor
of God.

15. A growing repose in, and satisfaction with, all the allot
ments of providence, is an evidence of growth in

16. Less temptation to murmur or repine at any allotment
of providence, is evidence of growth in grace.

17. Less temptation to fret, when we are crossed or dis
appointed in any respect, is an evidence of growth in grace.

18. Less and less temptation to resentment, and the spirit
of retaliation, when we are in anywise insulted or abused, is
evidence that the sensibility is becoming more and more thor-
oughly subdued, and consequently, that we are growing in
favor with God.

19. Less temptation to dwell upon, and to magnify our
trials and troubles, to think of ea and speak of them to
others, is evidence that we think less and less of self, and ac
cept our trials and troubles with more and more complacency
in God. It is sad to hear some professedly good people,
dwelling ever upon, and magnifying their own troubles and
qials. But, if they grow in grace, they will think less and


bee dal cde
eee eae E E


eet wath wg


GROWTH IN GRACE, 439


less of these, be more inclined to think of them as “light af
flictions.” The more we grow in grace, theless stress we lay
upon the evils we meet with in the way. Said a good man
to me once, who was really passing through what the world
would call very severe trials and afilictions (he had lost a
beloved wife, and his children had died one after another),
“I have many mercies, and few afflictions.” When, under
such circumstances, a man can say, “the lines have fallen
unto me in pleasant places, I have a goodly heritage,” he has
the most satisfactory evidence that he is growing in the favor
of God. For this state of mind is both aresult and an evi-
dence of the favor of God.

20. A growing disposition to make light of our trials and
to magnify our blessings, is an evidence that we are growing
in the favor of God.

21. Less and less anxiety and carefulness about the events
of providence, and especially about the things that nearly and
deeply affect ourselves, is evidence of growth in grace. This
is an evidence of a broader and more implicit faith, of amore
submissive will, and of a diminishing tendency to self-seeking;
and is, therefore, an evidence of growing favor with God.

22. Being less and less disturbed and troubled by the
events of life, especially those that go counter to our own
plans, and hopes, and expectations, and desires, and that
thwart our most cherished aims, is an evidence of growth in


ce.
208. A growing and realizing confidence in the wisdom, be
nevolence, and universality of the providence of God, a state
of mind that sees God in everything, is evidence of growth
in grace. Somé minds become so spiritual that they hardly
seem to reside in the body, and appear continually to perceive
the presence of God in every event, almost as if they were
disembodied, and beheld God, face to face. They seem to
dwell, live, move, and have their being, rather in the spiritual,
than in the natural world. They are continually under such
a sense of the Divine presence, agency, and protection, as
hardly to appear like inhabitants of earth. They are a living,
walking mystery to those in the midst of whom they dwell The
springs of their activity are so divine, their life is so much
hidden in God, they act under influences so far above the
world, that they cannot be judged by the same standards as
other men. Carnal minds cannot understand them. Their
hidden life is so unknown, and so unknowable to those who are
far below them in their spiritual life, that they are necessarily
regarded as quite eccentric, as being mystics or monomaniacs,


440 GROWTH IN GRACE. My


and as having very peculiar religious views, as being enthus _
asis and perhaps fanaties These persons are in the world,
but they live above the world. They have so far escaped from
the poliutions that are in the world, that they can truly, and
understandingly say with Paul, in Gal wi. 14, “But God for
bid that I should glory, save in the cross of eur Lord Jesus 7
Christ, whereby the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the ©
world.” Such persons are evidently growing in the grace of ~
God

24. Being less and less disposed to dwell upon the faults —
and foibles of others, is an evidence of growth in grace. i

25. Being less and less disposed to i x
severely, or to judge uncharitably of others A growing deli- —


cacy, or tenderness in speaking of their real or supposed ~


faults, behind their back, is an evidence of growth in grace.
26. An increasing reluctance to regard or treat any one


an enemy, and an increasing ease and naturalness in treating


them kindly, in praying for them heartily, and in efforts to do _
them good, is an evidence of growth in grace.

27. Less and less temptation to remember an inj E
the abatement of all desire to retaliate when injured, is an y
evidence of growth in grace. 5

28. A growing readiness and cordiality in forgiving and
burying an injury out of sight, and a kin of moral inability
to do otherwise than seek the highest good of those who have |
injured us most deeply, is an evidence of growth in grace. |

29. When we find in our own experience, and manifest to _
others, that it is more and more natural to regard all men as


E ;


God, in aiming to do good to all men, to enemies and
slike, we have then ourselves, and give to others, the


GROWTH IN GRACE. 44]


the cross, and despise the shame,” or any sacrifice that we are
salled to make, we have evidence that we are growing in favor
with God.

32. Again, when we find ourselves more and more inclined
to “count it all joy, when we fall into divers temptations,”
and when we ar2 disposed to look upon our trials, vexations,
losses, and crosses, in such a light as to lay less and less stress
apon them, we have evidence that we are growing in patience,
and therefore, in favor with God.

33. When we find less and less reluctance to making full
confession to those whom we have injured, when with increas
ing readiness and cordiality we lay our hearts open to be
searched, take home conviction of wrong-doing, and when in
such cases, we cannot rest till we have made the fullest con-
fession and reparation within our power, when to own up,

and confess, and make the fullest satisfaction, is a luxury
us, rather than a trial and a cross, we have evidence that we
are growing in the favor of God.

34. When we are more and more impressed and affected by
the mercies of God, and by the kindnesses of our fellow-men
and those around us, when we more deeply and thoroughly
appreciate manifestations of kindness in God, or in any one
else, when we are more and more humbled and affected b
these kindnesses, and find it more and more natural to walk
humbly, love mercy, and do justly,” and live gratefully, we
have evidence that we are growing in favor with God.

35. When we find ourselves drawn, with increasing earnest-
ness to follow on to know more of the Lord, we have evi-
dence of growth in grace.

36. When we find ourselves more and more readily im-
pressed and affected, quickened and stimulated by religious
truth, and when we find an increasing harmony in the action
of all our powers, intellectual, voluntary, and sensitive, in ac
cepting, and resting in, the whole will and providence of God,
however afflictive they may at present be, we have evidence
that we are growing in grace.

37. A growing jealously for the honor of God, for the purity
and honor of his church, for the rights of God, and for the
rights of all men, is evidence of growing in conformity to
God, and, of course, of growing in his favor.

VIL How to grow in grace.

1. Fulfill the conditions noticed under the fourth head of
this lecture. I need not repeat them.

2. Remember that every step of progress must be made by
faith, and not by works. The mistake that some good men

19*


442 GROWTH IN GRACE.


have made upon this subject, is truly amazing. Dr. Chalmers
affirms, that the way to be sanctified is to work for it. A few
years since, Dr. Pond published a pamphlet, in which he took
ground on this subject, with Dr. Chalmers, and affirmed that
the idea of being sanctified by faith was an absurdity. In-
deed, the custom has been almost universal, to represent
growth in grace as consisting in the formation of habits of
obedience to God. Now, it is quite surprising that so many
good men have fallen into this mistake. The fact is, that
every step of progress in the Christian life, is taken by a
fresh and fuller appropriation of Christ by faith, a fuller bap-
tism of the Holy Spirit. As our weaknesses, infirmities, be
setting sins, and necessities, are revealed to us, by the circum-
stances of temptation through which we pass, our only
efficient help is found in Christ, and we grow only as we step
by step more fully appropriate him, in one relation or another,
and more fully “put him on.” As we are more and more
Stee of self-dependence, as we more and more renounce
and discard all expectation of forming holy habits by any
obedience of ours, and as by faith we secure dee and
deeper baptisms of the Holy Ghost, and put on the Lord
Jesus Christ, more and more thoroughly, and in more of his
official relations, by just so much the faster do we grow in
the favor of God. Nothing can be more erroneous an
dangerous than the commonly received idea of growing in
grace by the formation of holy habits. By acts of faith alone,
we appropriate Christ, and we are as truly sanctified by faith
as we are justified by faith In my Systematic Theology, in
pointing out the conditions of entire or permanent sanctifica-
tion, I have noticed some sixty of the official relations of Christ,
as I have before said, and have there insisted, as I here insist,
that growth in holiness, and consequently, in the favor of
God, is secured only by fresh, fuller, and more thorough ap
propriations of Christ, in all these official relations. you
would grow in grace you must do it through faith. You must
pray in faith for the Holy Spint. You must appropriate and
put on Christ through the Holy Spirit. At every forward
step in your progress, you must have a fresh anointing of the
Holy Spirit ugh faith.


REMARES


1. We see, from this subject, the vast importance of rightly
instructing young converts. In many cases, they have very little
‘ustruction suited to their experience and degree of Christian


GROWTH IN GRACE. 448


intelligence. By some, such views are taken of the Persever-
ance of the Saints, that it is assumed that babes in Christ will
grow without nursing, and without that sincere milk of the
_ word, by means of which they must grow. Some, taking it for
granted that they need instruction, unwittingly give them false
instruction, set them to work outwardly and zealously, without
paying much regard to the strengthening and developing of
their inward life. They do not teach them how to appropriate
and live on Christ as their life, but continually press them up,
to do their duty, to labor for God, and labor for souls, not
sufficiently impressing upon them the idea that their doing is
of no account, unless it proceeds from the life of God in their
own souls. The result of this is a bustling, outward activity,
while the inward spiritual life is decaying. This must end in
disgust at one’s own want of heart, and a settling back into
apathy and neglect. :

2. Sometimes there is a mistake made in the opposite direc
tion. They are taught to rest in Christ, in such a sense as to
take on a type of quietism and antinomian inactivity. They
are exhorted to exercise faith, but they are not earnestly im-
pressed with the conviction that it must be a faith that works,
and works by love, that purifies the heart, and overcomes the
world. The result is, they do nothing in religion. Sinners
are allowed to sleep on, and go to hell, in their midst, and
they make no effort to save them.

3. We see the importance of a Holy Ghost anointed minis
try. The great want of the church is a ministry so thor
oughly anointed by the Holy Ghost as to know how to lead
the church onward and upward, to the fullest development of
Christian piety. In order to instruct converts, and keep the
church progressing in holiness, the minister must progress
himself. He must be a truly living, growing Christian. I
have good reason to know that the churches in many places
are deeply pained by the want of living piety and growth in
their ministers. Their ministers are intellectual, literary,
philosophical, theological, in their teaching, but they are seas
deficient in unction. They have but little power with God or
with man. They instruct the intellect to a certain extent, but
they do not meet the wants of the heart. Converts starve
under their preaching. They preach an intellectual, rather
than a spiritual Gospel. They preach religion as a theory, a
doctrine, a philosophy, and not as a real living experience. It
is often exceedingly painful to hear ministers preach who mani-
festly do not know what they say, or whereof they affirm.
They speak of religios. as an inward sentiment, instead of


444 GROWTH IN GRACE.


heart devotion to God ; as an emotion, a feeling, instead of
an all-embracing and efficient love, a voluntary state and atti-
tude of the mind, from which necessarily proceeds a holy life.
They speak of faith as a mere intellectual state or convie


tion, and not as an act of trust, and of committal of the —


|


X
4


q


X


whole being, to do and suffer all the will of God. They speak —


of repentance as if it were a mere involuntary sorrow for sin. |


They do not teach that repentance is a change of mind toward
God, a renunciation of the self-seeking spirit, and a

of the whole mind to God. They speak of holiness, as if it
were a state utterly unattainable in this life. Indeed, I say
it with sorrow, but I must say it, the teaching of a great many
ministers is but a stumbling-block to the church. Under


their instruction, converts do not, and cannot get so estab —


lished in grace as to be greatly useful, or to live lives that are
honorable to Christ. Just think, in the Nineteenth Century,
ministers preach to converts that they must grow in grace by
works. Be heaven and earth amazed atthis! Such teachers


do not know how to grow in grace themselves. Shall I beac


counted harsh if I say, “ They be blind leaders of the blind.”

4. We see the reason of so much backsliding. Converts
will of course backslide who are led by false instruction. If,
on the one hand, they are set to work out sanctification by


works, their works will soon become dead works, and not be _
the result of that faith that works by love. If, on the other —
hand, they are crammed with abstract notions and doctrines, —


e Urk


and taught to rest in an antinomian faith, they will sink a
into supmeness and inactivity. I fully believe that in nearly —


all cases where there has been disastrous reaction after are


vival, it has been owing to the want of timely and proper in-


struction. But to be timely and proper, it must be anointed Š


instruction.
5. The Theological Seminaries need to pay vastly more at-


tention to the growth in grace of their students. They need
a professor of experimental religion, who has experience and —


power enough to press them along into those higher regions
of Christian experience which are essential to their being able
to lead the church on to victory. It is amazing to see how


little effort is made to cultivate the heart of young men study- —
ing for the ministry, We must have a change in this respect, —


A much higher standard of Christian experience must be re


quired as a condition of ordination. It is painful to see how _
carefully men will be examined in regard to their intellectual
attainments, while the accounts they give of their Christian —
experience will barely allow us to hope that they have been —


ah Senn arg


GROWTH IN GRACE. 448


sonverted. How sad it is to set such young men to feed the
church of God. How do old Christians mourn, when they
e aa appointed leaders in the church of God but spiritual

a

6. I have never been present at the examination of a candi-
date for ordination where anything more than simple evidence
of conversion was required of him. I never heard them
questioned touching their progress in Christian experience,
and regarding their spiritual ability to lead the flock of God
into green pastures and beside the still waters. I never
heard them questioned in a manner that manifested the
slightest conception of what are the indispensable spiritual
qualifications of a man who is to stand forth as the leader and
spiritual instructor of the church of God. More hours are
spent in ascertaining the intellectual attainments of a candi-
date than minutes to ascertain his spiritual and experimental
attainments. The whole examination will plainly indicate
that the ordaining body lay very little stress on this part of a
minister’s education. Is it any wonder that the church of
God is so feeble and inefficient, while its leaders and teachers
are, many of them, mere children in spiritual knowledge,
while a ripe Christian experience is made no part of the in
dispensable education of a minister. Why, this is infinitely
more dangerous and ridiculous than to intrust men to lead
an army in the field, while they merely understand mathemat-
ics. and never havehad any training or experience in mili-
wary matters.

In this respect, too, there must be a great change. Churches
should refuse to ordain and receive pastors, unless they are
fully satisfied of their having made much progress in Chris-
_ tian experience, so as to be able to lead on, and keep the

church awake.

They should insist upon the education of his heart as well
as his head; upon his ability to take young converts, and con-
- duct them on to those deep experiences that will make them
stable and efficient workers in the cause of God. Think of
theological seminaries like those over which Dr. Chalmers
and Dr. Pond have presided, where the leaders of the church
of God are taught that sanctification or growth in grace is at
tained by works and not by faith. Tell it not in Gath. Alas
for Zion, when her great and good men fall into such mis

takes,


4


ian College Library = Mn ee


Sy:


a


A ay
ae a ee W,


otpore ERRA PIRORI ao
te Sagi K
of >
r Fa
een ty Pas


So
a
