The Character, Claims, and Practical Workings of Freemasonry (Charles G. Finney, 1869)
==========================================================
Finney's 1869 evangelical indictment of Freemasonry; the revivalist's case against the lodge. Public domain. Digitized from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/characterclaimsp0000revc).

Pesta IN geese Sold eh inh


Viney
Sev USO Ny gage cece mae Se)
NDE SR ear eRr coset ee ron
Sinstueriennyar Va rarssuarieann eh Aergee neteycaes,
ar PARIMCANSoeh ea Periiavctesie
: RUN Te BS


Aiveyrech lees


. LOUNGE NUN ATA SAGAN deg hy


SRA NIN.
et V NINN AVN


WLAN SSW NS SONAZAT NCES A NNR
MSIADUAN Oetesadoven Vinmacy PEN lass VM RAVEU UREN DSRS REAL NaN SUIS MATT NAN,
SSeS Rata ASHINP NES INIY LON AIBN DARN SURE ote


VINSVND SH hoy,
SUOMI VN EATS ed ey,


Flas eA ENE
S8vd Mowe


SOUS Cay

Vote ASIN ss LAPIN SS ak
aay A Vem Dum eboe CU Rea CU PASE SNE Soe eene ics
Vee


PNIVERSIND Ls SNOT SOA, st


aN
VANZSENS TONG TIAAD SN OAD AL At RER eR Se APRN ERIN NA ISN
SAN IC MERON SF SEED gm AA NAVERY GADARNABANL ASS ENSO GIR Mem ee

NOR VSS ASRLUAUSAS NOLIN Nemo ay AN MAW ATED WENANENERD SN Wt hs Gore

MARasatstehy LPL N ee) Se cn CRA A Is Te ee ress hoe

ne SHAN NAS LAALA SG NCUSNI NAIK UG eSATA MUDRSARE NDA A Cay


Narre
ADM Abe Neag aha


tug V wapaprn


SANNA


SVE Ses

SEMAROG IAEA PRONRN Gay vay CaN. Pen ASPGATAN Neweaewenien, NOS SOR kS,
tease Way Aan . NOEs ANNE STAA APSA Aa rATIN LAD NeMPND ee
sre ort eal wen ApiesD ADA EADS Swe SCREEN ere Br try
Dire irc Senin ‘ SASDOR WRENNER ENE GF KeaR oegAeE MAAS TTR DAEA ROR

Ro NAVINI” BMPS Saag .


BELINSVANAIE, MENS Un ents a Se
MINED ENEATAANDRIN DME NS pape NEN EARN DNS
VA raars aaa t Ma Vass NORM REISE cgi ny

AP MARTIN TV ans.
Lect)
SENDAEAB UWA) ASAKOIVANENEASS
IVS TNC Na,
Cena


SEs
ARE TERE
Van artawsasie trina


s SS
SEYOV I Aenea!
MS poner


VAG Ny
GePSA NES,


in 2024


7 - 7 } .
* —— At
4 i -
. tt ‘.
as
ie _ et \fe —— : 7


Ee


CHARACTER, CLAIMS,


AND


PRACTICAL Worxincs


FREEMASONRY.


py rey. f fp. FINNEY,


Late President of Oberlin College, Ohio.


SAL


I SPOKE OPENLY TO THE WORLD, AND IN SECRET
HAVE I DONE NOTHING, John xviii. 20.


CIN CIN NA TET:


. Western Tracr anp Boox Socrery 176 Exm Sr.


THE MASTER'S COLLECE


Entered according to Act of Congress in the year 1869, by the
WESTERN TRACT AND BOOK SOCIETY,


In the Clerk’s Office of the District Court of the United States, for the
Southern District of Ohio.


CONTENTS.


CHAPTER I. PAGE.


EDO DU CMOR ts Sees Pe Se Bs ae as st a, Gs


CHAPTER II.
Sera. Ol. Manian meen. scan Nis as oh aus oD
CHAPTER Iil.
EV GiyaknOwil, cutee a sas alae oy cs fo fe ce ge: oes 120


CHAPTER IV.


Credibility of the Books revealing Masonry, . . . . 30


CHAPTER V.


Examination of the Books revealing Masonry, . . . 63


CHAPTER VI.


Mister sconce med Wg cnrl tes fe. lis) ees PO


CHAPTER VII.
Royal Avch Deores, 2 2 0. ss see ew te BY


CONTENTS.


CHAPTER VIII. =


Sworn to Perseeute,. . . - +--+ + +e - 102


CHAPTER IX.
Awful Profanity of Masonic Oaths, . . . . - - 108


CHAPTER X.
Perverse and Profane Use of the Holy Bible, . . . 128


CHAPTER XI.


Freemasonry imposes on the Ignorant,. . . . . . 138


CHAPTER XII.
Masonry susceptible of Change only by Additions, . 152


CHAPTER XIII.
The Claim of Freemasonry to Antiquity is False,. . 170


CHAPTER XIV.
The boasted Benevolence of Masons a Sham, . . . 184


CHAPTER XY.


Freemasonry is a False Religion,. . . . . . ~~. 199


CHAPTER XVI.


The Argument that Great and Good Men have been
and are Freemasons examined, . ...- . - . 220


CONTENTS.


CHAPTER XVII. een
Masonic Oaths are Unlawful and Void, . ... . 229


CHAPTER XVIII.


Why Freemasons resort to Threats and refuse to dis-
cuss ther: Principles, 3 tw ft actee hx eile 9 200


CHAPTER XIX.
Relations of Masonry to the Church of Christ,. . . 255


CHAPTER XxX.
Conclusion, «cies «<0 “ws », cr 0% oh |e. to ni) 9) oie tO


[REFA CE.


In few words I wish to state what are no¢ and what
are my reasons for writing this book.

1. Itis not that I have any quarrel or controversy with
any member of the Masonic Order. Noone of them can
justly accuse me of any personal ill-will or unkindness.


2. It is not because I am fond of controversy—I
am not. Although I have been compelled to engage in
much discussion, still I have always dreaded and en-
deavored to avoid the spirzt and even the form of con-
troversy.

3. It is not because I disregard the sensibilty of
Freemasons upon the question of their pet institution,
and am quite willing to arouse their enmity by exposing
it. I value the good opinion and good wishes of Free-
masons as I do those of other men, and have no dispo-
sition to capriciously or wantonly assail what they regard
with so much favor.

4. Itis not because I am willing, if I can dutifully
avoid it, to render any member of the Fraternity odious.
But my reasons are :

1. I wish, if possible, to arrest the spread of this
great evil, by giving the public, at least, so much inform-
ation upon this subject as to induce them to examine
and understand the true character and tendency of the
institution.

2. I wish, if possible, to arouse the young men who
are Freemasons, to consider the inevitable consequences
of such a horrible trifling with the most solemn oaths, as
is constantly practiced by Freemasons. Such a course
must, and does, as a matter of fact, grieve the Holy Spirit,
sear the conscience, and-harden the heart.

3. I wish to induce the young men who are not Free-
masons “to look before they leap,’ and not be deceived
and committed, as thousands have been, before they
were at all aware of the true nature. of the institution
of Freemasonry.


PREFACE.


4. I, with the many, have been remiss in suffering
anew generation to grow up in ignorance of the character
of Freemasonry, as it was fully revealed to us who are
now old. We have greatly erred in not preserving and
handing down to the rising generation the literature upon
this subject, with which we were made familiar forty
years ago. Forone,I must not continue this remissness,

5. Because I know that nothing but. correct inform-
mation is wanting to banish this institution from whole-
some society. This has been abundantly proven. As
soon as Freemasons saw that their secrets were made
public, they abandoned their lodges for very shame.
With such oaths upon their souls, they could not face
the frown of an indignant public, already aware of their
true position.

6. Freemasons exhort each other to maintain a dig-
nified silence and are exhorted not to enter into contro-
versy with opposers of Freemasonry. The reasons
are obvious to those who are informed. We know
why they are silent if they are so, and why they will
not enter the field of controversy ard attempt to
justify their institution, Let anyone examine the ques-
tion and he will see why they make no attempt to just-
ify Freemasonry as it is revealed in the books from
which I have quoted. I greatly desire to have the pub-
lic, and especially the church of Christ, understand
what Freemasonry is. Then let them act as duty requires,

7. Should I be asked why I have not spoken out up-
on this subject before, I reply that until the question was
sprurg upon us in this place a year ago, I was not at all
aware that Freemesonry had been disinterred and
was alive, and stalking abroad over the face of the
whole land.

8. This book contains the numbers published in
in the Independent last year,, These are revised, en-
larged and rearranged. ‘To these are added eight num-
bers not heretofore published.

9. I have said in the body of the work, and say
also in this preface, that I have no pecuniary intent in
the sale of this work. I have not written for money,
nor for fame. I shall get neither for my pains. I
desire only to do good. Pe FINNEY.


JNTRODUCTION.


Ir is high time that the Church of Christ was awake
to the character and tendency of Freemasonry.

Forty years ago, we supposed that it was dead, and
had no idea that it could ever revive. But, strange to
tell, while we were busy in getting rid of slavery, Free-
masonry has revived, and extended its bounds most
alarmingly.

I propose to write a series of articles, giving my
views of the character and tendency of the institution.

I know something about it, for [ have been a Free-
mason myself. Soon after I was twenty-one years of
age, and while in Connecticut at school, an old uncle of
mine persuaded me to join the Freemasons, represent-
ing that, as I was from home and much among strangers,
it would be of service to me, because if a Freemason I
should find friends everywhere. The lodge in that
place was but a Master’s lodge. I therefore tock three
degrees, or as far as what they call “the sublime degree
of Master Mason.” When | returned to the State of
New York, to enter upon the study of law, I found at
Adams, where I resided, a Masonic lodge, and united
with them. I soon became secretary of the lodge, and
met regularly with the lodge. When I took especially
the Master’s degree I was struck with one part of the
obligation, or oath, as not being sound either in a polit-
ical or moral point of view. ;

However, I had been brought up with very few
re.igious privileges, and had but slight knowledge on
moral subjects; and I was not, therefore, greatly
shocked, at the time, with the immorality of. anything
through which I passed. The lodge where I took my
degrees was composed, i believe, mostly of professed
Christians. But when I came to join the lodge at
Adams I found that the Master of the lodge was a deist.
At this distance of time I can not be certain whether the


vi INTRODUCTION.


deist to whom I refer, Eliphalet Edmunds, was Master
of the lodge when I first joined. My best recollection
is that Captain Goodell was Master when I first joined
the lodge at Adams, and that Judge Edmunds was Mas-
ter at the time of my conversion to Christ. I am certain
that deism was no objection to any man becoming a
member or a master of the lodge. There were in that
lodge some as thoroughly irreligious men as I have
ever associated with anywhere, and men with whom I
never would have associated had they not been Free-
masons. Ido not recollect that any Christian men be-
longed to that lodge at the time I joinedit. There were
some very profane men who belonged to it, and some
men of very intemperate habits.

As I paid the strictest attention to what they called
their lectures and teachings, I became what they call
“a bright Mason ;”’ that is, as far as I went, I committed
to memory their oral teachings—for they had no other.

The oaths, or obligations, were familiar to me, as was
everything else that belonged to those three degrees
that I had taken.

I had belonged to the lodge in Adams nearly four
years when I was converted to Christ. During the
struggle of conviction of sin through which I passed I
do not recollect that the question of Freemasonry ever
occurred to my mind. The season that 1 called properly
my conviction of sin was short. My exercises were
pungent, and I very soon obtained hope in Christ.

Soon after my conversion the evening came for at-
tendance upon the lodge. I went. They, of course,
were aware that I had become a Christian, and the Mas-
ter of the lodge called on me to open the lodge with
prayer. I did so, and poured out my heart to the Lord
for blessing upon the lodge. I observed that it created
a considerable excitement. The evening passed away,
and at the close of the lodge I was requested to pray
again. I did so, and retired, but much depressed in
spirit. I soon found that I was completely converted
from Freemasonry to Christ, and that I could have no
fellowship with any of the proceedings of the lodge.
Its oaths appeared to me to be monstrously profane and
barbarous.


INTRODUCTION, Vii


At that time I did not know how much I had been
imposed upon by many of the pretensions of Masonry.
But upon reflection and examination, and after a severe
struggle and earnest prayer, I found that I could not


consistently remain with them. My new life instinct-
ively and irresistibly recoiled from any fellowship with
what I then regarded as “the unfruitful works of dark-
ness.”

Without consulting any person, I finally went to the
lodge and requested my discharge. After manifesting
considerable reluctance they granted my request. My
mind was made up. Withdraw from them I must; with
their consent if I might, without their consent if I must.
Of this I said nothing; but some way itcame to be known
that I had withdrawn from them. ‘This created some
little feeling amongst them. They, therefore, planned a
Masonic celebration or festival. I do ‘not recollect ex-
actly what it was. But they sent a committee to me, re-
questing me to deliver an oration on the occasion. I
quietly declined to do so; informing the committee that
I could not conscientiously in anywise do what would
manifest my approval of the institution, or sympathy
with it. However, at that time, and for years afterward,
I remained silent and said nothing against the institution;
for I had not then so well considered the matter as to
regard my Masonic oaths as utterly null and void. But
from that time I never allowed myself to be recognized
as a Freemason anywhere. This was a few years before
the revelations of Freemasonry, by William Morgan,
were published. When that book was published, I was
asked if it were a true revelation of Freemasonry. I re-
plied that it was, as far as I knew anything aboutit; and
that, as nearly as I could recollect, it was a verbatim
revelation of the first three degrees as J had myself taken
them. I replied in this way because I saw, of course,
that as the thing was published, and no longer a secret,
I could not be under any obligation to keep it a secret,
unless I could be under an obligation to lie, and to le,
perpetually, by denying that that which had been pub-
lished was truly Freemasonry.

I knew that I could be under no obligations to be
guilty of a perpetual falsehood, and that I really made


Viil INTRODUCTION.


no revelation of any secret when I frankly acknowledged
that that which had been published was a true account
of the institution, and a true expose of their oaths, prin-
ciples, and proceedings.

Afterward I considered it more thoroughly, and was
most perfectly convinced that I had no right to adhere
to the institution, or to appear to doso; and that I was
bound, whenever the occasion arose, to speak my mind
freely in regard to it, and to renounce the horrid oaths
that [ had taken.

On reflection and examination I found that I had been
grossly deceived and imposed upon. I had been led to
suppose that there were some very important secrets to
be communicated to me. But in this respect I found
myself entirely-disappointed.

Indeed, I came to the deliberate conclusion, and could
not avoid doing so, that my oaths had been procured by
fraud and misrepresentation, and that the institution was
in no respect what I had been previously informed that
it was.

And, as I have had the means of examining it more
thoroughly, it has become more and more irresistibly
plain to my convictions that the institution is highly
dangerous to the State, and in every way injurious to
the Church of Christ.

This I expect to show in detail should I be spared
to finish the articles which I contemplate writing. But
in my next it will be in place to inquire, How are the
public to know what Freemasonry really is 2

After this inquiry is settled, we shall be prepared to
enter upon an examination of its claims, its principles,
and its tendency.


FREEMASONRY. 9


, BS Ne ed de © et Di


SCRAP OF HISTORY.
ry By ‘R
i N this number I must remind readers of
Ves some facts that occurred about forty
ne) years ago; which, as matters of history, .
though then well-known to thousands, are prob-
ably now unknown to the great majority of our
citizens. Elderly men and women, especially in
the Northern States, will almost universally
remember the murder of William Morgan by
Freemasons, and many facts connected with
that terrible tragedy. But,as much pains have
been taken by Freemasons to rid the world of
the books and pamphlets, and every vestige of
writing relating to that subject, by far the
larger number of young people seem to be’
entirely ignorant that such facts ever occurred.
I will state them as briefly as possible.

About forty year ago, an estimable man by
the name of William Morgan, then residing in
Batavia, N. Y., being a Freemason, after much
reflection, made up his mind that it was his


10 FREEMASONRY.


duty to publish Freemasonry to the world.
He regarded it as highly injurious to the cause
of Christ, and as eminently dangerous to the
government of our country, and I suppose was
aware, as Masons generally were at that time,
that nearly all the civil offices in the country
were in the hands of Freemasons; and that the
press was completely under their control, and
almost altogether in their hands. Masons at
that time doasted that all the civil offices in the
country were in their hands. I believe that all
' the civil offices in the county where I resided
while I belonged to them, were in their hands.
I do not recollect a magistrate, or a constable,
or sheriff in that county that was not at that
time a Freemason.

A publisher by the name of Miller, also re-
siding in Batavia, agreed to publish what Mr.
Morgan would write. This, coming to be
known to Freemasons, led them to conspire for
his destruction. This, as we shall see, was only
in accordance with their oaths. By their oaths
they were bownd-to seek his destruction, and
to execute upon him the penalty of those
oaths.

They kidnapped Morgan and for a time con-
cealed him in the magazine of the United
States Fort—Fort Niagara, at the mouth of
Niagara River, where it empties into Lake


FREEMASONRY, 11


Ontario. They kept him there until they could
arrange to dispatch him. In the meantime,
the greatest efforts were made to discover his
whereabouts, and what the Masons had done
with him. Strong suspicions came finally to
_ be entertained that he was confined in that
fort; and the Masons, finding that those suspi-
cions were abroad, hastened his death. Two
_ or three have since, upon their death-bed, con-
fessed their part in the transaction. They
drowned him in the Niagara River. The ac-
count of the manner in which this was done
will be found in a book published by Elder
Stearns, a Baptist elder. The book is entitled
“Stearns on Masonry.” It contains the death-
bed confession of one of the murderers of
William Morgan. On page 311, of that work,
you will find that confession. But as many of
my readers have not access to that work, I take
the liberty to quote it entire, as follows:


' “CONFESSION.


“THE MURDER OF WILLIAM MORGAN, CONFESSED BY
THE MAN WHO, WITH HIS OWN HANDS, PUSHED HIM
OUT OF THE BOAT INTO NIAGARA RIVER!


“The following accoust of that tragical scene
is taken from a pamphlet entitled, ‘Confession
of the murder of William Morgan, as taken


12 FREEMASONRY.


down by Dr. John L. Emery, of Racine County,
Wisconsin, in the summer of 1848, and now
(1849) first given to the public?

“This ‘Confession’ was taken down as re-
lated by Henry L. Valance, who acknowledges
himself to have been one ot the three who were
selected to make a final disposition of the ill-
fated victim of masonic vengeance. This con-
fession it seems was made to his physicians, .
and in view of his approaching dissolution, and
published after his decease.

“After committing that horrid deed he was,
as might well be expected, an unhappy man,
by day and by night. He was much like Cain
—‘a fugitive and avagabond” To use his own
words, ‘Go where I would, or do what I would,
it was impossible for me to throw off the con-
sciousness of crime. If the mark of Cain was
not upon me, the curse of the first murderer
was—the blood-stain was upon my hands and
could not be washed out.

“fle therefore commences his confession
thus :—‘My last hour is approaching; and as
the things of this world fade from my mental
sight, I feel the necessity of making, as far as
in my power les, that atonement which every
violator of the great law of right owes to his
fellow men? In this violation of law, he says,


FREEMASONRY. i


‘I allude to the abduction and murder of the
ill-fated William Morgan.’

“He proceeds with an interesting narrative
of the proceedings of the fraternity in refer-
ence to Morgan, while he was incarcerated in
the magazine of Fort Niagara. I have room
for a few extracts only, showing the final dis-
position of their alleged criminal. Many con-
sultations were held, ‘many plans proposed
and discussed, and rejected.’ At length being
driven to the necessity of doing something
immediately for fear of being exposed, it was
resolved in a council of eight, that he must
die: must be consigned to a ‘confinement from
which there is no possibility of escape—rHx
GRAVE” Three of their number were to be se-
lected by ballot to execute the deed. ‘Hight
pieces of paper were procured, five of which
were to remain blank, while the letter D wes
written on the others. These pieces of paper
were placed ina large box, from which cach
man was to draw one at the same moment,
After drawing we were all to separate, without
looking at the paper that each held in his hand.
So soon as we had arrived at certain distances
from the place of rendezvous, the tickets were
to be examined, and those who held blanksz
were to return instantly to their homes; and
those who should hold marked tickets were to


14 FREEMASONRY.


proceed to the fort at midnight, and there put
Morgan to death, in such a manner as should
seem to themselves most fitting’ Mr. Valance
was one of the three who drew the ballots on
which was the signal letter. He returned to
the fort, where he was joined by his two com-
panions, who had drawn the death tickets.
Arrangements were made immediately for ex-
ecuting the sentence passed upon their pris-
oner, which was to sink him in the river with
weights; in hope, says Mr. Valance, ‘that he
and our crime alike would thus be buried be-
neath the waves. His part was to proceed to
the magazine where Morgan was confined, and
announce to him his fate—theirs was to pro-
cure a boat and weights with which to sink
him. Morgan, on being informed of their pro-
ceedings against him, demanded by what au-
thority they had condemned him, and who were
his judges. ‘ He commenced wringing his hands,
and talking of his wife and children, the recol-
lections of whom, in that awful hour, terribly
affected him, His wife, he said, was young and
inexperienced, and his children were but in-
fants; what would become of them were he cut
off, and they even ignorant of his fate? What
husband and father would not be ‘terribly af-
fected’ under such circumstances—to be cut


FREEMASONRY. 15


off from among the living in this inhuman man-
ner ?

“Mr. Vs comrades returned, and informed
him that they had procured the boat and
weights, and that all things were in readiness
on their part. Morgan was told that all his re-
monstrances were idle, that die he must, and
that soon, even before the morning light. The
feelings of the husband and father were still
strong within him, and he continued to plead
on behalf of his family. They gave him one
half hour to prepare for his ‘inevitable fate.
They retired from the magazine and left him.
‘How Morgan passed that time, says Mr. Val-
ance, ‘I cannot tell, but everything was quiet
as the tomb within” At the expiration of the
allotted time, they entered the magazine, laid
hold of their victim, ‘bound his hands behind
him, and placed a gag in his mouth” They
then led him forth to execution. ‘A short time/
says this murderer, ‘brought us to the boat,
and we all entered it—Morgan being placed in
the bow with myself, along side of him. My
comrades took the oars, and the boat was rap-
idly forced out into the river. The night was
pitch dark, we could scarcely see a yard before
us, and therefore was the time admirably
adapted to our hellish purpose’ Having
reached a proper distance from the shore, the


16 FREEMASONRY.


oarsmen ceased their labors. The weights were
all secured together by a strong cord, and an-
other cord of equal strength, and of several
yards in length, proceeded from that. ‘This
cord, says Mr. V., ‘I took in my hand [did not
that hand tremble ?] and fastened it around the
body of Morgan, just above his hips, using all
my skill to make it fast, so that it would hold.
Then, in a whisper, I bade the unhappy man to
stand up, and after a momentary hesitation he
complied with my order. He stood cluse to
the head of the boat, and there was just length
enough of rope from his person to the weights
to prevent any strain, while he was standing.
I then requested one of my associates to assist
me in lifting the weights from the bottom to the
side of the boat, while the others steadied her
from the stern. This was done, and,as Morgan
was standing with his back toward me, I ap-
proached him, and gave hima strong push with
both my hands, which were placed on the
middle of his back. He fell forward, carrying
the weights with him, and the waters closed
over the mass. We remained quiet for two or
three minutes, when my companions, without
saying a word, resumed their places, and
rowed the boat to the place from which they
had taken it.’”


FREEMASONRY. t7


They also kidnapped Mr. Miller, the pub-
lisher; but the citizens of Batavia, finding it
out, pursued the kidnappers, and finally rescued
him.

The courts of justice found themselves en-
_ tirely unable to make any headway against the
wide-spread conspiracy that was formed among
Masons in respect to this matter.

These are matters of record. It was found
that they could do nothing with the courts,
with the sheriffs, with the witnesses, or with the
jurors; and al]l their efforts were for a time en-
tirely impotent. Indeed, they never were able
to prove the murder of Morgan, and bring it
home to the individuals who perpetrated it.

But Mr. Morgan had published Freemasonry
to the world. The greatest pains were taken by
Masons to cover up the transaction, and as far
as possible to deceive the public in regard to
the fact that Mr. Morgan had published Ma-
sonry as it really is.

Masons themselves, as is affirmed by the very
best authority, published two spurious editions
of Morgan’s book, and circulated them as the
true edition which Morgan had _ published.
These editions were designed to deceive Ma-
sons who had never seen Morgan’s edition, and
thus to enable them to say that it was not a
true revelation of Masonry


18 FREEMASONRY.


In consequence of the publication of Mor-
gan’s book, and the revelations that were made
in regard to the kidnapping and murdering of
Mr. Morgan, great numbers of Masons were led
to consider the subject more fully than they
had done; and the conscientious among them
almost universally renounced Masonry alto-
gether. I believe that about two thousand
lodges, as a consequence of these revelations,
were suspended.

The ex-president of a Western college, who
is himself a Freemason, has recently published
some very important information on the sub-
ject, though he justifies Masonry. He says
that, out of a little more than fifty thousand”
Masons in the United States at that time, forty-
tive thousand turned their backs upon the lodge
to enter the lodge no more. Conventions were
called of Masons that were disposed to re-
nounce it. One was held at Leroy, another at
Philadelphia, and others at other places, I do
not now remember where. The men compos-
ing these conventions made public confession
of their relation to the institution, and public-
ly renounced it. At one of these large conven- .
tions they appointed a committee to superin-
tend the publication of Masonry in all its de-
grees. This committee was composed of men
of first-rate character, and men quite generally


FREEMASONRY. 19


known to the public. Elder Bernard, a Bap-
tist elder in good standing, was one of this com-
mittee; and he, with the assistance of his
brethren who had been appointed to this work,
obtained an accurate version of some forty-.
eight degrees. He published also the pro-
ceedings of those conventions, and much con-
cerning the efforts that were made by the
courts to search the matter to the bottom, and
also several speeches that were made by prom-


«


inent men in the State of New York. This\<-


work was entitled “Light on Masonry.” In this ©


work any person who is disposed may get a
very correct view of what Freemasonry really
is. This and sundry other reliable works on
Freemasonry may be had at Godrich’s, and
Fitch & Fairchild’s bookstores, in Oberlin.
In saying this, it is proper to add that I have
no direct or indirect pecuniary interest in the
sale of those or of any book on Freemasonry
whatever, nor shall I have in the sale of this
which I am now preparing for the press. Free-
masons shall not with truth accuse me of self-
interest in exposing their institution.

Before the publication of “Bernard’s Light
on Masonry,” great pains were taken to secure
the most accurate knowledge of the degrees
published by the committee, as the reader of
that work will see, if he reads the book through.


=


—


20 FREEMASONRY.


An account of all these matters will be found
in “Light on Masonry,” to which I have re-
ferred. In the Northern or non-slaveholding
States Masonry was almost universally re-
nounced at that time. But it was found that
it had taken so deep a root that in all New
England there was scarcely a newspaper in
which the death of William Morgan, and the
circumstances connected therewith, could be
published. This was so generally true through-
out all the North that newspapers had to be
everywhere established for the purpose of
making the disclosures that were necessary in
regard to its true character and tendency. The
same game is being played over again at the
present day. The “Cynosure,” the new anti-
masonic paper published at Chicago, is con-
stantly intercepted on its way to subscribers.
Four of its first six numbers failed to reach me,
and now in December, 1868, I have received
no number later than the sixth. The editor
informs me that the numbers are constantly
intercepted. The-public will be forced to learn
what a lawless and hideous institution Free-
masonry is. But at present I refrain from
saying more on this point.

It was found that Masonry so completely
baffled the courts of law, and obstructed the
course of justice, that it was forced into poli-


FREEMASONRY. 21


tics; and for a time the anti-masonic sentiment
of the Northern States carried all before it.
Almost all Masons became ashamed of it, felt
themselves disgraced by having any connec-
tion with it, and publicly renounced it. If they
did not publish any renunciation, they sus-
pended their lodges, had no more to do with it,
and did not pretend to deny that Masonry had
been published.

Now these facts were so notorious, so uni-
versally known and confessed, that those of us
who were acquainted with them at the time
had no idea that Masonry would have the im-
pudence ever again to claim any public re-
spect. I should just as soon expect slavery to be
re-established in this country, and become more
popular than ever before—to take possession
of the Government and of all the civil offices,
and to grow bold, impudent, and defiant—as I
should have expected that Masonry would
achieve whatit has. When the subject of Free-
masonry was first forced upon our churches in
Oberlin, for discussion and action, I can not ex-
press the astonishment, grief and indignation
that I felt on hearing professed Christian Free-
masons deny either expressly or by irresistible
implication that Morgan and others had truly
revealed the secrets of Freemasonry. But a

few oe ago such denial would have ruined


22 | FREEMASONHY.


the character of any intelligent man, not to say
of a professed Christian.

ButI must say, also, that Masonry itself has its
literature. Many bombastic and spread-eagle
books have been published in its favor. They
never attempt to justify it as it is revealed in
“Light on Masonry,” nor reply by argument to
the attacks that have been so successfully
made upon it; neither have they pretended to
reveal its secret. But they have eulogized it
in a manner that is utterly nauseating to those
that understand what it really is. But these
books have been circulated among the young,
and have no doubt led thousands and scores
of thousands of young men into the Masonic
ranks, who, but for these miserable produc-
tions, would never have thought of taking such
a step.


FREEMASONRY. 23


2S SOY el Sad Bs 21 El ees a Be


HOW KNOWN.


aR
wy E are prepared in this number to take


freed up the question, How are the public to
“Fe now what Lreemasonry really is?
This we may answer.

1. Negatively. (1.) Masonry cannot be
known from a perusal of the eulogistic books
which adhering Masons have written. Of course
they are under oath in no way whatever to re-
veal the secrets of Masonry. But it is their
secrets that the public are concerned to know
Now their eulogistic books, as any one may
know who will examine them, are silly, and for
the most part little better than twaddle. If
we read their orations and sermons that have
been published in support of Masonry, and the
books that they have written, we shall find
much that is silly, much that is false, and a
great deal more that is mere bombast and rho-
domontade. I do not say this rashly. Any
‘person who will examine the subject for him-
self must admit that this language is strictly


94 FREEMASONRY.


true. But I shall have occasion hereafter
when we come to examine the character of the
institution, to show more clearly the utter ig-
norance or dishonesty of the men who have
— eulogized it.

Let it be understood, then, that adhering
Masons do not profess to publish their secrets
And that which the country and the church are
particularly interested to understand they
never publish—their oaths, for example; and,
therefore, we cannot tell from what they write
what they are under oath to do.

(2.) We cannot learn what Masonry is from
the oral testimony of adhering Masons.

Let it be pondered well that every one of
them is under oath to conceal and in no way
whatever to reveal the secrets of the order.
This Freemasons do not deny. Hence,if they are
asked if the books in which Masonry has been
published are true, they will either evade the
question or else they will lie; and they are
under oath to do so.

Observe, adhering Masons are the men who
still acknowledge the binding obligation of
their oaths. Now, if they are asked if those
books truly reveal Masonry, they consider
themselves under an obligation to deny it, if
they say anything about it. And, as they are
well aware that to refuse to say anything about


FREEMASONRY. 25


itis a virtual acknowledgment that the books
are true, and would therefore be an indirect
revelation of Masonry; they will almost uni-
versally deny that the books are true. Some
of them are ashamed to say anything more than
that there is some truth and a great deal of
falsehood in them.

(3.) As they are under oath to conceal the
secrets of Masonry, and in no wise whatever to
reveal any part of them, their testimony in re-
gard to the truthfulness or untruthfulness of
those books is of no value whatever. Itis mere
madness «to receive the testimony of men who
are under oath, and under the most horrid oaths
that can be taken—oaths sustained by the
most terrific penalties that can be named to
conceal their secrets and to deny that they
have been published, and that those books con-
tain them—I say it is downright madness to
receive the testimony of such men, it matters
not who they are. Masons have no right to
expect an intelligent person to believe their
denials that these books have truly revealed
Masonry. Nor have they a right to complain
if we reject their testimony. What would they
have us do? Shall we believe the testimony
of men who admit that they are under oath
to conceal and never in any way reveal
the secrets of their order, when they deny that


THE MASTER'S COLLECE
POWELL LIBRARY


26 FREEMASONRY.


their secrets are revealed in certain books, and
shall we ignore the testimony of thousands who
have conscientiously renounced those horrid
oaths, at the hazard of their lives, and declared
with one accord, and many of them under the
sanction of judicial oaths lawfully administered,
that Morgan, Bernard and others have truly
revealed the secrets of Freemasonry? There
are at this day thousands of most conscientious
men who are ready to testify on oath that those
books contain a substantially correct exposi-
tion of Freemasonry as it was and is. I say
again that Freemasons have no right to expect
us to believe their denials; for while they ad-
here to Masonry they are under oath to “con-
ceal and never reveal” any part of its secrets
and of course they must expressly or impliedly
deny every revelation of its secrets that can
be made. Would they have us stultify our-
selves by receiving their testimony ?

2. Positively. How, then, are we to know
what Masonry is? JLanswer: (1.) From the
published and oral testimony of those who
haye taken the degrees; and afterward, from
conscientious motives, have confessed their er-
ror, and have publicly renounced Masonry,
But it has been said that these are perjured
men, and therefore not at all to be believed,
But let it be remarked that this very accusa-


FREEMASONRY. 27


tion is an admission that they have published
the truth; for, unless they have published the
secrets of Masonry truly, they have violated
no Masonic oath. Therefore, when Masons ac-
cuse them of being perjured, the very objection
which they make to the testimony of these
witnesses is an acknowledgment on the part of
Masons themselves that they have truly pub-
lished their secrets,
But again. If to reveal the secrets of Ma-
sonry be perjury, it follows that to accuse the
revealers of Masonry of perjury, is itself per-
jury; because by their accusation they tacitly
admit that that which has been published is
truly a revelation of Masonry, and therefore
their accusation is a violation of their oath of se-
crecy. Letit then be understood that the very
objection to these witnesses, that they have
committed perjury, is itself an acknowledgment
that the witnesses are entirely credible, and
have revealed Masonry.as it is. And not only
so—but in bringing forward the objection,
they commit perjury themselves, if it be perjury
to reveal their secrets ; because, as I have said,
in accusing the witnesses of perjury, they add
their testimony to the fact that these witnesses
have published Masonry as it is. So that
by their own testimony, in bringing this
charge of perjury, they themselves swell the


28 I'REEM ASONRY.


number of witnesses to the truthfulness of
these revelations.


(2.) Renouncing Masons are the best possi.
ble witnesses by whom to prove what Masonry
really is. (a.) They are competent witnesses:
They testify from their own personal knowledge
of what it is. (b.) They are in the highest de.
gree credible witnesses. First, because they
testify against themselves. They confess their
own wrong in having taken those terrible
oaths, and in having had any part in sustaining
the institution. Secondly, their testimony is
given with the certainty of incurring a most
unrelenting persecution. Adhering Freema-
sons are under oath to persecute them, to de-
stroy their characters, and to seek to bring
them to condign punishment. Zhis we shall
see when we come to examine the books. Ad-
hering Masons haye persecuted, and still per-
secute, those that reveal their secrets, just as
far as they dare. They are in the highest de-
gree intolerant, and this every Mason knows.
In a recent number of their great Masonic or-
gan, published in New York, they advise: the
Masons in Oberlin in no way to patronize those
who oppose them. Those who renounce Ma-


sonry are wellaware of their danger. _ But, not-
withstanding, they are constrain Pik by


Fa


FREEMASONRY 29


consciences, by the fear and love of God, and
by regard to the interests of their country, to
renounce and expose it. Now, surely, witness-
es that testify under such circumstances are
entitled to. credit; especially as they could
have had no conceivable motive for deceiving
the public. Their testimony was wrung from
them by conscience. And the authors of the
books that I have named, together with several
others—such as Richardson, Stearns, and Mr,
Allyn, andI know not how many others—are
sustained by the testimony of forty-five thou-
sand who publicly renounced Masonry, out of
a little more than fifty thousand that composed
the whole number of Freemasons then in the
United States. Now, it should be well remem-
bered that the five thousand who still adhered
belonged almost altogether to the slaveholding
States, and had peculiar reasons for still adher-
ing to the institution of Masonry. And, further,
let it be distinctly observed that, as they ad-
hered to Masonry, their testimony is null, be-
cause they still regarded themselves as under
oath in no wise to reveal their secrets; conse-
quently, they would, of course, deny that these
books had truly revealed Masonry. I say
again, it is mere madness to receive their tes:


timony.


30 FREEMASONRY.


(Oa = Beal SA Se BN


CREDIBILITY OF THE BOOKS REVEALING
FREEMASONRY.


wy ®% Ye
peep

j a FURTHER observe: (8.) The credi-
Ve bility of these books in which Masonry
\@)


is revealed is evident from the follow-
_ ing considerations:

(a.) The murder of Morgan by Freemasons
was an emphatic acknowledgment that he had
revealed their secrets. For, if he had not, he
had not incurred the penalty of Masonic obli-
gations. They murdered him because he had
truly revealed their secrets; and they could
have had no motive whatever for murdering
him if he had not done so.

(d.) The credibility of these books is further
sustained by the fact that adheriny Masons did
then, and have always, justified the murder of
Morgan as that which their oaths obliged them
to do. They have said that he deserved it;
and that he had taken upon him the obligation
consenting to suffer the penalty if he violated


FREEMASONRY, dl


it. In the two small volumes published by
Elder Stearns, letters will be found from the
most respectable and reliable Christian men,
that fully sustain this statement, that the ad-
hering fraternity, with very few exceptions, at
that time, justified tke murder of Morgan. In
thus justifying that murder they, of course, ad-
mit that he violated his oath, and had truly
published Freemasonry. I would quote these
testimonies; but, as they can be read from the
books themselves, I will not cumber these
pages by copying them.

(c.) The credibility of these books is sus-
tained by the express testimony of the seceding
Masons, who, after hearing them read, ordered
them printed.

(d.) The testimony of these books is further
sustained by the report of a committee ap- |
pointed at that time by the legislature of
Rhode Island. That body appointed a com-
mittee, and gave them authority to arrest and
examine Freemasons to ascertain whether the
oaths published in these books were truly the
oaths of Freemasons. This committee suc-
ceeded in bringing before them men that had
taken the first ten degrees of Freemasonry.
They put them on oath under the pains and
penalties of perjury. In these circumstances
they did not dare to deny it; but owned to the


32 FREEMASONRY.


committee that they were the oaths taken by
Freemasons. I said that they did not dare to
deny it, because they were well aware that of
seceding Masons hundreds and thousands might
be obtained who would confront them and
prove them guilty of perjury if they denied it.

I should have said that these Masons that
were arrested, and that testified before this
committee, were not seceding, but adhering,
Masons. So that here for the first ten degrees
of Freemasonry we have the admission on
oath of adhering Masons that these books
truly published their oaths. These facts may
_ be learned from the records of the legislature,
or from John Quincy Adams’ letters to Mr.
Livingston, who was at the head of the Ma-
sonic institution in the State of New York at
that time.

(¢.) The credibility of these books is further
sustained by the implied admission of the two
thousand lodges that suspended because their
secrets were revealed, and because they were
ashamed any longer to be known as sustaining
the institution. These lodges,as I have before
said, contained some forty-five thousand mem-
bers. Nowit should be particularly noted that,
of all the seceding Masons in the United States,
not one of them has ever, to my knowledge, de-
nied that these books had truly revealed Mason-


FREEMASONRY. 33


ry; while it is true that the five thousand who
did not secede would never acknowledge that
these books were credible. A worthy minis-
ter, who used to reside in this place, who has
himself taken a great many degrees in Mason-
ry, wrote to one of our citizens, a few months
since, denouncing the institution in strong
terms. He is a man who has traveled much
among Freemasons for many years in various
parts of the United States; and in that letter
he affirmed that he had never known but one
adhering Mason who would not deny, to those
wno did not know better, that those books had
truly revealed Masonry. This is what might
be expected.

(7) The credibility of these books is further
sustained by the published individual testi-
mony of a great many men of unquestionable
veracity—men standing high in the Christian
ministry, and in church and state.

The books to which I have alluded contain
very much of this kind of testimony.

But to all this testimony adhering Masons
have objected. First, that the movement
against Freemasonry was a political one. An-
swer: I have already said that by its having
seized upon all the civil offices, and totally ob-
structing the course of justice, it was forced
into politics by Masons themselves.


04 FREEMASONRY.


It was found that there was no other way
than for the people to rise up and take the
offices out of their hands by political action.
At first there was no thought on the part of
any one, so far as I could learn, that it would
ever become a political question. But it was
soon found that there was no other alternative.

But, again, it is said, Why should we receive
the testimony of those men who have passed
away, rather than the testimony of the living,
thousands of whom now affirm that those books
did not truly reveal Masonry ?

To this I answer that these men are every
one of them sworn to lie about it—expressly,
or virtually. Observe, they must conceal as
well as never reveal these secrets; therefore, as
refusing to deny would be regarded as a virtual
admission, they are sworn to make an impres-
sion amounting, morally, to a denial. At a re-
cent conference of ministers and delegates
from churches, a report was read by a commit-
tee previously appointed for that purpose,
representing the true character of Freemason-
ry. I was not present, but am informed, by
unquestionable authority, that after the report
was read, a minister who was a Freemason
represented the report as setting up a “man
of straw.” thereby intending to make the im-
pression that the report was not trwe. But it


FREEMASONRY. 35


was replied that the report may have exhibited
“a man of straw,” for such Freemasonry may
be, but he was asked, is not the report true?
To this question he refused to answer. Was
this Christian honesty? At recess another
minister, also a Freemason, in conversation
spoke of the report as trash, but on being
pressed with the question, “Is it not true?” he
refused to answer. These cases illustrate their
manner of disposing of this question. Many
of them dare not expressly deny the truthful-
ness of those revelations, but they will so
express themselves as to amount to a denial.
They have numerous methods of doing this.
They intend to deceive, manifestly for selfish
reasons, and are therefore guilty of lying, and
so they will find it held at the solemn judg-
ment. If they adhere to their oaths, they are
sworn to deny that these books truly reveal
Masonry; and, therefore, their testimony is not
to be received at all. But thousands of the
seceding Masons still survive, and universally
adhere to their testimony that those books did
truly reveal Masonry.

But it is said that Masonry is reformed, and
is not now what it was at that time.

Answer: First, this, then, is a virtual ac-
knowledgment that at that time it was truly
revealed. This is contradicting themselves.


36 FREEMASONRY.
As long as they can, they deny that these
books truly reveal it. But when forty-five
thousand witnessess are summoned, amorg
whom are a great many of the most valuable
citizens of the United States, insomuch that
they can have no face to deny that Masonry
was revealed, as it then was, then we are told,
“Oh! it is reformed; it is not what it was.”
But, again, if they have reformed, the bur-
den of proof is upon them. Itis for them to
show whether they have reformed out of it
those things that rendered it so odiows in a
moral point of view, and so dangerous in a po-
litical point of view, as those books revealed
it to be.


Again, their authorities do not pretend that
1t has been reformed. Their most recently
published books take exactly the opposite
ground, claiming that it is one and identical
with what it was in the beginning; and that it
neither has been nor can be changed in any
of its essential principles or usages. They ex-
pressly require of their candidates to conform
to all the anczent principles and usages of the
institution. In another number I shall en-
deavor to set this question of reform at reste
It were premature to do so before we have ex-
amined the books in which it is revealed


w


FREEMASONRY. 37


I might sustain these assertions by copious
extracts from their works, if it would not too
much encumber this article. Let those who
wish to know, get their books, and read them
for themselves. If anything can be established
by human testimony, it is forever beyond a
doubt that Mr. Morgan, Elder Bernard, Mr.
Richardson, and others that published Mason-
ry, have published it substantially as it was
and 7s.

I have already said that their secrets are
never written by themselves. All their secrets
are communicated orally. They take a great
deal of pains to secure entire uniformity in
regard to every word and sentiment which they
teach. Each State has its lecturers, who go
from lodge to lodge to teach and secure a uni-
formity as nearly perfect as possible.

And then there is a United States lecturer,
who goes from State to State, to see that the
grand lodges are all consistent with each
other.

In spite, however, of all this painstaking and
expense, slight verbal differences will exist
among them. But these differences are only
in words. The ideas are retained; but in some
few instances they are expressed by different
words, as we shall see when we come to exam-
ine the ae themselves.


38 I'REEM ASONRY.


The fact is, that the great mass of young
men who have joined them have been grossly
deceived. Having been imposed upon, as lL
was imposed upon, they have been made to
believe that the institution is a very different
matter from what it really is.

We shall see hereafter how this imposition
could be practiced upon them, and how it has
been practiced upon them.

I would not be understood as denouncing
the individuals composing the whole fraterni-
ty; for I am perfectly well persuaded that the
great mass of young men who belong to the
institution are laboring under a great delusion
in regard to its real object, character, and
tendency.

Lastly, it is inquired why we go to the ene-
mies of Freemasonry for a knowledge of what
it is, instead of getting our information from its
friends. “Why not,” they say, “allow us to
speak for ourselyes! We know what it is, and
we can inform the public what it is; and why
should you go to eur enemies?” But what do
Freemasons mean by asking such questions ?
Do they consider us ¢diots? Do they want to
insult our intelligence by asking us why we
don’t get their secrets from themselves? Of
course, as they well know, we cannot learn
what the secrets of Masonry are from its friends


FREEMASONRY. 39


and adherents, because they are under oath to
give us no information about them. We are
therefore, under the necessity, if we would
know what it is, of taking the testimony of
those who know what it is by having taken
its degrees, and have, from conscientious mo-
tives, renounced the institution. If they are
its enemies, it is only in the sense that they
regard the institution as not only unworthy of
patronage, but as so wicked in a moral point
of view, and so dangerous in a political point
of view, that they feel constrained to reveal
its secrets, and publicly to renounceit. These
are the only men from whom we can possibly
get any information of what Freemasonry is.
It is absurd for adhering Masons to ask us why
we do not allow ¢hem to teach us what it is;
for we know, and they know, that they can do
no such thing without violating their oaths
and these oaths they still acknowledge to be
binding upon them. Under this head I take
the liberty to subjoin—

1. The testimony of the Albany Evening
Journal Extra, of October 27, 1831. This
article, as its date demonstrates, was written
at the time of the investigation of the Morgan
murder, and refers to facts too notorious to be
denied:

“Since the public attention in this quarter


40 FREEMASONRY.


has been roused by recent events to the prac-
tical evils of Freemasonry, numerous inquiries
are made for the means of information respect-
ing the ridiculous ceremonies, the unlawful
oaths, the dangerous obligations, and the blas-
phemous mockeries of this order. Although
these have been from year to year, for the last
five years, spread before the public, yet as our
citizens here were indifferent to the subject,
they avoided reading what was so profusely
laid before them; and the consequence is, that
now, when they begin to feel and think on this
momentous matter, they find themselves in
want of that information necessary to enable
them to understand it. It shall be my purpose
to supply the deficiency to some extent, by
pointing out the sources of full and extensive
knowledge, and by presenting as briefly as
possible, the prominent features in the charac-
ter of Freemasonry. It has become a question
of such engrossing interest, that every man
should desire to be informed, and every citizen
who is called upon to act in reference to it in
his capacity as AN ELECTOR, is bound by the
highest duties of patriotism to act understand-
ingly.

~ The first revelation of Masonry in this
country was made by William Morgan. In
1826, he published a pamphlet, entitled ‘I]lus-


FREEMASONRY, 41


trations in Masonry, in which the ceremonies
of initiation and the obligations of the three
first degrees were disclosed. For this publica-
tion he was kidnapped and forcibly carried
away from a wife and two children, and was
murdered by being drowned in the Niagara
River. This was done by Freemasons. Thus
he has sealed the truth of his revelations by
eacrificing his own life, and the Freemasons
established their accuracy incontrovertibly by
the punishment they inflicted on him. For ac-
cording to their own bloody code, he could not
have incurred the penalty of death, if he had


not revealed their secrets. In February, 1828, _ |


a convention of seceding Masons was held at
Le Roy, in the County of Genesee, composed
of some thirty or forty of the most respectable
citizens. They published a declaration to the
world under their signatures, in which they de-
clared the revelations of William Morgan to be
' strictly true and perfectly accurate. Under the
same responsibility they also published the
oaths and obligations of the higher orders. In
the course of the same year, Elder Bernard, a
Baptist clergyman of good character, and who
was a distinguished Mason, published a work,
entitled ‘Light on Masonry, in which the
~ * ceremonies, oaths and mummeries of the order

"are given at full length. In 1829, on the trial


42 FREEMASONRY.


of Elihu Mather, in Orleans County, the obh-
gations of the three first degrees and of a Royal
Arch Mason, were proved, at a Circuit Court
held by Judge Gardiner, by the testimony of
three seceding Masons and one adhering Ma-
son. In obedience to aresolution of the Senate
of New York, Judge Gardiner reported this
evidence, and it was printed by order of the
Senate. In 1830, on a trial in Rhode Island,
the same obligations were proved in open
court, and the trial was published at large in
the newspapers. In 1831, on the trial of H. C.
Witherell, at New Berlin, in Chenango County,
the same obligations were proved by the oaths
of three adhering Masons, among whom was
_General Welch, the sheriff of the county. In
the year 18380, Avery Allyn, a regular Knight
Templar, published a book, called the ‘Ritual
of Freemasonry, in which the ceremonies of
initiation, the lectures, oaths and mummeries
of thirty-one degrees are fully exhibited.
Thousands of Masons individually have, under
their names in the public papers, declared
these publications of Bernard and Allyn to be
strictly accurate. These books may be found
‘*n our bookstores.”

2. I next subjoin a tract, made up of “The
Petition to the Legislature of Connecticut,
against extra-judicial oaths, with an abstract


FREEMASONRY. 43


of the evidence, and the report of the Com-
mittee to whom the subject was referred. Pub
lished in 1834:


To the Honorable General Assembly of the
State of Connecticut, to be holden at Hart-
Jord, on the first Wednesday of May, A. D.
1833:

Tue Petitioners, inhabitants of said State,
respectfully request the attention of your Hon-
orable body to the expediency of some legal
provision to prevent the administration of oaths
in all cases not authorized by law. It may
justly be required of the Petitioners, before a
compliance can be expected with this request,
that a case should be made out requiring such
Legislative provision; and your Petitioners
confidently trust that satisfactory grounds for
this application will be found to exist in the
oaths which are administered in Masonic
Lodges.

The disclosures which have been recently
made by the seceding Masons of the secret
proceedings of those Lodges fully prove that
the Institution of Freemasonry consists of nu
merous degress which may be increased to an
unlimited extent, and that an oath of an extra-
ordinary character is administered at the en-


44 FREEMASONRY.


trance of every degree. Your Petitioners
would not trespass upon the principles of
decorum by an unnecessary recital of all these
horrid imprecations, but justice to the cause
they have espoused compels them to exhibit
the following specimens, which are selected
from the oaths administered in the different
degrees: The Entered Apprentice Mason
swears, “I will always hail, ever conceal, and


-nmever reveal any part or parts, art or arts,


point or points of the secrets, arts, and mys-
teries of Ancient Freemasonry which I have
received, am about to receive, or may hereafter


. be instructed in;” “without the least equivoca-


tion, mental reservation, or self-evasion of mind


/in me whatever, binding myself under no less


penalty than to have my throat cut across, my
tongue torn out by the roots, and my body


' buried in the rough sands of the sea.” The


Master Mason swears, “I will obey all regular
signs, summonses, or tokens, given, handed,
sent, or thrown to me from the hand of a
brother Master Mason;” “a Master Mason’s
secrets, given to me in charge as such, and I
knowing them to be such, shall remain as
secure and inviolable in my breast as in his
own, when communicated to me, murder and -
treason excepted, and they left to my own elec-
tion.” The Royal Arch:Mason swears, “I will


FREEMASONRY, 45


aid and assist a companion Royal Arch Mason
when engaged in any difficulty; and espouse
his cause so far as to extricate him from the
same, if in my power, whether he be right or
wrong.” “A Companion Royal Arch Mason’s
secrets, given me in charge as such, and I
knowing them to be such, shall remain as
secure and inviolable in my breast as in his
own, without exception.” The following obli-
gations are contained in the oath of the Holy
Thrice Illustrious order of the Cross, Knights,
or Kadosh, etc.: “I swear to put confidence
unlimited in every illustrious brother of the
Cross as a true and worthy follower of the
blessed Jesus;” “JI swear to look on his ene-
mies as my enemies, his friends as my friends,
and to stand forth to mete out tender kindness
or vengeance accordingly.” “Isolemnly swear,
in the presence of Almighty God, that I will
revenge the assassination of our worthy Master
Hiram Abiff, not only on his murderers, but
also on all who may betray the secrets of
this degree.” “I swear to take revenge on the
traitors of Masonry.”

It can not be necessary for your Petitioners
to enter upon a formal argument in order to
satisfy this enlightened Assembly that oaths
like the foregoing ought not to be adminis-
tered. ws guarded and redundant language


~/


46 FREEMASONRY.


‘in which they are expressed, and the barbar-
ous and abhorrent penalties annexed to them,
were evidently designed to impose upon the
mind of the candidate the necessity of entire
and universal obedience to their requirements.
\They purport to be the injunctions of supreme
\power, and claim supremacy over every obli-
gation, human or divine. In this light they
were regarded and acted upon by Masons of
high standing and character who were con-
cerned in the late Masonic murder committed
in the State of New York, or connected with
the trials which sprang from it, and in this con-
struction these Masons were justified and up-
held by the Grand Chapter and Grand Lodge
of that State. Such obligations are obviously
inconsistent with our allegiance to the State,
and the obedience which is required by our
Maker, and with those fundamental principles
which constitute the basis and the cement of
civil and of religious communities. The Ma-
sonic oaths lead directly to the sacrifice of duties
and the commission of crimes; they cherish a
feeling of selfishness and of savage revenge,
instead of the spirit of the Gospel, and are
the ground-work of an insidious attempt to
effect the entire overthrow of our holy religion.

It is for these reasons that your Petitioners
respectfully request your Honors, by a suitable


FREEMASONRY. 4Y


legal provision, to prohibit the administration
of oaths not authorized by law; and they, as
in duty bound, will ever pray.


The foregoing was the petition of about
fourteen hundred citizens of the State of Con-
necticut, and was presented to the Legislature
at their session in May, 1833. By the House
of Representatives it was referred to a select
committee, who, having given notice of the
time and place of their meeting, entered into
an investigation of the subject. The sittings
of the committee were open to the public, and
every person who wished to hear the proceed
ings could attend, if he chose. Three witnesses
were presented by the Petitioners, viz.: Mr.
Hanks, of New York, and Messrs. Welch and
Hatch, of this State, by whom they expected
to substantiate the facts as set forth in the
petition. In giving his testimony, Mr. Hanks
read the several oaths, etc. as published in
Allyn’s Ritual, beginning with that of the
Entered Apprentice, and pointing out, as he
proceeded, any discrepancies or variations
which he had practiced or known. He had
taken, administered, or seen administered, the
oaths, etc.,in four different States of the Union,
viz.: New York, Pennsylvania, Virginia, and
Ohio—had taken, himself, many degrees, and


48 FREEM ASONRY.


testified from personal knowledge. The testi
mony of Mr. Hanks was full, explicit, and
particular on the first seven degrees of Ma-
sonry, and his statements were supported by
those of Messrs. Welch and Hatch, as far as
their experience extended.

Among the facts proved by the testimony
were the following, viz.: that Freemasonry,
with its oaths and penalties, is substantially
the same everywhere—that the variations are
slight, and, in most instances, merely verbal,
and such as have resulted from unwritten or
traditionary communication—that the oaths
and penalties of the first seven degrees are
revealed to the world ard correctly published
by Mr. Allyn in his Ritual, and by others—
that they are so administered in the lodges,
and are to be understood according to the
plain, literal import of the terms in which they
are expressed, and as they have been explained
by seceding Masons generally—that the decla-
ration of the Massachusetts and Connecticut
adhering Masons can not be made, or signed
understandingly, in consistence with truth—
that in the Royal Arch oath the terms “mur-
der and treason not excepted” are sometimes
used; sometimes the expression “in all cases
whatsoever,” or “in all cases without excep-
tion.” Some other verbal alterations were


FREEMASONRY. 49


noticed, which need not be detailed here. It


appeared, also, from the statements of the wit-
nesses, that the proportion of funds disposed
of for charitable purposes is extremely small,
while the lodges are scenes of extravagant
mirth and bacchanalian revelry, and the ad-
mission, passing, and raising of candidates oc-
casions of much indecent sport and ridiculous
merriment, accompanied with mock murders,
feigned discoveries, and profane and blasphe-
mous ceremonies and representations.

From the evidence before them the com-
mittee came to the conclusions expressed in
the following


REPORT.

To the Honorable General Assembly of the
State of Connecticut now in Session:
The committee to whom was referred the

petition of Gaius Lyman and others beg leave

respectfully to report that we have had the
same under consideration, and inquired, by
legal evidence, into the truth of the matters


therein set forth, and are of the opinion that


the same have been substantially proved, and
are true. The committee, at the commence-
ment of the investigation, adopted the rule,
and made known the same to the petitioners,
that we should attend to no evidence except


{
i


50 FREEMASONRY.


such as, in our opinion, would be admissible in
a court of law. The petitioners accordingly
summoned before us sundry witnesses who, for
aught we knew or could discover to the con-
trary, were men of respectability and intelli-
gence, and upon their testimony, and upon thaz
alone, have we come to our present result. It
was proved by these witnesses that oaths sim-
ilar in character (and some of them identical
in phraseology) to those set forth in the peti-
tion had been, in their presence and within
their hearing, repeatedly administered in this
State. The committee believe the administra-
tion of such oaths to be highly improper, and
that the same should be prohibited by legal
enactment. Our reasons for this opinion are:

1. Because they are unauthorized by law.

2. Because they bind the person to whom
they are administered to —— and violate.
the law.

3. Because they are, in their natural ten-
dency, subversive of public morals and blas-
phemous.

4. Because the penalties attached to the
breach of them are such as are entirely un-
known to our law, and are forbidden both by
the Constitution of the United States and by
_ the Constitution of this State.

First, then, these oaths are not authorized


FREEMASONRY. 51


by law. In our code of statute law we have
an act which points out the cases in which
oaths shall or may be administered, and pre-
scribes their several forms. In this act we
find no such oaths. Indeed, we find, upon ex-
amination of this code, that although extra-
judicial oaths are nowhere expressly prohib-
ited, their unlawfulness is throughout clearly
implied. And the implication is no less clear,
that no persons, except those expressly author-
ized by law, may rightfully administer oaths,
The committee would barely refer to a number
of those acts in which particular persons are,
on particular occasions and for particular pur-
poses, authorized to administer oaths. In the
act relative to insolvency, the commissioners
are expressly authorized to administer an oath
to the insolvent debtor. In the act relative to
surveyors, the surveyors are authorized to ad
minister an oath to the chainmen. In the act
relating to oaths, passed in 1822, Clerks of
the Senate and House of Representatives, and
the Chairmen of Committees are, during the
session of the Legislature, authorized to admin-
ister oaths. There are other acts of the same
nature, to which it can not be necessary par-
ticularly to refer. The inference, as we think,
plainly deducible from these acts, is, that ald
persons have not the right to administer oaths ;


FREEMASONRY.


und that those oaths only which the law pre-
scribes may be lawfully administered. And

we need only ask this Honorable Body whether
the public sense of propriety would not be
shocked at witnessing, in open daylight, the
administration of an oath by a person not by
law authorized, and in a case not by law
provided for. For instance, suppose a clergy
man, upon the admission of a member into his
church, should require him to kneel down, place
his hand upon the Bible, and then solemnly
swear that he would observe all the rules and
regulations of that church, upon no less penalty

than to have his throat cut across, his tongue
* torn out by the roots, and his body buried in
the rough sands of the sea; would hot an in-
voluntary shudder pervade the whole com-
munity at such a horrid exhibition; and would
not our first impression be that this clergyman
had violated the law, and that he ought forth-
with to be prosecuted? And yet we may
search our statute book in vain for any penal
enactment that would reach this case. Again,
suppose that any one of the charitable and
benevolent societies of the present day should,
on the admission of a member, compel him to
swear by the ever-living God that he would
obey all the laws of the society “upon no less
penalty than to have his left breast torn open,


FREEMASONRY. 53


his heart and vitals taken therefrom, thrown
over his left shoulder, and carried into the
valley of Jehoshaphat, there to become a prey
to the wild beasts of the field and the vultures
of the air.” And, moreover, suppose this oath
to be administered by some one not by law
authorized to administer any oath. We need
scarcely ask whether an insulted community
would not, under a sense that their laws had
been wantonly trampled upon, call aloud, and
with earnestness, upon the ministers of justice
to punish such awful and disgusting profanity.
And yet the ministers of justice could afford
them no aid, inasmuch as the law has not, on
this subject, clothed them with any authority.

Secondly. We object to the administration
of oaths like those set forth in the petition,
because they bind the person receiving them
to disregard and violate the law. In one of
the oaths, for instance, the person receiving it
swears that he will assist a companion of a
certain degree, so far as to extricate him from
difficulty, whether he be right or wrong. He
also swears that he will keep the secrets of a
companion of a certain degree without excep-
tion, or as the witnesses testified they had
heard it administered, “murder and treason


not excepted.” Now, the committee believe |


it to be morally wrong, as well as inconsistent


54 FREEM ASONRY.


with our allegiance to the government under
which we live, and a direct violation of the
law, to keep secret the commission of any
great and flagrant offense against the govern
ment. He who conceals treason is himself
guilty of misprision of treason. He who con-
ceals murder is himself (in some cases at least)
a murderer.

Thirdly. We consider the administration of
extra-judicial oaths, especially such as are set
forth in said petition, improper, because in
their tendency they are opposed to sound
morals and are blasphemous. The obligation
to assist another so far as to extricate him from
difficulty, whether he be right or wrong, and
to conceal another’s secrets, even though those
secrets should involve the highest and most
enormous crimes, is most assuredly opposed to
the spirit of the Gospel, and to the pure sys-
tem of morality therein inculcated. And to
call upon the great and awful name of Jehovah
to give sanction to such obligations is, in our
opinion, the hight of blasphemy.

Fourthly. We believe such oaths to be im-
proper, because the penalties attached to them
are such as are unknown to our law, and are
opposed both to the Constitution of the United
States and to the Constitution of this State.
If the breach of those oaths constitute the


FREEMASONRY. 55


crime of perjury, then, in our opinion, such
breach should be punished as perjury in other
cases is punished. By our law every person
who shall commit perjury, and shall be thereof
duly convicted, shall suffer imprisonment in
the Connecticut State Prison not less than
two nor more than five years; and this is the
extent of the pains and penalties which the
humanity of our law will suffer to be inflicted
upon him. But to the violation of the oaths
above referred to is annexed a great variety
of most cruel and inhuman punishments, such
as are not known in the criminal codes of any
civilized nation on the earth. Among them
are the tearing out of the tongue, or splitting
it from tip to roots—the cutting of the throat
across from ear to ear—the tearing out of the
heart and vitals, and exposing them to be de-
stroyed by wild beasts and birds of prey, ete.
These penalties we believe to be forbidden by
the tenth article of the amendments of the
Constitution of the United States, which pro-
hibits the infliction of all cruel and unusual
punishments; and by the tenth section of the
first article of the Constitution of this State,
which declares that “No person shall be ar-
rested, detained, or punished, except in cases
clearly warranted by law.” For these and for
various other reasons which must be obvious


56 FREEMASONRY.


to the good sense of this Honorable Body, we
are of the opinion that the prayer of the peti-
tion ought to be granted, and we would, there-
fore, recommend the passage of the accom-
panying Bill for a public Act. All of which is
respectfully submitted. Signed per order,
THOMAS BACKUS, Chairman.


3. L introduce the published renunciation of
Freemasonry by Jarvis F. Hanks, of New York,
1829, and of Calvin Hatch, published 1831.
Also, the published renunciation of Henry
Fish, Edwin Chapman, and Bliss Welch, 1830.
These are found on the cover of the tract, and
are only specimens of a multitude of similar
renunciations published in various books and
journals.


RENUNCIATION.

“ To the Editor of the Anti-Masonic Beacon:

“Sir: The time has come when I feel con-
strained, from a sense of duty to God, my
neighbor, and myself, to make void my alle-
giance to the Masonic Institution. In thus
taking leave of Freemasonry, I am not sensible
of the least hostility to Masons; but act under a
solemn conviction that Masonry is a wicked
imposture, a refuge of lies, a substitute for the
Gospel of Christ; that it is contrary to the


FREEMASONRY, 57


laws of God and our country, and superior
to either, in the estimation of its disciples; and
lastly, that it is the most powerful and success-
ful engine ever employed by the devil to de-
stroy the souls of men.

“TI was initiated into Masonry in 1821, and
have taken eighteen degrees. My motives
were curiosity and the expectation of personal
advantage, while, at the same time, I was dis-
honest enough to profess that disinterested
benevolence to my fellow-men was my object.
I have been intrusted with the highest offices
in the gift of a Lodge and Chapter, viz.: Wor-
shipful Master and Most Excellent High Priest,
which I acknowledge, at that time, I considered
very flattering distinctions. I approved of the


~


abduction of William Morgan as a just act of |


Masonry, and had I been called upon to assist,


should, under the opinions I then held, have


felt bound to attend the summons and obey tt.
I remained in favor of the Institution several
months after the abduction of Morgan.

“JI was convinced of the evil and folly of
Masonry from an inquiry instituted in my own
mind, which I was determined should be con-
ducted privately, candidly, impartially, and, if
possible, without prejudice. Under the scru-
tiny of the investigation I brought the Law
of God contained in the Old and New Testa-


58 FREEMASONRY.


ments, the laws of our country, the Masonic
oaths (so many as I have taken), Masoric pro-
fessions, and Masonic practice. I then resolved
not to be influenced by the fear or favor of
man, Who can only ‘kzll the body, and after
that has no more that he can do, but by the
fear of God, ‘who, after he hath killed, hath
power to cast into hell? (Luke xii. 4,5.) 1
feel assured that any Mason, or any man, taking
the same course, must arrive at the same con-
clusion. Yours, JARVIS F. HANKS.
“New York, Lebruary 13, 1829.”


CALVIN HATCH’S RENUNCIATION OF
FREEMASONRY.

“To the Church of Christ in Farmington:

“ BreTHREN : Impressed with a sense of duty,
I would solictt your attention, while I make
the following statement of facts: Soon after I
arrived at the age of twenty-one years I was
induced (principally from curiosity ) to become
a I'reemason; and before I was twenty-two, I
advanced to the third, and soon after to the
fourth degree of the then hidden mysteries of
that Institution, and remained a tolerably reg-
ular attendant upon its stated meetings, until
February, 1819; since which I have never at-
tended any of its meetings, though often re-
quested. ‘


FREEMASONRY. 59


“Hoodwinked to the principles of the Insti-
tution, I felt that, as a professed follower of the
Lord Jesus Christ, it was not profitable to
spend my time in the lodge-room.

“ Another fact I wish to notice: that for three
years I was accustomed to hear prayers offered
at the lodge by a man who was considered an
infidel; which, to my mind, was utterly revolt-
ing.

“ Within about a year my attention has been
particularly called to this subject. At first, I
felt that the Institution could not be bad, ex-
cept by being in the hands of bad men. I sat-
isfied myself that my withdrawment from the
lodge, while Masonry was in good repute, spoke
a language which could not be misunderstood;
and still, I confess I felt some veneration for
the Institution, on account of its beneficence
in relieving its afflicted members.

“Early last spring I became satisfied that
one of our citizens had fallen a sacrifice to
Masonic vengeance; yet, whether the Institu-
tion could be charged with it, was with me a
question. I found that it was thus charged by
those opposed to the Institution, and I hastily
and rashly resolved to read no more upon the
subject, because I considered the charge un-
just. In the course of the last summer I had
many misgivings for this decision, which closed


60 FREEMASONRY.


every avenue to information. Knowing that
many of my Christian brethren were grieved
that any professor of the religion of Christ
should remain even a nominal member of a
society, the principles of which they believed
were anti-christian, and opposed to the best
interests of our country.

“Feeling that some deference was due to
their judgment, I, early in the fall, with pray-
erfulness, divesting myself of all prejudice,
took up the subject for investigating the prin-
ciples, and sought information through the
press, and soon became satisfied that I had a
duty to perform which I had long neglected;
and in December last, without consulting any-
one, came to the conclusion that nothing short
of absolving myself from all connection with
the Masonic Fraternity, and from all its obli-
gations, would be answerable to my duty as a
citizen and a member of the church of Christ,
Since that time I have read the proceedings
of the United States Anti-Masonic Convention,
disclosing facts before unknown to me, and
am of the opinion that it is the bounden duty
of every professor of religion who feels bound
in the least by Masonic obligations to read the
doings of that convention, with prayerfulness
and without prejudice, before he decides upon
the path of duty,


FREEMASONRY. 61


“I feel that some acknowledgments are due
from me to those brethren who have been
grieved by my dilatoriness upon a subject so
plain and a duty so clear. And if I have thus
offended any of my brethren, I pray them to
forgive; and however great my sin has been,
I trust I have forgiveness of my God.

“Tf can not dismiss the subject without be-
seeching my Christian brethren who remain as
I have done, to examine and decide, as in the
presence of God, without delay ; for what we do
must be done quicky. CALVIN HATCH,

“Farmineton, Lebruary 3, 1831.”


COPY OF MY RENUNCIATION SENT BY MAIL TO
NEW MILFORD, FEBRUARY 3, 1831.


“To the Officers of St. Peter's Lodge, New
Milford, State of Connecticut:


“ (GENTLEMEN: For more than twenty years I
have been a member of your lodge; and now,
from a conviction that it is my duty as a citi-
zen and a professed follower of our blessed
Savior no longer to remain, even as I have
been for the last twelve years, a nominal mem-
ber of a society whose principles are opposed
to the best interests of our country, and whose
rites are, many of them, not only immoral, but


*


62 FREEMASONRY.


a profanation of Scripture, and, consequently,
opposed to the religion of the Gospel, I do,
therefore, absolve myself from all its obliga-
tions whatever. CALVIN HATCH.
“FARMINGTON, December 25, 1830.”


RENUNCIATION.


“Having been initiated some years since
in the mysteries of Freemasonry, but without
finding any of those advantages which were
so bountifully promised by the Fraternity, and
now being fully convinced that the Institution
is corrupt to the very core, and used to pro-
mote ends tending to subvert our free institu-
tions, we deem it our duty publicly to re-
nounce all obligations to the ‘Craft, believing
ourselves to be freed from its oaths, inasmuch
as no man can bind himself to do anything
contrary to the allegiance he owes to his
country, or the duties he owes to his Maker.


“HENRY FISH, Salisbury, Master Mason.

“EDWIN CHAPMAN, Windsor, M. Mason.

“BLISS WELCH, Chatham, Royal Arch.
“Dated at Harrrorp, Jeb. 4 1830.”


FREEMASONRY. 63


CREE A ee, Wie


EXAMINATION OF THE BOOKS REVEAI-
ING FREEMASONRY,


ra ar AVING established the fact that Ber-
y nardin his “ Light on Masonry,” William

Morgan, Allyn, Richardson, and others,
all of whom substantially agree, have truly re-
vealed Freemasonry as it was at that time, I
will now enter upon an examination of some
of these books, assuming as I must, or abandon
all idea that any thing can ever be proved by
human testimony, that they contain a veritable
revelation of Freemasonry.

After I have examined these books, and
learned and shown what Freemasonry was at
their date, I shall consider the question of its
having undergone any material change since
that, date, and also whether it can be so changed
as to be an innocent institution and still retain
the distinguishing characteristics of Freema-,
sonry.

_ That I may do no injustice to any one, I
shall not hold Masons responsible for oaths and


64 FREEM ASONRY.


degrees which are above and beyond them
and which they have not taken and of which
they have no knowledge. The question ot
their moral and responsible relation to the in
stitution, as a whole, will receive notice in an-
other place. At present I shall hold Masons
responsible for those oaths, principles, teach.
ings and degrees of which they have knowl.
edge.

In these numbers I need only to notice a
few points in the oaths of Masons, and I recom-
mend all persons to obtain the books in which
their oaths, ceremonies, and secrets are fully
revealed. The first of their oaths is that of an
Entered Apprentice. These oaths are adminis.
tered in the following manner: The candidate
stands on his knees, with his hands on the
Holy Bible. The Worshipful Master pronounces
the oath in short sentences, and the can-
didate repeats after him. The oath of the En-
tered Apprentice is as follows: “I, A. B, of
my own free will and accord, in presence of
Almighty God and this worshipful lodge of
Free and Accepted Masons, dedicated to God
and held forth to the holy order of St. John, do
hereby and hereon most sincerely promise and
swear, that I will always hail, ever conceal, and
never reveal any part or parts, art or arts, point
or points of the secrets, arts, and mysteries of


FREEMASONRY. 65


ancient Freemasonry, which I have received,
am about to receive, or may hereafter be in-
structed in, to any person or persons jn the
known world, except it be a true and‘ lawful
brother Mason, or within the body of a just and
lawfully constituted lodge of such; and not
unto him or unto them whom I shall hear so
to be, but unto him and them only whom I
shall find so to be after strict trial and due ex-
amination, or lawful information.

“ Furthermore, dol promise and swear, that I
will not write, print, stamp, stain, hew, cut,
carve, indent, paint, or engrave it on anything
movable or immovable under the whole can-
opy of Heaven, whereby or whereon the least
letter, figure, character, mark, stain, shadow, or
resemblance may become legible or intelligible
to myself or to any other person in the known
world, whereby the secrets of Masonry may be
unlawfully obtained through my unworthiness.
To all of which I do most solemnly and sincerely
promise and swear, without the least equivoca-
tion, mental reservation, or self-evasion of mind
in me whatever; binding myself under no less
penalty than to have my throat cut across, my
tongue torn out by the roots, and my body
buried in the rough sands of the sea at low-
water mark, where the tide ebbs and flows
twice in twenty-four hours. So help me God,


66 FREEMASONRY.


and keep me steadfast in the due performance
of the same.”— Light on Masonry, 8th edition,
page 27.

Upon this oath I remark:

1. That: the administration and taking of it
are in direct violation of both the law and gos-
pel of God. Jesus prohibits the taking of
oaths. Mat. V. 34. “But I say unto you
swear notatall.” Itis generally conceded that
He intended only to forbid the taking of
extra judicial oaths. That He did formally
and positively forbid the taking, and of course
the administering, of all oaths not regularly
administered for judicial and governmental
purposes, is, I believe, universally admitted.
Here then we find that in the first step in Free.
masonry the express command of Christ is set
at nought.

2. The administration and taking of this
oath is a taking of the name of God in vain
and is therefore an awful profanity. Exod. xx:
7: “Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord
thy God in vain: for the Lord will not hold
him guiltless that taketh his name in vain.”
Professing Christian Freemasons, do you hear
and remember this, and are you aware that in
taking or administering this oath you take the
name of God in vain and that He will not hold
you guiltless? Do you also remember that


FREEMASONHY. 67


whenever you are present aiding, abetting, and
consenting to the administering, and taking of
this or any other Masonic oath you are guilty
of violating the express command of Christ
above quoted, and also the express prohibition
of the lawgiver at Sinai? And yet you can
see nothing unchristian in Freemasonry.

3. This oath is a fore-swearing of the candi-
date. It is swearing him to keep all the se-
crets of Freemasonry that shall be revealed
to him when as yet he knows not what they
will be. This is in direct opposition to both
the law and gospelof God. And yet, professed
Christian, you can see no harm in it.

4. The administrator of this oath had just
assured the candidate that there was nothing
in itinconsistent with his duty to God or to
man. How is it, professed Christian, that you
did not remember that you had no right to
take an oath at all under such circumstances
and for such reasons. Why did you not in-
quire of the Master by what authority he was
about to administer an oath, and by what an-
thority he expected and required you to take
it? Why did you not ask him if God would
hold him guiltless if he administered an oath
in His name, and you guiltless if you took the
oath. And when you have seen this or any
other Masonic oath administered why have you


68 FREEM ASONRY.


not rebuked the violation of God’s law and left
the lodge ?

5. Why did the Master assure the candidate
that there was nothing in the oath contrary to
his obligations to God or man, and then in-
stantly proceed to violate the laws of both God
and man and to require of the candidate the
same violation of law, human and divine?

6. The penalty for violating this oath is
monstrous, barbarous, savage, and is utterly
repugnant to all laws of morality, religion or
decency. Binding myself “under no less a
penalty than to have my throat cut across, my
tongue torn out by the roots, and my body
buried in the sands of the sea at low-water
mark, etc.” Now, has any manaright to incur
such a penalty as this?

Isay again: such a penalty is savage, bar-
barous, unchristian, inhuman, abominable. It
should be here remarked that in this oath is
really found the wrws of all that follows in
Freemasonry. The candidate is sworn to keep
secret everything that zs to be revealed to him
in Freemasonry of which as yet he knows ab-
solutely nothing. This is frequently repeated
in the obligations that follow.

It will be observed that the candidate says,
“to all of which I do solemnly and sincerely
promise and swear, without the least equivoca-


FREEMASONRY. 69


tion, mental reservation, or self-evasion of mind
in me, whatever.” Richardson, who published
the Freemason’s Monitor in 1860, on the 4th
page of his preface, says of Masonry: “The
oaths and obligations were then undoubtedly
binding (that is when Freemasonry was first
established), not only for the protection of the
members but for the preservation of the very
imperfect arts and sciences of that period. To
suppose these oaths mean anything now is
simply absurd.” What! How is this compati-
ble with what is said in this first oath of Ma-
sonry, and hence binding through every degree
of Masonry. “AuL THIs, I Most SOLEMNLY AND
SINCERELY PROMISE AND SWEAR, WITHOUT TIE LEAST
EQUIVOCATION, MENTAL RESERVATION, OR SELF-EVA-
SION OF MIND IN ME WHATEVER.” And now we are
told by one of the highest Masonic authorities,
that, to suppose that Masonic oaths mean any-
thing in these days, is simply absurd. Tuen,
SURELY THEY ARE BLASPHEMY.


7


70 FREEMASONRY,


CREA Pree ee VEE


MASTERS DEGREE.


>


AVE sonry, the oath of which, in substance
We Y5 ; )


is similar to that in the first, and in this
number will consider the oath, or obligation
of a Master Mason. I do not notice the ridicu-
lous manner in which the candidate for the
different degrees, is dressed and conducted into
the lodge. The scenes through which they
pass, are most humiliating and ridiculous, and
cannot fail to be so regarded by all who will
read the books in which they are described. I
quote from the eighth edition of “Light on
Masonry,” by Elder David Bernard, published
by W. J. Shuey, Dayton, Ohio. The obligation
of the Master’s degree will be found on the
seventy-third and seventy-fourth pages of this
work, and is as follows: “I, A. B., of my own free
will and accord, in the presence of Almighty
God, and this worshipful Lodge of Master Ma-
sons, erected to God, and dedicated to the holy


i ~ PASS over the second degree of Ma:


FREEMASONRY. 71


order of St. John, do hereby and hereon, most
solemnly and sincerely promise and swear, in
addition to my former obligations, that I will
not give the degree of Master Mason to any
one of an inferior degree, nor to any one in the
known world, except it be to a true and lawful
brother or brethren Master Mason, or within
the body of a just and lawfully constituted
lodge of such; and not unto him nor unto them
whom I shall hear so to be, but unto him and
them only whom I shall find so to be, after
strict trial and due examination, or lawful in-
formation received. Furthermore, do I promise
and swear, that I will not give the Master’s
word which I shall hereafter receive neither in
the lodge nor out of it, except it be on the five
points of fellowship, and then not above my
breath. Furthermore, do I promise and swear,
that I will not give the grand hailing sign of
distress, except I am in real distress, or for the
benefit of the craft when at work; or should I
ever see that sign given, or hear the word ac-
companying it and the person who gave it,
appearing to be in distress, ] will fly to his re-
lief at the risk of my life, should there be a
greater probability of saving his life than of
losing my own. Furthermore, doI promise and
swear, that I will not wrong this lodge, nor a
brother of this degree, to the value of one cent


72 FREEMASONRY.


knowingly, myself, nor suffer it to be done by
others, if in my power to prevent. Further-
more, do I promise and swear, that I will not be
at the initiating, passing, and raising, a candi-
date at one communication, without a regular
dispensation from the Grand Lodge for the
same. Jurthermore, do I promise and swear,
that I will not be at the initiating, passing, or
raising a candidate in a clandestine lodge, I
knowing it to be such. Furthermore, do I
promise and swear, that I will not be at the in-
itiating of an old man in dotage, a young man
in nonage, an atheist, irreligious libertine,
idiot, madman, hermaphrodite, nor woman.
Furthermore, do I promise and swear, that I will
not speak evil of a brother Master Mason, nei-
ther behind his back, nor before his face, but
will apprise him of all approaching danger if
in my power. Furthermore, do I promise and
swear, that I will not violate the chastity of a
Master Mason’s wife, mother, sister, or daughter,
I knowing them to be such, nor suffer 1t to be
done by others, if in my power to prevent it.
Furthermore, do I promise and swear, that I
will support the constitution of the Grand
Lodge of the State of , under which
this lodge is held, and conform to all the by-
laws, rules and regulations of this, or any other
lodge, of which I may at any time hereafter


FREEMASONRY. 73


become amember. Furthermore, do I promise
and swear, that I will obey all regular signs,
summons, or tokens, given, handed, sent, or
thrown to me, from the hand of another brother
Master Mason, or from the body of a just and
lawfully constituted lodge of such, provided it
be within the length of my cable tow. Fur-
thermore, do I promise and swear, that a Mas-
ter Mason’s secrets, given to me in charge as
such, and I knowing them to be such, shall re-
main as secure and inviolable in my breast as
in his own, murder and treason excepted, and
they left to my own election. Furthermore, do
I promise and swear, that I will go on a Master
Mason’s errand whenever required, even should
I have to go barefoot and bareheaded, if with-
in the length of my cable tow. Furthermore,
do I promise and swear, that I will always re-
member a brother Master Mason when on my
knees, offering up my devotions to Almighty
God. Furthermore, do I promise and swear,
that I will be aiding and assisting all poor, in-
digent Master Masons, their wives and orphans,
wheresoever disposed around the globe, as far
as in my power without injuring myself or
family materially. Furthermore, do I promise


and swear, that if any part of this solemn oath .


or obligation be omitted at this time that I will
hold myself amenable thereto, whenever in-


74 FREEMASONRY.


formed. To all which I do most solemnly
promise and swear, with a fixed and steady
purpose of mind in me, to keep and perform
the same, binding myself under no less penalty

than to have my body severed in two in the
- midst, and divided to the north and south, my
bowels burnt to ashes in the center and the
ashes scattered before the four winds of heay-
en, that there might not the least track or
trace of remembrance remain among men and
Masons of so vile and perjured a wretch as I
should be, were I ever to prove willfully guilty
of violating any part of this my solemn oath or
obligation of a Master Mason. So help me
God, and keep me steadfast in the due per
formance of the same.”

Upon this oath I remark:

1. The first sentence is both profane and
false. The Master instructs the kneeling can-
didate with his hand on God’s Holy Word to
affirm, and the candidate does affirm that the
lodge in which he is kneeling is erected to God
and dedicated to the holy order of St. John.
Remember this is said in and of every Master
Masons’ lodge. But is this true? No, indeed,
it is mere mockery. The words are a mere
profane form. Does not every Freemason
know this?

2. This, and all the following oaths of Ma-


FREEMASONRY. q5


sonry, are administered and taken as additions
to all the previous oaths which the candidate
has taken. (See the oath.) All that is wicked
and profane in the former oaths is indorsed
and reaffirmed in this and in every succeeding
oath. Thus Freemasons proceed to pile oath
upon oath in a manner most shocking and re-
voiting. And is this a Christian institution?
Is this obedience to Him who has said “swear
not at all?”

3. The grand hailing sign of distress men-
tioned in this oath, consists in raising both
hands to heaven in the attitude of supplication.
The words accompanying this sign are, “O
Lord, my God, is there no help for the widow's
son?” The candidate is told by the Master
that this attitude was taken and these words
‘were used by Solomon when he was informed
of the murder of Hiram Abiff. Of this, “Light
on Masonry ” will give the reader full informa-
tion. This whole story of the murder of Hiram
Abiff is a profane falsehood, as I shall more
fully show in another place. Hiram Abiff was
never murdered. Solomon never gave any
such sign, or uttered any such words. The
whole story is false; both the grand hailing
sign of distress, and the accompanying words,
are a profane mockery, and an insult to God.
Bu: what is the thing promised in this part of


16 FREEMASONRY.


a Master Mason’s oath? Observe, the candidate
swears, ‘should I ever see that sign given, or hear
the word accompanying it, and the person who
gave it, appearing to be in distress, I will fly to
his relief at the risk of my life, should there be
a greater probability of saving his life than of
losing my own.” Observe, it matters not what
is the cause of the distress in which a Master
Mason may be—if he has committed a crime,
and is likely to be arrested, or has been ar-
rested; if he is imprisoned, or likely to be im-
prisoned; if he is on trial in a court of justice
and likely to be convicted, and a Master Ma-
son is on the bench as a judge, or on the jury,
or called as a witness; or is a Master Mason a
sheriff and has the prisoner in custody; or is
he a constable, having charge of the jury to
whom the case is to be submitted; or is he a
prosecuting attorney, appointed by the govern-
ment to prosecute him for his crime, and secure
his conviction—in any of these cases, the pris-
oner giving the grand hailing sign of distress,
binds, by a most solemn oath, the judge, jury-
men, sheriff, constable, witness, attorney, if a
Master Mason, to seek to release him, at the
hazard of his life. All who are acquainted
with the practical results of this section of the
Master’s oath, as they appeared in the inyesti-
gations connected with the murder of William


FREEMASONRY. ris


Morgan, are aware that Master Masons kept
this oath inviolate, when efforts were made to
convict the kidnappers and murderers, inso-
much that it was found impossible to execute
the laws. Cases are reported as having re-
peatedly occurred in the administration of
justice, where this hailing sign of distress has
prevailed to rescue the guilty from the hand
ot justice. In another part of this oath, you
will observe, the candidate swears, that he will
apprise a brother Master Mason of approach-
ing danger, if within his power. This binds a
Master Mason to give a criminal notice, if he
understands that he is about to be arrested.
If the sheriff has a writ for the arrest of a
brother Master Mason, this oath lays him under
an obligation not to arrest him, but to give
him notice, that if he does not keep out of the
way, he shall be obliged to arrest him. If the
magistrate who issued the writ is a Master Ma:
son, his oath obliges him to give the criminal
Master Mason warning, so that he may evade
the execution of the writ. Reader, get and
read the pamphlet published by Judge Whit- |
ney, of Belvidere, Illinois. It can be had, I |
believe, at the bookstores in this town. This —
pamphlet will give you an acconnt of the trial
of Judge Whitney, who was Master of a lodge,
before the Grand Lodge of Llinois. It will


78 FREEMASONRY.


show you how completely this oath may pre-
vail to obstruct the whole course of justice,
and render the execution of the law impossi-
ble. Ifa Master Masonis suspected of a crime,
and his case comes before a justice of the
peace who is a Master Mason, or before a grand
jury upon which there is a Master Mason, or
before a court or petit jury in which are Mas-
ter Masons, if they keep inviolate their oath,
it is impossible to reach the execution of the
law. Furthermore, if there be Master Masons
in the community, who hear of the guilt and
danger of a brother Master Mason, they are
sworn to give him warning. It is no doubt for
this reason, that Masons try to secure amongst
themselves all the officers connected with the
administration of justice. At the time of the
murder of Morgan, it was found that to such
an extent were these offices in the hands of
Freemasons that the courts were entirely im-
potent. I quote the following from “ Stearns’
Letters on Freemasonry,” page 127: “In speak-
ing of the murder of William Morgan, of the
justice of it, and of the impossibility of pun
ishing his murderers, a justice of the peace in
Middlebury, a sober, respectable man, and a
Mason, said, ‘that a man had a right to pledge |
his life” and then observed: ‘What can you do?
What can a rat do with a lion? Who are your


FREEMASONHY. 79


judges? who are your sheriffs? and who will
be your jurymen?’” It is perfectly plain that
if Freemasons mean anything by this oath, as
they have given frequent evidence that they
do, this obligation must be an effectual bar to
the administration of justice wherever Free-
masons are numerous. No wonder, therefore,
that dishonest men among them are very anx-
ious greatly to multiply their numbers. Inthe
days ot William Morgan, they had so multi-
plied their numbers that it was found impossi-
ble, and in these days Freemasons have be-
come so numerous, that in many places it w7//
be found impossible to execute the criminal
laws. Even in commercial transactions where
Freemasons are parties to a suit, it will be
found impossible to secure the ends of justice:
Let not Freemasons complain of this assertion,

4. You will observe that in this oath the
candidate also swears, that “a Master Mason’s
secrets, given to me in charge as such,” * *
“shall remain as secure and inviolate in my
breast as in his own, murder and treason ex-
cepted, and they left to my own election.”
Now, this section of the oath is very broad,
and may be understood to cover secrets of
every description. But to put it beycnd all
doubt whether crimes are to be kept secret,
murder and treason are excepted, showing that


80 FREEMASONRY.


the oath has respect particularly to concealing
the crimes of a Master Mason. He may com-
mit Theft, Robbery, Arson, Adultery, Rape, or
any crime whatever, Murder and Treason ex-
cepted, and however well the commission of
these crimes may be known to a Master Ma-
son, if a Master Mason has committed them, he
is under oath to conceal them. Now, is this
right? Is this consistent with duty, either to
God or man? Must not this often prove a fatal
bar to the detection of crime, and the admin-
istration of justice? Certainly it must, or Free-
masons must very frequently violate their sol-
emn oath. If Freemasons deny this, in the
denial they maintain that Masons care nothing
for their oaths. It is selfevident that this
Master’s oath is either a conspiracy against the
execution of law, or:Master Masons care noth-
ing for the solemnity of anoath. Gentlemen,
take which horn of the dilemma you please!
If these oaths are kept inviolate the course of
justice must be effectually obstructed. If they
are not kept, Master Masons are guilty of false
swearing, and that continually. Which shall
we believe to be true? Do Master Masons
continually treat this solemn oath with con-
tempt, or, do they respect their oaths, conceal
the crimes of Master Masons, and fly to their
rescue if they are detected and likely to be


FREEMASONRY, 81


punished? Let not Master Masons, or any body
else, exclaim: “Oh! these oaths are very in-
nocent things! Crimes will be detected, crim-
inals will be punished, for Masons care nothing
for their oaths.” Indeed! And does this excuse
them? It is only by being guilty of false swear-
ing that they can fail to thoroughly obstruct the
course of justice. They are certainly under
the most solemn oath to do that, in case of
crime cominitted by a Master Mason, which
will effectually defeat the execution of law.
Let it be then particularly observed, that in
every community where there are Master Ma-
sons, they either compose a class of conspira-
tors against the administration of criminal law,
and the execution of justice; or, they are a
class of false swearers who care nothing for the
solemnity of an oath. Let this not be re-
garded as alight thing. It is a most serious
and important matter, and that which I have
stated is neither false nor extravagant. Itisa
literal and solemn truth. Let it be well pon-
dered. There is the oath; read it for yourself,
mark its different points and promises, and you
will see there is no escape from these conclu-
sions.

5. The candidate in this oath swears, “I will
not wrong this lodge, nor a brother of this de-
gree to the value of one cent, knowingly my-


82 FREEMASONRY.


self, nor suffer it to be done by others, if in my
power to prevent.” Now observe, he makes
this promise “under no less penalty, than to
have my body severed in two in the midst, and
divided to the north and south, my bowels
burnt to ashes in the center, and scattered be-
fore the four winds of heaven, that there might
not the least track or trace of remembrance
remain among men or Masons of so vile or
perjured a wretch as I should be, were I ever
to prove willfully guilty of violating any part
of this my solemn oath or obligation as Master
Mason. So help me God, and keep ie stead-
fast in the due performance of the same.”
Now, observe, one part of this Master’s obliga-
tion is that which I have just quoted, that he
will not wrong the lodge, nor a brother of this
degree to the value of one cent. For doing
this, he solemnly agrees to incur the awful
penalty just above written. Is this just, as be-
tween man and man? Has any mana right to
take such an oath under such penalties?
Christian Freemason, can you see nothing
wrong in this? Is not this profane, abomina-
ble, monstrous ?

6. Observe, upon the same penalty, the can-
didate proceeds: “Furthermore do I promise
and swear, that I will not be at the initiating,
passing, and raising a candidate at one com-


FREEMASONRY. 83


munication without a regular dispensation
from the Grand Lodge for the same.” Observe,
then, to do this is so great a crime among Ma-
sons as to incur this awful penalty. The can-
didate proceeds: “ Furthermore do I promise and
swear, that I will not be at the initiating ofan old
man in his dotage, a young man in his nonage,
an atheist, irreligious libertine, idiot, madman,
hermaphrodite, nor woman.” To do this, ob-
serve, is so great a crime among Masons as to
incur the awful penalty attached to this oath.
And this is Masonic benevolence! It professes
to be a saving institution, and excludes the
greater part of mankind from its benefits! The
candidate proceeds: “Furthermore do I prom-
ise and swear, that I will not speak evil of a
brother Master Mason, neither behind his back,
nor before his face.” Now, observe again, to
do this is to incur this awful penalty, for this
is one part of the oath. But who does not
know that Freemasons violate this part of the
oath, as well as that which relates to wronging
each other, almost continually? The candi-
date proceeds: “Furthermore do I promiso
and swear, that I will not violate the chastity
of a Master Mason’s wife, sister, or daughter,
I knowing them to be such, nor suffer it to be
done by others, if in my power to prevent.”
But why not promise this in respect to all


84 FREEM ASONRY.


women? If this oath had included all women,
it would have the appearance of justice and
benevolence, but as it is, it is only an odious
partiality, and does not imply even the sem-
blance of virtue. The candidate proceeds:
“Furthermore do I promise and swear, that I
will support the constitution of the Grand
Lodge of the State of , under which this
lodge is held, and conform to all the by-laws,
rules, and regulations of this or any other lodge
of which I may, at any time hereafter, become
amember.” Observe that to violate this part
of the obligation is to incur the awful penalty
attached to this oath. The candidate pro-
ceeds: “Furthermore do I promise and swear,
that I will obey all regular signs, summonses,
or tokens given, handed, sent, or thrown to me
from the hand of a brother Master Mason, or
from the body of a just and lawfully consti-
tuted lodge of such, provided it be within the
length of my cable tow.” This, indeed, puts a
rope around the neck of every offending
brother. He is under oath to answer any sign
or summons given him from a brother Master
Mason, or from a lodge. If he refuses or neg-
lects to respond to the summons, he incurs the
penalty, aid is liable to have it executed upon
him. The cable tow is literally a rope of sey-
eral yards in length, but in a Master’s Lodge is


FREEMASONRY. 85


understood to represent three miles. In the
degrees of Knighthood the distance is reckoned
to be forty miles. This is fearful, and the re-
sponding to such summonses has, doubtless, cost
many a man his life, by placing him in the
hands of an exasperated lodge. The candidate
proceeds: “Furthermore do I promise and
swear, that I will go on a Master Mason’s er-
rand, whenever required, even should I have
to go barefoot and bareheaded, if within the
length of my cable tow.” Now, failure to do
this incurs the awful penalty of this obliga-
tion. A Master Mason’serrand! What errand?
From the words it would seem any errand,
however trivial it may be; every errand, how-
ever frequently, a Master Mason might wish to
send another on an errand. If it does not
mean this, what does it mean? But whatever
it means a failure incurs the whole penalty.
The candidate proceeds: “Furthermore do I
promise and swear, that I will always remember
a brother Master Mason when on my knees
offering up my devotions to Almighty God.”
put do Masons do this? In secret, family,
public, social prayer, do they do this? Pro-
fessed Christian Mason, do you do it? If not,
you are guilty of false swearing every time:
you omit it. What! on your knees offering up
your devotions to Almighty God, and guilty, at
8


86 FREEMASONRY.


that very moment, of violating a solemn oath,
by neglecting to pray for Master Masons!
Remember, to fail in this respect incurs the
awful penalty attached to this obligation. Now
comes that part of the obligation upon which
they lay so much stress as proving Masonry to
be a benevolent institution: “Furthermore do
I promise and swear, that I will be aiding and
assisting all poor, indigent Master Masons, their
wives and orphans, wherever disposed round
the globe, as far as in my power, without in-
juring myself or family materially.” In another
place I shall show that there is no benevolence
whatever in doing this, as every candidate pays
into the public treasury money to compose a
fund for the supply of the wants of the fami-
lies of indigent Freemasons, simply upon the
principle of a mutual insurance company. At
present I simply remark that a failure to do
this incurs the whole terrible penalty of this
obligation. The candidate concludes his prom-
ises by saying: “Furthermore do I promise
and swear, that if any part of this solemn oath
and obligation. be omitted at this time, I will
hold myself amenable thereto, whenever in-
‘formed.”

Some months since I received a letter from
a Master Mason who was manifestly a consci-
entious man, He informed me that he had


FREEMASONRY. 87


been reading my letters in the Independent, on
Freemasonry—that his mind was so distressed,
in view of his Masonic obligations and relations,
that he was wholly unable to attend to busi-
ness, and that he should become deranged,
if he could not escape from these entangle-
ments—that he must and would renounce
Freemasonry at all hazards. When he took
the oath of the Master’s degree the clause
pledging him to keep a Master Mason’s secrets,
murder and treason excepted, was omitted, so
that he was not aware of that clause until af-
terward. This clause, however, that I last
quoted, bound him fast. No wonder that this
conscientious man was frightened when he
came to understand his true position. In ad-
ministering this long oath to any conscientious
man, any part of it that would shock a tender
conscience may be omitted, and yet the can-
didate is pledged to hold himself amenable to -
that part, or those parts, that have been
omitted, whenever informed of the same. This
is a trap and a snare into which many a tender
conscience has been betrayed. And is this an
oath which a Christian man may take, or any
other man, without sin? Can any man admin-
ister this oath, or take it, or be voluntarily
present, aiding and abetting, and be guiltless
of awful profanity and blasphemy? I have


88 FREEMASONRY.


dwelt the longer upon this oath, because prob-
ably two-thirds of the Masons in the United
States have gone no further than this degree.
Now, is it not perfectly plain that a man who
has taken this oath ought not to be intrusted
with the office of a magistrate, a sheriff, marshal
or constable? That he is not to be credited
as a witness where a Master Mason is a party ?
That he ought not to be allowed a place on a
jury where a Master Mason is a party? And,
in short, that he can not safely be intrusted with
any office of honor or profit, either in Church
or State? Is it not plain that a Master’s Lodge,
in any community, is a dangerous institution,
and that the whole country is interested in the
utter suppression of such an institution ?

Let not this opinion be regarded as too se-
vere. The fact is that Freemasons intend to
fulfill their vows, or they do not. If Master
Masons intend to do what they swear to do, is
it right to intrust them with the execution of
the laws? If they do not intend to fulfill their
vows, of what avail will their oath of office be,
since they have no regard for the solemnity
of an oath? In every view of the subject it
is plain that such men ought not to be trusted.
Take either horn of the dilemma, it amounts
to the same thing. I shall have more to say
on this subject hereafter.


FREEMASONRY. 89


CHAPIEME. VIL.
ROYAL ARCH DEGREE.


BES

8 HE fourth degree of Masonry is that of
4 “Mark Master.” The fifth is that of
‘wie @ “Past Master.” The sixth is that of
“Most Excellent Master.” In these the same
points, in substance, are sworn to as in the
Master’s degree. In each succeeding oath the
candidate recognizes and reaffirms all of his
past obligations. In nearly every obligation
the candidates swear implicit allegiance to the
Grand Lodge of the United States and to the
Grand Lodge of the State under which his
lodge holds its charter. The candidate swears,
also, that he will never be present at the rais-
ing of any person to a higher degree who has
not regularly taken each and all of the pre-
vious or lower degrees. In the first degree
secresy alone is enjoined. After this, addi-
tional clauses areintroduced at every step, until
the oaths of some of the higher degrees spread
over several pages. They nearly all sledge


90 FREEMASONRY.


pecuniary help to poor, indigent, worthy Ma-
sons, and their families, as far as they can
without material injury to themselves and
families. They never promise to deny them-
selves or families any comfort or luxury for
the purpose of helping indigent, worthy Ma-
sons or their families. They never promise in
their oaths to give pecuniary aid to any but
Masons and their families. These families, by
their head, have paid into the Masonic fund
the amount that entitles them to aid, in case
of pecuniary want, on the principle of mutual
insurance against want. |

All Masons above the third, or Master’s de-
gree, are sworn to keep inviolate the secrets
of a brother, murder and treason excepted, up
to the seventh, or Royal Arch degree. In the
oath of this degree the candidate, as we shall
see, swears to keep all the secrets of a com-
panion of this degree, murder and treason not
excepted. All Masons of and above this degree
are solemnly bound to do this. The same is
' true of all the points sworn to in this obliga-
tion which we proceed to examine.

In reviewing this and the degrees above it, I
shall not need to give them in full, as they are
substantially and almost verbatim alike, except
as new points are added as the candidate goes
on from one degree to another. The Royal


——


FREEMASONRY. 91


Arch degree is taken in a lodge called a chap-
ter. A Mason of this degree is called a com-
panion, while in the lower degrees Masons ad-
dress each other as brothers. After swearing
to the same points contained in previously
taken oaths, the kneeling candidate, with hands
on the Holy Bible, proceeds: “I furthermore
promise and swear, that I will aid and assist a
companion Royal Arch Mason when engaged
in any difficulty, and espouse his cause so far
as to extricate him from the same, if within
my power, whether he be right or wrong.
Here, then, we have a class of men sworn,
under most frightful penalties, to espouse the
cause of a companion so far as to extricate
him from any difficulty, to the extent of their
power, whether he is right or wrong. How
can such aman be safely intrusted with any
office connected with the administration of the
law? He means to abide by and perform this
solemn oath, or he does not. If he does, will
he not inevitably defeat the due execution of
law, if intrusted with office connected with it?
Suppose he is a magistrate, a sheriff, marshal,
or constable, wiil he not be able to prevent the
execution of justice, if he does all within his
power, as he is solemnly sworn to do? If on
a jury, if sworn as a witness, how can he be
trusted, if he fulfills his Masonic vows?


92 FREEMASONRY.


But suppose he does not intend to abide by
and fulfill his vows, but still adheres, and does
not renounce them; suppose he still recognizes
their obligation, but fails to fulfill them, is hea
uran to be trusted with an office? If he does not
respect and fulfill his Masonic oaths, the valid-
ity of which he acknowledges by continued
adherence, of what avail will be his oath of
office? Of what use will it be for him to
swear that he will faithfully execute the laws,
if he has taken the oath of this degree, and
either fulfills or fails to fulfill it? If he fulfills
it, he surely will not execute the law upon a
companion Royal Arch Mason. If he still ad-
heres to, but fails to fulfill his oath, he does
not respect the solemnity of an oath, and ought
not to be intrusted with an office. If he pub-
licly, sincerely, and penitently renounces his
Masonic oath as unlawful, profane, and not
binding, he may be trusted with office, but
while he adheres he must violate either his
oath of office, or his Masonic oath, whenever
the accused is a Royal Arch Mason, and, in:
deed, whenever such an one is involved in any
legal difficulty.

I beseech the public not to think this severe.
There is, in fact, no third way. Take either
horn of the dilemma and it amounts to the ©
same thing. To treat this lightly, as some are


FREEMASONRY. 93


disposed to do, or to get over it under cover of
the plea of charity, is worse than nonsense; it
_ is wicked to ignore the truth, and proceed as
if there were no great wrong in this case.
There is great wrong, great sin, and great
danger in this case—danger to both Church
and State, danger to the souls of men thus
situated. I beseech this class of men to con-
sider this matter, and renounce this position.
If they will not, I see neither justice nor safety
in allowing such men to hold an office in
Church or State.

But what is the moral character of a man
who espouses the cause, and does all he can
to rescue a criminal from the hands of justice ?
I answer, he is a partaker of his guilt. He
is truly an accessory after the tact. This oath
does not contemplate the professsional serv-
ices of an advocate employed to defend an
accused person in a court of justice. But
even in this case an advocate has no right to
defeat the due administration of justice, and
turn the criminal loose to prey upon society.
When he does this he sins both against God
and society. It is his business to see that no
injustice is done the accused; to secure for
him a fair and impartial trial, but not to rescue
him, if guilty. An advocate who would “es-
pouse Lig cause” of a criminal “so far as to


94 FREEMASONRY.


extricate him from his difficulty, whether right
or wrong,” would deserve the execration of
both God and man.

The candidate in this degree proceeds, as
follows: “Also, that I will promote a compan-
ion Royal Arch Mason’s political preferment
in preference to another of equal qualifica-
tions.” Bernard, who has taken this and many
other Masonic oaths, says, in his “Light on
Masonry,” in a foot-note, that this clause of the
oath is, in some chapters, made a distinct point
in the obligation, thus: “I furthermore promise
and swear, that I will vote for a companion
Royal Arch Mason before any other of equal
qualifications,” and in some chapters both are
left out of the obligation. Upon this clause I
remark:


1. Freemasons deny that Freemasonry has
anything to do with any man’s political opin-
ions, or actions, provided he be not the enemy
of his country. From this obligation, or oath,
he can judge of*the truth or falsehood of this
profession, Again, who does not know that
thousands of the Southern rebels were and are
accepted Freemasons. How does this fact
comport with the pretense that a Freemason
must be loyal to the government under which
he lives. In the higher degrees they swear to


FREEMASONRY. 95


be loyal and true to their government, but are
the Southern Masons so ?


2. We see why such efforts are made to in-
crease the number of Royal Arch Masons, and
the reasons held out to induce political aspir-
ants to become Royal Arch Masons. It is said,
I suppose truly, that Royal Arch Masons are
multiplying by scores of thousands in this coun-
try. It is, beyond doubt, the design of their
leaders to control the elections and secure the
offices throughout the country. From letters
received from reliable parties I learn that in
some localities Masons avow this design. But
whether they avow or deny it, this oath unmis-
takably reveals their design. Why is this
clause found in this oath? It is presumption
and foolhardiness to ignore this plain revela-
tion of their design to control the govern-
ment, secure the offices, and have everything
their own way. If the public can not be
aroused to look this conspiracy in the face, and
rise up and put it down in time, they will surely
find, too late, that their hands are tied, and that
virtual slavery or a bloody revolution awaits
us. Our children and grandchildren will reap
the bitter fruits of our own folly and credulity
What do Freemasons mean by this oath? They
either intend to keep it, or no¢ tokeepit. If


96 FREEMASONRY.


they mean to do as they have promised under
the most solemn oath to do, then Freemasonry,
at least Freemasonry of this and all the higher
degrees, is a political conspiracy to secure the
offices and the control of the government. I
say Freemasonry of this and of all the higher
degrees, for be it remembered that all Masons
of and above this degree have taken the oath
of this degree. I quote the following from an
able editorial in the Albany Evening Journal
Extra, October 27, 1831: “An addition was
made to the Master's oath, in the northern
part of this State, a few years since, by Gov.
Pitcher, who introduced it from Vermont. It
was to the effect that, in voting for officers, a
preference should be given to a Mason over
another candidate of equal qualifications. Very
respectable testimony of the fact was pub |
lished very generally in the newspapers, about

two years since, and has never, to the knowl-
edge of the writer, been contradicted or ques-
tioned. It is admitted that this obligation, in
terms, has not generally been administered
(that is, in a Master’s Lodge), but it is insisted
that if the principle be once admitted that
men in our country may band together in se-
cret conclave, for any purpose not known to
the laws, and may bind themselves under obli-
gations involving the penalty of death for their


FREEMASONRY, 97


transgressions, they may as well pledge them-
selves to any new object, or purpose, as to
those for which they have already associated.
There is no limit to the extent of such associ-
ations, if they are allowed at all. The princi-
ple itself is radically wrong. But independent
of any positive obligation, the very creation
of such artificial ties of brotherhood, the
strength which they acquire by frequent repe-
tition and by the associations of the fraternity,
necessarily produce a clannish attachment
which will ordinarily exhibit itself in the most
important concerns of life in bestowing busi-
ness and patronage on a brother, and in eleva-
ting him to office and rank which will reflect
back honor upon the order to which he belongs.
The inevitable result, therefore, of such insti-
tutions is to give one class of citizens unequal
and unjust advantages over those who are not
of the favored order. And when we find this
natural result hastened and strengthened by
obligations, under the most awful penalties,
to fly to the relief of a brother, to espouse his
cause, whether right or wrong, and to conceal
his crimes, have not the rest of the community
a right to say to these exclusives, these privi-
leged orders, “we will not submit to your
usurpations, and until you restore your fellow-
citizens to equal rights and privileges with


98 FREEMASONRY.


you, we will not give you our votes or trust
you with public office.” To these remarks I
fully subscribe. But I return to another clause
of this oath. The candidate proceeds: “Fur-
thermore do I promise and swear, that a com-
panion Royal Arch Mason’s secrets, given me
in charge as such, and I knowing them to be
such, shall remain as secure and inviolable in
my breast as in his own, murder and treason
not excepted.” Bernard says, in a foot-note,
“In some chapters this is administered, ‘All
the secrets of a companion, without excep-
tion.” ” Upon this clause I remark:

1. That Freemasonry waxes worse and worse
as you ascend from the lower to the higher
degrees. It will be remembered that in the
Master’s oath murder and treason were ex-
cepted in the oath of secrecy. In this degree
murder and treason are not excepted. Now,
as all Masons who take the degrees above this
have also taken this oath, it follows that all
that army of Freemasons, composed of Royal
Arch Masons, and all who have taken the de-
grees above this, are under the most solemn
oath to conceal each other’s crimes, without
exception. And what an institution is this, to
to be allowed existence under any govern-
ment, especially under a republican form of
government? Is it safe to have such a set of


FREEMASONRY. 99


men scattered broadcast over all the United
States? Let us look this thing squarely in the
face. It can not be honestly denied that Royal
Arch Masons take this oath. But a short time
since a minister of the Gospel of my acquaint-
ance was confronted with this oath, and he did
not deny having taken it. Now, if all that
vast army of Masons who have taken this oath
intend to do as they swear to do, what must
be the result? Scores and hundreds of thcu-
sands of men, scattered broadcast over the
whole land, are pledged by the most: sol-
emn oath, and under the penalty of death, to
conceal each other’s crimes, without exception.
Are such men to be safely intrusted with
office, either in Church or State? And must
not a government be on the verge of ruin
when such a conspiracy is allowed to multiply
its numbers at such a frightful rate as it is
doing, at this time, in this country? Will the
people of the United States have the foolhardi-
ness to ignore the crime and danger of this
conspiracy against their liberty? Or will they
gooa-naturedly assume that Freemasons mean
no such thing? Why, then, is this oath? Will
they, under the cover of mock charity, assume
that these men wil] not cover up each other’s
crimes? What kind of charity is this? Is it
charity to believe that a set of men will lve,


100 FREEMASONRY.


under oath, as all Freemasons above the degree
of Fellow Craft must do,if they do not conceal
each other’s crimes? Again, what right have
Freemasons, themselves, to complain of a want
of charity in those who regard them as conspir-
ators against good government? Why, what
shall we do? If they do not repent of, and
renounce, these oaths, we must either regard
them as conspirators against government, or as
men who will /ze, under the solemnity of a
most awful oath. The gentlemen must choose
which horn of the dilemma they will take. On
the one hand, they are swom conspirators
against the execution of the criminal laws; on
the other, they are a class of men that do not
regard the solemnity of an oath. This is the
exact truth, and it is folly and madness to ig-
nore it. Freemasons, therefore, have no right
to complain of us, if we take them at their
word, and believe that they mean to do what
they have sworn they will do. They demand
charity of us. Is it not charitable to believe
that they intend to fulfill such solemn vows,
made, and often repeated, under such terrible
sanctions? The candidate of this degree con-
cludes by saying: “Binding myself under no
less penalty than that of haying my skull
smote off, and my brains exposed to the scorch-
ing rays of the sun, should I ever, knowingly


FREEM ASONRY. 101


or willfully, violate or transgress any part of
this, my solemn oath or obligation as a Royal
Arch Mason. So help me, God, and keep me
steadfast in the performance of the same.”
Now, upon this awful sanction, the candidate
swears that he will not wrong the chapter, or
a companion of this degree, out of anything,
or suffer it to be done by others, if in his power
to prevent it. Men in certain business part-
nerships and relations, whose partners have
been Royal Arch Masons, have been influenced
to take this degree to prevent their being
wronged by their Masonic partners. On the
best authority, I have been informed of one
case of this kind, recently, and it turned out
that while the one who was thus induced to
take this degree was in the army, fighting the
battles of his country, his Royal Arch partner
deliberately cheated him out of several thou-
sand dollars. What shall we say to, what shall
we do with, these men who swarm in every
part. of this country, and who are thus banded
together to espouse each other’s cause and to ex-
tricate each other from any difficulty, whether
they are right or wrong, to conceal each other’s
crimes, to vote each other into office, and the
like? Can wholesome society continue to
exist under the influence of such an institution
as this ?


102 FREEMASONRY.


CHASE reer ai eket


SWORN TO PERSECUTE.


Ne death anyone who violates Masonic
“4 obligation. In the oath of the Turice
InLustrious OrDER of the Cross the candidate
swears, as follows, “Light on Masonry,” eighth
edition, page 199: “You further swear, that
should you know another to violate any essen-
tial point of this obligation, you will use your
most decided endeavors, by the blessing of God,
to bring such person to the strictest and most
condign punishment, agreeably to the rules
and usages of our ancient fraternity; and
this, by pointing him out to the world as an
unworthy vagabond, by opposing his interest,
by deranging his business, by transferring his
character after him wherever he may go, and
by exposing him to the contempt of the whole
fraternity and of the world, during his whole
natural life” The penalty of this obligation
is as follows: “To all and every part thereof


FREEMASONRY. 103


we then bind you, and by ancient usage you
bind yourself, under the no less infamous pen-
alty than dying the death of a traitor, by hav-
ing a spear, or other sharp instrument, like our
Divine Master, thrust into your left side, bear-
ing testimony, even in death, to the power and
justice of the mark of the Holy Cross.” Upon
this obligation I remark:


1. Here we have an explanation of the no-
torious fact that Freemasons try, in every way,
to ruin the reputation of all who renounce
Masonry. The air has almost been darkened
by the immense number of falsehoods that
have been circulated, by Freemasons, to destroy
the reputation of every man who has renounced
Freemasonry, and published it to the world, or
has written against it. No pains have been
spared to destroy all confidence in the testi-
mony of such men. Does not this oath render
it impossible for us to believe what Freemasons
say of the character of those who violate their
obligations? Who of us that lived forty years
ago does not remember how Freeinasons en-
deavored to destroy the reputation of William
Morgan, of Elder Bernard, of Elder Stearns, and
also of Mr. Allyn, and who that is at all ac-
quainted with facts does not know that the
utmost pains are taken to destroy the reputation


104 FREEMASONRY.


of every man that dares to take his pen and
expose their institution. When I had occasion
to quote Elder Bernard’s book, in preaching on
the subject of Freemasonry a few months ago,
I was told in the streets, before I got home,
that he was aman of bad character. I knew
better, and knew well how to understand such
representations, for this is the way in which
the testimony of all such men is sought to be
disposed of by Freemasons. Will this be de-
nied? What, then, is the meaning of this oath?
Are not Masons under oath to do this? Indeed
they are. A few months since I received the
following letter. For reasons which will be
appreciated, [omit name and date. The writer
says: “About a week since, aman calling him-
self Professor W. &. Moore, the great South
American explorer, came to this place, lec-
turing on Freemasonry. He isa Mason, and has
given private lectures to the lodges here, and
has lectured once before the public. Heclaims
to have been at Oberlin, recently, and that while
there he had an interview with you, and that
he tested you sufficiently to satisfy himself that
you had never been a Mason; and further, he
says that the conversation he had with you
resulted to his great satisfaction, and to your
great discomfiture.” At nearly the same date
of this letter, I received, from the same place,


FREEMASONRY. 105


a letter from a Freemason of my acquaintance,
giving substantially the same account of this
Professor Moore. In this letter, however, it is
added that his conversation with me compelled
me to confess that I never had been a Mason,
and to say I would publish no more against
Masonry. ‘This last letter I have mislaid, so
that I can not lay my hand upon it. From the
first | quote verbatim et literatim. I replied
to these letters, as I now assert, that every word
of what this man says of me is false. That
I never saw or heard of this man, to my knowl-
edge, until I received those letters. But this
is nothing new or strange. Such false repre-
sentations are just what we are to expect, if
Freemasons of this and the higher degrees
fulfill their vows. Why should they be be-
lieved, and how can they complain of us for
not believing what they say of men who have
renounced Masonry and oppose it? It is mere
folly and madness to believe them. It is not
difficult, if Freemasons desire it, to produce
almost any amount of testimony to prove that
every manner and degree of falsehood is re-
sorted to to destroy the testimony of men who
witness against them. Any man who will re-
nounce these horrid oaths, and expose their
profanity to the public, should make up his
mind beforehand to endure any amount of


106 FREEMASONRY.


slander and persecution which the ingenuity
of Freemasons can invent.

In the degree of Knights Adepts of the
Eagle or Sun, “Light on Masonry,” eighth edi-
tion, page 269, we have the following: “ Zhe
man peeping. By the man you saw peeping,
and who was discovered, and seized, and con-
ducted to death, zs an emblem of those who
come to be initiated into our sacred mysteries
through a motive of curiosity; and tf so in-
discreet as to divulge their obligations, WE ARE
BOUND TO CAUSE THEIR DEATH, AND TAKE VENGEANCE
ON THE TREASON BY THE DESTRUCTION OF THE TRAI-
rors!!!” Here we find that Freemasons of this
and the higher degrees are solemnly pledged
to destroy the lives of those who violate their
obligations. Deacon William A. Bartlett, of
Pella, Iowa, in his public renunciation of Free-
masonry, says—* Letters on Masonry,” by Elder
John G. Stearns, page 169—“ During the winter
or spring following my initiation, a resolution
was offered in the lodge for adoption, and to be
published outside the lodge, condemning the
abduction of Morgan. After much discussion,
the Worshipful Master called another to the
chair, and said, ‘Brethren, what do you mean
by offering such a resolution as this? Had we
been at Batavia, we would have done just what
those brethren have done, and taken the life


I'REEM ASONRY. 107


of Morgan, because the oaths of Masonry de-
mand it at our hands. And will you condemn
brethren for doing what you would have done
had you been there? Itrust not” When the vote
to condemn them was taken, but zhree voted in
favor of the resolution.” There is abundant
proof that Freemasons generally, at first, de-
nied the murder of Morgan, and when they
could no longer have courage to deny it, they
justified it, until public indignation was so
much aroused as to make them ashamed to
justify it. Let those who wish for proof on
the question of their justifying it read the vol-
ume of Elder Stearns, to be had at the book-
stores, and he will find evidence enough of the
fact.


168 FREEMASONRY.


CR ALE Paes) cea:


AWFUL PROFANITY OF MASONIC
OATHS.


i y N the degree of Templar and Knight of

‘Vee Malta, as found in the seventh edition
VQ of “ Light on Masonry,” page 182, in a
lecture in which the candidate is giving an
account of what he had passed through, he
says: “I then took the cup (the upper part
of the human skull) in my hand, and repeated,
after the Grand Commander, the following
obligation: ‘This pure wine I now take in tes-
timony of my belief in the mortality of the
body and the immortality of the soul—and
may this libation appear as a witness against
me both here and hereafter—and as the sins
of the world were-laid upon the head of the
Savior, so may all the sins committed by the
person whose skull this was be heaped upon
my head, in addition to my own, should I ever,
knowingly or willfully, violate or transgress
any obligation that I have heretofore taken,
take at this time, or shall at any future period


FREEMASONRY. 109


take, in relation to any degree of Masonry or
order of Knighthood. So help me God?”
Now, observe what a horrid imprecation is
here. These Knights Templar and Knights of
Malta take their oaths sustained by such a
horrid penalty as this. They say that they
will incur this penalty, not merely if they
violate the peculiar obligation of this degree,
but “any obligation that I have heretofore
taken, take at this time, or shall at any future
period take, in relation to any degree of Ma-
sonry or order of Knighthood.” This is called
“the sealed obligation.” Here, in the most
solemn manner, the candidate, drinking wine
out of a human skull, takes upon himself this
obligation, under the penalty of a double
damnation. What can exceed the profanity
and wickedness of this?

On the 185th page of the same book, we
find a note quoted from the work of Brother
Allyn, who renounced Masonry and published
on the subject. I will quote the note entire.
Mr. Allyn says of the fifth libation, or sealed
obligation, it “is referred to by Templars in
confidential communications, relative to mat-
ters of great importance, when other Masonic -
obligations seem insufficient to secure secresy,”
silence, and safety. Such, for instance, was
the peuner of William Morgan, which was


110 FREEMASONRY.


communicated from one Templar to another,
under the pledge, and upon this sealed obliga-
tion.” He also remarks, in another place:
“ When I received this degree I objected to
drink from the human skull, and to take the
profane oath required by the rules of the
order. I observed to the Most Eminent that
I supposed that that part of the ceremonies
would be dispensed with. The Sir Knights
charged upon me, and the Most Eminent said:
‘Pilgrim, you here see the swords of your
companions drawn to defend you in the dis-
charge of every duty we require of you. They
are also drawn to avenge any violation of the
rules of our order. We expect you to pro-
ceed.’ A clergyman, an acquaintance of mine,
came forward, and said: ‘Companion Allyn,
this part of the ceremonies is never dispensed
with. I, and all the Sir Knights, have drank
from the cup and taken the fifth libation. It
is perfectly proper, and will be qualified to
your satisfaction. I then drank of the cup
of double damnation.”

Now, can any profanity be more horrible
than this?) And yet there is nothing in Ma-
sonry, we are told, that is at all inconsistent
with the Christian religion! On the 187th
page of the same volume, the “ Knight of the
Christian Mark,” at the conclusion of his obli-


FREEMASONRY. ala


gation, says: “ All this I promise in the name
of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost; and if I perform it not, let me be
ANATHEMA MaranatHa! ANATHEMA Marana-
THA!!” Anathema Maranatha is understood
to mean accursed at the Lord’s coming.
Again, the “ Knights of the Red Cross” take
their obligations upon the following penalty,
page 164: “To all of which I do most sol-
emnly promise and swear, bindmg myself un-
der no less penalty than that of having my
house torn down, the timbers thereof set up,
and I hanged thereon; and when the last
trump shall blow, that I be forever excluded
from the society of all true and courteous
Knights, should I ever, willfully or knowingly,
violate any part of this solemn obligation of
Knight of the Red Cross. So help me, God,
and keep me steadfast to keep and perform
the same.”

The “ Knights of the Eagle, and Sovereign
Prince of Rose Croix de Heroden,” in receiv-
ing this degree, pass through the following,
page 253, of Bernard’s eighth edition of
“ Light on Masonry:” “During this time the
brethren in the second department take off
their black decorations, and put on the red,
and, also, uncover the jewels. The candidate
knocks on the door, and the Warden, for an-


112 FREEMASONRY.


swer, shuts the door in his face. The Master
of Ceremonies says: ‘ These marks of indignity
are not sufficiently humiliating; you must
pass through more rigorous proofs, before you
can find it’ He then takes off the candidate
the chasuble and black apron, and puts over
him a black cloth, covered with ashes and
dust, and says to him: ‘I am going to conduct
you into the darkest and most dismal place,
from whence the word shall triumphantly
come to the glory and advantage of Masonry.’
He then takes him into the third apartment,
and takes from him his covering, and makes
him go three times around (showing him the
representation of the torments of the damned),
when he is led to the door of the chapter, and
the Master of Ceremonies says to him; ‘Zhe
horrors which yon have just now seen are but
a faint representation of those you shall suf-
fer, if you break through our laws, or infringe
the obligation you have taken.” In a foot-
note, the editor says: “ This certainly caps the
climax, and renders the institution of Masonry
complete. The torments of the damned, the
awful punishment which the Almighty inflicts
on the violators of his righteous law is but a
faint emblem of the punishment which Ma-
sonry here declares shall be inflicted on the
violators of Masonic law, or those who are


: FREEMASONRY. os


guilty of an infraction of Masonic obliga-
tions!” But I get sick of pursuing these
loathsome and blasphemous details; and I
fear I shall so shock my readers that they will
be as wearied as I am myself. In reading
over these oaths, it would seem as if a Ma-
sonic lodge was a place where men had as-
sembled to commit the utmost blasphemy of
which they were capable, to mock and scoff
at all that is sacred, and to beget among
themselves the utmost contempt for every
form of moral obligation. These oaths sound as
if the men who were taking and administer-
ing them were determined to annihilate their
moral sense, and to render themselves inca-
pable of making any moral discriminations,
and certainly, if they can see no sin in taking
and administering such oaths under such pen-
alties, they have succeeded, whether inten-
tionally or not, in rendering themselves ut-
terly blind, as regards the moral character of
their conduct. By repeating their blasphemy
- they have put out theirowneyes. Now these
oaths mean something, or they do not. Ma-
sons, when they take them, mean to abide by
them, or they do not. If they do not, to take
them is blasphemy. If they do mean to abide
by them, they are sworn to perform deeds, not


>


only the most injurious to society, to govern-


114 FREEMASONRY.


ment, and the church of God of any that can
well be named, but they swear, in case of the
violation of any point of these obligations, to
seek to have the penalties inflicted on the vi-
olator. In other words, in such a case, they
swear to commit murder; and every man who
adheres to such obligations is under oath to
seek to accomplish the violent death, not only
of every man who shall betray the secrets,
but, also, of everyone who shall violate any
point or part of these obligations. Now, the
solemn question arises, are these oaths a mere
farce, a mere taking of the name of God in
vain, in the most trifling manner, and under
the most solemn circumstances? or, are we
to understand that the Masonic institution is
a conspiracy, its members taking, in all seri-
ousness and good faith, such horrid oaths to
do such horrid deeds, upon such horrid penal-
ties? Which are we to understand to be
true? If either is true, I ask the church of
God, I ask the world, what more abominable
institution ever existed than this? And yet
we are told that in all this trifling with oaths,
or, if not trifling, this horrid conspiracy, there
is nothing inconsistent with the Christian re-
ligion! And even ministers of the Gospel are
found who can justify it and eulogize it in a
manner most profane, and even blasphemous,


FREEMASONRY. 115


Now, in charity, I suppose it to be true that
the great mass of Masons, who are nominally
so, and who have, in a hurry and under great
excitement, taken more or less of the degrees,
have only a very confused conception of what
Masonry really is. Surely, if Masons really
understood what Masonry is, as it is delineated
in these books, no Christian Mason would
think himself at liberty to remain another day
a member of the fraternity. The fact is, a
great many nominal Masons are not so in
reality. It is as plain as possible that a man,
knowing what it is,and embracing it in his
heart, can not be a Christian man. To say
he can is to belie the very nature of Chris-
tianity.

But here let me ask, in concluding this ar-
ticle, what is there in Masonry to justify the
taking of such oaths, under such penalties?
If there is any good in Masonry, why should
it be concealed? and why should such oaths
be taken to conceal it? If Masonry is an evi)
thing, and its secrets are evil, of course, to
take any oath to conceal the wickedness is
utterly unjustifiable. Does Masonry exact
these oaths for the sake of concealing from
outsiders the miserable falsehoods that they
palm off upon their candidates, which every-
where abound in Masonry? But what is


116 FREEMASONRY.


there in these stories, if true, that should be
concealed? If Hiram Abiff was murdered,
as Masons pretend; if the Ark of the Cove-
nant, with its sacred contents, was really
found in the vault under ground, as Masons
pretend, is there any justifiable reason for
- concealing from the whole world these facts.
I have sought in vain for a reason to justify
the taking of any oaths at all in Masonry.
And it is passing strange that such oaths,
under such penalties, should ever have been
so much as dreamed of by Masons as being
justified by their secrets. The fact is, their
stringent secrecy must be designed, in part,
to excite the curiosity of men, and draw can-
didates into the snare. The highest Masonic
authority has affirmed that their secrecy is es-
sential to their ewistence; and that, if their
secrets were exposed, the institution could
not live. Now, this is no doubt true, and is
the great reason, as I conceive, for guarding
their secrets with. such horrid caths. But I
said, in an early number, that Masonry is a
swindle. Where are the important secrets
which they promise to their candidates? For
what do the candidates pay their money but
really to be imposed upon? But it may be
well asked, why do Masons, once embarked in
Masonry, go on, from one degree to another.


FREEMASONRY. 117


multiplying their oaths, obligations, and im-
precations? When they are once within a
lodge to take a degree, they dare not do
otherwise than to go forward. I could quote
numerous instances from the writings of sece-
ding Masons showing how they have been
urged from step to step, and assured, if they
would proceed, that everything would be ex-
plained to their satisfaction. They have been
told, as in the case of Mr. Allyn just noticed,
that everything would be qualified and ex-
plained to their satisfaction. Upon Mr. Allyn,
as we have seen, the Sir Knights drew their
swords when he hesitated to go forward; and
the Most Eminent informed him that he must
go ferward, or their swords would avenge his
disobedience.

The fact is, when once within the lodge,
they dare not stop short of taking the obliga-
tion belonging to the degree; and they are
persuaded by those who have taken higher
degrees, to go forward from one degree to
another.

And the great Masonic argument to keep
them steadfast in concealing the imposition
that has been practiced upon them, and to
persuade them not to renounce and expose
what they have passed through, is, that of
having their throats cut, their tongues torn


118 FREEMASONRY.


out by the roots, their heart and vitals torn
out and thrown to the vultures of the air,
drowning and murder.

Masons profess not to invite or persuade
any to join the lodges; and the candidates,
when they come forward for their degrees, are
asked if they come forward of their own free
will and accord. To this, of course, they
answer, yes.

But what has made them willing? They
have been persuaded to it. They have been
invited to join;—they have been wrged to join;
motives of self-interest have been set before
them in such a light as to gain their consent.
They are thus made willing; and, therefore,
truthfully say, that they do it of their own
free will and accord.

But it is almost, if not quite, the universal
testimony of renouncing Masons, that they
were persuaded to it. They were made will-
ing to join by such representations as over-
persuaded them. I do not believe that one
in five hundred of those who join the Masonic
lodge, join without being persuaded to do so,
But let me say also, that the great mass of

, Freemasons have never taken more than the
‘first three degrees. They may know nothing
about the higher degrees. Now in what sense
are they responsible for the wickedness of the


FREEMASONRY. 119


institution as revealed in the higher degrees?
I answer, they would not be responsible at
all, if they neither knew anything of those
degrees, nor had any opportunity to know
anything of them.

But as these books have been widely circu-
lated, and are secretly kept by Masons, and
are better known to Freemasons at present
by far than they are to the outward world,—
those who have taken the lower degrees, if
they continue to sustain the institution, which
is in reality a unit, become morally responsi-
ble for the wickedness of the higher degrees.
But the obligations in the first three degrees
are by no means innocent. They are such
obligations as no man has any right to take
or to administer. To adhere to the institution
is to indorse it. But again, why do not Free-
masons now, who have these books, and who
know, or ought to know thoroughly the nature,
designs, and tendency of the institution, pub-
licly renounce the whole thing, confess their
sin, and proclaim their independence of the
order? I answer, first—They have seared their
consciences by what they have done, and
have, therefore, very little sense of the great
sinfulness of remaining a member of such an
abominable institution. I must say that I am
utterly amazed at the want of conscientious-


120 FREEMASONRY.


ness among Masons on this subject. As I
have said, they have put out the eyes of their
moral sense, and do not at all appreciate the
awful guilt of their position. And, secondly—
They dare not. And if by their oaths they
mean anything, it is not to be wondered at
that they are afraid to renounce Freemasonry.
Why the fraternity are under oath to perse-
cute them, to represent them as perjured
vagabonds, to destroy their characters, their
business, and their influence, and to follow
them from place to place, transferring their
character after them during their whole natu-
ral life. This surely is enough to deter com-
mon men from renouncing their allegiance to
the institution. To be sure, this danger does
not excuse them; but weak as human nature
is, it is not wonderful that it has its influence.

But again, Masons are under oath, if they
renounce the order, to seek the destruction of
their lives. And they have given terrible
proof that their oaths are not a dead letter in
this respect, not only in the murder of Wil-
liam Morgan, but of many others who have
renounced their allegiance to the brotherhood.
In a sermon which lies before me, delivered
by Rev Moses Thacher, a man well known in
the Christian world, and who has himself
taken many degrees of Masonry, he says:


FREEMASONRY, 121


“The institution is dangerous to civil and
religious rights. It is stained with blood. I
have reliable historical evidence of not less
than seven individuals, including Morgan,
murdered under Masonic law.” Since this
sermon was preached other cases have come
to light, and are constantly coming to light,
in which persons have been murdered for dis-
closing Masonic secrets. And if the truth
shall ever be known in this world, I believe
it will be found that scores of persons, in this
and other countries, have been murdered for
unfaithfulness to Masonic obligations. Free-
masons understand quite well the malignity
of the spirit of Freemasonry. They understand
that it will not argue, that it will not discuss
the reasonableness or unreasonableness, the
virtue or the sin of the institution; but that
its argument is assassination. I am now daily
in the receipt of letters from various parts of
the country, expressing the highest satisfac-
tion that anybody can be found who dares
write against the institution at this day. The
fact is, there are a great many men belonging
to the institution, who are heartily sick of it,
and would fain be rid of it; but who dare not
open their mouths or whisper to any individual
in the world their secret abhorrence of the
institution. But it is time to speak out. And


122 FREEMASONRY.


i do beg my brethren in the ministry, and the
whole Christian Church, to examine it for
themselves, and not turn away from looking
the evil in the face until it is too late.


FREEMASONRY. 123


(OAS ba SARA e Se ee


PERVERSE AND PROFANE USE OF THE
HOLY BIBLE.


3
iz #7N this number I wish to call the


wy - attention of my readers to some of the
UWA cases in which Freemasons misapply
and misrepresent, and most profanely, if not
blasphemously, use the Holy Scriptures. I
will not go far into the sickening details; but
far enough, I trust, to lead serious persons to
reflect upon the nature of a society that can
trifle with such solemn things.

The “Knights of the East and West” take
the following oath, and then pass through the
following ceremonies:—See pp. 214—220 of
the first edition, or eighth edition, 250—240,
of Bernard’s Light on Masonry— I , do
promise and solemnly swear and declare, in
the awful presence of the only One Most Holy,
Puissant, Almighty, and Most Merciful Grand
Architect of Heaven and Earth, who created
the universe and myself through His infinite
goodness, and conducts it with wisdom and


- 124 TREEMASONRY.


- justice; and in the presence of the Most
Excellent and Upright Princes and Knights
of the East and West, here present in conyo-
cation and grand council, on my sacred word
of honor, and under every tie both moral and
religious, that I never will reveal to any
person whomsoever below me, or to whom
the same may not belong by being legally
and lawfully initiated, the secrets of this degree
which are now about to be communicated to
me, under the penalty of not only being dis-
honored, but to consider my life as the im-
mediate forfecture, and that to be taken from
me with all the tortures and pains to be
inflicted in manner as I have consented to in
my preceding degrees. I further solemnly
promise and swear that I will pay due obe-
dience and submission to all the degrees beyond
this, &c. All this I solemnly swear and sin-
cerely promise upon my sacred word of honor,
under the penalty of the severe wrath of the
Almighty Creator of Heaven and Earth; and
may He have merey.on my soul in the great
and awful day of judgment agreeably to my
conformity thereto. Amen. Amen. Amen.
The All Puissant then takes the ewer filled
with perfumed ointment, and anoints his head,
eyes, mouth, heart, the tip of his right ear,
hand, and foot, and says,“You are now, my


FREEMASONRY. 125


dear brother, received a member of our soci
ety. You will recollect to live up to the
precepts of it; and also, remember that those
parts of your body which have the greatest pow-
er of assisting you in good or evil, have this
day been made holy.” The Master of Ceremo-
nies then places the candidate between the
two Wardens, with the draft before him. The
Senior Warden says to him, “Examine with
deliberation and attention everything which
the All Puissant is going to show you.” After
a short pause, he, the S. W., says, “Is there
mortal here worthy to open the book with
the seven seals?” All the brethren cast their _
eyes down and sigh. The Senior Warden
hearing their sighs, says to them, “Venerable
and respectable brethren, be not afflicted;
here is a victim (pointing to the candidate)
whose courage will give you content.”

S. W. to the candidate, “Do you know the
reason why the ancients have a long beard?”
Can. “Ido not, but I presume you do.”

S.W. “They are those who came here after
passing through great tribulation, and having
washed their robes in their own blood: will
you purchase your robes at so great a price ?”

Can. “Yes; I am willing.”

The Wardens then conduct him to the basin,
and bare both his arms; they place a ligature


126 FREEM ASONRY.


on each, the same as in performing the oper-
ation of blood-letting. Each Warden being
armed with a lancet, makes an incision in
each of his arms just deep enough to draw a
drop of blood, which is wiped on a napkin,
and then shown to the brethren. The Senior
Warden then says, “See, my brethren, a man
who has spilled his blood to acquire a knowl-
edge of your mysteries, and shrunk not from
the trial.”

Then the All Puissant opens the First Sean
of the great book, and takes from thence a
bone quiver filled with arrows, and a crown,
and gives them to one of the Ancients, and
says to him, “Depart and continue the con-
quest.” He opens the Second SEAL, and takes
out a sword, and gives it to the next aged,
and says, “Go and destroy peace among the
profane and wicked brethren, that they may
never appear in our Council.” He opens the
Tap Seat, and takes a balance, and gives it to
the next aged, and says, “Dispense rigid justice
to the profane and wicked brethren.” He opens
the Fourra Seat, and takes out a skull, and
gives it to the next aged, and says, “Go and
endeavor to convince the wicked that death is
the reward of their guilt”” He opens the
Frrru Srau, and takes out a cloth stained with
blood, and gives it to the next aged, and says,


FREEMASONRY. 127


“When is the time (or the time will arrive)
that we shall revenge and punish the profane
and wicked, who have destroyed so many of
their brethren by false aceusations.” He opens
the Srxtn Sgaz, and that moment the sun is
darkened and the moon stained with blood!
He opens the Seventy Sean, and takes out in-
cense, Which he gives to a brother, and alsoa
vase, with seven trumpets, and gives one to each
of the seven aged brethren. After this the
four old man in the four corners show their
inflated bladders (beeves bladders filled with
wind, under their arms), representing the four
winds, when the Al} Puissant says: “Here is
seen the fulfillment of a prophecy (Rey. vii.
3); strike not nor punish the profane and
wicked of our order until I have selected the
true and worthy Masons.” Then the four winds
raise their bladders, and one of the trumpets
sounds, when the two Wardens cover the can-
didate’s arms, and take from him his apron and
jewels of the last degree. The second trumpet
sounds, when the Junior Warden gives the’
candidate the apron and jewel of this degree.
The third trumpet sounds, when the Senior
Warden gives him a long beard. The fourth
trumpet sounds, and the Junior Warden gives
him a crown of gold. The fifth trumpet sounds,
and the Senior Warden gives him a girdle of


128 FREEMASONRY.


gold. The sixth trumpet sounds, and the Junior
Warden gives him the sign, token, and words.
The seventh trampet sounds, on which they
all sound together, when the Senior Warden
conducts the candidate to the vacant canopy.

[ This canopy, it will be recollected, is at the
right side of the All Puissant, who represents
Jehovah. The sounding of the seventh trump-
et, and the condueting of the candidate to the
canopy, is a representation of the end of the
world, and the glorification of true Masons at
the right hand of God, having “passed through
the trials of Freemasonry,” and “ washed their
robes in their own blood!” If this is not Anti-
christ, what is?”—Compiler.}

The editor also adds the following foot-note
in explanation of the foregoing:—* Compare
the foregoing with the fifth, sixth and seventh
chapters of Revelation, and the reader will
discover that the All Puissant represents Jeho-
vah seated on the throne of heaven; also, the
Lamb of God, opening the seven seals. The
Senior Warden represents the strong angel
proclaiming: “Who is worthy to open the book,”
&e. The aged brethren, and the four old men
with bladders, the angels of God with power;
and Masonry claiming its faithful servants as
the servants of God, the 144,000 who were
sealed in their foreheads, and of whom it is


FREEMASONRY. 129


- said, “These are they who were not defiled
with women; for they are virgins. These are
they which follow the Lamb,” &. See Rev.
14th chapter.

The following ceremonies are performed in
the “Knights of the Christian Mark,” found in
the same book as the preceding, pp. 168—170;
or eighth edition, 188—190:

“The Knights come to order; the Senior
Knight takes his seat; the candidate continues
standing; the conductor brings a white robe,
the Senior Knight says: ‘Thus saith the Lord,
he that believeth and endureth to the end
shall overcome, and I will cause his iniquities
to pass from him, and he shall dwell in my
presence for ever and ever. Take away his
filthy garments from him, and clothe him with
a change of raiment. For he that overcometh,
the same shall be clothed in white raiment,
and his name shall be written in the book of
life, and I will confess his name before my
Father and His holy angels. He that hath an
ear let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the
true believer. Set ye a fair miter upon his
head, place a palm in his hand, for he shall go
in and out; and minister before me, saith the
Lord of hosts; and he shall be a disciple of
that rod taken from the branch of the stem of
Jesse. For a branch has grown out of bis root,


130 FREEMASONRY.


and the Spirit of the Lord hath rested upon it,
the Spirit of his wisdom and might, and right-
eousness is the girdle of his loins, and faithful-
ness the girdle of his reins; and he stands as
an insignia to the people, and him shall the
Gentiles seek, and his rest shall be glorious.
Cause them that have charge over the city to
draw near, everyone with the destroying weap-
on in his hand’ The six grand ministers come
from the north with swords and shields. The
first is clothed in white, and has an ink-horn
by his side, and stands before the Invincible
Knight, who says: ‘Go through the city; run
in the midst thereof, and smite; let not thine
eye spare, neither have pity; for they have
not executed my judgments with clean hands,
saith the Lord of hosts’ The candidate is
instructed to exclaim: ‘Woe is me, for l am a
man of unclean lips, and my dwelling has been
in the tents of Kedar, and among the children
of Meshec’ Then he that has the ink-horn
by his side, takes a live coal with the tongs
from the altar, and touches the lips of the
candidate, and says: ‘If ye believe, thine
iniquities shall be taken away, thy sins shall
be purged. I will that these be’ clean with
the branch that is given up before me. All
thy sins are removed, and thine iniquities blot-
ted out Fer I have trodden the wine-press


FREEMASONRY. TS


alone, and with me was none of my people;
for behold 1 come with dyed garments from
Bozrah, mighty to save. Refuse not, therefore,
to hearken; draw not away thy shoulders;
shut not thine ear that thou shouldst not
hear’ The six ministers now proceed as though
they were about to commence the slaughter,
when the Senior Knight says to him with the
ink-horn: ‘Stay thine hand; proceed no further
until thou hast set a mark on those that are
faithful in the house of the Lord, and trust in
the power of his might. Take ye the signet,
and set a mark on the forehead of my people
that have passed through great tribulation, and
have washed their ropes, and have made tnem
white in the blood of the Lamb, which was
slain from the foundation of the world’ The
minister takes the signet and presses it on the
candidate’s forehead. He leaves the mark in
red letters, King of kings, and Lord of lords
[ Foot-note:—‘The reader is requested to turn
to the following passages:—lsa. vi. 5—7. Ps.
exx. 5. Isa. xliii. 15, and Ixiii. 1—3. Rev. viii.
2—14, and xix. 16, and xv. 3. Zech. iii. 7. Song
of Solomon viii. 6,7. The impious perversion
of these passages is incapable of defense or
excuse.| The Minister opens the scroll, and
says: ‘Sir Invincible Knight, the number of
the sealed is one hundred and forty-four


132 FREEMASONRY.


thousand.’ The Invincible Knight strikes four,
and all the knights stand before him. He says:
‘Salvation belongeth to our God which sitteth
upon the throne, and to the Lamb.’ All the
members fall on their faces, and say: ‘Amen.
Blessing, honor, glory, wisdom, thanksgiving,
and power, might, majesty, and dominion, be
unto our God for everand ever. Amen.’ They
all cast down crowns and palm branches, and
rise up and say: ‘Great and numberless are thy
works, thou King of saints. Behold, the star
which I laid before Joshua, on which is en-
graved seven eyes as the engraving of a signet,
shall be set as a seal on thine arm, as a seal on
thine heart; for love is stronger than death,
many waters cannot quench it. If aman would
give all the treasures of his house for love, he
cannot obtain it; it is the gift of God through
Jesus Christ our Lord?”

The following is found in the Royal Arch
degree, pp. 126, first edition, 137, eighth edition:

“Question.—‘Are you a Royal Arch Mason?’
Answer.—‘I am that I am.” [Note. “I am THAT
I am, is one of the peculiar names of the Deity;
and to use it as above, is, to say the least, taking
the name of God in vain. How must the
humble disciple of Jesus feel when constrained
thus to answer the question, “Are you a Royal.
Arch Mason?”] L.on Masonry, seventh edition.


FREEMASONRY. 133


On pp. 154, 155, we have a description of a
ceremony in the same degree, as follows: “The
candidates next receive the obligation, travel
the room, attend the prayer, travel again, and
are shown a representation of the Lord appear-
ing to Moses from the burning bush. This last
is done in various ways. Sometimes an earthen
pot is filled with earth, and green bushes set
around the edge of it, and a candle in the cen-
ter; and sometimes a stool is provided with
holes about the edge, in which bushes are
placed, and a bundle of rags or tow, saturated
with oil of turpentine, placed in the center, to
which fire is communicated. Sometimes a large
bush is suspended from the ceiling, around the
stem of which tow is wound wet with the oil
of turpentine. In whatever way the bush is
prepared, when the words are read, ‘He looked
and behold the bush burned with fire, etc., the
bandage is removed from the eyes of the can-
. didate, and they see the fire in the bush; and
at the words, ‘Draw not nigh hither, put off thy
shoes, etc., the shoes of the candidate are taken
off, and they remain in the same situation while
the rest of the passage to the words, ‘And
Moses hid his face; for he was afraid to look
upon God, is read. The bandage is then re--
placed, and the candidates again travel about


fel


‘Ff


134 FREEMASONRY-


the room while the next passage of Scripture
is read.”

[ Note. “This is frequently represented in
this manner: When the person reading comes
to that part where it says, ‘God-called to him
out of the midst of the bush, and said, ete., he
stops reading, and a person behind the bush


“calls out, ‘Moses, Moses” The conductor an-


swers,‘Here am I’ The person behind the bush
then says: ‘Draw not nigh hither; put off thy
shoes from off thy feet, for the place whereon
thou standest is holy ground” His shoes are
then slipped off. ‘Moreover, I am the God of
Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God
of Jacob’ The person first reading then says:
‘And Moses hid his face, for he was afraid to
look upon God’ At these words the bandage
is placed over the candidate’s eyes.”] And, if
any himself will examine, and read the books
through for themselves, in which these revela-
tions are made, they will find that the higher
degrees are replete with the same shocking
and monstrous perversion of the Scriptures.
Many of the most solemn passages in the Bible
are selected, read in their lodges, repeated by
their candidates, and applied in a manner too
shocking to read.

Here you observe the candidate taking the
Royal Arch degree, when asked if he is a


FREEMASONRY. 135


Royal Arch Mason, replies: “J am that F am;”
which is represented in the Bible as being said
by Jehovah himself. This answer was given
by God to Moses when he inguired after the
Divine name. Ged answered, “I am raarl am.”
Just think! a Christian, when inquired of if
he is a Royal Arch Mason, affirms of himself,
“fam that fam,” taking to himself the name
ef tbe God of Israel.

Again, in this representation of the burning
bush, the candidate is told to take off his shoes
from off his feet, for the place on which he
stands is holy ground; and then the Master of
the lodge claims to be the God of Abraham, of
Isaac, and of Jacob. Now how awfully profane
and blasphemous is this!

Again, observe that that most solemn scene,
depicted in the ninth chapter of Ezekiel, is
misapplied in the most profane manner. Reader,
the chapter is short; wall you not take your
Bible and read it ?

So again, in those chapters in Revelation,
the opening of the seals by the Son of God is
misapplied, and profanely misrepresented. Just
think! four aged men, with bladders filled with
wind, are made to represent the four angels
that hold the four winds from desolating the
earth till the servants of God were sealed in
their foreheads. What a shocking misapplica-


136 FREEMASONRY.


tion and misrepresentation do we find here
And the cases are mumerons in which, as I have
said, the most solemn passages in the Word of
God are used in their mummeries and childish
ceremonies, in so shocking a manner that we
ean hardly endure to read them. 1 beg my
Christian readers to examine these books for
themselves, and then see what they think of
the assertions of so many professors of religion,
and even of professed Christian ministers, that
“there is nothing in Freemasonry inconsistent
with the religion of Jesus Christ!” I cannot
Imagine anything more directly calculated to
bring the Word of God into contempt, than
such a use of it in Masonic lodges. It is enough
to make one’s blood curdle in his veins to think
that a Christian minister, or any Christian what-
ever, should allow himself to pass through such
an abominable scene as is frequently repre-
sented in the degrees of Masonry:—multiplying
their horrid oaths, heaping one imprecation
upon another, gathering up from every part of
the Divine oracles the most solemn and awful
sayings of Jehovah, and applying them in a
manner so revolting, that the scene must make
a Christian’s heart tremble, and his whole soul
to loathe such proceedings.

In some of my numerous letters I am
requested to quote the oaths entire. But this


FREEMASONRY. 137


would be to rewrite a great part of the books
m which Masonry is revealed. Some of these
degrees have several different oaths to sustain
them, filling several pages of the work. I can
only give parts of these oaths, and must leave
the readers to consult the books for themselves;
which I beseech them to do,


1388 FREEMASONRY.


CHAPTER XI.


¥FREEMASONRY IMPOSES ON THE
IGNORANT.


v
+N what is called the “Sublime Degree of
Master Masons” there are the following
«¢ gross misrepresentations worthy of no-
tice:

First, Hiram Abiff is represented as going
daily'into the Most Holy place for secret prayer;
- whereas the Bible representation is that no one
was allowed to enter the Most Holy place, ex-
cept the high priest. Neither Solomon nor
Hiram were allowed to enterit. And the high
priest was allowed to enter it only once a year,
and that on the great day of atonement, “not
without blood, which he offered first for himself
and then for the errors of the people.”

Again, this Hiram is represented in Masonry

as having been murdered by three ruffians, who
demanded of him the Master’s word.
, As he refused to give it, they murdered him,
and buried him at a distance from Jerusalem,
in a grave “six feet deep perpendicular,” where
he remained fourteen days.


FREEMASONRY. 139


Then, after a great deal of twaddle and
misrepresentation in regard to the supposed
circumstances of his murder and burial, Solomon
is represented as raising him from this depth in
the earth by the Master’s grip, and that “upon
the five points of fellowship,” which are, “foot
to foot, knee to knee, breast to breast, hand to
back, and mouth to ear.”

It is no wonder that infidel Masons should
ridicule the credulity of professed Christian
Masons in crediting such a ridiculous story as
this.

Again, Masonry goes on to represent that,
after Hiram was thus raised from this grave,
six feet deep—“foot to foot, knee to knee,
breast to breast, hand to back, and mouth to
ear’—he was brought up to Jerusalem, and
buried under the Most Holy place in King
Solomon’s Temple. I will quote from the lec.
ture of this degree, as found in the seventh
edition of Bernard, p. 81: “Question [speaking
of the body|.—What did they do with the
body? Answer.—Raised it in a Masonic form,
and carried it up to the temple for more decent
interment. Q—Where was it buried? A—
Under the Sanctum Sanctorum, or Holy of Ho-
lies, over which they erected a marble monu-
ment, with this inscription delineated thereon,
A virgin weeping over a broken column, with


140 FREEMASONRY.


a book open before her; in her right hand a
sprig of cassia; in her left,an urn; Time stand-
ing behind her, with his hands infolded in the
ringlets of her hair.”

Now, observe, this burial was under the Most
Holy place in King Solomon’s Temple; and the
marble monument was erected over it, and
consequently must have been in the Most Holy
place itself. Does not every careful reader of
the Bible know that this is false? We havea
minute description in the Bible of everything
relating to the Most Holy place—its form, size,
embellishments, and of every article of furni-
ture there was in it. _No such statue was ever
there, and the whole story is a gross falsehood.

But let me quote a little further from this
lecture, continuing on page 81: “Q.—What does
a Master’s lodge represent? A—The Sanctum
Sanctorum, or Holy of Holies of King Solomon’s
Temple. Q.—How iong was the temple build-
ing? A.—Seven years; during which it rained
not in the daytime, that the workmen might
not be obstructed in their labor.” This is a
likely story! Is there anything of this kind in
the Bible? And does anyone believe that a
miracle of this kind could have been wrought
without having been recorded in the Bible?
But again: “Q.—-What supported the temple?
A.—Fourteen hundred and fifty-three columns,


FREEMASONRY. 141


and two thousand one hundred and six pilasters,
all hewn from the finest Parian marble.” Where
did they get this? Again: “Q.—What further
supported it? A.—Three grand columns or
pillars. Q.—What were they called? A—
Wisdom, Strength, and Beauty. Q-——What did
they represent? A—The pillar of Wisdom
represented Solomon, King of Israel, whose
wisdom contrived the mighty fabric.” But the
Bible represents Solomon as haying received
the whole plan of the temple from David, who
received it directly from God. Solomon never
contrived the building at all—1 Chon.,, xxviii.
11, 12, 20.

Again, on page 82, we have the following:
“ (.—How many constitute a Master’s lodge?
A.—Three Master Masons. @-— Where did
they usually meet? -A.—In the sanctum sanc-
torum, or Holy of holies of King f§olomon’s
Temple.” Now, this misrepresentation is kept
up; and in the work of making a Master Ma-
son they make the lodge represent the Most
Holy place in King Solomon’s Temple. A Ma-
sonic lodge in the Most Holy place of King
Solomon’s Temple! What an absurd, unscrip-
tural, and ridiculous representation is this!
And yet this is seriously taught to the candi
date whenever a Master Mason is made.

But, again, this whole representation in re-


142 FREEMASONRY.


gard to Hiram Abiff is utterly false. If any
one will examine the fourth chapter of 2 Chron.
he will see that Hiram Abiff finished the work
for which he was employed; and, so far as we
can get any light from the Bible, he must have
lived till after the temple was finished. Where
and when he died we know not, as he, no doubt,
returned to Hiram, King of Tyre, who sent him
to assist Solomon. But that he died in the
manner represented by Freemasons, that he
was buried in a grave six feet deep, and raised
upon the five points of fellowship, that he was
then buried again under the Most Holy place
of King Solomon’s Temple, and a marble mon-
ument erected in the Most Holy place to his
memory, is a glaring falsehood.

Again, Masonry teaches that the Master’s
word could only be given by three persons
standing in a peculiar attitude, and each one
repeating one of its syllables. That this word
was known at the time by only three persons,
Solomon, Hiram, King of Tyre, and Hiram
Abiff; and that, consequently, when Hiram
was killed, the word was lost, as they were
under oath never to give it except in that par-
ticular manner.

Now, in the Royal Arch degree, Masonry
professes to give an account of the manner in
which that word was recovered.


*


FREEMASONRY. 1438


Some men, it is said, were employed in dig-
ging about the temple, and discovered a stone,
which proved to be the key-stone of an arch
covering a vault deep under ground, construct-
ed, as it is said, by Hiram Abiff, in which they
found the Ark of the Covenant.

On pp. 78, 79, of Richardson’s “ Monitor of
Freemasonry,” we have their explanation of
this pretended discovery as follows. On p. 78:
“ Principal Sojourner.— Most Excellent, in
pursuance of your orders, we repaired to the
secret vault and let down one of our compan-
ions. The sun at this time was at its meridian
hight, the rays of which enabled him to dis-
cover a small box or chest standing on a pedes-
tal, curiously wrought and overlaid with gold,
* * * We have brought this chest up for
the examination of the Grand Council. J/igh
Priest [looking with surprise at the Ark].—
Companion King this is the Ark of the Cove-
nant of God. ing [looking at it.]—It is un-
doubtedly the true Ark of the Covenant, Most
Excellent. High Priest [taking the Ark].—
Let us open it, and see what valuable treasure
it may contain. [Opens the Ark, and takes
out abook.] Aigh Priest to the King——Com-
panion, here is a very ancient looking book,
What can it be? Letusreadit. [Reads the


144 FREEMASONRY.


first three verses of the first chapter of Gene-
sis. |”

After reading several other passages, the
High Priest says: “This is a book of the law—
long lost, but now found. Holiness to the Lord!
[He repeats thistwice]. Aing—A book of the
law—Iong lost, but now found. Holiness to the
Lord! Scribe repeats the same. J/igh Priest
to Candidates.—You now see that the world is
indebted to Masonry for the preservation of this
sacred volume. Had it not been for the wis-
dom and precaution of our ancient brethren,
this, the only remaining copy of the law, would
have been destroyed at the destruction of
Jerusalem.” After several further misrepre-
sentations, on p. 79, we have the following:
“ Looking again into the Ark, the High Priest
takes out four pieces of paper, which he ex-
amines closely, consults with the king and
scribe, and then puts them together so as to
show a key to the ineffable characters of this
degree. After examining the key, he proceeds
to read by the aid of it the characters on the
four sides of the Ark. High Priest reading
first side: Deposited in the year three thou-
sand. Second side: By Solomon, King of Is-
rael. Third side: Hiram, King of Tyre, and
Hiram Abiff Fourth side: For the good of
Masonry generally, but the Jewish nation in


FREEMASONRY 145


particular.” If any one will consult the cere-
monies just as they occur, and as they are
recorded by Richardson, he will see to what
an extent the candidate is misinformed and
deceived in this degree. And the same in
substance may be learned from “ Light on Ma-
sonry.” Now, observe, Masonry teaches in this
most solemn manner that in Solomon’s time
the Ark of the Covenant, with its sacred con.
tents, was buried in a vault by Solomon and
the two Hirams.

Solomon was only the third king of Israel.
And when did he have this Ark buried? Did
it not stand in the Most Holy place during his
own reign? Was not the Ark of the Covenant,
with its sacred contents, in the Most Holy place
in the temple after Solomon’s day? What
reader of the Bible does not know that this
representation of Masonry is false? Again,
the candidate is also falsely taught that the
world is indebted to Masonry for preserving
the book of the law; that, but for this discov-
ery of the Ark with its contents in that vault,
no book of the law would have been preserved,
as this was the only copy in existence. But
this, again, is utterly false. Masonry teaches
that, but for the discovery of this volume, the
Bible would have been lost at the destruction
of Jerusalem. But there is no truth in this;


146 FREEMASONRY.


for copies had been multiplied before the first,
and still further multiplied before the last, de-
struction of Jerusalem.

The following examples I extract from
Professor Morgan’s report: “It is alleged that,
in consequence of the murder of Hiram Abiff,
a particular keystone failed of its designation;
but that Solomon caused search to be made for
it, when it was found by means of certain initial
letters which Hiram had employed as a mark.
These letters were the initials of the English
words, /Ziram, Zyrian, widow’s son sent fo
King Solomon. These initial letters are now
employed as the mark of the Mark Master’s
degree. Masons sometimes wear a seal or
trinket with these letters on it. I have seen
them exhibited in a picture of a seal or badge
in a widely circulated Masonic manual. Here
we have Hiram, who never could have known
one word of English—the English language
not existing till thousands of years after his
time—employing the initials of eight English
words as his mark., And, in honor of his em-
ploying them, Mark Masters display them as
their mark, and thus display the ignorance or
imposture of their craft.”

Another alleged. historic fact is given in
Richardson’s “Monitor of Freemasonry,” p. 155—
the Gold Plate story. “In the ceremonies con


FREEMASONRY. 147


nected with the degree of ‘Grand Elect, Perfect,
and Sublime Mason) the Master says: 4 will
now give you the true pronunciation of the
name of the Deity as revealed to Enoch; and
he engraved the letters composing it on a tri-
angular plate of gold, which was hidden for
many ages in the bowels of the earth, and lost
to mankind. The mysterious words which you
received in the preceding degrees are all so
many corruptions of the true name of God
which was engraved on the triangle of Enoch.
In this engraving the vowel points are so ar-
ranged as to give the pronunciation thus,
YOWHO. This word, when thus pronounced,
is called the Ineflable word, which cannot be
altered as other words are; and the degrees
are called, on this account, Ineffable degrees.
This word, you wil] recollect, was not found
until after the death of Hiram Abiff; conse-
quently, the word engraved by him on the
ark is not the true name of God

“Here we have a most ridiculous piece of
imposture, more than parallel with the gold
plate imposture of Mormonism. Every Hebrew
scholar of the most moderate attainments
knows that the vowel points, here alleged to
have been used by Enoch before the flood, did
not even exist till six or eight centuries after
the birth of Christ. Besides, the merest smat-


148 FREEMASONRY.


terer in Hebrew, with very little thought, would
know that the name of God could not, by any
proper arrangement of vowels, be pronounced
in this way.

“The story could impose only on the grossest
- ignorance, or most careless inconsiderateness.”

To quote all that is scandalously false in its
teachings and pretensions would be to quote
these books almost entire. We hear professed
Christians, and even ministers, claiming that
Freemasonry enables them to better under-
stand the Bible. Can it be that they are so
ignorant as to believe this? But this is often
urged as an inducement to join the lodge.
Indeed Masonry claims that, to this day, none
but Freemasons know even the true name of -
God. After Enoch’s day, the Divine name was
unknown until recovered by Freemasons in
the days of Solomon, and that this true name
of God is preserved by them as a Masonic
secret. Of course, all others are worshiping
they know not what. So this is Masonic be-
nevolence and piety, to conceal from all but
their craft the name of the true God. How
wise and benevolent Freemasonry is! I wonder
how many ministers of the Gospel are engaged
in keeping this secret! They only of all min-
isters know the true name of God, and have


FREEM ASONRY. 149


joined a conspiracy to conceal it from all but
Masons!

Before I close this number, I wish to ask
Freemasons who have taken the degrees above
the Fellow craft, or second degree, have you
believed the teaching of these degrees, as you
have taken them one after another? Have
you believed that the lodges, chapters, com-
manderies, etc., were really erected to God,
and consecrated to the holy order of Zerubbabel
and St. John? Have you believed what you
are taught in the Master’s degree, respecting
King Solomon, Hiram, king of Tyre, and Hiram
Abiff? Have you believed the teachings of
the Royal Arch degree, and of all those degrees
in which King Solomon figures so largely?
Have you believed that to Masonry the church
owes the preservation of the only remaining
copy of the law of God? Have you believed
the Gold Plate story, that Enoch lived in the
place where tie Temple of Solomon was after-
ward built, that he built, deep in the earth,
nine arches, one above the other, in which, on
the place where the temple was afterward
built, he deposited a golden plate on which
was written the true name of God, that this
name was written with the Hebrew vowels
a tached, and that its true pronunciation is
Y )WHO, as Masonry teaches? Now you have


150 FREEMASONRY.


believed these, and other outrageous falsehoods
taught in Masonry, or you have not. If you
have believed them, you have been greatly
imposed upon, you have been grossly deceived.
Will you allow yourselves to still give counten-
ance to an institution that teaches such false-
hoods as these? Had Ispace I could fill scores
of pages with the palpable falsehoods which
Masonry teaches its membership. How can
you adhere to an institution so basely false and
hypocritical as this? The secrets are all out.
Both you and the world are now made aware
of the base falsehoods that are palmed off upon
its members by Freemasonry. Professed Chris-
tian Freemason, how can you hold up your head
either in the church or before the world, if you
still adhere to this most hypocritical institution ?
Just think of the Worshipful Masters, the Grand
High Priests, in their mitres and priestly robes,
the great and pompous dignitaries of Masonry
arrayed in their sacerdotal robes, solemnly
teaching their members such vile falsehoods as
these, claiming that to Freemasons the church
owes the preservation of the law of God, and
that the true name of God is known only to
Freemasons! Shame! But I said you have
either been made to believe these things or
you have not. If you have never believed
them, pray, let me ask you how it is that you


FREEMASONRY. 152


have ever given any countenance to this insti-
tution when you did not at all believe its teach-
ing? How is it that you have not long since
renounced and denounced an institution whose
teaching is replete with falsehoods taught under
the most solemn circumstances? These false-
hoods are taugnt as Masonic secrets, under the
sanction of the most awful and solemn oaths.
What shall we say of an institution that binds
its members by such oaths, to keep and preserve
as truth and secrets, such a tissue of profane
falsehood? You see nothing in it inconsistent
with Christianity! Why,my dear brother, how
amazing it is that you can be so blinded! Are
vou not afraid that you shall be given over to
believe a lie, that you may be damned, because
you believe not the truth, but have pleasure in
unrighteousness


152 FREEMASONRY.


CREASE bey | ase esre


MASONRY SUSCEPTIBLE OF CHANGE
ONLY BY ADDITIONS.


eo proof of this, I first appeal to the


ea = testimony of Masons themselves. Hear
\\ the testimony, given under oath, of
eae Russell, once Grand Master of the
Grand Lodge of Massachusetts. His and other
depositions were given in Boston, before a
justice of the peace, by request of Masons
themselves. Observe, he was an ex-Grand
Master of one of the most important lodges in
the world. This surely is conclusive Masonic
authority. He says: “The Masonic institution
has been, and now is, the same in every place.
No deviation has been made, or can be made at
any time, from its usages, rules and regula-
tions.” Observe, he does not say that no
additions can be made, but no deviatons. He
proceeds: “Such is its nature, that no innova-
tions on its customs can be introduced, or
sanctioned, by any person or persons. DeWitt
Clinton, the former Governor of New York and


FREEMASONRY. 153


Grand Master of the Grand Lodge of New York
and of the United States, also made an affidavit
on the same occasion, He says: “The priniples
of Masonry are essentially the same and uni-
form in every place” ( Powell, p. 40, as quoted
by Stearns). In Hardy’s Monitor, a standard
Masonic work, we have the following, p. 96:
“Masonry stands in no need of improvement;
any attempt, therefore, to introduce the least
innovation will be reprobated, not by one, but
by the whole fraternity.” The Grand Lodge of
Connecticut asserts: “It is not in the power of
man, nor in any body of men, to remove the
ancient landmarks of Masonry” (Allyn’s Rituals
p- 14). These are the highest Masonic autior-
ities, and to the same effect might’ be quoted
from all their standard works.

Second.—From the nature of the institution
it cannot be changed, except by addition. In
proof of this I observe

I. That Masonry is extended over the
civilized world, at least Masons themselves
boast that it includes men of every language,
and of every clime. They claim for Masonry
that it is a universal language; that men of
every country and language can reveal them-
selves to each other as Freemasons; that by
their signs and grips and pass words, etc., they
can not only know each other as Masons, but


154 FREEMASONRY.


as having taken such and such degrees of the
order. that as soon as they reveal themselves
“to each other as having taken certain degrees
of Masonry, they know their obligations, each
to the other—what they may demand or expect
of each other, and what each is under oath to
do for the other. Now this must be true, or of
what avail would Masonry be to those who are
traveling through different countries, where
there are different languages. Unless their
methods of knowing each other were uniform,
universal, and unchangable, it is plain that
they could not know each other as Masons.
It is true in some particular localities there
may be an additional pass word or sign, to
indicate that they belong to that locality, but
in all that is essentially Masonic, it must be
universal and unchangable.

II. The same is true with respect to their
oaths. They must all,in every place, be under
the same obligations to each other, or it would
introduce endless confusion and uncertainty,
Every Mason, of every place, must know that
every other Mason, having taken the same
degrees, has taken the same oaths that he him-
self has taken; that he owes the same duties,
and can claim the same privileges cf any other
Mason of the same degree. If this were not
so, Masonry would be of no value among


FREEMASONRY. _ 155


strangers. Furthermore, if their obligations
were not exactly alike, they would necessarily
be betrayed into violating them. If they found
that they claimed duties of each other which
were not necessarily imposed by the obliga-
tions of both, or claimed privileges of each
other not conferred by the obligations of both,
they would in this way make each other ac-
quainted with their respective obligations
which were not in fact alike. Thus each would
reveal to the other, secrets which he was sworn
to keep.

Ill. The oaths of every degree, from the
lowest to the highest, must be uniform, every-
where the same, and unchangable. If they
were not the same in every country, in every
language, and at every time, Masonry would
be a perfect babel. Now degrees may be added
ad infinitum, but a Mason of any degree must
know that Masons of the same degree in every
place, have taken the same oath that he has
taken, and have taken all the oaths of the pre-
vious degrees, just as he has himself. If this
were not true, Masons could not everywhere
know with what they might entrust each other.
Suppose, for example, that the obligation to
conceal each other’s crimes, and to keep each
other’s secrets, was not universal and unchange-
able, how would they know with what they


156 FREEMASONRY.


might trust each other in different places?
Suppose the obligation to assist each other in
getting out of any difficulty, whether right or
wrong, was not uniform and universal, how
would they know what they might demand of,
or were under obligation to perform for, each
other? But can not its objectionable points,
it may be asked, be dropped out, and what is
valuable preserved? Drop from the obligation,
for instance, in any place, the clause that binds
them to keep each other’s secrets, murder and
treason excepted, or without exception,—to de-
liver each other from difficulty, whether right
or wrong, to give each other precedence in
business or politics, to give each other warning
of any approaching danger and the like. Now
if you drop out any one of these, at any time
or place, you introduce confusion, and Masons
could not understand each other. Furthermore,
drop out the most objectionable features of
Masonry, and you have robbed it of its prin
cipal value to the membership, you have anni-
hilated the principal reasons for becoming and
for remaining a Mason. But the changes are
manifestly impossible. There is nowhere any
authority for such change; and, as has been
stated, the whole fraternity would rebuke any
attempt at such innovation. We may rest


__assured, therefore, that Freemasonry is not,


FREEMASONRY. 157


and can not be, essentially changed, except by
addition. To this point all their highest au-
thorities bear the fullest testimony. Its very
nature forbids essential innovations at any
time or in any place. But should Masons
affirm that the institution is changed, how are
we to know what changes have been made?
They are under oath to keep this a profound
secret. Suppose they were to affirm that, since
tne revelations made by Morgan, Bernard, and
others, the institution has been greatly im-
proved, this is a virtual admission that those
books are true, which they have so often denied.
But since they have first denied that those
books were true, and now virtually admit their
truth, by claiming that Masonry has been
improved since those books were written, what
reason have we to believe them? I have, ina
previous number, shown that it is irrational to
believe what Masons themselves say in respect,
to their secrets. I do not know that any intel-
ligent and respectable Freemason pretends
that Masonry has been improved. But sup-
pose they should, how shall we know in what
respects it has been improved, that we may
judge for ourselves whether the changes are
improvements. If any number of them were?
now to affirm that Masonry, as it now exists, is
divested of all the objectionable features that
14


158 FREEMASONRY.


formerly belonged to it, how shall we know
whether this is true? They have always denied
that it Aad any objectionable features; they
have always claimed that it needed no im-
provement, and their highest authorities have
many times affirmed that all improvement and
innovation were impossible. In view of all the
testimony in the case, we have no right to
believe that Masonry is at all improved from
what it was forty years ago. As late as 1860,
Richardson revealed sixty-two degrees of Ma-
sonry as it then existed. It was then the same
in every essential feature as when Bernard
-made his revelation in 1829, and when Avery
Allyn made his revelation in 1831. We are
all, therefore, under the most solemn obliga-
tions to believe that Masonry is, in all import-
ant particulars, just what is has been since its
various degrees have been adopted and pro-
mulged. We certainly do greatly err and sin,
if, in view of all the facts, we assume, and act
upon the assumption, that Freemasonry is
divested of its immoral and obnoxious features.
Such an assumption is utterly unwarranted,
because, on the one hand, there is no evidence
of the fact, and, on the other, there is positive
and abundant proof that no such change has
been made. Weare all, therefore, responsible
to God and to humanity for the course we


FREEMASONRY. 159


shall take respecting the institution. We are
bound to judge of it, and to treat it, according
to the evidence in the case, which is, that
Freemasonry is necessarily a wicked institu-
tion, and incapable of thorough moral reform
ation.

I have spoken frequently of its having the
character, in certain respects, of a mutual aid,
or mutual insurance, company. It is inquired,
are all these necessarily wicked? I answer,
no. The benefits of these institutions may be
real and great. For example, an insurance
company that insures persons against loss by
shipwreck, by fire, or by what we call accident
of any kind, may be very beneficial to society.
When they help each other in cases of calam-
ity that involve no crime, they are not neces-
sarily wicked, but may be very useful. The
benefits of these companies are open to all
upon reasonable conditions; and if any do
not reap the fruits of them, it is not the fault
of the society, but of those who neglect to
avail themselves of its benefits. But Free-
masonry is by no means a mere insurance or
mutual aid society. The moral character of
any institution must depend on the end at
which it aims;—that is, the moral character
of any society is found in the end it is intend-
ed to secure. Mutual aid and insurance com-


160 FREEMASONRY.


panies, as they exist for business purposes, do
not necessarily deprive any one of his rights,
and are often highly useful. The members of
such societies or companies do not know each
other, nor exert over each other any personal
influence whatever. They are not bound by
any oath to render each other any unlawful
assistance, to conceal each other’s crimes,
nor “to espouse each other’s cause, whether
right or wrong.” There is no clannish spirit
engendered by their frequent meeting to-
gether, nor by mutual pledges under the
most awful oaths and penalties, to treat each
other with any favoriteism under any circum-
stances. But Freemasonry, on the contrary,
does pledge its members by the most solemn
oaths, to aid each other in a manner that sets
aside the rights of others. For example, they
are sworn first, in the Master’s degree, to con-
ceal each other’s crimes, “murder and treason
only excepted;” second, in the Royal Arch
degree, “murder and treason not excepted ;”
in this same degree they swear to endeavor
to extricate each other, if involved in any
difficulty, whether they are right or wrong;
third, they also swear to promote each other’s
political elevation in preference to any one
of equal qualifications who is not a Freemason;
fourth, to give each other the preference in


FREEMASONRY. 161


business transactions.—See Richardson’s Mon-
itor of Freemasonry, p. 92. Degree of Secret
Monitor: “I furthermore promise and swear,
that I will caution a brother Secret Monitor
by signs, word, or token, whenever I see him
doing, or about to do, any thing contrary to
his interest in buying or selling. I furthermore
promise and swear, that I will assist a brother
Secret Monitor in preference to any other
person by introducing him to business, by
sending him custom, or in any other manner
in which I can throw a penny in his way.”
They swear “to represent all who violate their
Masonic oaths as worthless vagabonds, and to
send this character after them to ruin their
business and their reputation wherever they
may go and be to the end of their lives.”
They also swear to seek the condign punish-
ment of all such in the infliction of the penal-
ties of their oaths upon them. They swear to
seck their death. They swear to a stringent
exclusiveness, excluding from their society
all that would most naturally need aid and
sympathy, and receiving none who are not
“physically perfect.” Old men in dotage, young
men in nonage, all women, idiots and other
needy classes, are all excluded. Freemasonry
has a vast fund of money at its disposal. The
fraternity are very numerous. They boast of


162 FREEMASONRY.


numbering in this country at the present time
six hundred thousand, and that they are mul-
tiplying faster than ever. They permeate
every community, and their influence is
almost omnipresent. Of course, such an aid
society as this will everywhere and in every
thing ignore and trample on the rights of
others to secure advantages for each other.
As an illustration of the workings of this
society, I make an extract or two from “The
American Freemason,” published in Louis-
ville, Kentucky, dated April 8, 5854, that is
1854, and edited by Robert Morris, an eminent
Masonic author. From the eighty-fifth page
I quote as follows: “ Lynn, Indiana.—In haul-
ing a load of pork to the depot a year or two
since, I found the rush of wagons so great
that the delivery was fully three days behind.
This was a serious matter to me, for I could
not lose so much time from my business, and
was seriously weighing the propriety of going
on to Cincinnati with my load, when the
freight agent, learning from a casual remark
of mine, that I was a Freemason, was kind
enough at once to order my errand attended
to, and in three hours I was unloaded, and
ready, with a light heart, to set my face home-
ward. Is it not an admirable thing, this
Masonic spirit of brotherly love?” To this


FREEMASONRY. 163


the editor adds: “Verily it is. We have seen
it in many varieties of form, but our kind-
hearted brother’s is but an every-day expe-
rience of Masonic practice, but to the world
how inexplicable do such things appear.”
Here we have a specimen of Masonic broth-
erly love. But was this right, to give this
preference to this man, and wrong all who
were there before him, and had a right to
have their business done before him! He
gained three days’ time, and saved the expense
of waiting for his turn, whilst others were
obliged to lose both the time and expense.
And this we are coolly told, by high Masonie
authority, is the “constant practice of Free-
masons.” What an exquisite brotherly love
is this. Itis delicious! But this is in entire
accordance with the spirit of their oaths. But
is it not a trampling on the rights of others!
In this same paper we have, in an illustration
of the nature of Freemasonry, a tale, the
substance of which is, that a criminal, under
sentence of death, was set free by Freemasons
under the pretense that he was not guilty of
the murder for which he was condemned. So
they took the case into their own hands, and
set aside the judgment of the court and jury.
Observe, this is given as an illustration of the
manner in which Freemasons aid each other.


164 FREEM ASONRY.


These cases are given as their own boast
of specimens of their brotherly love. But is
this consistent with right and good govern-
ment? The fact is, that it is impossible to
engage in any business, to travel, to do any
thing, to go anywhere, without feeling the
influence of this and other secret societies.
Wrongs are constantly inflicted upon individ-
uals and upon society, of which the wronged
are unaware. We can be wronged any day
by a favoritism practiced by these societies,
without being aware how or by whom we are
wronged. I was informed of late, that in a
large manufacturing establishment, poor men,
dependent for their daily bread upon their
labors in the factory, were turned out to give
place te Freemasons who were ‘no better
workmen than themselves. Indeed it is inev
itable that such a society should act upon
such a principle. But it may be asked, can
not Masonry be essentially reformed, so that
it shall involve no wrong? I answer, no,
unless its very fundamental principle and aim
be reversed, and then it would cease to be
Freemasonry. In its workings it is a constant
wrong inflicted upon society. It is an inces-
sant and wide-spread conspiracy for the con-
cealment of crime, to obstruct the course of
justice, and, in many instances, to persecute


FREEMASONRY. 165


the innocent and let the wicked go free. To
reform it, its ends and its means must both be
reformed. It must cease to be exclusive and
selfish. It must cease to promise aid in many
forms in which it does promise it. I have said
that it was more than an innocent mutual aid
society. Its members are pledged to aid each
other in concealing iniquity, and in many
ways that trample upon the rights of others.

And it is because this society promises aid
in so many ways, and under so many circum-
stances, that men unite themselves to it. I
have never heard any better reason assigned
for belonging to it, than that, in many respects,
one might reap a personal advantage from it.
Now reform it, and make it a truly benevolent
society; reform out of it all unrighteous favor-
itism, and all those forms of aid which are
inconsistent with the universal good, and the
highest well-being of society in general, and
you have altered its essential nature; it is no
longer Freemasonry, or any thing like Free-
masonry. To reform it is to destroy it. In
this view of Freemasonry, it is easy to see
how difficult, if not impossible, it is for a man
to be a consistent Freemason and yet a Chris-
tian. Just conceive of a Christian constantly
receiving the preference over others as good
as himself, in traveling, in railroad cars, on


15


166 FREEMASONRY.


steamboats, at hotels, and everywhere, and in
business transactions, and in almost all the
relations of life, allowing himself to be pre-
ferred to others who have equal rights with
himself. To be sure, in traveling, he may
bless himself because he is so comfortable,
and that so much pains are taken to give him
the preference in every thing. If at a hotel,
he may have the best seat at the table, and
the best room in the house, and may find him-
self everywhere more favored than others.

But can he honestly accept this? Has he
any right to accept it? No, indeed, he has
not! He is constantly favored at the expense
of others. He constantly has more than his
right, while others are deprived of their rights.
In other words, he is selfish, and that continu-
ally. He finds a personal benefit init. Yes,
and that is why he adheres to it. But again,
if true to his oath, he is not only thus con-
stantly receiving benefits unjustly, or to the
injury of others, but also conferring them.

Whenever he sees a Masonic sign and recog-
nizes a Masonic brother, he, of course, must
do by him asa Freemason, as he himself is
done by.

How can a man who is a Christian allow
himself to be influenced by such motives as
are presented in Freemasonry? Now let it be


FREEMASONRY. 167


understood that all action is to be judged by
its motive. No man has aright to receive or
confer fayors that interfere with the rights of
others. Anda man who can travel about the
country and make himself known as a Free-
mason for the purpose of being indulged, and
finding the best place in a hotel, or the best
seat in a railroad car, or the best state-room in
a steamboat, must be a selfish man, and can
not be a Christian,—for a selfish man is not a
Christian. Let it then be understood that Ma-
sonry in its fundamental principle, in which
its moral character is found, is not reformed,
and can not be reformed without destroying
its very nature.

It can not be a part of general benevolence,
but stands unalterably opposed to the highest
well-being of society in general. The same,
let me say, is true to a greater or less extent
of all secret societies, whose members are
bound by oath or pledge to treat each other
with a favoritism that ignores the rights of
others. Now, it has been said, and I think
truly, that in the late war if a man wished
preferment and high rank, he must be a high
Mason. Such things were managed so much
by high Masons that it was difficult for a man
to rise in rank unless he could make himself
known asa high Mason. And let the facts be-


168 FREEMASONRY. |


come known—and, J hope that measures will
be taken to make them known—and I believe
it will be found that the great mass of the
lucrative offices in the United States are in the
hands of the Freemasons.

It is evident that they are aiming to seize
upon the government, and to wield it in their
own interest. They are fast doing this, and
unless the nation awake soon it will be too
late. And let the church of God also awake
to the fact that many of her ministers and
members are uniting with a society so selfish
and wicked as this, and are defending it, and
are ready to persecute all who will not unite
with them in this thing. What Mr. Morris said
of the nature of Freemasonry, that is, that it
was the constant practice of Freemasons to
give each other the preference, as in the case
of the man delivering his load, is really what
every observant man, especially if he has ever
been himself a Mason, knows to be true.

When Freemasons say that it is “a good
thing,” they mean, by this that men reap per-
sonal advantage from it. But Iam bound to
say, that I should feel utterly ashamed to have
any one offer to give me a right that belonged
to others because I was a Mason.

It has been frequently said, by persons: “If
I was going to travel, I would become a Free-


FREEMASONRY. 169


mason.” A physician in the United States
Army in the late war, said to a relative of his:
“If I were going into the army again, I would
be sure to become a Freemason. There is such
a constant favoritism shown by Freemasons to
each other, on every occasion, that were I go-
ing to take the field again, I would be sure to
avail myself of the benefits of that institu-
tion.” Now, in opposition to this, I would say,
that were I going to travel, or were I going to
enlist in the army,I should be ashamed to
avail myself of any such benefits at all. It is
not right that any such favoritism should exist,
and any man ought to reject with indignation
the proposal of such favoritism. Any man
should blush, if he has entertained the thought.
of allowing himself to be placed in such a selfish
position. But it is asserted, no doubt with
truth, that oftentimes the lives of brother Ma-
sons have been spared, simply because of this re-
lation. But shall a man save his life by wrong-
doing? He had better remember, that if he
attempts this, he ruins his own soul. He that
would thus “save his life, shall lose it”. A man
can gain nothing in the end by wrong-doing; let
him do right, and if, by so doing, he loses his life,.
he will be sure to save it. With my present
knowledge of Freemasonry I would not become
a Freemason to save my life a thousand times,


170 FREEMASONRY.


ON Es Oy ee a EE Se Sa Se Se


THE CLAIM) OF FREEMASONRY TO
GREAT ANTIQUITY IS FALSE.


Way have seen that Freemasonry has
PRES been truly revealed. We have exam-
SOR ed its oaths, principles, claims, and
teaching, so far as to prepare the way for an
examination of its moral character and tenden-
cies, and also its relations to both Church and
State. This I now proceed to do. And

1. JLts claims to great antiquity are false.
Every one at all acquainted with the claims
of Freemasonry knows that it professes to have
existed in the days of Solomon; and itis claimed
that Solomon himself was a Freemason, and that
John the Baptist and John the Evangelist were
Freemasons. Indeed, the writers frequently
trace it back as coeval with the creation itself
Masons have claimed for their institution an
antiquity antecedent to human government;
and from this they have argued that they
have a right to execute the penalties of their
oaths, because Masonry is older than govern-


»


FREEMASONRY. 171


ment. Now an examination will show that
this claim is utterly false. Their own highest
authorities mow pronounce it to be false; and
still these claims are kept up, and their oaths
and ceremonies, and the whole structure of the
institution profess the greatest antiquity.

Solomon, for instance, figures as a Freema-
son everywhere in their ceremonies.

Their lodges are dedicated to St. John; and
in the third degree there is a scene professed
to have been enacted in the temple and at the
building of the Temple of Solomon.

Now, all this is utterly fallacious, a false pre-
tense, and a swindle; because it is the obtain-
ing of money from those who join them under
false pretenses.

Steinbrenner, a great Masonic historian, after
much research, with manifest candor, says that
Speculative Freemasonry—which is the only
form of Freemasonry now existing—dates no
further back than 171%. The article on Free-
masonry in the new “American Encyclopedia”
agrees with this statement of Steinbrenner.
Indeed, all modern research on this subject
has resulted in dating the commencement of
Freemasonry, as it now exists, not far from the
middle of the eighteenth century. F

Dr. Dalcho, the compiler of the book of con-
stitutions for South Carolina, says: “ Wezther


172 FREEMASONRY.


Adam, nor Noah, nor Nimrod, nor Moses, nor
Joshua, nor David, nor Solomon, nor Hiram,
nor St. John the Baptist, nor St. John the
Evangelist, were Freemasons. Hypothesis in
history is absurd. There is no record, sacred
or profane, to induce us to believe that those
holy men were Freemasons; and our tradi-
tions do not go back to those days. To assert
that they were Freemasons may make the vul-
gar stare, but will rather excite the contempt
than the admiration of the wise.”

Now, observe, this is a high authority, and
should be conclusive with Masons, because it
is one of their own leaders who affirms this.
But, if this is true, what shall we think of the
claims of Freemasonry itself? For every one
who reads these revelations of Freemasonry
will see that Solomon, and Hiram, and those
ancient worthies everywhere figure in these
rites and ceremonies; so that, if these men
were indeed not Masons, then Freemasonry is
a sham, an imposture, and a swindle. What!
has it'come to this, that this boasted claim of
antiquity, which everywhere lies at the foun-
dation of Masonic rites, ceremonies, and pre-
tensions, is now discovered to be false ?

Through all the Masonic degrees the pre-
tense is kept up that Masonry has always been -
one and the same; and that its degrees are


FREEMASONRY. 173


ancient, and all its principles and usages of
great antiquity. Let any one examine the
books in which it is revealed, and he can not
help being struck with this. Furthermore, in
the orations, sermons, and puffs that are so
common with Masons on all occasions on which
they show themselves off, they flaunt their very
ancient date, their very ancient principles and
usages, and they pledge their candidates, from
one degree to another, to conform to all the
ancient rites, principles, and usages of the
order.

But what shall we at the present day say of
these pretensions? I have before me the Ma-
sonic Monthly for October, 1867, printed in Bos-
ton. It will not be denied, I suppose, that this
is one of their standard authorities. At any
rate, whatever may be said of the editor of this °
paper, it will not be denied that the authori-
ties quoted in the discussions in this number
are high, if not the very highest authorities in
the Masonic fraternity. If I had space to quote
nearly this entire number, I should be very
happy to do so; for it is occupied almost en-
tirely, from beginning to end, with exposing
these pretensions to which I have alluded. It
appeals to their own standard authorities; and
insists that Speculative Freemasonry, in all its
higher degrees, is an imposture and a swindle.


174 FREEMASONRY.


It quotes their great historian—Steinbrenner,
of New York—to show that Speculative Free-
masonry was first established in London, in
1717; and that at that time Masonry consisted.
probably, of but one degree. That about 1725
a Mr. Anderson added two degrees; and, as
the writer in this number states, began the
Christianizing of Freemasonry. There is at
this day a great division among Freemasons
themselves, the point of disagreement being
this: One party maintains that the Christian
religion is of no more authority with Masons
than any other form of religion; that Masonry
proper does not recognize the Bible as of any
higher authority than the sacred books of
heathen nations, or than the Koran of Mo-
hammed; that Freemasonry proper recognizes
all religions as equally valid, and that so far
as Masonry is concerned it matters not at
all what the religion of its adherents is, pro-
vided they be not Atheists. The other party
maintains that Masonry is founded upon the
Bible, and that it is substantially a: Christian
institution.

This controversy is assuming extensive pro-
portions, and it is very interesting for outsiders
to look into it. Isay outsiders—and I might
say it is important, and wouid be very credita-
ble, for the members of the fraternity to un.


FREEMASONRY. 175


derstand this matter better than they do; for
I doubt if one in twenty of them is posted in
regard to the real state of this question among
the fraternity themselves. Mr. Evans, who is
the editor of this Masonic Monthly, takes the
ground, and I think sustainsit fully from their
own authorities, that all the upper degrees ot
Masonry are an imposture.

He goes on to show where and by whom, in
several important cases, these upper degrees
were manufactured and palmed off on the
brotherhood as ancient Freemasonry.

For example, he shows that Mr. Oliver, one
of their most prolific authors, asserts that one
of the grand lodges in London gave charters,
about the middle of the eighteenth century,
to the Masonic lodges in France; and that in
France they immediately betook themselves
to mannfacturing degrees and palming them
off on the public as of very ancient origin.
They proceeded to manufacture a thousand of
these degrees in France. Many of them they
asserted they had received from Scotland; but
the Grand Lodge of Scotland denied ever hay-
ing known of those degrees.

It is also asserted in this number that the
Royal Arch degree was at first, but an append- -
age to a Master’s lodge, and had no separate
charter, and for a long time was not recognized


176 FREEMASONRY.


at all as any part of Freemasonry. And it
informs us when and by whom the Royal Arch
degree was manufactured. This number also
shows that many of the Masonic degrees have
originated in Charleston, South Carolina; and
that a man by the name of Webb, in Massa-
chusetts, manufactured the Templars’ degrees.
In short, we find here their own standard au-
thorities showing up all the higher degrees of
Masonry as having been gotten up and palmed
off on the fraternity in order to make money
out of them; and is not thisa swindle? I wish
to call the attention especially of the fraternity
to these statements in this number of the /a-
sonie Monthly.

Indeed, it is now common for the highest
and best informed Masons to ridicule the pre-
tense that Speculative Freemasonry is an
ancient institution, as a humbug and a lie,
having no foundation in correct history at all.
Now will Freemasons examine this subject
for themselves ?’—for they have been imposed
upon. '

I am particularly anxious to have professed
Christians who are Freemasons thoroughly
understand this matter. They have regarded
Freemasonry as entirely consistent with the
Christian religion, and have professed to see
in it nothing with which a Christian can not


FREEMASONRY. 177


have fellowship. In the third, or Master’s,
degree we find the story of Hiram Abiff intro-
duced into Masonry.

Now this number of the Monthly charges,
that this class of Freemasons went on to con-
struct all the subsequent degrees of Freema-
sonry from the Bible, by ransacking the whole
Old and New Testaments for striking passages
from which they could construct new degrees,
thus leaving the impression that Masonry was
a divine institution, and founded upon the
Bible.

If professed Christians who are Freemasons
will really examine this subject, they will see
that a Masonic lodge is no place for a Chris-
tian.

But suppose it should be asked, may we
not innocently take those degrees that are
founded upon the Bible, and that recognize
the Christian religion as of divine authority?
I answer, Christians cannot be hypocrites.
Let it be distinctly understood, that all these
higher degrees are shown to be an imposture;
and that this Christianizing of Freemasonry
has consisted in heaping up a vast mass of
falsehood, and of palming it off upon the
fraternity as truth and as ancient Freema-


sonry. .
Can Masonic orators be honest in still


178 FREEMASONRY.


claiming for Speculative Masonry great an-
tiquity, divine authority, and that it 1s a
saving institution? Masons are themselves
now showing that the whole fabric of Specu-
lative Freemasonry is an enormous falsehood.
Stone Masonry, doubtless, had its simple de-
gree, and its pass words and signs by which
they knew each other. It also had its obli-
gations. But upon that little stem have been
engrafted a great number of spurious and
hypocritical degrees.

This does seem to be undeniable. Now will
Freemasons be frank enough to acknowledge
this, and to say frankly that they have been
imposed upon? Will they come out from
all fellowship with such an imposture and
such a swindle ?

It has then come at last to this, that the
highest authority among Freemasons has tak-
en the :ground that the Freemasonry which
has been so eulogized throughout the length
and breadth of the land, and which has drawn
in so many professed Christians and ministers,
is nothing less than an enormous cheat. That
those behind the curtain, who have manufac-
tured and sold these degrees—those Grand
Chapters and Encampments and Commander-
ies, and all those pompous assemblies—have
been engaged in enticing the brotherhood


FREEMASONRY. 179


who had taken the lower degrees, to come up
into their ranks and pay their money, that
they may line their pockets. Now remember
that these positions are fully sustained by
Masons themselves, as their views are set
forth in this number of the Masonic Monthly.

I do most earnestly entreat Freemasons to
inform themselves on this subject; and not
turn around and tell us that they, being Free-
masons, know more about it than we do our-
selves. The fact is, my friends, many of you
do not. You do not read. I have myself
recently conversed with a Freemason who
admitted to me that he was entirely ignorant
of what was being said in Masonic periodicals
on this subject. Ido not believe that one in
twenty of the Masonic fraternity in this
country is aware of the intense hypocrisy
with which all the higher degrees of Masonry
have been palmed off upon them, and upon
the whole fraternity. Can men of honor and
of principle allow their names and influence
to be used to sustain such an enormous mass
of false pretension ?

But again, no one can read Bernard on
Masonry through, or any of these authors,
without perceiving the most unmistakable
evidence that most of the degrees in Masonry
are of modern date. Ido not know why so much


180 FREEEMASONRY.


stress should be laid upon the antiquity of
Masonry by those who embrace and adhere
to it. It surely does not prove that it is of
any value, or that it is true. Sin is of very
ancient date, heathenism is of very ancient
date, and most of the abominations that are
in the world are of very ancient date; but
this is no reason for embracing them, or
regarding them as of any great importance.
But to certain minds there is a charm in
the appearance and profession of antiquity;
and young Masons are universally deceived
in this respect, and led to believe that it is
one of the most ancient of existing institu-
tions, if not the very most so. Now I would
not object to Masonry because it is of modern
origin; for this would not prove it to be false,
if it did not profess to be of anctent origin.
I notice this false pretense not because I
think its being of recent date would prove it
unworthy of notice, or of immoral character
or tendency. But observe that its pretensions
from first to last.are that it is of very ancient
date; and it is traced back to the days of
inspiration, and is claimed to have been
founded and patronized by inspired men.
What would Masonry be if all its claims to
antiquity were stricken out, and if those
degrees in Masonry, and those ceremonies


FREEMASONRY. 181


and usages, were abolished that rest upon the
claim that Solomon, that Hiram Abiff, and
John the Evangelist, were Freemasons? What
would remain of Freemasonry if all those
claims found in the very dody of the institu-
tion were stricken out? Why, their very
lodges are dedicated to the holy order of St,
John and Zerubbabel, etc. But what had St.
John to do with Freemasonry? Manifestly
nothing. He never heard or thought of it.
Nor did Solomon or Zerubbabel.

And here let me say a word to young men
who have been urged to unite with this fra-
ternity, and who have been made to believe
that the institution is so very ancient that it
was established and patronized by those holy
men. My dear young men, you have been
deceived. You have been imposed upon as I
was imposed upon. You have been made to
believe a lie. They have drawn your money
from you under false pretenses that some
very ancient mysteries were to be revealed
to you; and that the institution was one
established as far back, at least, as the days
of Solomon, and that St. John was the patron
of the institution. Now this, rely upon it, is
but a pretense, a sham, an imposture, and a)
swindle. I beg you to believe me; and if you


16


18Z FREEMASONRY.


will examine the subject for yourselves, you
will find it to be true.

Your own best historian, Steinbrenner, wilt
teach you that Freemasonry, as you know it,
and as it is mow universally known, dates no
further back than the eighteenth century.
And Dr. Dalcho, who is good authority with
the brotherhood, as we have seen, repudiates
the idea of its antiquity as that which “may
make the vulgar stare, but will rather excite
the contempt than the admiration of the
wise.” Eknow that Masons affirm that the
institution in its present form is the descend-
ant of a brotherhood of stone masons, whose
history may be traced back for some seven
hundred years. But remember that Freema-
sonry, as you know it, and as it now exists, is
not at all what it was among those simple
artisans. The name is preserved, and some
of its symbols, for the purpose of claiming
for it great antiquity. But do not be deceived.
if you will examine the subject for yourselves,
you will find that modern Freemasonry is
entirely another thing from that from which
it claims to be descended. And when you
hear ministers, or orators, on any occasion,
elaiming for Speculative Freemasonry—which
is the only form in which it now exists—a .
great antiquity, let it be settled, I pray you,


FREEMASONRY. 183


im your minds, that such claims are utterly
false; and that these whe make them are
either grassly ignorant or intensely dishonest.
King Selomon a stone maseom! Hiram a Grand
Master of a Grand Ledge of stone masens! ‘Those
men uniting in alodge with acompany of stone masons!
Does any one really believe the silly tale?

How long shall the intelligent of this gen-
eration be insulted by having this pretended
antiquity of Freemasenry paraded befare the
public? Dao not intelligent Freemasens blush
to hear their orators on public oceasions, and
even ministers of the Gospel im their Masonic
sermons, flaunt the silly falsehoods of the great
antiquity of Freemasonry before the public,
and claim that Enoch, Zerubbabel, Solomon,
the St. Johns, and all the ancient worthies,
were Freemasons!


184 FREEMASONEY.


(OMS GDS A 38 855 92-5 ae


THH BOASTED BENEVOLENCE OF FREE
MASONS A SHAM.


Panes Se
G@ HE law of God requires universal be-
eRe nevolence, supreme love to God, and
Mets equal love to our neighbor—that is, to
all markind.

This the Gospel also requires, and this is un-
deniable. But does Masonry inculcate this
morality? and is this Masonite benevolence?

By no means. Masonic oaths require par-
tial benevolence; or strictly, they require no
benevolence at all. For real benevolence is
universal in its own nature. It is geod-will-
ing; that is, it consists In willing tbe well-
being or good of universal being—and that
for its own sake, and not because the good be-
longs to this or that particular individual.

In other words, trve benevolence is neces-
sarily zmpartéal. But Masonic oaths not only
do not require impartial and unrversal benev-
olence, but they require the exact opposite of
this. The law and Gospel of God allow and


FREEMASONEY. 185


require as to discriminate in our doing good
between the holy and the wicked.

They require us to do good, as we have op-
portunity, to all men, but espeec/ally to the
household of faith. But the Masonic oaths
make no such discriminations as this, nor do
they allow it. These oaths require Masons to
discriminate between Masons and those that
are not Masons; giving the preference to Ma-
sons, even if they are not Christians, rather
than to Christians if they are not Masons.

Now this is directly opposite to both the
law and the Gospel. But this is the benevo-
lence and morality of Freemasonry, undenia-
bly.

The law and the Gospel require eur diserim-
inations in our treatment of men to be condi-
tional upon their holiness and likeness to God
and their faith in Jesus Christ.

But the oaths of Freemasons require their
discriminations to be founded upon the mere
relation of a brother Mason, whatever his
Christian or moral character may be.

It is not pretended that a man may not be a
good and worthy Mason who is not a Christian,
It is admitted and claimed by Freemasonry
that a man’s religion, or religiows character,
has nothing to do with his being a Mason. If
he admits the being of a God this is enough.


186 FREEMASONRY.


Now this, f say again, is not only mot in ae-
cordance with Christian morality, and with
the law and Gospel of God; but it is directly
opposed to both law and Gospel.

But, again, the utter want of true benevo-
lence in the Masonic institution will farther
appear if we consider the exclusivencss of the
institution. A minister in Cleveland, recently
defending the institution of Masonry, declared
that the glory of Masonry consists in its eg-
elusiveness. But is this in aecordanee with
the benevolence required in the Gospel?

Masonry, observe, professes to be a benevo-
lent institution. But, first, it excludes all
women from a participation in its rights, cere
monies, privileges, and blessings, whatever
they may be. Secondly, it excludes all old
men in their dotage. Thirdly, it excludes all
young men in their nenage; that is, under
twenty-one years of age. Several other classes
are excluded; but these that I have named
comprise a vast majority, probably not less
than two-thirds of all mankind. Again, they
admit no deformed person, and none but these
who are physically perfect. In short, they ad-
mit none who are likely to become chargeable
to the institution.

Some time since the Grand Lodge of the
State of New York adopted a series of articles


FREEMASONRY. 187


defining certain landmarks and principles of
Freemasonry. These articles have been ac-
eepted and eulogized by the Masonic press
The first is as follows. I quote it from the
American Ireemason, edited by ‘Robert
Morris, Knight Templar, and author of various
Masonic works.” with his preface and strictures.
These articles Mr. Morris regards as high Ma-
sonic authority. The namber from which I
quote is dated at Louisville, Kentucky, 8th of
April, 5854, Masonic date, in other words, in
1854, fourteen years ago.

“Our New York brethren are eminent for
the matchless ability with which their Grand
Lodge documents are prepared. In this de-
partment they have set the example for others,
and there are yet a few that would do well to
look to the East for more light. We copy
their ‘Thirty-four Articles’ with some conden-
sation and afew comments of our own, and
present them to our readers as a well-digested
system of Masonic law and practice.

“‘ArticLe L It is net proper to initiate into
our lodges persons of the negro race; and
their exclusion is in accordance with Masonic
law, and the ancient charges and regulations ,
Because of their depressed social condition;
their general want of intelligence, which
unfits them as a body to work in or adorn the


=


188 FREEMASONRY.


craft; the impropriety of making them our
equals in one place, when from their social
condition and the circumstances which almost
everywhere attach to them, we can not do so
in others; their not being, as a general thing,
free-born; the impossibility, or at least the
difficulty, of ascertaining, if we once com
mence, their free birth, and where the line of
intelligence and social elevation commences
and ends, or divides portions of their race; and
finally, their not being as a-race “persons of
good report,” or who can be “well recommend-
ed” as subjects for initiation, their very seldom
being persons who have any “trade, estate,
office, occupation or visible way of acquiring an
honest livelihood and working in the craft, as
becomes members of this ancient and most hon-
orable fraternity, who ought not only to earn
what is sufficient for themselves and families,
but Likewise something to spare for works of
charity and for supporting the ancient grandeur
and dignity of the royal craft, eating no man’s
bread for naught;” and their general positive
deficiency of natural endowments. All which
would render it impossible, as a general thing,
to conciliate and continue between them and
us good will and private affection or brotherly
love, which cements into one united body the
members of this ancient fraternity,’


FREEMASONRY. 189


“Comment. These arguments can not he
successfully controverted. We, in the South-
ern or slave-holding States, whose experience
with the colored race is greater than that of
others, affirm the New York doctrine in every
particular. However occasional instances may
be offered to the contrary, they are but the
exceptions to prove the general rule, that the
race ought not to amalgamate socially or phys-
ically.

“+ ArtioLE II. No person of the negro race
shall be examined or admitted as a visitor of
any lodge of Masons under this jurisdiction,
if made in an African lodge in North Amer-
ica. Because all such lodges are clandestine
and without legal authority.’”

Here we have their benevolence unmasked.
A depressed social condition is a bar to ad-
mission to this benevolent society. What if the
Christian church should adopt such an article ?
Is this Christian benevolence? Is it consist-
ent with Christian morality? Christean min-
asters, is this the morality you teach and prac-
tice? You profess to teach and practice the
precepts of Christ, and join and hold fast to a
society whose Jaw zs to exclude men for being
in a depressed social position, whatever their
wants, their moral and religious character
muy be. You boast of your benevolence and


17


190 FREEMASONRY.


exclude the very class who have most need of
sympathy and benevolence, and are you @
professed disciple, and perhaps a professed minister
of Jesus. SHAME!

But is this real benevolence, or Gospel mor-
ality? No, indeed! It is the very opposite of
Gospel morality or true benevolence. In a re-
cent number of the Vational Freemason—Il
think its date is the 18th of January—it is admit-
ted by the editor of that great national organ
that benevolent institutions have been so much
multiplied that there is now seldom any call
upon Masons for charitable donations. Yes,
but who has multiplied these benevolent socie-
ties? Surely Jasons have not done this
Christians have done it. And Masonry now
seems forced to admit that Christian benevo-
lence has covered the whole field, and left
them nothing to do. So far as I have had ex-
perience in Freemasonry, I can say that I do
not recollect a single instance in which the
lodge to which I belonged ever gave any money
to any charitable object whatever.

As a Freemason, I never was called upon,
and to my recollection I never gave a cent as
a Freemason, either to an individual as a mat-
ter of charity or to any object whatever. My
dues and fees to the lodges, of course, I paid
regularly; but that the money thus collected


FREEMASONRY. 191


was given to any charitable object whatever I
do not believe.

Again, Freemasonry, at the best, is but a
mutual insurance company. Their oaths pledge
them to assist each other, if in distress or in
necessitous circumstances; and each other’s
families, if left in want. This they can well
afford to do, on the principle of mutual insur-
ance: for they have vast sums, almost incalcu-
lable in amount, taking the whole fraternity
together; and they can lay out almost any
amount of money in fitting up their sumptuous
lodges of the higher degrees, in building Ma-
sonic temples, in seeking each other’s promo-
tion to office, and in defending each other in
case any one of them commits a crime and is
liable to suffer for it.

The following estimate, taken from a note in
the revised edition of Bernard’s “ Light on Ma-

-sonry,” p. 96, will give some idea how large are
the sums held by Masons. “Supposing that in
the United States there are 500,000 Entered
Apprentices, 400,000 Masters, and 200,000 Royal
Arch Masons, also 10,000 Knights, and that they
all paid the usual fees for the degrees, the
amount would be the enormous sum of $11,-
250,000; the yearly interest of which, at seven
per cent, is $787,500, which sum (allowing $100


192 FREEMASONRY.


to each individual) would support 7,875 per-
sons.

Now, I ask: Do Masons, by their charities,
support this number of poor in the United
States? Do they support one-tenth part of
this number? Supposing they do, is it neces-
sary to give $10, or $50 for the privilege of
contributing $1, $5, or $50 masonically? Must
the privilege of being a charitable man be
bought with gold? How many there are who
have rendered themselves incompent to bestow
charities, by their payment for and attendance
on Masonic secrets and ceremonies! If all the
money paid for the degrees of Masonry was
applied to charitable purposes, the subject
would appear differently; but it is principally
devoted to the erection of Masonic temples,
support of the Grand Lodges, and for refresh-
ment for the craft, and I think I may add, for
their support in kidnapping and murder.”

It is no doubt true that but a very small
part of their funds is ever used for the support
of even their own poor. If it is, it behooves
them to show it, and let the public know.
They boast much of their benevolence; and
the charities of Freemasons are frequently
compared with those of the church—and that,
too, boastfully ; they maintaining that they are
more benevolent and charitable, and do more


FREEMASONRY. 193


for the poor and destitute than even the church
has done.

But let us look at this. Is there any truth
in all this boasting? What has Freemasonry
done for general education in any part of the
world? Let them tell us. Again, what has
Freemasonry done for the general poor? Noth-
ing. What have they done for their own poor,
as a matter of charity and benevolence? Ab-
solutely nothing. They have not even dis-
bursed the funds which have been paid in for
that purpose. Let them show, if they can, that
_on the principle of a mutual insurance society
they have faithfully paid out to their own poor
that fund which has been paid in by Masons
for the purpose of securing to themselves and
families, in case they should be reduced to
poverty, what would meet their absolute neces-
sities. We challenge them to show any such
thing. We challenge them to show that, on
the principle of benevolence and charity, they
have really done anything for either the gen-
eral poor or their own poor. Zhey compare
themselves with the Church of Christ in this
respect! What have they done for the South-
ern poor during our great struggle, and during
the long period of starvation and distress that
has reigned in the South? What have Free-
masons, as such, done for the freedmen? And


194 FREEMASONRY.


what are they now doing? What have they
done in any age of the world, as Freemasons,
for Christian missions, for the conversion of the
world, for the salvation of the souls of men?
What! compare themselves boastfully with the
Church of God, as being more benevolent than
Christians ?

The fact is, the Church of Christ has done
ten thousand times as much for humanity as
they have ever done. And she has not done
it on the principle of a mutual insurance com-
pany, but as a matter of true benevolence;
including in her charities the poor, the lowly,
the halt and the blind, the old and the young,
the black and the white.

The Church of Christ has done more for the
bodies of men, ten thousand times more, than
Freemasonry has ever done or ever will do.

Besides, the Church of Christ has poured out
its treasure like a flood to enlighten mankind
generally, to save their souls, and to do them
good both for time and eternity. But what
has Freemasonry done in this respect? Their
boasted benevolence isa sham. I admit that
they do sometimes afford relief to an indigent
brother Mason, and to the families of such. I
admit that they have often done this. But I
maintain that this is not done as an act of
Christian charity, but only as an act of MMa-


FREEMASONRY. 195


sonic charity; and that Masonic charity is only
the part payment of a debt. Masons pay in
their money to the Masonic fund; and this
fund is that out of which their poor are help-
ed, when they are helped at all.

What individuals do for individuals, on rare
occasions, is but a trifle. Indeed, it is seldom
that they are called on as individuals. The
help granted to the poor is almost always
taken from the funds of the lodges. And I se-
riously doubt whether there is a lodge in the
United States that has ever paid as much for the
support of their own poor as has been paid in
to their funds by those who have joined the
lodge. Let it be understood, then, that their
boast of benevolence and of Christian morality
is utterly false. Their oaths do not pledge
them at all to the performance of any truly
Christian morality; but to a Masonic benevo-
lence, which is the opposite of true Christian
morality.

Instead, therefore, of Masonry’s inculcating
really sound morality, instead of its being
almost or quite true religion, the very per-
fection of that morality which their oaths
oblige them to practice is anti-Christian, and
opposed to both the law and Gospel of God.
It is partial. And here let me again appeal to
the dear young men who have been persuaded


196 FREEM ASONRY.


to join the Masonic fraternity under the im~
pression that it is a benevolent institution. Do
not, my dear young men, suffer yourselves to
be deceived in this respect. If you have well
considered what the law and Gospel require,
you will soon perceive that the benevolence
and morality required by your Masonic oaths
is not Gospel morality or true benevolence at
all; but that it is altogether a spurtous and
selfish morality. Indeed, you yourselves are
aware that you joined the lodge from selfish
motives; and that the morality inculeated by
Masons is an exclusive, one-sided, and selfish
affair altogether. Insome of the lectures, you
are aware that occasionally the duty of univer-
sal good-will is, in few words, inculeated. But
you also know that your oaths, which lay down
the rule of your duty in this respect, require
no such thing as universal and impartial benev-
olence; but that they require the opposite of
this. That is, they require you to prefer a Ma-
son because he is a Mason to a Christian be-
cause he is a Christian; and, instead of requiring
you to do good especially to the household of
faith, your oaths require you to do good espe-
cially to those who are Freemasons, whether
they belong to the household of faith or not
But this you know to be anti-Christian, and not
according to the Gospel. But you know also


FREEMASONRY. 197


that Christians devote themselves to doing
good to Masons and to those who are not Ma-
sons, to all classes and descriptions of men.
And this they do, not on the principle, as I
have said, of a mutual insurance society, but
as amere matter of benevolence. They deny
themselves for the sake of doing good to the
most lowly and even to the most wicked men.

Do not allow yourselves, therefore, to sup-
pose that there is any good in Masonry. We
often hear it said, and sometimes by professed
Christians and Christian ministers, that “ Ma-
sonry is a good thing.”

But be not deceived. If by good is intend-
ed morally good, the assertion is false. There
is nothing morally good in Freemasonry. If
there are any good men who are Freemasons,
Freemasonry has not made them so; but’
Christianity has made them so. They are
good not by virtue of their Freemasonry,
but by virtue of their Christianity. They
have not been made good by anything they
have found in Freemasonry ; but, if they are
good, they have been made good by Chris-
tianity, in spite of Freemasonry. I must say
that I have always been ashamed of Freema-
sons whenever I have read, in their orations,
or in the sermons of ministers who have eulo-
gized it, or in their eulogistic books, the


198 FREEEMASONRY.


pretense that Freemasonry is a benevolent
institution. Many have claimed it to be
religion, and true religion. This question I
shall examine in another place. But the
thing I wish to fix your especial attention
upon in the conclusion of this article is, that
Freemasonry has no just claims to Christian
morality: or benevolence; but that in its best
estate it is only partiality, and the doing in a
very slovenly manner the work of a mutual
insurance company. I do not claim that asa
mutual insurance company it is necessarily
wicked but I do insist that, being at best a
mutual insurance company, it is wicked and
shameful to flaunt their hypocritical profes-
sions of benevolence before the public as they
‘constantly do. How long shall an intelligent
people be nauseated with this pretense? How
can they expect us to have the least respect
for such claims to benevolence? We must
regard the putting forth of such claims as an
insult to our common sense.


FREEMASONRY. 199


Ce Ae Eee soe


FREEMASONRY IS A FALSE RELIGION.
zx

~ OME Freemasons claim that Freemason-
ry is a saving institution, and that it is
true religion. Others hold a different
opinion, claiming that it is the handmaid of
religion, asystem of refined morality. Others
still are free tu admit that it is only a mutual
aid or mutual insurance society. This dis-
crepancy of views among them is very striking,
as every one knows who has been in the habit
of reading sermons, lectures, and orations on
Masonry published by themselves. In this
article I propose to inquire, first, Do their
standard authorities claim that Masonry is
identical with true religion? secondly, Does
Freemasonry ztse/f claim to be true religion?
and, thirdly,Are these claims valid ?

1. Do their standard authorities clain that
Masonry is true religion ?

I quote Salem Town. I read his work some
forty years ago. The book professes on its
title-page to be “A System of Speculative
Masonry, exhibited in a course of lectures


200 FREEM ASONRY.


before the Grand Chapter of the State of New
York, at their annual meetings in the City of
Albany.” It was reduced to a regular system
by their special request, and recommended to
the public by them as a system of Freemason-
ry. It is also recommended by nine grand
officers, in whose presence the lectures were
delivered; by. another who had examined
them; and by “the Hon. DeWitt Clinton,
General Grand High Priest of the General
Grand Chapter of the United States of Amer-
ica, Grand Master of the Grand Lodge of the
State of New York, ete., etc.”

The book was extensively patronized and
subscribed for by Freemasons throughout the
country, and has always been considered by the
fraternity as a standard authority. From this
author I quote as follows:

“The principles of Freemasonry have the
same coeternal and unshaken foundations, con-
tain and inculcate the same truths in substance,
and propose the same ultimate end, as the
doctrines of Christianity."—P. 53. Again he
says: “The same system of faith and the same
practical duties taught by revelation are con-
tained in and required by the Masonic institu-
tion.”—P. 174. “Speculative Masonry com-
bines those great and fundamental principles
which constitute the very essence of the


FREEMASONRY. 201


Christian system.”—P. 37. “It is no secret
that there is not a duty enjoined nor a virtue
required in the volume of inspiration but what
is found in and taught by Speculative Free-
masonry.” “The characteristic principles are
such as embrace the whole subject-matter of
divine economy.”—P. 31.

Again he says: “As the Worp in the first
verse of St. John constitutes both the founda-
tion, the subject-matter, and the great ultimate
end of the Christian economy, so does the same
Worp, in all its relations to man, time, and
eternity, constitute the very spirit and essence
of Speculative Freemasonry.”—P. 155. Again,
referring to the promise of the Messiah, he
says: “The same precious promise is the
great corner-stone in the edifice of Speculative
Freemasonry.”—P. 171. Again he says: «The
Jewish order of priesthood from Aaron to
Zacharias, and even till the coming of Messias,
was in confirmation of the great event, which
issued in the redemption of man. All pointed
to the eternal priesthood of the Son of God,
who by his own blood made atonement for
sin, and consecrated the way to the Holy of
holies. Zhis constitutes the great and ulti-
mate point of Masonic research.”—P. 121.

“That a knowledge of the divine Worp, or
Logos, should have been the object of so much


202 FREEMASONRY.


religious research from time immemorial adds
not a little to the honor of Speculative Free-
masonry. —P. 4151.

Again he says: “It is a great truth, and
weighty as eternity, that the present and ever-
lasting well-being of mankind is solely and
ultimately intended.”—P. 170. This he says
of Freemasonry. But again he says: “ Spec-
ulative Masonry, according to present accep-
tation, has an ultimate reference to that
spritual building erected by virtue in the
heart, and summarily implies the arrangement
and perfection of those holy and sublime prin-
ciples by which the soul is fitted for a meet
temple of God in a world of immortality.”—
P. 63. Does not Freemasonry profess to be
a saving religion ?

Again he says: “In advancing to the fourth
degree, the good man is greatly encouraged
to persevere in the ways of well-doing even
to the end. He has a name which no man
knoweth save him that receiveth it. If, there-
fore, he be rejected and cast forth among the
rubbish of the world, he knows full well that
the great Master-builder of the universe, hay-
ing chosen and prepared him a lively stone in
that spiritual building in the heavens, will
bring him forth in triumph, while shouting
grace, grace to the Divine Redeemer. Then


FREEM ASONRY. 203


the Freemason is assured of his election and
jinal salvation. Hence, ovens the fifth degree,
where he discovers his election to, and his glo-
rified station in, the kingdom of his Father.”
Then again he is assured of his “election and
glorified station in the kingdom of his Father.”
If this is not claiming for Freemasonry a saving
power what is? Salem Town is the great
light in Freemasonry, as the title and history
of his work imports. Does he not claim that
Freemasonry is a saving religion? To be
sure he does, or no words can assert such a
claim. “With these views, the sixth degree
is conferred, where the riches of divine grace
are opened in boundless prospect.” “Then
he beholds in the eighth degree, that all the
heavenly sojourners will be admitted within
the veil of God’s presence, where they will
become kings and priests before the throne of
his glary forever and ever.”—Pp. 79-81. By
the “heavenly sojourners,” he certainly
means Freemasons. Observe what he asserts
of them: “Then he (the Freemason) beholds
in the-eighth degree that all the heavenly
sojourners will be admitted within the veil
of God’s presence, where they will become
kings and priests before the throne of his glory
forever and ever.” This clenches the claim.
“The maxims of wisdom are gradually unfold-


204 FREEMASONRY.


ed, till the whole duty of man is clearly and
persuasively exhibited to the mind.”—P. 184.

Again: “Principles and duties which lie
at the foundation of the Masonie system, and
are solemnly enjoined upon every brother;
whoever, therefore, shall conscientiously dis-
charge them in the fear of God fulfills the
whole duty of man.”—P. 48. Then he claims
for Freemasonry all that is or can be claimed
for the law or Gospel of God.

Again he says: “The Divine Being views
no moral character in aman with greater com-
placency than his who in heart strictly con
forms to Masonic requirements.” “The more
prominent features of a true Masonic charac-
ter are literally marked with the highest
beauties.”—-Pp. 33,185. Then again he rep-
resents Masonry as forming as holy a charac-
ter in man as the Gospel does or can.

Again he says that “every good Mason is
of necessity truly and emphatically a Chris-
tian.”—P. 37. Then he represents Freemasonry
as indentical with Christianity. A true Mason
must necessarily be atrue Christian. That Ma.
sonry professes to conduct its disciples to
heaven we find affirmed by Town, in the fol-
lowing language. Of the inducements to
practice the precepts of Masonry he says:
“They are found in that eternal weight of glo-


FREEMASONRY. 205


ry, that crown of jcy and rejoicing laid up for
the faithful in a future world.”—P. 188.

By the faithful here he means faithful Free-
masons. This same writer claims that Solomon
organized the institution by inspiration from
God. On page 187, he says: “So Masonry
was transmitted from Enoch, through Noah,
Abraham, Moses, and their successors, till
Solomon, being inspired of God, established
a regular form of administration.”

This will suffice for the purpose of showing
what is claimed for Masonry by their standard
authorities. The same in substance might be
quoted from various other standard writers.
I have made these quotations from Elder
Stearns’ book, not finding in my library a copy
of Town. In another place I shall find it con-
venient to quote sundry others of their stand-
ard writers, who, while they claim it to bea
religion, do not consider it the Christian re-
ligion.

This conducts us (2) to the second inquiry:
What does Freemasonry claim for itself ?

And here I might quote from almost any of
the Masonic degrees to show that this claim is
put forth in almost every part of the whole
institution. As Town claims for it, so it claims’
for itself, a power to conduct its disciples to
heaven. Any one who will take pains to read

18


206 FREEMASONRY.


Bernard’s “ Light on Masonry” through, will be
satisfied that Town claims for the institution
no more than it claims for itself.

I beg of all who feel any interest in this sub-
ject to get and read Bernard on Masonry; to
read it through, and see if Town has not right-
ly represented the claims of Freemasonry. I
deny, observe, that he has rightly represented
its principles, and that which it really requires
of Masons. That he has misrepresented Ma-
sonic Jaw L insist. But in respect to its prom-
ises of heaven as a reward for being good
Freemasons he has not misrepresented it. It
claims to be a saving institution. This cer-
tainly will appear to any person who will take
the pains to examine its teachings and its
claims as revealed in “Light on Masonry.”
Mr. Town has grossly misrepresented Masonic
law and morality as we have seen in examin-
ing its claims to benevolence, and in scrutiniz-
ing their oaths and their profane use of Scrip-
ture. But that Mr. Town has not misrepresented
the claims of Masonry to be a saving religion
has been abundantly shown in these pages by
quotations from “Light on Masonry.” I might
quote many pages from the body of Masonry
where it teaches the candidates that the observ-
ance of Masonic law, principles and usages
will secure his salvation. The Gospel professes


FREEMASONRY. 207


no more than this, that those who obey ?¢ shall
besaved. Surely Masonry claims to bea saving
religion just as much as the Gospel of Christ
does.

Just take the following from the degree of
“The Knights of the East and West.” «Light
on Masonry,” first edition, p. 217, already quoted
in another place.

In explaining the ceremony of sounding the
seventh trumpet, and conducting the candidate
to the vacant canopy, we find the following:
“This canopy it will be recollected is at the right side
of the All Puissant who represents Jenovan. The
sounding of the seventh trumpet, and the conducting
of the candidate to the vacant.canopy, is a represen-
tation of the end of the world, and the glorification
of all true Masons at the right hand of God, hav-
ing passed through the trials of Freemasonry and
washed their robes in their own blood.” If Freema-
sonry does not claim to be a saving religion
how can such a claim be made? The com-
piler adds: “If this is not Antichrist what is?,
But I must beg of the reader to examine the
books that reveal Masonry for themselves,
since to quote the claims of Masonry on this
head further than I have done, would not only
be useless and tiresome, but would swell this
work too much.

This brings me (3) to the third inquiry: Are


208 FREEMASONRY.


the claims that Masonry is a true and saving
religion valid?

To this question I reply that it is utterly
false; and in this respect Freemasonry is a
fatal delusion. From the quotations that I
have made from Town, it will be perceived
that he represents Freemasonry as identical
with Christianity.

Mr. Preston is another of their standard
writers. I quote the following note from
Stearns on Masonry, p. 28: “Mr. Preston’s book,
entitled ‘Illustrations of Masonry, has been
extensively patronized by the fraternity as a
standard work. The copy before me is the
first American, from the tenth London edition.”
Mr. Preston says in his book, p. 830: “The uni-
versal principles of the art unite in one indis-
soluble bond of affection men of the most
opposite tenets, of the most distant countries,
and of the most contradictory opinions.” Again,
p. 125, he says: “Our celebrated annotator has
taken no notice of Masons having the art of
working miracles; and foresaying things to
come. But this was certainly not the least
important of their doctrines. Hence, astrology
was admitted as one of the arts which they
taught, and the study of it warmly recom-
mended.”


“This study became, in the course of time,


FREEMASONRY. 209


a reguiar science.” So here we learn that Ma-
sons formerly claimed the power of working
miracles. I quote again from Bradley, p. 8,
He says: “We leave every member to choose
and support those principles of religion and
those forms of government which appear con-
sistent to his views.” In the work of Preston,
p. 51, we have the following: “As a Mason,
you are to study the moral law as contained
in the sacred code, the Bible; and in coun-
tries where that book is not known, whatever
is understood to contain the will or law of
God.” O, then, in every country Masons are
to embrace the prevalent religion, whatever it
may be, and accept whatever is claimed in any.
country where they may reside, to be the law and
will of God. But is this Christianity, or con-
sistent with it? Itis well known and admitted
that Masonry claims to have descended from
the earliest ages, and that the institution has
existed in all countries and under all religions ;
and that the ancient philosophers of Greece
and Rome, the astrologers and soothsayers, and
the great men of all heathen nations have
belonged to that fraternity.

It is also well known that at this time there
are multitudes of Jews, Mohammedans, and
skeptics of every grade belonging to the insti-
tution. Ido not know that this is denied by


210 FREEMASONRY.


any intelligent Mason. Now, if this is so, how
can Freemasonry be the true religion, or at all
consistent with it? Multitudes of Universal-
ists and Unitarians, and of errorists of every
grade, are Freemasons; and yet Freemasonry
itself claims to save its disciples, to conduct
them to heaven! .

The third question proposed for discussion
in my last number is: Ave the claims of Ma-
sonry to be atrue and saving institution valid?
To this I answer, No. This will appear if we
consider, first, that the morality which it in-
culcates ts not the morality of the law and
Gospel of God. The law and the Gospel, as
Ihave shown in a former number, lay down
the same rule of life. And Christ, in com-
menting upon the true meaning and spirit of
the law, says: “If ye love them that love you,
what thank have ye? Do not even the publi-
cans the same? He requires us to love our
enemies, and to pray for them, as truly as for
our friends. In short, he requires universal
benevolence; whereas Freemasonry requires
no such thing. Its oaths, which are its law,
simply require its members to be just to each
other. Isay just, for their boasted benevo-
lence is simply the payment of a debt.

They do, indeed, promise to assist each
other in distress, and to help each other’s


FREEMASONRY. 211


families, provided they fall into poverty. But
on what condition do they promise this?
Why, that a certain amount is to be paid into
their treasury as a fund for this purpose. But
this, surely, is not benevolence, but the sim-,
ple payment of a debt, on the principle of
mutual insurance.

This I have abundantly shown in a former
number. Again, the motives presented in
Freemasonry to secure the course of action
to which they are pledged are by no means
consistent with the law or the Gospel of God.
In religion, and in true morality, everything
depends on the motive or reason for the per-
formance of an action. God accepts nothing
that does not proceed from supreme love to
Him and equal love to our fellow-men. Not
merely to our brother Masons; but to our
neighbor—that is, to all mankind. Whatever
does not proceed from love and faith is sin,
according to the teachings of the Bible. And
by love, I say again, is meant the supreme love
of God and the equal love of our neighbor.

But Masonry teaches no such morality as this.
The motive urged by Masons is, to honor Ma-
sonry, to honor the institution, to honor each
other. While they are pledged to assist each
other.in distress; to keep each other’s secrets,
even if they be crimes; and to aid each other,


912 FREEMASONRY.


whether right or wrong, so far as to extricate
them from any difficulty in which they are
involved; yet they never present the pure mo-
tives of the Gospel. They are pledged not to
violate the chastity of a brother Mason’s wife,
sister, daughter, or mother; but they are not
pledged by Masonry, as the law and Gospel of
God require, to abstain from such conduct
with any female whatever. But nothing short
of wniversal benevolence, and universal mo-
rality, is acceptable to God.

But again: It has been shown that Mason-
ry claims to be a sdving institution ; that this
is claimed for it by the highest Masonic author-
ities; and that this claim is one setup by itself
as well. But an examination of Freemasonry
shows that it promises salvation upon entirely
other conditions than those revealed in the
Gospel of Christ. The Gospel nowhere incul-
cates the idea that any one can be saved ky
obedience to the law of God. “By the deeds
of the law shall no flesh be justified” is the
uniform teaching of the Bible. Much less can
any one be saved by conformity to IMasonie
law, which requires only a partial, and_there-
fore a spurious, morality. The Bible teaches
that all unconverted persons are in a state of
sin, of total moral depravity, and consequent
condemnation by the law of God; and that the


FREEMASONRY. 213


conditions of salvation are repentance and a
total renunciation of all sin, facth in our
Lord Jesus Christ, and sanctification by the
Holy Spirit. Now these are by no means the
conditions upon which Freemasonry proposes
to save its members. The teachings of Free-
masonry upon this subject are summarily this:
Obey Masonic law, and live.

Now, surely, whatever promises heaven to
men upon other conditions than those proposed
in the Gospel of Christ is a fatal delusion.
And this Freemasons can not deny, for they
profess to accept the Bible as true. Freema-
sonry lays no stress at all upon conversion
to Christ by the Holy Spirit. It presents no
means or motives to secure that result. The
idea of being turned from sin to holiness, from
a self-pleasing spirit to a supreme love of God,
by the preaching of the Gospel, accompanied
by the Holy Spirit, is not taught in Freema-
sonry. r

It nowhere recognizes men as being justified
by faith in Christ, as being sanctified by faith
in Christ, and as being saved as the Gospel
recognizes men as being saved.

Indeed, it is salvation by Masonry, and not
salvation by the Gospel, that Masonry insists
upon. It is another gospel, or presents en-
tirely another method of salvation than that

19


914 FREEMASONRY.


presented in the Gospel. How can it be pre-
tended by those who admit that the Gospel is
true that men can be saved by Freemasonry
at all? If Freemasons are good men, it is not
Freemasonry that has made them so; but the
Gospel has made them so, zn spite of Freema-
sonry. If they are anything more than self-
righteous, it is because of the teachings of the
Gospel; for-certainly Freemasonry teaches a
very different way of salvation from that which
the Gospel reveals. But, again, the prayers
recorded in Freemasonry, and used by them
in their lodges, are not Christian prayers; that
is, they are not prayers offered in the name of
Christ.

But the Gospel teaches us that it is funda-
mental to acceptable prayer that it be offered
in the name of Christ. Again,as we have seen
in a former number, the teachings of Freema-
sonry are scandalously false; and their cere-
monies are a mockefy, and truly shocking to
Christian feelings.

Again, Freemasonry is a system of gross
hypocrisy. It professes to be a saving institu-
tion, and promises salvation to those who
keep its oaths and conform to its ancient
usages. It also professes to be entirely consist-
ent with the Christian religion. And this it
does while it embraces as good and acceptable


IFREEM ASONRY. 215


Masons hundreds of thousands who abhor Chris-
tianity, and scoff at the Bible and everything
that the Bible regards as sacred. In a Chris-
tian nation it professes to receive Christianity
as a true religion; in Mohammedan countries
it receives the Koran as teaching the true reli-
gion; in heathen countries it receives their
sacred books as of as much authority as that
which is claimed in Christian countries for the
Bible. In short, Freemasonry in a pagan
country is pagan, in a Mohammedan country
it is Mohammedan, and in a Christian country
it professes to be Christian; but in this profes-
sion it is not only grossly inconsistent, but
intensely hypocritical.

Notwithstanding all the boasts that are made
in its lower degrees of its being a true religion,
if you will examine the matter through to the
end, you will find that, as you ascend in the
scale of degrees, the mask is gradually thrown
off, until we come to the “ Philosophical Lodge,”
in the degree of the “Knights Adepts of the
Eagle or Sun;” in which, as will be seen, no
concealment is longer attempted. I will make
a short quotation from this degree, as any one
- may find it in “Light on Masonry.”—P. 18.

“ Requisitions to make a good Mason.—if
you ask me what are the requisite qualities
that a Mason must be possessed of to come


216 FREEMASONRY.


to the center of truth, 1 answer you that you
must crush the head of the serpent, ignorance:
You must shake off the yoke of infant preju-
dice, concerning the mysteries of the reigning
religion, which worship has been imaginary
and only founded on the spirit of pride, which
envies to command and be distinguished, and
to be at the head of the vulgar in affecting an
exterior purity, which characterizes a false
piety joined to a desire of acquiring that which
is not its own, and is always the subject of
this exterior pride and unalterable source ot
many disorders; which, being joined to glut-
tonness, is the daughter of hypocrisy, and
employs every matter to satisfy carnal desires,
and raises to these predominant passions altars
upon which she maintains without ceasing the
light of iniquity, and sacrifices continually
offerings to luxury, voluptuousness, hatred,
envy, and perjury.

“ Behold, my dear brother, what you must
fight against and destroy before you can come
to the knowledge of the true good and sover-
eign happiness! Behold this monster which
you must conquer—a serpent which we detest
as an idol that is adored by the idiot and
vulgar under the name of religion!” —See
‘Light on Masonry,” pp. 270, 271. 8th edi-
tion.


FREEMASONRY. 217


Here, then, Masonry stands revealed, after
all its previous pretensions to being a true
religion, as the unalterable opponent of the
reigning or Christian religion. Thatit claims
to be a religion is indisputable; but that it
is not the Christian religion is equally evident.
Nay, it finally comes out flat-footed, and rep-
resents the reigning or Christian religion as
a serpent which Masons detest, as an idol
which is adored by the idiot and vulgar under
the name of religion.

Now let professed Christians who are Free-
masons examine this for themselves. Do not
turn away from examination of this subject.

And here, before I close this article, I beg
to be understood that I have no quarrel with
individual Masons. It is with the system that
I have to deal. The great mass of the frater-
nity are utterly deceived, as I was myself.
Very few, comparatively, of the fraternity are
at all acquainted with what is really taught in
the higher degrees as they ascend from one to
another. None of them know anything of
these degrees any further than they have
taken them, unless they have studied them
in the books as they are revealed. I can
not believe that Christian men will remain
connected with this institution, if they will
only examine it for themselves and look it


218 FREEMASONRY.


through to the end. I know that young Ma-
sons, and those who have only taken the lower
degrees, will be shocked at what I have just
quoted from a higher degree. I was so myself
when first I examined the higher degrees. But
you will inquire how, and in what sense, are
we who have only taken the lower degrees
responsible for the oaths and teachings of the
higher degrees, which we have not taken. Ina
future number I shall briefly answer this ques-
tion. Most Freemasoms, and many who have
been Masters of lodges of the lower degrees, are
really so ignorant of what Masonry as a whole
is, that when they are told the simple truth
respecting it, they really believe that what
you tell them is alie. I am receiving letters
from this class of Freemasons, accusing me of
lying and misrepresentation, which accusations
I charitably ascribe to ignorance. To such I
say, Wait, gentlemen, until you are better
informed upon the subject, and you will hold
a different opinion.

Thave quoted from Salem Town showing that
he claims that Solomon established the institu-
tion by divine authority—that Town claims for
it all that is claimed for Christianity as a saving
religion, I might show that others of their
standard writers set up the same claim. Now
Iam unwilling to believe that these writers


FREEMASONRY. 219


are hypocrites. It must be that they have
been imposed upon as I was. They were igno-
rant of the origin of Freemasonry. Perhaps
this was not strange, especially as regards
Mr. Town; for until within the last half cen-
tury this matter has not been searched to the
bottom. But certainly there is now no excuse
for the ignorant or dishonest assertions that
are so often made by Freemasons. Such pre-
tenses palmed off, as they now often are, upon
those whose occupation or other causes forbid
their examination of the subject, ought to
arouse the righteous indignation of every
honest citizen. I say it ought to do so; yes,
and it must do so, when we see our dear young
men lured by false pretenses in crowds into
this snare of Satan. They get drawn in and
committed, and, as we see, are afraid to be
convinced of their error and become uncandid
and will not honestly examine the subject.
They will shun the light when it is offered.
Can men be saved in this state of mind ?


220 FREEMASONRY.


CEASE bike Ve


THE ARGUMENT THAT GREAT AND
GOOD MEN HAVE BEEN AND ARE
FREEMASONS, EXAMINED.


a sons to claim as belonging to their
WY fraternity a great many wise and good
men.

As I have shown in a former number, Ma-
sonry itself claims to have been founded by
Solomon, and to have been patronized by St.
John. Their lodges are dedicated to St. John
and Zerubbabel, as I have shown; and Solomon
figures more or less prominently in a great
number of their degrees. Now it has already
been shown by their highest authorities that
this claim of having been founded by Solomon
and patronized by St. John is utterly without
foundation. Strange to tell, while it claims to
have always been one and identical, and that it
never has been changed, still on the very face
of the different degrees it is shown that the
great majority of them are of recent origin.
If, as their best historians assert, Speculative


FREEM ASONRY. 991


Freemasonry dates no further back than the
eighteenth century, of course, the claim of
Freemasons that their institution was estab-
lished and patronized by inspired men can
command no respect or confidence.

But, if this claim is false, what reason have
we to have confidence in their assertions that
so many great and good men of modern times
were Freemasons. Investigation will prove
that this claim is to a very great extent with-
out foundation. It has been asserted here
with the utmost confidence, over and over
again, that Bishop McIlvaine was a Freemason.
But haying recently been written to on the
subject, he replied that he never was a Free-
mason.

Again, it is no doubt true that many men
have joined them, and, when they have taken
a sufficient number of degrees to have the
impression entirely removed from their minds
that there is any secret in Freemasonry worth
knowing, they have become disgusted with its
shams, its hypocrisies, its falsehoods, its oaths
and its ceremonies, its puerilities and its blas-
phemies; and they have paid no further atten-
tion to it.

Freemasons have paraded the fact that Gen.
Washington was a Mason before the public.
The following conclusion of a letter from him


222 FREEMASONRY.


will speak for him, and show how little he had
to do with Masonry. Before his death he
warned the whole country to beware of secret
societies. The letter alluded to is dated
“Mt. Vernon, September 25,1798.” Here we
have its conclusion. It needs no comment:

“T have little more to add than thanks for
your wishes, and favorable sentiments, except
to correct an error you have run into of my
presiding over the English lodges in this coun-
try. The fact is I preside over none, nor have
I been in one more than once or twice within
the last thirty years. I believe, notwithstand-
ing, that none of the lodges in this country
are contaminated with the principles ascribed
to the society of the Iluminati.

“Signed, GEORGE WASHINGTON.”

I might quote numerous instances in which
good men have at first hesitated, and finally
refused to go any further in Masonry, and
have threatened to expose the whole of it to
the world. Whoever will read Elder Stearns’
little books on Masonry will find examples
of this.

But why should Freemasons lay so much
stress on the fact that many good men have
been Freemasons? It has always been the
favorite method of supporting a bad institu-
tion to claim as its patrons the wise and good.


FREEMASONRY. 223


This argument might have been used with
great force, and doubtless was, in favor of
idolatry in the time of Solomon and the
prophets. Several of the kings of Israel were
idolaters, as well as the queens and the royal
family generally.

The great mass cf the prophets, and religious
teachers, and great men of the nation, lapsed
into idolatry. Nearly all the learning, and
wealth and influence of the whole nation could
be appealed to asrejecting Christ.. Those who
received him were but afew fishermen, with
some of the lowest of the people. Now what
a powerful argument was this! If the argu-
ment of Masons be of any value, how over-
whelming an argument must this have been
against the claims of our Lord Jesus Christ!

Why the rejecters of Jesus could quote all
the great men_of the nation, and the pious
men, and the wise men, as decidedly opposed
_to his claims! The same was true after his
death and resurrection for a great while. The
question would often arise: “Do any of the
rulers believe on him %”

An institution is not to be judged by the
conduct of a few of its members who might
have been either worse or better than its
principles. Christianity, ¢ g., is not to be
judged by the conduct of particular professed
Christians; but by its laws, its principles, by


224 FREEMASONRY,


what it justifies and by what it condemns.
Christianity condemns all iniquity. It abhors
covering up iniquity. In the case of its great-
est and most prominent professors, it exposes
and denounces their sin, and never justifies it.
But Masonry, on the other hand, is a secret
work of darkness. It requires its members to
take an oath to cover up each other’s sins. It
requires them to swear, under the most awful
penalties, that they will seek the condign
punishment of every one who in any instance
violates any point of their obligation. It,
therefore, justifies the murder of those who
betray its secrets.

Masons consistently justified the murder of
Morgan, as everybody in this country knows
who has paid any attention to the subject.

This is not inconsistent with their princi-
ples. Indeed, itis the very thing demanded,
the very thing promised under oath.

But again: This same argument, by which
Masons are attempting to sustain their insti-
tution, was always resorted to to sustain the
practice of slaveholding.

Why, how many wise and good men, it was
said, were slaveholders. The churches and
ecclesiastical bodies at the North were full
of charity in respect to them. They could
not denounce slaveholding as a sin.


FREEMASONRY. 225


They would say that it was an evil; but for
along time they could not be persuaded to
pronounce it a moral evil, a sin. And why?
Why, because so many doctors of divinity
were slaveholders and were defending the
institution. Because a large portion of the
church, of nearly every denomination, were
involved in the abomination. “They are
good men,” it was said; “ they are great men—
we must be charitable.”

And so, when this horrid civil war came on,
these great and good men, that had sustained
the institution of slavery, sustained and stim-
ulated the war.

Many of them took up arms, and fought with
desperation to sustain the institution. But
what is thought now—at least throughout all
the North, and throughout all the Christian
world—of the great and good men who have
done this thing? Who does not now admit
that they were deluded? that they had any-
thing but the Spirit of Christ? that they were
in the hands of the Devil all along?

The fact is, this has always been the device
of those who have sustained any system of
wickedness. They have taken pains, in one
way and another, to draw into their ranks
men of reputation for wisdom and piety, men
of high standing in Church and State. A great


226 FREEMASONRY.


many of those who are claimed by Freema-
sons to be of their number never were Free-
masons at all. Others were entrapped into it,
and turned a “ cold shoulder” upon it, and
paid no more attention to it; but were ever
after claimed as Freemasons.

But there are great multitudes of Freema-
sons who have taken some of the degrees, and
have become heartily disgusted with it. But;
knowing that Freemasons are under oath to
persecute and even murder them if they pub-
licly renounce it and expose its secrets, they
remain quiet, say nothing about it, and go no
further with it; but are still claimed as Free-
masons. As soon as public sentiment is
enough aroused to make them feel safe in
doing what they regard as their solemn duty,
great numbers of them will no doubt publicly
renounceit. At present they are afraid to do
so. They are afraid that their business will
be ruined, their characters assailed, and their
lives at least put in jeopardy.

But it should be understood that, while it
may be true that there are many pious and
wise men belonging to the Masonic fraternity,
yet there are thousands of learned and pious
men who have renounced it, and thousands
more who have examined its claims, and who


FREEMASONRY. 227%


reject it as an imposture and as inconsistent
either with Christianity or good government.

It is sometimes said: “Those men that
renounced Masonry in the days of Morgan are
dead. There are now thousands of living
witnesses. Why should we take the testimony
of the dead instead of that of the living? The
living we know; the dead we do not know.”

To this ] answer, first: There are thousands
of renouncing Masons still living who reite-
rate their testimony on all proper occasions
against the institution. Many of them we
know, or may know; and they are not dead
witnesses, but living. Now, if it was wicked-
‘ness that led those men to renounce Freema-
sonry and publish its secrets, how is it that
no instance has ever occurred in which a se-
ceding Freemason has renounced and de-
nounced his renunciation, and gone back into
’ the ranks of Freemasons? I have never heard
of such a case. It is well for the cause of
truth that this question has come up again
before the Masons that renounced the institu-
tion in the days of Morgan were all dead. It
is well that hundreds and thousands of them
are still alive, and are still living witnesses,
bearing their steady and unflinching testimony
agains* the institution.

But, again: The present living witnesses


#


228 FREEMASONRY.


who testify in its behalf, let it be remember-
ed, are interested witnesses. They still adhere
to the institution. They are under oath not
to speak against it, but in every way to sup-
port it. Of what value, then, is their testi-
mony in its favor?

The fact is, we have their secrets publish-
ed; and these books speak for themselves.
Let the living or the dead say what they may,
the truth is established that these books truly
reveal Masonry; and by this revelation let
the institution stand or fall.

If any thing can be established by human
testimony, it is established that Bernard’s
“Light on Masonry” has revealed Masonry
substantially as it is. Bernard is still living.
He is an old man; but he has recently said:
“What I have written I have written on this
subject. I have nothing to add, and I have
nothing to retract.” And there are still hun-
dreds and thousands of men who know that
he has published the truth. How vain and
frivolous, then, is the inquiry, “Why should
we not take the testimony of living rather
than of dead witnesses?’ The prophets and
apostles are dead. Why not take the testi-
mony of living skeptics that we know? Some
of them are learned and respectable men.
Alas! if dead men are not to be believed!


FREEMASONRY. 229


CAS ear ey) EX Vi


MASONIC OATHS ARE UNLAWFUL AND
VOID.


ECAUSE, Ist, they are forbidden by
<3 Ohrist. Matt. v.34-387. Whatever ma
ACL be said of oaths administered by mag-
istrates for governmental purposes, it can not
be reasonably doubted that this teaching
prohibits the taking of extrajudicial oaths,
But Masonic oaths are extrajudicial.

2. Because they are awfully profane. “Thou
shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God
in vain. Exod. xx. 7. Certainly both the admin-
istering and taking of these oaths are taking
the name of God in vain.

3. Because they swear to do unlawful things.
Lev. xix. 12.

1. We have seen that all Masons forswear
themselves. This is expressly forbidden by
God. Matt. v. 33. In the oath of the Entered
Apprentice, the candidate swears to conceal
and never reveal any part or parts, point or
points of the secrets of Masonry which he’
has received, is about to receive, or that he
may hereafter receive. Here he forswears
20


230 FREEMASONRY.


himself, and binds himself to conceal and
never reveal secrets of which he as yet has
no knowledge. This he has no right to do.
It is wicked to take this oath, and it must be
repented of and renounced or forgiveness is
impossible.

2. They swear to conceal each other’s
crimes. This we have seen. This is a con-
spiracy against all good government in Church
and State. Is not this wicked ?

3. They swear to deliver a brother Royal
Arch Mason out of any difficulty and to es-
pouse his cause so far as to extricate him from
the same, if in their power, whether he be
right or wrong. Is not this wicked? How
this oath must lead to the defeat of the exe-
cution of law. It has defeated the ends of
justice often, as every intelligent Mason may
and ought to know.

4. They swear to give political preferment
to a Mason, because he is a Mason, over one
of equal qualifications, who is not a Mason.
This is swearing to be partial. But is it not
wicked to be partial? Can an oath to be par-
tial make partiality a virtue? By swearing to
do wrong can a man make it his duty, and,
therefore, right to do wrong? Wo indeed.

5. They swear to persecute all who violate
Masonic oaths as long as they live—to ruin


FREEMASONRY. 231


their reputation, derange their business, and,
if they go from place to place, to follow them
with representations of being worthless vaga-
bonds. Is not this a promise under oath to do
wickedly? Suppose those who violate Masonic
oaths are enemies of Masonry, as well they
may be, and as they ought to be, is it right to
seek, in any way, to ruin them? Is this loving
anenemy? Is not such persecution forbidden
by every precept of both law and Gospel?
This course is, in accordance with the tradition
of the elders, strongly denounced by Christ.
Matt. v.33: “Again, ye have heard that it hath
been said by them of old time, Thou shalt not
forswear thyself, but shalt perform unto the
Lord thine oaths.” But it is in direct opposi-
tion to his requirement. Matt. v 44: “But I
say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them
that curse you, do good to them that hate you,
and pray for them which despitefully use you,
and persecute you.”

6. They swear to seek the death or condign
punishment of all who violate Masonic oaths.
This we have seen! But is not this abomina-
ble wickedness? Is it not murder in intention,
and, therefore, really murder, whether they
succeed or not? To be sure it is.

7. They swear to seek revenge and to take
vengeance on those who violate Masonic oaths)


232 FREEMASONRY.


and to avenge the treason, as they call it, by
the death of the traitor. This, also, we have
seen. Now, is not this the perfection of wick.
edness? Ought not Masons to be put under
bonds to keep the peace?

8. They swear to support Freemasonry, an
institution, as we have seen, that ought not to
exist in any community. These are only some
of the reasons for pronouncing the oaths of
Freemasonry utterly unlawful.


MASONIC OATHS ARE NULL AND VOID.


1. Because they are obtained by fraud. The
candidate for the first degree is assured by the
master, in the most solemn manner, when the
candidate is on his knees and about to take
the oath, there is nothing in it inconsistent
with his duty either to God or to man. But he
finds, after taking and reflecting upon it, that
he has made promises inconsistent with his
duty both to God and man. This, of itself,
makes the oath null.

2. They are void because they pledge the
candidate to sin against God and man. Ist.
By swearing to commit a sin, a man can not
make it his duty, and, therefore, right to do
wrong. He can not make sin holiness, or
crime a virtue, by taking an oath to do it.
¥orty men took an oath that they would


FREEMASONRY. 933


neither eat nor drink until they hed killed
Paul. Were they under moral obligation,
therefore, to kill him? If they were, it was
their duty. If it was their duty, their killing
him would have been a holy act. Who does
not see the absurdity of this? To keep a
wicked promise or oath is only adding sin to sin-
But it maybe said that we are required to per-
form our vows. Yes, when we vow to do what
is right, hut not when we vow to do what is
wrong. Thisis not only the doctrine of the
Bible, but, also, of all the able writers on moral
philosophy. It is, indeed, a self-evident truth.
An oath to do wrong is sin. To perform it is
adding sin to sin. All oaths to do wrong, or to
refrain from doing right, are nw//.


ALL FREEMASONS OUGHT TO RENOUNCE THEIR MA-
SONIC OATHS,


1. Because they are profane and wicked.

2. Because they ought to repent the taking
or them.

8. But repentance consists in heart-renunci-
ation of them. A man can not repent of,
without forsaking them.

4. If not repented of and. forsaken, z. ¢., re-
nounced, the sin can not be forgiven.

5. Heart-renunciation must produce life-re-
nunciation of them.


234 FREEMASONRY.


6. A sin is not repented of while it is con-
cealed and not confessed to those who have
been injured by it.

7. A sin against society or against individ-
uals can not be forgiven, when just confession
and restitution are withheld.

8. Masonic oaths are a conspiracy against
God and man, and are not repented of while
adhered to.

9. They are adhered to, while heart-renun-
ciation is withheld.

10. Refusing to renounce is adherence.

11. Adherence makes them partakers of
the crimes of Freemasons— partakers of
other men’s sins.” Because, to adhere is to
justify their oaths and the keeping and ful-
fillment of them. But to justify their crimes,
the murder of Morgan for example, is to par-
take of the guilt of his murderers.

12. While a Mason adheres his word can
not be credited on questions relating to the
secrets of Masonry.

13. Nor can his testimony be believed
against one who has violated Masonic oaths,
because he is sworn to ruin his reputation,
and to represent him as a worthless vaga-
bond.

14. An adhering Mason is a dangerous man
in society. If he does as he is sworn to do,


|


FREEMASONRY, 935


is he not a dangerous man? If he does not
do what he is sworn to do, and yet does not
renounce his oath, he is a dangerous man, be-
cause he violates an oath, the obligation of
which he acknowledges. Is not he a danger-
ous man who disregards the solemnity of an
oath? But, perhaps, he is convinced that he
ought not to do what he has sworn to do, and,
therefore, does not do it, but still he adheres
in the sense that he will not confess and re-
nounce the sinfulness of the obligation. Is
not that a dangerous man who sees the wrong
of an oath an1 will not renounce it.

15. While he adheres to his Masonic oaths,
he ought not to be trusted with the office of
a magistrate. How should he, if he means to
perform his Masonic vows?

16. Nor, while he adheres, should he be
trusted with the office of sheriff, marshal, or
constable. If he intends to perform his Ma-
sonic vows, it is madness to trust him with an
office in Church or State.

17. If and while he adheres, he ought not to
be received as a witness or juror when a Free-
mason is a party. This has been ruled as law.

18. Nor should he have power to appoint
officers, as he will surely unduly favor Masons,

19. Nor should he have the control of funds
and the bestowment of governmental patron-


236 FREEM ASONRY.


age. This he will certainly abuse, if he keeps
and performs his vows.

20. Norshould he be intrusted with the par-
doning power. I wish it could be Known in
how many instances Freemasons have been
pardoned and turned loose upon the public
by governors and presidents who were Free-
masons, and who were sworn to deliver them
from any difficulty, whether right or wrong.

21. Nor should he be a post-master, as he
will surely abuse his office to favor Masonry,
and to persecute anti-Masons, if he keeps his |
vows. Of this we are having abundant proof. | |

22, While he adheres, his testimony against |
renouncing Masons ought not to be credited, |
because he has sworn to ruin.their reputation |
and their business, and, until their death, to |
represent them to others as worthless vaga- |
bonds. Is a man’s testimony against another |
worthy of credit, when he is thus sworn to |
hold him up to the world? We have no right |
to receive such testimony. It is the greatest |
injustice to credit the testimony of one who)
has taken and adheres to this oath, if he tes- |
tifies against a renouncing Mason. |

23. Those Masons who have taken and ad-
here to the vow to thus persecute, and the
vow to avenge the treason of violating Ma-
sonic oaths by the death of the traitor, should


FREEMASONRY. 237


be held to bail to keep the peace. If they in-
tend to perform their vows, they are eminently
dangerous persons, and should be imprisoned
or held to bail. Let no one say that this is
harsh. Indeed, it is not. It is only common
sense and common justice. Only remember
what they are sworn to do, and that they intend
to perform their vows, and then tell me is it
safe and just that such men should be at
large, and not even be put under bonds not to
fulfill their vows. We must take the ground,
either that they will not fulfill their vows, or
we must hold that they ought not to be at
large without adequate bail. I am aware that
some will say that this is a harsh and extreme
conclusion. But pray let me ask do you not
feel and say this because you do not believe
that there is real danger of Freemasons doing
what they have sworn to do? If they have
sworn as Bernard and others represent, and if
they really intend to fulfill their vows, and if
you admit this, is my conclusion harsh and
extreme? When no occasion arises, calling
for the fulfillment of their horrid oaths, they
appear to be harmless and even good citizens.
But let any man read the history of the ab-
duction and murder of Morgan, as found in
“Light on Masonry,” and see how many men
were engaged init. Let him understand how


21


938 FREEMASONRY.


this horrid murder was justified by the Grand
Lodge, and by many respectable citizens. Let
him ponder the fact that the men engaged in
that affair were accounted respectable and
good citizens; that a number of them were
men high in office and in public confidence,
and that the conspiracy extended over a wide
territory, and then let him say whether, if an
occasion arise demanding their action, they
will prove to be law-abiding citizens, or, if
they will not, as they have often done before,
set at naught any law of God and man, and,
if need be, reach their end through the blood
of their victim.

But some will say that this is representing
Freemasonry as infamous, and holding it up
to the disgust, contempt, and indignation of
mankind. I reply, I have not misrepresented
il, as it is revealed in the books which I have


been examining. Remember, it is with Ma- |


sonry as there revealed that I have to deal.


If a truthful representation of it excites the |
contempt, disgust, and indignation of the
public toward it—if to rightly represent Free- |
masonry is to render it ¢nfamous, I can not.
help it. The fault, if any,isnot mine. I have)


revealed nothing. [have only called attention


to facts of common concern to all honest citi- |


zens. Let the infamy rest where it belongs.


FREEMASONRY. 239


CEASE eee (xs Vel


WHY FREEMASONS RESORT TO THREATS
AND REFUSE TO DISCUSS THEIR PRIN-
CIPLES.


HERE are many aspects of this subject
that need to be thoroughly considered
by all men. For example, the bearing
of this institution upon domestic happiness is
of great importance.

The stringent secrecy enjoined and main-
tained at the hazard of one’s life, is really in-
consistent with the spirit of the marriage con-
tract. It is really an insult to a wife for a
husband to go and pledge himself to conceal
from his wife that which he freely communi-
cates to strangers. Suppose that wives should
get up lodges, spend their money and their
time in secret conclave, absent themselves
from home, and swear to keep their proceed-
ings entirely from their husbands; and sup-
pose that such organizations should be made
permanent, and extend throughout the length
and breadth of the land, would husbands en-
dure this? Would they think it right?


240 FREEMASONRY.


In short, if wives should do what husbands
do, would not husbands rebel, think themselves
abused, and insist upon such a course being
entirely and forever abandoned? Indeed they
would! How can aman look his wife in the
face after joining a Masonic lodge? I have
recently received several letters from the
wives of Masons complaining of this:—that
their husbands had joined the lodge and paid
their money, and were spending their time,
and concealing their doings and their princi-
ples from their wives. This is utterly unjust.
It is shameful; and no honorable man ean re-
flect upon it without feeling that he wrongs
his wife.

Of late, partly to appease women, and partly
to give the female relatives of Masons certain
signs and tokens by which they may make
themselves known as the wives or daughters,
Sisters or mothers, of Freemasons, they are
conferring certain side degrees upon women.
Of this Freemasons themselves—that is the


more honorable among them—are complain-
ing as an innovation, and as a thing justly to |


be complained of by outsiders. And observe
that they ask, what if these daughters or sis-


ters of Masons, who are taking these side de- |


grees, should marry men who are not Masons,
and who are opposed to the institution—what


}


|
|
|


FREEMASONRY. 241


would be the consequence of this? You ad-
minister, they say, the degrees for the sake of
preserving domestic peace; and here, on the
other hand, it would produce domestic discord.

But again, it-should be considered that Ma-
sonry is an institution of vast proportions, and
of such a nature that it will not allowits prin-
ciples to be discussed.

It works in the dark. And instead of stand-
ing or falling according to its character and
tendencies, when brought to the light, when
thoroughly discussed and understood by the
public, it closes the door against all discus-
sion, shrouds itself in midnight, and its argu-
ment is assassination. Now, what have we
here in a republican government? A set of
men under oath to assist each other, and even
to conceal each other’s crimes, embracing and
acting upon principles that are not to be dis-
cussed !

Immediately after the publication of the
first number of my articles in the /ndependent,
on the subject of Masonry, I received a threat-
ening letter from the city of New York, vir-
tually threatening me with assassination. I
have since received several letters of the most
abusive character from Freemasons, simply
because I discuss and expose their principles.
Now, if their principles can not bear the light,


942 FREEMASONRY.


they never should be tolerated. It is aninsult
to any community for a set of men to band
themselves together to keep each other's se-
crets, and to aid each other in a great variety
of ways, and refuse to have their principles
known and discussed, whilst their only argu-
ment is a dagger, a bullet, and a bowie knife,
instead of truth and reason. Indeed, it is well-
known throughout the length and breadth of
the land that Masonry is so determined not to
have its principles discussed, that men are
afraid to discuss them. They expect from the
very nature of Masonry, and from the revela-
tions that it has made of itself, to be perse-
cuted, and perhaps murdered, if they attempt
to discuss the principles and usages of that
institution. Now, is such a thing as this to be
tolerated in a free government? Why how
infinitely dangerous and shocking is this!
Everything else may be discussed. All
governmental proceedings, the characters of
public men, all institutions of learning, all
benevolent societies, and indeed everything
else in the world may be discussed, and crit-
icised, and held up for public examination; —
but Masonry, forsooth, must not be touched.
It must work in the dark. All the moneys
received by charitable institutions must be
reported; and the manner in which they dis-


FREEMASONRY. 243


pose of every dollar that they receive must be
held up before the public for examination.
Every one sees the importance of this, and
knows that it is right. But Freemasonry will
make no report of its funds. They will not
tellus what they do with them. They will not
allow themselves to be called in question.
No, that institution must not be ventilated
upon pain of persecution unto death.

Now, it is enough to make a man’s blood
boil with indignation that such an institution
as this should exist in the land. And what is
most astonishing is, that members of the
Christian Church, and Christian ministers,
should sympathize with, and even unite them-
selves to, such an institution as this.

Suppose the church should conduct in this
manner, and the Christian Church should re-
ceive its members in secret, and such oaths
should be administered to them. Suppose
Christianity would not allow its principles to
be discussed, would not allow itself to come
to the light, should use threats of assassina-
tion, and should actually resort to assassina-
tion to establish itself, and should thus create
a feeling of terror throughout the whole
world so that no man would dare to speak
against it, to ventilate it, and show up its
principles,—what would be said of Christian-


944 FREEMASONRY,


ity, should it, like Freemasonry, take such a
course as this ?

The fact is, that Freemasonry is the most
anomalous, absurd, and abominable institution
that can exist in a Christian country; and is,
on the face of it, from the fact that it will
not allow its principles to be discussed and
divulged, a most dangerous thing in human
society. In nearly all the letters that I am
receiving on this subject—and they are nu-
merous—astonishment is expressed, and fre-
quently gratitude and praise to God, that a
man is found who dares publicly to discuss
and expose the principles of the institution.
Now, what is this? Have we an institution,
the ramifications of which are entwining
themselves with every fiber of our govern-
ment and our institutions, our civil and reli-
gious liberties, of which the whole country is
so much afraid that they dare not speak the
truth concerning it ?

What is this, thrust in upon human society
and upon Christian communities, that can not
be so much as discussed and its principles
brought to light without threats of persecu-
tion and assassination? What honest man
cap witness such a state of things as this in
our government without feeling his indigna
tion enkindled ?


FREEMASONRY. 245


Everything else may be discussed, may be
brought to the light, may be held up to the
public for their verdict; but Freemasonry
must not be touched. Other institutions must
stand or fall in the light of reason and of
sound morality. If they are sustained at all
they must be sustained by argument, by logic,
by standing the test of thorough criticism.
But Masonry must stand, not by argument,
not by logic, not by sound reason, but must
be sustained by persecution and murder. And
so universally, as I have already said, is this
known and assumed, as to strike men in every
part of the land with such terror, that they
dare not speak their minds about it.

And now, are we in this country to hold our
peace? to hold out our hands and have the
shackles put upon them? Is the press to be
muzzled, and the whole country to be awed
and kept under the feet of this institution, so
that no man shall dare to speak his mind?
God forbid! “Every plant,’ says Christ,
“which my heavenly Father hath not planted
shall be rooted up.” The works of darkness
shall be dragged to the light; and the power
of this institution must be broken by a thor-
ough expose of its oaths, its principles, its
spirit and tendency. Afraid to speak out
against such an abomination a* this! Re-


246 FREEMASONRY.


member that he that would save his life by
concealing the truth, and refusing to embrace
and defend it, shall lose it.

Again, Freemasonry is a most intolerant
and intolerable despotism.

Let any one examine their oaths, and see
what implicit obedience they pledge to the
great dignitaries, and Masters, and High
Priests of their lodges, and they will see what
an institution this is in a republican govern-
ment. There is no appeal from the decision
of the Master of a lodge. In respect to every-
thing in the lodge, his word is law. In a re-
cent number of the “ Vational and Freema-
son,” which fell into my hands, the editor
asserts that there is no appeal to the lodge
from the decision of the Master of the lodge,
and that he should allow none. In the as-
cending scale of their degrees, they swear to
render implicit obedience to the grand lodges,
and the higher orders above them, and this
beforehand. They are not allowed to ques-
tion the propriety of those decisions at all.
They are not allowed to discuss, or to have
any voice or vote in regard to those decrees.
There is not in the world a more perfect and
frightful despotism than Freemasonry is from
beginning to end. Now, think of the great
number of Freemasons in this country that
are becoming accustomed to yield this im-


FREEMASONRY. Q47


plicit obedience to arbitrary power, a one
man power, running through every lodge and
chapter throughout the whole entangled sys
tem. And this institution is penetrating every
community, selecting its men, and enforcing
their obedience to arbitrary power throughout
this whole republican country. And will not
the country awake to this great wrong and
this great danger? A friend of mine, a min-
ister of the Gospel, writes me that he had
been himself a Mason. He was urged to join
the institution, as I was myself; but he re-
nounced it many years ago, and supposed that
it was dead. But some fifteen years since he
found it reviving in the neighborhood where
he was living, and he preached a sermon ex-
posing it. That very week they burned him
in effigy at his own gate; and that even now
he could not preach against it and expose it
without being set upon and persecuted he
knows not to what extent.

And this, then, is the way for Masons to
meet this question! If allowed to go on they
will soon resort to mobs, as the slaveholders
and their sympathizers did; and it will be
found that Masonry can not be spoken against
without mobs arising to disperse any assem-
bly that may meet for the examination of the
subject. If fifteen years ago a minister of the


948 FREEMASONRY.


Gospel could be burned in effigy before his
own gate, for bringing this institution to the
light, and if now threats of assassination come
from the four winds of heavenif a man speaks
or writes the truth concerning it, if let alone
how long will it be before it will have its foot
upon the neck of the whole nation, so that it
will be sure to cost any man his life who dares
to rebuke it?

But why do Freemasons take this course ?
Why do they decline to discuss, and resort to
threats of violence? JI answer first, for the
same reason that slaveholders did the same.

Many years ago John Randolph, with a
shake of his long finger, informed the Con-
gress of the United States, that slavery should
not be discussed there. At the South they
would not allow tracts to be circulated, nor a
word to be spoken against the institution. They
resorted to every form of violence to prevent
it. And who does not know the reason why ?
Their abominable institution would not bear
the light, and they knew it right well. Free-
masons know very well that they can not jus-
tify their institution before an enlightened
public. I mean, those of them who are well-
informed know this.

Multitudes of them are so ignorant as to
feel quite sure that they are right, and that


FREEMASONRY. 249


their institution is what it protesses to be.
The well-informed among them know better;
and those who would naturally be expected
to discuss the question, if it were discussed,
know that they can not stand their ground.
They can not justify their horrid oaths, with
their barbarous penalties. They know that
they can not establish their false claims to
great antiquity.

The ignorant or dishonest among them will
vapor, and set forth their ridiculous preten-
sions to antiquity; and will try to persuade us
that God was a Freemason when He created
the Universe, and that all the ancient worthies
were Freemasons. But the well-informed
among them know perfectly well that there is
not the shadow of truth in all this pretension,
and that their claim to great antiquity is a lie,
and nothing but a lie, from beginning to end.
They know also that the claims of the institu-
tion to benevolence are false, and can not be
sustained, and that there is not a particle of
benevolence in their institution.

Again, they know very well that the claim
- of Masonry to be a saving religion is a false
claim; and that its claim to be substantially
the Christian religion is without the least
foundation. They know also thatits professions
are false in regard to the truth of history; and


250 FREEMASONRY.


that its claim to be a depository of the sciences
and arts is without foundation.

They know very well that Masonry has no
just claims to be the light of the world in re-
gard to any of its pretensions. They know
that the secrecy which it enjoins can not be
defended, and that it has no right to exist as
a secret, oath-bound institution. They know
that this oath-bound secrecy can not be justi-
fied before an enlightened public; that there
is nothing in Freemasonry to justify their
oaths or penalties, and that there is nothing
in it that deserves the respect of the public.

They are well aware that they can not jus-
tify their pompous titles, their odious cere-
monies, their false teachings, their shameful
abuses of the Word of God; and they are
ashamed to attempt to justify the puerilities
on the one hand, or the blasphemies that
abound on the other.

Any one who will examine Richardson’s
“ Masonic Monitor,” will find in it diagrams of
the lodges and of many of the ceremonies;
and if anybody wishes to see how ridiculous,
absurd, and profane many of their ceremonies
are, letihim examine that work.

The reason of their declining all discussion,
and resorting to threats of violence, is mani-
fest enough. It is sagacious in them to keep


FREEMASONRY. 251


in the dark, and to awe people, if they can,
by threats; because they have no argument,
no history, no anything that can justify them
in the course they take.

Shame on an institution that resorts to such
a defense as this? But it can not live where
the press and speech are-free; and this its de-
fenders know right well. If freedom of speech
is allowed on the subject, and the press is
allowed to discuss and thoroughly to ventilate
it, they know full well that the institution can
not exist. The fact is, that Freemasonry must
die, or liberty must die. These two things can
not exist together. Freemasons have already
sold their liberty, and put themselves under
an iron despotism; and there is not one in
a thousand of them that dares to speak against,
the institution, or really to speak his mind.

I have just received a letter from one of
them, which reads as follows: “Dear Sir,—I
merely write you as a man and professed
Christian to say that you are doing God serv-
ice in your attacks upon the institution of
Masonry. I am a Mason, but have long since
been convinced that it is a wicked, blasphe-
mous institution, and that the Church of Christ
suffers from this source more than from any
other. You know that the oaths and scenes
of the lodge are most shamefully wicked; and


252 FREEMASONRY.


a Christian man’s character, if he leaves :
is not safe in the community where he lives.
You can make what use you please of this
but, perhaps, my name and place of residence
had better not be made public, for I fear for
my property and my person.” This is the way
that multitudes of Freemasons feel. They have
sold their liberty, and they dare not speak out.
Shall we all sell our liberties, and allow Ma-
sonry to stifle all discussion by a resort to vio-
lence and assassination? Threats are abun-
dant; and they go as far as they dare do in
executing their threats.

In some places, where Freemasons are nu-
merous and less on their guard, I am informed
that they do not hesitate to say that they in-
tend to have a Masonic government, peaceably
if they can. That this is the design of many
of the leaders in this institution, there can
be no rational doubt in the minds of those
who are well informed. The press, to a great
extent, is already either bribed or afraid to
speak the truth on this subject; and, so far as
I can learn, there are but few secular or relig-
ious papers open to its discussion. Now,
what a state of things is this! A few years
ago it was as much as a man’s life was worth
to write anything against slavery, or to speak
against it, in the Southern States. And has it


- *


FREERMASONRY. 2538


a 4

c ’ to this, that the North are to be made
slaves, and that an institution is to be sustain-
ed in our midst that will not allow itself to be

- ventilated? For one Ido not feel willing at
present to part with my liberty in this respect
—although I am informed that a Mason, not
far from here, intimated that I might be way-
laid and murdered. It matters not. I will
not compromise the liberty of free speech on
a question of such importance to save my life,
Why should I? I must confess that I have felt
amazed and mortified when so many have ex-
pressed astonishment that I dared to speak
plainly on this subject, and write my thoughts
and views.

Among all the letters that I have received
on this subject, I do not recollect one in which
the writer does not admonish me not to pub-
lish his name. And this in republican Amer-
ica! A man’s life, property and character
not safe if he speaks the truth in regard to an
institution which is aiming to overshadow the
whole land, and to have everything its own
way! as the writer of the letter from which I
have just. made an extract says, that a man’s
character is not safe if he speaks the truth
concerning Freemasonry. Is not this abomin-


able?
So well do I understand that Masons are


954 FREEMASONRY.


sworn to persecute, and to represent every
one who abardons their institution as a vile
vagabond, and to say all manner of evil against
him, that I do not pretend to believe what
they say of that class of men.

When the question of Freemasonry was first
forced upon us in our church, and I was obliged
to preach upon the subject and read from Ber-
nard’s “ Light on Masonry,” I found before I got
home that Elder Bernard had been so misrep-
resented and slandered that people were.say-
ing, “He is not a man to be trusted.” Who
does not know that whoever has dared to re-
nounce that institution, and publish its secrets
to the world, has either been murdered, or
slandered and followed with persecution in a
most unrelenting manner ?


FREEMASONRY. 255


ee oe ey) ke


RELATIONS OF MASONRY TO THE
CHURCH OF CHRIST.


SIE
WE are now prepared to consider the
page question of the relation of Freema-
“25 sonry to the Church of Christ. On
this question I remark:

1st. God holds the church and every branch
of it, responsible for its opinion and action in
accordance with the best light, which, in his
providence, is afforded them. ‘This, indeed, is
law universal, equally applicable to all moral
agents, at all times and in all places. But
at present I consider its application to the
Church of God. If any particular branch of
the church has better means of information,
and therefore more light on moral questions,
than another branch, its responsibility is
greater, in proportion to its greater means of
information. Such a branch of the church is
bound to take a higher and more advanceds
position in Christian life and duty, to bear
a fuller and higher testimony against every


256 FREEMASONRY.


form of iniquity, than that required by less
favored and less informed branches of the
church. They are not to wait till other
branches of the church have received their
light, before they bear a testimony and pur-
sue a course in accordance with their own de-
gree of information.

2d. While Masonry was a secret, the church
had no light, and no responsibility respecting it.
Although individual members of the church,
‘ were Freemasons, as a body, she knew noth-
ing of Masonry; therefore she could say noth-
ing of it, except as its results appeared to
be revealed in the lives of individuals; and,
in judging from this source of evidence, the
church could not decide, if the lives of the
members were good or bad, whether it was
Freemasonry that made them ‘so; because, of
its nature, designs, principles, oaths, doc-
trines, secret practices, she knew nothing.
Hence God did not require the church to
bear any testimony on the subject as long as.
Masoniy was a secret. The world did not
expect the church to take any action, or to
bear any testimony on the subject, as long
as Masonry was a thing unknown, except to
the initiated. In those circumstances the
unconverted world did not expect any tes-
timony from the church, and they had no


FREEEMASONRY. 267


right to expect it. The well-known fact, that
many professed Christians were Freemasons,
was then no disgrace to the Church of God,
because the character of Freemasonry was
not known.

3d. But the state of the case is now sreatly.
changed. Freemasonry is now revealed. It
is no longer a secret to any who wish to be
informed. Its nature, character, aims, oaths,
principles, doctrines, usages, are in print, and
the books in which they are revealed are
scattered broadcast over the land. As long
ago as 1826, Wm. Morgan published verbatim
the first three degrees of Masonry. That
these degrees were faithfully published as
they were known, and taken in the lodges,
no man can truthfully deny. Two, or more
spurious editions of this work have been pub-
lished, for the sake of deceiving the public.
To obtain a correct edition of this work is at
present difficult. Just previous to the pub-
lication of this work, Elder Stearns, a Baptist
minister, and a high Mason, one who had
taken many Masonic degrees, a man of good
character who is still living, had published a
volume entitled “An inquiry into the nature
and tendency of Speculative Freemasonry.”
In 1860 the same author published a volume
entitled “Letters on Freemasonry, addressed


958 FREEMASONRY.


chiefly to the Fraternity,” with an appendix.
He has recently published another volume,
entitled “A new chapter on Freemasonry.”
Soon after the publication of Morgan’s book,
already referred to, a body of seceding Masons,
appointed a committee of sixteen, if Ido not
mistake the number, upon which committee
were several ministers of Christ, to prepare
and publish a correct version of forty-eight
degrees of Freemasonry. Elder Bernard had
taken a large number of degrees, | know not
exactly how many. The degrees ordered to
be published by this committee were care-
fully collected and arranged and published
under the following title, “‘ Light on Masonry ?
A collection of all the most important docu-
ments on the subject of Speculative Masonry,
embracing the reports of the western commit-
tees in relation to the abduction of Wm. Mor-
gan, proceedings of conventions, orations,
essays, etc., etc, with all the degrees of the
order conferred in a Master’s lodge as written
by Capt. Wm. Morgan, all the degrees con-
ferred in the Royal Arch Chapter, and Grand
Encampmenof Knights Templar, with the
appendant orders as published by the conven-
tion of seceding Masons, held at Leroy, July 4th
and 5th, 1828. Also, a revelation of all the
degrees conferred in the Lodge of Perfection


FREEMASONRY. 259


- and fifteen degrees of a still higher order,
with seven French degrees, making forty-eight
degrees of Freemasonry, with notes and crit-
ical remarks by Elder David Bernard, of War-
saw, Genesee County, New York, once an inti-
mate Secretary of the Lodge of Perfection.
This book soon passed through seven editions.
An eighth, but an abridged edition, has been
recently published in Dayton, Ohio.” Since
the publication of Bernard’s book, a volume
has been published, entitled “ Richardson’s
Monitor of Freemasonry ;” being a practical
guide to the ceremonies in all the degrees
conferred in Masonic Lodges, Chapters, En-
campments, etc., explaining the signs, tokens
and grips, and giving all the words, pass-
words, sacred words, oaths, and hieroglyphics
used by Masons. The ineffable and historical
degrees are also given in full. By Jabez
Richardson, A. M. In this book are published
sixty-two Masonic degrees, with diagrams of
lodges, and drawings representing their signs
and ceremonies. Brother Avery Allyn has
also published-a large number of Masonic
degrees. The question of the reliability of
these works, I have discussed in a previous
number. I am a little more particular in
naming them in this place, for the information
of those who have not seen the books. The


260 FREEMASONRY.


substantial accord of all these authors, and
their reliability, seems to be established
beyond all reasonable question. Now, since
these revelations are made, and both the
church and the world are aware of what
Masonry really is, God demands, and the world
has a right to expect, that the church will
take due action and bear a truthful testimony
in respect to this institution. She can not
now innocently hold her peace. The light
has come. Fidelity to God, and to the souls
of men, require that the church, which is the
light of the world, should speak out, and
should take such action as will plainly reveal
her views of the compatibility or incompati-
bility of Freemasonry with the Christian relig-
ion. As God’s witnesses, as the pillar and
ground of the truth, the church is bound-to
give the trumpet no uncertain sound, upon
this question, that all men may know, whether,
in her judgment, an intelligent embracing and
determinate adhering to Freemasonry are com-
patible with a truthful profession of religion.

4th. The Church of Christ knows Masonry
through these books. This is the best and
most reliable source of information that we
can have, or can reasonably ask. We have
seen in a former number, that Freemasons do
not pretend that Freemasonry has been sub-


FREEMASONRY. 261


stantially altered since the publication of these
books, that we have the most satisfactory evi-
dence that it has not been, and can not be sub-
stantially changed. Let it therefore be dis-
tinctly understood, that the action and testi-
mony of the church respects Freemasonry as
it is revealed in these books, and not as éndt-
viduals may affirm of it, pro or con. By these
books we know it. By these books we judge
it, and let it be understood that whatever
action we take upon it, or whatever we say of
it, we both act and speak of Masonrv as it is
here revealed, and of no other Masonry or
thing, whatever. To this course, neither Ma-
sons nor any one else can justly take excep-
tions. - From all the testimony in the case, we
are shut up to this course. Let not Freema-
sons complain of this. These books certainly
reveal Masonry as it was forty years ago. If
it has been changed, the burden of proof is on
them, and inasmuch as they make no pretense
that Masonry has been reformed, and in view
of the fact, that they still maintain that they em-
brace all the principles and usages of ancient
Freemasonry, we are bound to speak. our
minds of Freemasonry as these books reveal
if.

5th. Judging then, from these revelations,
how can be fail to pronounce Fremasonry an


962 FREEMASONRY.


anti-Christian institution? For example, 1st.
We have seen that its morality is unchristian.
2a. Its oath-bound secrecy is unchristian. 3d.


The administration and taking of its oaths are.


unchristian, and a violation of a positive com-
mand of Christ. 4th. Masonic oaths pledge its
members to commit most unlawful and un-
christian deeds. «.To conceal each others
crimes. 0. To deliver each other from difficul-
ty whether right or wrong. e« To unduly
favor Masonry in political actions and in busi-
ness transactions. d.Its members are sworn
to retaliate, and persecute unto death, the
violators of Masonic obligation. e. Freema-
sonry knows no mercy, but swears its candi-
dates to avenge violations of Masonic ebliga-
tion even unto death. f. Its oaths are profane,
the taking of the name of God in vain. g.
The penalties of these oaths are barbarous
and even savage. A. Its teachings are false
and profane. 7. Its design is partial and sel-
fish. j. Its ceremonies are a mixture of puer-
ility and profanity. &. Its religion is Deistie.
l.Itis a false religion, and professes to save
men upon other conditions than those reveal-
ed in the Gospel of Christ. m. It is an enor-
mous falsehood. mn. It is a swindle, and ob-
tains money from its membership under false
pretenses, 0. It refuses all examination, and


FREEMASONRY. 263


veils itself under a mantle of oath-bound
secrecy. gp. It is a virtual conspiracy against
both Church and State. No one, therefore, has
ever undertaken, and for the plainest reasons
none will undertake, to defend Freemasonry
as it is revealed in these books. Their argu-
ments are threats, calumny, persecution, as-
sassination. Freemasons do not pretend that
Freemasonry, as revealed in these books, is
compatible’ with Christianity. I have not yet
known the first Freemason who would affirm
that an intelligent adherence to Freemason-
ry, as revealed in these books, is consistent
with a profession of the Christian religion.
But we know, if we can know anything from
testimony, that these books do truly reveal
Freemasonry. We have, then, the implied
testimony of Freemasons themselves, that the

Christian Church ought to have no fellowship
‘with Freemasonry as thus revealed, and that
those who adhere intelligently and determin-
ately to such an institution have no right to
be in the Christian Church. In our judgment
we are forced to the same conclusion, we can
not escape from it, we wish it were otherwise,
we therefore sorrowfully, but solemnly, pro-
nounce this judgment.

6th. Every local branch of the Church of
Christ is bound to examine this subject, and


264. FREEMASONRY.


pronounce upon this institution, according to
the best light they can get. God does not
allow individuals, or churches, to withhold
action, and the expression of their opinion,
until other churches are as enlightened as
themselves. We are bound to act up to our
own light, and to go as far in advance of others
as we have better means of information than
they. We have no right to say to God that
we will act according to our own “convictions,
when others become so enlightened that our
action will be popular and meet their ap-
proval.

Again: Those individuals and churches, who
have had the best means of information, owe
it to other branches of the church, and to the
whole world, to take action and to pronounce
upon the unchristian character of Freema-
sonry, as the most influential means within
their reach of arousing the whole church and
the world to an examination of the character
and claims of Freemasonry. If churches who
are known to have examined the subject with-
hold their testimony; if they continue to
receive persistent and intelligent Freemasons;
if they leave the public to infer that they see
nothing in Freemasonry inconsistent with a
creditable profession of the Christian religion,
it will be justly inferred by other branches of


FREEMASONRY. 265


the church, and by the world, that there is
nothing in it so bad, so dangerous and unchris-
tian as to call for their examination, action, or
testimony. Before the publishing of Morgan’s
book, the Baptist denomination, especially, in
that part of the country, had been greatly car-
ried away by Freemasonry. A large propor-
tion of its eldership and membership were
Freemasons. A considerable number of min-
isters and members of other branches of the
Christian Church had also fallen into the snare.
The murder of Wm. Morgan, and the publica-
tion of Masonry consequent thereupon in the
books I have named, broke upon the churches—
fast asleep on this subject—like a clap of thun-
der from a clear sky. The facts were such,
the revelations were so clear, that the Baptist
denomination backed down, and took the lead
in renouncing and denouncing the institution.
Their elders and associated churches, almost
universally, passed resolutions disfellowship-
ing adhering Masons. The denomination, to
a considerable extent, took the same course.
Throughout the Northern States, at that time,
I believe it was almost universally conceded,
that persistent Freemasons, who continued to
adhere and co-operate with them, ought not
to be admitted to Christian churches. Now,
it is worthy of all consideration and remem-


266 FREEMASONRY.


brance, that God set the seal of His approba-
tion upon the action taken by those churches
at that time, by pouring out His Spirit upon
them.

Great revivals immediately followed over
that whole region. The discussion of the sub-
ject, and the action of the churches took
place in 1827~8 and ’9, and in 1830 the great-
est revival spread over this region that had
ever been known in this or any other coun-
try. They knew Masonry, as we know it, by
an examination of those books in which it had
been revealed. We have the same means of
knowing Freemasonry, if we will use them,
that those churches and ecclesiastical bodies
had. We have the highest evidence that the
nature of the case will admit, that God ap-
proved of their decision and action. In the
brief outline that I have given in the pre-
ceding pages, I have endeavored to show
truthfully, so far as my space would allow, what
Freemasonry really is, and if it is what these
books represent it to be, it seems to me clear
as noonday, that it is an anti-Christian insti-
tution. And should the question be asked,
“What shall be done with the great number
of professed Christians who are Freemasons 2”
Ianswer, Let them have no more to do with it.
Again, let Christian men labor with them,


FREEMASONRY. 267


plead with them, and endeavor to make them
see if to be their duty to abandon it. These
oaths should be distinctly read to them, and
they should be asked whether they acknowl-
edge the obligation of these oaths, and whether
they intend to do the things that they have
sworn to do. Let it be distinctly pressed
upon their consciences, that all Masons above
the first two degrees have solemnly sworn to
conceal each other’s crimes, murder and trea-
son alone excepted, and all above the sixth
degree have sworn to conceal each other’s
crimes, without an exception All above the
sixth degree have sworn to espouse each
other’s cause and to deliver them from any
difficulty, whether they are right or wrong.
If they have taken those degrees where they
swear to persecute unto death those who vio-
late their obligations, let them be asked
whether they intend to do any such thing.
Let them be distinctly asked whether they in-
tend still to aid and abet the administration
and taking of these oaths, if they still intend
to countenance the false and hypocritical
teachings of Masonry, if they mean to coun-
tenance the profanity of their ceremonies,
and practice the partiality they have sworn to
practiced. If so, surely they should not be
allowed their places in the church.


968 FREEMASONRY.


CHAPTER XX.


CONCLUSION.


concluding these pages I appeal
a to Freemasons themselves. Gentle-

VQ men, I beg you to believe that I have
no personal ill-will toward any member of
your fraternity. Many of them are amongst
my personal acquaintances, and some of them
nearly related to me.

I have written of Masonry, I pray you to
remember, as revealed by Wm. Morgan, Rev.
Avery Allyn, Elders Bernard and Stearns, and
Mr. Richardson. That these authors truly
reveal Masonry I am certain, so far as I have
personal knowledge of it. That they truly
reveal the higher degrees I have as good rea-
sons for believing, as of any fact to be estab-
lished by human testimony. You can not
justly expect me to doubt the truthfulness of
these revelations. You must be aware that
God will hold me responsible, and demand
that I should, in view of the testimony, yield


FREEMASONRY. 969


my full assent to the credibility of these au-
thors. You must know that God requires me
to treat this subject in accordance with this
revelation. Now, gentlemen, no one of your
number has attempted to show that these
books are not substantially reliable and true.
No one of you has appeared to publicly jus-
tify Masonry as revealed by these authors.
You must be aware that no man can justify
it. No respectable author amongst you has
attempted to show that Freemasonry has un-
dergone any essential improvement, or modi-
fication, since these revelations were made;
but on the contrary the most recently pub-
lished Masonic authorities assert or assume
that Masonry has not been changed, and that
it is still what it ever has been, and that it is
insusceptible of change, as I have proved it to
be. Now, my dear sirs, what ought you to
expect of me? To hold my peace and let the
evil overrun the country until it is too late to
speak? Believing, as I most assuredly do,
that these works truly reveal Masonry, could
I be an honest man, a faithful minister of
Christ, and hold my peace in view of the
alarming progress that this institution 1s mak-
ing in these days. In your hearts you would
condemn and despise me if, with my convic-
tions, I suffered any earthly considerations to


270 FREEMASONRY.


prevent my sounding the trumpet of alarm to
both Church and State. Would you have me
stultify my intelligence by refusing to believe
these authors; or, believing them, would you
have me cower before this enormously ex-


tended conspiracy? Or would you have me
sear my conscience by shunning the cross, and


keeping silence in the midst of the perils of
both Church and State? And, gentlemen, can
you escape from the conclusions at which I
have arrived. Granting these works to be
true, and remember 1 am bound to assume
their truthfulness, can any of you face the pub-
lic and assert that men who have intelligently
taken and who adhere to the horrid oaths, with
their horrid penalties, as revealed in these
books, can safely: be trusted with any office in
Church or State? Can a man who has taken,
and still adheres to the Master’s oath to con-
ceal any secret crime of a brother of that de-
gree, murder and treason excepted, be a safe
man with whom to entrust an office? Can he
be trusted as a witness, a juror, or with any
office connected with the administration of
justice? Can a man who has taken and still
adheres to the oath of the Royal Arch degree
be trusted in office? He swears to espouse
the cause of a companion of this degree when
invo.~ed in any difficulty, so far as to extri-


FREEMASONRY. 271


cate him from the same, whether he be right
or wrong. He swears to conceal his crimes,
murder and treason not excepted. He swears
to give a companion of this degree timely
notice of any approaching danger that may
be known to him. Now is a man bound fast
by such an oath to be entrusted with office?
Ought he to be accepted as a witness, a juror—
when a Freemason is a party, in any case—
a sheriff, constable, or marshal; ought he to be
trusted with the office of judge or justice of
the peace? Gentlemen, you know he ought
not, and you would despise me should I not be
faithful in warning the public against entrust-
ing such men with office. But further: Take
the large class of men who have sworn, under
the most awful penalties, to take vengeance on
all who violate Masonic obligations; to seek
their condign punishment; to kill them; to
persecute them, and to ruin them by repre-
senting them wherever they go as worthless
vagabonds. Now, gentlemen, I appeal to you,
is a man who is under a most solemn oatn to
kill or seek the death of any man who shall
violate any part of the Masonic oaths a fit
person to be at large amongst men? Why,
who does not know that Freemasons are in the
habit of violating various points and parts of
their Masonic oaths, and are not Freemasons


212, FREEMASONRY.


bound by oaths to kill them, or seek their
death? There are many seceding Masons
throughout the land. Adhering Masons are
under oath to seek to procure their death.
Now if they adhere to their oaths and
thereby affirm that they deszgn to fulfill their
vows, if an opportunity occurs, ought they
not to be imprisoned or put under the heavi-
est bonds to keep the peace? No one can
face the public and deny this, admitting as he
must that their oaths are truly recorded in
these books. No one can think this conclu-
sion harsh unless he assumes contrary to all
evidence, either that no such oaths have been
taken, or if they have, and are still adhered to,
there is no danger that these vows will be
fulfilled. Take these books and say wherein
have I dealt harshly or uncharitably with
Freemasonry as herein revealed? Oughta
Freemason of this stamp to be fellowshiped
by a Christian Church? Ought not such an one
to be regarded as an unscrupulous and dan
gerous Ian? I appeal to your conscience in
the sight of God, and I know that your moral
sense must respond amen to the conclusions
at which I have arrived. Be not offended ©
with my telling you the truth in love. We
must all soon meet at the solemn judgment.
Let us not be angry, but honest.


4 189373


va T


028 087
