Death and Its Mystery: After Death
Camille Flammarion; Latrobe Carroll (trans.), 1923
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): The complete text of Volume III of Flammarion's 1921-1923 'Death and Its Mystery' — apparitions of the dead and the soul after death; the psychical-research canon's great trilogy (vol. II not located). Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/deathitsmystery1923flam). This 1923 publication is in the public domain in the United States.

========================================================================

3  9999  03299  169  5


IF


iiliiikliiiiiiiiNii^iiiiiiii]


BOSTON
PUBLIC
UBl^RY


T,7y


DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY
AFTER  DEATH


DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

IN  THREE  VOLUMES

I    BEFORE  DEATH
II    AT  THE  MOMENT  OF  DEATH
III    AFTER  DEATH


DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

AFTER  DEATH

Manifestations  and  Apparitions  of  the
Dead;  The  Soul  after  Death

BY

CAMILLE  FLAMMARION


TRANSLATED  BY

LATROBE  CARROLL


THE  CENTURY  CO.

New  York  and  London
1923


The  Century  Co.


Ernest  Flammarion


PRINTED   IN   IT.   S.   A.


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS

CHAPTER  PAGE

I     A  General  Investigation 3

II     The  Dead  Who  Have  Returned  according  to

Previous  Agreements 46

III  The  Dead  Who  Have  Returned  to  Attend  to

Personal  Affairs 72

IV  Manifestations  and  Apparitions  from  a  Few

Minutes  to  an  Hour  after  Death  ....  107

V    Manifestations    from    One    to    Twenty-Four

Hours  after  Death    ........  133

VI    Manifestations  and  Apparitions  from  One  Day

TO  One  Week  after  Death 168

VII    Manifestations    and    Apparitions    from    One

Week  to  One  Month  after  Death  ....  206

VIII    Manifestations    and    Apparitions    from    One

Month  to  One  Year  after  Death  ....  233

IX  Manifestations  and  Apparitions  during  the
Second,  Third,  and  Fourth  Years  after
Death 262

X    Manifestations  and  Apparitions  from  Four  to

Thirty  Years  after  Death 297

XI    Manifestations    of    the    Dead    in    Spiritistic

Experiments 319

XII    Conclusions  from  the  Three  Volumes  of  This

Work 346


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive

in  2011  with  funding  from

Boston  Public  Library


http://www.archive.org/details/deathitsmystery1923flam


DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

AFTER  DEATH


Death  is  our  common  lot.  Material  riches  are  won
and  lost.  Let  thy  life  be  inspired  by  the  purest  justice!
Be  beyond  reproach  in  relation  to  others  and  to  thyself.
Seize  every  opportunity  to  learn.  In  this  way  thou
wilt  lead  a  most  pleasurable  life.

Ponder  these  thoughts.  When  thou  art  filled  by  them
thou  wilt  be  enabled  to  conceive  of  the  nature  of  Grod,
of  men,  and  of  things,  and  to  account  for  the  unity  of
all  creation.  Thou  wilt  then  know  this  universal  law,
that  everywhere  in  the  world  matter  and  spirit  are  in
principle  identical.

Continue  the  work  of  liberating  thy  soul  by  making  a
judicious  and  well-considered  choice  in  all  things,  to
the  end  that  thou  mayest  assure  the  triumph  of  what
is  best  in  thyself — the  triumph  of  the  spirit.  Then,
when  thou  leavest  thy  mortal  shape,  thou  wilt  rise  into
the  ether  and,  ceasing  to  be  mortal,  wilt  thyself  assume
the  form  of  an  immortal  god.

Pythagoras.


DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY


A    GENERAL    INVESTIGATION

The  truths  of  mathematics  can  be
passed  upon  only  by  mathematicians.  I
despise  the  judgment  of  ignorant  mathe-
maticians.

Copernicus.

OUR  volume  ''At  the  Moment  of  Death,"  the  second
of  this  metaphysical  trilogy,  left  its  readers  certain
of  the  reality  of  phantasms  of  the  living,  of  appari-
tions and  manifestations  of  the  dying, — occurring  at  every
variation  of  distance, — and  of  telepathic  transmissions.  It
ends  with  this  question:  Shall  we  obtain  the  same  absolute
proofs,  the  same  certainty  as  to  the  real  existence  of  the
dead?

**This  is  a  book  written  in  good  faith,"  said  Montaigne  in
his  unforgetable  "Essays."  The  same  affirmation  must  be
made  concerning  the  present  work.

We  now  reach  the  door  of  the  closed  temple.  But  in  our
journeys  to  the  frontier  of  the  two  worlds  that  door  has  al-
ready seemed  to  open  half-way.  The  purpose  of  this  third
volume  is  to  prove  survival  after  death,  hy  scientifically  ob-
served facts,  by  the  same  experimental  method,  apart  from
all  religious  beliefs.

Reason,  meditation  may  aid  in  the  search  for  truth,  but
they  do  not  suffice,  have  not  sufficed,  up  to  the  present  time,
to  discover  truth.     Positive  observation  is  indispensable  to

3


4  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

insure  conviction.  Theories  mean  nothing  if  they  are  not
based  upon  realities.

It  is  remarkable  that  the  supreme  question  of  whether  we
are  ephemeral  or  lasting,  of  whether  or  not  we  survive  death,
has  remained,  so  far,  outside  the  sphere  of  the  recognized
sciences.  The  dweller  upon  this  earth  is  a  strange  being.
He  lives  upon  a  planet  without  knowing  where  he  is,  and
without  having  the  curiosity  to  ask  himself — without  seeking
to  know  his  own  nature !

It  is  time  to  assault  the  stronghold  of  time-honored  igno-
rance, without  concealing  any  difficulty,  any  objection.

Before  plunging  into  our  investigation,  and  in  order  not  to
run  the  risk  of  wasting  our  time — for  nothing  is  more  absurd
than  waste  of  time — it  seems  to  me  that  my  first  duty,  out
of  respect  to  the  numberless  readers  who  are  doing  me  the
honor  of  following  me,  is  to  take  in  at  one  glance  of  recapit-
ulation the  thousands  of  communications  which  have  been  sent
me.  I  must  then  add  to  these,  mentally,  the  thousands  of
observations  made  in  all  countries  and  at  all  epochs,  and  see
if  some  few  of  them  offer  such  a  weight  of  evidence  that  they
give  us  promise  of  the  desired  certainty,  free  us  from  the
fear  of  spending  our  time  fruitlessly,  and  warrant  our  con-
tinued consideration  of  the  subject  of  inquiry.  Later  we
shall  have  occasion  to  classify  by  categories  the  phenomena
observed.  Let  us,  then,  first  make  a  rapid  survey  which  will
in  itself  throw  some  light  upon  our  field  of  investigation.

Out  of  the  four  thousand  eight  hundred  letters  which  I
have  received  from  correspondents  with  whom  I  was — or
found  myself  afterward— in  touch,  and  whose  sincerity  and
moral  integrity  I  have  had  reason  to  esteem,  I  have  selected
only  a  few  hundreds  of  manifestations  from  among  those
which  seemed  to  me  unquestionable.  I  have  proceeded  ex-
actly as  we  do  in  scientific  journals  when  we  make  public
an  astronomical  observation,  a  meteorological  or  a  geological
observation.    I  have  been  much  more  exacting,  even.     Here  is


A  GENERAL  INVESTIGATION  5

no  romance,  no  phantasy,  but  rigorous  observation.  Those
readers  who  might  accuse  me  of  a  lack  of  method  in  this  work,
or  in  the  preceding  work  ''L'Inconnu"  (''The  Unknown"),
will  show  themselves  to  have  been  too  indolent  to  go  into
the  subject  thoroughly,  or  prove  that  they  are  completely
lacking  in  the  power  of  analysis.

Let  us  have  no  preconceived  convictions,  either  religious
or  anti-religious.  In  the  most  irrational  beliefs  one  often
discovers  a  basis  of  misinterpreted  truth.  Let  us  investigate
freely  and  draw  our  conclusions.  There  are  people  with
closed  minds.  Let  us  not  adopt  their  point  of  view.  "As
for  me,"  a  certain  obdurate  denier  said  one  day  to  a  free
seeker,  ''I  believe  only  in  what  I  can  understand." — ''And
every  one  knows  you  believe  in  nothing!"  replied  the  free
seeker.

The  principles  of  the  scientific  method  bid  us  accept  only
with  extreme  circumspection  stories  of  phenomena  that  are
outside  the  natural  course  of  events,  holding  them,  at  first,
under  suspicion,  precisely  because  they  are  extraordinary  and
inexplicable.  And  it  is  difficult  to  decide  at  the  outset  as  to
the  sincerity  and  perfect  mental  balance  of  narrators.  I
might  mention  more  than  one  pseudo-historian  troubled  in
no  way  with  a  respect  for  the  truth.  The  signer's  name  is  not
always  a  guarantee'.  The  simple  account  of  an  observation
made  by  an  attentive,  serious-minded  witness  without  literary
pretensions  is  often  of  greater  worth  than  that  of  a  profes-
sional writer.  We  may  even  have  reason  to  think  that  an
author  of  romance,  accustomed  to  writing  fiction,  is  quite
capable  of  putting  forward  errors  as  reality,  without  the
least  misgivings  of  conscience.  Consequently,  all  accounts
must  first  be  held  under  suspicion.  But  to  declare  all  of
them  inadmissible  is  simply  stupid.  There  are  real  occur-
rences. Despite  the  inexactness  of  historical  testimony,  I
take  the  liberty  of  repeating  the  statement  that  Louis  XVI
died  on  the  guillotine  on  January  21,  1793,  in  Paris,  and  that


6  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

the  body  of  Napoleon  lies  in  a  marble  sarcophagus  in  the
Invalides.  Let  us,  therefore,  proceed,  (1)  with  prudence;
(2)  with  entire  freedom  of  judgment.

The  method  which  we  have  adopted  in  our  investigation
appears  to  us  the  most  certain,  the  most  unassailable  method.

We  have  ascertained,  in  the  second  part  of  this  work,  that
the  soul,  when  leaving  the  body,  manifests  itself  in  various
ways,  often  at  great  distances  from  the  spot  where  death  takes
place.  But  the  manifestations  might  come  from  a  person  still
living,  for  the  precise  moment  of  death  is  extremely  difficult
to  determine  psychologically.

We  have  read  of  varied  phenomena  of  the  soul  in  a  state
between  life  and  death,  phenomena  which  do  not  seem  to  be
manifestations  of  the  dead.  We  have  not  wished  to  hide  the
objections  which  surround  the  problem  to  be  solved ;  we  have
looked  difficulties  in  the  face,  for  scientific  research  is,  above
all,  open  and  honest.  We  must  with  the  same  honesty,  the
same  sincerity,  the  same  independence  of  spirit  inquire  into
the  facts  now  to  be  revealed  to  us.

We  must  investigate  impartially,  discuss  and  interpret  a
large  number  of  phenomena  which  appear  to  be  manifestations
of  the  dead.  Certain  faculties  of  the  soul  exist,— faculties
that  are  unknown  or  little  investigated, — such  as  psychic
transmissions  at  a  distance,  the  will  functioning  without  the
medium  of  word  or  sign,  telepathy,  seeing  without  eyes,  hear-
ing without  ears,  and  the  foreseeing  of  the  future.  The  work-
ing of  these  faculties  under  different  conditions  has  revealed
the  existence  of  an  individual  soul,  a  soul  which,  from  this
time  on,  must  no  longer  be  considered  an  effect  but  a  cause.
The  subject-matter  with  which  we  are  here  beginning  to  deal
will  bring  us  positive  and  explicit  testimony  of  survival  after
death.  The  phenomena  which  we  shall  consider,  all  equally
inexplicable,  will  oblige  us  to  admit  the  existence  in  us  of  a
spiritual  element  differing  from  the  physiological,  physical,
mechanical,  and  chemical  attributes  of  the  animal  organism


A  GENERAL  INVESTIGATION  7

— a  veritable  psycMc  substance,  which  the  dissolution  of  the
body  leaves  intact.

But  the  value  of  our  conclusions  is  closely  bound  up  with
the  rigor  of  our  method.  We  must  consider  ourselves  the
less  authorized  to  attribute  to  the  dead  all  inexplicable  oc-
currences, from  the  fact  that  the  first  volume  of  ''Death  and
Its  Mystery"  (''Before  Death")  led  us  to  suspect  the  exist-
ence of  human  faculties  as  yet  indeterminate.

We  shall  have  before  our  eyes  manifestations  and  appari-
tions observed  after  death;  we  shall  have  frequent  examples
of  spirits  carrying  out  intentions  expressed  when  they  were
alive.  Our  duty  is,  unquestionably,  to  seek  first  to  explain
these  manifestations  as  acts  of  the  living,  through  mental
faculties;  but  we  shall  realize  that  with  the  best  will  in  the
world  this  is  not  easy,  and  that,  if  we  have  no  prejudice,
we  are  forced  to  admit  the  existence  of  will  on  the  part
of  those  dead.

Intercourse  between  the  dead  and  the  living  is  communica-
tion between  spirits  at  a  certain  phase  of  existence  and  other
spirits  at  a  totally  different  phase;  communication  taking
place  through  a  means  distinct  from,  that  of  the  physical
organs,  since  in  the  other  world  these  organs  no  longer  exist.
Let  us  make  a  careful  investigation,  without  confijiing  our-
selves to  any  rigid  system  of  thought.

In  this  investigation  we  shall  continue  to  follow  the  prin-
ciple which  has  guided  us  up  to  the  present :  no  empty  phrases,
no  dissertations,  no  hypotheses,  but  facts.

At  the  very  outset  let  us  state  that  the  posthumous  phe-
nomena which  we  shall  examine  are  not  in  contradiction  to
the  biological  law  of  continuity.  They  show,  on  the  contrary,
that  life  goes  on  beyond  the  tomb — goes  on  quite  simply,
quite  naturally.  Apparitions  at  the  moment  of  death  have
thrown  a  bridge  between  the  two  worlds;  they  lead  us  di-
rectly, with  no  break  in  continuity,  to  apparitions  after
death.


8  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

Science  must  investigate  psychic  phenomena,  as  it  does
physical  phenomena,  without  being  halted  by  improbabilities.
Before  the  discovery  of  Hertzian  waves,  could  we  have  brought
ourselves  to  adiuit  that  an  electric  wave  could  be  sent,  with-
out wires,  a  distance  of  thousands  of  kilometers  ?  Should  we
;not  have  laughed  if  some  one  had  asserted  that  a  metal  object
contained  in  a  thick  wooden  box  could  be  photographed?
Should  we  not  have  called  any  one  mad  who  told  us  that  we
should  one  day  see  photographs  of  our  bones,  taken  through
our  flesh  and  our  clothing?  Were  not  all  things  open  to
investigation?     Are  they  not  still  open?

It  is  a  mistake  to  disregard  manifestations  under  the  pre-
text that  they  are  infrequent  and  exceptional;  it  is  unscien-
tific. The  discovery  of  X-rays  was  due  to  an  accident;  that
of  argon  was  due  to  an  anomaly  in  the  habitual  behavior  of
nitrogen;  it  was  the  variance  between  the  observed  and  the
calculated  position  of  Uranus  which  revealed  the  existence
of  Neptune;  and  so  on.

Do  we  understand  telepathic  transmissions  at  the  moment  of
death  ?  No.  Are  they  absolutely  indubitable  ?  Yes.  They
are  of  still  more  frequent  occurrence  than  I  have  led  readers
to  believe.  While  I  was  writing  these  pages  (July,  1921)
I  received  the  following  letter  from  my  illustrious  friend
Camille  Saint-Saens,  who  died  several  months  afterward
(December  16th),  to  the  grief  of  his  admirers:

While  I  was  rereading  your  last  volume  for  the  nth  time,  a
recollection  awakened  in  my  memory,  and  I  shall  not  wait  until
to-morrow  to  tell  you  of  it.

It  was  in  January,  1871,  on  the  last  day  of  the  war.  I  was  at
the  front  lines,  at  Arcueil-Cachan.  We  had  just  dined  upon  an
excellent  horse,  of  which  we  had  made  a  good  meat  broth,  and
had  gathered  a  great  many  dandelions,  the  roots  of  which,  at  that
time  of  the  year,  are  fully  developed;  in  a  word,  a  dinner  that
had  satisfied  us  all,  and  we  were  on  that  day  as  gay  as  we  could
be  in  such  circumstances.     Suddenly  I  heard,  running  through  my


A  GENERAL  INVESTIGATION  9

head,  the  musical  dirge  of  melancholy  chords  which  I  have  since
made  the  beginning  of  my  Requiem.  I  felt  in  the  depths  of  my
being  the  presentiment  that  a  misfortune  was  happening  to  me.
A  profound  anguish  overwhelmed  me.

It  was  at  that  very  moment  that  Henri  Regnault  had  been  killed;
I  was  bound  to  him  by  the  closest  friendship.  The  news  of  his
death  caused  me  such  grief  that  I  fell  ill  and  was  obliged  to  stay
in  bed  for  three  days.

I  experienced,  therefore,  the  reality  of  telepathy  before  the  word
was  invented.  How  right  you  are  in  thinking  that  established
science  does  not  know  the  human  being,  and  that  we  have  every-
thing to  learn!

Yours  with  all  my  heart,

C.  Saint-Saens.

(Letter  4565.)

The  foregoing  is  still  another  psychic  occurrence  to  add  to
all  those  which  my  readers  have  passed  judgment  on.  The
name  of  the  man  to  whom  it  happened  lends  it  especial  value.

Telepathic  communication  from  one  soul  to  another  during
life  is  not  to  be  doubted.     Nor  is  it  doubtful  after  death.

Given  our  present  knowledge  of  radiations,  of  physical  and
psychic  forces,  and  of  the  atomic  structure  of  matter,  it  seems
to  me  that  from  this  time  oi  we  shall  be  in  a  position  to
analyze  our  subject-matter  with  greater  profit  than  would
have  been  possible  even  a  short  time  ago,  in  the  well-founded
hope  of  attaining  results  of  great  importance.  Let  us,  then,
investigate  this  serious  subject  in  all  its  aspects,  avoiding  pre-
conceived ideas  which  might  prevent  our  judging  freely.

I  shall  first  present,  for  the  impartial  consideration  of
my  readers,  a  series  of  observations  which  appear  to  me
absolutely  conclusive.  Such  must  be  the  logical  beginning  of
this  third  volume,  that  it  may  deserve  its  title,  ''After  Death."

One  of  the  most  conclusive  manifestations  of  the  dead  that
I  know  of  was  that  described  by  a  positivist  and  sincere  mate-


10  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

rialist,  Dr.  Caltagirone  of  Palermo.  He  gave  it  as  his  own
experience.  Let  ns  listen  to  the  personal  version  which  he
recounts.  (The  occurrence  took  place  not  long  ago,  in  De-
cember, 1910.)

I  was  a  friend  of  Benjamin  Sirchia;  his  physician,  in  fact.
Sirehia,  well  known  in  Palmero,  was  an  aged  patriot,  and  very
popular.  He  had  splendid  civic  and  moral  virtues.  He  was,  like
me,  a  skeptic,  in  the  widest  meaning  of  the  term.

One  day,  in  May,  1910,  we  happened  to  discuss  psychic  phenom-
ena. I  answered  his  questions  by  assuring  him  that,  speaking
from  my  own  experience,  certain  of  these  phenomena  were  real,
but  that  the  interpretations  given  them  were  debatable.  In  the
course  of  this  conversation  he  said  to  me  jestingly:

"Listen,  Doctor.  If  I  die  before  you,  which  is  probable,  since
I  'm  old  and  you  're  still  young,  strong,  and  healthy,  I  give  you
my  word  that  I'll  come  and  give  you  proof  of  my  survival,  if  I
still  exist."

Laughing,  and  in  the  same  jesting  way,  I  answered:

"Then  you'll  come  and  manifest  yourself  by  breaking  some-
thing in  this  room — for  example  that  gas-fixture  above  the  table.
(We  were  at  that  moment  in  my  dining-room.)  And,  to  be  polite,
I  added :  "I  '11  pledge  myself,  too,  if  I  die  before  you,  to  come
and  give  you  some  sign  of  the  same  sort,  in  your  house!"

I  wish  to  repeat  that  all  this  was  said  jestingly  rather  than
seriously.  We  separated,  and  some  days  afterward  he  left  for
Lieata,  in  the  province  of  Girgenti,  where  he  went  to  settle  down.
From  that  day  I  had  no  news  of  him,  either  directly  or  indirectly.
Tliis  conversation  took  place  in  May,  1910.

The  following  December,  the  first  or  the  second,  toward  six
o'clock  in  the  evening,  I  was  seated  at  table  with  my  sister  (the
two  of  us  compose  the  household)  when  our  attention  was  attracted
by  several  slight  blows,  some  of  them  struck  upon  the  shade  of
the  gas-fixture  which  hung  from  the  ceiling  of  the  dining-room  and
some  npon  the  little  movable  porcelain  bell  of  the  smoke-shield
above  the  glass  chimney.  At  first  we  attributed  the  tapping  to
the  action  of  the  heat  of  the  fiame,  which  I  tried  to  lessen.    But


A  GENERAL  INVESTIGATION  11

the  blows  increased  in  force,  and  continued  with  a  sort  of  rhythmic
noise.  I  then  climbed  upon  a  chair,  to  examine  more  carefully
what  was  happening,  and  I  ascertained  that  the  phenomenon  could
not  be  attributed  to  the  heat  of  the  flame,  which  was  burning  at
a  very  usual  rate  of  pressure.  Besides,  it  was  not  a  question  of
slight  popping  noises,  like  those  produced  as  a  result  of  extreme
heat,  but  of  sharp  taps  of  a  special  tone,  suggesting  blows  struck
with  the  knuckles  or  with  a  finger  ring  with  which  one  might  knock
purposely  upon  some  porcelain  object.  I  sought  to  discover  the
cause  of  these  strange  blows.  To  no  purpose.  Meanwhile  we  fin-
ished dinner  and  the  phenomenon  came  to  an  end.

The  following  evening  the  same  tapping  was  repeated,  as  it  was
on  four  or  five  consecutive  days;  this  continued  to  excite  our  in-
tense curiosity  more  and  more.

But  on  the  last  evening  a  strong,  sharp  blow  split  the  little
swinging  beU  in  two;  it  remained  in  this  state,  hanging  by  the
hook  of  the  metal  counterbalance.  I  could  verify  this  by  stand-
ing upon  the  table  to  observe  closely  the  effect  of  the  last  blow.
I  remember  clearly,  as  does  my  sister,  that  even  after  we  had  ex-
tinguished the  central  light  around  which  the  phenomenon  was
taking  place  and  had  lighted  another  branch  of  the  chandelier,  the
blows  still  continued  with  equal  force.

I  must  also  declare  and  affirm  upon  my  honor  as  an  honest  man
that  during  the  course  of  these  five  or  six  days  on  which  was  ob-
served the  phenomenon  which  I  could  not  explain,  I  never  once
thought  of  my  friend  Benjamin  Sirchia,  and  still  less  of  the  con-
versation of  the  preceding  May,  which  I  had  entirely  forgotten.

The  day  following  the  evening  when,  as  I  have  said,  the  little
porcelain  bell  split,  I  was  in  my  study;  my  sister  had  gone
out  on  the  balcony  to  look  at  something  or  other  in  the  street;  the
servant  had  gone  out;  when  we  heard,  in  the  dining-room,  a  tre-
mendous hang  as  though  a  violent  blow  with  a  club  had  been  struck
upon  the  table.

My  sister  heard  it  from  the  balcony,  and  I  from  my  study :  both
of  us  hurried  to  see  what  had  happened.

It  is  strange,  but  however  fantastic  this  occurrence  be,  I  can
answer  for  its  truth :  on  the  table,  and  as  though  it  had  been  placed


12  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

there  by  a  human  hand,  we  found  half  of  the  little  movable  bell,
while  the  other  half  was  still  hanging  in  its  place.

Evidently  the  violence  of  the  blow  was  out  of  proportion  to  the
result.  This  was  the  last  phenomenon;  it  brought  to  a  climax
the  strange  happenings  which  had  been  repeated  during  five  or
six  days.  It  had  taken  place  in  broad  daylight  and  without  the
action  of  heat.

The  half  of  the  porcelain  bell  could  not  have  fallen  to  the  table
perpendicularly,  for,  since  it  would  have  had  to  pass  through  the
center  of  the  shade,  it  would  have  struck  the  gas-jet  and  its  glass
chimney.  These  must  needs  have  broken  beneath  the  shock,  to  al-
low the  half -bell  of  the  smoke-shield  to  pass  through  freely.  But
the  two  objects  were  quite  intact  and  the  empty  space  was  not
wide  enough  to  allow  for  the  passage.  If  the  smoke-shield  had
fallen  obliquely  upon  the  porcelain  shade,  which  was  rather  large,
it  would  have  been  broken,  or  would  have  broken  the  shade.  Or,
granting  that  it  slid  without  breaking,  it  must  of  necessity  have
rebounded  to  a  point  far  from  the  center  of  the  table,  and  not
fallen  in  line  with  the  axis  of  the  gas-fixture.

It  follows  that  the  noise  was  a  warning  of  the  accomplished
phenomenon,  and  that  the  fragment  of  the  bell  was  placed  in  such
a  way  as  to  point  to  the  conclusion  that  what  had  happened  was
not  due  to  an  accident — an  accident  which  would,  moreover,  have
been  contrary  to  the  law  of  falling  bodies.

I  must  acknowledge  once  more  that  I  had  absolutely  forgotten
Sirehia  and  the  pact  which  we  had  made  in  the  preceding  month  of
May.

Two  days  afterward  I  met  Professor  Rusci;  he  said  to  me,  "Did
you  know  that  poor  Benjamin  Sirehia  had  died?" — "When?"  I
asked  anxiously. — "On  one  of  the  last  days  of  November — the  twenty-
seventh  or  the  twenty-eighth." — I  then  thought:  "The  last  days
of  November?  Strange!  Could  the  phenomena  which  happened  at
my  home  have  some  connection  with  his  death?"  (The  memory
of  our  last  conversation,  with  its  peculiar  details,  had  come  back
to  me.)  The  phenomena  began  on  the  first  or  second  of  December
and  continued  for  five  or  six  days.  An  attempt  to  break  some-
thing connected  with  the  gas-fixture  of  the  dining-room  had  been
agTeed  on  between  us,  in  the  month  of  May,  and  this  man'festa-


A  GENERAL  INVESTIGATION  13

tion  did  not  end  until  the  final  carrying  out  of  the  agreement.
A  thing  equally  strange  was  that  when  the  compact  had  been  car-
ried out  in  this  way,  almost  as  though  to  signal  its  fulfilment,  a  ter-
rific blow  informed  us  of  the  fact!  The  intentional  carrying  of
the  little  bell  to  a  spot  where  it  could  not  have  fallen  of  itself,
in  ordinary  circumstances,  thus  eliminating  the  element  of  chance,
completed  this   strange  manifestation.

Such  was  my  personal  experience.

My  sister  and  I  have  decided  to  keep,  as  a  souvenir  of  this
unexplained  phenomenon,  the  two  fragments  of  the  little  bell,
among  those  things  which  are  precious  and  dear  to  us.

ViCENZO  Caltagirone.

Sucli  is  the  witness's  story.

It  seems  to  me  logical  to  draw  from  his  experience  the
natural  conclusion,  as  we  do  in  the  case  of  an  experiment  in
chemistry  or  physics,  and  to  state  that  it  proves  the  following :
(1)  This  friend  still  existed  four,  five,  six,  seven,  eight  days
after  his  death;  (2)  he  had  retained  his  consciousness,  his
individuality;  (3)  he  remembered  his  promise;  (4)  he  was
able  to  fulfil  it.

Assuredly,  we  do  not  know  in  what  form  one  may  exist  after
this  life,  with  what  faculties  our  ultimate  psychic  atoms  may
be  endowed,  and  how  it  is  possible  for  them  to  function  mate-
rially, mechanically,  as  in  this  characteristic  example.  But
the  facts  are  before  us.  There  can  be  no  evasion.  To  explain
them  is  impossible  in  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge,  but
the  impossibility  of  explanation  does  not  lessen  their  value
in  the  least.  We  are,  with  regard  to  the  study  of  the  psychic
world,  at  the  point  where  Newton  was  when  he  was  seeking  to
explain  the  plan  of  the  physical  world,  and  we  may  apply
here  his  own  method  of  reasoning.     He  wrote :

Things  behave  as  if  bodies  attracted  each  other  in  direct  propor-
tion to  the  product  of  their  masses  and  in  inverse  proportion  to
the  square  of  their  distance  apart.     How,  I  do  not  know."


14  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

Let  us  say,  with  him:  Things  'behave  as  if  the  dead  man
were  acting.

Any  criticism  of  the  logic  of  this  argument  would  seem  to
me  of  small  validity.  The  old  hypothesis  of  chance  coinci-
dences is  really  no  longer  tenable.  The  most  thin-spun  rea-
soning leads  to  nothing.  We  must  either  deny  the  experience
or  admit  that  it  is  inexplicable.

I  repeat  with  Newton:  Things  behaved  as  if  Dr.  Caltagi-
rone's  friend  had  kept  his  promise.  That  is  the  true  scientific
method — not  blind,  persistent,  and  systematic  denial.

Once  again  let  me  state  that  we  do  not  know  how  a  soul
can  strike  a  chandelier,  break  the  little  bell  of  a  smoke-shield,
and  strike  a  blow,  like  that  of  a  club,  ^  upon  a  table.  These
instances  exist  by  hundreds.  Those  that  we  have  had  before
our  eyes  in  the  first  two  volumes  of  this  work  induce  us  to
think  that  electrical  force  comes  into  play ;  but  the  hypothesis
leads  nowhere,  since  no  one  knows  what  electricity  is.  More-
over, there  are,  in  nature,  unsuspected  forces.  They  may  play
a  preponderant  part  in  these  phenomena.  It  is  these  forces
that  we  must  discover,  instead  of  following  the  method  of
certain  contemporary  savants,  who  contend  that  science  has
a  right  to  explain  observed  facts  only  by  forces  that  have  al-
ready been  investigated,  without  admitting  those  that  are  un-
known.

I  have  received  a  large  number  of  different  accounts,  from
all  countries  of  the  world,  in  all  languages,  from  people  of  all
social  classes  and  of  all  ages — from  that  of  the  most  ingenuous
and  ignorant  childhood  to  years  of  full  power,  enlightened
by  experience  and  rigid  psychological  analysis.  So  numerous
are  they  that  it  is  absolutely  impossible  for  me  to  doubt  man-
ifestations on  the  part  of  the  dead,  under  certain  conditions,
and  their  survival  after  death,  at  least  for  a  certain  time.

1  Is  light  a  body  ?  It  acts  materially  upon  Crookes's  radiometer,
making  it  turn.  It  acts  upon  a  photographic  plate,  decomposing  the
salts.     It  may  produce  a  chemical  explosion;  and  so  on.


A  GENERAL  INVESTIGATION  15

To  keep  a  promise  in  order  to  prove  to  a  friend  that  one
still  exists  after  one's  last  breath,  is,  plainly,  a  definite  enough
indication.    What  more  could  we  ask?

The  blows,  the  mechanical  movements,  the  physical  phenom-
ena are  manifestations  of  a  force  emanating  from  the  spirit.
We  have  seen  a  very  great  number  of  examples  of  them  in
Volume  II — manifestations  of  a  psychic  force.

This  term  "psychic  force,''  which  I  had  brought  into  vogue
in  1865  through  the  publication  of  my  first  short  work,  ''Les
Forces  naturelles  inconnues"  ("Unknown  Natural  Forces''),
was  discussed,  and  even  made  fun  of  a  little,  by  certain  writers
who  were  particularly  conventional,  methodical  in  their  habit
of  thought,  and  ultra-prudent.  A  philosopher, — justly  es-
teemed, moreover,  for  certain  works  on  the  history  of  astron-
omy,— Monsieur  Th.-Henri  Martin,  dean  of  the  Rennes  fac-
ulty of  letters,  and  a  member  of  the  Institute, — wrote,  among
others :

It  does  not  seem  necessary  to  me  to  discuss  seriously  the  existence
of  the  unknown  natural  forces  which  Monsieur  Flammarion  calls
psychic — forces  which  are  supposed  to  bring  about  intelligent  move-
ments on  the  part  of  tables,  and  the  other  prodigies  attributed  to
mediums.^

The  celebrated  Rennes  professor  does  not  admit  the  exist-
ence of  these  unknown  forces.  After  a  long  dissertation  on
the  experiments  of  Agenor  de  Gasparin,  Thury,  and  other  ob-
servers,— experiments  he  did  not  understand  in  the  least, —
and  only  as  a  last  resort  siding  with  R.  P.  Matignon  and  the
partizans  of  the  intervention  of  the  devil,  he  writes :  "  I  see
strong  probabilities  which  might  lead  one  to  attribute  these
marvels  in  part  to  illusion  and  in  part  to  deception."-     In

1  Th.-Henri  Martin:  Les  sciences  et  la  philosophie  (Paris,  1869),
p.  438.

2  Idem,  p.  472.


16  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

other  words :  nothing.     Such  were  our  authoritative  predeces-
sors in  this  sort  of  research.

The  occurrence  of  which  we  have  just  read  is  characteristic.
To  attribute  it  to  unknown  human  faculties  or  to  chance
would  seem  to  me  extremely  rash.  Assuredly,  one  would  have
liked  to  see  the  cause  of  these  purposeful  blows.  Does  one
see  phantoms?  Yes,  sometimes.  Here  is  an  example,  precise
and  definite.  The  letter  given  below  was  sent  me  from  Lyons
on  April  25,  1921.

Dear  Master:

Allow  me  to  state,  first,  that  in  my  youth  (long  ago)  I  used  to
laugh  heartily  when,  by  chance,  those  about  me  spoke  of  manifes-
tations from  the  "beyond":  I  had  the  skepticism  of — let  us  say
the  word — imbecility.

My  youth  passed,  maturity  came,  and  if,  among  the  people  with
whom  I  found  myself,  these  questions  were  brought  up,  I  no  longer
laughed,  but  I  believed  no  more  than  before.  There  was  some  prog-
ress.    Well,  this  is  what  happened  to  me  personally:

One  autumn  night  (the  temperature  was  already  low)  I  was
seated  near  the  fireplace  where  some  logs  were  burning.  Before
me  was  my  wife,  in  an  arm-chair;  her  back  was  turned  to  a  win-
dow opening  on  the  passageway  leading  to  the  rooms  on  the  first
floor  of  my  house.  I  was  not  dreaming  I  assure  you,  for  I  had
just  run  through  a  treatise  on  "Electric  Transformers"  which
hardly  lent  itself  to  revery.  I  was,  therefore,  far  from  thinking
of  phenomena  of  the  other  world,  when  my  dog,  a  Pomeranian,  ly-
ing before  the  hearthstone,  jumped  up  and  began  to  howl,  looking
toward  the  window,  then  came  to  lie  down,  still  growling,  near
my  chair.

I  looked  toward  the  window  quickly,  and  behind  it  I  saw,  sil-
houetted, a  shade.  Its  contours  were  delicate;  it  might  have  been
drawn  in  soft  pencil  by  Henner.  It  went  toward  the  door  giving
into  my  room.  I  could  not  restrain  an  exclamation.  The  shade —
the  light  from  a  fairly  distant  gas-jet  shone  through  it  feebly — came
forward  slowly.  Its  manner  of  walking  showed  a  slight  limp,  and
in  spite  of  myself  I  cried,  "Why,  it^s  Father!"


A  GENERAL  INVESTIGATION  17

There  were  both  the  bodily  contour  and  the  gait  of  my  wife's
father,  who  had  died  two  years  before.  It  was  indeed  he.  I  got  up
hurriedly,  threw  myself  toward  the  door,  opened  it  abruptly  and —
nothing !

This  could  not  have  been  an  hallucination.  The  book  which  I
had  just  run  through  and  which  I  still  held  in  my  hand  did  not
lend  itself  to  that.  Besides,  my  wife  had  turned  around  sharply
at  my  cry,  and  like  me,  had  perceived  this  shade,  dear  to  her
memory.

When  I  had  entered  my  room  again,  my  dog  had  taken  refuge
under  the  bed  and  continued  to  growl.

Since  then  I  have  seen  nothing  more.

Please  accept,  dear  Master,  my  admiring  homage.

Ballet-  Gallifet,
12  montee  du  Greillon,  Lyons.

(Letter  4462.)

Not  all  the  letters  I  have  received  have  the  value  of  this
last  one.  The  observer  is  scientifically  inclined.  His  sponta-
neous experience  v^as  duplicated  by  that  of  his  v^ife,  and —
this  is  not  negligible — by  the  dog's  excitement.  All  this  is
hardly  commonplace.

According  to  my  rule,  I  wished  to  make  an  independent
investigation  of  the  incident.  Among  the  persons  in  Lyons
with  whom  I  am  in  touch,  one  seemed  to  me  particularly  well
fitted,  by  reason  of  her  work  and  her  ability,  to  assist  me  in
the  research :  Madame  Rougier,  my  esteemed  colleague  of  the
Astronomical  Society  of  France,  and  of  the  Metaphysical
Institute.  I  wrote  to  her,  without  giving  her  any  details  on
the  subject,  to  be  so  good  as  to  go,  on  some  pretext  or  other,
and  pay  a  visit  to  the  author  of  the  preceding  communication.
I  told  her  to  bring  the  conversation  round  to  the  subject  of
apparitions,  and  to  listen  attentively  to  the  personal  account
which  he  might  give  of  his  experience.

I  select  the  following  passages  from  the  answer  Madame
Rougier  so  kindly  sent :


18  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

The  letter  you  did  me  the  honor  of  sending  me  arrived  this
morning  (May  2d).  I  am  beginning  this  reply  at  five  minutes  to
six,  and  take  pleasure  in  informing  you  that  my  husband  and  I  have
just  returned  from  paying  a  call  on  Monsieur  Ballet-Gallifet.  That
gentleman  received  us  graciously,  and  it  was  not  long  before  he
referred  to  the  astounding  apparition  which  he  and  Madame  Ballet-
Gallifet  saw — the  apparition  of  that  lady's  father.  This  is  the  story
he  told  us:

"At  nine  o'clock  in  the  evening  my  wife  and  I  were  at  home,
when  suddenly  my  dog  gave  tongue  on  seeing  some  one  enter.  It
was  a  man,  coming  forward  slowly.  I  was  struck  with  astonish-
ment when  I  recognized  my  father-in-law,  for  not  only  was  this
person  really  he,  but  he  even  limped  as  he  did.  My  father-in-law
was  afflicted  with  lameness.  If  I  had  not  noticed  at  once  this  de-
tail, which  made  me  recognize  him  from  afar,  I  should  have  taken  up
a  weapon,  thinking  him  a  thief.  My  wife  was  also  a  witness  of
the  ^apparition.' "

It  was  your  last  two  books  which  made  Monsieur  B.-G.  tell  of  this
occurrence  which  happened  fifteen  years  ago !  He  is  an  intellectual,
keenly  interested  in  all  that  has  to  do  with  progress,  either  in
science  or  in  art;  he  seemed  to  us  worthy  of  being  trusted  in  every
respect.  Later  we  shall  go  and  call  on  his  wife,  who  was  not  able
to  appear,  because  of  the  short  time  my  husband  had  at  his  dis-
posal, but  I  caught  sight  of  her,  though  I  did  not  hear  her  speak.

T.   ROUGIER.

(Letter  4470.)

I  am  now  able  to  state  that  on  May  20th  I  made  a  second  call.
Madame  B.-G.  whom  I  had  not  been  able  to  see  the  first  time,  con-
firmed all  the  facts  related  by  her  husband,  and  seemed  keenly  in-
terested in  the  investigation  for  which  you  are  insisting  on  precision
in  observation.  I  must  add  that  Monsieur  B.-G.  also  said  to  us,
"The  phantom  glided  rather  than  walked."

T.   ROUGIER.

(Letter  4514.)

Another  letter  from  Monsieur  Ballet-Gallifet  gave  me  the
date  of  his  f atber-in-law 's  death:  March  19,  1904.     The  oc-


A  GENERAL  INVESTIGATION  19

currenee  described  took  place  in  the  course  of  the  autumn  of
1906.  With  the  additional  letter  (Number  4484)  was  a  map,
which  it  seems  to  me  superfluous  to  reproduce.

Judging  from  the  proofs,  the  apparition  cannot  be  doubted.
As  we  have  remarked,  its  reality  is  confirmed  by  the  dog's
perception  of  it.  To  assume  in  this  instance  a  triple  halluci-
nation would  be  equivalent  to  denying  the  reality  of  all  we
see  before  us  at  every  hour  of  the  day.

I  am  putting  this  case  before  my  readers  directly  after  the
preceding  one  because  of  their  dissimilarity.  It  might  be  ob-
jected that  the  first  was  coincidence;  this  objection  would
not  apply  to  the  latter.  It  is  another  sort  of  attestation.
What  can  we  suppose  in  this  instance  ?  An  hallucination  on
the  part  of  the  narrator,  hi&  wife,  and  the  dog?  What  do
you  think?

The  variety  of  these  manifestations  of  the  dead  would  lead
us  to  believe  in  their  reality.  Here  is  a  third,  altogether  dif-
ferent. A  manifestation  as  difficult  to  question  as  the  two
preceding  ones  will  be  found  in  the  interesting  letter  which
follows.  This  communication  was  addressed  to  me  from
Ruelle  (Charente)  on  June  9,  1921.  I  am  selecting  the  es-
sential passages:

The  facts  you  reveal  and  discuss  are,  to  me,  unquestionably  true.
You  have  quoted  ^  a  letter  which  I  wrote  you  more  than  twenty
years  ago  after  reading  "L'Inconnu.''  All  that  I  have  said  is  abso-
lutely authentic,  but  it  was  not  that  blow  and  that  movement  of  a
curtain  coinciding  with  a  death  which  convinced  me  that  all  is  not
over  after  death;  it  was  the  experience  which  I  shall  relate.

I  shall  tell  you  upon  what  my  conviction  rests;  it  is  not  a  thing
of  to-day,  for  it  is  a  childhood  recollection,  but  it  has  remained  en-
graved upon  my  memory,  and  I  see,  in  thought,  the  spot  where  the
occurrence  took  place  as  though  it  were  yesterday.

It,  too,  happened  in  Isere,  in  Saint-Gervais,  where  in  former  days
there  was  a  cannon  foundrj^  for  the  navy.     We  were  living  in  a

1  At  the  Moment  of  Death,  p.  254.


20  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

dwelling  provided  by  the  State.  My  father  was  a  fervent  believer
in  spiritualism;  as  for  me,  I  was  very  young  and  paid  no  attention
to  it — all  the  more  so  because  my  father  was  exceptional  in  giving
himself  up  to  this  investigation.

In  Rochefort-sur-Mer  he  had  a  friend  named  Cognet  the  news  of
whose  death  was  given  him  in  a  letter.

One  evening,  after  receiving  this  letter  (I  do  not  remember  if  it
was  the  same  day  or  later)  we  were  in  bed.  The  two  beds  were
in  an  alcove,  the  doors  of  which  were  open,  but,  lying  as  I  was,
my(  back  was  to  the  two  sections  of  this  folding-door ;  I  could,  there-
fore, see  nothing  in  the  room  giving  on  the  alcove.  I  was  not
asleep.  I  heard  my  father  speaking  in  a,  low  tone  in  Jiis  bed,  and
did  not  understand  the  words  he  was  uttering.  Suddenly  I  saw  a
glow  which  made  me  utter  a  cry  of  terror.  My  father  got  up  and
took  me  into  bed  with  him.  The  glow  persisted;  it  was  a  sort  of
phosphorescent  cloud,  without  definite  outlines,

I  remember  that  very  well,  for  I  saw  it  from  my  fathers  bed.
It  ia  noteworthy  that  I  had  been  struck  by  the  glow  though  my
back  was  turned)  and  no  mirror  could  have  reflected  anything.  My
father  pronounced  these  words  in  a  loud  voice:  ^'If  you  are
Cognet,  strike  three  blows  on  the  chest  of  drawers."  This  piece  of
furniture,  marble-topped  (it  is  still  in  my  possession)  was  in  the
room  giving  on  to  the  alcove.  Three  loud  and  measured  blows  were
then  struck  upon  the  marble  of  the  chest  of  drawers.  Then,  little
by  little,  the  glow  thinned,  melted,  and  I  saw  nothing  more.  I  do
not  remember  that  my  father  asked  other  questions;  probably  he
did,  but  I  have  no  recollection  of  them.

Well,  this  simple  happening  of  which  I  have  thought  all  my  life
(I  reflected  upon  it  later,  when  I  was  able  to  reason)  gave  me  the
conviction,  the  certainty  that  death  does  not  end  all.  People  have
often  said  in  my  presence,  "After  death  there's  nothing  more." —
"Yes,"  I  always  answer,  "there  is  something." — "What  do  you  know
about  it?"  they  ask.  I  answer:  "I  saw.  1  saw  without  wishing
to  see;  I  heard,  shuddering  with  fear."

Texier_,
Ruelle  Foundry,  Charente.

(Letter  4528.)


A  GENERAL  INVESTIGATION  21

Thougli  there  were  only  two  rather  vague  witnesses  of  this
manifestation,  it  seems  to  me  that  it  may  be  confidently  re-
corded. The  recollection  of  it  was  precise.  My  readers  are
familiar  with  other,  similar  examples;  for  instance,  a  glow
lighting  a  room,  coinciding  with  a  death  (Volume  II,  page
120) ;  the  luminous,  phosphorescent  spot,  synchronizing  with
a  comatose  condition  preceding  a  father's  demise  (idem,  page
134)  ;  the  luminous  aureole  surrounding  some  one  dead  (idem,
page  285)  ;  an  apparition  enveloped  in  a  very  bright  light
(idem,  page  353)  ;  the  lighting  up  of  a  room  (idem,  page
360).  This  mysterious  glow  has  been  perceived  rather  often;
always  it  came  unsought.  We  are  obliged  to  see  in  this,  as
in  other  similar  happenings,  a  manifestation  of  some  one  dead
— some  one  who,  in  consequence,  still  existed,  as  in  the  case
of  the  chandelier  struck  by  Benjamin  Sirchia,  who  had  died
eight  days  before,  and  the  case  of  the  apparition  of  Madame
Ballet-Gallifet's  father.

A  man  who,  all  his  life,  has  preserved  vividly  in  memory
an  unforgetable  experience,  is  a  witness  we  should  not  neglect.
These  experiences  are  very  varied.  Here  is  a  fourth.  It  is
another  sort  of  manifestation  and  substantiates  our  first  two
cases.  Is  it  possible  not  to  give  consideration  to  the  following
letter,  which  was  sent  me  from  Nantes  on  March  31,  1921  ? —
possible  to  suppose  that  its  author  fabricated  a  fantastic  tale
or  had  an  hallucination?

My  dear  Master:

I  am  forty-two.  I  love  science  too  much,  I  have  too  much  interest
in  all  those  questions  which  you  are  investigating  so  impartially  and
so  scientifically,  and  finally — and  this  should  be  enough — I  have  too
much  esteem  and  consideration  for  the  savant  that  you  are,  to  fabri-
cate or  exaggerate  anything  whatsoever.

I  was  nineteen,  and  was  living  in  Nantes,  where  I  am  at  present.
I  frequented  a  cafe  where  I  spent  almost  all  my  evenings;  I  was
on  very  intimate  terms  with  the  proprietor.     A  charwoman  used  to


22  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

come  into  this  cafe,  to  do  the  heavy  work.  This  woman  was  not
married,  and  was  living  in  a  marital  relation  with  a  workman  from
Marseilles,  whose  given  name  was  Marius.  She  was  a  native  of
Brittany;  Keryado  was  her  family  name;  but  we  only  called  her,
familiarly,  "Mother  Marius."  She  drank  a  little.  These  details
have  their  own  importance.  She  was,  on  the  whole,  a  good  sort,
kind-hearted,  and  she  had  done  for  me  certain  small  services.

Every  week  I  used  to  leave  Nantes  on  Saturday  evening  and  spend
Sunday  on  a  farm  in  the  very  midst  of  the  country-side.  One  Sat-
urday I  left  as  usual — took  leave  of  the  proprietor,  of  my  friends,
and  said  good-by  to  this  same  charwoman,  who  was  in  excellent
health.  So,  late  on  Saturday  night,  I  found  myself  in  the  country
as  usual,  but  I  must  explain  that  this  time,  through  exceptional
circumstances,  I  was  to  remain  there  for  the  whole  week.  The
farm-house  had  two  rooms :  a  kitchen  and  another  room.  On  Thurs-
day, at  one  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  I  was  talking,  in  the  other
room,  with  the  young  girl  of  the  house.  There  was  no  one  in  the
kitchen.  The  doors  and  windows  were  closed.  We  were  talking,
when  both  of  us  heard  a  noise  ia  the  kitchen,  as  though  the  fire-
tongs  had  fallen  on  to  the  hearthstone.  Out  of  precaution,  thinking
that  the  cat  might  be  getting  into  the  jars  of  milk,  I  went  to  see
what  it  was.  There  was  nothing;  everything  was  shut  up.  Scarcely
had  I  come  back  into  the  room  when  there  was  the  same  noise.  I
turned.  Nothing.  Since  I  had  already  taken  up  spiritualism,  I
said  to  the  young  girl,  laughing,  "It 's  a  spirit,  perhaps," — attaching
no  importance  to  my  words,  however.  I  then  had  the  idea  of  using
a  little  round  table,  with  which  we  had  already  experimented,  and
we  waited,  both  of  us  sitting  at  it,  our  hands  upon  it.  Almost  im-
mediately we  got  a  communication  through  rapping,  one  that  was
according  to  the  usual  alphabetic  code.  "Is  this  a  spirit?" — "Yes."
—"You  lived  on  earth  f'—" Yes."— "You  knew  mef— "Yes."—
"What  was  your  name?" — "Keryado."  At  this  odd  name  (I  did  not
remember  the  charwoman's  family  name)  I  was  about  to  leave  the
table,  thinking  that  the  reply  was  pointless,  when  the  young  girl
said  to  me,  "That 's  the  family  name  of  the  charwoman  in  the  cafe."
— "That 's  true,"  I  answered,  and  then  I  began  a  series  of  questions.
I  was  unwilling  to  believe  that  she  was  dead,  having  left  her  in
perfect  health  only  five  days  before.     I  asked  her  for  details  and


A  GENERAL  INVESTIGATION  23

learned  that  she  had  been  taken  ill  at  eight  o'clock  on  Tuesday-
evening,  that  she  had  been  carried  to  her  home,  and  that  she  had
died  at  eleven  o'clock,  of  a  hemorrhage.  I  have  already  said  that
she  drank.  (The  young  girl  knew  her,  but  since  going  to  the
country  a  month  before  had  had  no  news  of  her.)  This  happened
on  Thursday.  On  Saturday,  when  I  returned  to  Nantes,  as  soon  as
I  got  out  of  the  train,  I  went  to  the  cafe,  and  there,  to  my  stupe-
faction, they  gave  me  confirmation  of  this  woman's  death  and  of  all
the  details  she  had  given  me.

Such  was  the  experience  I  had.  I  have  since  told  it  more  than
twenty  times,  when  the  conversation  turned  on  this  general  subject.
Autosuggestion  cannot  explain  it.  I  had  left  this  woman  in  per-
fect health;  I  had  no  reason  for  thinking  of  her;  the  girl  who  was
at  the  little  table  had  not  seen  her  for  a  month,  and  was  not  in
correspondence  with  her.

Neberry,

(Letter  4407.)  Nantes.

The  customary  investigation  which  I  made,  after  this  com-
munication, allows  no  doubt  of  its  authenticity.  Unquestion-
ably, spiritualistic  experiments  are  at  least  half  the  time  with-
out intrinsic  value  and  reflect  naively  the  mentality  of  the
experimenters,  but  in  this  case  the  manifestation  was  spon-
taneous, unexpected,  and  singularly  precise.

The  same  correspondent  became  a  spiritualist  of  unalterable
conviction,  as  every  observer  is  convinced  of  what  he  has
seen,  as  a  mason  is  sure  that  the  walls  which  lie  has  built
were  constructed  of  stones,  and  a  planter  is  sure  that  his
fields  have  yielded  him  grain.  He  told  me  of  another  occur-
rence no  less  remarkable.  It  concerns  a  manifestation  on  the
part  of  a  man  who  committed  suicide — one  that  took  place
some  days  after  his  death.     Here  is  the  experience:

My  grandparents  kept  an  inn  in  Bordeaux;  sailors  were  the
chief  patrons  of  its  restaurant.  The  captain  of  a  vessel  sailing  the
high  seas  was  in  the  habit  of  stopping  at  this  inn  whenever  he  re-


24  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

turned  from  a  voyage;  he  used  to  spend  some  days  in  Bordeaux
before  rejoining  his  family  in  Rochefort.

One  day,  when  he  was  stopping  at  the  inn,  he  made  the  acquaint-
ance, in  the  city,  of  a  woman  of  the  streets,  who  stole  his  pocket-
book.  Desperate,  heartsick  at  having  to  go  back  to  his  family  after
this  misadventure,  he  hanged  himself  from  the  window-fastening  of
his  room.  The  next  morning,  disturbed  at  not  seeing  him  come  down,
they  went  upstairs  and  the  maid  found  him  hanged!  The  usu'al
formalities  were  observed,  and  his  family  communicated  with.  Some
days  afterward  my  aunt  (she  told  me  this  story;  she  is  incapable
of  lying;  she  is  now  living  in  Nantes) — my  aunt  and  the  maid  were
busy  putting  the  captain's  room  to  rights  and  were  talking  of  him,
when  suddenly  the  bedside  table  was  set  violently  in  motion,  and  the
curtains  of  the  bed  shook.  The  maid,  terrified,  fled  to  the  stair-
way, and  my  aunt,  frightened,  went  to  hide.

Some  time  afterward,  this  same  room  was  occupied  by  a  simple
sailor.  He  had  not  been  told  the  story  (in  hotels  they  try  rather  to
prevent  talk  of  these  happenings).  Coming  in  one  night,  he  lighted
the  candle ;  it  went  out.  He  lighted  it  once  more ;  again  it  went  out.
Thinking  there  must  be  a  draft  (he  himself  told  this  story  the  next
day),  he  went  to  the  window,  but  it  was  tightly  shut.  He  lighted
the  candle  once  more.  It  went  out  still  another  time.  Fear  gripped
him;  he  hesitated  as  to  what  he  should  do.  Should  he  go  down-
stairs and  tell  people  what  had  happened?  But  it  was  late;  every
one  was  in  bed;  they  would  make  fun  of  him,  think  he  had  been
drinking.  He  lighted  the  candle  again,  and  this  time  it  did  not
go  out.  He  got  into  bed,  and  at  once  the  curtains  began  to  shake.
The  prey  of  an  agitation  that  may  be  easily  comprehended,  he  did
not  sleep,  and  went  down  early  in  the  morning  to  tell  what  had  hap-
pened. Then  they  told  him  that  in  that  room  a  captain  had  com-
mitted suicide.

What  conclusion  must  we  draw?  In  my  opinion  a  spirit,  a
soul — in  a  word,  the  captain — manifested  itself.  What  did  he
wish?  Doubtless,  something  difficult  to  guess.  What  do  we  know
about  it?  Has  it  not  been  remarked  that  persons  who  have  com-
mitted suicide  have  a  tendency  to  return  to  the  scene  of  their
suicide?

G.  Neberrt.


A  GENERAL  INVESTIGATION  25

When  I  asked  for  an  investigation,  the  author  of  this  nar-
ration was  good  enough  to  answer :

Nantes,  April  14,  1921.

I  have  been  to  see  my  aunt,  who  was  a  witness  of  the  phenomena
that  occurred  after  the  captain's  suicide.  It  was  three  or  four
days  after  the  captain's  death  when,  busy  making  the  bed  in  the
room  in  which  this  man  had  killed  himself,  she  saw,  as  did  the  maid
in  the  hotel,  the  bedside  table  move  of  itself  and  make  a  rather  loud
noise.

Here  I  must  remark  that,  while  making  the  bed,  the  maid  talked
about  the  captain;  it  was  at  that  moment  that  the  phenomenon  took
place.

And  it  was  five  or  six  days  later  that  the  sailor  who  slept  in  that
room  was  terrified  by  his  candle  going  out  three  consecutive  times,
and,  once  he  was  lying  down,  by  the  curtains  of  the  bed  moving
of  themselves.  Here  is  a  detail  which  I  had  not  given  you  and
which  my  aunt  told  me:  this  sailor,  according  to  her  account,  said
that  he  perceived  in  a  comer  of  the  room  a  form,  a  shade  which  he
could  not  explam.

I  am  convinced,  dear  Master,  that  if  all  those  persons  should
write  to  you  who  have  been  personal  witnesses  of  the  occurrences
which  you  are  seeking  to  elucidate,  the  sum  total  of  their  accounts
would  fill  libraries.

G.  Neberry.

(Letter  4435.)

This  fourth  contribution  to  our  proofs  of  phenomena  ob-
served post  mortem  shows  us  their  variety.  The  case  is
complex  enough.  To  judge  from  the  information  which  I
have  been  able  to  obtain,  it  is  unquestionable.  Here  is  an-
other, still  more  singular,  and  rather  startling.  However,
we  cannot  question  it,  either.  I  defy  the  most  skepti-
cal of  those  who  contradict  me  to  explain  the  following  ex-
perience, unless  they  are  ready  to  admit  a  manifestation
on  the  part  of  some  one  dead.     The  apparition  of  which  we


26  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

shall  speak  came  spontaneously,  two  days  after  dissolu-
tion.^

A  friend  of  Gurney,  the  author,  with  Myers  and  Podmore,
of  that  important  work  ''Phantasms  of  the  Living," — a  cer-
tain Mr.  D (who  begged  Gurney  not  to  reveal  his  name),

was  the  owner  of  two  factories,  one  in  Glasgow,  the  other  in
London.  He  had  in  his  employ  a  weak  and  delicate  young
boy  named  Robert  Mackenzie  who  had  left  him,  ill-advisedly,
after  three  years.  Some  years  after  his  departure  the  fol-
lowing occurred:

One  day,  in  the  street,  Mr.  D remarked  a  young  man

who  was  devouring  avidly  a  bit  of  dry  bread.  He  looked  like
a  starving  man,  on  the  point  of  dying  of  hunger.  It  was
Robert  Mackenzie.  The  manufacturer  halted,  and  Listened  to
the  words  of  his  former  employee — words  of  deep  regret  at
having  left  a  place  which  had  assured  him  his  daily  bread.

Mr.  D consented  to  take  him  back.     Mackenzie  expressed

his  gratitude  with  deepest  emotion.  From  that  time  on,  with-
out ever  making  a  show  of  his  feelings,  he  seemed  to  live
only  for  his  employer.  As  soon  as  he  caught  sight  of  him,
his  large,  pensive  eyes  fixed  themselves  upon  him,  following
all  his  movements.  His  protector  was  the  guiding  star  of
his  life.

The  manufacturer  went  to  live  in  London,  where  he  forgot,
after  a  time,  his  Scotch  workmen.  On  a  certain  Friday  eve-
ning the  workmen  gave  their  annual  ball.  Robert  Mackenzie,
who  did  not  mingle  much  with  the  others,  asked  permission
to  serve  in  the  refreshment-room.  Everything  passed  off  well,
and  the  festivities  continued  into  Saturday.

The  following  Tuesday,  a  little  before  eight  o'clock,  in  his

house  on  Campden  Hill,  Mr.  D received  a  manifestation

which  he  sums  up  as  follows:

1  Proceedings  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  1885,  III,  95.
Myers,  Human  Personality   (1904),  II,  52.


A  GENERAL  INVESTIGATION  27

I  dreamed  that  I  was  seated  at  a  desk,  engaged  in  a  business  con-
versation with  a  gentleman  whom  I  do  not  know,  and  that  Mac-
kenzie came  toward  me.  Irritated,  I  asked  him  rather  brusquely  if
he  did  not  see  that  I  was  busy.  He  withdrew  with  an  air  of  annoy-
ance, then  approached  again  as  though  requesting  an  immediate
interview.  I  reproached  him,  quite  harshly,  for  his  lack  of  tact.
Meanwhile  the  man  with  whom  I  was  talking  took  his  leave  and
Mackenzie  came  forward.

"What  does  all  this  mean,  Robert  f'  I  asked,  rather  annoyed.
"Didn't  you  see  I  was  busy?"

"Yes,  sir,"  he  answered,  "but  I  must  speak  to  you  at  once."

"About  whaf?     What  is  it  that's  so  urgent f

"I  wish  to  tell  you,  sir,  that  I  am  accused  of  something  I  did  not
do.  I  want  you  to  know,  and  to  pardon  me  the  thing  for  which
people  blame  me,  for  I  'm  innocent."  He  then  added,  "I  did  n't  do
what  they  say  I  've  done."

"What's  that?"  I  asked.  He  repeated  the  same  words.  I  then
asked  him,  quite  naturally,  "But  how  can  I  pardon  you,  if  you  don't
tell  me  what  you  're  accused  of  ?"  I  shall  never  forget  the  emphatic
tone  of  his  answer,  in  Scotch  dialect:  "Ye  will  ken  it  soon.''  My
question  was  repeated  at  least  twice;  I  am  sure  that  his  reply  was
repeated  three  times,  in  the  most  earnest  way.  I  then  awakened,
with  a  certain  uneasiness  as  a  consequence  of  this  strange  dream.  I
was  asking  myself  if  it  had  a  meaning,  when  my  wife  rushed  into
my  room,  greatly  agitated,  an  open  letter  in  her  hand.  She  cried:
"Oh,  James!  something  terrible  happened  at  the  workmen's  ball:
Robert  Mackenzie  committed  suicide."  Understanding  then  the
meaning  of  the  vision,  I  answered  calmly  and  firmly,  "No,  he  did
not  commit  suicide." — "How  can  you  know  thatf" — "He  has  just
told  me."

When  he  appeared  to  me  I  had  been  struck  by  the  strangeness  of
his  appearance.  His  face  was  a  livid  blue,  and  on  his  hrow  were
to  he  seen  spots  UJce  drops  of  sweat.  I  did  not  know  what  that
meant.  But  this  is  what  had  happened.  When  he  had  gone  home
on  Saturday  night,  Mackenzie  had  taken  a  bottle  containing  nitric
acid,  thinking  that  it  was  his  bottle  of  whiskey;  he  had  poured  him-
self out  a  little  glass  of  it,  which  he  had  drunk  at  one  gulp.  He
had  died  on  Sunday,  in  terrible  agony.  It  was  thought  that  he  had
committed  suicide.     And  this  was  why  he  had  come  to  say  to  me


28  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

that  he  was  innocent  of  the  accusation  against  him.  Now,  it  was  a
remarkable  thing — I  had  not  had  the  slightest  idea  of  it  before — in
looking  up  the  symptoms  which  accompany  poisoning  hy  nitric  acid,
I  saw  that  they  were  practically  those  which  I  had  perceived  on
Boberfs  face.

It  was  soon  realized  that  a  mistake  had  been  made  in  attributing
his  death  to  suicide.  I  was  informed  of  this  the  next  day  through
a  letter  from  my  representative  in  Scotland.

This  apparition  was  due,  in  my  opinion,  to  the  excessive  grati-
tude of  Mackenzie,  whom  I  had  snatched  from  a  deplorable  con-
dition of  want,  and  to  his  keen  desire  to  stand  well  in  my  estimation.

Such  is  the  Glasgow  manufacturer's  story.  The  fact  that
the  workman  came,  after  his  so-called  suicide,  to  reveal  the
truth  to  him — is  this  not  testimony  as  to  survival  after  death  ?
It  is  worthy  of  note  that  in  England  suicide  is  held  to  be  a
crime.

The  investigation  made  by  the  Psychical  Society  leaves  no
doubt  as  to  the  exactitude  of  the  account  which  I  have  just
quoted.  Certainly,  in  this  case  there  was  a  manifestation  of
some  one  dead.  This  can  be  neither  suggestion  that  remained
latent  for  a  certain  time,^  nor  chance,  nor  anything  of  the
sort.

We  have,  therefore,  four  bits  of  personal  testimony  as  to
survival,  differing  absolutely  among  themselves.  To  deny
them,  four  different  hypotheses  would  be  necessary.

All  those  who  examine  this  testimony  honestly  and  fully
realize  that  none  of  us  has  the  right  to  consider  himself
justified  in  denying  it;  in  regarding  the  narrators  as  im-
postors, or  mad,  or  the  victims  of  hallucinations.     We  must

1  The  hypothesis  of  suggestion  remaining  latent  for  a  certain  time
cannot  explain  a  delay  of  forty-eight  hours.  I  agree  with  Myers,  the
originator  of  the  theory,  who  has  made  a  closer  study  than  I  of  the
attendant  conditions,  that  suggestion  may  remain  latent  only  for  a  few
hours.  (See  Human  Personality,  II,  13.)  We  cannot  admit,  either,
that  there  was  thought-transmission  on  the  part  of  the  wife,  who  had
read  the  letter,  since  this  letter  announced  the  suicide.


A  GENERAL  INVESTIGATION  29

acknowledge  frankly  that  there  is  here  a  whole  order  of
things  as  yet  unknown  to  scientific  investigation.  Let  us  also
read  the  following  account.  It  was  sent  me  from  Paris,  on
June  14,  1921 ;  I  was  asked  to  suppress  the  names.

My  yoimg  friend  Marguerite  ,  who  is  now  twenty-two,  had

the  misfortune  to  lose,  in  the  same  year  (1918),  her  father,  her
mother,  and  her  sister  Jeanne,  aged  sixteen.  Jeanne,  who  had
always  been  in  perfect  health,  began  to  sink  soon  after  her  mother's
death;  her  lungs  became  infected,  and  after  having  languished  for
five  or  six  months,  the  poor  little  thing  succumbed  in  her  turn.

Marguerite  and  Jeanne,  who  loved  each  other  very  dearly  and
were  never  separated,  slept  in  the  same  room.  Their  grandmother
had  lived  with  them  since  the  time  they  became  orphans.  About
two  months  after  their  mother's  death,  Marguerite  woke  up  one
morning  about  five  o'clock,  and  heard  a  rustling  in  the  room.  She
opened  her  eyes  and  saw  a  silhouette,  clad  in  black,  glide  to  the  foot
of  her  bed,  draw  near  her  sister's  bed,  bend  over  Jeanne,  who  was
asleep,  and  kiss  her  on  the  brow.  Marguerite  sat  up,  gazed  more
attentively,  and  said,  "Why,  it's  Mama!"  At  the  same  instant
the  shade  stood  erect  and  vanished  as  it  had  come.  The  young  girl,
deeply  affected,  got  up  noiselessly,  that  she  might  not  disturb  her
sister, — already  ailing  at  that  time, — and  ran  to  her  grandmother's
room.  Her  gTandmother  was  sleeping  soundly.  She  awakened  her
and  asked,  "Meme,  was  it  you  who  came  and  kissed  Jeanne,  in  her
bed?"  And  she  told  her  what  she  had  just  seen,  "l^o,  dear,"  her
grandmother  answered;  "I  didn't  stir;  you've  been  dreaming.  Go
back  to  bed  quickly,  and  sleep  two  whole  hours  longer."

Marguerite  went  back  to  her  room,  trying  to  persuade  herself
that  she  had  been  dreaming.  But  as  she  was  getting  back  into  bed
her  sister  awakened  and  said  to  her:  "Oh,  what  a  pity  that  you
woke  me  up !  I  was  so  happy !  While  I  was  asleep  Mama  came
and  kissed  me.  She  was  dressed  in  black,  as  she 's  always  been
since  Papa  died ;  she  brushed  against  the  foot  of  your  bed,  then  she
came  toward  me.  She  bent  over,  and  I  felt  her  kiss  me  on  the  fore-
head."   Marguerite  then  told  her  of  her  vision.

How  shall  we  explam  this  vision,  if  it  was  not  the  real  presence,


30  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

in  her  eMldren's  room,  of  this  mother,  dead  for  two  months,  who
had  come  back  to  place  a  kiss  on  the  brow  of  her  daughter  who  was
soon  to  join  her?  Was  it  a  physiological,  spiritual,  or  astral  pres-
ence? I  do  not  know,  but  it  was  an  indubitable  presence,  percep-
tible to  the  eyes  of  the  girl  who  was  awake,  and  to  the  sensibilities
of  her  who  was  asleep.

Marguerite  still  had  tears  in  her  eyes  when  she  gave  me  the  de-
tails of  this  scene.  She  is  a  healthy,  robust  young  girl,  very  alert,
straightforward,  and  spontaneous,  highly  intellectual,  and  not  in  the
least  predisposed  to  morbid  imaginings.

Madame  Corneille.

(Letters  4542  and  4575.)

My  correspondence  with  the  narrator  showed  me  that  the
foregoing  account  was  well  founded.

Always  to  put  forward  hallucinations  as  an  explanation
of  these  phenomena  is  no  longer  in  accord  with  our  actual
observation.  There  were  in  this  case  two  absolutely  inde-
pendent witnesses,  since  one  of  the  two  sisters  was  awake
and  the  other  asleep.  Just  as,  in  the  preceding  case,  young
Mackenzie  manifested  himself  beyond  a  doubt,  so  the  actual-
ity of  the  apparition  of  the  two  young  girls'  mother  must
be  admitted  with  the  same  conviction.  Let  us  remember
that  time  and  space  are  not  what  they  seem  to  us.  The
mother  of  these  two  young  girls  may  have  manifested  herself
without  really  having  been  there.

The  hypothesis  of  hallucination  is,  certainly,  no  more  ten-
able in  the  following  case :  a  child  of  twelve  seeing  his  dead
father  and  dying  in  his  turn.

Tommy  Brown  was  a  poor  boy,  twelve  years  old,  belonging  to  a
numerous  and  destitute  family.  His  health  was  shattered;  he  was
stretched  on  a  hospital  bed.  His  father  had  died,  two  years  before,
in  a  bed  near  this  one.

On  a  certain  night  he  said  to  his  mother,  "Mamma,  there 's
Father."

'^o,  dear/'  his  mother  answered ;  "there 's  no  one  there."


A  GENERAL  INVESTIGATION  31

"Yes  there  is!  Why,  don't  you  see  him  near  the  bed?  Speak  to
him."

She  saw  nothing,  and  the  nurse  saw  nothing.

"What's  your  papa  doing f'  the  mother  asked,  at  length.

"He 's  looking  at  you."  And,  a  moment  afterward :  ''He 's
looking  at  me,  and  beckoning  me  to  follow  him,  so  he  can  take  me
away  with  him."

While  speaking  to  those  near  her,  the  mother  remarked  that  the
little  boy's  father  had  been  dead  for  two  years.  The  child  heard
this  and  said:

"No,  he 's  not  dead,  since  he  's  there  and  beckoning  to  me  with
his  hand.     He 's  calling  me ;  he 's  calling  me."

Talking  in  this  way,  the  child  lost  consciousness.  He  died  some
days  later.i

Mrs.  Chambers,
Volunteer  nurse.

A  child's  ingenuous  testimony  is  as  valid  as  the  testimony
of  a  man.

In  the  following  pages  rather  a  large  number  of  analogous
occurrences  will  pass  before  our  eyes.  The  souls  of  the  dead
exist,  see,  hear,  manifest  themselves.  The  chapters  about  to
be  read  will  offer  abundant  proof  of  this.

These  attested  cases  do  away  with  a  frequent  cause  for
sadness.  The  methods  of  present-day  science  can  establish
their  truth,  but  cannot  as  yet  explain  them.  If  photography
had  not  been  invented,  we  should  not  know  that  light  can
stamp  upon  a  plate  images  which  remain  latent,  invisible,
until  a  chemical  poured  upon  the  plate  causes  them  to  ap-
pear. It  may  be  that  the  influence  of  the  dead  upon  our
brains  gives  rise  to  images,  to  phantoms,  only  under  certain
physical  and  psychic  conditions.

Despite  their  relative  infrequency,  manifestations  of  the
dead  are,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  numerous  and  varied.  There
are  all  sorts  of  them.     Here  is  an  eighth  example,  a  partic-

'i- Light,  1915,  p.  502;  Luce  e  Omhra,  1919;  Annales  psychiques,  1919.


32  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

ularly  odd  apparition  described  in  Myers. 's  work  ''Human
Personality"  (Volume  II,  page  27).^  It  was  told,  first  hand,
to  Professors  Royce  and  Hodgson.

The  narrator  stated  that  his  sister,  a  young  woman  of  eighteen,
had  died  suddenly  of  cholera,  in  Saint  Louis,  in  1867.  On  a  trip
to  the  United  States  in  1876 — -that  is  to  say,  nine  years  afterward
— he  was  busy  in  his  room  one  day,  toward  noon,  writing  orders,
and  was  smoking  an  excellent  cigar,  when  he  thought  he  saw  some
one  sitting  at  his  left,  with  one  arm  on  the  table.  At  once  he
turned  in  that  direction  and  saw  his  sister.  Instantly  he  had  a
feeling  of  happiness,  for  he  had  been  devoted  to  her  and  had  in-
finitely regretted  her  loss.  But  she  vanished  at  once.  He  asked
himself  if  he  had  been  dreaming;  but  his  cigar  in  his  mouth,  his
pen  in  his  hand,  the  ink  still  wet  upon  the  paper  proved  to  him
that,  undoubtedly,  he  was  wide  awake.  To  him  she  had  appeared
absolutely  alive;  her  eyes  had  gazed  at  him  with  great  calmness.

This  vision  had  impressed  him  so  intensely  that  he  took  the  train
at  once,  that  he  might  go  and  tell  his  family  of  it.  His  father  made
fun  of  him,  calling  him  the  dupe  of  an  hallucination,  and  people
listened  to  him  only  with  incredulity  and  skepticism.  But  in
describing  the  vision  as  it  had  appeared  to  him,  he  mentioned  a
scratch  on  the  right  side  of  the  face,  which  had  appeared  to  him
fresh  and  recent.  His  mother  was  so  struck  with  this  detail  that
she  fell  in  a  faint.  When  she  regained  consciousness,  she  declared
that  she  herself  had  made  the  scratch  on  her  daughter  when  she  was
arranging  her  burial  robes;  that  afterward  she  had  hidden  it  by
covering  it  with  powder,  and  that  no  one  in  the  world  could  know  of
it.  Her  son's  vision,  therefore,  proved  to  her  incontestably  the  au-
thenticity of  the  apparition,  and  she  saw  in  it,  at  the  same  time,
an  announcement  of  her  early  death,  which  came,  indeed,  two  weeks
later.

The  narrator  adds  that  the  impression  made  on  him  by  the
sudden  apparition  of  his  sister,  seemingly  so  absolutely  alive,

1  See,  also,  Proceedings  of  the  8.  P.  R.,  VI,  17,  and  Annates  psy-
cMques,  1909,  p.  325.


A  GENERAL  INVESTIGATION  33

was  stronger  than  that  made  by  all  the  other  happenings  oi
his  life  put  together.  The  clear  sunshine  which  lighted  up
his  room,  his  contentment  with  life,  the  fact  that  his  business
was  doing  well,  that  a  cigar  was  in  his  hand,  that  his  state
of  mind  was  alert — everything  proved  to  him  that  the  hy-
pothesis of  an  hallucination  was  inadmissible.

This,  too,  is  my  conviction.  All  would  seem  to  point  to
its  being  well  founded,  despite  possible  objections.  For  ex-
ample, Mr.  Podmore,  who  does  not  admit  the  reality  of
apparitions,  and  thinks  that  he  can  explain  them  as  thought-
transmission,  elects  to  believe  that  precisely  at  the  moment
of  this  manifestation  the  dead  girl's  mother  thought  of  her
daughter,  of  the  scratch,  and  that  her  idea  was  transmitted,
afar,  to  her  son.  This  hypothesis  involves,  really,  too  many
suppositions  for  it  to  be  acceptable.  Why  should  she  have
thought  of  all  this  precisely  nine  years  afterward?  And
why  should  the  idea  have  reached  her  son,  on  a  business
trip?  We  think,  also,  of  the  possibility  of  a  sudden  optical
illusion  on  the  part  of  the  dead  girl's  brother.  But  (1)  he
was  not  thinking  of  her;  (2)  he  did  not  know  that  the  scratch
existed.  Is  it  not  simpler  to  admit  the  reality  of  the  appari-
tion?

We  have  just  said  that  manifestations  of  the  dead  are  as
varied  as  they  are  numerous,  and  that  there  are  all  kinds  of
them.     Here   is   still   another   one,   particularly   remarkable.

It  is  usually  difficult  to  separate  the  testimony  for  survival
after  death  from  psychological  factors  in  the  minds  of  the
living,  and  to  be  certain  that  some  one  dead  is  the  undeniable
cause  of  manifestations.  The  case  which  we  shall  now  ex-
amine seems  to  me  to  fall  into  this  category.  It  was  revealed
through  the  valued  work  of  the  Nancy  Society  for  Psychical
Investigation.

Monsieur  P.  Bossan,  accountant  of  the  telegraph  company
in  Grenoble,  wrote  me  on  July  28,  1920 :


34  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

In  the  pages  which  I  shall  put  before  your  eyes,  I  declare  that
all  is  scrupulously  veracious.  I  am  the  surviving  husband  of
Augustine  Chabert,  and  I  authorize  you  to  make  what  use  you  wish
of  these  documents,  in  view  of  the  service  you  are  doing  humanity.
I  am  giving  you  all  the  proper  names,  only  some  of  which  were
published  in  the  "Nancy  Bulletin."

Here  is,  first,  an  extract  from  the  official  report  of  the  first
spiritualistic  seance,  which  took  place  on  January  29,  1913.  The
witnesses  speaking  are  natives  of  Nancy;  their  depositions  were
summed  up  by  the  secretary  in  these  words:

"The  table  made  a  few  movements,  after  which  the  name  Albert
Revol  was  dictated.  We  asked  this  'entity'  if  it  could  prove  its
identity.  By  spirit  rapping  we  were  told  that  Revol  had  been  dead
for  two  years;  that  he  had  died  at  the  age  of  fifty-four;  that  he
had  lived  in  Pontcharra  (Isere)  in  the  Grande-Rue;  had  followed
the  trade  of  tailor;  was  married  and  the  father  of  three  children.
One  of  them,  Eugene,  aged  twenty,  was  in  the  same  trade  in  which
he  had  been.

"These  details,"  the  secretary  added,  "interested  us  all  the  more
from  the  fact  that  none  of  us  was  familiar  with  the  Province  of
Dauphine.  Only  one  of  the  participants  had  crossed  the  Depart-
ment of  I'Isere  by  rail  at  a  time  long  past,  but  suspected  no  more
than  any  of  the  other  persons  present  the  existence  of  Pontcharra,
and  still  less  that  of  the  Revol  family.

"  *I  died  suddenly/  the  mysterious,  unknown  being  continued,  'and
I  am  still  uneasy!'  We  insisted  on  details.  He  added:  'I  have
two  daughters,  Helene  and  Henriette.  I  was  not  buried  there.  My
earthly  remains  lie  in  Grignon.     It  was  my  native  place.'

"We  knew  only  one  Grignon,  in  Seine-et-Oise.  We  remarked  to
Revol  that  this  place  is  very  far  from  Pontcharra.

"  'No,  it 's  very  near.  I  still  have  my  mother.  She  is  living  near
us,  in  Grignon.'

"This  seemed  to  us  unlikely.  If  the  mother  of  the  spirit  Revol
were  living  near  her  son,  it  could  not  be  at  Grignon.  We  asked
Revol  to  whom  we  could  address  ourselves  in  order  to  verify  these
assertions.  He  answered:  'Write  to  Madame  Goudon.'  Then:
^No,  I'm  afraid  of  falsehood;  write  to  the  parish  priest  instead;  he


A  GENERAL  INVESTIGATION  35

"knows  me;  you  must  not  tell  him  why  you  are  writing,  or  speak  of
spirits.     Speak  of  the  family.'

"I  wrote  to  the  town  clerk  in  Ponteharra,  asking  him  for  the
death  certificate  of  this  Revol.  I  requested  him  to  tell  me  of  what
illness  he  had  died ;  what  his  profession  was ;  if  he  had  left  children ;
their  names  and  ages.     I  received  the  following  death  certificate:

"Commune  or  Pontcharea
"Registry   Office  of  Births,  Marriages  and  Deaths.
"Death  Certificate.
"Upon   the   register   of   births,    marriages,    and    deaths    of   the   parish   of    Pont-
eharra,   canton   of  Goncelin,    Department  of  the  Isere,   it   is  recorded   that   Revol
(Frangois-Antoine-Albin),    son    of    the    deceased    Frangois    and    Gaillard     (Adele),
a  widower  by  his  first  marriage  with   Billaz    (Elisa- Josephine),    the  husband,    by
his  second  marriage,  of  Goudon    (Philomene-Leontine),   died  in  this   commune  on
March    sixth,    nineteen    hundred    and    eleven,    and    that    his    death    was    recorded
that  same  day  in  the  town  haU  of  the  said  commune,  number  75.
"Ponteharra,  February  4,  1913.

"The  Registrar  of  Births,  Marriages  and  Deaths:
"Fautier."

^^Thus,  Revol  had  really  lived,  and  had  been  dead  for  two  years.
He  had  married  a  Mademoiselle  Goudon.  The  existence  of  Madame
Goudon  was  confirmed;  her  name  had  been  mentioned  as  that  of
some  one  able  to  give  information.

"The  certificate  was  accompanied  by  a  letter  from  which  the  fol-
lowing has  been  taken :

"Ponteharra,   February   4,    1913.
"Department  of  the  Isere
"District  of  Grenolle
"Ponteharra  Town  HaU
"I  found  no  Revol  (Albert),  but  only  Revol  (Fran§ois-AntDine-Albin),  who  died
suddenly  in  Ponteharra  on  March  6,   1911.

"This  Revol  was  a  merchant  tailor,  and  he  left  three  children  born  of  a  former
marriage.     These  children  are  :
"(1)    Revol   (Eugene  Isidore)
"(2)    Revol    (Marie-Helene-Lucie-Blanche)
"(3)    Revol    (Henriette-Marie-Philomene)

"Monsieur  Revol  died,  as  I  told  you,  suddenly, — of  an  embolia  of  the  heart,
I  believe, — without  having  had  any  illness.

"(Signed)    FAUTIER."

"It  appears  from  this  letter  that  Revol  had  really  been  a  merchant
tailor,  and  that  he  had  three  children  whose  sex  and  Christian
names  had  been  given  with  precision.  There  is  a  difference  in
Revol's  Christian  name:  Albin  instead  of  Albert..  I  must  remark
that  this  given  name  had  been  dictated  by  means  of  the  table,  and


36  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

a,ll  those  who  have  experimented  by  this  method  know  that  people
have  an  annoying  habit  of  wishing  to  end  a  word  before  the  dicta-
tion has  been  completed,  in  order  to  save  time.

"I  wrote  once  more  to  the  town  clerk  in  Pontcharra,  asking  him
to  tell  me  at  what  age  Revol  had  died  and  what  street  he  had  lived
in;  I  also  asked  him  to  clear  up  a  point  as  to  which  we  were  in-
tensely curious:  the  spot  where  Revol  had  been  buried.  For  in
spite  of  my  investigation  I  had  been,  able  to  discover  no  parish  with
the  name  of  Grignon  other  than  the  one  in  Seine-et-Oise.^  I  re-
ceived the  following  answer:

"Pontcharra,  February  19,  1913.
"My  dear  Sir:

"In  reply  to  j'our  letter  of  the  sixteenth  of  this  month,  I  wish  to  inform  you.
that  Monsieur  Revol  died  at  the  age  of  fifty-four.  While  alive,  he  lived  in  our
city,  in  the  Grande-Rue,  and  he  was  buried  in  the  cemetery  of  Grignon  parish,
in  the  commune  of  Pontcharra.

"While  on  this  subject,  I  must  teU  you  that  our  commune  is  divided  into  two
parishes,  each  of  which  has  its  cemetery.

"(Signed)  Fauteee."

"The  mystery  of  Grignon  was  thus  cleared  up.  Revol  had  been
absolutely  right  in  telling  us  that  he  had  been  buried  in  Grignon,
the  name  of  one  of  the  parishes  of .  Pontcharra.  This  letter  also
confirms  the  age  which  he  had  given  us  as  his  own  age,  at  his  death,
and  the  fact  that  he  dwelt  in  the  Grande-Rue.

"My  investigation  established  the  truth  of  all  information  given
by  ^the  spirit  Revol'  to  make  known  its  identity."

Such  is  the  account  of  the  zealous  secretary  of  the  Nancy  Society.

At  another  seance,  on  the  fifth  of  the  following  March,  the  com-
munication given  below  was  revealed  by  a  writing  medium  and  not
by  rapping:

"  *I  am  a  friend  of  Revol.  I  lived  two  centuries  ago.  I  grew  to
know  him  in  the  Beyond,  for  I  came  from  the  same  region.  Chabert
is  my  name.'

"  'Have  you  any  descendants?'

"  Yes,  they  live  in  Grenoble.  They  are  my  grandnephews.  I
watched  over  my  grandniece  closely.  I  protected  her,  but  she  died,
and  I  can  tell  you  where  her  grave  is.'

II  myself  know  of  another  one,  Grignon  near  Montbard  (Cote-d'Or),
where  I  inaugurated  the  observatory  of  Dom  Damey,  in  1890.     C.  F.


A  GENERAL  INVESTIGATION  37


"  'What  was  her  name  V

"  ^She  was  named  Marie-Augustine  Chabert/


Was  she  married?  Is  her  husband  still  living?  If  he  is,  what
is  his  name?     What  is  his  profession?'

"  Taul  Bossan.     He  is  a  clerk  in  the  Grenoble  post  office/

"  'How  long  has  your  niece  been  dead  f

"  Tor  about  three  years.  I  have  n't  yet  a  precise  idea  of  time.
She  lived  in  the  Nouveau  Jardin  School,  a  boarding-school.'

"  'How  old  was  she  when  she  died  ?'

"  'Forty-three,  I  believe.'

"  'What  did  she  die  of?'

"  'She  suffered  for  a  long  time ;  I  see,  principally,  her  diseased
stomach.'

"  'Had  she  any  brothers  and  sisters  ?'

"  'Yes,  but  I  don't  see  them ;  I  go,  chiefly,  to  her  grave.'

"'What  sort  of  grave  is  it?'

"  'A  very  simple  stone,  standing  upright.  It  bears  the  inscrip-
tion :  Marie-Augustine  Chabert,  wife  of  Bossan,  died  in  her  forty-
third  year.'

"  'Was  she  buried  in  Grenoble  V

"  'No,  in  Chatte.'

"This  name,  as  that  of  a  commune,  seemed  strange  to  us.  We
persisted:  'Aren't  you  making  a  mistake?  Is  it  possible  that
there  is  a  district  called  Chatte?'

'•  'Yes,  her  grave  is  there.'

"We  asked  the  spirit  to  make  an  effort  and  to  tell  us  about
Augustine  Chabert's  brothers  and  sisters.  He  said  that  he  found
difficulty  in  doing  this.     At  length  he  added:

"  'There  is  Elie.  He  is  in  Lans.  There  is  also  Isabelle ;  she  is
not  married;  she  is  a  teacher  in  a  district.'

"'Which  one?'

"  'I  can't  tell ;  it 's  a  compound  word.  There  is  Monsieur  Naud ;
he  is  a  relative.  There  is  Eugenie-Henri  Chabert;  there  is  also  a
canon;  they  are  people  who  are  very  well  off.  You  must  all  think
of  Augustine,  to  hasten  her  liberation.  You  must  tell  the  superin-
tendent of  the  cemetery  to  put  flowers  on  her  grave,  for  she  loved
them  dearly.'


38  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

^'We  asked  further  questions  as  to  his  identity,  but  the  spirit
Chabert  said  to  us :  You  don't  need  all  that  in  order  to  put  flowers
on  her  grave.'     And  he  left  us.

"After  this  unexpected  eommunieation,  we  consulted  a  gazetteer,
that  we  might  find  out  if  the  commune  of  Chatte  existed  and  if  there
were  a  Lans  in  the  Isere.  All  was  confirmed.  The  Grenoble  Town
Hall  sent  the  following  quotation  from  Madame  Bossan's  death  cer-
tificate :

"Upon  the  register  of  births,  marriages,  and  deaths  of  the  city  of  Grenoble,
it  appears  that  Marie-Augustine  Chabert,  married  to  Joseph-Eugene-Paul  Bossan,
died   in   Grenoble  on   July   7,    1911.

"Grenoble,   March  26,    1913.

"We  had,  therefore,  through  this  document,  confirmation  of  the
fact  that  Augustine  Bossan  had  really  existed;  that  she  had  been
married  to  Monsieur  Paul  Bossan  and  that  she  died  at  the  address
given.  The  location  of  the  tomb  was  not  revealed,  nor  how  long
it  had  been  there."

The  judicious,  conscientious  secretary  of  the  Nancy  Society
thought  that  he  could  easily  obtain  the  additional  information  by
writing  to  the  town  hall  in  Chatte.  He  wrote,  therefore,  to  the
town  clerk,  asking  him  to  be  so  good  as  to  send  Augustine  Bossan's
death  certificate,  details  as  to  her  family,  her  grave,  etc.  Here  is
a  quotation  from  the  reply  he  received:

"Chatte,  April  15,  1913.
"Monsieur  Thomas,
"Secretary  of  the  Nancy  Society  for  Physical  Investigation :

"...  Enclosed  is  Madame  Bossan's  marriage  certificate;  it  takes  the  place
of  a  birth  certificate,  since  it  contains  all  the  information  to  be  found  in  the
latter.

"Madame  Bossan's  grave:  The  tombstone  is  upright  upon  a  vault.  It  faces
the  south,  and  stands  beside  the  path  in  the  middle  of  the  cemetery.  The  inscrip-
tion reads:  'Madame  Paul  Bossan,  nee  Chabert,  headmistress  of  the  boarding
school  of  Jardinde-Ville,   in  Grenoble,   1867-1911.'

"Madame  Bossan  died  in  Grenoble,  in  July,  1911,  and  was  buried  in  Chatte,
at  that  same  time.

"She  was  born  in  Lans,  a  commune  of  the  canton  of  Villard-de-Lans  (Isere).
She  had,  in  fact,  two  brothers:  one,  Helie,  who  is  now  a  landowner  in  Lans,
and  the  other  Amedee,  who  was  a  road-surveyor  in  Voiron.

"She  had  three  sisters:  one,  Isabelle,  who  was  first  a  lay  teacher,  then  a  nun
in  the  convent  of  the  Ursulines,  in  TuUins  (Isere),  and  is  now  a  lay  teacher
in  La  Buisse,  near  Voiron    (Isere).

"Another:  Sophie,  the  wife  of  Naud,  a  landowner  in  Beaulieu  (Isere).  And
finallv,   a  third,  Eugenie,  married  to  Henri  Chabert,  her  first  cousin.

I'The   Town  Clerk:

"Deevont."


A  GENERAL  INVESTIGATION  39

"Marriage  Certificate

"On  August  19,  1891,  were  married  in  our  commune  Monsieur  Joseph  Eugene-
Paul  Bossan,  born  in  the  commune  of  Chatte  on  September  23,  1865,  son  of,
etc.  .  .  .  and  Mademoiselle  Marie  Augustine  Chabert,  born  in  the  commune  of
Lans,  on  December  10,  1867,  daughter  of,  etc.   ...

"Saint-Marcellin,   April   15,   1913.

"The   Mayor:     Nacrairb."

"These  statements  confirm  the  information  given  by  the  spirit
Chabert,  almost  in  its  entirety.  His  niece,  Augustine  Chabert,  was
indeed  married  to  Monsieur  Paul  Bossan,  post-office  clerk.  She  had
died  when  head-mistress  of  the  boarding-school  of  the  Jardin  de
Ville-de- Grenoble,  and  was  buried  in  Chatte.  The  upright  stone
bears  an  inscription  differing  in  its  wording  from  that  given  by
the  spirit  Chabert.  This  is  not  surprising,  since  the  spirit  had
warned  us  that  he  could  not  be  exact.

"According  to  the  writing  on  the  tombstone  and  the  marriage
certificate,  Augustine  Chabert  died  at  the  age  of  forty-four,  or,
to  be  more  exact,  at  the  age  of  forty-three  and  a  half,  since  she
was  born  on  December  10,  1867,  and  died  on  July  7,  1911.  The
spirit  Chabert  had  said  she  was  forty-three.

"We  learn,  too,  that  Augustine  really  had  a  brother  named  Helie,
who  was  living  in  Lans;  a  sister  Isabelle,  unmarried,  and  a  teacher
in  La  Buisse,  a  compound  word  which  Chabert  had  not  been  able
to  give;  another  sister  married  to  a  Monsieur  Naud,  who  was,  as
a  matter  of  fact,  a  relative,  since  he  had  married  a  sister  of  Au-
gustine. While  giving  the  names,  the  spirit  Chabert  had  added:
^There  is  also  Eugenie-Henri  Chabert  J  We  find  the  explanation  of
this  bit  of  information  in  the  letter  from  the  town  clerk,  stating
that  the  third  sister,  Eugenie,  had  married  her  cousin,  Henri  Cha-
bert.

"All  the  details  given  by  the  spirit  Chabert  were  thus  confirmed.

"We  had  only  to  find  out,  then,  what  disease  Augustine  had  died
of,  and  if  she  had  a  relative  who  was  a  canon.

"This  information  was  fully  and  exactly  given."

The  upshot  of  these  revelations  was  to  put  the  Nancy
Psychical  Society  in  touch  with  Monsieur  Paul  Bossan.

As  my  readers  already  know,  Augustine  Chabert  ^s  sur-
viving husband  wrote  me  himself,  especially  to  call  my  at-


40  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

tention  to  these  odd  happenings.  Since,  by  the  positive
method,  we  must  always  seek  in  the  minds  of  the  living
what  might  be  attributed  to  those  minds,  I  made  the  remark
that  the  president  of  the  Nancy  Psychical  Society,  Colonel
Collet,  was  a  native  of  the  Province  of  Dauphine,  and  knew
the  region.  I  was  told  that  he  had  not  been  present  at  these
two  seances,  which  took  place  at  the  home  of  a  native  of
Nancy,  with  a  special  group.  Nevertheless  I  wished  for  more
precise  information,  and  I  asked  Monsieur  Bossan,  in  Gre-
noble, for  further  information.  His  reply,  of  August  2,
1920,  follows:

Colonel  Collet  did  not  know  my  family  nor  my  wife's  family
at  all.

During  his  very  short  annual  visits  to  Madame  Vacher  (Grenoble)
he  never  met  my  jDOor  dead  wife  at  the  latter's  home.

Monsieur  Leon  Vacher  will,  if  necessary,  corroborate  this  state-
ment. He  is  the  son  of  Madame  Vacher  (who  died  about  fifteen
days  ago).  He  lives  at  number  32,  avenue  Felix- Viallet,  in  Grenoble.
And  it  will  be  corroborated  as  unreservedly  by  Madame  Collet,
who  survives  her  husband  (8  rue  Sergeant-Bobillot,  in  Nancy).

As  may  be  readily  understood,  all  this  information  gave
me  a  feeling  of  complete  certainty.

A  letter  dated  July  28,  1920,  ended  as  follows:  ''On  June
20,  1898,  at  10 :50,  I  had  the  honor  of  greeting  the  author  of
'Stella'  at  the  little  window  of  the  telegraph  office  in  Grenoble,
and  of  shaking  hands  with  him."  My  correspondent  is,
therefore,  not  a  total  stranger  to  me.  At  this  date,  1898,
already  far  in  the  past,  the  events  which  have  just  been
related  were  still  dormant  in  the  unknown  future.

But  what  is  time  ?

And  this  Chabert,  dead  for  two  hundred  years,  Madame
Bossan 's  great-great-uncle,  who  made  the  acquaintance,  in
the  other  world,  of  his  compatriot  of  the  nineteenth  century,
Revol,  who  came  to  tell  experimenters  in  Nancy  that  his


A  GENERAL  INVESTIGATION  41

grandniece  was  buried  in  the  Province  of  Dauphine  in  a
commune  unknown  to  those  who  were  present,  as  was  the
commune  first  mentioned :  Grignon,  in  the  Isere !

Can  telepathic  transmission  from  the  living  to  the  living
explain  all  that?

Monsieur  Bossan  concludes,  from  this  long  discussion:

(1)  That  two  entities,  Revel  and  Chabert,  grew  to  know  each
other  in  the  Beyond.

(2)  That  the  entity  Chabert  was  interested  in  his  great-great-
niece,  while  she  was  alive  (my  poor  dead  wife)  and  that  he  is  still
protecting  her,

(3)  That  this  entity  described  exactly  the  location  of  the  grave-
stone, and  spoke  with  accuracy  of  the  husband,  children,  brothers,
sisters,  and  uncle  of  my  dear  wife.

The  accuracy  is,  in  general,  so  striking  that,  on  the  advice  of
friends,  who  are  also  your  readers,  I  think  I  should  inform  you
of  this  disturbing  and  extraordinary  communication  from  the  Be-
yond, beheving  that  it  will  command  your  attention.

Paul  Bossan^
Grenoble.

How  can  we  refuse  to  ponder  with  especial  care  my  esti-
mable correspondent 's  conclusions  ?

It  is  altogether  natural  that  we  should  seek  to  explain
phenomena  by  means  of  human  faculties,  known  or  unknown.
This  is,  in  fact,  what  a  contemporary  author,  Monsieur  Paul
Jagot,  desirous  of  solving  psychic  problems,  has  had  in  mind
in  a  recent  work  of  scientific  analysis. ^  He  even  reaches  a
definite  conclusion  in  the  matter,  for  we  may  read  on  page
221:  ''In  these  occurrences  I  see  absolutely  nothing  which
could  not  be  explained  by  the  functioning  of  the  medium's
own  psychic  faculties."  He  gives  in  this  connection  remark-
able examples  of  seeing  into  the  past,  of  instantaneous  mathe-

1  Methode  soientifique  moderne  de  magnetisme,  hypnotisme,  sugges-
tion (Paris,  1920).


42  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

matical  calculations,  of  thought-reading.  Well,  I  admit  that
I  do  not  at  all  see  how  the  Nancy  medium  could  have  divined
the  existence  of  those  who  had  died,  unless  we  formulate  a
random  hypothesis  bolder  than  the  spiritualistic  interpreta-
tion. It  seems  to  me,  moreover,  that  theories  which  exclude
all  but  a  given  number  of  facts  are  applicable  but  rarely  to
these  transcendental  investigations.

On  the  contrary,  occurrences  of  the  sort  which  we  have
just  given  in  detail,  as  well  as  the  eight  examples  put  before
the  eyes  of  readers  as  the  brief,  initial  inquiry  of  this  volume,
would  lead  us  to  grant  the  reality  of  survival  after  death
and  to  think,  also,  that  the  life  beyond  the  grave  is  a  con-
tinuation of  this  life.  We  may,  it  is  true,  suppose  that  minds
other  than  ours  exist,  minds  which  know  these  things;  but
this  would  be  a  much  more  complex  hypothesis.

In  meditating  upon  the  state  of  the  soul  after  death,  we
regret  at  times  that,  whatever  this  state  be,  it  is  our  destiny
no  longer  to  possess  the  organs  which  allow  us  to  enjoy  life :
the  eyes  with  which  we  gaze  upon  the  splendors  of  nature,
glorious  sunsets,  sublime  starry  nights,  woods,  mountains,
valleys,  brooks,  rivers,  seas;  the  sense  of  smell  which  allows
us  to  perceive  the  fragrance  of  growing  things  on  sweet
summer  evenings,  the  cut  grass,  the  mown  hay ;  ears  charmed
by  the  twittering  birds,  by  the  thousand  sounds  of  living
nature.  We  know  that  we  shall  no  longer  have  a  retina,
nor  auditory  nor  olfactory  nerves.  We  dread  the  loss  of
all  these  organs  of  perception,  and  ask  ourselves  what  an
immaterial  spirit  can  feel.

When,  on  a  beautiful  summer  day,  we  have  followed  the
coffin  of  a  dearly  loved  friend  to  the  cemetery  and  seen  it
lowered  into  the  grave,  and  when,  returning  to  every-day
life,  we  gaze  at  the  country-side  lighted  by  the  glad  radiance
of  a  splendid  sun,  we  reflect  that  this  friend  is  under  the
earth,  in  the  tomb,  that  his  eyes  are  closed  forever  and  will
no  longer  see  this  grateful,  tender  light.     This  stretch  of


A  GENERAL  INVESTIGATION  43

country,  these  trees,  these  prairies,  these  fields,  these  villages,
are  bathed  in  radiant  beams  which  no  longer  exist  for  him.
But  a  few  days  before,  his  eyes  were  enchanted.  To-day,  all
is  over.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  this  impression  is  erroneous.
The  soul  sees,  hears,  thinks,  remains  in  touch  with  this  ter-
restrial world.  Psychic  phenomena  have  shown  us,  in  Vol-
umes I  and  II  of  this  work,  that  vision  without  eyes,  hy  the
spirit y  exists  even  during  terrestrial,  material  life;  that  will
power  functions  without  words;  that  telepathic  transmission
of  thought  is  indubitable.  Those  phenomena  which  we  have
presented  from  the  beginning  of  Volume  III  show  us,  besides,
that  the  souls  of  the  dead  see  and  hear  without  the  bodily
organs  of  sight  and  hearing.

How  many  times  have  I  not  read  these  sentences,  marked
by  traces  of  tears,  in  the  letters  of  heartbroken  women:  ^'I
cannot  live  without  him.  Our  two  souls  were  one.  My  mind
is  torn.  Oh,  this  separation!  I  am  religious.  I  believe.  I
hope.  But  I  do  not  know !  If  I  only  knew  that  he  sees  me
and  that  he  sees  his  children ! ' '

I  have  always  replied :  ' '  Human  beings  survive  death,  and
souls  which  love  each  other  are  not  separated.  Those  who
are  invisible  are  not  absent."

As  for  the  explanation,  as  for  the  conditions  under  which
manifestations  occur — these  I  do  not  know.

It  is  extremely  difficult,  on  this  strange  planet  of  ours,  to
be  frank  and  honest.  From  the  first  page  of  the  first  volume
of  the  present  work  I  have  been  declaring  that  my  sole  object
is  to  collect  observed  facts  and  to  draw  conclusions  only  from
positive  proofs;  that  there  is  here  a  new  science  to  be  estab-
lished :  psychic  science,  established  upon  the  same  experimen-
tal foundations  as  the  so-called  exact  sciences.  Several  critics
have  reproached  me  with  not  having  drawn  conclusions
speedily  enough;  with  indecision  as  to  the  interpretation  of
certain  facts.  Instead  of  understanding  the  necessity  foi
this  method,  they  confuse  the  most  unlike  phenomjena:  subv


44  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

stance-production  with  thought-transmission,  the  living  with
the  dead.  They  declare  that  one  should  not  grant  the
existence  of  that  which  one  is  incapable  of  explaining.  In-
deed, to  a  few  of  these  critics,  all  the  cases  cited  prove
nothing;  nothing  at  all.  Margaritas  ante  porcos!  Why  do
the  blind  busy  themselves  with  problems  of  optics  when  it
is  so  easy  to  do  nothing?  If,  for  example,  I  declare  that  it
is  now  impossible  for  any  savant,  whoever  he  be,  to  divine
how  some  one  dead,  or  even  some  one  alive  who  is  dying  a
thousand  kilometers  away,  can  strike  blows  upon  your
window  or  your  table,  I  do  not  see  why  the  absence  of  an  ex-
planation should  justify  any  one  in  declaring  that  there  is
here  only  illusion.  In  vain  we  pile  up  occurrences  scrupu-
lously observed;  the  work  accomplishes  nothing.  People,
with  one  voice,  repeat  this  piece  of  stupidity:  "It  is  not
possible;  therefore,  it  is  not  true."

We  should  be  in  error,  mark  you,  if  we  thought  that  there
were  neither  hallucinations  nor  chance  coincidences  at  times.
As  for  me,  I  bear  in  mind,  constantly,  the  usual  objections.
The  scientific  method  is  to  consider  all,  to  weigh  all.  It  is
none  the  less  true  that  manifestations  of  the  dead  remain
indubitable.

The  examples  I  have  just  elucidated  before  the  jury  of  my
readers  can,  it  seems  to  me,  leave  no  doubt  in  any  unfettered
mind,  desirous  of  learning  the  truth.  No  doubt  can  remain
that,  in  certain  circumstances  and  under  observation,  the
dead  have  manifested  themselves,  and  have  thus  proved  that
they  are  not  really  dead.  Thinkers  have  long  known  this.
But  we  may  repeat,  one  and  a  half  centuries  after  him,  what
the  philosopher  Immanuel  Kant  wrote,  saying  once  more
virtually  what  Cicero  had  already  said,  approximately  two
thousand  years  before  him:

Philosophy,  which  does  not  fear  to  compromise  itself  by  investi-
gating all  sorts  of  futile  questions,  is  often  most  perplexed  when


A  GENERAL  INVESTIGATION  45

it  finds  in  its  path  certain  facts  that  it  cannot  doubt  with  impunity,
and  that  it  cannot  believe  without  making  itself  ridiculous.  Such
is  the  case  with  tales  of  ghosts.  There  is,  indeed,  no  reproach  to
which  philosophy  is  more  sensitive  than  that  of  credulity  and  of  be-
lief in  common  superstitions.  Those  who  claim  cheaply  the  name
and  eminence  of  savants  make  fun  of  all  that  which,  inexplicable
to  the  savant  as  well  as  to  the  ig-norant  man,  puts  both  of  them
upon  the  same  level.  As  a  result  of  this,  ghost-stories  are  always
listened  to  in  privacy  but  disavowed  publicly.  We  may  be  sure
that  an  academy  of  science  will  never  choose  a  like  theme  as  a  sub-
ject of  competition;  not  that  each  of  its  members  is  convinced  of
the  futility  and  falsity  of  these  accounts,  but  because  laws  of  pru-
dence put  discreet  limits  upon  the  investigation  of  such  questions.
Ghost-stories  will  always  find  secret  believers  and  will  always  be
regarded  in  public  with  well-bred  incredulity.

As  for  me,  my  ignorance  of  the  manner  in  which  the  human
spirit  enters  this  world  and  of  that  in  which  it  leaves  this  world
forbids  me  to  deny  the  truth  of  the  various  stories  that  are  current.

To-day,  we  may  all  think  as  did  the  author  of  the  ' '  Critique
of  Pure  Reason"  and  not  reject  with  unjustifiable  disdain
ghost-stories  such  as  the  example  I  have  just  given.  It  is
noteworthy  that  in  France  the  Academy  of  Sciences  no  longer
rules  out  such  subjects  of  inquiry,  and  that  it  even  offers  an
annual  prize  (the  Emden  prize)  for  works  concerned  with
these  great  problems.  The  ''ghost-stories"  discussed  in  this
chapter  are  no  longer  disdained.  They  may,  however,  have
amazed  more  than  one  reader.  We  shall  have  many  others
before  our  eyes !  I  shall  give  them  according  to  that  classifi-
cation which  is  most  logical  and  most  helpful  for  our  study.
It  seems  to  me  that  it  will  be  interesting  to  relate  first,  with
especial  emphasis,  accounts  of  the  dead  who  have  manifested
themselves  after  taking  an  oath  and  making  a  promise.


II


THE   DEAD   WHO   HAVE   RETURNED  ACCORDING   TO  PREVIOUS
AGREEMENTS

I    see    without    fear   theJ   grave,    with    its
everlasting    shadows ;

For  I  know  that  the  body  finds  a  prison
there,

But  the  soul  finds  wings !

VicTOE  Hugo.

WE  have  already  come  upon  manifestations  of  this
sort,  in  Volume  II  of  the  present  work.  A  case
in  point  is  the  precise  account  given  by  Mademoi-
selle Ximenez  de  Bustamante  (pages  341-343).  We  asked
ourselves  whether  the  young  girl  who  came  so  suddenly  to
announce  her  death  to  her  friend  had  already  died,  or  were
still  on  this  side  of  the  barrier.  We  read,  too  (pages  113-
116),  of  the  apparition  which  showed  itself  to  Countess
Kapnist,  in  St.  Petersburg — that  of  a  friend  who  had  promised
to  come  back,  and  who  appeared  even  before  he  was  dead.
We  shall  devote  here  a  special  chapter  to  manifestations  in
fulfilment  of  promises,  thus  showing  the  survival,  after  death,
of  the  soul,  and  the  persistence  of  memory.  The  chapter
which  we  have  just  read  offers  the  first  case  of  posthumous
fulfilments  of  promises — that  of  the  friend  of  Dr.  Caltagirone
of  Palermo,  striking,  as  he  had  promised,  the  chandelier  in
the  dining-room.  Such  bits  of  testimony  are  numerous,  and
our  only  difficulty  is  the  selection  of  those  to  be  investigated.
One  of  the  most  remarkable  apparitions  of  the  collection
which  I  have  long  been  making  is  that  of  Lord  Brougham's
friend.  The  story  of  it  was  related  by  this  eminent  person-
age himseK.

46


PREVIOUS  AGREEMENTS  47

The  men  of  my  generation  had  opportunities  to  see  this
fine-looking  old  man,  either  in  Paris  or  in  Cannes,  where
he  died  in  1868.  (He  was  born  in  Edinburgh  in  1778.)
Lord  Brougham  wrote  his  autobiography  and  published  the
following  quotation  from  it  on  October  16,  1862.  No  doubt
has  ever  been  cast  on  the  exactitude  of  the  recollection.^
The  event  took  place  in  December,  1799 ;  the  future  politician
and  celebrated  English  historian  was  then  only  twenty-one,
and  was  making  a  trip  through  Sweden.     lie  writes :

The  weather  was  cold.  Upon  arriving  in  Gottenburg,  at  an  at-
tractive-looking inn,  I  asked  for  a  hot  bath,  and  while  taking  it
I  had  such  an  odd  adventure  that  I  wish  to  tell  of  it  from  the  begin-
ning.

I  had  had  a  school  friend,  in  high  school,  named  G ,  whom

I  particularly  loved  and  esteemed.  At  times  we  discussed  the  great
subject  of  the  immortality  of  the  soul.  One  day  we  were  foolish
enough  to  draw  up  a  contract,  written  in  our  blood,  stating  that
whichever  of  us  two  should  die  first,  that  one  should  return  and
manifest  himself  to  the  other  in  order  to  banish  any  doubt  that
he  might  have  had  as  to  the  continuation  of  life  after  death.
G left  for  India,  and  I  virtually  forgot  his  existence.

I  was  then,  as  I  say,  in  my  bath,  in  delicious  enjoyment  of  the
grateful  heat  that  warmed  my  numbed  limbs,  when,  preparing  to
rise,  I  cast  my  eyes  upon  the  chair  on  which  I  had  put  my  clothing,

and   what  was  my   stupefaction   to   see  my   friend   G seated

there,  gazing  at  me  calmly!  How  I  got  out  of  the  bath-tub  1
cannot  say,  for  when  I  came  to  myself  I  found  myself  stretched
out  on  the  floor.  This  apparition,  or  whatever  the  phenomenon
was  which  was  a  likeness  of  my  friend,  was  no  longer  there.  So
strongly  was  I  impressed  that  I  wished  to  write  down,  without  de-
lay, all  the  details  together  with  the  date,  which  was  December  19th.

Lord  Brougham  adds  that  upon  his  return  to  Edinburgh
he  found  a  letter  from  India,  telling  him  of  the  death  of  his
friend,  which  occurred  on  December  19th.

1  See  Phantasms  of  the  Living  (1886),  I,  395;  Life  and  Times  of
Lord  Brougham   (1871),  p.  201.


48  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

In  his  account  the  learned  writer  states  that  he  had  in
this  instance  a  dream  which,  despite  its  characteristic  exacti-
tude, can  have  coincided  only  by  chance  with  his  friend's
death.  But  in  telling  of  it  Myers  remarks,  justly,  that  the
description  of  the  bath  and  of  the  incident  are  not  in  accord
with  this  hypothesis.  We  might  suppose  it  an  illusion  pro-
duced by  the  arrangement  of  the  garments  thrown  over  a
chair;  but  the  friend's  gaze?  Was  it  an  hallucination?
No,  for  Lord  Brougham  declares  that  during  his  long  life
he  had  never  had  a  single  hallucination.  We  are  led  to
believe,  in  this  case,  in  the  influence  of  the  dead  man's  soul
on  his  friend's  mind,  an  influence  which  took  the  form  of  an
image.

In  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge  of  psychic  phenom-
ena, we  must  ask  ourselves  if  the  apparition  appeared  at  the
moment  of  death  or  after  it.  The  occurrence  took  place
on  December  19th,  about  two  o'clock  in  the  morning  (or
perhaps  on  December  20th).  The  friend  died,  in  India,  on
December  19th.  At  what  time?  We  do  not  know;  but  we
know  that  the  farther  east  one  is,  the  later  is  the  hour.  The
probabilities  are  that  there  was  a  more  or  less  long  interval
after  the  demise.  We  can  readily  understand  that  Lord
Brougham  dared  not  take  a  definite  stand,  and  took  refuge
in  the  hypothesis  of  a  dream — a  hypothesis,  however,  in  which
there  is  little  probability.  We  think,  naturally,  that  if  we
had  before  our  eyes  but  a  single  case  of  this  sort,  we,  too,
should  doubt.  But  there  are  so  many !  And  at  every  period
of  time !

We  have  only  to  skim  through  ancient  treatises  on  psychic
phenomena  to  come  upon  experiences  similar  to  that  of  Lord
Brougham.  Let  us  open,  for  example,  Don  Calmet's  book,
published  in  1746:  ''Dissertations  sur  les  apparitions  des
anges  des  demons  et  des  esprits  et  sur  les  revenants"  ("Dis-
sertations upon  Apparitions  of  Angels,  Demons,  and  Spirits,
and  upon  Ghosts").     In  Chapter  XLVI,  Part  II  (page  375),


PREVIOUS  AGREEMENTS  49

we  find  under  the  heading  ''Persons  who  have  promised  one
another  to  give,  after  their  death,  news  of  the  other  world,"
the  following  lines  :

The  Marquis  of  Rambouillet's  story,  told  after  the  death  of  the
Marquis  of  Precy,  is  famous.  The  two  noblemen  were  discussing
the  after  life,  as  men  who  were  not  entirely  convinced  of  all  that
is  said  of  it.  They  promised  each  other  that  the  first  of  the  two
who  should  die  would  appear  and  bring  news  of  the  death,  to  the
other.  The  Marquis  of  Rambouillet  left  for  Flanders,  where  war
was  then  being  waged,  and  the  Marquis  of  Precy  remained  in  Paris,
kept  there  by  a  severe  fever.  Six  weeks  afterward,  he  heard  the
curtains  of  his  bed  being  drawn.  Turning  to  see  who  it  was,  he
perceived  the  Marquis  of  Rambouillet  in  a  buff-jacket  and  boots.
He  rose  from  his  bed  to  embrace  him,  but  Rambouillet,  stepping
back  several  paces,  told  him  that  he  had  come  to  fulfil  his  promise;
that  all  that  was  said  of  the  other  life  was  true;  that  he  (Precy)
should  change  his  way  of  life;  that  he  would  soon  die.  Precy
again  made  an  effort  to  embrace  his  friend,  but  his  arms  closed
on  nothing  but  air.  Then  Rambouillet,  seeing  that  he  did  not  be-
lieve what  he  had  said,  showed  him  the  spot  where  he  had  received
a  musket  wound  in  the  back,  from  which  the  blood  still  seemed
to  be  flowing.

Precy  received  soon  afterward,  by  letter,  confirmation  of  the
Marquis  of  Rambouillet's  death.  When  fighting  in  the  civil  war,
he  was,  himself,  killed  in  the  battle  of  Faubourg   Saint- Antoine.

It  is  probable  that  the  story  was  more  or  less  changed
and  rearranged,  especially  as  regards  the  phantom's  words.
But  it  is  probable,  also,  that  it  was  not  made  out  of  whole
cloth.  One  finds  it  again  in  a  book  by  Collin  de  Plancy,
written  to  combat  credulity  and  superstition.^  After  having
given  it,  with  even  more  details,  he  adds:

While  admitting  the  truth  of  all  the  circumstances  connected
with  the  happening,  one  can,  however,  draw  no  conclusion  in  favor

^ 'DicfAomiaire  infernal  (Paris,  1826),  IV,  344.


50  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

of  ghosts.  It  is  not  difficult  to  understand  that  the  Marquis  of
Precy's  imagination,  heated  by  fever  and  troubled  by  the  memory
of  the  promise  which  Rambouillet  and  he  had  made  each  other,
should  have  conjured  up  the  phantom  of  his  friend.  He  knew  this
friend  was  in  the  army  and  in  danger  of  being  killed  at  any  mo-
ment; perhaps  he  even  knew  that  there  was  to  be  a  battle  with  the
enemy  that  day.  The  circumstances  connected  with  the  Marquis  of
Rambouillet's  wound,  and  the  prediction  of  Precy's  death,  which
was  realized,  must  be  taken  more  seriously.  Nevertheless,  those
who  have  felt  the  power  of  presentiments  may  easily  conceive  that
the  Marquis  of  Precy's  mind,  disturbed  by  the  heat  of  the  malady,
followed  the  fortunes  of  his  friend  m  all  the  hazards  of  war;  that
Precy  lived  in  constant  expectation  of  having  his  friend's  phantom
announce  what  must  happen  to  him;  that  Precy  foresaw  that  the
Marquis  of  Rambouillet  would  be  killed  by  a  musket  shot  in  the
back,  and  that  the  battle-ardor  which  he  himself  felt  would  lead
to  his  own  death  at  the  first  encounter.  Before  believing  in  occur-
rences which  are  outside  the  natural  course  of  events,  we  must  have
certain  proof;  and  in  this  case  we  have  neither  witnesses  nor
records  nor  historians  that  are  worthy  of  entire  confidence.

This  reasoning  is  most  sagacious,  and  it  is  in  accordance
with  this  just  estimate  of  things  that  we  are  faithful  to-day,
in  our  inquiry,  to  the  exactions  of  the  experimental  method.
Investigation  must  verify  the  truth  of  the  facts  related.  But
let  us  not  reject  all  these  accounts  by  dismissing  the  cases,
though  we  should,  above  all,  see  to  it  that  we  accept  the
facts  only  for  what  they  are  worth.  That  is  why  it  is  im-
portant, in  our  personal  investigation,  to  compare  all  observa-
tions, without  prejudice.

It  is  noteworthy  that  people  take  advantage  of  every  loop-
hole: Lord  Brougham's  is  a  ''dream";  Collin  de  Plancy's
is  a  ''presentiment."     Let  us  remain  free!

Perhaps  it  was  the  difficulty,  or  even  the  impossibility,  of
granting  the  real  presence  of  the  Marquis  of  Rambouillet 's
phantom,  in  war  attire  and  boots,  which  prevented  this  story
from  being  conceded  as  true.     To-day  we  think  that,  as  in


PREVIOUS  AGREEMENTS  51

the  case  of  Lord  Brougham's  friend,  there  was  no  material
apparition  in  the  case — merely  the  influence  of  a  dead
man's  spirit  upon  that  of  a  living  man.

Before  proceeding  farther,  we  may  well  ask  ourselves  of
what  the  phantoms  consist  whose  manifestations  we  have  here
been  examining.

A  long  study  of  these  phenomena  has  led  me  to  conclude,
with  Myers,  that  nothing  justifies  us  in  affirming  that  the
phantom  which  appears  is  the  person  himself,  in  the  ordinary
sense  of  the  word.  We  are  here  concerned,  rather,  with  those
hallucinatory  forms  or  phantoms  which  we  studied  in  the
second  volume,  projections  which  we  actually  see,  beyond
a  doubt.  We  investigated  them  without  concluding  that
the  apparition  is  the  living  person.  Likewise,  what  we
call  a  specter  or  a  ghost  is  in  no  way  the  deceased  person  him-
self. There  exists,  certainly,  a  connection  between  the  specter
and  the  defunct  human  being,  a  connection  the  nature  of
which  is  still  to  be  determined,  but  the  identity  is  not  com-
plete.

All  this  was  presented  in  Volume  II,  in  the  chapter
'' Thought  as  a  Generator  of  Images."  Myers  writes,  as  his
view  :

A  posthumous  phenomenon  may  be  a  manifestation  of  the  per-
sistence of  personal  energy ^  or  even  an  indication  merely  that  a
certain  force,  associated  with  a  person  whom  we  have  known  during
his  terrestrial  life,  continues  to  manifest  itself  after  his  death.
Theoretically  it  is  possible  that  this  force  or  influence  which,  after
the  death  of  a  person,  creates  a  phantasmagorial  impression  of  the
person,  is  due  not  to  the  actual  functioning  of  the  latter,  but  to
some  residue  of  the  force  or  energy  which  that  person  generated
while  stiU  alive.  We  have  examples  of  this  in  certain  cases  of
haunting.

As  for  me,  after  a  long,  special  study  of  apparitions  (during
a  period  of  about  thirty  years)   I  have  reached  this  double


52  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

conclusion:  (1)  They  are  real;  (2)  in  general,  they  are  not
material,  ponderable.

It  will  be  helpful  to  pass  in  review  a  few  cases,  without
further  delay.

At  a  date  already  far  in  the  past,  an  eminent  seeker.
Monsieur  Castex-Degrange,  who  was  extremely  desirous  of
learning  the  truth,  wrote  me  as  follows  (it  was  in  the  last
century,  on  March  13,  1899)  :

Though  I  value,  quite  at  its  true  worth,  your  high  personal  dis-
tinction, and  share  fully  your  views  as  to  those  who  are  profession-
ally '^credulous"  or  "incredulous,"  there  is,  to  me,  something  lack-
ing in  your  investigations.

In  my  view — alas,  I  am  a  trifle  skeptical! — the  supremely  inter-
esting thing  would  be  the  proof  of  the  survival  of  the  individual
after  death,  the  scientific  proof.  This  proof  would  have,  for  our
poor  human  kind,  many  consequences  that  could  make  it  happier
and  better.

In  "L'Ineonnu"  you  speak  only  of  the  "living";  for  in  my  view
these  manifestations  of  dying  people  may  be  the  last  gleam  of  a
lamp  which  is  going  out.

And  now  you  promise  that  you  will  also  speak  of  the  "dead."
Well  and  good!

I  do  not  know  if  you  have  a  great  many  "cases"  in  reserve.  Will
you  allow  me  to  relate  an  absolutely  authentic  one — one  which  I
can  vouch  for,  on  my  word  of  honor?

You  may  do  what  you  like  with  this  story,  and  what  you  consider
necessary  for  the  purpose  of  your  investigation.  I  ask  you  only
to  keep  the  names  to  yourself,  if  you  give  this  case,  and  to  put
down  merely  initials  of  some  sort.

Two  years  ago  an  aunt  of  mine  Avas  still  alive, — a  fine  woman  and
the  best  of  friends.     Her  name  was  Madame  A.  B .

This  aunt,  who  died  at  the  age  of  eighty-three,  had  as  a  child-
hood friend  a  certain  Madame  C ,  whose  daughter  is  still  liv-
ing. The  latter  can  bear  witness  to  the  truth  of  the  account,  as
can  my  wife,  a  niece  of  Madame  A.  B .

These  two  women  had  made  a  mutual  promise  to  pay  each  other


PREVIOUS  AGREEMENTS  53

a  visit  after  death.  Tlie  first  to  die  was  to  go  to  see  the  one  remain-
ing upon  earth.

Madame  C-- —  died.     This  caused  my  poor  aunt  great  sorrow.

Some  days  later,  my  aunt,  slightly  indisposed,  was  lying  on  her
bed.     A  night  lamp  half  lighted  her  bedroom.

Suddenly  she  saw  her  friend,  seated  in  her  arm-chair,  which  was
drawn  up  near  her  work-table.

But — and  this  is   what  is  most   odd  about  the  vision — Madame

C had  on,  over  her  dress,  a  sort  of  cape  with  a  hood,  which  my

aunt  had  never  seen  her  wear.  This  particular  circumstance  sur-
prised the  latter  a  little.

One  or  two  days  after  the  vision,  the  dead  woman's  daughter
came  to  inquire  as  to  my  aunt's  health.  My  aunt  told  her  of  her
experience,  adding  that  it  was  probable  that  she  had  been  the  victim

of  an  hallucmation.     Then  Mademoiselle  C said  to  her:     "No,

Madame.  My  poor  mother  was  put  in  her  coffin  with  a  hooded  cape
on,  which  she  only  wore  in  the  evening,  when  she  was  alone.  She  'd
had  a  preference  for  it  for  a  long  time."

It  seems  to  me  (1)  that  there  was  no  hallucination  in  this  case,
but  a  real  intention  on  the  part  of  the  person  to  show  herself,
as  well  as  to  give  absolute  proof  that  she  had  really  done  so;  (2)
that  since  the  vision  took  place  several  days  after  death,  it  would
imply  the  continuance  of  the  soul's  existence.

Castex  Degrange.    ;

My  readers  are  already  familiar  with  the  signer  of  this
letter.  (See  " L 'Inconnu, "  page  84,  and  '^Les  Forces  natu-
relles  inconnues,"  pages  512-525).  He  is  no  longer  alive
(1840-1918).  He  was  head  of  the  Lyons  National  School  of
Fine  Arts.  His  observations  of  psychic  phenomena,  which  I
have  just  recalled  to  my  readers,  are  particularly  instructive,
but  I  shall  not  repeat  them  here.  They  end  with  the  state-
ments just  given,  which  I  have  not  previously  made  public.

Yes,  these  visions  are  really  produced  by  the  dead,  whose
spirits  act  upon  ours.  In  the  same  way,  in  our  second
volume,  we  proved  that  this  was  the  case  with  telepathic
transmission  during  life.


54  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

Let  us  investigate  other  occurrences.

A  minister  plenipotentiary,  whose  perfect  sincerity  I  well
know,  related  to  me,  in  1900,  the  following  disturbing  little
adventure :

Father  N ,  parish  priest  of  0 ,  in  Moravia,  had  a  niece

whom  he  particularly  loved;  she  had  lived  for  some  time  at  his
home.  When  they  parted,  the  priest  said  to  her,  jestingly:  "Well,
if  you  die  before  I  do,  let  me  know."

It  happened  that  some  time  afterward  this  niece  fell  ill  of  a
severe  malady.     A  fatal  outcome,  however,  was  not  expected.

One  day.  Father  N ,  quite  overwhelmed,  went  to  the  young

priest  who  was  his  assistant  and  told  him  that  while  he  was  quietly
seated  at  his  desk  a  short  time  before,  and  was,  consequently,  thor-
oughly awake,  he  had  seen  his  niece  appear  before  him,  and  that
she  had  said  good-by  to  him.  He  had  recognized  her  at  once  and
was  convinced  that  she  had  died.

The  news,  which  he  received  confirmed  this  supposition,  and  the
time  of  her  death  coincided  with  the  day  and  the  hour  of  the
apparition.

I  am  giving  you  the  names  in  the  ease,  as  well  as  my  own  name,
because  I,  too,  detest  anonymity,  and  I  wish  you  to  know  that  there
is  here  no  mystification.  However,  you  will,  I  am  sure,  take  into
account  my  wish,  prompted  by  the  regard  due  others,  that  in  case
you  publish  this  account,  the  names  be  omitted.

Allow  me,  dear  Master,  to  express  my  high  regard  for  you.

Baron  de  Maricourt.

(Letter  964.)

(In  conformity  with  my  correspondent's  wishes,  I  give
only  the  initials  of  the  names,  in  order  to  avoid  indiscretion.)

Simply  to  deny  these  stories,  as  is  so  generally  done,  is  not
honest,  though  it  is  the  simplest  method  of  avoiding  all  ex-
planation. It  is  our  opinion  that  this  apparition  at  the
moment  of  death  was  connected  with  the  compact  that  had
been  made.


PREVIOUS  AGREEMENTS  55

One  hears  the  objection,  at  times,  that  members  of  the
clergy  are  more  readily  disposed  than  others  to  admit  the
reality  of  manifestations  from  beyond  the  grave.  This  is  an
error.  Some  of  them  are  more  skeptical  than  their  calling
would  lead  ns  to  suppose  (I  have  letters)  ;  others  are  be-
lievers, admitting  the  existence  of  hell,  purgatory,  and  para-
dise, and  refusing  to  grant  the  truth  of  these  occurrences,  be-
cause they  attribute  them  to  the  devil.  (I  have  letters  in  sub-
stantiation of  this,  too.)

The  following  manifestation,  which  took  place  after  an  odd
promise,  may  be  compared  with  the  preceding  one.  The
account  was  sent  me,  on  March  25,  1899,  by  a  correspondent
whose  sincerity  can  be  questioned  no  more  than  that  of  the
previous  ones.

Do  not  think  that  members  of  the  clergy  are  over-credulous.

About  twelve  years  ago  a  colleague  and  friend  of  mine,  who  was
a  strong  partizan  of  the  cause  of  spiritualism,  said  to  me  at  a
gathering  at  which  there  were  both  laymen  and  clergymen,  that
several  of  his  friends,  in  dying,  had  pushed  his  shoulder  with  their
hands.  Since  this  communication  was  received  by  us  all,  and  by  me,
particularly,  with  a  smile, — or,  rather,  a  burst  of  incredulous  laugh-
ter,— he  turned  to  me,  addressing  me  in  particular,  and  said,
laughing,  that  he  would  reserve  his  first  reappearance  for  me.

When  we  parted,  after  shaking  hands,  no  one  gave  another
thought  to  the  matter.  Six  months  afterward,  on  an  evening  in
February,  when  I  was  kneeling  before  a  seat  in  church,  I  felt  a
sudden  push  on  my  shoulder,  a  push  which  made  me  bend  forward
sharply.

I  turned  around  at  once,  to  see  whence  had  come  this  ill-timed
familiarity.  But  I  realized  that  it  could  have  come  from  no  one
of  the  persons  present,  for  the  one  nearest  me  was  at  least  six
meters  away.

I  then  thought  of  the  conversation  which  I  have  mentioned.  I
reflected  that  it  was  possible  that  some  one  I  knew  had  produced
this  supernatural  or  extra-natural  manifestation.     Some  days  after-


56  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

ward  I  learned  of  the  sudden  death  of  my  estimable  colleague,
which  had  come  with  lightning  swiftness.  He  had  died  on  precisely
the  day  and  at  the  hour  of  this  manifestation.

BouiN^
Honorary  Canon^  Pastor  of  Douze,  Dordogne.
(Letter  4.)

This  narration  interested  me  doubly.  It  bears  all  the  marks
of  absolute  sincerity.  We  can  attribute  it  not  to  some  one
living  or  to  some  one  dying  but  to  a  worthy  man  who  had
just  died  and  who  kept  his  fantastic  promise.  We  might  con-
clude from  this,  too,  that  there  is  nothing  disagreeable  about
the  transition  from  life  to  death,  and  that  it  leaves  us  a
certain  freedom.

I  am  taking  the  following  statement  from  another  letter,
which  was  sent  me  at  the  same  period :

A  young  woman,  a  paralytic,  would  often  spend  the  afternoon
at  my  aunt's  home.  My  cousins,  who  knew  how  good-natured  she
Was,  and  who  liked  to  laugh,  would  make  from  time  to  time  some
little  jest  as  to  the  position  in  which  she  might  find  herself  in  the
other  world.

"You  don't  seem  to  believe  in  the  other  world,  much,"  she  an-
swered, smiling,  "and  you  're  making  fun  of  me.  That  is  n't  nice,
you  know.  But  I  '11  have  my  revenge :  when  I  'm  dead,  I  '11  come
and  frighten  you."

She  died  a  short  time  afterward.  Some  weeks  went  by,  and  no
one  thought  any  longer  of  her  little  threat,  when,  in  a  thick  cup-
board door,  a  strange  noise  made  itself  heard.  It  sounded  like  a
series  of  blows,  purposely  struck.  Called  by  my  aunt,  my  cousins
hurried  to  her,  and  examined  the  piece  of  furniture.  There  seemed
nothing  unusual  about  it.  But  when  they  expressed  their  impa-
tience, the  noise  answered  so  loudly  that  they  drew  back,  terrified.
I  am  telling  you  of  this  happening,  though  it  is  of  such  slight  im-
portance, because  it  is  unquestionable  and  because  we  know  that
you  overlook  nothing  in  order  to  discover  all,  and  because  we  all


PREVIOUS  AGREEMENTS  5T

have,  for  you,  a  feeling  of  profound  veneration:   I  have  named
my  child  Camille,  to  commemorate  my  having  read  your  works.

J.  Vivoux,
Digne,  March,  1899.
(Letter  386.)

The  following  v^as  a  similar  occurrence.  A  correspondent
who  said  that  his  name  was  for  my  eyes  only  wrote  me  from
Paris  on  April  30,  1899  :

I  have  the  honor  of  telling  you  of  the  following  experience,  which
bears  out  the  results  of  your  investigation.  My  clear  recollection
of  it  justifies  me  in  guaranteeing  its  authenticity.

I  had  Monsieur  Netom,  a  printer,  at  breakfast  at  my  home.  He
said  to  my  wife  and  me :

"I  was  most  disagreeably  surprised  last  night.  I  was  waked  up,
suddenly,  by  a  feeling  as  though  my  feet  were  being  pulled  vio-
lently; you  can^t  think  how  painful  it  was."

I  attributed  this  feeling  of  his  to  nerves  or  muscles  affected  by
some  physical  cause,  as  happens,  at  times,  during  sleep.  Then  the
conversation  took  another  turn,  but  Monsieur  Netom  again  brought
up  the  experience  of  the  night  before,  as  though  it  had  impressed
him  strongly.

We  were  not  thrown  together  again  until  a  year  from  that  date.
Then  we  saw  him  and  he  said  to  us :

"Since  we  were  last  together,  I  have  learned  of  some  one's
death.  .  .  .  Well,  his  death  coincided  day  for  day — or,  rather,  night
for  night — with  the  night  on  which  I  felt  that  odd  sensation  of
my  feet  being  pulled!"

"What  connection  was  there?"

"It 's  extraordinary !  We  'd  always  told  each  other  that  the  one
who  died  first  should  go  and  pull  the  other's  feet!"

"Are  you  sure  of  the  coincidence  in  dates'?"

"Heavens !  if  you  speak  to  me  like  an  examining  magistrate  I  '11
have  to  adniit  that  I  did  n't  make  a  precise  note  of  the  date.  What
I  'm  certain  of  is  that  the  date  of  the  death  was  within  the  period
when  you  extended  your  hospitality  to  me;  I  can  answer  for  that.


58  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

And,  besides,  I  can  state  positively  that  I  was  no  more  thinking
of  that  friend  than  of  the  Sultan  of  Turkey,  at  the  moment  when
the  phenomenon  occurred/'
(Letter  648.)

One  of  my  readers  residing  in  Paris,  who  wishes  that  his
name  should  not  be  made  public,  wrote  me  on  March  26, 1899 :

My  relatives  were  living  in  the  country.  A  first  cousin  of  my
mother,  who  had  attempted  to  commit  suicide  after  her  fiance's
death,  and  had  failed,  had  taken  refuge  with  my  grandmother,  her
aunt,  in  order  that  she  might  escape  ill-treatment  by  her  father,  an
inveterate  drunkard.  She  was  waiting  until  she  should  be  sum-
moned to  a  convent,  which  she  had  made  application  to  enter.

She  was  a  temperamental  woman,  and  I  have  often  heard  it  said
that  at  night  she  would  go  to  the  cemetery,  to  her  fiance's  grave.

All  my  relatives  had  many  and  many  a  time  tried  to  dissuade
her  from  the  idea  of  shutting  herself  up  in  a  convent, — she  who
was  so  charming,  so  captivating.  By  her  work,  she  made  her  pres-
ence useful  as  well  as  a  pleasure,  for  she  knew  how  to  do  every-
thing. There  was  no  sacrifice  which  we  would  not  have  made  to
keep  her  from  so  sad  an  end.

We  said  all  we  could,  but  it  had  no  effect.  So  she  left,  on  a
foggy  day  which  heightened  our  sadness.  She  took  all  our  hearts
with  her.

"To  think  that  I  shall  never  see  you  again!"  said  my  mother,
before  her  departure.  "To  think  that  I  shall  never  see  you  again !"
said  my  gTandmother.

"My  dear  cousin,"  she  replied  to  my  mother,  "I  should  like  to
come  back  and  see  you,  for  I  can't  live  long.  I  've  had  so  many
shocks,  and,  what's  worst,  I  have  this  poison  in  my  blood;  but  as
you're  timid,  I  shan't  trouble  you  by  my  presence.  As  for  you,
my  aunt,"  she  said  to  my  grandmother,  laughing,  "I  know  you're
not  afraid ;  I  '11  make  an  outrageous  racket  for  you."

On  a  certain  evening,  some  time  afterward,  my  grandfather  and
grandmother  were  about  to  get  into  bed,  when  they  heard  a  terrible
uproar.  Everything  seemed  in  a  turmoil;  the  bricks  seemed  to  be
knocking  against  one  another  violently,  the  roof  seemed  to  have


PREVIOUS  AGREEMENTS  59

fallen  in.  They  ran  to  open  the  door:  all  was  intact.  They  were
amazed  and  terrified.  They  went  back  to  bed;  there  was  the  same
noise.  "Clementine  is  dead!"  my  grandmother  cried.  The  noise
ceased  at  once.  The  next  day,  about  noon,  the  telegram  arrived.
She  had  died  on  the  previous  day,  at  the  very  hour  of  the  uproar,
in  a  convent  in  Amiens.

The  witnesses  are  still  living.

J.  L.,
Paris.

(Letter  79.)

The  readers  of  this  work  are  familiar  with  loud  noises  of
the  sort  and  will  not  be  astonished.  The  first  part  of  our
present  investigation  furnished  many  examples.

The  foregoing  manifestation  also  corresponds  to  the  an-
nouncement of  a  purpose  which  was  carried  out,  to  an  in-
tention, to  a  previous  promise.

Here  is  another  incident,  equally  strange,  which  occurred
after  a  promise  had  been  made.  It  was  sent  us  by  that  ex-
cellent review  "Luce  e  Ombra"^:

In  1882,  Count  Charles  Galateri  grew  to  know  a  certain  Virgin!,
a  former  officer  in  the  grenadiers.  Their  conversation  turned  at
times  to  a  discussion  of  spiritualism.  Monsieur  Galateri  tried  in
vain  to  convince  his  friend  on  the  subject.  One  day,  half  seriously,
half  jestingly,  the  two  comrades  promised  each  other  that  the
first  who  should  die  would  warn  the  other  of  this  fact.  And  how?
By  tickling  Ms  feet!

Several  years  went  by.  In  November,  1887,  Monsieur  Virgini
told  his  friend  that  he  had  again  taken  service  with  the  troops  in
Africa.

On  the  night  of  Sunday,  August  5,  1888,  Monsieur  Galateri  was
in  bed,  when  his  wife,  who  was  beside  him,  said  to  him  a  trifle
crossly,  "Keep  still!"  Her  husband  asked  her  if  she  were  dream-
ing, for  he  had  not  stirred.     She  said  again:     "Keep  still,  I  tell

^  Luce  e  Omhra  (Rome),  Nov.,  1905.  Annates  des  Sciences  psy-
chiques,  Dec.,  1905.


60  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

you!  Don't  tickle  my  feet!"  Since  Monsieur  Galateri  continued
to  deny  doing  this,  they  thought  that  some  insect  might  have  got
into  the  bed;  they  lighted  a  candle  and  looked  carefully.  Nothing!
They  blew  out  the  candle  and  got  back  into  bed.  But  at  once
Countess  Galateri  started  and  cried  out:  "Look!  Look  at  the
foot  of  the  bed!"  Her  husband  looked  and  saw  nothing,  but  she
persisted :  "Yes,  look ;  there 's  a  tall  young  man,  with  a  colonial
helmet  on  his  head.  He 's  looking  at  you,  and  laughing !  Oh,  poor
man!  What  a  terrible  wound  he  has  in  his  chest!  And  his  knee
is  broken !  He 's  waving  to  you,  with  a  satisfied  air.  He 's  dis-
appearing !"

The  next  day,  Countess  Galateri  told  some  friends  and  relatives
of  the  experience.  On  Tuesday,  August  14th,  the  newspapers  an-
nounced that  a  band  of  native  troops  commanded  by  Captain  Comac-
chia  and  by  Lieutenants  Poli,  Brero,  Virginia  and  Adam  Aga  had
been  attacked  near  Saganeiti  by  the  Abyssinians;  Virgini,  the
last  surviving  officer,  had  been  struck  on  the  knee  and  thelQ  killed
by  a  bullet  in  the  chest.

Monsieur  de  Vesme  remarks,  in  giving  this  account,  that
it  v^ould  be  desirable  to  have  the  written  attestation  of  the
different  persons  who  were  in  some  manner  connected  with
the  occurrences;  but  that  nevertheless,  the  unquestionable
trustworthiness  of  the  Galateri  family  and  of  several  of  the
people  concerned — people  whom  he  knows  personally — gives
the  case  a  certain  importance,  even  apart  from  the  truthful
tone  of  the  narration.  Count  Charles  Galateri  belongs  to
an  honorable  family  of  the  Piedmont.

We  may  ask  ourselves  whether  the  officer  who  was  killed,
and  who  remembered  his  promise,  chose  the  wrong  feet  by
mistake  or  did  so  purposely,  or  if  telepathic  influence  were
exerted  upon  two  minds  near  together,  one  of  which  per-
ceived nothing.  Certainly  the  story  is  an  odd  one,  but  'it
was  not  fabricated.

What  proof  is  there  that  we  have  no  caprices  after  death,
and  that  we  are  of  necessity  sad,  or  even  always  serious?


PREVIOUS  AGREEMENTS  61

Manifestations  occur  in  every  imaginable  variety.  The  one
just  related  is  rather  amusing ;  but  that  which  we  shall  have
before  our  eyes  is  really  dramatic  and  frankly  gruesome.  I
am  taking  it  from  Bozzano's  excellent  work  on  "Les  Pheno-
menes  de  hantise."  It  is  substantiated  by  Professor  Hy-
slop's  investigation  and  the  attestations,  of  five  witnesses
connected  with  the  strange  experience.  Let  us  listen  to  one
of  them,  Dr.  H.  A.  Kinnaman:

My  uncle,  John  W.  Kinnaman,  my  father,  Jacob  Kinnaman,  and
a  young  man  named  Adams  were  students  of  medicine,  and  inti-
mate friends.  One  day  they  made  a  compact  that  if  one  of  them
should  die  young,  the  others  should  have  the  right  to  take  pos-
session of  his  body  for  purposes  of  scientific  study,  on  condition
that  the  skeleton  should  always  remain  in  the  keeping  of  friends;
if  the  day  should  come  when  this  condition  could  no  longer  be
observed  the  skeleton  was  to  be  buried.  Adams  had  declared  that
for  his  part  he  would  insist  on  the  scrupulous  observance  of  the
compact;  otherwise  he  would  protest  by  making  a  noise.

Some  time  afterward  young  Adams  died;  my  uncle  John,  by  his
right  as  eldest  brother,  took  possession  of  the  body,  prepared  the
skeleton  and  kept  it  until  his  death.  After  him  it  was  kept  by
my  father,  Dr.  Jacob;  then  by  his  brother,  Dr.  Lawrence;  then  by
Dr.  Jackson,  then  by  my  brother  Robert,  and,  finally,  by  my  other
brother  Charles.  During  this  long  lapse  of  time  it  was  noted  that
when  the  conditions  fixed  by  the  compact  were  complied  with,
Adams  remained  quiet,  but  if  they  were  neglected,  people  were
tormented.

I  remember  that  in  1849,  when  I  was  a  child,  my  father  was
obliged  to  go  to  California  for  a  time,  and  the  skeleton  was  relegated
to  an  attic.  This  did  not  satisfy  Adams.  That  very  night  heavy,
noisy  steps  were  heard,  mounting  and  descending  the  attic  stair-
way, or  coming  and  going  in  the  attic  itself.  These  manifestations
seriously  disturbed  my  mother,  because  they  kept  the  family  from
sleeping.  She  begged  my  uncle  to  free  us  from  Adams's  bones.  He
consented,  and  as  soon  as  he  took  them  into  his  care,  quiet  reigned
once  more  in  the  family.


62  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

My  uncle  kept  them  in  his  office  for  a  long  time,  but  one  day
he  thought  he  would  put  them  in  a  distant  corner  of  the  house.
Two  families  which  were  living  in  this  part  of  the  building  soon
had  to  move  out  as  a  result  of  the  inexplicable  noises  heard  during
the  night.  After  these  families  had  left,  no  one  could  live  in  this
haunted  house.  When  my  father  returned  from  California,  he
took  Adams's  skeleton  back  and  put  it  in  his  office.  There  was
silence  once  more.

My  father  died  in  1874,  and  my  brother  Robert  inherited  the
bones;  he  put  them  under  the  bed,  in  a  room  adjoining  his  office.
One  day,  he  thought  he  would  carry  them  into  a  neighbor's  cellar,
which  was  used  as  a  store-room  for  building  materials.  They  were
put  there  without  the  workmen  of  the  establishment  knowing  it;
but  a  short  time  afterward  these  workmen  refused  to  go  into  the
cellar  in  the  evening,  because  of  the  mysterious  noises  heard  there.
My  brother  took  the  skeleton  back,  and  once  more  the  place  be-
came quiet  again.

Adams's  mortal  remains  are  still  in  the  possession  of  my  family.

Another  witness,  Dr.  C.  L.  Kinnaman,  describes  with  a
great  abundance  of  detail  the  noises  heard  in  the  attic  when
Adams's  remains  were  put  there.     He  writes:

.  .  .  The  attic  contained  hundreds  of  bottles  from  a  drug  store.
It  happened  that  one  night,  when  every  one  had  gone  to  bed,
extraordinary  noises  were  heard,  coming  from  the  top  of  the  house;
noises  of  bottles  knocking  together  with  violence,  breaking,  and  fall-
ing to  the  floor.  Then  we  thought  we  heard  a  large  cannon-ball  roll
downstairs  to  the  dining-room,  strike  against  the  door,  and  then
mount  the  stairs  again,  leaping  from  one  step  to  another!  A  mem-
ber of  the  family  went  up  into  the  attic,  with  a  candle  in  his  hand ;
but  the  noises  ceased  at  once;  everything  was  found  in  its  place.
When  we  had  gone  to  bed  again  and  blown  out  the  light,  the  mani-
festations began  once  more.  Some  one  made  the  remark  that  the
object  that  was  rolling  downstairs  must  be  very  heavy,  to  judge
from  the  noise  that  it  made;  instantly  the  uproar  diminished  to
the  mere  echo  of  a  light  touch,  moving  up  and  down  from  one
step  to  another.     The  manifestations  changed  according  to  our  re-


PREVIOUS  AGREEMENTS  63

marks;  they  continued  until  we  went  to  bed  again,  overcome  by
fatigue  and  sleep.  From  the  day  on  which  the  bones  were  taken  out
of  the  attic,  tranquillity  reigned  once  more  in  the  house.

Dr.  R.  C.  Kinnaman  testified  in  his  turn :

I  was  the  first  to  be  awakened  by  the  dull  sound  of  a  fall,  as
though  some  one  had  leaped  out  of  bed  in  his  bare  feet;  then  there
was  a  rustling  of  garments,  a  slightly  louder  noise,  and  at  length
the  sound  of  a  heavy  body  rolling  over  the  floor,  going  down  the
stairs  by  leaping  from  one  step  to  another,  and  up  again,  with
frequent  variations  in  force  and  tone.  My  mother  chanced  to  come
into  my  room  then,  with  Olivier;  although  she  was  a  vigorous
woman,  she  seemed  terribly  affected.  Both  of  them,  taking  lighted
candles,  ventured  into  the  attic;  their  presence  made  the  noises
stop.  After  a  fruitless  investigation  they  went  away,  closing  the
door;  at  once  the  noises  began  again.  They  returned;  the  noises
ceased.  Again  they  left ;  the  uproar  began  again  as  loudly  as  ever,
the  moment  they  closed  the  door.^

Such  is,  in  abridged  form,  the  extraordinary  case  investi-
gated by  Professor  James  Hyslop.  Doubt  is  not  possible.
The  threat  of  a  manifestation,  part  of  this  student's  singular
compact,  was  fully  carried  out  by  the  deceased  man.  The  up-
roar did  not  come  from  the  living,  without  their  knowing
it.  This  is  proved  by  the  fact  that  it  came  to  an  abrupt  halt
in  the  presence  of  the  living,  only  to  begin  again  when  they
went  away — a  thing  frequently  noted  in  phenomena  of  the
kind.

Observed  happenings,  therefore,  prove  that  the  dead  return
after  making  pledges,  promises,  and  threats,  and  consequently
that  they  continue  to  exist.  Where  are  they  when  they
bring  about  these  phenomena?  I  know  nothing  about  that.
Where  was  this  skeleton 's  soul  ?  I  do  not  know.  But  it  was
evidently  that  soul  which  manifested  itself.

We  have  just  given,  above,  cases  of  visible  manifestations,

1  Bozzano,  Les  Phenomenes  de  hantise,  pp.  50-52.


64  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

of  apparitions,  and  we  have  already  fnrnislied  (Volume  II,
Chapter  IV)  examples  of  the  generation  of  images  by  the
thought  of  the  dying.  These  phenomena  are  extremely
numerous;  there  are  images  that  are  visible,  objective,
external — considered  real  and  material  by  those  who  see
them.  The  images  are  nevertheless  subjective,  arising  in  the
mind  of  the  observer,  though  they  cannot  be  called  hallucina-
tions, being  neither  unauthentic  nor  illusory.  They  proceed
from  a  cause :  the  will  of  the  dying  or  dead  person,  which
produces  them.  They  are  psychic  projections  with  the  aspect
of  physical  projections.

The  case  we  shall  relate  is  as  significant  as  the  preceding
one,  though  less  gruesome.  It  concerns  a  church  singer,
who,  was,  on  a  certain  Saturday,  to  rehearse  some  musical
selections  with  a  colleague.  He  died  the  day  before  the
appointment — in  the  street,  of  a  stroke  of  apoplexy.  He  was
then  fifty  years  old.  He  appeared  to  his  colleague,  a  roll  of
music  in  his  hand;  his  colleague  did  not  know  of  his  death.
The  account  was  sent  to  Professor  Adams  of  Cambridge
(U.  S.A.).i    Let  us  read  it:

St.  Luke's  Church,  San  Francisco,
September  11,  1890.

Some  weeks  ago  our  choir-leader,  a  man  robust  in  health  and  of
a  most  skeptical  turn  of  mind,  saw,  positively,  the  apparition  of
one  of  his  singers  who  had  just  died:

Mr.  Russell,  the  bass  of  the  choir,  had  a  stroke  of  apoplexy  in
the  street,  on  a  certain  Friday  at  ten  o'clock;  he  died  in  his  home
at  eleven  o'clock.  My  wife,  learning  of  his  death,  sent  my  brother-
in-law  to  the  home  of  Mr.  Reeves,  the  choir-leader,  to  discuss  the
music  to  be  played  at  the  funeral.  He  arrived  at  the  choir-leader's
house  at  about  half-past  one.  Suddenly  he  heard  an  exclamation
in  the  vestibule.     Some  one  had  just  cried  out,  ''Good  God!"     In

1  Proceedings  of  the  8.  P.  R.,  VIII,  214.  Myers,  Human  Personality,
II,  45.


PREVIOUS  AGREEMENTS  65

the  middle  of  the  stairway,  sitting  on  a  step,  was  the  choir-leader,
in  his  shirt  sleeves,  showing  signs  of  great  terror.

When  Mr.  Reeves  had  come  out  of  his  room,  he  had  seen  Mr.
Russell  standing  on  the  stairway,  one  hand  on  his  forehead  and
the  other  holding  a  roll  of  music  out  to  him.  The  choir-leader  went
toward  him,  but  the  phantom  vanished.  It  was  then  that  he  uttered
the  exclamation  mentioned  above.

He  knew  nothing  of  Mr.  Russell's  death.

This  is  the  most  authentic  ghost-story  that  I  have  ever  heard.
I  know  all  these  persons  very  well,  and  can  swear  to  their  sincerity.
I  have  no  doubt  that  the  choir-leader  saw  something,  subjectively  or
objectively:  it  made  him  ill  for  several  days,  in  spite  of  his  usual
fine  health.

To  state  my  own  personal  conviction,  Mr.  Russell  was  a  man  of
very  regular  habits,  very  loyal  and  very  dependable;  he  had  sung
in  the  choir  for  years  without  pay ;  his  last  thought  must  have  been :
"How  shall  I  let  the  choir-leader  know  that  I  cannot  rehearse  to-
morrow evening?"  He  died  in  an  hour,  without  having  regained
consciousness.

The  attitude  in  which  he  showed  himself  bears  out  this  hy-
pothesis; it  indicated  his  malady  (pain  in  the  head)  and  his  desire
to  perform  his  duty.

W.  M.  W.  Davis,
Rector.

The  ''San  Francisco  Chronicle"  gave  in  the  following
terms  its  version  of  the  curious  story :

On  Friday  morning,  Edwin  Russell,  a  well-known  Englishman,
had  reached  the  corner  of  Stutter  and  Mason  streets,  when  he  had
a  stroke  of  apoplexy,  and  died  before  noon.  He  had  lived  in  our
city  for  ten  years  and  was  respected  in  the  commercial  world.  He
was  a  member  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  Church  and  had  a
magnificent  bass  voice.  For  this  reason  he  was  a  great  asset  to
the  choir  of  St.  Luke's  Church,  and  was  in  constant  touch  with  the
Rev.  W.  W.  Davis,  rector  of  the  church,  and  with  Harry  E.  Reeves,
the  new  choir-leader.

It  was  to  Mr.  Reeves  that  the  sensational  thing  happened  which


66  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

people  are  all  talking  about.  I  interviewed  him  at  the  home  of
his  sister,  Mrs.  Cavenagh,  on  California  Street.  He  told  me  that
he  was  not  a  spiritualist,  and  gave  me  the  following  account:

"I  had  seen  Russell  on  the  Saturday  before  his  death.  He  had
come  to  rehearse.  I  had  asked  him  where  I  might  find  a  good
cigar,  and  he  had  taken  me  to  a  cigar  store.  Then  I  had  invited
him  to  my  home — or,  rather,  to  my  sister's  home — to  rehearse,  and
we  arranged  to  meet  on  the  following  Saturday.  I  thought  no
more  of  the  matter  until  Friday  afternoon.  As  it  is  my  custom
to  look  through  my  volumes  of  music  one  or  two  days  beforehand,
for  selections  to  be  sung  on  Sunday,  I  chose  two  Te  Deums.  I
left  my  room  and  saw  on  the  landing,  which  was  half  lighted  as
it  is  now,  my  friend  Mr.  Russell,  so  real,  so  alive,  that  I  went
forward  at  once  to  give  him  my  hand  in  welcome.

"He  had  a  roll  of  music  in  one  hand,  and  the  other  was  before
his  face.  It  was  really  he.  I  am  absolutely  sure  of  it.  Well,
he  melted  away  like  a  cloud  which  vanishes  into  the  air.

"I  was  about  to  speak  to  him,  but  was  struck  dumb.  I  sank
down  against  the  wall,  crying  out :  'Oh,  good  God  V  My  sister,  my
niece,  and  another  person  came  up  My  niece  asked,  'Uncle  Henry,
what's  the  matter f  I  wished  to  explain,  but  could  not  speak.
Then  my  niece  said  to  me,  'Did  you  know  that  Mr.  Russell  is
dead?'  I  was  literally  stupefied  by  this.  I  saw  this  Russell  three
hours  after  his  death  as  well  as  I  see  you  in  that  arm-chair."

The  investigation  made  by  the  English  Society  for  Psy-
chical Research — one  in  which  every  possible  precaution  was
taken — left  no  doubt  as  to  this  spontaneous  apparition.  The
cry  uttered  by  Mr.  Reeves  was  heard  by  witnesses;  the
vision  was  perceived  in  an  absolutely  normal  state,  and  the
hypothesis  of  an  hallucination  is  utterly  inadmissible,  given
all  the  circumstances  attendant  upon  the  phenomenon.

"We  are  concerned  here,  as  in  cases  in  which  promises  and
pledges  to  appear  were  fulfilled,  with  a  very  definite  intention
not  to  miss  a  meeting  agreed  upon.  To  refuse  to  accept
the  occurrence,  to  go  on  indefinitely  seeking  flaws,  would
lead  us  nowhere.


PREVIOUS  AGREEMENTS  67

Manifestations  of  the  dead  are  numerous  and  varied,  as
we  have  ascertained.  Here  is  still  another,  which  greatly
astonished  the  beholder.  An  Indian  half-breed  appeared  to
a  traveler,  a  woman,  after  having  sworn  to  her  to  do  so.  He
was  in  Colorado,  and  she,  having  gone  back  to  Europe,  was
then  in  Switzerland.  Mrs.  Bishop,  nee  Bird,  a  well-known
traveler  and  writer,  related  the  following  incident.^  While
traveling  in  the  Rocky  Mountains,  Miss  Bird  had  grown  to
know  an  Indian  half-breed,  James  Nugent,  called  '' Mountain
Jim,"  and  she  had  had  considerable  influence  upon  him.
She  writes:

On  the  day  of  my  departure,  he  was  much  affected.  I  had  had
a  long  conversation  with  him  on  the  subject  of  this  .mortal  life
and  immortality,  a  conversation  which  I  had  ended  with  some  quo-
tations from  the  Bible.  He  seemed  to  me  to  be  greatly  impressed,
and  had  cried :  *'I  '11  not  see  you  again  in  this  life,  perhaps,  but
X  '11  see  you  when  I  die."  I  reproved  him  gently  for  his  violence
of  speech,  but  he  repeated  the  same  words  even  more  vehemently,
adding :  "I  '11  never  forget  your  words,  and  I  swear  I  'II  see  you
again  when  1  die."     On  this,  we  parted.

For  some  time  I  had  letters  from  him;  I  learned  that  his  con-
duct had  improved,  then  that  he  had  fallen  back  into  his  savage
customs;  that  he  had  been  wounded  in  a  brawl,  then  that  he  was
better  and  was  meditating  plans  of  revenge.  The  last  time  I
heard  from  him,  I  was  at  the  Hotel  Interlaken,  in  Interlaken,
Switzerland,  with  Miss  Clayton  and  the  Kers.  Some  time  after
this  (it  was  in  September,  1874)  I  was  stretched  out  on  my  bed
one  morning,  writing  a  letter  to  my  sister,  when,  lifting  my  eyes,
I  saw  Mountain  Jim  standing  before  me.  His  eyes  were  fixed
on  me,  and  he  said  to  me  in  a  low  voice,  but  very  distinctly :  "Here
I  am,  as  I  promised."  Then  he  made  a  gesture,  and  added,
"Good-by!"

When  Miss  Bessie  Ker  came  to  bring  me  my  breakfast,  we  noted
the   date   and  time   of  the  happening.     News   of  Mountain   Jim's

^Phantasms  of  the  Living,  I,  531.  Hallucinations  telepathiques,
p.  185,


68  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

death  reached  us  some  time  afterward;  taking  into  account  the
difference  in  longitude,  the  date  coincided  with  that  of  his  ap-
parition.

In  reply  to  inquiries  concerning  this  story,  Mrs.  Bishop
wrote  that  she  had  never  had  any  other  sensory  hallucination.
She  had  seen  Mountain  Jim  for  the  last  time  in  St.  Louis,
on  December  11,  1873.  At  Fort  Collins,  in  the  state  of
Colorado,  where  he  died,  it  was  ascertained  that  his  death
took  place  on  September  7,  1874.  The  half-breed's  promise,
or  threat,  was  exactly  fulfilled.

We  cannot,  however,  refrain  from  remarking  that  these
pledges,  these  compacts,  these  promises,  are  far  from  always
being  kep;t.  As  for  me,  people  have  made  me  a  certain
number,  and  I  have  never  perceived  anything.  Is  this  the
fault  of  those  who  have  died,  or  my  own  fault  ?  Is  it  always
possible  for  some  one  dead  to  manifest  himself  ?  Is  it  always
possible  for  a  living  person  to  perceive  manifestations  ?  They
are  produced  by  vibrations,  and  the  harp-strings  capable  of
being  touched  by  them  are  doubtless  rare  enough.

While  on  the  subject  of  the  difficulty  and  rarity  of  appari-
tions we  may,  with  Myers,  take  note  of  the  experience  of
Countess  Kapnist,  and  observe  that  the  fulfilment  of  agree-
ments of  this  sort  is  often  made  through  intermediaries — a
strange  enough  fact.^  For  example,  it  was  Countess  Kap-
nist's  sister  who  saw  the  apparition,  not  she  herself.  It  is
probable  that  a  good  many  attempts  have  not  succeeded  be-
cause of  the  maladaptation  of  the  subjects,  and  that  they
would  have  ended  in  typical  manifestation  if  the  one  who
wished  to  appear  had  chosen  more  sensitive  subjects.

It  is  the  same  in  the  following  instance,  the  indirect  ful-
filment of  a  promise.  A  lady  who  had  made  a  compact  with
a  friend,  was  seen  in  phantom  form  after  her  death,  by  the

^  At  the  Moment  of  Death,  p.  113.  Human  Personality,  II,  51  and
350,  Sec.  727  A.     Proceedings  of  the  8.  P.  R.,  V,  440.


PREVIOUS  AGREEMENTS  69

friend's  husband  but  not  by  the  friend  herself.  This  curious
example  was  furnished  by  the  Rev.  Arthur  Bellamy  of  Bristol,
in  February,  1886.^     His  account  follows:

When  she  was  a  school-girl  my  wife  had  made  a  pact  with  one
of  her  comrades  that  the  one  who  died  first  should  appear
to  the  surviving  one,  God  willing.  In  1874  my  wife,  who  for  years
had  neither  seen  her  school  friend  nor  heard  of  her,  learned  of
her  death.  This  news  reminded  her  of  the  compact  which  they
had  made,  and  she  then  began  to  dwell  upon  it,  and  spoke  of  it
to  me.  I  knew  of  this  agreement  of  my  wife,  but  had  never  seen
a  photograph  of  her  friend,  nor  heard  anything  concerning  her.

One  or  two  nights  afterward  we  were  sleeping  quietly;  a  bright
fire  shone  in  the  room  and  there  was  a  lighted  candle.  I  awakened
suddenly  and  saw  a  lady  seated  beside  the  bed  in  which  my  wife
was  sleeping  deeply.  I  sat  up  in  bed  and  gazed  at  her;  I  saw  hw
so  clearly  that  I  can  still  remember  her  form  and  her  attitude.
If  I  had  an  artist's  skill,  I  could  paint  her  likeness  upon  canvas.
I  remember  that  I  was  struck  particularly  with  the  careful  way
in  which  her  hair  was  dressed;  it  was  arranged  with  a  certain
elegance.  I  cannot  say  how  long  I  sat  gazing  at  her;  but  as  soon
as  this  odd  phantom  vanished  I  got  out  of  bed  to  see  if  the  gar-
ments hung  over  the  head  of  the  bed  had  caused  some  optical
illusion.  But  there  was  nothing,  in  my  line  of  vision,  between  me
and  the  wall.  Since  I  could  not  thmk  it  an  hallucination,  I  did
not  doubt  that  I  had  really  seen  an  apparition.

I  got  back  into  bed  and  remained  there  until  my  wife  awakened,
some  hours  afterward.  Only  then  did  I  describe  to  her  the  face
which  I  had  seen.  Complexion,  stature,  etc. — all  was  in  exact
accordance  with  my  wife's  recollection  of  her  childhood  friend.  I
asked  my  wife  if  there  were  anything  particularly  striking  in  her
friend's  appearance;  she  answered  at  once,  "Yes,  at  school  we  used
to  tease  her  about  her  hair,  wliich  she  always  arranged  with  special
care."     It  was  precisely  this  which  had  struck  me.

I  must  add  that  I  had  never  seen  an  apparition  before  this,  and
have  not  since.

Arthur  Bellamy.

1  Human  Personality,  II,  350,  Sec.  727  A.


70  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

We  may  suppose  that  the  apparition  was  caused  by  the
psychic  influence  which  Mrs.  Bellamy's  deceased  friend  had
upon  her,  and  that  she  transmitted  it  to  her  husband,  since
there  was  no  reason  why  the  dead  woman  should  manifest  her-
self to  this  gentleman,  who  was  a  stranger  to  her.  But  other
considerations  perplex  us.  What  strikes  us  above  all  is  that
the  manifestation  intended  for  the  wife  was  seen  by  her  hus-
band and  not  by  her.  We  have  already  noted  ("At  the  Mo-
ment of  Death,"  page  348)  that  an  apparition  intended  for
Mrs.  Gierke  was  seen  by  her  negro  servant  and  not  by  her.
And  how  about  the  case  of  Madame  Galateri's  feet  being  tick-
led? And  my  readers  have  also  been  reminded  of  Countess
Kapnist.

I  have  before  my  eyes  five  or  six  times  the  number  of  cases
I  have  given,  cases  in  which  the  dead  fulfilled  promises  that
they  remembered  precisely  and  were  able  to  carry  out —
among  others,  the  very  touching  story  of  General  Thiebault,
published  in  his  Memoirs  (Paris,  1893;  Volume  I,  pages
43-47),  as  to  the  apparition  of  his  brother,  followed  by  this
sentence :  "I  have  never  been  able  to  believe  in  it,  and  never-
theless I  have  never  been  able  to  doubt  it."  Space  is  lack-
ing for  their  publication.  The  examples  just  given  are  suffi-
cient, it  would  seem  to  me,  to  convince  us  of  the  reality  of
the  manifestations.  Other  cases  will  add  nothing  to  the
proofs.  We  must  admit  the  authenticity  of  the  phenomena.
As  for  explaining  them,  that  is  more  difficult.

I  shall  select  one  more  letter  from  among  those  received.
It  was  sent  me  from  Kaliche,  Russian  Poland,  on  June  27,
1913.

Most  esteemed  Monsieur  Flammarion  :

My  father,  after  bis  death  in  1879,  proved  to  me  that  he  was
still  alive,  through  signs  which  we  had  agreed  upon  beforehand:

(1)  The  window-pane  which  we  had  designated  cracked  in  a
straight,  horizontal  line:   it  broke  with  a  noise  like  the  firing  of


PREVIOUS  AGREEMENTS  71

a  gun;  (2)  the  clock  which  we  had  selected  (its  strokes  were  or-
dinarily rapid  and  gay)  began  to  strike  the  hours  slowly  and
sadly,  and  for  several  weeks  continued  to  do  so.

I  must  be  silent  no  longer,  because  I  am  old.  And  since  you,
the  champion  of  truth,  are  no  longer  young,  either,  it  is  your  duty
not  to  be  silent,  for  the  world  is  listening  to  you.

Nicholas  Stepanow.

(Letter  2358.)

If  in  1913  my  advanced  age  constituted  a  reason  for  not
keeping  silent,  there  is  still  greater  reason  in  1922,  and  I
bov^  to  my  duty  by  classifying  all  this  testimony  for  the  sake
of  our  store  of  general  knowledge.

In  the  face  of  the  facts  we  have  the  impression,  as  Oliver
Lodge  said,  that  the  souls  of  the  dead  are  striving  to  enter
into  relations  with  us,  as  we  with  them,  and  that  on  both
sides  such  efforts  resemble  those  of  pioneers  who  in  order  to
open  a  tunnel  through  a  mountain  work  at  both  ends  of  the
tunnel.  The  wall  separating  the  ends  of  the  two  passage-
ways is  still  thick,  but  we  are  beginning  to  hear,  from  this
side,  the  blows  of  pickaxes  on  the  other  side.  It  would  even
seem  that  the  barrier  is  already  being  penetrated  by  X-rays.

So  we  have  seen,  indubitably,  cases  of  the  dead  returning
by  reason  of  mutual  pledges  or  promises.  It  seems  to  me
that  this  second  chapter,  read  after  the  first,  cannot  fail  to
strengthen  the  foundations  upon  which  the  new  science  must
be  built.  Let  us  go  on  with  our  investigation  by  proving,
now,  that  the  dead  also  return  on  account  of  personal  matters,
quite  apart  from  the  declared  intentions  of  which  we  have
spoken.


Ill


THE   DEAD  WHO    HAVE   RETURNED    TO   ATTEND   TO
PERSONAL  AFFAIRS

Truth   may,    at  times,    appear
improbable.

BOILEAU.

THIS  heading  may  surprise  more  than  one  reader.
We  have  just  had  before  our  eyes  varied  examples
of  the  dead  who  have  manifested  themselves  be-
cause of  promises  made  during  life.  The  examples  which  we
shall  present  in  this  chapter  will  show  us  posthumous  phenom-
ena no  less  worthy  of  our  attention,  having  as  an  object  the
setting  in  order  of  personal  affairs.  Here,  as  before,  the  first
objection  which  we  must  bring  forward  is  that  an  explanation
may  be  found  in  the  observers'  own  minds ;  but  it  has  seemed
to  us  that  this  objection  would  not  apply  to  the  foregoing
accounts,  such  as  Lord  Brougham's,  the  apparition  of  Kam-
bouillet.  Monsieur  Castex-Degrange's  statement,  that  of
Monsieur  de  Maricourt,  of  Canon  Bouin,  the  apparition  of
Russell  the  singer,  and  so  on.  It  will  be  the  same  with  the
following  cases.  Nevertheless  let  us  make  a  careful  examina-
tion, that  no  obscurity  may  remain  after  our  inquiry.

Since  we  are  seeking  truth,  whatever  it  be,  our  duty  is
to  admit  any  hypothesis,  while  protecting  ourselves  through
analysis.     Let  us  compare,  let  us  investigate  everything.

A  ''possibility"  which  presents  itself  as  an  explanation  of
these  manifestations,  is  that  of  thought-transmission  from
the  living  to  the  living.  The  solid  body  of  testimony  as  to
this  sort  of  phenomena,  supported  ceaselessly  by  new  occur-

72


PERSONAL  AFFAIRS  73

rences,  constitutes  a  foundation  of  the  highest  importance
for  our  psychic  investigation.

This  thought-transmission  may  explain  certain  phenomena
attributed  to  the  dead,  who  appear  to  return  from  beyond
the  grave,  and  take  a  hand  in  our  affairs,  although  the  mani-
festations may  be  due,  in  many  cases,  to  emanations  from  our
world  of  the  living.

Our  ''unconscious  mind,"  or,  if  one  prefers,  "subconscious
mind,"  is  a  receiving  apparatus;  its  sensitiveness  varies
according  to  the  particular  person  under  consideration.  It
is,  besides,  a  prodigious  storehouse  of  latent  impressions.
Some  of  them,  by  reason  of  certain  physical  or  psychic  ex-
ternal influences,  emerge  from  the  inmost,  mysterious  depths
of  our  psychic  being,  through  a  process  that  is  still  little
known;  others — the  greater  part  of  them — remain  buried
there  and  are  absorbed.

A  debtor's  thoughts  may,  while  he  is  alive,  be  transmitted
to  his  children  and  remain  for  months  in  their  minds — impres-
sions that  are  hidden,  unguessed,  lost  amid  all  the  other
latent  impressions  but  not  destroyed.  Then,  for  some  un-
known reason,  and  in  favorable  circumstances,  they  may  de-
tach themselves — above  all,  in  dreams — clarify,  and  emerge,
distinct  and  definite,  from  the  obscurity  of  the  subconscious.
It  may  be  the  same  with  knowledge  of  a  secret  hiding-place
for  money.

This  is  only  a  hypothesis,  but  it  is  worthy  of  our  attention.
Even  if,  in  the  manifestations,  there  were  but  new  testimony
as  to  the  unknown  faculties  with  which  living  beings  are
endowed,  the  acquisition  to  the  new  science,  however  modest
it  be,  should  be  given  due  consideration.  Before  plunging
into  the  future  life,  let  us  strive  to  know  terrestrial  life
better.

Words  are  not  indispensable  for  the  expression  of  thought,
for  unformulated  thought  is   at  times  transmitted.     I,  for


74  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

one,  know  of  a  number  of  cases  scientifically  verified  by  ex-
periments.

Words  are  one  of  the  last  conquests  of  mankind.  Before
making  use  of  articulate  speech,  our  remote  ancestors  made
themselves  understood  by  uttering  cries  with  a  meaning,
like  animals.  To-day,  with  language  as  our  tool,  we  are
incapable  of  understanding  all  that  is  hidden  in  the  sounds  of
the  animal  world.

On  the  subject  of  thought-transmission,  my  learned  friend
Dr.  Coste  de  Lagrave  sent  me  an  account,  among  others,  of
the  following  experiment,  which  he  himself  made.     He  said:

I  choose  the  leaf  of  a  tree.  I  fill  my  mind  with  its  aspect;  I
make  it  a  part  of  me  psychically,  so  that  I  shall  be  sure  to  know
it,  afterward,  among  a  hundred  thousand  others.  I  go  back  to  the
sensitive  subject,  who  is  standing  about  fifty  meters  away.  He
puts  a  bandage  over  his  eyes,  I  take  his  wrist,  place  my  fingers
on  his  pulse,  and,  thinking  of  the  designated  leaf,  follow  him.
He  runs  swiftly,  drawing  me  after  him,  halts  at  the  spot  where
the  leaf  is,  stretches  out  his  free  hand  and  places  it  carefully  on
the  leaf  which  I  have  chosen  mentally  some  minutes  before.  This
is  the  result  of  the  transmission  of  unformulated  thought.

I  have,  so  far  as  possible,  put  myself  in  touch  with  those  ca-
pable of  transmitting  thought,  above  all  to  discover  if  there  were
not  some  deception,  and  to  make  experiments  myself.  The  power
of  transmitting  unformulated  thought  is  a  faculty  which  really
exists,  but  which  is  more  or  less  developed  according  to  the  indi-
vidual. With  certain  subjects,  it  is  greatly  developed;  the  power
of  receiving  unformulated  thought  may  be  equally  developed,  and
certain  subjects  give  remarkable  results.

The  foregoing  is  what  Dr.  Coste  de  Lagrave  has  to  say  on
the  matter;  in  Paris  his  course  in  psychology  has  long  been
valued.  In  days  gone  by  I  myself  made  similar  experiments
with  Ninof  and  Clovis  Hugues  (''L'Inconnu,"  page  316),
which    prove    the    reality     of    thought-transmission.     And


PERSONAL  AFFAIRS  75

readers  may  remember  my  experiment  with  Charcot  at  the
Saltpetriere  Hospital;  I  told  of  it  in  the  chapter  entitled
^'Thought  as  a  Generator  of  Images,"  in  the  volume  ''At  the
Moment  of  Death"  (page  84).

In  the  course  of  more  than  a  century,  twenty-eight  im-
portant works  on  dreams  have  been  written,  the  first  by
Maine  de  Biran  (1792),  the  last  by  Yves  Delage  (1920).
The  list  includes  one  of  the  most  authoritative  books,  Alfred
Maury's  (1861) ;  I  have  all  of  them  before  me,  and  I  must
give  it  as  my  opinion  that  not  one  of  them  has  yet  furnished
a  complete  and  definite  explanation  of  dreams.

How  shall  we  decide  whether  an  apparition,  or  a  similar
manifestation,  of  a  deceased  person  is  anything  more  than
a  simple  subjective  manifestation,  or,  if  a  dream,  is  caused
by  a  mind  exterior  to  ours?

We  can  reach  a  conclusion  only  by  careful  analysis.

Let  us  consider  a  few  significant  cases.

I  have  long  been  calling  attention  to  psychic  occurrences.
My  readers  have  already  had  an  opportunity  to  read,  in
"Uranie,"  of  the  following  odd  episode,  taken  from  the  life
of  Swedenborg:

In  1761,  Madame  de  Marteville,  widow  of  a  former  Dutch  min-
ister to  Sweden,  received  from  one  of  her  husband's  creditors  a
demand  for  the  sum  of  twenty-five  thousand  Dutch  florms.  She
knew  that  this  had  been  paid  by  her  husband;  to  pay  it  again
would  have  placed  her  in  the  greatest  straits,  would  have  almost
ruined  her.     The  receipt  could  not  be  found.

She  paid  a  visit  to  Swedenborg,  and,  eight  days  afterward,  saw
her  husband  in  a  dream.  He  showed  her  the  piece  of  furniture
in  which  the  receipt  was,  together  with  a  hair-pin  adorned  with
twenty  diamonds,  which  she  had  believed  was  lost  also.  This  hap-
pened at  two  o'clock  in  the  morning.  Joyful,  she  rose,  and  found
everything  in  the  spot  indicated.  She  went  back  to  bed,  and  slept
until  nine.  About  eleven  o'clock,  Monsieur  Swedenborg  was
announced.     Before  learning  anything   of  what  had  happened  he


76  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

related  that  on  the  previous  night,  he  had  seen  Monsieur  de  Marte-
ville's  spirit,  who  had  told  him  that  he  was  going  to  his  widow.

These  experiences  are  not  so  rare  as  people  think.  I  have,
at  this  moment,  a  great  number  of  such,  accounts  before  my
eyes.  In  the  very  era  of  which,  we  are  speaking,  we  may  find
in  the  story  of  the  Seer  of  Prevorst  (less  unreal  than  it
seems),  the  description  of  several.

Is  there  an  immanent  justice?

Can  one  be  absolved  of  a  theft  committed?  Can  the  theft
be  nullified?

Among  the  documents  which  I  have  received  or  collected,
several  communications  from  deceased  persons  would  indicate
that  they  were  uneasy,  and  came  back  to  demand  that  certain
things  be  restored  to  their  rightful  owners.

Since  we  began  this  chapter  with  posthumous  revelations
of  financial  troubles,  let  us  bring  together,  here,  various
occurrences  of  the  same  sort.

At  the  beginning  of  my  inquiry,  I  received,  from  Algeria,
the  following  letter  (April  1899)  :

We  know  in  our  immediate  circle  of  a  curious  happening  hav-
ing to  do  with  Monseigneur  Pavie,  who,  when  he  died,  was  Bishop
of  Algiers.^  He  was  reading  in  his  study,  when  he  heard  the  door
open  behind  him.  He  turned  and  saw  a  shade  or  vaporous  form.
Its  contours  were  definite  enough  to  enable  him  to  recognize,  in  it,
one  of  his  parishioners  who  had  been  dead  for  some  time,  and  of
whom  he  had  been  particularly  fond.  Then  he  heard,  distinctly,
these  words :  "You  who  loved  me,  help  me !  I  left  a  debt  unpaid.
[He  gave  the  amount,  as  well  as  the  creditor's  name  and  address].
Discharge  this  debt,  that  I  may  cease  to  suffer."

The  observer,  much  moved,  could  not,  on  account  of  the  lateness
of  the  hour,  go  that  very  day  to  the  address  indicated.  He  went
the  next  day.     The  information  given  proved  to  be  exact,  and  since

1 1  made  this  incident  public,  for  the  first  time,  in  the  Revue  des
remies  of  July  15,  1899.


PERSONAL  AFFAIRS  77

the  amount  of  the  debt  corresponded  exactly  with  the  sum  men-
tioned by  the  deceased,  the  Abbe  Pavie  paid  it.

There  can  be  no  question  here  of  an  hallucination.  We  might
suppose  that  the  priest  learned  of  the  debt,  in  the  confessional,
and  that,  through  a  "pious  fraud,'^  he  wished  to  settle  things  thus.
But  that  is  hardly  probable;  it  would  seem  that  in  this  ease  he
would  have  attributed  the  revelation  to  a  dream.  His  precise  ac-
count warrants  a  totally  different  interpretation.

I  have  received  more  than  one  communication  similar  to
the  foregoing.  The  foUov^ing  account  v^as  sent  me  from
Nice  on  June  23,  1899 :

A  most  estimable,  pious  lady,  living  in  Paris,  told  me  that  her
father,  who  had  been  dead  for  several  years,  appeared  to  her  at
eleven  o'clock  one  night,  while  she  was  lying  awake  in  her  bed.
(She  was  dreaming,  doubtless.)  Having  first  calmed  the  terror
that  had  come  upon  her,  he  requested  her  to  pay  a  definite  sum
(his  daughter  knew  absolutely  nothing  of  it)  which  he  owed  a
certain  person;  he  designated  the  person.  Preoccupied  by  the  ex-
traordinary occurrence,  the  lady  rose  early.  When  she  opened  her
window,  the  first  person  she  saw  was  the  very  creditor  named  by
the  deceased.  She  asked  him  in  hurriedly,  though  the  hour  was
unseasonable,  and  requested  him  to  inform  her  if  her  father  did
not  owe  him  such  and  such  a  sum.  He  answered  in  the  affirmative,
and  mentioned  exactly  the  sum  which  the  deceased  had  spoken  of
the  night  before.

I  can  vouch  for  this  occurrence,  since  I  was  told  of  it  by  a  lady
in  whom  I  have  entire  confidence.  Without  believing  in  appari-
tions of  ghosts,  one  cannot,  all  the  same,  help  thinking  of  these
things,  related  by  perfectly  reasonable  persons,  quite  sound  in
mind  and  body.  I  do  not  feel  that  I  have  the  right  to  set  down
the  name  of  this  person,  whom  I  am  as  sure  of  as  I  am  of  my-
self.    But  I  am  signing  my  name,  and  giving  you  my  address.

Peretti.

(Letter  732.)

Such  dreams  are  usually  explained  on  the  supposition  that
people  remember  things  they  already  know.     But  the  narrator


78  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

took  care  to  remark  that  this  person  did  not  know  of  the
existence  of  the  debt.

The  following  letter  brings  forward  a  serious  argument  in
favor  of  survival.  I  leave  my  readers  to  judge  of  its
contents :

Romanow,  Province  of  Volkynie,
October  13,  1899.
Dear  Master:

Since  I  wish  to  aid  yon  in  your  honest,  sincere  inquiry  as  to
manifestations  from  beyond  the  grave,  I  am  taking  the  liberty  of
telling  you  of  a  happening  that  is  well  known  in  my  family.  I
have  frequently  heard  my  relatives  talk  of  it.

My  grandfather's  brother,  Count  Thadee  Czacki,  after  the  death
of  his  father,  saw  the  latter  in  a  dream.     His  father  told  him  that

he  had  borrowed  one  hundred  ducats  from  a  neighbor,  M.  N ;

the  lender  had  not  wished  to  take  a  written  receipt  for  the  sum.
He  asked  his  son,  therefore,  to  pay  the  debt,  that  his  soul  might
find  rest.

My  great-uncle  treated  this  dream  as  any  other  dream,  and  paid
no  attention  to  it.

The  next  night  he  had  the  same  dream,  exactly  in  the  same  way.
At  once,  my  great-uncle  had  the  horses  harnessed  to  his  carriage,
to  go  and  pay  his  neighbor  a  visit.  Questioning  him,  he  learned
that  he  really  had  lent  one  hundred  ducats,  but  had  no  written
proof.  My  great-uncle  paid  him,  and  his  father  appeared  to  him
once  again,  to  thank  him.

I  should  be  delighted  if  this  story  were  of  use  to  you.  I  can
guarantee  its  authenticity,  for  all  the  members  of  my  family  have
always  considered  it  indubitable.

Henri  Stechi.
(Letter  774.)

"We  may  object  that  the  son  might  have  heard  his  father
speak  of  the  loan  of  one  hundred  ducats,  might  have  for-
gotten the  fact,  and  have  remembered  the  debt  in  a  dream,
a  dream  into  which  his   father  entered   in   another  form.


PERSONAL  AFFAIRS  79

The  lender's  generosity  and  disinterested  sentiments  might
have  struck  him  when  he  heard  his  father  mention  the  loan.
But  the  objection  is  only  a  hypothesis.  Another  hypothesis
(one  which  we  have  no  right  to  disdain)  is  that  the  de-
ceased man,  being  honest,  told  his  son  of  the  debt  and  asked
him  to  pay  it.

We  are  making  an  investigation.  Let  us  consider  and  dis-
cuss every  case.  The  objection  just  made  would  not  be
applicable  to  the  following  account,  taken  from  a  valued
work  by  Dr.  Binns.  He  published  it  with  the  remark  that
it  had  been  completely  verified.  It  concerns  a  letter  written
on  October  21,  1842,  by  Charles  M'Kay,  a  Catholic  priest,
to  the  Countess  of  Shrewsbury.  The  Earl  of  Shrewsbury
had  sent  the  letter  to  Dr.  Binns.  Dale  Owen,  too,  had  quoted
it  in  his  book  "Footfalls"  (page  294).  Here  is  the  narra-
tion, in  abridged  form:

In  July,  1838,  I  left  Edinburgh  for  the  Perthshire  Mission.
Upon  my  amval  in  Perth,  I  was  summoned  by  a  Presbyterian
woman,  Anne  Simpson.  For  more  than  a  week  she  had  been  ex-
tremely anxious  to  see  a  priest,  because  one  of  her  friends,  a
woman  named  Maloy,  had  appeared  to  her  for  several  nights,  and
begged  her  to  ask  a  priest  to  pay  a  small  sum  of  money  (three
shillings  and  ten  pence)  which  the  dead  woman  owed  when  she
died.     There  was  no  other  source  of  information.

I  began  to  investigate,  and  found  that  a  woman  of  that  name
had  died;  that  she  had  been  a  laundress  in  a  regiment.  I  ended
by  discovering  the  gTocer  with  whom  she  had  had  dealings,  and
asked  him  if  a  woman  named  Maloy  owed  him  anything.  He  con-
sulted his  books  and  told  me  that  she  owed  him  three  shillings
and  ten  pence.  I  paid  this  sum.  The  woman  came  to  see  me,  to
tell  me  that  the  apparitions  had  ceased.^

These  cases  of  the  dead  who  have  returned  to  see  to  personal
matters  are  significant  and  absolutely  undeniable.     I  shall

1  Myers,  Human  Personality,  II,  348.


80  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

add  the  following  one,  taken  from  that  work  by  Bozzano,  so
full  of  information,  ' '  Les  Phenomenes  de  hantise. ' '  He  him-
self took  it  from  Robert  Dale  Owen's  well-known  book  ''The
Debatable  Land"  (page  226).  This  explanation,  by  the
author,  precedes  it:

The  following  case  was  brought  to  my  attention  by  the  pro-
tagonist in  person,  Miss  V ,  in  the  winter  of  1869-70;  I  ob-
tained   her   full   consent   to   the   publication    of  names   and   dates.

Nevertheless,  when  Miss  V spoke  of  the  matter  to  her  aged

aunt,  the  latter  feared  the  notoriety  which  it  would  give  to  their

names.     Miss  V was  obliged,  in  consequence,  to  withdraw  her

consent.

Owen  continues  in  these  words :

An  unmarried  lady  whom  I  know,  young  and  cultivated  and  be-
longing to  one  of  the  oldest  families  of  New  York   (I  shall  call

her  Miss  V ),  was  spending  about  fifteen  days  at  the  home  of

an  aunt,  who  owned  a  very  large  and  very  old  house  on  the  banks
of  the  Hudson  River.  This  dwelling,  like  many  European  Cha-
teaux, had  the  reputation  of  being  haunted.  This  was  spoken  of
as  little  as  possible  in  the  family,  but  a  certain  room  was  never
used  save  in  exceptional  cases.  At  the  very  time  of  her  stay,
so  many  guests  arrived  that  there  were  no  more  vacant  rooms.  The
aunt  asked  her  niece  if  she  had  the  courage  to  move  from  her  own
room  to  the  haunted  room   for  two  or  three   days,  thus  running

the  risk  of  a  visit  from  a  ghost.     Miss  V acquiesced  without

hesitation,  adding  that  ghostly  visits  did  not  disturb  her  much.

When  the  appointed  night  came,  Miss  V got  into  bed  and

went  to  sleep  without  the  least  anxiety.  She  awakened  at  midnight
and  perceived  the  form  of  a  grown  woman  walking  up  and  down
in  the  room,  wearing  a  chambermaid's  dress  that  was  very  clean
and  rather  old-fashioned.  At  first  she  was  not  at  all  frightened,
thinking  it  some  one  of  the  household  who  had  come  in  to  look
for  something;  but;  on  reflection,  she  recalled  that  she  had  locked
the  door.  This  thought  made  her  shiver,  and  her  fear  increased
when   she  saw  the  form   draw  near  the  bed,  bend  over  her,  and


PERSONAL  AFFAIRS  81

vainly  attempt  to  speak.     Absolutely  terrified,  Miss  V hid  her

face  under  the  covers  and  when,  a  moment  afterward,  she  looked
again,  the  phantom  had  vanished.  Then  she  sprang  from  the  bed
and  ran  to  the  door;  she  found  it  locked,  and  the  key  on  the  in-
side.

Some  time  afterward,  at  the  home  of  one  of  her  intimate  friends
who  was  interested  in  spiritualism,  she  took  part  in  the  experi-
ments, through  curiosity.  On  a  certain  evening  an  entity  mani-
fested itself,  which  called  itself  Sarah  Clarke,  a  name  unknown  to
the   experimenters.     This   personality  explained  that,  long  before,

she  had  been  a  chambermaid  in  the  home  of  Miss  V 's  aunt,

and  that  when  Miss  V had  gone  to  visit  her  relative,  she  had

vainly  tried  to  speak  to  her,  that  she  might  confess  that  she  was
guilty  of  having  stolen  from  the  aunt,  and  beg  the  aunt's  forgive-
ness. She  added  that  the  desire  to  confess  her  fault  was  so  strong
in  her,  that  it  compelled  her  to  haunt  the  room  in  which  she  had
lived  when  alive.  She  then  said  that,  when  living,  she  had  allowed
herself  to  take  several  household  articles,  among  them  a  silver  sugar-
bowl  and  other  objects  which  she  enumerated.     She  ended  by  saying

that  she  would  be  eternally  grateful  to  Miss  V if  she  would

be  so  good  as  to  take  this  message  to  her  aunt  and  say  that  she
felt  a  deep  repentance  and  implored  her  forgiveness.

At   the   first   opportunity.   Miss   V asked   her   aunt   if,   by

chance,  she  had  known  some  one  named  Sarah   Clarke.

"Certainly,"  she  answered.  "She  was  a  chambermaid  we  had
thirty  or  forty  years  ago."

"What  sort  of  girl  was  shef

"She  was  good,  industrious,   and  faithful."

"During  the  time  she  was  with  you,  did  you  never  miss  any
silver  tableware?"

After  a  moment's  thought  the  old  lady  cried:

"Yes,  I  remember,  now;  at  that  time  a  silver  sugar-bowl  disap-
peared mysteriously,  and  several  things  of  that  sort."

"Did  you  never  suspect  your  chambermaid,  Sarah  Clarke  f

"Never.  It's  true  that  she  had  free  access  to  everything;  but
all  of  us  knew  that  she  was  very  honest  and  above  suspicion."

Then  Miss  V told  her  aunt  of  the  message  sent  through  the

medium.     They  found  that  the  list  of  the  thefts,  furnished  by  thi'


82  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

so-called  spirit  of  Sarah  Clarke,  corresponded  \vitli  the  objects  ac-
tually taken  from  the  aunt's  home.  After  this  discovery  the  old
lady  said,  merely,  "If  Sarah  Clarke  was  really  guilty,  I  '11  pardon
her  with  all  my  heart."

The  most  remarkable  thing  about  this  episode  is  that  from  that
day  on  tJie  manifestations  in  the  haunted  room  ceased  and  Sarah
Clarke  no  longer  appeared  to  any  one.

I  repeat  that  I  can  vouch  for  the  truth  of  these  facts,  since  I
know  personally  the  two  ladies  chiefly  concerned.

In  this  case,  apart  from  the  manifest  proof  of  a  causal  connec-
tion between  the  dead  woman's  fixed  idea  and  the  haunting  of  the
room — a  proof  confirmed  by  the  spirit's  words  to  the  effect  that
the  desire  to  confess  her  fault  was  so  intense  that  it  compelled
her,  in  spite  of  herself,  to  haunt  the  room  in  which  she  had  lived
when  alive — apart  from  this,  we  must  also  note  a  very  important
additional  proof.  This  lies  in  the  fact  that  the  manifestations  in
the  haunted  room  ceased  immediately  after  the  spirit  gained  its
compelling  desire  for  pardon.^

The  story,  related  with  so  much  detail,  is  instructive  from
more  than  one  point  of  view,  like  all  the  foregoing  ones.

The  phenomena  similar  to  this  are  too  numerous  not  to
be  taken  into  consideration :  apparitions  of  the  dead  in
dreams,  demanding  that  certain  services  be  performed — ask-
ing people  to  do  errands,  we  might  say.  It  is  often  difficult,
not  to  say  impossible,  to  attribute  the  incidents  to  autosug-
gestion, to  some  recollection,  to  the  dreamer's  subconscious
mind.  In  the  little  narration  which  we  shall  now  give,  the
author  attributes  the  manifestation  not  to  the  deceased,  for
he  does  not  admit  the  existence  of  ghosts,  but  to  a  genius,  a
spirit,  the  existence  of  which  has  never  been  proved,  either.
Here  it  is.  Though  it  happened  in  the  seventeenth  century,
it  is  not  to  be  disdained.  People  often  say,  ''That  's  a  very
old  story."  But  can  they  really  think  that  Montaigne,  Des-
cartes, or  Moliere  observed  less  keenly  than  we?

1  Ernest  Bozzano,  Les  Phenomenes  de  hantise,  pp.   154-157,


PERSONAL  AFFAIRS  83

The  Abbe  de  Villars,  author  of  ''Comte  de  Gabalis"  (1670),
states  that  the  account  was  given  him  by  the  observer  herself,
the  wife  of  Marshal  Grancey.^

A  spirit  showed  itself  to  her  as  she  slept,  in  the  guise  of  her
late  husband.  He  did  not  speak  long;  he  said  only:  "Madame,
have  my  clothes-closet  searched.  There  is  a  letter  in  my  breeches
pocket  which  is  of  the  utmost  consequence  to  one  of  our  good
friends;  be  careful  to  burn  it."  The  marshal's  wife  tried  to  ask
questions  as  to  the  other  life;  the  phantom  disappeared  without
replying.  She  awakened,  greatly  troubled,  and  called  her  attend-
ants. They  ran  to  her  bed;  she  told  of  her  dream.  She  had  the
deceased  marshal's  body-servant  get  up;  he  had  remained  in  the
house  after  the  death  of  his  master.  He  obeyed  Madame  de  Gran-
cey's  summons;  she  asked  him  if  any  of  the  marshal's  garments
were  still  in  his  clothes-closet.  He  answered  that  there  were  none;
that  he  had  sold  them  for  as  much  as  he  could  obtain.  The  mar-
shal's wife  ordered  him  to  make  a  thorough  search.  He  left,  and
came  back  empty-handed.  He  was  sent  again,  with  no  greater
success.  But  at  last,  having  gone  a  third  time  because  of  his  mis-
tress's urgent  solicitations,  he  looked  so  thoroughly  that  he  discov-
ered, in  the  darkest  corner  of  the  clothes-closet,  in  the  midst  of
a  heap  of  sweepings,  an  old  pair  of  black  taffeta  breeches  with
eyelets,  such  as  were  worn  in  former  days.  He  gave  these  breeches
to  the  marshal's  wife;  she  put  her  hand  into  one  of  the  pockets,
from  which  she  drew  a  letter.  She  opened  it,  read  it,  and,  under-
standing its  importance,  threw  it  into  the  fire,  that  she  might  spare
a  friend  of  the  household  the  grief  that  might  have  been  caused
him  had  its  contents  been  divulged.

The  narrator  refuses  to  admit  that  the  marshal  himself
appeared  to  his  wife,  and  attributes  the  phenomenon  to  a
spirit,  a  genius.  (This  refusal  reminds  us  of  our  reflections
on  the  subject  of  Lord  Brougham  and  the  Marquis  of  Ram-
bouillet,  page  49).  As  for  me,  I  am  giving  the  incident  as
it  was  related  to  me,  and  asking  my  readers  to  compare  it

1  Le  Comte  de  Gabalis,  les  genies  assistants,  II,  87   (edition  of  1742).


84  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

with  other,  similar  ones.  Let  us  investigate  without  pre-
judice ;  but  let  us  be  logical.  Is  it  not  more  probable,  in  this,
as  in  preceding  cases,  that  the  dead  man's  soul  played  a
part,  rather  than  some  other  spirit?

Such  cases  show  us  that  the  dead  have  returned  to  see  to
intimate  personal  affairs,  to  ask  that  long-neglected  debts  be
paid,  or  to  confess  to  thefts  for  which  they  were  responsible,
I  have  before  my  eyes  many  others  more  or  less  similar.  Let
us  broaden  our  inquiry  to  include,  also,  testimony  as  to  the
discovery  not  of  debts  to  be  paid  but  of  sums  of  money,  dis-
closed through  posthumous  revelations.

The  following  manifestation,  three  days  after  death,  would
seem  to  be  well  authenticated.  An  account  of  it  was  sent  me
from  Hyeres,  on  May  31,  1899.  The  story  was  told  to  the
narrator  by  a  neighbor,  a  woman  estimable  from  every  point
of  view,  ''simple,  truthful,  and  sincere."     She  said:

"Three  days  had  passed  since  we  lost  our  father  through  sudden
death.  (He  had  died  of  congestion  of  the  brain.)  Since  it  was
customary  in  our  house  for  my  father  to  pay  all  expenses,  he  alone
had  charge  of  the  money.  He  was  in  the  habit  of  putting  it —
his  ideas  were  a  little  odd — in  certain  places  more  or  less  hidden
from  us.

"After  the  funeral,  when  we  wished  to  settle  up  everything,  my
mother,  in  order  to  pay  pressing  bills,  began  to  look  for  the  sum
from  which  household  and  all  other  expenses  were  taken.  We  were
certain  that  my  father  had  hidden  it  somewhere.  It  was  probable
that  the  amount  was  very  small.

"The  whole  family — my  mother,  myself,  and  two  boys — began  a
search.  We  looked  from  attic  to  basement,  with  no  more  result
than  if  we  had  not  looked  at  all.  My  mother  was  in  despair,  since
she  had  counted  on  the  money  to  pay  household  and  other  expenses
with.  We  did  not  know  which  way  to  turn,  and  were  all  in  the
deepest  misery.

"In  the  course  of  the  third  night,  between  eleven  and  midnight,
I  heard,  suddenly,  steps  descending  the  stairs  which  led  to  the
hay-loft.    These   steps   halted  on   the  landing   before  the   door  of


PEKSONAL  AFFAIRS  85

my  room,  and  immediately  I  heard  the  latch  lifted  and  the  door
creak.  And  my  father's  well-known  voic3  reached  my  ears,  calling
three  times,  'Baptistine,  my  child!'  As  you  may  well  suppose,
I  was  more  dead  than  alive.  My  girl  cousin  was  sleeping  with
me;  I  pushed  her  with  all  the  strength  I  had  left,  trying  to  waken
her.  It  was  useless;  she  slept  on  undisturbed.  Then  I  answered
my  father,  but  in  a  voice  so  choked  by  emotion  that  only  with
difficulty  could  I  utter  the  two  words  ^My  father!'

"  'Listen,  my  child,'  he  said.  'Since  I  left  you,  you  have  been
greatly  worried  and  have  suffered  most  terribly  because  you  can't
find  the  money.  Well,  it 's  in  an  old  packing-case  that  once  had
oranges  in  it;  the  box  is  in  the  room  behind  the  kitchen.  It  is  di-
vided into  compartments ;  there  are  bags  of  several  kinds  of  grain  on
one  side  of  it.  And  on  the  other  side,  at  the  very  bottom,  under
some  rags,  is  the  money  which  is  causing  you  so  much  suffering!
Good-by,  my  child.'

"I  need  not  add  that  the  whole  family  was  at  once  up  and  about;
some  minutes  afterward  we  found  the  hoard.

"Such  is  my  story.  I  shall  neither  retract  from  it,  nor  add  to
it."

HiLAEiON  Marquand,  Landowner.

(Letter  710.)  Place  des  Palmiers,  34.

Follov^ing  my  usual  methods  of  inquiry,  I  requested  the
writer  of  the  foregoing  to  ask  for  confirmation  of  the  account.
I  received  the  following  reply :

I  am  very  happy  to  oblige  you.  This  morning  I  went  to  the
Widow  Eugene  Ardouin's  garden  (nee  Baptistine  Pons) ;  she  was
picking  strawberries.  In  a  few  words  I  explained  to  her  the  rea-
son for  my  visit.

I  read  her  the  letter  which  I  had  the  honor  of  writing  you;  I
asked  her  if  the  account  contained  in  it  were  identical  with  the
one  she  had  given  as  to  her  father's  apparition.  She  answered,
"That  was  it."

Then  I  said:  "You  must  do  me  a  kindness.  You  must  send
Monsieur  Flammarion  a  simple  story  of  the  incident,  as  you  re-
member it  now."  She  began  to  smile,  saying  that  that  was  quite
impossible,  since  she  did  not  know  how  to  write!     I  was  most  dis-


86  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

tressed.  I  had  her  tell  me,  once  more,  how  it  had  all  happened;
she  did  so  with  pleasure,  but  with  much  emotion.  "Were  you  sure
you  were  n't  asleep  f — "Oh,  quite  sure ;  he  made  a  loud  noise,  com-
ing down  the  attic  stairs ;  you  'd  have  said  he  was  dragging  chains
with  him." — "But  how  was  it  that  your  bedroom — a  young  girl's
bedroom,  particularly — was  closed  only  with  a  latch  f — "Why,  you
see,"  she  answered,  "we  weren't  in  the  habit  of  locking  the  doors,
in  our  home."

"And  the  sum  of  money,"  I  said  to  her.  "How  much  was  there  f
— "Fifteen  hundred  francs.  I  still  seem  to  see  that  old  worm-
eaten  box,  full  of  bags  of  grain  on  one  side,  and  on  the  other  the
sum  that  had  worried  us  so."

I  asked,  finally:  "Couldn't  it  have  been  your  intense  desire  to
find  the  money  which  made  you  dream  of  this  sum  and  of  your
father?" — "No,  no,"  she  answered.  "I  was  too  young,  then,  to
think  of  anything  so  practical  as  money.  And  then,  how  could  my
wish  have  made  me  discover  the  hiding-place?"

Such,  my  dear  Master,  is  the  occurrence  which  happened  in  this
place.  I  may  say,  without  flattery,  that  we  all  admire  you  too
much  to  distort,  in  any  way,  the  information  we  give  you,  that
we  may  aid  you  to  enlighten  humanity.

Marquand.

(Letter  719.)

More  than  one  discovery  of  the  sort  has  been  made  in
dreams.  Was  this  a  dream?  The  narrator  declares  that  she
was  awake,  that  she  heard  the  sound  of  footsteps,  that  the
door  of  her  room  opened,  that  she  heard  but  did  not  see  her
father,  and  that  he  told  her  of  the  hiding-place,  known  to
him  alone.  Nevertheless  it  seems  to  me  that  all  this  took
place  in  a  dream.  This  would  not,  however,  mean  that  there
was  no  intervention  on  the  part  of  the  father.

The  foregoing  was  a  case  of  a  voice  heard  subjectively, —
but  really  heard, — a  phenomenon  caused  by  the  deceased.

Because  of  my  wish  to  consider  only  that  which  is  indubi-
table, I  related   (Volume  II,  page  259)    a  curious  incident


PERSONAL  AFFAIRS  87

concerning  a  ring  stolen  from  a  dying  man's  finger,  but
classified  the  phenomenon  among  those  attributable  rather  to
the  living  than  to  the  dead.  A  letter  from  General  Berthaut
(dated  July  22,  1921)  requested  me  to  refer  to  it  again,  in
this  third  volume.     He  wrote :

We  have  here  a  clearly  defined  apparition,  in  a  dream.  It  took
place  after  death,  since  it  was  confinned  by  the  subsequent  avowal.
Occurrences  of  this  nature  are  of  immense  value  to  those  who  wish
to  prove  sur^dval  after  death,  because  they  are^  unfortunately,
least  numerous.

(Letter  4583.)

I  accede  to  the  request  with  pleasure,  and  shall  ask,  simply,
that  pages  255  to  259  of  Volume  II  be  read  once  more,  with
care.

It  would,  indeed,  seem  virtually  certain  that  the  brother
manifested  himself  to  his  sister,  in  a  dream,  about  two  months
after  his  death.

General  Berthaut  had  already  sent  me,  in  September,
1920,  the  following  account.  It  was  taken  from  G.  Chardel's
''Essai  de  psychologic  physiologique. "  The  author  was  a
councilor  of  the  Court  of  Cassation,  and  a  former  deputy
from  the  Department  of  the  Seine  (Paris,  1841).

During  the  disturbances  in  Brittany  there  died  in  the  village  of
la  Garenne,  near  La  Chese,  a  weaver  named  Jean  Goujon.  He
was  a  widower  without  children,  and  his  thatched  cottage  was  left
empty  and  abandoned.  It  was  harvest-time.  A  girl  of  nineteen,
returning  from  the  fields,  was  going  to  the  farm  next  the  cottage,
when  she  drew  back,  screaming.  She  said  she  saw  Jean  Goujon,
lying  across  the  threshold  of  his  door,  looking  at  her.  He  asked
that  masses  be  said  for  him,  and  pointed  out  money  which  he
had  put,  for  this  purpose,  in  the  chimney-corner,  behind  a  stone
The  money  was  found,  and  the  masses  said.

(Letter  4270.)


88  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

It  would  be  interesting  to  know  how  the  request  was  made.
Did  she  hear  an  inner  voice  ?  We  are  to-day  rather  exacting
in  our  demands  for  precise  information,  all  the  more  so
because  the  manifestations  take  every  form.  In  any  case,
the  above  incident  belongs  in  the  present  chapter.

Let  us  read  the  following  letter  from  a  certain  Mrs.  P

(who  did  not  wish  her  name  revealed)  to  Mr.  Myers.^  It  is
an  account  of  a  father  who  appeared  to  his  son  at  a  moment
of  great  perplexity.

Married  in  1867,  my  life  was  calm  and  happy  until  the  end  of
the  year  1869,  when  my  husband's  health  failed  and  he  became
irritable.  He  answered  all  my  questions  evasively.  On  Christmas
Eve,  about  half-past  nine,  he  had  gone  to  bed.  He  had  left  the
lamp  lighted  because  I  was  lingering  for  a  moment  near  my  little
girl's  cradle.  Suddenly,  to  my  great  amazement,  I  saw  a  man  in
the  uniform  of  a  naval  officer,  with  a  pointed  hat  on  his  head.
His  face  was  in  the  shadow;  it  was  all  the  more  in  obscurity  from
the  fact  that  he  was  leaning  on  his  elbow  upon  the  head-board
of  the  bed,  supporting  his  head  with  his  hand.  I  asked  myself
who  this  man  could  be.  My  husband  had  his  back  turned  to  me;  I
touched  him  on  the  shoulder  and  murmured,  "Willie,  who  is  that
man?"  He  turned,  gazed  at  the  intruder,  stupefied,  then  sat  up
suddenly  and  cried  out,  "What  are  you  doing  here?"

The  form  straightened  slowly,  then,  in  an  imperious,  unhappy
voice  said,  "Willie!  Willie!"  I  looked  at  my  husband.  He  had
grown  livid  and  was  greatly  agitated;  he  rose  from  the  bed  as
though  to  attack  the  stranger,  but  stood  still  at  once,  either  in
perplexity  or  fright.  The  form,  impassive  and  solemn,  crossed  the
room,  moving  at  right  angles  to  the  wall.  When  it  passed  before
the  lamp,  a  shadow  fell  upon  the  wall  and  upon  ourselves,  as
though  it  had  been  a  real  person.  In  spite  of  this,  the  phantom
vanished  mysteriously  through  the  wall.  My  husband,  still  agi-
tated, took  the  lamp,  saying,  "I  'm  going  through  the  house  and
see  where  he   went."     I,  too,   was  terribly  agitated;   however,   re-

1  Proceedings  of  the  S.  P.  B.,  VI,  26.  Annales  des  Sciences  psy-
cUques,  1909,  p.  325.


PERSONAL  AFFAIRS  89

membering  that  the  door  was  locked  and  that  the  mysterious  visitor
had  not  gone  in  that  direction,  I  said,  "But  he  didn't  go  out  by
the  door!"  Nevertheless  my  husband  drew  back  the  bolts,  opened
the  door,  and  went  out  to  search  the  house.  Alone  in  the  darkness,
I  thought:  "WeVe  seen  an  apparition.  What  can  it  portend?
Perhaps  my  brother  Arthur  is  ill.  [He  was  a  naval  officer  and
was  on  a  voyage  to  India.]  I  Ve  always  heard  it  said  that  these
things  happen."  Such  were  my  thoughts  as  I  trembled  with  fear,
pressing  my  little  girl  against  me;  she  had  awakened.  Then  I  saw
my  husband  coming  back,  more  livid  and  more  agitated  than  ever.
He  sat  down  on  the  edge  of  the  bed,  put  his  arm  around  me,  and
murmured,  "Do  you  know  whom  we  saw?" — "Yes,"  I  answered,
"a  spirit ;  I  'm  afraid  it  has  something  to  do  with  Arthur,  but  I
could  not  see  the  face."     He  answered,  "It  was  my  father!"

My  husband's  father  had  been  dead  for  fourteen  years;  he  had
been  a  naval  officer  in  his  youth,  then,  on  account  of  his  health,
he  had  been  obliged  to  leave  the  service  before  my  husband  was
born,  and  the  latter  had  seen  him  in  uniform  only  once  or  twice.
As  for  me,  I  had  not  known  him.

The  next  day,  we  told  our  uncle  and  aunt  of  the  incident,  and
we  could  all  see  that  my  husband's  agitation  was  not  lessening.

As  the  days  went  by,  my  husband  lost  strength  and  was  obliged
to  take  to  his  bed,  seriously  ill.  It  was  only  then  that,  little  by
little,  he  confided  his  secret  to  me.  For  some  time  he  had  been  in
serious  financial  difficulties,  and  at  the  time  when  his  father  ap-
peared to  him  he  was  about  to  heed  the  fatal  advice  of  a  man
who  would  have  led  him  to  ruin,  or  perhaps  to  something  worse.
I  cannot  help  seeing  in  this  a  providential  warning  given  my  hus-
band by  means  of  the  voice  and  the  features  of  the  man  he  had
most  revered  in  his  life,  and  the  only  man  whom  he  would  have
obeyed.

The  narrator's  husband  answered  as  follows  the  inquiries
sent  him:  "I  shall  add  nothing  to  my  wife's  story;  it  is
rigorously  exact,  and  the  occurrence  took  place  just  as  she
described."

We  have  here  the  apparition  of  a  phantom  who  showed


90  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

himself  to  be  familiar  with  his  son's  affairs,  thus  proving
himself  to  know  things  that  had  happened  after  his  death,
but  which  were  in  his  son's  mind.  But  the  phantom  was
first  seen  by  the  very  percipient  who  was  ignorant  of  the
facts  in  question.

Monsieur  Bozzano  observes  that  the  hypothesis  of  telepathy
must  not  be  wholly  ruled  out  in  explaining  this  case,  though
the  hypothesis  becomes,  here,  too  complex,  too  tangled,  to
be  readily  accepted.  We  should  have  to  suppose  that  the
percipient's  husband,  on  the  point  of  venturing  into  an  un-
dertaking which  would  have  jeopardized  his  honor,  thought
instinctively  of  his  father's  revered  memory.  This  brought
about  a  corresponding  telepathic  hallucination  on  the  part
of  his  wife,  who  in  turn,  calling  her  husband's  attention  to
her  own  thought,  made  objective,  transmitted  it  to  him.
Thus  the  husband,  seized  with  remorse  at  the  sight  of  his
father's  phantom,  must,  by  this  supposition,  have  been  the
dupe  of  a  supplementary  verhal  auto-hallucination,  through
which  the  phantom  rebuked  him  in  an  imperious,  unhappy
tone — an  auto-hallucination  which  the  husband  re-transmitted
to  his  wife.

It  is  all  very  complicated !  Is  it  not  simpler  to  admit  that
there  was  intervention  on  the  part  of  the  deceased  father,
though  such  a  thing  be  incomprehensible?  Here,  too,  there
was  a  financial  question,  and,  above  all,  a  son  in  a  desperate
position.  This  phantom  was,  apparently,  real;  it  cast  a
shadow,  and  vanished  through  the  wall  (the  fourth  dimen-
sion).

We  might  compare  this  experience  with  more  than  one
similar  manifestation.  A  man  on  the  point  of  being  ship-
wrecked, with  his  vessel,  was  saved  from  peril  by  a  protector
long  dead.  Aksakof  has  told  us  how  the  vessel  Harry  Booth,
commanded  by  Captain  Drisko,  who  told  the  story,  was  saved
from  shipwreck  while  on  a  voyage  between  New  York  and


PERSONAL  AFFAIRS  91

Dry  Tortugas,  in  1865.     Here  are  the  essential  passages  of
his  statement  ^ :

Seeing  that  everything  on  the  bridge  was  as  it  should  be,  I
turned  the  command  over  to  my  first  mate,  an  absolutely  trust-
worthy officer,  and  went  down  to  my  cabin  for  a  little  rest.

At  ten  minutes  to  eleven  I  heard,  distinctly,  a  voice  saying  to
me,  "Go  up  on  the  bridge  and  give  orders  to  cast  anchor." — "Who
are  you?"  I  demanded,  running  up  on  the  bridge.  I  was  surprised
to  receive  an  order.  Up  above,  I  found  everything  as  it  should
have  been.  Nobody  had  seen  any  one  at  all  go  down  into  my
cabin.

Supposing  that  I  had  been  the  dupe  of  an  auditory  illusion,  I
went  down  again.  At  ten  minutes  to  twelve  I  saw  a  man  clad  in
a  long  gray  overcoat  enter  my  cabin;  he  had  a  broad-brimmed  hat
on  his  head.  Gazing  at  me  fixedly,  he  ordered  me  to  go  up  and
have  the  anchor  cast.  Thereupon  he  went  away  calmly,  and  I  heard
distinctly  his  heavy  steps  as  he  passed  in  front  of  me.  I  went  up
to  the  bridge  once  more,  and  saw  nothing  out  of  the  ordinary.
Everything  was  all  right.  Since  I  was  absolutely  sure  of  my
course,  I  had  no  reason  for  heeding  a  warning,  no  matter  from
what  quarter.  So  I  went  back  to  my  room,  but  no  longer  slept;
I  did  not  undress  and  was  ready  to  go  up,  if  there  were  need.

At  ten  minutes  to  one,  the  same  man  entered  and  ordered  me,
in  still  more  authoritative  tones,  to  go  up  on  the  bridge  and  give
orders  to  cast  anchor.  I  then  recognized  in  the  intruder  my  old
friend  Captain  John  Burton,  with  whom  I  had  gone  on  voyages
as  a  boy,  and  who  had  been  extremely  kind  to  me.  With  one
bound  I  reached  the  bridge  and  ordered  the  sails  lowered  and
the  anchor  cast.  The  sea,  where  we  were,  was  fifty  fathoms  deep.
It  was  in  this  way  that  the  vessel  escaped  running  on  the  rocks
of  Bahama.2

First,  an  auditory  illusion ;  so  much  could  be  granted.  In
the  second  place,  an  optical  illusion;  this  is  going  a  little

1  Animisme  et  spiritisme,  p.  426.

2  The  details  may  be  read  in  Light  (1882),  p.  303.


92  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

farther.  But  was  this  definite  apparition  imaginary?  Events
proved  the  contrary.

It  is  difficult  to  challenge  the  fact  that  we  are  here  con-
cerned with  a  manifestation  on  the  part  of  some  one  dead.
Surely,  my  readers  have  not  forgotten  the  typical  episode,
similar  to  the  foregoing  one,  of  the  phantom  which  gave
this  command :  * '  Steer  to  the  northwest. ' '  ("  Uranie, ' '  page
214.)

Aksakof  has  told,  elsewhere,  how  an  important  will  was
found  through  information  furnished  by  the  deceased  person
himself.  On  July  5,  1867,  Prince  Wittgenstens  related  the
incident  in  the  letter  given  below  ^ :

A  friend  of  mine,  Lieutenant-General  Baron  de  Korff,  who  has
been  dead  for  some  months,  manifested  himself  to  me  through
a  medium  (without  my  thinking  of  him  in  the  least).  He  ordered
me  to  point  out  to  his  family  the  place  where,  through  malevolence,
his  will  had  been  hidden.  It  had  been  concealed  in  a  certain  cup-
board of  the  house  in  which  he  died.  I  did  not  even  know  that
the  heirs  were  looking,  without  success,  for  the  will  in  question.
It  was  found  at  the  exact  spot  designated  by  the  spirit  of  the  de-
ceased. It  was  a  document  of  the  greatest  importance  for  the
management  of  the  family  estate,  as  well  as  for  the  solution  of
questions  which  would  arise  upon  the  sons'  coming  of  age.  Here
is  an  occurrence  that  defies  all  skepticism.

In  giving  this  remarkable  instance  of  a  communication
from  beyond  the  grave — supported  by  vouchers — Aksakof  re-
minds us  of  the  case  of  Dr.  Davey's  son,  who  revealed  to
his  father  that  there  were  seventy  pounds  sterling  in  his
pocket-book  instead  of  the  twenty -two  declared  to  have  been
there.  Aksakof  reminds  us,  too,  of  the  phenomenon  con-
nected with  the  carrying  out  of  a  will,  made  public  by  the
London  Dialectic  Society.     Under  the  heading  '*  Identity  of  a

1  Animisme  et  spiritisme,  p.  566.


PERSONAL  AFFAIRS  93

dead  man's  personality  established  by  the  communication  of
facts  which  could  have  been  known  only  to  the  deceased  him-
self, and  which  only  he  could  have  communicated, ' '  he  gives  a
certain  number  of  typical  occurrences,  among  them  the  fol-
lowing :

Mrs.  G ,  the  wife  of  a  United  States  army  captain  in

command  of  regular  troops,  was  living  with  her  husband,  in
1861,  in  the  city  of  Cincinnati.  In  December,  1863,  her  hus-
band's brother  ''Jock,"  as  he  was  called  familiarly,  died
suddenly.  In  March,  1864,  when  Mrs.  G ,  out  of  curios-
ity, was  making  spiritistic  experiments,  she  found  that  she
was  a  medium.     Jock's  name  was  given  her  by  rappings.

Mrs.  G asked  him  if  he  wished  anything.     By  way  of

reply  he  gave  her  a  list  of  debts  to  be  paid;  the  details  of
these  took  up  two  large-sized  pages  of  the  last-mentioned
work.  This  same  chapter  contains  several  other  proofs  of
identity.  But  we  already  have  too  much  testimony  to  war-
rant our  giving  more.

The  famous  hypnotist  Deleuze  who  was,  as  is  well  known,
librarian  of  the  Paris  Museum  of  Natural  History  (my  read-
ers are,  surely,  familiar  with  his  principal  works),  related
the  following  as  an  instance  of  the  apparition  of  some  one
dead  ^ :

A  young  woman  who  was  a  somnambulist  and  who  had  lost  her
father,  saw  him  twice  very  distinctly.  He  appeared  in  a  dream
and  gave  her  important  advice.  After  praising  her  conduct,  he
told  her  that  an  opportunity  for  getting  married  would  present
itself;  that  this  marriage  would  seem  right  and  proper,  and  that
she  would  like  the  young  man,  but  that  she  would  not  be  happy
with  him.  Her  father  advised  her  to  refuse  him.  He  added  that
if  she  did  not  avail  herself  of  this  opportunity,  another  would  oc-
cur soon  afterward,  and  that  all  would  be  concluded  before  the
end  of  the  year.     It  was  then  the  month  of  October.

1  See  Charpignon:  Physiologic,  medecine  et  metaphysique  du  Mag-
netisme  (Orleans,  1841),  p.  317.


94  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

The  first  young  man  was  proposed,  as  a  suitor,  to  the  mother,
but  the  daughter,  struck  by  what  her  father  had  told  her,  refused
him.

A  second  suitor,  who  came  from  the  country,  was  introduced  to
the  mother  by  friends.  He  asked  for  the  young  lady's  hand,  and
the  marriage  took  place  on  December  30th.

The  foregoing  was  a  premonitory  dream;  I  have  given  a
great  many  examples  of  dreams  of  the  same  sort.  Usually
they  originate  in  the  mind  of  the  dreamer  himself.  But  was
that  true  in  this  case  ?  Is  it  not  plain  that  the  father  inter-
vened ?

I  shall  give  still  another  case.  A  dead  man  who  had  just
been  buried  appeared  and  made  a  personal  revelation  having
to  do  with  his  son  and  daughter.  The  case  was  investigated
with  special  care  by  Hodgson,  and  made  public  by  Myers  in
Volume  VIII  (page  200)  of  the  "Proceedings  of  the  Society
for  Psychical  Research,"  in  ''Human  Personality,"  Volume
II,  page  36,  and  by  Bozzano  in  the  ''Annales  des  Sciences
psychiques"  of  April,  1910.  The  following  is  an  abridged
account  of  it.     We  are  now  in  the  United  States.

On  February  2d,  a  certain  Michael  Coulay,  a  farmer  living  in
the  environs  of  Ionia,  was  found  dead  in  the  livery-stable  of  the
Jefferson  Inn.  After  the  customary  inquest,  held  by  Mr.  Hoff-
mann, an  examining  magistrate,  the  corpse  was  placed  in  the  coffin,
ready  for  burial.  The  old,  soiled  clothes  which  the  farmer  had
worn  were  thrown  into  the  yard.

When  the  deceased  man's  daughter  learned  of  her  father's  death
she  fainted  away,  then  came  to  and  cried:  "Where  are  our
father's  clothes?  He  appeared  to  me  in  a  white  shirt,  a  black
vest,  and  satin  slippers;  he  had  sewed  a  packet  of  hank-notes  into
hh  gray  shirt,  and  in  doing  that  he'd  used  a  piece  of  red
cloth  cut  from  one  of  my  old  dresses.  He  warned  me  that
the  money  is  still  where  he  put  it,''    Then  she  fainted  once  more.

The  members  of  the  family  thought  this  only  an  hallueinatiou.


PERSONAL  AFFAIRS  95

Nevertheless  the  doctor  advised  them  to  send  for  the  garments,  in
order  to  calm  the  ill  girl.  The  son  telephoned  to  Hoffmann,  the
judge,  who  found  them  in  the  yard.  His  sister  had  exactly  de-
scribed the  costume  in  which  the  dead  man  had  been  clothed,  in-
cluding the  slippers,  although  she  had  not  seen  her  father  after
his  death,  and  although  those  related  to  him  had  seen  his  face
only,  through  the  lid  of  the  coffin.  The  gray  shirt  was  found,  and
in  the  inside  of  the  part  over  the  chest  was  found  a  packet  of
bank-notes  (thirty-five  dollars)  sewed  up  in  a  piece  of  red  cloth,
like  that  of  which  one  of  his  daughter's  dresses  was  made.  The
stitches  were  long  and  irregular,  as  though  made  by  an  untrained
hand.

The  Rev.  Amos  Crum,  a  pastor  in  Dubuque,  sent  an  attestation
as  to  these  incidents,  with  supplementary  details;  they  were  fur-
ther confirmed  by  Judge  Hoffmann,  by  the  Rev.  R.  A.  Green,
Messrs.  Ham  and  Carver,  owners  of  a  newspaper,  "The  Herald,"
Mr.  H.  L.  Sill,  a  writer  for  this  same  newspaper,  and  Mrs.  George
Brown,  a  farmer's  wife.  All  these  lived  in  the  same  town  with
the  Coulay  family.

This  account  led  to  an  immediate,  careful  investigation;
it  revealed  the  fact  that  the  deceased  communicated  tv^o  es-
sential bits  of  information,  one  of  which  (concerning  the
garment  in  which  he  had  been  clothed)  was  known  only  to
persons  whom  the  seer  had  never  met;  the  other  (the  exist-
ence of  the  inner  pocket  and  the  sewed-up  money)  was  known
only  to  the  dead  man  himself.

The  apparition  of  the  father  and  the  daughter's  clair-
voyance are  two  phenomena  equally  remarkable.

Testimony  as  to  identity  is  rare  and  precious;  to  reject  it
through  prejudice  is  not  honest.  Some  testimony  emanates
from  particularly  estimable  quarters.  The  following  account,
it  seems  to  me,  is  worthy  of  the  highest  consideration.  Mon-
sieur de  la  Rouliere,  residing  at  the  Chateau  des  Loges  (Saint-
Christophe-sur-Roc,  in  the  Department  of  Deux-Sevres)  wrote
me  on  July  16,  1920:


96  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

I  had  the  misfortune,  last  year,  to  lose  my  daughter,  who  was
twenty-four.  She  was  very  good;  she  died  like  a  saint.  I  also
had  a  son,  who  was  killed  at  Douaumont.     He  was  charming,  very

splendid.     It  happened  that  my  cousin,  Madame  de  G ,  said  to

me  one  day:  "Don't  grieve  so  about  your  children's  death.  They
are  very  happy.  Their  souls  are  in  brightness;  they  know  perfect
happiness.  Your  dear  daughter  spoke  to  me  the  other  day.  She
said  to  me:  ^My  poor  little  papa  is  crying  on  my  account;  tell
him  I'm  very  happy.  He  tried  to  keep  a  promise  he  made  me,
but  he  didn't  keep  it.' — 'What?  Why,  what  is  this  promise?' —
'Speak  to  my  little  papa  about  it ;  he  '11  know  what  I  mean.' "

I  was  greatly  agitated  by  my  cousin's  words.  It  was  true  that
on  the  day  before  my  daughter's  death  I  was  telling  my  beads
with  her  and  she  said  to  me,  '^My  little  papu,  promise  me  you'll
tell  ten  beads  for  me  every  day."

After  a  month  I  stopped  doing  this.  No  one  in  the  world  knew
of  this  promise.  How  could  my  cousin  have  known  of  it?  It
follows  that  my  daughter  told  her  of  it.

I  answered  my  cousin:  "That's  true;  but  I've  lost  the  rosary
that  my  daughter  gave  me."

"Come  to  my  home  this  evening;  I'll  give  you  another  one."

My  cousin  took  out  a  box  in  which  there  were  twenty  or  twenty-
five  rosaries  which  she  was  planning  to  give  to  children  in  the
nuns'  charge;  she  offered  me  one  of  them,  a  silvered  one.

"Ah,"  she  said  to  me,  "your  daughter  does  not  wish  me  to  give
you  this  rosary,  for  my  hand  encountered  resistance."

My  cousin  gave  me  another  rosary,  a  black  one.

"Why,"  I  said,  "that 's  odd ;  this  black  rosary  is  exactly  like  the
one  my  daughter  gave  me."

It  was  true.     I  had  found  the  rosary  again.

Explain  that,  Monsieur  Flammarion.

There  is  a  further  problem.  My  son  was  killed  on  March  4,
1916,  near  Douaumont.  My  cousin  said  to  me  one  day:  "My
poor  cousin,  you  think  that  Jean  is  a  prisoner.  Well,  he  is  not.
He  was  killed  by  a  bullet  that  pierced  his  heart.  His  last  words
were  addressed  to  his  dear  wife :     Ah,  Renee !     My  poor  wife !'  *'

Two  months  afterward  my  son's  orderly  (a  prisoner  in  Germany)


PERSONAL  AFFAIRS  97

wrote  me:  "Your  son,  my  brave  Lieutenant,  fell  ten  paces  from
me.     He  said  as  he  fell :     'Ah,  Renee !     My  poor  wife !'  "

How  could  my  cousin  have  known  his  last  words,  which  were
sent  me  by  letter  three  months  after  his  death*?

From  that  day  on,  without  being  what  is  called  a  spiritualist,
I  have  believed  in  spiritualism.

De  la  Rouliere.

(Letter  4200.)

'  I  agree  with  my  esteemed  correspondent,  and  with  his  rela-
tive the  Marchioness  of  G (who  did  me  the  honor  of

coming  in  person  to  tell  me  of  her  experiments),  that  the
manifestation  on  the  part  of  this  pious  young  deceased  woman
is  worthy  of  attention.  It  would  seem  as  though  she  herself
came  to  remind  her  father  of  his  promise.  And  as  he  was
not  with  the  cousin,  he  had  to  be  informed.  But  can  Mon-
sieur de  la  Rouliere  be  absolutely  certain  that  he  never  spoke
to  his  cousin  of  his  conversation  at  his  dear  child's  death-
bed ?  Then,  too,  could  there  not  have  been  a  telepathic  trans-
mission from  the  brain  of  one  to  the  brain  of  the  other?
Would  it  not  seem  that  there  is,  about  the  case,  something
very  human?  One  can  see  how  careful  we  must  be  in  inves-
tigations of  this  sort,  in  order  to  draw  indubitable  conclu-
sions.

The  episode  of  his  son,  who  fell  on  the  field  of  battle,  is
equally  deserving  of  an  adequate  explanation.  The  entire
structure  of  psychic  science  is  still  to  be  built  up.

The  following  manifestation  is  that  of  some  one  dead  pro-
testing against  an  unjust  accusation.  An  account  of  it  was
sent  me  from  Curityba,  Brazil,  on  May  21,  1921,  in  this  letter :

Dear  Master:

Must  not  all  thinking  men  aid  you  in  your  work,  no  matter  in
what  latitude  they  live?

I  consider  it  a  duty  to  tell  you  of  the  incident  given  below.     It


98  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

happened  some  months  ago  in  Rio  de  Janeiro,  and  was  much  talked
of.

It  concerns  the  death  of  a  police  officer  who  had,  in  his  keeping,
certain  army  accoutrements.  After  his  death  it  was  found  that
these  had  vanished.  This  led  to  a  meeting  of  superior  officers,  to
decide  on  the  liability  of  his  widow.

While  this  meeting  was  at  its  height,  and  was  not  proving  fa-
vorable to  the  deceased  man,  suddenly  an  extraordinarily  violent
blow  was  struck  upon  the  table — so  violent  that  the  ink-stands  rolled
to  the  floor.

It  was  discovered  afterward  that  the  dead  man  was  in  no  way
responsible  for  the  disappearance  of  the  accoutrements.

Gaston  Cord'homme.

(Letter  4511.)

One  of  our  colleagues,  Monsieur  Leon  d'Binbrodt,  sent  me,
in  reference  to  this  phenomenon,  the  f ollov^^ing  comment :

It  would  be  helpful  to  know  if  the  widow  of  the  incriminated
officer  were  present  at  the  inquiry,  if  she  were  there  at  the  mo-
ment of  this  violent  blow,  because,  if  she  were,  we  might  believe
that  the  blow  was  produced  by  this  lady's  subconscious  mind —
an  explosion  of  reserve  psychic  force.  In  ease  she  were  not  present,
it  would  be  easier  to  attribute  the  blow  to  the  intervention  of  her
deceased  husband.

I  recall  that  in  his  book  "Vies  des  Dames  galantes"  ["Lives  of
the  Courtesans"]  Brantome  tells  a  story  which  would  seem  to  prove
the  possibility  of  defending  oneself  psychically.  A  young  woman,
seeing  her  jealous  husband  rushing  upon  her,  sword  in  hand,  had
only  time  to  call  upon  the  Virgin,  and  instantly  the  husband  was
sent  rolling  over  the  ground ;  but  instead  of  getting  up  more  furious
than  ever,  which  would  have  been  natural,  this  man  grew,  suddenly,
as  mild  as  a  dove.  He  was  content  merely  to  ask  his  wife  what
could  have  saved  her.

Every  one  may  read  the  story  in  the  book  by  Brantome
(Dissertation  I) .  Doubtless,  we  should  not  have  gone  in  search
of  it  there,  except  for  my  painstaking  correspondent's  erudi-


PERSONAL  AFFAIRS  99

tion.  .  .  .  There  was  here  a  typical  and  definite  mental  phe-
nomenon which  comes  within  the  scope  of  our  investigation.

By  sending  letters  of  inquiry  to  Brazil,  regarding  the  police
officer's  case,  I  received  confirmation  of  the  exactitude  of  the
above  account.  But  I  was  not  able  to  learn  if  the  widow
were  present.  We  may  ask  how  her  ''subconscious  mind"
could  have  struck  a  resounding  blow.  We  are  concerned
here  with  invisible  forces.  A  manifestation  on  the  part  of
the  accused  man  would  seem  the  most  probable  explanation.

What  shall  we  think  of  the  following?

On  the  very  day  of  her  death,  a  young  woman  who  had  died  in
bringing  a  baby  into  the  world,  appeared  to  one  of  her  friends  (a
woman)  and  said  to  her,  "I  am  dead,  but  the  baby  will  live."
Some  days  previous  to  this,  she  had  said  that  she  was  frightened
on  account  of  her  condition  and  feared  she  was  going  to  die.  It
was  in  the  month  of  June,  1879.  The  narrator  was  Mrs.  Smith,
head  of  the  children's  boarding-school  in  Amble,  Northumberland
(England).  The  apparition  went  around  her  bed,  moved  toward
the  door,  which  was  hidden  by  hangings,  and  vanished.  Much
affected  by  this  vision,  Mrs.  Smith  rose  to  make  an  investigation,
ran  toward  the  door  without  finding  any  one,  then  called  her  sister,
who  was  in  bed  in  a  room  near  by;  the  latter  took  care  to  make
note  of  the  occurrence  in  her  memorandum-book.  Professor  Sidg-
wick  and  his  wife  made  a  careful  inquiry  and  published  a  report
of  it.  The  narrator  was  then  twenty-nine  years  old  and  in  perfect
health.  Children  were  taken  into  her  school  and  brought  up  with
especial  care.^

We  have  already  noted,  in  Volume  II  (page  314)  an
odd  case  similar  to  the  one  above.  A  young  mother  died  in
Bruges.  In  a  vision,  her  new-born  baby  was  presented,  to-
gether with  its  elder  brother,  to  their  mother's  sister-in-law
in  England,  Miss  Lucy  Dodson.  In  this  instance  Miss  Dod-
son's  own  mother  held  the  children  out  in  her  arms;  she

1  See  Myers,  Human  Personality,  II,  33  and  342.


100  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

had  been  dead  for  sixteen  years.  But  we  took  care  to  state
that  the  apparition  could  not  with  certainty  be  said  to  come
within  the  scope  of  this  third  volume.  There  may  have  been
here  only  thought-transmission  on  the  part  of  the  dying
woman,  together  with  an  association  of  ideas  (thought  as  a
generator  of  images).  The  phantom  of  the  mother  holding
the  two  children  in  her  arms  would  seem  to  us,  then,  a  tele-
pathic manifestation  proceeding  from  the  mind  of  the  woman
in  childbed.  This  fits  in  with  what  we  said  above,  as  to  the
visioning  of  phantoms  (page  51).

As  we  see,  such  cases  are  always  those  of  the  dead,  mani-
festing themselves  because  of  personal  affairs.  It  is  instruc-
tive to  bring  them  together  and  to  compare  them.

There  are  sometimes,  among  these  posthumous  manifesta-
tions, examples  of  revenge  taken — dramas,  tragedies.  Space
is  lacking  in  which  to  give  all  of  them.  I  should  not  Like,
however,  to  neglect  to  place  before  the  eyes  of  my  careful
readers  the  following  manifestation  on  the  part  of  a  man
who  had  been  assassinated.  He  appeared  to  revenge  him-
self upon  his  murderer.  Monsieur  Bozzano  himself  witnessed
it,  at  a  spiritistic  seance  in  which  he  took  part.  The
account  of  it  was  published  very  recently,  for  in  order  to
make  it  public  it  was  necessary  to  await  the  death  of  the
hero.     Monsieur  Bozzano  writes^:

To-day  I  can  speak  of  it  in  the  general  mterest  of  metaphysical
research,  omitting,  however,  the  name  of  the  person  chiefly  con-
cerned.

Seance  held  on  April  5,  1904. — The  following  were  present:  Dr.
Giuseppe  Venzano,  Ernesto  Bozzano,  the  Cavaliere  Carlo  Peretti,

Signore  X ,   Signora  Guidetta  Peretti,  and  the  medium  L.  P.

The  seance  was  begun  at  ten  o'clock  in  the  evening.

From  the  beginning  we  noted  that  the  medium  was  troubled,  for
some  unknown  reason.     The  spirit-guide  Luigi,  the  medium's  father,

'^  Luce  e  Omhra   (Eome,  1920).     Bevue  spirite,  1921,  p.  214,


PERSONAL  AFFAIRS  101

did  not  manifest  himself,  and  L.  P.  gazed  with  terror  toward  the
left  corner  of  the  room.  Shortly  afterward  he  freed  himself  from
his  ''spirit-controls/'  rose  to  his  feet,  and  began  a  singularly  real-
istic and  impressive  struggle  against  some  invisible  enemy.  Soon  he
uttered  cries  of  terror,  drew  back,  threw  himself  to  the  floor,  gazed
toward  the  corner  as  though  terrified,  then  fled  to  the  other  corner
of  the  room,  shouting:  "Back!  Go  away.  No,  I  don't  want  to.
Help  me!  Save  me!"  Not  knowing  what  to  do,  the  witnesses  of
this  scene  concentrated  their  thoughts  with  intensity  upon  Luigi,  the
spirit-guide,  and  called  upon  him  to  aid.  The  expedient  proved
effective,  for  little  by  little  the  medium  grew  calmer,  gazed  with
less  anxiety  toward  the  corner  of  the  apartment;  then  his  eyes  took
on  the  expression  of  some  one  who  looks  at  a  distant  spectacle,  then
a  spectacle  still  more  distant.  At  last  he  gave  vent  to  a  long  sigh
of  relief  and  murmured :     "He  's  gone !     What  a  bestial  face !"

Soon  afterward,  the  spirit-guide  Luigi  manifested  himself.  Ex-
pressing himself  through  the  medium,  he  told  us  that  in  the  room
in  which  the  seance  was  being  held  there  was  a  spirit  of  the  basest
nature,  against  which  it  was  impossible  for  him  to  struggle;  that
the  intruder  bore  an  implacable  hatred  for  one  of  the  persons  of  the
group.  Then  the  medium  exclaimed  in  a  frightened  voice :  "There
he  is  again!     I  can't  defend  you  any  longer.     Stop  the — "

It  is  certain  that  Luigi  wished  to  say,  "Stop  the  seance,"  but  it
was  already  too  late.  The  evil  spirit  had  taken  possession  of  our
medium.  He  shouted;  his  eyes  shot  glances  of  fury;  his  hands,
lifted  as  though  to  seize  something,  moved  like  the  claws  of  a  wild

beast,  eager  to  clutch  his  prey.     And  the  prey  was  Signore  X ,

at  whom  the  medium's  furious  looks  were  east.  A  rattling  and  a
sort  of  concentrated  roaring  issued  from  our  medium's  foam-covered
lips,  and  suddenly  these  words  burst  from  him :  "I  've  found  you
again  at  last,  you  coward!  I  was  a  Royal  Marine.  Don't  you  re-
member the  quarrel  in  Oporto  *?  You  killed  me  there.  But  to-day
I  '11  have  my  revenge,  and  strangle  you."

These  distracted  words  were  uttered  as  the  hands  of  the  medium,
L.   P.,   seized   the  victim's   throat,   and   tightened   on   it  like   steel

pincers.     It  was  a  fearful  sight.     The  whole  of  Signore  X 's

tongue  hung  from  his  wide-open  mouth;  his  eyes  bulged.     We  had


102  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

gone  to  the  unfortunate  man's  assistance.  Uniting  our  efforts  with
all  the  energy  which  this  desperate  situation  lent  us,  we  succeeded,
after  a  terrible  hand-to-hand  struggle,  in  freeing  him  from  the  des-
perate grip.  At  once  we  pulled  him  away,  and  thrust  him  outside,
locking  the  door.  We  barred  the  medium's  access  to  the  door;  ex-
asperated, he  tried  to  break  through  this  barrier  and  run  after  his
enemy.  He  roared  like  a  tiger.  It  took  all  four  of  us  to  hold  him.
At  last,  he  suffered  a  total  collapse  and  sank  down  upon  the  floor.

On  the  following  day  we  prepared  to  clear  up  this  affair — to  seek
information  which  might  enable  us  to  confirm  what  '^the  Oporto
spirit"  had  said.     We  were,  in  fact,  already  quite  certain  of  the

truth  of  the  accusation,  for  it  was  noteworthy  that  Signore  X

had  not  protested  in  the  least  when  the  serious  charge  of  homicide
had  been  hurled  at  him.

The  words  uttered  by  the  furious  spirit  served  me  as  a  means  for
arriving  at  the  truth.     He  had  said,  "I  was  a  Royal  Marine."     And

I  knew  vaguely  that  Signore  X had,  himself,  in  his  youth,  been

an  officer  of  marines;  that  he  had  witnessed  the  Battle  of  Lissa,
and  that  after  resigning  his  commission  he  had  devoted  himself  to
commercial  enterprises.  With  these  facts  as  a  basis,  I  proceeded
to  ask  a  retired  vice-admiral  for  other  details;  he,  too,  had  fought
at  Lissa.  As  for  Dr.  Yenzano,  he  questioned  a  relative  of  Signore
X ,  with  whom  the  latter  had  broken  off  all  relations  years  be-
fore. Between  us  we  gathered  separate  bits  of  information  which
tallied  amazingly,  and  which,  brought  together,  led  us  to  these  con-
clusions :

Signore  X had,  indeed,  served  with  the  Royal  Marines.     One

day,  being  upon  a  battle-ship  on  a  training  cruise,  he  had  landed
for  some  hours  at  Oporto,  Portugal.  During  his  stay,  while  he  was
walking  in  the  city,  he  heard  a  noise  of  drunken,  furious  voices
coming  from  an  inn.  He  perceived  that  the  language  was  Italian,
and,  realizing  that  it  was  a  quarrel  between  men  of  his  vessel,  he
went  into  the  room,  recognized  his  men,  and  commanded  them  to
return  to  their  ship.  One  of  the  drinkers,  more  intoxicated  than
the  others,  answered  him  back  and  even  went  so  far  as  to  threaten
his  superior  officer.  Angered  by  his  attitude,  the  officer  drew  his
sword  and  plunged  it  into  the  insolent  fellow's  breast;  the  latter
died  soon  afterward.     As  a  result  of  this  adventure,  the  officer  was


PERSONAL  AFFAIRS  103

court-martialed,  was  sentenced  to  six  months^  imprisonment,  and,  on
the  expiration  of  Ms  term,  was  asked  to  resign  his  commission.

Those  are  the  facts;  it  follows  from  them  that  the  disturbing
spirit  had  not  lied.     He  had  exactly  stated  his  rank  as  a  Royal

Italian  Marine.     He  had  remembered  that  Signore  X had  killed

him.  He  had,  moreover, — and  this  was  a  particularly  remarkable
statement, — indicated  the  place  where  he  had  died,  the  setting  for
the  drama,  Oporto.

A  painstaking  inquiry  confirmed  the  authenticity  of  all  this.  By
what  hypothesis  could  one  explain  occurrences  so  strikingly  in  agree-
ment— those  which  were  revealed  to  us  at  the  seance  of  April  5,
1904,  and  those  which  had  taken  place  in  Portugal  many  years
before?

Ernesto  Bozzano.

That  was,  beyond  a  doubt,  a  dramatic  manifestation.  I
have  no  criticism  to  offer,  unless  v^e  suppose  that  the  officer's
remorse  created  a  phantom  in  the  medium's  mind!  This  is
scarcely  probable.  We  know  of  threats  to  Dr.  Gibier  still
more  savage  than  this,  perhaps.  The  carrying  out  of  these
threats  was  actually  begun.^

It  is  time  for  us  to  call  a  halt  in  our  special  investigation
of  ^ '  the  dead  who  have  returned  to  attend  to  personal  affairs. ' '
Like  all  our  chapters,  this  one  might  well  contain  three
or  four  times  as  many  accounts  of  conclusive  occurrences.
Those  we  have  just  read  amply  suffice  to  prove  that  dead
persons  have  manifested  themselves  for  personal  reasons,  just
as  the  dead  of  the  preceding  chapter  returned  to  carry  out
promises  they  had  made.  It  seems  to  us  that  the  petty  affairs
of  earthly  life  should  no  longer  disturb  those  who  are  gone,
and  that  they  should  enjoy  everlasting  rest  (Requiem  ceternam
dona  &i&  Domine).  Yes,  so  it  would  seem;  but  this  is  not  so.
They  are  still  living.  The  possibility  of  communication  with
the  dead  is  shown  to  be  as  unquestionable  as  that  of  telepathic
communication  from  one  living  person  to  another.     Among

1  See  Analyse  des  choses  (Paris  and  Philadelphia,  1890),  p.  196.


104  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

the  cases  omitted  from  this  chapter,  for  lack  of  space,  I  must
mention  (it  may  be  read  in  the  book  on  "Maisons  hantees"
"Haunted  Houses")  that  of  Monsieur  Sainte-Foix,  father  of
the  translator  of  ''La  Mystique,"  by  Gorres.  He  was  tor-
mented by  the  spirit  of  one  of  his  parents,  until  he  had
assumed  the  guardianship  of  his  children.  These  manifesta-
tions are  unquestionable,  and  doubt  is  no  longer  possible.

The  various  occurrences  given  here  show  us  dead  persons
who  returned  for  personal  reasons.  In  interpreting  them,
the  only  objection  which  presents  itself  is  the  unknown  part
that  the  living  may  have  had,  without  their  knowledge,  in
the  odd  manifestations.  These  first  three  chapters  state  the
problem  clearly,  and  in  most  of  the  cases  we  have  eliminated
this  objection.

While  admitting,  naturally,  that  we  do  not  at  present  know
the  whole  range  of  a  living  man's  faculties,  can  we  logically
attribute  to  these  faculties  all  phenomena  the  nature  of  which
we  do  not  know?  Shall  we  suppose  that  we  are  making  a
perpetually  false  interpretation  of  that  which  seems  real?
Let  us  recapitulate.  The  unknown  being  which  returned  to
strike  upon  the  gas-fixture,  as  Sirchia  had  formally  announced
he  would  do  (page  11)  would  seem  really  to  have  been  the
deceased  Sirchia;  the  phantom  seen  and  recognized  by  Mon-
sieur and  Madame  Ballet-Gallifet  was  actually  identified
(page  16)  ;  the  worthy  woman  from  the  cafe  in  Nantes
actually  came  to  state  that  she  had  been  dead  for  two  days
(page  22)  ;  Robert  Mackenzie,  said  to  have  committed  sui-
cide, actually  appeared  to  clear  himself  of  the  false  accusa-
tion (page  27)  ;  the  scratch  upon  the  body  of  the  young
American  woman  was  quite  real  (page  32)  ;  Monsieur  Bos-
san's  wife,  Augustine  Chabert,  who  died  in  Grenoble,  actually
manifested  herself  in  Nancy  (page  38)  ;  Lord  Brougham's
friend  kept  his  promise  to  show  himself  (page  47)  ;  the  old
lady  in  the  shawl  was  actually  seen  and  recognized  (page
53)  ;  Canon  Bouin's  deceased  colleague  actually  pushed  him


PERSONAL  AFFAIRS  105

on  the  shoulder  (page  55) ;  Adams's  skeleton  actually  caused
an  uproar  (page  61)  ;  Russell  the  singer  really  showed  him-
self  (page  64)  ;  Pavie,  Bishop  of  Algiers,  really  paid  a
debt  revealed  by  some  one  dead  (page  76)  ;  Sarah  Clarke
really  returned  to  accuse  hers.elf  of  theft  (page  81)  ;  a  father
who  had  been  dead  for  fourteen  years  actually  showed  him-
self to  his  son  and  his  son's  wife  (page  88)  ;  Captain  Drisko
really  avoided  shipwreck  through  a  command  which  came
from  somewhere  outside  himself  (page  91)  ;  Mrs.  Smith's
friend,  who  died  in  giving  birth  to  a  child,  really  provided
for  her  children's  future  (page  99)  ;  and  as  for  our  last
case,  the  marine's  revenge  (page  102),  it  was  equally  spon-
taneous, and  as  unexpected  as  it  was  disagreeable.  The  hy-
pothesis that  the  living — those  present,  those  making  the  ex-
periments— are  responsible  for  such  manifestations  would
seem,  in  most  of  the  cases,  not  only  unlikely  but  inadmissible.
As  we  have  already  said,  an  incomprehensible  fact  is
still  a  fact,  but  an  incomprehensible  explanation  is  no
explanation.

"We  see  that  the  investigation  begun  with  the  purpose  of
studying  these  problems  has  led  to  interesting  results.  I  am
happy  to  have  instituted  this  investigation,  despite  the  banter,
the  sarcasm,  and  even  the  insults  of  a  large  number  of  igno-
rant persons.

What  are  all  of  us  seeking  ?  The  truth.  "We  wish  to  know.
What  is  life  ?     What  is  death  ?

I  paid  a  visit  one  day  to  Westminster  Abbey,  in  London,
the  burial-place  of  great  men.  I  read  there,  on  the  monu-
ment erected  to  John  Gay,  the  following  inscription — odd,
for  a  tomb :

Life  is  a  jest;  and  all  things  show  it.
I  thought  so  once;  but  now  I  know  it.

Whether  life  be  a  jest,  a  bit  of  sportive  humor,  whether  it
be  buffoonery,  irony,  mystification,  comedy  or  drama,  farce


106  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

or  tragedy — if  those  on  the  other  side  of  death's  door  know,
like  John  Gay,  let  us  continue  to  question  them.

"We  shall  now  consider  a  rather  large  number  of  diverse
happenings,  and,  the  better  to  analyze  them,  we  shall  classify
them  according  to  how  long  after  death  they  occurred.  We
shall  begin  with  those  just  after  death — a  continuation  of
Volume  II.  But  before  proceeding  farther,  let  us  not  forget
that  by  reason  of  what  has  been  proved  we  shall  know  from
this  time  on  that  dead  persons  manifest  themselves,  that  their
acts  prove  they  see  us  and  hear  us.  We  say  dead  persons,
and  not  the  dead,  for  there  is  nothing  to  prove  that  it  is  the
same  with  all.  The  life  beyond  the  grave  is  more  complex
than  one  might  think;  all  souls  are  not  alike,  and  do  not
proceed  along  the  same  path.  Let  us  continue  our  inquiry;
let  us  adhere  to  the  same  rigorous,  scientific  method  which
has  led  us  to  the  results  already  obtained.


IV


MANIFESTATIONS    AND   APPARITIONS    FROM    A    FEW    MINUTES    TO
AN    HOUR    AFTER    DEATH

Except  for  facts,  all  is  but  a  matter
of  opinion.  For  Man  there  are  no  posi-
tive truths  save  those  facts  which  he  can
learn  through  observation.

Lamarck.

AS  we  have  just  said,  we  shall  cite  in  chronological  order
all  cases  to  be  investigated.  There  is  a  necessity  for
our  method.  The  subject  is  a  serious  one.  We  must
discover  reality;  the  three  preceding  chapters  have  already
furnished  us  with  remarkable  revelations  as  to  this  reality.
The  subject  concerns  each  one  of  us,  and  that  which  awaits
each  one  of  us,  to-morrow  or  later,  at  an  inevitable  hour.
The  earth  will  not  have  turned  a  hundred  times  around  the
sun  before  you  and  I,  dear  readers,  shall  have  entered  upon
a  future  life.

No  one  can  have  seen,  in  Venice,  Canova's  splendid  and
sublime  tomb — so  penetrating  in  its  symbolism  is  the  setting
forth  of  the  human  soul  into  the  unknown — without  feeling
deeply  moved  before  this  door  partially  opened  upon  an
eternal  night.  Who  has  not  experienced  the  same  emotion
before  Bartholome's  magnificent  monument  to  the  Dead,  in
the  Pere-Lachaise  Cemetery,  which  symbolizes  with  equal  elo-
quence the  disturbing  mystery  of  death?

All  those  who  think  have  felt  the  importance  of  the  subject,
and  every  one  feels  that  the  problem,  not  yet  solved,  can
from  this  time  on  be  approached  only  by  the  positive  method
which  we  have  adopted ;  by  ascertaining  facts  and  discussing

107


108  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

them.  The  new  psychic  science  has  need  of  the  same  reason-
ing which  the  natural  sciences  needed  at  the  time  of  the
reform  proposed  by  Lamarck.  That  profound  naturalist
wrote  in  1809,  in  his  ''Philosophic  zoologique,"  which  trans-
formed the  whole  of  natural  history,  from  mollusks  to  Man :
''Except  for  facts,  all  is  but  a  matter  of  opinion.  For  Man,
there  are  no  positive  truths  save  those  facts  which  he  can
learn  through  observation. ' '  ^  That  is  the  principle  I  have
adhered  to  in  these  pages,  from  the  very  first  line  of  our
first  volume.

The  scientific  and  philosophic  importance  of  this  is  not
understood  by  every  one.  How  many  times  have  people  not
tried  to  divert  me  from  my  research,  thinking  it  could  lead
to  nothing?  Well,  have  not  the  three  preceding  chapters
sufficed  to  induce  us  to  continue  our  investigation?

It  is  only  through  comparative  research  that  we  may  arrive
at  a  solution  of  the  problem.  The  subject  thrusts  itself  upon
us.  What  question-mark  has  ever  been  more  challenging
than  this  one  ?

But  the  letters  which  I  receive  from  deniers  and  those  who
contradict  astonish  me.  They  come  from  two  groups  that  are
poles  apart:  ecclesiastical  spiritualists  and  radical  materi-
alists :

Here  are  two  examples  of  such  letters:

Barcelona,  July  15,  1900.
Dear  and  illustrious  Master  :

Those  about  me  speak  of  you  in  these  terms,  and  in  Spain  un-
believers venerate  you  as  a  god.  The  triumphal  journey  you  have
just  made  there  because  of  an  eclipse  of  the  sun  is  a  proof  of  this.

But  you  are  not  a  master  but,  rather,  a  slave  of  the  devil.

It  is  incredible  that  so  famous  a  savant  should  lose  time,  which
might  be  put  to  better  uses,  in  seeking  what  was  revealed  to  us
nearly  two  thousand  years  ago.

^  PMlosopMe  zoologique    (Charles  Martins  Edition,  1873),  I,  16-17.


WITHIN  AN  HOUR  AFTER  DEATH  109

No  one  can  have  any  doubt  as  to  our  destiny  after  death.  One
must  be  totally  ignorant  (allow  me  to  tell  you  this)  not  to  know  that
the  good  go  to  heaven,  the  wicked  to  hell,  and  those  neither  one  nor
the  other — that  is  to  say,  the  greatest  number — to  purgatory.  If
these  last  are  able  to  manifest  themselves,  it  can  be  only  with  God's
permission.     Otherwise,  they  are  fallen  angels.

Have  you  never  read  the  Gospel?  Do  you  not  know  that  our
Savior  descended  into  hell  on  Good  Friday,  after  having  poured
out  his  blood  for  the  salvation  of  the  world?

What  need  have  you  to  seek,  then?  The  Church  has  been  en-
trusted, by  the  Holy  Ghost,  with  the  mission  of  teaching,  and  it
alone  has  the  right  to  teach.  You  are  a  renegade,  like  Julian  the
Apostate,  and  you  will  end  like  him,  with  your  Sun  Cult.

You  are  disturbing  men's  souls.  Let  them  slumber  upon  the
pillow  of  Faith.

Yes,  you  serve  Lucifer,  Satan,  Beelzebub,  and  Ashtoreth,  like  the
Free  Masons;  you  are  a  slave,  while  believing  yourself  free  and  a
master.

Then  renounce  these  barren  investigations,  which  can  lead  you
nowhere  and  which  are  compromising  your  reputation  as  a  savant.
This  is  the  earnest  solicitation  of  a  former  admirer,  who  was  greatly
deluded  concerning  you.

Canonico  della  Ventura.

(Letter  1049.)

This  is  rather  like  the  ideas,  cited  in  our  first  volume,
concerning  Lourdes  and  the  healing  attributed  to  the  Virgin
Mary.  Opinions  are  divided.  A  very  devout  Christian — one
who  is  eager,  even,  to  make  converts — Monsieur  Jean  Vetter,
wrote  me  from  Switzerland,  on  October  7,  1921  (Letter  4710)  :
' '  Only  Jesus  is  in  question.  As  for  his  mother,  Mrs.  Joseph,
or  Mrs.  Mary,  who  does  not  deserve  the  name  of  Virgin
because  Jesus  had  brothers  and  sisters,  her  influence  is  non-
existent. ' '

These  various  interpretations  do  not  concern  us  here.  The
myth  of  the  Virgin  mother  is  a  Hindu  and  also  an  Egyptian
myth  which  came  long  before  Christianity.     Let  us  give  facts.


110  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

Here  is  a  protest  identical  with  the  preceding  one,  though
its  antithesis:

Lyons,  September  10,  1900.
My  dear  Sir:

I  did  not  reply  to  your  solicitation,  published  by  the  newspapers,
regarding  so-called  psychic  phenomena,  because  it  depressed  me
greatly  to  see  a  man  of  science,  like  you,  seeking  to  begin  a  second
such  book  as  Julius  Obsequens's  "De  prodigiis."  You  are  doing  this
by  the  worst  of  methods :  by  evoking  the  lucubrations  of  all  the  far-
ceurs, of  all  the  impostors,  of  all  the  practical  jokers,  of  all  the
neurotic  and  hysterical  persons  in  the  world,  and  of  all  those  who
are  weak-minded,  crazy,  and  given  to  hallucinations.^  I  can  dis-
cover no  explanation  of  what  you  might  hope  for,  unless  you  are
seeking  large  sales  for  your  book ;  such  sales  you  will  certainly  have,
but  at  the  sacrifice  of  your  dignity  as  a  savant.

I  have  not  the  honor  of  knowing  you,  but  have  been  a  careful
reader  of  your  works  since  your  first  book  appeared.  At  that  time
I  myself  was  a  student  in  Paris,  living  at  my  father's  publishing
house,  number  5  rue  de  Tournon,  where  Allan  Kardec  (Monsieur
Kivail)  was  bookkeeper.  He  was  also  bookkeeper  for  the  news-
paper "L'Univers'' — incognito,  of  course.  He  was  a  good  sort,  but,
apart  from  his  work,  absolutely  crack-brained.^  I  used  to  enjoy
talks  with  him.  The  clergymen  and  the  prelates  who  used  to  come
to  our  house,  because  of  the  nature  of  my  father's  business,  believed
firmly  in  spiritualism,  in  the  existence  of  spirits,  in  manifestations
from  beyond  the  grave,  but  stated  positively  that  all  these  phe-
nomena were  manifestations  of  the  devil.  You  will  understand  that
between  the  clergymen  and  book  publishers  there  was  a  professional
antagonism  as  well  as  a  blind  and  wilful  faith  in  statements  which
both  groups  took  care  not  to  verify  seriously,  for  fear  of  destroying
the  lucrative  framework  of  the  two  professions,  about  which  there
was  more  cooperation  than  rivalry.

1  Which  of  these  epithets  could  be  applied  to  a  single  one  of  the
published  accounts?  As  for  Obsequens's  book,  my  readers  have  long
since  known  what  I  said  of  it.

2 That  is  not  my  own  opinion.     I  knew  him  personally   (1861-69).


WITHIN  AN  HOUR  AFTER  DEATH  111

From  my  boyhood  these  visits  have  drawn  my  attention  and  my
curiosity  to  so-called  psychic  or  supernatural  phenomena.

But  my  emphatically  critical  turn  of  mind  allowed  me  to  believe
nothing  without  proofs.  Nobody  has  been  able  to  give  me  a  single
one.  Every  time  I  wished  to  verify,  by  scientific  methods,  some
story,  some  account  of  an  apparition,  an  evocation,  or  whatever  so-
called  psychic  phenomenon  it  was  which  passed  beyond  the  sphere
of  the  known  natural  laws,  I  found  myself  face  to  face  with  a
void,  a  distressing  and  often  painful  void.^  Sometimes  I  had  no
"psychic  fluid,"  sometimes  the  presence  of  a  person  who  did  not
believe  halted  the  "spirits,"  sometimes  I  was  not  ready  to  receive
their  communications.  Sometimes  persons  such  as  Madame  Blavat-
sky  and  the  theosophists  admitted  to  me,  honestly,  that  it  was  neces-
sary to  torment  oneself,  to  addle  one's  brain,  to  hypnotize  one's  pow-
ers of  reasoning  for  long  years  in  order  to  work  oneself  into  a  state
of — besottedness,  capable  of  putting  one  into  communication  with
the  principle  of  universal  intelligence.  In  short,  I  heard  fine  things
talked  of,  but  each  time  that  I  got  to  the  bottom  of  such  stories,  I
always  found  either  gross  illusions,  or  farces,  or  second-hand  testi-
mony accepted  without  verification  by  weak  or  disordered  minds,  or
lies,  the  originators  of  which  ended  by  believing  in  them  seriously,
after  having  told  them;  this  last  happens  very  often.  I  am  not
speaking  of  deliberate  and  wilful  imposture,  like  that  of  the  mother
superior  of  the  commune  of  2,  who,  in  order  to  hide  her  noc-
turnal meetings  with  the  head  mason  who  had  built  the  school-house,
terrorized  the  whole  village  for  eighteen  months — even  the  arch-
bishop, who  did  not  know  what  exorcism  to  resort  to.

Later  I  traveled  in  the  Orient,  to  do  research  work  in  natural
history  and  the  history  of  religions ;  there,  Indian  fakirs  showed  me
things  that  were  absolutely  astonishing:  the  phenomenon  of  the
mango-tree,  levitation,  the  invisible  carrying  of  certain  objects  to  a
designated  spot,  etc.     But  there  is  an  important  difference  between

iThe  known  natural  laws?  Where  do  they  stop?  This  statement
presupposes  that  all  the  men  of  science  whoi  have  ascertained  the
reality  of  psychic  phenomena  have  not  known  how  to  observe!  To
declare  that  these  phenomena  do  not  exist  is  contrary  to  truth.

2  I  am  omitting  the  name  given  by  my  irascible  correspondent.


112  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

all  these  prodigies  and  the  study  of  our  so-called  psychic  manifes-
tations in  the  Occident.  The  Oriental  marvels  may  be  repeatedly
brought  about  by  the  will  of  the  person  causing  them,  and  may
therefore  be  classed  at  once  with  scientific  applications  of  natural
laws.^  Certainly  we  do  not  know  the  forces  by  virtue  of  which  they
are  produced,  but  we  see  clearly  that  they  are  caused  not  by  a
capricious  and  unknowable  entity,  but  by  the  working  out  of  a
general  natural  law.  This  distinction  is  the  best  criterion  by  which
we  may  distinguish  the  true  from  the  false — the  phenomena  of  a
scientific  nature,  which  must  be  investigated,  from  imposture  which
must  be  exposed  and  deception  which  must  be  brought  to  light.

If  the  dead  could  come  back,  all  of  them  would  do  so.  They
would  come  back,  above  ail,  to  do  useful  things  for  those  they  had
loved:  to  save  innocent  persons  unjustly  accused,  to  reveal  treasure
which  they  had  hidden  and  the  secrets  which  they  know  would  be
useful  to  their  suffering  loved  ones;  these  apparitions  would  not
appear  to  a  very  few  persons,  merely,  and  talk  nonsense  to  them.
As  for  the  payment  of  debts,  the  advantage  in  deception  is  only  too
evident :  is  fecit  cui  prodest.  Besides,  Monseigneur  Pavie  may  well
have  thought  of  this  way  of  doing  a  service  without  hurting  a  per-
son who  he  knew  was  worthy  of  his  interest. ^  On  the  other  hand,
it  is  very  evident  that  if  the  dead  could  return,  they  would  do  so
entirely  naked.  Where  could  they  procure  the  clothing,  long  since
rotted  away,  in  which  people  assert  that  they  see  them?  These
apparitions  can  only  be  subjective;  they  can  exist  only  in  the
minds  of  those  who  see  them.  Then  how  can  they  leave  material
traces  upon  furniture,  upon  photographic  plates?  There  is  here  a
dilemma  from  which  it  is  impossible  to  escape.  In  short,  there  is
in  all  this  absolutely  nothing  that  can  be  taken  seriously,  nothing
worthy  of  a  man  of  science.  And  as  for  those  who  have  taken  or
are  taking  delight  in  childish  nonsense  of  the  sort,  they  will  find

1 1  have  often  refuted  this  error.  To  think  in  this  way  is  to  con-
fuse observation  with  experiment;  astronomy  and  meteorology  with
chemistry  and  physics.  Can  one  reproduce,  at  will,  spontaneous
phenomena  such  as  the  fall  of  a  meteorite,  the  appearance  of  a  new
star,  a  magnetic  solar  eruption,  a  flash  of  lightning  which  tears  a
man's  clothes  off  without  killing  him,  etc?

2  The.  writer  is  referring  to  an  article  which  I  had  published  in  La
Revue  des  revues,  July  15,  1899.     (See  above,  p.  76.)


WITHIN  AN  HOUR  AFTER  DEATH  113

mucli  more  of  it  in  the  Acta  sanctorum;  it  would  seem  quite  super-
fluous to  compile  a  new  edition  of  that  work.

All  this,  my  dear  sir,  is  not  my  reason  for  writing  this  letter,
which  is  already  very  long,  but  simply  my  pretext.  What  I  wish
to  discuss  with  you  is  a  question  exclusively  scientific ;  in  this  matter
you  may,  if  you  will,  render  an  incomparable  service  to  the  science
of  which  you  are  master  .  .  .

This  letter,  interesting  from  more  than  one  aspect,  held
nothing  nev^  to  me  in  the  v^ay  of  subject-matter,  the  sort  of
thing  which  has  been  considered  and  refuted  a  hundred  times.
It  went  on  to  ask  me  to  found  an  observatory  on  Bourbon
Island,  upon  Mount  Benard,  at  a  height  of  three  thousand
meters — one  similar,  as  to  situation,  to  the  Flammarion  Ob-
servatory established  in  1880  in  Bogota,  on  the  equator  (also
at  a  height  of  three  thousand  meters),  by  Jose  Gonzalez.
The  letter  (Number  770)  was  signed  by  that  man  of  most
estimable  judgment,  Monsieur  E.  Pelagaud,  President  of  the
Lyons  Anthropological  Society,  Doctor  of  Letters  and  of  Law.

I  wished  to  place  these  two  protests  (selected  from  a  large
number  of  analogous  ones  among  the  four  thousand,  eight
hundred  letters  received  since  1899)  before  the  eyes  of  my
readers,  who  are  well  informed  as  to  psychic  phenomena.
It  is  my  wish  that  they  themselves  should  judge  whether
reason  lies  on  the  side  of  those  who  deny,  or  those  who  seek.

I  have  made  allowance,  naturally,  for  cases  in  which  there
was  a  possibility  of  there  being  concerned  farceurs,  Hars,
and  minds  that  were  disordered  or  given  to  illusions.  I  have
for  years  made  careful  note  of  such  cases.  (See  "L'ln-
connu,"  page  81,  and  '*Les  Forces  naturelles  inconnues,"
page  201:  Cheating,  Deception,  Mystification.)  Such  cases
exist,  but  constitute  a  minimum.  In  almost  every  instance
in  which  I  have  been  able  to  make  a  personal  investigation  I
have  encountered  perfectly  trustworthy  people.  A  few  of
them  may  have  suffered  from  self-deception,  may  have  been


114  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

the  dupes  of  illusions;  but  they  themselves  had  taken  the
possibility  of  illusions  into  account.

Among  those  who  have  told  of  the  occurrences  given  here,
it  would  be  absolutely  impossible  to  find  a  farceur,  an  im-
postor, a  practical  joker — the  terms  used  in  the  second  of
the  letters.

It  will  be  readily  understood  that  the  arguments  just  cited
did  not  stop  me.  I  have  been  considering  and  reconsidering
them  since  1865  (the  date  of  the  first  edition  of  "Forces
naturelles  inconnues'^.  I  have  received  a  certain  number
of  criticisms  of  this  sort ;  I  grant  that  most  of  them  have  been
prompted  by  the  desire  to  do  me  a  service,  and  I  sincerely
thank  my  unknown  friends.  It  is  not  to  be  doubted  that
established  science,  as  well  as  the  opinion  of  the  worldly-
minded,  is  opposed  in  spirit  to  these  investigations.  I  have
found  this  to  be  the  case  every  time  I  have  called  attention
to  the  problems,  in  various  French  and  foreign  reviews.
The  fruit  is  not  yet  ripe.  People  are  afraid.  Often  their
scruples  are  prompted  by  father  confessors.  Believers  as
well  as  rationalists  fail  to  understand  that  my  investigation
concerning  the  existence  of  the  human  soul  and  its  survival
after  this  life  that  is  so  transient,  so  fleeting,  so  easily  de-
stroyed, is  a  study  of  the  greatest  importance — that  it  is
conducted  in  a  manner  rigorously  scientific.  Such  investi-
gation constitutes  the  first  duty  of  savants.  People  will  un-
derstand some  day — in  a  hundred  years,  perhaps.

We  may  find  consolation  in  the  fact  that  Lamarck  was
in  exactly  the  same  position  when  he  set  out  to  transform
natural  history.  He  was  not  understood  before  the  time  of
Darwin.

Since  I  have  never  written  anything  nor  done  anything
from  personal  interest,  and  although  my  independent  inves-
tigations are  in  general  taken  in  bad  part,  I  shall  continue
my  research  in  the  belief  that  I  am  laboring  in  the  cause
of  general  enlightenment  and  freedom  of  conscience.


WITHIN  AN  HOUR  AFTER  DEATH  115

But  we  are  not  concerned  with  my  ephemeral  self  (I  regret
to  bring  myself  forward  so  often)  ;  we  are  concerned  with
the  method  here  extolled,  one  very  different  from  that  under-
lying ancient  beliefs  and  sentimental  considerations.  Let  us
study  in  all  freedom  the  manifestations  and  apparitions  of
the  dead.  To  suppose,  as  people  do  sometimes,  that  an  ap-
parition is  an  illusion  because  they  cannot  admit  the  exist-
ence of  phantoms,  comes  down,  simply,  to  this:  ''I  do  not
believe  because  I  do  not  believe."  What  logic!  Is  it  not
time  to  proceed  as  free  men?

Let  us  begin  our  chronological  exposition  by  giving  the
occurrences  which  followed  closest  upon  the  moment  of  death.
They  belong,  in  naturel  sequence,  after  the  accounts  set  forth
in  Volume  II,  of  apparitions  and  manifestations  at  the  mo-
ment of  death.  After  careful  analysis  we  attributed  them
to  the  dying,  to  those  still  alive.  Nevertheless  we  gained
an  impression  from  several  that  they  may  have  taken  place
after  dissolution.  For  example,  this  would  seem  true  of  the
last  manifestation  (Volume  II,  page  331) — that  of  the  mad-
man Landry,  who  made  an  uproar  when  the  nun  in  the
hospital  came  to  bring  breakfast  to  his  former  neighbors  in
the  adjoining  cells.  Then,  too,  there  was  the  apparition  of
the  servant  who  had  been  drowned,  and  who  showed  herself
to  her  mistress,  dripping  water  (Volume  II,  page  366)  ;  and
also  the  statements  made  by  dead  persons,  expressed  in  these
words:  '^I  am  dead/^  in  the  cases  given  on  pages  282,  285,
and  287  of  the  same  volume.  There  was  also  (Volume  II,  page
308)  the  young  soldier  from  Ivry,  who  was  killed  in  the
war  by  the  bursting  of  a  shell,  on  June  16,  1915,  and  who
announced  his  death  by  three  blows  struck  upon  the  door
of  his  mother's  room.  There  was  the  case  of  Madame  Pierre
Ulric's  son,  killed  on  the  famous  Hill  304  (upon  which, our
attention  was  fixed  so  desperately  during  the  whole  of  the
German  war)  ;  the  manifestation  followed  immediate^  after
the  young  sergeant's  death.     His  mother  did  not  hear  the


116  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

noises  in  question  before  the  ball  struck  him;  probably  she
did  not  hear  them  long  afterward.  In  all  likelihood,  she
heard  them  at  the  very  moment  of  his  death:  they  were
telephonic  blows.  Moreover,  a  question  we  have  often  asked
ourselves  always  arises,  that  of  time.  What  is  duration  of
time?  As  we  have  said,  a  minute  of  analysis  is  longer  than
six  hours  of  sleep.

The  cases  of  manifestations  on  the  part  of  persons  who
have  come  to  announce  their  death  are  so  numerous,  so
varied,  so  wholly  without  connection  one  with  another,  that
it  is  impossible  to  doubt  them.  Let  us  consider  those  which
followed  immediately  upon  the  moment  of  dissolution.  I  shall
present  in  this  chapter  only  occurrences  which  took  place
during  the  -first  hour  after  death.

Here  is  an  odd  happening,  an  account  of  which  was  sent
me  in  1900  by  a  Russian  correspondent :

My  grandfather  took  real  pleasure  in  startling  people  in  a  way
that  was  naively  original.  He  would  clap  his  hands  three  times  if
one  seemed  absorbed,  preoccupied,  and  without  fail  if  one  were  un-
fortunate enough  to  be  half  asleep.

Since  he  had  had  this  mania  from  the  time  he  was  very  young,
he  had  several  serious  quarrels  with  strangers,  or  even  with  friends
who  would  grow  impatient.  His  real  butt  was  an  aged  relative  of
his,  a  certain  Mademoiselle  Stephanie,  who  was  deeply  devout.  She
liked  to  sit  very  quietly,  was  a  little  apathetic,  and  often  dreamed
away  the  time  in  a  corner.

My  grandfather,  delighted  by  this  propitious  habit  of  mind,  always
surprised  her  at  a  moment  when  she  least  expected  it,  and  frightened
her  so  with  his  terrible  clapping  that  she  would  fall,  literally,  into
a  swoon!  And  he  would  laugh,  the  heartless  wretch,  as  happy  as
could  be.  He  would  tell  her  over  and  over  again  that  she  could
be  absolutely  sure  of  hearing  him  clap  his  hands  three  times  at  the
moment  of  his  death,  no  matter  where  he  died,  even  if  it  were  a
thousand  miles  away.


WITHIN  AN  HOUR  AFTER  DEATH  117

This  had  gone  on  for  a  number  of  years.  Once  my  grandfather,
before  making  a  long  trip,  spent  some  weeks  at  Mademoiselle
Stephanie's  home.  Although  he  was  particularly  fond  of  her,  he
did  not  deny  himself  the  pleasure  of  frightening  her  more  than  ever.
It  was  a  veritable  mania,  and  he  always  found  amusement  in  her
terror.  When  he  left  her,  he  assured  her  once  more  that  she  could
be  certain  of  hearing  him  clap  his  hands  three  times  at  the  moment
of  his  death.  Several  months  went  by  without  news  from  him.
My  grandfather  was  still  on  his  travels.

One  evening,  when  she  was  having  supper  with  a  woman,  a  neigh-
bor of  hers,  what  did  they  both  hear,  at  precisely  half -past  nine,
but  the  terrible,  thrice-repeated  clapping  of  hands!  Absolutely
astonished,  they  looked  in  the  hiding-places  where  my  grandfather
might  have  been,  but  in  vain.  Poor  Stephanie  fell  ill  from  it.
Several  days  afterward  she  received  a  special-delivery  letter  sent  by
my  Uncle  Max.  This  letter  informed  her  of  the  sudden  death  of  my
gTandfather,  at  half-past  nine,  on  November  13th,  just  as  they  were
sitting  down  to  supper.  At  that  very  instant  they  were  speaking
of  Mademoiselle  Stephanie.  My  grandfather,  laughing  uproari-
ously, emptied  his  glass  and  fell  dead.

The  district  where  he  died  is  situated  in  the  interior  of  Volhynia
(European  Russia),  about  a  hundred  and  fifty  Russian  leagues  from
the  chateau  where  Mademoiselle  Stephanie  was  living.  Since  there
was  no  way  of  telegraphing  at  that  time,  and  the  means  of  communi-
cation were  inadequate,  my  Uncle  Max  sent  her  a  special-delivery
letter,  which  took,  I  believe,  nearly  two  weeks  to  arrive.  All  the
members  of  my  family  can  vouch  for  this  incident.

Olga  Pouchkine.

(Letter  1007.)

This  is,  undeniably,  an  odd  story.  It  is  not  probable  that
the  amiable  practical  joker,  who  died  suddenly  at  the  dinner
table,  thought  of  clapping  his  hands  before  he  was  dead;
he  must  have  thought  of  it  afterward.  We  may  conclude
from  this  that  death  is  not  so  dramatic  an  event  as  we  sup-
pose it  to  be,  and  that  our  personalities  do  not  change  in-
stantly.


118  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

The  only  way  of  escaping  the  dilemma  of  granting  the
reality  of  this  significant  incident  is  to  declare  that  the  nar-
rator lied!    And  it  is  the  same  with  all  similar  happenings.

An  account  of  another  purposive  manifestation,  through
the  striking  of  blows,  was  given  me  in  the  following  letter,
sent  from  Paris  on  May  16,  1900 :

On  November  23,  1893,  I  had  gone  to  bed  at  about  nine  o'clock.
A  quarter  of  an  hour  afterward  very  distinct  blows  were  struck
upon  my  bookcase.  Surprised,  I  attributed  the  noise,  at  first,  to
the  fact  that  the  furniture  might  possibly  have  made  a  cracking
sound.  Some  minutes  afterward  three  blows  were  struck  upon
the  wall;  I  sat  up  in  bed;  the  moon  was  shining  brightly  in  the
sky;  there  was  no  sign  of  any  wind  that  could  shake  the  windows
or  the  blinds,  and  I  concluded  that  in  the  repeated  blows  there  must
be  the  warning  of  an  event  which  concerned  me.

I  then  demanded  that,  if  this  were  the  case,  the  same  blows  be
struck  upon  the  head  of  my  bed  (the  sound  had  come  from  various
spots:  the  wall,  the  table,  etc.).  Two  or  three  minutes  went  by,
and  the  knocking  sounded  again,  near  me,  and  very  distinctly.  It
continued  in  this  way  until  two  o'clock  in  the  morning,  when  it
ceased.

The  next  day  (the  twenty-fourth  of  November)  I  was  informed
of  the  death  of  my  nephew,  Ernest  Jouard.  It  had  occurred  on  the
preceding  night.     He  was  forty  years  old.

I  am  absolutely  sure  that  my  poor  nephew  thought  of  me,  at  the
final  moment,  and  that  his  soul  came  to  give  me  warning  of  his
departure.  The  hour  of  his  death  coincided  with  the  strange  mani-
festations.

I  affirm,  on  my  honor,  the  absolute  exactitude  of  this  account.
It  may  be  useful  to  you,  since  you  are  gathering  information.

A.  L.  Danet,

(Letter  919.)  Paris.

In  this  instance  also  it  would  be  difficult  not  to  see  a  very
close  connection  between  cause  and  effect;  difficult  not  to
think  that  the  blows  were  a  purposive  warning,  probably


WITHIN  AN  HOUR  AFTER  DEATH  119

on  the  part  of  a  man  already  dead,  for  a  dying  man  does
not  act  thus.  What  we  call  "death"  is  a  continuation  of
life,  under  another  form.  I  did  not  cite  this  case  in  Volume
II;  it  seems  to  me  to  belong  in  the  present  volume,  since
the  replies  were  made  with  definite  intent.  It  forms  a  con-
tinuation of  the  manifestations  at  the  moment  of  death  which
we  have  already  given.  As  we  said  before,  it  is  often  difficult
to  decide  whether  such  and  such  a  manifestation  took  place
at  the  very  moment  of  death,  or  some  seconds  afterward.

I  am  constantly  receiving  communications  concerning  un-
expected revelations.  A  teacher  in  Copenhagen,  who  asked
me  not  to  give  her  name,  told  me  that  when  she  was  about
twenty  years  old  she  was  in  the  habit  of  corresponding  with
her  husband  by  means  of  thought.  Both  of  them  usually
put  down,  in  automatic  writing,  the  same  ideas  at  the  same
time.     She  adds:

My  husband  fell  ill,  and  was  being  nursed  in  a  hospital  which  was
some  distance  away  from  me.  One  morning  he  appeared  to  me  at
the  foot  of  my  bed,  seemingly  in  good  health.  It  was  a  dream,  but
a  dream  which  awakened  me,  and  made  me  cry  out  suddenly,  "You
here,  and  well!"  I  gazed  about,  I  sought  for  him;  he  was  not  there,
of  course,  but  I  heard  his  voice  say,  in  tones  so  pleading  that  I
shall  never  forget  them,  ^'Pray,  my  dear,  pray  J'

On  that  morning  he  had  died  suddenly,  the  victim  of  an  accident.

On  the  supposition  that  a  large  number  of  accounts,  sent  you
from  all  countries,  may  help  you  to  solve  the  deepest  problems  of
the  soul,  I  am  sending  you  these  lines.  Professor,  written  from  Den-
mark. They  may  aid  in  your  investigations,  so  helpful  to  humanity.
But  if  my  true  statement  is  to  be  published,  I  shall  ask  you  not  to
let  my  name  be  known.

(Letter  929.)

We  have  always  the  tendency  to  see  in  such  things  only
hallucinations  coinciding  with  the  hour  of  death.  Is  this
admissible?     No.     There  are  too  many  cases.    Arithmetical


120  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

calculation  has  shown  the  improbability  of  the  hypothesis.
This  case  might  be  open  to  discussion  if  the  sick  man  had
seemed  to  be  dying;  but  he  appeared  to  be  cured.  The
manifestation  on  the  part  of  some  one  dead  may  therefore
be  considered  real.  But  why  the  requests  for  prayers?
What  good  can  they  do?  Here  we  have  mystery  upon  mys-
tery, and  yet  reality.  Was  it  mental  transmission?  Was
it  an  interpretation  by  a  religious  person 's  subconscious  mind,
a  mind  that  believed  in  prayer  ?    Was  it  a  wandering  soul  ?

Whether  phantoms  actually  exist,  or  are  only  telepathic
transmissions  of  the  thoughts  of  the  dead,  we  may  safely
say  that  the  question  is  of  interest  to  us  all,  since  all  of  us
must  disembark  upon  the  unknown  shore.

It  is  inconceivable  that  people  should  prefer  to  know  noth-
ing for  the  childish  reason  that  this  knowledge  may  not  be
pleasant.  The  subject  concerns  all  of  us  personally.  But  is
destiny  the  same  for  all?  When  they  leave  this  life,  are  all
souls  errant  souls?  Do  not  some  of  them  take  flight  at  once
to  higher  spheres?  Is  not  the  invisible  world  as  varied  as
ours,  even  more  varied  ?

All  these  are  questions  which  future  science  must  solve.

The  only  way  of  enlightening  ourselves  is  by  comparing
observations.  I  should  like  to  add  to  the  preceding  com-
munications one  which  was  sent  me  at  the  time  of  my  earliest
inquiry.  I  did  not  publish  it  in  ''L'Inconnu, "  because  I
omitted,  on  principle,  all  anonymous  letters.  Since  I  am  now
better  informed,  after  a  quarter  of  a  century  of  comparative
research,  I  often  find,  when  reading  these  letters  again,  the
marks  of  an  indubitable  sincerity.  Here  is  the  letter  of
which  I  was  speaking :

I  was  seven  years  old,  and  was  at  a  school  in  Italy;  my  mother
had  gone  to  Vienna  (Austria)  with  my  father,  where  he  was  to  be
operated  upon  for  gall-stones.  On  November  23d  I  was  punished,
since  I  did  not  know  my  music  lesson,  and  put  on  dry  bread.     My


WITHIN  AN  HOUR  AFTER  DEATH  121

teacher,  wlio  was  sorry  for  me,  probably,  said  to  me,  "Go  up  and
get  your  music-book  and  if  you  know  your  lesson,  you  may  have
dinner."  The  piano  was  in  a  little  room  on  the  third  floor.  I  went
up,  as  a  matter  of  course,  without  a  light;  the  word  "fear"  was
unknown  to  me;  and,  besides,  in  our  home  we  were  not  accustomed
to  admit  that  there  was  such  a  thing.  I  picked  up  my  music-book
and  turned  as  I  heard  some  one  call,  "Mimi,  Mimi!"  three  times  in
succession.  I  saw  my  father  and  threw  myself  towards  him.  He
was  not  there,  and  I  went  downstairs  four  steps  at  a  time,  calling
out,  "Papa  is  up  there!"  They  went  up  with  a  light:  nothing —
absolutely  nothing.  I  cried  all  that  night ;  I  said  that  my  father  had
come  back,  that  he  had  hidden  himself  because  I  had  not  been  good,
and  I  promised  to  work  hard,  so  that  he  would  come  back.  The
next  day  a  telegram  reached  the  school:  my  poor  father  had  died
at  half-past  seven  in  the  evening,  at  the  hour  at  which  he  had
appeared  to  me.

He  appeared  not  only  to  me  but  also  to  my  grandmother.  She
was  my  mother's  mother,  and  therefore  my  father's  mother-in-law,
but  he  loved  her  dearly.  There  were  three  of  them  in  the  dining-
room:  my  grandmother,  her  second  husband,  and  my  grandmother's
daughter,  when  the  door  opened  and  my  father  came  in.  My  grand-
mother exclaimed:  "There  you  are!  How  splendid  that  you  got
well  so  soon!"

There  was  no  one  there.  My  grandmother  said:  "Let  us  pray!
He  is  dead."

I  can  vouch  for  these  occurrences.  I  should,  perhaps,  have  for-
gotten them  because  of  my  youth  (I  am  now  forty-six  years  old),
but  people  told  me  of  them  so  often  that  they  are  engraved  upon
my  memory;  my  conviction  is  unshakable.

I  should  prefer  that  you  give  only  my  initials  as  a  signature.

L.  M.  G.,

(Letter  76.)  Venice.

After  a  careful  reading  of  this  account,  there  was  no
doubt  in  my  mind  as  to  its  sincerity.  The  two  distinct
apparitions  give  it  an  especial  value.     And  a  child  of  seven !

These  may  be  illusions,  hallucinations,  we  always  say  to


122  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

ourselves.  But,  emphatically,  this  hypothesis  of  the  lazy-
minded  satisfies  us  no  longer.  We  wish  an  explanation.  It
is  certain  that  there  are,  at  times,  hallucinations;  but  it  is
inadmissible  that  there  be  only  hallucinations  in  all  the  cases
cited.  The  following  experience,  for  example,  was  so  definite,
so  spontaneous,  so  unexpected,  that  it  seems  to  me  impossible
not  to  consider  it  conclusive.  It  was  taken  from  a  letter
which  I  received  recently  (April  17,  1921).

Most  honored  Master:

I  should  never  have  dared  to  write  you,  if  I  did  not  feel  that  the
modest  but  authentic  information  which  I  can  bring  to  your  notice
may  be  of  service  in  your  exalted  task.

I  am  a  young  engineer.  I  have  long  known  you  through  my
father,  one  of  your  earliest  readers.

I  had  a  friend  named  Charles,  a  youth  of  sixteen.  It  was  in
1908.  One  evening,  when  I  was  reentering  my  home,  I  heard  my-
self called  several  times,  most  distinctly,  and  I  recognized  his  voice
perfectly.  The  voice  was  disturbed  and  beseeching,  but  very  tender,
I  instantly  recalled  that  Charles  had  told  me  that  at  times  during
our  spiritualistic  seances  he  had  seen  one  of  his  uncles,  who  had
died  a  short  time  before,  beckoning  to  him  to  approach.

Disturbed  in  spite  of  myself,  I  did  not  go  to  sleep  until  very
late.  Then,  almost  at  once,  I  was  awakened  by  some  one  touching
my  forehead,  and  a  voice  calling  me;  I  saw  Charles  distinctly  at
the  head  of  my  bed;  he  said  to  me:  "Good-by!  Good-by!  All  is
well  with  me!  Comfort  my  family!  I'll  come  back  to  your
seances!"  And  he  disappeared  slowly.  Then  there  was  nothing
more!

As  soon  as  morning  came  I  ran  to  our  friends'  home.  I  found
them  greatly  disturbed:  Charles  had  not  come  back  that  night.

Instinctively — I  do  not  know  why — I  thought  of  a  little  piece  of
ground  in  the  country  which  they  owned.  I  confided  my  fears  to
the  family,  and  took  them  there.

In  the  garden,  under  the  arbor,  we  found  his  body,  stretched  out
on  the  ground;  in  his  right  hand  he  held  a  flask  in  which  there  was
still  left  a  little  cyanide  solution.


WITHIN  AN  HOUR  AFTER  DEATH  123

He  had  killed  himself  of  his  own  free  will,  and  had  warned  me
of  it  through  this  manifestation.

There  was  one  curious  thing  which  struck  all  of  us:  the  ground
about  the  arbor  was  covered  with  little  white  flowers,  which  looked
as  though  they  had  come  up  spontaneously,  for  I  am  sure  that  they
were  not  there  some  days  before,  and  nothing  had  been  done  to
make  them  grow.

There,  dear  Master,  is  something  the  exactitude  of  which  I  can
guarantee.  You  can  verify  the  facts  if  you  like,  although  I  lost
sight  of  this  family  long  ago.

Henry  Bourgeois,

(Letter  4443.)  Macon.

There  is  an  indubitable  connection  between  the  manifesta-
tion and  the  act  of  the  man  who  committed  suicide.  The
theories  of  the  subconscious  mind,  of  the  subliminal,  give
us  no  explanation  of  the  vision,  of  the  utterance:  ''Good-byl
Comfort  my  family !  I  '11  come  back  to  your  seances !"  These
were  Charles's  very  ovm  words.

Those  whom  we  have  loved  while  they  were  alive  and  to
whom  we  remain  attached  until  they  die  do  not  grow  to  be
strangers  to  us.  They  still  exist,  and  in  various  circum-
stances we  feel  their  invisible  presence.  But  positive  mate-
rial proofs  of  their  communication  with  us  are  rare.

From  that  most  informative  but  slightly  prejudiced  work
of  the  Marquis  of  Mirville  "Des  Esprits  et  de  leurs  mani-
festations diverses"  (*' Spirits  and  Their  Various  Manifesta-
tions") we  take  the  following  incident,  given  also  by  d'Assier
C'L'Humanite  posthume" — ''Human  Beings  after  Death '^
— page  41)  :

Monsieur  Bonnetty,  the  present  editor  of  "Annales  de  philosophic
religieuse^'  tells  us  that  one  evening  before  he  went  to  sleep  he  saw
the  shade  of  one  of  his  friends,  who  was  then  in  America,  partially
open  the  curtains  of  his  bed.  The  shade  told  him  that  lie  had  just
died  that  very  moment.     The  sad  news  was  confirmed  later,  and  that


124  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

hour  was  mentioned  as  his  friend's  last.  Moreover,  the  shade  wore
a  vest;  Monsieur  Bonnetty  was  much  struck  with  the  design  on  it,
which  was  most  extraordinary.  He  made  inquiries  later,  and  asked
that  he  be  sent  the  pattern  of  the  vest.  It  was  precisely  that  of  the
one  which  the  apparition  wore.

In  this  case,  what  role  could  the  subconscious  play?

The  letters  which  I  have  been  sent  concerning  manifesta-
tions immediately  following  dissolution  are  too  numerous  to
be  published  in  this  chapter;  there  is  one  among  them,  how-
ever, which  I  should  not  like  to  omit.  Madame  Thenard,  of
the  Comedie-Frangaise,  wrote  me  in  August,  1908 :

My  great-grandmother  perceived  Etienne  Thenard's  death  from  a
distance,  in  an  odd  manner.  She  was  playing  loto  one  evening.
Since  she  was  already  blind  at  that  time,  Mademoiselle  Rachel  had
had  special  cards,  in  relief,  made  for  her.  Suddenly  she  ceased
playing  and  cried:  "Stop,  children!  My  grandson  is  ill!"  We
began  to  joke  with  Grandmother,  and  to  say  that  she  was  disturbed
without  reason.  How  could  she  think  that  Etienne  was  ill"?  Had
she  not  heard  from  him  the  very  day  before?  But  she  insisted:
"I  'm  sure  of  it.  I  heard  two  blows  struck  on  the  window."  It  is
to  be  noted  that  she  lived  in  a  third-floor  .apartment,  without  a
balcony,  at  176  rue  Montmartre.  We  believed  that  she  had  been
the  dupe  of  an  hallucination,  and,  very  gently,  we  made  her  resume
her  game.  But  after  some  minutes  she  burst  into  sobs  and  com-
manded in  a  firm  tone :  "On  your  knees,  my  children !  Etienne  is
dead;  let  us  pray  for  him!"  Terrified  by  her  attitude  and  full  of
sadness,  each  of  us  did  as  she  did.  We  spent  a  part  of  the  night
grouped  about  her,  in  prayers  and  tears.  The  morning  of  the  next
day  we  learned,  through  a  telegram,  that  Etienne  had  died,  the  day
before,  at  nine  o'clock  in  the  evening, — that  is,  at  the  very  moment
when  the  scene  which  I  have  described  was  taking  place.  "I  was
sure  of  my  misfortune,"  the  poor  blind  woman  moaned.  "I  had
heard  a  knocking  at  the  window  a  second  time:  it  was  my  grand-
son's soul  saying  good-by  to  me !"

J.  Thenard,
Of  the  Comedie-Frangaise.


WITHIN  AN  HOUR  AFTER  DEATH  125

(Etienne  Thenard,  of  the  Opera- Comique,  was  born  in  Lyons,  in
1807,  and  died  in  1838.  The  first  Madame  Thenard  was  born  in
1757,  in  Voiron,  and  died  in  1849.  She  played  at  the  Theatre-
Frangaise  from  1777  to  1819 ;  she  was  the  great-grandmother  of  our
contemporary,  Madame  Thenard.  Rachel  was  bom  in  1820  and  died
in  1858.)

Here,  too,  we  have  a  case  of  telepathic  transmission  im-
mediately after  dissolution.  Blows  struck  upon  the  windows
were  heard — blows  which  had  no  actual  reality.  It  was  a
mental  impression  produced  by  the  dead  man.  We  found
in  Volume  II  a  large  number — selected  from  a  still  larger
number — of  fictitious  physical  phenomena  produced  hy  the
dying.  Those  which  proceed  indubitably  from  the  dead  are
much  less  numerous,  less  automatic,  more  purposeful.  I  shall,
however,  give  one,  among  others,  that  is  quite  comparable
to  those  in  Volume  II.  I  am  taking  it  from  an  old  letter,
sent  me  in  April,  1899.     Here  is  the  account :

My  grandparents  were  living  in  a  little  town  in  the  Canton  of
Savoie.  Grandmamma  had  a  brother  of  whom  she  was  very  fond;
he  lived  about  fifty  kilometers  from  the  town.  One  evening,  at
about  eleven  o'clock.  Grandfather  and  Grandmother  heard  a  loud
noise  of  falling  dishes  in  the  kitchen,  out  of  which  their  bedroom
opened.

My  grandfather  got  up  to  see  what  bad  happened  and,  to  his
great  surprise,  found  that  nothing  in  the  kitchen  was  broken  or  out
of  place.

Then  my  grandmother  said,  after  a  moment  of  thought:  "That
noise  was  not  natural.  My  brother  is  dead ;  I  'm  sure  of  it.  Get
on  your  horse  and  start  off."  Grandfather  left  some  minutes  later.
When  he  had  gone  about  twenty  kilometers  he  met  one  of  his
brother-in-law's  servants,  who  was  coming  to  announce  the  latter's
death.

He  went  on  his  way,  and,  when  he  reached  the  home  of  the  man
who  had  died,  he  learned  that  death  had  taken  pljace  fifteen  to
twenty  minutes  before  the  noise  had  been  heard.


126  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

This  statement  which  I  have  made  is  rigorously  exact.

H.   MOLLIER,

(Letter  313.)  Paris.

If  I  should  repeat  for  the  twentieth  time  that  these  noises
seem  absurd  to  us  though  they  are  indubitable,  that  would
not  aid  in  the  solution  of  the  problem.  For  the  moment  we
are  making  sure  of  the  reality  of  the  synchronism;  that  is
all.  Did  the  fictitious  noise  occur  at  the  moment  of  death,
or  afterward?     I  am  giving  the  account  just  as  I  received  it.

The  following  incident  would  seem  to  me  to  have  followed
immediately  upon  dissolution.  In  this  case  we  are  concerned
with  an  adventure  of  a  very  personal  nature.  It  was  pub-
lished, together  with  an  account  of  the  inquiry  which  estab-
lished its  truth,  in  ''Phantasms  of  the  Living,"  and  was
related  by  a  well-known  sculptress,  Mademoiselle  Hosmer.

A  young  Italian  woman  named  Rosa  who  had  been  in  my  serv-
ice for  some  time,  was  obliged  to  go  back  to  her  sister's  home  be-
cause of  chronic  ill  health.  When  I  took  my  usual  horseback  rides
I  often  went  to  see  her.  On  one  of  these  visits,  which  I  made  at
six  in  the  evening,  I  found  her  gayer  than  she  was  ordinarily.  I
had  long  since  given  up  hope  that  she  would  get  well,  but  nothing
in  her  appearance  led  me  to  believe  that  there  was  any  immediate
danger.  When  I  left  her  I  was  counting  on  seeing  her  often  in
the  future.  She  expressed  a  wish  for  a  bottle  of  wine  of  a  special
sort,  and  I  promised  to  bring  it  to  her  myself  the  next  morning.

I  do  not  remember  thinking  of  her  for  the  rest  of  the  evening.
I  went  to  bed,  my  mind  calm.  But  I  awakened  from  a  deep  sleep
with  the  feeling  that  there  was  some  one  in  the  room.  I  reflected
that  no  one  could  have  come  in.  My  bed  was  in  the  middle  of  the
room ;  a  screen  was  at  the  foot  of  it.  Thinking  that  there  might
be  some  one  behind  it,  I  cried  out,  "Who  is  there  f  But  there  was
no  answer.  The  clock  in  the  next  room  struck  five.  At  the  same
instant  I  saw  Rosa's  form  standing  before  my  bed,  and  in  some
way  (I  cannot  state  definitely  that  it  was  through  speech)  I  gained
an  impression  that  the  following  words  came  from  her :  '^Adesso  son


WITHIN  AN  HOUR  AFTER  DEATH  127

felice,  son  contenta"  ("Now  I  am  happy  and  content.")  Then
the  shade  vanished.

At  breakfast  I  said  to  the  woman  friend  who  shared  my  apart-
ment, "Rosa  is  dead." — '"What  are  you  thinking  of!"  she  replied.
"You  told  me  yesterday  that  you'd  found  her  better."

Then  I  told  her  what  had  happened  to  me  that  morning.  She
laughed  and  said  that  I  had  been  dreaming.  She  continued  to  make
a  jest  of  the  matter,  and  even  annoyed  me  a  little  by  her  persistence,
since  I  was  absolutely  sure  of  having  been  fully  awake.  In  order
to  settle  the  question,  I  sent  a  messenger  for  news  of  Rosa's  con-
dition. He  came  back  with  the  report  that  she  had  died  that
morning  at  five  o'clock.

The  account  was  followed  by  a  statement  of  supplementary
details  establishing  the  fact  that  Mademoiselle  Hosmer  was
thoroughly  awake  at  the  moment  of  her  vision.     She  wrote :

I  heard  familiar  noises  in  the  apartment  below  me,  the  noises
which  the  servants  made  in  opening  the  windows  and  doors.  An
old  clock  struck  the  hour  sonorously  and  vibrantly;  I  counted  "One,
two,  three,  four,  five,"  and  decided  to  get  up  at  once.  It  was  then
that  I  saw  that  Rosa  was  looking  at  me  and  smiling.

H.    G.   HOSMER.

I  shall  not  stop  to  refute  the  objections  of  obdurate  deniers,
who  continue  to  contradict  all,  blindly.  We  shall  continue
to  point  out  examples  of  manifestations  which  occurred  dur-
ing the  first  hour  after  dissolution.

The  apparition  described  below  appeared  half  an  hour  after
death.  It  is  among  those  which  bear  the  most  convincing
stamp  of  authenticity,  and  which  are  best  explained  by
mutual  sympathy.  Mademoiselle  Stella  wrote  from  Chiari
(Italy)  on  January  18,  1884  ^r

When  I  was  about  fifteen,  and  was  spending  my  vacation  at  the
home  of  Dr.  J.  G ,  I  formed  a  close  friendship  with  my  host's

1  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  1,  532.  Hallucinations  telepathiques,
p.  186.


128  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

cousin,  a  boy  of  seventeen.  We  grew  to  be  inseparable.  We  worked
together,  rode  horseback  together,  and  shared  the  same  amusements,
like  a  brother  and  sister.  He  was  in  very  delicate  health;  I  took
care  of  him,  and  we  never  spent  an  hour  far  from  each  other.

I  am  giving  you  all  these  details  to  show  you  that  there  was  no
trace  of  passion  in  our  case;  our  relations  were  like  those  of  two
boys.

One  night  they  sent  for  Monsieur  G ,  to  examine  his  cousin

who  had  suddenly  fallen  seriously  ill  with  inflammation  of  the
lungs.  The  poor  boy  died  on  the  following  night.  I  had  been
given  no  hint  of  the  danger  in  which  he  was,  and  was  not  dis-
turbed in  the  least  about  him.  The  evening  he  died  I  was  quietly
reading,  when  the  door  opened  and  Bertie,  my  friend,  came  in.
I  got  up  abruptly  to  push  an  arm-chair  over  to  the  fire  for  him,
for  he  seemed  to  be  cold  and  had  no  coat,  although  it  was  snowing.
I  began  to  scold  him  for  having  gone  out  without  wrapping  him-
self up  well.  Instead  of  answering,  he  pressed  his  hand  to  his
chest  and  shook  his  head.  I  interpreted  this  as  meaning  that  he
was  not  cold,  that  his  lungs  hurt  him,  and  that  he  had  lost  his  voice
— a  thing  which  sometimes  happened  to  him.

As  I  was  still  reproaching  him  for  his  imprudence  the  doctor
entered  and  asked  me  to  whom  I  was  speaking.  I  answered:  ^'To
this  poor  boy  without  any  coat,  who  has  a  terrible  cold.  We  must
lend  him  a  coat  to  go  home  in."  I  shall  never  forget  the  horror
and  the  stupefaction  depicted  upon  the  good  doctor's  face,  for  he
knew  {what  I  was  ignorant  of)  that  the  poor  boy  had  died  half
an  hour  before,  and  he  had  come  to  tell  me  of  this.  His  first
thought  was  that  I  already  knew,  and  had  gone  mad.  The  doctor
made  me  go  out  of  the  room,  speaking  to  me  as  though  I  were  a
little  girl.  For  some  moments  we  talked  to  each  other  at  cross-
purposes.  At  length  he  explained  that  I  had  had  an  hallucination,
an  optical  illusion;  he  did  not  deny  that  I  had  seen  Bertie  with
my  own  eyes,  but  he  gave  me  a  "most  scientific"  explanation  of  this
vision,  fearing  to  frighten  me  or  leave  me  with  a  painful  impres-
sion. As  for  me,  I  am  sure  of  what  I  saw.  I  was  reading  an
amusing  book,  and  I  clearly  remember  that  I  was  laughing  with
all  my  heart  at  some  absurdity  of  the  hero  at  precisely  the  moment
when  the  door  opened.  J.  S.


WITHIN  AN  HOUR  AFTER  DEATH  129

The  investigation  brought  out  the  fact  that  the  narrator
was  neither  nervous  nor  over-excitable,  and  had  never  had
any  other  hallucination.

The  house  in  which  the  youth  died  was  a  quarter  of  an
hour's  walk  from  the  doctor's  house,  and  death  had  occurred
half  an  hour  before  the  apparition  appeared.  It  always
seemed  strange  to  the  narrator  that  she  heard  the  door-knob
turn  and  the  door  open,  for  it  was  the  noise  of  the  catch
that  made  her  lift  her  eyes  from  her  book.  The  phantom
walked  across  the  room  toward  the  fireplace  and  sat  down.
All  seemed  absolutely  natural  to  her,  and  it  is  her  opinion
that  the  experience  may  have  lasted  almost  five  minutes.
The  room  was  lighted  only  by  the  large  fire  on  the  hearth,
by  the  light  of  which  she  was  reading.  She  lighted  a  candle
when  her  friend  arrived.

Thus  we  have  the  specter  ^  of  a  youth  who  had  been  dead
for  half  an  hour,  opening  a  door,  crossing  a  room,  and  seem-
ing to  be  cold.  His  constant  companion  did  not  suspect
that  he  was  dead,  and  spoke  to  him,  but  received  no  reply.
This  '^double"  would  appear  to  be  much  like  those  of  which
we  read  in  "At  the  Moment  of  Death";  it  was  an  image
produced  in  Mademoiselle  Stella's  mind  by  the  dead  boy,
who  was  thinking  of  her.  There  was,  besides,  a  material
manifestation.

We  must  also  give  in  this  chapter  the  two  following  ap-
paritions; the  first  of  these  manifested  itself  immediately
after  dissolution.^^  The  Bishop  of  Carlisle  wrote  in  the
''Contemporary  Review";  of  January,  1884:

My  correspondent,  a  student  in  Cambridge  had  some  years  be-
fore made  an  agreement  with  one  of  his  college  friends:  they  were
to  meet  in  Cambridge  on  a  certain  date,  and  were  to  work  together.

1  Read  again  the  chapter  on  Simulacres  (Lucretius,  De  Natura  Re-
rum)  .

2  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  I,  414.  Hallucinaiions  telepathiqucs,
p.  130.


130  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

Shortly  before  the  time  set  for  this  meeting  my  correspondent  was
in  the  south  of  England.  Waking  up  one  night,  he  saw,  or  thought
that  he  saw,  his  friend  seated  at  the  foot  of  his  bed.  He  was,
naturally,  most  surprised  by  this  sight — all  the  more  so  from  the
fact  that  his  friend  was  dripping  water.  He  spoke  to  him,  but  the
apparition  merely  shook  its  head  and  vanished.  This  vision  came
back  twice  that  same  night.  Soon  afterward  the  news  arrived  that,
a  short  time  before  the  moment  of  the  vision,  his  friend  had  been
drowned  while  swimming.

Learning  that  the  bishop's  correspondent  was  Archdeacon
Farler,  those  who  were  making  the  investigation  wrote  to
him.     He  answered  on  January  9,  1884:

Pampisford  Vicarage,  Cambridge.

I  told  of  the  vision  the  following  morning,  at  breakfast,  several
days  before  receiving  news  of  my  friend's  death.  I  related  it  to
my  professor,  John  Kempe,  and  to  his  wife  and  family.  I  was
living  in  Long  Ashton,  in  Somerset  County ;  my  friend  died  in  Kent
County.  Since  I  was  not  in  the  least  frightened  by  this  vision  at
the  moment  when  I  saw  it,  I  spoke  of  it  as  a  singular  dream  rather
than  an  apparition  of  some  one  dead.

My  vision  occurred  on  September  2  or  3,  1868.  It  was  repeated
on  the  seventeenth  of  the  same  month.  I  have  never  had  any  sort
of  hallucination.

G.  P.  Farler.

It  was  learned,  from  the  official  records,  that  the  narrator 's
friend  was  drowned  in  the  Cronch  River  on  September  2,
1868.

Therefore,  on  the  very  night  on  which  he  was  drowned
the  student  first  appeared  twice  to  his  comrade,  and  the  latter
saw  him  again  fifteen  days  later.  Was  the  second  vision  a
recollection  of  the  first  1  But  it  was  not  the  same  phantom ;
the  first  was  that  of  a  drovi^ed  man,  and  the  second  seemed
clothed  as  usual.

In  ''Phantasms  of  the  Living"  we  may  find  similar  cases


:WITHIN  AN  HOUR  AFTER  DEATH  131

of  various  apparitions  manifesting  themselves  repeatedly.
(Volume  I,  pages  415,  444,  561,  and  Volume  II,  pages,  59,  237,
256,  467,  500.)  As  for  those  who  have  been  drowned,  we
have  seen  more  than  one  case  of  the  sort  in  the  volume  ''At
the  Moment  of  Death,"  the  second  in  the  trilogy  ''Death
and  Its  Mystery."

One  often  hears  persons,  when  one  speaks  to  them  of  ghosts,
of  apparitions  of  the  dead,  express  the  traditional  belief  that
"these  things  can  happen  only  by  the  special  dispensation  of
Providence."  As  to  this  statement,  Frederic  Myers  remarks
that  it  involves  implications  the  truth  of  which  cannot  be
verified,  since,  for  those  who  believe  in  a  God  ruling  all,  the
words  dispensation  and  Providence  are  no  more  applicable
to  these  occurrences  than  to  any  other  occurrences;  further-
more, nothing  proves  that  the  man  who  has  died  is  there  him-
self, and  that  the  phantom  is  not  a  "double,"  something  pro-
jected to  a  distance  by  the  deceased,  an  hallucinatory  image.
Instead  of  defining  a  specter  as  "some  one  dead  who  has  been
given  permission  to  communicate  with  a  living  person,"  we
might  see  in  it  "  a  manifestation  of  the  persistence  of  personal
energy";  an  indication  that  a  certain  sort  of  force  comes  into
play  after  death,  in  connection  with  a  person  who  has  lived
upon  this  earth.  Then,  too,  images  may  persist,  though  the
dead  man  may  have  ceased  to  be  the  cause  of  them.

Communication  between  some  one  dead  and  some  one  living
can  be  only  communication  between  thought  in  a  certain
state  of  existence  and  thought  in  a  wholly  different  state.
It  is  not  like  two  persons  talking  together.  There  is,  on  the
one  side,  spirit  that  is  separate  from  matter,  aiid,  on  the  other,
spirit  in  a  brain.  A  hypnotized  subject,  who  is  in  communi-
cation only  with  the  hypnotist,  gives  us  a  conception  of  these
differences  in  the  state  of  the  spirit.

These  distinctions  will  grow  clear,  of  themselves,  in  the
following  pages.     Let  us  proceed  methodically.

It  seems  to  me  that  no  impartial  reader  of  the  preceding


132  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

accounts  can  doubt  that  dead  persons  have  manifested  them-
selves immediately  after  death  to  friends  who  did  not  know
of  their  demise.  One  would  have  to  be  unpardonably  and
ridiculously  intolerant  to  consider  that  these  statements  are
of  doubtful  authority.

The  occurrences  given  in  this  first  chapter,  selected  from
manifestations  and  apparitions  classified  according  to  their
remoteness  from  the  moment  of  dissolution,  took  place  during
the  first  hour  after  death.  Let  us  now  read  of  those  which
took  place  several  hours  afterward,  up  to  twenty-four  hours,
during  the  first  day  after  dissolution.

I  think,  however,  that  it  may  aid  us  if  I  remark  that  not
one  of  the  incidents  given  in  this  chapter  occurred  during  a
spiritistic  seance.  ''Spirit"  manifestations,  as  they  are
called,  will  take  up  a  special  chapter.


MANIFESTATIONS  FROM   ONE   TO   TWENTY-FOUR   HOURS
AFTER   DEATH

The    swarm    of    the    dead    hums    and
swells.

Sophocles.

LET  us  continue  our  research,  following  the  same
method  of  approach.  We  shall  gradually  draw  away
from  the  ending  of  earthly  life.  Let  us  bring
together,  in  this  chapter,  manifestations  and  apparitions
observed  during  the  first  twenty-four  hours  after  death.
There  is  a  great  number  of  them,  and  we  are  obliged  to
restrict  ourselves  to  a  very  limited  choice.

The  accounts  in  the  chapter  just  read  concern  manifesta-
tions immediately  after  death — within  an  hour  after  it.  Those
of  which  we  are  about  to  read  occurred  at  various  periods
from  one  to  twenty-four  hours  afterward.

The  first  in  this  classification  is  offered  us  by  one  of  my
colleagues  of  the  Royal  Astronomical  Society  of  London,
the  Rev.  Charles  Tweedale.  It  was  related  in  a  scientific
periodical  well  known  to  astronomers,  ' '  The  English  Mechanic
and  "World  of  Science"  of  July  20,  1906.  We  give  it  in
full:

The  evening  of  Friday,  January  10,  1879,  I  went  to  bed  early.
Awakening  in  the  midst  of  my  first  sleep,  I  saw  the  moon  through
the  window  giving  on  the  south;  its  bright  beams  lighted  up  my
room.  At  once  my  gaze  was  drawn  toward  the  panels  of  a  cup-
board, which  was  part  of  the  wall,  and  which  served  as  a  ward-
robe.    My  eyes  followed  the  shaft  of  light  which  illuminated  the

133


134  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

eastern  wall  of  my  room,  in  which  was  the  cupboard.  Gazing
fixedly  in  this  direction,  I  saw,  suddenly,  a  form  appear  in  front
of  me,  before  the  panels  of  the  cupboard.  Indistinct  at  first,  it
gradually  grew  clearer,  until  I  recognized  the  face  of  my  grand-
mother. I  had  been  observing  it  for  some  seconds,  when  the  vision
melted  away  gradually,  and  disappeared  in  the  moonlight.  An
unusual  thing  struck  me,  and  stamped  itself  upon  my  mind :  it  was
the  fact  that  my  grandmother  had  on  an  old-fashioned  cap,  v/hich
was  fluted  in  a  shell-like  design.  I  was  not  in  the  least  afraid  and,
thinking  myself  the  victim  of  an  illusion  caused  by  the  moonlight,
I  turned  over  and  went  to  sleep  again.

The  morning  of  the  next  day,  at  breakfast,  I  was  beginning  to
tell  of  the  apparition  of  the  previous  night,  when  to  my  great  sur-
prise my  father  left  the  table  abruptly.  He  was  most  agitated;
he  went  out  of  the  room  hastily,  leaving  his  breakfast  almost  un-
touched. I  asked  my  mother  for  an  explanation.  She  silenced
me  with  a  gesture.  When  the  door  was  closed  once  more,  I  re-
peated my  question.  Then  my  mother  answered:  "Charles,  I  ^m
going  to  tell  you  the  strangest  thing  I  've  ever  heard  of.  This
morning  your  father  told  me  that  he  had  waked  up  in  the  night,
and  that  he  had  seen  his  mother  standing  near  his  bed,  but  just  at
the  moment  when  he  wished  to  speak  to  her  she  had  disappeared."

This  scene  and  this  conversation  had  taken  place  about  half-
past  eight,  on  the  morning  of  Saturday,  January  11th.  Before
noon  we  received  a  telegram  announcing  that  my  grandmother
had  died  during  the  night.  But  that  was  not  all,  for  my  father
next  learned  that  his  sister,  who  lived  about  thirty  kilometers  from
our  home,  had  also  seen  my  grandmother  appear.  Three  persons,
therefore,  had  the  same  vision  independently,  and  each  attributed
it  to  an  hallucination.

There  is  no  doubt  that  this  apparition  was  that  of  a  person
passing  through  the  change  we  call  death,  in  view  of  the  moment
when  this  triple  apparition  occurred.  I  remember  perfectly  that
it  was  two  o'clock  in  the  morning;  my  father  made  a  note  of  the
precise  moment  of  the  vision.  I  did  not  get  up  to  look  at  the
time,  but  made  an  approximate  reckoning  of  it.  The  house  faces
south,  and  the  window  of  the  room  in  which  I  was  sleeping  also
looks  toward  the  south.


ONE  TO  TWENTY-FOUR  HOURS  AFTER  DEATH     135

When  I  set  about  verifying  details,  I  tried  to  find  out  at  what
hour  the  moon  was  at  its  highest  point  on  the  night  of  January
10-11,  1879.  The  Nautical  Almanac  showed  the  time  to  have  been
nineteen  minutes  past  two  in  the  morning.  When  the  moon  is  at
its  height,  the  two  east  and  west  walls  are  lighted  up  equally,  as
well  as  the  north  wall,  at  the  back  of  my  room.  Consequently,  I
am  sure  that  the  moon  was  not  far  from  its  highest  point  at  the
moment  of  the  apparition,  and  that  it  was  ab.out  two  o'clock  in
the  morning.  This  confirms  in  a  remarkable  way  the  time  noted
by  my  father.  My  aunt,  too,  said  that  the  apparition  which  she
witnessed  occurred  after  death.  Dissolution  took  place  at  -fifteen
minutes  past  twelve.  This  proves  that  we  are  not  concerned  with
a  telepathic  or  subjective  manifestation,  occurring  before  death
or  at  the  very  moment  of  death,  but  with  a  really  objective  appari-
tion occurring  after  life  had  left  the  body.  We  may  conclude,
therefore,  that  the  dead  woman,  though  apparently  lifeless,  was
sufficiently  alive  some  hours  later  to  manifest  herself  to  different
persons  separated  by  considerable  distances.

As  for  the  "garments  of  apparitions,"  I  described  the  vision  to
my  parents  just  as  I  had  seen  it,  without  attempting  to  find  out  if
my  grandmother  had  actually  worn  a  cap  with  the  trimmings
which  had  struck  me.  Several  weeks  ago,  with  the  idea  of  obtain-
ing precise  details  as  to  this  mystery,  I  wrote  my  uncle  (my  aunt
departed  this  life  in  1900),  asking  him  to  clear  up  certain  interest-
ing points,  and  sending  him  a  sketch,  drawn  from  memory,  of  the
face  I  saw  in  my  vision.  Here  is  an  extract  taken  from  the  reply
which  I  received:

"I  can  vouch  for  the  exactitude  of  these  details,  for  your  grand-
mother died  in  my  house  the  morning  of  Saturday  January  11,
1879,  at  fifteen  minutes  past  twelve.  Her  death-agony  began  on
Friday  and  she  breathed  her  last  a  little  after  midnight,  according
to  my  memorandum.  My  daughter  and  I  have  a  distinct  memory  of
what  my  wife  said  when  she  told  us  of  the  apparition  of  which
she  had  been  a  witness.

"You  ask  me  if  the  sketch  of  the  cap  which  you  sent  me  is  at  all
like  the  dead  woman's  last  head-dress.  The  resemblance  is  striking.
It  is  certainly  the  fluted  cap  which  your  grandmother  wore  the
whole  time  she  was  ill  and  when  she  died;  also,  your  description


136  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

of  the  phantom  is  in  exact  agreement  with  the  dying  woman's
appearance  at  the  moment  when  life  left  her.  I  am  telling  the
simple  truth,  and  can,  if  necessary,  vouch  for  these  details  by  oath."

My  father  died  in  1885;  but  my  mother  is  still  living  and  has  a
distinct  memory  of  the  whole  scene  of  which  she  was  a  witness.
She  confirms  its  essential  points:

^'I  have  read  carefully  my  son's  account  of  his  vision,  and  I
also  remember  that  of  my  deceased  husband  (Doctor  Tweedale).
At  that  same  time,  my  sister-in-law  told  us  of  the  phenomenon
which  she  had  witnessed  that  night."

The  occurrence  which  I  have  just  related  presents  so  many  re-
marks of  authenticity  that  we  cannot  hold  it  under  suspicion.  I
advise  those  who  are  incredulous  to  inform  themselves  as  to  analo-
gous happenings  which  have  already  been  observed,  and  I  shall
add  that  there  are  many  very  interesting  and  very  authentic  phe-
nomena which  are  still  unexplained.

Charles  Tweedale,
Member  of  the  Royal  Astronomical  Society  of  London.

It  seemed  to  me  helpful  to  give  this  story  in  its  entirety.
It  is  remarkable  in  that  it  relates  an  occurrence  observed
about  one  hour  and  three  quarters  after  death — one  that  was
seen  independently  by  three  persons.  ,  Death  occurred  fifteen
minutes  after  midnight,  and  the  apparition  was  seen  at  two
0  'clock.

What  is  the  explanation?

Plainly  it  is  in  this  case  impossible  to  think  that  there  was
any  deception  whatsoever.

In  the  ^'Annales  des  Sciences  psychiques^'  of  October,
1906,  I  discussed  this  most  valuable  observation  and  compared
the  hypotheses  of  illusion,  hallucination,  and  telepathy.

In  our  present  state  of  ignorance  as  to  the  nature  of
matter,  energy,  and  spirit,  attempts  to  discover  whether  ap-
paritions exist  or  not  can  only  be  approved  of  by  all  friends
of  truth,  and  we  must  congratulate  Mr.  Tweedale  on  having
made  this  triple  observation  known.


ONE  TO  TWENTY-FOUR  HOURS  AFTER  DEATH    137

That  there  was  an  illusion,  an  hallucination  on  the  part
of  three  independent  witnesses  would  seem  to  me  inadmis-
sible.

The  narrator  declares  that  so  far  as  he  and  his  father
were  concerned,  the  phantom  was  there  objectively  and  that
the  cap  proved  it.  It  seems  to  me  that  the  reality  of  the
apparition  may  be  explained  on  the  assumption  that  the
dead  woman  influenced  the  minds  of  her  children,  and  that
this  suggestion  took  the  form  of  an  image.  A  dead  person
may  act  upon  a  living  person  at  a  distance;  may  manifest
himself  under  one  form  or  another,  doubtless  by  an  impres-
sion made  upon  the  brain.

Let  us  continue  our  investigation.  The  apparition  of  which
we  have  just  spoken  was  seen  one  hour  and  three  quarters
after  death.  Here  is  one,  that  of  a  mother  to  her  daughter,
seen  a  little  later.

I  owe  my  acquaintance  with  this  remarkable  story  to  a
kindness  of  the  brilliant  poet  Auguste  Dorchain.  The  account
was  set  down  in  1821,  and  is  of  a  very  clearly  defined  case
of  telepathy.  The  observation  was  made  at  a  time  when
these  phenomena  were  not  known  and  had  not  been  given  a
name.  The  dramatic  incident  was  taken  from  Colonel
Voutier's^  Memoirs.  He  was  an  ardent  philhellenist ;  in
the  middle  of  an  account  of  his  campaigns  in  Greece  appears
the  story  of  an  apparition,  in  a  dream,  immediately  after  the
death  of  a  Turkish  woman  who  had  been  assassinated.  The
soldier  historian  was  neither  a  braggart  nor  over-credulous;
he  does  not  undertake  to  explain  the  mystery,  but  gives  an
honest  account  of  it.     Here  is  the  story :

October^  1821.  Before  taking  up  my  narrative  (it  will  carry  me
far  from  Tripolitza)  I  yield  to  my  desire  to  relate  a  remarkable
occurrence.

1  Memoires  sur  la  Guerre  actuelle  des  Grecs  ( I  vol.  Paris,  Bossange,
1823),  pp.  97-100.


138  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

A  young  Turkish  girl  was  brought  me  by  my  soldiers.  She  was
beautiful,  and  her  fear  of  the  misfortunes  which  in  the  case  of  a
girl  of  sixteen  follow  upon  captivity  in  a  country  where  the  enslave-
ment of  women  is  so  odious — this  fear  made  her  still  more  interest-
ing. I  accepted  the  present  of  her  which  they  made  me,  and  in
order  to  reassure  her,  I  gave  orders  that  she  be  placed  in  separate
rooms  and  treated  with  all  the  regard  due  her  sex  and  position.
The  procedure  filled  my  captive  with  astonishment;  she  showed  her
gratitude  by  tears.

A  few  days  went  by  and  my  kindness  to  her  and,  above  all,  my
restraint,  so  foreign  to  Mohammedan  ways,  had  won  her  affection
and  her  confidence.  I  used  to  spend  a  little  time  with  her,  trying
to  console  her.  Since  she  was  separated  from  her  mother,  I  was
the  only  one  to  whom  she  could  confide  her  grief.  She  loved  me  as
a  friend,  and  I  was  attached  to  her  by  that  spiritual  satisfaction
unknown  to  him  who  reads  these  lines  with  a  mocking  eye.  (A  firm
resolution  which  I  had  taken  to  save  a  young  girl  in  all  this  up-
heaval, and  the  necessity  of  giving  my  soldiers  an  example  of  a
virtue  which  they  were  beginning  to  forget  forbade  any  other  sort
of  relation  with  the  pretty  slave.)

One  day  I  saw  her  approaching  me,  her  head  bent  low  and  her
eyes  full  of  tears.  "What's  the  matter,  my  girl?"  I  asked  her.
"Won't  you  ever  be  able  to  get  over  your  sadness?" — "Oh,  I  have
a  good  reason  for  crying!  They've  killed  my  mother." — "Who
told  youf— "/S'/je  did."— "When?"— "Last  night.  I  saw  her;  she
spoke  to  me,  and  said:  'See,  my  daughter!  The  wicked  men
have  killed  me.'  And  she  showed  me  her  neck,  which  was  cut
through;  there  was  another  wound  in  her  side.  'Dig  a  grave  for
me,'  she  added.  And  the  spade,  my  dear  mother?' — 'Dig  up  the
earth  with  your  nails,  my  daughter.'  "

That  I  might  calm  the  unhappy  child,  I  gave  orders  that  in-
formation should  be  sought  as  to  what  had  become  of  her  mother.
They  came  to  tell  me  that  a  woman  had  been  found  dead,  with
wounds  that  were  still  bleeding,  in  her  neck  and  side.  I  asked
Emme,  who  was  still  depressed,  how  we  could  recognize  her  mother.
"She  wore  trousers  of  this  material."  I  went  to  the  spot  where  the
body  was;  I  secured  a  piece  of  the  trousers  and  showed  it  to  the
young  girl:   "Was  your  mother's  garment  made  of  material  like


ONE  TO  TWENTY-FOUR  HOURS  AFTER  DEATH    139

that?" — "Yes,  it  was  really  my  mother;  you  found  her,  but  you
found  her  dead.  Poor  Mother!'^  And,  summoning  all  her
strength,  she  threw  herself  upon  me,  to  seize  my  dagger  and  kill
herself.  I  stopped  her,  and,  that  I  might  turn  her  from  her  fatal
course,  I  told  her  that  they  had  carried  off  her  mother  and  sent  her
to  Asia.     This  lie  calmed  the  unfortunate  girl.

I  confess  that  the  memory  of  the  occurrence  made  an  extraor-
dinary impression  on  my  mind.  I  do  not  believe  in  nocturnal
revelations,  and  nevertheless  I  am  still  utterly  at  a  loss  when  I
think  that  the  terrible  reality  corresponded  to  the  young  Turkish
girFs  dream;  we  must  see  in  this  at  least  a  strange  trick  of  fate.

I  have  the  consolation  (it  is  very  gratifying),  in  ending  this
sad  story,  of  being  sure  that  poor  Emme  is  happy;  a  respectable
family  of  the  Peloponnesus  adopted  her.

We  can  but  repeat  here  what  we  have  said  of  certain  other
happenings:  chance  coincidence  is  possible,  since  the  young
girl  was  uneasy  as  to  her  mother's  fate;  she  may  have
dreamed  that  she  saw  her  assassinated.  But  one  cannot  help
pointing  out  (1)  that  this  was  no  ordinary  dream,  and  that
the  impression  received  was  most  violent  in  its  intensity;
(2)  that  the  wounds  were  seen,  that  the  drama  was  lived
through.  Though  possible,  the  chance  coincidence  of  a  dream
is  quite  improbable.  Moreover,  a  considerable  number  of
similar  cases  that  are,  to-day,  known,  and  have  been  investi-
gated and  discussed,  would  lead  us  to  consider  that  the
probability  of  telepathic  communication  approaches  certainty.
We  have  been  prepared  for  this  by  Mrs.  Tweedale's  phantom,
and  by  all  the  others.

The  apparition  of  the  mother  to  the  daughter,  in  a  tele-
pathic dream,  would  appear  to  have  occurred  a  short  time
after  she  was  assassinated.

According  to  the  law  of  probability,  hallucinations  repre-
senting such  and  such  persons  should  not  coincide  by  chance
with  some  particular  event — for  example,  the  death  of  these
persons — in  greater  proportion  than  it  should  with  other


140  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

events.  If  this  proportion  is  exceeded,  we  have  some  warrant
for  excluding  the  element  of  chance  and,  as  a  consequence,
for  thinking  that  the  phantom  had  a  real  cause.

My  readers  may  remember  reading  of  a  phenomenon  con-
cerning two  members  of  the  same  family  which  rather  re-
calls the  preceding  case :  it  was  a  most  remarkable  apparition
of  a  dead  man  to  his  brother,  several  hours  after  dissolution.
I  gave  the  story  in  ^'L'lnconnu"  (page  450).  It  concerned
Mr.  Frederic  Wingfield,  Belle-Isle-en-Terre,  C6tes-du-Nord,
who  writes:

On  the  night  of  March  25,  1880,  I  dreamed  that  I  saw  my
brother,  Richard  Wingfield-Baker,  seated  on  a  chair  before  me.  I
spoke  to  him;  he  merely  bowed  his  head  in  reply;  then  he  rose  and
left  the  room.  I  awakened  and  found  that  I  was  standing,  one  foot
on  the  floor  near  my  bed  and  the  other  on  my  bed,  and  that  I  was
trying  to  speak  and  utter  my  brother's  name.  The  impression  that
he  was  really  present  was  so  strong,  and  the  whole  scene  was  so
lifelike,  that  I  left  the  bedroom  to  look  for  my  brother  in  the  draw-
ing-room, where  I  found  no  one.  I  then  had  a  feeling  of  impending
misfortune,  and  I  made  a  note  of  this  "apparition"  in  my  daily
memorandum,  adding  the  words:  "May  God  prevent  it!"  Three
days  afterward  I  received  news  that  my  brother  had  died  that  day,
at  half-past  eight  o'clock,  as  a  result  of  a  faU  when  hunting.

Death,  therefore,  had  preceded  this  well-defined  vision,  by
some  hours.

The  objection  which  we  raised  as  to  the  reality  of  the
apparition  of  the  young  Turkish  girl's  mother  would  not
apply  in  the  present  case.  Thus  one  occurrence  confirms  an-
other.

The  following  experience  was  not  less  conclusive.  It  took
place  when  the  observer  was  fully  awake,  and  even  out  in
the  open  air.  A  person  was  seen — seen  clearly,  and  recognized
with  certainty — ^two  hours  after  her  death,  by  a  gardener  who


ONE  TO  TWENTY-FOUR  HOURS  AFTER  DEATH    141

did  not  know  that  she  had  died.     A  special  investigation  of
the  incident  was  made  by  Frederic  Myers.^

The  Rev.  C.  T.  Forster,  pastor  of  Hinxton,  wrote  on
August  6,  1885:

My  late  parishioner  Mrs.  de  Freville  was  a  rather  eccentric  lady;
she  had,  in  particular,  an  abnormal  interest  in  graves.  Two  days
after  her  death,  which  occurred  in  London  in  the  afternoon  of
May  8th,  I  heard  that  the  gardener,  Alfred  Bard,  had  seen  her
that  same  evening  (May  8th).  I  sent  for  him,  and  he  gave  me  a
very  clear  and  very  detailed  account  of  what  he  had  seen.

He  is  a  man  who  has  the  habit  of  observing  carefully.  He  edu-
cated himself  as  a  gardener,  and  I  am  convinced  that  he  is  speak-
ing the  truth  without  any  exaggeration.  I  am  absolutely  sure,
also,  that  news  of  Mrs.  de  Freville's  death  could  not  have  reached
Hinxton  before  the  next  morning  (May  9th).  She  was  found  dead
at  half-past  seven  in  the  evening.  She  had  been  left  alone  in  her
room;  she  was  rather  unwell,  but  was  not  believed  to  be  seriously
ill.

C.  F.  FORSTER.

Here  is  Mr.  Alfred  Bard's  own  story:

July  25,  1885.
I  am  a  gardener;  I  work  at  Sawston.  When  I  go  home  from
my  work  I  always  go  through  the  Hinxton  cemetery.  On  Friday,
the  eighth  of  last  May,  I  was  returning  as  usual.  When  I  was  in
the  cemetery  I  looked  down  rather  closely  at  the  lawn,  at  a  cow
and  a  donkey  lying  there  just  within  the  gateway.  As  I  lowered
my  head  I  glanced  in  the  direction  of  the  square  vault  where  Mr.
de  Freville  had  been  buried.  Then  I  saw  Mrs.  de  Freville  leaning
against  the  grating,  dressed  just  as  I  used  to  see  her  ordinarily;
she  had  on  a  hat  of  the  sort  called  a  coal-scuttle  bonnet,  a  black
jacket  trimmed  with  crepe  and  a  black  dress.  She  looked  straight
at   me.     Her   face   was   very  white — much   whiter   than    usual.     I

1  See  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  I,  212,  a^d  Hallucinations  telepath-
iques,  p.  235.


142  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

knew  her  well,  for  I  had  worked  at  her  home  for  some  time.  I
supposed  that  she  had  come,  as  she  sometimes  did,  to  go  into  the
mausoleum,  and  thought  that  Mr.  Wiles,  a  mason  from  Cambridge,
must  be  in  the  tomb,  busy  about  something.  I  walked  all  around
the  door,  looking  closely  to  see  if  it  were  open.  My  eyes  were
riveted  on  her,  and  I  myself  was  not  more  than  five  to  six  meters
from  her.  She  turned  her  face  toward  me,  following  me  with  her
eyes.  I  walked  between  the  church  and  the  tomb  (they  are  about
four  meters  apart)  looking  to  see  if  the  tomb  were  open,  for  she
was  in  just  such  a  position  that  she  hid  the  door  of  it  from  me.
When  I  turned  around  she  was  gone.  It  was  impossible  for  her
to  have  left  the  cemetery,  because  to  reach  either  one  of  the  two
exits  she  would  have  had  to  pass  me.

I  was,  therefore,  convinced  that  she  had  gone  into  the  tomb
quickly.  I  went  toward  the  door,  which  I  expected  to  find  open,
but  to  my  great  surprise  it  was  locked.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  it
had  not  been  opened  at  all;  there  was  no  key  in  the  lock.  I  hoped
to  be  able  to  look  into  the  tomb  itself;  I  shook  the  door  to  make
sure  that  it  was  firmly  locked,  but  there  was  no  sign  that  any  one
had  been  there.  Then  I  was  very  much  frightened  and  looked  at
the  clock;  it  was  half -past  nine.  When  I  got  home,  I  asked  myself
if  what  I  had  seen  had  been  a  product  of  my  imagination;  I  told
my  wife  of  it,  however.  When,  the  next  day,  I  was  told  that  Mrs.
de  Freville  was  dead,  I  was  so  startled  that  it  made  me  jump.  I
have  never  had  any  other  hallucination.

Alfred  Bard.

A  statement,  sworn  to  by  Mrs.  Bard  (space  is  lacking  to
give  it  here),  confirms  the  truth  of  the  account.

Forster,  the  pastor,  took  Mr.  Myers  through  the  Hinxton
cemetery,  and  the  description  of  the  place  was  found  to  be
absolutely  exact.  Furthermore,  the  date  of  the  death  was
verified,  by  looking  at  the  ''Times."

Shall  we  think  this  experience  an  hallucination?  But
(1)  the  worthy  gardener  had  never  had  one;  (2)  the  appari-
tion followed  the  death,  which  he  did  not  know  of;  (3)  the
woman,  original  in  her  way  of  thinking,  loved  to  visit  graves.


ONE  TO  TWENTY-FOUR  HOURS  AFTER  DEATH    143

This  too  was,  unquestionably,  an  apparition  some  hours
after  death.  The  phantom's  garments  demand  an  explana-
tion. We  may  think  that  the  woman  who  appeared  remained
faithful  to  her  habit  of  visiting  the  cemetery  (she  was,  more-
over, destined  to  be  borne  there  herself),  and  that  her  in-
visible, spiritual  presence  had  an  effect  on  the  gardener 's  mind
and  showed  him  a  corporeal  image.

The  following  case  is,  perhaps,  still  more  curious.

A  young  woman  who  had  just  died,  suddenly,  showed
herself  to  her  doctor.  She  died  at  one  o'clock  in  the  morn-
ing, and  the  doctor  was  awakened  at  four  o  'clock  by  a  bright
light  in  his  room  and  a  woman's  form  which  he  did  not
recognize.  Let  us  give  the  story;  it  was  published  by  Pod-
more  in  his  *' Apparitions."  ^

The  doctor  wrote  from  Albany  (U.S.A.)  to  Dr.  Hodgson
on  September  10,  1888 :

I  am  a  physician,  have  been  practising  for  eleven  years,  and
am  in  excellent  health ;  I  have  never  believed  in  apparitions.

Last  Monday,  on  September  3d,  I  went  to  bed  about  eleven
o'clock,  after  my  daily  work.  I  had  dined  very  lightly,  at  seven
o'clock.

My  bedroom  is  on  the  second  floor,  and  I  lock  all  my  doors  ex-
cept the  one  communicating  with  my  wife's  room.  Below  is  the
plan  of  our  apartment.

I  occupy  room  Number  1,  and  my  wife  Number  2;  her  room  has
only  one  window  and  only  one  door,  communicating  with  mine.
My  room  has  three  doors,  locked  at  night,  and  one  window.  The
two  windows  of  our  rooms  are  hung  with  thick  green  curtains,
which  fall  below  them  in  order  to  exclude  the  light  from  without.
No  artificial  light  shines  on  the  windows,  and  moonlight  scarcely
reaches  them.

I  undressed,  went  to  bed  about  eleven  o'clock,  and  was  not  long
in  going  to  sleep.  About  four  o'clock  in  the  morning  I  was  awak-
ened by  a  bright  light  in  my  face.  At  first  I  thought  it  was  my
wife,  standing  at  the  point  marked  3,  for  she  was  to  get  up  at

^Apparitions  and  Thought-Transference   (1915),  p.  401.


144


DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY


half -past  five  to  catch  a  morning  train.  The  light  was  so  brilliant
that  I  began  to  ask  her  questions  at  once,  but  no  voice  answered
me.  While  I  was  speaking,  the  person  I  had  seen  withdrew  toward
point  4  and  seemed  gradually  to  disappear  toward  point  5.  The
light,  gliding  along  silently,  made  me  think  that  it  was  a  servant
crossing  the  hall,  and  that  the  light  he  carried  had  passed  through
the  keyhole.  But  this  was  not  possible,  for  hangings  hid  the  lock.
Then  the  idea  occurred  to  me  that  a  thief  might  be  in  the  other
room.  I  shouted  to  my  wife  to  strike  a  light  at  once.  She  awakened
and  asked  me  this  unexpected  question:  "Why,  what's  that  bril-
liant light  in  your  room?"  I  lighted  the  gas  in  my  room,  made  a
search  and  found  that  there  was  no  light  in   any  of  the  rooms.

My  wife  left  on  the  morning  train.  I  busied  myself  with  my
work  as  usual.

At  noon,  when  I  went  back  home,  my  servant  informed  me  that
during  my  absence  a  man  had  come  to  ask  me  for  a  certificate
for  a  young  woman  who  had  died  suddenly  at  an  early  hour  in  the
morning,  as  a  result  of  a  hemorrhage  of  the  lungs.  She  had  died
about  one  o'clock.  I  had  seen  the  apparition  about  four  o'clock.
So  far  as  I  was  able  to  note,  there  was  no  great  resemblance  be-
tween it  and  my  patient,  except  in  the  matter  of  height.  The  lack
of  facial  resemblance  was  not  so  great,  perhaps,  but  the  apparition
had  seemed  much  older  to  me.  I  had  seen  the  young  woman  on
the  previous  evening,  and  her  illness  had  not  seemed  to  promise
any  immediate  danger:  she  had  been  ill  for  only  two  days.  She
had  at  first  spit  a  little  blood,  as  a  result  of  having  strained  her-


ONE  TO  TWENTY-FOUR  HOURS  AFTER  DEATH    145

self.    When  the  hemorrhage  occurred  that  momiDg  she  had  called
for  help  and  had  uttered  my  name.

This  is  the  only  phenomenon  of  this  nature  that  has  come  within
my  personal  experience.  The  apparition  was  very  clear,  but  it
vanished  rapidly.  My  wife  had  noticed  the  light  before  I  said
anything  to  her,  at  the  very  moment  when  I  awakened  her.  As  for
me,  I  had  got  up  at  once  when  the  luminous  apparition  appeared,
for  I  am  accustomed  to  answer  the  telephone  during  the  night.

It  would  seem  clear  that  we  must  see  here  a  cause-and-
effect  relation,  and  that  the  dying  woman — or  the  dead
woman — produced  the  manifestation.  Chance  cannot  be
made  an  explanation.

Frank  Podmore,  in  conformity  with  his  title  ''Apparitions
and  Thought-Transf erence, "  is  willing  to  see  only  a  case  of
transference  of  thought  from  the  young  woman  to  her
doctor,  before  her  death.     But  is  this  really  the  explanation?

In  the  first  place,  the  phenomenon  occurred  three  hours
after  death.  Why  should  the  dying  woman's  summons
have  required  this  time  to  take  effect  on  her  doctor,  who  was
accustomed  to  awaken  for  telephone  calls,  and  who  did  not,
therefore,  sleep  very  deeply  ?

Then,  what  caused  the  light,  seen  by  two  persons?  It
could  not  be  attributed  to  an  hallucination.

The  question  of  deciding  whether  the  light  and  the  appari-
tion were  caused  by  a  person  still  alive,  or  by  that  same  per-
son three  hours  after  death,  is  put  before  us  flatly.  No
subterfuge  will  avail.  We  must  decide  without  preconceived
ideas,  without  prejudice  of  any  sort.

Would  not  the  simple,  logical  answer  seem  to  you  to  be
that  the  dead  woman  manifested  herself,  rather  than  that
there  was  a  strange  case  of  thought-transmission  and  that
the  thought  remained  latent  for  three  hours  in  the  doctor's
mind  and  then  resulted  in  the  light  and  the  phantom?

Let  us  note  that,  unlike  the  apparitions  of  Mr.  Tweedale's


146


DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY


grandmother,  of  the  young  Turkish  woman's  mother,  of  Mr.
Wingfield,  and  of  Mrs.  de  Freville,  this  phantom  remained
very  vague.  The  impressions  received  are  most  varied.  Here
is  another  example :

A  native  of  Bordeaux  heard  a  door  open  and  felt  that  some
one  had  just  come  in  behind  him  and  sat  down  at  a  table.
He  looked  round.  It  was  his  uncle,  who  lived  in  Laroche-
foucauld;  he  had  killed  himself  at  five  o'clock  in  the  morn-
ing. It  was  then  half -past  nine.  Let  us  listen  to  the  narra-
tor's story:

In  1888  I  was  in  Bordeaux,  in  the  rue  du  Palais-Gallien,  living
in  an  apartment  arranged  according  to  the  little  diagram  which
accompanies  this  note.

At  half-past  nine  on  the  morning  of  February  27th  (the  weather
was  quite  good)  I  was  seated  at  the  point  A,  before  my  work-
table,  when  I  suddenly  had  the  impression  that  the  door  B  had
just  opened  and  that  some  one,  who  had  entered  noiselessly,  was
standing  behind  me.

I  turned  toward  the  left  and  saw,  very  distinctly,  my  uncle
G .     The  vision  was  of  rather  short  duration.


About  a  quarter  of  an  hour  afterward  I  was  interrupted  in
my  work  by  the  arrival  of  a  telegram  announcing  that  my  uncle
was  very  ill,  and  asking  me  to  go  to  him  in  Larochefoucauld,  Cha-
rente.  The  telegram  had  been  taken  to  the  telegraph  office  a  little
after  eight  o'clock.


ONE  TO  TWENTY-FOUR  HOURS  AFTER  DEATH     147

1  left  immediately,  and  upon  my  arrival  I  learned  of  my  uncle's
death.  He  had  fired  two  bullets  into  his  head,  and  the  doctors
said  that  death  had  occurred  at  five  o'clock  in  the  morning.  When
I  saw  him  in  the  apartment  in  the  rue  du  Palais-Gallien,  he  was
wearing  the  same  clothes  that  he  had  had  on  at  our  last  interview,
about  eight  days  before  that  time.  I  had  been  carrying  on  a  brisk
correspondence  with  him.  Upon  my  arrival  I  found  several  letters
from  him  that  were  intended  for  me,  written  during  the  night
which  preceded  his  suicide.^

Another  occurrence.  A  woman,  in  excellent  health  and
under  absolutely  normal  conditions  for  observation,  saw  her
uncle  appear,  for  several  minutes,  seven  hours  after  his  death,
which  she  did  not  know  of.^

On  Tuesday,  May  25,  1897,  at  eight  o'clock  in  the  morning,  Mrs.
de  Lagenest  was  in  her  apartment  in  Fontenay-le-Comte,  making
her  bed  in  the  absence  of  her  maid,  when,  on  the  other  side  of  the
bed  (which  was  in  the  middle  of  the  room),  she  saw  her  uncle.
Monsieur  Bonnamy.  He  was  living  in  Loche  (near  Loehes),  and
she  believed  him  in  good  health.  She  saw  him  smile  happily,  but
this  apparition  distressed  her,  and  she  walked  to  the  other  side  of
the  bed,  hoping  to  escape  it.  To  her  great  surprise,  she  saw  her
uncle  in  the  spot  which  she  had  just  left.  Then  she  spoke  to  him,
asking  the  reason  for  his  presence.  She  received  no  reply  from
the  apparition;  ceasing  to  smile,  it  gazed  at  her  in  a  kindly  way.
Madame  de  Lagenest  attributed  this  obsession  to  an  hallucination.
To  escape  its  gaze,  which  disturbed  her,  she  went  down  to  the  rooms
on  the  ground  floor,  and  went  into  her  husband's  office.  The  same
phantom  rose  before  her.  "But  Uncle,  why  have  you  come  here?
Are  you  dead?"  The  apparition  vanished  immediately  after  Ma-
dame de  Lagenest  had  uttered  these  words.

She  went  to  take  a  walk  in  the  garden,  to  regain  her  self-control.
Half  an  hour  afterward,  hearing  some  one  ring  the  door-bell,  she
said  to  the  servant  near  her,  without  having  seen  the  person  who
had   just   arrived :     "Go    and  get   the   telegram   that 's   come  j   my

i  Annales  des  Sciences  psychiques,  1897,  p.  114,

2  Annates  des  Sciences  psychiques^  1900,  p.  65.


148  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

uncle  is  dead."     This  was  true;   Monsieur  Bonnamy  had   died  in
Loche  on  May  25th,  at  a  quarter-past  one  in  the  morning.

According  to  Madame  de  Lagenest,  the  vision  lasted  for  ten
minutes.  It  caused  her  excessive  fatigue,  which  did  not  disappear
until  very  late  in  the  evening.

F.  BODROUX.

We  may  legitimately  think  that  this  was  an  optical  illusion ;
but  we  must  not  accept  one-sided  reasoning.  These  were
illusions  corresponding  to  reality.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the
ancle  appeared  to  his  niece  seven  hours  after  his  death,  which
she  did  not  know  of.

We  are  familiar  with  many  observations  of  the  same  sort.
Have  we  not  already  read,  in  Volume  II,  page  140,  of  the
apparition  of  a  friend  seen  in  an  arm-chair  in  a  drawing-room
twelve  hours  after  his  death  ?  To  think  that  all  these  things,
seen  spontaneously,  are  illusions,  is  an  hypothesis  that  grows
less  and  less  admissible,  given  the  number  of  the  phenomena
and  the  normal  conditions  under  which  they  were  observed.

The  sensation  described  below,  experienced  by  a  son  after
his  mother's  death,  would  seem  to  have  been  due  to  the  in-
fluence of  the  mother,  who  was  dead  and  happy  at  her  de-
liverance from  earthly  life.  The  communication,  sent  me  on
December  11,  1920,  by  my  friend  Warrington  Dawson,  an
American  diplomat  already  known  to  my  readers  ("Before
Death,"  page  130),  is  doubly  interesting  by  reason  of  the
strange  premonition  recounted  in  it.     Here  it  is:

Sixteen  months  before  her  death  my  mother  saw  herself  lying
dead  in  the  spot  where  she  was  to  die  as  the  result  of  a  chance  cold.

In  January,  1908,  we  were  under  the  necessity  of  finding  an
apartment  very  quickly.  One  morning  I  had  found  one  with  which
I  was  most  satisfied,  in  the  rue  de  I'Universite.  When  I  went  back
to  luncheon  with  my  mother,  in  the  rue  de  Varenne,  where  we  lived,
I  proposed  that  she  go  and  see  it  at  once,  telling  her  that  if  she
liked  it  I  would  find  the  agent  immediately  and  sign  the  lease.


ONE  TO  TWENTY-FOUR  HOURS  AFTER  DEATH     149

We  did  this.  My  mother  seemed  as  satisfied  with  it  as  I.  As
we  were  passing  from  one  room  to  another,  she  talked  to  me  of
how  we  would  arrange  the  furniture  and  the  pictures.  Lastly,  we
arrived  at  the  threshold  of  what  was  to  be  her  bedroom.  Suddenly
I  saw  her  face  grow  pale,  and  she  fixed  her  eyes  upon  the  central
panel  of  the  left  wall;  I  had  never  seen  such  an  expression  on  her
face.  I  uttered  an  exclamation,  and  asked  her  what  was  the  mat-
ter. At  the  sound  of  my  voice  a  shiver  ran  through  her  body;  she
recovered  herself,  and  answered  in  a  strangled  voice:  "It's  noth-
ing; I'm  cold."

As  it  was  January,  and  the  apartment  was  unoccupied,  this
seemed  natural  to  me,  and  I  thought  no  more  of  the  incident.

Some  weeks  after  we  had  moved  in  I  was  more  than  surprised  to
learn  from  my  friends  that  my  mother  was  very  unhappy  in  our
new  apartment;  that  she  had  a  horror  of  it  and  bitterly  regretted
my  haste  in  signing  the  lease.  I  asked  her  for  an  explanation,  for
I  should  never  have  taken  an  apartment  which  was  not  to  her
taste.  She  seemed  very  much  embarrassed ;  she  said  that  our  friends
should  not  have  repeated  an  unconsidered  statement  on  her  part.
But  her  confusion  showed  me  clearly  that  she  was  hiding  something
from  me.     I  insisted,  and  she  answered  me  with  futile  objections.

I  returned  to  the  attack  several  times,  only  to  see  that  she  was
always  hiding  her  inmost  thoughts  from  me.  At  length  I  per-
suaded her  to  open  her  heart  to  me.  She  then  said:  "It's  this.
When  I  reached  the  door  of  my  bedroom,  7  saw  myself  lying  dead
on  that  hed,  which  was  where  it  is  now.  Then  I  knew  that  I  should
leave  this  apartment  in  my  coffin."

At  these  words  I  remembered  her  expression  on  our  first  visit.
She  had  approved  of  everything  until  that  moment,  and  had  then
let  me  make  all  arrangements  without  protesting.

By  force  of  argument  I  tried  to  banish  her  ideas,  calling  them
morbid.  Since  I  did  not  succeed,  I  proposed  that  she  go  and  spend
some  months  with  my  sister,  in  America.  She  left,  and  did  not
return  until  December.  I  asked  her  if  she  still  wished  to  move
out;  I  did  not  remind  her  of  her  vision,  hoping  that  she  would
have  forgotten  it,  for  she  seemed  in  very  good  health.  She  an-
swered simply  that  she  would  never  be  happy  in  that  house,  and
asked  me  to  give  up  the  lease.


150  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

1  obtained  the  owner's  permission,  but  on  condition  that  I  find
another  tenant.  I  began  to  look  for  one  immediately,  and  suc-
ceeded. It  was  then  that  I  left  for  Africa,  unexpectedly,  with
President  Roosevelt,  in  April,  1909.  She  made  preparations  to
move  out.  It  was  a  strange  thing  that  in  one  of  the  last  letters
which  she  wrote  me,  she  spoke  of  her  packing  and  added,  "I  am
preparing  for  the  great  Exodus."  This  letter,  written  from  the
rue  de  FUniversite  before  her  illness,  did  not  reach  me  until  long
after  her  death.

But  friends  had  telegraphed  me  that  she  had  developed  pneu-
monia, and  w^as  seriously  ill.  Day  after  day  the  cablegrams  suc-
ceeded one  another,  and  left  me  no  hope.  It  was  with  terror  that
I  used  to  wait  until  the  afternoon,  when  the  telegrams  were  given
me;-  day  and  night  I  was  oppressed  with  a  feeling  of  inevitable
and  imminent  catastrophe.

One  day.  May  5th,  I  experienced,  suddenly,  an  indescribable  re-
lief. I  felt  her  presence  near  me;  I  was  pervaded  by  a  heavenly
well-being  such  as  I  had  never  known.

I  thought  at  once  of  the  telepathic  bonds  which  had  united  us
for  long  years.  My  only  idea  was :  "The  crisis  is  past ;  my  mother
is  saved,  and  in  thinking  of  me  she  has  transmitted  her  relief."

I  was  completely  happy  for  the  first  time  since  I  received  the
first  telegram.  At  sunset  I  heard  my  name  being  called;  a  native
had  come  with  a  telegram,  as  usual.  I  rushed  out  to  him.  I  opened
the  envelope:  it  announced  my  mother's  death!

I  was  absolutely  thunderstruck  by  this  news.  I  thought  that  she
was  alive;  she  had  transmitted  her  thought  to  me;  I  had  been  in
mental  communication  with  her,  and  she  was  dead!  Her  loss
would  have  been  terrible  for  me,  even  if  I  had  been  prepared  for
it.  Since  I  was  no  longer  prepared,  it  was  like  a  blow  with  a
club.

It  took  me  several  years  to  comprehend  the  truth.  My  mother
had  indeed  sent  her  thought,  but  from  what  we  call  the  other  world.
She  had  made  me  feel  her  presence,  had  made  me  experience  her  re-
lief, her  celestial  well-being,  had  expressed  to  me  all  her  mother-love,
showing  that  our  souls  could  not  be  separated.  I  had  been  able
to  hear,  but  not  to  understand.

As  nearly  as  I  could  compute  the  time,  this  occurred  several


ONE  TO  TWENTY-FOUR  HOURS  AFTER  DEATH  151

hours  after  her  death  in  Paris;  her  soul  had  required  this  delay,
either  to  accustom  itself  to  a  state  of  eternal  life  after  leaving
this  life,  or  to  make  itself  felt  by  me  through  the  veils  of  the  flesh.

Warrington  Dawson.
(Letter  4352.)

There  was  nothing  material  about  the  manifestation.  It
was  none  the  less  remarkable  on  this  account,  and  I  was  all
the  more  ready  to  accept  it  as  genuine  from  the  fact  that  I
had  for  many  years  known  of  the  profound  affinity  which
united  this  son  to  his  mother.  Both  of  them  were  endowed
with  special  psychic  faculties.  As  we  remarked  above,  the
manifestations  of  the  dead  are  extremely  varied.

The  following  apparition,  twelve  hours  after  death,  bears,
like  the  preceding  one,  all  the  marks  of  authenticity.     The.
writer  is  already  known  to  us  (Volume  II,  pages  360-361).
It  was  sent  me  from  Miinster  on  April  22,  1899.

I  am  a  man  in  good  health,  aged  forty-seven.  I  am  straight
and  tall,  moderately  stout,  and  good-looking.  I  have  a  good  appe-
tite and  sleep  well.  I  was  formerly  employed  in  a  telegraph  office.
I  am  a  free  thinker.  One  of  my  friends  died  on  April  9,  1898,  on
the  night  before  Easter,  at  six  o'clock  in  the  morning.  He  ap-
peared to  me  in  my  room  and  began  to  look  at  all  the  pictures
with  war  as  a  subject  which  were  hung  there;  I  had  promised  to
show  them  to  him.  Some  days  before  his  death,  when  I  told  him
that  he  was  looking  better  and  that  a  French  cuirassier  of  1870
could  not  die  before  Alsace  had  been  freed,  he  had  answered  that
he  was  going  to  get  well  to  see  my  fine  pictures.  I  recognized  him,
though  he  was  in  a  shroud  and  no  longer  had  his  characteristic
mustache.  He  stayed  for  a  long  time  looking  at  my  pictures,  then
nodded  to  me  in  a  friendly  way  and  vanished  suddenly.  I  was  fully
awake.  I  went,  that  very  morning,  to  the  house  in  which  he
had  died,  and  found  that  his  mouth  and  mustache  had  been  covered
with  a  white  cloth.

Jean  Lau.

(Letter  618.)


152  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

Judging  from  the  writer's  description  of  himself,  it  would
be  difficult  to  admit  that  there  was  i^  this  case  an  hallucina-
tion, an  affection  of  the  nerves,  or  an  illusion  caused  by
imagination.  No  conclusive  argument  could  be  brought  for-
ward to  prove  that  it  was  impossible  for  a  dead  man's  spirit
to  have  paid  a  visit  to  his  friend  some  hours  after  dissolution.
There  is  nothing  absurd,  either,  in  the  possibility  that  his
image  was  transmitted,  together  with  his  thought.  It  was  a
telepathic  transmission  on  the  part  of  some  one  dead.  The
account  confirms  what  we  said  in  Volume  II.

Similarly,  it  was  twelve  hours  after  death  that  the  curious
incident  given  below  occurred.  It,  too,  was  related  to  me  at
the  beginning  of  my  investigation,  in  March,  1899,  in  the
following  letter,  written  by  a  boy  about  twelve  years  old:

I  did  not  know  what  fear  was.  One  of  my  cousins,  with  whom
I  had  taken  a  walk  the  evening  before  and  talked  with  until  half-
past  nine,  died  suddenly  at  eleven  o'clock.

At  four  o'clock  in  the  morning  (it  was  in  the  month  of  August)
I  left  the  farm,  to  go  to  school  as  usual,  but  earlier  than  I  generally
did,  to  report  his  death  at  the  town  hall.

At  eleven  I  usually  went  to  ring  the  bell  and  wind  the  clock.
The  latter  was  in  the  tower  of  the  church.  In  order  to  reach  it,
it  was  necessary  to  climb  a  long  spiral  staircase  and  cross  a  loft
about  twenty  meters  long.  The  teacher  stopped  me  that  day  and
said  to  me,  "If  you  don't  want  to  go  up  alone  to  wind  the  clock
to-day,  stay  down,  and  I  '11  go  myself." — "I  f  I  said.  "Why
shouldn't  I  want  tof

I  am  telling  all  this  to  explain  my  state  of  mind  at  that  moment.
I  remember  very  well  that  I  said  to  myself,  "How  funny  that  the
teacher  asked  me  that  question !"

When  I  reached  the  loft  I  was,  therefore,  very  much  surprised
to  see  my  cousin  standing  there,  hiding  a  part  of  the  door  which
led  to  the  clock.  The  light  from  the  window  in  the  roof  fell  right
on  his  face.  He  was  in  his  working-clothes,  and  was  looking  at
me  hard,  his  face  a  little  sad.  I  picked  up  a  small  iron  bar  which
lay  on  the  floor,  and,  going  forward,  I  threw  it  right  at  the  appari-


ONE  TO  TWENTY-FOUR  HOURS  AFTER  DEATH     153

tion.  The  bar  struck  the  door  with  a  dull  sound  and  the  illusion —
if  it  was  an  illusion,  for  your  accounts  make  me  doubt  this —
vanished.     Then  I  wound  the  clock  and  went  away.

My  cousin  was  on  my  right,  in  the  loft,  leaving  me  a  free  passage
this  time,  and  smiling.  "This  is  too  much!"  I  said  out  loud,  as  if
to  prove  to  myself  that  I  was  not  dreaming.  The  phantom  made
a  movement  as  though  to  raise  its  arms,  and  disappeared  suddenly.

I  went  downstairs  quickly  and  told  my  story  to  the  teacher,  who
said  to  me,  "Now  you  '11  know  what  fear  is."

(Vouched  for  by)  J.  Tuequin,  Instructor,

Ardennes.

From  the  evidence  in  the  account,  it  would  really  not  seem
possible  for  the  boy  (v^ho  v^as  absolutely  calm,  whose  mind
was  at  rest,  and  who  was  care-free,  as  was  natural  at  his  age)
to  have  been  the  dupe  of  an  illusion — above  all,  one  that
occurred  twice — and  not  to  have  been  affected  in  any  way;
he  regarded  it  merely  as  a  curious,  causeless  phenomenon
demanding  investigation.  The  fact  that  he  threw  an  iron
bar  at  the  phantom  demonstrates  that  there  was  an  utter
absence  of  fear  on  his  part.  He  was  astonished,  merely,
and  had  not  the  least  idea  that  this  was  possibly  a  manifesta-
tion on  the  part  of  his  friend.  His  was  a  purely  automatic
movement.  This  apparition,  twelve  hours  after  death,  was
spontaneous.

Following  my  usual  method  of  investigation,  I  asked  the
writer  of  the  narration  if  the  instructor  of  whom  he  speaks
could  confirm  his  story.  I  received  the  teacher's  attestation;
it  gave  me  an  impression  that  he  himself  had  seen  the  appari-
tion.

Here  is  another  communication,  sent  at  that  same  period:

Montbeliard,  March  26,  1899.
On  a  certain  evening  of  the  year  1888,  my  son-in-law,  who  was
living  in  Haute-Loire,  appeared  to  me.     It  was  about  eleven  o'clock,
and  I  was  thoroughly  awake.


154  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

On  the  following  day  I  learned  that  he  had  died  on  the  morning
of  the  previous  day,  at  eleven  o'clock.  It  is  noteworthy  that  I
had  no  reason  to  believe  him  ill,  and  that  he  died  suddenly.

I  shall  ask  you  to  give  only  my  initials,  if  you  publish  my  letter.

C.  H.

(Letter  210.)

It  should  be  pointed  out  that  this  apparition,  twelve  hours
after  death,  occurred  without  the  observer  knowing  of  the
death.

I  should  like  to  give  otnly  concise,  very  short  accounts,  of
the  sort  which  we  have  just  read,  that  I  might  offer  a  larger
number  of  them;  but  there  are  cases  in  which  details  are  in-
dispensable, such  as  the  following  one.

A  dead  woman  who  did  not  believe  that  she  was  dead,  an-
nounced her  death !  I  take  from  a  letter  sent  me  from  Cher-
bourg on  October  10,  1921,  the  following:

Madame  BouUier,  on  a  certain  night  (September  13-14,  1918)
thought  that  she  was  awake,  and  heard  some  one  calling  her  by
name.  Her  first  thought  was:  "Why,  I  was  asleep,  since  I  was
dreaming."  But  at  that  moment  she  heard  once  more:  "Madame
Boullier!"  Sure  of  being  awake  this  time,  she  looked  about  her
and  saw,  between  the  window  and  the  cupboard,  the  bust  of  a
woman  which  had  emerged  from  the  wall  and  was  speaking  to
her.  "Who  are  youf  she  demanded. — "You  don't  recognize  me?"
— "No." — "But  you  bought  fish  from  me  this  morning,  at  the  mar-
ket; I  am  Mother  Arondel." — "Oh,  indeed!  What  would  you  like?"
— "Why,  I  must  be  dead;  I  saw  my  body  stretched  out  on  the
ground  and  my  children  around  it,  crying.  I  tried  to  talk  to  them,
but  it  was  no  use;  they  didn't  hear  me." — "How  did  you  die?" —
"I  flew  into  a  temper  when  I  was  going  home,  and  then  fell  down.
I  saw  my  body  on  the  ground,  and  people  all  around  it ;  still,  I  'm
not  dead !"— "Well,  what  would  you  like?"— "You  must  go  and  tell
the  people  at  home  that  I'm  not  dead." — "No,  they  would  think
I  was  crazy;  I  can't  do  that.     Go  away,  my  good  woman."


ONE  TO  TWENTY-FOUR  HOURS  AFTER  DEATH     155

Then  the  apparition  vanished,  sliding  sideways  through  the  wall.

Early  the  next  morning  Madame  Boullier  went  to  call  on  one
of  her  neighbors,  Madame  Micheau,  and  told  her  of  the  apparition.
They  went  to  the  market  to  verify  the  happening.  A  bit  of  paper,
glued  to  her  stall,  announced  Mother  Arondel's  death,  and  the
other  venders  explained  that  she  had  died  suddenly,  as  soon  as
she  got  home.

Gaston  Thorin.

(Letter  4712.)

I  made  an  investigation  in  Cherbourg,  that  I  might  verify
these  statements,  and  I  wish  to  thank  the  writer  of  the  letter
for  his  care  in  making  the  inquiry.  Several  persons  took
part  in  it.  At  the  town  hall  the  record  of  births  and  deaths
gives,  as  the  date  of  death,  September  13,  1918,  at  one  o'clock
in  the  afternoon:  the  widow  Arondel,  born  on  February  22,
1846.  A  neighboring  fishwoman  stated  that  she  had  seen  her
at  noon,  on  the  day  of  her  death,  when  she  left  the  market,
and  had  learned  upon  her  own  return  at  two  o'clock  that
Mother  Arondel  had  died  suddenly  at  one.  The  attestations
are  all  the  more  convincing,  so  far  as  I  am  concerned,  from
the  fact  that  I  myself  was  in  Cherbourg  in  September,  1918.

In  this  case  we  must  remember  that  the  dead  woman  did
not  believe  that  she  was  dead ;  her  apparition  appeared  about
twelve  hours  after  death.

The  following  manifestation  proceeded,  plainly,  from  some
one  dead,  like  the  one  above,  and  not  from  some  one  living  or
dying.  A  young  man  died,  in  Paris,  on  January  8,  1908,  in
the  afternoon,  at  a  hospital.  His  grandmother,  who  lived
in  Vierzon,  had,  on  the  following  night,  a  nightmare  in  which
she  saw  the  face  of  her  grandson,  passing  and  repassing*
behind  the  window-panes,  and  gazing  at  her.  He  vanished,
and  she  saw  him  stretched  out  dead  upon  a  kind  of  slab.
The  vision  occurred  ten  or  twelve  hours  after  death.    Let


156  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

us  listen  to  an  account  of  the  happening;,  related  by  a  com-
petent judge.  I  am  taking  it  from  a  letter  written  by  Dr.
Fernand,  in  Vierzon:

You  are,  above  all,  seeking  facts.  Here  is  an  incident  which
chance  brought  to  my  notice;  it  will,  perhaps,  be  of  interest  to
you.

Let  me  tell  you,  first,  that  I  am  thirty-nine  years  old  and  that,
personally,  I  have  no  preestablished  convictions  as  to  any  phil-
osophic system.  But  I  am  of  the  opinion  that  we  do  not  know
all,  and  that  it  would  be  contrary  to  scientific  principles  to  deny
the  inexplicable.

As  a  physician,  I  have  under  my  care,  here  in  Vierzon,  Madame

X ,   who   is   about   seventy   years   old    (allow   me   to   omit   her

name).  She  is  most  intelligent,  and  is  nervous  to  the  point  of
having  been  neurotic  in  her  youth.  I  am  now  giving  her  treat-
ments for  attacks  of  asthma.

Upon  her  request,  her  daughter,  who  was  living  in  Paris,  had
come  to  live  with  her  in  December,  1907.

During  the  night  of  Wednesday  to  Thursday, — from  the  eighth
to  the  ninth  of  last  January, — about  two  o'clock  in  the  morning,
the  invalid  called  her  daughter  and  demanded  a  light,  saying:
"Light  the  lamp.  I  've  had  a  terrible  nightmare."  These  were
the  only  words  she  spoke.  The  following  Sunday,  she  said  to  her
daughter,  "You  can't  have  eaten  much  for  breakfast."  And,  after
her  daughter  had  shown  her  astonishment:  "You  can't  have  eaten
much,  for  you  are  suffering  a  gTeat  deal.  It's  useless  to  keep  it
secret:  your  son  is  dead.  The  other  night,  when  I  called  you,  I
had  seen  his  face;  it  passed  and  repassed  behind  the  window-
panes,  and  he  looked  at  me.  Next,  he  disappeared,  but  then
I  saw  Mm  lying  dead  on  a  sort  of  slab,  covered  with  a  gray
cloth."

The  invalid's  grandson  had  really  died  on  the  afternoon  of
Wednesday,  January  8th,  in  Paris,  in  a  hospital  where  he  had  been
treated  for  some  time  for  tuberculosis  of  the  lungs.

This  was  the  account  given  me,  in  the  first  instance,  immediately
after  the  happening,  then  subsequently  on  several  occasions,  at
intervals   some   time   apart.     The   story   was  related   both   by   the


ONE  TO  TWENTY-FOUR  HOURS  AFTER  DEATH     157

invalid  herself  and  her  daughter,  without  any  variations,  despite
my  discreet  but  searching  questions.

.If  I  may  be  permitted  a  few  more  words,  I  should  like  to  show
the  occurrence  in  all  its  extraordinary  aspects.

The  invalid's  daughter  was  not  informed  of  her  son's  death  until
Thursday  morning^  when  she  learned  of  it  through  a  telegram.
She  did  not  go  to  Paris  for  the  funeral  and  did  not  leave  her
mother:  there  was,  therefore,  no  absence  on  her  part  which  might
have  led  to  suspicion.  She  was  already  wearing  black,  and  did
not  change  her  clothing  to  go  into  mourning.

And,  lastly,  no  one  spoke,  in  the  invalid's  presence,  of  her  grand-
son; besides,  his  condition  had  seemed  unchanged  for  some  time:
the  announcement  of  his  death  was  almost  a  surprise.

Such  was  the  occurrence.  I  am  giving  you  a  dry  account  of  it,
as  I  would  of  an  observation  made  in  a  hospital,  without  relying
in  the  least  on  imagination.  Without  wishing  to  offer  an  explana-
tion, I  should  like  to  add  these  remarks:

(1)  The  apparition  corresponded  to  actual  reality.

(2)  The  description  given  by  the  grandmother  was  absolutely
exact.  When  a  death  occurs  in  a  hospital,  the  corpse  is  taken
into  a  room  where  autopsies  are  performed,  and  placed  on  a  long
narrow  table,  usually  zinc-covered,  "a  sort  of  slab."  The  descrip-
tion is  correct,  and  Madame  X did  not  know  of  this  particular

detail.

(3)  There  can  be  no  question,  under  the  circumstances,  of  telep-
athy from  one  brain  to  another:  the  apparition  occurred  after
the  young  man  had  actually  died.

(4)  It  would  seem  that  we  are  confronted  by  two  separate  phe-
nomena :

(a)  The  replica  of  a  dead  man  in  Paris  appeared  to  his  grand-
mother in  Vierzon.  (One  detail  deserves  to  be  noted:  the  appari-
tion did  not  enter  the  room,  but  remained  behind  the  window-
panes.)

(b)  The  grandmother's  consciousness  (she  was  alive)  seems,  after
that^  to  have  been  borne  from  Vierzon  to  Paris,  and  to  have  seen
the  corpse.

Dr.  Fern  and,
(Letter  1823.)  Vierzon,  Cher.


158  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

This  double  observation  is  so  deserving  of  wide  publicity
that  I  asked  the  doctor  if  it  would  be  indiscreet  to  publish  it.
Here  is  his  answer :

I  do  not  think  that  I  am  betraying  any  professional  secret,
since  I  am  not  giving  the  person's  name.  I  authorize  you,  there-
fore, to  make  whatever  use  you  wish  of  my  communication,  even
with  my  name:  I  have  no  respect  for  any  other  than  signed  ac-
counts.

I  consider  that  there  are  all  possible  guarantees  of  the  veracity
of  the  "observation"  which  I  have  told  you  of.  Were  the  contrary
true,  I  should  have  put  no  faith  in  it.  I  had  the  story  from  the
very  lips  of  my  patient  and  her  daughter.

These  two  persons  are  intelligent  and  well  educated.

What  shall  we  think?

The  phenomenon  occurred  ten  or  twelve  hours  after  the
death.  The  simple,  direct  interpretation  is  that  the  grand-
son, who  had  died,  thought  of  his  grandmother  and  manifested
himself  (1)  by  showing  himself  to  her;  (2)  by  causing  her  to
see  his  corpse.

We  may  seek  other  interpretations.  We  may  suppose  that
he  thought  of  her  before  his  death,  and  that  an  impression
made  by  this  thought  remained  latent  in  the  percipient's
mind  until  two  o'clock  in  the  morning.  But  this  is  more
complicated.

We  may  suppose,  also,  that  the  seer  of  the  vision,  bound
to  her  grandson  by  a  deep  affinity,  was  borne  to  him  in
spirit,  from  Vierzon  to  Paris.  This  is  all  very  well,  but  why,
then,  should  she  have  seen  him  behind  the  window?

Every  one  of  my  readers  is,  like  me,  free  to  seek  an  ex-
planation.

It  seems  to  me  that  for  the  moment  we  must  confine  our-
selves to  recording  occurrences,  above  all  when  their  truth  is
as  carefully  established  as  it  was  in  this  case.  Even  that  is
a  great  deal,  given  the  prevalent  idiotic  incredulity.


ONE  TO  TWENTY-FOUR  HOURS  AFTER  DEATH     159

Where  does  life  end  ?  Where  does  death  begin  ?  In  Chap-
ter X  of  Volume  II  (it  is  called  ''Between  Life  and  Death")
we  read  how  a  young  girl,  Mademoiselle  Noell,  summoned  her
brother  eighteen  hours  after  her  death.  To  quote  this  sum-
mons :  ' '  Louis,  what  are  you  doing  ?  Why  don 't  you  come  1 ' '
It  would  seem  that  she  uttered  this  just  as  she  was  dying,  be-
fore dissolution.  It  is  through  the  comparative  study  and
wise  discussion  of  observations  that  we  may  enlighten  our-
selves as  to  their  nature  and  their  psychological  meaning.
As  a  matter  of  fact,  an  account  of  a  similar,  very  curious
observation  was  sent  me,  which  it  will  be  interesting  to
analyze.  Its  authenticity  is  as  certain,  as  unquestionable  as
that  of  the  account  I  have  just  given.  Here  is  the  narra-
tion:

On  the  evening  of  Saturday,  May  28,  1921,  and  the  whole  of
Sunday  May  29th,  I  felt  unwell  without  any  apparent  cause.  I
was  so  tired  that  I  lay  down  for  part  of  the  afternoon.  It  was
as  if  I  had  a  weight  on  my  shoulders,  and  I  had  a  vague  impression
that  something  out  of  the  ordinary,  something  painful  was  about
to  happen.  The  evening  of  the  twenty-ninth,  I  went  to  bed  early,
and  as  soon  as  I  fell  asleep  I  began  to  dream.  This  lasted  all
night,  and  what  a  dream  it  was!  I  was  standing  near  one  of  my
friends,  a  woman  living  in  Versailles;  for  two  years  circumstances
had  prevented  my  seeing  her.  I  saw  her  most  distinctly,  lying
upon  her  bed,  with  the  bloodless  face  of  those  who  have  died
after  much  suffering.  She  stretched  out  her  arms  to  me,  wishing
to  kiss  me,  but  terror  nailed  me  to  the  spot,  and  I  made  no  move-
ment to  approach  her.  This  filled  her  poor  face  with  sadness.
The  appeals  which  she  made  for  me  to  kiss  her  and  her  efforts
to  draw  near  me  lasted  the  whole  night.  I  awakened  often,  and
each  time  I  went  to  sleep  again  the  dream  began  once  more.  It
was  a  real  struggle,  the  whole  night  long,  to  escape  from  this
nightmare,  to  such  an  extent  that  in  the  morning,  when  I  was
quite  tired  and  worn  out,  my  first  words  to  my  husband,  on  awak-
ening, were  an  account  of  this  painful  dream.  I  had  scarcely
finished  telling  him  of  it  when  the  door-bell  rang,  and  he  was  given


160  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

a  letter  with  a  black  border,  telling  of  my  poor  friend's  funeral;
her  death  had  occurred  on  the  evening  of  Saturday  the  twenty-
eighth,  at  nine  o'clock.

Greatly  disturbed  by  all  this,  I  went  to  Versailles  on  Tuesday,
the  day  of  her  funeral.  When  I  got  there,  three  of  her  friends,
who  had  been  with  her  during  her  last  moments,  said  to  me,  "Is
that  you,  Madame  David  f" — "Yes,"  I  answered. — "Well,  our  dear
friend  asked  for  you  on  Saturday  night  before  she  died;  she  asked
several  times,  and  repeated  your  name  insistently!"

Then  I  remembered  the  whole  of  my  dream.  It  had  really  been
an  appeal  from  my  poor  friend;  she  had  come  to  look  for  me,
not  at  once  but  twentj^-four  hours  afterward.  Perhaps  the  uneas-
iness which  I  had  felt  on  Saturday  evening  was  an  unconscious
recording  of  her  thought,  which  was  seeking  to  stamp  itself  upon
my  mind.

L.  David,
149  rue  de  Rennes,  Paris.

(Letter  4669.)

This  precise  aceount  is  highly  interesting.  The  dying
woman  thought  v^ith  intensity  of  her  friend  Madame  David
before  she  died  on  the  evening  of  Saturday,  May  28th.  That
evening  and  the  whole  of  the  next  day  Madame  David  felt
unwell  and  in  pain.  The  night  of  Sunday,  the  twentj^-ninth,
to  Monday,  the  thirtieth,  a  terrible  nightmare  showed  her
this  person,  in  the  guise  of  a  living  corpse ;  she  had  not  seen
her  for  two  years.  Madame  Denis  had  breathed  her  last  on
Saturday,  the  twenty-eight,  and  she  was  buried  on  Tuesday.
Is  there  not  unquestionable  evidence  in  favor  of  a  telepathic
transmission  from  Madame  Denis  to  Madame  David,  which  be-
gan at  the  hour  of  death  and  was  continued  the  following
day?  Is  not  the  hypothesis  of  chance  coincidence  utterly
improbable?

When  I  made  my  methodical  investigation,  Monsieur  David
(who  is  a  state  official)  was  kind  enough  to  give  me  complete
confirmation  of  all  the  details  set  forth  above.


ONE  TO  TWENTY-FOUR  HOURS  AFTER  DEATH    161

There  is  no  question  that  this  was  a  case  of  telepathic  trans-
mission— transmission  that  was   continued  after  death.

The  following  occurrence  did  not  have  this  somber  aspect.

We  shall  now  have  an  account  of  a  curious,  amusing,  and
ingenuous  apparition.  A  little  girl  appeared  to  a  little  boy
eighteen  hours  after  she  had  died;  he  did  not  know  of  her
death.  The  occurrence  is  of  special  interest  to  us,  for  it
was  certainly  an  unusual  one.  I  owe  my  knowledge  of  it  to
an  observer  with  whom  my  readers  are  already  familiar  ^ ;
she  and  her  husband  were  good  enough  to  make  a  careful,
special  investigation  of  this  particular  case,  which  deserves
our  undivided  attention.  The  letter  which  informed  me  of
the  incident  is  worthy  of  being  given  word  for  word.  It  was
written  before  the  letter  which  we  read  in  Volume  IT.  Here
it  is:

Paris,  Sunday,  November  30,  1917.

Pardon  me.  Master,  if  I  monopolize  your  attention  for  a  few
minutes,  to  tell  you  of  something  which  happened  recently  in  my
home.  You  must  forgive  me  because  of  my  humble  desire  to
bring  to  your  notice  a  bit  of  testimony.  This,  added  to  the  thou-
sands of  other  narrations  of  this  sort  already  in  your  possession,
will  add  to  the  information  at  your  disposal,  and  aid  in  the
triumph  of  Truth.

One  night,  about  two  o'clock  in  the  morning,  my  husband  and  I
were  awakened  by  our  little  boy  Fernand,  aged  six  and  a  half;
he  was  calling  to  me.  Since  I  was  half  asleep  at  that  moment
and  thought  that  he  was  dreaming,  I  told  him  to  go  to  sleep
again;  then  there  was  silence  once  more.

The  next  morning  the  child  came  into  our  room,  as  he  usually
did,  to  kiss  us  good  morning.  Then  I  asked  him  why  he  had  been
so  disturbed  in  the  night — what  dream  he  had  had.  And  here,
without  my  changing  a  word,  is  the  dialogue  which  took  place
between  us:

"Why  did  you  call  me  last  night  f

"I  was  afraid,  Mamma."

^  At  the  Moment  of  Death,  p.  134:  a  manifestation  before  death.


162  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

"Afraid?    Why,  my  dear?"

"A  little  girl  was  sitting  at  the  foot  of  my  bed."

"A  little  girl!     Tell  me  about  it."

"A  little  girl  with  a  doll  in  her  arms.  She  was  rocking  it,  and
in  front  of  her  on  the  table  [I  must  add  that  our  child  sleeps  in
the  dining-room,  in  a  little  iron  bed,  and  that  the  table  touches
his  bed]  was  a  little  basin,  with  a  sponge;  she  was  washing  her
doll's  face."     He  gave  me  an  imitation:     "Just  like  that."

"Ah,"  I  said,  "you  were  dreaming,  my  dear."

"No,  Mamma,  I  wasn't  dreaming,  because  I  did  this  to  see  if
I  was  asleep  [he  then  made  a  comical  movement;  with  his  little
fingers  he  lifted  one  of  his  eyelids] ;  my  eye  was  open,  I  could
feel  that  it  was,  and  to  make  sure  that  I  wasn't  asleep  I  shook
my  bed,  too,  and  it  went  click-clack.  Then  the  little  girl  got  up
and  walked  on  my  bed,  coming  toward  me.  I  was  afraid;  I  called
you  and  hid  under  the  covers  for  a  few  minutes.  Afterward  I
put  my  head  out  and  there  was  nothing  there  any  more."

"Ah!"  I  said,  and  looked  at  my  husband.

"What  was  it?  Tell  me,  little  mother,"  my  boy  said,  still  fright-
ened.

"It  was  doubtless  your  guardian  angel,  my  dear;  he  came  to  see
if  you  were  good."

Completely  reassured  and  full  of  enthusiasm,  the  child  then  asked
me  if  he  would  come  back,  and  added:  "How  pretty  my  guardian
angel  was!  He  was  dressed  like  a  little  girl  and  had  beautiful
curls."

Then  I  sent  the  little  boy  into  the  adjoining  room.  When  we
were  alone,  my  husband  and  I  looked  at  each  other,  though  we
were  not  much  surprised.  We  had  both  been  witnesses  of  an  oc-
currence of  this  nature  when  my  father-in-law  died.

"That  little  girl,"  we  thought,  "has  died.  We  're  going  to  learn
something."

In  the  afternoon  I  had  some  errands  to  do.  I  met  a  woman
whom  I  had  not  seen  for  about  ten  days.  Since  her  little  girl  had
been  unwell,  I  asked  her  for  news  of  her  child,  and  the  happy
mother  gave  me  very  good  news.  At  that  moment  another  woman
came  up,  a  friend  of  the  first,  whom  I  scarcely  knew.  Out  of
consideration  I  was  about  to  move  away,  when  I  heard  this  person


ONE  TO  TWENTY-FOUR  HOURS  AFTER  DEATH     163

say:  "Just  think  of  it!  What  a  terrible  misfortune!  Such  a
beautiful  child!"  Puzzled,  I  drew  near  her  involuntarily,  moved
by  I  know  not  what  curiosity,  and  asked  whom  they  were  speak-
ing of.  I  learned  in  this  way  that  the  little  daughter  of  the  con-
cierge of  the  first  woman  to  whom  I  had  spoken  had  died  the  day
before  of  cerebro-spinal  meningitis,  which  had  carried  the  child
off  in  forty-eight  hours.

I  wish  to  tell  you  again,  Master,  that  I  had  not  seen  this  person
for  about  ten  days^  and  that  she  alone  could  have  told  me  of  this
little  girl's  illness.

The  mystery  was  then  explained.  The  little  girl  was  a  playmate
of  my  child,  and  many  a  time  that  summer  these  two  children,
who  were  the  same  age,  had  played  together.  Since  winter  weather
had  begun,  they  no  longer  saw  each  other.  The  darling  loved  to
play  with  dolls,  like  so  many  other  little  mothers  of  the  future,
and  she  loved  above  all  to  dress  and  wash  her  baby;  and  it  was
in  this  way  that  the  little  angel,  to  insure  recognition,  came  to
say  good-by  to  her  small  friend  Fernand.

Returning  home,  I  told  my  husband  this  news,  and  asked  my
child  if  he  had  been  able  to  recognize  the  little  girl's  face.  I  give
his  own  words  again :

"Her  face  seemed  to  have  a  veil  over  it,  I  couldn't  see  it  well;
it  seemed  as  if  she  had  a  piece  of  muslin  over  it.  She  was  all
white;  her  dress,  her  hair,  everything  about  her  was  white."

That,  Master,  was  the  occurrence  in  all  its  simplicity;  a  little
child  was  the  truthful  and  innocent  witness  of  it.

I  shall  ask  you  to  pardon  the  simplicity  of  this  poor  letter,  which
(I  dare  not  hope  for  anything  else)  will  doubtless  remain  unan-
swered. My  only  excuse  for  writing  it  is,  I  repeat,  the  fact  that
It  is  absolutely  sincere.

Believe  me,  dear  Master,  you  have  our  deep  and  respectful  ad-
miration.

F.  Gayraud,

(Letter  3995.)  5  rue  Nobel,  Paris.

After  receiving  this  letter,  I  wrote  the  sender  of  it,  follow-
ing my  usual  custom  of  making  an  analytical  investigation.
The  narrator  is  the  wife  of  Monsieur  Paul  Gayraud,  a


164  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

pianist,  who  won  first  prize  at  the  Conservatory.  Both  of
them  were  kind  enough  to  place  themselves  at  my  disposal,
in  order  to  bring  the  inquiry  to  a  successful  conclusion.
This  is  what  the  investigation  brought  out :
It  was  on  Wednesday,  November  21,  1917,  at  eight  o'clock
in  the  morning,  that  the  little  girl  died:  Emilienne  Blin,
117  rue  Caulaincourt.  And  it  was  on  Thursday,  November
22d,  at  two  o'clock  in  the  morning — that  is  to  say  eighteen
hours  afterward — that  little  Fernand  Gayraud  saw  her  on
his  bed,  at  a  time  when  her  death  was  known  neither  to  him
nor  to  his  parents.     The  two  children  were  playmates..

ATTESTATIONS

Paris,  January  11,  1918.

I  hereby  certify,  Master,  that  the  facts  given  by  my  wife  are
stated  with  the  most  rigorous  exactitude.

I  wish  to  state  that  when  I  went  home  at  noon,  on  Thursday
November  22,  1917,  my  wife  said  to  me:  "I  have  the  explanation
of  last  night^s  phenomenon.  You  know  little  Emilienne,  that  child
who  used  to  play  so  often  with  Fernand  last  summer?"

"Yes,"  I  said.

"She 's  dead."

"Really!     When  did  it  happen?"

"Yesterday.  You  see,  she  was  really  dead  when  she  appeared
that  night."

"Yes,"  I  said,  "and  that  gives  us  a  great  deal  to  think  about."

Paul  Gayraud.

We,  the  undersigned,  certify  that  Monsieur  and  Madame  Paul
Gayraud  told  us  the  story  of  the  apparition  which  their  little
boy  Fernand  witnessed,  during  the  night  of  November  21-22,  1917,
— an  occurrence  that  followed  the  death  of  one  of  the  child's  play-
mates, which  had  taken  place  on  the  day  before  and  which  was
unknown  to  them.

Em.  Boulanger,  E.  Prud'homme,  M.  Forcin,

18  r.  Saint-Jean,  10  r.  Custine.  72  r.  Lamarck.


ONE  TO  TWENTY-FOUR  HOURS  AFTER  DEATH    165

The  inquiry  made  at  the  town  hall,  apart  from  the  pre-
ceding communications,  brought  out  the  fact  that  the  little
girl  in  question  was  Emilienne  Blin,  117  rue  Caulaincourt,
who  died  on  Wednesday,  November  21st,  at  eight  o'clock  in
the  morning.

There  is  no  doubt,  therefore,  that  eighteen  hours  after  her
death  she  appeared  to  Fernand,  her  little  playmate.  What
was  the  nature  of  the  apparition  ?  She  did  not  go  to  him,  sit
down  at  the  foot  of  the  bed,  and  wash  her  doll's  face.  But
she  influenced  the  little  boy's  mind.  How  did  she  do  this?
Did  she  think  of  him  when  she  was  dying,  and  did  her  image
reach  the  child's  brain  and  remain  latent  there  for  eighteen
hours?  This  is  a  defensible  hypothesis,  but  one  that  has
not  been  proved.  It  would  seem  more  probable  that  the
influence  was  exerted  after  death ;  that  it  was  a  communication
from  mind  to  mind  which  took  the  usual  form  of  an  image
of  the  little  girl.

Let  us  repeat,  for  the  hundredth  time,  that  the  impossibility
of  explaining  a  thing  does  not  in  the  least  lessen  its  reality.

There  is  a  considerable  number,  relatively,  of  manifestations
of  the  dead  on  the  first  day  of  their  life  after  death.  They
alone  would  suffice  to  make  up  a  volume  such  as  this  one.
I  can  give  merely  the  outstanding  ones,  and  my  only  regret
is  that  I  must  omit  too  many.  For  example,  I  should  regret
not  to  tell  here  how  Madame  Juliette  Adam,  so  well  known
and  so  esteemed  by  all  French  people  ^  (she  is  the  charming
author  of  "Payenne" — "Pagan"),  came  to  write  ''Chre-
tienne" — '^ Christian" — through  being  converted  by  a  mani-
festation on  the  part  of  Madame  Blavatsky  on  the  very  day
of  the  latter 's  death  (May  8,  1891).  I  numbered  among  my
acquaintances  the  Duchess  of  Pomar,  at  whose  home  I  gave
some  lectures,  as  did  our  friend  A.  de  Rochas.     She  threw

iMy  readers  are  already  familiar  with  an  observation  made  by  her
in  1898    {L'Inconnu,  p.  187).


166  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

herself  into  spiritualistic  experiments  with  a  certain  fervent
enthusiasm.     But  let  us  listen  to  Madame  Adam:

I  had  a  habit  of  never  going  out  in  the  evening  without  glanc-
ing rapidly  through  the  latest  news  in  the  "Temps."  Well,  when
I  had  opened  that  newspaper  on  one  occasion,  before  going  to  the
home  of  the  Duchess  of  Pomar  (she  had  promised  to  introduce  us
to  an  astonishing  medium)  I  was  struck  to  see  an  announcement
of  Madame  Blavatsky^s  death;  it  seemed  to  me  to  be  printed  in
huge  letters.  I  attached  no  further  importance  to  it,  and  went  on
to  the  evening  meeting.

We  began  the  seance;  one  of  those  present  called  off  the  letters
of  the  alphabet.  There  was  a  rapping,  and  the  name  rapped  out
was  Blavatsky.

"That 's  impossible,"  cried  the  duchess.  "I  left  her  only  three
days  ago!"

I  remained  silent;  the  medium  insisted  that  the  communication
had  been  authentic.  Madame  Blavatsky  returned,  and  dictated:
"I  am  dead;  I  left  a  will  with  Colonel  Olcott,  in  which  I  ask  to
be  cremated.  Cremation,  as  it  is  practised  in  India,  in  the  open
air,  is  in  conformity  with  religious  precepts,  but  it  is  done  in  an
oven  here,  and  means  a  loss  of  one's  psychic  personality.  I  implore
you  to  write  to  Colonel  Olcott  not  to  have  me  cremated,  though
I  have  a  presentiment  that  you  will  not  succeed.  However,  I  was
determined  to  tell  you  this,  in  order  that  I  might  save  a  soul:  that
of  Madame  Adam;  fifteen  days  ago  she  made  a  will  in  which  she,
too,  asked  to  be  cremated.

And  was  this  true?

Absolutely,  though  none  of  the  persons  present  could  be  aware
of  the  circumstance.

Madame  Blavatsky  was  cremated  in  London,  where  she
died.  There  is,  in  the  preceding  statement,  a  curious  con-
fusion between  the  soul  and  the  fluid  body.

The  Duchess  of  Pomar,  whom  all  occultists  knew,  lost  the
sense  of  direction  requisite  in  following  the  path  of  this  re-
search.    She  believed  that  she  was  the  reincarnation  of  Mary


ONE  TO  TWENTY-FOUR  HOURS  AFTER  DEATH     167

Stuart,  and  nevertheless  used  to  invoke  the  unfortunate
Scotch  queen's  spirit!  We  have  not  the  space  in  which  to
wander  amidst  these  memories,  and  our  next  chapter  urgently
demands  our  attention.  It  will  be  a  continuation  of  the
present  one,  and  will  be  given  over  to  manifestations  observed
from  one  day  to  one  week  after  death.

It  would  seem  to  me  that  in  the  face  of  the  occurrences  of
which  we  have  just  read,  no  impartial  reader  can  remain  in-
different or  undecided.


VI


MANIFESTATIONS   AND   APPARITIONS  FROM   ONE  DAY   TO
ONE   WEEK   AFTER   DEATH

Death   dominates   all  of   the  living.

AUGUSTE     COMTE.

LET  US  continue  to  investigate  posthumous  manifesta-
tions, classifying  them  as  we  have  done  heretofore.
Let  us  consider  those  which  occurred  the  first  week
after  death,  from  one  to  eight  days.  Like  the  preceding
ones,  they  are  very  numerous.

The  author  of  that  great  work,  well  known  to  my  readers,
''Phantasms  of  the  Living,"  states,  after  patient  and  long-
continued  research,  that  the  interval  between  the  sending
of  a  psychic  message  and  the  time  that  it  is  received  would
appear  never  to  exceed  twelve  hours.  This  would  lead  us  to
conclude  that  the  apparitions  and  manifestations  observed
after  that  length  of  time  are  not  delayed  communications
from  the  living,  but  are  caused  by  the  dead.  This  is  true
of  all  the  accounts  which  are  to  follow.

We  are  now  about  to  read  of  the  apparition  of  a  dead
woman  seen  by  two  persons  on  the  day  after  her  death.  I
am  taking  the  following  account  from  a  letter  sent  me  from
Italy  on  July  16,  1899 :

In  an  article  in  the  newspaper  "La  Stampa,"  dealing  with  the
investigations  which  you  are  making  public,  I  read  that  you  would
be  happy  to  learn  of  occurrences  similar  to  those  which  you  are
studying,  and  I  feel  that  it  is  my  duty  to  tell  you  of  the  following'
one.     It  is  absolutely  authentic.

One  evening,  about  nine  o'clock,  every  one  in  the  house  was  still

168


ONE  DAY  TO  ONE  WEEK  AFTER  DEATH       169

up  and  about.  When  my  sister,  aged  seventeen,  was  walking
through  a  hall  of  the  apartment,  she  was  stupefied  to  see  a  tall,
beautiful  girl  standing  near  her  under  the  lighted  gas-jet.  She
did  not  know  this  girl,  who  was  dressed  in  the  costume  of  a  peas-
ant. Astounded,  she  uttered  a  cry,  and  the  phantom  vanished.
She  wept  with  fright,  and  my  mother  scolded  her.  Next  morning,
the  cook,  a  girl  of  about  twenty-five,  came  to  my  mother  and  told
her  that  that  evening,  when  she  had  got  into  bed,  she  had  heard
a  sound  of  breathing,  and  felt  on  her  face  something  that  was
like  a  breath;  that  when  she  had  opened  her  eyes  she  had  seen,
standing  near  her  bed,  one  of  her  friends  whom  she  had  known
in  her  native  place:  a  tall,  beautiful  girl  dressed  in  peasant  cos-
tume. "That  beautiful  girl,"  said  the  cook,  "was  in  the  habit  of
behaving  badly;  I  often  gave  her  good  advice,  but  it  didn't  have
any  effect."     She  had  died  on  the  previous  day.

Countess  Amelie  Caeandini,
Parella,  Province  of  Turin.
(Letter  751.)

People  believe  that  they  can  find  a  way  out  by  calling  such
visions  causeless  hallucinations.  But  in  this  case  there  were
two  independent  manifestations.  The  numerous,  successive
pictures  which  our  inquiry  reveals  show  that  we  can  no  longer
be  content  with  this  childish  explanation.

In  1915  Jules  Lermina,  the  writer,  sent  me  the  following
account.  It  had  been  sent  to  him  from  Brussels  by  a  lady
to  whose  family  he  was  related.

I  saw  one  of  my  relatives  on  April  4,  1878,  and  spoke  to  him,
though  he  had  died  in  an  accident  the  day  before;  I  did  not  know
of  Ms  death.  The  incident  was  odd  enough  for  me  to  recount  it
as  faithfully  as  possible.

Absolutely  contrary  to  my  habit,  I  had  left  the  table  during
dinner — that  is  to  say  about  half-past  six  in  the  evening — to  go
into  the  kitchen  to  get  something  or  other  which  the  servant  had
forgotten.  When  I  was  bending  down  in  front  of  a  cupboard
where  china  was  kept,   and  had  put  out  my  hand  to  take  up  a


170  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

dish  for  stewed  fruit  which  was  not  in  its  proper  place  on  the
shelf,  I  was  called  by  name  and  recognized  my  cousin's  voice.  I
lifted  my  eyes  toward  the  window  of  the  kitchen  (it  was  partially
underground)  and  did  actually  see  my  cousin,  bending  down  to  the
window.  He  nodded  and  said  several  times,  "Good-day,  Louie."
He  usually  said  this  when  he  saw  me.  "Good-day,  Wenand,"  I
answered.  Springing  up,  I  left  in  the  cupboard  the  thing  I  had
come  for.  I  went  upstairs  to  the  ground  floor  and  myself  opened
the  street  door,  but  there  was  no  one  there.

My  father,  who  was  in  the  dining-room,  was  astonished  to  hear
the  door  opened,  though  no  one  had  rung  the  bell.  He  left  the
room  and  went  into  the  hallway  to  see  what  was  going  on.  I
explained  to  him  that  my  cousin  had  arrived,  and  even  added  that
he  was  doubtless  hiding,  to  tease  me.  But  my  father  answered:
''It's  impossible  for  Wenand  to  be  here!  He  died  yesterday.  I
did  n't  want  to  tell  you."

In  short,  I  saw  a  person  who  had  been  dead  for  twenty-four
hours,  and  spoke  to  him.  I  was  neither  depressed  nor  ill  when
I  had  this  vision;  I  had  not  a  trace  of  fever.

Lermina,  extremely  v^^ell  versed  in  this  sort  of  happenings,
classified  the  experience  as  v^e  have  classified  all  those  of  the
kind  with  which  we  are  familiar.  There  were  in  this  case
two  phenomena:  the  dead  person's  words  and  the  apparition.
Here  is  something  still  more  remarkable.  A  murdered  man
appeared  to  his  wife  and  to  his  mother,  and  told  of  a  physical
peculiarity  of  the  assassin.^

Count  Ubaldo  Beni  had  been  living  for  some  months  in  the  lit-
tle commune  of  Pietra  Montecorvino,  as  manager  of  the  smelting-
works.

In  this  work  Count  Beni  employed  young  Garibaldi  Veneziani,
the  son  of  the  station-master  in  Lucera.  It  was  the  young  man's
duty  to  take  charge  of  the  sums  of  money  which  reached  the  rail-
way station,  destined  for  the  company.     That  he  might  do  this,

1  See  Anrvales  des  Sciences  psychiques,  1919,  p.  67.


ONE  DAY  TO  ONE  WEEK  AFTER  DEATH      171

Count  Beni  gave  him  receipts  with  the  space  for  the  signature
left  blank.

In  the  month  of  May,  1916,  Veneziani  kept  nine  hundred  francs
out  of  the  twelve  hundred  which  he  had  received  in  Count  Beni's
name.  It  was  not  long  before  the  latter  learned  of  this  fraudulent
appropriation,  and  there  followed  lively  scenes  between  the  man-
ager and  the  faithless  employee.

After  this  incident  Count  Beni  distrusted  his  subordinate.  The
latter,  knowing  that  the  count  intended  to  give  up  the  manager-
ship, wished  to  succeed  him.  He  was  able  to  arrange  things  so
cleverly  that  during  the  latter  half  of  August,  two  days  before
the  manager  left,  he  was  put  in  his  place,  provisionally.  Unfor-
tunately for  Veneziani,  the  count,  before  leaving,  stopped  at  the
Lucera  station  and  took  the  opportunity  to  look  over  his  succes-
sor's books.

On  August  24,  1916,  Count  Beni  went  to  Lucera  to  sell  a  horse.
About  eight  o'clock  in  the  evening  he  left  in  a  cabriolet,  to  go
back  to  Pietra  Monteeorvino.  He  was  accompanied  by  Veneziani,
who  rode  beside  his  vehicle  on  a  bicycle,  along  a  part  of  the  road,
and  then  turned  back  to  go  to  Lucera.

Th€  morning  of  the  next  day,  passers-by  found  the  count's  body
covered  with  wounds,  on  the  road  from  Lucera  to  Pietra,  near  a
little  wood.  He  had,  still  on  him,  his  watch,  hanging  by  its  chain,
and  his  pocket-book  containing  twenty  lira.

The  spot  in  which  the  body  was  found  was  only  some  hundreds
of  meters  away  from  the  point  where  Veneziani  declared  that  he
had  left  his  companion  and  gone  back  to  Lucera.  It  was  not  long
before  suspicion  attached  to  the  employee,  and  an  investigation
brought  out  the  fact  that  he  had  cashed  various  money-orders,
amounting  in  all  to  sixteen  hundred  lira,  and  said  not  a  word
about  it.  At  first  he  denied  the  embezzlement.  They  put  the
post-of&ee  receipts  before  him;  confronted  by  the  evidence,  he  was
obliged  to  confess  that  he  had  taken  the  money  and  kept  it,  while
pretending  to  have  given  it  to  the  count  some  days  before  his
death.

Veneziani  was  arrested,  charged  with  homicide  and  embezzle-
ment of  funds.     The  legal  inquiry  was  nearing  its  end,  when  the


172  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

presiding  magistrate  received  from  the  commissary  of  police  in
Spoleto,  Umbria  (where  the  members  of  the  Beni  family  lived),
a  note  and  two  letters,  one  from  Countess  Anne  Beni-Gasparini,
the  widow,  and  the  other  from  Countess  Catherine  Beni,  the  vic-
tim's mother.     Here  are  these  two  documents:

"I  hereby  declare  that  on  the  night  of  the  twenty-fourth  of  this
month,  when  I  was  anxiously  awaiting  Ubaldo's  return,  I  saw
my  husband  before  me.  He  said:  'Look!  The  reins  of  my  horse
have  been  taken  from  my  hands.  Look  for  the  traitor.  The  guilty
man  has  a  spot  on  his  eyeball.*  On  the  morning  of  the  next  day
I  spoke  of  the  vision  to  Signora  Philomene  Ramponi,  in  Pietra
Montecorvino ;  I  also  told  Prince  Strozzi,  of  Florence,  about  it.

"Anne  Beni."

"On  the  night  of  the  twenty-sixth  of  this  month  I  am  certain
that  I  saw,  enacted  before  my  very  eyes,  the  crime  which  meant
the  death  of  my  poor  son  Ubaldo.  It  seemed  to  me  that  I  saw
him  approaching  in  his  cabriolet,  on  a  deserted  road;  then  he  was
attacked.  The  assailant  was  peculiarly  marked;  he  had  a  spot  on
his  eyeball.  My  poor  son,  who  fell  to  the  road,  made  a  slight
movement.     Then  the  assassin  fled  precipitately.

"Catherine  Beni.'*

In  short.  Countess  Beni-Gasparini  and  the  countess  mother  saw
the  same  vision,  with  the  characteristic  detail  of  the  spot  upon
the  eyeball.  The  first  saw  the  vision  the  day  after  the  crime,  the
second  two  days  afterward,  at  a  time  when  she  did  not  yet  know
all  the  details  of  the  drama.

When  v^e  try  to  account  for  the  nature  of  the  phenomenon,
we  may  think  at  first  that  we  have  a  case  of  double  telepathy,
in  which  Count  Beni  was  the  ''agent"  at  the  moment  when
he  was  assassinated,  and  thought  of  his  wife.  But  it  is  diffi-
cult to  admit  that  this  hypothesis  would  cover  the  countess
mother's  vision;  she  had  it  two  days  after  the  crime,  which
had  been  committed  five  hundred  kilometers  away.

"We  may  also  suppose  that  after  the  widow  saw  the  vision
in  Lucera,  she  transmitted  it,  by  means  of  telepathy,  to  her
mother-in-law  in  Spoleto.    But  how  complicated  that  is !


ONE  DAY  TO  ONE  WEEK  AFTER  DEATH       173

Since  the  countess  mother's  vision  occurred  two  days  after
the  crime,  it  was  a  post-mortem  manifestation  on  the  part  of
the  victim.  The  dead  man,  as  though  to  prove  the  assassin's
identity  indirectly,  furnished  a  detail  unknown  to  the  per-
cipient and  those  with  her,  the  spot  upon  the  eyeball.  If
he  had  restricted  himself  to  giving  the  assassin's  name,  the
proof  would  have  been  debatable,  since  public  opinion  had
already  selected  Veneziani  as  the  guilty  man.^

In  making  my  usual  investigation  I  had  recourse  to  a  native
of  Lucera — my  learned  friend  Dr.  Lastaria,  a  member  of  the
Astronomical  Society  of  France.  He  had  completely  verified
the  accounts  of  the  various  phases  of  the  drama,  and  sent  me
the  attorney  generaVs  declaration.  (Letter  4732.)  It  would
be  out  of  place  here,  it  seems  to  me,  to  publish  all  the  attesta-
tions. I  think  after  so  many  cases,  so  completely  in  agree^
ment,  my  readers  are  well  enough  informed  not  to  wish  for
useless  phrases.

We  are  always  trying  to  explain  such  occurrences  by
attributing  them  to  human  faculties;  but  there  are  cases  in
which  the  explanation  is  (unacceptable.  Monsieur  Bieni's
wife  and  his  mother  saw  the  crime.  Let  us  admit  that  there
was  thought-transmission  from  the  count  to  his  wife  and  his
mother.  But  what  shall  we  make  of  the  fact  that  two  days
after  the  crime  the  victim  spoke  of  the  spot  on  Veneziani 's.
eyeball  ?

We  gave  on  page  70  an  example  of  manifestations  follow-
ing previous  promises.  This  was  the  case  of  Monsieur
Stepanow:  a  window  was  broken  and  a  clock  made  to  strike
more  slowly.  We  asked  ourselves  whether  these  were  not
mere  fortuitous  coincidences,  and  how  much  could  be  attrib-
uted to  chance.     Let  us  always  be  on  our  guard  against  illu-

1  G.  Veneziani  was  condemned,  by  the  Court  of  Assize,  to  twenty-one
years  of  imprisonment.  His  appeal  to  the  Court  of  Cassation  was  re-
jected.


174  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

sions !  Plainly  the  narrator  was  sufficiently  impressed  by  the
manifestation  to  have  described  it  in  the  words  which  we  read.
If  father  and  son  had  previously  designated  the  window  and
the  clock,  chance  could  not  have  played  any  great  part.  All
the  occurrences  set  down  here  are  scrutinized  with  the  great-
est care.

We  are  making  our  investigation  in  a  painstaking,  critical
spirit.  In  regard  to  this  scientific  discussion,  I  should  like
to  warn  my  readers  against  certain  statements  which  the
newspapers  often  put  into  my  mouth.  I  shall  ask  them  to
consider  authentic  only  those  statements  signed  by  me,  and
not  those  which  may  be  attributed  to  me.

An  account  of  the  following  manifestation  on  the  part  of
some  one  dead  was  sent  me  from  Florence  on  November  9,
1920,  by  Madame  J.  de  Vasconcellos :

On  January  15,  1915,  at  ten  minutes  to  three  in  the  morning,
I  lost  my  brother,  aged  forty-one.  His  was  a  master  mind,  be-
cause of  his  great  intelligence,  and  he  was  a  confirmed  idealist.
His  ilhiess  lasted  twenty  years!  He  had  lung  trouble;  his  heart
weakened,  and  he  passed  away  suddenly.  During  the  last  months
of  his  illness  he  often  discussed  the  question  of  immortality;  he
believed  in  a  future  life  rather  by  reason  of  that  instinct  inherent
in  every  superior  nature  than  because  of  any  rehgious  conviction.

During  the  night  of  the  second  day  after  his  death,  at  an  hour
corresponding  to  that  of  his  demise — ten  minutes  to  three  in  the
morning — I  was  awakened  by  a  loud  noise  near  my  bed.  The  room
was  lighted  by  electricity,  and  the  noise  came  from  the  combination
washstand  and  chest  of  drawers  a  meter  from  my  bed.  It  was
one  of  the  handles  of  the  chest  of  drawers  which  was  striking
distinct  and  very  loud  blows!  I  did  not  have  the  courage  to  look
at  once  in  the  direction  of  these  blows.  After  a  few  minutes  they
began  again.  I  turned  my  head,  very  much  agitated.  The  blows
ceased,  but  I  no  longer  had  the  courage  to  keep  on  looking,  and
turned  over  on  my  back  once  more.  Several  times  there  was  a
repetition  of  the  blows,  and  immediately,  emanating  from  this  part


ONE  DAY  TO  ONE  WEEK  AFTER  DEATH      175

of  the  chest  of  drawers,  a  fluid  in  violent  motion  (I  shall  never
forget  the  strange  sound  it  made)  passed  over  the  whole  of  my
bed,  and  flowed  to  the  end  of  the  room.  When  this  strong  current
was  flowing  by  (I  cannot  describe  it,  since  it  was  not  of  the
nature  of  air)  I  had  the  impression  that  my  bed  was  about  to
fall  to  pieces;  the  continuous  cracking  noises  were  so  loud  and
so  violent  that  a  Belgian  lady  and  gentleman  who  were  in  the
room  next  mine  were  awakened,  and  I  heard  them  cry  out,  "What 's
that?"  The  current  passed  over  my  bed  a  second  time,  moving
in  the  direction  of  the  chest  of  drawers,  and  once  more  one  of
the  handles  struck,  clearly,  several  loud  blows,  as  though  it  had
been  seized  by  an  invisible  hand.  I  could  not  go  to  sleep  again.
In  the  morning  my  chambermaid,  before  I  had  spoken  to  her  of
the  phenomenon,  told  me  that  about  three  o'clock  some  one  had
tried  to  open  her  door;  that  she  had  lighted  the  light  and  asked
who  was  there,  but  had  received  no  reply.  I  do  not  doubt  that
it  was  my  brother's  spirit  seeking  to  manifest  itself;  wishing  to
give  me  a  proof  of  survival.

J.    DE    VaSCONCELLOS.

(Letter  4306.)

What  a  prodigious  variety  there  is  in  all  these  happenings !
And  people  claim  to  knov^  the  laws  of  nature !  The  dis-
turbances, which  seem  to  be  electrical,  astonish  us  by  their
trivial  nature.  But  we  should  try  to  find  out  how  spirits
may  draw  attention  to  themselves;  the  means  at  their  dis-
posal are  not,  perhaps,  numerous.

The  foregoing  manifestation  was  observed  two  days  after
dissolution.  I  have  before  me  a  great  number  following,  like
it,  almost  immediately  after  death.  Such  is,  among  others,
the  strange  statement  which  I  shall  now  give ;  it  was  sent  me
at  the  period  of  my  general  inquiry  (1899)  :

A  friend  of  my  father  had  just  died.  The  evening  of  the  funeral,
my  father,  my  mother,  myself,  and  two  of  the  younger  children
(the  youngest  of  us  was  at  least  fifteen)  were  gathered  together
for  the  evening  meal.     We  were  talking  of  the  friend  who  was


176  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

gone,  when  we  heard  a  strange  and  very  loud  noise,  which  seemed
to  come  from  the  attic.  From  that  day  on,  from  nightfall  until
dawn,  this  noise  continued,  growing  louder,  if  anything,  and  this
lasted  for  twenty  consecutive  nights.  We  could  hardly  sleep  at  all
except  during  the  day.  It  became  very  tedious,  not  to  say  unbear-
able. I  need  not  tell  you  that  we  tried  in  every  imaginable  way
to  find  the  cause  of  the  strange  racket,  but  without  success.

At  last  my  mother  resolved  to  have  recourse  to  the  "super-
natural," and  without  telling  any  one,  for  fear  my  father  would
make  fun  of  her,  she  sought  out  a  parish  priest  and  asked  him
to  say  masses  for  the  dead  man.  After  this  act  of  faith  we  heard
nothing  more.

Judging  from  what  I  have  read  in  your  books  and  heard  from
your  lips,  you  do  not  admit  the  supernatural,  you  acknowledge  the
truth  of  no  religion,  and  you  do  not  believe  that  God  can  have
revealed  himself  to  Man  in  any  perceptible  way.  I  conclude,  there-
fore, that  you  will  not  admit  that  my  ghost-story  is  possible,  be-
cause it  was  an  act  of  faith  in  the  supernatural  which  brought
about  the  cessation  of  the  noise.

The  Widov^  Montceny,
8  rue  des  Anges,  Lyon-Saint-Just.

(Letter  136.)

I  am,  above  all,  sincere,  and  I  am  making  this  letter  public
with  the  v^ish  that  it,  like  all  the  others,  should  serve  to  en-
lighten us.

The  circumstance  that  the  masses  for  the  dead  man  brought
about  the  cessation  of  the  noise  does  not  keep  me  from  admit-
ting that  the  noises  were  really  heard.  Before  Christianity,
when  the  mass  did  not  exist,  the  pagans  observed  the  same
phenomena.  (See  the  letter  from  Pliny  the  Younger,
Valerius  Maximus — Simonides,  I,  7,  etc.)  We  are  not
obliged,  for  all  that,  to  admit  the  supernatural,  for  all  must
be  included  in  nature.  Let  us  deny  nothing.  I  am  submit-
ting everything  in  these  pages  to  my  readers'  judgment.  A
dead  man  may  continue  to  believe  in  the  efficacy  of  prayer.
Moreover,  have  we  not  gained  an  impression  that  the  manif es-


ONE  DAY  TO  ONE  WEEK  AFTER  DEATH      177

tations  of  the  dead  are  connected  with  the  minds  of  the  living  ?
Are  not  spiritualism  and  animism  related?

An  account  of  an  apparition  on  the  day  of  burial  was  given
by  Mrs.  Blackwell  in  the  *' Revue  scientifique  et  morale  du
Spiritisme"  and  in  the  ''Revue  des  Etudes  psychiques."
iWe  have  often  been  halted,  in  explaining  these  happenings,
by  the  idea  that  possibly  they  may  have  been  hallucinations
— which  are  of  frequent  occurrence,  by  the  way — and  I,  for
my  part,  have  eliminated  a  large  number  of  such  cases  from
my  notes.  But  there  are  limits.  Where  do  cases  of  sub-
jective hallucinations  stop — ^hallucinations  without  exterior
causes?  When  we  read  of  the  following  occurrence,  do  we
not  feel  that  it  was  a  real  phenomenon  ?  Here  is  the  strange
story :

During  the  afternoon  of  Friday,  March  1,  1901,  my  chamber-
maid's mother-in-law  died  of  cancer,  in  the  hospital.  I  had  never
seen  the  old  woman,  had  no  idea  how  she  looked,  and  had  never
heard  her  given  name  spoken.  My  chambermaid,  when  she  re-
ferred to  her,  always  called  her  "my  mother-in-law."

The  burial  was  on  the  next  day,  Saturday,  in  the  afternoon.
About  six  o'clock  in  the  evening,  on  that  same  Saturday,  I  was
reading  in  my  room  and  I  was,  one  might  say,  alone  in  the  house,
for  my  husband  had  gone  out  and  the  servants  were  all  in  the
basement,  two  floors  below.  During  half  an  hour  or  more  I  heard
repeatedly,  very  loud  blows,  sometimes  one,  sometimes  several  in
rapid  succession.  And  there  were  various  noises  of  objects  being
dragged  about  in  the  very  room  in  which  I  was.  I  lifted  my  head
every  few  moments,  thinking  each  time  that  I  would  see  some  one,
although  I  am  accustomed  to  hearing  noises  of  this  sort.  Several
times,  also,  I  heard  steps  in  the  hallway,  as  though  some  one  were
going  into  the  dressing-room  adjoining  my  room,  and  then  going
out  again.  Twice  I  ran  to  the  door  and  opened  it  suddenly:  there
was  absolutely  no  one  either  in  the  halls,  or  at  the  head  of  the  stairs,
or  on  the  stairway.  The  door  of  the  dressing-room  giving  on  the
hall  was  closed.     There  was  no  one  anyv^here.

After  dinner,  when  my  husband  and  I  were  in  the  drawing-room,


178  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

my  chambermaid  came  to  tell  me  that  she  had  come  back.  She
told  me  that  the  funeral  had  gone  off  very  well,  that  the  sisters
in  the  hospital  had  been  very  kind,  that  they  had  put  a  pillow
in  the  coffin  and  had  wrapped  the  body  in  fine  cloth.  She  left  the
drawing-room  without  adding  any  other  details,  and  some  mo-
ments later  a  young  girl,  a  friend  of  ours,  came  to  spend  the
evening  with  us.  Shortly  afterward,  about  half-past  nine,  I  saw,
suddenly^  a  vague  form  some  distance  away,  on  the  other  side  of
the  drawing-room.  At  once  I  tried  to  draw  my  husband's  and  my
friend's  attention  to  it,  but  they  saw  nothing.

Little  by  little,  the  contours  of  this  form  grew  more  sharply
defined,  and  soon  I  saw  it  clearly,  distinctly.  It  was  so  opaque
that  the  furniture  behind  it  was  completely  hidden,  as  though  by
a  body  that  was  really  material.

The  form  seemed  to  be  that  of  an  old  woman,  with  very  bright,
very  piercing  eyes,  a  rather  pointed  nose,  and  gray  hair,  darker
over  her  forehead.  At  first  her  dress  seemed  to  be  black,  but  I
soon  saw  that  it  was  turning  to  a  dark  blue.  On  her  head  she
wore  a  handkerchief,  apparently  of  silk;  it  was  decorated  with
little  squares,  some  of  them  red.  Her  first  movement  was  to
raise  her  hand  to  her  head,  and  to  throw  her  handkerchief  back,
letting  it  fall  upon  her  neck,  where  it  remained  Ijke  a  kerchief
carelessly  fastened.

My  husband  and  I  spoke  to  her  in  English,  but  apparently  she
did  not  understand  us,  though  her  glances  seemed  to  question  us
anxiously.  Then  we  spoke  to  her  in  French.  This  time  she  be-
came greatly  excited,  and  appeared  to  answer  us  volubly,  but  I
was  not  able  to  hear  the  words.  Though  she  was  invisible  to  the
two  other  witnesses  of  this  scene,  she  appeared  to  see  and  hear  them.
My  friend  had  a  feeling  of  oppression  or  of  suffocation,  as  though
there  were  some  disagreeable  presence  there.  I  spoke  to  the
shade,  but  without  being  able  to  hear  her  reply;  this  seemed  to
irritate   her.    At    length   my   friend    suggested    that   it    might    be

Madame    M ,    the    chambermaid's    mother-in-law.     The    shade

nodded  briskly,  meaning  "Yes."  Then  I  could  distinguish  some
sounds,  and  at  last  I  understood  the  word  "Clemence." — "Is  that
your  name?"  I  asked.  "Yes,"  she  nodded.  "Then,"  said  my
friend,  "it  can't  be  Madame  M- ,  for  I  saw  her  name  in  the


ONE  DAY  TO  ONE  WEEK  AFTER  DEATH       179

death  notices,  in  the  newspaper,  and  the  name  was  Marthe  M ."

(I  had  not  seen  the  newspaper.)  The  shade  inclined  her  head  in
affirmation.  Questioning  her,  I  learned  that  she  had  two  names.
Then  I  discovered  that  she  had  come  to  ask  something  of  us,  that
she  did  not  know  that  she  was  dead,  though  she  realized  that  she
had  been  at  her  own  funeral  that  very  afternoon.  When  I  asked
her  if  she  regretted  having  been  harsh  to  her  daughter-in-law,  she
signified  by  a  gesture  that  she  did  not.  She  answered  all  my  ques-
tions with  motions  of  her  head;  but  then  I  heard  the  word  "plum."
Recalling  that  my  chambermaid  had  told  me  she  often  took  plums
to  her,  I  asked  her  if  she  wished  some.  With  a  movement  of  her
head  she  told  me,  "No."  Then  my  husband  guessed,  after  several
attempts,  that  she  wished  to  say,  "A  plum-colored  dress."  She
seemed  very  happy.  Yes,  that  was  it.  I  asked  her  if  she  wished
to  make  a  gift,  to  some  one,  of  a  plum-colored  dress.  She  gave
me  to  understand,  by  pointing  to  herself  with  her  finger,  and  by
repeated  gestures,  that  she  wished  the  dress  for  herself.  We  tried
to  explain  her  new  state  to  her,  but  in  vain.  I  wished  to  approach
her,  but  the  form  grew  vague  and  seemed  to  tremble  violently.
At  last  she  disappeared,  little  by  little,  from  my  sight.  During  the
whole  of  this  scene  the  drawing-room  was  brilliantly  lighted  with
electricity.

That  very  evening,  when  I  went  up  to  go  to  bed,  I  began  to
speak  to  my  chambermaid  about  her  mother-in-law.  I  told  her
that  my  friend  had  seen  her  name  in  the  death  notices — "Marthe
M "  and  I  asked  her  if  this  were  her  only  name.  She  an-
swered, at  once,  that  she  had  two,  Marthe  and  Clemence,  and  that
her  mother-in-law  herself  had  always  preferred  the  name  Clemence.

I  then  asked  her  if  she  had  seen  her  after  she  had  been  dressed
for  the  grave — how  she  looked,  etc.  She  told  me  that  she  had  ar-
rived too  late,  but  that  her  sister  and  her  husband,  the  old  woman's
son,  had  told  her  that  her  mother-in-law  had  been  very  well  attired;
that  the  sisters  in  the  hospital  had  put  a  dark-blue  dress  on  her.
She  thought,  too,  that  a  cotton  handkerchief  with  red  squares  had
been  put  on  her  head,  and  that  a  rosary  had  been  placed  in  her
hand.  It  took  me  a  long  time  to  discover,  among  the  mass  of
details  of  all  sorts,  the  fact  that  the  old  woman  was  seventy-two,
that  her  hair  was  gray  but  that  she  had  had  a  habit  of  dyeing  it


180  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

in  front  with  cosmetics;  that  she  had  bright  eyes;  that  she  had
left  furniture  which,  naturally,  belonged  to  her  son,  Julie's  hus-
band; but  that  her  dresses  were  all  very  old  and  were  really  not
worth  the  trouble  of  keeping,  with  the  exception  of  two,  one  black
and  the  other  plum-colored.  Both  of  these  were  almost  new,  and
the  old  woman  had  set  great  store  by  them,  particularly  the  last.
The  next  morning  my  husband  questioned  Julie  closely  on  this
subject,  giving  as  a  reason  his  interest  in  such  minute  details.
He  said  that,  as  a  doctor,  he  wished  to  know  how  things  were
conducted  in  such  cases  in  the  hospital.  He  got  her  to  talk,  in
this  way,  until  she  had  repeated  to  him  all  that  she  had  told  me.

Dora  Blackwell.

Witnesses:  Miss  A.  Bird;  M.P.D.  Wise;  Lady  Blackwell;  Dr.
A.  Blackwell.i

While  taking  into  account  the  caution  which  bids  us  make
allowance  for  illusions,  autosuggestion,  and  hallucinations,
would  it  not  seem  to  every  impartial  reader  that  the  reality
of  the  foregoing  apparition  is  certain?  The  observer  is  a
sensitive.  But  why  these  trivial  matters?  Why  should  a
dead  woman  wish  for  her  dress?  Naturally,  we  attribute
such  things  to  the  minds  of  those  who  tell  these  stories,  but
the  narrator  knew  nothing  about  it.  What  then  ?  The  dead
woman  thought  that  she  was  still  alive.  Plainly,  it  would
be  simpler  to  deny  the  whole  thing.  But  can  we?  Should
we?  And  then,  have  we  not  accounts  of  other,  similar  hap-
penings? Did  we  not  see  above  (page  154)  that  ''Mother
Arondel"  of  Cherbourg  thought  she  was  not  dead?

The  following  occurrence,  too,  concerns  a  dead  person
buried  in  garments  which  the  observer  of  the  phenomenon
had  never  seen.  An  account  of  it  was  sent  me  from  Vence,
Alpes-Maritimes,  in  April,  1921,  by  a  most  scholarly  man.
He  was  seeking  knowledge,  but  was  little  disposed  to  admit

1  Revue  des  Etudes  psychiques,  De  Vesme,  July,   1902.


ONE  DAY  TO  ONE  WEEK  AFTER  DEATH       181

that  there  is  a  future  life,  above  all  '^  because  we  can  con-
ceive of  neither  the  form  nor  the  duration  of  life  beyond
the  grave."  Nevertheless  he  was  convinced  that  a  dead
woman  was  seen  in  the  cemetery  where  she  had  been  buried.

I  was  then  living  in  Paris,  in  the  rue  Mazagran,  in  the  same
house  with  the  Bilger  family.  Madame  Bilger  had  lost  her  mother,
who  had  been  living,  with  her  other  children,  in  Saint-Rambert-
sur-Rhone,  and  who  had  succumbed  to  a  very  short  illness.  Ma-
dame Bilger  learned  of  the  death  and  the  illness  simultaneously.

She  went  to  Saint-Rambert  some  days  afterward.  Upon  her
arrival,  she  asked  one  of  her  sisters-in-law  to  go  with  her  to  the
cemetery.  When  she  arrived  at  the  grave,  what  was  her  surprise
to  see  her  mother  before  her,  in  the  garments  she  had  been  buried
in !  The  garments  were  rather  poor  in  quality,  and  were  quite
worn  out.  Madame  Bilger  protested  against  this  to  her  sister-in-
law,  who  said  that  her  description  was  correct.  She  offered  the
excuse  that  it  was  useless  to  put  new  garments  on  some  one  dead.

COURTON,

Place  Nationale,  Vence.
(Letter  4479.)

The  author  expressed  to  me  his  conviction  of  Madame
Bilger 's  absolute  sincerity.  It  is  impossible  to  concede  that
there  was  any  illusion  on  her  part,  because  she  did  not  know
what  had  happened.  May  we  think  that  the  dead  woman's
image  was  in  the  sister-in-law's  mind,  and  showed  itself  to
Madame  Bilger  ?  But  this  is  only  a  supposition.  Is  it  really
logical  to  try  always  to  rule  out  the  direct  explanation?
Would  it  not  seem  that  the  dead  woman  herself  caused  the
apparition?  Let  us  investigate  without  prejudice.  Out  of
all  this  a  new  science  will  be  built.

Let  us  continue  to  record  here  the  phenomena  observed
during  the  first  week  after  death.  The  two  which  follow
occurred  two  days  after  dissolution.


182  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

Prinoess  de  Montarcy  gave  me  an  account  of  the  following
personal  experience  (her  letter  was  dated  December  10,
1920)  :

(1)  My  grandmother  had  always  said  to  me,  "If  you're  not
with  me  when  I  die,  I  '11  let  you  know  I  'm  dead."  When  I  was
in  Monte  Carlo  in  May,  1886,  I  received  a  telegram  from  my
cousin  informing  me  that  my  grandmother  was  ill,  and  asking  me
to  come  without  delay.  It  was  one  o'clock,  and  I  could  not  leave
until  six.  At  four  o'clock  another  telegram  informed  me  that  she
was  better.  I  decided  to  take  the  train  that  left  at  eight  o'clock
the  next  morning.  That  same  evening  I  went  to  bed  at  seven
o'clock.  At  nine  o'clock  my  little  dog  jumped  up  on  my  bed,
howling  as  if  he  were  being  killed.  I  looked  and  saw  (the  lamp
was  lighted)  at  the  foot  of  my  bed,  my  grandmother,  just  as  I
had  seen  her  last,  but  pale.  She  threw  me  a  kiss,  and  disappeared.
The  following  morning,  at  seven  o'clock,  I  was  brought  a  telegram
announcing  that  she  had  died  between  eight  and  nine  in  the
evening.

(2)  At  twenty  I  was  engaged  to  a  Hungarian  count;  we  loved

each  other  dearly.     But  my  "mother,"  the  Duchess  of  B (I

was  an  adopted  daughter),  had  other  plans  for  me,  and  she  took
me  to  Rome,  where  some  days  later  she  told  me  that  the  count
had  broken  off  the  engagement.  I  answered  that  I  did  not  believe
this.  As  a  result  of  anxiety  I  fell  ill  in  Rome,  and,  as  soon  as
I  was  better,  was  taken  to  Spa.  On  September  30th,  having  been
most  unwell  for  two  days,  I  was  in  bed,  reading,  when  I  heard  my
name  spoken  in  a  dying  voice.  I  looked  up  involuntarily,  and  saw
the  count,  dead  and  stretched  out  on  the  floor  (he  had  on  white
trousers,  a  blue  shirt,  and  was  without  a  vest),  with  a  small  bottle
in  one  hand  and  my  photograph  in  the  other.  I  uttered  a  cry.
The  chambermaid  came  in  with  the  newspapers  from  Paris.  I
opened  the  "Gil  Bias,"  a  newspaper  which  I  never  read,  and  saw  on
the  first  page  that  the  count  had  been  found  in  his  room,  dead  from
morphine  poisoning,  on  September  28th.

These  two  experiences  made  an  impression  which  will  last  all  my
life.

(Letter  4342.)  Princess  de  Montarcy.


ONE  DAY  TO  ONE  WEEK  AFTER  DEATH      183

It  is  not  always  easy  to  make  inquiries  as  to  the  authentic-
ity of  the  occurrences  related.  Plainly,  we  may  remain  in-
credulous as  to  many  stories.  What  is  there  to  prove  that
the  writer  of  this  narration  is  not  deceiving  me?  Historical
certainty  is  not  like  scientific  certainty.  If  you  tell  a  friend
that  you  ate  fish  for  your  breakfast  this  morning,  he  is  not
compelled  to  believe  you.  But  why  would  you  tell  him  this
if  it  were  not  true?  Is  lying  universal?  I  do  not  believe
it  is.  In  any  case,  often  it  is  inadmissible  that  lies  have
been  told.

The  following  statements  are  bound  up  with  the  ingenuous
impressions  of  childhood.  They  are  full  of  such  good  faith
and  such  complete  conviction;  they  bear  each  other  out  so
well  and  are  told  with  such  simplicity  that  they  plead  with
especial  emphasis  on  behalf  of  life  after  death.  Here  are
some  extracts  from  a  long  letter :

Ben-Danoun-Kouba,  Algiers,
July  20,  1899.

My  husband,  one  of  the  best  and  most  intelligent  men  who  ever
hved,  had  promised  me  that  if  he  departed  this  life  before  I  did  he
would  certainly  come  and  give  me  some  positive  sign  as  to  his  life
beyond  the  grave,  if  it  were  possible.  While  in  perfect  health  he
had  a  sunstroke,  which  carried  him  off  in  a  few  days.  He  died  on
October  10,  1898.  We  were  Uvmg  in  the  country,  in  the  house
where  we  now  are.  The  family  consisted  of  my  husband,  myself,
and  my  daughter,  a  very  young  widow,  with  three  little  children
(boys),  two  years  and  a  half,  three,  and  five  years  old.  In  the
course  of  the  cruel  days  which  ended  in  my  husband's  death,  friends
took  charge  of  the  children  and  took  them  away,  and  the  fact  that
their  grandfather  had  died  was  concealed  from  them.  Guy,  the
youngest  of  the  three,  was  at  the  table  with  our  friends  on  the  day
of  the  burial,  toward  noon,  when  suddenly  he  stood  up  in  his  chair
and  said :  "There 's  grandpa,  there  in  the  window.  Look !"  He
wished  to  leave  the  table  and  go  toward  the  window.

He  was  two  years  and  six  months  old;  not  only  did  he  not  knoio
of  his  grandfather's  death  but  he  had  no  conception  of  death.


184  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

The  next  morning  I  heard  him,  in  the  room  adjoining  mine,
making  happy  sounds;  jumping,  laughing,  calling:  "Grandpapa!
Grandpapa!"  Annoyed,  I  went  out  to  make  him  stop.  But  he  kept
on  clapping  his  hands  and  laughing,  and  he  said  to  me:  "Look
how  pretty  grandfather  is!  He's  all  white  and  he's  making  a
light."  My  daughter-in-law  and  the  servants  who  had  come,  brought
by  the  noise,  were  astonished.  They  asked  him  if  he  really  saw  his
grandfather.  The  child  seemed  not  to  understand  that  we  did  not
see  him.  '^But  there  he  is!  He's  there !'^  he  cried,  and  lifted  his
eyes  to  about  the  height  at  which  a  man's  face  would  have  been.
Then,  after  a  moment,  he  looked  up  and  said,  ^'Why,  he 's  gone
away !"

Eight  months  later,  Guy,  who  was  then  three  years  and  two
months  old,  saw  the  same  apparition  for  the  third  time.  My  hus-
band had  often  told  me  of  a  beautiful  spot,  near  La  Motte-les-Bains,
in  the  Alps  of  Dauphine,  and  he  wished  very  much  to  take  me  there.

In  the  month  of  June  following  his  death  I  went  to  spend  the
summer  in  La  Motte,  with  my  daughter,  her  three  children,  and  their
nurse.  In  memory  of  my  husband,  I  wished  to  visit  the  spot  which
had  pleased  him  so,  and  one  morning  we  all  went  there  together.
It  is,  indeed,  an  ideal  mountain  haunt,  delightfully  wooded,  full  of
flowers,  strawberries,  and  wild  raspberries.  Raymond,  the  eldest  of
the  children,  began  to  pick  strawberries  for  his  mother.  Etienne
brought  me  raspberries.  Then  little  Guy  said  to  me,  '^I'm  picking
flowers  for  grandpapa.''  Raymond  cried,  "How  can  you  give  them
to  him,  since  he  's  dead !"  Guy  seemed  very  much  surprised,  and
answered,  "Why,  he 's  there ;  I  'm  giving  him  my  hand."  After
some  moments  he  said  sadly,  "He's  not  there  any  longer;  he's
gone."

I  can  vouch,  dear  Master,  for  the  perfect  exactitude  of  this  ac-
count. The  three  children  were  too  young  to  remember  the  incidents,
but  they  made  an  unforgettable  impression  on  my  daughter,  the
nurse,  and  me.

The  question  of  the  immortality  of  the  soul  is,  as  you  say,  very
serious,  and  everything  connected  with  it  deserves  to  be  considered
earnestly  and  in  good  faith,  without  distortion  or  "stage-setting."
If  you  and  the  other  men  of  science,  who  spend  your  time  in  col-
lecting and  verifying  these  manifestations,  succeed  in  establishing


ONE  DAY  TO  ONE  WEEK  AFTER  DEATH       185

the  truth  of  them,  ineontestably  and  beyond  all  doubt,  what  a  service
you  will  render  humanity!  The  absolute  certainty  of  a  future  life
and  the  persistence  of  a  personal  individuality  would  stop  crime  and
lying,  and  those  who  are  weeping  for  their  beloved  dead  would
cease  to  weep  for  them.  The  gratitude  of  those  who  are  already
convinced  is  due  you,  and  you  have  it.  Be  so  kind  as  to  accept  this
sincere  gratitude.

Anne  E.  Carriere.
(Letter  750.)

The  fact  that  this  child,  two  and  a  half  years  old,  saw  his
grandfather,  would  seem  to  me  to  plead  effectively  against
the  hypothesis  of  hallucinations.  The  little  innocent  knew
nothing  about  anything,  had  no  conception  of  death,  and
saw  his  grandfather  as  if  he  had  been  before  him.  We  can-
not disdain  all  this.

The  following  occurrence  makes  a  similar  impression  on  us.
It  was  taken  from  the  ' 'Proceedings"  of  the  English  Society
for  Psychical  Research  (Volume  XI,  page  428)  and  was  in-
vestigated by  Bozzano  as  a  case  of  auto-premonition  on  the
part  of  a  child  two  years  and  seven  months  old.  His  little
brother,  who  had  died  when  eight  months  old,  appeared  to
him.  In  the  following  words  the  mother  told  of  the  appari-
tions ^ :

Is  there  a  life  beyond  the  grave?  If  I  had  doubted  that  there
is,  my  doubts  would  have  been  banished  by  the  "visions"  of  which
I  was  a  witness.

In  18S3  I  was  the  happy  mother  of  two  beautiful  and  vigorous
children.  The  elder  was  two  years  and  seven  months  old;  the  other
was  a  little  angel  eight  months  old.  I  lost  him  on  August  6,  1883,
and  was  left  with  little  Ray,  who  was  then  enjoying  perfect  health.
Nevertheless,  after  the  day  on  which  his  little  brother  died,  he  ac-
quired a  habit  of  saying  to  me  several  times  a  day,  "Mamma,  little
brother  ^s   calling  Ray."     He  would  often  interrupt  his   play  and

^Annates  des  Sciences  psychiques,  1912,  p.  301,


186  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

run  to  me,  calling  out  his  habitual  sentence,  "Mamma,  little  brother
keeps  on  calling  Ray."  And  during  the  night,  he  would  wake  me
up  and  repeat  the  same  words:  "Mamma,  little  brother's  really
calling  Ray ;  he  wants  to  have  him  with  him.  But  you  're  crying !
Why?  You  mustn't  cry  when  Ray  goes  away  with  little  brother,
because  little  brother  wants  him  to."

One  day  when  I  was  having  the  drawing-room  cleaned,  he  came
running  out  of  the  dining-room,  where  the  chair  stood  which  had
belonged  to  his  little  dead  brother.  I  had  never  seen  him  so  excited ;
he  seized  the  hem  of  my  skirt,  and  drew  me  toward  the  dining-room,
crying:  "Mamma,  Mamma,  come  quickly  and  see  little  brother
sitting  in  his  chair."  Just  as  he  was  opening  the  door  to  show  him
to  me,  he  cried,  "Oh,  Mamma,  you  ought  to  have  come  faster.  He
isn't  there  any  more!  If  you'd  seen  how  he  smiled  at  Ray  when
Ray  passed  near  him!  Ray's  going  away  with  him;  but  you
mustn't  cry.  Mamma."

A  short  time  afterward  our  little  child  fell  seriously  ill;  our  care
and  our  tears  were  unavailing.  On  October  13,  1883,  two  montlis
and  seven  days  after  his  brother's  death,  he  died  also.  His  intelli-
gence was  developed  far  beyond  his  years.

As  I  read  these  accounts  I  admit  that  I  am  unable  to
understand  how  people  can  make  fun  of  them  and  call  them
fabrications.

Dr.  Hodgson  wrote  to  the  narrator  and  received  the  fol-
lowing  confirmation:

I  have  only  to  guarantee  the  truth  in  every  detail,  of  what  Mr.
Kingsbury  published  in  the  "Religio-Philosophical  Journal."
When  the  child  came  running  to  tell  me  that  his  little  brother  was
sitting  in  the  chair  which  had  been  his,  there  was  no  one  else  in  the
house  but  the  maid-servant,  to  whom  I  said  nothing.  But  when  my
husband  came  back  for  lunch,  I  told  him  what  had  happened.  On
that  same  day  I  related  the  episode  to  some  women  who  were  friends
of  mine.     Little  Ray  could  not  have  known  what  death  was.

The  last  time  I  went  with  him  to  visit  my  little  child's  grave —
that  is  to  say,  a  short  time  before  Ray  fell  ill — both  of  us  sat  down


ONE  DAY  TO  ONE  WEEK  AFTER  DEATH       187

beside  the  gTave,  and  I  thought,  "Oh,  if  I  could  take  my  baby  in
my  arms  and  see  him  for  just  one  minute !  How  glad  I  'd  be !"
Simultaneously  Ray  cried,  "Oh,  Mamma,  let 's  take  little  brother  in
our  arms  for  just  one  minute;  then  we'd  be  happy."  As  we  were
getting  ready  to  leave,  he  put  several  lumps  of  earth  on  the  grave,
and  remarked,  "Soon  Ray  will  sleep  here,  near  his  little  brother;
but  you  mustn't  cry,  Mamma."
He  now  sleeps  on  the  spot  which  he  pointed  out.

The  child's  father  wrote,  in  his  turn,  to  Dr.  Hodgson:

I  certify  that  my  wife  told  me  of  the  incident  (of  the  vision  in  the
chair)  on  the  very  day  on  which  it  occurred,  when  I  came  back  for
lunch.  I  myself  was  present  many  a  time  when  the  child  announced
to  his  mother  that  his  little  brother  was  calling  him  insistently.

W.  H.

Mrs.  J.  H.  Shulsters,  a  friend  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  W.  H.,  also
confirmed  all  the  statements  previously  made.

This  episode  is  particularly  interesting,  as  are  all  the  super-
normal manifestations  told  of  by  children,  for  their  untouched
minds  are  free  from  any  influence  which  might  induce  in
them  any  of  the  varied  forms  of  sensory  hallucinations.  And
every  time  there  is  a  premonition  of  death  with  one  of  these
visions,  a  premonition  that  is  realized,  this  adds  a  further
logical  reason  for  believing  in  their  reality.

The  following  experience,  an  account  of  which  was  taken
from  a  letter  sent  me  from  Bordeaux  in  April,  1899,  was
similar  in  its  nature:

I  had  just  lost  my  son  Gaston,  aged  sixteen  (in  February,  1884).
Some  days  later  his  younger  brother  (aged  five)  was  alone  in  a
room  set  apart  as  a  play-room  for  the  children.  He  was  amusing
himself  by  harnessing  a  wooden  horse,  when  he  rushed  into  his
mother's  room  and  said  to  her:  'Mother,  Fve  just  seen  Gaston
[this  was  what  he  called  his  brother] ;  he  was  sitting  down,  watching


188  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

me  play;  he  told  me  to  be  very  good,  and  then  he  left  without
wanting  to  play  with  me."  The  child  (he  is  now  twenty)  still  re-
members this.

N.  V.
(Letter  259.)

The  child  had  this  vision  several  days  after  his  elder
brother's  death.  On  page  85  of  ''At  the  Moment  of  Death"
we  read  of  a  similar  vision,  seen  one  hour  after  death,  on
the  very  day  of  dissolution.     Here  is  still  another:

When  my  brother  Henri  Chambige  (known  to  the  world  of  letters
as  Marcel  Lami)  died,  his  youngest  daughter,  then  aged  three,  in-
sisted that  she  had  seen  him  on  several  occasions.  She  would  say,
for  example :  "Why  are  you  crying  ?  My  papa  has  n't  gone ;  he 's
there,  you  can  see."  She  would  state  that  she  saw  him  seated  in  an
arm-chair  or  bent  over  her  little  bed,  smiling  at  her.  Other  people
could  see  nothing,  and  I  have  always  thought  that  if  the  power  of
manifesting  itself  could  have  been  given  my  brother's  soul,  he  would
have  appeared  to  liis  smallest  daughter.  Since  she  had  no  concep-
tion of  death,  she  could  not  have  been  surprised  to  see  him.  This
happened  in  Cluny  (Saone-et-Loire).

Andree-Germ.  Roze,
Montelimar,  Drome.

(Letter  4322.)

Such  experiences  on  the  part  of  children  are  significant  to
me.  They  are  as  enlightening  as  any  other  experiences  of
the  sort.  Whether  seen  by  children  or  by  adults,  the  appar-
itions seem  real.

What  are  these  apparitions?  When  the  persons  are
recognized,  when  they  come  to  announce  a  death,  when  they
offer  consolation,  we  think  we  understand  them.  But  there
are  some  which  are  bafflingly  incomprehensible.  Such  was
the  following.  My  friend  Dr.  Dariex  received  an  account  of
it,  sent  by  a  person  whose  character  and  whose  well-balanced


ONE  DAY  TO  ONE  WEEK  AFTER  DEATH       189

mind  he  esteems.     This  is  what  the  narrator/  Madame  E.
M ,  wrote  to  him:

In  1846  my  mother,  aged  forty-six,  gave  birth  to  a  son  who  seemed
to  us  to  have  fallen  from  the  skies ;  my  elder  sister  was  married  and
lived  at  a  distance,  and  I  was  eighteen  years  old.

Since,  in  the  country,  I  had  nothing  to  entertain  me,  I  welcomed
this  child  with  enthusiasm.  I  took  care  of  him  from  morning  till
night;  I  was  a  second  mother  to  him,  and  the  child  had  a  deep
affection  for  me.  We  parted  when  he  was  eight ;  I  got  married,  and
he  was  sent  to  school.  There  he  made  such  rapid  progress  that  at
fourteen  and  a  half  he  was  able  (with  special  permission  on  account
of  his  age)  to  take  the  examination  for  the  degree  of  bachelor  of
arts.  He  passed  with  the  mark  ^'Good,"  and  six  months  afterward
had  an  equally  brilliant  success  with  his  examination  in  the  sciences.
He  entered  his  name  for  the  first  year  of  medical  study,  and  came
to  Paris,  when  scarcely  sixteen,  to  continue  the  studies  to  which  he
had  given  his  mind  completely.

As  he  always  stood  unusually  well  in  his  examinations,  though
working  much  less  hard  than  his  rivals,  his  prodigious  facility  left
him  too  much  free  time.  He  was  not  able,  on  certain  occasions,  to
resist  the  temptations  incident  to  his  age,  and  divided  his  time
equally  between  study  and  pleasures.  But  he  was  too  young,  too
delicately  organized  to  indulge  with  impunity  in  even  a  slight  over-
taxing of  his  strength,  and  he  took  cold  when  he  was  leaving  a  ball.
This  cold  grew  worse,  and  he  languished  for  fifteen  months,  kept
alive  only  by  our  tender  care.

Since  my  marriage  I  had  been  living  thirty  kilometers  away  from
my  parents'  estate.  Every  week  I  went  to  spend  three  days  with
him.  It  would  be  impossible  to  tell  how  it  grieved  my  heart  to  see
this  adored  brother  pine  away  day  after  day,  impossible  to  express
my  bitter  regrets  at  the  blighting  of  such  brilliant  hopes.  He  him-
self still  cherished  chimerical  hopes  of  being  cured;  he  used  to  re-
ceive me  with  great  joy.

The  last  week  of  his  life  I  left  him  regretfully,  as  I  had  found  him
weaker,  but  nothing  had  made  us  foresee  a  fatal  outcome.     I  had

1  Annates  des  Sciences  psychiques,  1902,  p,  321.


190  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

a  duty  to  my  other  family  as  well.  On  the  following  day  I  received
a  telegram,  calling  me  back  at  once.  I  made  haste,  but  could  em-
brace only  a  dead  body!  The  poor  child  had  passed  away,  at
scarcely  nineteen,  like  a  burnt-out  candle  that  a  breath  extinguishes.
My  name  had  been  on  his  lips  several  times!

My  mother  was  crushed  by  sorrow;  my  father  was  sad  and  dis-
couraged. I  made  preparations  to  stay  with  them  for  eight  days,
and  tried  to  lighten  what  was  irreparable,  so  far  as  lay  in  my  power.

Was  it  two  or  three  days  after  this  lamentable  event?  I  cannot
state  the  exact  time,  but  it  was  certainly  not  more  than  three  days
— I  walked  down  the  steps  before  the  door  one  evening,  wishing  to
get  a  breath  of  pure  air  before  going  to  bed.  It  might  have  been
about  nine  o'clock.  A  few  steps  away  from  me  the  road  that  crossed
the  estate  stood  out  white  beneath  the  feeble  light  of  the  quarter-
moon,  and  vanished  behind  the  dividing  wall  that  joined,  at  an  angle,
the  one  against  which  I  was  leaning.  I  looked  at  the  familiar  pano-
rama without,  it  seems  to  me,  thinking  of  anything,  when  I  saw,
coming  along  the  road,  a  tall  man  in  a  well-fitting  frock-coat  and  a
silk  hat.  With  hurried  steps,  and  without  paying  any  attention  to
me,  he  went  on  his  way  across  the  open  space  before  the  house,
which  stretched  out  before  my  gaze,  and  disappeared  behind  the
dividing  wall.

"Well,"  I  said  to  myself,  astonished  by  his  formal  attire,  "there 's
a  gentleman  who's  very  late!"

The  next  day,  enticed  by  the  mildness  of  the  evening,  I  went  out
at  the  same  hour  and  stood  leaning  against  the  half -open  gate,  with
no  feeling  but  that  of  relaxation  as  I  gazed  at  the  dark  blue  of  the
sky,  pricked  by  a  multitude  of  stars.  I  saw,  suddenly,  coming  along
the  same  road,  the  gentleman  of  the  evening  before,  dressed  in
exactly  the  same  way.  With  the  same  hurried  gait  he  crossed  the
open  space  before  the  house,  and  took  the  road  that  passed  behind
the  dividing  wall.

"Who  is  it?"  I  asked  myself,  puzzled  only  by  the  elegance  of  his
dress  in  this  region  where  the  frock-coat  is  reserved  for  formal
occasions,  for  the  short  cut  through  our  property  is  often  taken  by
walkers  from  the  two  villages.  "He  's  doubtless  a  wine-broker  going
to  a  meeting,"  I  added  mentally,  and,  fairly  satisfied  by  my  ex-
planation, I  went  in  again  without  thinking  any  more  of  it.


ONE  DAY  TO  ONE  WEEK  AFTER  DEATH      191

In  the  South  the  October  evenings  are  exquisitely  beautiful  and
transparent.  A  desire  to  enjoy  the  charm  of  one  of  them  for  a
moment,  or  some  other  mysterious  impelling  force,  drew  me  out  of
doors  on  the  following  day  as  well.  Again  I  went  out  between  eight
and  nine  o'clock,  at  an  hour  when  every  one  was  accustomed  to  go
to  his  room.  I  had  been  leaning  against  the  large  barred  gate  for
scarcely  a  minute  when  the  same  gentleman,  slender  and  erect,
appeared  on  the  road.  In  the  pale  light  of  the  moon  his  features,
as  on  the  two  preceding  days,  were  invisible  in  the  shadow  cast  by
the  brim  of  his  hat.  As  on  the  day  before,  the  skirts  of  his  frock-
coat,  correctly  buttoned,  flapped  against  his  black  trousers  as  he
walked  rapidly.  His  white  hands — as  they  had  two  days  before —
hung  at  his  sides.  He  passed  on,  and  disappeared  behind  the
dividing  wall.

This  time  I  was  astounded!

"But  one  would  say,"  I  thought,  "that  this  gentleman  chooses  the
exact  moment  when  I  am  outside  in  which  to  pass  through  our  estate
every  evening!"  Yielding  to  an  impulse  of  lively  curiosity,  I  ran
after  him  as  far  as  the  bend  in  the  wall.  I  remained  there,  over-
whelmed by  an  indescribable  emotion.  No  one  was  there!  The
empty  road  stretched  out  like  a  long  gray  ribbon,  without  a  shadow.
Where  could  he  have  gone*?

A  victim  of  that  unreasonable  fear  which  grips  our  feeble  under-
standing when  we  see  an  inexplicable  phenomenon,  I  felt  my  knees
give  way  in  sudden  weakness.  A  cold  shiver  ran  over  me,  to  my
very  finger-tips.  I  was  struck  by  a  mad  idea  which  came  at  once
into  my  confused  mind;  an  idea  that  was  incontrovertible,  as  plain
as  the  ground  on  which  I  stood  as  though  rooted.  I  thrust  it  back
into  the  depths  of  my  being  with  a  sort  of  fear,  and  fled  in  haste
to  tell  my  mother  what  I  had  just  seen.

I  had  scarcely  gone  in  when  words  fell  in  floods  from  my  trem-
bling lips.  The  poor  woman,  in  anguish,  placed  on  the  table  the
lamp  she  had  been  holding,  to  go  up  to  her  room.  My  eyes  looked
deep  into  hers:  two  flashes  started  from  them — two  tears.

"It  was  my  son!"  she  cried,  falling  into  a  chair,  almost  uncon-
scious. "It  was  my  poor  child !  My  beloved  son  !  Did  n't  you  rec-
ognize him  by  his  height?  Didn't  you  recogTiize  him  by  the  gar-
ments in  which  we  dressed  Mm,  for  Ms  coffin  f     To-morrow  we  '11


192  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

go  together,"  she  went  on,  weeping  inexhaustible  tears,  *'to  that  same
place  where  he  appeared  to  you  three  times!"

We  were  there  at  the  mysterious  hour.  Pressed  one  against  the
other,  we  heard  the  mad  beating  of  our  hearts.  On  that  evening  the
crescent  of  the  moon,  which  had  grown  larger,  cast  a  more  vivid
light;  the  road  was  whiter  beneath  our  hypnotized  gaze.  All  re-
mained deserted!  On  the  following  evenings  we  went  down  vainly
at  the  same  hour,  and  evoked  the  dear  apparition  with  all  the  force
of  our  will:  there  was  nothing  more.

He  who  had  been  my  brother — a  mind  out  of  the  common,  a
"radiant  soul,"  as  Victor  Hugo  would  have  said  (he  had  expiated
the  few  excesses  of  his  youth  by  fifteen  months  of  suffering) — ^had
he,  through  some  exceptional  deviation  from  natural  laws,  been  able
to  come,  in  visible  form,  and  bid  me  a  last  and  supreme  farewell  ?

If  this  was  the  case,  why  did  he  not  appear  to  me  when,  after  I
had  been  thinking  of  him,  I  summoned  him  with  all  the  force  of  my
spirit?  Without  a  doubt  the  terrestrial  bonds  which,  in  the  un-
fathomable and  dizzy  Beyond,  still  bound  the  son  of  my  heart  to
my  humble  nature,  to  my  gross  being,  had  been  broken  forever !

Dr.  Dariex  adds  the  following  remarks:

I  have  known  Madame  M for  a  very  long  time.     She  has  an

excellent  memory,  and  the  accomit  of  this  experience  is  certainly
exact.  We  are  here  concerned  with  a  simple  occurrence:  an  appa-
rition was  seen  on  three  successive  days,  at  the  same  hour;  it  is  easy

to  remember  a  thing  such  as  this.    Madame  M never  had  any

other  hallucination  or  vision.  It  is,  therefore,  most  remarkable  that
an  apparition,  with  the  deceased  man's  silhouette,  was  seen  on  three
successive  days,  by  a  person  who  was  not  expecting  this,  who  knew
nothing  of  these  phenomena.  And  it  is  remarkable  that,  after
thinking  it  was  an  apparition  of  her  brother,  neither  she  nor  her
mother  saw  anything  more,  and  had  no  hallucination,  though  their
imaginations  were  stimulated  and  they  were  under  the  best  con-
ditions for  autosuggestion.

We  cannot  admit  that  s.o  well-balanced  an  observer  had
three  hallucinations.     Nevertheless  it  is  impossible  for  us  to


01^  DAY  TO  ONE  WEEK  AFTER  DEATH      193

concede,  on  the  other  hand,  that  the  young  man,  who  had
been  buried  for  some  days,  took  a  walk  there,  in  a  frock-coat
and  a  high  hat.  What,  then?  Still  more  singular  is  the
fact  that  he  seemed  to  pay  no  attention  at  all  to  his  sister,
whom  he  had  loved  so   dearly.     All  is  paradoxical.

What  mysterious  world  have  we  entered?

Can  a  dead  person's  thought  produce  an  automatic  replica?

We  must  observe  everything,  and  investigate  everything,
that  we  may  discover  the  truth  of  these  abstruse  problems.

Here  is  another  manifestation  on  the  part  of  some  one
dead,  perceived  three  days  after  death.  The  following  ac-
count was  taken  from  a  letter  sent  me  on  April  10,  1921 :

In  1918,  I  was  living  in  the  Principality  of  Monaco,  with  my
sister,  and  we  were  without  news  of  a  friend  residing  in  Paris  who
ordinarily  answered  our  letters  at  once.  For  three  weeks  we  had
been  waiting  impatiently  for  a  reply  to  several  letters  expressing
our  uneasiness  at  the  thought  that  he  was  unwell.  One  evening  (I
had  just  gone  to  bed;  it  was  about  ten  o'clock)  I  heard  in  my
dressing-room  which  adjoined  my  bedroom  (the  door  of  this  dressing-
room  was  open  and  there  was  a  light  in  it  the  whole  night  long)  a
terrible  uproar.  It  was  as  though  all  the  mirrors  in  the  room  (there
were  a  great  many  in  it)  had  been  broken,  and  the  glass  shivered  to
bits.  It  was  even  worse  than  this.  I  cannot  describe  the  noise,
which  was  more  like  a  loud  and  very  long  peal  of  thunder,  made  up
of  the  sound  of  breaking  glass.  While  it  was  going  on  I  cannot
say  that  I  was  frightened;  I  was  astonished,  rather,  and  all  sorts
of  ideas  came  into  my  mind,  above  all  the  idea  of  a  bomb,  in  spite
of  the  fact  that  the  armistice  had  been  signed.  When  this  noise  had
stopped,  I  got  up,  thinking  I  should  find  that  everything  had  been
pulverized,  and  my  astonishment  was  great  when  I  saw  that  nothing
was  out  of  place  except  a  picture  which  was  on  the  floor.  Its  glass
was  barely  cracked ;  its  cord,  new  and  very  strong,  looked  as  though
it  had  been  cut.  When  I  saw  the  picture  on  the  floor,  knowing
that  this  is  often  a  presage  of  death,  I  thought  at  once,  "Why,
A must  be  dead!"

The  loud  noise  was  also  heard  by  my  sister,  who  was  then  seated


194  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

at  the  piano,  at  the  other  end  of  the  large  villa,  but  she  thought
that  a  wagon-load  of  broken  glass  was  being  emptied,  and  paid  no
attention  to  it.  The  servants  heard  it,  too,  and  went  out  into  the
street  to  see  if  a  rubbish-cart  had  turned  over.

The  next  morning,  at  nine  o'clock,  I  received  a  telegram  informing
me  of  our  friend's  death;  it  had  occurred  three  days  before.

There  is  nothing  more  extraordinary  about  this  occurrence  than
about  those  you  have  related,  but  the  astonishing  circumstance  is
the  fact  that  this  friend  did  not  cause  the  manifestation  until  three
days  after  his  death,  and  after  the  telegram  which  was  to  inform
me  of  it  had  been  sent  and  was  to  be  given  to  me  the  next  morning.
Doubtless,  he  did  not  wish  to  leave  me  in  anxiety  by  producing
the  phenomenon  at  the  moment  of  his  death,  since  it  would  have
been  impossible  for  me  to  obtain  any  information,  and  he  awaited
the  moment  when  a  certain  person  was  sure  to  receive  a  letter  in
which  the  news  was  given  and  sure  to  let  me  know;  this  did,  in
fact,  happen.

For  me  this  occurrence  is  an  absolute  proof  of  immortality,  for
there  were  thought  and  deliberate  waiting.

I  am  giving  my  name  and  address,  but  I  shall  ask  you  to  reveal
nothing  of  a  personal  nature.  My  sister  and  I  are  in  a  delicate
position  with  regard  to  this  friend's  family.  He  is  married,  had
lived  with  my  sister  for  a  long  time,  and  had  remained,  in  spite  of
his  marriage,  in  most  friendly  relations  with  us.  Discretion  is
necessary.  But  the  experience  is,  in  itself,  something  which  may
aid  in  your  investigation,  and  I  am  giving  it  to  you  in  entire  con-
fidence. As  for  supposing  that  I  made  it  up,  I  do  not  see  under
what  pretext  I  could  be  accused  of  this.

Madame  X.

(Letter  4431.)

It  happens  that  I  am  correcting  the  proofs  of  these  pages
in  Monte  Carlo  (in  December,  1921),  the  place  where  this
phenomenon  occurred,  and  I  can  conjure  up  the  scene  ap-
proximately as  it  was.  Nevertheless  it  seems  to  me  that  the
interpretation  is  debatable.


ONE  DAY  TO  ONE  WEEK  AFTER  DEATH      195

I  owe  to  General  Berthaut  my  information  as  to  the  follow-
ing occurrence.  Tlie  account  of  it  was  in  the  form  of  an
extract  from  a  letter  written  by  H.  S.  Olcott,  and  published
in  the  ''Spiritual  Telegraph'^  of  July  15,  1854.

A  p-astor,  who  had  been  told  that  his  father  was  ill,  was  going
home,  when  he  perceived  the  latter,  standing  in  a  fenced-in  field
of  alfalfa.  He  went  forward  to  shake  hands  with  him.  The  old
man  leaped  over  the  fence,  led  his  son  away,  and  told  him  many
things  which  seemed  most  strange  to  the  pastor.  He  noted  that
his  father  looked  well,  and  he  thought  that  he  had  been  completely
cured.  When  they  drew  near  his  house,  the  old  man  stopped  and
told  his  son  to  go  on  ahead  and  to  speak  to  his  mother.  His
mother  received  him  in  deep  sadness.  "My  dear  child,"  she  said,
"your  father  was  buried  day  before  yesterday."  He  assured  her
that  it  was  indeed  his  father  whom  he  had  met,  and  that  he  had
never  seemed  in  better  health.  It  took  quite  a  long  time  to  con-
vince him  that  his  father  was  really  dead.

When  he  sent  me  the  account,  General  Berthaut  observed
that  he  saw  in  it  ''a  case  of  the  telepathic  influence  of  the
dead  man's  mind  upon  his  son  and  of  psychic  influence  af-
fecting his  vision  and  hearing.  It  was  not,"  he  added,  "an
hallucination  which  corresponded  to  nothing.  It  was  an  ap-
pearance, an  illusion  occurring  under  certain  given  con-
ditions, a  real  phenomenon  produced  by  something  the  cause
and  mechanism  of  which  remain  to  be  explained."  (Letter
4516.)

Yes,  we  are  forced  to  acknowledge  the  fact  that  these
varied  occurrences  are  both  real  and  inexplicable.  Such
was  the  following  phenomenon.

A  mother  received,  in  a  dream,  information  as  to  the  spot
where  her  son,  killed  in  the  war,  was  buried.  This  letter  was
sent  me  from  Cherbourg  on  October  13,  1921,  by  Madame
Demeantis,  the  principal  of  the  primary  school:


196  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

It  was  during  the  last  days  of  May,  1915.  I  was  suffering  from
the  most  intense  grief  which  it  is  possible  for  a  woman  to  experience.
I  had  just  learned  of  the  death  of  my  eldest  son,  Georges,  a
sergeant  in  the  twenty-fifth  Regiment  of  the  line.  He  had  fallen,
on  May  23d,  in  the  attack  on  the  Labyrinth.  He  was  swallowed
up  at  twenty-seven,  leaving  a  young  vtdfe,  twenty-four  years  old,
and  two  babies.  In  the  opinion  of  those  who  knew  him,  he  was  a
serious,  steady,  most  cultivated  young  man;  his  heart  was  tender


and  good,  and  he  was  endowed  with  great  energy.  The  grief  of
all  of  us  was  intense.  Preyed  upon  all  day  long  by  the  thought
of  the  terrible  truth,  and  above  all,  by  the  supposition,  which  was
so  cruel,  that  the  dear  boy  had  no  coffin,  my  suffering  was  indescrib-
able. At  night  I  should  not  have  been  able  to  sleep  without  the
bromide  of  potassium  which  my  children  had  me  take  in  the  evening.
I  am  giving  these  details  to  bring  out  the  fact  that  on  the  night
•of  which  I  shall  speak,  I  was  sleeping  calmly  and  deeply.  My
slumbers  could  not  well  have  been  interrupted  without  cause,  and
have  begun  again  almost  immediately.  Well,  when  I  was  sleeping
in  this  way,  I  saw  tlie  little  picture  given  here.


ONE  DAY  TO  ONE  WEEK  AFTER  DEATH       197

I  saw  it  very  distinctly,  very  clearly.  At  once,  without  having
been  awakened  by  any  shock  or  any  noise,  I  opened  my  eyes,  fully
awake,  as  one  is  in  broad  daylight.  I  told  myself,  "I  've  seen
that;  what  can  it  bef  And  without  any  effort  I  fell,  once  more,
into  the  same  sort  of  sleep.  The  next  day  I  spoke  to  my  family
of  what  I  had  seen,  and  then  we  thought  no  more  of  it.  This,  I
repeat,  took  place  during  the  period  immediately  following  the
death.

It  was  at  this  same  time  that  my  son-in-law,  Monsieur  Tricard,
an  instructor  in-  Cherbourg,  left  for  the  front,  and  for  the  same
region  north  of  Arras.  He  told  me  to  have  courage,  and  swore
that  he  would  do  everything  possible  to  find  the  grave  of  our  Georges.
He  kept  his  promise,  did  my  dear  son  whom  we  mourn  (Lieutenant
Tricard.  He  fell  at  Verdun,  in  September,  1916).  On  August  8,
1915,  he  sent  me  a  touching  letter,  which  I  still  have,  with  the  map
of  the  cemetery  in  which  my  poor  child  lay.  This  map  had  been
given  him  by  the  chaplain  of  the  regiment  who  had  conducted  the
burial  service;  he  had  set  down  the  details  I  wished  for,  on  the
second  page  of  a  book.  I  enclose  this  map  [it  is  not  given  here].
On  it  the  graves  are  represented  by  parallel  lines,  and  one  of  these
lines,  longer  than,  the  others,  has  opposite  it  the  words:  '^13th
grave,  G.  Demeantis."

My  emotion  may  be  imagined!  The  above  picture,  which  I  had
seen  in  my  sleep,  during  one  of  the  nights  that  followed  my  child's
death,  'returned  to  my  mind,  and  this  disturbing  association  gave
me  not  merely  hope  but  conviction,  apart  from  any  religious  dogma :
the  conviction  that  the  best  of  us  does  not  perish  with  the  body;
that  the  spirits  of  those  we  have  lost  still  exist  and  go  on  living,
apart  from  our  little  sphere.  And  from  the  bottom  of  my  heart
I  give  thanks  to  the  great  thinkers  who,  rising  above  skeptical,
materialistic  critics,  laboriously  seek  to  find  scientific  proofs  of  the
immortality  of  the  soul.

P.  S. — When,  in  August,  1919,  in  the  Roclincourt  sector,  the
bodies  of  these  poor  unfortunates  were  exhumed,  that  of  our  dear
Georges  was  found  in  the  row  indicated  upon  the  map,  and  at  the
spot  revealed  in  my  dream.  He  was  in  a  special  grave,  between
two  sheets  of  corrugated  iron,  buried  twenty-five  centimeters  deeper
than  the  twelve  bodies  beside  him.


198  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

He  now  lies  in  the  Roclincourt  soldiers'  graveyard.

L.  Demeantis.
(Letter  4714.)

Apart  from  any  question  of  sentiment,  the  incident  is  most
interesting.  In  the  first  place,  there  can  be  no  doubt  as  to
the  narrator's  sincerity  and  intelligence.  However,  since  I
apply  impartially  my  methods  of  investigation,  I  must  state
that  I  obtained  confirmation  of  her  high  intelligence,  from
my  learned  friend  Dr.  Valleteau  de  Moulliac  of  Cherbourg.
Nov^,  what  line  can  a  critical  investigation  take  in  this  case?
By  what  hypotheses  can  the  phenomenon  be  explained?

(1)  The  first  hypothesis,  namely,  ''It  is  not  true;  it  is  a
story  which  the  narrator  made  up,"  cannot  apply  in  this
case.

(2)  We  may  assume  that  the  number  thirteen,  seen  in
the  dream,  was  meaningless,  was  evoked  by  the  mental  suf-
fering of  the  afflicted  mother,  and  that  its  coincidence  with
the  location  of  the  grave  was  purely  accidental.  But  does
this  explanation  satisfy  us  ?  The  circumstances  in  which  this
vision  occurred,  the  mother's  desire  to  know  whether  her  son
had  received  proper  burial — must  not  these  things  be  taken
into  account  when  we  pass  judgment?

(3)  We  may  assume  that  the  dead  son  did  not  cause  the
vision,  on  the  supposition  that  Madame  Demeantis  was  gifted
with  clairvoyance  and  that  she  saw  the  row  of  graves  men-
tally. Such,  a  supposition  would  be  confirmed  by  all  the  ex-
amples of  vision  at  a  distance  which  my  readers  know  of.
But  such  was  not  the  case:  she  saw  neither  the  cemetery
nor  the  grave,  and  there  was  no  number  above  the  grave.

(4)  The  most  direct  explanation  must  be  preferred  to
those  hypotheses :  that  there  was  thought-communication  'be-
tween the  mother  and  the  son,  telepathic  waves  which  took
the  form  of  the  number  indicating  the  spot  where  this  grave
was.     It  seems  to  me  that  by  reasoning  logically  we  must


ONE  DAY  TO  ONE  WEEK  AFTER  DEATH      199

reach  this  conclusion.  We  know  of  other  similar  cases;  for
example,  that  which  my  readers  will  find  farther  on — among
the  manifestations  observed  more  than  three  years  after  death
— the  case  of  an  officer  killed  in  the  same  circumstances.
His  mother  had  wished  earnestly  that  she  knew  where
he  had  been  buried  (Letter  4378,  page  286.)  She  learned
of  the  spot  through  the  apparition  of  her  son  between  a  Rus-
sian and  a  German.  These  were  examples  of  thought-trans-
mission between  a  mother  and  son.  We  cannot  guess  how
the  transmission  was  accomplished  but  it  is  evidence  of  the
fact  that  human  beings  survive  in  a  state  that  is  unknowable,
so  far  as  our  earthly  senses  are  concerned.

The  following  is  a  totally  different  sort  of  manifestation.
Monsieur  Armand  Moulin,  an  employee  of  the  State  Rail-
roads, in  a  position  of  importance,  wrote  me  on  August  28,
1921:

My  dear  Master,  I  must  inform  you  that  my  grandmother  has
just  told  me,  for  the  tenth  time,  perhaps,  of  the  following  occurrence.
It  took  place  in  her  husband's  family — that  of  my  grandfather.

She  had  a  brother-in-law  who  died  when  he  was  about  twenty-
five.  During  his  illness,  when  he  wished  to  call  his  mother  he
struck  three  blows  on  a  wooden  chest  near  his  bed.  Before  his  last
moments  he  expressed  a  desire  that  after  his  death  prayers  should
be  said  for  the  repose  of  his  soul.  His  father,  who  did  not  believe
in  the  Catholic  religion,  did  not  have  this  done.  A  few  nights  after
his  death  his  mother  felt  a  strange  pressure,  which  frightened  her
greatly.  Then  she  heard  three  blows  similar,  in  loudness,  to  those
which  her  son  used  to  strike  before  his  death.  These  blows  came
from  the  chest  that  was  still  near  the  deceased  man's  bed.  The
father,  too,  felt  the  pressure  and  heard  the  three  blows.

This  phenomenon  occurred  on  several  nights,  and  my  grand-
mother was  so  agitated  by  it  that  she  no  longer  went  to  bed.  At
last  her  husband  consented  to  have  the  masses  said,  and  all  ceased
immediately.

In  spite  of  the  fact  that  a  great  many  years  have  gone  by  since


200  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

this  happened,  it  will  be  very  easy  for  you  if  you  wish  to  make  an
investigation.  My  grandmother  is  still  living,  and  her  children,  too.
I  can  vouch  for  their  perfect  good  faith,  and  I  have  heard  them
tell  of  it  frequently.

If  you  wish  to  make  use  of  the  story  in  your  works  (I  am  an
ardent  admirer  of  them)  I  shall  authorize  this  with  pleasure,  in
the  interests  of  the  goal  which  you  have  set  yourself.

Marc  Moulin^

(Letter  4637.)  Paris.

According  to  my  usual  method  of  following  things  up,  I
asked  the  author  if  there  were  still  witnesses  of  the  occurrence.
His  reply,  sent  from  Bussiere-Poitevin,  on  September  4,  1921,
gave  me  confirmation  of  all  details.  The  letter  ended  as
follows :

In  the  opinion  of  my  grandparents  it  was,  without  any  doubt,
the  spirit  of  their  son  which  demanded  that  the  masses  he  had  asked
for  be  said.     He  had  left  the  money  necessary  to  have  this  done.
Catherine  Dupont  (married  name:  Colix).

I  also  consider  it  a  duty  to  guarantee  the  authenticity  of  the
incidents  related  above.

Rose  Dupont  (married  name:  Drodrier).
(Letter  4681.)

This  story,  like  so  many  others,  raises  more  than  one  ques-
tion. Would  it  not  seem,  in  the  first  place,  that  the  demand
for  masses  was  in  the  minds  of  those  still  living,  and  that
consequently  they  themselves  might  have  caused  the  noises,
unconsciously?     But  how?     This  we  cannot  fathom.

If  it  was  really  the  dead  man  who  demanded  the  prayers,
why  did  he  do  so?  We  see  here  the  continuation  of  the
Catholic  belief  in  purgatory,  in  the  Church  suffering,  the
Church  militant  (living  Christians),  and  the  Church  trium-
phant (those  in  heaven).  But  nothing  is  less  fully  proved,
nothing  less  admissible.    Where  is  this  heaven  ?    Where  is  this


ONE  DAY  TO  ONE  WEEK  AFTER  DEATH       201

purgatory  ?  Are  they  states  of  the  soul  in  space  ?  This  would,
indeed,  be  a  complete  metamorphosis  of  the  ancient  Christian
cosmography.     We  cannot  fathom  this,  either.

We  have  already  related  above  (page  176)  the  story  of  a
demand  for  masses  which  was  similar  to  the  preceding  one,
and  a  request  that  prayers  be  said  with  a  rosary  (Chapter
V,  page  176).  These  requests  for  prayers  surprise  us.  They
are  made  frequently,  and  it  is  my  duty  to  give  them  here.
How  shall  we  explain  them?  What  part  do  the  living  play
in  the  manifestations?

Cases  of  this  sort  occur  in  Catholic  families,  which  believe
in  souls  in  purgatory,  but  not  in  Protestant  families,  which
do  not  hold  the  belief.

We  may  think  that  there  is  autosuggestion.  A  man  hears
strange  noises,  tells  himself,  ''I  promised  to  have  prayers
said  for  him."     He  even  hears  a  voice,  demanding  them.

How  explain  the  fact  that  noises  cease  after  masses  have
been  said,  and  also  in  the  case  of  certain  haunted  houses?
It  occurs  to  us,  naturally,  that  these  noises  might  be  caused
by  the  hearers  themselves,  just  as  certain  responses,  by  spirit
rapping,  would  seem  to  be  dictated  by  those  making  the  ex-
periments.    But  how  could  the  hearers  cause  them?

Only  numerous  and  varied  comparisons  may  enlighten  us.

However  it  be,  I  must  mention  the  fact  that  demands  for
prayers,  requests  that  masses  be  said,  date  back,  so  far  as
tales  of  them  go,  to  very  early  times.  We  may  see  in  the
Van  Eyck  Museum,  in  Bruges,  a  book  consisting  of  two  leaves
that  is  significant.  It  shows  a  skeleton  counting  pieces  of
money  with  one  hand,  and  with  the  other  holding  a  written
contract  which,  unfulfilled,  had  been  found  by  a  priest.  At
this  very  moment  I  have  a  photograph  of  the  picture  before
my  eyes.  It  would  seem  to  represent  a  request  of  the  sort
we  are  discussing.

A  woman  who  was  visiting  the  museum  wrote  me,  in  this
connection   (Letter  4781),  that  she  knew  of  an  incident  of


202  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

the  kind  which  occurred  in  the  Department  of  Mayenne.  A
farmer's  wife,  terrified  by  mysterious  noises,  went  to  the
clergyman,  who  found  the  record  of  a  donation  for  masses
that  had  been  given  previously  and  later  forgotten.  The
masses  were  said,  and  the  uproar  ceased.

We  shall  return  to  this  enigma.

Among  the  arguments  against  the  authenticity  of  appari-
tions of  the  dead  which  our  powers  of  reasoning  may  sug-
gest, is  the  supposition  that  they  are  subjective  visions.  But
when  the  death  is  unknown  to  the  person  seeing  the  ap-
parition, this  explanation  can  no  longer  hold.  The  follow-
ing account  belongs  in  the  latter  class;  it  was  sent  me  from
Switzerland  on  May  29,  1899 :

I  am  seventy-six  years  old,  and  do  not  remember  seeing,  per-
sonally, any  supernatural  apparition.  But  here  is  an  incident  of
which  I  was  a  witness  in  my  childhood.

I  was  in  my  uncle's  living-room,  in  Winzenheim  (Alsace).  My
aunt  was  busy  piling  up  wood  in  the  kitchen.  Suddenly  I  beard
her  utter  a  terrible  cry.  Terrified,  she  came  into  the  room,  and
said,  weeping:  "My  sister  Hannah  is  dead!  She  appeared  to  me
behind  the  sticks  of  wood,  dressed  all  in  white!"  As  a  matter  of
fact,  this  sister,  who  lived  in  Grussenheim,  a  village  about  twenty
kilometers  from  ours,  had  died  some  days  previously.

G.  Bloche,

(Letter  420.)  Le  Loch.

Such  visions  are  not  infrequent.  A  similar  one  will  be
found  on  page  210.  The  following  one  belongs  in  the  same
category.  Lord  Beresford  sent  an  account  of  it  to  the  Eng-
lish Society  for  Psychical  Research.

It  was  in  the  spring  of  1864;  I  was  on  board  the  frigate  Raccoon
on  its  way  from  Gibraltar  to  Marseilles.  I  had  to  go  down  into  my
cabin  to  get  my  pipe.  Inside  the  cabin  I  saw  a  coffin  in  which  my
father  was  lying;  I  saw  this  as  distinctly  as  if  it  had  been  real!


ONE  DAY  TO  ONE  WEEK  AFTER  DEATH      203

I  was  deeply  impressed,  and  at  once  told  my  companions  what  had
happened;  they  were  seated  near  there,  between  the  cannon,  talking.
I  also  told  the  ship's  chaplain,  the  Rev.  Mr.  Onslow.  In  a  few
days  we  reached  Marseilles,  and  there  I  learned  of  my  father's
death;  he  had  been  buried  on  the  same  day  and  at  the  same  time
at  which  he  had  appeared  to  me  (half -past  twelve).  I  must  add
that  at  the  moment  of  the  apparition  there  was  splendid  weather,
and  that  I  was  feeling  no  uneasiness  as  to  my  father,  having  recently
received  reassuring  news  as  to  his  improved  health.  Between  my
father  and  me  there  had  always  been  a  great  bond  of  sympathy,
one  far  stronger  than  is  usual  between  a  man  of  seventy-two  and  a
young  man  of  twenty^ — for  such  were  our  respective  ages.

The  investigation  brought  out  the  fact  that  the  observer's
father  died  in  Kensington  on  April  29,  1864,  and  was  buried
on  May  4th.  The  vision  of  the  father  in  his  coffin  occurred
on  the  day  of  the  burial,  five  days  after  dissolution.  Was
it  the  dead  man  who  manifested  himself? — who  thought  of
his  son,  when  his  body  was  already  in  the  coffin?  Was  it
the  son  who,  suddenly  clairvoyant,  thought  of  his  father,
for  no  apparent  reason?  We  may  also  suppose  that  there
was  telepathic  transmission  between  a  relative  who  was  at
the  funeral  and  the  dead  man's  son,  but  is  this  not  even
less  probable  ?  In  any  case,  we  see  that  all  these  occurrences,
ignored   until   now,   deserve    our   attention.

We  know  of  Ernest  Renan's  love  for  his  sister  Henri ette,
and  we  know  that  a  sudden,  cruel  malady  came  near  to
cutting  short  their  days  at  the  same  time,  on  September  24,
1860,  in  Amschit,  near  Beirut.  We  read  on  one  of  the  great
writer's  most  touching  pages;

Two  or  three  times,  in  my  feverish  dreams,  there  came  to  me  a
terrible  doubt;  I  thought  I  heard  my  name  called  from  the  vault
from  where  her  body  lay!  The  presence  of  French  physicians  at
the  moment  of  her  death  disposes,  doubtless,  of  this  horrible  sup-
position." ^

^  Ma  soeur  Henriette   (1895),  p.  88.


204  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

The  skeptical  philosopher  does  not  appear  to  have  thought
of  the  possibility  of  posthumous  communication  between  his
dearly  loved  sister  and  himself.  Nevertheless  we  know  of
happenings  of  the  sort.  As  for  the  survival  after  death  of
his  sister's  soul,  he  writes,  farther  on:

Was  it  not  for  souls  like  hers  that  immortality  was  decreed  ?  Mat-
ter does  not  exist,  since  it  is  not  one;  the  atom  does  not  exist,
since  it  is  unconscious.  It  is  the  soul  which  exists,  when  it  has
really  left  its  mark  on  the  eternal  history  of  the  true  and  the  good.
The  really  eternal  part  of  each  of  us  is  his  connection  with  infini-
tude. It  is  in  God's  memory  that  Man  is  immortal.  It  is  there
that  our  Henriette,  forever  radiant,  forever  blameless,  lives  a  thou-
sand times  more  truly  than  at  the  period  when  she  was  struggling,
with  her  weak  organs,  to  create  her  spiritual  being;  when,  thrown
upon  the  world,  which  could  not  understand  her,  she  stubbornly
sought  perfection.  All  the  logic  of  the  system  of  our  universe
would  be  brought  to  nothing  if  such  reasoning  were  but  deception
and  illusion.

Despite  these  philosophical  ideas,  the  author  of  the  '*Vie
de  Jesus"  (''The  Life  of  Jesus")  did  not  believe  in  im-
mortality. By  his  way  of  thinking,  his  sister  Henriette  no
longer  exists  an  an  individual.  Then  what  do  the  preceding
lines  mean?  And  what  does  his  dedication  of  the  book  to
his  sister  Henriette  mean:  "In  God's  bosom,  where  you
are   at  rest"?

Kenan's  reminiscence  is  not  given  here  as  a  posthumous
manifestation  on  the  part  of  his  sister,  but  as  a  mere  ' '  possibil-
ity.''

In  closing  this  chapter,  I  shall  make  the  same  remark  that
I  did  at  the  end  of  the  two  preceding  ones:  not  one  of  the
accounts  which  we  have  read  was  borrowed  from  spiritistic
experiments.  These  last  will  have  a  special  chapter  to  them-
selves.


ONE  DAY  TO  ONE  WEEK  AFTER  DEATH       205

The  foregoing  manifestations  were  observed  during  the
first  week  after  death.  Let  us  continue  our  investigation.
Following  this  same  chronological  order,  let  us  look  at  those
which  were  observed  from  one  week  to  one  month  after  death.


VII


MANIFESTATIONS  AND  APPARITIONS  FROM  ONE  WEEK
TO   ONE    MONTH    AFTER   DEATH

If  I  heard  people  speak  of  returned
spirits,  of  sorcery  or  other  tales  by  which
I  was  not  deceived,  I  used  to  feel  sorry
for  these  poor,  deceived  mortals.  I  now
find  that  I  myself  was  at  least  as  much
to   be   pitied.

Montaigne.

IF  we  wish  exact,  full,  and  rigorously  authenticated  in-
formation as  to  these  extraordinary  occurrences,  we
must  not  stop  here.  Perhaps  as  we  go  on  they  will
seem  to  us  more  and  more  fantastic,  more  and  more  un-
believable. But  we  must  remember  that  it  is  not  a  romance
that  we  are  reading,  but  accounts  of  visual  observation —
things  seen,  as  Victor  Hugo  would  say.  The  question  is
whether  the  old,  standard  hypothesis  of  hallucinations  can
still  be  accepted:  whether  so-called  positive  science  has  not
until  now,  been  on  a  wrong  tack.

The  following  manifestation,  eight  days  after  death,  was
strange  enough,  but  such  phenomena  are  not  very  infrequent.
I  am  taking  the  account  from  a  letter  sent  me  from  Paris
in  August,  1900,  by  some  one  living  near  the  house  in  which
my  brother's  publishing  business  is  conducted.

My  wife's  maternal  grandfather,  who  died  on  February  13,  1880,

was  living  in  the  home  of  his  son-in-law,  M.  S ,  librarian  of

the  Polytechnic  School.     About  eight  days  after  his  death  the  bell

in  M.  S 's'room,  on  the  ground  floor,  began  to  ring.     This  room

had  been  closed  since  the  burial.     The  whole  family  was  then  at
table  in  the  dining-room,  also  on  the  ground  floor.     The  servant

206


ONE  WEEK  TO  ONE  MONTH  AFTER  DEATH       207

was  in  the  kitchen  on  the  first  floor.  As  soon  as  this  noise  was
heard,  every  one  ran  into  the  room.  There  was  nothing  unusual
about  its  appearance,  but  the  bell-cord  was  still  in  motion.  The
same  manifestation  occurred  again  and  again — three  times,  at  in-
tervals.

E.  Reboul._,
(Letter  1066.)  Paris,  20  rue  de  Vaugirard.

My  readers  are  already  familiar  with  eases  of  bell-ringing,
unexplained  but  authentic.  This  last  one,  like  so  many
others,  can  leave  no  doubt  in  the  minds  of  those  who  know
and  value  the  narrator's  well-balanced  judgment.

Manifestations  of  the  sort  are  commonplace,  so  to  speak.
Cases  of   apparitions  are  rarer,   and  often  more   debatable.

We  wish,  here,  to  give  accounts  of  neither  illusions  nor
dreams  nor  imaginary  visions,  but  phenomena  precisely  ob-
served. Ghost-stories  are  usually  not  believed,  and  this  is
natural,  since  usually  they  are  related  with  a  blind  and  dis-
concerting credulity.  I,  for  my  part,  have  always  shown
little  disposition  to  believe  them;  I  have  not  accepted  them
until  I  have  made  as  close  a  critical  examination  as  possible.
It  is  absolutely  necessary  that  we  seek  to  learn  precisely  what
parts  are  true,  and  what  that  madcap,  imagination,  has
added;  this  is  always  difficult  to  determine.

The  best  proof  that  I  have  never  been  in  a  hurry  to  take
kindly  to  these  stories  is  the  fact  that  I  have  known  of  one
since  childhood,  which  I  have  never  made  public.  I  be-
lieve that  I  may  give  it  now.

It  happened  in  my  family  a  very  long  time  ago,  under
Louis  XVI,  in  1784.  My  maternal  great-grandmother  was  a
witness.  I  almost  knew  her,  for  when  she  died  in  1844,
aged  nearly  a  hundred,  I  was  two  years  old.  She  did  not
tell  it  to  me;  but  my  mother  did  so,  herself.

It  happened  in  Illoud,  a  little  village  in  the  County  of  Bar,
which  is  to-day  included  in  the  Department  of  Haute-Marne,


208  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

not  far  from  the  region  where  I  was  born ;  it  was  my  maternal
grandfather's  native  district.  During  the  whole  of  my  child-
hood I  spent  my  vacations  there,  on  the  vine-covered  slopes
opposite  Bourm.ont,  in  the  midst  of  a  smiling  country-side,
in  woods  full  of  the  songs  of  birds.  The  house  in  which  the
occurrence  took  place  is  still  standing;  it  is  at  the  entrance
of  the  village,  on  the  right,  and  is  called  ''the  chateau."
(It  now  belongs  to  one  of  my  cousins.)  When  in  1899  I
was  collecting  documents  for  my  investigation,  my  mother,
who  had  gone  back  to  her  native  region  at  that  very  time,
after  a  long,  laborious  life  in  Paris,  sent  me  the  following
account :

You  would  never  take  seriously  the  famous  story  of  "our  dead
Rollet"  which  you  so  often  heard  Papa  and  Mama  tell,  but  I  am
sending  it  to  you,  all  the  same.  You  may  do  what  you  like  with
it.  As  for  me,  I  have  never  had  reason  to  doubt  it.  This  Frangois
Rollet  was  the  brother  of  my  grandmother's  sister-in-law.  They
were  farming  people,  and  lived  together.  Some  time  after  this
worthy  man's  death  my  grandmother  went  to  the  kitchen  which  you
know,  on  the  ground  floor,  to  see,  like  a  good  housekeeper,  if  the
boiled  beef  and  broth  were  cooking  well.  She  saw  her  brother-in-
law  seated  at  the  corner  of  the  great  hearth,  as  though  he  were  alive.
Astounded,  she  fled.  A  short  time  afterward  the  young  men  came
back  from  the  fields.  One  of  them  told  her  that  he  was  very  hungry.
She  sent  him,  it  seems,  not  without  curiosity  but  without  telling
him  anything,  to  get  a  little  bacon  from  the  pot  which  was  simmer-
ing on  the  fire,  until  supper  time  should  come.  The  boy  went  away
eagerly,  but  when  he  was  putting  the  lid  back  on  the  pot  he  saw
the  phantom  and  began  to  shout:  "Good  God!  Our  dead  Rollet!"
I  have  heard  it  said,  too,  that  at  that  instant  a  farm-boy  began  to
swear,  and  that  this  oath  coincided  with  the  ghost's  sudden  dis-
appearance.

Such  is  my  mother's  story;  I  heard  it  also  from  my  grand-
mother's lips.     There  was  no  doubt  as  to  this  apparition,  in


ONE   WEEK  TO   ONE  MONTH  AFTER  DEATH      209

the  minds  of  members  of  the  family.  ''Our  dead  Rollet"  was
a  legendary,   though  most  unassuming  person.

It  was  generally  believed  that  this  was  an  imaginary  vi-
sion— an  hallucination  on  the  part  of  my  great-grandmother,
and  then  on  the  part  of  the  young  man  who  had  returned
from  the  fields.  She  stated  definitely  that  she  had  said
nothing  to  him,  wishing  the  amusement  of  seeing  his  sur-
prise, and  desirous  of  knowing  if  he,  too,  would  perceive  the
dead  man.  Neither  w^as  satisfied  by  this  hypothesis  of  an
hallucination,  for  they  were  both  positive  of  having  actually
seen  and  recognized  the  man;  he  was  calmly  seated  at  the
corner  of  the  hearth.

What  is  true,  in  this  story?     What  can  we  be  sure  of?

The  most  probable  explanation,  it  would  seem,  is  that  my
great-grandmother  (then  aged  thirty-nine)  was  the  victim
of  an  illusion,  which  she  described  to  those  about  her,  with-
out remembering  afterward  that  she  had  done  so.  We  may
read  in  a  most  informative  work  by  Briere  de  Boismont  en-
titled ''Les  Hallucinations"  of  a  great  number  of  most  inter-
esting experiences  of  the  sort.  But  when  we  have  read  this
standard  work,  we  have  a  strong  impression  that  the  word
''hallucination"  does  not  by  any  means  explain  all  the  cases.

That  this  worthy  man,  who  had  died  and  been  duly  buried,
came  to  sit  at  the  fireplace  in  his  usual  garments — this  is
what  we  are  asked  to  believe  and  will  not  admit.  Never-
theless, if  he  were  seen, — what  is  called  "seen," — an  explana-
tion of  the  incident  should  be  found,  as  in  the  case  of  so
many  others.

My  mother,  whose  absolute  sincerity  and  mental  poise
(despite  her  unshakable  convictions  as  to  Catholicism,  in
the  face  of  which  no  reasoning  could  prevail)  were  valued
by  all  those  who  knew  her,  held  this  story  to  be  absolutely  au-
thentic. She  was  all  the  more  ready  to  believe  it  because  she
knew  of   similar   experiences   in  her   family — the  following


210  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

one,    among   others.     I    am   taking    an   account   of  it   from
another  letter,  written  in  1899:

Eugenie  Biehet,  whom  you  knew  when  you  were  a  child,  (she
was  the  first  wife  of  our  cousin  Lomon  de  Bourmont,  the  watioh-
maker)  lost  her  mother  when  she  was  not  much  more  than  fourteen
or  fifteen.^  Twice,  at  nightfall,  when  she  was  going  to  the  wood-
shed, a  small  structure  in  front  of  the  house — on  two  separate
occasions,  I  repeat — she  saw,  with  her  own  eyes,  her  mother  sitting
on  the  woodpile.  She  was  so  frightened  that  she  would  not  go
back  there.  There  are  still  persons  who  can  remember  her  re-
peated affirmations,  I  among  others.

As  for  me,  I  never  saw  anything,  and  I  should  have  so  liked  to
see  your  poor  father!

Until  now  such  visions  have  been  regarded  by  almost
every  one  as  simple  hallucinations.  But  in  this  work  we  wish
to  analyze  the  subject  fully,  in  entire  freedom  of  mind,  and
to  compare  observations.  The  preceding  chapters  show  that
we  are  justified  in  giving  the  subject  our  sustained  atten-
tion, such  as  that  given  scientific  research.

At  the  beginning  of  this  chapter,  we  quote  one  of  Mon-
taigne's reflections.     La  Rouchefoucauld  wrote,  as  his  view:

True  love  is  like  the  apparition  of  spirits:  every  one  talks  about
it,  but  few  have  seen  it.  It  is  eertam,  indeed,  that  our  personal
sources  of  information  on  this  question  are  much  less  numerous
than  our  second-hand  sources,  and  still  less  numerous  than  our
third-hand  sources,  or  those  still  further  removed.  But  it  could
not  be  otherwise,  since  those  who  give  us  information  are  more  or
less  numerous,  while  each  of  us  is  the  only  observer  of  those  things
which  happen  to  him  personally.  This  is  an  additional  reason  why
we  should  carefully  record  what  seems  authentic  to  us.

Our  age  is  no  less  rich  in  posthumous  manifestations  than
that  of  La  Eouchefoucauld  or  Montaigne.     But  only  now  are

1  I  am  not  omitting  these  rather  intimate  details,  because  the  oc-
currence in  question  was  known  to  my  family.


ONE   WEEK  TO   ONE  MONTH  AFTER  DEATH      211

we  beginning  to  analyze  them  rigorously.     I  hope  that  this
present  work  will  definitely  establish  their  reality.

In  ''L'Inconnu/'  page  552,  there  is  an  account  of  a  re-
markably precise  premonitory  dream  which  Monsieur  Amedee
Basset,  had;  he  was  a  notary  in  Vitrac,  Charente.  Here  is
the  story  of  an  apparition  seen  by  his  father,  a  landowner  in
Upper  Vienna.  As  a  preface  to  it,  I  am  giving  a  letter
showing  the  great  importance  which  the  author  himself  at-
taches to  this  investigation :

Vitrac,  April  27,  1899.

Although  very  much  absorbed  by  my  studies,  I  cannot  resist  a
desire  to  express  my  great  admiration  for  your  research,  published
under  a  name  which  should  captivate  all  those  anxious  to  gain  en-
lightenment, "L'Inconnu"!  The  problems,  a  scientific  solution  of
which  you  hope  for,  are  in  truth  those  that  every  one  should  be
familiar  with,  for  in  my  opinion  there  is  no  question  that  is  of
greater  importance  to  this  poor  human  race  of  ours!

To  catch  a  glimpse  of — or,  rather,  to  prove  that  Lavoisier's
famous  statement,  "Nothing  is  created,  nothing  is  lost,  all  is  trans-
formed," is  applicable  not  only  to  what  we  agree  to  call  matter
but  to  all  that  makes  up  the  world;  to  prove  that  all  in  nature  is
interconnected,  and  that  everything  that  is  was  caused  by  something
else,  whether  it  be  a  question  of  thought  or  of  material  e?iergy — is
there  a  problem  more  captivating,  the  solution  of  which  should  lead
to  happier  results?

When  I  was  a  member  of  the  priesthood  I  took  an  intense  interest
in  these  questions,  and  I  set  down  in  a  note-book  (unfortunately,
I  lost  it)  the  result  of  my  investigations.  But  I  remember  that  I
had  come  to  a  realization  of  the  fact  that  our  ideas  as  to  existence
are  contrary  to  reality,  that  time  and  space  cannot  be  defined
rationally  and  that  an  invisible  but  powerful  bond  joins  all  the
worlds.

In  my  humble  opinion,  absolute  space  exists  nowhere,  and  infini-
tude is  peopled  by  beings,  by  forces,  if  you  will.  In  order  to  come
within  the  sphere  of  our  senses — that  is  to  say,  in  order  that  we
should  realize  their  existence — these  need  only  an  agent  ad  hoc,
such  as  the  vital  fluid  which  causes  them  to  materialize.     I  reached


212  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

the  conclusion  that  mediums  have,  to  put  it  simply,  the  power  to
produce  doubles  of  themselves,  the  power  to  lend  their  vital  fluid
to  the  energy,  the  spirit  which  is  seeking  to  enter  into  communication
with  them.
(Letter  640.)

This  letter  shows  us  that  the  questions  which  we  are  in-
vestigating here  are  of  interest  to  all  social  classes.  It  told
of  the  dream  given  above,  and  then  went  on  to  describe  the
strange  apparition  of  some  one  dead  which  we  are  about  to
give.  This  story  is  all  the  more  worthy  of  attention  from  the
fact  that  (1)  we  are  concerned  with  a  phantom  seen  in  broad
daylight;  (2)  the  observer  followed  the  shade  for  so  long  a
time  that  the  hypothesis  of  hallucination  is  not  applicable,
here.  What  was  it  ?  I  do  not  know,  but  there  the  facts  are.
Monsieur  Basset  wrote :

My  father  saw  on  several  occasions,  and  very  distinctly,  the  phan-
tom of  a  man  who  had  been  dead  for  a  month.  On  one  of  these
occasions  he  saw  him  under  the  following  circumstances.  He  was
dressed  in  holiday  attire,  probably  the  garments  in  which  he  had
been  buried.  He  was  seen  crossing  the  road  which  skirts  the
cemetery;  then  he  climbed  the  slope  beside  this  road,  and  went
toward  the  gate  of  the  cemetery,  where  he  disappeared.  It  was
about  five  o'clock  in  the  afternoon.

In  the  evening,  before  sitting  down  to  the  table,  my  father  was
taking  his  daily  walk,  accompanied  by  one  of  his  friends,  when
suddenly  he  saw,  leaving  the  road  A,  opposite  the  cemetery  (I
am  enclosing  a  sketch  of  the  vicinity),  a  man  who,  in  the  most
natural  way,  crossed  the  road  B.  This  man  climbed  the  slope  C,
a  slope  five  to  six  meters  high,  with  the  greatest  ease  (I  am  quoting
the  passage  in  my  father's  letter  word  for  word).  He  reached  the
point  E,  where  there  is  a  platform  at  the  level  of  the  cemetery,
then,  still  walking  straight  before  him,  entered  the  cemetery  by
the  gate  F.  Nothing  can  make  us  admit  that  my  father  was  the
victim  of  an  hallucination,  for,  as  he  observes,  it  was  only  when
he  saw  the  phantom  climb  the  slope  so  easily  that  he  was  surprised.


ONE  WEEK  TO  ONE  MONTH  AFTER  DEATH    213


Only  then  did  he  remember  that  this  man    (named  Boireau)   was
dead.

Unfortunately,  my  father  does  not  remember  whether  the  person
who  was  with  him  saw  the  phantom,  but  he  stated  definitely  that
this  person  had  been  on  very  bad  terms  with  the  deceased.  What
is  certain  is  that  my  father  spoke  of  this  that  same  evening  and
gave  as  an  explanation  of  the  apparition  the  mutual  hatred  of  his
friend  and  the  dead  man.

My  father  is  prepared  to  give  you  such  supplementary  details  as
may  seem  helpful  to  you.  I  am  giving  you  his  address  in  Upper
Vienna.

Amedee  Basset.


Monsieur  Basset  and  his  son  do  not  admit  that  the  hypoth-


214  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

esis  of  an  hallucination  explains  this  case.  The  occur-
rence was  observed  very  coolly,  very  simply,  very  naturally,
as  though  it  had  been  any  commonplace  meeting.

It  is  curious  that  among  the  hundreds — the  thousands —
of  stories  I  have  been  collecting  for  fifty  years,  there  is  one
which  is  absolutely  like  the  preceding  one.  It  was  told  by
Dr.  Fugairon,  doctor  of  medicine  and  of  sciences;  he  pub-
lished it  in  his  book  ''La  Survivance  de  I'ame" — ''The  Im-
mortality of  the  Soul"— (Paris,  1907).     Here  it  is:

The  accompanying  sketch  shows  the  west  entrance  to  the  little
village  of  Savignac,  situated  in  the  high  valley  of  the  Ariege.  The
reader  can  see  that,  on  the  left,  a  road  runs  between  the  graveyard
and  the  park  before  the  chateau.  The  national  highway  skirts  the
whole  length  of  the  gardens  and  park  of  the  chateau,  as  well  as  the
cemetery.

At  seven  o'clock  in  the  evening  in  the  month  of  October,  1837,
my  grandmother  and  her  two  younger  sisters  were  walking  along
the  road.  They  were  going  back  to  the  village  and  were  at  the
points  M  and  G,  when  they  saw,  almost  in  front  of  them,  a  gentle-
man dressed  in  gray,  with  a  cane  in  his  hand.  His  soft  felt  hat
was  gray  and  his  trousers  as  well,  but  the  latter  were  darker  than
his  vest  and  frock-coat.  My  mother  said  to  her  mother:  "If  my
uncle  had  n't  died  a  month  ago,  you  'd  believe  that  was  he ;  that
man  is  dressed  like  him,  and  has  the  same  walk."  Since  night
was  falling,  they  could  not  see  his  face  very  well.

My  two  aunts  said,  "Let 's  go  and  see  who  it  is."  And  they  be-
gan to  run.

When  they  reached  the  points  TT  and  the  walker  had  arrived
at  the  point  F,  thirty  paces  from  them,  he  stopped  short  and  strode
from  F  to  A,  stepping  over  the  wall,  eighty  centimeters  high,
which  skirts  the  meadow  and  divides  it  from  the  highway.  It  is
impossible  to  take  this  at  one  stride,  for  the  distance  from  F  to  A
is  more  than  three  meters.  My  two  aunts  cried  out,  "Oh,  what  a
stride !"  At  that  moment  the  phantom  vanished  into  the  air.  They
ran  to  the  spot  where  he  had  disappeared,  to  see  if  he  had  not
fallen  from  the  wall.     They  walked  this  way  and  that  over  the


ONE  WEEK  TO  ONE  MONTH  AFTER  DEATH    215

East


G


t^i   4    +    >    t   f    t    f

Cemeter  y      e^
i  1


t  f  -r


iamgmxiusrcnrmu^^-Lu:


•F/efd-


Field


yMea


do


w


west

meadow  (the  grass  on  it  was  very  short)  but  they  saw  no  one.
This  apparition  was  seen  by  four  persons,  in  no  way  the  victims
of  hallucinations.  My  younger  aunt  died  in  1895,  aged  seventy-
five.  Some  time  before  she  died  she  told  me  of  this  apparition;
her  description  corresponded  to  my  mother's,  who  had  given  me  an
account  of  it  several  times.


I  should  like  to  ask  the  impartial  reader,  who  has  just
had  these  lines  before  him,  if  it  does  not  seem  to  him  that
the  two  independent  occurrences  bear  each  other  out;  that
the  old  hypothesis  of  hallucination  is  most  improbable  as
applied  to  these  various  experiences,  and  that  in  the  two
cases  the  dead  man  would  seem  really  to  have  been  wander-
ing not  far  from  his  grave.

The  following  incident  occurred  in  Haute-Marne,  and  one
of  my  eminent  compatriots  told  me  of  it;


216  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

Monsieur  de  Maricourt  bad  made  a  journey  to  Brittany,  to  see
several  relatives.  It  was  in  the  time  of  Napoleon  III.  On  the
trip,  letters  had  not  been  reaching  him  regularly.  As  for  telegrams,
there  were  no  offices  in  any  of  these  out-of-the-way  places.  The
railroad  to  Wassy  was  not  yet  built;  people  had  to  go  to  Saint-
Dizier  to  take  trains,  and  a  little  mail-coach  went  from  one  of
these  places  to  the  other.  Monsieur  de  Maricourt  had  taken  this
coach,  to  go  back  home.  The  road  skirted  the  cemetery ;  about
noon  he  saw  his  son  at  the  gate,  looking  at  him  as  he  went  by.
The  young  man  looked  so  natural  that  his  father  thought  for  a
moment  of  having  the  coach  stopped  so  that  he  could  get  off  and
go  back  with  him.  He  thought  that  there  had  been  a  funeral  and
that  his  son  was  coming  out,  after  having  been  present  at  the  cere-
mony. When  he  reached  home  he  learned  of  the  death,  more  or
less  sudden,  of  his  son.     He  had  been  buried  several  days  before.

Long  afterward,  when  telling  of  the  occurrence.  Monsieur  de
Maricourt  used  still  to  weep.

These  three  cases  that  were  so  alike  (there  are  many
others)  v^ould  lead  us  to  conclude  that  the  dead  wander  at
times  in  the  neighborhood  of  their  graves..  But  among  the
other  difficulties  that  stand  in  the  way  of  an  admission  of  the
objective  reality  of  occurrences  of  the  sort,  is  not  the  chief
obstacle  that  of  the  clothing  seen  by  witnesses?

May  we  attempt  an  explanation?

Yes.

If  we  grant  that  the  dead  person  be  there,  near  us, — as  an
invisible  spirit,  an  immaterial  shade,  a  being  different  from
us,  not  perceptible  through  our  physical  senses, — we  may
grant,  also,  that  the  same  person  affects  our  mind  psychically
and  that  his  influence  is  revealed  to  us  in  a  perceptible  form.
So-and-so  is  there,  and  acts  upon  our  brains  through  unknown
psychic  waves.  His  influence  takes  the  form,  in  us,  of  an
image  of  the  person  whom  we  have  known.  Witnesses  see
him  in  the  shape  in  which  they  knew  him.  The  ghost  may
be  real  and  invisible,  and  become  visible  to  us — may  assume


ONE  WEEK  TO  ONE  MONTH  AFTER  DEATH     217

a  shape  so  far  as  our  minds,  our  optic  nerves,  and  our  ret-
inas are  concerned.  It  may  affect  certain  cerebral  fibers,  and
remain  invisible  to  brains  not  attuned  to  its  vibrations.

Apparitions  of  doubles  of  the  living  are  probably  of  this
same  sort.  When  Mrs.  Wilmot  went  to  see  her  husband
aboard  a  ship,  after  a  storm,  and  was  seen  by  him  and  by  the
man  with  whom  he  shared  his  cabin  (William  Fait),  her
spirit  alone  had  crossed  the  sea  and  was  there  before  her
husband.  Nevertheless  both  of  them  saw  her,  in  her  night-
dress. (''L'Inconnu/'  pages  488-492.)  All  the  cases  of
doubles  are  similar.  The  phenomenon  is  both  objective,  out-
side the  seer,  real,  and  subjective,  in  so  far  as  the  seer  inter-
prets it.

However  strange  they  be,  ghost-stories  are  founded  on  ob-
servation, and  they  can  be  explained  neither  as  hallucina-
tions nor  as  illusions.  It  is  not  scientific  to  deny  them,  be-
cause of  preconceived  ideas,  or  to  dismiss  them  without  an
investigation.

Adolphe  d'Assier,  an  independent  seeker  and  a  positivist
of  the  school  of  Auguste  Comte,  stated  that  he  was  writing
a  work  on  the  vsubject  of  ghosts,  and  that  the  ideas  in  the
book  '*are  as  far  from  the  reveries  of  mysticism  as  they  are
from  the  hallucinations  of  the  spiritualists."  Things  which
seem  impossible  to  us  and  which  have  been  regarded  as  ficti-
tious by  the  most  serious-minded  savants  are  nevertheless
real.  In  this  book^  he  related  that  he  had  seen  all  the
natives  of  his  canton  agitated  by  the  following  episode:

The  Abbe  Peytoux,  parish  priest  of  Sentenac  (Ariege)  had  just
died.  During  the  following  days  noises  made  themselves  heard
in  the  parsonage;  they  were  so  strange  and  so  persistent  that  the
officiating  priest  who  had  succeeded  the  Abbe  Peytoux  was  on  the
point  of  leaving  the  house.  The  country  people,  as  ignorant  as
they  were  superstitious,  had  no  difficulty  in  explaining  the  prodigy.

^Esmi  sur  Vhufnanite  posthmme,  by  a  positivist  (Paris,  1883).


218  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

They  declared  that  the  soul  of  the  dead  man  was  restless  because
he  had  not  had  time,  before  his  death,  to  say  all  the  masses  for
which  he  had  received  payment.  Brought  up  to  believe  in  the
Christian  dogma,  they  told  themselves  that  the  dead  priest  had
definitely  left  this  earth  for  one  of  these  three  posthumous  abiding-
places:  heaven,  hell,  or  purgatory.  They  supposed  that  the  doors
of  the  two  abodes  of  correction  were  too  firmly  locked  for  him  to
be  able  to  return.

But  let  us  listen  to  the  ghost-story.  It  is  really  the  most
curious  one  of  that  period,  as  much, on  account  of  the  dura-
tion of  the  manifestations  as  because  of  the  forms  they  took;
a  large  number  of  natives  of  the  region  v^itnessed  them.

Monsieur  d'Assier  addressed  himself,  in  order  to  have  a
more  or  less  exact  report,  to  Monsieur  Auge,  the  former
school-teacher  in  Sentenac.  The  latter,  after  having  ques-
tioned the  old  people  of  the  village  as  to  what  they  had  seen
or  heard,  sent  in  the  following  statement  as  to  his  investiga-
tion:

Sentenac-de-Serou,  May  8,  1870.
(I)  When,  about  forty-five  years  ago,  Peytoux,  the  parish  priest
of  Sentenac,  died,  every  evening,  as  soon  as  night  fell,  some  one
was  heard  moving  chairs  in  the  rooms  of  the  parsonage,  walking
about,  and  opening  and  closing  a  snuff-box ;  there  was  also  the  sound
of  a  man  taking  a  pinch  of  snuff.  This  phenomenon,  which  was
repeated  over  a  long  period,  was  believed  in  by  those  most  ingenuous
and  most  given  to  fear.  Those  who — if  I  may  be  allowed  the  ex-
pression— were  the  strong-minded  ones  of  the  commune,  put  no
faith  in  all  this.  They  merely  laughed  at  all  those  who  believed
that  the  dead  priest  was  coming  back.  A  man  named  Eycheinne
(Antoine)  who  was  mayor  of  the  commune  at  that  time  (he  has
been  dead  for  five  years),  and  one  named  Galy  (Baptiste),  who  is
still  living,  were  the  only  men  in  the  region  who  had  any  education.
They  were  the  most  incredulous  of  all,  and  they  wished  to  ascer-
tain for  themselves  if  all  the  nocturnal  noises  said  to  be  heard  in
the  parsonage  had  some  basis  in  fact,  or  were  merely  the  product


ONE  WEEK  TO  ONE  MONTH  AFTER  DEATH    219

of  the  over-impressionable  imaginations  of  those  easily  frightened.
One  evening,  armed,  one  of  them  with  a  gun  and  the  other  with  an
ax,  they  resolved  to  go  and  spend  the  night  in  the  parsonage,  thor-
oughly determined  not  to  be  duped  if  they  heard  anything.  They
sat  down  in  the  kitchen,  near  a  good  fire,  and  began  to  talk  about
the  simple-mindedness  of  the  natives,  when,  in  a  room  above  their
heads,  they  heard  a  noise.  Then  they  heard  chairs  being  moved
about,  and  some  one  walking.  Next,  the  steps  were  heard  coming
downstairs  and  going  toward  the  kitchen.  They  rose.  Eycheinne
went  to  the  kitchen  door,  holding  his  ax  in  one  hand,  ready  to
strike  any  one  who  should  dare  to  enter.  Galy  brought  his  gun  to
his  shoulder.

When  the  person  who  seemed  to  be  walking  about  reached  the
kitchen  door,  he  took  a  pinch  of  snuff;  that  is,  the  men  heard  the
same  sounds  that  a  man  taking  a  pinch  of  snuff  makes.  Then,
instead  of  opening  the  kitchen  door,  the  ghost  went  into  the  parlor,
where  he  seemed  to  walk  up  and  down.  Eycheinne  and  Galy,  still
armed,  left  the  kitchen,  entered  the  parlor,  and  saw  absolutely
nothing.  They  went  up  into  the  other  rooms,  went  through  the
house  from  top  to  bottom,  looked  in  all  the  corners,  and  found
neither  chairs  nor  anything  else  out  of  place.  Eycheinne,  who  had
been  the  more  incredulous  of  the  two,  then  said  to  his  companion:
"My  friend,  those  noises  were  n't  made  by  living  people.  It 's  Mon-
sieur Peytoux.  What  we  heard  was  his  walk  and  his  way  of  taking
snuff;  we  can  sleep  quietly."

(II)  Marie  Calvet  was  Monsieur  Ferre's  maid-servant;  he  was
Monsieur  Peytoux's  successor.  She  was  a  brave  woman,  if  there
ever  was  one.  She  did  not  allow  herself  to  be  frightened  by  any-
thing; she  did  not  believe  all  the  stories  that  were  told,  and  she
would  have  slept  in  a  church  without  fear,  as  the  common  expres-
sion goes  when  one  wishes  to  characterize  a  person  who  is  not
terrified  by  anything.  This  servant,  as  I  was  saying,  was  cleaning
the  kitchen  utensils  one  evening,  at  nightfall,  in  the  barn.  Mon-
sieur Feire,  her  master,  who  had  gone  to  call  on  his  neighbor
Desplas,  a  parish  priest,  was  not  due  to  return.  While  Marie  Calvet
was  busy  giving  her  utensils  a  good  scrubbing,  a  priest  passed
before  her,  without  speaking.  "Oh,  you  can't  scare  me,  Monsieur,"
she  said.    "I'm  not  so  stupid  as  to  believe  that  Monsieur  Peytoux


220  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

has  come  back."  Since  the  priest  who  had  passed,  and  whom  she
had  taken  for  her  master,  did  not  answer,  she  lifted  her  head,
turned  around,  and  saw  no  one.  Then  fear  began  to  master  her,
and  she  went  over  to  some  neighbors,  quickly,  to  tell  them  what  had
just  happened  and  to  ask  Galy's  wife  to  come  and  sleep  with  her.

(Ill)  Anne  Maurette,  the  wife  of  Ferran  (she  is  still  living)
was  going  to  the  mountain,  at  daybreak,  with  her  donkey,  to  get  a
load  of  wood.  Passing  by  the  parsonage  garden,  she  saw  a  priest
who,  with  a  rosary  in  his  hand,  was  walking  along  a  path.  Just
as  she  was  going  to  say  to  him,  "Good-day,  sir ;  you  've  got  up
early,"  the  priest  turned  his  back  and  went  on  saying  his  beads.
The  woman,  not  wishing  to  interrupt  him  in  his  prayers,  continued
on  her  way  without  any  thought  of  a  ghost  coming  into  her  mind.
When  she  was  returning  from  the  mountain,  with  her  donkey  loaded
with  wood,  she  met  the  new  priest  of  Sentenac  before  the  church.
"You  got  up  early,  sir,"  she  said.  "I  thought  that  you  were  going
on  a  trip  whea  I  passed  by  and  saw  you  saying  your  prayers  in
the  garden." — "No,  my  good  woman,"  the  priest  answered,  "I
have  n't  been  out  of  bed  long ;  I  Ve  just  said  holy  mass." — "Why,
then,"  the  woman  answered,  as  though  seized  with  fright,  "who
was  the  priest  who  was  telling  his  beads  in  your  garden  at  day-
break? He  turned  his  back  just  as  I  was  going  to  speak  to  him.
I  'd  have  been  scared  to  death  if  I  'd  thought  that  it  was  the  priest
who 's  no  longer  alive.  O  Lord !  0  Lord !  I  won't  have  the  cour-
age to  go  by  here  again  in  the  morning."

There,  Monsieur,  are  three  occurrences  which  were  not  fabricated
by  the  morbid  imaginations  of  frightened  people.  I  doubt  if  science
can  explain  them  in  any  natural  way.  Was  it  a  ghost?  I  shall
not  say  that  it  was,  but,  all  the  same,  it  was  something  that  Avas
not  natural.

J.  AUGE.

Such  is  the  story  of  the  teacher  in  Sentenac.  I  think  with
d'Assier  that  it  is  very  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to  reject  the
testimonj^,  even  if  all  this  be  inexplicable,  as  were  meteorites
in  the  seventeenth  century.  We  may  object  that  after  forty-
five  years  recollections  may  have  lost  their  precision.    But


ONE  WEEK  TO  ONE  MONTH  AFTER  DEATH     221

the  occurrences  were  so  simple  and  of  so  commonplace  a  na-
ture that  time  could  not  have  caused  much  distortion.  I
should  like  to  remark  in  this  connection  that  I  am  writing
these  lines  in  1921,  and  I  remember,  as  though  they  had  hap-
pened yesterday,  certain  details  of  the  "War  of  1870.  I  took
part  in  it  as  a  captain  in  the  Engineers,  and  it  was  my  duty
to  keep  the  Prussians  under  observation;  they  were  seeking
to  gain  a  footing  on  the  slopes  of  Meudon.  Shells  were  fired
at  this  spot  from  the  fortresses  of  Montrouge,  Vanves,  and
Issy;  these  were  connected  telegraphically  with  our  Muette
observation-post.  My  recollections  of  this  are  absolutely  pre-
cise.    The  teacher's  story  may  be  accepted  as  authentic.

That  the  worthy  priest  who  had  died  came  back  to  his
parsonage,  walked  up  and  down  there,  used  his  snuff-box,  and
told  his  beads,  at  an  early  morning  hour,  in  the  path  in  which
he  had  usually  done  so — all  this  seems  a  tale  which  our  most
elementary  powers  of  reasoning  must  reject.

What  then?

''Stones  cannot  fall  from  the  sky,"  said  Lavoisier.

"The  earth  cannot  rotate,"  said  Ptolemy.

"The  sun  cannot  have  spots,"  declared  the  followers  of
Aristotle  in  1610,  to  Galileo  and  to  Scheiner.

"It  is  impossible  to  send  a  telegram  across  the  Atlantic
Ocean,"  Babinet,  a  member  of  the  Institute,  maintained.

' '  The  phonograph  is  a  trick  of  ventriloquism ! ' '  cried  Mon-
sieur Bouillaud,  to  the  members  of  the  Academy  of  Sciences.

"Electricity  does  not  cause  contortions  on  the  part  of
frogs,"  Galvani's  adversaries  stated.

"Vaccine  cannot  prevent  smallpox,"  Jenner's  colleagues
declared.

' '  The  fossilized  bones  of  men  will  never  be  found, ' '  Elie  de
Beaumont  told  Boucher  de  Perthes.     Et  cetera.

The  author  of  "L'Humanite  posthume"  declares  that,  ac-
cording to  the  principles  of  the  positive  method,  it  is  unde-
niable that  there  are  ghosts ;  that  it  is  impossible  to  doubt  this.


222  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

He  adds  to  the  stories  of  apparitions  on  tlie  part  of  the
Sentenac  priest  a  fairly  large  number  of  similar  statements.
His  conclusion,  based  on  doubles  of  the  living  as  well,  is
that  every  man — and  even  every  animal — has  a  double,  a
fluid  body,  and  that  this  truth  is  recognizable  by  virtue  of
the  fact  that  those  v^ho  have  had  parts  of  the  body  amputated
feel  pain  at  the  extremities  of  the  limbs  v^^hich  they  no  longer
have.  By  this  way  of  thinking,  every  person  bears  in  himself
his  fluid  replica,  which  after  death  becomes  his  posthumous
phantom.  This  ethereal  being,  when  it  leaves  the  body,  un-
dergoes merely  a  change  of  environment,  and  often  keeps  its
habits,  its  ideas,  its  prejudices.  It  stays  near  the  spot  where
it  was  buried,  it  remains  in  touch  with  the  persons  dear  to
it,  and  even  with  the  things.  But  this  continuation  of  our-
selves does  not  last  long.  The  phantom  is  formed  of  ele-
ments which  are  one  day  dispersed,  and  revert  to  the  uni-
verse. These  shades  exist  for  a  short  time  only,  though  a
few  of  them  do  their  utmost  to  maintain  their  life  after
death  to  the  detriment  of  the  living — vampires,  for  example.

I  am  giving  d'Assier's  beliefs  without  holding  them  my-
self, despite  their  ancient  Egyptian  origin.  He  does  not
believe  in  the  soul,  in  the  psychic  world,  and  reduces  every-
thing to  matter.  What  he  says  as  to  apparitions  of  the
dead  is  none  the  less  interesting.

Let  us  deny  nothing.  But  let  us  not  put  forward  any
theory.  The  time  has  not  yet  come.  Let  us  give  facts,  the
foundations  of  a  future  science.  Let  us  investigate  all  im-
partially.

The  progress  of  psychic  investigation  is  due  to  the  work
of  a  small  number  of  men  who  are  pushing  ahead  with  a
self-assured,  firm  step,  without  heeding  the  blows  and  the
sarcasm  of  the  opposed  philosophic  schools.  In  all  periods
of  time  the  conservative  majority  of  savants  has  yielded  to
progress  only  with  repugnance  and  with  a  bad  grace.

My  readers  know,  absolutely,  that  a  human  being  filled


ONE  WEEK  TO  ONE  MONTH  AFTER  DEATH    223

with  a  desire  to  announce  his  death  to  some  one  to  whom
he  is  attached,  may  affect  the  mind  of  this  person,  at  a  dis»-
tancC;  in  snch  a  way  as  to  produce  in  him  the  desired  im-
pression. Official  science  long  ago  characterized  by  the  word
hallucinations  the  impressions  thus  created,  but  we  should
be  clear  as  to  just  what  this  word  means.

When  reading  Briere  de  Boismont's  standard  work,  ''Les
Hallucinations,"  one  feels  that  he  falls  far  short  of  ex-
plaining everything,  as  he  claims  to  do;  he  is  in  agreement
with  the  usual  teachings  of  physiologists.  Hallucinations,
as  commonly  regarded,  take  the  place  which  the  devil  occupied
for  a  thousand  years.  Professors  of  the  old  school  explained
everything  by  attributing  it  to  his  occult  power,  the  exist-
ence of  which  had  not  been  in  the  least  proved.  The  existi-
ence  of  the  demons  and  genii  of  the  Greeks  and  Hebrews  was
no  more  fully  demonstrated.  People  are  too  easily  con-
tented with  hypotheses.  Hallucinations  play  the  role  of  the
devil.  It  would  even  seem  at  times  that  they  are  ' '  not  worth
the  devil."

In  our  present  work  it  is  scienti-fically  observed  occur-
renses  which  are  of  interest  to  us.  I  repeat  for  the  thou-
sandth time  that  we  cannot  explain  them  on  the  score  of
hallucinations.

What  hallucination  can  there  have  been  in  the  following
case?  We  are  concerned  with  the  apparition  of  some  one
dead,  seen  by  two  independent  witnesses.  1  am  taking  the
account  from  a  letter  sent  me  from  Nantes  on  March  31,
1921.

There  were  two  witnesses  of  the  ease  which  I  am  about  to  submit
to  you.  One  of  them  is  now  living  in  Nantes^  m  the  same  building
and  on  the  same  floor  with  my  aunt.

When  this  witness  was  a  young  girl,  she  had  a  position  as  nurse,
in  Paris,  with  a  family  which  owned  a  little  shop.  At  the  table,
when  the  conversation  drifted  to  the  general  subject  of  the  soul,
and  immortality,  the  husband  said  to  his  wife,  "If  I  die  first,  and


224  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

can  come  back,  I  will  come  and  see  you."  Years  went  by;  the
husband  fell  ill,  and  died.  Some  time  afterward  the  nurse  was
sleeping  in  the  kitchen  on  the  ground  floor,  behind  the  shop.  She
heard  a  noise  in  the  cupboard,  as  if  dishes  were  breaking.  She  got
up,  thinking  that  the  cat  had  caused  this  noise,  but  she  could
not  find  the  reason  for  it.  Moreover,  not  a  plate  or  a  glass  had
been  broken.  Astonished,  she  went  back  to  bed.  The  noise  began
again.  She  had  put  out  the  light.  She  perceived  at  the  foot  of
her  bed  a  whitish  form,  which  grew  clearer  in  outline.  In  this
apparition  she  recognized  perfectly  her  former  master.  Terrified,
she  did  not  go  to  sleep  again.  When  morning  came  she  went  up
to  the  first  floor,  to  her  mistress's  apartment,  taking  her  her  break-
fast, as  she  did  every  morning.  She  was  struck  by  her  mistress's
paleness.  She  questioned  her,  and  got  this  replj^:  "Marie,  just
imagine — last  night  my  husband  appeared  to  me.  I  recognized  him
perfectly.  He  spoke  to  me,  and  said,  'You  see,  we  don't  die ;  I  'm
in  need  of  prayers.' "  The  mistress  said  to  the  nurse,  "Go  and  see
if  the  children  saw  anything,  for  I  'm  uneasy."  In  an  adjoining
room  the  two  little  girls  were  resting  quietly.  Then  the  nurse
told  her  mistress  what  she  herself  had  seen.

This  case  seems  an  interesting  one  to  me,  for  the  apparition
appeared  a  rather  long  time  after  death,  and  on  the  same  nighty  to
two  persons  sleeping,  one  of  them  on  the  ground  floor,  the  other  on
the  second  floor.  These  persons  had  not  told  each  other  of  their
experiences.  In  this  case,  what  becomes  of  the  hypothesis  of  a
collective  hallucination?

G.  Neberry.

(Letter  4407.)

My  correspondent  has  no  doubts  as  to  the  sincerity  of
either  of  the  two  narrators.  May  we  suppose  that  one  of
them  had  an  illusion  which  she  transmitted,  telepathically,
to  the  other?  But  the  manifestations  were  not  alike.  The
servant  heard  the  noise  of  breaking  dishes,  and  the  mistress
a  demand  for  prayers!

A   remarkable   case   of   a  mother   who   appeared  to   her


ONE  WEEK  TO  ONE  MONTH  AFTER  DEATH     225

children,  to  save  them  from  danger,  was  told  of  by  Lead-
beater  ^  :

Dr.  John  Mason  Neale  relates  that  a  man  who  had  just  lost  his
wife  was  invited,  together  with  his  children,  to  spend  a  certain
time  at  a  friend's  country  house.  It  was  a  vast  dwelling;  in  its
basement  there  stretched  out  long,  dark  passages;  the  children  took
great  pleasure  in  playing  in  them  and  in  running  through  them.
One  day,  however,  they  went  up  gravely  to  the  floor  where  the
older  people  were,  and  two  of  them  explained  that  when  they  were
running  through  one  of  the  passages  they  had  seen  their  mother.
She  had  ordered  them  not  to  go  any  farther,  but  to  turn  back;
when  she  had  said  this,  she  vanished  immediately.  An  investigation
brought  out  the  fact  that  if  the  children  had  gone  a  little  further
along  this  hall,  they  would  have  fallen  into  an  open  well  which  lay
in  their  path.  Their  mother,  therefore,  had  saved  them  from
certain  death.

This  case  proves,  Leadbeater  writes,  that  the  mother,  "even  on
the  astral  plane,"  had  kept  her  attitude  of  affectionate  concern,
and  her  intense  desire  to  protect  her  children  from  imminent  danger
had  given  her,  for  a  moment,  as  often  happens,  the  power  to  make
herself  seen  and  heard  by  them,  or  to  suggest  to  them  merely  that
they  saw  and  heard  her.  It  is  also  possible,  he  adds,  that  aid  was
given  by  a  different  entity  which  had  assumed  the  familiar  form  of
the  mother  in  order  not  to  frighten  the  children.  But  the  sim-
plest and  by  far  the  most  probable  hypothesis  is  that  this  inter-
vention was  due  to  ever-vigilant  maternal  love,  which  persisted
even  beyond  the  portals  of  the  grave.

Since  the  authenticity  of  the  occurrences  was  verified,  it
would  seem  that  this  interpretation  is  logical  and  well
founded.  It  is  another  case  to  add  to  those  in  Chapter  III
of  our  volume  ''At  the  Moment  of  Death":  ''Thought  as  a
Generator  of  Images  Projected  to  a  Distance."

It  would  seem  to  me  equally  impossible  to  refuse  to  admit

1  The  Other  Side  of  Peath,


226  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

the  authenticity  of  the  following  manifestation.  It  occurred
fifteen  days  after  death.^  An  account  of  it  was  sent  me
by  my  learned  friend,  Profess.or  Charles  Richet.

On  September  3,  1916,  during  the  attack  on  the  "sunken  road"
(a  region   between   Maurepas   and   Clery,   one  of  the  most   hotly

contested   points    in    the    Department    of   the    Somme),    D ,    a

second  lieutenant  of  the  Thirteenth  Battalion  of  Alpine  chasseurs,
was  struck  by  a  bullet  in  both  arms,  and  left  the  front  line  to  have
the  wounds  dressed  at  the  rear.  That  evening,  and  for  fifteen
days  afterward,  he  was  absent  at  roll-call.  In  vain  they  sought
in  all  the  ambulances.     He  was  listed  as  missing.

On  September  8th  the  Thirteenth  Battalion  went  back  to  the
same  sector,  where  the  front  line  had  been  carried  forward  about
three  kilometers,  thanks  to  the  victory  of  September  3d.  Here,
now,  is  the  manifestation,  an  explanation  of  which  must  be  sought.

During  the  night  of  September  18th-19th  M.  V (an  intimate

friend   of   D ,   the   second   lieutenant),   who   was  in  charge   of

the  cannon   ("37s")   of  this  same  battalion,  had  a  strange  dream.

He  saw  D at  the  bottom  of  a  shell-hole,  beside  the  "sunken

road"  in  question,  at  the  foot  of  a  willow  tree,  dying.  D re-
proached him  bitterly  for  letting  his  best  friend  die  in  this  way,
without  help.

M.  V ,  who  is  a  cool,  calm,  almost  skeptical  officer,  was  ob-
sessed by  the  dream.     He  confided  it  to  the  head  of  his  battalion.

Major  S ,  who  did  not  take  it  too  seriously,  but  who,  in  order

to  oblige  him  and  to  put  an  end  to  the  thing,  granted  him  a  short
leave  of  absence  in  which  to  make  a  search  in  the  "sunken  road."

M.  V — —  reached  it.  He  found  the  same  spot  that  he  had  seen
in  his  dream.  At  the  foot  of  the  willow  was  a  stake,  with  this
inscription:  "Here,  two  French  soldiers."  Nothing  could  have
led  him  to  suspect  that  there  were  in  this  spot  the  remains  which

he  had  seen  in  his  dream.    Lieutenant  Y had  a  search  made.

He  found  his  friend's  body  there;  it  could  be  identified  perfectly
by  various  details  of  the  uniform.  It  had  been  buried  about  fifteen
days  before.

1  Charles  Richet's  investigation  of  metaphysical  occurrences  in  the
armies,  Animles  des  Sciences  psycMques,  1919,  p.  23.


ONE  WEEK  TO  ONE  MONTH  AFTER  DEATH    227

The  following  was  a  very  different  occurrence ;  it  happened
three  weeks  after  death.

A  grandmother  was  seen  by  her  two  granddaughters ;  each
saw  her  separately,  and  there  was  no  communication  between
them.  This  woman  had  preserved  a  noble  beauty  up  to  the
advanced  age  of  eighty-eight,  the  year  of  her  death.  She
had  an  old  clock,  of  which  she  was  very  fond.  It  had  been
a  wedding  present,  and  she  was  in  the  habit  of  saying  that
this  companion  of  many  years  was  connected  with  all  her
impressions — with  her  husband's  absences,  with  her  children's
return  from  school,  with  the  hour  of  waking,  et  cetera.  Let
us  listen  to  the  account.  One  of  her  granddaughters,  Madame
Judd,  writes:

August  6,  1885.

One  morning  in  October,  three  weeks  after  her  death,  I  saw  my
grandmother  distmctly — her  face,  as  always,  calm,  and  her  big
eyes  looking  at  the  old  clock  as  usual.  I  closed  my  eyes  for  some
seconds,  then  opened  them  again,  and  still  saw  her.  I  closed  my
eyes  a  second  time,  but  when  I  opened  them  she  was  no  longer
there.

Since  my  family  sometimes  called  me  a  dreamer,  I  took  care  not
to  breathe  a  word  about  this  vision.

On  the  following  evening  my  sister,  who  is  not  at  all  dreamy,
but  most  practical,  told  me  in  confidence,  before  we  got  into  bed
(her  bed  was  beside  mine)  :  "If  you'll  promise  not  to  make  fun
of  me,  I  've  something  to  tell  you." — "What  f — "Well,  I  saw  my
grandmother  this  morning."  The  details  which  she  then  gave  me
were  in  entire  accord  with  what  I  had  seen  myself.

Caroline  Judd.

The  narrator  adds  that  although  twenty  long  years  have
gone  by  since  that  double  vision,  the  two  sisters  never  speak
of  it  without  deep  emotion.

A  letter  from  her  sister  confirmed  the  authenticity  of  the
account.


228  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

The  hypothesis  of  two  separate  hallucinations  would  not
seem  to  be  admissible.

An  account  of  the  following  collective  apparition  (it
could  not,  any  more  than  the  last,  be  attributed  to  two  sepa^
rate  hallucinations  mutually  in  accord)  was  given  by  my
hard-working  friend  of  long  standing,  Gabriel  Delanne.
It  was  taken  from  Gurney's  Memoirs  concerning  apparitions
observed  shortly  after  death,  apparitions  which  possessed  this
characteristic  in  common :  they  affected  three  different  senses,
vision,  hearing,  and  the  sense  of  touch.  A  Miss  Lister  was
the  narrator.  After  the  death  of  the  husband  of  one  of
her  friends,  she  had  gone  to  live  with  this  friend,  and  was
a  witness  of  the  following  phenomenon:

One  evening,  having  been  asked,  just  as  she  was  about  to  take
her  bath,  to  go  and  look  for  a  book  that  had  been  left  in  the  drawing-
room  the  day  before,  Miss  Lister  saw  her  friend's  dead  husband
seated  at  the  table  in  the  drawing-room.  His  elbow  was  resting
on  the  table,  very  near  the  book.

"The  phantom,"  she  related,  "seemed  to  smile,  as  though  he  had
known  my  thoughts.  I  took  up  the  book,  went  to  my  friend,  and
gave  it  to  her,  without  telling  her  what  had  happened.  Then  I
went  into  the  bath-room  and  thought  no  more  about  it.  I  had  not
been  there  more  than  twenty  minutes  when  I  heard  my  friend  open
the  drawing-room  door.  I  smiled  to  myself  and  Hstened;  I  wished
to  discover  whether  the  apparition  were  still  there.  I  heard  my
friend  rush  out  of  the  room,  go  downstairs  four  steps  at  a  time,
and  feverishly  ring  the  bell  in  the  dining-room.  A  servant  came
running.  I  dressed  myself  as  quickly  as  possible,  and  went  down .
to  my  friend;  I  found  her  pale  and  trembling.  'What's  happened?'
I  asked.  'I  've  just  seen  my  husband,'  she  answered.  'How  fool-
ish!' I  replied.  'Oh,  no,  I  saw  him  distinctly;  he  spoke  to  me
twice.  I  ran  out  of  the  room,  but  he  followed  me,  and  put  his  icy
hand  on  my  shoulder.'  "

Were  there,  here,  two  mutually  unrelated  hallucinations?
We  should  find  difficulty  in  conceding  this.     There  is  some-


ONE  WEEK  TO  ONE  MONTH  AFTER  DEATH    229

thing  at  the  bottom  of  it  all.  The  two  effects  had  a  cause.
Here  is  another  occurrence.  An  account  of  the  appari-
tion of  a  father  to  his  children  and  to  their  mother  was  given
me  by  a  correspondent.  There  is  every  evidence  that  the
writer's  judgment  is  well  balanced  and  that  her  sincerity  is
absolute.  The  communication  was  sent  me  from  Mans,  on
July  25,  1921.

I  had  an  account  of  this  happening  directly  from  the  person
who  was  a  witness  of  it;  her  whole  family  witnessed  it  also.  She
is  the  daughter  of  a  blacksmith;  since  she  was  a  child  she  has  been
in  the  service  of  Countess  Auguste  de  Las  Cases.  She  has  al-
ways  had  the  esteem  of  every  one.

When  she  was  a  child,  she  and  her  little  brothers  and  sisters
lived  in  the  same  room  with  their  mother.  The  latter  had  been  a
widow  for  only  a  short  time.  On  one  occasion  she  was  resting,
her  head  turned  toward  the  wall,  and  could  not,  therefore,  see
what  was  going  on  in  the  room,  but  she  heard  her  children  making
a  commotion  and  shouting :  ^'There  's  Papa !  There 's  Papa !" —
'^Keep  still  and  go  to  sleep,  children,"  she  said  to  them.  "You
know  very  well  that  your  papa  has  gone  to  heaven."  But  the  chil-
dren kept  on  shouting :  "Papa 's  there !  There 's  Papa !"  One
of  the  little  girls  clapped  her  hands  in  her  joy  at  seeing  her  father
come  back.

The  widow  finally  turned  her  face  toward  the  room,  and  saw  her
husband,  who  spoke  to  her.  He  told  her,  among  other  things,  that
if  he  had  believed  in  immortality  he  would  have  lived  a  very  differ-
ent life,  and  that  he  regretted  not  having  believed  in  it  with  more
conviction.  He  took  her  hand  and  pressed  it  very  hard.  I  know  no
more  details  as  to  this  particular  case  of  reappearance,  but  it
seems  to  me  a  very  remarkable  one,  since  several  children  and  their
mother  witnessed  it.  The  mother's  hand  was  so  wounded  by  the
ghost's  grip  that  it  had  to  be  bandaged  for  several  days.

I  must  add  that  the  narrator  of  this  experience  is  a  calm,  steady,
sincere  person,  and  that  all  the  details  of  it  have  been  known  since
her  childhood.  I  can  therefore  authorize  you  to  publish  this  account.
I  can  vouch  for  the  fact  that  I  had  it  direct  from  the  phantom's


230  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

daughter.     I  authorize  you  to  give  my  name  and  address  if  you
think  it  would  be  helpful.

Viscountess  de  Breuil.
(Letter  4594.)

This  experience,  like  all  the  preceding  ones,  demands  an
explanation.  Was  it  an  hallucination?  In  the  course  of  my
rigorous  investigation  (the  estimable  narrator  v^as  good
enough  to  take  an  active  part  in  it)  there  w^ere  no  less  than
seven  letters  written.  It  appeared  from  all  this  correspond-
ence that  Countess  de  Las  Cases  commemorated  in  a  little
poem  (I  have  it  before  me)  the  extraordinary  apparition,
and  that  the  widov^'s  hand  had  certainly  to  be  bandaged  for
several  days  (Letter  4727).  The  incident  occurred  fifteen
days  after  the  death.

The  student  of  our  problems  knows  that,  since  the  time  of
Cicero's  story  about  Parmenides  and  Pliny  the  Younger 's
story  about  the  ghost  of  Athens,  the  dead  who  have  not
been  interred  have  often  manifested  a  desire  to  be  buried.
Why  ?  What  difference  can  it  make  to  them  ?  Little,  it  would
seem  to  us.  So  we  retain  an  attachment  for  our  bodies!
We  do  not  like  to  see  them  abandoned.  In  the  following
experience  the  same  wish  to  be  buried  would  seem  to  have
predominated.  An  account  of  it  was  given  us  by  Dr.  Lee
in  his  ''Glimpses  of  the  Supernaturar '  (Volume  II,  page
61^).  He  affirms  that  the  account  came  from  trustworthy
persons,  who  gave  a  faithful  and  sincere  report  of  a  most
striking  occurrence.

Two  cattle-raisers,  who  had  entered  into  partnership,  had  left
England  and  emigrated  to  Australia;  it  was  not  long  before  they
owned  a  fairly  large  ranch  in  that  country.  Suddenly  one  of  the
partners  disappeared;  he  could  not  be  found.

One  evening,  about  three  weeks  afterward,  the  surviving  partner

1  See  Leadbeater,  The  Other  Side  of  Death.


ONE  WEEK  TO  ONE  MONTH  AFTER  DEATH    231

was  returning  to  his  hut  by  a  path  that  skirted  a  stretch  of  deep
water.  Dusk  was  coming  on  and  the  sun  was  setting  behind  the
large  bushes,  thick  brush,  and  luxuriant  grass  which  grows  up  so
quickly  in  this  country.  Suddenly  he  perceived  his  companion's
form,  as  real  and  as  living  as  ever.  He  was  seated  on  the  ground
beside  the  pool;  his  left  arm  was  bent,  and  rested  on  one  knee.
The  living  man  was  about  to  rush  over  to  his  friend,  to  speak  to
him,  but  the  form  seemed  to  grow  less  clear,  and  the  face,  gray  in
color,  took  on  an  expression  of  sadness  and  melancholy  which  was
not  usual.  So  he  stopped.  Then  the  form  gTew  more  clearly
visible;  it  lifted  one  arm,  and,  with  the  index  finger  of  its  right
hand,  pointed  to  a  deep  hole  where  the  water  was  calm  but  black,
under  a  tree  the  branches  of  which  hung  down  over  the  surface.
This  gesture  was  repeated  twice,  deliberately,  then  the  shade  thinned
out,  little  by  little,  and  soon  vanished  utterly.

The  next  morning  the  hole  was  dragged,  and  the  body  of  the
partner  who  had  disappeared  was  found  in  the  very  spot  which
the  phantom  had  pointed  out,  and  given  a  proper  burial.  A  large
stone  had  been  tied  to  the  body,  and  an  ax  was  found  (it  had  been
hidden  at  the  same  spot),  doubtless  the  weapon  which  the  murderer
had  used  to  commit  his  crime.  It  was,  moreover,  recognized  as  be-
longing to  a  certain  vagabond,  who  was  accused  and  arrested.
Since  important  documents  belonging  to  the  victim  were  found  on
him,  he  was  obliged  to  confess  his  crime  and  was  executed.

"We  seem  to  see,  here,  as  in  other  cases,  a  desire  for  burial.
Together  vnth  the  desire  there  are  indications  of  other  inten-
tions. We  may  think  that  the  dead  man  wished  to  let  his
partner  know  what  had  happened  to  him.  It  is  possible,
too,  that  he  was  animated  by  a  desire  for  vengeance  on  his
murderer.  This  desire,  moreover,  has  been  the  cause  of  a
great  number  of  apparitions.

Why  should  there  be  a  wish  for  burial  of  the  corpse?
It  is  far  from  always  being  expressed,  if  we  may  draw  conclu-
sions from  the  innumerable  men  killed  in  the  terrible  Ger-
man war.    Perhaps,  taken  as  a  whole,  they  were  not  able


232  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

to  manifest  themselves.  Perhaps  only  certain  believers  wish
for  burial.  Perhaps  those  who  are  indifferent  to  it  are  the
most  numerous.

We  might  add  to  the  foregoing  occurrences  the  discovery
of  Edouard  Boner's  body  (^'Annales  psychiques/'  1910,  page
191).  He  was  an  Italian  poet  who  was  buried  among  the
ruins  of  Messina  at  the  time  of  the  earthquake  in  1908.  The
discovery  was  due  to  the  apparition  of  the  poet,  in  a  dream,
t6  a  little  girl,  a  friend  of  his  family.  This  chapter  might
be  twice,  three  times  its  length.  But  we  must  hasten  on  to
the  following  manifestations.

Let  us  note  that,  as  in  Chapters  IV,  V,  VI,  we  have  re-
mained outside  the  sphere  of  spiritistic  experiments.


VIII

MANIFESTATIONS  AND  APPARITIONS,  PROM  ONE  MONTH
TO  ONE  YEAR  AFTER  DEATH

Do  not  believe  anything  merely  be-
cause it  is  hallowed  by  tradition.  Do
not  believe  anything  merely  on  the  au-
thority of  your  elders  or  your  instructors.
But  what  you  yourselves  have  tried  and
found  to  be  true — this  you  may  accept
as  real.

The  Sayings  of  Buddha,

THE  four  chapters  just  read  have  presented  accounts
of  a  certain  number  of  manifestations  and  appari-
tions of  the  dead  which  occurred  anywhere  from  the
time  of  dissolution  up  to  a  month  from  the  extinction  of
terrestrial  life.  We  shall  continue  our  independent  investi-
gations in  the  same  chronological  order.  The  following  oc-
currences took  place  from  one  month  to  one  year  after  death.
I  received,  a  long  time  ago,  before  my  investigations  of
1899  (in  December,  1896),  the  following  odd  communication.
It  was  sent  me  by  a  learned  member  of  the  Institute,  Charles
Naudin  the  botanist,  head  of  the  Laboratory  of  Higher  Edu-
cation in  Antibes,  Villa  Thuret.  It  concerned  the  appari-
tion of  some  one  dead,  an  apparition  the  authenticity  of  which
it  is  difficult  to  doubt.  Moreover,  my  duty  as  a  scientist  is  to
seek  to  explain  it.  I  had  had  occasion,  during  my  stay  at  the
Observatory  in  Nice,  some  years  before,  to  spend  a  day  at
Antibes,  with  the  head  of  this  observatory,  my  friend  Per-
rotin,  and  with  Victorien  Sardou,  my  colleague  in  a  psychic
investigation  many  years  before  (1858-64),  who  had  wished
to  go  with  us.  We  had  talked  of  these  problems  and  the
questions  connected  with  them.  Here  is  Monsieur  Naudin 's
letter :

233


234  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

Antibes,  December  2d,  1896.
My  dear  Colleague:

Since  the  kind  visit  you  made  us  some  years  ago,  such  painful
things  have  happened  at  the  Villa  Thuret  that  I  have  not  the
courage  to  dwell  upon  them.  I  wish  to  tell  you  of  a  strange  occur-
rence, that  cannot  fail  to  interest  you.  It  concerns  a  subject  with
which  you  have  long  busied  yourself,  and  in  which  I  am  as  in-
terested as  you.

It  was  on  the  twenty-sixth  of  last  June  that  the  occurrence  took
place,  in  Denain  (Nord).  A  nun  belonging  to  the  Order  of  Dames
de  la  Sainte-Union  (the  seat  of  the  mother  superior  is  in  Douai,
and  there  is  a  branch  in  Denain)  had  been  sent  to  the  main  convent
to  help  the  sister  in  charge  of  the  kitchen,  who  was  then  swamped
with  work.  Before  she  left,  the  mother  superior,  who  was  very  ill
of  cancer  of  the  stomach  and  felt  her  end  approaching,  had  asked
the  nun  in  question  to  promise  to  pray  for  her,  and  the  nun  had
made  the  promise.  The  sick  woman  died  sometime  during  the  first
days  in  May.

Five  or  six  weeks  afterward — that  is  to  say  on  the  twenty-sixth
of  the  following  June — this  same  nun,  who  was  assisting  in  the
washing  of  clothes,  and  who  had  her  sleeves  rolled  up  to  the  elbow,
was  sent  down  to  the  cellar  to  draw  some  beer.  There,  without
her  having  become  aware  of  the  presence  through  any  other  sense,
she  saw  another  nun  beside  her,  and  recognized  in  her  the  mother
superior  who  had  died  some  weeks  before.  The  apparition  gave  her
bare  arm  a  hard  pinch,  causing  her  intense  pain,  and  said  to  her,
"Pray,  for  I'm  suffering."  All  this  had  taken  place  in  less  time
than  it  takes  to  tell  it.  The  poor  sister,  terrified,  climbed  the  cellar
stairs  precipitately  and  dropped  down  on  a  near-by  bench  more
dead  than  alive.

Those  who  were  washing,  finding  that  she  did  not  return  with  the
beer,  went  to  see  what  had  become  of  her.  They  found  her  on  the
bench,  so  agitated  that  she  could  barely  tell  them  that  she  had  been
cruelly  pinched.  She  showed  them  her  arm,  on  which,  to  the  stupe-
faction of  those  present,  there  were  discovered  five  red  marks,  such
as  bums  make.  There  were  four  on  one  side,  and  a  fifth,  on  the
other  side  of  her  arm,  which  was  broader  and  deeper.     This  was


ONE  MONTH  TO  ONE  YEAR  AFTER  DEATH   235

the  place  where  the  dead  woman's  thumb  had  pressed.  It  was  as
if  an  iron  hand,  heated  in  the  fire  until  it  was  red,  had  seized  the
sister's  arm.  It  was  not  long  before  blisters  appeared  on  the  parts
affected.

They  summoned  Dr.  Toison,  the  physician  of  the  order,  to  take
care  of  the  wounded  woman.  After  having  taken  a  photograph  of
the  burns,  he  gave  directions  as  to  what  must  be  done  to  effect  a
cure.  The  places  healed,  leaving,  however,  five  scars  which  bear
witness  to  the  reality  of  the  accident.  Dr.  Toison,  a  distinguished
practising  physician,  is  a  professor  of  the  faculty  of  the  Lille
Charity  Clinic.     He  is  also  the  physician  of  the  order  in  Denain.

The  veracity  of  the  persons  who  witnessed  the  occurrence  cannot
be  doubted.  Was  the  sister's  vision  subjective?  But  the  burn  was
only  too  objective.

I  submit  all  this  to  your  judgment.  Please  allow  me,  dear  col-
league, to  express  my  esteem,  together  with  my  best  wishes  for  the
new  year.

Chaeles  Naudin,
Member  of  the  Institute.

The  learned  botanist  went  on  to  request  me  to  ask  readers
of  the  ''Petit  Marseillais, "  to  which  I  was  sending  articles
on  popular  science  from  time  to  time,  if  there  were  those
among  them  who  had  observed  phenomena  of  the  same  sort
which  proved  indubitably  that  a  dead  person  may  manifest
himself  in  some  way.  "This,"  he  added,  ''is  a  problem
which  has  been  asked  for  thousands  of  years,  and  it  is
truly  regrettable  that,  in  spite  of  so  many  authentic  stories,
there  is  no  answer  to  it."

I  published  his  letter  in  the  ' '  Petit  Marseillais, ' '  but  not  un-
til May  25,  1899,  since  I  was  swamped  by  too  much  work,  and
I  added  the  following  comments:

This  occurrence,  however  strange  it  be,  and  granting  that  the
account  is  absolutely  true,  does  not  lead  to  any  certainty.

(1)  The  apparition  of  the  dead  sister  may  have  been  an  hallueina-


236  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

tion.  Delusive  images,  optical  illusions  occur  in  certain  cases.
Books  on  hallucinations  are  full  of  such  cases;  it  would  be  super-
fluous to  give  any  of  them  here.

(2)  The  case  of  the  stigmata  of  the  five  fingers  on  the  nun's  bare
arm  is  a  rarer  phenomenon.  But  autosuggestion  gives  rise,  at
times,  to  results  of  this  sort,  and  by  a  recent  experiment  a  blister
was  produced  on  a  certain  person's  arm  simply  through  suggestion.

This  story,  therefore,  does  not  prove  the  reality  of  the  mother
superior's  apparition.  We  do  not  say  that  the  apparition  did  not
manifest  itself;  we  know  nothing  about  this.  There  are  but  two
possible  hypotheses;  the  reality  of  the  apparition  on  the  one  hand,
and,  on  the  other,  hallucination  and  autosuggestion.  As  between
the  two  hypotheses,  we  choose  the  second  through  preference,  be-
cause it  is  more  "scientific"  and  seems  more  natural  to  us.

The  doubt  I  expressed  in  1899  would  seem  to  me,  to-day,
to  be  partially  cleared  away  by  the  numerous  occurrences
which  I  have  been  comparing  for  the  twenty-two  years
since  then.^  The  probability  in  favor  of  the  objective  reality
of  these  phenomena  has  gradually  increased,  in  my  mind;
it  even  amounts  to  a  certainty  in  absolutely  characteristic
cases.

More  than  one  experience  similar  to  that  of  the  nun  is
known.  There  is  even  one  other  account  having  to  do  with
an  apparition  in  a  cellar,  appearing  to  some  one  going  to
get  some  beer.     Here  it  is:

An  old  woman,  now  dead,  had  long  been  in  service  with  my
family.  She  had  ended  by  filling  the  position  of  concierge  on  our
estate.  We  had  absolute  confidence  in  her;  she  was  a  sensible
woman.  This  is  what  she  related.  One  day,  when  a  comrade  had
called   on   her  husband,  the  latter  had   sent  her  to  the   cellar  to

1  There  have  been  cases  of  impressions  made  by  phantoms  on  inani-
mate objects — tables,  cloth,  furniture — which  cannot  be  attributed  to
autosuggestion.  I  have  no  space  in  which  to  give  them  here,  and  can
only  hold  them  in  reserve  for  another  book.  Some  remarkable  ex-
amples will  be  found  in  Luce  e  Omhra    (Dec.  1910).


ONE  MONTH  TO  ONE  YEAR  AFTER  DEATH   237

get  beer.  When  she  was  going  upstairs  she  thought  that  she  saw
her  dead  father,  most  distinctly;  he  was  going  downstairs.  Full
of  fear,  she  pressed  back  against  the  wall,  to  let  this  phantom
pass;  he  did  not  seem  to  see  her.  ^

These  impressions  and  spontaneous  experiences  which  re-
semble one  another  are,  assuredly,  most  bizarre.  But,  we  can-
not refrain  from  remarking,  once  more,  that  things  hehave  as
if  the  dead  manifested  themselves,  either  intentionally  or
for  an  unknown  reason.

Let  us  record  the  occurrences.     It  is  our  duty.

One  of  the  oldest  and  most  venerable  members  of  the
Astronomical  Society  of  France,  Monsieur  Louis  Cremiere,
wrote  me  from  Bordeaux,  on  March  30,  1899:

I  am  one  of  the  twelve  members  of  long  standing  whom  you
mentioned  last  May  in  your  speech  at  the  General  Assembly;
your  books  are  my  constant  companions.  Three  years  ago  I
lost  a  wife  who  had  made  me  happy  for  fifty-five  years.  Since
my  misfortune  I  have  been  living  in  her  room,  surrounded  by  all
the  thing's  which  remind  me  of  her.  One  evening  last  winter  I
was  reading;  the  room  was  lighted  by  an  oil  lamp,  with  a  white
paper  shade,  which  allowed  a  softened  light  to  illuminate  all  the
objects  about.  Suddenly,  by  the  lateral  vision  well  known  to
astronomers,  I  saw  my  dear  wife  in  the  corner  that  was  least
brightly  lighted.  It  was  a  curious  thing  that  when  I  looked  at
the  vision  directly,  it  disappeared,  to  my  great  unhappiness.  I
made  this  experiment  three  times.  What  explanation  can  there
be?

(Letter  350.)

The  writer  of  the  letter  is  a  scientist,  possessed  of  perfect
coolness.  He  did  not  doubt  the  reality  of  the  occurrence;
he  simply  asked  himself  why  the  apparition  could  be  seen
by  oblique  refraction  through  the  crystalline,  and  not  by  di-

1  Anrmles  des  Sciences  psychiques,  1894,  p.  272.


238  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

rect  vision.  In  studying  astronomy — ^when  we  look  at  the
stars — we  explain  this  peculiarity  on  the  supposition  that  the
retina  is  more  fatigued  and  less  sensitive  in  the  center.  All
astronomical  observers  have  grown  aware  of  this  peculiarity
of  vision.

I  shall  give  some  of  the  numerous  accounts  I  received
during  this  period.  The  following  letter  was  sent  me  from
Montbeliard,  on  March  26,  1899 :

It  was  sixteen  years  ago,  one  month  after  my  husband's  death,
which  occurred  in  August,  1883.  One  night,  when  I  had  awak-
ened, I  heard  the  door  of  my  room  open;  then  I  heard  steps
and  saw  my  dead  husband  draw  near  my  bed.  He  pressed  my
right  side  to  him,  very  hard,  without  saying  a  single  word.  As-
tounded, I  did  not  speak.  Then  he  went  away,  and  I  leaned  out
of  my  bed  to  watch  him  go  (this  proves,  absolutely  that  I  was
awake.)     I  heard  steps  again,  and  heard  the  door  close  once  more.

Long  afterward,  I  still  felt  pain  in  my  side.  I  shall  ask  you
to  give  only  my  initials  in  case  you  publish  this.

C.  H.

(Letter  210.)

The  happenings  would  seem  to  have  been  noted  coolly:
(1)  The  door  was  opened.  (2)  Steps  were  heard.  (3)
The  husband  was  seen.  (4)  A  pain  began  in  the  wife's
side.  (5)  The  husband  left.  (6)  The  door  was  closed.
f(7)  The  pain  in  the  wife's  side  persisted.  It  is  difficult  to
suppose  that  there  was  an  hallucination  in  this  case.

The  following  is  another  account,  sent  me  at  that  same
period.  It  was  mailed  on  April  5,  1899.  I  was  asked  to
give  it  anonymously.

My  mother  and  my  sister — about  a  month  after  my  mother's
brother-in-law,  our  uncle,  had  died — were  witnesses  of  an  apparition
of  him.  They  saw  this  on  different  dates — my  mother  about  a
month  after  the  death,  and  my  sister  fifteen  days  later  still.


ONE  MONTH  TO  ONE  YEAR  AFTER  DEATH   239

My  mother  saw  it  spontaneously,  without  previous  warning.  As
for  my  sister,  she  was  on  this  occasion  alone  in  a  room.  She  was
astonished  to  hear  some  one  walking  in  a  hall  near  my  mother's
room.  She  went  into  the  hall  and  found  herself  in  the  presence
of  the  apparition,  which  vanished  immediately.  I  must  add  that
my  sister  had  learned  of  the  apparition  seen  by  my  mother.

L.  B.

(Letter  532.)

Was  this  a  double  hallucination?  We  are  seeking  truth.
Let  us  continue  to  compare  examples.  It  seems  to  me  that
my  readers  will,  like  me,  attain  to  certainty,  if  they  have  not
already  attained  to  it  by  reason  of  the  cases  given  in  the
preceding  chapters.  We  have  already  learned  hov^  varied
these  happenings  are,  and  how  difficult  it  is  to  interpret
them.

Here  is  one  of  them,  that  is  both  indubitable  and  inex-
plicable. Dr.  L.  Arnoux  of  Guadeloupe,  related  it,  stating
that  it  was  an  experience  of  one  of  his  patients,  about  one
month  after  the  death  of  the  latter's  wife.     He  wrote  me:

Marie   Galante,   Guadeloupe,
June  18,  1899.

I  was  called  in  to  render  professional  services  to  the  wife;  she
was  carried  off,  in  forty-eight  hours,  by  a  violent  fever.  The
husband  and  wife,  who  already  had  three  children,  had  a  happy
home  life;  they  were  united  by  bonds  of  deep  affection.  Here  is
the  husband's  authentic  story:

"It  was  about  four  o'clock  in  the  morning.  I  was  lying  on  a
mattress  about  a  meter  away  from  my  bed,  on  which  I  had  not
slept  since  my  wife's  death.  I  had  been  awake  for  some  moments,
and  was  smoking  a  cigarette  which  I  had  just  lighted,  when  I  heard
the  noise  of  steps  on  the  stairway  which  ends  at  my  room.  I
hstened;  the  noise  grew  louder  and  louder;  I  looked  in  the  direc-
tion from  which  it  seemed  to  come.  I  saw  my  wife  enter,  pass
rapidly  between  the  bed  and  the  mattress,  cross  the  room,  and
kneel  down  before  a  little  altar  in  a  comer.     She  rose  almost  im-


240  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

mediately  and  retraced  her  steps,  going  in  the  direction  of  the
stairway.  As  she  was  passing  near  me  I  stretched  out  my  arms
toward  her  instinctively,  as  if  to  catch  her  dress,  and  cried  out,
^LoulouteP  the  given  name  by  which  I  usually  called  her.  But,
passing  me  rapidly,  she  avoided  me.  Teace,  Fernand!'  she  said,
in  imperative  tones,  and  at  once  she  reached  the  stairs,  where  she
disappeared.

"Then  I  rose  abruptly,  went  down  to  the  ground  floor  by  this
same  stairway,  and  went  through  all  the  rooms  carefully.  I  found
them  all  locked."

L.  Arnoux.

(Letter  673.)

The  husband  did  not  understand  the  apparition  in  the
least,  and  v^e  do  not  understand  it  any  better  than  he.  It
is  always  easy  to  escape  from  the  dilemma  by  using  the  orac-
ular word  hallucination.  But  is  that  an  explanation  of  oc-
currences so  varied?  In  this  case,  the  observer  was  wide
awake,  smoking  a  cigarette,  listening  and  looking  closely.

Let  us  continue  to  inspect  our  panorama,  in  chronological
order.  The  following  narration  concerns  a  reflected  form,
seen  six  weeks  after  death  by  six  persons.

Mr.  Charles  A.  W.  Lett,  a  member  of  the  London  Military
and  Royal  Naval  Club,  wrote  on  December  3,  1885  ^ :

On  April  5,  1873,  my  wife's  father.  Captain  Towns,  died  at  his
home  in  Cranbrook  Rosebay,  near  Sydney,  New  South  Wales.
About  six  weeks  after  his  death  my  wife  went  into  one  of  the
bedrooms  of  the  house  at  about  nine  o'clock  in  the  evening.  She
was  accompanied  by  a  young  woman,  a  Miss  Berthon.  As  they
entered  the  room  (the  gas  was  lighted)  they  were  surprised  to
see  Captain  Towns's  image  reflected  on  the  polished  surface  of
the  cupboard.  They  could  see  half  his  body:  his  head,  his  shoul-
ders, and  his  arms.  It  was  not  unlike  a  life-sized  portrait.  His
face  was  pale  and  thin,  as  it  had  been  before  his  death,  and  he

1  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  II,  213.  Hallucinations  telepathiques,
p.  359.


ONE  MONTH  TO  ONE  YEAR  AFTER  DEATH   241

had  on  a  gray  flannel  jacket  in  which  he  had  been  in  the  habit
of  going  to  bed.  Surprised  and  half  afraid,  they  thought  at  first
that  they  were  looking  at  the  reflection  of  a  portrait  in  the  room;
but  there  was  nothing  of  the  sort  there.

While  they  were  gazing  at  it,  my  wife's  sister.  Miss  Towns,  came
in.  Before  the  others  had  spoken  to  her,  she  cried,  "Good  Heavens!
Look  at  Papa!"  One  of  the  chambermaids  was  passing  on  the
stairs  at  that  moment.  She  was  called,  and  they  asked  her  if
she  saw  anything;  her  reply  was,  "Oh,  Miss! — the  master!"  They
sent  for  Graham,  the  captain's  orderly,  and  he  cried  at  once,  "God
preserve  us,  Mrs.  Lett !  it 's  the  captain !"  The  steward  was  called,
then  Mrs.  Crane,  my  wife's  nurse,  and  both  of  them  said  they
saw  him.  At  length  they  asked  Mrs.  Towns  to  come.  When  she
saw  the  apparition  she  went  forward,  her  arms  outstretched  as
though  to  touch  it,  but  as  she  advanced,  holding  out  her  hand
toward  the  panel  in  the  cupboard,  the  likeness  gradually  disap-
peared. It  was  never  seen  afterward,  though  the  room  was  often
occupied.

Such  were  the  actual  circumstances;  it  is  impossible  to  doubt
them.

The  undersigned,  after  having  read  the  above  account,  guarantee
its  authenticity.     Both  of  us  witnessed  the  apparition.

Sara  Lett.
SiBBiE  Smith  (nee  Towns).

Mrs.  Lett  assures  us  that  neither  she  nor  her  sister  had
ever  had  any  other  hallucinations.  She  is  certain  that  the  wit-
nesses recognized  the  apparition  independently,  and  that
this  recognition  was  due  to  no  suggestion  on  the  part  of  the
persons  who  were  in  the  room.

But  why  was  there  a  portrait  on  the  cupboard,  and  not  a
bodily  replica?  How  was  the  image  produced?  What  was
this  momentary,  transcendental  photography,  seen  by  six  per-
sons ?  Was  it  a  collective  hallucination  ?  A  case  of  thought-
transmission  ?  What  are  these  expressions  but  mere
words  ?


242  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

The  following  account  of  an  apparition  of  a  dead  woman,
a  month  and  a  half  after  dissolution,  was  sent  me  from
Pointe-a-Pitre,  Guadeloupe,  in  a  letter  dated  April  15,  1921,
by  Monsieur  Gilbert  de  Chambertrand :

About  1896  my  wife  and  my  sister-in-law  were  living  with  their
father,  in  Saint-Frangois  (Guadeloupe).  A  lady,  a  friend  of  the
family,  had  been  dead  for  about  a  month  and  a  half;  she  was
the  godmother  of  one  of  the  young  girls;  they  called  her  "Aunt
Armande."  The  two  sisters  were  going  to  the  first  mass;  it  was
about  half-past  five  in  the  morning.  They  were  going  downstairs,
the  elder  in  front,  when  they  saw  a  form  standing  at  the  bottom
of  the  stairs.  The  elder  said  to  her  sister,  ^'There's  some  one
there!"  They  went  on  down  to  the  strange  form,  and  the  younger,
looking  attentively,  cried  out,  "Aunt  Armande!"  They  collapsed
from  fright.  A  cry  brought  their  father,  but  nothing  more  was  to
be  seen.  The  lady's  replica  had  been  seen  very  distinctly  by  the
two  sisters.  Her  arms  were  crossed,  her  eyes  bright;  a  veil  cov-
ered her  head  and  fell  down  on  one  side.

The  apparition  had  remained  motionless  and  dumb.

(Letter  4623.)

It  is  more  and  more  questionable,  always  to  attribute  every-
thing to  causeless  illusions.  There  are  too  many  cases,  without
ascertainable  causes.

An  account  of  a  manifestation  on  the  part  of  some  one
dead,  two  months  after  dissolution,  was  given,  with  reserva-
tions, in  that  chapter  of  Volume  II  of  the  present  work
that  deals  with  cases  in  which  deaths  were  announced  by
physical  phenomena :  a  brother  was  seen  by  his  sister  in  a
dream;  he  told  her  that  a  ring  she  had  entrusted  to  him
had  been  taken  from  his  finger  at  the  moment  of  his  death.
We  let  it  be  understood  that  the  manifestation  might  be  at-
tributed not  to  the  dead  man  but  to  a  living  person's  sub-
conscious mind.  Nevertheless  it  cannot  be  proved  that  the
man  who  had  died  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  dream.     The


ONE  MONTH  TO  ONE  YEAR  AFTER  DEATH   243

incident  (page  256)  should  be  read  once  more,  and  compared
with  the  one  just  given.

As  we  see,  these  were  manifestations  two  months  after
death.  Here  is  an  account  of  another,  sent  me  in  a  letter
dated  May  25,  1899 :

Last  year,  in  the  month  of  April,  an  uncle  of  my  father  died
in  Marseilles.  At  that  period  we  were  all  living  there;  when  we
came  to  live  here,  in  Luc  (Var),  we  left  my  sister  with  her  aunt,
the  dead  man's  niece.  My  sister  had  dearly  loved  this  uncle,  and,
during  the  hours  when  his  remains  were  being  watched,  she  had
made  a  vow  to  pray  for  him.

At  this  point  I  shall  let  her  continue  the  story:

^^One  day  (he  had  been  dead  for  about  two  months)  I  was  alone
in  the  house,  sewing,  and  my  cat  was  lying  on  a  chair  before
me.  Suddenly  I  saw  it  get  up,  look  to  one  side  of  me  and
spit — pfif! — as  it  does  when  it  is  angry  or  when  it  sees  strangers.
At  the  same  time  I  heard  a  barely  perceptible  voice  say  to  me,
^MarieF  I  felt  on  my  shoulder  the  weight  and  sensation  of  a
hand  pressing  down  hard.

"My  sewing  fell  from  my  hands.  I  wished  to  get  up,  but  the
hand  still  gripped  my  shoulder.  Then  I  thought:  'Good  Heavens,
it 's  my  poor  godfather  who 's  come  back  to  ask  me  to  pray  for
him!     For  several  days  I\e  forgotten  my  usual  prayer.'

"The  pressure  ceased  as  I  thought  this.  Nevertheless,  to  find
out  whether  or  not  the  cat  had  spat  at  some  one,  I  opened  the
door  of  the  little  adjoining  room.  There  was  nothing  there;  there
was  no  one  in  the  hallway.  Since  then  I  have  always  said  a
prayer  for  my  uncle,  and  have  felt  nothing  more."

I  believe  neither  in  phantoms  nor  in  ghosts,  for  I  know  that
our  imagination  makes  us  see  things  that  do  not  exist.  But  in  this
case?    And  the  cat's  behavior?

Madame  H.  Pontet,  Jr.,

Luc,  Var.

This  occurrence  is  equally  inexplicable.  Why  are  these
frequent  demands  for  prayers  made?


244  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

We  can  see  how  all  these  phenomena  concerning  the  dead,
pile  up.  Here  is  another  one,  that  is  very  strange.  A  doc-
tor's mother,  who  had  been  dead  for  three  months,  made  a
very  useful  little  revelation  to  him,  in  unexpected  circum-
stances.

In  1896  the  "Revue  Spirite"  published  a  letter  signed  "Manfred
Meyer/'  giving  a  case  in  which  a  spirit's  identity  was  established.
The  experiment  took  place  at  St.  Paul  (Brazil) ;  hypnotism  was
used.  The  case  seemed  to  Dr.  Hodgson  sufficiently  worthy  of  no-
tice to  justify  his  making  an  investigation,  the  results  of  which
were,  in  the  main,  confirmative.  Here  is  the  story  as  told  in  the
"Journal  of  the  Psychical  Society,"  for  1898   (pages  281-295).

Dr.  0.  Vidigal  lives  in  the  Allee  du  Triomphe,  with  his  family,
consisting  of  his  wife,  his  two  sons,  and  his  old  father.  His
mother  died  three  years  ago.  Since  he  needed  a  young  maid-
servant, he  went  to  the  bureau  of  immigration.  There  he  took
into  his  service  a  young  Spanish  girl,  twelve  years  old.  She  had
arrived  that  same  day,  and  did  not  know  a  word  of  Portuguese.

The  child's  father  had  died.  The  same  evening  on  which  she
entered  Dr.  Vidigal's  service,  the  latter  had  a  visit  from  Monsieur
Edouard  Silva,  who  had  been  born  in  Gibraltar,  and  who  spoke
Spanish  fluently.

Monsieur  Silva  asked  for  a  glass  of  water,  and  the  child  brought
it  to  him.  Since  he  was  a  good  hypnotist,  he  asked  her,  moved
by  a  remarkable  intuition,  if  she  would  let  herself  be  hypno-
tized. She  consented,  and,  a  few  moments  afterward,  fell  into  a
trance.

Suddenly,  opening  her  eyes,  she  said  that  she  saw  exceedingly
beautiful  things,  and  asked  them  not  to  interrupt  her  vision.  After
some  moments  of  silent  contemplation  she  declared  that  she  saw
her  own  father,  speaking  to  her,  and  she  lifted  her  hand  to  her
ear,  as  an  ear-trumpet,  to  listen.  Her  father  told  her  that  an
old  lady,  then  present,  had  a  communication  to  make  to  Dr.  Vidigal,
and  she  gave  such  an  exact  description  of  this  old  lady  that  in-
timates of  the  family  recognized,  in  her,  the  doctor's  dead  mother.
Then  the  lady's  spirit,  through  the  little  girl  as  a  medium,  ordered


i


ONE  MONTH  TO  ONE  YEAR  AFTER  DEATH   245

her  son  to  go  into  the  room  in  which  she  had  lived;  no  one  had
gone  into  it  since  her  death.  There  he  would  find,  she  said,  a
black  silk  garment  hanging  on  the  wall,  and  in  this  garment  a
pocket  with  the  sum  of  75,000  reis  (about  five  hundred  francs)
sewed  up  in  it;  she  wished  this  sum  to  he  given  to  her  husband.

Those  who  were  present  did  not  attach  any  great  importance
to  this  revelation,  but  the  intimates  of  the  family,  taking  into
consideration  the  fact  that  the  child  had  been  with  them  only  one
day,  and  could  not  have  found  out  what  she  had  told  them,  decided
to  verify  the  thing.  Dr.  Vidigal  had  a  great  deal  of  trouble  in
opening  the  door,  for  the  lock  was  rusty.  He  went  into  the  room,
accompanied  by  Dr.  Silva  and  three  persons  desirous  of  knowing
the  result  of  the  investigation.  A  garment  of  black  silk  was  hang-
ing on  the  wall,  and  they  found  in  it  a  sewn-up  pocket  which
contained  exactly  the  sum  indicated.

It  appeared  from  the  investigation  made  by  Dr.  Hodgson  and
Professor  Alexander  that  neither  the  seer  nor  the  hypnotist  could
have  known  how  the  dead  woman  looked,  or  anything  about  her
clothing,  and  that  Monsieur  Silva  had  known  Dr.  Vidigal  only
after  the  latter's  mother  had  died.  They  learned,  too,  that  at  the
time  of  the  old  lady's  death  Dr.  Vidigal  was  in  financial  diffi-
culties, and  that  he  had  barely  been  able  to  meet  the  funeral  ex-
penses. This  is  an  important  point,  for  one  may  well  imagine
that  if  he  had  known  of  the  existence  of  this  money,  he  would
not  have  left  it  where  it  was.

Here  are  Dr.  Hodgson's  conclusions:

"We  could  admit  that  there  was  thought-transmission  on  Dr.
Vidigal's  part  had  Frangoise  (the  seer)  merely  confined  herself  to
descriptions  of  things  of  a  physical  nature,  such  as  the  dead
woman's  person  and  the  clothes  which  she  had  worn  on  her  death-
bed. But  in  the  case  of  the  designated  sum,  sewed  into  a  pocket,
we  are  obliged  to  admit  that  the  dead  woman  alone  knew  of  this,
and  that  the  revelation  came,  at  least  in  part,  from  this  disem-
bodied entity."

Can  v^e  accuse  a  child  less  than  two  years  old  of  imagin,-
ing  things  that  have  no  real  existence,  and  concede  that  there


246  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

was  an  hallucination,  without  external  cause,  in  the  following
visual  impression?  We  are  concerned  with  the  spontaneous
apparition  of  the  child's  grandmother,  who  had  been  dead
for  three  months.  The  account  given  was  sent  in  by  Mon-
sieur Gabard,  parish  priest  of  Saint-Aubin.^  The  parents
are  speaking:

On  Sunday,  January  12,  1891,  about  six  o'clock  in  the  evening,
Ernest,  our  little  boy,  aged  twenty-three  months  and  twelve  days,
was  on  his  father's  knee  in  the  chimney-corner,  in  the  kitchen.
He  began  to  wriggle,  and  cried:  "Lady!  Up  there!  Lady!"  He
got  down  and  climbed  the  stairs  which  led  to  the  upper  room,
above  the  kitchen.  We  followed  him  with  a  candle,  gTeatly  puz-
zled. As  soon  as  he  reached  the  second  floor,  he  ran  to  the  bed
in  which  his  grandmother  had  died  three  months  and  a  half  before,
on  September  26,  1890.  Since  he  did  not  see  her,  he  went  all
around  the  room  looking  for  her.  At  last  he  saw  her  at  the  win-
dow and  ran  to  her,  crying:  '^Lady!  Grandmamma!  Oh,  pretty
lady!" — smiling,  stretching  out  his  little  arms  to  take  her  in  them.
When  he  reached  the  window,  the  vision,  it  would  seem,  moved
to  the  corner  of  the  room,  where  he  followed  it,  but  without  be-
ing able  to  seize  it.  Finally  it  moved  to  the  window,  where  it
vanished.  There  he  made  signs  to  it;  spoke  to  it:  "Good-by.
Oh,  pretty  Grandmamma  .  .  .  Gone  .  .  .  Don't  see  any  more ;  let 's
go  away" — all  this  in  his  childish  language,  so  easily  understood.

The  next  day  he  went  up  again  several  times  without  seeing
anything.  In  the  afternoon  of  the  day  following  that,  he  went  up,
carried  by  his  mother.  He  looked  about  for  some  time;  at  length
he  saw  her,  for  about  five  minutes,  and  greeted  her  once  more:
"How  d'  y'  do,  Grandmamma !     Oh,  pretty  Grandmamma !"

Ernest  was  nineteen  and  a  half  months  old  when  his  grand-
mother died.  He  loved  her  dearly.  He  had  never  seen  her  ex-
cept in  the  bed  in  which  she  died  after  eight  months  of  a  long
and  very  cruel  illness.  Ernest  is  neither  more  nervous  nor  more
intelligent  than  other  children  of  his  age.  When  he  was  asked
where  his  grandmother  was,  he  used  to  answer  that  she  had  gone

1  Annales  des  Sciences  psychiques,  1894,  p.  7.


ONE  MONTH  TO  ONE  YEAR  AFTER  DEATH   247

to  heaven,  without  knowing  what  that  meant.     She  had  not  been
mentioned  for  several  days  before  the  manifestation,

Bremond  (Joseph).

Madame  Bremond.

Monsieur  Gabard  adds  that,  according  to  the  factory  rec-
ords, Ernest  Bremond  was  born  on  February  8,  1889,  and  that
the  v^idow  Chardonneau,  his  grandmother,  died  on  September
26,  1890.  He  obtained  the  above  information  from  the  Bre-
monds'  own  lips;  they  signed  the  account.  ''I  declare,"  he
states,  ''on  my  honor,  that  I  believe  them  incapable  (knowing
them  well)  of  distorting  in  any  way  what  they  believe  to  be
the  truth.  The  husband  is  a  hired  farm  laborer ;  the  wife  is
a  dealer  in  groceries,  vdth  a  family  of  children.  Both  are
little  given  to  flights  of  the  imagination."

Here  is  another  occurrence;  this,  too,  took  place  during
the  first  year  after  death.  The  following  communication
^as  sent  me  from  Algiers  on  April  27,  1921:

Dear  Master:

Since  I  was  twenty  I  have  been  an  assiduous  reader  of  your
books!  I  am  now  sixty.  I  had  not  felt  that  I  dared  write  you,
but  I  have  been  assured  that  you  will  read  my  letter.

My  husband  died  five  years  ago.  I  left  my  apartment,  sold
everything,  and  went  to  the  home  of  one  of  my  sons.  Three  months
after  my  husband's  death  I  had  returned  from  the  country,  where
I  had  spent  a  day;  there  I  had  hardly  thought  of  my  husband  at  all.
I  went  to  bed;  it  was  dark  in  the  room.  With  my  eyes  open,
I  saw  my  husband  before  me,  in  a  suit  of  clothes  which  he  had
worn  out  a  long  time  before.  His  expression  was  mild  and  calm;
it  was  as  though  his  face  were  lighted  up.  His  features  were  not
bright,  but  were  clear  and  distinct  and  seemed  unsubstantial.  I
asked  myself  if  it  were  really  he.  He  bent  over  and  kissed  me.
"This  is  an  illusion,"  I  told  myself.  I  also  perceived  an  odor
of  menthol  (when  he  was  alive,  he  always  had  a  stick  of  it  with
him,  because  he  suffered  from  headaches).  Again  I  thought  that
this  could  not  be  possible.     Mechanically  I  passed  my  tongue  over


248  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

my  lips  and  tasted  something  slightly  bitter;  I  did  not  know
whether  or  not  it  was  the  taste  of  the  menthol.  "Is  that  really
you?"  I  asked.  Slowly  he  vanished.  I  have  not  seen  him  since,
and  have  rarely  dreamed  about  him.

Was  this  an  illusion?    I  have  never  had  any  others.

V.  Schwartz.

(Letter  4472.)

It  would  seem  that  if  these  were  hallucinations,  people
w'ould  have  more  than  one  of  them  in  their  lives.  This  in^
explicable  occurrence  took  place  three  months  after  dissolu-
tion.

We  may  suppose  that  the  dead  husband  thought  of  his
wife  with  intensity,  and  that  his  thought  was  transmitted
in  the  simplest  and  most  direct  way  possible.  The  follow-
ing transmission,  also  several  months  after  death,  took  quite
another  form ;  that  of  sound.  The  account  was  sent  me  from
Crest,  Drome,  on  August  26,  1921.

My  grandfather,  Monsieur  Vertupier  (former  Assistant  Paris
Postmaster,  in  retirement  in  Crest  (Drome)  had  been  dead  for
some  months.

I  was  about  eight  years  old  at  the  time.  After  his  retirement
my  grandfather  had  been  accustomed — in  order  that  he  might  re-
main active  and  keep  his  limbs  in  condition — to  taking  a  simple
sort  of  gymnastic  exercise,  when  he  got  out  of  bed.  This  consisted
of  walking  to  and  fro  in  his  room,  stretching  out  his  arms  and
drawing  them  in  as  he  inhaled  and  exhaled.  I  had  seen  him,  more
than  twenty  times,  taking  this  exercise,  and  had  very  often  heard
the  sound  of  his  Turkish  slippers  sliding  over  the  floor,  dragging
a  little.

Some  months  after  his  death  (I  could  give  you  the  date,  if  it
would  interest  you)  I  was  in  his  suite  of  rooms,  in  which  we  had
lived  ever  since  he  died.  It  was  six  o'clock  on  a  winter  evening.
I  was  in  the  dining-room;  it  was  divided  off  from  my  grandfather's
bedroom  by  an  open  door,  before  which  curtains  hung.  I  was
reading  a  book  for  children,  "Les  belles  images."


ONE  MONTH  TO  ONE  YEAR  AFTER  DEATH   249

I  was  reading  this,  and  thinking  of  nothing  else,  when  I  heard
very  distinctly,  in  the  adjoining  room,  the  slippers  treading  the
floor  rhythmically,  just  as  my  grandfather  used  to  do.  A  mad
terror  came  over  me,  and  I  wished  to  call  my  mother,  but  could
not;  the  steps  drew  near  the  curtain  which  divided  the  rooms.
My  mother  came  up  at  that  moment,  and  I  fled  away  with  her,
but  without  daring  to  tell  her  what  had  happened.  It  was  only
the  next  morning,  in  broad  daylight,  that  I  told  her  of  it,  weep-
ing, but  she  thought  it  merely  a  childish  story,  and  paid  no  at-
tention to  it.

Since  reaching  an  age  of  reflection  (I  am  now  thirty)  I  have
gone  over  that  evening,  in  memory,  and  I  am  absolutely  certain
that  I  again  heard  this  noise,  which  had  so  often  reached  my  ears.

R.  Marcellin,

(Letter  4632.)  Crest.

Alv^ays  to  attribute  these  impressions  to  ingenuous  illusions
leads  to  no  satisfactory  hypothesis.  The  narrator  heard  the
noises.  Where  did  they  come  from?  Was  it  a  continuation
of  the  grandfather's  habits  in  his  apartment?  What  an  odd
idea!  Happenings  of  the  same  sort  have  been  observed  for
centuries' — among  others,  that  concerning  the  parish  priest  in
Sentenac  (page  218).  Here  is,  another  experience,  which  re-
minds us  of  several  similar  ones,  equally  incomprehensible :

A  member  of  the  K family,  living  in  the  village  of  Bisch-

heim,  near  Strasburg,  had  been  drafted  into  the  German  Army
and  was  killed  by  a  bursting  shell,  at  Verdun.  About  six  months
after  his  death,  his  body  was  brought  to  Bischheim,  to  be  buried
in  the  cemetery.  At  two  o'clock  the  corpse,  which  was  at  the  rail-
way station,  was  taken  from  the  baggage-car  and  put  into  the
hearse.  A  certain  number  of  relatives  had  gathered,  to  be  with
the  young  widow,  in  the  deceased  man's  house.  Suddenly,  just
when  the  body  was  being  placed  in  the  hearse,  a  decorative  plate
which  the  dead  man  had  hung  on  the  wall  several  years  before,
when  he  and  his  wife  were  setting  up  housekeeping,  was  thrown
violently  and  obliquely;  it  fell  to  the  floor.    Those  present  were


250  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

deeply  agitated,  for  they  had  the  impression  that  an  invisible  hand
had  seized  the  plate  and  hurled  it.
(Letter  4100.)

This  may  have  been  mere  chance.  But,  confronted  with  the
simple  incident,  we  may  also  think  that  the  poor  dead  soldier's
soul  was  the  cause  of  it.  When  the  worthy  workman  had
arranged  the  decorations  in  his  home,  he  had  been  interested
in  ornamenting  his  dining-room  with  a  row  of  plates.  He
set  great  store  by  those  plates,  it  seems.  His  body  was
brought  back;  it  was  about  to  be  carried  to  the  graveyard.
He  took  up  one  of  the  plates  and  threw  it  to  the  floor.  This
was  a  strange  idea,  we  think.  Wliy  this  expression  of  dis;-
content?  Perhaps  we  understand  it  only  too  well.  It  was
commonplace,  it  was  vulgar,  it  was  all  that  we  like  to  say
of  it.  But  that  is  what  happened.  Doubtless  the  dead  man
had  in  the  other  world  the  same  mentality  as  in  this  life.
That  must  be  more  or  less  the  case  with  every  one.

On  May  25,  1899,  I  received  the  following  letter  from
Marseilles :

Allow  me  to  tell  you,  for  your  instructive  investigations,  of
something  that  happened  to  me  personally.

I  am  forty-two  years  old.  I  was  brought  up  in  a  religious  at-
mosphere; unfortunately  for  me,  I  lost  my  faith  as  a  result  of
the  misfortunes  without  number  which  have  afflicted  me  for  many
years — and  are  still  afflicting  me  without  truce  or  mercy.  I  scarcely
believe  any  longer.  But  I  am  bringing  up  my  child  as  I  myself
was  brought  up,  happy  to  see  in  him  the  faith  and  the  religious
feeling  which  were  the  joy  of  my  youth.

I  have,  therefore,  no  prejudices;  I  suggest  no  explanation;  on
the  contrary,  I  shall  analyze,  coldly,  what  follows:

Ten  years  ago,  at  two  o'clock  in  the  morning,  my  father  died,
suddenly,  in  my  arms.  All  the  proper  religious  observances  were
complied  with,  and  masses — ^though  not  in  sufficient  numbers,  per-
haps— ^were  said  for  him.


ONE  MONTH  TO  ONE  YEAR  AFTER  DEATH   251

One  night,  at  two  o'clock,  six  months  afterward,  my  wife  and
I  were  awakened  by  a  lively  scratching  in  the  bed-curtains.

Then  every  night,  at  the  same  hour,  the  scratching  began  again,
each  time  in  a  different  place  in  the  room.

Every  night  I  would  get  up  and  light  the  gas,  but  I  could  find
nothing.

I  had  the  upholsterer  come.  The  bed  was  taken  to  pieces, —
both  the  hangings  and  the  top  covering, — for  I  thought  mice  might
be  in  it.    But  not  a  trace  of  anything  was  found.

On  those  same  nights,  at  the  same  hour,  my  mother,  who  was
living  on  our  estate,  was  awakened  by  the  beating  of  wings  in
her  room.

It  goes  without  saying  that  there  was  no  trace  of  anything
there,  either.

We  thought  of  my  father,  and  had  masses  said,  and  since  then
we  have  never  heard  anything  more.

I  must  add  this  detail:  whenever  I  was  awakened,  it  was  always
at  two  o'clock  in  the  morning.

I  must  add,  too,  that  on  the  second  or  third  night  on  which  we
were  awakened,  my  wife  thought  of  my  father  and  confided  her
thoughts  to  me.  Immediately,  without  the  slightest  fear,  I  said
aloud,  ^Tapa,  if  that's  you,  speak  or  appear  to  us."  The  noise
ceased  at  once.

So  far  as  I  am  concerned  (my  coolness  is  said  to  be  extraor-
dinary), I  have  no  doubts  as  to  this  manifestation.  I  am  very
sure  that  there  was  no  autosuggestion  on  my  part,  for  I  analyzed
my  impressions  at  the  moment  when  I  had  them.

This  took  place  in  Bordeaux,  in  1889.

My  name  is  for  you  alone.

A.  T.

(Letter  702.)

This  strange  manifestation,  which  took  two  forms,  leads
us  to  admit:

(1)  That  the  narrator's  father  survived  after  death.

(2)  That  his  Catholic  beliefs  persisted  after  his  death.

(3)  That  he  grew  quiet  when  these  beliefs  were  respected.


252  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

It  is  our  duty  to  record  such  happenings  in  all  frankness.
We  shall  explain  them  later — if  we  can.

The  following  communication,  of  the  same  sort,  was  sent
m,e  from  Russia,  on  June  12,  1899 :

In  1847  I  had  gone  with  my  husband  to  the  home  of  my  cousin,
who  had  just  bought  a  farm.  And  since  a  great  many  of  his
relatives  had  gone  that  day  to  felicitate  him,  and  there  was  not
enough  room,  beds  for  my  husband  and  me  had  been  placed  in
the  parlor.  About  three  o'clock  in  the  morning  I  awakened,  grad-
ually, and  saw  a  gentleman  in  the  middle  of  the  room.  That  hap-
pened more  than  forty  years  ago,  and  I  can  still  see  his  face
clearly!  The  gentleman — ^who  was  unknown  to  me — said:  "I  died
in  this  room;  I  need  your  prayers;  pray  to  the  Holy  Virgin  for
the  repose  of  my  soul.     My  name  is  Jean."

It  is  astonishing  that  I  was  not  in  the  least  afraid.  I  got  down
on  my  knees  at  once,  to  pray.  My  husband,  who  was  sleeping
in  the  same  room,  saw  nothing  and  heard  nothing,  but  he  saw  me
praying.     After  the  prayer  I  fell  asleep  again,  quietly.

The  next  day  when  I  questioned  my  cousin,  he  told  me  that
a  gentleman  named  Jean  (I  forget  his  family  name)  had  died
there.

Two  days  afterward  the  deceased  man's  widow,  who  lived  twelve
versts  away,  came  to  tell  us  that  on  the  same  night  on  which  I
had  prayed  she  had  dreamed  that  her  dead  husband  asked  her  to
come  and  thank  me  for  my  prayer.  I  must  add  that  the  lady
was  unknown  to  me.

I  am,  sir,  seventy-three  years  old;  at  my  age  people  tell  only
the  simple  truth.  I  should  not  dare  to  write  you  if  the  occur-
rence were  not  authentic  and  if  it  had  not  remained  in  my  memory
during  my  whole  life.

Helene  Danitovitch,

(Letter  668.)  Tyraspol,  Russia.

It  is  indeed  difficult  to  deny  that  the  deceased  man  (un-
known  to   the   narrator)    appeared   in   the    death-chamber.


ONE  MONTH  TO  ONE  YEAR  AFTER  DEATH   253

These  demands  for  prayers  continue  to  surprise  me.     But  it
is  only  honest  to  tell  of  them  here.

Monsieur  Moreillon,  an  architect  (102  rue  Reaumur),  gave
Monsieur  Vetter  the  following  account:

A  young  man  had  been  brought  up  in  Alsace  by  his  grand-
mother (his  parents  had  died  young),  whom  he  had  lost  when  he
was  anywhere  from  twenty  to  twenty-five  years  old.  From  that
time  on,  he  lived  in  his  grandmother's  room;  it  contained,  among
other  pieces  of  furniture,  an  arm-chair  in  which  she  had  loved
to  sit.  One  night,  several  months  afterward,  she  appeared  to
him,  seated  in  this  arm-chair.  He  rubbed  his  eyes,  struck  a  light,
and  saw  her  for  a  moment  more.  Then  he  noticed  that  his  dog,
whose  favorite  bed  the  arm-chair  was,  was  not  in  it.  He  ended
by  discovering  him  hidden  under  the  bed,  and  trembling  all  over.
Never  again  did  the  dog  jump  up  into  the  arm-chair.

The  story  given  below  is  still  stranger.

An  estimable  correspondent  had  told  me  that  a  nun — the
head  of  a  Home  for  Aged  Men — ^had,  personally,  both  seen
and  heard  an  apparition  of  some  one  dead,  under  conditions
indicative  of  authenticity,  which  rendered  the  case  worthy  of
special  attention.  As  a  result  I  went  to  this  Home,  that  I
might  speak  directly  to  the  nun,  and  be  able  to  judge,  as
exactly  as  possible,  of  the  impressions  which  she  might  have
had.  Here  is  what  she  told  me,  asking  me  not  to  give  her
name,  or  that  of  her  order:


I  only  told  it  to  the  priest,  and  I  'm  astonished  that  the  story
of  it  has  spread.  It  did  n't  happen  here,  but  in  a  convent  in
the  North,  where  I  was  several  years  ago.

It  was  half-past  nine  in  the  morning.  I  had  taken  charge  of
the  children,  and  had  just  left  them.  When  I  drew  near  the  iron
fence  surrounding  the  convent  I  noticed  that  the  entrance  gate
was  open.  I  went  to  close  it,  and,  reaching  it,  I  saw  a  priest
leaning  against  it.  He  was  poorly  dressed;  in  his  hand  he  held
a  stick,  made  of  the  branch  of  a  tree,   and  a  little  bag,  like  a


254  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

beggar.  He  also  had  in  his  hand  a  large  yellow  checked  hand-
kerchief.    Surprised  by  this  costume,  I  asked  him  what  he  wished.

"I'd  like  a  mass/'  he  answered.

"There  are  no  more  masses  at  the  convent  at  tliis  hour,"  I
replied,  "but  if  you  go  to  the  church,  you  might  perhaps  hear
one."

Then  I  went  with  him  down  the  three  steps  at  the  entrance,  and,
leading  him  along  the  iron  fence,  I  pointed  out  the  most  direct
road  to  the  church.  While  talking,  there  in  the  bright  light,  I
looked  at  his  garments  more  closely.  He  did  not  wear  any  band,
but  a  little  collar,  and  had  on  glasses;  he  was  gazing  at  me  from
beneath  them.  Suddenly  his  features,  the  glasses,  the  collar,  and
the  checked  handkerchief  reminded  me  of  the  father  superior  of
our  order,  who  had  died  six  months  before.  Then  I  pointed  to
the  road  he  must  take,  looking  in  that  direction.  When  I  turned
toward  him  again  I  did  not  see  him:  he  had  disappeared!

We  still  think  of  hallucinations ;  hallucinations  of  the  eyes,
the  ears — or,  rather,  of  the  brain.  But  the  witness  assured
me  that  she  was  absolutely  cool,  in  very  good  health,  no»t
imaginative,  and  that  she  had  seen  clearly.

"The  idea  that  our  dead  father  superior  had  stood  before
me  struck  me  with  such  force,"  she  said,  ''that  I  scarcely-
had  the  strength  to  stand  erect.  The  sisters  asked  me,  when
I  reached  them,  if  I  were  ill.  I  am  convinced  that  it  was  he
whom  I  saw."

"Have  you  ever  had  any  other  hallucination f"

''Never.  Besides,  you  can  see  that  I  'm  a  healthy  woman,
with  normal  mental  balance.  That  I  was  the  dupe  of  an
illusion — it  's  a  most  fantastic  theory.  This  presence  lasted
for  about  three  minutes.  I  was  thinking  neither  of  our  dead
father  superior  nor  of  anything  that  might  have  affected  my
imagination.  And  at  first  this  priest  seemed  to  me  like  a
beggar,  and  that  astonished  me.  I  didn't  lose  my  presence
of  mind  for  a  single  instant.     I  was  as  calm  as  I  am  now.


ONE  MONTH  TO  ONE  YEAR  AFTER  DEATH   255

It  was  only  afterward  that  I  realized  he  didn't  want  to  go
to  a  mass,  but  to  have  one  said  for  him."

^'Did  you  have  one  said?"

''The  next  morning — and  more  than  one.  His  was  a  soul
from  purgatory,  in  need  of  prayers."

Such  was  the  nun's  story.  It  seems  to  me  that  her  position
would  justify  us  in  considering  it  perfectly  sincere.  These
apparitions  seem  to  us  more  and  more  clearly  defined,  as  we
examine  a  succession  of  them.  Nevertheless  the  dead  man
was  not  there,  with  glasses,  with  his  checked  handkerchief
and  his  garments.

The  occurrence  challenges  explanation.     Here  is  another.

The  protective  visit  of  a  dead  mother  to  her  little  boy
is  described  in  the  following  story,  which  has  all  the  ear-
marks of  indubitable  authenticity.  The  mother  manifested
herself  six  months  after  her  death.  The  account  was  fur-
nished by  the  Rev.  C.  Jupp,  head  of  the  Alberlour  Orphan-
Asylum  in  Craigellachie.^

In  1875  a  man  died,  leaving  a  wife  and  six  children.  The
three  eldest  were  taken  into  the  orphan-asylum.  Three  years  after-
ward the  widow  died  also,  and  friends  raised  the  money  to  send
the  other  children  there.  The  youngest  was  four  years  old.
Rather  late  one  evening,  six  months  after  these  children  had  been
admitted  to  the  asylum,  some  visitors  arrived  suddenly.  The  su-
perintendent consented  to  sleep  on  a  bed  placed  in  the  children's
dormitory:  it  contained  ten  beds,  nine  of  which  were  occupied.

At  breakfast  one  morning  the  superintendent  told  the  following
story:  "So  far  as  I  can  remember,  I  fell  asleep  about  eleven
o'clock,  and  slept  soundly  for  a  time.  Suddenly  I  awakened,
without  any  apparent  reason;  I  felt  an  urge  to  turn  toward  the
children.  Lifting  my  eyes,  I  saw  a  soft  light  in  the  room.  The
gas  in  the  hallway  had  been  turned  low,  and  as  the  door  to  the

1  This  account  first  appeared  in  June,  1883,  in  the  orphan-asylum's
annual  report,  and  was  published  in  Hallucinations  Hlepathiques,
p.  360.     It  is  absolutely  authentic.


256  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

dormitory  was  open,  I  thought  that  the  light  was  coming  from
there,  but  such  was  not  at  all  the  case.  I  turned,  and  saw  some-
thing surprising.

"Above  the  second  bed,  against  the  wall,  and  on  the  same  side
of  the  room  on  which  I  was,  there  was  floating  a  small  cloud  of
light,  forming  a  halo  as  bright  as  the  moon  on  an  ordinary  moon-
light night.

^'I  sat  up  in  bed,  to  examine  the  strange  apparition.  I  took
up  my  watch,  and  noted  that  the  hands  stood  at  five  minutes  to
one.  All  was  still,  and  all  the  children  were  sleeping  soundly.
In  the  bed  above  which  the  light  seemed  to  float  was  sleeping
the  youngest  of  the  children  previously  mentioned.

"I  asked  myself,  Am  I  dreaming?'  No,  I  was  wide  awake.  I
thought  I  would  get  up  and  touch  the  substance,  or  whatever  it
was  (for,  taking  it  as  a  whole,  it  was  five  feet  high),  but  some-
thing held  me  back.  I  heard  nothing,  but  I  felt  and  understood,
perfectly,  these  words:  'Stay  in  bed;  no  harm  will  come  to  you.'
It  was  not  long  before  I  went  to  sleep,  and  I  got  up  at  half-
past  five,  as  was  my  habit.

"About  six  o'clock  I  began  to  dress  the  children,  commencing
with  the  bed  farthest  from  mine.  I  reached  the  bed  over  which
I  had  seen  the  light  floating.  I  lifted  the  little  boy  up,  put  him
on  my  knee,  and  drew  his  clothes  on.  The  child  had  just  been
talking  with  the  others;  suddenly  he  grew  silent.  Then,  looking
me  full  in  the  face,  with  an  extraordinary  expression,  he  said :  'Oh,
Mr.  Jupp,  my  mother  came  to  me  last  night.  Did  you  see  herf
For  a  moment,  I  could  not  answer  him.  I  thought  that  it  was
better  not  to  speak  at  all  of  that,  and  said:  'Come!  Let's  hurry,
or  we  '11  be  late  for  breakfast.' "

Never  again  did  the  child  speak  of  this  vision,  we  were  assured,
and  neither  did  any  one  speak  of  it  to  him.  The  superintendent
of  the  orphanage  acknowledges,  simply,  that  there  is  a  mystery
in  it,  to  him.  He  has  recorded  the  occurrence,  and  there  the  thing
stands.  He  is  virtually  certain  of  having  given,  without  a  single
mistake,  an  account  of  what  he  still  remembers  very  exactly.

In  short,  we  have  here  two  wholly  separate  experiences:
that  of  the  head  of  the  institution,  and  that  of  the  child.


ONE  MONTH  TO  ONE  YEAR  AFTER  DEATH   257

How  can  we  doubt  the  reality  of  the  phenomenon?  Does
it  not  offer  us  testimony  concerning  a  mother's  love  for  her
child,  six  months  after  her  death?

The  head  of  the  orphan-asylum  had  told  the  story  to  hi^
wife,  who  made  this  reply  on  the  occasion  of  the  Psychical
Society's  investigation :  ''I  certify  that  this  account  is  exact;
that  it  was  given  me  on  the  morning  after  the  incident."
The  story  was  then  told  to  the  bishop,  and  to  other  persons.

I  am  classifying  the  occurrence  among  the  "Manifesta-
tions" rather  than  among  the  "Apparitions."  But,  al-
though it  is  a  trifle  indefinite,  it  must  be  recorded  and  its
value  determined.

Frank  Podmore,  too,  published  it  in  his  book  "Apparitions
and  Thought-Transf erence " ;  he  regarded  it  as  a  telepathic
hallucination.  Nevertheless  one  cannot  see,  at  all,  that  there
was  any  thought-transmission  in  the  manifestation.  Thought-
transmission  on  whose  part  ?  On  the  part  of  the  head  of  the
orphanage?  Nothing  would  indicate  this.  Of  the  sleeping
child?  He  may  have  dreamed  of  his  mother,  but  the  light
irradiating  the  room?  "There  was  floating  a  small  cloud  of
light  forming  a  halo  as  bright  as  the  moon  on  an  ordinary
moonlight  night."  No,  this  is  not  an  explanation;  let  us
not  try  to  push  classification  so  far.

In  the  course  of  a  lecture  made  before  the  London  Spiritual
Alliance,  General  Dryson  told  of  the  following  experience:

It  happened  many  years  ago.  One  morning  I  received  a  tele-
gram announcing  the  death  of  an  excellent  friend  of  mine,  a
clergjnnan  from  the  North  of  England.  On  that  same  day  I  made
a  visit  to  a  lady  who  claimed  to  possess  the  faculty  of  seeing
spirits  and  talking  with  them!  Wlien  I  reached  her  home  I  was
given  over  to  thoughts  of  my  reverend  friend.  After  some  mo-
ments of  conversation  with  the  lady,  I  asked  her  if  she  did  not
see  a  spirit  near  me  who  had  just  left  this  world.  She  answered
that  she  did  see  one,  who  had  died  very  recently.     I  thought  it


258  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

must  be  the  clergyman.  But  the  lady  told  me  that  the  apparition
was  in  military  uniform,  and  had  told  her  that  he  had  died  a
violent  death.  She  gave  me  his  Christian  name  and  his  family
name,  and,  besides  these,  a  nickname  by  which  not  I  alone,  but
also  several  other  of  his  brothers  in  arms,  had  been  accustomed
to  call  him.  I  questioned  her,  wishing  for  fuller  details  as  to
his  death.  She  replied  that  his  head  had  been  cut  off,  and  his
body  thrown  into  a  canal;  that  this  had  happened  in  the  Orient,
but  not  in  India.  Now,  I  had  not  seen  this  officer  for  three
years,  and  the  last  news  that  I  had  had  of  him  was  that  he  was
in  Hindustan.

After  this  visit  I  went  to  Woolwich  for  information.  I  learned,
in  this  way,  that  the  officer  in  question  had  really  been  in  India,
but  that  he  had  left  for  China.  Some  weeks  later  the  news  ar-
rived that  he  had  been  taken  prisoner  by  the  Chinese.

A  large  sum  was  offered  as  a  ransom;  but  he  was  never  found.

Long  years  afterward  I  met,  in  India,  this  officer's  brother.  I
asked  him  if  anything  had  ever  been  learned  as  to  his  brother's
death.  He  told  me  that  his  father  had  gone  to  China,  and  that
he  had,  in  that  country,  come  upon  proof  that  a  Tartar  chief,
furious  at  the  loss  of  one  of  his  friends,  had  ordered  the  officer's
head  cut  off,  on  the  banks  of  a  canal  into  which  his  body  had
been  thrown.

I  agree  with  Metzger  that  in  this  case  suggestion  must  be,
of  necessity,  eliminated,  as  well  as  thought-transmission.  The
general  was  not  thinking  of  the  officer,  and  knew  nothing
of  what  had  happened.  It  is  equally  plain  that  the  sub-
conscious had  nothing  to  do  with  the  case.

Manifestations  of  the  dead  are  not  so  rare  as  people  be-
lieve.    My  fellow-countryman  Count  A.  de  M (he  asked

me  not  to  give  his  name)  told  me  of  a  certain  number
of  cases  which  occurred  in  his  family.  He  guaranteed  their
authenticity.  I  shall  select  only  the  following  one,  since  it
belongs  in  this  chapter,  holding  the  others  in  reserve  for  a
later  book:


ONE  MONTH  TO  ONE  YEAR  AFTER  DEATH   259

My  cousin  Baroness  de  M was  living  in  Paris,     Some  months

after  the  death  of  her  son  Rene  she  was  coming  home,  after  visit-
ing friends.  It  was  broad  daylight.  She  entered  the  drawing-
room,  her  mind  perfectly  calm,  and  saw  her  son  seated  in  an  arm-
chair before  the  fireplace.  She  fled,  and  never  again  entered  that
drawing-room.

Let  lis  end  this,  chapter  with  the  following  experience,
a  manifestation  one  year  after  death.  It  was  published  in  the
''Revista  de  Ciencias  Psiquicas"  of  Caracas,  in  November,
1913. ^

Dr.  Cabral,  head  of  "El  Atheneu  Brasileiro,"  relates  that  he
had  taken  care  of  a  poor,  deserted  girl  named  Deolinda,  who  had
died  of  consumption.  Some  time  afterward  the  doctor  had  ac-
cepted the  hospitality  of  his  friend,  Monsieur  Barbosa  de  Andrade,
who  lived  in  a  rather  out-of-the-way  place.  Monsieur  Andrade's
sister  had  just  fallen  so  seriously  ill  that  it  was  necessary  to  look
after  her  during  the  night.

This  is  the  doctor's  story:

One  night,  when  I  had  finished  my  rounds,  I  was  so  tired  that
I  went  to  bed.  Two  sisters,  Mesdames  Ana  and  Felicia  Diaz,  took
my  place  at  the  invalid's  bedside.

I  had  scarcely  stretched  myself  out  on  my  bed  when  I  was
pervaded  by  an  intense  feeling  of  well-being.  I  could  not  account
for  this  sensation.  Soon  I  had  an  impression  that  some  object  was
touching  my  head,  as  though  some  one  were  wrapping  me  up  in
something.  Astonished  at  this  feeling,  I  called  to  the  two  ladies
who  were  on  duty  in  the  next  room.  Madame  Felicia  Diaz  said
to  me:  "I  see  a  young  girl,  dressed  in  white,  at  the  head  of  your
bed;  she's  putting  a  wreath  of  roses  on  your  forehead.  She
says  that  her  name  is  Deolinda,  and  that  she  has  come  to
show  her  gratitude  for  the  generosity  with  which  you  cared  for
her."

I  was  greatly  astonished  by  this  statement.  I  recalled  the  fact
that  it  was  the  anniversary  of  Deolinda's  death;  neither  I  nor  any

^Annates  des  Sciences  psychiques,  1909,  p.  166,  and  1914,  p.  125.


260  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

one  else  had  tliought  of  this.     I  had  never  spoken  to  any  one  in
that  house  of  what  I  had  done  for  Deolinda.

Dr.  Cabeal.

This  account  is  hereby  confirmed  by  the  following  signatures:
Manuel  Barbosa  de  Andrade,  Madame  Emilia  Barbosa  de  Andrade,
Madame  Ana  Ines  Diaz  Fortes.

How  shall  we  explain  this  manifestation  of  a  dead  woman?
Was  it  a  waking  dream?  But,  if  we  accept  this  hypothesis,
why  the  shade,  the  wreath  of  roses?  Did  the  deceased
woman  transmit  her  thoughts  ?

Professor  Alexander,  the  recorder  of  the  occurrence,  states
that,  according  to  the  declarations  of  members  of  the  Barbosa
family,  no  one  knew  of  the  story  concerning  Deolinda.  He
adds  that  Madame  Felicia  was  endowed  with  very  pronounced
mediumistic  faculties.  (Proceedings  of  the  Society  for  Psy-
chical Research,  Volume  X,  page  385.)

This  case  was  taken  from  Professor  Sidgwick's  "Inquiry  as
to  Hallucinations."  Myers,  Frank  Podmore,  Mrs.  Sidgwick,
and  Miss  Alice  Johnson  were  his  collaborators.  Here  are  the
deductions  of  this  committee :

If  one  wishes  to  exclude  the  possibility  of  any  real  intervention
on  Deolinda's  part,  one  must  assume:  (1)  that  Dr.  Cabral  remem-
bered subconsciously  that  that  day  was  the  anniversary  of  the  young
girl's  death;  (2)  that  the  memory  gave  rise  in  him,  through  as-
sociation, to  his  feeling  of  happiness  and  his  tactile  sensations,
without,  however,  influencing  his  concious  memory;  (3)  that  the
subconscious  recollection  was  transmitted,  telepathically,  to  the  lady
who  saw  the  deceased.  Let  us  acknowledge  that  this  triple  hy-
pothesis seems  forced  and  artificial  beyond  all  measure,  and  that
a  small  number  of  similar  cases,  as  precisely  substantiated  as  this,
lead  us  to  grant  the  reality  of  manifestations  after  death.

Such  are  the  posthumous  manifestations  observed  during
the  first  year  after  death.     They  have  been  selected  from  a


ONE  MONTH  TO  ONE  YEAR  AFTER  DEATH   261

large  number  of  others.  Let  us  also  read  of  those  still  far-
ther removed  from  the  date  of  dissolution.  They  grow  more
and  more  infrequent.


IX


MANIFESTATIONS  AND  APPARITIONS  DURING  THE  SECOND
THIRD,   AND  FOURTH   YEARS   AFTER   DEATH

The  great  discoveries  are  born  of  the
precise  observation  of  unexpected  phe-
nomena.

AS  we  draw  farther  away  from  the  hour  of  death,  mani-
festations and  apparitions  grow  rarer.  In  all  the
preceding  chapters  I  have  been  obliged  to  eliminate
a  great  many  accounts,  in  order  that  I  might  not  furtiher
increase  the  number  of  pages,  a  number  already  large.
From  this  point  on  we  shall  not  be  so  swamped.  I  shall
bring,  in  the  same  order,  the  principal  occurrences  to  my*
readers'  attention,  still  without  prejudice  and  with  but  one
object:  our  enlightenment.  I  shall  give  the  accounts  exactly
as  I  received  or  came  upon  them,  without  explanatory  hy-
potheses. The  hypotheses  will  come  afterward.  The  mani-
festations which  follow  occurred  from  one  to  three  years
after  death.

The  first,  observed  one  year  after  dissolution,  was  ac-
companied by  an  analytical  statement  which  substantiated
it,  a  statement  which  would  seem  to  eliminate  any  possibility
of  hallucination  or  illusion.  The  account  was  sent  me  from
Paris,  on  April  7,  1921.

My  maternal  grandfather,  a  devout  and  loyal  man,  adored  his
wife.     He  was  extremely  jealous  where  she  was  concerned.

He  died  in  1895.

About  one  year  afterward  my  parents,  who  had  gone  to  call
on  my  grandmother,  found  her  in  tears.     They  asked  her  the  rea-

262


SECOND,  THIRD,  AND  FOURTH  YEARS  AFTER    263

son.  "Yesterday  evening,"  she  told  them,  '^I  was  sitting  in  my
arm-chair.  Lifting  my  eyes  to  the  glass  door,  I  saw  my  poor
Henri  [this  was  her  husband's  name].  He  gazed  at  me  fixedly,
then  passed  on,  smoking  a  cigarette;  I  could  see  its  glow  distinctly.
Terrified  by  the  vision,  I  sat  motionless.  Then,  suddenly,  he  went
by  again,  in  the  opposite  direction,  and  always  at  the  same  gait,
as  though  he  were  walking.  I  rushed  after  him,  calling  to  him:
the  hallway  was  empty,  though  brightly  lighted,  and  the  door  to
it  was  locked."

In  vain  my  parents  tried  to  persuade  her  that  she  had  been
the  victim  of  an  hallucination;  she  would  not  admit  this.  "I  saw
him,"  she  said,  "as  distinctly  as  I  see  you."

It  had  been  my  grandfather's  habit  in  the  evening  to  walk  up
and  down  in  the  hallway  which  ran  the  length  of  the  apartment,
while  his  wife  was  busy  with  household  duties.  When  he  left  his
study  he  usually  wore  a  work- jacket  and  a  skullcap.  It  was  in
this  costume  that  he  appeared  to  her.

On  another  occasion  my  grandmother  saw  her  dead  husband  in
a  dream;  he  spoke  to  her  roughly,  and  gripped  her  arm  with
force.  The  pain  awakened  her:  she  wept,  and  suffered  as  be-
fore. The  pain  in  her  arm  persisted;  in  the  morning  an  extremely
large  bruise  could  be  seen  upon  it,  as  though  something  solid  really
had  gripped  it.

According  to  my  parents,  my  grandmother  did  not  have  strength
enough  to  make  such  a  serious  bruise;  moreover,  there  was  no  trace
of  finger-marks.  They  would  have  been  there  in  the  normal  course
of  things  if  she  herself  had  pinched  her  arm  while  asleep.  On  the
other  hand,  the  hypothesis  of  a  blow  received  accidentally  must  be
ruled  out.

I  must  add  that  before  this  experience  my  grandmother,  although
of  a  nervous  temperament,  was  in  no  way  inclined  to  a  belief  in
the  supernatural,  and  would  never  have  admitted  that  occurrences  of
this  sort  could  take  place.

As  regards  the  first  case,  the  phenomenon  would  seem  to  have
been  only  visual.  No  one  thought  of  asking  her  if  it  had  been
auditory  as  well  (the  sound  of  steps)  and  olfactory  (the  odor  of
tobacco).  It  would  appear,  however,  that  in  this  case  my  grand-
mother would  not  have  omitted  to  mention  such  a  thing.     She  died


264  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

in  1918;   this  is,  therefore,  a  point  which  cannot  be  cleared  up.

As  to  the  second  ease,  the  objection  may  be  raised  that  a  nervous
invalid,  during  an  attack,  has  a  strength  incomparably  greater  than
this  same  invalid's  strength  in  a  normal  state.  My  grandmother
never  had  any  nervous  disorder.

However  that  may  be,  there  was  no  question,  in  the  first  case,  of
a  vaporous  apparition  in  the  darkness;  we  are  concerned  with  an
opaque,  material  presence,  occupying  a  given  space  and  seen  in
perspective,  and  in  a  bright  light.

I  cannot  end  this  letter,  dear  Master,  without  telling  you  how
much  we  venerate  you  and  your  work,  in  our  home,  and  how  many
times  we  have  found  in  it  interest,  courage,  and  consolation.

For  twenty  years  my  father  has  been  buying  your  books;  they
have  the  place  of  honor  in  his  library.  This  is  enough  to  show
you  that  I  have  been  brought  up  under  your  mental  guidance,  and
have  spent  nights  reading  your  books.  I  wish  to  express  my  grati-
tude.

What  I  have  said  will  also  serve  to  give  you  assurance  of  the
authenticity  of  the  occurrences  here  related.  I  authorize  you  to
make  unrestricted  use  of  them.

Allow  me  to  express,  etc.

Henri  Labour.

(Letter  4426.)

This  letter  v^as  accompanied  by  the  parents'  attestation:

We  certify  that  the  preceding  account  is  exact,  and  we  share  our
son's  feelings.

L.  Labour.

Jeanne  Labour  (nee  Delpeuch).

There  is  no  need  for  me  to  remark,  for  my  readers'  ben-efit,
that  if  I  gave  the  end  of  this  letter,  it  v^as  simply,  as  in,
similar  cases,  to  bring  out  the  fact  that  these  accounts  are
absolutely  sincere,  and  do  not  warrant  our  doubting  the
reality  of  the  occurrences.  We  must  concern  ourselves
merely  with  their  interpretation.  We  must  ask  ourselves,  at
the  outset,  if  the  first  vision  were  not  a  sort  of  waking  dream.


SECOND,  THIRD,  AND  FOURTH  YEARS  AFTER  265

But  all  that  the  narrator  saw  was  seen  in  a  bright  light,  and
she  ran  after  the  phantom.  The  stigma  which  followed  the
dream  in  which  she  saw  her  husband  and  felt  the  pr'essure
of  his  hand  would  indicate  that,  in  this  case,  an  extremely
violent  pressure  was  exerted.  It  would  seem  admissible  to  me
that  the  deceased  was  the  real  cause  of  the  pressure.  Not
that  he  came  back,  either  the  first  time,  smoking  a  cigarette
and  with  a  skullcap  on  (this  would  have  no  meaning)  or
the  second  time,  when  he  grasped  her  arm,  but  that  he  pro-
jected his  thoughts  toward  her;  thoughts  which  gave  rise  to
images,  through  psychic  energy.  This  manifestation  was  less
sharply  defined  than  those  figuring  in  the  photographs  of
phantoms  which  we  shall  have  occasion  to  discuss,  but  it  too
was  caused  by  the  deceased  communicating,  in  thought,  with
his  wife.

The  hypothesis  of  an  hallucination  is  easy  to  put  forward,
but  it  has  not  in  the  least  been  proved  satisfactory.  In  the
following  case  this  hypothesis  would  not  seem  even  admis-
sible, since  the  witness  was  totally  unprepared.

An  account  of  the  apparition  of  a  young  girl  who  had  been
dead  for  a  year,  was  sent  me  from  Sestri  Ponente,  Italy,  in
a  letter  dated  July  22,  1899,  by  Monsieur  Giuseppe  Cavag-
naro;  he  took  an  oath  that  it  was  true.  This  young  girl,
who  had  died  at  eighteen,  was  seen  crossing  certain  rooms,
not  only  by  the  narrator  but  by  other  occupants  of  the  house.
The  observer  was  calm;  there  are  no  grounds  for  the  hy-
pothesis of  an  hallucination.

Here  is  the  letter:

I  was  eighteen  years  old  and  was  a  student  in  Genoa,  where  I
was  living  in  my  father's  home.  One  morning,  about  seven  o'clock,
while  I  was  turning  the  pages  of  a  Greek  book,  I  heard  a  noise  like
that  of  a  door  being  opened.  I  looked  up  and  saw  a  young  girl,  in
her  chemise,  coming  out  of  the  kitchen.  She  was  tall,  white-skinned,
and  beautiful,  with  long  dark-brown  hair  which  fell  in  curls  down
her  back.     She  passed  me,  looking  at  me  and  almost  smiling,  then


266  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

entered  my  father's  room,  opening  the  door  and  closing  it  noisily.
I  was  astounded,  and  said  to  myself,  "I  'd  like  to  find  out  who  she
is  and  why  she  's  here."

About  ten  minutes  afterward  my  father  came  out  of  this  same
room  and,  as  was  his  custom,  went  into  the  kitchen  to  wash  his
face  and  hands.  At  once  I  ran  into  the  room  which  he  had  just
left,  but  found  no  one  there.  I  looked  everywhere :  under  the  cup-
board, where,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  no  one  could  have  hidden  because
the  shelves  were  so  low;  under  the  bed,  which  was  very  low — not
even  a  child  could  have  got  beneath  it.  I  also  opened  the  drawers!
I  looked  behind  the  chairs  and  in  all  the  corners;  in  a  word,  I
sought  everywhere.  It  would  have  been  impossible  for  the  young
girl  to  escape  by  the  window,  for  we  were  living  on  the  fifth  floor,
in  an  isolated  street,  4  Via  Edera.

When  my  father  came  back,  after  washing  his  face  and  hands,
I  told  him  what  had  happened.  At  once  we  ran  to  the  stairway,
to  search  it  carefully,  and  could  find  nothing.  My  father  was
obliged  to  unbolt  the  street  door,  which  was  still  locked.  The  con-
cierge assured  us  that  no  one  had  either  entered  or  gone  out.  Then
we  went  to  a  neighbor  who  lived  opposite  us,  Manzini,  a  lawyer,
and  told  him  of  the  occurrence.  To  our  gTeat  surprise,  he  was
not  at  all  astonished  by  our  story,  recognizing,  from  my  description
of  her,  a  young  girl  of  eighteen,  who  had  died  a  year  before  in  my
father's  room,  which  I  had  seen  her  enter.  He  added  that  I  was
not  the  only  one  who  had  seen  her,  and  that  a  whole  family,  which
had  lived  in  the  house  before  us,  had  been  obliged  to  give  up  that
apartment  because  of  these  apparitions,  which  had  frightened  all
those  who  had  witnessed  them.

I  affirm  under  oath  that  what  I  have  told  you  is  the  exact  truth.

C.  Cavagnaro.

(Letter  767.)

The  investigation  made  for  me  on  the  spot  proved  to  me
the  authenticity  of  this  account.  It  v^as  proved  as  indubita-
bly as  the  fact  that  Madame  Brentano  threw  herself  from
a  v^indov^  in  a  Milan  Street,  as  Prince  Troubetzkoy  related
to  me  (''At  the  Moment  of  Death,"  page  236).

I  confess  that,  after  making  every  allowance,  I  am  more


SECOND,  THIRD,  AND  FOURTH  YEARS  AFTER     267

and  more  astonished  by  the  denials  of  those  who  contradict
everything.

Has  the  testimony  of  persons  belonging  to  the  lower  classes
of  society  the  same  value  as  that  of  cultivated  persons  ?  This
is  the  question  which  the  narrator  of  the  following  observa-
tion put  to  me.     The  story  was  told  her  by  her  charwoman.

One  midsummer  day,  about  three  or  four  o'clock  in  the  after-
noon, this  woman  was  sewing.  She  states  that  she  saw  her  father,
who  had  been  dead  for  about  a  year,  pass  before  her.  He  went
into  an  adjoining  room,  where  the  store  of  wood  for  the  winter
was  kept.  She  ran  after  him.  Although  she  knew  he  was  dead,
she  was  so  sure  of  having  seen  him  that  she  looked  into  the  little
room  into  which  he  had  gone,  but  saw  no  one  there.  She  was  not
thinking  of  her  father  at  the  moment  of  this  apparition,  and  af-
firmed positively  that  she  had  seen  him  as  distinctly  as  one  sees  a
person  of  flesh  and  blood,  when  that  person  stands  before  one.  She
even  remembers  that  he  carried  a  cane  in  his  hand,  and  had  on  a
brown  suit.

Berthe  Liebmann,

(Letter  308.)  Paris.

When  we  see  dead  persons  in  our  dreams  and  talk  with
them,  this  mental  illusion  proves  nothing.  The  most  incon-
gruous and  absurd  situations  arise  in  the  course  of  dreams.
But  our  normal  waking  state  is  different.  Why  should  not
this  observation  on  the  part  of  a  charwoman  be  as  valuable
as  that  of  a  savant,  of  a  scholar,  of  an  artist,  if  this  person
has  a  calm  disposition  and  good  sense  that  is  proof  against
illusions?  Moreover,  why  are  observations  of  this  sort  so
numerous  ?

The  foregoing  narrations  would  lead  us  to  think  that  dead
persons  return  to  their  former  abodes.  They  may  think  of
these  abodes  without  really  coming  back.  We  may,  on  the
other  hand,  see  in  such  cases  only  mental  images  or  hallucina-
tions, but  we  must  beware  of  solutions  that  are  too  easy.


268  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

Thus  we  might  see  in  the  following  impression  an  optical  and
auditory  illusion.  But  the  percipient  was  a  child  five  or  six
years  old,  who  did  not,  probably,  at  the  time  of  this  experi-
ence, have  much  imagination.  On  the  other  hand,  we  know
of  rather  a  large  number  of  similar  manifestations  on  the
part  of  dead  persons  who  continued  their  former  habits.
An  account  of  the  following  phenomenon  was  sent  me  by  Ma-
demoiselle Eve  Cabot,  from  Montpellier,  on  April  27,  1920.
It  bears  the  number  4134,  on  my  records  of  psychic  occur-
rences.

When  I  was  five  or  six  years  old,  I  was  living  in  the  country,
with  my  grandmother.  We  slept  in  the  same  bed.  One  morning,
when  I  waked  up,  I  saw  my  grandfather,  who  had  been  dead  for  a
year.  He  was  sighing  as  he  walked  from  one  window  to  another.
I  was  not  in  the  least  frightened.  In  this  same  way  my  grand-
father came  back  several  times.  My  grandmother  used  to  say  to
me,  again  and  again,  that  what  I  had  told  her  was  meaningless,  but
I  heard  my  mother  tell  her  that  my  visions  corresponded  to  my
grandfather's  former  habits.  He  had  almost  ruined  himself  by
building  the  house  in  which  we  were  living,  and  he  used  often  to  go
from  one  window  to  another,  sighing.

As  we  said  a  short  time  ago,  a  large  number  of  happen-
ings of  this  sort  would  lead  us  to  think  that  the  dead  con-
tinue the  habits  peculiar  to  them  when  they  were  alive.
Is  this  strange  and  inexplicable  circumstance  enough  to
make  us  reject  these  happenings?  Would  it  not  be  better
to  try  to  explain  them?

We  shall  read  now  of  a  posthumous  anniversary.  I  received
the  following  letter  from  Port-Louis,  He  Maurice,  on  May  4,
1899:

When  I  was  twenty  I  celebrated  my  birthday  with  my  brother-
in-law,  who  was  passing  through  this  city;  his  age  was  exactly
double  mine.    It  was  on  December  13,  1874.    Ever  since  that  time


SECOND,  THIRD,  AND  FOURTH  YEARS  AFTER     269

we  have  continued  to  celebrate  our  birthday  together.  My  brother-
in-law  died  in  October,  1897,  about  two  months  before  his  sixty-
third  birthday.  I  did  not  celebrate  that  birthday  alone,  for  I  was
very  sad.  At  the  close  of  1898,  I  did  not  think  of  our  birthday.
This  is  all  the  stranger  from  the  fact  that  I  cannot  remember  for-
getting this  date  on  any  other  occasion  in  my  life.  In  the  course
of  the  night  of  December  12th-13th — I  do  not  know  at  what  hour
— I  saw  my  brother-in-law  distinctly,  while  asleep.  His  features
were  clearly  defined.  I  did  not  see  him  as  though  in  a  dream,  but
as  though  it  were  broad  daylight.  He  seemed  a  little  older,  as  he
might  well  have,  after  one  or  two  years.  When  I  awakened  in  the
morning,  this  experience  seemed  very  odd  to  me.  It  was  only  in
the  course  of  the  day  that  I  thought  of  the  date  and  remembered
that  it  was  my  forty-fourth  anniversary.  I  must  add  that  there
was  a  very  close  intimacy  between  us.

I  had  never  had  any  vision  such  as  that  since  my  brother-in-law's
death.

Regis  de  Chazal,
Manufacturing  Engineer.

(Letter  654.)

We  are  free  to  seek  every  possible  explanation.  Could  the
narrator's  subconscious  mind  have  perceived  what  his  con-
scious mind  did  not?  But  have  we  a  right  to  deny  the  in-
fluence of  the  deceased  brother-in-law  ?  It  was  a  year  and
a  half  after  his  death.  If  we  wished  to  interpret  the  dream
in  a  literal  spirit,  we  should  conclude  that  the  dead  man's
soul  was  not  free  to  manifest  itself  two  months  after  death,
but  was  able  to  do  so  fourteen  months  afterward.

We  read  in  Volume  II  (page  122)  of  a  mother  who  mani-
fested herself  one  year  after  her  death,  and  asked  her  daughter
to  go,  despite  her  fatigue,  to  the  religious  ceremonies  at  the
anniversary  of  her  death.  Was  this  not  a  mere  reflection  of
the  daughter's  thought?  She  had  been  particularly  busy  in
preparing  for  the  ceremony.  Let  us  never  lose  sight  of  the
fact  that  we  are  far  from  knowing  the  whole  extent  of  human
faculties.    It  was  on  account  of  consideration  such  as  this  that


270  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

the  occurrence  just  mentioned  was  given  in  Volume  II,  and
not  here.

The  following  is  an  account  of  a  ghost,  distinctly  seen  and
closely  scrutinized  by  the  observer.  The  witness  himself
wrote  out  the  story  of  it.^

In  1880  I  succeeded  my  predecessor  as  librarian.  I  had  never
seen  him,  nor  any  photograph  or  portrait  of  him.  People  may  have
spoken  to  me  about  him  and  about  his  appearance,  but  that  was  all.
One  evening  in  March,  1884,  I  had  remained  in  the  library  until
rather  late,  and  was  working,  alone.  Suddenly  I  realized  that  I
should  miss  my  train  if  I  did  not  hurry.  It  was  then  fifty-live
minutes  past  ten,  and  the  last  train  left  at  five  minutes  past  eleven.
I  rose  hastily,  took  up  some  books  in  one  hand  and  the  lamp  in  the
other,  then  went  out  through  a  hallway.  As  my  lamp  lighted  up
this  hallway  I  perceived  a  man  at  the  other  end,  and  it  occurred
to  me  at  once  that  a  burglar  had  broken  in — a  thing  that  was  not
impossible.  Instantly  I  went  back  to  the  room  I  had  just  left,  put
down  the  books,  took  up  a  revolver,  held  my  lamp  behind  me  and
again  went  along  the  hallway  to  a  corner  where  it  seemed  to  me
that  the  burglar  might  have  hidden  himself,  in  order  to  make  his
way,  from  that  point,  into  the  main  room.  But  I  could  find  no
one,  and  saw  only  the  room,  lined  with  shelves  of  books.  Several
times  I  shouted  to  the  intruder  to  show  himself,  hoping  that  my  call
would  be  heard  by  a  policeman.  Then  I  saw  him  again.  I  noted
that  he  seemed  to  be  examining  the  shelves  of  books.  His  head  was
bald,  colorless;  his  eye-sockets  were  very  sunken.  I  went  toward
him.  He  was  an  old  man  with  high  shoulders.  He  swayed  from
side  to  side  as  he  gazed  at  the  books;  he  continued  to  look  at  them,
turning  his  back  to  me.  With  a  dragging  step  he  left  the  shelves
and  made  his  way  silently  toward  the  door  of  a  little  lavatory
opening  on  the  room  in  which  the  books  were,  a  lavatory  which  had
no  other  door.  I  followed  the  man  into  it,  and,  to  my  great  sur-
prise, found  no  one.  I  examined  the  window  (it  measured  about
fourteen  by  eighteen  inches),  and  found  it  securely  locked.  I
opened  it  and  looked  out.  Outside  was  a  pit  ten  feet  deep;  no  one
could  have  got   out   of  it   unaided.     He  could  not  have   escaped.

1  Frank  Podmore,  Appa/ritions  an^  Th?ought-Transference,  p.  427.


SECOND,  THIRD,  AND  FOURTH  YEARS  AFTER     271

Deeply  mystified,  I  admit  that  I  began  to  have,  for  the  first  time,
what  might  be  called  "a  feeling  of  supernatural  fear."  I  left  the
library  and  found  that  I  had  missed  my  train.

The  next  morning  I  told  my  story  to  a  clergyman  of  that  region,
who,  when  he  heard  my  description,  replied,  "Why,  that's  the  old
librarian!"  Soon  afterward  I  was  shown  a  portrait  of  my  prede-
cessor; the  resemblance  was  very  striking.  The  deceased  had  lost
all  his  hair,  his  eyebrows,  and  his  eyelashes;  he  had,  if  I  remember
rightly,  been  the  victim  of  an  explosion.  He  had  high  shoulders,
and  walked  with  a  waddling  gait.

Later  inquiry  proved  he  had  died  at  about  the  time  of  year  at
which  I  saw  the  figure.

After  telling  this  story,  Mr.  Podmore  admits  quite  frankly
that  to  account  for  it  by  the  hypothesis  of  thought-transmis-
sion ''has  seemed  to  some  extravagant."  But,  all  the  same,
he  will  not  abandon  this  theory.  In  the  course  of  the  dis-
cussion he  cites  Gurney's  reflections  in  the  second  volume
of  ''Phantasms  of  the  Living"  (Volume  II,  pages  267-269),
"where  the  telepathic  bond  between  the  agent  and  the  percip-
ient would  seem  to  be  of  a  local,  rather  than  a  personal
character."  We  can  guess,  after  a  fashion,  what  the  author
is  driving  at,  but  his  meaning  is  not  dazzlingly  clear.  Pod-
more  adds:

In  the  ease  of  the  most  usual  apparitions— for  example,  that  of
a  dying  mother  to  her  son — the  manifestations  are  not  of  the  same
sort  as  in  the  case  of  casual  acquaintances,  since  people  who  have
lived  together  a  part  of  their  lives  have  sentiments  in  common.

In  the  case  given  here,  the  bond  of  union  which  led  to  such
common  sentiments  may  be  found  in  the  fact  that  the  witness  had
the  same  occupation  as  the  deceased.

This  interpretation  would  lead  us  to  conclude  that  the  witness  saw
the  librarian's  form  in  his  habitual  environment  because  a  friend  of
the  deoeased,  may  at  this  precise  moment  have  remembered  the
former  librarian  and  mentally  recalled  his  image.


272  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

All  of  us  feel  that  this  '' explanation"  is  no  explanation  at
all.  Thought-transmission  is  no  universal  panacea.  To  go  so
far  as  to  suppose  that  some  unknown  person  thought,  at  that
very  moment,  of  the  former  librarian,  and  that  the  thought
produced  the  vision  seen  by  his  successor,  who  followed  the
shade  which  was  walking  in  the  library,  and  which  disap-
peared into  the  lavatory — this  supposition  forces  us  to  put
forward  a  hypothesis  so  audacious  in  its  temerity  that  it
would  seem  further  removed  from  truth  than  the  admission
that  the  phantom  actually  existed.  If  it  did  actually  exist,
as  an  image  projected  by  the  dead  man's  thought,  it  was
distinct  and  substantial  enough  in  appearance  to  have  been
taken  for  a  burglar  and  followed  by  the  observer,  armed
with  a  revolver.

To  see  in  these  phenomena  only  hallucinations  is  really
not  possible;  this  would  mean  finding  madmen  and  mentally
unbalanced  persons  everywhere.  The  observer  did  not  know
the  former  librarian,  and  the  apparition  corresponded  to  the
portrait  which  he  saw  afterward  and  the  description  given
him  later.  The  librarian  was  bald,  with  high  shoulders,  and
he  walked  with  a  waddling  gait.  It  was  really  he  whom  his
successor  met,  scrutinized,  and  followed;  the  witness  had  no
nervous  disorder,  moreover.  What  was  the  phantom  doing
there  ?  Was  it  a  harking  back  to  his  life,  his  habits  ?  These
ghosts  are,  most  assuredly,  bizarre.  There  are  numerous
analogous  cases.  Though  we  have  no  preconceived  ideas,  we
are  forced  to  admit  their  authenticity.  What  had  this  old
librarian  come  to  look  for?  Why  was  the  Sentenac  priest
seen  walking  up  and  down  and  telling  his  beads?  How  do
impalpable  beings  grow  visible?  All  these  occurrences  have
been  denied,  disdained,  and  accounts  of  them  suppressed;
plainly,  this  was  the  simplest  course.  But  would  it  not  be
better  to  learn  from  them?

The  exact  date  of  dissolution  was  not  given,  but  it  would
seem  that  the  apparition  was  observed  one  year  after  death.


SECOND,  THIRD,  AND  FOURTH  YEARS  AFTER     273

Whether  the  phenomenon  was  subjective  or  objective,  it
had  a  cause.  After  all,  there  may  be  nothing  unpleasant
in  meeting  a  ghost;  the  thing  may  resolve  itself  into  a
problem  in  optics  demanding  an  explanation.  We  shall
read  later  of  the  ghost  of  Maupertuis  in  a  room  of  the  Berlin
Academy.

The  apparition  of  which  I  am  about  to  give  an  account —
that  of  a  horseman,  a  year  after  his  death — was  actually
seen  by  a  man  known  and  esteemed  for  his  physical  and
moral  qualities.  General  R.  Barter,  of  the  British  Army.  The
account  is  particularly  fantastic  and  unbelievable,  and  never-
the  less  it  cannot  be  doubted !     Here  is  the  picture  ^ :

The  general  was  campaigning  in  the  Punjab.  One  night,  when
the  moon  was  full  (there  was  that  splendid  tropical  moonlight),  he
was  alone,  some  distance  from  his  camp.  He  was  calmly  smoking
a  cigar,  when,  on  his  left,  he  heard  the  sound  of  a  trotting  horse.
About  a  hundred  meters  away,  above  the  sunken  road,  he  first  saw
a  moving  hat  appear — evidently  the  horseman's  hat,  he  thought.
Soon  afterward  a  group  emerged  full  into  the  open;  there  was  a
European  in  civilian  dress,  on  a  horse,  accompanied  by  two  native
servants.  The  group  approached  at  a  good  rate  of  speed.  General
Barter  cried,  "Who  goes  there?"  There  was  no  answer.  The  rider
still  came  on,  with  his  followers.  He  was  not  more  than  four
paces  away  when,  upon  a  last  commanding  challenge,  he  stopped
short  and  turned  his  face  toward  Barter.  At  once  the  general  recog-
nized in  him  a  lieutenant  whom  he  knew  to  have  been  dead  for  a
year.  With  a  quick  glance  he  took  in  the  whole  picture.  The  lieu-
tenant was  in  full  dress — a  high  hat,  a  white  vest,  et  cetera — but,
though  he  had  been  clean-shaven,  the  general  saw  that  he  now  had
whiskers  under  his  chin.  Besides  this,  he  noted  that  he  was  much
more  corpulent  than  when  he  had  known  him.  The  lieutenant's
mount  also  drew  his  attention;  it  was  a  vigorous  mountain  pony,
brown,  with  a  black  tail  and  mane.  General  Barter  restrained  him-
self no  longer;  he  wished  to  banish  all  doubt  as  to  this  adventure,
and  he  threw  himself  toward  the  fantastic'horseman,  across  an  inter-

^  Annales  des  Sciences  psychiques,  November,  1891.


274  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

vening  slope.  But  the  earth  gave  way  beneath  his  feet,  he  fell
forward  on  his  hands,  and  rose  instantly.  All  had  vanished!  The
subsequent  inquiry  brought  out  the  fact  that  the  lieutenant  had  let
his  whiskers  grow  a  short  time  before  his  death,  and  that  he  had
become  much  stouter  in  his  latter  days.  General  Barter  learned,  at
the  same  time,  that  he  had  owned  a  horse,  bred  in  the  Punjab.
This  horse  corresponded,  point  by  point,  to  his  description  of  the
horse  of  his  vision.  This  horse  was  also  dead,  having  been  killed
through  the  imprudence  of  his  master,  who  was  known  as  a  break-
neck rider.  General  Barter,  who  had  lost  sight  of  the  lieutenant
for  some  years,  was  completely  ignorant  of  all  these  details.  His
memory,  therefore,  could  not  have  aided  his  imagination  to  create
the  apparition,  with  all  its  special  characteristics.  Nor  could  the
apparition  have  taken  form  in  the  mind  of  any  telepathist,  and  have
been  reconstructed  in  every  detail,  without  any  error  or  omission.

In  citing  this  case  of  the  apparition  of  an  officer  who  had
been  dead  for  a  year,  and  of  his  horse,  Durand  de  Gros  admits
that  the  initial  thought  v^ould  seem  to  have  resided  in  the
phantom  himself,  "as  in  the  case  of  the  apparitions  of  those
in  a  trance;  as  in  Alfonso  of  Liguori's  visit  to  the  pope"
C'Le  Merveilleux  scientifique, "  page  68).  But  his  theory
seems  to  me  extremely  vague.

It  is,  certainly,  most  difficult  to  explain  such  a  phenomenon.
We  may  think  that  there  was  no  real  phantom  there,  either
of  man  or  horse.  But  may  we  not  admit  the  visioning  of
a  real  scene  which  actually  occurred?  Through  double  vi-
sion, through  clairvoyance,  people  sometimes  perceive  a  fu-
ture scene.  "Why  should  they  not  witness  a  scene  in  the
past  ?  Time  has  no  real  existence.  And  could  not  this  image
have  been  caused  by  the  deceased  himself,  thinking  of  his
friend?

Into  what  world  have  we  set  sail,  dear  readers?  But  let
us  not  be  disturbed.  Let  us  calmly  continue  to  give  oc-
currences carefully  observed.  Let  us  not  imitate  the  writ-
ers who  suppose  that  all  must  be  explained  by  the  natural


SECOND,  THIRD,  AND  FOURTH  YEARS  AFTER     275

sciences  in  their  present  state  of  development  and  who  are
inexcusably  fatuous  enough  to  throw  doubt  and  suspicion  on
the  best  efforts  of  those  who  seek  in  good  faith.

If  we  must  be  convinced  of  any  one  thing,  it  is  that  we
know  nothing.

The  preceding  occurrences  took  place  during  the  first  and
second  years  after  death.  We  shall  ndw  read  of  those
which  happened  after  the  second  year.

I  take  occasion  to  state  here  that  since  1899  I  have  been
keeping  the  following  note  separate  from  the  letters  I  was
receiving :

In  the  course  of  the  night  of  January  1  and  2,  1898,  I
saw  my  mother  in  a  dream;  she  had  been  dead  for  two  years  and  a
half.  She  came  toward  my  bed  gravely,  kissed  me  on  the  fore-
head, and  went  out  without  saying  anything  to  me.  The  next  day
I  received  a  letter  telling  me  of  the  sudden  death  of  my  sister  at  ten
o'clock  on  the  evening  of  January  1st.  Since  I  did  not  awaken,
it  was  impossible  for  me  to  know  if  there  was  an  exact  coincidence
between  the  time  of  the  dream  and  that  of  my  sister's  death.

M.  Razous,
Instructor  in  Trelons,  Haute-Garonne.

(Letter  360.)

The  correspondence  between  the  mother's  manifestation,
in  a  dream,  and  the  unforeseen  death  of  her  daughter,  is
indubitable.  The  theory  of  chance  really  will  not  suffice;
we  need  an  explanation.  Our  interpretation  is  that  the
mother  thought  of  her  son  in  this  supreme  hour,  and  that
there  was  telepathic  communication  between  her  and
him.

This  account  was  taken  from  ^'L'lnconnu.''  When  I  was
preparing  that  work  for  the  press,  I  received  the  following
communication.  I  did  not  publish  it  at  the  time,  my  inten-
tion being  to  give  accounts  relative  to  the  dying  before  con-
sidering the  dead.


276  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

I  can  guarantee  the  absolute  authenticity  of  the  following  oc-
currence.    My  mother  had  this  experience  some  years  ago:

An  aunt,  of  whom  she  was  very  fond,  had  died  two  years  pre-
viously, leaving  a  son  with  whom  my  mother,  for  special  reasons,
had  practically  broken  off  all  relations.  One  night  she  was  awak-
ened by  a  very  clear  perception  of  this  aunt's  presence;  she  had
seen  her  open  the  door  of  the  room,  draw  near  her  bed,  and  stand,
erect  and  motionless,  at  her  bedside.

The  phenomenon  was  repeated  again  after  two  days.  This  time
my  mother  was  most  agitated;  she  told  my  father  about  it,  and
asked  him  to  find  out  if  any  misfortune  had  happened  to  her
cousin;  she  had  no  doubt  that  the  apparition's  intention  had  been
to  commend  him  particularly  to  her.

The  presentiment  was  a  true  one,  for  on  the  following  day  my
parents  were  informed  that  a  member  of  the  family,  who  was
dying,  had  asked  to  see  them.  The  cousin — since  it  was  he —
wished  for  a  reconciliation  with  my  mother;  she  regarded  it  as  a
double  duty  to  take  care  of  him  until  the  last.  He  lived  on  for
some  days.

Even  to-day,  although  several  years  have  gone  by  since  this
happened,  my  mother  never  speaks  of  it  without  emotion,  and  is
convinced  that  her  aunt  came  to  tell  her  of  her  son's  illness.

For  family  reasons  this  note  must  remain  anonymous.

(Letter  48.)  A.J.

How  can  we  deny  the  reality  of  this  apparition? — its  ob-
ject and  its  result  ?

A  mother's  vdice  was  heard  two  years  after  her  death.  I
received  the  following  letter  from  Siorac  de  Belvis,  Dordogne,
on  May  14,  1899 :

I  think  it  my  duty  to  bring  to  your  knowledge  a  happening  in
the  commune  of  Bosset,  in  the  canton  of  Laforce.

A  lady  named  X died  in  1895,  leaving  a  little  daughter,

four  months  old,  who  was  taken  care  of  by  her  uncle,  a  worthy
farmer.  Two  years  afterward  the  latter  was  gathering  in  the  har-
vest, with  his  daughter  and  his  wife.  The  child,  then  about  three
years  old,  had  followed  them  into  the  field.     This  field  was  so  situ-


SECOND,  THIRD,  AND  FOURTH  YEARS  AFTER     277


ated  that  no  one  could  approach  the  harvesters  without  being  per-
ceived.

Suddenly  these  h'arvesters  heard  the  word  "Good-day"  spoken
near  them,  slowly,  in  a  sad  tone.  The  three  of  them,  who  had
known  the  deceased  woman  well,  recognized  her  voice  immediately.
The  little  girl,  who  could  not  remember  it,  having  been  orphaned
at  too  early  an  age,  .asked  her  aunt,  whom  she  called  mother:
"Mamma,  who  's  saying  good-day  to  us  ?     There  ^s  no  one  here."

They  did  not  answer  her,  but  began  to  weep,  believing,  according
to  the  superstition  of  their  region,  that  the  dead  woman  was  de-
manding her  daughter,  and  that  the  latter  would  die  very  soon.

All  these  persons  are  trustworthy,  and  almost  completely  illiterate.
They  n'ever  spoke  of  this  incident  without  tears  in  their  eyes.

If  you  wish  more  exact  information  as  to  these  people  (I  know
them  slig^htly,  and  all  of  them  are  still  living),  and  as  to  the  day
and  hour  of  the  hallucination,  I  shall  take  advantage  of  the
Easter  holidays  and  shall  go  and  question  them  myself.

Rebeyrol.

(Letter  117.)

The  investigation  confirmed  the  authenticity  of  the  curious
account.  It  shov^ed  me,  once  again,  that  it  is  unreasonable
to  deny  everything.  We  are  concerned  in  this  case  with  an
auditory  perception:  there  were  three  adult  hearers  and  a
child.

The  following  occurrence  to^ok  place  during  that  same
period   (1S99)  :

Something  quite  strange  happened  to   my  mother  and  me.

We  hved  in  Seine-et-Marne  for  a  long  time.  Through  a  change
in  the  government  my  father  was  called  to  Chalon-sur-Saone.  One
evening,  when  my  mother  and  I  were  going  to  the  post-office  and
were  passing  under  a  gas-light,  at  a  corner  we  saw  a  lady  some
paces  in  front  of  us,  coming  from  the  opposite  direction.  Both  of
us  cried,  "Madame  Seigneur!"  (She  was  an  old  lady  we  had
known,  who  had  lived  near  us  formerly,  and  had  been  dead  for
about  two  years.)     After  a  mom'ent's  thought  we  added,  "That  is


278  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

she!"  We  turned  to  follow  her — .  Nothing!  We  have  never  been
able  to  explain  this  apparition.  My  mother  and  I  often  speak  of
it.  We  are  sure  of  having  seen  her;  we  can  describe  what  she  was
wearing,  to  the  smallest  detail.  If  it  had  been  I  alone,  I  should
distrust  my  nervous  and  impressionable  temperament,  but  my
mother  is  very  calm.  We  used  to  care  a  great  deal  for  that  old
friend,  and  often  used  to  speak  of  her.  Did  she  wish  to  show  us
that  she  had  not  forgotten  us?

Here  is  another  manifestation.  In  the  religious  school  where  I
finished  my  education,  my  schoolmistress  grew  dangerously  ill.  A
young  girl  about  twenty  years  old  came  from  Paris  to  take  her
place.  She  lived  in  one  of  the  little  rooms  called  cJiamhrettes,  with
an  assistant  mistress,  a  young  girl  preparing  to  take  her  diploma,
and  a  woman  in  charge  of  the  linen.  Every  morning  all  these  went
to  mass  at  half -past  six,  with  the  exception  of  Mademoiselle
Adrienne.  One  morning,  when  all  the  sisters  were  leaving  the
chapel,  Mademoiselle  Adrienne  was  seen  in  the  kitchen.  She  said
that  she  did  not  wish  to  live  in  her  room  any  longer,  that  a  sister
had  frightened  her.  They  proved  to  her  that  all  the  sisters — that
every  one  except  herself  was  at  mass.  "I  know  that,"  she  said.
"It  was  a  sister  whom  we  don't  know.  She's  tall,  slender,  and
very  pale.  She  came  up  to  my  bed,  and  looked  at  me.  I  spoke  to
her  and  she  did  not  answer,  but  I  shall  never  forget  her  gaze.  She
walked  all  around  the  room,  slowly,  then  went  away."

There  was  no  sister  who  corresponded  to  Mademoiselle  Adrienne's
description,  and  they  spent  the  whole  day  discussing  this  phenom-
enon. Then  one  of  the  nuns  thought  of  showing  her  a  photograph
of  Sister  Bouchez,  whb  had  died  two  months  before  Mademoiselle
Adrienne  entered  the  school.  She  recognized  her  at  once.  Sister
Bouchez  had  been  accustomed  to  working  in  these  small  rooms,
where  she  gathered  together  all  sorts  of  things  for  the  sick,

L.  Delvert.

(Letter  223.)

I  repeat  for  the  hundredth  time  that  we  cannot  always  see
in  these  cases  mere  hallucinations! — that  this  explanation
of  Occurrences  so  num^erous  and  varied  is  absolutely  unsatis-
factory.


SECOND,  THIRD,  AND  FOURTH  YEARS  AFTER      279

The  following  incident  would  lead  us  to  admit  that  a  dead
person  may  manifest  himself,  in  exceptional  circumstances,
three  years  after  he  has  passed  away.  The  communication
which  I  am  about  to  give  was  sent  me  from  Intra,  Italy,  on
August  31,  1899,  by  the  learned  Dr.  Perossi.

The  Italian  newspapers,  my  dear  Master,  give  us  assurance  that
you  are  still  patiently  questioning  the  Unknown,  and  that  it  will
please  you  to  be  kept  informed  as  to  manifestations  touching  on
the  problems  which  you  study,  as  well  as  the  sky.  I  seize  this  op-
portunity to  tell  you  of  a  personal,  technical  observation.

A  young  girl,  Marie  Bottini,  aged  thirteen  (she  is  a  peasant  from
Boregio),  fell  over  a  precipice  and  struck  her  head  against  a  stone
which  made  a  wound  on  her  right  temple.  It  fractured  her  skull
and  a  piece  of  bone  was  driven  into  it.  It  was  6  x  7 — that  is  to
say,  42  centimeters  square.  The  fragment  of  bone,  completely  de-
tached from  the  skull,  buried  itself  in  the  gray  matter  of  the
brain,  where  it  still  is.  A  great  deal  of  the  gray  matter  issued
from  her  head;  in  order  to  sew  up  the  flesh  wound  I  had  to  take
out  about  fifty  grams  of  it.  The  little  girl  was  brought  to  me
thirty-six  hours  after  the  accident;  I  found  her  able  to  give  clear
answers  to  all  my  questions,  and  up  to  the  present  time  she  has
not  been  afflicted  with  any  nervous  disorder,  either  of  her  intel-
lectual faculties,  her  muscular  control  or  her  sensibility.

In  spite  of  the  effects  of  the  wound  on  her  system,  she  suffered
no  mental  disturbance,  and  was  able  to  give,  and  can  still  give,
minute  explanations  of  what  happened  to  her.  Having  fallen  into
a  ravine  hollowed  out  by  water,  she  took  refuge  in  it  and  remained
there  until  the  following  day.  When  she  was  asked  if  she  had  not
been  afraid  during  the  night,  she  answered  that  she  had  not,  and
stated  that  toward  the  close  of  the  day  her  father  had  appeared  to
her  and  had  given  her  courage,  telling  her  to  wait  patiently  for  her
relatives,  who  would  surely  come  to  look  for  her  the  next  day  and
would  take  very  good  care  of  her.  Her  father  had  been  dead  for
three  years.  I  told  her  that  a  person  who  had  been  dead  for  so
long  could  not  come  back,  but  she  stated  with  conviction  that  her
father  had  come,  and  had  protected  her  during  the  whole  night.
This  child  still  sticks  to  what  she  said.


280  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

There,  my  dear  Professor,  is  the  authentic  account  of  the  occur-
rence. It  is  for  you  to  study.  Was  it  an  illusion  or  reality?  We
physicians  see  in  it  an  hallucination.

Allow  me,  dear  Professor,  etc.

Dr.  Perossi.

(Letter  771.)

May  we,  logically,  deny  all  these  occurrences?  Then,  how
could  all  these  numerous  and  consistent  apparitions  of  the
dead — fathers,  mothers,  children,  relatives — manifest  them-
selves, if  there  is  no  truth  at  the  bottom  of  it  all?  Could
these  be  varied,  mutually  unconnected  hallucinations,  in
agreement  one  with  the  other?  Each  of  my  readers  must
honestly  and  sincerely  ask  himself  this  same  question.

We  shall  now  read  of  the  mysterious  voice  of  a  dead
father,  who  saved  the  life  of  his  son  and  the  lives  of  a  ship's
crew.  The  "Filosofia  della  Scienza"  of  Palermo  published
the  following  letter,  sent  from  Civita  Vecchia  on  February
27,  1911,  to  the  editor  of  this  review :

All  my  ancestors  were  seamen.  My  father  came  into  his  own
when  he  took  command  of  the  brig  Notre-Dame  de  Graces  in  Mar-
seilles. This  was  in  1837.  He  left  Marseilles  for  Brindisi  with  a
cargo  of  grain.  Navigation  was  at  that  time  much  more  difficult
than  it  is  to-day,  because  of  pirates  on  the  one  hand,  and,  on  the
other,  because  the  coasts  had  no  lighthouses.  There  were  only  a
few  lanterns  here  and  there.

When  they  neared  Brindisi  it  was  black  night,  and  a  tempest  was
raging.  The  brig  was  sailing  to  windward.  My  father  was  at  the
stern  of  the  vessel,  trying  to  discover  some  vague  light  which  would
dhow  him  where  the  port  was.  The  wind  was  blowing  tempes-
tuously; the  waves,  with  a  noise  like  hell,  shook  the  vessel  at  in-
tervals, covered  it  with  foam,  and  pounded  its  sides.  Peals  of
thunder  followed  the  flashes  of  lightning.  The  fury  of  the  tem-
pest increased  steadily;  it  was  a  critical  moment.

Suddenly  a  loud   voice   cried:     "Captain,    Captain,   come  here!


SECOND,  THIRD,  AND  FOURTH  YEARS  AFTER     281

Come  here  at  once!"  Not  knowing  what  had  happened,  my  father
rushed  to  the  poop,  whence  the  calls  were  coming.

"What  is  it?"  he  asked  the  helmsman.  The  latter,  dazed  and
trembling,  stammered:

"Don't  you  hear  it?  Didn't  you  hear  the  voice  that's  been  re-
peating, ^Puggia!  puggiaF^  for  the  last  few  minutes'?"

"The  voiee?  What  voice?  The  rain's  making  you  hear  imag-
inary voices,  or  it 's  the  whistling  of  the  wind  that 's  fooling  you.
I  don't  hear  anything."

But  he  had  not  finished  speaking  when  a  voice  from  the  steering-
apparatus  (at  least  that  is  where  it  seemed  to  come  from)  repeated
in  a  commanding  tone:     ''Puggia!  puggia!  puggiaF'

Astounded,  hardly  believing  his  ears,  my  father  approached  the
spot  from  which  this  cry  had  seemed  to  come.  He  went  all  around
it;  he  examined  all  the  nooks  of  the  poop,  but  since  he  discovered
nothing  and  thought  that  he,  too,  must  be  the  victim  of  a  sensory
hallucination,  he  said  to  the  helmsman :  "But  there 's  no  one  there.
All  the  crew  are  at  the  bow."  Then  the  voice,  clearer  and  more
vibrant,  repeated  the  command.  This  time  my  father  not  only
heard  it  distinctly,  but  recognized  in  it  the  quality,  the  cadence,  and
the  very  tones  of  his  father's  voice — a  voice  that  was  most  familiar
to  him,  since  he  had  made  trips  with  his  father  from  the  age  of
nine.

Fascinated,  moved,  in  his  turn,  by  an  irresistible  and  incompre-
hensible force,  he  shouted  out  the  order  to  haul  taut.  Taking  the
tiller  from  the  helmsman's  hands,  he  himself  exerted  the  necessary
strength.  The  crew  then  loDsened  the  sheets  and  the  yards  on  the
leeward  side.

The  brig,  catching  the  wind,  swung  over  to  the  right,  and  part-
ing the  raging  waves,  pushed  forward  swiftly,  like  a  runaway  horse
when  the  reins  are  released.  Almost  at  the  same  time  a  flash  of
lightning  irradiated  the  quarter  from  which  the  wind  was  coming —
that  is  to  say  the  larboard  side — which  was  precisely  the  direction
in  which  the  vessel  was  previously  moving.     By  the  light  of  this

1  This  word  (it  is  Neapolitan  dialect)  may  be  translated,  "Haul
taut!" — which  here  means  to  steer  the  ship  in  the  direction  opposite
to  that  from  which  the  wind  was  blowing.


282  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

fleeting  gleam  the  frightened  eyes  of  the  crew  beheld  the  foamy
whiteness  of  raging  waves  beating  the  rocks  of  the  coast.

If  the  vessel  had  continued  her  original  course  for  a  few  more
minutes  all  would  have  been  over  for  both  ship  and  crew.^

F.    SCOTTI,

Ship's  captain.

To  suppose  that  this  was  an  hallucination  seems  to  me
pure  madness.

People  may  alv^ays  say  that  the  story  was  merely  made
up,  that  Captain  Scotti  lied.  All  the  preceding  narrations
might  be  met  with  this  same  special  answer.  Some  people
are  deaf,  blind,  idiotic.  Let  us  continue,  in  all  freedom,  to
seek  self -enlightenment.

The  remarkable,  symbolic  manifestation  which  we  shall
now  read  of  took  place  three  years  and  eight  months  after
death.

In  general  we  can  eliminate  only  with  great  difficulty  the
possibility  of  influence  exerted  by  living  persons'  minds.
Our  efforts  to  attain  to  truth  lead  to  no  precise  results  com-
parable to  those  achieved  in  the  solution  of  algebraic  equa-
tions. With  these  equations  we  proceed  by  elimination,  until
we  are  left  with  an  absolutely  definitive  quantity.  In  the
following  case,  as  in  so  many  others,  we  can  really  see  no
other  course  but  to  admit  the  personal  influence  of  the  de-
ceased. I  thank  the  observer  for  having  been  kind  enough
to  allow  me  to  set  forth,  for  the  benefit  of  all  those  anxious
to  solve  the  greatest  of  problems,  the  graphic  account  which
follows.     I  owe  my  knowledge  of  it  to  her.

Her  letter  was  sent  me  from  Paris.  It  was  dated  Febru-
ary 7,  1921.

In  order  that  you  may  have  one  more  document  for  use  in  the
important  investigation  which  you  are  making,  allow  me  to  tell  you

'^  Annales  des  Sciences  psychiques,  l&ll,  p.  126.


SECOND,  THIRD,  AND  FOURTH  YEARS  AFTER     283

of  the  two  following  experiences.  I  was  concerned  in  them  per-
sonally.

On  September  2,  1916,  between  ten  and  eleven  o'clock  in  the
morning,  I  was  dressing  in  my  room  when,  suddenly,  I  was  seized
by  a  terrible,  stifling  anguish.  What  I  felt  was  so  painful  that  I
rushed,  scarcely  dressed  at  all,  into  my  daughter's  room,  making
my  way  along  the  walls  so  that  I  might  not  fall.  I  cried  out  to
her,  "I  don't  know  what  -s  the  matter :  I  'm  suffering,  I  'm
stifling!"  Then,  when  my  daughter's  kind  words  had  calmed  me  a
little,  I  said :  "Good  Heavens !  A  great  misfortune  's  happened  to
Rene!"

Two  days  afterward,  on  September  4,  Major  Duseigneur,  com-
mander of  Squadron  57,  informed  me  that  my  beloved  son,  a  pilot
in  the  aviation  service,  had  disappeared  behind  the  German  lines,
after  an  aerial  battle  above  Verdun,  on  the  very  day  and  at  the
very,  time  when  I  had  been  so  agitated.

Only  after  the  armistice  did  the  Germans  inform  us  that  my  son
had  been  brought  down  within  their  lines  on  September  2d,  at
Dieppe,  near  Verdun,  and  that  he  had  been  buried  in  the  Dieppe
soldiers'  graveyard,  in  grave  56.  We  made  four  trips  and  searched
innumerable  times  in  this  cemetery,  without  finding  anything.  The
graveyard  had  been  torn  up  by  bombs,  and  most  of  the  crosses  were
broken.  Since  we  could  not  find  our  dear  child's  remains,  we  ad-
dressed ourselves  to  the  officer  in  <•  command  of  that  sector,  whose
duty  it  was  to  see  to  the  exhumation  of  the  bodies,  that  he  might
let  us  know  the  day  on  which  the  corpses  in  this  graveyard  were  to
be  exhumed.  Several  persons  in  high  positions  had  conununicated
with  him  on  our  behalf,  and  my  husband  wrote  to  him  continually
in  order  that  he  might  not  forget  us.     This  took  place  last  spring.

At  half-past  eight  on  May  25th  I  was  pervaded  by  a  feeling
of  great  sadness;  I  was  even  sadder  than  usual,  without  reason.
That  I  might  shake  off  this  deep  depression,  I  went  to  the  window,
and  my  gaze  wandered  to  the  rue  Ribera,  which  runs  up  a  slope
directly  opposite.  There  are  trees  there,  and  a  little  blue  sky.
Suddenly,  in  a  group  of  trees,  I  saw  my  sdn  Rene  appear!  His
handsome  face  was  pale  and  sad;  he  seemed  to  be  depicted  on  a
great  circular  medallion.  At  his  sides  were  two  young  men,  one  on
his  right,  the  other  on  his  left.     I  did  not  know  them,  and  had


284  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

never  seen  them.  Terrified  by  tliis  vision,  I  left  the  window,  put
my  hands  to  my  head,  and  asked  myself  if  I  were  going  mad.  I
walked  up  and  down  the  room  several  times,  then  went  back  to
the  window;  the  vision  was  still  there.  There  could  be  no  doubt
that  it  was  Rene.  His  head  was  tilted  to  the  left,  as  usual.  "But
who  can  these  young  men  hef  I  asked  myself.  "The  one  on
the  right  seems  to  be  a  Russian,  and  the  one  on  the  left,  a  German.
But  that  means  that  my  son  isn't  dead:  he  must  be  a  prisoner
somewhere."  Still  overwhelmed  by  terror,  I  left  the  window  once
more  and  ran  to  tell  my  husband.  But  when  I  reached  the  door
of  his  room  I  got  myself  in  hand  and  said  to  myself:  "No,  I
must  n't  speak  to  him ;  he  'd  think  me  mad ;  it  would  be  too  pain-
ful for  him.  What  shall  I  do*?"  I  went  back  to  (the  window:  the
vision  was  still  there.  This  time  I  sat  down  on  the  window-sill,
determined  to  stay  there  to  the  end,  near  him.  What  happened?
I  came  to  myself.  Had  I  been  asleep  ?  Or  had  I  lost  consciousness  ?
I  no  longer  saw  my  son.  I  rose  painfully,  left  the  window,  looked
to  see  what  time  it  was.  It  was  half-past  ten  o'clock.  All  this
had  lasted  for  two  hours.  I  went  to  bed,  much  agitated,  shaken
by  emotion,  but  could  not  sleep  and  dared  not  say  anything  to  my
husband.  What  could  the  vision  mean?  I  never  ceased  asking
myself  this  question.

Some  days  afterward  I  told  three  of  my  women  friends  all  that
had  happened  to  me;  they  can  vouch  for  this,  if  you  like.

Three  months  went  by.  Then,  at  the  close  of  August,  the  officer
in  command  of  the  sector,  in  reply  to  a  further  demand  on  my
husband's  part,  more  pressing  than  the  others,  informed  us  that
the  bodies  in  the  cemetery  in  Dieppe  had  been  exhumed,  and  that
our  child  had  not  been  found  there.  We  were  deeply  grieved.  How
could  we  ever  know,  now,  what  had  become  of  our  poor  son?  I,
for  my  part,  felt  hopeless.  After  some  days  of  extreme  depression
I  took  courage  again,  and  wished  to  return  to  the  Dieppe  cemetery.

It  was  a  fixed  idea  on  my  part.  My  husband  opposed  it,  telling
me,  very  reasonably,  that  since  we  had  found  nothing  when  there
were  bodies  there,  we  could  not,  now,  hope  to  find  anything  what-
soever. Nothing  could  convince  me.  Since  my  decision  was  final,
my  husband  was  good  enough  to  accompany  me,  and  we  left  in  the
course  of  the  first  days  of  September.


SECOND,  THIED,  AND  FOURTH  YEARS  AFTER     285

We  went  directly  to  the  Eix  sector.  I  asked  on  what  date  the
bodies  in  this  cemetery  had  been  exhumed.  The  officer  consulted
the  records  and  told  us,  "It  took  five  days  (there  were  one  hundred
and  ten  bodies),  from  the  twentieth  to  the  twenty-fifth  of  May  J'
This  last  date  was  precisely  that  of  my  vision!  I  looked  at  my
husband,  for,  most  fortunately,  I  had  decided  to  tell  him  everything.
This  coincidence  in  dates  disturbed  both  of  us.  We  set  out.  The
cemetery  was  five  kilometers  away.

As  we  were  going  there,  I  reflected  that  my  husband  was  right:
what  were  we  to  look  for,  since  there  was  nothing  left?

When  we  reached  our  destination,  I  ordered  the  men  to  dig  in  a
great  shell-hole;  I  thought  that,  most  certainly,  no  one  could  have
looked  in  it.  In  this  hole  they  found  a  pair  of  aviator's  goggles.
I  took  courage  once  more:  without  any  doubt,  an  aviator  had  been
buried  there.  They  made  a  further  search.  Nothing — absolutely
nothing.  At  last  a  little  soldier  who  was  most  intelligent  took
charge  of  things.  Und^r  his  guidance  we  reached  an  empty  ditch
where  we  found  a  large  pieee  of  fur — which  I  recognized — gloves,
some  pieces  of  a  pair  of  violet  silk  suspenders.  There  was  no
longer  the  shadow  of  a  doubt:  my  son  had  lain  there.  "Where
did  you  put  him"?" — "In  the  German  cemetery.  We  wrote  the  word
'Unknown'  above  him,  and  put  up  a  black  cross."  The  cross  of
those  accursed  men!  My  grief  and  indignation  may  well  be  imag-
ined! I  wanted  to  hurry  to  the  other  graveyard;  I  did  not  wish
my  son  to  remain  there.  But  the  officer  refused  my  request.  He
could  not  undertake  to  have  bodies  in  coffins  unearthed.  Besides,
how  could  we  find  the  particular  coffin  which  we  were  looking  for?
There  were  more  than  two  thousand  graves  in  this  German  cemetery.
But  my  mind  was  made  up.  We  went  back  to  Verdun,  eighteen
kilometers  away.  We  found  the  officer  in  charge  of  the  grave-
yards. After  a  long  discussion,  and  influenced  by  our  determined,
threatening  attitude,  he  yielded,  and  authorized  us  to  have  a  search
made.

The  next  day,  at  five  o'clock  in  the  morning,  we  were  in  the
cemetery,  with  nine  men  and  several  soldiers.  By  noon  they  had
opened  twenty  coffins  without  any  result.  The  men  went  to  lunch.
My  husband  and  I  remained  there,  deeply  distressed,  for  we  were
beginning  to  lose  hope.    We  were  in  despair  at  the  idea  of  leaving


286  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

our  child  among  his  accursed  enemies,  when,  suddenly,  I  thought
of  my  vision.  As  though  a  gleam  of  light  had  irradiated  my  mind,
"Why,  yes!"  I  said;  "we'll  find  him;  he's  between  a  Russian  and
a  German.  There  was  a  Russian  in  the  Dieppe  cemetery ;  let 's  look
for  him."  The  men  came  back  and  took  up  the  work  once  more.
As  for  us,  we  looked  for  the  Russian.  We  had  to  interrupt  our
search  again  and  again,  to  inspect  each  newly  opened  coffin;  this
delayed  us  greatly.  At  last,  at  four  o'clock,  I  found  the  Russian.
On  his  left  was  an  unknown  man;  on  the  latter's  left  was  a  Ger-
man. I  felt,  I  was  sure  that — ^beyond  a  doubt — the  unknown  man
was  my  son.  They  dug  up  the  coffin;  it  was  he!  His  poor  skele-
ton was  enveloped  in  his  fur  coat.  More  bits  of  suspenders.  But,
above  all,  I  recognized  his  teeth.  They  had  opened  forty-two
coffins.  One  hundred  and  ten  of  them  had  come  from  the  Dieppe
cemetery,  and  in  all  there  were  more  than  two  thousand,  that  had
been  sent  from  various  regions!  Except  for  my  vision  we  should
have  had  to  give  up  our  search.

Wasn't  this  marvelous?  My  poor  child  did  not  wish  me  to
leave  him  in  this  graveyard;  he  did  not  wish  me  to  have  this  added,
cruel  suffering.  He  came  to  my  assistance;  he  gave  me  the  will
power  to  push  on  to  the  end,  to  overcome  all  difficulties,  all  ob-
stacles. Now  that  I  am  calm,  I  feel  that  he  lives,  that  he  sees  me.
dinary  thing  about  my  vision;  it  must  have  been  their  very  fea-
But  I  find  the  portraits  of  the  two  young  men  the  most  extraor-
tures.  Oh,  how  happy  I  should  be  if  you  would  tell  me  how  this
could  happen.  I  think  of  my  vision  constantly,  and  each  time  that
I  do  I  am  most  disturbed.

My  husband  and  my  women  friends  will  certainly  vouch  for  the
scrupulous  exactitude  of  this  account.  It  is,  doubtless,  too  long,
but  I  thought  that  every  detail  would  have  its  own  importance  in
your  eyes.

A.  Clarinval.

(Letter  4378.)

It  v^ill  be  readily  understood  that,  after  reading  this
story  that  is  so  touching,  so  sincere,  so  remarkable,  I  wished
to   render   it   complete  through   the   investigation   which   I


SECOND,  THIRD,  AND  FOURTH  YEARS  AFTER     287

usually  make  when  the  subjects  of  inquiry  warrant  my  doing
so.  Accepting  the  kind  invitation  of  the  narrator  herself,
I  asked  her  husband,  Monsieur  Clarinval,  a  retired  officer
of  high  rank,  to  be  good  enough  to  write  me  directly,  and
to  give  his  own  personal  recollections.  His  reply  was  a  de-
tailed account;  it  set  forth,  in  different  terms,  the  incidents
just  related;  it  seems  to  me  superfluous  to  give  it  here.  It
ends  as  follows:

This  discovery  was  absojutely  providential.  I  hereby  state  that
without  my  wife's  vision  it  would  have  been  altogether  impossible
to  find  our  poor  child  again.  He  is  now  lying  in  the  Montparnasse
Cemetery,  where  we  had  him  taken  on  November  22,  1920.

The  bodies  in  the  Dieppe  cemetery  were  exhumed  during  the
period  from  May  20th  to  May  25th,  1920.  Now,  it  was  precisely  on
May  25th  that  my  wife  had  the  vision.  After  the  circumstances
were  verified,  it  appeared  that  it  was  precisely  on  this  date — May
25th — that  our  son's  remains  were  transferred  from  the  Dieppe
cemetery  to  the  German  cemetery.

I  can  therefore  vouch  for  the  veracity  of  this  account.  I  must
add  that  my  wife  has  a  clear,  well-balanced  mind.  Her  judgment  is
always  so  sound  that  I  admit  I  was  impressed  by  her  account  of  the
apparition,  which  lasted  two  whole  hours.  The  occurrence  was  all
the  more  important  because  of  the  fact  that  she  is  not  subject  to
hallucinations,  and  in  all  her  life — that  is  to  say  for  sixty- three
years — she  never  had  any  other  vision.

Clarinval,
Retired  Major.

This  statement  by  Major  Clarinval  was,  certainly,  all  that
was  required  for  my  investigation.  Nevertheless  the  three
persons  whom  Madame  Clarinval  had  told  of  her  vision  were
good  enough  to  add  their  attestations ;  I  shall  place  these,  too,
before  my  readers'  eyes.  But  I  shall  first  give  another
statement,  of  equal  significance  in  our  investigation:  that  of
Dr.  Vercoutre,  the  distinguished  physician.


288  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY,

ATTESTATIONS


I  the  undersigned,  Doctor  of  Medicine  of  the  Paris  Faculty,
hereby  certify  that  Madame  Anna  Clarinval,  despite  the  severe  test
that  she  v/as  put  to  when  she  lost  her  son  Rene,  an  aviator  killed
at  the  front,  has  never  suffered  the  slightest  mental  trouble.  On
the  contrary,  it  was  due  to  the  perfect  clearness  of  her  mind  that
she  was  able  to  bring  to  a  successful  conclusion  the  extremely  diffi-
cult search  for  the  remains  of  her  dear  dead  son.

Doctor  Vercoutre,^
Member  of  the  Association  of  French
Physicians;  officer  of  the
Paris,  February  14,  1921.  Legion  of  Honor.

B

It  is  with  all  my  heart  that  I  am  sending  you  these  lines,  certify-
ing that  my  friend  Madame  Clarinval  had  told  me  all  that  she
wrote  you.  She  did  so  several  days  after  she  saw  the  vision  of  her
son.  Allow  me  to  add  that  this  did  not  astonish  me  in  the  least,
and  that,  wishing  to  calm  her,  I  advised  her  to  hope,  in  spite  of
what  I  thought  of  it  all.

I  must  add  that  my  friend  Madame  Clarinval,  before  the  vision,
did  not  believe  in  spiritism  in  the  least,^  and  would  not  even  allow
people  to  speak  of  it  in  her  presence.

Baroness  de  Bournat.


I  am  very  happy  to  be  able  to  certify  that  Madame  Clarinval,
during  the  first  days  in  June  of  last  year,  told  me  that  on  May
25th  she  had  seen  her  son  appear  to  her  in  a  group  of  trees  in  the
rue  Ribera,  which  is  directly  in  front  of  her  home;  that  on  each
side  of  her  son  there  was  a  young  mun  whom  she  did  not  know;

1  It  seems  indiscreet  to  me  to  give  addresses  (they  are  now  before
me)    of  the  sic^ners  of  these  four  bits  of  testimony.

2  To  identify  this  vision  with  spiritistic  experiments  would  be
a  mistake.


SECOND,  THIRD,  AND  FOURTH  YEARS  AFTER     289

these  men  appeared  to  be  a  Russian  and  a  German.    She  was  greatly
preoccupied  by  this  apparition  and  spoke  of  it  often.

It  was  only  when  she  made  a  trip  to  Verdun,  in  September,  that
she  understood  what  the  extraordinary  vision  meant.

J.    DUMAILLET.

D

I  am  happy  to  attest  the  authenticity  of  the  communication  which
you  received  from  Madame  Clarinval;  I  had  read  it  before  she
sent  it.

The  account  is  scrupulously  exact  in  every  detail.  Madame  Clarin-
val  had  told  me  of  her  vision  eight  days  after  she  had  it.

M.  Barbier.

Such  was  this  occurrence.  It  is  unquestionable ;  the  ac-
count of  it  v^as  based  on  observations  mutually  in  agreement.
The  manifestation  came  long  after  death:  from  September  2,
1916,  to  May  25,  1920,  there  are  three  years  and  two  hundred
and  sixty-six  days — that  is,  three  years,  eight  months,  and
twenty-six  days.

What  conclusion  may  we  draw,  in  the  interests  of  our  own
personal  convictions?

Monsieur  and  Madame  Clarinval  came,  themselves,  to  talk
to  me  about  their  experiences.  My  investigation  was  made
as  methodically  as  in  the  case  of  an  astronomical,  a  meteoro-
logical, a  geological  phenomenon,  or  a  historical  fact.  It  was
a  real  scientific  inquirj^  No  doubt  can  remain  as  to  the
authenticity  of  the  vision,  and  its  connection  with  the  dis-
covery of  the  young  aviator's  body.  We  all  of  us  feel  how
great  was  the  resultant  consolation,  to  the  grief-stricken
mother,  to  the  hopeless  father:  their  dear  child's  body  is  now
here,  in  the  city  of 'Paris,  where  they  are  living.  Nothing  is
left  of  it,  or  almost  nothing.  But  the  body  was  only  the
garment  of  the  soul,  and  they  know  that  the  soul  survived
the  catastrophe  of  death,  that  it  manifested  itself,  that  it
guided   them   in   their   energetic   and  persevering   inquiry.


290  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTEEY

We  are,  doubtless,  not  yet  entirely  satisfied.  We  should  like
to  know  more,  and  we  ask  ourselves  why  there  was  this  sym-
bolism in  the  vision,  why  this  enigmatical  apparition,  be-
tween the  Eussian  and  the  Germ.an.  It  would  seem  that  it
would  have  been  simpler  for  Rene  Clarinval  to  inform  his
mother,  directly,  that  he  had  been  killed  on  September  2d,
and  buried  in  such  and  such  a  place.

We  might  suppose,  perhaps,  that  since  Madame  Clarinval
was  thinking  constantly  of  her  son,  she  was  endowed  for  a
moment  with  the  faculty  of  seeing  at  a  distance,  or,  to  phrase
it  more  precisely,  with  the  faculty  of  feeling  what  was  taking
place.  And  we  might  suppose,  too,  that  the  feeling  took  the
concrete  form,  to  her  eyes,  of  a  living  scene:  the  apparition
of  her  son  between  a  Russian  and  a  German.  But,  in  this
case,  why  should  she  no.t  have  seen  the  reality  ?*  I  have  pub-
lished so  many  examples  of  precise  visioning  at  a  distance
that  this  interpretation  seems  very  debatable  and  less  prob-
able than  that  of  psychic  influence  on  the  part  of  the  de-
ceased.

We  must  not,  we  cannot  judge  things  from  our  common-
place point  of  view.  The  whole  of  the  invisible  world  is  still
to  be  discovered ;  we  know  neither  its  conditions  nor  its  laws.
Let  us  be  grateful  for  the  rudimentary  knowledge  that  has
been  vouchsafed  us,  with  which  to  begin  our  investigation.
Christopher  Columbus  discovered  America,  believing  that  he
had  reached  the  East  Indies :  it  was  a  new  world,  on  the  op-
posite side  of  the  globe  from  the  East  Indies.  The  spiritual
world  is  still  less  known  to  us  than  America,  in  1492,  was  to
the  people  living  at  that  time,  although  it  concerns  us  more
deeply  and  is  all  about  us.

What  shall  we  think  of  the  following  case?  A  person
gifted  with  the  faculty  of  foreseeing  the  deaths  of  certain
people  proved  to  be  endowed  with  this  same  faculty  after
death.  Let  us  read  the  account  of  it;  it  is  given  word  for
word:


SECOND,  THIRD,  AND  FOURTH  YEARS  AFTER     291

Dear  Master:

I  must  tell  you  of  the  following  personal  experiences.  In  1891
I  was  not  yet  married.  I  knew  in  Paris  a  most  intelligent  woman,
fifty  years  old,  who  took  a  great  liking  to  me.  She  had  this  pe-
culiarity: she  always  dreamed  of  the  misfortunes  which  were  to
happen  to  her  friends  and  acquaintances.  How  many  times  was  I
not  a  witness  of  the  veracity  of  her  dreams!  One  day,  when  she
saw  that  I  had  been  rather  frightened  by  her  power  of  prevision,
she  said  to  me,  laughing :  "Don't  be  afraid ;  I  '11  never  foretell  your
death  to  you,  for  that  would  make  you  suffer — only  the  deaths  of
others."

She  herself  died  that  same  year  (1891),  after  having  foreseen
her  own  death,  as  she  had  the  deaths  of  other  people,  in  her  dreams.

My  regret  was  sincere,  but  having  left  Paris,  and  even  left
France,  I  was  no  longer  thinking  of  her,  when,  one  night  in  Decem-
ber, 1892,  she  appeared  to  me  in  a  dream.  She  was  dressed  in
black.  Gazing  at  me  sadly,  she  said  to  me,  "All  is  over."  I
suffered  terribly,  without  knowing  what  she  meant.  My  father  was
ill  at  the  time,  but  I  had  had  a  letter  from  him  on  that  very  day
— a  happier  letter  than  usual,  for  he  was  better.  Three  days  after
this  dream  he  died.  It  was  the  first  and  the  greatest  sorrow  of
my  life.

In  November,  1895,  she  appeared  to  me  again,  still  dressed  in
black,  but  this  time  she  did  not  speak  to  me.  Three  days  later  my
beloved  mother  was  dead.

At  length,  in  October,  1898,  I  saw  her,  still  in  black,  for  the
third  time.  "Whose  turn  is  it  now?"  I  asked  myself.  Alas!  it
was  my  best  friend,  who  was  living  in  Wiesbaden,  and  whom  I  loved
with  all  my  heart.  The  next  day  I  received  a  letter  from  her;  she
was  unwell,  but  she  wrote  gayly  and  cleverly,  as  she  always  did.
Three  days  afterward,  however,  through  a  telegram  from  her  hus-
band, I  learned  of  her  death.

These  were,  certainly,  three  very  strange  dreams;  in  them  my
woman  friend  still  had  the  habits  peculiar  to  her  while  she  was
alive.  You  alone,  dear  Master,  may  be  able  to  explain  them.
This  woman  in  black  had,  until  her  death,  denied  the  existence  of
the  soul.  We  often  discussed  this  subject,  for  at  that  time  I  was
certain  that  the  soul  exists,  as  I  am  now.


292  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

Why  is  it  she  who  appears  to  me  to  predict  the  deaths  of  those
whom  I  love?  To  prove  to  me,  doubtless,  that  she  was  mistaken
when  she  was  alive,  and  that  my  belief  was  the  true  one.

I  have  no  other  religion  save  a  great  love  for  the  Creator  of
life  in  His  all-powerful  grandeur,  and  for  everything  here  below
that  reflects  His  image.

Ida  Cail,
Paris.
(Letter  803.)

Walter  Scott,  who  wrote  a  book  on  spirits,  apparitions,
and  sorcery,^  showed  himself  a  radical  skeptic.  He  denied
these  occurrences  utterly,  thinking  them  only  hallucinations,
nightmares  caused  by  indigestion,  visual  or  auditory  illu-
sions, and  even,  most  of  the  time,  symptoms  of  mental  de-
rangement. He  gives,  moreover,  examples  of  temporary
insanity,  such  as  the  visions  of  Nicolai  and  of  Gregory,  well
known  to  historians.  To  him  all  apparitions  were  mental
impressions  on  the  part  of  people  who  were  ill.

I  shall  borrow  the  following  narration  from  him.  De-
spite his  opinion  it  seems  to  me  worthy  of  attention,  seen
in  the  light  of  present-day  knowledge.  We  are  concerned
with  Maupertuis,  a  member  of  the  Paris  and  Berlin  Academy
of  Sciences;  he  was  its  president,  in  fact.  Here  is  Walter
Scott's  account:

A  short  time  after  Maupertuis's  death.  Monsieur  Gladisch  was
obliged  to  cross  the  room  in  which  the  Academy  held  its  meetings.
He  had  some  work  to  do  in  the  Natural  History  room,  which  came
within  his  province,  and  he  wished,  furthermore,  to  prepare  himself
for  Thursday,  before  the  hour  of  meeting.  When  he  en-
tered the  room,  he  perceived  Monsieur  de  Maupertuis's  shade,
erect  and  motionless,  in  the  first  corner  on  his  left;  the  appari-
tion's eyes  were  fixed  on  him.     It  was  three  o'clock  in  the  after-

1  Letters  on  Demonology  and  Witchcraft,  translated  into  French  by
Albert  Montemont   (Paris,  1838)  p.  36.


SECOND,  THIRD,  AND  FOURTH  YEARS  AFTER  293

noon.  The  professor  of  philosophy  knew  too  much  about  physics
to  suppose  that  his  president,  who  had  died  in  Bale,  with  Monsieur
Bernoulli's  family,  had  come  back  in  person  to  Berlin.  He  re-
garded the  thing  only  as  an  illusion  caused  by  some  derangement
of  his  organs.  He  went  on  about  his  business  without  being
stopped  any  longer  by  this  object.  But  he  told  his  colleagues  of
the  vision,  assuring  them  that  he  had  seen  a  shape  as  well  formed
and  as  perfect  as  Monsieur  de  Maupertuis  himself.

When  we  remember  that  Maupertuis  died  far  from  Berlin,  for-
merly the  scene  of  his  triumph,  crushed  by  the  merciless  ridicule  of
Voltaire  and  out  of  favor  with  Frederick,  in  whose  eyes  to  be
ridiculous  was  to  be  guilty,  we  can  hardly  be  astonished  by  this
spell  which  fell  upon  a  physicist  who  thought  he  saw  Maupertuis's
phantom  in  the  room  which  had  witnessed  his  early  grandeur.

Walter  Scott  refused  to  admit  the  possibility  of  the  reality
of  this  apparition.  Nevertheless  he  believed  firmly  in  the
story  of  the  fallen  angels,  in  Adam  and  Eve 's  fall,  in  the  del-
uge, in  the  Chosen  People,  in  diabolical  powers,  in  the  eter-
nal damnation  of  children  v^ho  died  without  being  baptized,
and  in  other  legends  devoid  of  all  experimental  proof.

Schopenhauer  considered,  with  his  usual  critical  acumen —
which  was  sternly  analyi;ical  but  a  trifle  obscure — ^this  ques-
tion of  apparitions  of  the  dead.^  He  reached  the  conclusion
that  apparitions  of  the  dying  and  the  dead  are  subjective,
in  the  mind  of  the  seer;  that  the  first  are  of  frequent  occur-
rence, the  second  exceedingly  rare.  He  gives  a  great  many
examples,  and  takes  up  in  particular  the  case  of  the  Seer  of
Prevorst.  The  reader  can  pronounce  upon  Schopenhauer's
ideas  better  if  I  give  the  final  conclusions  of  his  dissertation:

Apparitions  are,  like  dreams,  mere  appearances,  and,  like  them,
exist    only   in   the    consciousness   which   perceives   them;    but   the

^  Par  erg  a  und  Paralipomena  (Berlin,  1851;  second  ed,,  published
by  Frauenstadt,  1862).  A  good  French  translation  was  published  under
the  title  Memoires  sur  les  sciences  occultes,  Magn6tisme  et  Apparitions
(Paris,  Leymarie,  1912).


294  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

same  may  be  said  of  our  real,  external  world.  Our  immediate
perception  of  this  world  is  a  mere  appearance;  it  is  a  mere  mental
phenomenon  caused  by  nervous  excitation,  and  governed  by  the  laws
of  our  subjective  functions  (forms  of  pure  sensibility  and  reason).
Could  we  have  any  other  sort  of  reality?  The  question  which  arises
is  that  of  the  thing  in  itself.  This  problem,  discussed  by  Locke  and
solved  too  hastily,  was  taken  up  by  Kant,  who  saw  all  its  perplexi-
ties. Finally  I  found  its  solution,  although  with  a  certain  limita-
tion. But,  in  any  case,  no  matter  in  what  way  the  thing  in  itself
(which  shows  itself  in  our  perception  of  an  exterior  world)  is  dis-
tinguished from  this  world,  as  in  the  case  of  apparitions  of  spirits,
there  is  in  this,  perhaps,  only  manifestations  of  will.  In  the  matter
of  the  objective  reality  of  the  apparitions  of  spirits,  as  with  the
physical  world,  there  are  four  different  systems  of  thought :  realism,
idealism,  skepticism,  and,  finally,  the  critical  philosophy,  the  meta-
physical system  which  I  have  adopted.

It  appears  from  his  rather  fine-spun  dissertation  that  to
Schopenhauer  it  is  our  inner  vision — what  he  calls  *'the
organs  of  dreamjng" — ^v^hich  perceives  lapparitions ;  that
apparitions  of  the  living  are  rather  numerous  and  those  of
the  dead  extremely  rare;  and  that  the  thing  in  us  v^hich
survives  the  destruction  of  the  body  is  not  the  soul,  *'for
Man  is  not  made  up  of  a  body  and  a  soul,"  but  the  will.
He  declares  that  spiritualism  is  in  error;  that  it  is  idealism
which  is  true;  that  our  vision  of  the  exterior  world  is  not
merely  sensuous  but  above  all  intellectual,  and  that  it  is  the
same  with  the  visioning  of  spirits.

The  theories  of  the  German  philosopher  have,  with  good
reason,  been  widely  discussed.  But  we  cannot  pass  them  by
in  silence.

The  following  remarks,  which  he  made  on  the  subject  of
the  apparition  of  spirits  and  of  souls  in  purgatory,  are
strange :

To  deny,  a  priori,  the  possibility  of  apparitions  and  to  ridicule
this  possibility,  as  is  ordinarily  done — such  a  procedure  can  only


SECOND,  THIRD,  AND  FOURTH  YEARS  AFTER     295

be  based  on  the  conviction  that  death  is  the  absolute  end  of  Man,
unless  such  a  conviction  were  founded  on  the  beliefs  of  the  Protes-
tant Church.  By  the  Protestant  way  of  thinking,  spirits  cannot  ap-
pear, because,  according  as  human  beings  believed  or  did  not  believe
during  their  few  years  of  earthly  life,  they  will  as  soon  as  they  are
dead  go  to  eternal  joys  in  heaven,  or  suffer  torments  equally  eter-
nal in  hell,  and  they  can  never  leave  either  of  these  places.  As  a
consequence,  according  to  the  Protestant  belief,  all  apparitions  of
this  sort  come  from  the  devil,  or  from  the  angels,  but  are  never
caused  by  the  souls  of  men.  This  was  explained  at  length  by
Lavater  ("De  Spectris,"  Geneva,  1580,  Part  II,  Chapters  3  and  4).
The  Catholic  Church,  on  the  contrary,  even  in  the  sixth  century,
owed  it  to  Pope  Gregory  the  Great,  in  particular,  that  this  absurd
and  revolting  dogma  was,  fortunately,  ameliorated  through  a  be-
lief in  purgatory.  This  middle  state  was  interpolated  between  the
two  extremes  of  these  desperate  alternatives.  The  Catholic  Church
admits  that  it  is  possible  for  souls  that  are  in  purgatory,  for  a
short  time,  to  appear.  It  even  admits  that  other  souls  may  appear,
under  exceptional  circumstances,  as  is  explained  at  length  in  Petrus
Thyracus's  book  ("De  Locis  infestis,"  Part  I,  Chapter  3,  and  follow-
ing chapters).  The  Protestants  believed  themselves  forced  to  main-
tain that  the  devil  existed,  for  the  simple  reason  that  they  could
not  get  along  without  him  in  explaining  apparitions  of  spirits  that
were  impossible  to  deny.  Apart  from  such  mythological  views,  the
possibility  of  the  real  apparition  of  the  dead  cannot  be  rejected  save
on  the  conviction  that  when  Man  dies  he  is  utterly  annihilated.
Aside  from  this  conviction,  one  cannot  see  why  a  being  which  still
exists  somewhere,  might  not  manifest  itself  and  even  influence
another  being,  though  the  latter  were  in  an  altogether  different  state.
If  we  wish  to  admit  the  possibility  of  the  dead  really  acting  upon
the  world  of  the  living,  we  must  also  admit  that  this  influence  is
exerted  with  difficulty  and  is  rare  and  exceptional.

I  have  given  Schopenhauer's  dissertation  at  greater  length
in  my  book  (still  unpublished)  ''Les  Apparitions."  In  giv-
ing a  resume  of  it  here,  I  w^ish  to  remind  my  readers  that
while  he  admits  the  possibility  of  apparitions,  the  German
philosopher  does  not  explain  them  very  clearly  to  himself.


296  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

since  these  visual  phenomena  seem  to  him  both  subjective
and  objective.  Be  that  as  it  may,  he  does  not  doubt  mani-
festations of  the  dead.

Let  us  continue  our  experimental  survey,  a  survey  that  is
independent  of  all  theories.     It  is  progressing  gradually.


MANIFESTATIONS   AND    APPARITIONS   PROM    FOUR   TO
THIRTY   YEARS   AFTER   DEATH

Are  there  any  scientific  observations
which  permit  us  to  doubt  the  total  disap-
pearance of  the  individual,  after  he  is
dead  ?

Le  Dantec.

THE  accounts  which  we  have  just  read  differ  in  value.
All  of  liheni  present  testimony  as  to  survival,  but
certain  of  them  are  pervaded  by  such  a  human
quality  that  we  may  well  ask  ourselves  whether  future  an-
thropological science  may  not,  one  day,  discover  an  explana-
tion. Some,  however,  seem  to  be  unquestionable  posthumous
manifestations,  definitely  and  rigorously  proved,  such  as,
for  example,  the  manifestation  of  the  sailor  Scotti,  saving  his
son  and  the  son's  vessel  (page  280)  ;  the  young  girl,  dead  for
a  year,  seen  in  Monsieur  Cavagnaro's  apartment  (page  265) ;
General  Dryson's  friend  who  was  murdered  in  China  (page
258)  ;  a  mother's  visit  to  her  child  in  the  Alberlour  Orphan-
age (page  255)  ;  the  Sentenac  parish  priest  (page  218)  ;
Count  Beni  of  Lucera,  who  announced  to  his  wife  and  his
mother  that  he  had  been  murdered  (page  170)  ;  the  astron-
omer Tweedale's  grandmother,  who  appeared  to  him  as  well
as  to  his  father  (page  134)  ;  Mademoiselle  Stella's  friend
(page  127)  ;  Robert  Mackenzie  (page  26),  and  a  certain
number  of  other  manifestations  as  plain  as  sunlight  at  noon.
Nevertheless  a  very  well-known  contemporary  writer,  Felix
Le  Dantec,  who  is  esteemed  for  his  honest-mindedness  (he
is  a  convinced  materialist  and  atheist)  wrote  me  in  1914:
*'I  shall  soon  be  forty-five  years  old,  and  T  have  never  per-

297


298  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

ceived  anything  that  justified  me  in  believing  in  extraphysical
intervention.  If  souls  could  manifest  themselves,  it  would
be  most  astonishing  that  I  had  never  found  a  single  one
of  them  in  evidence  when  I  made  my  observations."  ^  And
he  wrote  with  entire  conviction  the  sentenoe  given  at  the
beginning  of  this  chapter.

I  do  not  think  that  a  single  one  of  my  readers  cian  be
of  this  same  negative  opinion.

Our  classification  of  posthumous  occurrences  has  shown  us
that  manifestations  may  occur  a  very  long  time  after  death.
"We  now  reach  those  which  took  place  some  time  after  dis-
solution: five,  ten,  fifteen,  twenty,  thirty,  forty,  sixty  years
and  more.  I  have  not  enough  space  to  set  all  of  them  be-
fore my  readers'  eyes.  All  of  them  are,  moreover,  open
to  discussion.  We  shall  examine  the  principal  ones.  Read-
ers will  be  struck,  in  these  cases  also,  by  clear  and  unques-
tionable examples — among  others,  that  of  Palladia,  who  ap-
peared recurrently  during  a  number  of  years  (page  302)
as  well  as  that  of  Monsieur  Cocozza's  father,  ten  years  after
his  death  (page  310).  We  shall  investigate  these  pos.thu-
mous  manifestations  so  long  after  death.

Apparitions  of  the  dead  have  already  been  classified  by
Frederic  Myers,  in  a  very  detailed  statistical  study  ("Human
Personality,"  1903,  Volume  II,  page  14),  in  the  order  of
their  relative  frequency  after  the  day  of  dissolution.  His
statistics  show  that  the  maximum  number  occur  at  the  mo-
ment of  death.  I  have  come  to  virtually  the  same  conclusion
in  classifying  the  accounts  sent  me.  The  manifestations  be-
gin before  death — several  hours,  even  several  days  before  it —
when  the  subject  is  in  a  state  of  coma  or  weakness,  and  we
set  them  down  under  the  heading  of  telepathic  manifesta-
tions of  the  dying.  (See  ''L'Inconnu,"  pages  59  to  215
and  411  to  457,  and  "At  the  Moment  of  Death,"  chapters
IV,  V,  XI,  and  XII.)     These  occurrences  suggested  the  pos-

1  Le  Dantec,  Le  prohleme  de  la  mort  et  la  conscience  universelle,  p.  69.


FOUR  TO  THIRTY  YEARS  AFTER  DEATH   299

sibility  that  certain  manifestations  of  the  dead  might  be
delayed  manifestations  of  the  living,  which  had  remained
latent  in  the  percipients'  brains  for  some  physiological  reason.
The  case  of  Helene  Noell  was  of  this  particular  kind  (Vol-
ume II,  page  320).  But  this  theory  is  applicable  only  to  a
small  number  of  cases.  Certain  apparitions  did  not  mani-
fest themselves  for  several  months,  or  even  several  years
after  dissolution.  We  saw,  from  our  own  classification,  that
the  greatest  number  were  observed  during  the  first  days,
the  first  weeks,  the  first  months.  By  the  end  of  the  first  year
the  phenomena  diminished  in  number:  this  may  be  repre-
sented graphically  by  a  very  sharply  dipping  curve.  It  does
not  seem  to  me,  however,  as  it  does  to  Myers,  that  the  curve
could  be  lowered  to  zero,  and  instead  of  his  diagram  in  which
it  touched  the  bottom  line,  at  its  right  extremity,  I  should
like  to  propose  the  diagram  shown  below.     It  is  based  on


I        2       3       45       6        7Q-9'o/</2    More  ihan
^ .  one  year

Months  ^

thousands  of  comparisons  which  I  have  made,  and  takes
into  consideration  apparitions  more  than  one  year  after
death,  for  there  are  certain  apparitions  of  this  sort,  though
they  are  rare.  And  we  cannot  omit  all  consideration  of
haunted  houses.

The  accounts  in  the  preceding  chapter  have  already  in-
cluded phenomena  occurring  several  years  after  death.     We


300  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

shall  push  on.  If  all  these  scientific  observations  were  false,
illusory,  this  would  be  entirely  useless.  Each  of  my  careful
readers  can  judge  for  himself,  as  I  do.  Though  many  of
the  accounts  make  us  entirely  certain  as  to  the  authenticity
of  the  facts  related  and  the  resultant  proofs  of  survival  after
death,  it  is  not  to  be  doubted  that  others  appear  to  warrant
the  theory  of  autosuggestion,  illusion,  hallucination.  Y\^hat
are  we  seeking,  in  all  freedom  of  conscience?  The  truth.
Now,  there  are  two  alternatives:  either  the  stories  that  we
have  read  are  all  false,  or  there  are  true  ones  among  them.
Were  but  a  single  one  of  them  true,  incontestable,  unques-
tionable, its  reality  would  suffice  to  prove  survival  after
death.  Well,  I  ask  every  honest-minded  reader  to  which
side  the  balance  leans.  Does  not  the  heavy  side  of  posi-
tive occurrences  outweigh,  decisively,  the  light  side  of  de-
batable or  uncertain  cases?  In  every  human  work,  mistakes
may  occur.  We  are  not  dealing  with  mathematical  theorems.
Let  us,  above  all,  be  fair;  let  us  judge  things  as  they  must
be  judged.  A  grain  of  oats  lost  in  a  bushel  of  wheat  does
not  lessen  the  value  of  the  grains  of  wheat.  If,  therefore,
we  take  things  as  a  whole,  we  are  led  to  think  that  those
readers  who  are  not  yet  convinced  will  never  be  convinced
by  any  proof.  I  know  perfectly  honest-minded  men  who
think,  sincerely,  that  the  rotation  of  the  earth  has  not  been
proved !

J'rom  among  the  posthumous  manifestations  which  belong,
chronologically,  after  the  preceding  ones,  I  shall  first  submit
the  following  one  to  my  readers.  It  took  place  as  late  as
the  third  year.

Dr.  Martin,  of  the  Paris  Faculty,  who  lived  in  Penne,  Lot-
et-Garonne,  wrote  me  in  March,  1899:

Two  most  respectable  ladies,  who  are  still  alive  and  can  furnisH
attestations,  were  living  in  a  honse  in  the  open  country  in  which,
three  years  before,  an  infirm  old  man  had  died.     He  had  lived  on


FOUR  TO  THIRTY  YEARS  AFTER  DEATH   301

the  second  floor  and  had  tyrannized  over  the  servants  by  continually
ringing  the  bell.  The  bell  was  in  the  vestibule,  on  the  ground
floor,  high  up  near  the  ceiling,  and  the  wires  had  been  removed
after  his  death.  Now,  one  fine  day,  these  ladies  and  their  servants
heard  a  diabolical  peal;  they  rushed  into  the  vestibule,  where  they
saw  the  bell  ringing  madly.  Terrified,  the  witnesses  of  this  went
through  every  part  of  the  house.  There  were  no  practical  jokers
about,  and  they  ascertained  that  the  wires  were  still  missing.  The
ringing  lasted  a  certain  number  of  minutes,  and  then  stopped.
They  always  supposed  that  the  old  fellow  had  fallen  back  into  a
former  habit  of  his.  This  took  place  at  the  home  of  Mesdames
Daubeze,  in  Castel-Sarrasin.

There  is  no  need  for  me  to  add  that  the  attempts  to  discover  a
natural  explanation  ended  in  nothing.

Dr.  Martin.

(Letter  148.)

My  investigation  (it  was,  however,  superfluous)  confirmed
the  authenticity  of  this  account.  It  cannot  have  surprised
my  readers.  They  will  remember,  in  particular,  the  account
on  page  244  of  our  first  volume,  with  its  accompanying
sketch.  They  know  that  these  odd  manifestations — so  in-
comprehensible, so  inexplicable — were  witnessed  by  observ-
ers as  well  balanced  as  you  and  I.

People  object,  sometimes,  that  these  are  most  commonplace
things.  I  am  the  first  to  acknowledge  the  truth  of  this —
above  all,  when  we  regard  the  problems  to  be  cleared  up
from  the  philosophical  point  of  view.  But  what  can  I  do
about  it?  Rain  is  commonplace,  too,  and  so  is  the  birth  of
a  child  (eighty-six  thousand,  four  hundred  babies  a  day  are
born  on  our  diminutive  planet.)

In  general,  the  dwellers  on  our  globe  are  not  philosophers,
thinkers,  or  savants.  On  the  day  after  death  they  must
be  the  same  as  the  day  before.

The  time  to  put  forward  theories  has  not  yet  come.  This
work  has  only  one  object:  to  prove  a  certain  fact — ^that  the


302  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

dead  manifest  themselves.  Even  this  is  a  great  deal,  and  I
shall  be  satisfied  if  I  succeed  in  convincing  my  readers  of
that  much.

We  shall  now  consider  an  apparition  that  occurred  re^
peatedly.  It  was  seen  not  only  by  two  persons  but  by  sev-
eral, and  it  was  perceived  by  a  dog.  It  is  particularly  in-
teresting. I  am  taking  it  from  Myers's  "Human  Personal-
ity'' (Volume  II,  page  21).  It  was  described  in  the  follow-
ing terms  by  a  Russian  magistrate,  Monsieur  Mamtchitch:

St.  Petersburg,  April  29,  1891.

Palladia  was  the  daughter  of  a  rich  Russian  landowner,  who  died
one  month  before  she  was  born.  Her  mother,  in  despair,  dedicated
her  unborn  child  to  life  in  a  convent.  The  girl's  name  owed  its
origin  to  this  circumstance;  it  was  what  the  nuns  called  her.  Two
years  afterward  her  mother  died,  and  the  orphan  was  brought  up,
until  the  age  of  fourteen,  in  a  Moscow  convent,  by  her  aunt,  who
was  the  mother  superior.

In  1870,  when  I  was  still  a  student  in  the  University  of  Moscow,
I  made  the  acquaintance  of  Palladia's  brother,  a  student  like  my-
self, and  we  often  talked  of  giving  back  to  the  world  this  girl  who
was  a  nun,  though  not  by  her  own  choice.  But  our  plan  was  not
realized  until  1872.  I  had  gone  to  Moscow  in  the  summer,  to  see
the  exposition,  and  I  met  Palladia's  brother  there,  by  chance-  I
learned  that  he  was  preparing  to  send  her  to  the  Crimea  for  her
health,  and  I  seconded  this  project  as  earnestly  as  I  could.  It  was
then  that  I  saw  Palladia  for  the  first  time.  She  was  fourteen;
though  tall,  she  was  very  timid,  and  she  already  had  tuberculosis.
On  her  brother's  request,  I  accompanied  her  and  her  sister  to  the
Crimea,  where  they  spent  the  winter.

In  the  summer  of  1873  I  happened  to  meet  Palladia  and  her
sister  in  Odessa,  where  they  had  gone  to  consult  physicians.  On
August  27th,  while  I  was  reading  to  the  two  sisters.  Palladia  died,
suddenly,  of  an  aneurism.     She  was  fifteen  years  old.

Two  years  afterward,  in  1875,  when  I  was  in  Kieff,  I  happened,
one  December  evening,  to  be  at  a  spiritistic  seance  for  the  first
time.     I  heard  blows  inside  the  table,  but  this  did  not  astonish  me


FOUR  TO  THIRTY  YEARS  AFTER  DEATH   303

in  the  least,  for  I  was  convinced  that  it  was  a  joke.  When  I  got
back  home,  I  wished  to  see  if  I  could  produce  any  rapping;  I
assumed  the  same  position,  with  my  hands  on  the  table.  Soon  I
heard  blows.  Imitating  the  procedure  which  I  had  witnessed,  I  be-
gan to  recite  the  alphabet.  Palladia's  name  was  dictated.  I  was
astonished  and  almost  frightened.  Not  being  able  to  calm  myself,
I  again  took  up  my  position  near  the  table,  and  asked  Palladia
what  she  had  to  say  to  me.  The  reply  was,  "Set  the  angel  up;  it
is  fallhig  down."  I  did  not  understand  what  she  was  talking  about.
She  is  buried  in  Kieff,  and  I  had  heard  it  said  that  they  wished
to  put  up  a  monument  on  her  grave,  but  had  never  been  to  the  spot
where  she  was  buried  and  did  not  know  what  sort  of  tombstone
it  was.

I  did  not  go  back  to  bed,  and  as  soon  as  dawn  came  I  went  to
the  cemetery.  With  the  superintendent's  assistance,  and  not  with-
out difficulty,  I  discovered  the  grave,  buried  under  the  snow.  I
halted,  astounded:  the  marble  statue  of  the  angel,  with  a  cross,  was
tilted,  markedly,  to  one  side.

From  this  I  concluded  that  there  is  another  world,  with  which  we
can  enter  into  relations.

In  October,  1876, 1  was  moving  into  my  new  dwelling  (rue  Drores-
naya)  with  Potolof,  my  colleague  in  the  Department  of  Justice.
I  was  in  a  very  good  humor,  and  was  playing  on  a  small,  upright
piano;  it  was  about  eight  o'clock  in  the  evening.  On  one  side  of
me  was  my  study;  it,  too,  was  lighted  by  a  lamp.  My  comrade  was
busy  at  his  desk,  at  the  other  end  of  these  adjoining  rooms.  All
the  doors  were  open,  and  from  where  he  sat  he  could  see  the  study
very  distinctly,  and  the  room  in  which  I  was.  Suddenly  I  saw
Palladia!  She  was  standing  in  the  middle  of  the  doorway,  her
form  turned  a  little  to  one  side.  Her  face  was  toward  me;  she  was
looking  at  me  calmly.  She  had  on  the  same  dark  dress  which  she
had  worn  when  she  died  in  my  presence.  Her  right  hand  hung
free.  I  saw  her  shoulders  and  her  waist  distinctly.  I  was  looking
into  her  eyes  the  whole  time,  queerly  enough,  without  thinking  that
a  dead  person  stood  before  me.  She  was  lighted  up  on  both  sides,
and  my  eyesight  is  very  good.  But  I  admit  that  at  once  I  felt  a
shiver  run  down  my  spine,  and  was  as  though  petrij[ied!  It  was
not  fear,  it  was  something  else,  such  as  the  feeling  I  have  when


304  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

I  look  down  from  a  great  height;  at  such  thries  I  experience  a
terrible,  giddy  qualm.  I  could  not  say  hoAv  long  Palladia  remained
there  before  me,  but  I  remember  that  she  moved  to  the  right  and
vanished  behind  the  door  of  the  study.  I  rushed  toward  her.
Only  then  did  I  remember  that  she  was  dead.

At  that  moment  my  comrade  came  up  to  me  and  asked  me  what
was  the  matter.  I  told  him  what  had  just  happened;  then  we  went
into  the  study,  where  we  found  no  one.  My  comrade,  who  had
heard  me  suddenly  stop  playing,  had  lifted  his  head  and,  so  far
as  I  can  remember,  he  told  me  that  he,  too,  had  seen  some  one
pass  before  the  door.  Because  of  my  excitement  he  told  me,  to
calm  me,  that  it  was  probably  my  servant,  who  had  come  to  attend
to  the  lamp.  But  this  servant  was  downstairs,  in  the  kitchen.  That
was  how  I  saw  Palladia  for  the  first  time,  three  years  after  her
death.

I  have  often  seen  her  since.  Sometimes  she  appears  to  me  three
times  in  a  week  or  twice  on  the  same  day;  or  even  a  month  may  go
by  without  my  seeing  her.

Palladia  always  appears  unexpectedly,  taking  me  by  surprise  at  a
time  when  I  am  least  anticipating  it.

Never  do  I  see  her  in  my  dreams.

I  see  her  both  when  I  am  alone  and  with  a  great  many  people.

She  always  appears  to  me  with  the  same  serene  expression  in  her
eyes;  sometimes  with  a  slight  smile.

I  always  see  her  in  the  dark  dress  which  she  wore  when  she  died
before  my  eyes.  I  see,  distinctly,  her  face,  her  head,  her  shoulders,
and  her  arms,  but  I  do  not  see  her  feet,  or,  rather,  do  not  think
of  looking  at  them.

On  these  occasions,  when  I  see  Palladia  unexpectedly,  I  grow
dumb,  I  have  a  feeling  of  coldness  in  my  back,  I  turn  pale,  I  utter
a  feeble  cry,  and  my  breathing  stops  (this  is  what  I  am  told  by
those  who  have  by  chance  seen  me  at  such  moments).

The  apparitions  of  Palladia  last  one,  two,  or  three  minutes,  then
gradually  vanish  and  dissolve.

These  manifestations  bear  a  great  resemblance  to  the  best-
knov^^n  types  of  hallucinations,  v\^ith  the  exception,  however,
of  the  first  one :  the  revelation  concerning  the  grave  in  the


FOUR  TO  THIRTY  YEARS  AFTER  DEATH   305

cemetery.     The  following  experiences  do  not  bear  out  this
analogy :

In  1879,  at  the  end  of  November,  I  was  in  Kieff,  seated  at  my
desk,  writing  out  an  indictment.  It  was  eight  o'clock  in  the  eve-
ning; my  watch  was  before  me  on  the  table.  I  was  hurrying  to
finish  my  work,  for  at  nine  o'clock  I  was  to  go  to  an  evening  party.
Suddenly  I  saw  Palladia  seated  in  an  arm-chair  before  me;  her
right  elbow  was  on  a  table  and  her  head  was  in  her  hand.  When  I
had  recovered  from  the  shock,  I  looked  at  my  watch,  following  with
my  eyes  the  movement  of  the  second-hand.  Then  I  lifted  my  gaze
to  Palladia.  I  saw  that  she  had  not  changed  her  position,  and  I
could  see  her  elbow,  clearly,  on  the  table.  Her  eyes  gazed  at  me
with  joy  and  serenity.  Then,  for  the  first  time,  I  decided  to  speak
to  her.  "How  do  you  feel,  nowf  I  asked.  Her  face  remained
impassive;  her  lips,  so  far  as  I  can  remember,  did  not  move,  but  I
distinctly  heard  her  voice  utter  the  word  "Calm." — "I  understand,''
I  answered.  And,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  I  understood  at  that  moment
all  the  meaning  she  had  put  into  the  word.  That  I  might  be  still
more  certain  that  I  was  not  dreaming,  I  looked  at  the  watch  again,
and  the  second-hand.  When  I  looked  at  Palladia  once  more  I
noted  that  she  had  begun  to  melt  away  and  vanish.

In  1885  I  was  living  with  my  parents  on  an  estate  in  the  Province
of  Poltava.  One  day,  when  I  woke  up  at  dawn,  I  saw  Palladia.
She  was  standing  before  me,  about  five  paces  away,  gazing  at  me
with  a  joyful  smile.  Drawing  near  me,  she  spoke  these  words:
"I  have  been,  I  have  seen,"  and,  still  smiling,  she  disappeared.
What  did  these  words  mean?  I  could  not  understand  them.  In
my  room  my  dog  was  sleeping  near  me.  As  soon  as  I  saw  Palladia,
the  dog's  hair  bristled.  With  a  yelp,  he  jumped  up  on  my  bed,
pressed  against  me,  and  looked  in  the  direction  in  which  I  was  gaz-
ing. He  did  not  bark,  though  ordmarily  he  let  no  one  enter  my
room  without  barking  and  growling.  Whenever  my  dog  saw  Pal-
ladia he  pressed  against  me,  as  though  seeking  a  refuge.  I  spoke
to  no  one  about  the  incident.  The  evening  of  that  same  day,  a
young  girl  w^ho  was  stopping  with  us  told  me  that  something  strange
had  happened  to  her  that  morning.  "When  I  waked  up  early  this
morning,"  she  said,  "I  had  a  feeling  that  some  one  was  standing  at


306  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

the  head  of  my  bed,  and  I  heard  a  voice  saying  to  me,  distinctly,
'Don't  be  afraid  of  me;  I'm  good  and  loving/  I  turned  my  head,
but  saw  nothing."

A  year  later,  I  was  engaged  to  this  girl.  I  must  add  that  on  the
previous  occasion  I  had  met  the  young  lady  for  the  first  time,  and
was  not  thinking  in  the  least  of  a  future  marriage.

Five  years  afterward,  in  1890,  I  was  with  my  wife  and  my  son,
aged  two.  We  were  staying  with  my  old  friends  the  Strijewskys,
on  their  estate  in  the  Province  of  Woroneje.  One  day,  about  seven
o'clock  in  the  evening,  I  was  returning  from  a  hunting  expedition.
I  went  into  the  wing  in  which  we  were  living,  in  order  to  change  my
clothes.  I  was  seated  in  a  room  lighted  by  a  large  lamp.  The
door  opened  and  my  son  Oleg  hurried  to  where  I  sat  in  an  arm-
chair. Then,  suddenly.  Palladia  appeared  before  me.  I  noticed
that  he  did  not  take  his  eyes  from  her.  He  turned  to  me;  pointing
at  her,  he  spoke  these  two  words:  "My  aunt."  I  took  him  on  my
knee  and  glanced  toward  Palladia,  but  she  had  vanished.  Oleg's
face  was  absolutely  calm  and  joyful;  he  was  only  beginning  to
speak ;  this  explains  his  words  concerning  the  apparition.

This  detailed  statement  was  supplemented  by  the  substan-
tiating declarations  of  the  other  v^itnesses.  This  is  important,
for  the  first  explanation  which  occurs  to  us,  in  every  case,
is  that  of  a  possible  hallucination.  Among  others,  Madame
Mamtchitch  wrote :

I  remember  very  well  that  on  July  10,  1885,  when  we  were  visit-
ing Monsieur  C.  Mamtchitch's  relatives,  I  waked  up  at  daybreak,
for  my  sister  and  I  had  agreed  that  we  would  take  an  early  morn-
ing walk.  I  sat  up  in  bed  and  saw  that  Mama  and  my  sister  were
asleep.  At  that  moment  I  had  a  feeling  that  some  one  was  standing
at  the  head  of  my  bed.  I  half  turned  around,  for  I  was,  so  to
speak,  afraid  to  look,  but  saw  no  one.  When  I  had  lain  down
again  I  heard  at  once,  behind  me  and  above  my  head,  a  woman's
voice  saying  in  a  low  tone,  but  distinctly,  "Don't  be  afraid  of  me;
I  'm  good  and  loving,"  and  a  whole  sentence  more,  which  I  forgot
as  soon  as  she  had  spoken  it.  Immediately  afterward  I  dressed
and  went  out  for  a  walk.     It  is  strange  that  I  was  n't  frightened  in


FOUR  TO  THIRTY  YEARS  AFTER  DEATH   307

the  least.  I  said  nothing  about  it  to  my  mother  and  my  sister,  for
they  did  not  like  such  things,  and  did  not  believe  in  them;  but  on
the  evening  of  that  same  day,  when  the  conversation  turned  on
problems  of  the  unknown,  I  told  Monsieur  Mamtchitch  what  had
happened  to  me  that  morning.

Such  is  the  story  of  this  odd  psychic  manifestation.
Plainly,  if  we  should  persist  \n  seeing  here  only  an  hallucina-
tion, we  should  be  in  error,  for  we  should  have  to  admit  that
(1)  the  narrator  (2)  his  wife,  who  was  at  that  time  a  stranger
to  him  (3)  his  child,  two  years  old,  (4)  his  dog — we  should
have  to  admit,  I  say,  that  all  these  were  the  victims  of  hal-
lucinations. We  should  still  have  to  explain  the  first  warn-
ing, regarding  the  cemetery.  Everything,  in  this  case,  would
lead  us  to  decide  in  favor  of  real  manifestations  on  the  part
of  the  deceased  Palladia  (who  died  at  the  age  of  fifteen)  in
the  years  1873,  1875,  1876,  1879,  1885,  and  1890— that  is  to
say,  two,  three,  six,  twelve,  and  seventeen  years  after  her
death.  The  only  way  to  avoid  reaching  this  conclusion  would
be  to  accuse  the  narrator  of  having  made  up  a  whole  series  of
lies.  That  is  a  most  serious  accusation.  And  the  magistrate
has  some  one  to  vouch  for  his  honesty :  Aksakof .

That  there  were  hallucinations  may  be  granted  in  the  cases
of  certain  visual  and  auditory  phenomena;  but  this  hy-
pothesis is  far  from  explaining  everything,  as  is  generally
imagined.  Even  if  hallucinations  played  the  chief  role,
people  about  whom  the  narrators  were  thinking  would  show
themselves,  rather  than  spontaneous  apparitions  of  unknown
people.  And  it  would  be  nervous,  sensitive  people  who
would  have  these  visions,  rather  than  those  who  are  calm,
well  poised,  and  often  skeptical.  Out  of  five  thousand  ac-
counts sent  me  from  various  social  classes  in  various  coun-
tries, there  were,  perhaps,  only  a  hundred  sent  by  men  or
women  (women,  above  all)  whose  mental  poise  might  have
been  doubted — in  whom  light-headedness  dominated  reason.


308  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

Generally  these  observations  are  as  positive  as  an  astronomi-
cal, meteorological,  physical,  or  chemical  observation  made,
on  some  one  occasion,  by  chance,  and  under  unexpected  con-
ditions.    There   is   nothing  pathological  about   them.

It  cannot  be  doubted  that  (at  times)  we  receive  warnings
in  dreams.  In  general  these  warnings  would  seem  to  come
from  ourselves,  from  our  own  consciousness,  from  our  sub-
conscious minds.  But  they  are  (at  times)  connected  with
communications  from  dead  relatives.  This  connection  may
be  only  an  apparent  one,  and  have  no  basis  in  fact.  Never-
theless we  knoWj  on  the  other  hand  ("Before  Death,"  pago
308),  that  there  are  voices  from  outside  ourselves — voices
that  are  unreal,  but  of  psychic  origin.  Besides,  it  happens
not  infrequently  that  we  see  dead  persons  in  dreams,  as
though  they  were  still  alive,  and  they  do  not  count  for
nothing  in  these  illusions.  When,  therefore,  a  warning  is
given  by  a  friend  beyond  the  grave,  the  question  arises  as
to  whether  or  not  this  deceased  person  was  really  the  sender
of  the  warning.

The  following  letter  presents  this  problem.  It  was  sent
me  from  Baltimore,  Maryland,  by  an  interested  reader.

When  I  was  young — nineteen  years  old — I  lost  a  mother  whom
I  adored.  Her  memory  is  sacred  to  me  and  I  often  used  to  take
counsel  of  it,  mentally.  Several  years  later — five  or  six  years — I
had  to  go  through  great  struggles,  and  was,  without  knowing  it,  in
much  danger.

One  night  I  was  sleeping  deeply,  without  dreaming.  I  saw  no
one;  no  scene  rose  before  me,  but  my  mother's  voice  said  to  me
distinctly,  "Take  care,  Fanny  V^  I  cannot  tell  you  if  I  woke  up
when  I  heard  the  voice,  or  after  hearing  it,  I  know  that  I  still
heard,  distinctly,  the  sound  of  this  dear,  familiar  voice  when  I  was
fully  awake — a  voice  the  sound  of  which  remained  engraved  upon
my  heart.  The  next  day,  at  a  certain  moment,  I  understood  sud-
denly why  my  mother's  voice  had  put  me  on  my  guard.

Several  of  my  dreams  have  come  true.     They  are  what  I  might


FOUR  TO  THIRTY  YEARS  AFTER  DEATH   309

call  parable-dreams,  and  when  I  awaken  I  know  their  meaning  in-
tuitively; not  after  a  time,  but  at  once.

Now  that  I  am  older,  and  perhaps  stronger,  less  nervous,  and  less
impressionable,  such  things  have  almost  ceased  to  happen  to  me.

It  seems  to  me — if  I  may  express  my  opinion — that  we  can  more
or  less  put  ourselves  in  touch  with  psychic  forces,  or  cut  ourselves
off  from  them.

I  have  never  seen  an  apparition,  and  the  very  thought  of  one
frightens  me,  but,  in  order  to  reach  a  scientific  conclusion,  no  re-
search seems  too  arduous  to  me;  for,  dominating  all  my  inner
struggles,  came  this  voice  from  beyond  the  grave,  clear  and  distinct :
a  mother's  warning  to  her  child  whom  she  saw  in  danger  because
of  her  ignorance.

Why  my  mother's  voice  rather  than  any  other?  Whence  came
this  voice?  Why  did  not  the  presentiment  of  danger  come  to  me
precisely  at  the  crucial  moment?  I  often  have  presentiments,  I
feel  things,  and  I  believe  in  these  presentiments;  but  my  mother's
voice  was  as  clear  and  distinct  as  if  she  had  spoken  to  me,  in  her
earnest  tone.     And  she  did  speak  to  me;  therefore  she  is  not  dead.

F.  Th.  Meylau,
Bryn  Mawr  School,  Baltimore.

(Letter  653.)

It  seems  to  me  that  this  voice  belongs  in  the  category  of
exterior  causes,  and  came  from  the  dead  mother.  It  is  anti-
philosophicial  to  deny  because  of  preconceived  convictions.
The  narrator's  perception  may  not  have  been  one  that  could
be  ascribed  merely  to  sentiment.

The  following  occurrence  is  a  clear  case  of  posthumous
intervention.

A  man  who  had  been  dead  for  ten  years  appeared  to  his
children  in  a  dream.  He  reproached  them  for  having  left
his  bones — unearthed  by  grave-diggers — abandoned  in  the
snow,  and  the  prey  of  wolves.  They  could  not  in  the
least  have  suspected  that  this  was  the  case.  This  example
is  particularly  remarkable  in  that  it  would  seem  to  show
with  certainty  the  influence  of  the  dead  man,  and  because


310  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

it  led  to  legal  action  and  the  sentencing  of  the  grave-dig-
gers.^

Castel  di  Sangro,  Italy,
May,   1905.

In  the  pretty  little  town  of  Castel  di  Sangro — lost  in  the  midst
of  the  high  Abruzze-Aquilen  Mountains  and  until  a  few  days
ago  almost  buried  under  the  snow — something  happened  which
has  excited  and  held  the  attention,  these  last  few  days,  of  the
local  authorities  and  the  whole   population.

On  the  night  of  the  third  of  last  March,  Signore  Pascal  Cocozza,
a  worthy  man — Baron  Raphael  Corrado's  game-warden — saw,  in
a  dream,  his  father,  who  had  been  dead  for  ten  years.  His  father
reproached  him,  as  well  as  his  brothers,  for  having  forgotten  him,
and — something  still  more  serious — for  having  left  his  poor  bones,
unearthed  by  grave-diggers,  behind  the  tower  in  the  cemetery,  in
the  snow,  the  prey  of  wolves!

Signore  Cocozza,  greatly  affected  by  this  gruesome  dream,  re-
lated it  to  his  sister  the  next  day.  To  his  great  surprise,  his
sister  declared  that  she  had  had  precisely  the  same  dream.  Then
the  worthy  warden,  without  further  delay,  and  in  spite  of  a
snow-storm,  took  his  rifle  and  went  to  the  cemetery,  situated  on  a
hill  above  the  town.  There,  behind  the  tower,  among  the  brambles
and  on  the  snow,  on  which  there  were  wolves'  footprints,  he  saw
human  bones!     The  dream  had,  therefore,  been  veridical.

Naturally,  Signore  Cocozza  sent  an  accusation  of  the  superin-
tendent of  the  cemetery,  FranQois  Mannarelli,  to  the  town  hall.
It  was  transmitted  to  Signore  Casoria,  the  Justice  of  the  Peace,  who
ordered  the  arrest  of  Mannarelli  and  three  other  grave-diggers.
The  accused  men  said,  in  self-justification,  that  since  the  time  set
for  the  exhumation  of  the  bodies  and  their  transportation  to  the
charnel-house — ten  years  after  burial — had  just  come,  they  were
moving  the  bones  at  nightfall,  had  been  overtaken  by  the  snow  and
the  cold,  and  had  not  been  able  to  transfer  some  of  the  skeletons.
At  first  the  grave-diggers,  in  their  own  defense,  tried  to  deny  that
the  bones  found  were  those  of  Signore  Cocozza's  father;  in  this  way
they  could  plead  that  the  game-warden  had  not  been  wronged  by

1  Annales  des  Sciences  psychiques,  September,  1905,  pp.  551-555.


FOUR  TO  THIRTY  YEARS  AFTER  DEATH   311

their  negligence.  But  it  appeared,  through  confidential  information
and  from  other  investigations  made  in  the  cemetery,  that  the
bones  were  really  those  of  Signore  Cocozza,  senior,  who  had  been
dead  for  ten  years.

The  dream  was  veridical  from  every  point  of  view.  If,  on  the
one  hand,  we  cannot  exclude  the  possibility  of  the  grave-diggers
having  influenced  the  percipients  telepathically,  there  remains,  how-
ever, an  implication  that  some  more  than  human  agency  intervened,
some  agency  which  alone  knew  that  wolves  had  gnawed  the  bones.
The  grave-diggers,  moreover,  could  not,  when  they  exhumed  the
bodies,  have  known  to  whom  the  skeletons  belonged.  And  lastly —
and  this  is  remarkable — two  percipients,  the  only  persons  directly
concerned,  had  this  dream  simultaneously.

GuiDO  FioccA-Novi.

A  careful,  systematic  investigation  of  these  strange  occur-
rences has  led  to  certain  conclusions  that  are  worthy  of  our
attention.  One  of  the  most  important  documents  in  the  case
bears  the  stamp  of  the  Castel  di  Sangro  justice  of  the  peace.
Here  it  is:

On  Dr.  Guido  Fiocca  Novi's  demand  and  in  the  interests  of  scien-
tific research,  with  the  authorization  of  the  Justice  of  the  Peace  of
Castel  di  Sangro,

We  hereby  certify:

That,  from  the  records  of  the  trial  instituted  by  the  Justice  of  the
Peace  with  an  ordinance  against  Mannarelli  Francesco,  Gentil  An-
tonio, Fusco  Ippolito,  Petrarca  Antonio,  and  Ricchiuto  Giovanni,
following  an  accusation  dated  March  4,  1905,  for  the  misdemeanor
of  exhuming  human  bones,  it  appears :

(1)  On  page  1  of  the  official  records  of  March  4,  1905,  that  the
police  officer  Vito  Pesehinelli,  as  soon  as  he  received  the  accusation
of  Signore  Pascal  Cocozza  (son  of  the  deceased  Pierre),  went  to
the  spot  and  verified  what  Signore  Cocozza  had  related.  He  found,
also,  that  there  were  wolves'  and  foxes'  footprints  near  the  bones;
this  helped  to  explain  the  disappearance  of  certain  portions  of  the
skeleton.

(2)  On  page  15  of  the  official  report  of  the  action  brought  by


312  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

the  plaintiff,  dated  March  7,  1905,  that  Signore  Pascal  Cocozza
stated  to  the  magistrate  that  on  the  night  of  March  3-4,  he  had  seen,
in  a  dream,  his  father,  who  had  complained  that  no  one  thought  of
protecting  his  remains.  He  then  went  immediately  to  the  cemetery,
and  afterward  went  back  there  with  his  brother-in-law,  who  told
him  that  he  remembered  the  precise  spot  where  the  deceased  had
been  buried.  Scattered  over  a  distance  of  from  fifteen  to  twenty
meters,  thirteen  human  bones  were  found.  Signore  Cocozza,  senior,
had  died  on  January  10,  1895.

(3)  On  page  20  of  the  Royal  Riflemen's  report,  dated  March
7,  containing  the  record  of  the  investigation,  the  commanding  officer
of  the  riflemen  (the  author  of  the  report)  declared  that  everything
led  to  the  belief  that  the  bones  in  question  had  been  abandoned  there
by  the  grave-diggers  because  of  the  difficulty  they  had  had  in  carry-
ing them  to  the  charnel-house,  about  which  a  great  quantity  of  snow
had  accumulated.

From  the  Clerk's  Office  of  the  Justice  of  the  Peace  (Castel  di
Sangro)  May  24,  1905.

RiDOLFI   GuiDO;

Assistant  Clerk  of  the  Court.
(Official  stamp  of  the

Justice  of  the  Peace)  Examined  this  day  hy  A.  Casoria,

Justice  of  the  Peace.

Before  publishing  this  case.  Dr.  Dariex,  editor  of  the  An-
nales  psychiques  at  that  time,  wrote  to  Dr.  Fiocca-Novi  once
more,  asking  him  for  information  as  to  the  result  of  the
grave-diggers'  trial,  and  requesting  him  to  find  out  whether
in  the  days  immediately  preceding  the  dream  Signore  Co-
cozza had  not  passed  near  the  cemetery,  where,  more  or  less
unconsciously,  he  might  have  been  struck  by  its  disordered
condition.     Here  is  the  doctor's  reply:

Castel  di  Sangro,  August  4,  1905.

First,  I  shall  give  the  result  of  the  trial :  The  grave-diggers  were
found  guilty.     The  superintendent,  Mannarelli,  was  acquitted,  be-


FOUR  TO  THIRTY  YEARS  AFTER  DEATH   313

cause  he  was  able  to  justify  his  absence.  Siguore  Cocozza  was  al-
lowed to  assume  the  position  of  plaintiff,  as  the  injured  party,  since
the  Justice  of  the  Peace  admitted,  after  the  proofs  submitted  dur-
ing the  proceedings,  the  reality  of  the  dream.

As  for  the  accidental  or  subconscious  knowledge  which  Signore
Cocozza  might  have  had  as  to  the  condition  of  the  bones,  this  theory
must  be  absolutely  ruled  out:  (1)  because  the  cemetery  is  difficult
of  access;  a  special  trip  must  be  made  to  it;  it  is  on  the  top  of  a
very  precipitous  pass,  surrounded  by  great,  mediaeval  walls,  as  you
may  see  from  the  enclosed  photograph;  (2)  because,  at  the  time
when  this  happened,  the  snow  was  very  high,  wolves  infested  the
country-side  and  we  had  had  nothing  less  than  21°  below  zero!  It
was  precisely  for  these  reasons  that  the  poor  grave-diggers  had  with-
drawn. How  could  Signore  Cocozza  have  been  walking  in  the
graveyard  under  such  conditions,  when  it  was  only  with  the  great-
est difficulty  that  he  and  the  other  subordinates  (my  clerk  included)
were  persuaded  to  leave  their  houses?,  .  .  .

GuiDO  FioccA-Novi.

Can  we  reasonably  dispute  the  fact  that  there  was  direct
influence  on  the  part  of  this  man  who  had  been  dead  for
ten  years?

These  experiences  are  of  the  greatest  interest.

Sinoe  this  chapter  is  devoted  to  posthumous  manifesta-
tions observed  from  four  to  thirty  years  after  dissolution,  I
must  here  remind  my  readers  of  the  occurrence  related  in  Vol-
ume II  (page  314)  by  Miss  Lucy  Dodson.  A  mother  ap-
peared, sixteen  years  after  her  death,  bearing  in  her  arms  two
children  which  she  held  out  to  her  daughter,  whose  sister-in-
law  had  just  died,  as  a  result  of  confinement.  But  we  may
suppose  that  the  woman  who  was  in  childbed,  thinking  of
the  future  of  these  children,  acted  telepathically  on  her
sister-in-law,  and  that  she  herself  produced  the  image  of  the
mother.

In  the  matter  of  identity,  we  can  be  less  certain,  in  this
case,  than  in  the  case  given  on  page  88 :  a  father,  dead  for


314  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

fourteen  years,  who  appeared  to  his  son  and  to  his  daughter-
in-law.

The  following  occurrence  took  place  twenty  years  after
death.  I  am  taking  an  account  of  it  from  a  letter  sent  me
in  May,  1900.  The  apparition,  in  a  dream,  seemed  objective
to  the  dreamer.  Was  there,  in  this  case,  only  a  wave  of
memory  due  to  the  subconscious  mind?  That  hypothesis
deserves  discussion.

Mr.  Holbrook,  editor  of  the  ''Herald  of  Health"  (New
York),  wrote  on  July  30,  1884 ^i

In  the  spring  of  1870  I  had  an  attack  of  acute  bronchitis,  which
made  me  very  ill.  Since  I  had  had  a  similar  attack  every  winter
and  every  spring  for  several  years,  I  was  most  disturbed  and  be-
lieved that  it  would  become  chronic,  and  would^  perhaps,  end  fatally.
I  was  young  and  having  just  begun  a  line  of  work  in  which  I
wished  to  remain  for  a  long  time,  I  was  most  dejected  by  the  pros-
pect.

One  day  I  fell  into  a  deep  sleep,  and  had  the  following  dream,
which  is  still  fresh  in  my  memory:

My  sister,  who  had  been  dead  for  more  than  twenty  years,  and
whom  T  had  almost  forgotten,  drew  near  my  bed  and  said:  "Don't
worry  about  your  health;  we  have  come  to  take  care  of  you;  you
still  have  a  great  deal  to  do  in  this  world."  Then  she  disappeared,
and  it  seemed  to  me  that  my  brain  was  electrified,  as  though  by  the
shock  of  contact  with  a  battery.  But  instead  of  being  painful,  this
sensation  was  delicious.  The  current  descended  into  my  lungs  and
chest,  where  I  felt  it  very  strongly.  It  spread,  thence,  to  the  ex-
tremities, where  it  caused  an  agreeable  warmth.  I  awakened  almost
at  once,  and  felt  very  well.  Since  then  I  have  never  had  any  at-
tack of  this  illness.  The  phantom  of  my  sister  was  indistinct,  but
her  voice  was  very  clear.  Nothing  like  that  had  ever  happened  to
me  before,  and  has  not  since.

M.  L.  Holbrook.

1  Proceedings  S.  P.  R.,  VIII,  374.  Human  Personality,  I,  370.  An-
nates des  Sciences  psychiques,  1899,  p.  168.


FOUR  TO  THIRTY  YEARS  AFTER  DEATH   315

One  may  easily  imagine  the  doubts  of  an  honest-minded
seeker,  when  these  experiences  are  put  before  him.  Is  it  prob-
able that  the  sister  counted  for  nothing,  as  regards  these
sensations  1  Was  not,  in  this  case,  a  sort  of  magnetism  trans-
mitted from  beyond  the  grave  ?

The  following  account  was  sent  me  from  Valparaiso  on
May  9,  1899.  The  apparition  was  that  of  a  person  who  had
been  dead  for  more  than  thirty  years.

I  was  extremely  young  at  that  time,  and  slept  in  a  room  with  my
mother.  My  bed  was  just  in  front  of  the  door  which  gave  on  to  a
hallway.  One  evening  I  was  sent  to  bed  early,  as  usual.  My  mother
went  with  me  herself,  with  a  candle  which  she  put  on  the  table,
and  left  me,  to  rejoin  the  rest  of  the  family;  they  used  to  stay  up
until  ten  or  eleven.  I  was  sitting  on  the  bed,  hesitating  as  to
whether  to  slip  under  the  sheet  because  it  was  growing  cold,  when,
lifting  my  eyes  by  chance,  I  saw  at  the  end  of  the  hall — for  the
door  was  still  open — an  old  woman  coming  toward  me.  I  thought
at  first  that  it  was  my  grandmother.  But  as  I  perceived  details
better  I  saw  that  it  was  not  she,  and  that  I  did  not  know  her.  My
astonishment  changed  to  terror  when  the  apparition  entered  the
room.  Although  she  stood  fully  in  the  light,  and  I  could  see  her
clearly,  I  perceived  the  furniture  through  her  body.  The  phantom
approached  the  foot  of  my  bed,  and  then  I  could  not  help  uttering
piercing  cries.  Every  one  came  up;  I  told  what  I  had  seen;  they
laughed  in  my  face,  and  said  that  I  had  been  dreaming.

No  one  in  my  family  had  died  at  that  time.  Some  years  later
I  heard  my  grandmother  relate  that,  about  thirty  years  before,  my
uncle  had  bought  this  house  from  the  heirs  of  an  old  woman  to
whom  it  had  belonged,  and  that  this  old  woman  had  died  in  the  very
room  in  which  I  had  seen  the  apparition.  I  should  like  to  point  out
the  coincidence  without  drawing  any  conclusion.  I  shall  add  only
one  thing:  that  I  had  never  had  any  visions  or  hallucinations  before
this  adventure,  and  that  I  have  never  had  any  since  then.

L.  JOURIDE.

(Letter  666.)


316  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

It  is  usual  to  reason  like  the  parents  of  this  child,  who
was  accused  of  having  seen  nothing,  of  having  dreamed.
But  he  was  not  asleep.  Was  it  an  imaginary  vision?  He
never  had  any  other.  In  this  way  such  occurrences — ^which
are,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  inexplicable — have  been  dismissed.
But  should  they  not  be  examined  a  little  more  carefully?
The  child  saw  an  old  woman  whom  he  mistook  at  first,  in
all  calmness,  for  his  grandmother.  It  was  a  phantom,
through  which  he  could  see  the  furniture.  On  the  other
hand,  an  old  woman  had  died  in  this  room.  It  seems  to  me
that  instead  of  wiping  the  slate  clean  of  the  picture,  and  ef-
facing everything  because  the  occurrence  puzzles  us,  it  is
more  scientific  to  enlighten  ourselves  by  investigating  and
discussing  such  problems.

These  diverse  accounts,  therefore,  give  us  'examples  of  ap-
paritions observed  ten,  fifteen,  twenty,  and  thirty  years  after
death.  Have  we  not  already  read  (in  Volum-e  II,  page  195)
of  the  apparition  of  a  Mrs.  Carleton,  who  had  been  dead  for
fifty-six  years?  Mrs.  Carleton,  faithful  to  her  promise  to
a  woman  friend,  announced  to  this  friend  that  she  must  pre-
pare to  die  in  twenty-four  hours.  The  friend,  convinced  of
the  truth  of  the  announcement,  took  a  bath,  that  the  family
might  be  spared  the  trouble  of  washing  her  dead  body.  She
died  at  the  time  specified.

I  have  before  me  a  great  many  bits  of  testimony  as  to  mani-
festations on  the  part  of  dead  persons.  They  include  warn-
ings helpful  to  those  who  received  them.  Among  the  docu-
ments is  an  account  of  a  personal  experience,  which  was  sent
me  by  Monsieur  Oscar  Belgeonne,  secretary  to  the  Anvers
public  prosecutor.  The  account  bears  the  number  4421,  in
my  records.  The  large  number  of  documents  contained  in
this  volume  obliges  me  to  hold  these  bits  of  testimony  in  re-
serve; they  might  be  considered  a  supplement  to  those  pub-
lished here.

While  seeking  to  explain  these  experiences — to  bring  them


FOUR  TO  THIRTY  YEARS  AFTER  DEATH   317

into  line  with  the  normal  course  of  events — as  forgotten  rec-
ollections, latent  in  the  memory,  we  have  seen  that  many
call  for  quite  another  sort  of  explanation.  I  had  kept  one
last  one  in  reserve,  an  occurrence  which  took  place  sixty-eight
years  after  dissolution.  It  concerns  a  man  who  died  in  1824,
and  who  appeared  to  his  grandson  in  a  dream,  in  1892,  to
show  him  where  his  grave  was.  The  analysis  of  the  case  fills
a  large  number  of  pages,  and  leaves  us  with  an  impression
that  it  is  ''possible"  to  attribute  the  dream  to  a  forgotten
recollection.  In  any  case,  I  should  like  to  call  investigators'
attention  to  it — the  attention  of  those  with  a  love  for  analysis.
(See  ''Annales  des  Sciences  psychiques,"  1912,  page  24.)

Are  the  occurrences  which  have  just  been  given  (and  pains-
takingly analyzed)  not  at  one  in  proving  the  immortality
of  the  soul  and  the  reality  of  communication  between  the
dead  and  the  living  ?  They  take  place  at  intervals,  as  we  see,
from  the  very  moment  of  dissolution  to  days,  weeks,  months,
and  years  afterward.

There  are  other  occurrences  still  farther  removed  from  the
hour  of  dissolution.  These  persist  as  legends,  even  for  sev-
eral centuries.  In  this  way  we  reach  haunted  houses,  step
by  step.

We  cannot  here  investigate  this  important  field.  But  we
cannot  help  taking  still  a  little  time  to  consider  other  proofs
of  survival  and  the  Qontinuity  of  psychic  life  by  turning  to
the  teachings  of  s.piritism,  which,  so  far,  we  have  not  been
able  to  take  up  in  this  work.

I  had  planned  to  put  still  another  series  of  occurrences  be-
fore my  readers,  since  they  add  special  evidence.  These
were,  on  the  one  hand,  apparitions,  at  death-beds,  of  those
already  dead.  On  the  other  hand,  I  had  planned  to  show
the  actual  reality  of  certain  phantoms,  and  to  give  photo-
graphs of  them.     But  space  is  lacking  for  such  an  analysis.

The  conclusion  that  we  may  draw,  therefore,  from  all  the
preceding  pages,   and  from  these   ten   chapters,  is  that  if


318  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

readers  have  not  been  convinced  by  the  innumerable  proofs
offered,  clear  as  the  sun  at  noon,  they  will  never  be  con-
vinced. One  might  as  well  go  into  the  fields  and  speak
Hebrew  or  Sanskrit  to  the  husbandmen.

Perhaps  future  science  will  discover  an  explanation  of  the
phenomena — one  different  from  that  which  seems  to  us  to-day
the  most  direct  and  most  natural.  But  the  occurrences  prove
that  there  are  such  phenomena,  and  that  they  must  no  longer
be  disdained.


XI

MANIFESTATIONS    OF    THE    DEAD    IN    SPIRITISTIC    EXPERIMENTS

^  I,  like  every  one  else,  laughed  at  spir-
itism. But  what  I  mistook  for  Voltaire's
laugh  was  but  an  idiot's  laugh.

EUG.    BONNEMEEE.

SPIRITISM ^  is,  in  general,  in  bad  repute,  and  deserves
to  be.  Most  of  its  disciples  are  unmethodical;  they
are  often  lacking  in  mental  poise,  are  often  dupes
of  illusions.  They  prefer  a  belief  and  a  religion  which  merely
console,  to  the  impartial  and  critical  investigation  without
which  we  can  be  sure  of  nothing.  These  are  bad  conditions
fqr  research;  adequate  safeguards  are  lacking.

In  Allan  Kardec's  time  (in  the  course  of  the  speech  which
I  made  at  his  grave  on  April  2,  1869)  I  believed  it  helpful
and  even  necessary  to  proclaim,  at  this  very  grave,  that
'^spiritism  is  not  a  religion  hut  a  science/'  and  to  add  that
**we  are  now  at  the  dawn  of  an  undiscovered  science."
During  the  fifty  years  which  followed  the  utterance  of  these
words,  the  continued  progress  of  our  research  has  lent  them
greater  and  greater  emphasis,  confirmed  them  more  and  more
fully.

It  is  by  the  scientifi'c  method  alone  that  we  may  make
progress  in  the  search  for  truth.  Religious  belief  must  not
take  the  place  of  impartial  analysis.  We  must  be  constantly
on  our  guard  against  illusions.

Apart  from  deliberate  deception,   dishonest  and  inexcus-

1  Monsieur  Flammarion  makes  a  distinction  between  "spiritualism'*
and  "spiritism."  By  "spiritualism"  he  means  the  general  doctrine
that  departed  spirits  hold  intercourse  with  mortals.  By  "spiritism"
he  means  mediumistic  research. — Translator.

319


320  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

able,  there  is  autosuggestion  leading  to  involuntary  decep-
tion. Believers  allow  themselves  to  be  easily  gulled.  I  have
seen  tables  moved,  quite  patently,  by  the  hands  of  so-called
*' mediums,'^  without  these  "mediums"  themselves  suspect-
ing it  (at  times),  despite  the  clearest  evidence.  People  too
often  accept  the  sayings  of  self-styled  "spirits,"  without
the  slightest  verification  (controle).  Moreover,  they  have
ended  by  giving  the  name  controle  ("control")  to  the  spirit
itself — that  is  to  say,  to  the  unknown  cause  which  is  to  be
determined!     This  is  a  grammatical  absurdity.

And  all  this  is  usually  done  in  good  faith.

There  are  also  dishonest  exploiters  of  credulity,  who  give
"seances,"  promising  apparitions  and  posthumous  mani-
festations to  the  simpletons  who  listen  to  them.  Those  who
have  been  gulled  then  complain,  laughably,  of  having  been
robbed!  The  human  race,  supposedly  intelligent,  is  truly
strange.  One- must  have  a  great  deal  of  courage  to  work
perseveringly,  surrounded  by  these  impostors;  one  must  be
sustained  by  the  conviction  that  there  are  truths  to  be  dis-
covered.

There  is  more  than  one  danger  in  psychic  research,  and
above  all  in  spiritistic  experiments.  The  chief  danger  is
that  we  prove,  indubitably,  the  reality  of  phenomena  that
are  not  merely  inexplicable  but  are,  at  times,  improbable
and  logically  inadmissible.  In  this  way  we  begin  a  danger-
ous descent,  for  where  does  reality  stop?  There  is  a  limit.
Where  is  it?  Men  and  women  admit  the  most  blatant  ab-
surdities in  perfect  good  faith — women,  above  all,  if  we  must
speak  the  truth.  Their  credulity  sometimes  equals  that  of
the  most  simple-minded  bigots,  who  see  the  devil  or  Provi-
dence in  the  least  changes  in  temperature  or  the  least  impor-
tant vicissitudes  of  existence.  And  with  what  ease  certain
' '  mediums ' '  play  upon  weak  minds !  We  even  ask  ourselves,
often,  whether  these  naive  experimenters  are  dupes  or  ac-
complices, and  would  not  prefer  to  be  deceived!     We  must


SPIRITISTIC  EXPERIMENTS  321

guess  where  this  dangerous  descent  begins,  and  never  draw
near  that  point.

It  is  difficult  to  obtain  definite  results  from  the  encompass-
ing psj^chic  atmosphere.  We  get,  at  times,  replies  differing
so  greatly  from  the  ideas  of  the  persons  present  that  the
identity  of  the  spirit  that  has  been  evoked  would  seem  to  be
proved  by  the  particular  details  which  that  spirit  reveals.
Then,  when  his  name  is  asked,  he  cannot  give  it!  Very
often,  too,  he  gives  only  one  initial.  Why?  It  is  discon-
certing.

But  those  who  reject  everything  connected  with  these  ex-
periments are  wrong,  without  a  doubt.  We  cannot  say  in
such  cases,  '' Everything  or  nothing."  There  are  occurrences
worthy  of  the  most  serious  attention.  And  these  occurrences,
as  well  as  the  diverse  experiences  given  in  the  three  volumes
of  this  work,  prove  the  materialistic  theory  to  be  erroneous.

It  appears  to  me  that,  in  order  to  form  an  exact  and  rigor-
ous estimate  of  the  authenticity  of  proofs  of  identity  in  spirit-
istic communications,  we  must  be  certain,  above  all,  that  no
part  of  these  communications  proceeds  from  the  subcon-
scious minds  of  the  experimenters  and  of  those  present.  If
any  part  can  be  attributed  to  them,  this  renders  posthumous
research  illusory.

If  the  influence  of  persons  present  at  the  seance  can  be
eliminated,  research  becomes  possible.  But,  again,  we  must
not  lose  sight  of  our  present  knowledge  of  telepathy  and
forget  that  living  people  may  transmit  thought  to  a  dis-
tance.

We  see  what  care  is  necessary  in  the  experimental  study
of  spiritism.

We  have  already,  in  this  volume,  seen  examples  of  such
manifestations — among  others,  in  our  preliminary  investiga-
tion, in  the  revelations  of  Monsieur  Bossan's  family,  and  in
other  cases  in  which  the  identity  of  the  communicating
spirit  has  seemed  to  us  well  established.


322  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

They  are  not  things  of  to-day,  these  investigations  in  which
the  identity  of  the  communicating  spirits  is  discussed;  in-
vestigations which  lead  to  positive  results.  More  than  a
quarter  of  a  century  ago  Dr.  Chazarain  published,  in  '^Le
Pr ogres  spirite"   (Lyons),  the  following  account:

Monsieur  Honore  Cliavee  was  a  distinguished  anthropologist  and
linguist,  and  author  of  a  remarkable  book,  valued  by  all  the  savants
of  the  world:  "The  Indo-European  Lexicology."  He  was  Hove-
laeque's  instructor  in  matters  of  linguistic  erudition,  and  was  one  of
the  first  lecturers  who,  with  Flammarion,  JacoUiot,  Sarcey,  Maria
Deraisme,  and  others,  used  to  speak  in  the  lecture  hall  in  the  boule-
vard des  Capucines,  at  a  time  when  Yves  Henry,  whose  physician
and  friend  I  was,  was  in  charge  of  it.     This  was  in  1866.

While  attending  his  lectures  I  became  acquainted  with  Mon-
sieur Chavee,  and  entered  into  long-continued  and  friendly  relations
with  him,  which  lasted  until  his  death.

Monsieur  Chavee  believed  in  successive  existences,  but  did  not
admit  that  it  is  possible  for  the  dead  to  communicate  with  us.  To
explain  spirit  communications  and  the  part  played  by  mediums,  he
had  evolved  a  most  original  theory,  similar  to  that  based  on  mental
suggestion  and  the  exteriorization  of  thought.

Madame  Chavee  had  obtained,  through  Madame  Rodiere  as  a
medium  (in  1862  she  had  served  as  Monsieur  Flammarion^s
medium),  a  communication  which  seems  to  me  to  express  her  hus-
band's ideas  before  he  returned  to  his  life  in  space.

Some  days  later  I  had  gone  to  the  home  of  one  of  my  patients,

Madame  D ,  who  was  in  bed.     I  entered  her  room,  in  which

were  two  of  her  friends.  Mademoiselle  G and  Madame  V ,

her  housekeeper;  they  were  seated  at  a  table  placed  close  beside  her
bed.  Both  were  mediums  and  were  at  that  moment  engaged  in
spiritistic  experiments.  At  once  I  decided  to  profit  by  the  oc-
casion and  to  evoke  Chavee.  It  was  simple  curiosity  on  my  part;
I  had  no  other  idea.

The  table  having  replied  in  the  affirmative,  Madame  D ,  sitting

up  in  bed,  wrote  down  the  letters  given  by  the  rapping.

After  the  last  letter,  the  table  stopped;  we  asked  whether  the
communication  were  ended.     Since  there  was  an  affirmative  reply,


SPIRITISTIC  EXPERIMENTS  323

Madame  D wrote  the  spirit's  name  at  the  bottom  of  the  sheet,

spelling  it  in  this  way:  Chavet.  She  believed  this  spelling  to  be
correct.

Scarcely  h^d  she  finished  when  the  table;  on  which  our  hands
were  still  resting,  began  to  move  once  more,  and  dictated  these
words :  "That  is  not  the  way  my  name  is  spelled."

When  Madame  D had  had  the  pencil  in  her  hand,  I  was  about

two  meters  away  from  her,  on  a  level  with  her  feet.  Had  I  wished
to  do  so,  it  would  have  been  absolutely  impossible  for  me  to  see
what  she  had  written.  This  was  equally  true  of  the  other  persons
who  had  their  hands  on  the  table;  they  were,  moreover,  ignorant  of
the  correct  spelling.

No  one  of  us,  therefore,  could  have  known  that  the  name  had
been  wrongly  spelled  when  the  table  began  to  move,  calling  atten-
tion to  the  error.

Consequently,  the  medium  could  not  have  been  warned,  by
thought-vibration  on  the  part  of  the  persons  present,  of  the  mistake
that  had  been  made,  and  could  not  have  controlled  the  table.

I  must  inform  you  that  the  great  linguist  Honore  Chavee  could
not  bear,  when  he  was  alive,  to  have  his  name  incorrectly  written
or  his  first  name  altered.  His  widow,  to  whom  I  showed  the  com-
munication in  question  and  the  subsequent  remark  which  the  writer
of  it  had  dictated,  cried  at  once:  "Ah,  that  protest  was  just  like
him!  Just  think:  when  one  of  his  compatriots  and  friends  [Mon-
sieur Chavee  was  a  native  of  Namur]  spoke  of  his  books  most
eulogistically  in  a  speech  he  made  in  Brussels,  the  newspapers  of
that  city  printed  a  report  of  the  speech,  giving  his  first  name  as
Henri.  He  was  so  annoyed  by  this  error  that  he  had  scarcely
finished  reading  the  account  in  the  Belgian  newspaper  when  he  sent
a  telegram  protesting  against  the  unintentional  substitution;  he
wasn't  willing  to  wait  until  evening  to  send  a  letter."

This  furnished  still  another  proof  of  the  spirit's  identity.  It
was  because  of  the  persistence,  beyond  the  grave,  of  this  original
side  of  his  character  that  he  wished  to  call  attention  to  the  mistake
that  had  been  made.  For  this  reason  we  have  here,  more  or  less
by  chance,  an  extremely  clear  proof  of  identity;  its  value  is  un-
questionable. But  I  am  inclined  to  believe  that,  while  faithful
to  this  peculiarity  which  made  him,  when  alive,  unable  to  bear  any


324  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

confusion  of  his  name  with  any  similar  name  whatsoever,  even  for
a  moment,  he  also  availed  himself,  eagerly  and  joyfully,  of  an  oc-
casion to  give  us  a  rare  proof  of  the  identity  of  a  spirit.

Dr.  Chazarain.

The  best  proof  that  these  phenomena  are  not  alv^^ays  caused
by  autosuggestion  is  the  fact  that  they  often  occur  vrithout  our
willing  it.  For  example,  how  many  times  do  we  not,  at
table-rapping  seances,  demand  vainly  that  an  important
message  be  continued!  All  those  present  v^sh  ardently  for
a  continuation,  and  despite  all  their  waiting  (it  sometimes
lasts  a  very  long  while)  nothing  happens.  An  exterior  will
dominates  us,  or,  at  least,  dominates  our  own  conscious  will.
The  beginning  of  a  sentence  is  dictated,  and  we  think  we  can
guess  the  end  of  it;  but  not  at  all:  it  ends  in  another  wat^.
A  word  is  begun:  we  believe  we  foresee  what  the  last  let-
ters  will  be;  but  it  is  another  word  which  is  dictated.  On
a  particular  day  we  are  in  an  especially  receptive  mood  as
regards  communications ;  we  wait  for  half  an  hour,  an  hour,
two  hours,  without  obtaining  any  results.  On  another  day
there  are  rappings,  cracking  noises;  the  table  moves  at
once.  There  is  here,  plainly,  a  cause  other  than  our  con-
sciousness.

All  of  us  live,  without  knowing  it,  in  a  psychic  environ-
ment we  do  not  understand.  The  atmosphere  contains  not
only  chemical  elements — oxygen,  nitrogen,  carbonic-acid  gas,
watery  vapor,  et  cetera — but  also  psychic  elements.  Every-
where there  are  souls.  There  is  a  constant  mingling  of
animism  and  spiritism  in  the  experiments  of  which  we  are
speaking ;  it  is  extremely  difficult  to  separate  them,  to  isolate
them.     Let  us  try  to  do  this  here,  however.

Among  the  experiments  which  would  lead  us  to  believe  in
communication  with  spirits,  I  should  like  particularly  to  call
my  readers'  attention  to  the  following  ones,  because  these
were  made  during  the  very  first  years  of  modern  spiritism,


SPIRITISTIC  EXPERIMENTS  825

wliich  had  its  inception  in  1855.  "We  are  concerned  here  with
unquestionable  testimony:  that  of  Judge  Edmonds,  who  ob-
served the  phenomena  in  question  in  his  own  family,  in  the
case  of  his  daughter  Laura.

Judge  Edmonds  was  not  a  negligible  witness.  He  en-
joyed a  considerable  renown  in  the  United  States  by  reason
of  the  exalted  powers  with  which  he  was  invested,  at  first  as
President  of  the  Senate,  then  as  a  member  of  the  New  York
High  Court  of  Appeal.  When  his  attention  was  drawn  to
spiritism  he  despised  it  with  all  the  skepticism  of  a  magistrate
accustomed  to  dealing  with  uncertain  human  testimony.  But
after  a  conscientious  inquiry  he  stated  that  he  believed  not
merely  that  such  occurrences  took  place,  but  also  in  the
validity  of  the  theory  of  spirits  as  an  explanation.

The  amazement  and  indignation  of  the  best  American  so-
ciety were  so  great  that  Judge  Edmonds  was  forced  to  give
up  his  work  as  a  magistrate  and  tender  his  resignation.  He
sacrificed,  unhesitatingly,  his  own  personal  interests  to  what
he  considered  to  be  the  truth.  He  showed  in  this  a  rare
courage  which  we  should  do  well  to  admire;  it  lent  weight
to  the  affirmations  of  this  early  witness.

His  daughter  Laura  had  received  a  careful  education.
She  was  a  fervent  Catholic.  Her  spiritual  adviser  ordered
her  to  renounce  mediumistic  research;  she  did  this,  and
refused  to  be  present  at  seances,  though  the  persons  about
her  often  held  them.

But  the  dwelling  in  which  she  Hved  eventually  became
a  sort  of  haunted  house.  Half  a  year  had  gone  by  in
this  way ;  she  constantly  heard  strange  sounds  and  witnessed
phenomena  no  less  strange  occurring  without  apparent  human
intervention;  phenomena  which,  nevertheless,  seemed  to  be
guided  by  some  intelligent  entity.  Impelled  by  curiosity,
she  began,  once  more,  to  go  to  seances.  Soon  she  was  con-
vinced of  the  presence  of  an  intelligent  force,  without  know-
ing what  this  force  could  be.     She  began  to  speak  various


326  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

languages,  though  she  knew  besides  her  mother  tongue  only
French,  which  she  had  learned  at  school.  Her  father  stateri
that  during  this  first  year,  in  various  circumstances,  she
spoke  nine  or  ten  languages,  sometimes  within  an  hour,  with
perfect  ease  and  fluency.

But  let  us  listen  to  the  judge  himself:

With  her  as  an  intermediary,  people  who  were  perfect  strangers
to  ns  could  speak  to  their  dead  friends  in  their  own  languages.
The  following  occurrence,  among  others,  took  place:

One  evening  I  had  a  visit  from  a  stranger,  a  Greek  named
Evangelides ;  it  was  not  long  before  he  was  speaking  to  Laura  in  his
own  tongue.  In  the  course  of  the  conversation  he  seemed  greatly
affected,  and  even  shed  tears.  Six  or  seven  people  were  present,
and  one  of  them  asked  the  reason  for  his  emotion.  The  Greek
avoided  a  direct  reply,  saying  that  it  was  a  question  of  family
matters.

On  the  next  day  he  renewed  his  conversation  with  Laura,  and
since  there  were  no  strangers  in  my  home  this  time,  he  gave  us  the
desired  explanation.  The  invisible  personality  with  whom  he  was
speaking,  with  Laura  as  an  intermediary,  said  that  he  was  an  in-
timate friend,  who  had  died  in  Greece:  the  brother  of  the  Greek
patriot  Marco  Bozarris.  This  friend  informed  Evangelides  of  the
death  of  his  (Evangelides's)  son,  who  had  stayed  in  Greece  and  had
been  in  excellent  health  when  his  father  left  for  America.

Ten  days  after  his  first  visit  Evangelides  informed  us  that  he
had  just  received  a  letter  telling  him  of  the  death  of  his  son.  This
letter  must  have  been  on  its  way  at  the  time  of  his  first  interview
with  Laura.

I  should  like  to  know  how  I  should  regard  this  occurrence.  It
is  impossible  to  deny  it;  it  was  too  startlingly  evident.  I  might  just
as  well  deny  that  the  sun  shines  upon  us.

Nor  could  I  consider  it  an  illusion,  for  there  was  nothing  to
distinguish  it  from  any  other  reality  which  one  grows  aware  of  at
any  time  in  one's  life.

All  this  took  place  in  the  presence  of  from  eight  to  ten  persons,
all  of  them  educated,  intelligent,  logical,  and  as  capable  as  any  one
of  distinguishing  an  illusion  from  a  real  occurrence.


SPIRITISTIC  EXPERIMENTS  327

It  would  be  vain  to  contend  that  it  was  the  reflection  of  our  own
thoughts.  We  had  never  seen  this  man;  he  had  been  introduced
to  us  by  a  friend  on  that  very  evening.  Moreover,  even  supposing
that  our  minds  could  have  transmitted  to  him  the  idea  that  his  son
was  dead,  how  could  our  thoughts  have  made  Laura  understand  and
speak  Greek,  a  language  which  she  had  never  heard?

J.  W.  Edmonds.

In  giving  this  account  Aksakof/  too,  asks  himself  how  it
should  be  interpreted.  If  there  ever  was  a  case,  he  remarks,
in  which  we  might  cite  clairvoyance,  this  would  be  the  one.
But  such  an  explanation  could  not  apply,  here.  Laura  saw
Evangelides  for  the  first  time  in  her  life.  She  knew  abso-
lutely nothing  of  his  family,  which  was  living  in  Greece,
and  still  less  of  his  deceased  friend,  Bozarris's  brother.
Where,  then,  can  we  discover  the  ''intense  interest"  the
''powerful  motive,"  capable  of  rendering  the  medium  clair-
voyant, by  which  Hartmann  claims  to  explain  everything?
And  however  perfect  this  young  girl's  clairvoyance  might
have  "been,  how  could  it  have  given  her  the  ability  to  speak
Greek?  Nor  would  it  be  logical  to  attribute  to  one  source
the  gift  of  speaking  Greek,  and  to  another  source  the  revela-
tion of  the  child's  death.  Plainly,  the  two  manifestations
had  one  and  the  same  cause.

There  is,  in  this  case,  a  psychic  element  still  to  be  isolated.

Here  is  a  similar  story,  also  related  by  Judge  Edmonds:

One  day,  an  unknown  entity  caused  my  wife  to  speak  the  purest
Scotch  dialect.  This  entity  had  taken  the  name  of  a  woman  from
Paisley,  Scotland,  who  informed  us  of  her  death;  she  said  that  she
had  died  in  that  town  some  days  earlier.  We  learned  that  she  was
the  grandmother  of  one  of  the  members  of  our  circle  who  had  come
to  America  about  a  year  before.  Three  or  four  days  afterward  the
same  individuality  manifested  itself,  using  as  a  medium  Miss  Scon-
gall,  a  young  person  from  Roekfort,  Illinois,  who  knows  no  Scotch

1  Animisme  et  Spiritisme,  p.  419.


328  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

at  all.  She  announced  her  death  through  this  young  woman  as
well,  speaking  her  usual  dialect  and  giving  various  details  as  to  the
house  in  which  she  was  living:  the  garden,  the  trees,  etc.  Miss
Scongall  had  not  been  present  at  the  first  manifestation  of  this
woman,  and  knew  nothing  about  it.  A  young  man  who  had  a  per-
sonal interest  in  the  communication,  asked  various  questions,  that
he  might  verify  the  identity  of  the  entity  manifesting  itself.  He
sought  information  concerning  certain  people, — among  others,  those
whom  he  had  known  in  Scotland, — and  got  replies  that  were  satis-
factory in  every  respect.  The  same  spirit  manifested  itself  at  sev-
eral consecutive  seances,  and  gave  undeniable  proofs  of  its  iden-
tity.

The  young  man's  conviction  was  so  absolute  that  he  wrote  at
once  to  his  friends  in  Scotland  and  informed  them  of  his  grand-
mother's death,  taking  care  to  indicate  the  source  of  his  informa-
tion. The  letters  which  he  afterward  received  confirmed  the  news
fully.  1

We  have,  therefore,  in  the  foregoing,  two  similar  occur-
rences :  the  death  of  a  person  completely  unknov^n  to  the
mediums,  announced  in  a  language  with  which  the  mediums
were  unacquainted,  but  which  was  spoken  by  the  deceased
person.  These  phenomena  occurred  during  the  period  of
the  first  experiments  of  modern  spiritism.

We  might  give  a  large  number  of  like  cases  in  which  the
messages  announcing  the  deaths  of  certain  persons  also  re-
vealed various  details  as  to  the  deceased  persons'  private
affairs,  details  which  were  entirely  unknown  to  the  others
present.  "Light"  (Letter  1885,  page  315)  gave  among  other
occurrences  the  following  most  remarkable  one :

Dr.  Davey,  who  was  living  near  Bristol,  had  a  son — also  a
physician — ^residing  in  a  foreign  country.  The  son,  who  wished  to
return,  left  for  England  on  an  English  vessel,  bound  for  London.
Instead  of  paying  for  his  passage  he  offered  his  services  as  ship's
doctor;  but  he  died  in  the  course  of  the  voyage.     When  the  ship

1  Edmonds,  Letters  on  Spiritualism   (New  York,  1860),  pp.  118-120.


SPIRITISTIC  EXPERIMENTS  329

reached  London  the  captain  informed  the  father  of  this,  and  gave
him  the  sum  of  twenty-two  pounds  sterling  which  he  said  he  had
found  on  the  deceased  man.  He  also  gave  him  an  excerpt  from  the
ship's  log-book,  in  which  all  these  details  were  set  down.  Dr.
Davey  was  touched  by  the  captain's  acts  and  gave  him,  as  a  remem-
brance, a  gold  pencil-holder.

Some  months  afterward  the  doctor  and  his  wife  were  at  a  spirit-
istic seance  in  London.  Several  boisterous  manifestations  took
place,  such  as  the  moving  of  furniture,  rappings,  et  cetera.  The
medium,  who  was  a  woman,  explained  these  phenomena  as  mean-
ing that  the  spirits  had  a  communication  to  make  to  one  of  the
persons  present.  We  wished  to  know  which  one  it  was.  Then  a
large  table,  which  no  one  was  touching,  and  which  was  at  the  other
end  of  the  room,  began  to  slide  along  and  stopped  very  near  Dr.
Davey.  We  asked  who  was  manifesting  himself.  The  name  spelled
out  was  that  of  Dr.  Davey's  dead  son.  He  declared,  to  every  one's
horror,  that  he  had  been  poisoned!

The  doctor,  wishing  to  make  sure  of  this  person's  identity,  asked
for  a  proof.  Then  the  occult  speaker  told  him  of  his  gift  to  the
captain,  a  thing  which  no  one  of  the  persons  present  could  have
known  about.  The  doctor  asked  whether  the  poison  had  been  ad-
ministered intentionally  or  by  accident.  The  reply  was,  '^Both
things  are  possible."  It  was  stated,  furthermore,  that  the  sum  of
money  left  by  the  deceased  was  seventy  and  not  twenty-two  pounds
sterling.     Various  other  details  were  also  given.

After  receiving  these  communications,  Dr.  Davey  had  the  ship-
owner give  him  a  copy  of  the  log-book;  it  did  not  agTee  with  the
excerpt  which  the  captain  had  put  into  his  hands.

In  October,  1884,  just  before  publishing  this  account,  we  wrote
to  Dr.  Davey.     Here  is  part  of  his  reply:

"After  my  son's  death  (1863)  I  had  occasion  to  take  up  spirit-
ism. I  learned,  one  day,  at  a  seance  held  in  London  at  which  my
son  manifested  himself,  that  the  details  as  to  his  death,  given  by
the  captain,  were  not  authentic.  I  found  out  that  his  death  was
due  to  the  imprudence  of  a  steward  who  had  put  extract  of  bitter
almonds  into  his  castor-oil  instead  of  mint,  as  my  son  had  requested.
I  knew  nothing,  beforehand,  about  all  the  pecuniary  matters  to
which  he  alluded.    Among  the  effects  which  were  given  me  after  my


330  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

son's  death  were  only  twenty-two  pounds  sterling  and  several  cop-
per coins,  but  I  have  every  reason  to  believe  that  at  the  moment
of  his  death  he  had  nearly  seventy  pounds  sterling  in  his  possession."

We  are  seeking  to  arrive  at  certainty.  But  in  what
science  do  v^e  attain  it,  absolutely  ?  Most  of  the  time  v^e  at-
tain only  a  high  degree  of  probability,  generally  speaking,  as
an  equivalent  for  certainty.  This  is  true,  above  all,  in
ethical  questions.

The  follow^ing  is  a  remarkable  case,  vouched  for  by  ab-
solutely trustv^orthy  witnesses.

Dr.  Vincent  Gubernari,  who  had  made  his  home  on  the
pretty  Arcetri  Hill  near  Florence  (all  Galileo's  admirers
know  of  it),  had  been  an  orphan  from  his  earliest  years  and
had  been  brought  up  tenderly  by  his  aunt,  who  had  become
a  second  mother  to  him.

He  was  a  convinced  materialist,  and  was,  above  all,  com-
pletely skeptical  where  spiritism  was  concerned.  He  was
nevertheless  impressed  by  the  fact  that  several  of  his  friends,
who  were  learned  and  well  balanced,  were  taking  certain
experiments  seriously.  Desirous  of  learning  the  truth  with
his  own  eyes,  he  expressed  a  desire  to  try  a  seance  in  his
home.

Favored  by  fortune,  he  had  married  Signora  Isabella  Ser-
gardi,  a  member  of  a  patrician  family  in  Siena,  who  had
brought  him  a  large  dowry.  The  husband  and  wife  had
agreed  that,  in  case  either  should  die,  the  possessions  of  the
deceased  one  should  go  to  the  other.  Signora  Isabella  had
already  made  her  will  with  this  provision,  thinking  that  her
husband  had  done  likewise.

The  doctor  made  an  agreement  with  his  spiritistic  friends
that  he  would  be  present  at  certain  seances,  and  would  see
what  happened.     Let  us  listen  to  the  story  ^ :

1  Bozzano,  Luce  e  Ortibra,  Dec.  1919.


SPIRITISTIC  EXPERIMENTS  331

So  they  held  some  seances.  On  the  occasion  of  the  second  one,
on  October  29,  1874,  the  persons  of  the  group  had  scarcely  placed
their  hands  on  the  table  when  it  was  violently  shaken.  The  doctor
demanded  the  disturber's  name.

"Tua  zia  Rosa  [Your  Aunt  Eosa],"  was  the  answer.

Surprised,  the  doctor  replied:

"Well,  if  you  're  really  my  good  Aunt  Rosa,  help  me  in  my  pro-
fession and  aid  me  to  make  money."

"I  did  not  come  for  that.  I  came  to  advise  you  to  change  your
way  of  life,  and  to  think  of  your  wife."

"Of  my  wife  ?  I  've  already  thought  of  her,"  the  doctor  answered
boldly.  "So  much  so  that  each  of  us  has  made  a  will  in  the  other's
favor."

"That  is  a  lie,"  said  the  spirit,  shaking  the  table  violently.  "She
has  left  everything  to  you,  but  you  have  left  her  nothing."

It  was  then  that  Signora  Gubernari,  who  was  present  at  the
seance,  entered  into  the  conversation.  She  declared  that  the  spirit
was  mistaken  and  that  her  husband  could  prove  it  by  showing  his
will  to  the  friends  then  present.

Upon  this  interruption  on  the  part  of  his  wife,  Dr.  Gubernari,
feeling  himself  compromised,  answered  that  he  was  a  conscientious
man,  but  that  he  would  show  the  will  to  no  one.

Then  the  spirit,  shaking  the  table  still  more  violently,  added:

"I  tell  you  again  that  you  are  an  impostor!  Change  your  will,
and  change  your  life,  too!  You  have  no  time  to  lose,  for  before
many  days  have  passed  you  will  be  in  the  spirit  world."

This  revelation  was  like  a  thunderbolt  to  the  doctor.  He  was
overwhelmed  by  it,  and  cried,  in  a  rage :

"Die  before  my  wife  ?  It 's  impossible.  I  'm  younger  than  she.
To  the  devil  with  that  table !"

The  seance  ended  at  this  point.

The  next  day  Colonel  Maurizio,  a  friend  of  the  doctor,  saw  that
he  was  greatly  agitated,  and  spoke  to  him  of  the  deception  often
practised  at  spiritistic  meetings,  proposing  that  he  verify  the  state-
ments at  another  seance  at  the  home  of  Countess  Passerini.  This
seemed  to  calm  the  doctor,  and  he  awaited  impatiently  the  upshot
of  the  new  experiment.


332  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

"There  was  no  deception,"  the  spirit  stated  at  this  new  seance,
"and  what  was  said  was  the  absolute  truth."

"Therefore,"  they  asked,  "Dr.  Gubernari  must  soon  die?"
"Without  any  doubt,  and  before  the  end  of  the  year."
That  they  might  not  increase  the  doctor's  worry,  they  told  him
that  there  had  been  deception  in  this  case  also,  and  that  he  would
be  wrong  to  bother  himself  about  it.  This  statement  calmed  his
distress  to  such  an  extent  that  he  found  himself  unable  to  under-
stand the  anguish  which  the  prediction  of  his  imminent  death  had
caused  him.

Nevertheless  during  the  night  of  November  12th,  he  came  down
with  a  raging  fever.  The  physicians  stated  that  his  illness  was
not  serious,  yet  the  patient  suffered  terribly.

His  friends  went  to  Countess  Passerini's  home,  for  a  new  seance.

A  spirit  manifested  itself,  and  made  this  reply  to  the  questions

asked:     "I  understand  nothing   about  medicine,  but  to  do  you  a

favor  I  can  go  and  look  for  a  spirit  who  followed  that  profession

during  his  life  on  earth.     Wait  a  minute."

A  silence.     After  some  moments  the  table  moved  once  more :
"I  have  found  the  doctor;  he  is  here;  question  him."
"What  illness  is  Gubernari  suifering  from?"
"From  a  fatal  disease.     He  will  soon  be  one  of  us."
"Is  his  illness  merely  physical,  or  is  it  mental  as  well?"
"Both  physical  and  mental."
"Can  you  tell  us  who  you  are?"

"My  name  is  not  unknown  to  you :     Dr.  Panattoni."  ^
Some  days  later  Signore  Gubernari's  colleagues,  called  into  con-
sultation, diagnosed  his  malady  as  inflammation  of  the  bladder,  and
he  succumbed  on  December  30,  1874.

This  former  skeptic,  on  his  death-bed,  stated  that  he  saw,  near
him.  Dr.  Panattoni,  who  did  not  desert  him  for  an  instant,  and  also
his  mother  and  his  Aunt  Rosa,  who  tried  to  console  him,  and  ex-
horted him  not  to  regret  leaving  this  earthly  life.  And  he  added:
"What  I  say  is  the  absolute  truth ;  I  feel  it 's  the  end,  for  me,  and
under  such  circumstances  people  don't  lie."

1  Dr.   Panattoni  was,  when  he  was   alive,   a   physician   in   Florence.


SPIRITISTIC  EXPERIMENTS  S33

This  case  seemed  to  me  a  most  interesting  one  to  give
here.  All  conceivable  scientific  explanations  are  inadequate
to  explain  it :  the  hypotheses  that  Signora  Gubernari  's.  doubt
was  transmitted,  that  the  doctor  had  an  uneasy  conscience,
that  there  was  telepathy,  and  so  on.  As  for  the  first  hy-
pothesis, the  doctor 's  wife  showed  that  she  had  no  doubt  of  his
sincerity.  As  for  the  second,  Signore  Gubernari  felt,  as-
suredly, no  remorse,  and  was  astounded  by  his  aunt's  inter-
vention. Was  it  a  case  of  clairvoyance  on  the  part  of  the
medium,  who  might  have  read  his  thoughts?  But  the  whole
thing  was  absolutely  unforeseen.  And  who  knew  of  this
*'Aunt  Rosa,"  long  since  dead?  That  it  was  telepathy  would
seem  equally  out  of  the  question.

The  spiritistic  theory  must  be  taken  into  consideration,
like  all  the  other  theories,  and  is  no  less  "scientific."  Let
us  repeat  that  when  Newton  discovered  the  laws  of  gravi-
tation he  summarized  his  thought  in  these  words:  ''Things
behave  as  if  the  stars  attracted  each  other  by  a  force  pro-
portional to  the  product  of  their  masses  and  inversely  propor-
tional to  the  square  of  their  distance  apart."  Let  us  state,
here,  with  equal  simplicity:  "Things  behave,  in  the  story
we  have  just  related,  as  if  the  doctor's  aunt  had  really  ap-
peared to  reproach  him  as  he  deserved,  and  to  announce  his
death. ' '  And  this  explanation  is  the  most  satisfactory  of  all ;
let  us  admit  this  without  any  prejudice  and  say,  with
Newton,  ^^  Hypotheses  non  fingo!  I  put  forward  no  hy-
pothesis, I  merely  state  facts ! "

Myers  gave,  as  particularly  conclusive  evidence  of  sur-
vival after  death,  an  experiment  recorded  by  the  English
Psychical  Society  (VIII,  page  428).  This  was  the  case  of
Mrs.  Finney's  brother,  who,  some  months  before  his  death,
made  certain  marks  on  a  brick  and,  breaking  it  in  two,  gave
half  of  it  to  his  sister.  He  promised  to  tell  her  after  his
death,  if  he  could,  the  spot  where  he  intended  to  hide  the


334  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

other  half,  as  well  as  the  contents  of  a  sealed  letter  con-
cealed in  the  same  place.  After  her  brother's  death  Mrs.
Finney  received,  by  means  of  a  table,  the  promised  com-
munication.^

We  may  think  that  Myers  had  sufficient  reasons  for  con-
sidering this  case  conclusive,  for  his  discussion  of  motor
automatism  shows  that  he  had  a  tendency  to  dismiss  the
spiritistic   explanation.     He  had  written  previously  ^ :

There  is  no  reason  to  attribute  the  movements  of  a  table  to  my
deceased  grandfather's  intervention,  any  more  than  to  my  own  in-
fluence, for  though  we  do  not  see  how  I  could  have  caused  these
movements,  we  see  no  better  how  my  grandfather  could  have  done
so.  By  my  way  of  thinking,  the  most  plausible  explanation  is
that  these  replies  were  dictated  not  by  the  conscious  mind,  but  by
that  deep  and  hidden  region  where  fragmentary  or  incoherent
dreams  originate.

It  was,  assuredly,  the  precise  realization  of  the  dead  man's
promise  which  made  Myers  certain  of  the  reality  of  this
posthumous  manifestation.  He  himself  tried  an  experiment
conducted  on  the  assumption  that  he  was  already  dead.  It
did  not  succeed.^

These  manifestations  from  beyond  the  grave,  through  me-
diums, are  the  subject  of  much  debate,  and  rightly  so,  for
it  is  of  the  highest  importance  that  their  authenticity  be
proved.  A  remarkable  example  was  also  afforded  by  the
case  of  Minot  Savage.  His  dead  son  asked  him,  in  the
course  of  one  of  Mrs.  Piper's  seances,  to  go  to  one  of  his  (the
son's)  former  dwelling-places,  which  the  father  did  not
know  of,  to  look  for  certain  papers  hidden  in  a  drawer,  and
to  burn  them.  The  father  understood  the  reason  for  this.
The  extreme  partizans  of  telepathy  think  that  the  son's  sub-

1  Human  Personality,  p.  346,

2  Idem,  ip.  SIS.

3  Oliver  Lodge,  The  Survival  of  Mom.     Official  report,  Dec.  13,  1904.


SPIRITISTIC  EXPERIMENTS  335

conscious  mind  might  have  acted,  when  he  was  alive,  upon
the  father's  mind,  and  have  revealed  the  secret  papers  to
him,  and  that  Mrs.  Piper  might  have  read  the  father's  sub-
conscious mind.  According  to  his  extremely  informative
work  on  telepathy,  Monsieur  Warcollier  considers  this  hy-
pothesis preferable  to  that  of  influence  on  the  part  of  the  dead
son.^  It  appears  to  me,  however,  the  least  probable  expla-
nation.

We  were,  assuredly,  surprised,  not  many  pages  back,  to
read  of  a  spirit  going  in  search  of  a  physician  in  the  other
world;  but  such  quests  are  not  infrequent  in  these  strange
experiments.

Proofs  of  identity  are  the  touchstone  of  this  research.
They  are  as  rare  as  they  are  difficult  to  obtain.  Satisfaetory,
conclusive,  unquestionable  proofs  are  rarely  met  with.  The
following  proofs  were  of  a  sort  absolutely  unlooked  for.
They  were  based  on  mutually  consistent  attestations
published  by  the  English  Society  for  Psychical  Research.
The  account  was  given,  recently,  by  the  review  ''Psychica,"
and  was  published  by  Myers  (''Human  Personality,"  Volume
II,  page  473),  by  Bozzano  ("Les  Phenomenes  de  hantise."
page  129),  and  by  other  competent  writers.  The  story  was
told  by  an  esteemed  observer,  Mr.  Hodgson,  and  deserves  to
be  classified  with  the  preceding  ones.  Let  us  listen  to  this
curious  narration:

On  Saturday  evening,  June  14,  1890,  Sofia- Alida  Kamp,  a  widow
living  in  Wymberg  (Wolf  Street),  her  daughter,  Alida  Sofia,  and
Miss  Catherine  Mahoney,  who  was  living  in  the  same  house,  went
to  bed  about  eleven  o'clock,  and  from  that  moment  to  dawn  were
not  able  to  sleep  because  of  the  strange  noises  which  they  heard.
They  could  not  discover  what  caused  them,  though  they  searched
the  farthest  corners  of  the  house.

The  next  morning  they  told  me  of  these  sounds.  They  had  heard
stools  being  rolled  heavily  in  their  rooms,  noises  of  empty  boxes

1  R.  Warcollier,  La  Telepathie,  p.  335.


336  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

being  dragged  across  the  attic,  though  it  contained  nothing  by  which
these  sounds  might  have  been  explained.  Upon  their  request  I  con-
sented to  go  and  spend  the  night  in  their  house  (Sunday,  June  15th).

The  narrator  then  goes  on  to  say  that,  before  he  went  to  bed,
lie  suddenly  thought  of  improvising  a  " mediumistic  seance"
in  his  room,  and  of  inviting  the  ladies  in  question  to  take
part  in  it.  When  they  were  seated  about  the  table  the  name
"Lewis"  was  dictated,  by  rappings,  and  shortly  afterward
the  words:  "It  is  a  warning."  The  seance  then  ended.
Here  is  the  rest  of  the  story :

After  I  had  gone  to  bed,  I  kept  my  candle  lighted  until  after
midnight,  that  I  might  finish  a  novel  in  which  I  was  interested.
Then  I  fell  asleep.

About  two  o'clock  in  the  morning  I  was  awakened  by  the  noise
of  a  chair  being  dragged  heavily  about  in  the  room  in  which  I  was
sleeping.  This  noise  was  succeeded  by  another:  that  of  a  heavy
body  being  pulled  about  the  attic  floor.  There  was  such  an  uproar
that  it  would  have  awakened  any  one.  And,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  I
heard  Miss  Kamp's  voice  asking  me,  from  her  room,  what  this  noise
could  be.

I  heard  a  box  of  matches  fall  down  very  near  me.

I  got  up,  out  of  curiosity,  and  groped  for  this  box,  which  I  had
put  on  the  candlestick,  but  was  not  able  to  find  it.  I  had  a  second
box  of  matches  and  was  therefore  able  to  light  the  candle.  Then  I
saw  that  the  other  box  was  on  the  floor,  two  feet  away  from  the
candlestick.

Now  begins  the  strangest  part  of  this  business.  Up  to  that  time
not  one  of  us  had  been  able  to  guess  for  what  motives  an  individ-
ual named  Lewis  should  disturb  our  sleep.  We  were  all  the  more
perplexed  from  the  fact  that  none  of  us  had  ever  had  anything  to
do  with  people  of  this  name.  On  Monday  morning,  June  16th,  I
opened  the  newspaper  I  habitually  read, — "The  Cape  Times," — and
among  other  news  I  read  that  on  the  evening  of  the  fourteenth,  at
fortj^-nve  minutes  past  eight,  an  unknown  man  had  been  killed  by
a  moving  train,  near  Woodstock.  It  did  not  occur  to  any  of  us
that  the  mysterious  noises  might  be  attributed  to  this  accident.


SPIRITISTIC  EXPERIMENTS  337

The  Tuesday  edition  of  this  same  newspaper  printed  the  records
of  the  inquest,  from  which  it  appeared  that  the  victim  was  unknown.
That  evening  I  was  seated  in  the  Kamps'  shop,  when  a  negress  came
in.  In  the  course  of  her  conversation  with  Mrs.  Kamp,  she  asked:
"Have  you  heard  about  the  man  who  was  killed  by  a  train  on  Sat-
urday evening?" — "Yes,"  Mrs,  Kamp  answered,  "but  they  don't
know  who  he  is."

"I  knew  him,"  the  negress  replied.  "He  lived  in  my  sister's
home,  and  his  name  was  Jim  Lewis."  When  we  heard  this  name
we  all  thought  that  we  had  the  key  to  the  mystery.  We  thought  so
for  the  following  simple  reasons:

(1)  A  man  had  been  killed  at  forty-five  minutes  past  eight  on
the  evening  of  June  14th.

(2)  Mrs.  Kamp  had  closed  her  shop  at  ten  o'clock;  she  had  gone
to  bed  at  eleven  o'clock,  and  at  that  moment  the  noises  had  begun.

(3)  None  of  us  knew  of  the  accident  until  we  learned  of  it
through  the  newspapers — that  is  to  say,  on  the  morning  of  the  six-
teenth.

(4)  Before  the  night  of  the  fourteenth  no  nocturnal  noises  had
ever  been  heard  in  Mrs.  Kamp's  house.

(5)  The  disturbing  spirit,  on  the  night  of  the  fifteenth,  had  given
the  name  "Lewis."

Unquestionably,  these  arguments  were  enough  to  convince  us.
Out  of  curiosity,  we  held  still  another  seance  that  evening.  The
name  "Lewis"  was  again  dictated,  together  with  this  message,  "I
cannot  find  peace  until  they  succeed  in  identifying  my  body."  He
answered  our  repeated  questions  by  declaring  that  he  was  "the
spirit  of  the  man  who  was  killed  by  the  moving  train."  He  said
that  his  name  was  Lewis.

This  account  was  supplemented  by  the  follov^ing  attesta-
tion:

All  of  us  declare  that  this  account  is  in  perfect  conformity  with
the  truth. — Frederick  Hodgson,  Sophia  Alida  Kamp,  Alida
Sophia  Kamp,  Kate  Mahoney,  C.  F.  Kamp,  J.  S.  Kamp.

It  appears  to  me  that  this  spontaneous  occurrence  leaves
nothing  to  be  desired  as  a  proof  of  identity.     To  attribute


338  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

it,  in  all  its   details,   to   unknown  human   faculties,  would
seem  to  me  absolutely  out  of  the  question.

Without  prolonging  endlessly  our  discussion  of  this  sub-
ject (a  subject  which  has  already  taken  up  six  hundred
pages  of  "Les  Forces  naturelles  inconnues")  I  shall  end
this  chapter  concerning  manifestations  during  the  course
of  spiritistic  seances  and  proofs  cf  identity,  with  the  fol-
lowing story,  which  is  astounding,  unbelievable,  and  yet
real.     The  observer  himself  told  it:

How  many  of  the  four  of  us  who  were  together  that  evening  are
still  of  this  world?  Life  has  separated  us.  The  war  came.  On
two  occasions  I  had  news  of  the  three  others;  one  died  at  Sedul-
Bahr,  when  he  was  leading  his  company  of  Senegalese  in  an  attack
on  the  Turkish  positions.  If  one  of  my  other  two  friends  should
happen  to  see  these  lines,  this  reminiscence  will  certainly  awaken  a
deep  emotion  in  his  breast,  for  there  are  things  which  one  never
forgets,  and  the  message  which  we  received  on  that  day  is  one  of
them.

As  for  me,  my  agitation  was  the  beginning  of  a  salutary  moral
evolution,  which  Brought  me  faith,  calmness,  and  serenity.

It  was  in  1904,  in  Toulon,  when  the  entrance  examinations  for
the  Military  School  were  being  held.  We  had  returned  from  the
colonies,  and  had  gone  to  the  barracks  of  the  Fourth  Regiment  of
Marines.  In  this  way  we  found  one  another  again — three  from
Madagascar  and  one  from  Africa.  We  lived  on  the  same  floor,  in
the  rue  de  la  R^publique.  In  the  evenings  we  used  to  gather  in
the  room  of  one  of  us,  to  work  or  to  talk  and  drink  tea.

A  friend  lived  in  the  same  house  in  which  we  were.  One  fine
evening  we  went  into  his  room,  for  he  had  invited  us  to  a  table-
turning  seance.  The  evening  party  was  a  gay  one,  and  we  received
a  multitude  of  revelations  as  to  the  contents  of  our  pocket-books,
the  number  of  buttons  which  each  of  us  had  on  his  trousers,  and  the
numbers  on  our  watch-cases.  One  of  us,  who  had  mislaid  his  watch,
found  it  again,  thanks  to  the  numbers  stamped  on  the  gold  watch-
case.

Every   evening    there    arose    in    our   conversations   the    question


SPIRITISTIC  EXPERIMENTS  339

whether  in  what  we  had  seen,  proved,  experimented  with,  there  was
something  supernormal:  the  manifestation  of  an  intelligent  entity,
apart  from  that  which  we  agreed  to  call  the  soul  of  each  of  the
persons  taking  part.  Can  the  mingling  of  fluids  emanating  from
the  organisms  of  several  human  beings  produce  another  intelligent
soul,  which  has  access  to  our  inmost  consciousness,  can  read  numbers
in  our  pockets,  and  count  pieces  of  money  in  our  purses,  the  con-
tents of  which  we  do  not  know?  Or  is  all  that  the  marvelous  feat
of  a  clever  conjurer  or  a  potent  trickster? — a  trick  which  may  de-
prive a  whole  gathering  of  the  power  of  reasoning,  of  memory,  and
of  feeling?  Can  the  trickster  draw  from  every  one  present  every-
thing he  wishes  to  know,  and,  waking  his  subjects  once  more,  re-
store each  person's  self-control,  and  astonish  us  with  the  result  of
his  robbery  of  our  pockets  and  our  thoughts?

Or  can  there  be  really  a  manifestation  on  the  part  of  a  disem-
bodied soul  and  for  that  reason  could  we  find  in  life,  once  again,
an  object,  an  ideal,  a  driving  force?

Such  were  the  deep  thoughts  which  glowed  in  our  minds  and  lifted
us  to  dizzy  heights!

How  could  we  know?

Why  not  ask  this  unknown  thing  to  answer  the  question  which
was  burning  on  our  lips:  ^Who  are  you?  Where  did  you  come
from?"

One  evening  we  gathered  in  my  room,  about  a  small,  round,  three-
legged  table.  We  had  placed  this  table  in  the  very  center  of  the
room,  with  only  our  four  chairs  around  it ;  all  the  other  furniture
had  been  moved  away.  We  examined  everything,  so  that  we  could
see  that  there  could  be  no  tricks,  and  that  no  strings  were  tied  to
anything.     On  the  mantelpiece  were  two  lighted  lamps.

We  promised  one  another  that  we  would  do  nothing  either  to  help
or  to  hinder  anything  that  might  take  place,  and  sat  down,  with
our  hands  flat  on  the  table,  forming  a  continuous  chain  with  our
fingers.

Ten  minutes  passed  without  anything  happening.  We  were
serious,  and  in  a  rather  painful  state,  perhaps  (at  least  I  was),  but
were  not  in  the  least  nervous.  I  was  praying,  under  my  breath:
"If  there  is  really  something  beyond  terrestrial  life,  may  a  gleam
come  to  us  from  this  unknown  source  of  light."


340  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

Suddenly,  within  the  table — in  the  wood  of  the  table,  seemingly —
a  sharp  blow  was  struck.  We  looked  at  one  another.  This  crack-
ing noise  seemed  to  me  so  characteristic,  of  such  a  special  kind,
that  the  idea  that  it  might  have  been  caused  by  one  of  my  three
friends  did  not  occur  to  me,  and  I  felt  a  shiver  run  through  me  from
head  to  foot.

Soon  another  sharp  blow  was  struck;  the  table  rose  on  two  of  its
legs  and  struck  three  very  distinct  blows.  I  had  the  feeling  that
the  cracking  noise  could  not  have  been  caused  by  any  of  us,  but  that
the  movement  of  the  table,  in  striking  the  floor  with  one  of  its  legs,
might  have  been  so  caused,  and  without  a  doubt  we  all  had  the  same
thought:  that  perhaps  without  wishing  to,  one  or  the  other  of  us,
bearing  down  too  hard,  had  pulled  the  table  toward  him.

We  confided  these  thoughts  to  one  another,  honestly,  and  then
decided  to  make  use  of  the  alphabet,  and  agreed  that  the  various
letters  should  be  designated  by  the  number  of  blows.  After  stipu-
lating, besides  this,  that  one  blow  should  mean  "no"  and  two  blows
should  mean  "yes,"  we  sat  down  again.

It  was  not  long  before  the  table  tilted  again.     I  asked:

"Is  this  table  being  moved?"

"Yes."

"May  I  know  who  is  moving  itf"

"Spirit."

"Spirit?     The  spirit  of  whom?— of  one  of  us?'^

"No."

"Have  you  a  name?"

"Yes;  Baudelaire."

The  blows  had  been  struck  distinctly,  and  the  letters  designated
without  any  mistake.  One  of  the  party,  even  if  we  had  not  been
watching  him,  could  not  have  made  the  table  rap  with  such  precision.
In  a  painful  state,  we  looked  at  one  another,  without  daring  to  say
anything.  The  table  answered  some  questions  as  to  the  existence  of
the  soul  after  death,  and  as  to  certain  great  moral  and  religious
subjects;  it  stated  the  dominant  defect  of  each  one  of  us,  and  ad-
vised:    "Read  Tleurs  du  Mai  [Flowers  of  Evil].'"

All  this  time  the  rappings  had  been  sharp.  We  were  growing
accustomed  to  this  long  and  difficult  mode  of  conversation.  At
times  we  would  guess  a  word  before  it  was  finished,  would  utter  it,


SPIRITISTIC  EXPERIMENTS  341

and  the  table  would  rap  out,  more  sharply,  "Yes."  We  sometimes
guessed  the  wrong  word,  and  the  quick,  jerky  blows  seemed  to  ex-
press the  impatience  of  the  spirit  who  was  speaking  to  us;  they
were  somewhat  like:     "No,  no!     No,  no!     No,  no!"

After  a  silence  the  table  said,  of  itself,  "Jaequot  doubts!"

"Why,  yes,  I  do  doubt!"  cried  Jaequot,  getting:  up.  "Haven't
all  of  you  doubts?"

No  one  answered,  and  the  table  rapped  out,  ^^Kammaral"

Only  three  of  us  had  our  hands  on  the  table;  Jaequot  had  g^one
over  to  the  mantelpiece  and  had  put  his  elbows  on  it.  These  seven
letters  meant  nothing  to  us  three.  I  asked  that  they  be  repeated,
and  said  to  Jaequot :  "Get  a  pencil  and  take  this  down ;  it 's  grow-
ing complicated."

And  the  table  said  once  more,  "Kammara!"

But  then  something  happened  which  froze  us  with  terror  and
made  us  rise  suddenly  and  leave  the  table.  Scarcely  had  the  last
letter  of  the  word  been  rapped  out  when  Jaequot,  who  had  written
it  down,  advanced  toward  the  table.  I  had  never  seen  him  so  pale ;
his  voice  was  raucous,  though  he  had  had  a  mocking,  almost  joking
air  before.  He  said,  "Lieutenant,  when  you  ordered  me  to  stay,  did
you  know  of  the  danger?" — "Yes!" — "But,  then,  why  did  you  tell
Ravan  to  lead  the  men?  It  was  my  turn." — "Because  I  was  fond
of  you."

We  three  from  Madagascar  witnessed  this  scene  without  under-
standing it.  We  felt  only  that  something  fearful  was  happening
before  our  eyes.  Our  comrade,  who  had  been  skeptical  a  short  time
before,  was  standing  before  the  table,  and  speaking  to  it  respect-
fully, as  he  would  have  spoken  to  a  real  person,  and  the  table,
which  we  had  left  suddenly,  was  moving  of  itself,  rapping  replies
which  we  spelled  out,  mentally,  letter  by  letter.

It  was  terrible !

The  dialogue  went  on,  and  we  learned  in  this  way  that  Lieutenant
Maucorge  was  speaking;  he  had  been  in  command  of  the  military
post  of  Kammara,  in  western  Africa,  where  he  had  under  him  the
French  non-commissioned  officers  Ravan  and  Jaequot,  our  friend.
Since  the  lieutenant  was  fond  of  Jaequot,  and  knew  that  a  reeon-
noitering  expedition,  which  was  to  be  made,  was  dangerous,  he  had
chosen  Sergeant  Ravan  to  accompany  him,  leaving  Sergeant  Jaequot


342  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

at  the  army  post.  He  went  away  and  never  came  back.  The
whole  of  the  reconnoitering  party  was  massacred;  the  bodies  of  the
two  white  men  were  not  found.

Before  us,  the  lieutenant  told  his  former  comrade  the  story  of
the  ambuscade  in  which  he  and  Ravan  were  wounded.  Both  were
roasted  and  eaten  by  their  cannibal  foes;  the  infantrymen  were
massacred,  and  no  one  ever  knew  what  had  happened.  The  guilty
native  chiefs  would  not  be  found,  and  this  somber  drama  of  the
African  brush  was  forgotten.  The  lieutenant  gave  our  comrade
the  names  of  the  traitorous  and  rebellious  chiefs;  he  stated  where
his  and  Ravan's  revolvers  might  be  found,  and  Ravan's  watch.

On  that  evening  in  February,  1904,  we  lived  through  hours  which
we  shall  never  forget.  When  he  had  told  his  story,  this  entity  went
away;  Baudelaire  returned  to  say  that  he  was  fond  of  Jacquot,  that
he  would  always  come  back  when  he  called  him,  and  that  we,  too,
had  in  him  a  familiar  spirit  and  a  protector.  Then  we  parted
company.

The  examinations  were  held.  Three  out  of  the  four  of  us  en-
tered Saint-Maixent  that  year.  I,  the  fourth,  went  to  Indo-China,
where  I  served  with  the  Native  Guard.

Some  years  later,  in  Saigon,  I  saw  one  of  my  three  friends,  and
we  talked  of  the  past.  I  learned  that,  through  information  given
by  Lieutenant  Jacquot  to  the  Ministry  of  War,  Lieutenant  Mau-
corge^s  weapons  and  watch  had  been  found,  and  Sergeant  Ravan's
weapons.  They  were  discovered  in  the  hands  of  the  black  chiefs
who  had  planned  and  carried  out  the  ambuscade  in  which  a  part  of
the  Kammara  garrison  perished.

I  have  never  seen  Jacquot  since,  but  the  message  from  his  former
commander,  who  was  fond  of  him  and  wished  to  banish  all  doubt
from  his  mind,  gave  him  back,  most  certainly,  his  faith  in  the  im-
mortality of  the  soul.  And  it  gave  him,  as  it  did  me,  the  courage
to  live  on,  doing  a  little  good,  and  waiting  for  the  blessed  hour
when  we,  too,  shall  step  over  the  threshold  of  this  new  life,  which
will  be  what  we  know  how  to  make  it.  There  is,  in  the  spontaneous
manifestation  of  Lieutenant  Maueorge's  soul,  a  fine  example  of
communication  with  the  dead,  and  a  convincing  proof  of  identity.

It  is  as  a  proof  of  this  sort  that  I  am  giving  the  story.  I  guar-
antee its  truth,  so  far  as  I  can  answer  for  my  memory,  and  I  assure


SPIRITISTIC  EXPERIMENTS  343

you  that  that  past  scene  i^  always  in  my  mind.  When  I  recall  it,
I  still  feel  a  little  of  the  intense  agitation  which  it  aroused  in  all
four  of  us,  who  witnessed  it.

P.  DE  LA  Fontaine.

This  fantastic  story  was  published  in  the  ''Revue  spirite"
of  July,  1920.  I  thought  at  first  that  it  must  be  taken
only  for  what  it  was  worth.  I  sought  information  as  to
the  narrator,  and  when  my  first  inquiry  had  virtually  satis-
fied me,  I  asked  Monsieur  Jean  Myer,  the  editor  of  this
review,  for  his  personal  opinion.  He  was  the  founder  of  the
Metaphysical  Institute,  is  an  unbiased  thinker,  and — some-
thing that  does  not  lessen  intellectual  worth — is  upright  and
a  generous  philanthropist.  This  was  in  February,  1921.
His  reply,  dated  February  18th,  was  as  follows:  ''I  knew
Monsieur  de  la  Fontaine  personally;  he  died  eight  days
ago.     You  may  consider  his  story  authentic."

It  seems  to  me  that  all  the  objections  that  may  be  brought
up  on  the  score  of  forgotten  recollections,  and  the  subcon-
scious mind — any  objections  whatsoever — could  not  disprove
the  identity  of  the  spirit  which  manifested  itself  in  this
case.     I  could  not  say  the  same  of  the  spirit  of  Baudelaire.

As  regards  testimony  concerning  the  identity  of  the  spirits
manifesting  themselves,  I  should  like  to  bring  to  the  atten-
tion of  readers  of  psychic  works  the  information  given  by
Jules  Baissac  in  my  friend  Eugene  Nus's  book  ''A  la  re-
cherche des  destinees"  (1890),  page  223,  and  the  testimony
that  may  be  read  on  page  128  of  G.  Bourniquel's  book  ''Les
temoins  posthumes"  (1921).  But,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  there
is  a  whole  library  concerning  these  occurrences,  infinite  in
their  variety.^

This  chapter,  which  began  with  clearly  defined  manifes-
tations  occurring   during  the  first   years   of  spiritism  and

1  Among  the  latest  books  to  be  published,  Madame  Lacombe's  is
noteworthy,  MerveilleucB  phenomenes  de  VAu-deld,   (Lisbon,  1921).


344  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

gave,  as  a  final  example,  a  very  recent  case,  must  enii
here.  It  has  given  us  clear  proofs  that  in  the  course  of  cer-
tain mediumistic  experiments  dead  persons  have  made  their
presence  known.  I  have,  in  both  an  unpublished  and  a
printed  form,  ten,  twenty  times  as  much  testimony.  It  is  of
the  deepest  interest,  above  all  from  the  point  of  view  of  the
psychic  environment,  about  which  we  must  learn,  but  there
is  no  place  for  it  in  a  single  chapter.  Baffling  obscurities
must  be  cleared  up  before  we  can  eliminate  entirely  the
influence  of  the  subconscious  mind.  Spiritism  either  will  or
will  not  become  scientific.  It  must  be  transformed,  and  the
time  for  this  has  come.  As  we  remarked  in  the  first  lines
of  this  chapter,  most  of  its  adepts  have,  until  now,  been  the
dupes  of  senseless  illusions.  When  one  asks  a  student  of
these  problems,  who  is  convinced  of  the  reality  of  psychic
manifestations,  the  question:  ^'Are  you  a  spiritist?"  it
would  be  wise  to  come  to  an  understanding.  Certain  lec-
turers are  of  the  opinion  that  spiritism  is  represented  by
incidents  such  as  the  following:

Knock,  knock,  knock!

"Dear  spirit!     Is  that  really  you,  Napoleon?"

"Yes.    What  do  you  wish?"

"It  would  be  so  good  of  you  if  you'd  go  and  find  the  Virgin
Mary  for  us,  for  we  want  to  ask  her  for  some  information  about  the
apparitions  of  Lourdes."

"All  right,  my  friends.     Wait  a  minute."

Knock,  knock,  knock!

"Is  this  the  Virgin  Mary?"

"No,  she 's  busy.    But  here  's  Messalina."

I  know  spiritists  so  credulous  that  they  believe  in  com-
munications of  this  sort !

If  this  is  what  is  called  being  a  spiritist,  we  can  say  that
we  are  not  spiritists.  But  metaphysical  research  is  quite
another  thing.     From  this  time  on  such  credulity  must  cease.


SPIRITISTIC  EXPERIMENTS  345

The  pages  already  read  are  numerous  and  very  closely
packed.  They  contain  a  considerable  number  of  documents:
the  basic  material  for  the  new  science.  I  have  already
greatly  overtaxed  my  readers'  patience,  and  it  is  time  to
end  this  general  exposition,  that  we  may  arrive  at  conclu-
sions.


XII


CONCLUSIONS  FROM  THE  THREE  VOLUMES  OF  THIS  WORK

I  say  that  the  tomb,  whicli  closes  on  the

dead.
Opens  the  firmament,
And    that    what,    on    earth,    we    call    the

end
Is  the  commencement.

Victor  Hugo.


I


"^HE  object  of  this  work  has  been  attained.  The  evi-
dence embodied  in  it  is  based  on  accounts  which  I
have  been  amassing  for  more  than  half  a  century;
barely  a  tenth  of  them  have  been  presented  here.  The  writ-
ing of  the  three  volumes  took  no  less  than  three  years.
The  occurrences  cited,  the  truth  of  which  has  been  duly
established,  prove  that  there  is  no  death ;  that  it  is  but  evolu-
tion; that  human  beings  survive  this  supreme  hour,  which
is  by  no  means  the  last  hour.  Mors  janua  vitae — "Death  is
the  portal  of  life."  The  body  is  but  an  organic  garment
of  the  spirit;  it  dies,  it  changes,  it  disintegrates:  the  spirit
remains.  The  matter  which  constitutes  the  body  of  Man  is
a  mere  appearance,  like  all  other  matter.  The  universe  is
a  dynamism.  An  intelligent  force  rules  all.  The  soul  can-
not be  destroyed.

After  the  publication  of  Volume  II  of  this  work,  a  thinker
wrote  me :

Will  your  third  volume  give  us  the  same  certainty  with  regard  to
the  immortality  of  the  soul  which  the  first  two  volumes  gave  us  con-
cerning the  real  existence  of  the  soul  ?  If  it  does  not,  there  is  noth-
ing left  for  us  but  to  die  of  despair,  for  we  shall  be  forced  to  ad-

346


CONCLUSIONS  347

mit  that  Chance  created  us,  that  there  are  no  moral  truths,  nor  any
justice,  and  that  no  fertile  harvest  will  spring  from  all  the  suffering
sown  along  the  road  of  life.  A  negative  reply  from  you  would
mean  the  final  annihilation  of  all  that  constitutes  the  nobility  of
mankind.

(Letter  4743.)

I  hope  that  I  have  now  definitely  brought  out  the  fact
that  my  reply  is  in  the  affirmative,  and  that  my  readers  have
gained  the  satisfaction  which  they  desire  and  deserve.

Is  this  not,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  time-honored  wish  of
thinking  beings,  expressed  in  every  epoch  and  in  all  tongues  ?
It  is  Nature's  cry.  Among  the  works  of  our  con-
temporaries, one  of  the  beautiful  poems  of  the  Countess  of
Noailles,  that  passionate  singer  of  Life  and  Love,  ends  with
this  sorrowful  stanza:

Never  to  see  you  again,  0  radiance  of  the  sky!
Alas,  I  was  not  made  to  die!

No,  poets,  your  vibrant  souls  were  not  made  to  die;  no
soul  was  made  to  die,  and  the  light  of  the  heavens  is  not
extinguished.

Empirical  science  gives  us  this  assurance,  to-day.

Readers  who  have  had  the  time  and  the  inclination  to  read
the  one  thousand  two  hundred  and  sixty^five  pages  of  the
three  volumes  of  this  work  must,  like  me,  have  reached  the
conviction  that  there  is  in  a  human  being  an  element  not
yet  understood  in  the  recognized  scientific  theories:  a  think-
ing soul,  endowed  with  special  faculties.  And  they  must
know,  also,  that  this  soul  does  not  undergo  dissolution,  like
the  body;  that  it  survives  the  body.  It  was  our  object  to
prove  this  survival  by  positive  occurrences.  That  is  the  chief
result  of  this  long  work.

The  conclusions  arrived  at  in  this  book  reach  farther
than  those  given  previously  in  ''L'Inconnu,"  published  in


348  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

1900,  and  in  "Les  Forces  naturelles  inconnues,"  published
in  1906.  We  have  proceeded  slowly,  step  by  step,  in  this
gradual  elaboration.     Our  previous  conclusions  were :

(1)  The  soul  exists  as  a  real  entity,  independent  of  the
body.

(2)  It  is  endowed  with  faculties  still  unknown  to  science.

(3)  It  may  act  at  a  distance,  telepathically,  without  the  in-
termediary of  the  senses.

(4)  There  exists  in  nature  a  psychic  element,  the  character
of  which  is  still  hidden  from  us.

To-day  we  may  add  the  following  conclusion:

(5)  The  soul  survives  the  physical  organism  and  may
manifest  itself  after  death.

We  have  reached,  experimentally,  the  conclusion  that  the
reality  of  thought-transmission,  at  all  distances,  between  the
minds  of  the  living,  has  been  proved  beyond  question.  And  we
decided  that  ''the  existence  of  telepathy  is  as  certain  as  the
fact  that  Napoleon  existed,  that  oxygen  and  Sirius  exist."
Well,  it  is  just  as  true  that  there  is  this  psychic  transmission
between  the  souls  of  the  dead  and  those  of  the  living.

Phenomena  the  authenticity  of  which  is  unquestionable
leave  no  doubt  that  at  the  moment  of  death  the  soul  (what-
ever its  nature  be)  acts  upon  the  minds  of  the  living  when
it  is  kilometers — hundreds  and  thousands  of  kilometers^ —
away  from  these  minds;  it  causes  people  to  hear  rappings
and  varied  noises,  often  extremely  loud  noises,  and  to  see
the  image  of  the  dying  person,  under  aspects  equally  varied.
These  phenomena  convince  us,  also,  that  the  soul  manifests
itself  after  death;  the  inquiry  which  I  began  in  1899  and
have  since  continued,  that  I  might  add  to  the  numerous
accounts  which  I  had  been  receiving  for  many  years  and  aid
in  the  experimental  study  of  manifestations  of  the  dead —
this  inquiry  has  yielded,  as  we  have  seen,  conclusive  results.

By  reason  of  the  phenomena  which  have  been  witnessed —
consistent,  numerous,  and  definite  phenomena — it  seems  to


CONCLUSIONS  349

me  that  I  am  justified  in  putting  forward  the  following,
as  statements  resting  upon  unshakable  foundations:

(1)  Human  beings  who  have  died — those  we  call  the  dead
— still  live  on  after  the  dissolution  of  the  material  organism,

(2)  They  exist  in  the  form  of  invisible,  intangible  sub-
stances, which  our  eyes  do  not  perceive,  which  our  hands
cannot  touch,  nor  our  senses  grow  aware  of  under  normal
and  ordinary  conditions.

(3)  In  general,  they  do  not  manifest  themselves.  Their
mode  of  existence  is  entirely  different  from  ours.  They  act
on  our  consciousness  at  times  and,  in  certain  circumstances,
may  prove  their  existence.

(4)  When  they  act  upon  our  souls  and,  through  these,
upon  our  brains,  we  see  them  in  perceptible  forms,  as  we
have  known  them,  with  their  clothing,  their  bearing,  their
habitual  movements,  their  individualities.  It  is  our  inner
eye  which  sees  them.     One  soul  can  perceive  another  soul.

(5)  These  are  not  hallucinations,  imaginary  visions,  but
realities.     Invisible  beings  become  visible.

(6)  They  may  also  manifest  themselves  in  objective  forms.

(7)  In  a  great  many  cases,  apparitions  of  the  dead  do  not
appear  intentionally.  The  dead  person  does  not  act  on  the
spectator  purposely.  It  would  seem  that  he  continues,
vaguely,  certain  habits;  that  he  wanders  about  the  places
where  he  has  lived,  or  not  far  from  his  grave.  But  let  us
not  forget  that  these  are  human  conceptions  on  our  part,
and  that  with  spirits  distance  does  not  count.  Ether- waves
emanate  from  the  soul;  these  reach  the  percipient  and  are
changed  to  images  in  his  brain,  which  receives  them  and  is
attuned  to  them.

(8)  Apparitions  and  manifestations  occur  with  relative
frequency  during  the  hours  which  follow  immediately  upon
dissolution;  their  number  diminishes  as  time  passes,  and
grows  smaller  from  day  to  day.

(9)  Souls  which  have  left  the  body,  long  retain  their  ter-


350  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

restrial  mentality.  In  the  case  of  Catholics,  demands  for
prayers  are  often  expressed.  This  is  a  fact  which  might
well  be  analyzed  from  a  psychological  and  transcendental
point  of  view.

These  statements,  induced  from  the  entire  body  of  scien-
tific observations,  hold  good,  in  general,  with  regard  to  ap-
paritions of  the  dead.  There  are  cases  not  in  accord  with
them ;  there  are  variations  and  exceptions.  But  the  principle
which  may  be  laid  down,  from  this  time  on,  is  that  we  may
be  certain  that  there  is  an  entity  which  persists  after  death,
that  there  is  a  dynamism,  thanks  to  which  our  personality
continues  its  existence.

We  make  these  inductions  from  experiment  and  observa-
tion, and  with  the  absolute  conviction  that  every  impartial
seeker,  endowed  with  a  spirit  of  analysis,  who  gives  himself
up  to  a  serious  investigation  of  this  sort,  will  reach  the  same
conclusions.

Humanity  has  progressed  since  the  time  of  Francis  Bacon.
That  profound  philosopher  foresaw  the  gradually  won  vic-
tory of  scientific  observation  and  experiment  in  every  do-
main of  human  research,  with  the  exception,  he  said,  of
investigations  as  to  the  destiny  of  the  soul,  which  belong  in
the  domain  of  religious  faith.  He  erred  in  making  this
exception.  The  positive  method,  the  Baconian  method,  has
pervaded  such  research  as  it  has  all  others.  Bacon  made,  in
this  case,  the  same  error  in  judgment  that  Auguste  Comte
did  when  he  declared  that  it  would  be  impossible  ever  to
discover  the  chemical  composition  of  the  stars.  May  the  ex-
perience of  these  great  minds  guide  us !

There  is  no  break  between  this  life  and  the  next.  There
is  continuity.  Our  personalities  survive,  though  there  is  a
considerable  difference  between  the  two  states  of  existence.
Material  possessions  no  longer  exist;  physical  suffering  and
infirmities  are  done  away  with.  In  general,  the  dead  person
does  not  understand  his  new  state.    There  is  slumber,  there


CONCLUSIONS  351

are  dreams  and  inconsistencies.  Sometimes  there  are  added
faculties.  The  marvelous  metamorphoses  of  insects — the
transformation  of  the  larva  into  the  chrysalis  and  into  the
butterfly — present  a  vague  and  loose  analogy  to  the  change
to  the  after  life.  The  psyche  spreads  its  wings;  there  is  a
spiritual  life  in  the  ether.  The  faculties  function  through
the  immensity  of  space;  the  bodiless  spirit  is  not  confined
to  our  space;  it  lives  in  the  fourth  dimension,  in  hyper-
space.^  It  can  communicate  with  the  living  only  with  dif-
ficulty. In  order  to  do  this,  it  must  enter  our  sphere  of
activity,  must  penetrate  our  minds,  must  undergo  materiali-
zation, must  express  itself  by  mechanical  means.  The  in-
fluence of  invisible  entities  on  us  may  be  more  general  than
would  appear,  and  may  even  pass  unperceived  by  almost
every  one:  we  are  too  preoccupied  with  the  business  of  liv-
ing to  notice  it.

Let  us  acknowledge  that  these  posthumous  manifestations
are  not  in  conformity  with  our  usual  terrestrial  point  of'
view.  They  are  far  removed  from  our  conception  of  what
they  should  be.  We  have  an  entirely  different  world  to  in-
vestigate: an  unknown,  unexplored,  incomprehensible  world.
It  is  difficult,  in  the  study  of  it,  to  eliminate  our  own  earthly
associations.

These  difficulties  are  a  great  stumbling-block;  they  oblige
us  to  be  extremely  cautious  in  our  interpretation.  So  many
objections  rise  up  before  us !  It  seems  to  us  that  our  dearest
friends  should  be  at  our  beck  and  call,  and  should  always
manifest  themselves.  Beings  from  whom  we  expect  testi-
mony remain  dumb.  Most  of  the  time  the  messages  are
vulgarly  trivial,  and  teach  us  nothing  about  **the  other
world."  The  master  minds — philosophers,  savants,  writers,
artists — who  in  various  lines  of  endeavor  have  contributed  to

1  Those  wishing  to  study  the  fourth  dimension  and  hyperspace  may
read,  with  profit,  the  astronomer  Newcomb's  dissertation;  I  published
it  in  1899,  and  included  it  in  Reves  etoiles,  pp.  343-345.


352  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

the  progress  of  hmnanity,  have  not  returned  to  enlighten
us.  These  and  a  hundred  other  objections  stand  in  the  way
of  our  honest  desire  to  know  the  truth.  Let  us  point  them
out  without  abandoning  our  investigation.  They  make  us
think,  at  first  blush,  that  there  is  no  greater  equality  among
the  dead  than  among  the  living.  There  is  an  infinite  di-
versity among  souls,  from  the  most  exalted  to  the  humblest.
For  the  moment  all  that  we  can  affirm  is  that  the  spirit  does
not  die  when  the  body  dies,  and  that,  in  certain  circum-
stances,  the  soul  may  give  proof  of   its  survival.

Side  by  side  with  the  material  world,  there  is  a  psychic
world,  the  reality  of  which  is  as  certain  as  that  of  the  visible
world.     These  two  worlds  interpenetrate.

To  gain  as  precise  an  idea  as  possible  of  the  reality  of  the
occurrences  set  forth  in  this  work,  it  will  be  best  for  us  to
give,  here,  a  sort  of  comparative  recapitulation  of  these  nu-
merous and  varied  experiences.

The  most  usual  communications  are  those  from  relatives
and  friends.  They  are  with  us,  or,  rather,  distance  does
not  exist  for  them.  Some  unforeseen  circumstance  often
suffices  to  reveal  their  presence.  The  dead  show  their  sur-
vival in  the  most  varied  ways.

In  the  first  place,  they  may  appear  to  be  flesh  and  blood.
To  recall  the  truth  of  this,  readers  need  only  open  this  vol-
ume at  pages  16,  26,  29,  32,  49,  54,  55,  64,  69,  70,  80,  91,  99,
120,  127,  129,  133,  138,  141,  143,  146,  151,  152,  154,  156,  159,
161,  172,  178,  183,  188,  191,  194,  202,  208,  212,  214,  216,  220,
223,  225,  227,  229,  230,  231,  234,  236,  239,  240,  242,  246,  247,
253,  254,  259,  265,  267,  268,  270,  275,  277,  279,  292,  303,  310,
315.

If  curiosity  impels  you  to  re-read  certain  of  these  accounts,
your  conclusion  will  be  the  same  in  the  case  of  each  of  them :
that  dead  persons  have  been  seen  beyond  a  doubt,  not  in
dreams,    but    in    a    state    of    mental    alertness.     This    is    a


CONCLUSIONS  353

fact;   it  is   definite,   positive;   it   demands   an   explanation.
The  dead  manifest  themselves  by  noises,  movements,  psy-
chic phenomena  which  are  usually  incomprehensible  (pages:
10,  20,  22,  24,  29,  55,  56,  58,  98,  etc.)

They  appear  to  us  clothed  either  in  the  garments  in  which
we  knew  them,  or  in  those  in  which  they  were  buried  (52,
134,  151,  179,  181,  191)  ;  or  in  forms  more  or  less  vague,
though  recognizable  (page  16,  etc.)  These  phantoms  are
sometimes  opaque,  like  real  bodies  (pages  128,  152,  178,
190)  sometimes  transparent,  and  furniture  and  walls  can  be
seen  through  them  (page  315).

They  may  manifest  themselves,  for  several  years,  to  the
same  person  (pages  291,  302-306).

They  may  return  to  keep  a  promise  (pages  10,  47,  49,  54,
56,  58,  59,  61,  64.)

They  may  come  back  because  of  personal  affairs  (pages  77,
78,  79,  80,  83,  87,  91,  92,  94,  96,  98,  99,  103,  105,  245,  etc.)

They  may  reveal  their  death,  when  thought  to  be  still
alive  (pages  22,  126,  128,  129,  134,  138,  141,  143,  154,  252,
etc.)

A  murdered  man  may  tell  who  the  murderer  was  (page
172,  etc.)

They  may  appear  to  be  amusing  themselves;  their  mani-
festations may  seem  farcical  (pages  24,  55,  59,  etc.)

They  often  ask  for  prayers  (pages  87,  96,  119,  176,  199,
201,  224,  243,  251,  etc.)

They  may  take  gruesome  revenges  (pages  61,  101).

They  may  manifest  themselves  through  spiritism  (pages
34,  303,  322,  326,  328,  330,  334,  336,  338).

They  may  transmit  telepathic  mental  impressions  to  the
living  (pages  150,  308,  etc.)

They  may  appear  to  children  (pages  30,  161,  183,  187,  225,
246,  256,  268,  277).

They  may  appear  to  animals  (pages  16,  243,  253,  305).


354  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

They  may  not  believe  that  they  are  dead,  and  may  feel
so  alive  that  they  are  astounded  to  see  their  dead  bodies  and
the  people  gathered  about  them  (pagres  154,  179,  195,  208,
etc.).

They  may  save  people  from  imminent  dangers  (pages  91,
280)  or  announce  an  approaching  rescue  (page  279).

They  may  be  seen  without  showing  themselves  intention-
ally, (pages  190,  208,  212,  236,  265,  etc.),  as  if  they  did
not  recognize  their  nearest  relatives.  How  paradoxical  is
such  indifference!  But  apparitions  such  as  these  manifest
themselves  frequently.

Let  us  not  forget  that  these  were  actual  occurrences,  as
real  as  all  the  happenings  which  make  up  daily  life.  They
bring  us  face  to  face  with  posthumous  manifestations  that
are  extremely  varied;  almost  all  of  them  are,  to  us,  inexpli-
cable. The  thoughts  and  beliefs  of  the  living  often  play  a
part  in  such  manifestations,  and  it  is  difficult  to  eliminate
them  and  to  decide  precisely  what  belongs  to  the  other  world.
Let  us  note,  however,  that  a  belief  in  the  dogmas  of  the
Christian  paradise,  the  Christian  purgatory,  and  the  Christian
hell  is  not  justified  by  the  communications — apart  from  the
cases  in  which  prayers  are  demanded.

What  emerges  most  clearly  from  all  this  is  the  fact  that
there  exists  in  us  *' something"  that  is  unknown,  that  has
up  to  the  present  time  been  systematically  eliminated  from
all  scientific  theories,  and  that  this  *' something"  survives  the
disintegration  of  the  earthly  body,  and  the  transformation
of  our  material  molecules ;  these,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  cannot,
from  the  strictly  scientific  point  of  view,  be  said  to  be
destroyed,  either.  Whether  this  "something"  be  called  a
principle,  an  element,  a  psychic  atom,  a  soul,  or  a  spirit,
matters  little.  In  what  form  does  this  force  survive?  That
is  what  we  are  inyestigating.  Manifestations  (intentional
or  involuntary)  on  the  part  of  the  dead  prove  that  this
force  inherent  in  every  living  being  may  in  certain  cases,


CONCLUSIONS  355

and  during  a  rather  long  period,  be  bound  to  earthly  life
by  extremely  subtle  threads.  But  there  is  nothing  to  show
that  this  is  the  normal  state  of  the  dead.  The  change  from
terrestrial  life  to  life  after  death  would  indicate  that  the
soul  must  adapt  itself  to  new  psychic  conditions — something
very  difficult  for  us,  who  are  living,  to  grasp.

I  am  all  the  more  certain  of  my  inductions  as  to  the
existence  of  the  soul  beyond  the  grave,  and  the  soul's  in-
fluence, from  the  fact  that  I  spent  a  long  time  in  probing
them,  verifying  them,  and  passing  upon  them.  From  1861
to  1922  there  are  more  than  sixty  years.  So  far-reaching
an  investigation  is  in  itself  a  guarantee  which  gives  me  the
highest  hopes  of  the  scientific  worth  of  the  conclusions.  It
would  be  only  logical  for  those  who  deny  the  occurrences  to
base  their  opposition  on  an  investigation  of  the  same  sort.

It  is  to  be  noted  that  we  are  here  concerned  with  facts  and
not  with  explanations.  There  is  an  important  distinction!
We  know  almost  nothing  as  to  the  real  nature  of  all  these
phenomena.     There  is  a  whole  world  to  be  discovered.

The  numerous  discussions  inspired  by  this  complex  sub-
ject show  us  that,  in  general,  people  do  not  form  a  correct
estimate  of  the  precise  nature  of  the  formidable  problem.
We  may  divide  our  uncompromising  adversaries  into  two  dis-
tinct categories :  intolerant  Catholics  who  are  convinced  that
they  know  the  fundamentals  of  the  future  life — heaven,  pur-
gatory, and  hell — and  who,  knowing  all,  have  nothing  to
learn,  and  materialists  equally  convinced  that  the  soul  does
not  exist.  The  materialists,  believing  they  know  that  the
soul  is  an  illusion,  see  in  everything  manifestations  of  or-
ganized matter.  It  is,  therefore,  to  neither  of  these  two  sorts
of  adversaries  that  these  pages  are  addressed,  since  they  are
not  impartial  and  are  already  predisposed  to  deny.  Since
they  know  everything,  let  them  not  waste  their  time  read-
ing this  book,  which  is  written  for  those  who  seek.  But
readers  free  from  all  prejudices  may  wish  for  indispensable


356  ,    DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

enlightenment    on   which   to    base    their    personal   opinions.

First,  a  word  as  to  the  value  of  our  method.

Despite  all  the  care  we  may  take  in  verifying  documents
and  investigating  the  accuracy  of  the  details  given  in  them,
it  is  impossible  that  they  should  all  have  an  equal  value.
Some  of  them  remain,  of  necessity,  inexact,  because,  though
people  remember  what  they  have  witnessed,  they  do  not
always  take  note  of  details.  Others,  however,  are  mathe-
matically ,exact.  We  must  take  this  into  consideration  in
judging  the  recollections.  Our  adversaries  have  not  always
the  necessary  honesty  of  mind.  For  example,  the  account
given  in  Volume  II,  page  200,  has  been  called  questionable,
doubtful  (it  is  not  a  scientific  rep'ort,  but  a  mere  reminis-
cence). But  the  hotheads  who  wish  to  reject  it  on  this
pretext,  and  who  dare  to  say  that  this  lack  of  precision  is
typical  of  all  the  rest  of  the  accounts  ( ! ) ,  have  taken  good
care  not  to  call  attention  to  the  apparition  told  of  on  page
335 — a  case  in  which  the  names,  the  place,  and  the  time  were
given,  or  that  on  page  354,  or  a  hundred  other  cases.  This
is  not  mental  honesty:  it  is  a  systematic  opposition  to  the
search  for  truth.  A  person  who  relates  an  occurrence  is  not
making  a  technical  I'eport,  and  is  not  of  necessity  careful  in
noting  every  detail.  In  the  case  in  question  (that  of  Lord
Dufferin)  there  may  have  been  confusion  as  to  the  pkce  and
the  date,  but  the  occurrence  itself  took  place,^  and  this
is  what  struck  the  writer.  Why  should  we  not  feel  that  in
this,  as  in  every  case,  there  are  degrees  of  precision?  Are
there  not  degrees  of  precision  in  astronomy,  the  most  exact
of  all  sciences?  What  observer  can  be  sure  as  to  the
thousandth-of-a-second  parallax  of  a  star?  And  in  spite  of
this,  who  can  doubt  that  the  stars  are  really  at  a  great  dis-

1  We  may  read  of  an  analogous  case  in  Les  Phenomenes  premoni-
toires,  by  Bozzano,  p.  397.  It  is  even,  most  probably,  another  reminis-
cence of  the  same  occurrence.  Let  us  not  take  all  these  accounts
literally.


CONCLUSIONS  357

tance  away?  For  example,  when  the  famous  constellation
of  Hercules  was  measured  with  precision,  the  calculations
did  not  agree.  Do  these  divergencies  prevent  us  from  affirm-
ing that  this  star-cluster  is  an  immense  distance  away?  In
all  these  extremely  complex  investigations,  there  must  be  a
certain  proportion  of  errors.  These  do  not  invalidate  the
worth  of  the  investigation.  Let  us  not  judge  these  psychic
phenomena  more  severely  than  we  do  mathematical  astron-
omy, and  let  us  not  forget  that  in  the  case  of  every  scien-
tific observation  there  is  the  personal  equation.  Nor  must  we
be  more  severe  than  in  the  case  of  historical  facts,  which  it
is  difficult  to  be  certain  of.  Let  us  judge  every  science,
every  field  of  research,  according  to  its  own  special  char-
acteristics, and  the  conditions  under  which  it  may  be  investi-
gated. Let  us  even  suppose  that  out  of  these  thousands  of
accounts,  in  general  scrupulously  authentic — accounts  pre-
sented sincerely,  carefully  and  faithfully — there  are  a  few
that  are  vague  or  incomplete:  in  what  way  would  the  ex-
ceptions lessen  the  value  of  the  others?

We  can  be  sure  of  the  facts.  The  explanations  are  still
to  be  found.  I  should  like  to  take  the  opportunity,  just  here,
to  remark  that  our  knowledge  is  not  absolute.  All  human
science  comes  down  to  a  perception  of  the  relations  existing
between  the  appearances  of  things:  science  is  a  tiny  island
in  the  midst  of  the  unknowable  absolute.  In  my  first  pub-
lished book  C'La  PluraUte  des  Mondes  habites,"  1862)  I
laid  especial  emphasis  on  this  great  issue  in  modern  philos-
ophy. Readers  will  find,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  heading
''The  Essential  Relativity  of  Things"  on  pages  249-253  of
this  work,  and  the  following  statement :

The  whole  of  human  science — from  the  alpha  of  our  knowledge
to  the  omega — is  hut  the  study  of  relativity.  There  is  nothing  ab-
solute in  the  edifice  of  our  sciences,  however  marvelous  that  edifice
may  be  appear.  The  human  mind  seeks  to  know  the  relations  be-
tween things;   this  is  all  that  it  may   dare.     Our  knowledge  has


358  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

validity  when  we  compare  things  to  an  arbitrary  "metaphysical
unity/'  taken  as  a  starting-point.  The  universe,  with  its  interplay
of  forces  which  are  transformed  ceaselessly  as  they  act  upon  mat-
ter, can  provide  nothing  fixed  which  we  might  take  as  an  absolute
guide  in  our  investigation  of  nature.

These  lines  were  written  in  1862.  I  did  not  suspect  to
what  degree  the  progress  of  science  would  have  confirmed
them  by  the  time  the  words  should  come  under  the  reader's
eyes.

The  essential  nature  of  the  forces  of  the  universe  is  hidden
from  us.  We  cannot  be  said  to  have  penetrated  the  mystery
merely  because  science  has  invented  certain  words.  I  have
before  me  at  this  moment  a  compass  made  in  the  time  of
Louis  XIII.  It  responds  as  readily  as  ever:  its  magnetized
needle  oscillates  feverishly  when  it  is  moved  in  the  slightest
degree,  and  points  with  a  sort  of  love  toward  the  north
pole.  Wliat  is  magnetism?  What  is  this  property  which
has  lasted  for  three  hundred  years?  With  what  inherent
quality  has  the  steel  needle  been  endowed?

What  is  universal  attraction  ?

The  degree  in  which  the  worlds  attract  one  another  has
long  since  been  calculated  by  astronomers.  Attraction  be-
tween spirits,  invisible  communication  and  telepathy  are  quite
as  real.  Some  day  the  force  of  this  attraction  will  be  rigor-
ously calculated.  And  there  is  nothing  to  prove  that  psychic
communication  will  not  be  established  between  the  worlds:
between  Mars  or  Venus  and  the  earth,  between  the  various
earths  of  the  heavens.

This  work  has  proved,  it  appears  to  me,  that  spirit  rules
all,  from  the  smallest  molecule  to  human  intelligence;  I  had
already  demonstrated  this.^  All  is  contiguous,  but  the  world
of  thought  is  not  the  world  of  matter,  and  we  must  repeat,
for  the  hundredth  time,  that  materialism  is  an  erroneous

^  Dieu  dans  la  nature  (1886).


CONCLUSIONS  359

and  untenable  theory.  Mental  attributes  such  as  the  power
of  judging,  of  reflecting,  of  affirming,  of  deciding,  are  not
dependent  on  a  mechanical  combination  of  molecules  of  iron
or  carbon.  The  world  of  thought  is  not  like  this.  Nor
could  any  collection  of  molecules  succeed  in  even  working
out  the  simple  calculation  that  two  and  two  make  four,  or
that  the  three  angles  of  a  triangle  are  equal  to  two  right
angles.  Yes,  the  materialistic  doctrine  is  erroneous.  If  we
assume  that  the  universe  is  ruled  by  forces  that  are  uncon-
scious, blind,  and  hostile,  this  leads  to  the  conclusion  that  all
life  will  finally  be  annihilated  because  of  the  cooling  of  the
earth  and  the  dissipation  of  energy,  while  a  belief  in  spirits
leads  us  to  grant  the  existence  of  an  intelligent  guiding
force — a  safeguard  of  the  Ideal — and  a  progressive  evolution
of  all  beings.  And,  as  a  matter  of  fact  (let  us  ask  it  again),
what  is  matter,  really?  The  difference  between  a  block  of
ice  amd  a  cloud  is  only  a  difference  in  their  state ;  the  nature
of  them  is  not  dissimilar.  The  word  matter  is  but  a  word.
An  analysis  of  what  matter  really  consists  of  makes  it  take
on,  to-day,  fantastically  intricate  aspects.  It  would  appear,
from  rigorous  calculations  and  extremely  precise  experiments,
that  a  milligram  of  radium  contains  two  million  trillions  of
atoms!  What  can  the  size  of  an  atom  be?  The  atom,  in
turn,  is  revealed  as  a  world  in  itself,  a  system  of  forces.
May  not  an  ''immaterial"  soul  be  an  atomic  world?  Matter
and  energy  become  one.  This  is  what  Pythagoras  said  (we
quoted  him  at  the  beginning  of  this  very  volume).  The  visi-
ble universe  is  composed  of  invisible  elements.

All  is  still  to  be  looked  into.  But  how  unprepared  human-
ity is  for  a  complete  investigation  of  things!  Mankind  as  a
whole  does  not  live  in  the  sphere  of  the  spirit.

It  follows  that  it  is  not  possible  to  convince  every  one.
In  fact,  our  earthly  human  kind  is  not  wholly  intelligent.
It  is  not  ruled  by  pure  reason;  it  is  still  a  little  barbarous,
a  little  animal,  we  might  say.     General  Berthaut,  a  man  of


360  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

great  mental  vigor  and  wide  erudition,  wrote  me  one  day:
**Yes,  this  human  kind  of  ours,  supposedly  logical,  is  stupid.
I  can  still  see  Colonel  de  la  Tour  d'Auvergne,  standing,  in
1870,  on  the  field  of  battle.  Crossing  his  arms  as  death
mowed  down  all  those  about  him,  he  cried,  'Good  God!
how  silly  it  all  is!'  "

With  two  or  three  exceptions  out  of  every  thousand  human
beings,  we  must  acknowledge  that  we  are  living  on  a  planet
of  brutes.  Our  earthly  race,  far  from  having  reached  an
age  of  reason,  is  hardly  more  than  four  or  five  years  old.
People  are  children,  unconsciously  ferocious ;  they  find  amuse-
ment in  cutting  the  heads  off  flies,  in  making  innocent  animals
suffer;  they  think  that  war,  which  is  infamous  and  the  her-
itage of  the  beasts,  is  a  divine  institution  and  will  endure
forever.     Yes,  it  will  endure  as  long  as  men  are  fools.

Must  we,  on  this  account,  despair  of  progress  ?

Analytical  research  will  require  much  time,  above  all  in
the  realm  of  the  psychic.  We  must  applaud  every  attempt.
.  The  special  problem  which  we  have  gone  into  deeply  in
this  work  has  been  probed  and  discussed  numerous  times,  in
particular  by  spiritists.  Monsieur  L^on  Denis,  a  writer  who
is  sincere,  eloquent,  and  persuasive,  published  in  1890  a  re-
markable book  entitled  ^'Apres  la  mort:  expose  de  la  phi-
losophic des  Esprits"  (''After  Death:  An  Exposition  of  the
Philosophy  of  Spirits") .  It  was  widely  read  and  ran  through
a  large  number  of  editions.  It  is  a  sort  of  new  bible,
founded  on  spiritism.  I  considered  myself  justified  in  giving
the  name  "After  Death"  to  the  third  part  of  this  trilogy;
I  told  the  author  of  the  aforementioned  work,  whom  I  have
the  honor  of  numbering  among  my  friends,  that  it  would  be
impossible  to  confuse  his  book  with  mine,  since  mine  is  the
third  part  of  a  longer  work,  and  is  an  independent  scientific
discussion,  in  which  spiritism  enters  only  as  something  to
be  investigated  and  not  as  a  doctrine.  I  think  that  medium-
istic  research  must  not  be  disdained,  must  not  be  considered


CONCLUSIONS  361

illusory  and  valueless  (this  accusation  is  often  made),  but  that
it  is  far  from  having  solved  the  problem.  There  is  no  con-
nection between  the  work  which  I  have  had  the  pleasure  of
mentioning  and  the  present  work.  Out  of  the  four  hundred
and  thirty  pages  which  make  up  Leon  Denis's  book,  one  hun-
dred and  eighty  are  given  over  to  an  exposition  of  the  various
religions,  from  those  of  ancient  India  to  Christianity,  and
the  two  hundred  and  fifty  other  pages  are  dedicated  to  the
teachings  of  spiritism  considered  as  a  religion.  It  is  a  noble
ethical  and  religious  dissertation  and  is,  above  all,  a  work  in
which  feeling  predominates.

In  the  present  work  we  have  been  careful  not  to  abandon  the
experimental  method;  careful  to  remain  within  the  realm
of  pure  science.

The  objection  is  often  made  that  there  is  a  possibility  of
illusions,  of  wrong  impressions,  of  hallucinations;  I  believe
that  I  have  answered  all  such  objections.  To  deny  every-
thing would  be  highly  absurd.  Unless  we  reject  all  human
testimony,  it  is  not  possible  to  doubt  narrations  that  are  suffi-
ciently well  authenticated.  Indeed,  there  are  not  many  his-
torical facts  or  scientific  phenomena  which  are  vouched  for  by
so  great  a  number  of  witnesses.  To  suppose  that  all  these
people  were  "woolgathering,''  had  hallucinations,  or  were
the  dupes  of  their  imagination — ^such  a  hypothesis  is  abso-
lutely untenable.

We  have  before  us  a  problem  to  be  solved;  the  solution
of  it  is  so  difficult,  the  problem  is  so  obscure  that  in  general
people  prefer  not  to  face  it,  to  deny  everything.  But  not
to  admit  the  authenticity  of  occurrences  because  one  is  in-
capable of  explaining  them,  presupposes,  really,  an  ingenu-
ousness no  longer  in  fashion.  What  are  we  really  explain-
ing? Are  we  not  always  halted  by  a  question-mark?  But
facts  are  facts ;  there  is  no  escaping  that.  The  skepticism  of
uncompromising  deniers  seems  as  strange  and  as  lacking  in
logic   as  that   of   certain  believers,   who   are   familiar  with


362  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

astroriomical  truths  and  know  that  the  earth  revolves  around
the  sun;  know  the  importance  of  this  heavenly  body;  know
that  the  distance  from  the  earth  of  millions  of  suns  has  been
measured;  know  about  the  Milky  Way,  the  star-strewn  im-
mensities, and  yet  continue  to  believe  that  our  planet  is  the
ethical  center  and  the  goal  of  creation,  and  that  the  starry
universe  was  created  for  the  dweller  on  this  tiny  ant-hill.
But  most  physiologists  reason  in  this  way,  because  they  can-
not discover  a  soul  with  their  scalpels.

No  one  has  the  right  to  affirm  that  the  dead  never  come
back,  that  ghosts  are  always  illusory,  and  that  all  appari-
tions are  the  products  of  erroneous  impressions.  We  do
not  die  (as  was  proved  recently,  in  his  treatise,  by  Monsieur
Chevreuil,  one  of  the  most  indefatigable  of  our  contemporary
psychologists).  But  what  we  may  state  with  certainty  is
that  manifestations  of  the  dead  are  not  a  part  of  the  normal
course  of  nature  and  that  they  constitute  extremely  rare
exceptions.

Life  beyond  the  grave  must  be  regarded  as  entirely  sepa-
rate from  ours,  from  a  physical  point  of  view.  The  two
spheres  are  dissimilar,  and  our  mortal  eyes  cannot  behold
the  other  world.

By  watching  the  course  of  events  we  see  that  in  general
the  dead  do  not  come  back,  and  that  manifestations  from
the  other  side  of  the  grave  are  exceptional.  We  may  regret
this  with  regard  to  the  administering  of  justice  and  the  cor-
rection of  errors  in  the  teaching  of  history — in  particular
cases  as  well  as  in  general.     But  it  is  a  fact.

The  ethical  world  is  governed  by  laws,  as  is  the  physical
world;  but  we  do  not  know  these  laws.  Everything  still
awaits  investigation.  It  is  a  world  very  different  from  ours,
and  we,  with  our  earthly  ideas,  should  like  to  see  it  con-
ducted on  different  principles.  After  certain  crimes,  should
not  spirits  'protest,  reveal,  take  vengeance?  (We  are
astonished,  for  example,  to  mention  a  recent  case,  that  the


CONCLUSIONS  363

eleven  women  and  the  youth  murdered  by  Landru  remained
unalterably  dumb  during  this  long  trial  of  a  vain  and  in-
famous monster.)  Such  silence  on  the  part  of  victims  is
— let  us  not  deny  it — one  of  the  great  objections  which  our
honest  investigation  finds  in  its  way.  Unfortunately,  psychic
phenomena  always  come  unsought ;  we  wish  for  them  in  vain.
It  is  a  question  of  observation  and  not  of  experiment,  a  dif-
ference which  is  almost  always  forgotten.

These  phenomena  are  spontaneous;  they  are  witnessed;
they  are  not  deliberately  produced.  Several  professors  at
the  Sorbonne  and  at  the  College  de  France  are  declaring  that
an  occurrence  is  authentic  only  if  it  can  be  reproduced  in
a  laboratory.  Such  reasoning  is  absolutely  fallacious.  We
cannot  reproduce,  experimentally,  a  shooting-star,  an  aerolite,
a  storm,  an  electrical  disturbance,  or  a  sun-spot.  I  will  go
farther  and  add  that  the  impossibility  of  authenticating  a
metaphysical  occurrence  does  not  justify  us  in  denying  that  it
actually  took  place.  A  celebrated  physician  told  me  that  a
woman  who  was  in  his  care  grew  seriously  ill  and  almost  died
as  a  result  of  a  psychic  manifestation  on  the  part  of  some
one  dead.  But  it  seems  that  she  refused,  obstinately,  to  allow
her  name  to  be  mentioned  in  connection  with  the  story,  which
remained,  of  necessity,  anonymous.  We  must  take  things
as  they  are.

If,  therefore,  on  the  one  hand,  the  immortality  of  the
soul  has  been  proved  positively,  the  fact  has  been  brought
out,  on  the  other,  that  these  occurrences  which  prove  it  are
rare,  exceptional,  and  often  incomprehensible.  But — let  us
repeat  it — it  is  not  important  from  the  standpoint  of  reality
whether  or  not  we  understand  a  thing,  whether  or  not  we
can  explain  it.  Are  there  indubitable  manifestations  of  the
dead? — ^yes,  or  no?  This  was  the  question  which  we  asked.
We  have  answered  it  in  the  affirmative.

Judging  by  the  occurrences  as  a  whole,  we  gain  an  im-
pression that  visible  manifestations  of  the  dead  are  rare.


364  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

But  who  can  prove  to  us  that  spirits  do  not  act  upon  our
minds,  and  that  thoughts  which  seem  our  own  are  not  caused
by  them,  in  certain  cases?  Beings  whom  we  love  may  be
near  us  without  our  suspecting  it,  and  may,  though  we  know
nothing  of  it,  act  upon  our  souls,  which  are  attuned  to  theirs.

An  invisible  world  surrounds  us ;  unknown  forces  are  more
numerous  than  known  forces;  science  is  merely  at  its  dawn,
and — let  us  repeat  it — ^what  we  know  is  but  a  tiny  island  in
the  midst  of  an  unexplored  ocean.  During  the  last  quarter
of  a  century,  unexpected  discoveries  in  the  realms  of  physics
and  occultism  have  made  us  guess  the  existence  of  regions
hitherto  unsuspected;  since  we  are  now  better  informed,  we
shall  be  able  to  explore  them  from  this  time  on.  For  cen-
turies, our  minds  have  slumbered  too  deeply  on  the  pillow  of
indifference  offered  us  by  the  recognized  sciences.

We  must  not  expect  to  enter  into  relations  with  the  dead
under  the  same  conditions  as  with  the  living.  They  have
no  material  bodies,  endowed  with  physical  senses.  They  are
different  beings,  in  a  different  world.  Communication  be-
tween the  living  and  the  dead  is  of  the  most  varied  and
enigmatical  nature.

In  this  work  we  have  always  stressed  actual  occurrences,
not  metaphysical  reasoning,  not  philosophic  or  religious  con-
siderations nor  sentimental  inductions.  Eventually  all  these
must  be  brought  into  harmony  with  the  new  facts;  but  the
positive  experimental  method  must  continue  to  be  our  guide.

Now  that  it  has  been  proved  that  death  does  not  annihilate
human  beings  and  that  they  continue  to  live  on,  we  should
like  to  know  what  substance  they  consist  of,  where  they  exist,
whether  they  are  happy,  whether  they  continue  their  re-
lations with  us.

Yes,  these  questions  must  now  be  asked.  Where  are  these
souls?  Do  they  remain  in  communication  with  the  beings
whom  they  loved?  What  do  they  do?  What  becomes  of
them?     Do  they  go  far  away  from  the  earth?     Do  they  oc-


CONCLUSIONS  365

cupy  a  determinable  sphere  ?  By  what  means  do  they  mani-
fest themselves?  Are  they  immortal?  Are  they  reincar-
nated? Does  the  multiplicity  of  the  soul's  existences  com-
plete the  doctrine  of  the  multiplicity  of  ir habited  worlds?
All  these  are  further  problems,  supplement  iry  to  our  first
problem;  they  could  not  be  taken  up  until  it  had  been  con-
sidered. Can  they  be  solved  by  the  scientific  method  which
enabled  us  to  solve  the  initial  problem?  All  these  are  ques-
tions like  those  which  we  have  just  looked  into;  I  should  be
particularly  happy  if  I  could  solve  them,  as  well.  I  must
ask  my  readers  to  take  into  consideration  the  fact  that  we
had  to  begin  at  the  beginning — that  is  to  say,  hy  first  provv-
ing  the  existence  of  the  soul  after  death.

Since  this  main  point  has  been  settled,  we  shall  now  trj^
to  elucidate  some  few  of  these  questions.  But  before  begin-
ning this  attempt  we  must  bear  in  mind  the  fact  that  we
shall  not  be  able  to  attain  the  same  certainty  that  we  did
in  the  case  of  the  existence  of  the  soul,  and  that  we  shall,
doubtless,  succeed  in  solving  only  a  small  part  of  a  mystery
that  has  until  now  been  impenetrable.

In  the  first  place,  the  accounts  of  occurrences  given  in
this  work  show  us  that  our  loved  ones  who  have  died  remain
for  some  time  in  our  mental  environment,  and  manifest  them-
selves when  circumstances  are  propitious,  though  to  them
time  and  space  are  not  what  they  are  to  us,  and  though  they
live  in  the  fourth  dimension,  in  hyperspace.  Material  mani-
festations do  not  take  place  easily,  and  are  rare,  but  psychic
impressions  may  be  frequently  transmitted.  Reincarnation,
which  would  seem  to  be  the  general  law,  does  not  take  place
immediately.  Perhaps  the  higher  spirits  soar,  of  themselves,
and  without  any  delay,  to  the  other  worlds  for  which  their
evolution  has  fitted  them.  The  ethical  world,  as  we  have
said,  is  governed  by  laws,  as  is  the  physical  world.

"We  have  proved  that  manifestations  of  the  dead  are  un-
questionable.    But  how  can  we  understand  the  manner  in


366  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

which  a  dead  person  acts  upon  a  living  person?  This  re-
quires extended  and  complex  investigation.  I  should  like
to  remind  readers  that  I  had  made  this  my  subject  of  inquiry
when  I  wrote  ''Uranie"  (1889),  and  that  I  tried  to  sum  up
my  conclusions  in  the  following  terms:

Must  we  admit  that  in  these  apparitions  the  dead  person's  spirit
really  took  on  bodily  form?  It  does  not  seem  necessary  to  as-
sume this.  In  our  dreams  we  believe  that  we  see  persons  who  are
in  reality  not  before  our  eyes,  which,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  are  closed.
We  see  them  perfectly,  as  distinctly  as  in  broad  daylight.  We
speak  to  them,  we  listen  to  them,  we  converse  with  them;  we  have
an  impression  that  we  are  really  living  through  certain  scenes.
Assuredly,  it  is  neither  our  retina  nor  our  optic  nerve  which  sees
them,  any  more  than  it  is  our  ears  which  hear  them.  It  is  a  ques-
tion of  our  brain-cells  alone.

Certain  apparitions  may  be  subjective,  within  us.  In  this  case,
the  being  who  manifests  himself  acts,  from  a  distance,  on  the  being
who  perceives,  and  this  influence  on  the  percipient's  brain  deter-
mines the  inner  vision,  which  seems  exterior,  as  in  dreams.  But
this  vision,  while  subjective,  is  neither  chimerical  nor  illusory.

The  investigations  conducted  recently  through  experiments  in  the
phenomena  of  suggestion,  hypnotism,  and  somnambulism  put  us  on
the  road  not  to  an  explanation,  perhaps,  but  at  least  to  a  rational
admission  of  a  certain  number  of  facts.  In  these  cases,  one  mind
influences  another,  beyond  a  doubt.  Certainly  the  soul  is  not  ac-
tually borne  from  one  place  to  another,  and  does  not  really  take  on
the  aspect  of  a  person  whose  clothes  were  made  by  a  tailor  or  a
dressmaker.  And  there  is  no  being  before  the  percipient;  no  being
with  an  overcoat  more  or  less  ample,  a  dress  or  a  cloak,  and  the
various  accessories  of  masculine  or  feminine  dress;  no  being  with
a  cane  or  an  umbrella.  But,  without  a  doubt,  the  spirit  which  is  to
appear  acts  directly  upon  the  mind  of  the  percipient  and  effects  it
in  such  a  way  that  the  percipient  believes  he  sees,  hears,  and  even
touches  a  person  appearing  in  the  exact  form  in  which  he  (the  per-
cipient) knew  him.

Just  as  a  thought,  a  recollection  gives  rise,  in  our  minds,  to  an
image  which  may  be  very  clear  and  vivid — in  this  same  way  a  be-


CONCLUSIONS  367

ing,  acting  upon  another  being,  may  transmit  to  him  an  image  which
will  give  him  a  momentary  illusion  of  reality.  These  phenomena
are  now  obtained  experimentally  in  investigations  of  hypnotism  and
suggestion,  investigations  which  are  still  in  their  first  stages  but
which  yield  nevertheless  results  worthy  of  the  closest  attention,  from
a  psychological  as  well  as  a  physiological  point  of  view.  It  is  not
the  retina  which  is  affected,  but  the  optic  centers  of  the  brain ;  these
are  played  upon  by  psychic  forces.  It  is  the  actual  mentality  which
is  influenced.     In  what  way?     We  do  not  know.^

I  still  agree  v^ith  what  I  wrote  at  that  time.  I  continue
to  think  as  I  did  then,  after  more  than  thirty  consecutive
years  of  experiments,  and  this  interpretation  has  been  con-
firmed and  elaborated  by  the  progress  of  the  psychic  sciences,
by  the  prodigious  discoveries  of  Hertzian  waves,  of  the  wire-
less telegraph  and  telephone,  and  by  the  new  phenomena
observed  in  the  fields  of  telepathy  and  thought-transmdssion.

One  mind  may  act  upon  another,  from  a  distance.
This  mental  action  results,  in  the  receiving  brain,  in  a  mental
image  which  seems  objective.

There  is,  really,  no  clothing,  nor  is  there  any  body,  even
an  ethereal  or  astral  body ;  there  is  merely  a  cerebral  impres-
sion which  results  in  an  image.  The  image  which  we  see
in  a  mirror  is  not  real,  though  it  seems  so,  at  first  sight,
to  a  child  or  a  dog.

As  the  fact  that  there  may  be  suggestion  from  one  in-
carnate mind  to  another  incarnate  mind  is  admitted  to-day
in  scientific  theories,  is  it  rational  to  refuse  to  admit  that
the  soul,  freed  from  the  material  bonds  of  the  body,  may
possess  the  same  faculties,  since  its  survival  has  been  proved  ?

Is  it  over-bold  to  suppose  that  a  bodiless  soul  may  mani-
fest itself  to  an  incarnate  soul,  and  may  make  this  incarnate
soul  perceive  a  form,  an  aspect  known  or  unknown  to  the
percipient  ?

1  Uranie,  p.  236


368  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

My  readers  may  have  seen  the  following  (in  the  year
1900)  in  ''L'Ineonnu,"  on  the  subject  of  apparitions:

It  is  not  necessary  to  suppose  that  the  soul  of  the  dying  person
leaves  its  sphere  and  is  borne  to  the  subject  aifected.  There  may
be  only  a  radiation,  a  kind  of  energy  still  unknown,  an  ether-
vibration,  a  wave  coming  in  contact  with  a  brain  and  giving  it  an
illusion  of  external  reality.  All  the  objects  which  we  see,  in  fact,
are  perceptible  to  us  only  through  images  and  reach  our  minds
only  as  images.^

What  v^e  conceived  of  intuitively  in  1900,  has  been  actu-
ally shown  to  be  true,  to-day.

Through  a  historical  coincidence  worthy  of  attention,  our
present  metaphysical  conclusions  synchronize  with  one  of  the
most  marvelous  discoveries  of  physical  science:  the  radio
telegraph  and  telephone.  A  performance,  a  concert,  a
speech  may  be  seen  and  heard,  when  we  are  hundreds  of
kilometers  away ;  they  may  be  gathered  in  by  a  receiving  ap-
paratus, without  being  transmitted  by  any  wire  whatsoever.
In  the  open  ocean  the  passengers  and  crew  of  a  ship  may  see
and  hear  a  performance  being  played  and  sung  in  Paris.  I
had  dared  to  predict  this  progress  in  ''Lumen"  (in  1866),  on
page  273,  where  the  following  may  be  found:  ''The  tele-
phoneoscope  makes  all  the  most  important  or  the  most  inter-
esting happenings  known  everywhere.  A  play  given  in  Chi-
cago or  in  Paris,  is  heard  and  seen  in  all  the  cities  of  the
world."  The  genius  of  inventors  has  made  such  progress
possible  in  our  times — progress  which  I  had  thought  of  as
taking  place  only  in  future  centuries — and,  to-day,  makes
us  begin  to  understand  telepathic  transmission,  which  was
denied  only  a  few  years  ago.

We  may  now  try  to  discover  what  apparitions  consist  of,
since  their  authenticity  has  been  proved.  What  is  their
nature?     Are  phantoms  realf

^  Ulnconnu,  p.  276.


CONCLUSIONS  369

In  the  first  place,  what  is  reality?  What  is  our  criterion
of  reality?

The  usual  answer  is:  ''That  which  is  objective,  outside
ourselves,  is  real;  that  which  is  subjective,  a  product  of  our
own  sensations,  is  not  real."

This  definition  is  highly  debatable.  An  inner  sensation
may  correspond  to  reality,  above  all  with  regard  to  psychic
occurrences.  A  friend  who  has  just  died  at  a  distance,  ap-
pears to  you,  in  a  dream  or  otherwise,  announces  his  death,
tells  you  that  he  has  been  drowned,  crushed  beneath  a  train,
or  murdered.  He  is  dripping  with  water,  or  you  can  see  his
wounds;  in  a  word,  his  image  corresponds  to  reality.  We
have  had  a  large  number  of  examples  of  this.  These  are
subjective  impressions,  but  real.

The  first  half  of  the  definition  is  equally  debatable.  We
are  told  that  that  which  is  objective,  outside  ourselves,  is
real.  But  in  what  consists  the  reality  of  the  rainbow  which
you  see,  which  you  measure,  which  you  analyze,  which  you
take  a  photograph  of?  It  is  but  an  optical  phenomenon.
Your  neighbor  sees  a  rainbow  different  from  the  one  you
see;  your  left  eye  does  not  see  the  same  one  as  your  right
eye.  In  what,  then,  does  the  reality  of  the  rainbow  lie?
Or  that  of  a  landscape  depicted  by  the  atmosphere,  in  the
form  of  a  mirage  ?  The  stick  which,  when  you  thrust  it  into
the  water,  is  broken  by  refraction,  furnishes  merely  an  ex-
ample of  an  illusion.     Et  cetera.

Our  reasoning  must  be  guided  by  such  considerations  as
these.

Yes,  phantoms  are  real.  But  in  what  does  their  reality
lie?

Madame  Ballet-Gallif et 's  father,  who  had  been  dead  for
two  years,  really  appeared  to  his  daughter,  to  his  son-in-law,
and  to  their  dog,  in  their  house  in  Lyons  (Chapter  I,  page
16).  Eobert  Mackenzie  really  appeared  to  tell  his  employer
that  he  had  not  committed  suicide    (page  26).     The  young


370  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

woman  who  died  of  the  cholera  in  St.  Louis,  and  whose  face
had  been  scratched  by  her  mother  when  she  was  being  at-
tired for  the  funeral,  really  appeared  to  her  brother,  in
broad  daylight  (page  32).  Monsieur  Castex-Degrange's
aunt  actually  saw  her  woman  friend,  in  a  costume  of  which
the  aunt  knew  nothing  (Chapter  II,  page  52).  Russell,  a
member  of  the  church  choir,  really  appeared,  with  a  roll  of
m^usic  in  his  hand,  to  his  colleague,  who  did  not  know  of  his
death  (page  64).  The  Colorado  Indian  was  actually  seen,
at  Interlaken,  by  Mrs.  Bishop  (page  67).  Mrs.  Bellamy's
friend  really  appeared  to  Mr.  Bellamy  (page  69).  A  father
really  appeared  to  his  daughter  to  ask  her  to  pay  a  debt  of
which  she  was  ignorant  (Chapter  III,  page  77)  ;  there  was
the  same  sort  of  apparition  in  the  case  of  Count  Czacki
(page  78).  Mrs.  Simpson's  friend  really  appeared  to  her,
and  asked  her  to  pay  a  small  debt  (page  79).  The  voice  of
a  father  was  really  heard  by  his  daughter — a  voice  which
revealed  the  secret  whereabouts  of  a  sum  of  money  (page
84).  Drisko,  the  captain  of  a  ship,  was  actually  saved  by
his  friend  Burton  just  as  his  ship  was  about  to  be  wrecked
(page  91).  Michael  Coulay  really  appeared  to  his  daughter,
in  the  clothing  in  which  he  had  been  dressed  for  burial
(page  94).  The  Copenhagen  teacher  really  saw  her  hus-
band (Chapter  IV,  page  119).  The  child  of  seven  really
saw  his  father  (page  120).  A  young  man  actually  heard  his
friend  speak — a  friend  who  had  just  committed  suicide
(page  122).  Rosa,  the  young  Italian  woman,  really  ap-
peared, after  her  death,  to  Mademoiselle  Hosmer  (page  126).
Mademoiselle  Stella  actually  saw,  in  her  room,  her  friend
who  had  just  died  (page  127).  Mrs.  Tweedale  actually
showed  herself  to  her  grandson  and  her  son  (Chapter  V,
page  133).  Bard  the  gardener  actually  saw  Madame  de
Freville  (page  141).  The  Albany  doctor  really  saw  a  young
woman,  who  had  just  died,  crossing  his  room  (page  143).
Madame    Boullier,    in    Cherbourg,    actually    saw    Madame


CONCLUSIONS  371

Arondel,  who  had  been  dead  for  some  hours  (page  154).
The  little  Gayraud  boy  really  saw  his  little  girl  friend,  who
had  died  the  day  before  (page  161).  Count  Ubaldo  Beni
really  appeared  to  his  wife,  to  tell  her  about  his  murderer
(Chapter  VI,  page  170).  A  young  man  who  had  been  buried
for  two  days  was.  really  seen  by  his  sister,  walking  along
before  her  (page  189).  Monsieur  Basset  really  saw,  on  a
road,  the  phantom  of  a  man  who  had  been  dead  for  a  month
(Chapter  VII,  page  212).  Et  cetera.  We  might  go  on  in
this  way  to  the  end  of  the  volume.  It  would  be  useless  to
give  a  recapitulation  of  these  hundreds  of  pages.

It  is  absolutely  clear  that  these  were  neither  illusions  nor
the  i)roducts  of  the  observers'  minds.  Phantoms  of  the
dead  exist,  show  themselves,  manifest  themselves.  They  are
seen  in  full  face,  in  profile,  obliquely,  and  reflected  in  mirrors,
in  perfect  accord  with  the  laws  of  perspective.  We  may
even  think  that  certain  of  them  are  more  or  less  material,
like  the  doubles  of  the  living  which  we  investigated,  for
photographs  have  been  taken  of  them  (I  have  unquestionable
proofs  of  this).  They  are,  therefore,  similar  in  certain  as-
pects to  living  persons.

We  have  realized,  on  the  other  hand,  how  difficult  it  is  to
understand  the  transition  from  the  visible  world  to  the  invis-
ible world,  even  from  the  essentially  materialistic  angle  of
the  atomic  state.  What  we  call  matter  is  a  visible  and  pon-
derable collection  of  invisible  and  imponderable  atoms.  One
and  the  same  substance  may  be  in  turn  visible  and  invisible,
the  difference  being  effected  in  a  lapse  of  a  few  minutes.
Observe  the  formation  of  a  summer  cloud,  and  its  dissipation
into  the  blue,  and  you  will  be  convinced  of  the  possibility  of
this  metamorphosis.  Fire  consumes  a  fragment  of  matter
and  reduces  it  to  vapor,  to  invisible  and  imponderable  mole-
cules. Air,  water,  carbon,  nitrogen,  and  the  other  elements
are  palpable  in  the  living  bodies  which  they  have  formed,
as  well  as  in  inorganic  substances.     To  our  eyes,  to  our  senses,


372  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

a  fragment  of  marble^  a  piece  of  iron,  a  human  being,  an
animal,  a  tree,  is  solid,  compact,  unyielding.  In  the  case  of
electricity,  the  air  offers  resistance,  while  metal  is  a  conductor.
To  minds  superior  to  ours,  endowed  with  other  means  of  per-
ception, this  solid  matter  may  seem  unreal,  v>^hile  thoughts
may  be  the  only  things  real  to  their  habitual  perceptions.
And  this  is  not  a  purely  groundless  hypothesis:  in  that  part
of  terrestrial  nature  which  we  perceive  directly^ — in  the  ani-
mal world  and,  in  particular,  in  the  insect  world,  though  we
class  animals  and  insects  as  inferior  beings — we  note  faculties
very  superior  to  ours.  These  faculties  are  markedly  differ-
ent from  those  of  human  beings;  they  are  disconcerting  and
incomprehensible.  The  least  imaginative  entomologists  at-
test that  such  powers  have  been  scientifically  observed,  and
that  they  are  marvelous  and  inexplicable.

That  there  is  a  psychic  world,  invisible  yet  real,  would,
seem  to  me  proved  unquestionably  for  all  future  time.
Doubtless,  we  are  now  committing:

The  unpardonable  sin  of  being  right  too  soon,

but  the  problem  will  be  solved  in  the  near  future.

The  particular  occurrences  investigated  in  this  work  have
shown  us  unquestionable  physical  phenomena:  furniture
moved,  blows  struck,  bells  rung,  objects  broken,  et  cetera.
The  preceding  pages  are  full  of  such  things.  Often  these
noises,  these  rappings  inside  furniture,  this  ringing  of  bells,
these  chairs  and  dishes  being  moved,  these  steps  that  are
heard,  astonish  us  by  their  trivial  nature.  But  should  we
base  our  beliefs  concerning  the  future  life  on  the  descriptions
of  Plato,  of  Confucius,  of  Buddha,  of  Jesus?  Should  we
think  of  normal  life  beyond  the  grave  as  going  on  in  a  world
only  of  noble  minds,  of  thinkers?  On  the  day  after  their
death  are  men  very  different  from  the  men  they  were  the  day
before?  We  know  the  worth  of  the  great  majority  of  them,
from  equatorial  Africa  to  the  poles.


CONCLUSIONS  373

"We  have  a  tendency  to  think  that  the  dead  are  superior  to
the  living,  a  tendency  to  see  in  them  theosophists  taught  by
Zoroaster,  Manu,  and  Krishna,  making  conscious  progress
toward  nirvana,  and  learned  in  the  doctrines  of  Karma.
Such  an  idea  is  erroneous.  There  is  no  testimony  to  prove
this  superiority.  Take  most  of  the  dwellers  on  our  planet,
more  than  half  of  them:  what  can  these  be  after  death?
How  many  human  beings  are  there  who  feed  their  bodies
greedily,  but  who  never  nourish  their  minds?  It  cannot  be
denied  that  there  are  very  few  who  do  otherwise.  In  such
cases  the  human  machine  is  controlled  by  a  soul  smothered  in
matter.

I  often  pass  the  door  of  a  ruddy-faced  wine-merchant,  and
always  see  him  pouring  out  more  or  less  adulterated  drinks
for  groups  of  drunkards,  and  listening  toi  the'ir  various
political  squabbles.  Oaths  and  disputes  have  free  sway,  to
the  joy  of  the  speakers.  What  will  all  those  people  be  the
day  after  their  death?

And  the  millions  of  peasants  who  have  never  thought  of
anything,  whose  horizon  is  bounded  by  a  nut-shell  ?  And  the
innumerable  vulgar  simpletons  of  great  cities  ?  In  a  word,  all
the  stupid,  illiterate  elements,  all  the  useless  or  harmful  per-
sons? Look  at  the  idlers,  the  actors,  the  dancers,  the  box-
ing enthusiasts,  the  petty  stock-jobbers,  the  gamblers,  the
pleasure-seekers,  the  prostitutes;  people  who  do  nothing,  who
think  of  nothing  but  their  own  engrossing  selves;  these  in-
tellectual and  moral  nullities — all  these  beings  who  are  blind
and  deaf  in  the  midst  of  the  varied  spectacles  offered  by  na-
ture, in  the  midst  of  human  evolution  and  the  prodigious  dis-
coveries of  science!  They  live  on  the  snobbishness  found
everywhere,  on  material  appetites  that  are  ever  unsatiated,
ignorant  of  everything  and  totally  indifferent  to  the  search
for  truth  (there  are  souls  of  animals  which  are  superior  to
those  of  certain  men).  We  may  ask  ourselves  in  just  what
their  immortality  lies.


374  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

An  erroneous  impression,  the  origin  of  which  is  lost  in  the
night  of  time,  and  which  successive  religions  have  handed
down  for  thousands  of  years,  has  perpetuated  the  idea  that
bodiless  souls,  by  the  mere  fact  of  having  left  the  flesh,  be-
come perfect,  pure  spirits.  This  is  a  false  doctrine  similar
to  the  one  which  teaches  that  the  sky  is  a  beatific  abode
unchanged  by  any  shadow,  any  disturbance,  though  we  know
from  modern  astronomy  that  the  immensity  of  the  skies  is
the  scene  of  tremendous  cataclysms.  We  perceive  this  con-
stantly with  our  telescopes.

When  the  human  soul  leaves  earthly  life,  it  does  not  be-
come angelic.  Death  cannot  make  any  man  omniscient.  The
state  of  the  soul  on  the  day  after  death  cannot  be  very  differ-
ent from  its  state  on  the  day  before  death,  as  we  have  al-
ready remarked.  The  ignorant  man  cannot  take  on  knowl-
edge which  he  did  not  acquire,  nor  can  the  simpleton  become
intelligent.  The  guillotine  does  not  make  a  saint  of  a  bandit.
We  may  conclude  from  this  that,  for  the  most  part,  the  dead
are  not  intellectual,  are  not  superior  to  most  of  the  living.

On  this  earth,  taken  as  a  whole,  nearly  a  hundred  thousand
human  beings  die  in  a  day.  The  great  majority  of  these
dead  beings  are  unconscious  monads.  The  atmosphere  is  full
of  them.

It  Y/ould  appear  that  souls  still  at  a  low  stage  of  evolution
— in  an  embryonic  state,  so  to  speak — remain  for  some  time  in
the  atmosphere,  and  that  the  vast  majority  of  them  are  un-
conscious. They  constitute  a  cosmic  environment  of  diffused
consciousness.  This  mingles  at  times,  and  under  certain  con-
ditions, with  the  individual,  subconscious  minds  of  the  living,
and,  in  the  case  of  mediums,  manifests  itself  in  various  spiri-
tistic phenomena.  If  this  is  true — and  it  would  seem  very
probable — ^we  should  have  to  change  markedly  our  conception
of  the  composition  of  the  atmosphere.  Simple  chemical  analy-
sis would  no  longer  suffice.  We  should  have  to  make  out  a  list
such  as  the  following:


CONCLUSIONS  375

Nitrogen     78.1.

Oxygen       20.9.

Watery  vapor  (variable  according  to

location  and  temperature).

Hydrogen   (increases  with  altitude ;

considerable  quantities  300
kilometers  above  sea-level).

Carbonic  acid   0.03.

Argon      0.00937.

Neon    0.0015.

Helium    0.0005.

Krypton     0.0001.

Xenon     0.000005.

Innumerable,  invisible  bacilli,  by  the  billion.

Ions,  electrons,  dynamic  atoms.

Psychic  elements,  which  cannot  be  measured.

(A  long  time  must  elapse  before  the  last  line  of  the  fore-
going can  be  set  down  in  scientific  treatises.)

We  do  not  live  merely  in  a  material  way,  but  are  sur-
rounded by  a  mental  environment  which  influences  our  phys-
ical and  moral  well-being.  Many  incidents  in  our  lives,
which  we  attribute  to  chance,  are  not  fortuitous.

There  are  psychic  currents  which  may  be  likened  to  aerial
and  magnetic  currents;  their  existence  is  shown  by  very
numerous  and  exact  coincidences.  The  old  adage  that  ' '  ideas
are  in  the  air"  is  not  far  from  the  truth.

The  psychic  elements  which  we  spoke  of  a  short  time  ago
manifest  themselves  in  particular  in  spiritistic  experiments.
I  should  like  to  give,  word  for  word,  the  following  state-
ments, made  by  Primot  ^  :

To  scientific  observations,  which  bear  each  other  out,  on  the  part
of  Aksakoff,  Myers,  and  Carl  du  Prel,  I  can  add  my  own  personal
observations.  In  the  course  of  the  numerous  mediumistic  experi-
ments which  I  have  made  (more  than  three  hundred)  with  mediums
of  different  temperaments  and  aptitudes    (one  of  them  went  into

'i- Psychologie  d'une  Conversion,  p.  671.


376  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

a  trance  each  time  and  was  a  remarkable  subject  of  study)  I  have
never  been  able  to  obtain,  though  I  asked  for  them  at  each  ex-
periment, any  exact  and  coherent  replies  as  to  the  form  and  con-
ditions of  life  in  the  Beyond.  Most  of  the  time  I  was  given  infor-
mation hopelessly  meaningless.  Very  often,  the  spirit  answered
that  the  inhabitants  of  the  other  world  were  forbidden  to  make
revelations  of  this  nature.  And  when,  by  chance,  he  deigned  to
drop  his  customary  triviality,  it  was  to  dictate  sentences  and  state-
ments more  or  less  philosophic,  some  of  which  were  not  lacking
in  power  or  in  literary  value,  but  which  never  passed  beyond  the
bounds  of  what  the  subconscious  mind  of  a  cultivated  man  could
have  thought  of  or  suggested,  and  which,  in  any  case,  never  told  us
anything  that  we  should  have  liked  to  know  as  to  the  future  life.

Nevertheless,  it  will  be  admitted  that  if  there  is  any  one  subject
on  which  a  disembodied  spirit  might  help  us  by  giving  us  interesting
and  unlooked-for  information,  it  is  assuredly  this  subject  of  sur-
vival after  death.  It  would  even  seem  that  this  should  be  his  chief
concern  and  that  he  should  spare  no  pains  to  give  precise  replies  to
those  who  question  him  on  such  important  matters;  replies  which
should  bear  the  stamp  of  mystery,  originality,  and  extraneousness,
so  to  speak,  which  we  would  be  justified  in  expecting  from  a  spirit
who  has  become  a  stranger  to  our  terrestrial  preoccupations,  and
who  lives  in  a  world  very  different  from  ours.  Take  the  case  of  a
traveler  who  has  returned  from  the  polar  regions:  has  he  nothing
better  to  talk  of  to  his  friends  and  relatives  than  the  unimportant
news  of  the  day  and  the  trivialities  of  ordmary  life?

When  we  consider,  moreover,  the  motives  which  inspire  and  ap-
pear to  govern  the  apparitions  of  phantoms,  we  see,  likewise,  that
it  is  almost  always  terrestrial  preoccupations,  terrestrial  mono-
ideisms  which  absorb  completely  the  very  limited  field  of  con-
sciousness through  which  they  manifest  themselves.  These  preoc-
cupations are  like  those  of  hypnotic  suggestion,  which  also  absorbs,
entirely,  the  field  of  consciousness,  equally  limited,  of  a  hypnotized
person,  and  renders  him  insensitive  to  any  other  influence  but  that
of  the  hypnotist.

It  is  the  same  with  the  disembodied  spirit  when  it  manifests  it-
self through  a  medium.  The  field  of  consciousness  which  the
medium  displays  in  this  manifestation,  must  be,  like  that  of  the


CONCLUSIONS  377

phantom,  very  limited,  and  is  most  often  made  up  only  of  earthly
recollections.  The  spirit's  real  personality,  the  personality  which
results  from  his  new  state  in  the  Beyond,  would  appear  to  have  no
part  in  it.  And  it  is  precisely  because  this  is  true  that,  in  France,
disembodied  spirits — unless  it  is  the  medium  himself  or  those  with
him  who  play  this  part  unconsciously — teach  the  doctrine  of  suc-
cessive reincarnations,  while  those  in  America,  on  the  contrary,  con-
demn this  doctrine.  Both  groups  of  spirits  are  sincere:  all  have
found  such  beliefs  among  their  earthly  recollections.  The  reincar-
nationist,  for  example,  has  remembered  the  works  of  AUan-Kardec
or  other  French  spiritists  whose  books  he  might  have  read  when
he  was  alive,  or  else  such  things  were  discussed  in  the  circles  which
he  frequented.  The  anti-reincarnationist  remembers  certain  books
or  the  discussions  in  American  spiritist  circles  where  a  belief  in
reincarnation  is  usually  condemned   (because  of  the  negroes).

Our  conclusion,  after  considering  these  various  circumstances,  is
as  follows :  That  part  of  the  personality  of  the  deceased  which,  in
mediumistic  seances,  manifests  itself  and  reaches  us,  is,  generally
speaking,  but  a  reflection  of  the  total  consciousness:  one  of  those
transitory  and  fragmentary  states  of  being  which  the  study  of  hyp-
notism has  allowed  us  to  perceive  and  to  define;  a  condition  fed  by
terrestrial  memories.  It  is  a  sort  of  dim  dream  on  the  part  of  the
disembodied  spirit.

It  is  not  to  be  doubted,  however,  that  intelligent  forces
exist  around  us.  When,  in  spiritistic  seances,  we  ask  that
our  hands  or  our  foreheads  be  touched,  we  feel  this  contact
exactly  in  the  spot  designated.  There  is  no  hesitation,  even
in  total  darkness.  Du  Prel  relates  that,  during  a  spiritistic
seance  in  Vienna,  he  asked,  mentally,  that  Ms  left  ear  be
pulled,  and,  since  he  felt  nothing,  that  his  nose  be  pulled:
still  nothing.  Then  he  asked  that  his  right  ear  be  pulled.
Thereupon,  his  left  ear,  his  nose  and  his  right  ear  were  pulled
consecutively,  without  any  hesitation,  and  with  as  much  as^
surance  as  if  it  had  been  done  by  some  one  who  could  see
clearly.  I  know  personally  of  fifty  phenomena  of  this  same
sort.


378  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

The  psychic  world  which  is  still  to  be  discovered  is  immense
and  illimitable.

Many  conceptions  have  been  formed  as  to  the  state  of  the
soul  after  death  and  the  future  life :  by  the  Aryans  in  the
time  of  Rama;  by  the  Asiatics  in  the  time  of  Zoroaster;  by
the  Greeks  in  the  time  of  Homer,  of  Hesiod,  of  Pythagoras,
of  Plato ;  by  the  Pharaohs  known  to  us  through  excavations ;
the  Hebrews  in  the  time  of  Moses ;  the  Hindus  in  the  time  of
Buddha ;  the  Druids  in  the  time  of  the  Gallic  dolmens ;  Jesus
Christ  and  the  gospels ;  Mohammed  and  the  Koran ;  the  Swe-
denborgians ;  the  spiritists ;  the  theosophists ;  the  scientists  of
the  nineteenth  and  twentieth  centuries.  There  have  been  de-
scriptions of  the  Elysian  Fields,  of  paradise,  of  hell,  of  pur-
gatory, of  limbo,  of  the  abode  of  the  dead,  of  the  astral  plane,
of  ethereal  journeys,  of  palingenesis,  of  reincarnation,
of  the  multiplicity  of  the  existences  of  the  soul :  a  whole  un-
explored universe  has  been  created,  in  comparison  with  which
the  suggestive  bits  of  sculpture  of  our  cathedrals  are  but  an
inadequate  anthropomorphic  representation.  Is  it  possible  to
bring  some  clarity  into  these  more  or  less  hazy  conceptions?

Analysts  enumerate  about  fifty  religions,  or,  rather,  about
fifty  distinct  religious  beliefs,  each  with  its  own  particular
dogma  as  to  the  future  life.  These  religions  are  not  in
agreement,  nor  do  they  agree  with  the  little  positive  science
which  we  may  possess.  But  let  us  not  forget  the  noteworthy
pronouncement  of  a  deep  thinker,  Claude  Bernard:  ^*I  am
fully  persuaded,'^  he  wrote,  *'that  a  day  will  come  when
the  physiologist,  the  poet,  and  the  philosopher  will  speak  the
same  language,  and  when  all  of  them  will  agree."  And  let
us  join  Edouard  Schure  in  regretting  that  science  and  re-
ligion are  two  mutually  hostile  and  irreconcilable  forces;
such  a  state  of  things  should  not  prevail.  Two  truths  can-
not be  reciprocally  opposed.  Men  know  only  what  they  have
learned.  We  know,  for  example,  that  the  earth  makes  a
complete  rotation  in  twenty-four  hours  and  a  complete  revo-


CONCLUSIONS  379

lution  about  the  sun  in  a  year.  These  are  facts ;  they  are  in-
contestable, proved  up  to  the  hilt.  That  which  positive
science  has  definitely  proved  is  unshakable.  We  are  justified
in  thinking  that  religious  ideas  will  undergo  a  progressive
evolution  and  that  the  conflicts  between  religion  and  science,
rendered  famous  by  Spencer  and  the  other  rationalists,  will
vanish  like  the  fogs  of  dawn  at  the  rising  of  the  summer  sun.

Louis  Eble,  a  distinguished  author,  wrote,  some  years  ago,
a  discerning  book  ^  which  aimed  to  show  that  modern  science
cannot  teach  us  what  the  future  life  is,  but  that  there  can  be
no  doubt  as  to  the  reality  of  that  future  life.  This  work  was
published  in  1904.  Have  the  investigations  of  the  last  twenty
years  shed  any  more  light?

' '  Where  are  the  souls  of  the  dead  ? ' '  people  ask.

The  various  religions  present  various  views  as  to  the  future
life.  Those  Christians  who  are  Protestants  have  taken  over
heaven  and  hell;  Catholics  have  set  purgatory  between  the
two.  The  Jews  refrain  from  putting  forward  a  definite  con-
ception, while  retaining  the  angels;  the  Mohammedans  hope,
rather,  for  a  sensual  paradise;  the  Buddhists  see  nirvana  on
destiny's  celestial  horizon;  the  Greeks  had  their  Elysian
Fields  and  their  Tartarus;  the  Egyptians  had  their  Amenti,
and  believed  in  doubles.  At  bottom,  all  these  conceptions
are  anthropomorphic.

In  the  reliefs  on  Gallo-Roman  tombs,  we  often  see  the
moon  represented  by  a  crescent  (to  see  these  one  should
visit  the  Langres  museum,  in  particular),  and  the  idea  that
the  souls  of  the  dead  might  be  borne  to  the  moon  prevailed
for  a  long  time.  Upon  the  rise  of  the  Christian  religion,
its  followers  immediately  opposed  this  conception,  and  we
frequently  read  the  following  denial  in  the  homilies  of  the
first  centuries  of  our  era:  ^'Nec  in  lunam  incolant^'  (''They
do  not  dwell  on  the  moon").

1  La   Vie  future  decant   la  sagesse   antique   et   la  science   modern^
(Paris,  1904).


380  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

The  question  of  an  abiding-place  does  not  apply  to  souls
as  it  does  to  bodies.  The  spirit  does  not  occupy  any  definite
spot.  But  let  us  acknowledge  that  it  is  impossible  for  us  to
conceive  of  any  form,  any  aspect  of  a  future  life  which  is
dissociated  from  our  senses.

Christians  ask  themselves,  very  naturally,  where  their  dead
loved  ones  are;  they  try  to  form  a  conception  of  the  place
where  they  may  dwell.  This  is  because  they  have  been
brought  up  with  the  ideas  and  according  to  the  imagery  of  the
ancient  theological  astronomy  of  the  time  of  the  Apostles,
the  Apocalypse,  the  Evangelists,  and  the  church  fathers.
By  this  doctrine  there  is  a  paradise  for  the  good,  the  saints,
and  the  angels;  this  conception  of  things  includes  the  de-
scent of  Jesus  into  hell,  the  Ascension,  the  Assumption,
the  Trinity,  the  singing  bands  of  the  chosen.  It  is  difficult,
not  to  say  impossible,  to  rid  ourselves  of  terrestrial  ideas
of  time  and  space.

Nevertheless,  the  soul,  withdrawn  from  human  life,  is
free  from  all  these  restrictions  of  the  material  world.

Astronomy  has  always  been  connected  with  philosophic  and
religious  speculations  as  to  the  future  life.  It  could  not  be
otherwise.  The  physical  world  is  the  framework  of  the  spir-
itual world.  That  these  two  divisions  of  thought  should  be
associated  is  inevitable.  What  does  the  expression  'Ho  be
in  the  sky"  mean?  Everything  is  in  the  sky.  The  earth
on  which,  we  live  is  a  heavenly  body  in  the  sky,  like  Mars,
Jupiter,  Saturn,  Sirius,  or  Vega.  Dante's  spheres,  the  choirs
of  the  Cherubim,  the  thrones  and  the  heavenly  hosts,  the
band  of  the  chosen,  the  supreme  domination  of  the  Trin-
ity— all  these  can  no  longer  be  accepted  save  in  symbolic
form.  Eternal  life  has  nothing  to  do  with  all  this.  We
know  to-day  that  nothing  in  the  universe  is  either  ''up"  or
*'down."  A  representation  of  Christ's  ascension  had  a
meaning  when  people  believed  that  the  earth  was  flat  and
at  the  bottom  of  the  universe,  that  hell  was  in  the  lower


CONCLUSIONS  381

regions  {ad  inferos),  and  that  the  sky  was  above.  This  rep-
resentation no  longer  has  any  significance,  since,  twelve  hours
afterward,  by  this  way  of  thinking,  Jesus  would  fall  ver-
tically, head  downward.

What  is  the  sky,  then?  It  is  universal  space;  to  us  it  is
the  Milky  Way.  Our  planet  is  a  tiny  village  of  this  Milky
Way ;  our  sun  is  one  of  its  stars ;  it  is  composed  of  a  billion
suns.  According  to  modern  calculations  it  may  have  a  di-
ameter anywhere  up  to  three  hundred  thousand  light  years,
each  of  these  years  corresponding  to  nine  thousand  four
hundred  and  sixty-seven  billion  kilometers!

The  reliefs  on  our  beautiful  Gothic  churches  show  us,
everywhere,  representations  of  the  Christian  universe,  of  the
last  judgment,  of  heaven  and  hell;  these  can  correspond  to
no  reality.

i'or  centuries  and  centuries  Christian  doctrines  have  taught
the  resurrection  of  the  body.  Credo  resurrectionem  carnis.
It  is  an  article  of  faith.  In  his  Epistle  to  the  Romans,  Saint
Paul  said  (viii,  11)  :  "But  if  the  Spirit  of  him  that  raised
up  Jesus  from  the  dead  dwell  in  you,  he  that  raised  up  Christ
from  the  dead  shall  also  quicken  your  mortal  bodies  by  his
Spirit  that  dwelleth  in  you."  Belief  was  exacted — definite,
unquestioning  belief.  It  was  actually  that  same  body  which
lived,  suffered,  and  enjoyed  while  on  earth,  that  was  to
awaken  and  come  to  life  again  at  the  last  judgment.  Jesus
was  to  appear  in  the  East,  announced  by  angels'  trumpets;
the  dead  were  to  rise  from  the  earth,  and  graves  were
placed  in  such  a  way  that,  in  arising,  those  brought  back
to  life  should  face  the  east.  Such  was  the  admitted  ordi-
nance of  Christian  cemeteries.  This  custom  has  been  aban-
doned since  the  passing  away  of  faith,  and  to-day  the  bodies
are  buried  in  any  position,  just  as  the  opening  happens  to
be  placed.  Nor  are  churches  built  to  face  in  any  particular
direction.  But  the  principle  of  the  Credo  is  absolute.  Is
as  unquestionable  as  it  is  unacceptable.    No  educated,  in-


382  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

telligent,  and  honest-minded  man  admits,  any  longer,  the
resurrection  of  the  body,  unless  he  humbles  his  knowledge
before  a  self-contradictory  dogma.  Such  ideas  belong  to
another  age.

As  for  the  legend  of  the  eternal  torments  of  hell,  where
the  bodies  of  the  damned  were  to  suffer  without  end,  we  may
with  difficulty  conceive  of  the  possibility  of  human  reasoning
having  dictated  the  teachings  of  the  church,  when  we  read,
in  Bossuet  's  books,  phrases  such  as  this :  ' '  Thus  ever  living
and  ever  dying,  immortal  that  they  may  suffer,  too  strong
to  die,  too  weak  to  bear  their  pain,  they  shall  wail  eternally
on  beds  of  flame,  racked  by  terrible  and  irremediable  tor-
ments. ' '

But  that  is  what  believers  in  a  '^Good  God"  judged  him
capable  of  doing  when  he  created  human  souls!  What  an
aberration,  and  what  blasphemy!

Human  bodies  brought  to  life  again!  The  idea  is,  in  it-
self, indefensible.  Life  beyond  the  grave  is  spent  under
conditions  altogether  different  from  those  of  earthly  life.
There  can  be  no  assimilation  of  food.  What  would  organisms
made  like  ours  be  good  for?  It  is  a  state  without  any  con-
nection with  the  vital  needs  of  human  beings  on  our  planet.
Assuredly,  those  in  the  other  sphere  are  not  slaves  of  their
digestive  tubes,  like  the  coarse  dwellers  on  earth.  They  have
different  bodies!  Are  they  fluid  beings?  In  this  other
world,  there  are  no  Adam  and  Eve,  nor  Mars,  nor  Venus:
^'Neque  nuhent,  neque  nuhentur/'  says  the  gospel.  But  it
is  quite  impossible  for  us  to  conceive  of  unknown  forms,  and,
I  repeat,  it  is  entirely  out  of  the  question.  Can  we  even
imagine  what  the  mentality  of  a  soul  freed  from  earthly  im-
pressions might  be  ?  The  larva,  if  it  were  capable  of  reason-
ing, could  not  guess  what  the  life  of  the  butterfly  might  be,
though  the  question  of  its  own  existence  is  involved.  And
as  for  memory,  could  the  butterfly— supposing  that  it  were
endowed  with  a  memory — have  any  recollection  of  its  former
state  ?


CONCLUSIONS  383

Despite  difficulties,  contradictions,  and  antitheses,  let  us
note  that  the  Christian  religion  is  in  agreement  with  Bud-
dhism and  its  four  hundred  million  believers  in  asking,  in
the  prayer  for  the  dead,  for  eternal  repose.  Requiem  (eter-
nam  dona  eis  Domine!  This  repose  bears  a  great  resemblance
to  nirvana,  to  annihilation.

But  this  immobility  is  found  nowhere.  The  universe  is
a  dynamism  ruled  by  the  spirit,  and  matter  is  but  an  ap-
pearance, since  atoms  are  governed  by  energy.  All  is  in
movement,  all  is  in  flux  in  the  infinite.  God,  the  Unknow-
able, rules  all,  from  the  infinitely  large  to  the  infinitely  small.
The  future  life  is  a  part  of  this  whole.  The  designation
''future  life"  is,  moreover,  relative  and  anthropomorphic,
since  what  is  the  future  for  us,  is  now  the  present  for  those
who  lived  before  us,  and  since  our  ' '  present ' '  will  be  ' '  past ' '
in  an  approaching  future.  To  put  it  in  terms  of  the  absolute,
there  is  but  an  eternal  present.  Those  who  were  alive  a
hundred  years  ago  are  now  in  ''the  future  life"  which  has
become  the  present  for  them,  and  in  a  hundred  years  that
life,  which  is  now  the  future  for  us,  will  be  the  present.

A  fairly  large  number  of  occurrences  would  lead  us  to
grant  that  all  phenomena  are  permanent  or  simultaneous;
that  they  take  place  in  the  midst  of  a  universal  soul  to  which
our  ideas  of  time  are  foreign.  The  future  is  seen.  The  past
is  also  seen.     It  is  as  though  there  were  a  perpetual  present.

In  eternity,  which  stands  still,  time  does  not  exist.  Our
conception  of  it  is  connected  with  the  movements  of  the  earth.

If  we  did  not  have  a  succession  of  years,  of  seasons,  of
days  and  nights,  then  there  would  be  a  motionless  eternity
instead  of  our  calendar,  instead  of  days,  of  hours,  of  minutes,
of  seconds.

In  absolute  space  there  is  no  time.

Each  planet  makes  and  measures  its  own  time.  Neptune's
year  equals  one  hundred  and  sixty-five  of  ours,  Uranus 's
eighty-four  of   ours,   Saturn's   thirty,   Jupiter's  twelve.    A


384  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

day  on  Mars  lasts  twenty-four  hours  and  thirty-nine  min-
utes ;  our  days  might  last  as  long  as  that  or  longer,  and  to  us
they  would  still  be  days.

Considered  in  itself,  time  does  not  exist.

Since  time  has  no  real  existence,  the  future,  as  well  as  the
past,  is  the  present.  All  occurrences  are  determined  by
the  causes  which  produce  them.  The  human  will  is  a  part  of
the  forces  at  work  in  nature.

This  is  not  a  theory;  these  are  facts.  Readers  of  this
work  have  learned  as  much  through  the  large  number  of
future  happenings  seen  beforehand.

Metaphysical  analysis,  therefore,  as  well  as  scientific  ob-
servation proves  that  time  has  no  existence  in  itself,  that
occurrences  may  be  seen  beforehand,  and  that  everything  is
in  the  present.

Since  time  does  not  exist,  that  which  remains  of  us  after
death — the  soul,  the  spirit,  the  psychic  entity,  whatever  name
one  gives  it  and  whatever  its  nature  be — ceases  to  belong
to  what  we  call  "time"  when  we  are  alive.  To  the  thinking
being,  which  may  live  on,  there  are  neither  years,  nor  days,
nor  hours.     The  relative  gives  way  to  the  absolute.

That  which  underlies  appearances,  "the  thing  in  itself"
of  which  Kant  speaks,  the  essence  of  things,  has  nothing  in
common  with  our  ideas  of  the  past  or  the  future,  and  any
happening  may  be  as  easily  perceived  before  it  takes  place
as  afterward.  To  a  being  beyond  the  sphere  of  time,  our
terrestrial  ideas  of  the  past  and  the  future  wear  different
aspects.     Yesterday  and  to-morrow  are  to-day.

Nevertheless,  there  is  a  continuity.  What  we  call  the  sur-
vival of  the  soul  must  not  be  taken  to  mean  merely  the  con-
servation of  an  indestructible  psychic  atom,  with  no  con-
sciousness of  itself,  but  the  persistence  of  a  thinking  entity,
endowed  with  memory.

The  soul  is  an  invisible,  impalpable,  imponderable  sub-
stance ;  it  cannot  be  perceived  under  our  physical  conditions


CONCLUSIONS  385

of  observation.  Nor  can  our  measurements  of  space  be  ap-
plied to  it  any  more  tban  our  measurements  of  time.  It  may
manifest  itself  over  distances  of  hundreds  and  thousands  of
kilometers.  The  occurrences  given  in  our  three  volumes
prove  this.

In  a  word,  therefore,  time  and  space,  as,  with  our  ideas
of  measurements,  we  conceive  them  to  be,  do  not  exist.  It
is  a  question  of  infinitude,  of  eternity.  The  distance  from
the  earth  to  Sirius  is  no  greater  part  of  infinitude  than  that
which  lies  between  your  left  hand  and  your  right.  Elec-
tricity has  already  accustomed  us  to  rapid  transmissions
over  distances.  Light  rays  do  not  take  two  seconds  to  cross
the  space  between  the  earth  and  the  moon.  There  are  trans-
missions which  may  be  called  instantaneous.  Time  and  space
sometimes  become  one.

Nor  is  space,  on  the  other  hand,  what  it  seems  to  us.
Our  measurements  of  a  practical  nature  are  in  three  dimen-
sions :  length,  breadth,  and  thickness.  But  there  is  a  fourth
dimension;  there  is  hyperspace.  The  force  of  gravitation,
which  is  not  exerted  on  surfaces  but  penetrates  bodies;  the
electromagnetic  energy  of  ether;  molecular  chemistry — all
these  reveal  a  fourth  dimension.  The  apparitions  which  we
have  read  of  have  their  being  in  this  fourth-dimensional
space.  We  saw,  among  other  accounts,  how  Alfonso  of
Liguori  was  borne  from  his  convent  in  the  Kingdom  of  Naples
to  the  bedside  of  Pope  Clement  XIV,  in  Rome  ("At  the
Moment  of  Death,"  page  35)  ;  how  Saint  Anthony  of  Padua,
preaching  in  Montpellier,  showed  himself  in  his  convent
(idem,  page  36)  ;  how  Saint  Catharine  de'  Ricci,  in  Prato,
talked  with  Saint  Philip  of  Neri  in  Rome  {idem,  page  36).
We  read  of  Mademoiselle  Sagee's  double  (idem,  page  40)  ;
of  Sir  Came  Rasehse  in  the  House  of  Commons  (idem,  page
47)  ;  of  Mrs.  Wilman  (idem,  page  48)  ;  of  Miss  Rhoda  Clary
(idem,  page  55),  et  cetera.  We  have  already  made  the  as-
sertion, based  on  precise  scientific  observations   (idem,  page


386  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

59),  that  ^'a,  man  or  a  woman  in  good  health  may,  in  the
form  of  a  phantom,  be  in  a  spot  other  than  that  in  which
the  normal  body  is."  We  might  also  cite  proved  calcula-
tions as  well  as  these  accounts,  but  this  is  not  the  place  to
discuss  them.  Everything,  however,  is  in  agreement  in  lead-
ing us  to  believe  in  the  existence  of  a  fourth  dimension.  An
object  or  a  man  shut  into  a  room  by  the  four  walls,  the  ceil-
ing, and  the  floor,  may  leave  that  room.  It  would  seem  that
the  ultra-terrestrial  life  of  the  soul  is  passed  in  this  fourth-
dimensional  space,  already  calculable  by  algebraic  methods.

Do  souls  take  on  a  form?  What  is  Saint  Paul's  "spiritual
body,"  the  theosophists'  "astral  body,"  the  occultists'
"ethereal  body"?

Cases  in  which  "doubles"  have  appeared  may  be  instruc-
tive to  us.  We  made  a  special  choice  of  certain  examples  of
these  in  Volume  II,  and  we  have  encountered  them  during
the  entire  course  of  our  work.  There  are,  indubitably,  three
elements  in  a  human  being:  the  thinking  soul,  the  fluid
double,  and  the  physical  body.  This  double  is  governed  bj?'
the  soul  and  has  been  analyzed  under  more  than  one  aspect.
It  was  the  double  which,  in  the  middle  of  the  last  century,
Reichenbach  studied  under  the  name  Od,  sl  word  taken  from
the  Sanskrit,  meaning  "that  which  penetrates  everywhere."
The  word  does  not  mean  ether,  however.  All  psychists  have
the  works  of  this  writer  in  their  libraries,  as  well  as  those  of
the  man  who  continued  his  work.  Colonel  A.  de  Rochas.  The
odic  body  is  the  aura  investigated  by  occultists,  the  human
emanation  visible  to  sensitives  and  even  to  certain  normal
eyes,  after  suitable  preparation.  It  is  this  fluid  which  comes
into  play  in  experiments  in  levitation,  in  cases  of  apparitions,
and  of  more  than  one  posthumous  manifestation.  It  sur-
vives molecular  disintegration.  When  I  was  present  at  the
experiments  of  my  friend  Colonel  de  Rochas,  at  the  Poly-
technic School,  and  also  at  those  of  Dr.  Baraduc  in  his  labora-
tory, we  could  not  help  thinking  that  the  "doubles"  inves-


CONCLUSIONS  387

tigated  in  our  era  were  those  which  figured  in  the  rites  of  the
ancient  Egyptian  religion.  Innumerable  representations  of
them  have  been  preserved,  representations  four  thousand
years  old.     These  traditions  would  seem  to  have  been  lost.

Charles  du  Prel,  a  Bavarian  savant  (1839-99)  of  French
extraction/  to  whom  the  psychic  sciences  owe  important  in-
vestigations, reached  the  conclusion,  after  thirty  years  of
study,  that  the  soul  is  not  spirit  alone  but  a  spirit  that  is
joined  to  a  transcendental  body,  which  he  likens  to  Keichen-
bach's  Od.  According  to  his  way  of  thinking,  this  ethereal,
odic  body  comes  into  play  in  hypnotic  and  spiritistic  mani-
festations. It  is  the  occultists'  and  the  theosophists '  ''astral
body, ' '  endowed  with  its  own  special  forces.  According  to
this  theory  it  survives  the  physical  organism,  has  a  direct
connection  with  the  universal  ether,  can  penetrate  matter,
and  creates,  at  times,  substantial  phantoms  such  as  those  de-
scribed by  Crookes  and  other  observers.  This  astral  body
exists  during  life  (it  is  said)  as  well  as  after  death.  In
this  connection,  it  reminds  us  of  Kant's  idea  that  ''after  this
life  the  human  soul  is  bound  simultaneously  to  two  worlds"
and  that  "when,  at  last,  the  union  of  the  soul  and  the  body
ceases  with  death,  the  soul's  life  in  the  Beyond  is  the  natural
continuation  of  the  affinity  which  it  has  already  had  with
this  Beyond."  ("Dreams  of  a  Seer,"  20-25.)

If  the  human  soul  survives  the  physical  organism,  it  ex-
isted before  this  physical  organism ;  there  is  the  same  eternity
behind  us  as  before  us.  The  fundamental  objection  made  to
this  is  that  we  remember  nothing.  It  is  not  unanswerable,
for  every  one  of  us  is  born  with  personal  faculties  which  do
not  come  from  heredity,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  some  people
have  more  or  less  definite  recollections  of  an  unknown  past.

1  Le    Prel    is    in    the    possession    of    the    Saint-Claude    Monastery
( Franche-Comte ) .     See  du  Prel's  book  La  Mort,  VAu-dela,  la  Vie  dans
VAu-dela,    published   by   Madame    Hsemmerle    and    Colonel    de    Rochas
(Paris,  1905).


388  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

Eternal  life  can  be  understood  only  according  to  the  prin-
ciple of  reincarnation  laid  down  by  Pythagoras,  Origen,
Jean  Reynand,  and  so  many  other  philosophers.  We  have
not  the  space  in  the  present  volume  in  which  to  discuss  this
tremendous  question,  but  we  must  accept  the  principle  of
reincarnation.

In  our  total  ignorance,  from  a  scientific  point  of  view,  of
the  conditions  of  ultra-terrestrial  life,  we  can  only  make  con-
jectures as  to  this  life.  We  know,  and  shall  know  hence-
forth, that  the  soul  exists.  To  admit  this  survival  leads  us
to  admit  preexistence.  Earthly  life  is  but  a  phase  in  the
life  of  the  spirit.  The  doctrine  of  reincarnation  is,  more-
over, the  only  one  which  remains  admissible  after  we  have
pondered  all  metaphysical  considerations,  and  it  is  the  oldest
of  definite  religious  beliefs.  There  must  be  both  a  previous
existence  and  an  after  life.

The  discussion  of  this  great  problem  would  take  up  a  whole
book.  From  the  historical  point  of  view  alone  we  should
have  to  go  back  to  Origen,  one  of  the  most  learned  fathers  of
the  Church,  and  still  farther  back — to  Pythagoras,  to  Manu,
to  Buddha.  The  arguments  in  favor  of  preexistence  have
indisputable  value.^  The  principal  argument  is  the  inequal-
ity of  human  beings,  from  the  time  of  their  birth.  There  are
mental  inequalities  which  cannot  be  attributed  to  heredity,
special  aptitudes  for  sciences  and  arts,  innate  predispositions,
and  convictions  dating  from  childhood,  which  could  not  have
been  acquired  previously,  in  this  life.  Another  argument  is
that  people  have  recollections  more  or  less  vague,  more  or
less  precise,  of  things  "already  seen,"  of  sounds  "already
heard";  sensations  that  are  most  marked  with  certain  men
and  women,  and  that  are  inexplicable  save  by  the  hypothesis
of  reincarnation.

1  See,  in  particular,  the  book  by  Andre  Pezzani,  the  laureate  of  the
Institute,  La  Pluralite  des  existences  de  Vdrne,  conforme  a  la  doctrine
de  la  pluralit4  des  mondes  (1865):  The  chapter  on  Jean  Reynaud,
Henri  Martin,  Flammarion.


CONCLUSIONS  389

Each  of  us,  I  repeat,  enters  this  world  with  special  apti-
tudes, the  origin  of  which  cannot  be  found  in  heredity.  I
know  a  family  in  which  there  are  five  boys.  They  differ
entirely,  radically,  as  though  they  were  of  different  races.
A  hundred,  a  thousand  such  examples  might  be  given.

All  accumulated  memories  of  the  past  remain  latent  in
the  depths  of  us,  in  a  subconscious  mind  independent  of  the
brain.  The  memory  of  that  which  occurred  in  a  former
life  is  not  recorded  on  the  brain.

In  our  tastes,  our  preferences,  our  impressions,  our  in-
tuitions, our  dreams,  our  recollections,  our  sympathies,  and
our  antipathies,  it  is  the  self  which  existed  previous  to  ter-
restrial birth  that  emerges  more  or  less  vaguely.

One  of  my  friends  has,  as  a  companion,  a  lovable  and
distinguished  wife.  Her  disposition  is  unfailingly  gay  in
normal,  everyday  life;  she  is  a  charming  model  of  perpetual
good  humor.  But  her  dreams  are  terribly  sad  and  often  so
painful  that  they  make  her  weep.

There  are  two  beings  in  us  from  the  point  of  view  of  mem-
ory; two  memories  which  are  usually  combined  but  are  at
times  perfectly  distinct.

The  chief  objection  made  to  the  theory  of  preexistence
is  that  we  have  no  precise  recollections  of  our  previous  lives.
Of  what  use  is  it  to  have  lived  if  we  cannot  remember
having  done  so?  Is  memory  not  the  essence  of  personality?
One  may  answer  this  objection  by  saying  that  upon  enter-
ing earthly  life,  the  physical  organism  brings  with  it  new
conditions  and  a  brain  endowed  with  new  recording  capac-
ities for  transitory  memories.  It  may  further  be  answered
by  the  statement  that  we  do  not  remember  the  thousandth
part  of  what  has  happened  since  our  birth,  and  that  the
souPs  inherent  memory  cannot  function  except  during  its
freedom  in  the  intervals  between  incarnations.  In  our  sub-
conscious minds  there  is  knowledge,  there  are  thoughts  which
belong  to  our  former  existences,  and  cerebral  thoughts  born


390  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

of  our  present  existence.  The  first  are  truer,  deeper  than
the  second  and  more  firmly  based  on  reality.

In  the  case  of  certain  people,  recollections  of  the  occur-
rences of  a  former  life  have  been  very  distinct.  Our  pre-
vious existences  have  been  a  preparation  for  the  present  life.
The  present  life  is  a  preparation  for  the  existence  to  come.

The  soul  brings  with  it,  in  assuming  bodily  form,  the  apti-
tudes resulting  from  knowledge  previously  acquired.  Among
other  child  prodigies  we  might  mention  Pic  de  la  Mirandole,
Pascal,  Mozart,  and  Saint-Saens.  Parents  give  physical  life
to  their  children,  at  birth,  not  intellectual  and  moral  quali-
ties.

I  have  often  heard  the  objection  that  if  reincarnation  is
a  law  of  nature,  communication  with  the  dead  is  impossible.
We  may  answer  that,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  such  communica-
tion occurs  infrequently,  but  that  in  any  case  there  is  noth-
ing to  prove  that  reincarnation  takes  place,  of  necessity,  at
once.  Since  we  know,  as  yet,  almost  nothing  of  this  other
world,  all  is  still  to  be  learned.  Our  present  research  will
result  in  the  complete  transformation  of  the  various  religious
doctrines  as  to  the  future  life.  The  dead  who  communicate
with  us  speak  neither  of  paradise,  nor  of  hell,  nor  the
gardens  of  Islam,  nor  the  Elysian  Fields  of  the  Greeks,  nor
the  Hindu  nirvana.  We  may  say  with  Monsieur  Alfred
Benezech  and  with  Conan  Doyle  that  we  are  witnessing  an
intellectual  movement  which  will  revolutionize  the  trend  of
human  thought, — the  most  important  movement  since  the  ad-
vent of  Christianity.

From  the  philosophic  and  religious  point  of  view,  let  us
be  Pythagoreans  who  have  reappeared  in  the  twentieth  cen-
tury, with  its  astronomical  knowledge.

Whether  definite  or  not,  the  belief  in  a  future  life  dom-
inates all  nations,  in  spite  of  uncertainty  and  denial.  Under
some  form  or  other,  immortality  allures  human  hopes,  to-day
as  in  the  time  of  the  Gauls  and  the  Romans.     Revolutions


CONCLUSIONS  391

have  altered  this  in  no  way;  Robespierre  presided  at  the
festival  of  the  "Supreme  Being',"  and,  until  recently,  on  the
front  of  the  church  near  my  observatory  in  Juvisy  could  be
read  this  inscription,  in  large  letters:  ''The  French  people
acknowledges  the  existence  of  God  and  the  immortality  of
the  soul."  This  soul  is  believed  in  in  all  latitudes.  In
Japan,  at  the  present  day  (as  was  recently  seen  at  the  funeral
of  Lafcadio  Hearn,  the  writer,  in  Tokio)  little  cages  are
opened,  setting  birds  at  liberty:  a  touching  symbol  of  the
flight  of  the  soul  from  its  terrestrial  prison.

FVom  existence  to  existence,  psychic  life  lifts  us  by  a
progressive  evolution.  Each  of  us  has  been  mineral  mat-
ter, vegetable  matter,  and  animal  matter  before  becoming  a
man,  and  Man  is  not  the  last  stage.  We  are,  as  yet,  most
inferior.

Our  life  after  death  will  vary  according  to  our  prepara-
tions for  it.  We  are  what  we  make  ourselves.  The  the-
osophists'  Karma  is  real.  Those  who  live  only  for  matter
and  by  matter  will  not  enjoy  the  pleasures  of  the  spirit.
Plainly,  voluptuaries,  wedded  to  the  flesh,  will  be  disap-
pointed; sensualists  will  long  be  delayed  in  their  evolution.
Spiritual  progress  is  not  the  same  for  all.  Reincarnation
is  bound  up  with  intellectual  and  moral  qualities.

There  is  no  reason  for  thinking  that  the  reincarnations
of  the  human  soul  are  limited  to  our  planet.  Nor  is  it  un-
scientific to  attribute  to  psychic  monads  the  faculty  of  voy-
aging through  the  immensities  of  space,  of  passing  from  one
planet  to  another — from  the  earth  to  Mars,  Venus,  or  some
other  world.  Science  has  recently  demonstrated  that  ions
and  electrons  are  borne  almost  instantaneously  across  the
one  hundred  and  fifty  million  kilometers  which  lie  between
the  earth  and  the  sun.  During  the  magnetic  storms  of  the
solar  photosphere,  the  sun's  ions  reach  us;  they  pull  the
needles  of  compasses  out  of  their  proper  direction  and  cause
disturbances  of  our  terrestrial  electricity.


392  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY

Since  there  can  be  telepathic  transmissions  over  vast  dis-
tances, it  would  not  be  unreasonable  for  astronomers  to  hope,
as  we  remarked  above,  that  the  day  is  perhaps  not  distant
when  psychic  communication  might  be  established  between
a  planet  of  our  solar  system  and  the  earth.  As  regards  telep-
athy, space  is  non-existent.  'AH  these  aspects  cannot  be
gone  into  deeply.  My  readers  had  a  glimpse  of  them  in
'* Lumen,"  half  a  century  ago.

The  conclusions  which  we  have  reached  are  the  result  of
independent,  individual  labor,  carried  on  without  predilec-
tion for  any  belief  or  any  religious  system.^  It  is  note-
worthy, from  the  historical  point  of  view,  that  these  conclu-
sions are  in  conformity  with  the  teachings  of  occultism,  the
esoteric  traditions  common  to  India,  to  Egypt,  to  Chaldea,
to  Persia,  to  Greece,  to  the  Hebrews,  to  the  Essenes,  to  Caba-
lism,  and  to  the  alchemists  of  the  middle  ages.

Most  of  the  subjects  discussed  in  the  chapters  of  these
three  volumes — doubles,  telepathic  transmissions,  manifesta-
tions after  death,  and  apparitions — ^we  find  in  the  Book  of
the  Dead,  in  the  Rig- Veda,  in  the  Zend-Avesta,  in  the  Bud-
dhists' Tripitaka,  in  the  Mahabharata,  in  the  Laws  of  Manu,
and  in  the  Bible.  We  should  be  less  surprised  by  this  close
relation  between  the  ancient  and  modern  perceptions  of  the
same  truth — conclusions  reached  at  periods  several  thousand
years  apart  and  by  methods  wholly  dissimilar — than  was  the
first  Jesuit  missionary  who  arrived  in  China  upon  learning
that  the  myth  of  a  child  god,  born  of  a  virgin,  had  been
taught  there  for  five  thousand  years.

Are  we  returning,  therefore,  in  our  twentieth  century,  to
doctrines  enunciated  seven  thousand  years  ago?  Yes,  and
no.  Yes,  in  the  sense  that  the  ancients  knew  more  about
these  things  than  is  generally  supposed.     No,  in  the  sense

1  The  first  precept  of  Pythagoras's  Golden  Verses  may  be  translated
as  follows:     "Let  human  beings  devise  their  religions,  but  have  your


CONCLUSIONS  393

that  present  scientific  methods  have  brought  practical  con-
firmation and  the  beginning  of  an  explanation.


"Whatever  additional  information  may  be  added  to  that
gathered  from  the  preceding  occurrences,  from  this  time  on
we  may  be  certain — and  our  certainty  is  based  on  scientific
proofs — that  the  soul  survives  after  the  last  earthly  breath
has  been  drawn.  The  soul  is  independent  of  the  material
organism  and  continues  to  live  on  after  death.

Assuredly,  v^e  are  far  from  knowing  everything.  There
are  difficulties,  obscurities,  and  enigmas  which  remain  in-
soluble to  our  human  faculties.  Proofs  of  survival  are  rare
and  exceptional.  A  limitless,  unknown  region  surrounds  us :
we  have  not  attained  to  a  knowledge  of  reality.  If  we  ap-
proach it  in  some  measure,  let  us  be  satisfied;  instead  of
slumbering  in  the  night  we  shall  awaken  at  the  dawn.

Since  this  is  the  first  time  that  a  work  of  the  sort  has
been  written,  and  since  no  mortal  has  been  able,  thus  far,
to  lift  the  veil  of  Isis,  I  dare  not  claim  to  have  entirely  solved
our  tremendous  problem;  but  I  hope  that  the  present  work
will  not  prove  fruitless.  I  have  only  cleared  the  ground  and
opened  a  way  for  the  new  science.  The  future  will  pass
judgment  on  the  results  of  my  efforts.  We  have  acted  upon
the  counsel  of  Jesus:  ^'Seek,  and  ye  shall  find."  However
far  future  discoveries  may  carry  us,  the  doctrines  which  we
have  acquired  may  henceforth  be  summed  up  in  these  words :
The  body  dies.  The  soul  lives  on  in  the  infinite  and  the
eternal.


-irC_^^  A/.
