Death and Its Mystery: Before Death
Camille Flammarion; E. S. Brooks (trans.), 1921
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): The complete text of Volume I of Flammarion's 1921-1923 'Death and Its Mystery' — proofs of the soul's existence before death; the psychical-research canon's great trilogy (vol. II not located). Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/deathitsmysteryb00flamrich). This 1921 publication is in the public domain in the United States.

========================================================================

/ 


E5TABLISMEU      lOf-^ 


X 


MUDIES^i^LIBRARY, 

.    LIMITED.' 

30  TO  34.  NEW  OXFORD  STREET,  W.C.I. 


BRANCH  OFFICES 


I32,KENSINGT0N  HIGH  STREET,W.8. 
48, QUEEN    VICTORIA   ST.  E.C.4. 


\ 


SUBSCRIPTION, 
TWELVE  SHILLINGS   PER   ANNUM  &  UPWARD 


Y 


DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

BEFORE  DEATH 


DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

BEFORE  DEATH 

Proofs  of  the  Existence  of  the  Soul 

BY 

CAMILLE  FLAMMARION 


TRANSLATED  BY 

E.  S.  BROOKS 


T.  FISHER  UNWIN,  Ltd. 
LONDON:  ADELPHI  TERRACE. 

1922 


',1 


Copyright,  1921,  by 
The  Century  Co. 


Copyright,  1920,  by 
Ernest  Flammarion 


PRINTED  IN  U.  S.  A. 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS 

CHAPTER  PAGE 

I    The  Greatest  of  Problems — Can  It  Actually   Be 

Solved?    3 

II    Materialism — an  Erroneous,  Incomplete,  and  Insuf- 
ficient Doctrine 28 

III  What  Is  Man f    Does  the  Soul  Exist? 47 

IV  Supra-normal  Faculties  of  the  Soul,  unknown  or 

Little  Understood 63 

V    The  Will,  Acting  without  the  Spoken  Word,  with- 
out A  Sign,  and  at  a  Distance -  .     99 

VI    Telepathy  and  Psychic  Transmissions  at  a  Distance  128 

VII    Vision  without  Eyes — the  Spirit^s  Vision,  Exclusive 

OF  Telepathic  Transmissions 164 

VIII    The  Sight  of  Future  Events;  The  Present  Future; 

The  Already  Seen 221 

IX    Knowledge  of  the  Future 243 


517GJ8 


DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 


DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 


THE  GREATEST  OP  PROBLEMS — CAN  IT  ACTUALLY  BE 
SOLVED  ? 

To  be  or  not  to  be. 

Shakspeeb. 

ALTHOUGH  I  am  not  yet  entirely  satisfied  with  it, 
I  have  decided  to  offer  to-day,  to  the  attention  of 
thinking  men,  a  work  begun  more  than  half  a  cen- 
tury ago.  The  method  of  scientific  experiment,  which  is 
the  only  method  of  value  in  the  search  for  truth,  lays  re- 
quirements upon  us  which  we  cannot  and  ought  not  to  avoid. 
The  grave  problem  considered  in  this  treatise  is  the  most 
complex  of  all  problems  and  concerns  the  general  construc- 
tion of  the  universe  as  well  as  of  the  human  being — that 
microcosm  of  the  great  whole.  ^  In  the  days  of  our  youth 
we  begin  these  endless  researches  because  we  are  full  of  con- 
fidence and  see  a  long  life  stretching  out  before  us.  But 
the  longest  life  passes,  with  its  lights  and  shadows,  like  a^ 
dream.  (If  we  may  form  one  wish  in  the  course  of  this  exist- ^' 
ence,  it  is  to  have  been  in  some  way  of  service  to  the  slow 
but  none  the  less  real  progress  of  humanity,  that  fantastic 
race,  credulous  and  skeptical,  virtuous  and  criminal,  indif- 
ferent and  curious,  good  and  wicked,  as  well  as  incoherent 
and  ignorant  as  a  whole — ^barely  out  of  the  chrysalis  wrap-  » 
pings  of  its  animal  state. 
When  the  first  editions  of  my  book  *'La   Pluralite  des 

3 


4  DEATH  AND  ITB  MYSTERY 

Mondes  habites*'  were  published  (1862-64),  a  certain  number 
of  readers  seemed  to  expect  the  natural  sequel :  * '  La  Pluralite 
des  existences  de  I'ame."  If  the  first  problem  has  been  con- 
sidered solved  by  my  succeeding  books  (''Astronomic  popu- 
laire,"  ''La  Planete  Mars/'  "Uranie,''  "Stella,"  "Reves 
etoiles,''  etc.),  the  second  has  remained  an  open  question,^ 
and  the  survival  of  the  soul,  either  in  space  or  on  other 
/\  worlds  or  through  earthly  reincarnations,  still  confronts  us 
as  the  most  formidable  of  problems. 

A  thinking  atom,  borne  on  a  material  atom  across  the 
boundless  space  of  the  Milky  Way,  man  may  well  ask  himself 
if  he  is  as  insignificant  in  soul  as  he  is  in  body,  if  the  law 
of  progress  can  raise  him  in  an  indefinite  ascent,  and  if  there 
is  a  system  of  order  in  the  moral  world  that  is  harmoniously 
associated  with  the  order  of  the  physical  world. 

Is  not  spirit  superior  to  matter  ?    What  is  our  true  nature  ? 
What   is   our   future   destiny?    Are   we   merely   ephemeral 
flames  shining  an  instant  to  be  forever  extinguished?     Shall 
we  never  see  again  those  whom  we  have  loved  and  who  have 
gone  before  us  into  the  Great  Beyond?    Are  such  separa- 
tions eternal?     Does  everything  in  us  die?     If  something  re- 
\  mains,  what  becomes  of  this  imponderable  element — invisible, 
H^i'^Hntangible,  but  conscious — which  must  constitute  our  lasting 
*  personality?    Will  it  endure  for  long?    Will  it  endure  for- 
ever? 

Vfo  he  or  not  to  he?     Such  is  the  great,  the  eternal  question 

/asked  by  all  the  philosophers,  the  thinkers,  the  seekers  of  all 

t/  times  and  all  creeds.     Is  death  an  end  or  a  transformation? 

-^k  Do  there  exist  proois^evidences  of  the  survival  of  the  human 

being  after  the  destruction  of  the  living  organism?    Until 

to-day  the  subject  has  remained  outside  the  field  of  scientific 

observation.     Is  it  possible  to  approach  it  by  the  principles 

1  Although  a  distinguished  writer,  the  philosopher  Andr6  Pezzani,  who 
calls  himself  my  disciple,  pulilished  in  1865  La  Pluralite  des  existences 
de  Vame,  conforme  a  la  doctrine  de  la  Pluralit6  des  mondes. 


THE  GREATEST  OF  PROBLEMS        5 

of  experimentation  to  which  humanity  owes  all  the  progress 
that  has  been  realized  by  science?  Is  the  attempt  logical? 
Are  we  not  face  to  face  with  the  mysteries  of  an  invisible 
world  which  is  different  from  that  which  lies  before  our 
senses  and  which  cannot  be  penetrated  by  our  methods  of 
positive  investigation  ?  May  we  not  essay,  seek  to  find  whether 
or  not  certain  facts,  if  carefully  and  correctly  observed,  are 
susceptible  of  being  scientifically  analyzed  and  accepted  as 
real  by  the  severest  criticism  ?  We  want  no  more  fine  words, 
no  more  metaphysics.     Facts!     Facts! 

It  is  a  question  of  our  fate,  our  destiny,  our  personal  future, 
our  very  existence. 

It  is  not  cold  reason  alone  that  demands  an  answer;  it  is 
not  only  the  mind ;  it  is  our  longings,  our  heart  also. 

It  is  childish  and  may  appear  conceited  to  bring  one's  own 
self  upon  the  scene,  but  it  is  sometimes  difficult  to  refrain 
from  doing  so;  and  as  I  have  undertaken  these  laborious  re- 
searches primarily  in  order  to  answer  the  questions  of  sor- 
rowing hearts  it  seems  to  me  that  the  most  logical  preface 
to  this  book  will  be  furnished  by  some  of  those  innumerable 
confidential  communications  which  have  reached  me  during 
more  than  half  a  century,  begging  with  anguish  for  the  solu- 
tion of  the  mystery. 

Those  who  have  never  lost  by  death  some  one  deeply  loved 
have  never  sounded  the  depths  of  despair,  have  never  bruised 
themselves  against  the  closed  door  of  the  tomb.  We  seek,  and 
an  impenetrable  wall  rises  inexorably  before  the  terror  that 
confronts  us.  I  have  received  hundreds  of  earnest  appeals 
which  I  should  have  liked  to  answer.  Should  I  make  these 
confidences  known  ?  I  have  hesitated  a  long  time.  But  there 
are  so  many  of  them,  they  reflect  so  faithfully  the  intense 
desire  that  exists  to  reach  a  solution,  that  it  has  now  become  a 
matter  of  general  interest  and  my  duty  is  clear.  These  ex- 
pressions of  feeling  are  the  natural  introduction  to  this  work, 
for  it  is  they  that  have  decided  me  to  write  it.     Nevertheless, 


6  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

I  must  apologize  for  reproducing  these  pages  without  altera- 
tion ;  for  if  they  reveal  the  very  souls  of  their  sensitive  authors, 
they  also  express  themselves  about  me  in  terms  of  praise  which 
it  might  well  seem  immodest  on  my  part  to  publish.  But  this 
is  only  a  personal  detail,  and  consequently  insignificant,  espe- 
cially as  an  astronomer,  who  realizes  that  he  is  an  atom  be- 
fore the  infinite  and  eternal  universe,  is  inaccessible  to  and 
hermetically  sealed  against  feelings  of  worldly  vanity.  Those 
who  know  me  have  considered  me  so  for  many  long  years. 
My  absolute  indifference  to  all  honors  has  abundantly  proved 
this  true.  Whether  I  am  considered  great  or  insignificant, 
whether  I  am  praised  or  criticized,  I  remain  the  distant 
spectator. 

The  following  letter  was  written  me  by  a  distracted  mother 
and  has  been  reproduc'&d  literally.  It  shows  how  well  worth 
while  it  would  be  at  least  to  attempt  to  relieve  suffering 
humanity.  It  is  more  than  the  science  of  doctoring  the  body, 
it  is  the  science  of  healing  the  soul  that  must  be  created. 

To  Our  Great  Flammarion 

Reinosa,  Spain,  March  30,  1907. 
Monsieur  : 

I  wish  I  might  cling  to  your  knees  and  kiss  your  feet  while  I 
beseech  you  to  hear  me  and  not  to  reject  my  prayer.  I  cannot,  I 
know  not  how  to  express  myself.  I  wish  I  might  arouse  your  pity, 
might  interest  you  in  my  grief,  but  I  should  have  to  see  you,  to  tell 
you  myself  of  my  unhappiness,  to  paint  the  horror  of  what  is  pass- 
ing in  my  soul,  and  then  you  could  not  deny  me  an  immense  com- 
passion. What  I  have  had  to  suffer  before  I  could  bring  myself  to 
commit  this  act  of  daring  and  indiscretion  that  resembles  mad- 
ness! Whence  came  the  idea  of  addressing  myself  to  our  illus- 
trious Flammarion,  of  asking  him  to  console  an  unknown  person 
who  has  no  other  claim  upon  his  kindness  than  that  of  a  fellow- 
countrywoman?  It  is  because  I  am  suffering!  I  have  just  lost 
a  son,  an  only  son.    I  am  a  widow  and  my  only  happiness  consisted 


THE  GREATEST  OP  PROBLEMS       7 

in  this  son  and  one  daughter.  Monsieur  Flammarion,  you  would 
have  had  to  know  the  beloved  child  I  have  just  lost,  to  understand. 
I  should  have  to  tell  you  the  story  of  the  thirty-three  years  of  his 
existence:  then  you  would  understand. 

When  at  five  years  of  age  he  was  given  up  by  all  the  celebrated 
physicians  of  Paris  and  Madrid,  because  of  hip  trouble,  my  poor 
husband  and  I  sacrificed  a  brilliant  position  at  Madrid  and  buried 
ourselves  in  a  lonely  country  district  in  Spain  in  order  to  save  this 
little  boy  who  was  the  object  of  our  devotion.     For  eight  years  he 
was  ill  and  he  was  left  lame!    What  he  cost  me  in  anxiety,  care, 
sorrow,  sleepless  nights,  anguish,  and  sacrifices  it  would  be  impossible 
to  explain.     But  how  dear  and  lovable  he  was!     Brought  up  in  a 
little  carriage,  petted  and  caressed,  he  was  the  most  adorable  child 
one  could  imagine.     Oh,  that  childhood!  how  I  wish  I  could  get  it 
back!     At  twelve  years  of  age  he  no  longer  suffered  from  his  leg, 
but  he  could  not  walk  without  crutches.    What  a  grief  this  was  to 
me,  who  had  brought  him  into  the  worM  strong  and  well  made! 
Later,  at  seventeen,  he  walked  with  only  one  crutch  and  a  cane.    At 
twenty,  he  was  as  handsome  a  lad  as  could  be  seen  anywhere.    If 
I  dared,  I  would  send  you  his  photograph,  so  that  you  might  see 
that   my   mother's   love   exaggerates   nothing.     Every   one   felt   his 
charm;  he  had  that  gift  of  pleasing  which  can  be  neither  defined 
nor  explained.     Men,  women,  children,  old  and  young  were  charmed 
by  I  know  not  what  that  radiated  from  his  person.     Wherever  I 
went  with  him,  I  was  congratulated  on  the  beauty  and  goodness  of 
my  son.     People  envied  me  him.    Ah!  that  was  because  he  was  as 
beautiful  as  he  was  good!     His  soul  was  all  nobility,  grandeur, 
generosity.     Intelligent  and  spiritual,  even-tempered  and  sweet  in 
his  disposition  as  he  was,  life  with  him  was  a  heavenly  dream,  a  con- 
tinual enchantment.    You  will  realize  what  this  meant.  Monsieur, 
when  I  tell  you  that  at  twenty  he  developed  cystitis,  which  was 
certainly  a  return  of  that  first  trouble  in  his  leg,  and  that  this  cy- 
stitis was  the  beginning  of  a  whole  chain  of  suffering  of  which  only 
hell  could  give  you  any  idea.     I  cannot  understand  how  God,  our 
Creator,  can  permit  the  human  body  to  be  so  martyrized.     Above 
all,  when  this  martyrdom  is  inflicted  on  a  good  and  innocent  being 
like  my  son.     All  the  great  specialists  were  consulted  again,  but 
alas!  none  of  them  was  able  to  cure  him.    He  spent  thirteen  years 


8  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

alternating  between  periods  of  better  and  worse,  preserving,  in  the 
midst  of  the  most  atrocious  suffering,  his  sweetness,  his  goodness 
and  even  his  gaiety,  so  as  not  to  sadden  others.  ^ 

For  the  past  four  years  he  has  scarcely  suffered  at  all,  and  last 
year  he  was  so  much  better  that  he  believed  he  was  cured.  My 
poor  husband  had  died  in  1902.  From  that  time  my  son  had  been 
the  head  of  our  little  family:  mother,  sister,  and  himself.  How 
happy  we  were! 

Although  we  were  obliged  to  work  to  supply  our  needs,  life  ap- 
peared very  beautiful  to  us!  My  daughter  had  never  wished  to 
marry,  so  that  she  might  devote  herself  to  her  brother,  whom  she 
adored.  I  was  so  happy  in  the  love  I  saw  that  my  children  bore 
each  other  that  I  no  longer  feared  death  for  myself,  as  I  knew  I 
should  leave  them  together,  not  to  be  separated  as  long  as  they 
lived,  living  each  for  the  other.  And  how  shall  I  describe  to  you 
the  tenderness  of  my  son  for  his  mother,  of  this  mother  for  her 
son?  Seek  in  heaven  among  the  angels;  seek  above,  among  those 
worlds  to  which  your  gaze  penetrates;  seek  among  all  the  best  and 
sweetest  things  that  love  can  produce,  and  you  will  have  only  a 
feeble  idea  of  the  filial  and  the  maternal  love  of  these  two.  I  dare 
not  think  of  it.  I  dare  not  remember  his  eyes,  his  voice,  when  he 
looked  at  me  and  said,  "Darling  Mother!'^ 

Last  August  it  was  proposed  to  him  that  he  should  visit  a  mine  (he 
had  acquired  a  taste  for  this  kind  of  work  and  had  been  occupied 
with  it  for  some  time).  He  wished  to  take  me  with  him.  When 
we  reached  a  certain  spot  we  were  told  that  we  should  have  to  go 
on  horseback  to  reach  the  mine.  As  I  knew  he  had  been  forbidden 
to  ride  horseback,  because  of  his  bladder,  I  refused;  but  my  son 
assured  me  he  felt  certain  he  could  make  this  trip  without  danger. 
We  hesitated;  we  discussed  it;  I  yielded. 

Ah !  why  can  we  never  retrace  our  steps !  This  excursion  so  tired 
my  son  that  he  fell  ill  of  gastric  fever.  He  was  in  the  hands  of 
stupid  and  ignorant  physicians  who  knew  nothing  of  his  condition 
and  who  let  months  slip  by  while  they  said  that  nothing  was  the 
matter!  A  tumor  attacked  the  bladder,  the  walls  could  not  endure 
the  strain:  the  bladder  burst! 

The  tortures  of  hell  are  nothing  to  the  tortures  suffered  by  my 


THE  GREATEST  OF  PROBLEMS       9 

unhappy  son!  A  celebrated  surgeon  was  called  in.  He  did  not 
arrive  until  twenty-two  hours  after  the  accident.  My  child  had 
made  all  his  preparations  for  leaving  this  world.  They  operated, 
but  all  hope  was  gone.  The  poor  boy  survived  the  operation  for 
thirteen  days;  the  surgeon  had  given  him  only  twenty -four  hours 
more.  But  my  son,  who  understood  his  mother's  and  sister's  grief, 
resisted,  fighting  bravely  in  spite  of  everything.  What  days,  Mon- 
sieur !     They  gave  us  the  measure  of  his  greatness  of  soul. 

Thinking  only  of  us,  of  the  consequences  of  his  death  to  two 
women  who  would  remain  alone  and  without  support  in  a  foreign 
country,  who  would  always  mourn  an  adored  son  and  brother,  he 
tried  in  all  ways  to  soften  the  horror  of  this  situation.  What  he 
said  to  us  in  those  supreme  moments  were  the  words  not  of  a  young 
man  of  thirty-three  but  of  a  saint,  an  angel,  a  superhuman  being! 
Oh,  that  face  tortured  by  suffering!  Those  eyes  that  seemed  to  see 
something  of  another  world!  And  his  mouth,  twisted  by  pain,  still 
trying  to  smile,  his  hand  pressing  mine  as  he  said :  "Good-by,  darl- 
ing Mother,  good-by!  I  have  loved  you  so  dearly!  Do  not  forget 
me!  Oh!  Almighty  God,"  he  said,  "you  did  not  lay  so  much  on 
your  son,  on  your  own  son,  who  was  God,  and  I,  who  am  only  a 
poor  man,  you  give  ten  times  more  to  bear.  Oh!  death!  in  pity, 
death !    If  you  love  me,  ask  God  to  send  me  death !" 

For  thirteen  days  and  longer! 

Oh,  Flammarion !  have  pity  on  me !  In  the  name  of  your  mother, 
be  merciful!  I  am  mad  with  grief.  It  is  thirty-two  days  since  he 
died  and  I  have  not  slept  ten  hours  since.  At  night  I  sit  up  until 
four  in  the  morning,  and  when  fatigue  has  conquered  me  I  throw 
myself,  entirely  clothed,  on  my  bed  and  shut  my  eyes,  but  a  iixed  idea 
continues  during  this  painful  sleep ;  I  do  not  lose  my  memories  for  a 
single  instant,  and  when  I  open  my  eyes  I  am  obsessed  by  them  all 
day  long;  what  I  suffer  is  so  frightful,  so  atrocious  that  I  ask  my- 
self if  hell  is  not  preferable  to  what  I  endure.  Is  it  possible  that 
it  can  be  God  who  has  created  beings  destined  to  experience  such 
horrors ! 

You,  an  astronomer  and  a  thinker,  who  weigh  the  suns  and  the 
worlds,  you  whose  glance  penetrates  those  mysterious  regions  among 
which  our  spirit  loses  itself,  tell  me,  I  beg  you  on  my  knees,  tell  me 


10  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

if  our  souls  survive  somewhere.  If  I  can  preserve  the  hope  of  see- 
ing my  son  again,  if  he  sees  me.  If  there  exists  any  way  of  com- 
municating with  him. 

You  who  know  so  many  things  about  the  heavens,  about  spirits, 
about  the  marvels  of  the  universe,  I  ask  you  in  pity  to  tell  me  some- 
thing that  can  leave  my  wounded,  tortured  heart  a  ray  of  hope,  how- 
ever feeble !  You  cannot  understand  the  excess  of  my  grief.  I  wish 
that  I  might  die  of  it.  I  hope  to  die,  but — my  daughter  is  here,  who 
beseeches  me  to  live,  not  to  leave  her  alone  in  the  world;  and  then 
I  see  myself  forced  to  live  and  forced  to  suffer!  What  horror! 
When  I  think  that  in  an  instant  I  could  put  an  end  to  my  misery! 
If  it  were  possible  to  weigh  grief,  to  measure  it  as  you  measure  the 
worlds,  the  weight  would  be  so  heavy,  the  extent  so  great  that  you 
would  be  frightened  to  think  that  one  human  soul  could  reach  such 
a  degree  of  torture :  there  must  be  something  infernal  in  my  destiny ! 
Neither  red-hot  irons  nor  pincers  could  cause  such  suffering!  My 
son,  my  beloved  child !  I  want  him,  I  wish  to  see  him !  I  desire  no 
heaven  without  him.  Oh!  my  adored  Emanuel!  flesh  of  my  flesh! 
joy  of  my  life!  my  happiness  as  a  mother  lost  forever!  Is  there  a 
God?  Is  it  he  who  permits  these  horrors  on  earth?  Monsieur 
Flammarion,  in  pity,  in  the  name  of  those  you  love  and  who  love 
you,  do  not  be  insensible  to  the  greatest  human  grief  that  has  ever 
torn  a  heart !  Say  something  to  me,  you  who  possess  the  secrets  of 
the  heavens!  you  who  know!  We  simple  mortals  can  neither  know 
nor  understand.  Tell  me  if  souls  survive  somewhere,  if  they  remem- 
ber, if  they  still  love  those  who  remain  on  earth ;  if  they  see  us,  if  we 
can  call  them  near  us. 

Ah !  if  I  could  see  you  and  fall  at  your  knees !  Forgive  this  mad 
act.  I  no  longer  know  whether  I  dream  or  wake!  I  feel  only  one 
thing,  a  grief  so  sharp  that  it  seems  like  a  red-hot  iron,  continually 
plunged  into  a  gaping  wound. 

Forgive  me.  Monsieur  Flammarion!  Your  suns  and  stars,  so 
beautiful  and  so  marvelous,  do  not  feel  or  suffer.  And  I  feel  a  grief 
greater  than  all  the  worlds  that  move  in  space!  So  small,  so  un- 
important a  thing,  and  yet  to  feel  so  intolerable  a  grief!  What  can 
it  be?  What  is  this  mystery?  A  being  so  feeble  and  limited — and 
to  suffer  so ! 


THE  GREATEST  OP  PROBLEMS       11 

Forgive  me  once  more,  Master,  in  the  name  of  your  mother! 
Forgive  me  and  pity  your  unhappy  countrywoman, 

N.   BOFFARD, 

At  Reinosa,  Province  of  Santander,  Spain. 

So  runs  this  letter,  full  of  anguish,  v^^hich  I  reproduce 
literally,  in  order  to  show  all  the  horror  of  such  a  situation. 
I  repeat  that  I  must  apologize  for  the  dithyrambics  that 
concern  me.  Their  only  significance  is  in  so  clearly  revealing 
this  immense  grief  joined  to  the  ardent  hope  of  seeing  these 
clouds  dispersed. 

One  would  have  to  possess  a  heart  of  stone  to  be  un- 
touched by  these  heartrending  appeals  of  mother  love,  to 
remain  deaf  to  the  an^ish  of  such  despair,  and  not  to  feel 
an  ardent  desire  to  consecrate  one's  life  to  bringing  some 
relief. 

Priests  receive  appeals  of  this  sort  every  day,  because 
they  are  considered  ministers  of  God,  endowed  with  the 
power  of  penetrating  the  riddle  of  the  supernatural  and 
solving  it.  They  answer  such  grief  with  the  consolations 
of  religion.  The  priest  speaks  in  the  name  of  Faith  and 
Revelation;  but  faith  cannot  be  imposed,  it  is  not  even  as 
generally  held  as  we  imagine.  I  know  priests,  bishops,  and 
cardinals  who  are  without  it,  even  while  they  teach  it  as 
a  social  necessity.  There  are  a  hundred  different  religions 
on  earth,  all  of  them  perhaps  useful,  but  unacceptable  from 
the  point  of  view  of  philosophy.  Face  to  face  with  such 
events  as  I  have  just  related,  are  their  ministers  able  to 
convince  us  that  a  just  and  good  God  rules  over  humanity? 
The  man  of  science  is  seated  neither  on  the  bench  of  the 
confessional  nor  in  the  bishop's  chair,  and  he  can  tell  only 
what  he  knows.  He  is  honest,  frank,  independent,  rational 
before  everything.  His  duty  is  research  and  study.  We  are 
still  seeking  and  we  do  not  pretend  to  have  found  the  answer, 
still  less  to  have  a  revelation  of  the  truth  from  heaven.     That 


12  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

was  the  only  answer  I  was  able  to  give  the  unknown  woman, 
even  while  I  left  her  the  hope  of  some  day  seeing  her  son 
again  and  in  the  meantime  of  remaining  in  spiritual  rela- 
tionship with  him.  But  I  do  not,  like  Auguste  Comte,  Saint- 
Simon,  or  Enfantin,  imagine  myself  the  high  priest  of  a  new 
religion.  Nevertheless,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  uni- 
versal religion  of  the  future  will  be  founded  upon  science, 
and  especially  upon  astronomy,  associated  with  the  knowl- 
edge of  physics. 

Let  us  make  our  search  humbly  and  all  together.  I  must 
excuse  myself  again  for  having  reproduced  the  expressions 
of  praise  in  this  letter,  but  to  suppress  them  would  be  to 
suppress  at  the  same  time  the  expression  of  this  distress, 
this  confidence  and  this  hope. 

The  loss  of  a  son  inspired  the  preceding  letter ;  the  loss  of  a 
daughter  inspired  the  following. 

Theil-sur-Vanne,  November,  1899. 
Master  : 

I  have  the  honor  of  knowing  you  through  your  works  well  enough 
to  be  sure  that  you  are  kind  and  to  hope  that,  although  I  am  un- 
known to  you,  you  will  be  willing  to  read  with  indulgence  what  I 
write  and  will  pity  my  misfortune  while  according  me  your  spiritual 
help,  of  which  I  have  such  great  need. 

On  the  nineteenth  of  last  September  I  had  the  unspeakable  sor- 
row of  losing  a  charming  child  sixteen  and  a  half  years  old,  of  great 
intelligence  and  an  exquisite  delicacy  of  feeling,  and  oh!  how  beau- 
tiful! She  seemed  an  incorporeal  being,  so  ideally  lovely  were  her 
chaste,  graceful  body  and  her  angelic  face.  My  sweet  darling,  w4th 
her  large,  magnificent  blue  eyes  full  of  expression,  framed  with 
lashes  as  dark  as  her  delicately  arched  eyebrows,  her  nose  a  little 
long  but  fine  and  straight,  her  mouth  somewhat  large  but  expressing 
so  much  goodness,  her  face  a  soft  oval,  the  color  of  a  lovely  lily. 
A  dear  little  dimple  in  her  chin  gave  beauty  to  her  smile  and  lighted 
up  a  face  that  was  usually  rather  serious. 

A  splendid  mass  of  liglit  auburn  hair,  naturally  curly,  delicntely 
waved,  graced  her  virginal  forehead  like  a  golden  foam;  her  ears 


THE  GREATEST  OF  PROBLEMS       13 

were  dear  little  shells  which  you  divined,  hidden  in  the  mass  of 
her  fine  hair,  little  nests  for  kisses,  upon  which  I  can  no  longer 
place  my  lips,  hungry  with  tenderness.  My  dearly  loved  daughter 
is  no  more.  My  eyes  can  no  longer  rest  in  affection  upon  her  charm- 
ing, beloved  face;  I  can  only  weep  for  her.  So  many  moral  and 
physical  perfections  brutally,  cruelly,  stupidly,  savagely  blotted  out! 
Pitiless  death  has  taken  everything  from  me.  My  Renee,  my  be- 
loved— I  have  her  no  longer,  and  I  go  on  living.  Life! — what  a 
prison ! 

And  with  her  have  vanished  our  good  talks.  They  are  ended  now 
— all  our  wonderful  conversations  on  the  most  abtruse  questions  of 
the  life  beyond,  for  although  she  was  so  young,  my  daughter  was 
a  thoughtful  girl,  a  precious  friend,  my  confidante  and  dearly  loved 
companion.  She  was  everything  to  me,  this  pure  and  lovely  flower, 
cut  down  before  her  full  and  perfect  blooming.  Why?  What  a 
problem ! 

Since  then,  I  have  thought  of  suicide  as  a  way  of  rejoining  her, 
but  (did  this  intuition  come  from  her  approaching  end?)  the 
evening  before  her  death,  while  her  arms  were  about  me,  she  said 
coaxingly,  "Mamma  must  not  commit  suicide ;  she  must  wait,  must  n't 
*shef'  I  was  completely  taken  aback  and  I  did  not  understand  until 
the  next  day  when,  white  as  a  lily,  she  gave  me  her  last  kiss  and 
closed  her  eyes  forever.  Ah !  that  last  kiss !  She  put  all  that  re- 
mained of  her  life  into  it.  What  moments!  What  tortures!  Su- 
preme, never-to-be-forgotten  hours!  I  still  see  her.  I  love  my 
suffering.  I  see  my  dear  little  dead  girl  who  had  felt,  who  had 
guessed  my  despair:  she  wished  me  to  remain  to  weep  for  her.  My 
grief  is  full  of  vain  regrets,  of  the  sense  of  bitter  deception,  of 
revolt  against  everybody  and  everything;  I  find  myself  murmuring 
against  God  Himself,  who  has  taken  from  me  what  is  a  thousand 
times  dearer  than  my  life.  From  this  time  on  I  can  live  only  in 
the  memory  of  her — my  daughter,  my  constant  thought — she  was 
my  religion,  I  adored  her.  If  it  is  possible,  I  should  like  to  find 
some  consolation  in  spiritualism,  to  take  refuge  in  it  with  faith, 
hope,  and  love. 

But  I  know  so  little  about  these  matters. 

My  husband  and  I  have  tried  to  experiment  with  a  table,  alas! 
without   results,   although   we   did   everything   to   insure    success — 


14  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

placing  on  the  table  the  photograph  of  our  dear  child,  one  of  her 
curls,  a  page  of  her  writing — and  although  we  evoked  her  with  all 
the  strength  of  our  will.  But  our  tears,  our  calls,  our  longings  were 
all  useless.  I  wish  to  go  on,  to  persevere,  and  it  is  toward  this  end, 
dear  and  illustrious  Master,  that  I  am  begging  you  to  help  us. 
Does  she  still  exist?  she  whose  life  was  cut  off  so  brutally  in  its 
first  flowering,  who  had  had  time  to  love  only  her  mother,  her 
mamma — dear  word  in  so  beloved  a  mouth !  Ah !  I  was  too  happy  ! 
how  long  is  it  since  I  heard  the  sweet  sound  of  her  voice !  I  would 
gladly  give  all  the  years  of  life  that  remain  to  me  in  order  to  hear 
it  again. 

I  am  consumed  with  the  desire  for  proofs  of  the  survival  of  the 
beautiful  and  loving  soul  of  my  daughter.  If  I  could  attain  to  such 
happiness,  most  dear  Master,  with  your  help,  I  cannot  tell  you  what 
this  never-failing  source  of  consolation  would  mean  to  me.  You 
would  mingle  in  my  thoughts  with  my  daughter  and  God. 

Reading  your  admirable  works  has  made  me  think  of  placing  my 
hope  in  you,  feeling  sure  that  you  will  be  able  to  do  as  I  ask  and 
will  be  willing  to  receive  kindly  the  prayer  of  a  poor  mother  who 
lives  only  in  the  hope  of  finding  once  more  the  child  who,  as  you 
believe,  has  vanished  but  is  not  dead.  Extend  your  kindness  to  this 
sad  and  ignorant  mother.  You  who  have  light,  lighten  her  darkness, 
help  her  in  her  moral  distress :  it  is  the  most  beautiful  gift  of  charity 
that  can  be  given.  My  great  desire  to  fathom  these  mysteries  does 
not  spring  from  vain  curiosity;  it  is  a  real,  a  unique,  a  potent  need 
from  which  death  alone  can  deliver  me.  I  await  your  answer  with 
confidence,  but  also  with  impatience,  and  should  you  think  it  wise, 
I  will  gladly  go  to  Paris  or  wherever  you  advise  me. 

Be  good  enough  to  receive.  Monsieur  and  illustrious  scientist,  my 
thanks  in  anticipation  and  the  warmest  greetings  of  your  servant, 

R.  Primault. 

I  have  reproduced  this  letter,  like  the  former,^  without 
modification,  and  without  suppressing  the  words  of  praise 

1  The  letters  reproduced  here  are  preserved  in  the  files  of  my  research 
into  psychic  phenomena  which  I  opened  in  1899.  (See  L'Inconnu,  p.  88.) 
This  one  is  No.  809.  The  preceding  one  is  No.  1730.  The  originals  may 
always  be  referred  to. 


THE  GREATEST  OF  PROBLEMS       15 

addressed  to  me.  As  I  have  already  said,  the  sensations  of 
childish  vanity  are  unknown  to  me  and  for  more  than  half 
a  century  I  have  ^own  used  to  titles  that  no  longer  have 
any  significance  for  me.  The  absolute  conviction  of  an  as- 
tronomer is  that  we  are  all  atoms  of  the  utmost  insignificance. 
But  these  expressions  of  admiration  from  an  author's  readers, 
whoever  he  may  be,  explain  the  confidence  and  the  faith  ex- 
pressed and  should  be  respected. 

Alas !  scientific  honesty  obliges  us  to  say  only  what  we  know. 
AVe  have  no  right  to  deceive  any  one,  even  from  the  best  of 
motives  and  in  order  to  offer  him  a  transitory  happiness.  I 
could  not  give  absolute  certainty  to  that  poor  mother.  That 
was  twenty  years  ago.  Since  then  I  have  never  ceased  to 
search  along  the  same  path.  This  book  is  written  to  set  forth 
the  elements  of  a  solution. 

I  have  allowed  myself  to  produce  literally  the  touching 
letter  of  my  unknown  correspondent  because  it  expresses  the 
grief  of  all  mothers  who  have  lost  a  child,  of  all  those  who 
have  lost  some  one  dearly  loved  and  to  whom  the  very  term 
*'Just  God"  seems  an  insult  to  reality.  We  can  easily  un- 
derstand the  revolt  of  these  souls.  I  possess  other  letters  that 
are  incomparably  more  severe  with  all  the  false  consola- 
tions of  religion,  that  have  been  sent  me  by  Catholics,  Protes- 
tants, Jews,  spiritualists  of  all  beliefs,  free-thinkers,  material- 
ists, atheists,  taking  as  a  text  the  injustice  which  we  see 
about  us,  in  order  to  deny  the  existence  of  an  intelligent 
Principle  in  the  organization  of  the  world.  Men  often  con- 
sole themselves  with  skepticism,  by  submission  to  the  in- 
evitable, by  convincing  themselves  of  the  indifference  of  na- 
ture to  human  efforts.  Women  will  not  do  this,  they  will  not 
resign  themselves.  They  will  not  accept  nothingness.  They 
feel  that  there  exists  something  unknown  but  real.  They  wish 
to  know. 

Hardly  a  week  passes  but  I  receive  letters  of  this  sort. 

But  what  is  the  universal  intelligence?    We  have  a  tend- 


16  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

ency  to  believe  that  God  thinks  as  we  do  and  that  our 
sense  of  justice  corresponds  with  His;  that  His  thought  is  of 
the  same  nature  as  our  own,  although  infinitely  superior  to  it. 
It  is  perhaps  something  entirely  different.  The  insect  thinks 
dully  when  it  forms  the  chrysalis  and  also  when  it  bursts  this 
envelop  to  spread  the  wings  it  has  acquired;  perhaps  our 
thought  is  as  far  removed  from  the  thought  of  God  as  that  of 
the  caterpillar  is  from  our  own.  We  are  surrounded  by  mys- 
tery. 

But  our  duty  is  to  search. 

During  the  infamous  German  war,  which  has  cut  down, 
in  the  flower  of  their  youth,  fifteen  million  young  men  who 
had  the  right  to  life,  who  had  been  brought  up  bj^  their 
fathers  and  their  mothers  often  at  the  price  of  enormous  sac- 
rifices, letters  reached  me  by  the  hundred,  denouncing  the 
barbarity  and  injustice  of  human  institutions,  lamenting  that 
the  hatred  of  war,  which  a  group  of  humanity's  friends  have 
preached  for  so  long,  should  not  have  been  understood  by 
rulers;  revolting  against  God,  Who  permits  such  frightful 
destruction,  and  declaring  that  their  lives  had  been  shat- 
tered by  the  irreparable  loss  of  those  they  loved. 

More  than  ever  the  frightful  problem  of  our  destiny  rises 
before  us.  Is  it  really  insoluble  ?  Cannot  the  veil  be  pushed 
aside,  lifted,  if  only  for  a  moment?  Alas!  The  religions 
which  have  all  sprung  from  this  heartfelt  need,  this  desire 
to  understand,  this  grief  at  seeing  before  us  the  mute  body 
of  some  one  dearly  loved,  have  not  brought  with  them  the 
proofs  they  promised.  The  finest  theological  discussions  prove 
nothing.  We  do  not  want  words  but  demonstrable  facts. 
Death  is  the  profoundest  subject  that  has  ever  occupied  the 
thoughts  of  men,  the  supreme  problem  of  all  times  and  all 
peoples.  It  is  the  inevitable  end  toward  which  we  all  tend; 
^  it  is  a  part  of  the  law  of  our  existence,  as  important  as  birth. 


THE  GREATEST  OF  PROBLEMS       17 

They  are  both  natural  transitions  in  the  general  evolution, 
and  yet,  for  all  that,  death,  which  is  just  as  natural  as  birth, 
seems  to  us  to  be  against  nature. 

Hope  in  the  continuation  of  life  is  innate  in  human  nature. 
It  belongs  to  all  periods  and  all  peoples.  The  development 
of  science  plays  no  part  in  this  universal  belief,  which  rests 
on  personal  aspiration  and  which  nevertheless  is  not  based  on 
positive  foundations.  That  is  a  fact  which  it  is  valuable 
to  state. 

Sentiment  is  not  a  negligible  quantity,  equal  to  zero,  its 
scientific  coefficient. 

The  two  letters  already  reproduced  form  part  of  a  series 
which  I  began  to  collect  long  ago  and  with  which  my  readers 
are  already  familiar.  The  number  of  letters  received,  re- 
corded, and  included  in  this  collection  of  documents,  of  ob- 
servations, of  investigations,  of  questions  that  have  arisen 
since  the  inquiry  began,  in  1899  (see  my  work  "L'Inconnu 
et  les  problemes  psychiques,"  p.  90),  have  reached  the  figure 
4106,  to  which  I  ought  to  add  about  500  that  reached  me 
before  I  began  the  inquiry. 

I  could  quote  here  hundreds  of  others,  very  much  like  the 
two  preceding.  Here  is  one  which  may  seem  striking,  in 
another  respect,  to  more  than  one  reader.  It  is  a  fervent 
prayer,  which  was  sent  me  at  La  Rochelle,  the  fifteenth  of 
August,  1904.  It  is  somewhat  brutal,  but  I  give  it  com- 
plete, as  I  gave  the  others. 

My  Elder  Brother: 

Both  my  eyes  are  suffering  from  cataract,  but  nevertheless  I  must 
write  to  you.  I  am  a  skeptic,  a  hardened  scoffer,  but  I  must  be- 
lieve in  something.  A  frightful,  irreparable  catastrophe  has  just 
crushed  the  lives  of  four  people.  My  daughter,  whose  charm,  sim- 
plicity and  gaiety  in  1902  had  delighted  all  Rochefort,  beginning 
with  the  mothers  of  those  girls  who  were  her  rivals,  has  just  gone 
to  a  madhouse  in  Niort,  where  she  vegetates,  waiting  for  the  end. 


18  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

It  was  an  eighteen-months'  agony  for  her,  the  martjT,  and  for  her 
poor  mother,  who  took  her  to  Paris,  to  Bordeaux,  to  Saujon,  where 
ambitious  specialists  demonstrated  the  utter  powerlessness  of  their 
pretended  science, — an  agony  also  for  me,  alone  here,  and  for  my 
son,  victims  both  of  the  same  catastrophe.  I  am  haunted  by  the 
thought  of  suicide.  ]^.Iy  brain  beats  out  this  refrain :  "Your  daugh- 
ter is  mad !"  and  I  think  of  the  general  misery,  of  the  immense  fraud 
that  life  is  for  the  great  majority  of  human  beings.  We  carry  with 
us  from  our  birth  the  defects  of  our  ancestors.  What  can  become 
of  our  personality,  paralyzed,  stuck  fast  in  the  carnal  magma?  This 
magma,  by  the  play  of  its  molecules,  by  the  example  of  the  parents^ 
education,  by  the  manner  of  life  forced  upon  us,  by  the  physical 
and  moral  condition  of  the  father  and  mother,  this  matrix  will  be 
the  all-powerful  director  of  the  destiny  of  the  personality  that  has 
just  become  incarnate,  or  rather  that  has  just  been  merged  into 
an  aggregate  of  which  it  will  be  the  slave,  all  its  life.  What  does 
all  this  mean? 

The  gross  ignorance  and  degrading  stupidities  uttered  in  the 
pulpits  of  the  Church  have  ended  by  revolting  me.  But  I  should 
like  to  believe  in  something  acceptable.  The  spiritualists,  with 
their  naive  credulity,  are  really  too  silly,  also.  They  have  given  me 
pages  of  Pythagoras,  Buddha,  Abelard,  Fenelon,  Robespierre  which 
are  lacking  in  common  sense.     It  is  grotesque. 

For  thirty-three  years  I  have  not  cared  to  read.  The  blow  that 
has  fallen  on  me  has  made  me  pick  up  some  books  in  which  I  hoped 
to  find  what  I  seek.     In  short,  here  is  "Ulneonnu" ! 

Shall  I  confess  that  I  have  read  it  religiously?  I  admit  on  prin- 
ciple the  manifestations  and  apparitions  you  mention,  as,  for  ex- 
ample, the  story  of  Marie  de  Thilo's  cat  (page  166).  The  fear  of 
the  cat,  which  must  have  seen  the  phantom,  seems  to  have  been  due 
to  some  electrical  excitation.  But,  Monsieur,  my  elder  brother,  why 
do  you  see  in  these  things  only  the  dying? 

There  is  nothing  to  prove  that  the  last  sigh,  the  last  human  thought 
of  the  one  who  is  passing  should  be  the  cause  of  manifestations  pro- 
duced without  his  knowledge.  Would  it  not,  on  the  conti'ary,  be 
a  question  of  the  first  step  in  the  world  beyond,  at  the  moment  of 
the  rupture  with  the  flesh? 

I  surely  belong  to  the  great  number  of  your  unknown  friends, 


THE  GREATEST  OF  PROBLEMS       19 

of  those  who  sympathize  with  you.  They  are  awaiting,  at  present, 
a  final  book  that  will  conclude  your  psychical  investigations. 
Spirits?  Mediums?  What  have  you  been  able  to  prove,  to  verify 
scientifically,  as  an  astronomer  and  a  mathematician  for  whom  two 
and  two  make  four  and  not  five?  In  a  word,  with  your  universally 
recognized  authority,  what  conclusion  have  you  reached?  We  wish 
to  know.  And  it  is  the  part  of  a  man  such  as  you  to  enlighten  so 
many  eager  minds.  And  do  not  think  that  I  am  burning  incense 
before  you  when  I  speak  in  this  way.  That  is  not  one  of  my  fail- 
ings. Are  you  not  going  to  make  up  your  mind  to  it?  You  have 
no  right  to  conceal  anything.  Ah !  what  a  service  you  would  render 
us  in  writing  this  honest,  convincing  book!  We  have  enough  of 
evangelical  sermons,  of  the  dissertations  of  mediums,  of  neuroses,  of 
claptrap.  We  beg  you,  tell  us  what  you  know." 
(Letter  1465.) 

It  will  be  easily  understood  that  I  cannot  reveal  the  author 
of  this  letter,  who  is  a  high  official  in  the  Government. 

It  will  also  be  understood  that  I  should  not  wish  to  publish 
this  work  until  I  believed  it  had  attained  the  dignity  of 
its  important  subject.  It  was  already  under  way  at  the 
time  of  this  request,  in  1904;  it  had  even  been  begun  in 
1861,  as  one  can  judge  from  my  Memoirs.  Such  works  as 
these  cannot  be  written  out  in  a  year. 

Besides,  if  I  had  replied  to  all  these  appeals  I  should  have 
written  not  one  book  but  a  dozen.  Will  they  ever  see  the 
light?  As  some  of  them  have  been  well  started  for  nearly 
a  quarter  of  a  century,  they  are  on  the  road  to  being  finished. 

But  let  us  begin  with  this  one.  My  readers  have  assisted 
me  greatly  in  this  research  by  sending  me  for  many  years 
such  observations  as  helped  to  prepare  the  solution, — the 
solution  that  has  been  demanded  with  perhaps  too  much  con- 
fidence. Can  our  efforts  succeed  in  throwing  some  light 
upon  this  darkness  of  ages  that  surrounds  the  pfoblem  of 
death? 


In  my  childhood,  during  lessons  in  philosophy  and 


re- 


20  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

ligious  instruction  in  school,  I  often  heard  a  discourse,  given 
periodically,  which  took  as  text  the  four  words:  ^'Porro 
unum  est  necessarium/ '  or  in  English,  ''one  single  thing  is 
necessary/'  This  single  thing  was  the  salvation  of  our  souls. 
The  lecturer  spoke  to  us  of  the  wars  of  Alexander,  of  Caesar, 
of  Napoleon,  and  arrived  at  this  conclusion:  *'What  does 
a  man  profit,  if  he  gain  the  whole  world,  and  lose  his  own 
soul?''  They  described  to  us  also  the  flames  of  hell,  and 
they  terrified  us  with  frightful  pictures  representing  the 
damned,  tortured  by  devils  in  an  inextinguishable  fire  which 
burned  them  without  consuming  them,  for  all  eternity.  The 
subject  of  the  text  retains  its  value,  whatever  may  be  one's 
beliefs.  It  cannot  be  disputed  that  the  one  all-important 
point  for  us  is  to  know  what  fate  is  reserved  for  us  after  our 
last  breath.  ' '  To  be  or  not  to  be ! "  That  scene  in  ' '  Hamlet ' ' 
is  repeated  every  day.  The  life  of  a  thinking  man  is  a  medi- 
tation upon  death. 

If  the  existence  of  human  beings  leads  to  nothing,  what  is 
all  this  comedy  about? 

Whether  we  face  it  boldly,  or  whether  we  avoid  the  image 
of  it,  Death  is  the  supreme  event  of  Life.  To  be  unwilling 
to  consider  it  is  a  bit  of  childish  silliness,  as  the  precipice  is 
before  us  and  as  we  shall  inevitably  fall  into  it  some  day.  To 
imagine  that  the  problem  is  insoluble,  that  we  can  know 
nothing  about  it  and  shall  only  be  wasting  our  time  if, 
with  daring  curiosity,  we  try  to  see  clearly, — that  is  an  ex- 
cuse dictated  by  a  careless  laziness  and  an  unjustified  timidity. 

The  funereal  aspect  of  death  is  due,  above  all,  to  what 
surrounds  it,  to  the  mourning  that  accompanies  it,  to  the 
religious  ceremonies  that  envelop  it,  to  the  Dies  Irae,  to  the 
De  Profundis.  Who  knows  if  the  despair  of  those  who  are 
left  behind  would  not  give  place  to  hope  if  we  had  the  cour- 
age to  examine  this  last  phase  of  our  earthly  life  with  the 
same  pains  that  we  bring  to  an  astronomical  or  a  psychologi- 
cal observation?    Who  knows  if  the  prayers  of  the  dying 


THE  GREATEST  OF  PROBLEMS       21 

would  not  give  place  to  the  serenity  of  the  rainbow  after 
the  storm? 

It  is  hard  not  to  desire  an  answer  to  the  formidable  ques- 
tion that  presents  itself  when  we  think  of  our  destiny,  or 
when  a  cruel  death  has  taken  from  us  some  one  we  love. 
How  is  it  possible  not  to  ask  whether  or  not  we  shall  find 
each  other  again,  or  if  the  separation  is  for  eternity?  Does 
a  Deity  or  Goodness  exist?  Do  injustice  and  evil  rule  over 
the  progress  of  humanity,  with  no  regard  for  the  feelings 
that  nature  has  placed  in  our  hearts?  And  what  is  this  na- 
ture itself?  Has  it  a  will,  an  end?  Could  there  be  more 
intelligence,  more  justice,  more  goodness,  and  more  inspira- 
tion in  our  infinitesimally  small  minds  than  in  the  great 
universe  ?  How  many  questions  are  associated  with  the  same 
enigma ! 

.  We  shall  die ;  nothing  is  more  certain.  When  the  earth  on 
which  we  live  shall  have  turned  only  a  hundred  times  more 
around  the  sun,  not  one  of  us,  dear  readers,  will  still  be  of 
this  world. 

Ought  we  to  fear  death  for  ourselves,  or  for  those  whom 
we  love? 

''Horror  of  death"  is  a  senseless  expression.     One  of  two 

things  is  true :  either  we  shall  die  wholly,  or  we  shall  con- 

^  tinue  to  exist  beyond  the  grave.     If  we  die  wholly  we  shall 

never  know  anything  about  it ;  consequently  we  shall  not  feel 

it.     If  we  continue  to  exist,  the  subject  is  worth  examining. 

Some  day  our  bodies  will  cease  to  live:  there  is  not  the 
least  doubt  on  this  point.  They  will  resolve  themselves  into 
millions  of  molecules,  which  will  later  be  reincorporated  in 
other  organisms  of  plants,  animals,  and  men;  the  resurrec- 
tion of  the  body  is  an  outworn  dogma  that  can  no  longer 
be  accepted  by  any  one.  If  our  thought,  our  psychic  entity 
survives  the  dissolution  of  the  material  organism,  we  shall 
have  the  joy  of  continuing  to  live,  because  our  conscious  life 
will  continue  under  another  mode  of  existence  that  is  superior 


22  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

to  this.  It  must  be  superior,  for  progress  is  a  law  of  nature 
that  manifests  itself  throughout  the  whole  history  of  the 
earth,  the  only  planet  that  we  are  able  to  study  directly. 

As  concerns  this  great  problem,  we  can  say  with  Marcus 
Aurelius:  ''What  is  death?  If  we  consider  it  in  itself,  if 
we  separate  it  from  the  images  with  which  we  have  surrounded 
it,  we  see  that  it  is  only  a  work  of  nature.  But  whoever 
fears  a  work  of  nature  is  still  a  child." 

Francis  Bacon  merely  repeated  the  same  thought  when  he 
said:  "The  ceremonies  of  death  are  more  terrifying  than 
death  itself." 

''True  philosophy,"  wrote  the  wise  Roman  emperor,  "is 
to  await  death  with  a  tranquil  heart  and  to  see  in  it  only  the 
dissolution  of  those  elements  of  which  each  being  is  composed. 
That  is  according  to  nature,  and  nothing  is  evil  which  con- 
forms to  nature." 

But  the  stoicism  of  Epictetus,  of  Marcus  Aurelius,  of  the 
Arabs,  the  Mussulmans,  the  Buddhists  does  not  satisfy  us: 
we  wish  to  know. 

And  besides,  whether  or  not  nature  ever  does  anything 
wrong  is  a  debatable  question. 

No  thinking  man  can  avoid  being  troubled  in  his  hours  of 
personal  reflection  by  this  question:  "What  will  become  of 
me?    Shall  I  die  wholly?" 

It  has  been  said,  not  without  apparent  reason,  that  this  is 
on  our  part  a  matter  of  naive  vanity.  We  attribute  a  certain 
importance  to  ourselves;  we  imagine  it  would  be  a  pity  for 
us  to  cease  to  exist;  we  suppose  that  God  occupies  Himself 
with  us,  and  that  we  are  not  a  negligible  quantity  in  crea- 
tion. Assuredly,  especially  when  we  speak  astronomically, 
we  are  no  great  matter;  and  even  the  whole  of  humanity 
itself  is  likewise  of  little  importance.  We  can  no  longer 
reason  to-day  as  in  the  time  of  Pascal;  the  geocentric  and 
anthropocentric  system  no  longer  exists.    Lost  atoms  on  an- 


THE  GREATEST  OF  PROBLEMS       23 

other  atom,  itself  lost  in  the  infinite!  But  at  any  rate  we 
exist,  we  think,  and  ever  since  men  have  thought  they  have 
asked  themselves  the  same  questions  to  which  the  most  varied 
religions  have  attempted  to  reply,  without  any  of  them,  how- 
ever, having  succeeded. 

The  mystery  before  which  we  have  raised  so  many  altars 
and  so  many  statutes  of  the  gods,  is  still  there,  as  formidable 
as  in  the  times  of  the  Chaldeans,  the  Egyptians,  the  Greeks, 
the  Romans,  and  the  Christians  of  the  Middle  Ages.  The 
anthropomorphic  and  the  anthropophagic  gods  have  crumbled 
away.  Their  religions  have  vanished,  but  the  religion  re- 
mains— the  research  into  the  conditions  of  immortality.  Are 
we  blotted  out  by  death,  or  shall  we  continue  to  exist? 

Francis  Bacon,  more  popular  and  celebrated  than  Roger 
Bacon,  but  without  his  genius,  had,  in  laying  down  the  founda- 
tions of  scientific  experiment,  foreseen  the  progressive  victory 
of  observation  and  experience,  the  triumph  of  fact,  judiciously 
established  according  to  theories,  in  all  the  domains  of  human 
study  except  one,  that  of  *' divine  matters,''  of  the  ** super- 
natural," which  he  abandoned  to  religious  authority  and  to 
Faith.  This  was  an  error  in  which  a  certain  number  of 
learned  men  still  actually  persist.  There  is  no  valid  reason 
for  not  studying  everything,  for  not  submitting  everything 
to  the  test  of  positive  analysis,  and  we  shall  never  know  any- 
thing that  we  have  not  learned.  If  Theology  has  been  mis- 
taken in  pretending  that  these  subjects  were  reserved  for 
her.  Science  has  been  equally  mistaken  in  disdaining  them 
as  unworthy  or  foreign  to  her  mission. 

The  problem  of  the  immortality  of  the  soul  has  not  yet 
been  solved  in  the  affirmative,,  but  neither  has  it  yet  been 
solved  in  the  negative,  as  has  sometimes  been  pretended. 

It  is  the  general  tendency  to  believe  that  the  solution  of 
the  sphinx's  riddle  of  what  lies  beyond  the  grave  is  out  of 
our  reach,  and  that  the  human  mind  has  not  the  power  to 


24  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

pierce  this  mystery.  Nevertheless,  what  subject  concerns  us 
more  closely,  and  how  can  we  fail  to  be  interested  in  our  own 
lot? 

The  persistent  study  of  this  great  problem  leads  us  to 
believe,  to-day,  that  the  mystery  of  death  is  less  obscure  and 
impenetrable  than  has  been  admitted  hitherto,  and  that  it 
may  become  clear  to  the  mind's  eye  by  the  light  of  certain 
actual  experiments  that  were  unknown  half  a  century  ago. 

It  ought  not  to  surprise  us  to  find  psychical  research  asso- 
ciated with  astronomical  research.  It  is  the  same  problem. 
The  physical  and  moral  world  are  one.  Astronomy  has  al- 
ways been  associated  with  religion.  The  errors  of  that  an- 
cient science,  which  was  founded  on  deceptive  appearances, 
had  their  inevitable  consequences  in  the  erroneous  beliefs 
of  former  days;  the  theological  heaven  must  accord  with 
the  astronomical  heaven  under  pain  of  collapse.  The  duty 
of  all  honest  men  is  to  seek  loyally  after  truth. 

In  our  epoch  of  free  discussion,  science  can  study  tran- 
quilly, with  complete  independence,  the  gravest  of  problems. 
We  can  remember,  however, — not  without  some  bitternesSj — 
that  during  the  intolerant  centuries  of  the  Inquisition,  in- 
quiries of  free  thought  brought  their  disciples  to  the  scaffold. 
Thousands  of  men  have  been  burned  alive  for  their  opinions: 
the  statue  of  Giordano  Bruno  reminds  us  of  this,  even  in 
Rome.  Can  we  pass  before  it  or  before  that  of  Savonarola 
in  Florence  or  that  of  Etienne  Dolet  in  Paris,  without  feeling 
a  shiver  of  horror  at  religious  intolerance?  And  Vanini, 
burned  at  Toulouse!  And  Michael  Servetus,  burned  at 
Geneva  by  Calvin ! 

We  once  affirmed  things  of  which  we  were  ignorant;  we 
imposed  silence  upon  all  seekers.  This  is  what  has  above  all 
retarded  the  psychic  sciences.  Undoubtedly  this  study  is  not 
indispensable  to  a  practical  life.  Men  in  general  are  stupid. 
Not  one  out  of  a  hundred  of  them  thinks.  They  live  on  the 
earth  without  knowing  where  they  are  and  without  having 


THE  GREATEST  OF  PROBLEMS       25 

the  curiosity  even  to  wonder.  They  are  brutes  that  eat,  drink, 
enjoy  themselves,  reproduce  their  kind,  sleep,  and  are  occu- 
pied above  everything  in  acquiring  money.  I  have  had,  dur- 
ing an  already  long  life,  the  joy  of  spreading  among  the 
different  classes  of  all  humanity,  in  all  countries  and  all  lan- 
guages, the  basic  ideas  of  astronomical  knowledge,  and  I  am 
in  a  position  to  know  the  proportion  of  those  who  are  inter- 
ested in  understanding  the  world  which  they  inhabit  and  of 
forming  a  rudimentary  idea  of  the  marvels  of  creation.  Out 
of  the  sixteen  hundred  million  human  beings  who  inhabit  our 
planet  there  are  about  a  million  interested  in  such  things, 
that  is  to  say,  who  read  astronomical  books,  out  of  curiosity 
or  otherwise.  As  for  those  who  study  and  make  themselves 
personally  familiar  with  the  science,  who  keep  up  with  the 
new  discoveries  by  reading  special  and  yearly  publications, 
their  number  can  be  placed  at  about  fifty  thousand  for  the 
entire  world,  of  which  six  thousand  are  in  France. 

We  can  therefore  conclude  that  out  of  every  sixteen  hun- 
dred human  beings  there  is  one  who  knows  vaguely  what 
world  he  inhabits,  and  out  of  a  hundred  and  sixty  thousand 
there  is  one  really  well  informed. 

As  for  the  instruction  in  astronomy  in  primary  and  sec- 
ondary schools,  in  colleges  and  lyceums,  either  civil  or  ec- 
clesiastical, it  virtually  amounts  to  nothing.  In  the  matter  of 
positive  psychology  the  results  are  equally  negligible.  Uni- 
versal ignorance  is  the  law  of  our  mundane  humanity,  from 
the  days  of  its  simian  birth. 

The  deplorable  conditions  of  life  on  our  planet,  the  obliga- 
tion to  eat,  the  necessities  of  material  existence,  explain  the 
indifference  to  philosophy  on  the  part  of  the  earth's  inhabi- 
tants, without  entirely  excusing  them ;  for  millions  of  men  and 
women  find  the  time  to  indulge  in  futile  amusements,  to  read 
newspapers  and  novels,  to  play  cards,  to  occupy  themselves 
with  the  affairs  of  others,  to  pass  along  the  old  story  of  the 
mote  and  the  beam,  to  criticize  and  spy  upon  those  about 


26  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

them,  to  dabble  in  politics,  to  fill  the  churches  and  the  theaters, 
to  support  luxurious  shops,  to  overwork  the  dressmakers  and 
hatmakers,  etc. 

Universal  ignorance  is  the  result  of  that  miserable  human 
individualism  that  is  so  self-sufficient.  The  need  of  living  by 
the  spirit  is  felt  by  no  one,  or  almost  no  one.  Men  who  think 
are  the  exception.  If  these  researches  lead  us  to  employ  our 
minds  better,  to  find  what  we  are  here  to  do,  on  this  earth, 
we  may  be  satisfied  with  this  work;  for,  truly,  our  life  as 
human  beings  seems  very  obscure. 

The  inhabitant  of  the  earth  is  still  so  unintelligent  and  so 
bestial  that  everywhere,  even  up  to  the  present  day,  it  is 
still  might  that  makes  right  and  upholds  it ;  thejjeading  states- 
man of  each  nation  is  still  the  Minister  of  War,  and  ^ine 
tenths  of  the  financial  wealth  of  the  peoples  is  consecrated 
to  periodic  international  butcheries. 

And  Death  continues  to  reign  over  the  destinies  of  human- 
ity! 

She  is  indeed  the  sovereign.  Her  scepter  has  never  exer- 
cised its  controlling  power  with  such  ferocious  and  savage 
violence  as  in  these  last  years.  By  mowing  down  millions 
of  men  on  the  battle-field  she  has  raised  millions  of  questions 
to  be  addressed  to  Destiny.  Let  us  study  it,  this  final  end. 
It  is  a  subject  well  worthy  of  our  attention. 

The  plan  of  this  work  is  outlined  by  its  aim :  to  estaUisk  the 
positive  proofs  of  survival.  It  will  contain  neither  literary 
dissertations  nor  fine  poetic  phrases,  nor  more  or  less  captivat- 
ing theories,  nor  hypotheses,  but  only  the  facts  of  observation, 
with  their  logical  deductions. 

Are  we  to  die  wholly?  That  is  the  question.  What  will 
remain  of  us?  To  say,  to  believe  that  our  immortality  rests 
with  our  descendants,  depends  on  our  works,  on  the  way  in 
which  we  have  helped  humanity,  is  a  mere  jest.  If  we  die 
wholly,  we  shall  know  nothing  of  these  services  we  have  ren- 


X 


THE  GREATEST  OP  PROBLEMS       27 

dered,  and  our  planet  will  come  to  an  end  and  humanity  will 
perish.     Thus  everything  will  be  utterly  destroyed. 

In  order  to  discover  if  the  soul  survives  the  body  we  must 
first  find  out  if  it  exists  in  itself,  independently  of  the  physical 
organism.  We  must  therefore  establish  this  existence  on  the 
scientific  basis  of  definjta,  observation  and  not  on  the  fine 
phrases  and  the  ontological  arguments  with  which,  up  to  the 
present,  the  theologians  of  all  times  have  been  satisfied.  And 
first  of  all  we  must  take  into  account  the  insufficiency  of  the 
theories  of  physiology,  as  they  are  generally  accepted  and 
conventionally  taught. 


II 

MATERIALISM — ^AN  ERRONEOUS,   INCOMPLETE,   AND 
INSUFFICIENT   DOCTRINE 

St  appearances. 

COPEENICUS. 

EVERY  one  is  familiar  with  the  Positlve^[?kil^sophy  of 
Auguste  Comte  and  his  judicious  classification  o1 
the  sciences,  descending  gradually  from  the  universe 
of  man  to  astronomy  and  biology.  Every  one  is  also  familiar 
with  Littre,  the  follower  of  Auguste  Comte ;  his  dictionary  is 
in  all  the  libraries  and  his  works  are  scattered  broadcast.  I 
used  to  know  him  personally.  He  was  an  eminent  savant, 
an  encyclopedia,  a  profound  thinker ;  in  addition,  a  convinced 
materialist  and  atheist.  The  beauty  of  his  face  did  not  cor- 
respond to  the  beauty  of  his  soul.  It  was  difficult  to  look 
at  him  without  thinking  of  our  simian  origin,  and  yet  he  had 
the  greatest  nobility  of  mind  and  a  rare  generosity  of  heart. 
He  lived  not  very  far  from  the  Observatoire.  His  wife  was 
very  pious,  and  on  Sunday  he  used  to  escort  her  to  mass 
at  Saint-Sulpice,  out  of  pure  and  simple  goodness,  without 
ever  entering  the  church  himself.  Le  Dantec,  atheist  and  ma- 
terialist, who  succeeded  him,  let  himself  be  buried  with  the 
rites  of  the  church,  though  this  is  to  be  regretted,  in  order 
not  to  pain  his  wife,  who  also  was  very  pious, — we  should  like 
to  see  these  lifelong  companions  of  the  same  minds  as  their 
husbands.  This  professor,  of  atheism  also  was  very  good.  All 
this  is  rather  paradoxical./  The  same  was  true  of  Jules  Soury, 
that  '  *  devourer  of  cures, '  ^  who  was  buried  by  them  with  their 

)        28 


MATERIALISM  29 

liturgies.  There  is  no  real  logic  in  this  world.  But  one's  doc- 
trines do  not  always  direct  one's  deeds.  One  can  be  a  pro- 
fessing Catholic  and  yet  a  liar,  or  one  who  takes  advantage  of 
others.  .Qnecan  be  amaterialist  andan^Rntirelv  honpst  m^n- — — 
I  also  knew  the  "excellent  Ernest  Renan,  who,  out  of  deep 
sincerity  and  in  order  to  absolve  himself  from  all  hypocrisy, 
had  refused  the  priesthood  to  which  his  theological  studies 
had  led  him. 

These  eminent  minds  are  much  to  be  respected  in  their  sin- 
cere opinions,  which  we  should  respect  as  they  respected  the 
opinions  of  others;  but  we  may  take  exception  to  their  ideas, 
and  moreover  they  never  made  any  pretense  to  infallibility. 

Littre  worked  over  the  psychological  questions  that  we  are 
proposing  to  study  here.  We  may  take  his  arguments,  as 
well  as  those  of  Taine,  his  emulator,  as  a  basis  for  the  modem 
materialistic  assertions.  Do  not  let  us  fear  to  meet  them 
directly  and  to  take  the  bull  by  the  horns. 

In  his  work  entitled  ''La  science  au  point  de  vue  philoso- 
phique, ' '  a  chapter  on  psychic  physiology  contains  the  follow- 
ing statements: 

Perhaps  the  expression  psychic  'physiology  may  appear  anomalous. 
I  could  have  made  use  of  the  term  psychology,  which  is  used  to 
designate  the  study  of  the  intellectual  and  moral  faculties.  I  my- 
self have  used  this  word  many  times  in  my  writings,  and  because 
of  its  common  usage  and  when  the  text  leaves  no  room  for  obscurity 
in  my  thought,  I  shall  use  it  again.  It  is  true  that  the  word  xl/vxq 
which  is  its  root,  is  suited  to  metaphysics  and  theology,  but  it  can 
also  be  applied  to  physiology  by  giving  it  the  meaning  of  the  total- 
ity of  the  intellectual  and  moral  faculties, — a  phrase  much  too  long 
and  complex  not  to  be  replaced,  on  most  occasions,  by  some  simpler 
expression. 

Nevertheless,  as  psychology  was  undoubtedly  at  its  beginning,  and 
still  is,  the  study  of  the  mind,  considered  independently  of  the 
nervous  substance,  I  neither  wish  to  nor  ought  to  use  an  expression 
which  is  peculiar  to  a  philosophy  quite  different  from  that  which 


30  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

lends  its  name  to  the  exact  sciences.  Among  the  positive  sciences 
one  recognizes  no  quality  without  matter,  not  at  all  because  a  priori 
one  has  the  preconceived  idea  that  there  exists  no  independent 
spiritual  substance,  but  because,  a  posteriori,  we  have  never  met 
with  gravitation  except  in  a  body  possessing  weight,  nor  with  heat 
except  in  a  warm  body,  nor  with  chemical  affinities  without  sub- 
stances that  may  be  combined,  nor  with  life,  feeling,  or  thought? 
except  in  a  living,  feeling,  thinking  being. 

It  has  seemed  necessary  to  me  for  the  word  physiology  to  appear 
in  the  title  of  this  work.  I  could,  indeed,  have  used  the  expression 
cerebral  physiology.  But  cerebral  physiology  implies  more  than  I 
expect  to  include. 

The  brain  is  engaged  in  all  sorts  of  operations  which  I  do  not 
pretend  to  consider,  for  I  shall  limit  myself  to  the  part  it  plays  in 
producing  those  impressions  which  result  in  the  idea  of  the  ex- 
terior world  and  of  myself. 

It  is  for  this  reason  that  I  have  determined  to  choose  the  ex- 
pression, "psychic  physiology,"  or,  more  briefly,  psychophysiology. 
Psychic,  that  is  to  say  relating  to  feelings  and  ideas;  physiology, 
that  is  to  say  the  formation  and  combination  of  these  feelings  and 
ideas  in  relation  to  the  construction  and  function  of  the  brain.  This 
is  not  because  I  wish  to  be  so  pretentious  as  to  introduce  a  new  ex- 
pression into  science;  all  that  I  wish  to  do  here  is,  on  one  hand,  to 
outline  my  subject  clearly,  and  on  the  other  to  impress  on  my  readers 
that  the  description  of  psychic  phenomena  with  their  connections 
and  relations,  belongs  to  pure  psychology  and  the  study  of  a  func- 
tion and  its  effects.  The  more  progress  psychology  has  made  in 
breaking  away  from  the  theory  of  innate  ideas,  especially  the  psy- 
chology that  springs  from  the  school  of  Locke,  the  more  closely  it 
has  approached  to  physiology.  And  the  more  physiology  has  ex- 
amined the  extent  of  its  province  the  less  it  has  been  frightened  by 
the  anathemas  of  psychology,  which  forbade  it  to  indulge  in  lofty 
speculations.  And  to-day  there  is  no  longer  any  doubt  that  in- 
tellectual and  moral  phenomena  are  phenomena  of  the  nervous  tis- 
sue, that  humanity  is  only  a  link,  though  without  doubt  the  most 
considerable  link,  in  a  chain  that  stretches,  without  any  clearly  de- 
fined  breaks,  down  to  the  least  of  the  animals;  and  that,  under 
whatever  name  we  may  act,  so  long  as  we  employ  the  methods  of 


MATERIALISM  31 

description,  observation,  and  experience,  we  are  physiologists.  I 
can  no  longer  conceive  of  a  physiology  in  which  all  that  is  best  in 
the  theory  of  feelings  and  in  ideas  should  not  occupy  a  great  place.  ^ 

Such  is  the  basis  of  the  materialistic  philosophy  of  the  soul. 

I  invite  the  reader  to  consider  scrupulously  this  manner  of 
reasoning.  We  may  not  admit  the  existence  of  the  soul,  * '  be- 
cause we  know  of  no  quality  without  matter,  because  we 
have  never  met  with  gravitation  in  a  body  without  weight, 
heat  without  a  warm  body,  electricity  without  an  electrical 
body,  affinity  without  substances  in  combination,  life,  feeling, 
thought  without  a  living  being,  feeling  and  thinking." 

But  this  sort  of  reasoning,  starting  with  the  use  of  the 
word  quality f  simply  begs  the  question. 

To  compare  thought  to  gravitation,  to  heat,  to  the  me- 
chanical, physical,  and  chemical  reactions  of  material  bodies 
is  to  compare  two  very  different  things,  precisely  those  things 
which  we  are  debating, — mind  and  matter. 

The  will  of  a  human  being,  even  of  a  child,  is  personal  and. 
conscious,  while  gravity,  heat,  light,  and  electricity  are  im- 
personal and  unconscious,  the  results  of  certain  material  con- 
ditions, inevitable,  blind,  essentially  material  in  themselves. 
The  difference  between  the  two  subjects  I  have  mentioned  is 
great ;  it  is  all  the  difference  between  night  and  day. 

Scientific  reasoning  itself  sometimes  errs  fundamentally. 
Heat,  for  example,  does  not  always  come  from  a  warm  body; 
motion,  which  has  no  temperature,  can  produce  heat.  Heat 
is  a  form  of  motion.  Light  also  is  a  form  of  motion.  The  na- 
ture of  electricity  remains  unknown. 

I  confess  that  I  cannot  understand  how  a  man  of  the  merit 
of  Littre,  the  head  of  the  Positivist  school,  could  have  been 
satisfied  with  such  reasoning  and  not  have  perceived  that  this 
was  merely  begging  the  question,  almost  a  play  on  words; 

1  Littr^,  La  Science  au  point  de  vue  philosophique  (Paris,  1873),  p. 
306;  La  Philosophie  positive,  March  23,  1860. 


32  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

for  this  argument  plays  with  the  word  '  *  qualitj^ ' '  What  we 
ought  first  to  prove  positively  is  that  thought  is  a  property 
of  the  nervous  substance,  that  the  unconscious  can  create 
the  conscious,  which  is  contradictory  in  principle. 

We  should  hardly  dare  to  compare  a  piece  of  wood  to  a 
piece  of  marble  or  a  fragment  of  metal,  and  yet  we  carefully 
compare  the  mind  and  thought,  the  sentiment  of  liberty,  jus- 
tice, goodness,  the  will,  to  a  function  of  the  organic  substance. 
Taine  assures  us  that  the  brain  secretes  thought  as  the  liver 
secretes  bile.  Does  it  not  seem,  with  such  intellects  as  his,  as 
if  the  trend  of  the  argument  had  been  determined  in  ad- 
vance, and  no  less  blindly  than  with  the  theologians?  Is  not 
that  a  case  of  preconceived  ideas,  of  systematic  convictions  ? 

It  is  important,  from  the  very  beginning  of  this  discussion, 
for  us  not  to  be  easily  satisfied  with  words.  What  is  matter  ? 
According  to  general  opinion,  it  is  what  is  perceived  by  our 
senses,  what  can  be  seen,  touched,  weighed.  Very  well!  the 
following  pages  are  to  prove  that  there  is  in  man  something 
besides  what  can  be  seen,  touched,  and  weighed;  that  there 
exists  in  the  human  being  an  element  independent  of  the 
material  senses,  a  personal  mental  principle,  which  thinks, 
wills,  acts,  which  manifests  itself  at  a  distance,  which  sees 
without  eyes,  hears  without  ears,  discovers  the  future  before 
it  exists,  and  reveals  unknown  facts.  To  suppose  that  this 
psychic  element — invisible,  intangible,  and  imponderable — is 
an  essential  faculty  of  the  brain,  is  to  make  a  declaration  with- 
out proof;  and  it  is  a  self-contradictory  form  of  reasoning, 
as  if  one  said  that  salt  could  produce  sugar  or  that  fish  could 
become  inhabitants  of  terra  firma.  What  we  wish  to  show 
here  is  that  actual  observation  itself,  the  observation  of  the 
facts  of  experience,  prove  that  the  human  being  is  not  only 
a  material  body  endowed  with  various  essential  faculties, 
but  also  a  psychic  body  endowed  with  different  faculties  from 
those  of  the  animal  organism.  And  by  ' '  actual  observation ' ' 
we  mean  that  we  shall  use  no  other  method  than  that  of 


MATERIALISM  33 

Littre,  Taine,  Le  Dantec,  and  other  professors  of  materialism, 
and  that  we  shall  repudiate  the  grotesque  doctrines  of  oral 
arguments,  mere  wanderings  from  the  subject. 

How  was  it  possible  that  eminent  thinkers  such  as  Comte, 
Littre,  Berthelot  were  able  to  imagine  that  reality  is  bounded 
by  the  circle  of  our  sense  impressions,  which  are  so  limited 
and  so  imperfect?  A  fish  might  well  believe  that  nothing 
existed  outside  of  water;  a  dog  which  made  a  classification 
of  canine  sense  impressions  would  classify  them  according 
to  odor  and  not  according  to  sight,  as  a  man  would  do;  a 
carrier-pigeon  would  be  especially  aware  of  the  sense  of  direc- 
tion, an  ant  of  the  sense  of  touch  in  his  antenna?,  etc. 

The  spirit  overrules  the  body;  the  atoms  do  not  govern, 
they  are  governed.  The  same  reasoning  can  be  applied  to 
the  entire  universe,  to  the  worlds  that  gravitate  in  space, 
to  vegetables  and  animals.  The  leaf  of  the  tree  is  formed,  an 
e^g  that  hatches  is  formed.  This  formation,  itself,  is  of 
the  intellect  in  its  nature. 

The  universal  spirit  is  in  everything,  it  fills  the  world,  and 
that  without  the  intervention  of  a  brain.  It  is  impossible 
to  analyze  the  mechanism  of  the  eye  and  of  vision,  of  the  ear 
and  of  hearing,  without  concluding  that  the  organs  of  sight 
and  hearing  have  been  intelligently  constructed.  This  same 
conclusion  can  be  drawn,  with  even  more  supporting  evidence, 
from  the  analysis  of  the  fecundation  of  a  plant,  an  animal,  or 
a  human  being.  The  progressive  evolution  of  the  fertilized 
human  egg,  the  role  of  the  placenta,  the  life  of  the  embryo 
and  the  fetus,  the  creation  of  the  little  creature  in  the  womb 
of  the  mother,  the  organic  transformation  of  the  woman, 
the  formation  of  the  milk,  the  birth  of  the  child,  its  nourish- 
ment, the  physical  and  psychical  development  of  the  child, 
are  so  many  irrefutable  manifestations  of  an  intelligent,  di- 
recting force  that  organizes  everything  and  directs  the  tiniest 
molecules  with  as  perfect  an  order  as  it  does  the  planets  and 
stars  in  the  immensity  of  the  heavens.    And  this  spirit  does 


34  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

not  come  from  a  brain.  It  has  been  truly  said  that  if  God 
has  created  man  in  his  own  image,  man  has  returned  the 
compliment.  If  the  cockchafers  imagined  a  creator  they 
would  make  him  a  great  cockchafer.  The  anthropomorphic 
God  of  the  Hebrews,  the  Christians,  the  Mussulmans,  the 
Buddhists  has  never  existed.  God  the  Father,  Jehovah, 
Jupiter  are  only  symbolic  words. 

If  generation  has  been  admirably  arranged  from  the  point 
of  view  of  physiology,  it  has  been  far  from  perfect  from  the 
point  of  view  of  maternity.  Why  so  much  suffering?  Why 
the  frightful  final  pains  ?  The  church  sees  in  them  a  punish- 
ment of  Eve^s  sin.  What  nonsense!  Did  Adam  and  Eve 
ever  exist  1  Do  not  the  female  animals  suffer  ?  Nature  takes 
no  heed  of  the  woman's  periods  of  suffering  or  of  the  brutal- 
ity of  the  actual  birth ;  it  is  undoubtedly  lacking  in  sensibil- 
ity: the  ''good  God"  is  not  tender  toward  his  creatures.  He 
is  not  even  humane,  and  the  Sisters  of  Charity  are  kinder 
than  he.  What  a  problem !  We  do  not  understand  God :  all 
the  evidence  shows  this.  What  does  it  prove?  Our  own 
spiritual  inferiority. 

It  is  undeniable  that  spirit,  intelligence,  and  mental  order 
exist  in  everything.  Experimental  science  stops  short  when 
it  teaches  that  all  the  phenomena  of  the  universe  reduce  them- 
selves, in  the  last  instance,  to  the  dualism  of  matter  and  move- 
ment, or  even  to  the  monism  of  matter  and  its  properties. 
In  natural  history,  botany,  animal  physiology,  anthropology, 
an  element  may  be  observed  that  is  distinct  from  matter  and 
movement:  that  is  Life,  Has  not  the  physiologist  Claude 
Bernard  shown  us  that  life  is  not  a  product  of  material 
molecules?  Moreover,  the  universe  reveals  itself  to  us  as  a 
dynamism,  for  movement  is  inherent  in  the  atoms  themselves, 
and  this  djmamism  is  not  confined  to  the  material  order,  since 
it  organizes  everything,  things  and  persons.^ 

1  Some  years  ago  I  knew  a  modest  naturalist  and  skilful  observer,  of 
the  highest  personal  worth,  who  studied  directly,  with  his  own  eyes. 


MATERIALISM  35 

We  may  say  with  the  psychologist  Bergson  that  the  doc- 
trine which  makes  thouglit  a  function  of  the  brain,  or  which 
sees  a  parallel,  an  equivalent,  between  the  labor  of  the  brain 
and  that  of  thought,  is  entirely  insufficient.  They  tell  us  that 
the  memories  are  there,  accumulated  in  the  brain  under  the 
form  of  a  modification  that  has  been  impressed  on  such  or 
such  a  group  of  anatomical  elements:  if  they  vanish  from 
our  memory  it  is  because  the  anatomical  elements  in  which 
they  lie  have  been  impaired  or  destroyed.  The  impressions 
made  by  external  objects  would  exist  in  the  brain  as  on  a 
sensitized  plate  or  a  photographic  film.  These  comparisons 
are  really  most  superficial;  for  example,  if  the  visual  image 
of  an  object  were  an  impression  left  by  this  object  upon  the 
brain,  there  would  not  be  the  memory  of  an  object,  there 
would  be  thousands,  there  would  be  millions  of  them;  for 
the  most  simple  and  stable  object  changes  its  form,  its  di- 
mensions, its  shade  of  coloring  according  to  the  spot  from 
which  it  is  perceived;  unless  I  condemn  myself  to  absolute 
stability  while  watching  it,  unless  my  eye  remains  absolutely 
immovable  in  its  orbit,  innumerable  images,  which  cannot  be 
imposed  upon  one  another,  will  be  traced,  one  after  another, 

the  life  of  the  insects  and  discovered  marvels  concerning  it.  He  was 
called  Henri  Fabre,  and  lived  at  S^rignan  (Vaucluse).  It  was  not  until 
after  fifty  or  sixty  years  of  uninterrupted  labors  that  he  saw  his  repu- 
tation pass  beyond  his  own  department.  Every  one  has  read,  especially 
since  his  death,  the  ten  volumes  of  his  Souvenirs  entomologiques,  and  it 
seems  to  me  that  no  reader  can  refuse  to  see  there  the  constant  mani- 
festation of  mind  in  nature,  in  each  insect,  even  in  each  living  molecule. 
Let  us  recall,  as  an  example,  the  Sphex,  a  hymen-opteral  insect  which 
digs  several  holes  in  the  sandy  earth  and  lays  an  egg  in  each  after  it 
has  first  deposited  there  a  victim  that  has  been  paralyzed  but  not  killed, 
to  serve  as  fresh  food  for  the  larva  after  its  hatching.  The  victim  must 
remain  living  but  inert  as  long  as  the  feast  of  the  larva  lasts:  the  little 
larvcB  would  not  relish  spoiled  meat.  Everything  for  their  cherished  ex- 
istence is  foreseen  by  the  mother,  which  will  never  know  them  and 
understands  nothing  about  it.  The  whole  of  insect  life  is  full  of  these 
instincts  of  foresight.  See  also  in  my  Conies  philosophiques,  the  chapter 
entitled  "L'oreille,"  and  in  Contemplations  scientifiques  (p.  18),  "L'lntel- 
ligence  des  plantea." 


36  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

on  my  retina  and  transmitted  to  my  brain.  What  would 
happen  if  it  were  a  question  of  the  visual  image  of  a  person 
whose  physiognomy  changes  and  whose  body  moves,  whose 
clothing  and  surroundings  are  different  every  time  you  see 
him?  And  yet  it  cannot  be  denied  that  our  consciousness 
holds  in  reserve  a  unique  image — or  one  almost  unique — an 
invariable  image  of  the  object  or  the  person,  which  is  evident 
proof  that  something  quite  different  has  taken  place  here 
from  a  mere  mechanical  registration.  The  same  things  can 
be  said  about  auditory  memories.  The  same  word  spoken 
by  different  persons,  or  by  the  same  person  at  different  mo- 
ments, in  different  sentences,  gives  sound  images  that  are  by 
no  means  exactly  the  same.  How  can  the  memory  be  com- 
pared to  a  phonograph?  This  consideration  alone  would 
be  enough  to  make  us  suspect  the  theory  which  attributes  a 
weakness  in  the  memory  for  words  to  the  impairment  or  de- 
struction of  the  memories  themselves,  automatically  recorded 
by  the  surface  of  the  brain. 

But  let  us  see,  according  to  the  same  author,  what  hap- 
pens in  these  maladies. 

In  those  cases  where  the  injury  to  the  brain  is  serious  and  the 
memory  of  words  has  been  greatly  impaired,  it  sometimes  happens 
that  a  more  or  less  great  excitement,  for  example  some  deep  emo- 
tion, will  suddenly  bring  back  the  memory  that  had  seemed  lost  for- 
ever. Would  this  be  possible  if  the  memory  had  been  lodged  in  the 
brain  matter,  now  impaired  or  destroyed?  Far  more  often  things 
happen  as  if  the  brain  served  to  recall  the  memory  but  not  to  pre- 
serve it.  The  sufferer  from  aphasia  becomes  incapable  of  finding 
the  word  he  needs:  he  seems  to  go  round  and  round  it,  and  to  lack 
the  necessary  strength  to  put  his  finger  on  the  desired  sound;  and 
in  fact,  in  the  realm  of  psychology  the  outward  sign  of  strength 
is  always  precision.  But  the  memory  still  seems  to  be  there,  and 
at  times,  when  he  has  replaced  by  paraphrases  the  word  believed  to 
have  disappeared,  the  sufferer  from  aphasia  will  manage  to  slip  into 
one  of  them  the  word  itself. 


MATERIALISM  37 

Let  us  now  consider  what  takes  place  in  progressive  aphasia,  that 
is  to  say,  when  the  difficulty  in  remembering  words  grows  steadily 
greater.  In  such  eases,  the  words  generally  disappear  in  regular 
order,  as  if  the  malady  were  well  acquainted  with  grammar.  Proper 
names  disappear  first  of  all,  then  common  names,  next  adjectives 
and  finally  verbs,  as  if  they  were  in  layers,  placed  one  above  an- 
other, and  the  injury  reached  these  layers  successively.  Yes,  but 
this  malady  can  spring  from  the  most  diverse  causes,  take  the  most 
varied  forms,  appear  at  some  point  in  the  affected  region  of  the 
brain  and  progress  in  no  matter  what  direction.  The  order  in 
which  the  various  memories  disappear  remains  the  same.  Would 
this  be  possible  if  the  malady  were  attacking  the  memories  them- 
selves ? 

If  the  memory  has  not  been  stored  in  the  brain,  then  where  has 
it  been  preserved?  For  that  matter,  has  the  question  of  "where" 
any  significance  when  we  speak  of  something  else  than  a  body"? 
Photographic  plates  are  preserved  in  a  box,  phonographic  records  in 
racks,  but  why  should  memories,  which  are  not  visible,  tangible 
things,  have  need  of  a  container,  and  how  could  they  have  one?  Are 
these  memories  anywhere  but  in  the  mind?  But  the  human  mind 
is  consciousness  itself,  and  consciousness  means  first  of  all  memory.^ 

We  can  say  here,  with  the  eminent  thinker,  that  all  things 
happen  as  if  the  body  were  simply  made  use  of  by  the  spirit. 
In  this  case  we  have  no  reason  to  suppose  that  the  body  and 
the  spirit  are  inseparably  bound  together. 

Here  is  a  brain  that  labors,  there  is  a  consciousness  that 
feels,  thinks,  and  desires.  If  the  labor  of  the  brain  corre- 
sponded to  the  totality  of  consciousness,  if  there  were  some 
equivalence  between  the  cerebral  and  the  mental,  conscious- 
ness might  share  the  fate  of  the  brain  and  death  be  the  end 
of  everything:  at  least  experience  could  show  nothing  to  the 
contrary  and  the  philosophy  which  affirms  our  survival  would 
be  reduced  to  basing  its  thesis  on  some  structure  of  meta- 
physics, a  basis  generally  fragile!     But  if  the  mental  life 

1  See  the  lectures  "Foi,"  and  "Vie,"  in  Le  MaUrialisme  actuel  (Paris), 
1913. 


38  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

surpasses  the  physical  life,  if  the  brain  is  limited  to  translat- 
ing into  movement  a  small  part  of  what  takes  place  in  our 
consciousness,  then  life  after  death  becomes  so  probable  that 
the  burden  of  proof  rests  upon  him  who  denies  rather  than 
on  him  who  affirms ;  for  the  only  reason  we  can  possibly  have 
to  admit  the  extinction  of  consciousness  after  death  is  that 
we  see  the  body  disintegrate,  and  this  reason  is  no  longer 
valid  if  it  is  a  fact,  established  by  experience,  that  the  con- 
sciousness is  at  least  partially  independent  of  the  body. 

Bergson,  metaphysician  that  he  is,  appears  more  '*  posi- 
tive'' than  the  physicist  Littre.  Spirit  is  not  matter.  It 
has  never  been  proved  that  the  soul  is  a  function  of  the  brain, 
a  property  of  the  cerebral  substance  that  is  destined  to  die 
with  it. 

We  even  ask  how  it  is  possible  that  a  thinker  of  Taine's 
breadth  of  mind,  for  example,  who  appreciates  at  its  full  value 
the  conception  and  composition  of  a  work,  its  plan  and  exe- 
cution ^nd  who  hsis  even  written  a  special  book  on  the  intel- 
ligence ("L 'Intelligence"),  should  be  able  to  attribute  the 
creation  of  a  philosophical  work  to  the  secretion  of  a  combina- 
tion of  molecules  of  the  materials  that  constitute  a  brain. 
The  action  of  personal  intelligence  is  so  evident  in  a  matter 
like  this,  so  irrefutable,  that  it  needs  a  veritable  and  sys- 
tematic autosuggestion  to  eclipse  it. 

The  brain  is,  without  any  doubt,  the  organ  of  thought,  and 
no  one  would  attempt  to  deny  it.  But  in  contradiction  to 
what  was  formerly  believed,  the  whole  brain  is  not  necessary 
to  thought  or  to  life. 

To  the  examples  drawn  from  the  disorders  of  memory 
which  we  have  just  cited,  we  can  add  many  others  leading 
to  the  same  conclusion. 

My  learned  friend  Edmond  Perrier  presented  to  the  Acad- 
emy of  Sciences,  in  his  lecture  of  December  22,  1913,  an  ob- 
servation of  Dr.  Robinson's  concerning  a  man  who  had  lived 
for  nearly  a  year  with  almost  no  suffering  and  with  no  ap- 


MATERIALISM  39 

parent  mental  trouble,  with  a  brain  that  was  nearly  reduced 
to  a  pulp,  and  was  no  longer  anything  but  a  vast  purulent 
abscess.  In  July,  1914,  Dr.  Hallopeau  brought  to  the  So- 
ciety of  Surgery  the  account  of  an  operation  that  had  been 
performed  at  the  Necker  Hospital  upon  a  young  girl  who 
had  fallen  from  the  Metropolitan  Railway:  at  the  trepanning 
it  was  ascertained  that  a  large  proportion  of  the  brain  matter 
was  reduced  literally  to  pulp.  They  cleaned,  drained,  and 
reclosed  the  wound;  the  patient  recovered.  On  March  24, 
1917,  at  the  Academy  of  Sciences,  Dr.  Guepin  showed,  through 
an  operation  on  a  wounded  soldier,  that  the  partial  ablation 
of  the  brain  does  not  prevent  manifestations  of  intelligence. 
Other  examples  could  be  cited.  At  times  there  remain  only 
very  slight  portions:  the  mind  makes  ingenious  use  of  what 
it  can. 

If  the  students  of  anatomy  do  not  find  the  soul  at  the  points 
of  their  scalpels,  when  they  dissect  a  body,  it  is  because  it 
is  not  there.  When  the  doctors  and  physiologists  see  nothing 
in  our  psychic  faculties  but  the  peculiar  qualities  of  the  brain, 
they  are  grossly  deceiving  themselves.  There  is  something 
else  in  the  human  being  besides  the  gray  or  white  substance 
of  the  brain. 

We  may  object  that  generally  the  faculty  of  thinking  seems 
to  depend  on  the  condition  of  the  brain  and  that,  like  the 
brain  itself,  it  grows  feeble  with  age.  But  is  it  not  the  in- 
strument that  grows  weaker,  the  body  and  not  the  spirit? 
Very  often,  among  great  brain-workers,  the  mind  remains 
sound  up  to  the  very  last  day  of  life.  All  my  contemporaries 
have  known  in  Paris  writers  like  Victor  Hugo,  Lamartiue, 
Legouve,  historians  like  Thiers,  Mignet,  Henri  Martin,  scholars 
like  Barthelemy-Saint-Hilaire  (1805-95),  savants  like  Che- 
vreul  (1786-1889),  who  have  shown  up  to  a  very  advanced 
age  the  strength  and  youth  of  their  souls. 

Homo  sapiem,  thinking  man :  it  is  under  this  title  that  cer- 
tain physiologists  have  long  defined  the  human  race.     Is  it 


40  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

possible  that  a  chemical  association  of  the  molecules  of 
hydrogen,  carbon,  nitrogen,  oxygen,  etc.,  should  be  able  to 
think  ? 

Biology  is  a  very  recent  science.  Deterministic  biology 
is  a  philosophy.  The  field  of  this  philosophy  is  to  consider 
mental  and  psychic  phenomena  as  the  effects  of  physiological 
reactions.  But  physiological  explanations  in  the  form  of  fig- 
urative expressions  are  only  a  confession  of  weakness.  People 
look  on  the  invention  of  a  word  as  a  great  discovery  and  the 
hypothetical  statement  of  a  fact  as  an  explanation. 

Despite  modern  discoveries  in  the  purely  physico-chemical 
origin  of  muscular  movements,  sensation  and  the  vital  prin- 
ciple have  remained  almost  as  mysterious  as  in  past  ages. 
We  cannot  refuse  to  recognize  in  each  one  of  us,  side  by 
side  with,  or  rather  above,  physiological  phenomena,  an  in- 
tellectual principle,  active  and  autonomous,  without  which 
nothing  can  be  explained,  with  which  everything  is  easily 
understood. 

As  for  this,  let  us  say  at  once  that  the  normal  and  well- 
known  manifestations  of  the  soul,  of  which  we  have  just 
spoken,  are  eclipsed  beside  those  which  will  be  represented 
in  the  following  chapters. 

Medicine  would  find  it  of  great  advantage  to  take  these 
things  into  consideration,  and  to  work  not  only  with  the 
physical  organism  but  also  with  the  intellectual  dynamism. 
A  certain  number  of  diseases  which  do  not  yield  to  pharma- 
ceutical treatment,  may  be  cured  by  means  of  the  mind.  As 
evidence  that  this  is  so,  we  have  the  cures  effected  by  hypno- 
tism and  suggestion,  and  the  so-called  miracles  of  the  re- 
ligious faiths,  from  the  time  of  the  temple  of  Epidaurus  and 
the  cult  of  j3^sculapius  up  to  Lourdes  and  its  rivals.  Do 
not  the  homeopathetic  globules  of  the  twentieth  solution  act 
a  little  through  persuasion?     Faith  moves  mountains. 

The  mind  is  not  the  body;  it  does  not  emanate  from  it  and 
proclaims  itself  as  entirely  distinct  from  it     The  will  of 


MATERIALISM  41 

man  is  recognized  by  every  one.  The  good  or  evil  perseverance 
in  this  will,  the  spirit  of  sacrifice,  heroism,  contempt  for  pain, 
the  organic  insensibility  of  the  martyrs  when  they  defied  the 
most  atrocious  tortures,  renunciation,  devotion,  the  virtues 
and  the  vices,  friendship  as  well  as  hatred,  charity  as  well 
as  envy — are  they  not  all  proofs  of  the  soul's  independence 
of  the  brain? 

There  are  some  human  beings  who  do  not  think  about  any- 
thing. We  meet  a  few  of  them  in  this  world.  But  in  general, 
even  the  most  primitive  man  knows  that  there  is  something 
greater  than  eating,  drinking,  and  love-making,  that  this 
ephemeral  world  of  the  senses  is  not  an  end  in  itself, — is 
indeed,  only  the  manifestation  of  a  superior  principle,  of 
which  we  can  perceive  nothing  here  but  the  confused  shadow. 
This  is  the  feeling  which  the  religions  have  tried  to  satisfy. 

If  we  analyze  the  human  body  and  its  natural  functions 
we  cannot  fail  to  recognize  that  despite  all  the  charms  it  can 
offer  to  our  senses,  it  is,  on  the  whole,  when  we  consider  only 
its  substance,  a  rather  vulgar  object.  Its  true  nobility  lies 
in  its  spirit,  its  feeling,  its  intelligence,  in  its  veneration  for 
art  and  science;  and  the  value  of  a  man  does  not  lie  in  his 
body,  so  short-lived,  so  changeable,  so  frail,  but  in  his  soul, 
which  reveals  itself,  even  in  this  life,  as  blessed  with  the 
faculty  of  enduring  eternally. 

Moreover,  this  body  is  not  an  inert  mass,  an  automaton; 
it  is  a  living  organism.  But  the  construction  of  a  being,  a 
man,  an  animal,  or  a  plant,  is  the  witness  of  the  existence  of 
a  constructive  force,  of  a  mind  in  nature,  of  an  intellectual 
principle  that  governs  the  atoms  and  is  not  of  them.  If  there 
were  only  material  molecules,  devoid  of  direction,  the  world 
would  not  go  on,  some  sort  of  chaos  would  have  existed  in- 
definitely, without  mathematical  laws,  and  the  Cosmos  would 
not  have  been  ruled  by  order. 

According  to  the  mechanical  theory  of  the  universe,  the 
totality  of  things  is  the  inevitable  effect  of  unconscious  com- 


42  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

binations;  creation  is  an  intellectual  nothingness  which  be- 
comes something  and  ends  by  thinking.  Could  we  imagine  a 
hypothesis  more  absurd  in  itself  and  more  contrary  to  all  our 
observations  ? 

Mysterious  nature  has  filled  everything  with  spirit  and  she 
even  shows  herself  endowed  with  a  malignity  that  is  gener- 
ally unsuspected.  What  is  the  coquetry  of  the  young  girl 
which  leads  her  to  become  a  wife,  to  suffer  in  her  beautiful 
body,  to  be  happy  in  the  pains  of  motherhood  in  order  to 
perpetuate  the  human  race?  What  is  love,  that  delightful 
snare?  What  is  mental  suffering?  What  is  feeling?  Does 
not  the  silent  language  of  nature  make  itself  clearly  heard? 
What  is  the  building  of  a  nest  by  two  birds?  the  brooding 
mother  fed  by  the  future  father  ?  the  beakful  of  food  brought 
by  the  father  and  mother  to  the  hungry  nestlings?  What 
are  the  hen  and  her  chickens?  Have  you  ever  thought  about 
the  fi/rst  beat  of  a  heart  in  an  egg,  in  a  child  ?  Have  you  ever 
analyzed  the  fertilization  of  flowers?  Not  to  see  in  that  a 
reasoned  order,  an  intention,  a  plan,  a  general  aim,  a  finality, 
a  mind  which  governs  us  all;  not  to  see  in  life  itself  the 
supreme  aim  of  the  organization  of  the  worlds — that  is  to 
fail  to  see  the  sun  at  high  noon. 

Where  does  this  mysterious  force  lead  us?  We  do  not 
know.  So  long  as  life  imposes  its  laws  upon  us,  the  planet 
which  we  inhabit  carries  us  through  space  at  the  speed  of 
107,000  kilometers  an  hour,  itself  the  plaything  of  forces 
that  direct  the  world's  system  and  of  fourteen  different  move- 
ments. We  are  thinking  atoms  on  a  moving  atom  a  million 
times  smaller  than  the  sun,  which  is  itself  an  atom  in  our 
gigantic  stellar  nebula,  which  is  only  one  universe,  surrounded 
by  an  infinity  of  other  universes.  Unlimited  immensity! 
Prodigious  movements,  stupefying  speeds ! 

Force  itself  seems  inherent  in  the  atom,  for  we  can  nowhere 
find  an  immovable  atom.     A  living  being  which  did  not  con- 


MATERIALISM  43 

tain  in  itself  a  directing  force,  would  not  live  but  would  fall 
in  ruins  like  an  abandoned  building. 

Renan  and  Berthelot,  those  two  inseparable  friends,  would 
sometimes  discuss  together  the  problem  which  interests  us 
here.  They  both  died  without  the  hope  of  a  future  life,  but 
with  somewhat  different  sentiments.  On  August  2,  1892, 
Berthelot  wrote  to  Renan,  who  was  sinking  from  day  to  day 
(and  died  a  month  later)  :  ''Let  us  console  ourselves  in 
watching  the  growth  of  our  grandchildren.  It  is  the  only 
sort  of  survival  of  which  we  can  have  any  certain^  scientific 
knowledge,' '  This  manner  of  speaking  does  not  imply,  in 
its  spirit,  an  absolute  negation,  and  undoubtedly  it  responded 
to  certain  thoughts  of  the  author  of  ' '  La  Vie  de  Jesus. ' ' 

On  the  preceding  July  20th,  Renan  had  written  to  Berthe- 
lot:^ 

The  most  important  act  of  our  life  is  our  death.  Generally  we 
perform  this  act  under  detestable  circumstances.  Our  school  of 
thought,  the  very  essence  of  which  is  to  have  no  need  to  blind  our- 
selves with  illusions,  has,  I  believe,  quite  special  advantages  for  this 
solemn  hour. 

At  this  moment  I  am  at  work  correcting  the  proofs  of  my  fourth 
and  fifth  volumes  of  "Israel"  and  I  should  greatly  like  to  see  it  all 
again.  If  some  one  else  should  give  the  proofs  to  the  printer  I 
should  be  somewhat  impatient  in  the  depths  of  Purgatory,  yet  no 
one  but  the  Eternal  and  myself  will  ever  be  aware  of  the  greater 
part  of  the  corrections  I  intended  to  make.  God's  will  be  done! 
In  utrumque  paratus. 

The  philosopher,  the  ancient  theologian,  is  prepared.  His 
belief  in  God  persists.  One  can.  be  an  anti-clerical  and  a 
deist,  like  Voltaire.  Renan  was  perhaps  not  far  from  admit- 
ting an  indeterminable  survival  of  the  soul. 

According  to  his  son-in-law.  Monsieur  Psichari,  who  was  at 

^  Correspondance  de  Renan  et  Berthelot  (Paris,  189S),  published  by 
Berthelot. 


44  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

his  death-bed,  Renan  declared  that  nothing  of  him  would 
remain,  nothing,  nothi7ig,  nothing!  This  was  the  impression 
of  his  last  hour.  A  hundred  other  great  minds  have  had  the 
same  skepticism  concerning  the  survival  of  the  soul.  Never- 
theless, they  continued  to  think  about  it.  This  opinion  is 
founded  only  on  our  ignorance.  Ptolemy  considered  nothing 
more  stupid  than  the  hypothesis  of  the  movement  of  the 
earth:  -n-aw  yeXoLorarovy  superlatively  ridiculous.  What  is 
thought?  What  is  the  soul?  The  supernatural  does  not 
exist,  and  the  soul,  if  it  exists  in  individuals,  is  as  natural  as 
the  body. 

We  have  finally  reached  the  point  of  admitting  the  unity 
of  force  and  the  unity  of  substance} 

Everything  is  djrnamism.  Cosmic  dynamism  rules  the 
worlds.  Newton  gave  it  the  name  of  attraction.  But  this  in- 
terpretation is  insufficient.  If  there  were  nothing  but  attrac- 
tion in  the  universe,  the  stars  would  form  only  one  mass,  for 
it  would  have  brought  them  together  long  ago,  in  the  begin- 
ning of  time;  there  is  something  else,  there  is  movement. 
Vital  dynamism  governs  all  beings :  in  man  as  he  has  evolved, 
psychic  dynamism  is  constantly  associated  with  vital  dynam- 
ism. At  bottom  all  these  dynamisms  are  one :  it  is  the  spirit 
in  nature,  deaf  and  blind  as  far  as  we  are  concerned  in  the 
immaterial  world,  and  even  in  the  instinct  of  animals,  uncon- 
scious in  the  majority  of  human  works,  conscious  in  a  small 
number. 

In  ''Uranie*'  (1888),  I  wrote: 

What  we  call  matter  vanishes  just  as  scientific  analysis  believes 

1  This  is  the  title  which  I  gave  in  1865  to  the  scientific  account  which 
was  published  in  the  Annuai/re  du  Cosmos  for  1866.  At  that  time  we 
■were  singularly  blind;  but  the  progress  of  science  has  merely  confirmed 
this  idea  of  the  ancient  alchemists.  The  structure  of  the  atom,  composed 
of  electrons,  shows  us  even  to-day  that  matter  is  being  lost  in  the  modern 
idea  of  energy.     The  atoms  are  the  center  of  forces. 


MATERIALISM  45 

it  is  about  to  grasp  it.  We  find  force  is  the  dynamic  element,  the 
mainstay  of  the  universe,  and  the  essential  principle  behind  all 
forms.  The  human  being  has  the  soul  as  its  essential  principle. 
The  universe  is  an  intelligent  principle  that  we  can  not  under- 
stand. 

In  *'Les  Forces  naturelles  inconnues"  (1906),  I  wrote: 

Psychic  manifestations  confirm  what  we  have  learned  elsewhere, 
that  the  purely  mechanical  explanation  of  the  universe  is  insufficient 
and  that  there  is  something  else  in  the  universe  than  this  pretended 
matter.  It  is  not  matter  whicn  governs  the  world:  it  is  a  psychic 
and  dynamic  element. 

Since  the  time  when  these  lines  were  written,  the  progress 
of  psychic  observations  has  superabundantly  confirmed 
them. 

A  mental  power  rules  silently  and  ail-powerfully  over  the 
instincts  of  insects,  assuring  their  existence  and  their  per- 
petuation, as  it  rules  over  the  birth  of  a  bird  and  the  evolution 
of  the  superior  animals,  including  man  himself.  It  is  this 
sort  of  dynamism  which  leads  the  caterpillar  to  become  a 
formless  pulp  in  the  chrysalis,  and  afterward  a  butterfly. 
It  is  this  that  from  the  organism  of  certain  media  brings 
forth  a  substance  which  changes  into  organs  that  are  real, 
though  they  live  for  but  a  short  space, — a  dynamism  instan- 
taneously creating  transitory  materializations. 

Let  us  assert  it:  the  universe  is  dynamic.  An  invisible 
thinking  force  governs  worlds  and  atoms.     Matter  obeys. 

The  analysis  of  things  reveals,  everywhere,  the  action  of  an 
invisible  spirit.  This  universal  spirit  is  in  everything,  gov- 
erning each  atom,  each  molecule,  though  they  .themselves  are 
impalpable,  imponderable,  infinitely  small,  invisible,  and  con- 
stitute by  their  dynamic  aggregation  visible  things  and  living 
creatures ;  and  this  spirit  is  indestructible  and  eternal. 

Materialism  is  an  erroneous  doctrine,  incomplete  and  in- 


46  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

sufficient,  which  explains  nothing  to  our  entire  satisfaction.^ 
To  admit  only  matter  endowed  with  c^tain  essential  quali- 
ties, is  an  hypothesis  that  does  not  bear  analysis.  The  Posi- 
tivists  are  mistaken,  there  exist  ''positive"  proofs  that  the 
hypothesis  of  matter  dominating  and  governing  everything 
through  its  essential  qualities  is  beside  the  truth.  They  have 
not  divined  the  dynamic  intelligence  which  animates  living 
creatures  and  even  tilings. 

We  are  able  to  say,  with  Dr.  Geley,  that  the  classical  agents 
are  powerless  to  solve  the  general  difficulty  of  philosophy  in 
regard  to  evolution,  which  has  at  least  brought  the  fnost 
out  of  the  least.'^ 

Materialism  which,  whether  consciously  or  unconsciously, 
has  become  so  wide-spread  among  all  the  classes  of  society, 
is  only  a  theory  of  the  appearance  of  things,  is  only  the  outer 
surface  of  things  that  have  not  been  analyzed.  "Quod  terra 
immohiliSf  in  medio  coeli,  si  ego-  contra  assererem  terram 
moveri  ..."  wrote  Copernicus,  on  the  first  page  of  his  im- 
mortal work,  in  its  dedication  to  the  pope.  And  it  proves 
that  what  has  been  considered  fully  demonstrated  was  abso- 
lutely false.  We  should  do  as  much  to-day  for  psychic  physi- 
ology. 

For  it  is  through  the  experimental  method  itself  that  we 
are  going  to  prove  the  weakness  of  materialism.  We  shall 
bring  forward  as  evidence  the  entire  error  of  classic  ma- 
terialism. The  whole  of  the  standard  psychic  physiology 
is  erroneous,  contrary  to  reality.  There  is  in  the  human  be- 
ing something  more  than  chemical  molecules  endowed  with 
certain  qualities:  there  is  an  element  that  is  not  material,  a 
spiritual  principle.  The  impartial  explanation  of  facts  will 
show  it  to  us  and  we  shall  see  it  act,  independently  of  the 
physical  senses. 

1  The  greatest  of  physiologists,  Claude  Bernard,  who  passed  his  life 
in  carefully  investigating  the  functions  of  the  brain,  concludes  that  "  the 
mechanism  of  thought  is  unknown  to  us."  {La  Science  expMmentale, 
p.  371.)  '  De  V Inconscient  au  Conscient,  p.  33. 


Ill 

WHAT  IS  MAN?      DOES  THE  SOUL  EXIST? 

We  ought  to  seek  for  truth  in  entire 
liberty  of  mind,  freed  from  all  precon- 
ceived ideas, 

Dkscaetes. 

WE  have  just  shown  that  the  theories  of  material- 
ism are  entirely  unproved.  They  are  not  founded 
on  as  solid  a  basis  as  has  been  imagined;  they 
have  many  deficiencies;  they  leave  a  large  number  of  things 
unexplained.  They  cannot  be  compared,  as  is  pretended,  to 
geometrical  theorems  or  to  mathematical  certainties.  There- 
fore the  question  is  open  to  our  free  examination. 

Before  seeking  to  learn  if  our  soul  survives  the  dissolution 
of  our  body,  it  is  indispensable  to  know  if  our  souls  truly  exist. 
To  discuss  the  continuance  of  a  thing  that  did  not  exist  would 
be  to  waste  our  time  rather  ingenuously.  If  thought  were  a 
product  of  the  brain  it  would  perish  with  it. 

This  knowledge  can  be  acquired  only  by  scientific,  positive 
observation,  by  the  experimental  method.  But  until  our  day 
psychology  has  been  rather  a  matter  of  words,  of  meditations 
on  theories,  of  hypotheses.  That  is  a  tradition  which  we  shall 
take  good  care  not  to  follow  here.  We  shall  try  to  determine 
the  nature  of  the  soul  and  to  learn  its  faculties  by  practical 
observations. 

It  is  regrettable  to  have  to  admit  that  until  the  present  day 
these  faculties  have  been  almost  unknown.  The  new  psychol- 
ogy ought  to  be  founded  on  science.  Let  us  remember  the 
origin  of  the  word  metaphysic,  ''after  the  physical,"  in  the 
classification  of  its  founder,  Aristotle. 

47 


48  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

It  has  been  forgotten  too  often. 

In  order  to  go  on  living  after  the  destruction  of  the  body, 
we  should  have  to  exist  spiritually.  Has  our  soul  an  in- 
dividual existence?  Have  we  a  soul?  Or,  to  speak  more 
exactly,  is  man  a  soul?  This  is  the  first  question  to  be  an- 
swered; this  is  the  first  point  to  be  established. 

We  have  seen  above  that  the  materialists,  the  positivists,  the 
atheists,  the  deniers  of  spirit  in  nature  are  utterly  wrong 
in  thinking  and  teaching  that  there  is  nothing  in  the  universe 
but  matter  and  its  properties,  and  that  all  the  facts  of  human- 
ity can  be  explained  by  this  theory,  which  is  at  once  learned 
and  popular.  Here  is  an  incorrect  hypothesis.  But  we  must 
prove  the  contrary  thesis. 

What  is  the  soul  ?  Where,  by  the  way,  does  this  word  come 
from  ?    What  does  it  mean  ? 

Up  to  the  present  the  belief  in  the  soul  has  been  based 
on  metaphysical  dissertations  and  on  revelations  that  claimed 
to  be  divine,  but  were  unproved.  Religion,  faith,  sentiment, 
desire,  fear  are  not  proofs. 

How  did  the  idea  of  the  soul  occur  to  the  minds  of  men? 

The  word  ''soul"  and  its  equivalents  in  our  modern  lan- 
guages (''spirit,"  for  example)  or  in  the  ancient  languages, 
such  words  as  anima,  animus  (a  Latin  transcription  of 
av€/xos),  spiritus,  ^vxq,  Trvevfia,  atma,  soul  (a  Sanskrit  word  re- 
sembling the  Greek  ar/xos,  vapor),  etc.,  all  imply  the  idea  of 
breath;  and  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  idea  of  the  soul  and 
the  spirit  were  the  primitive  expression  of  this  idea  of  breath, 
among  the  psychologists  of  the  earliest  epoch.  Psyche,  even, 
comes  from  if/vxetv,  ' '  to  breathe. ' ' 

These  early  observers  who  identified  the  essence  of  life  and 
thought  with  the  phenomenon  of  respiration,  had  to  reconcile 
the  patent,  undeniable  fact  of  the  decomposition  of  the  dead 
body,  of  the  body  deprived  of  breath,  deprived  of  the  soul, 
with  their  belief  in  the  apparitions  of  the  dead,  that  is  to 
say,  in  the  persistent  life  of  those  whose  bodies  lay  there  in- 


WHAT  IS  MAN?    DOES  THE  SOUL  EXIST?      49 

animate  or,  what  was  more,  were  dissolved  and  reduced  to 
ashes.  They  therefore  imagined  that  the  breath,  the  soul 
was  something  which  abandoned  the  body  at  the  moment 
of  death  to  go  and  live  elsewhere  its  own  life. 

Even  to-day,  *'the  last  breath''  designates  death.  If  some 
admitted  the  persistence  of  life  under  an  invisible  form, 
others  saw  in  this  admission  only  the  expression  of  the  senti- 
ment, the  regret,  the  affection  of  the  survivors,  and  from  the 
very  beginning  of  the  various  human  groups,  we  see  two 
distinct  and  even  opposed  theories  dividing  the  beliefs  of  men 
— spiritualism  on  one  hand,  materialism  on  the  other.  But 
the  one  group  as  well  as  the  other  reasoned  superficially. 

The  meaning  of  the  words  "soul"  and  "spirit"  ought  to  be 
discussed,  examined.  There  are  fundamental  distinctions  to 
be  established.  The  properties  of  the  living  organism  and 
psychic  elements  differ  essentially. 

In  general,  men  think,  with  complete  conviction,  that  there 
is  only  one  incontestable  reality  in  the  world,  the  reality  of 
objects,  of  matter, — that  is  to  say,  of  what  we  see  and  touch 
and  of  what  comes  within  the  range  of  the  senses.  For  them 
everything  else  is  only  an  abstraction,  a  chimera,  nothing. 

The  majority  of  laymen  and  scholars  adhere  to  this  way 
of  thinking.  But  it  is  possible  for  the  laymen  and  the  scholars 
to  be  mistaken,  and  that  is  what  has  occurred  in  this  case. 

I  agree  with  my  regretted  friend  Durand  de  Gros  that 
physics,  physics  itself,  teaches  us  that  appearances,  even  when 
they  have  all  the  force  of  the  most  irresistible  evidence,  ought 
to  be  held  in  suspicion  and  severely  examined.  "What  is  more 
evident  than  the  passage  of  the  sun  and  the  entire  heavens 
above  our  heads?  Have  not  tlie  eyes  of  all  men  in  all  times 
proclaimed  this  as  evidence?  Could  there  be  any  more  im- 
posing ?  And  yet,  it  is  only  an  illusion ;  astronomy  has  proved 
it  to  be  so. 

How  superficial  our  doctrines  appear  in  their  criticism  of 
knowledge,  when,  reasoning  only  from  apparent  observations, 


50  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

they  point  out  to  us  what  appear  to  be  facts  of  experience, 
''The  sun  is  a  luminous  disk  which  revolves  above  our  heads 
from  the  east  to  the  west,  from  its  rising  to  its  setting": 
there  was  a  truth  of  observation,  it  would  seem — if  there 
were  such  a  thing! — and  one  that  the  unanimous  testimony 
of  men  had  proclaimed  for  thousands  of  years.  How  does 
it  happen,  then,  that  science  dares  to  affirm  that  this  ''truth 
established  by  observation"  is  undeniably  an  error?  How 
does  it  happen  that  all  the  world  knows  to-day  that  it  is 
an  error? 

To  be  best  understood, — that  fact  which  can  be  accurately 
and  truthfully  affirmed,  that  which  is  the  result  of  real  ob- 
servation, is  not  that  one  which  is  expressed  by  saying: 
' '  The  sun  is  a  disk, ' '  etc. ;  it  is  the  fact  which  should  be  ex- 
pressed thus:  "I  have  the  impression  of  a  brilliant  disk 
which  I  have  named  the  sun,  and  which  is  of  such  a  nature 
that  it  appears  to  me  to  move  from  east  to  west. ' ' 

Those  are  the  words  in  which  the  experimenter  ought  to  set 
forth  the  statement  of  his  experience,  if  he  wishes  to  re- 
main within  the  strict  limits  of  the  known  facts  of  his  ex- 
perience; that  is  to  say,  if  he  wishes  to  express  absolute  cer- 
tainty. 

And  even  this  disk  is  a  false  appearance,  as  the  sun  is  a 
globe. 

Let  us  give  sensations  and  perceptions  their  due  and  not 
confound  them  with  reality.  The  latter  has  to  be  proved. 
I  see  a  flash  of  lightning,  the  sound  of  a  cannon  shot  reaches 
my  ears.  To  be  quite  exact,  I  ought  to  think:  "I  have  the 
sensation  of  having  heard  a  cannon  shot,  I  have  the  sensation 
of  having  seen  a  flash  of  lightning."  But  the  physiologists 
often  ignore  this  essential  distinction.  The  things  they  offer 
us  as  facts  of  observation  are  often,  if  strictly  examined,  only 
conjectured  facts,  not  observations  at  all ;  they  are  inductions 
drawn  from  observations,  where  they  have  failed  to  take  into 
account  this  operation  of  their  minds.     I  have  the  sensation 


WHAT  IS  MAN?    DOES  THE  SOUL  EXIST?      51 

of  a  luminous  disk,  of  such  or  such  an  apparent  diameter, 
moving  across  the  sky,  from  sunrise  to  sunset;  that  is  abso- 
lutely true.  That  is  what  I  have  every  right  to  affirm,  at 
least  according  to  the  principles  laid  down  by  the  doctrine 
of  experiment  in  regard  to  certainty.  But  if  I  say,  '*A  disk 
moves  across  the  sky,"  etc.,  I  am  stating  more  than  I  know 
and  I  risk  making  a  mistake;  and  the  proof  is  that  I  have, 
in  fact,  made  a  sort  of  mistake. 

It  would  be  superfluous  to  multiply  examples  in  support 
of  this  thesis.  We  experience  such  or  such  a  sensation,  we 
have  such  or  such  an  idea,  such  or  such  an  emotion;  that  is 
the  only  knowledge  which  is  immediate  and  certain,  that  is 
the  only  truth  that  is  actually  experimental,  and  worthy  of 
absolute  belief. 

The  idea  of  an  object  implies,  therefore,  a  sensation,  a  per- 
ception, a  conception.  But  what  are  these  things?  Are  they 
so  many  attributes  of  the  object  itself?  No.  This  sensation, 
this  conception,  prove  that,  face  to  face  with  the  object  felt, 
perceived,  apprehended,  there  is  something  that  feels,  per- 
ceives, apprehends. 

Speaking  exactly,  the  fact  of  feeling,  perceiving,  appre- 
hending constitutes  in  itself  an  absolutely  fundamental  fact, 
the  only  one  that  our  immediate  observation  imposes  upon  us. 

We  have  made  use  of  this  form  of  reasoning  since  the  dis- 
cussions of  Berkeley  (1710),  and  even  since  those  of  Male- 
branche  (1674).  It  is  not  a  matter  of  yesterday.^  We  judge 
the  universe,  objects,  living  beings,  forces,  space,  and  time 
only  through  our  sensations,  and  all  that  we  are  able  to  think 
about  reality  exists  in  our  mind,  in  our  brain.  But  it  is 
a  strange  form  of  reasoning  to  conclude  from  this  that  our 
ideas  constitute  reality  itself.  These  impressions  have  a  cause, 
and  this  cause  is  external  to  our  eyes,  and  to  our  senses.  We 
are  mirrors  that  reflect  the  images  cast  upon  them. 

1  The  general  discussion  of  this  may  be  found  in  my  work  Philosophie 
astronomique  [just  being  published],  in  the  chapter  "The  External  World 
and  Human  Perception." 


52  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

The  pure  idealism  of  Berkeley,  of  Malebranche,  of  Kant, 
of  Poincare,  goes  too  far  in  its  skepticism;  but  let  us  never 
lose  sight  of  the  principle. 

It  is  true  that  it  is  urgently  necessary  to  protest  against 
superficial  appearances,  and  to  proclaim  that  the  external 
world  is  not  what  it  seems  to  us.  If  we  were  not  endowed 
with  our  eyes  and  ears  it  would  seem  utterly  different  to  us. 
The  retina  might  be  constructed  differently,  the  optic  nerve 
might  be  able  to  register  not  merely  those  vibrations  of  be- 
tween 380  and  760  trillions  a  second,  that  range  from  the 
extreme  red  to  the  extreme  violet,  but  even  those  beyond  the 
infra-red  and  the  ultra-violet,  or  to  be  replaced  by  nerves" 
that  were  sensitive  to  the  electrical  vibrations  or  to  the  mag- 
netic waves  or  to  the  invisible  forces  that  are  unknown  to 
us.  To  those  beings  who  may  exist  on  other  planets,  the 
universe  would  be  something  quite  different  from  the  uni- 
verse of  our  scientific  systems.  We  should  therefore  be  in 
error  if  we  mistook  our  sensations  for  realities.  Real  nature 
is  quite  otherwise.  We  do  not  know  it,  but  the  mind  ought 
to  study  it. 

I  feel,  I  think;  this  is  the  only  thing  of  which  we  are  cer- 
tain, with  a  present  certainty — a  real  test,  and  the  only  one 
worthy  to  be  so  qualified.  From  this  primary  fact,  the  only 
one  of  real  observation,  of  undeniable  certainty,  there  springs, 
by  means  of  induction,  a  great  secondary  fact, — the  cause 
from  which  emanates  this  sensation  and  this  thought. 

And  this  cause  resolves  itself  into  two  elements:  the  sub- 
ject and  the  object ;  that  is  to  say,  that  which  feels  and  thinks, 
and  that  which  is  thought  and  felt. 

Certain  philosophers  of  the  idealistic  school,  such  as  Berkeley 
in  the  eighteenth  century,  and  H.  Poincare  in  the  twentieth, 
have  gone  so  far  as  to  pretend  that  only  the  thinking  subject 
exists,  that  only  our  sensations  are  proved  for  us,  and  that  the 
object,  the  exterior  world,  may  very  well  not  exist  at  all. 


WHAT  IS  MAN?    DOES  THE  SOUL  EXIST?      53 

That  is  an  exaggeration,  exactly  contrary  to  that  of  the 
radical  materialists,  and  no  less  erroneous. 

What  is  true  and  irrefutable  is  that  we  know  what  we  think, 
and  that  we  are  ignorant  of  the  ultimate  reality,  the  essence  of 
things,  and  of  the  external  world  of  which  we  are  able  to  per- 
ceive only  the  appearance. 

Suppose  we  know  that  reality  is  anti-scientific.  We  know 
that  our  senses  reveal  only  a  part  of  it  and  even  so  after 
the  manner  of  prisms,  which  modify  reality.  If  our  planet 
were  constantly  covered  with  clouds  we  should  know  nothing 
of  the  sun,  nor  the  moon,  nor  the  planets,  nor  the  stars,  and 
*fhe  world  system  would  remain  unknown,  with  the  result 
that  human  knowledge  would  be  condemned  to  an  irremediable 
falsity.  But  what  we  know  is  nothing  to  what  we  do  not 
know.    And  even  our  optic  nerve  is  only  a  partial  interpreter. 

Illusion  forms  the  unstable  basis  of  our  ideas,  of  our  sensa- 
tions,  of  our  sentiments,  of  our  beliefs.  The  first  and  most 
fundamental  of  these  illusions  is  the  immobility  of  the  earth. 
Man  feels  himself  to  be  fixed  in  the  center  of  the  universe  and 
has  imagined  all  sorts  of  things  in  consequence.  Despite  the 
demonstrations  of  astronomy,  we  have  sought  in  vain  to  see,  to 
touch  truth ;  we  have  not  been  able  to  do  so.  We  are^  let  us 
suppose,  at  the  close  of  a  beautiful  day  in  summer,  the  air  is 
calm,  the  sky  clear,  and  everything  about  us  is  utterly  peace- 
ful. And  yet  we  are,  in  fact,  on  an  automobile  racing  through 
the  depths  of  the  heavens  with  dizzy  speed. 

Hunranity  lives  in  a  state  of  profound  ignorance  and  does 
not  know  that  nature's  organization  does  not  help  us  to  learn 
anything  of  reality.  Our  senses  deceive  us  in  everything. 
Scientific  analysis  alone  brings  some  light  to  our  minds. 

Thus,  for  example,  we  feel  nothing  of  the  formidable  move- 
ments of  the  planet  on  which  our  feet  rest.  It  appears  stable, 
immovable,  with  fixed  positions:  a  top,  a  bottom,  left  side, 
right  side,  etc     But  it  rushes  through  space,  bearing  us  with 


-4 


54  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

it,  at  a  speed  of  107,000  kilometers  an  hour,  in  its  annual 
course  around  the  sun,  which  itself  moves  through  space  in 
such  a  fashion  that  the  earth's  course  is  not  a  sharp  curve  but 
an  ever  open  spiral,  and  that  our  wandering  earth  has  not 
passed  twice  over  the  same  path  since  it  existed. 

At  the  same  time,  the  globe  turns  on  its  axis  every  twenty- 
four  hours,  so  that  what  we  call  the  top  at  a  certain  hour,  is  the 
bottom  twelve  hours  later.  This  diurnal  movement  makes  us 
travel  350  meters  a  second,  in  the  latitude  of  Paris,  and  465 
meters  at  the  equator. 

Our  planet  is  the  plaything  of  fourteen  different  movements, 
not  one  of  which  do  we  feel, — not  even  those  which  touch  us 
the  most  closely ;  for  example,  that  of  the  tides  on  the  earth 's 
surface,  which  twice  a  day  lift  the  ground  beneath  our  feet 
as  much  as  30  centimeters.  There  is  no  fixed  landmark 
that  can  enable  us  to  observe  them  directly;  if  there  were  no 
shores  the  ocean  tides  would  not  be  visible. 

Do  we  even  feel  the  weight  of  the  air  which  we  breathe? 
The  surface  of  a  man's  body  supports  16,000  kilograms  of 
the  air's  weight,  which  is  exactly  counterbalanced  by  the  pres- 
sure from  within.  Before  Galileo,  Pascal,  and  Torricelli,  no 
one  suspected  that  air  had  weight.  Science  has  proved  it; 
nature  did  not  make  us  feel  it. 

The  air  is  crossed  by  various  currents  of  whicji  we  are 
unaware.  Electricity  has  a  continual  part  in  it,  the  mani- 
festations of  which  we  scarcely  ever  perceive,  except  during 
storms,  when  there  are  violent  ruptures  of  equilibrium.  The 
sun  sends  us  constantly  magnetic  radiations  which,  at  a  dis- 
tance of  150  millions  of  kilometers,  act  on  the  magnetic  needle 
without  our  senses  being  able  to  reveal  this  action.  A  few 
sensitive  delicate  organisms  resemble  these  electric  and  mag- 
netic currents. 

Our  eye  perceives  what  we  call  light  only  through  the  vi- 
brations of  ether  that  are  comprised  of  from  380  trillions 
(extreme  red)   to  760  trillions   (extreme  violet)    a  second; 


WHAT  IS  MAN?     DOES  THE  SOUL  EXIST?      55 

but  the  slow  vibrations  of  the  infra-red,  below  380,  exist  and 
bear  their  part  in  nature,  in  the  same  way  as  do  the  rapid  vi- 
brations, above  760,  of  the  ultra-violet,  which  are  invisible 
to  our  retina. 

Our  ear  perceives  what  we  call  sound  only  from  32  vibra- 
tions a  second  up  to  36,000  for  the  shrillest  whistles. 

Our  sense  of  smell  perceives  what  we  call  odors  only  in 
very  great  proximity,  and  from  a  certain  number  of  emana- 
tions only.  The  sense  of  smell  in  animals  differs  from  that  in 
human  beings. 

As  a  matter  of  fact,  in  nature,  outside  of  our  senses,  there 
is  no  light,  nor  sound,  nor  odor;  it  is  we  who  have  created 
these  words  in  response  to  our  impressions.  Light  is  a 
form  of  motion,  like  heat,  and  there  is  as  much  ''light"  in 
space  at  night  as  there  is  at  noon,  that  is  to  say,  as  many 
vibrations  of  ether  crossing  the  immensity  of  the  heavens. 
Sound  is  another  form  of  motion,  and  it  is  a  noise  only  to  our 
auditory  nerves.  Odors  come  from  particles  suspended  in  the 
air,  which  especially  affect  our  olfactory  nerves. 

These  are  the  only  three  senses  which,  in  our  terrestrial 
order,  put  us  in  touch  with  the  world  external  to  our  bodies. 
The  other  two,  taste  and  touch,  act  only  through  contact, 
which  serves  us  little;  they  do  not  in  all  cases  bring  us  the 
knowledge  of  reality. 

There  are  about  us  vibrations  of  ether  or  of  air,  forces,  in- 
visible things  which  we  do  not  perceive.  That  is  a  statement 
of  our  order  which  is  absolutely  scientific  and  incontestably 
rational. 

It  is  possible  that  there  may  exist  about  us  not  only  in- 
visible things  but  even  invisible,  intangible  beings,  with  whom 
our  senses  do  not  put  us  in  touch.  I  do  not  say  that  such  do 
exist,  but  I  say  that  they  may  exist,  and  this  statement 
is  the  absolutely  scientific  and  rational  corollary  of  the  state- 
ments which  precede  it. 

As  it  is  granted — and  proved — that  our  organs  of  percep- 


56  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

tion  do  not  reveal  things  to  us  as  they  are,  and  often  give  us 
false  or  erroneous  impressions  concerning  movements  of  the 
earth,  the  weight  of  the  air,  radiations,  electricity,  magnetism, 
etc.,  we  are  not  justified  in  thinking  that  what  we  see  repre- 
sents the  only  reality;  we  are  even  invited  to  admit  the  con- 
trary. 

Invisible  beings  may  exist  about  us.  Who  would  have 
imagined  the  microbes  before  they  were  discovered  ?  But  they 
swarm  by  millions  and  play  a  considerable  part  in  the  life 
of  all  organisms. 

Appearances  do  not  reveal  reality  to  us.  There  is  only 
one  reality  directly  appreciated  by  us, — that  is  our  thought. 
And  what  is  most  undeniably  real  in  man  is  the  spirit.  My 
former  works  have  already  led  to  this  conclusion.  The  pres- 
ent book  is  destined  to  prove  it  even  more  convincingly. 
Will  my  readers  pardon  me  for  having  repeated  here  what  I 
published  in  "Lumen"  in  1867,  and  in  ''Les  Forces  naturelles 
inconnues,"  1907?  It  is  absolutely  necessary  to  recall  these 
ideas. 

Henri  Poincare,  of  whom  we  were  just  speaking,  ' '  idealist, ' ' 
not  ''spiritualist"  as  he  was,  despite  the  skepticism  of  his 
conversation,  wrote  the  following  page,  apropos  of  the  last 
years  of  a  French  scholar,  Potier,  a  professor  at  the  Ecole 
Polytechnique : 

The  illness  which  killed  him  was  long  and  cruel.  For  twelve 
years  he  was  stretched  on  his  bed  or  on  a  sofa,  deprived  of  the 
use  of  his  limbs  and  often  tortured  with  pain.  The  encroachment 
of  the  disease  was  slow  and  prolonged,  the  crises  were  more  fre- 
quent every  year.  At  the  end,  there  was  almost  nothing  left  of  his 
body,  and  in  the  bed,  from  which  he  could  no  longer  rise,  one  saw 
only  two  eyes.  His  soul  was  stronger  than  the  blind  power  of  a 
brutal  illness;  it  did  not  yield.  He  had  himself  carried  to  the 
Polytechnic  School  and  the  School  of  Mines.  More  and  more,  in 
the  moments  that  were  left  him  of  respite  from  suffering,  he  con- 
tinued to  interest  himself  in  all  that  he  had  once  loved.     And  in 


WHAT  IS  MAN?    DOES  THE  SOUL  EXIST?      57 

this  body,  which  became  more  piteous  from  day  to  day,  the  intelli- 
gence remained  as  luminous  as  ever,  like  a  fortress,  the  ramparts 
of  which  crumble  bit  by  bit  under  the  enemy  shells  and  which  is 
still  rendered  redoubtable  by  the  energy  of  its  commander.  Several 
weeks  before  his  death,  he  asked  me  for  some  books  on  mathematics, 
in  order  to  take  up  a  study  that  was  new  to  him.  To  his  last  day, 
he  showed  us  that  thought  is  stronger  than  death.^ 

No,  it  was  not  a  spiritualist  who  wrote  these  lines,  it  was  a 
professor  of  skepticism.  So  true  is  it  that  truth  triumphs 
through  itself  and  bums,  inextinguishable,  like  Sirius  in  the 
midst  of  the  starry  night. 

As  a  matter  of  fact,  Henry  Poincare  has  often  assured  me 
personally  in  our  many  and  lengthy  conversations,  that  as 
he  doubted  even  the  reality  of  the  external  world,  he  believed 
only  in  spirit.  That  was  excessive.  Let  us  exaggerate  noth- 
ing. 

After  all,  we  are  well  aware  of  what  we  feel  in  ourselves. 
While  I  am  writing  this  book,  while  I  conceive  the  plan,  while 
I  lay  out  the  chapters,  I  feel  exactly,  strictly,  without  any 
parti  pris,  without  any  dogma,  simply,  directly,  that  it  is  I 
who  do  this  work,  my  mind  and  not  my  body.  I  have  a  body. 
It  is  not  my  body  that  has  me.  This  consciousness  of  our- 
selves is  our  immediate  impression,  and  it  is  on  the  basis  of  our 
impressions  that  we  can  and  must  reason:  they  are  the  very 
foundation  of  all  our  reasoning. 

How  is  it  possible  to  pretend  that  the  definition  of  the 
human  being  can  be  given  in  these  words:  ''A  tissue  of 
flesh  about  a  skeleton";  or  in  these:  *'A  combination  of 
molecules  of  oxygen,  hydrogen,  nitrogen,  carbon";  or  in 
these:  ''A  man  consists  of  six  kilos  of  bones,  fifteen  of  albu- 
men and  fibrine,  and  fifty  of  water";  or  ''He  is  a  bundle 
of  nerves"? 

Let  us  prefer  the  definition  of  Bonald:  ''Man  is  an  in- 
telligence served  by  organs." 

1  Savants  et  4cHvains,  p.  199, 


58  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

Let  us  declare  that  man  is  essentially  spirit,  whether  he 
knows  it  or  not.  Does  not  each  one  of  us  carry  in  himself 
the  sense  of  justice?  Does  not  a  child  who  has  been  justly 
punished  for  a  fault  know  that  he  deserved  it?  And  when 
he  has  been  unjustly  punished  does  he  not  revolt  against  the 
injustice?  From  what  comes  the  moral  conscience?  Man 
has  had  for  ancestors  the  animals  of  the  tertiary,  secondary, 
and  primary  geological  periods,  which  had  gradually  evolved 
from  reptiles  into  simians.  It  is  not  their  brains  that  have 
created  moral  conscience,  especially  this  sense  of  justice  which 
is  innate  in  children.  "We  can  pretend  that  it  comes  first  from 
ancestors,  then  from  education.  But  whence  comes  this  edu- 
cation ?  This  belongs  to  the  world  of  the  spirit.  There  is  no 
common  measure  between  this  intellectual,  spiritual,  moral 
world  and  the  physico-chemical  operations  of  the  brain  sub- 
stance. 

The  will  is  certainly  a  form  of  energy  belonging  to  the 
order  of  the  intelligence.  Let  us  take  one  example  out  of  a 
thousand.  Napoleon  wishes  to  conquer  the  world  and  sacri- 
fices everything  to  this  ambition.  Examine  all  his  acts,  even 
the  least  important,  from  the  campaign  in  Egypt  up  to  Water- 
loo. Not  physiology,  nor  chemistry,  nor  physics,  nor  the 
theory  of  mechanism,  will  explain  this  personality,  this  con- 
tinuity of  ideas,  this  perserverance,  this  obstinacy.  Cerebral 
vibrations?  That  is  not  enough.  In  the  brain  there  is  an- 
other thinking  being  of  which  the  brain  is  only  the  instrument. 
It  is  not  the  eye  which  sees,  it  is  not  the  brain  which  thinks. 

The  study  of  a  star  through  the  telescope  cannot  be  legiti- 
mately attributed  to  the  instrument,  nor  to  the  eye,  nor  to 
the  brain,  but  only  to  the  spirit  of  the  astronomer  which  seeks 
and  finds.  The  human  will,  in  itself  alone,  would  suffice 
to  prove  the  existence  of  the  psychic  world,  of  the  thinking 
world  that  differs  from  the  material,  visible,  tangible  world. 

The  action  of  the  will  is  revealed  in  everything.  We  can 
take  very  simple  examples  of  this. 


WHAT  IS  MAN?     DOES  THE  SOUL  EXIST?      59 

I  am  sitting  in  an  arm-chair,  my  hands  on  my  knees. 

With  my  right  hand  I  amuse  myself  in  lifting,  one  by  one, 
the  fingers  of  my  left  hand;  they  fall  back  naturally. 

But  if  I  will  they  do  not  fall  back;  they  will  remain  in 
the  air. 

What  is  it  that  is  acting  upon  their  muscles?  It  is  simply 
my  will. 

Therefore,  there  is  a  mental  force  that  acts  upon  matter. 
This  force  is  associated  with  my  brain, — that  goes  without 
saying.  But,  nevertheless,  it  is  an  idea,  and  this  idea  acts 
upon  matter.  The  initial  cause  is  not  the  brain,  the  vibra- 
tions of  which  are  only  the  effects. 

The  man  who  exercises  his  will  is  the  author  of  his 
destiny. 

Let  us  now  consider,  especially,  thought  in  man. 

It  is  the  perpetual  demonstration  of  the  existence  of  the 
soul.  When  we  reflect,  when  we  say  simply,  '*I  think,"  or  "I 
will,"  when  we  calculate  a  problem,  when  we  exercise  our 
power  of  abstraction  and  generalization,  we  affirm  the  exist- 
ence of  the  soul. 

Thought  is  the  most  precious,  the  most  personal,  and  the 
most  independent  thing  possessed  by  man.  Its  liberty  can- 
not be  attacked.  You  can  torture  the  body,  imprison  it,  drive 
it  by  material  force;  you  can  do  nothing  against  thought. 
Nothing  you  do,  nothing  you  say  can  compel  it.  It  laughs^ 
at  everything,  scorns  everything,  dominates  everythingf^ 
When  it  acts  a  sham  part,  when  worldly  or  religious  hypocrisy 
causes  it  to  lie,  when  political  or  commercial  ambition  puts  a 
deceptive  mask  upon  it,  it  remains  itself,  despite  and  against 
everything,  and  knows  what  it  wishes.  Is  this  not  convincing 
evidence  of  the  existence  of  a  psychic  being,  independent  of 
the  brain? 

It  is  not  merely  matter,  not  merely  an  assemblage  of  mole- 
cules that  is  able  to  think.  It  is  just  as  childish,  just  as 
ridiculous  to  assert  that  the  brain  feels  and  thinks  as  to 


V 


60  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

attribute  the  thoughts  expressed  in  a  telegram  to  the  galvanic 
batteries  that  create  the  electricity  used  in  the  telegraph. 

Spirit,  thought,  the  controlling  power  of  the  mind,  is  neither 
matter  nor  force.  The  earth  which  gravitates  about  the  sun, 
a  falling  stone,  running  water,  heat  which  loosens  or  tightens 
the  bonds  between  the  atoms,  show  us,  on  the  one  hand, 
matter,  on  the  other,  energy.  Thought,  reason,  the  direction 
of  things  in  accordance  with  a  certain  plan,  reveals  an  en- 
tirely different  principle. 

No  one  has  forgotten  the  classic  lines  of  Vergil,  in  the  mag- 
nificent sixth  book  of  the  ^neid : 

Spiritus  intus  alit,  totamque  infusa  per  artus, 
Mens  agitat  molem,  et  magno  se  corpora  miseet.^ 

The  poet  has  expressed  the  truth.     The  universe  is  ruled 
by  spirit,  and  when  we  study  this  spirit  in  man,  we  ascer-  • 
tain  that  it  is  neither  physical  energy  nor  matter.     It  makes 
use  of  both  and  it  often  governs  them  according  to  its  will. 

The  proofs  of  the  existence  of  the  human  personality  are 
innumerable:  a  special  volume  would  be  necessary  to  state 
them.     As  a  matter  of  fact,  has  not  each  one  of  us  many, 
times  apprehended  their  significance? 

We  have  these  proofs  before  our  eyes  every  day.  Stoicism 
in  adversity,  the  energy  displayed  in  escaping  poverty,  the 
devotion  to  noble  causes,  the  sacrifice  of  one's  own  life  for 
the  welfare  of  the  country,  the  will  to  conquer,  the  apostle 
of  either  religion  or  science,  the  martyr  for  the  triumph  of 
what  he  believes  to  be  true — are  not  all  these  just  so  many 
manifestations  of  the  existence  of  the  soul?  How  is  it  possible] 
that  material  cerebral  secretions  which,  as  people  pretend,  re- 
semble those  of  the  kidneys  or  of  the  liver,  could  produce  in- 
tellectual personalities? 

1  All  that  exists  in  the  universe  is  transfused  by  the  same  principle, 
Soul  animating  matter,  which  mingles  with  this  great  body. 


WHAT  IS  MAN?    DOES  THE  SOUL  EXIST?      61 

A  v^ry  original  demonstration  of  ''the  reality  of  the  soul 
through  a  study  of  the  effects  of  chloroform  and  curari  on 
the  animal  economy'*  was  presented  a  long  time  ago  (in 
1868)  under  this  title,  by  Monsieur  Ramon  de  la  Sagra,  a 
corresponding  member  of  the  Institute  (Academy  of  Moral 
and  Political  Sciences),  who  died  in  1871  on  the  island  of 
Cuba. 

The  breathing  of  the  vapors  of  ether  or  of  chloroform  de- 
stroys all  general  sensitiveness,  so  that  persons  who  have  been 
placed  in  this  extraordinary  physiological  state  can  undergo 
the  most  serious  operations  without  feeling  them.  And  not 
only  do  those  under  the  influence  of  ether  or  chloroform  feel 
no  pain,  while  sharp  instruments  separate,  cut,  and  torture 
their  tissues  and  nerves;  not  only  do  they  remain  entirely 
insensible  to  these  lacerations,  wounds,  and  cuts,  which  in  an 
ordinary  state  would  wring  cries  of  pain  and  terror  from  them, 
but  it  often  happens  that  agreeable,  even  exquisite  and  de- 
lirious sensations  are  experienced  by  the  soul  during  this 
astonishing  sleep. 

Ramon  de  la  Sagra  presents  this  phenomenon  as  a  scien- 
tific demonstration  of  the  existence  of  the  soul.  The  soul  and 
the  body  are  certainly  not  the  same  thing,  as  they  are  so 
manifest]}^  separated  here;  thanks  to  the  influence  of  ether 
or  chloroform,  the  soul  continues  to  think  as  an  individual, 
while  the  body  is  tortured  by  the  steel.  These  two  elements 
of  the  human  whole  are  separated  here  by  the  agent  of 
anaesthesia.  This  learaed  Spaniard  had  been  very  much 
struck  by  the  action  of  the  chloroform  upon  his  wife,  who, 
during  her  moments  of  unconsciousness,  had  kept  her  thought 
intact  and  had  shown  him  that'  her  intelligence  had  been* 
in  no  way  affected.  She  talked  tranquilly  with  the  surgeon, 
Verneuil,  while  he  was  cutting  flesh  and  nerves  with  his  knife. 
And  later  she  told  her  husband  that  her  ideas  had  been 
rather  agreeable. 


62  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

Let  us  remember,  also,  that  in  the  school  of  Nancy  pain 
has  been  suppressed  by  hypnotism. 

The  distinction  between  the  soul  and  the  body — nay,  more, 
their  separation — has  been  observed  under  many  conditions, 
in  certain  states  of  hypnosis,  of  somnambulism,  of  magnetism, 
of  double  personality,  etc.  The  physiological  hypotheses 
that  have  been  imagined  to  explain  these  manifestations  of 
the  psychic  individuality  independent  of  the  bodily  organism 
are  entirely  insufficient.  Our  present  conceptions  of  life  and 
thought  are  on  the  point  of  collapsing.  -^ 

Everything  proves  to  us  that  the  human  soul  is  a  substance 
distinct  from  the  body.  Despite  its  etymology,  the  ''souP' 
is  not  a  breath ;  it  is  an  intellectual  entity.  How  many  words, 
in  fact,  have  changed  their  significance!  Electricity,  for  ex- 
ample, which  is  derived  from  the  word  anibre,  eXcKTpov. 

We  intend   to   establish   this  personality  by  proving  the 
existence  of  the  supra-normal  faculties  which  have  nothing  '^ 
in  common  with  the  properties  of  nature. 


IV 

SUPRA-NORMAL  FACULTIES  OF   THE  SOUL,   UNKNOWN  OR 
LITTLE   UNDERSTOOD 

When  I  was  a  child,  I  spake  as  a 
child  ...  I  thought  as  a  child:  but 
when  I  became  a  man,  I  put  away 
childish  things. — Saint  Paul. 

TO  imagine  that  we  can  attain  certainty  in  any  sort 
of  study  is  to  be  rather  naive:  we  are  certain  of 
nothing;  our  senses,  our  powers  of  observation,  our 
intellect  are  not  fitted  to  discover  absolute  reality.  The  most 
positive  of  the  sciences,  astronomy,  attains  to  certainty  in 
its  measurements.  Like  arithmetic,  algebra,  and  geometry, 
it  is  an  exact  science.  We  know  that  our  planet  turns  about 
the  sun  in  365  days,  6  hours,  9  minutes,  and  9  seconds,  at  a 
distance  of  149,500,000  kilometers,  that  the  sun  is  1,301,000 
times  larger  than  the  earth,  that  it  is  332,000  times  heavier; 
that  Mars  turns  about  the  sun  at  a  distance  of  228  millions 
of  kilometers,  in  a  year  of  686  days,  23  hours,  30  minutes  and 
40  seconds,  and  revolves  on  its  own  axis  in  24  hours,  37  min- 
utes, 22  seconds,  etc.  Physics,  chemistry,  zoology,  botany, 
geology,  are  far  from  being  so  exact ;  human  physiology  and 
medicine  also  are  far  from  exactitude,  and  psychology  is  still 
farther. 

All  psychological  instruction  in  schools  and  from  standard 
treatises  needs  to  be  perfected  and  even  reformed. 

As  the  normal  faculties  of  the  soul— understanding,  reason, 
will,  which  are  the  objects  of  classical  instruction  and  which 
are  habitual  and  permanent  in  their  manifestations — have  not 
given  indisputable  proof  of  the  soul's  independence  of  the 

63 


64  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

brain  or  of  the  certainty  of  survival,  we  have  approached  the 
problem  from  another  angle  and  we  ought  to  go  farther  to- 
ward its  solution.  (  Man  is  before  everything  a  thinking  be- 
ing. Thought  is  a  fact.;  Along  with  this  primordial  fact, 
may  we  not  inquire  if  certain  faculties  of  the  soul,  at  present 
unknown  or  little  understood,  do  not  offer  us  subjects  for  in- 
vestigation, the  careful  analysis  of  which  would  help  us 
to  dispel  an  ignorance  that  has  already  lasted  far  too  long, 
throw  light  on  the  problem  of  our  psychical  constitution, 
increase  our  very  limited  knowledge,  and  finally  establish 
an  acceptable  science  of  psychology  such  as  we  have  always 
desired,  after  so  many  barren  discourses  on  the  same  subject, 
and  so  many  useless  dissertations  revolving  in  the  same  circle  ? 
Perhaps  humanity  is  not  intended  to  remain  always  impris- 
oned. 

The  preceding  chapter  has  already  invited  us  to  study 
experimentally  the  question  as  to  whether  or  not  the  soul 
exists  independently  of  the  body.  If  it  exists,  like  an  atom  of 
iron,  of  oxygen,  of  hydrogen,  or  of  radium,  for  example, — 
an  atom  which  would  be  endowed  with  the  faculty  of  think- 
ing, a  psychic  atom, — it  must  survive  organic  disintegra- 
tion and  even  pass  through,  in  the  course  of  the  corporeal 
life,  the  material  modifications  of  the  brain  as  well  as  those  of 
ideas.  The  animating  principle  remains;  the  form  alone  is 
perishable. 

We  have  just  recognized,  through  the  preceding  discussions, 
that  the  probability  of  the  soul's  personal  existence  has  been 
physiologically  settled.  We  can  go  even  farther  and  prove 
this  personal  existence,  by  the  manifestations  of  faculties  of 
the  soul  that  cannot  be  attributed  to  the  material  properties 
of  the  brain,  or  to  organic,  chemical,  or  mechanical  combina- 
tions— faculties  that  are  intrinsic. 

The  will,  the  special  proof  of  the  individuality  of  the  spirit, 
will  be  examined  in  the  following  chapter,  as  well  as  other 
demonstrative  faculties.    But  first  I  wish  to  point  out  cer- 


SUPRA-NORMAL  FACULTIES  OF  THE  SOUL      65 

tain  unexplored  or  little-understood  faculties, — ^metaphysical 
faculties,  to  use  the  happy  expression  of  Charles  Richet. 

For  example,  the  mind's  power  of  perceiving  unknown 
things,  or  rather  of  foreseeing. 

What  is  a  presentiment  ?  What  is  the  nature  of  this  faculty 
of  the  soul  which  is  often  so  sure? 

For  this  investigation,  which  was  begun  so  many  years 
ago,  I  have  brought  together,  compared,  and  discussed  hun- 
dreds of  observations. 

Some  of  my  readers  may  remember  that  in  the  year  1899  I 
undertook  an  analytical  inquiry  into  these  faculties  of  the 
soul  and  their  manifestations,  the  first  results  of  which  I 
published  in  my  work,  ^'L'lnconnu  et  les  problemes  psy- 
chiques. "  Twenty  years  have  passed  since  then  and  I  have 
continued  to  receive,  from  great  numbers  of  observers,  commu- 
nications which  I  have  made  it  my  duty  to  verify  as  much  as 
possible,  well  knowing  that  despite  the  best  memory  and  the 
most  indisputable  honesty,  one's  recollections  inevitably  lose 
their  shape  and  make  all  testimony  more  or  less  suspicious. 
We  shall  not  exercise  a  too  great  severity  in  the  admission  of 
these  often  extraordinary  facts.  Another  excess  would  be 
to  reject  them  all  beforehand.  Truth  lies  between  extremes, 
and  we  must  not  forget  that  "the  truth  may  at  times  not 
appear  true." 

One  may  have  remarked,  in  the  work  of  which  I  have  just 
spoken,  examples  of  presentiments  that  had  a  definite  cause; 
for  example,  on  page  124,  that  of  a  collegian,  weeping  bit- 
terly at  the  moment  when  his  father  was  dying  far  from 
him;  on  page  324,  that  of  a  student  of  medicine  who  met  a 
doctor  whom  he  had  not  seen  for  a  long  time  and  of  whom 
he  was  just  thinking;  on  page  326,  that  of  a  lady  oppressed 
with  a  great  uneasiness  at  the  hour  in  which  her  father  was 
dying,  far  away ;  on  page  332,  that  of  a  workman  leaving  his 
work  to  rush  to  his  wife  who  had  just  been  knocked  down 
by  a  wagon;  that  of  a  man  leaving  his  friends  abruptly,  at 


.66  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

a  pleasure  party,  to  return  home,  where  he  found  his  child 
ill  with  croup,  surrounded  by  four  doctors,  etc.  These  pre- 
sentiments were  caused  by  the  transmission,  if  not  of  thoughts 
and  of  some  sort  of  appeal,  at  least  of  psychic  waves.  We 
shall  give  them  special  study  here. 

The  presentiment  of  which  you  are  about  to  read  is  par- 
ticularly worthy  of  attention.  I  invite  my  most  stubborn 
readers  to  weigh  it  well  in  every  way. 

Monsieur  Constans,  Minister  of  the  Interior,  President  of 
the  Council  of  Ministers,  while  he  was  dining  one  day,  with 
j  Madame  Constans,  at  my  table  in  my  observatory  of  Juvisy, 
told  us  the  following  incident  as  it  had  happened  to  him- 
self: 

It  was  in  1889,  at  the  time  of  the  great  struggle  against 
General  Boulanger  ^  and  his  party  over  the  revision  of  the 
French  Constitution.  One  morning,  in  his  office,  a  book  was 
handed  him  with  his  mail.  As  he  was  in  a  hurry  to  leave 
for  the  Council  of  Ministers,  he  flung  it  on  a  table,  asking 
Madame  Constans  to  see  what  it  was,  and  went  out.  Madame 
Constans,  who  was  having  her  hair  arranged  by  her  maid,  took 
the  book  on  her  Imees  and  started  to  open  it:  she  thought 
it  was  a  prayer-book  sent  by  a  cousin.  But  three  days  before 
she  had  received,  she  said,  '^some  horrible  things"  which 
had  made  her  prudent.  When  with  great  care  she  had  half 
opened  the  book  she  thought  she  saw  "some  vile  things. ' '  She 
immediately  gave  the  whole  package  to  her  maid,  saying: 
''Carry  that  out  to  the  entrance  hall,  it  's  some  more  filth." 
This  confidential  servant  had  hardly  gone  out  when  Madame 
Constans,  half-dressed,  her  hair  down  her  back,  ran  to  the 
entrance  and  cried :    ^'DonH  open  it,  donH  touch  it!''    Why  ? 

She  sent  for  Monsieur  Cassel,  the  Director  of  Public  Safety, 
and  urged  him  to  examine  the  object,  as  she  had  a  presenti- 

1  With  whom  I  also  had  relations,  as  astronomers  like  to  observe 
everything,  even  in  politics. 


SUPRA-NORMAL  FACULTIES  OF  THE  SOUL      67 

ment  of  some  mystery  connected  with  it.  When  Monsieur 
Cassel  shook  the  book,  he  saw  certain  little  white  particles 
fall  on  the  table.  He  put  a  match  to  them,  and  they  caught 
fire.  He  realized  the  danger,  put  the  book  under  his  arm, 
and  left  for  the  prefecture,  for  the  laboratory  of  Monsieur 
Girard.  At  the  end  of  an  hour  Monsieur  Cassels  came  back 
and  told  Madame  Constans  that  the  book  contained  enough 
dynamite  to  blow  up  the  wing  of  the  Ministry  that  was  occu- 
pied by  the  minister.  Madame  Constans  fainted  and  re- 
mained ill  for  eight  days. 

Such  was  the  tale  which  Monsieur  and  Madame  Constans 
told  us  at  table,  before  SL-^ozen  persons. 

The  minister's  wife  hasS^ guessed  the  danger;  more  than 
guessed, — felt  it  so  intensely  that  she  had  run,  half-clothed, 
as  far  as  the  minister's  antechamber  to  stop  the  servants  who 
were  about  to  open  it. 

Does  not  this  show  a  sort  of  inner  vision  of  the  spirit, 
which  has  no  connection  with  normal  sight?  We  may  at- 
tempt to  compare  this  impression  to  a  dog's  sense  of  smell, 
but  what  an  abyss  exists  between  the  two  experiences!  To 
have  suspected  a  menace,  that  can  be  explained  in  the  cir- 
cumstances; but  to  have  violently  felt  the  immediate  danger! 

A  few  days  after  this  was  told  me,  my  friend  Girard, 
director  of  the  laboratory  of  the  prefecture  of  police,  con- 
iirmed  for  me  his  special  analysis  of  the  charge  of  dynamite. 

At  this  same  dinner  Madame  Constans  told  us  of  another 
presentiment  no  less  worthy  of  attention,  which  she  had 
experienced. 

In  accordance  with  my  practice  to  verify  everything,  by 
investigation,  I  was  able  to  have  the  story  confirmed  by  the 
physician  who  was  attending  her,  Dr.  Resseguet  of  Toulouse, 
the  Constans  family  physician,  in  a  letter  which  I  give  fully 
as  I  have  given  the  preceding  ones. 


68  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 


LETTER  OF  DR.   RESSEGUET 

Toulouse,  March  16,  1901. 
Dear,  Great  Master: 

I  am  making  it  my  task  to  answer  your  questions  on  the  subject 
of  Madame  Constans's  presentiment  in  connection  with  her  refusal 
to  take  some  medicine  sent  by  a  pharmacist.  This  is  the  story;  I 
shall  tell  it  to  you  impersonally,  as  a  historian: 

Madame  Constans  was  twenty-three  years  old,  and  was  living  in 
Toulouse,  when  one  day  she  contracted  diphtheria.  Dr.  Resseguet, 
who  is  still  at  Toulouse,  was  called  to  her  bedside.  He  ordered  that 
her  throat  should  be  painted  with  muriatic  acid.  Madame  Constans's 
mother  gave  him  a  bottle  containing  the  supposed  acid;  but  the 
sick  woman,  though  very  feeble,  refused  to  let  them  go  on,  objecting 
that  they  were  going  to  kill  her, — ^that  it  was  not  muriatic  acid. 
After  a  few  unsuccessful  attempts  to  treat  her,  and  wishing  to  make 
sure  himself  as  well  as  to  prove  to  the  patient  that  the  medicine 
was  all  right,  he  thrust  the  stick  of  a  match  into  the  little  bottle. 
It  carbonized  at  once;  it  was  sulphuric  acid! 

That  is  what  I  remember.  I  do  not  recall  the  exact  details,  but 
I  have  not  forgotten  that  a  serious  mistake  had  been  made  by  the 
druggist  in  connection  with  one  of  my  prescriptions,  and  that 
Madame  Constans,  because  of  a  strong  presentiment,  felt  she  must 
refuse  to  use  the  remedy. 

I  have  endeavored  to  gather  more  materials  about  it ;  I  have  looked 
through  my  old  note-books  of  this  period,  but  in  vain.  I  know 
that  it  was  a  case  of  diphtheria.  My  prescription  had  called  for 
two  bottles,  one  of  which  was  for  cauterization,  the  other  for  a 
potion,  and  the  druggist's  mistake  must  have  been  a  confusion  of 
labels.  I  know  I  have  always  remembered  the  fortunate  presenti- 
ment which  saved  Madame  Constans  from  the  terrible  effects  of 
the  ingestion  of  a  caustic. 

Allow  me  to  tell  you.  Monsieur  and  great  Master,  that  I  am  one 
of  those  whom  your  learned  and  interesting  writings  on  the  "Plur- 
ality of  Worlds"  has  deeply  interested  and  stirred.  For  a  long  time 
I  have  been  your  disciple  in  the  matter  of  scientific  theology,  which 
has  come  to  save  the  religious  aspirations  of  humanity  from  ma- 
terialism. 


SUPRA-NORMAL  FACULTIES  OP  THE  SOUL      69 

Be  good  enough  to  receive  the  homage  of  my  profound  and  sin- 
cere gratitude.     This  homage  is  your  due. 

B.  Resseguet. 
(Letter  980.1) 

Here,  then,  are  two  incontestable  empirical  observations  of 
presentiments,  of  which  a  materialist  physiology  can  surely 
give  no  explanation.  I  could  add  to  them  a  hundred  similar 
statements  which  prove  the  existence  of  inner  faculties,  still 
unknown,  that  may  be  studied  for  our  personal  instruction. 

There  is  here  no  act  of  reasoning,  nor  transmission  of 
thought,  nor  telepathy.  It  is  a  sort  of  divination.  The  trans-  • 
mission  of  thought,  telepathy,  will  be  the  object  of  special 
chapters  later.  We  are  entering  upon  the  analysis  of  a  ^hole 
unknown  world,  and  we  ought  to  distinguish  with  care  the 
intrinsic  nature  of  the  phenomena. 

We  shall  have  analogous  facts  to  study  in  the  chapters  on 
mental  vision.  Let  us  limit  ourselves  here  to  what  are  strictly 
presentiments  of  our  waking  hours,  without  troubling  our- 
selves for  the  moment  about  what  happens  in  dreams. 

I  have  related  somewhere  how  Delaunay,  the  director  of  the 
Observatoire  at  Paris,  had  the  presentiment  that  the  sea 
would  prove  fatal  to  him  and  had  always  refused  to  take 
a  sea  voyage,  until  one  of  his  relatives,  Monsieur  Millaud, 
came  in  August  to  beg  him  to  take  a  week's  rest.  They  went 
to  Cherbourg  and  were  both  drowned  as  they  were  return- 
ing from  visiting  the  ''roadstead,"  the  boat  capsizing  in  a 
gust  of  wind.  Arsene  Houssaye  relates  a  similar  story  in  his 
"Confessions"  (Volume  IV,  page  425).     Let  us  hear  him: 

I I  repeat  here,  what  I  have  aheady  feaid  on  page  14,  that  the  numbers 
associated  with  these  letters  are  those  under  which  they  were  filed 
during  my  researches  on  psychic  phenomena,  begun  in  1899,  and  they 
may  serve,  on  occasion,  for  reference  to  the  originals  and  to  verify  the 
narratives.  I  will  add  that  among  the  numerous  letters  that  have  been 
sent  me  telling  me  of  these  inexplicable  facts  are  some  which  state  that 
they  are  only  revealing  them  to  me,  personally,  on  the  express  condition 
that  I  do  not  publish  them.     (For  example,  letter  419.) 


70  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

His  sister  Cecile  had  fled  from  the  Prussian  invasion  of 
1870  and  had  taken  refuge  in  a  town  on  the*  sea-coast. 

One  day  some  one  suggested  a  trip  on  the  ocean,  but  all  at  once  my 
sister  exclaimed :  "No,  I  do  not  wish  to  go  on  the  ocean."  Her  friends 
asked  her  why :  she  told  them  how  once  at  Toulon,  as  she  was  going 
on  board  a  ship,  an  Italian  fortune-teller  had  advised  her  to  stay 
on  shore;  ^'Carissima  donna,  the  sea  will  do  you  harm."  My  sister 
had  gone  on,  nevertheless,  giving  a  hundred  sous  to  the  Italian. 
They  were  hardly  at  sea  before  a  gust  of  wind  had  flung  her  into 
the  water,  from  which,  however,  she  had  been  saved.  The  next 
day,  the  fortune-teller  had  appeared-  at  the  sous-prefecture.  They 
did  not  wish  to  receive  her,  but  my  sister  went  out  to  her.  The  old 
sibyl  looked  into  her  eyes  and  prophesied  that  the  sea  would  be 
fatal  to  her. 

That  was  why  she  had  not  wished  to  take  refuge  in  England, 
where  she  was  expected  by  one  of  her  friends.  Instead  of  a  trip 
by  sea,  they  decided  on  a  walk  on  terra  firma. 

It  was  the  tenth  of  October;  the  prefect,  his  wife,  his  young 
daughter,  his  two  nieces  and  my  sister  went  gaily  to  the  pointjif 
Penmarc'h,  that  bristling  promontory  of  cyclopean  crags.  --Pen- 
marc'h  means  "horse's  hea,d,"  for  the  speech  of  the  Bretons  is  as 
full  of  images  as  that  of  Chateaubriand.  The  sea  broke  against 
it  with  the  noise  of  a  tempest,  all  about  were  unfathomable  depths 
and  whirlpools;  also,  below  the  horse's  head  there  was  a  veritable 
hell-hole.  Out  on  the  point  of  Teul-an-Ifem,  then,  the  prefect  led 
these  five  young  and  pretty  women,  so  that  they  might  see  the  ter- 
rifying spectacle  of  the  raging  sea.  They  were  all  laughing  gaily 
when  they  came  out  on  the  rock,  as  into  a  box  at  the  opera.  While 
they  sat  down  here  and  there,  the  prefect  smoked  a  cigar  near  by  in 
the  doorway  of  a  marine  painter's  studio.  The  women  called  to 
him  to  come  and  watch  the  wonderful  sight  of  the  sea  besieging  the 
rock.  They  were  not  in  the  least  uneasy,  for  the  assault  of  the 
waves  stopped  far  below  them. 

The  hour  for  departure  had  come,  but  my  sister,  captivated  by 
the  rugged  beauty  of  the  spectacle,  asked  for  five  minutes'  grace. 
Suddenly  a  wave  from  the  depths,  one  of  those  terrible  waves  like  a 
thunderbolt  leapt  up,  scaled  the  rock,  and  carried  off  the  five  tern- 


SUPRA-NORMAL  FACULTIES  OF  THE  SOUL      71 

fied  women.  The  prefect  turned  white  as  he  stared  at  the  whirling 
water.  An  umbrella  was  flung  toward  him ;  a  single  cry :  "Mother !" 
He  dashed  forward  as  if  to  fight  the  waves,  but  already  the  flood  had 
gone  down,  bearing  its  harvest.  And  then  nothing,  just  nothing  but 
the  sea,  already  calmer,  singing  the  De  Profwndis,  its  bouquet  of 
women  on  its  bosom. 

The  jealous  ocean  has  kept  my  sister  in  its  depths,  without  flinging 
her  back  upon  the  shore.  Nothing  reappeared, — ^her  graceful  body, 
or  her  hair,  loosened  by  the  waves,  or  her  umbrella,  or  her  fan; 
nothing  remained  of  her  but  that  cry :  "Mother !" 

It  was  a  white  pigeon  that  brought  me  this  somber  news.  Alas! 
the  pigeons  of  the  siege  of  Paris  never  brought  us  good  tidings. 

Presentiments,  warnings  of  this  kind  are  too  numerous  to 
be  fortuitous  and  it  is  not  surprising  that  we  should  seek  an 
explanation  of  them.  They  form  part  of  the  psychic  phe- 
nomena we  are  to  study.  One  chance  coincidence,  yes;  but 
twenty,  a  hundred,  a  thousand  ?  No.  There  is  no  superstition 
in  analyzing  these  mysteries. 

The  story  we  are  about  to  hear  shows  us  an  entirely  well- 
balanced  man  who,  while  he  was  with  friends  twenty  kilo- 
meters from  home,  and  expecting  to  spend  the  night,  was  op- 
pressed with  a  sense  of  indefinable  misfortune.  He  changed 
his  plans  so  as  to  return  home  immediately,  where  he  found  his 
mother  playing  cards.  Later  she  went  to  bed  as  usual,  but  ap- 
peared to  him  at  the  end  of  the  same  night,  announcing  that 
she  was  dying,  at  the  very  moment  when  she  actually  died 
from  the  rupture  of  an  aneurism,  in  a  room  situated  at  the 
other  end  of  the  house.  There  are  two  distinct  facts  here: 
first,  the  sensation  from  fear  of  imminent  and  unforeseen 
misfortune;  secondly,  the  apparition  at  the  moment  of  death. 
Here  is  the  letter: 

Dear  Master: 

For  the  sake  of  the  knowledge  you  are  giving  to  the  world,  I  must 
inform  you  of  something  that  happened  to  me  five  years  ago,  and 


72  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

which  you  certainly  ought  not  to  doubt,  despite  your  severe  scien- 
tific methods.     First  of  all,  I  must  tell  you  who  I  am. 

At  present  (1899)  I  am  thirty-five  yeai*s  old.  I  enjoy  excellent 
health.  I  have  never  suffered  from  hallucinations,  and  I  have  always 
been  skeptical  regarding  visions  and  presentiments. 

I  am  a  landowner  and  live  on  my  estate.  I  am  engaged  in  the 
cultivation  of  my  lands,  and  besides,  I  have  administrative  duties  in 
the  service  of  the  government.  I  am  a  semsky  natchalnik,  which  can 
be  translated  as  an  administrator  or  territorial  judge,  in  the  district 
of  Kolm,  province  of  Pskoff. 

At  half -past  seven  in  the  morning,  on  the  twentieth  of  April,  1894, 
my  mother,  Madame  Olga  Nikoloiewna  Arboussoff,  breathed  her 
last.  Nothing  gave  warning  of  the  approach  of  this  death,  for  my 
mother  was  only  fifty-eight  years  old  and  was  feeling  well.  At  the 
time  I  was  living  with  her  on  my  estate,  where  I  am  still  living,  in 
the  village  of  Fnoukovo,  district  of  Kolngdepskof . 

In  the  year  1894,  the  twentieth  of  April  (the  day  of  my  mother's 
death)  fell  during  Easter  week  (old  style)  and  on  the  nineteenth  I 
had  gone  to  pay  an  Easter  visit  to  some  friends.  They  live  about 
two  kilometers  from  my  estate  and  I  have  often  passed  the  night 
with  them,  returning  home  the  next  morning.  I  expected  to  do  so 
on  this  occasion.  Nevertheless,  an  indefinable  presentiment  prevented 
me  from  spending  the  night  with  them,  and  despite  their  urgent 
entreaties,  I  started  back  the  very  same  evening.  During  the  whole 
journey  I  was  ill  at  ease  and  obsessed  with  the  presentiment  of 
approaching  misfortune.  I  knew  no  relief  until  I  arrived  home 
and  found  some  friends  with  whom  my  mother  was  playing  cards. 

My  mother  used  to  suffer  from  violent  attacks  of  headache,  and 
when  I  asked  her  how  she  felt,  she  answered  that  her  head  pained  her 
a  little.  Before  going  to  my  room,  I  wished  her  good  night,  as  usual, 
and  then  lost  no  time  in  falling  asleep. 

My  house  is  large  and  my  chamber  is  somewhat  removed  from  my 
mother's;  two  stone  walls  separate  them. 

The  next  day  (April  20th)  I  awoke  entirely  covered  with  cold 
sweat,  and  trembling  from  a  frightful  dream  that  had  just  appeared 
to  me.  To  tell  the  truth,  it  was  not  a  dream  but  a  vision.  At  the 
moment  of  my  awakening,  at  exactly  half -past  seven  (for  I  looked 
at  once  at  my  watch),  I  plainly  saw  my  mother  approach  my  bed. 


SUPRA-NORMAL  FACULTIES  OP^  THE  SOUL      73 

She  came  and  kissed  me  on  the  forehead,  saying:     "Farewell,  I  am 
dying !     I  am  dying !" 

I  was  just  getting  up  to  go  into  my  mother's  room  when  I  sud- 
denly heard  a  gTeat  uproar  in  the  house  and  people  running  about. 
My  mother's  chambermaid  dashed  into  my  room,  bathed  in  tears 
and  screaming:     "Monsieur,  Madame  has  just  died!" 

According  to  the  statement  of  the  sei^vants,  it  appeared  that  my 
mother  had  risen  at  about  seven,  and  had  gone  into  her  grandchil- 
dren's room.  She  kissed  her  little  granddaughter,  went  back  to  her 
room  and,  as  her  custom  was,  knelt  down  before  the  icons  to  say 
her  morning  prayers. 

At  the  moment  when  she  prostrated  herself  before  the  images  she 
suddenly  died.  Death  had  been  caused  by  the  bursting  of  a  blood- 
vessel. 

Well,  the  death  had  taken  place  at  exactly  half-past  seven,  the 
hour  of  my  vision. 

There,  my  dear  Master,  is  the  event  which  I  believed  I  ought  to 
communicate  to  you.  If  you  desire  to  ask  me  some  questions  I  shall 
make  haste  to  satisfy  you  for  the  sake  of  your  valuable  and  care- 
fully verified  researches.  It  seems  to  me,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  as  if  I 
had  already  written  to  you. 

Alexis  Arboussoff, 
Kolm,  Government  of  Pskoff,  Russia. 

(Letter  814.) 

There  are  two  remarkable  facts  here  that  may  be  interpreted 
for  our  instruction. 

Whatever  may  be  the  tale  of  the  observer,  who  may  vary 
his  expressions  according  to  his  memory,  and  whatever  may 
be  the  orthography  of  the  foreign  names,  the  events  in  them- 
selves exist. 

In  the  first  place,  the  account'  is  scientifically  admissible. 
It  is  that  of  a  well-balanced  man,  at  the  height  of  his  powers, 
and  it  is  our  duty  to  consider  it  with  the  same  care  as  an 
astronomical,  meteorological,  or  chemical  observation,  or  any 
other  actual  obsen^ation.  There  are  two  remarkable  facts 
here  to  be  examined  for  our  instruction. 


74  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

Monsieur  Alexis  Arboussoff,  thirty  years  of  age,  in  1894, 
living  with  his  mother,  fifty-eight  years  of  age,  on  his  estate 
in  Russia,,  goes  to  visit  his  friends,  twenty  kilometers  from 
his  home,  intending  to  spend  the  night  and  return  the  next 
day.  But  that  very  night  a  painful  presentiment  disturbs 
him  to  the  depths  of  his  being  and  prevents  him  from  carry- 
ing out  his  plans:  he  feels  himself  urged  to  return  home  at 
once,  without  waiting  until  the  next  day.  When  he  comes 
back  into  the  house,  he  is  amazed  to  find  no  explanation  of 
this  presentiment,  everything  is  going  along  tranquilly,  as 
usual,  and  friends  are  playing  cards  with  his  mother. 

The  interesting  thing  to  know  would  be  what  had  been  the 
cause  of  this  telepathic  sensation.  It  did  not  seem  that  it 
could  have  been  his  mother,  as  she  did  not  appear  disturbed 
about  her  health  despite  the  headache  from  which  she  was 
suffering.  We  know  of  cases  in  which  sorrowful  appeals 
have  been  sent  out,  physically  or  morally,  and  heard  far 
away  under  some  form  or  other.  Here  we  seem  to  find  an 
intuition  in  the  mind  of  the  son.  Nevertheless,  the  psychic 
communication  between  the  two  cannot  be  doubted,  and  it  is 
accompanied  here  by  a  singular  prevision  of  the  future. 
Madame  Arboussoff  was  going  to  die  in  a  few  hours :  she  did 
not  suspect  it  and  her  son  was  equally  unaware  of  it. 

But  there  is'  something  else  in  us  besides  our  apparent 
normal  consciousness.  Whatever  name  we  may  give  it — 
** unconscious, "  '* subconscious,"  ''subliminal" — this  other 
thing  exists :  you  cannot  escape  that. 

Well,  it  is  our  inmost  self,  transcendent,  permanent,  exist- 
ing before  our  material  body  and  independent  of  it;  it  is 
our  soul,  whose  faculties  are  unknown  to  official  science. 

Let  us  now  look  at  the  second  point. 

The  man  who  tells  the  story,  a  responsible  landowner  a^d 
territorial  judge,  goes  to  bed  and  sleeps  the  sleep  of  an 
honest  man  satisfied  with  his  lot.  But  now  it  happens  that 
the  next  morning  he  awakens,  covered  with  sweat,  trembling 


SUPRA-NORMAL  FACULTIES  OF  THE  SOUL      75 

from  a  horrible  nightmare.  What  was  it  ?  His  mother,  dead 
suddenly  in  her  room  far  away  and  separated  from  him  by 
two  other  rooms,  comes  up  to  his  bed,  kisses  him  on  the 
forehead,  and  says,  ''Farewell,  I  am  dying!" 

The  personal  action  of  the  dying  woman  cannot  be  doubted 
here.  Her  spirit  must  have  affected  that  of  her  son,  enough 
to  show  him  her  image.  We  must  not  conclude  from  this 
that  something  material,  or  semi-material,  an  ethereal  body, 
clad  like  the  dead  woman,  had  passed  from  the  mother's  room 
to  the  son's:  such  an  interpretation  is  not  necessary.  But 
this  mother  did,  nevertheless,  really  show  herself  to  her  son 
when  she  announced  her  death  to  him.  That  is  the  incon- 
testable fact  before  which  all  denials  must  yield. 

Is  that  not  a  proof  of  the  existence  of  a  spirit  in  the  human 
organism,  a  thinking  spirit,  a  mental  will,  affection,  person- 
ality ?  The  observation  is  as  positive,  as  irrefutable  as  that  of 
a  fire-ball,  of  a  thunderbolt,  of  any  carefully  verified  physical 
phenomenon. 

It  was  in  spirit  that  this  mother  made  herself  felt  to  her 
son  and  this  psychic  action  of  her  brain  was  expressed  by  her 
image. 

The  account  that  follows  shows  a  certain  analogy  with 
the  preceding  one  and  in  the  same  way  brings  forward  a 
supra-normal  faculty  of  the  soul  for  our  study. 

My  mother  died  on  October  4,  1888,  in  her  home  five  miles  from 
Ozark,  Missouri.  She  was  fifty-eight  years  old.  At  the  time  I  was 
living  at  Fordland,  about  twenty  miles  from  my  mother's  house.  I 
had  not  seen  her  for  two  months,  but  she  wrote  to  me  every  week. 
The  night  of  her  death,  I  was  attending  a  religious  service  with  my 
wife.  We  had  our  year-old  baby  with  us.  About  ten  o'clock  in 
the  evening,  before  the  end  of  the  service,  while  the  congregation 
was  singing,  I  felt  the  need  of  seeing  my  mother,  a  thought  which 
was  suggested  to  me  by  the  sight  of  some  people  who  seemed  too 
warm  and  which  reminded  me  that  my  mother  was  subject  to  attacks 
of  breathlessness  in  which  she  needed  air,  and  in  their  faces  I  seemed 


76  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

to  see  my  mother  suffering.  All  at  once  I  was  mastered  by  the  im- 
pulsive desire  to  rush  to  her,  a  desire  so  strong  that  I  confided  the 
baby  to  a  neighbor  and  left,  without  telling  my  wife,  who  was  in 
another  part  of  the  church.  I  ran  to  take  the  train,  but  missed  it, 
and  in  my  determination  to  reach  my  mother's  home  without  delay, 
I  followed  the  track  on  foot,  for  about  seven  miles,  and  by  another 
road;  I  was  able  to  reach  my  mother's  house  at  three  in  the  morn- 
ing.    I  had  therefore  walked  more  than  four  hours. 

My  mother  had  just  died.  I  knocked,  no  one  answered.  I  man- 
aged to  open  the  door  and  found  my  sister,  whom  the  noise  had 
awakened.  I  asked  her  where  my  mother  was  and  she  answered: 
"She  is  in  bed."     "Oh !"  I  said,  "she  is  dead !" 

I  was  sure  of  it.  We  went  to  her  bed;  she  had  indeed  died,  un- 
doubtedly several  hours  before.  She  had  gone  to  bed  about  ten 
o'clock,  feeling  better  than  usua^  and  planning  with  my  sister  to 
get  up  early  to  go  to  Ozark. 

Thomas  Garrison. 

An  inquiry  made  by  the  English  Society  for  Psychical  Re- 
search has  published  the  details  of  the  verification  of  this 
tale  by  the  sister  of  the  narrator,  his  wife  and  the  neigh- 
bors.^ 

So  here  is  a  man  who,  without  any  known  cause,  without 
any  normal  reasons,  leaves  a  religious  service  which  he  is 
attending,  gives  his  child  to  a  neighbor  to  hold,  does  not  tell 
his  wife,  and  goes  twenty  miles  on  foot  at  night  to  rush  to  his 
mother  who  has  just  died ! 

It  seems  to  me  impossible  to  doubt  that  the  spirit  of  the 
dying  mother  had  affected  his  own.  Moreover,  it  was  the 
spirit  of  the  narrator  which  had  felt  that  emotion,  as  im- 
perious as  it  was  incomprehensible.  Was  the  action  con- 
scious or  unconscious  on  the  part  of  the  mother?  We  know 
nothing  about  it.  But  we  cannot  refuse  to  admit  that  be- 
tween the  two  persons,  the  mother  and  son,  there  was  psychic 
communication,  mental  correspondence.     It  is  what  we  call 

1  Myers,  Euman  Personality  (London,  1903),  II,  112. 


SUPRA-NORMAL  FACULTIES  OF  THE  SOUL      77 

supra-normal  faculties  belonging  to  the  soul,  independent  of 
the  physical  senses. 

Let  us  continue  our  free  examination.  Ought  we  to  classify 
this  event  in  the  category  of  tragic  presentiments?  In  any 
case  it  is  most  extraordinary. 

Among  hundreds,  among  thousands  of  psychic  phenomena 
of  this  order,  we  have  merely  an  embarrassment  of  choices 
to  prove  the  existence  in  man  of  unknown  powers  and  un- 
solved riddles.  For  example,  here  is  one  of  recent  date,  of 
which  I  heard  from  the  mouth  of  the  very  person  to  whom 
it  had  occurred. 

A  lady  living  in  Paris  (Madame  Marichal,  20  rue  Custine, 
xviiith  arrondissement)  awoke  on  a  certain  night — Thurs- 
day, the  twenty-sixth  of  March,  1914, — under  the  impression 
of  a  terrible  nightmare.  A  sort  of  specter,  vague  and  form- 
less, was  there,  close  to  her  bed,  clutching  her  arm,  and  or- 
dering her  to  choose  between  two  frightful  menaces.  ''It  is 
necessary,"  it  made  her  understand,  ''that  of  the  two,  your 
husband  and  your  daughter,  one  must  die.     Choose ! ' ' 

"Choose,"  she  said,  "between  my  husband  and  my  daugh- 
ter? It  is  impossible.  Neither  the  one  nor  the  other!"  she 
replied,  trembling  all  over. 

"You  must  choose,"  replied  the  apparition.  "One  of  the 
two  must  die.     Decide !    Which  is  to  be  sacrificed? ' ' 

The  woman  struggled  long  minutes,  a  prey  to  the  most 
dreadful  anguish,  without  being  able  to  decide.  Mad  with 
grief,  she  refused  to  answer.  What  indescribable  suffering 
gripped  her  soul!  We  can  imagine  it.  Her  husband  was 
there,  in  perfect  health,  forty-six  ye^rs  of  age,  sleeping  beside 
her.  Her  daughter,  who  came  with  her  to  tell  me  this  singular 
hallucination,  is,  at  the  moment  at  which  I  write  these  lines 
(June,  1918)  a  beautiful  girl  of  seventeen.  We  can  imagine 
Madame  Marichal's  agitation.  She  felt  an  equal  affection  for 
them  both. 

Finally,  conquered  by  a  will  stronger  than  her  own  that 


78  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

insisted  on  an  answer,  she  ended  by  saying  to  herself  that 
maternal  love  ought  to  be  stronger  than  anything  else  and 
that  she  would  sacrifice  her  husband  sooner  than  her  child. 
Five  days  later  Monsieur  Marichal,  whom  she  had  been 
careful  not  to  tell  of  this  nightmare,  and  who  had  never  been 
ill  in  his  life,  felt  fatigued  when  he  returned  from  his  office 
(Marine  Cable)  and  went  to  bed.  The  doctor,  who  was 
called  on  Wednesday,  could  not  discover  symptoms  of  any 
malady,  and  diagnosed  the  case  as  a  slight  attack  of  grippe. 
On  Thursday  his  condition  grew  worse.  On  Saturday  the 
condemned  man  was  dead.  The  heart  had  stopped,  the  doctor 
declared.  No  indication  of  any  heart  trouble  had  ever  been 
discovered. 

I  have  questioned  Madame  Marichal  and  her  daughter, 
both  separately  and  together,  in  order  to  compare  their  ac- 
counts of  this  strange  tale,  and  for  me  its  authenticity  is  un- 
questioned. 

We  can  add  this  premonitory  dream  to  the  seventy-six  simi- 
lar dreams  published  in  ' '  L 'Inconnu. "  But  what  a  sinister 
affair !  and  how  explain  it  ? 

The  most  simple  thing  is  to  suppose  that  Monsieur  Marichal 
was  to  die  at  this  date,  without  himself  suspecting  his  state 
of  health.  (  When  we  die  it  is,  in  certain  circumstances^  only 
the  end  of  a  cycle  of  illness  of  which  we  are  unaware,  j  We 
think  our  health  is  good,  but  gradually  an  unknown  sickness 
is  weakening  us.  The  very  sensitive  subconsciousness  of  the 
wife  may  have  unconsciously  perceived  this  state  of  health 
and  its  fatal  end.  Our  psychic  personality  is  endowed  with 
powers  that  have  as  yet  been  analyzed  very  little. 

This  is  an  explanatory  hypothesis,  but  it  is  only  an  hypo- 
thesis. 

If  we  accept  it  we  must,  to  complete  it,  imagine  why  it 
took  the  form  of  an  apparition  with  an  annunciation. 

Another  hypothesis: 


V         SUPRA-NORMAL  FACULTIES  OF  THE  SOUL      79 

Does  not  the  invisible  world,  in  the  midst  of  which  we 
live,  contain  beings  as  invisible  as  the  forces  that  govern 
nature,  such  as  attraction,  electricity,  magnetism  of  the  sun 
and  the  planets,  etc., — ^beings,  spirits,  thoughts  which  may 
possess  a  rudimentary  consciousness  as  well  as  the  power  of 
seeing  what  is  taking  place  in  a  living  organism  and  of  making 
themselves  manifest?  That  is  a  bold  hypothesis,  but  it  will 
help  us  to  understand  the  case  that  has  just  been  reported. 
An  invisible  being  which  had  become  visible  could,  so  to 
speak,  impose  on  Madame  Marichal  the  trick  of  the  forced 
card.  We  have  all  seen  those  sleight-of-hand  men  who  offer 
us  a  handful  of  cards,  inviting  us  to  choose  ** freely."  But 
we  always  choose  the  card  the  man  wishes  (except  when  an- 
other is  substituted).  The  spirit  we  are  imagining  might 
have  known,  seen  that  the  condemned  man  had  to  die  shortly 
and  have  led  the  wife  to  choose  him  herself. 

Even  while  I  am  imagining  this  hypothesis,  I  admit  that 
it  seems  to  me  very  unlikely;  but  we  cannot  declare  that  it 
is  inadmissible.  It  recalls,  under  another  aspect,  the  guard- 
ian angel  which  the  Christian  religion  teaches  us  is  the  in- 
visible companion  of  each  one  of  the  faithful.  Whether  it  is 
applicable  or  not,  the  fact  to  be  explained  is  there  before  us, 
unassailable. 

May  we  not  also  admit,  from  the  evidence  of  events, — a 
series  rich  in  concurring  observations, — that  the  atmosphere, 
or,  to  speak  more  exactly,  the  ether  contains  a  psychic  element 
that  has  not  yet  been  discovered?  The  chemical  composition 
of  the  air,  oxygen,  and  nitrogen,  was  discovered  only  in  the 
eighteenth  century.  It  was  believed  then  that  its  composition 
was  entirely  understood;  about  twenty  years  ago,  however, 
more  subtle,  unknown  elements  were  discovered,  neon,  trypton, 
argon,  and  xenon.  Others  may  exist,  even  more  tenuous  and 
of  a  finer  essence.  Every  second  a  human  soul  abandons  a 
body.  Is  it  annihilated?  Nothing  proves  that  it  is.  These 
souls  number  about  86,000  to  100,000  a  day,  more  or  less,  one 


80  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

million  in  ten  days,  ten  millions  in  a  hundred  days,  thirty- 
six  millions  a  year.  To  believe,  with  Victor  Hugo,  that 
*' everything  is  full  of  souls"  is  perhaps  not  poetic  fiction. 
But  may  not  this  psychic  element  be  concerned  in  the  ex- 
planation of  the  phenomena  we  are  studying? 

Nevertheless,  in  the  example  with  which  we  are  dealing 
here,  the  first  hypothesis  seems  to  me  the  most  probable,  es- 
pecially if  we  reflect  that  our  mental  being  is  able  to  external- 
ize itself,  to  go  out  from  us  and  assume  a  form  that  is  foreign 
to  our  consciousness  and  even  to  talk  with  us,  as  happens  in 
dreams.  But  in  this  instance  it  is  the  case  of  a  dream  that 
was  at  first  unconscious  and  on  awakening  became  hallucina- 
tory. 

"We  see  how  complex  the  question  is  which  we  are  studying. 
This  example,  which  I  have  just  presented  from  among  a 
thousand,  has  no  other  aim,  for  the  moment,  than  to  justify 
the  title  of  this  chapter:  "Supra-Normal  Faculties  of  the 
Soul,  Unknown  or  Little  Understood."  It  bears  the  number 
4033  in  the  inquiry  of  which  I  have  already  spoken. 

A  tale  which  is  not  without  resemblance  to  that  of  Madame 
Marichal  is  related  in  "Ainslee's  Magazine"  for  March,  1892, 
by  Dr.  Minot  Savage: 

In  a  certain  quarter  of  New  York  there  Hved  a  young  man  who  had 
just  finished  his  studies  abroad  at  the  university  of  Heidelberg.  By 
nature  he  was  anything  but  imaginative.  Tall  and  robust,  he  had 
the  reputation  of  an  athlete.  His  favorite  studies  were  mathematics, 
the  physical  sciences,  and  electricity.  He  had  just  come  back  from 
abroad  and,  so  far  as  could  be  known,  his  health  was  excellent.  He 
was  at  the  time  with  his  mother  in  her  house  in  the  country.  It  was 
his  custom  to  go  every  day,  after  dinner,  into  the  public  square 
for  a  little  stroll  while  he  smoked  his  pipe.  One  evening  he  came  in 
quietly  and  went  to  bed  without  speaking  to  any  one.  The  next 
morning  he  went  into  his  mother's  room,  before  she  had  risen,  and 
passed  his  hand  over  her  face  so  as  to  wake  her  gently ;  then  he  said  : 

"Mother,  I  have  sometliing  very  sad  to  tell  you.     You  must  arm 


SUPRA-NORMAL  FACULTIES  OF  THE  SOUL      81 

yourself  with  courage  so  as  to  be  strong  enough  to  bear  the 
news." 

His  mother  was,  naturally,  astounded  and  asked  him  what  he  meant. 

"Mother,  I  know  what  I  am  saying;  I  shall  die  soon." 

Troubled  and  full  of  anguish,  as  may  be  imagined,  she  asked  him 
to  explain  himself. 

"Last  evening,"  he  answered,  "as  I  was  walking  in  the  square,  a 
spirit  appeared  to  me  and  began  to  walk  beside  me.  I  have  received 
the  warning :  I  must  die." 

Very  much  impressed,  the  mother  sent  for  a  doctor  and  told  him 
of  the  incident.  The  doctor,  after  having  carefully  examined  the 
young  man,  found  nothing  abnormal  in  his  condition  and  assured 
them  that  it  was  only  a  bad  dream,  a  pure  hallucination,  that  they 
must  not  think  of  it  again,  and  that  in  a  few  days  the  mother  and 
son  would  laugh  at  their  fears. 

The  next  day,  the  young  man  was  not  quite  so  well  as  usual  and  the 
doctor  was  called  a  second  time :  again  he  laughed  at  their  fears. 

The  third  day  the  condition  of  the  sick  man  had  grown  worse, 
and  then  he  was  obliged  to  admit  a  case  of  appendicitis.  The  young 
man  was  operated  upon  and  died  two  days  later.  Only  five  days 
had  passed  between  the  vision  and  the  death. 

When  confronted  with  these  tales,  people  have  the  habit  of 
disposing  of  them  lightly  with  the  word  ''hallucination,"  and 
they  imagine  they  have  solved  the  problem  by  suppressing 
it.     This  is  childish. 

I  should  only  have  to  dip  into  the  innumerable  documents 
of  this  inquiry  to  add  new  and  different  cases  to  those  that 
have  been  told  and  to  show  the  extent  of  the  unknown  re- 
gions we  have  to  explore.  My  hand  has  just  fallen  on  the 
following  letter,  which  is  qu,ite  different  from  the  preceding 
one  and  no  less  curious.  It  was  sent  me  from  Constantinople, 
September  22,  1900.     Here  it  is: 

Monsieur  : 

On  behalf  of  the  scientific  research,  based  on  experiment,  to  which 
you   are   faithfully   consecrating   so   many   hours,   devoted   to   the 


82  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

furthering  of  public  instruction,  I  have  made  it  my  duty  to  acquaint 
you  with  two  cases  observed  by  myself. 

A  gentleman,  who  is  related  to  me,  was  at  my  house  in  Constanti- 
nople one  day,  at  about  half-past  eleven  in  the  morning,  and  said 
to  me:  "I  don't  know  why,  but  since  this  morning  I  have  been 
obsessed  with  the  thought  that  my  aunt  is  dead  at  Geneva."  I  asked 
him,  then,  if  he  thought  his  aunt  was  ill,  and  he  answered  that  he 
had  quarreled  with  his  family  ten  years  before,  and  had  had  no  news 
of  them  since.  But  while  we  were  talking  and  I  was  trying  to  prove 
to  him  what  mere  imagination  his  presentiment  was,  his  servant  came 
to  my  house,  bringing  him  a  telegram  from  Geneva,  announcing  the 
sudden  death  of  his  aunt,  which  had  taken  place  that  very  morning. 

This  same  gentleman,  on  the  night  of  the  thirty-first  of  last  July, 
awoke  with  a  start  and  said  to  his  wife :  "They  have  killed  the  King 
of  Italy." 

His  wife,  thinking  he  was  dreaming,  did  not  answer  him.  The 
next  morning  she  spoke  to  him  about  this  dream,  but  he  answ^ered  that 
it  was  not  a  dream  and  that  those  words  had  come  out  of  his  mouth 
without  his  being  able  to  imagine  how  or  why. 

From  the  window  they  could  see  the  harbor,  and  he  himself  said 
to  his  wife:  "The  best  proof  that  the  King  of  Italy  isn't  dead  is 
that  all  the  police-ships  have  raised  their  flags." 

An  hour  later,  he  went  back  to  the  window  and  all  the  police-ships 
had  their  flags  at  half-mast.  Astonished  at  this  change,  he  ran  out 
for  information  and  learned  that  King  Humbert  had  been  assassi- 
nated during  the  night..  Frightened  at  this  coincidence,  he  came  to 
consult  me  as  an  alienist,  and  asked  me  if  this  vision  were  not  a 
grave  symptom  that  something  was  wrong  with  his  brain.  I  reas- 
sured him,  but  did  not  fail  to  take  down  notes  on  the  case,  especially 
because,  as  I  have  just  told  you,  this  man  is  perfectly  well  balanced 
and  in  all  ways  worthy  of  trust. 

While  awaiting  a  reply,  I  beg  you  to  be  good  enough  to  pardon  my 
boldness  in  addressing  you  without  knowing  you  personally,  and  to 
accept  my  respectful  homage. 

Dr.  L.  Mougeri, 
Alienist  of  the  Royal  Italian  Hospital, 
20  rue  Cabristan,  Constantinople. 

(Letter  943.) 


SUPRA-NORMAL  FACULTIES  OF  THE  SOUL      83 

We  have  here,  as  we  see,  two  cases  of  telepathy,  analogous 
though  different:  first,  a  death  perceived  at  a  distance,  from 
Constantinople  to  Geneva,  in  a  waking  state;  secondly,  the 
assassination  of  the  King  of  Italy,  learned  of  during  sleep. 
There  can  be  no  doubt  of  the  perception  of  the  two  facts.  Is 
the  explanation  the  same  for  the  two  cases?  In  the  first 
there  was  probably  a  special  current  between  the  aunt  and 
the  nephew,  in  the  second  case,  a  transmission  through  the 
general  spherical  waves.  It  is  difficult  to  decide.  It  is  be- 
cause of  this  difficulty  that  the  number  of  observations  has  a 
real  value. 

I  have  thanked  the  honorable  doctor  for  adding  this  com- 
munication to  so  many  others.  No  one  has  the  right  to 
deny  these  facts.  It  is  senseless  to  see  nothing  in  them  but 
illusion ;  it  is  denying  the  sun  at  high  noon.  The  human  be- 
ing is  still,  for  us,  an  unexplored  mystery.  The  science  taught 
in  schools  has  followed  the  wrong  track  until  now,  and  he  who 
seeks  for  truth  must  henceforth  be  convinced  that  there  exist 
unknown  powers  of  the  soul  of  the  greatest  importance,  to  be 
discovered,  determined,  and  explained. 

My  opinion  is  that  we  ought,  with  an  open  mind,  to  in- 
vestigate everything.  Francisque  Sarcey  was  gracious 
enough,  one  day,  to  show  me  a  letter'  which  he  had  just  re- 
ceived about  palmistry,  dated  March  22,  1899,  and  which 
began  as  follows: 

No  one  admires  more  than  I  your  good  sense,  and  the  excellent 
principles  which  you  profess  or  the  very  prudent  advice  which  you 
give  the  world  in  your  chronicles.  But  no  one  can  know  everything, 
and  the  excellent  good  sense  (a  rare  thing)  which  is  most  peculiarly 
characteristic  of  you,  does  not  permit  you,  I  admit,  to  fathom  what 
at  first  seems  unfathomable.  In  this  you  are  diametrically  opposed 
to  Monsieur  Flammarion,  who  himself  possesses  the  real  scientific 
sense.    He  rejects  nothing  without  examination. 

A.  DE  M. 

(Letter  84L) 


84  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

This  letter  continues  with  a  dissertation  upon  palmistry 
which  there  is  no  need  for  us  to  discuss  here.  If  I  have 
reproduced  this  passage  it  is  only  to  remind  us  of  the  care 
we  must  take  to  disdain  nothing,  in  the  hope  that,  unhindered 
by. preconceived  ideas,  we  may  succeed  in  determining  what 
is  true  and  actual  in  psychic  phenomena.  Sarcey  was  all  the 
kinder  to  show  me  this  letter  because  he  did  not  in  the  least 
believe  in  these  phenomena. 

Nevertheless,  how  numerous,  how  irrefutable  are  these  phe- 
nomena !    Let  us  no  longer  disdain  them. 

To  prove,  to  discuss  supra-normal  powers  of  the  soul ! 
That  is  not  always  easy.  The  following  case  was  sent  me 
from  Cette,  January  20,  1912,  and  it  was  one  of  those  which 
showed  me  how  wise  I  had  been  to  invite,  through  the  press, 
those  who  had  had  these  experiences  to  be  good  enough  to 
inform  me,  in  the  interest  of  our  general  understanding. 

On  a  certain  evening,  I  came  out  of  the  Grand  Cafe  at  Cette,  leav- 
ing a  good  friend  of  mine  within,  in  perfect  health.  It  was  ex- 
actly midnight.  I  went  to  bed  in  excellent  humor  and  slept  the 
sleep  of  the  just,  with  no  other  preoccupation  than  that  of  enjoying 
a  well-earned  repose. 

All  at  once,  at  three  o^clock  in  the  morning,  I  sat  up  in  my  bed, 
wakened  by  a  frightful  nightmare.  I  saw  my  comrade,  his  skull 
open,  breathing  his  last,  bidding  me  farewell  and  embracing  me.  It 
was  horrible !  I  can  still  see  clearly  that  frightful  vision.  I  got  up 
terrified,  dressed,  and  waited  for  day  in  the  hope  that  the  distraction 
of  the  coming  and  going  in  the  streets  would  drive  away  the  fright- 
ful nightmare  that  obsessed  me.  At  seven  o'clock  in  the  morning  I 
set  out  from  my  home.  They  were  just  coming  to  tell  me  that  my 
lamented  comrade,  Theaubon,  while  visiting  a  friend,  had,  after 
events  that  do  not  concern  us  here,  jumped  out  of  a  window  and 
broken  his  skull,  which  had  caused  instant  death. 

Stunned,  overwhelmed,  and  still  under  the  impression  of  my  dream, 
I  thought  I  was  going  to  faint. 

What  I  tell  you  is  the  exact  truth,  for  I  have  too  much  respect  and 


SUPRA-NORMAL  FACULTIES  OF  THE  SOUL      85 

veneration  for  the  great  scholar  whom  I  admire  to  tell  him  anything 
that  is  not  literally  true. 

Louis  Perier, 
Employed  in  the  Town-hall  at  Cette. 
(Letter  2220.) 

How  should  we  interpret  this  vision  ? 

Did  the  spirit  of  the  narrator  see  the  accident  at  a  dis- 
tance or  did  the  person  appear  and  show  himself? 

We  are  familiar  with  so  many  cases  of  sight  at  a  distance 
that  the  first  explanation  occurs  to  us. 

However,  the  author  did  not  see  the  accident,  he  saw  his 
friend,  his  skull  broken,  breathing  his  last  and  embracing 
him. 

But,  on  the  other  hand,  if  the  dead  man  had  been  killed 
instantly,  at  a  most  tragic  moment  for  himself,  can  we  im- 
agine that  he  would  have  thought  of  his  friend  ? 

This  is  not  probable,  but  after  all  it  is  possible;  he  had 
just  left  him,  three  hours  before.  We  see  how  complex  the 
question  is. 

Here  is  a  very  remarkable  case  of  the  telepathetic  percep- 
tion, on  the  part  of  a  wife,  of  an  accident  occurring  to  her 
husband,  at  a  distance,  taken  from  *' Phantasms  of  the  Liv- 
ing. ' '  It  concerned  Dr.  Olivier,  a  physician  at  Huelgoat, 
Finistere,  who  writes : 

On  October  10,  1881,  I  received  a  professional  call  into  the  country 
about  seven  miles  from  my  home.  It  was  in  the  middle  of  the 
night,  a  very  dark  night.  I  started  down  a  sunken  road,  above 
which  rose  trees  that  formed  an  arch  overhead.  The  night  was  so 
dark  that  I  could  not  see  how  to 'guide  my  horse  and  so  let  the  animal 
choose  his  own  path  by  instinct.  It  was  about  nine  o'clock;  the 
country  road  on  which  I  happened  to  be  at  this  moment  was  strewn 
with  large  round  stones  and  sloped  down  steeply.  The  horse  walked 
slowly,  very  slowly.  All  at  once,  the  animal's  forefeet  slipped  and 
he  fell,  his  mouth  striking  the  ground.     Naturally,  I  was  thrown  far 


86  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

over  his  head.     My  shoulder  struck  the  earth  and  I  fractured  my 
collar-bone. 

At  this  very  moment  my  wife,  who  was  undressing  at  home  and 
preparing  to  go  to  bed,  had  a  strong  inward  feeling  that  an  acci- 
dent had  happened  to  me;  she  was  seized  with  a  nervous  trembling, 
began  to  cry,  and  called  the  maid :  "Come  quickly,  I  am  frightened, 
some  misfortune  has  happened  to  my  husband;  he  is  dead  or  injured." 
Until  my  arrival  she  kept  the  servant  beside  her  and  did  not  cease 
weeping.  She  wished  to  send  a  man  to  find  me,  but  she  did  not  know 
to  what  village  I  had  gone.  I  returned  home  about  one  o'clock  in  the 
morning  and  called  the  servant  to  bring  me  a  light  and  unsaddle  my 
horse.     "I  am  hurt,"  I  said,  "I  can't  move  my  shoulder." 

My  wife's  presentiment  was  confirmed. 

A.  Olivier, 
Physician  at  Huelgoat,  Finistere. 

I  possess,  in  my  collection,  the  accounts  of  a  certain  num- 
ber of  events  similar  to  this,  the  perception  of  misfortune 
or  accident  at  a  distance.  Further  on  we  shall  see  one  al- 
most identical,  which  oddly  enough  occurred  three  quarters 
of  an  hour  earlier. 

The  actual  existence  of  the  human  soul  is  revealed  by  the 
evidence  of  psychic  powers  that  cannot  be  attributed  to  mat- 
ter and  which  are  still  far  from  having  been  sufficiently 
studied.  Man  does  not  yet  know  his  true  nature.  He  is 
endowed  with  hardly  suspected  powers,  which  his  gradual 
evolution  will  develop.  The  classical  schools  of  learning  have 
taken  the  wrong  path. 

We  see,  touch,  analyze,  and  dissect,  in  the  human  organ- 
ism, only  what  is  most  apparent,  most  superficial,  and  most 
crude.  We  still  ignore  what  subtleties  it  possesses  inwardly, 
and  nevertheless,  this  is  what  it  is  essential  to  understand. 
Analysis  by  experiment  of  the  powers  of  the  soul  ought  from 
now  on  to  take  the  place  of  our  former  metaphysics  and  the 
words  which  represent  it.  The  pretended  knowledge  of  the 
soul  has  consisted,  in  fact,  of  words.     There  is  very  little 


SUPRA-NORMAL  FACULTIES  OF  THE  SOUL      87 

reality  beneath  these  expressions  with  which  we  have  been 
contented  for  centuries,  and  which  have  never  taught  us  any- 
thing. Another  method  is  necessary  from  now  on.  This  ex- 
amination of  the  powers  of  the  human  soul  will  lead  us  to 
consider  as  exactly  as  possible  all  the  actual  observations 
which  reveal  them,  and  which  prove  the  reality  of  such  much- 
disputed,  paradoxical  happenings  as  the  following: 

The  will  acting  without  words  and  at  a  distance; 

Psychic  transmissions:  telepathy; 

Mental  vision,  by  the  spirit ;  the  prevision  of  the  future ; 

Manifestations  of  the  dead  at  the  moment  of  death — and  after. 

Diverse  and  independent  observations  all  agree  in  affirm- 
ing that  there  is  in  man  an  active  psychic  element,  different 
from  the  properties  of  his  material  senses. 

We  are  entering  here  upon  an  immense  world,  newer  than 
that  which  Christopher  Columbus  discovered  on  arriving  at 
the  so-called  West  Indies. 

Is  it  from  his  own  brain  that  the  subject,  who  has  been 
hypnotized  can  draw  what  he  says,  when  he  speaks  of 
things  that  he  does  not  understand;  visits,  mentally,  houses 
that  are  unknown  to  him;  treats  of  questions  that  are  for- 
eign to  him ;  replies  to  unknown  languages ;  hears  the  thought 
and  not  the  words ;  feels  what  a  person,  near  or  far  away, 
is  thinking,  x)r ^transports  his  spirits  to  a  distance  and  de- 
Bcribes  scenes  of  which  he  can  know  nothing? 

Let  us  cease  basing  our  judgments  on  material  appear- 
ances, on  the  classic  physiology. 

In  general,  we  dare  not .  confront  the  unknown,  face  it 
as  a  problem,  an  equation;  we  are  inclined  to  believe  we 
know  everything  ( !)  and  that  what  is  outside  the  limits 
of  science  is  not  worthy  of  examination. 

Long  ago,  about  the  year  1865,  I  was  almost  alone  in 
France  in  upholding  the  connection  between  solar  activity 


88  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

and  the  diurnal  oscillations  of  the  magnetic  needle.  The 
astronomers,  among  others  IMonsieur  Faye  who,  with  Le- 
Verrier,  was  the  most  celebrated  of  all,  said  I  was  mistaken. 
For  them  the  observed  correspondences  were  only  fortuitous. 

Kepler's  sentence,  comparing  the  sun  to  a  magnet,  Corpus 
S'olis  esse  magneticum^^  was  my  own,  his  humble  disciple's; 
the  physicists  would  not  admit  it.  The  sun,  they  proclaimed, 
could  not  be  a  magnet,  since  the  magnetism  of  an  iron  bar 
is  lost  when  it  is  heated. 

But  the  sun,  despite  its  6500  degrees  of  heat,  is  a  magnetic 
center,  and  now  (1919)  they  have  found  the  means  even 
of  measuring  the  magnetism  of  the  individual  spots!  It  is 
thus  that  science  itself  is  transformed.  We  are  far  from  un- 
derstanding ''reality"  in  anything  whatever. 

Apropos  of  the  constant  observations  that  any  one  can 
make  on  the  difference  between  reality  and  appearance,  I 
have  just  caught  sight  of  the  following  note.  I  wrote  it  in 
my  observatory  at  Juvisy  on  November  13,  1917: 

On  this  cold  morning,  the  solar  disk  is  a  burning  red.  The  at- 
mosphere is  impregnated  with  a  half -transparent  fog.  Lovely  win- 
ter landscape,  although  a  great  number  of  trees  still  keep  their  green 
foliage.  Many  red  and  yellow.  Many  entirely  bare.  If,  because 
of  atmospheric  conditions,  the  sun  constantly  appeared  as  red  as  this, 
we  should  believe  this  was  its  natural  color.  No  one  would  ever  have 
seen  it  white.  It  is  thus  with  a  great  many  things.  Our  impressions 
form  the  natural  basis  of  our  judgments. 

This  is  perhaps  the  hundredth  time  I  have  seen  the  sun  like  this 
and  have  made  the  same  reflections.  The  same  may  be  true  of  all 
our  sensations. 

As  I  transcribe  this  note,  I  can  add  to  it  what  I  have  said 
very  often  for  fifty  years:  if  the  atmosphere  were  even  more 
opaque,  or  constantly  covered  with  clouds,  neither  the  sun  nor 

1  Kepleri  Opera  omnia,  III,  304,  cd.  Frisch ;  see  my  Etudes  sur  VAs- 
tronomie,  I   (1867),  117. 


SUPRA-NORMAL  FACULTIES  OF  THE  SOUL      89 

the  stars  would  ever  be  visible,  the  solar  system  would  remain 
unknown,  and  the  human  race  would  remain  irretrievably 
in  the  most  absolute  ignorance  of  reality. 

What  shall  we  think  now  of  persons  that  are  psychic, 
psychic  in  different  degrees?  They  are  more  numerous  than 
one  imagines;  Goethe  and  Schumann  were  remarkable  types 
of  them.  We  shall  speak  further  on  of  Goethe  in  con- 
nection with  "double  personalities."  Let  us  notice  in  pass- 
ing a  curious  telepathic  experience  of  Schumann 's.  In  a  letter 
written  in  the  year  1833,  to  Clara  Wiek,  he  relates  what 
follows : 

I  must  tell  you  of  a  presentiment  which  I  have  just  had:  it  has 
haunted  me  from  the  twenty-fourth  to  the  twenty-seventh  of  March, 
while  I  was  absorbed  in  my  new  compositions. 

There  is  a  certain  passage  which  obsessed  me,  and  some  one  seemed 
to  repeat  after  me,  from  the  depths  of  his  heart:  ^^Ach,  Gott!" 
While  I  was  composing  I  saw  funereal  things,  coffins,  despairing 
faces.  When  I  had  finished  I  sought  for  a  title.  The  only  one  that 
came  to  my  mind  was:  Leichenphantasie  (Funereal  Fantasy). 
Wasn't  it  extraordinary?  I  was  so  much  upset  that  tears  came  to 
my  eyes;  I  really  did  not  know  why;  it  was  impossible  for  me  to 
discover  a  reason  for  this  sadness.  Then  came  Therese's  letter  and 
everything  was  explained. 

His  sister-in-law  wrote  him  that  his  brother  Edward  had 
just  died.  Schumann  gave  the  name  of  Nachtstilcke  (Noc- 
turne) to  this  piece  which  he  had  at  first  wished  to  call 
Leichenphantasie} 

Presentiments  appear  under  all  forms.  An  examination  of 
them  would  fill  an  enormous  volume.^     I  shall  point  out  one 

1  Schumann:  sa  vie  et  ses  ceuvres,  by  Louis  Schneider  and  Marcel 
Mareschal. 

2  We  find  in  the  writings  of  Daniel  Defoe,  the  author  of  Robinson 
Crusoe,  the  story  of  the  fire  at  London  that  was  foreseen  by  one  of  his 
friends,  a  lady,  and  which  he  speaks  of  in  his  Vision  of  the  Angelic 
World;  a  case  very  like  that  of  the  Princess  de  Conti,  who  saved  her 
children. 


90  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

more  of  the  most  extraordinary,  experienced  by  a  great  lady 
across  the  channel,  Lady  Eardley,  who  related  it  in  the  follow- 
ing words  to  Mr.  Myers :  ^ 

When  I  was  a  young  girl  of  about  sixteen  I  had  a  light  attack  of 
measles.  I  was  living  with  my  grandfather  and  grandmother.  After 
three  or  four  days  in  my  room,  they  told  me  I  could  take  a  warm 
bath.  I  was  overjoyed,  and  since  I  felt  much  better  I  went  to  the 
bath-room  and  undressed;  but  just  as  I  was  about  to  enter  the  water 
I  heard  a  voice  say  to  me,  "Open  the  door."  The  voice  was  dis- 
tinct, quite  external,  and  yet  seemed  to  come  in  some  way  from 
myself.  I  cannot  say  whether  it  was  a  man's  or  a  woman's  voice.  I 
was  astonished  and  looked  about  me.  Naturally  no  one  was  there. 
A  second  time  I  heard,  "Open  the  door !"  I  began  to  be  frightened, 
saying  to  myself:  "I  must  be  mad  or  ill."  But  I  did  not  feel  ill. 
I  decided  to  think  no  more  of  it  and  was  already  in  the  bath  when 
I  heard  for  a  third,  and  I  think  for  a  fourth  time  the  same  words 
spoken.  I  made  a  bound,  opened  the  door,  and  came  back  to  the 
bath.  As  I  stepped  into  it  I  fainted  and  fell  flat  in  the  water.  For- 
tunately I  was  able  to  seize  the  bell-rope  which  hung  on  the  wall 
close  to  the  bath.  The  chambermaid  arrived  and  found  me,  she  says, 
with  my  head  under  water.  She  seized  me  and  carried  me  out  of  the 
room;  my  head  struck  against  the  door,  which  brought  me  to  my 
senses  at  once.  If  the  door  had  been  closed  I  should  certainly  have 
been  drowned. 

How  extraordinary!  What  was  this  voice?  "Whence  did 
it  come  ?  Probably  from  the  young  girl  herself,  who  may  have 
thought  of  a  possible  weakness.  What  variety  there  is  in  all 
these  incomprehensible  warnings!  Yes,  the  human  soul  is 
gifted  with  powers  unknown  to  the  science  of  to-day. 

Our  psychic  mentality,  which  is  in  general  submerged  in 
our  material  being,  shows  itself  in  certain  examples  that  are 
well  known  but  have  been  poorly  explained  by  the  blind 
physiological    skepticism    of    the    modem    schools.     Among 

1  Annales  des  Sciences  psychiques,  1889,  p.  197. 


SUPRA-NORMAL  FACULTIES  OF  THE  SOUL      91 

others,  let  us  recall  the  following  events  in  the  life  of  Jeanne 
d'Arc: 

Jeanne  said  to  the  soldier  of  Chinon,  who  had  cursed  her 
when  she  was  entering  the  chateau:  **Ah!  You  deny  God, 
and  yet  you  are  so  near  your  death ! ' '  That  very  evening  the 
soldier  was  accidentally  drowned. 

At  other  times,  and  more  often,  it  is  Jeanne  herself  who 
attests  that  she  is  warned  by  ' '  her  voices. ' '  At  Vaucouleurs 
she  goes  directly  to  the  lord  of  Baudricourt,  without  having 
ever  seen  him:  '*I  recognized  him,"  she  explained,  *' thanks 
to  my  voice;  it  said  to  me:     'There  he  is!'  " 

At  Chignon,  when  she  had  been  brought  into  the  king's 
presence,  Jeanne  recognized  him  unhesitatingly  among  the 
three  hundred  courtiers  in  the  midst  of  whom  he  had  disguised 
himself  under  a  borrowed  coat.  She  asked  him  for  a  private 
interview  in  which  she  recalled  to  him,  to  convince  him  of 
her  mission,  the  words  of  the  silent  prayer  that  he  had  al- 
ready addressed  to  God,  alone  in  his  oratory,  a  prayer  con- 
cerning his  contested  legitimacy. 

It  is  once  more  her  voices  which  inform  her  that  the  ham- 
mer of  Charles  Martel  is  buried  in  the  church  of  Saint  Cather- 
ine de  Fierbois;  which  waken  her  at  Orleans  when,  worn  out 
with  fatigue,  she  has  flung  herself  on  her  bed  in  ignorance 
of  the  attack  on  the  fortress  of  Saint-Loup ;  which  warn  her 
that  she  will  be  wounded  by  a  dart  on  May  7,  1429,  at  the 
attack  of  Tournelles. 

At  the  seige  of  Orleans  she  warns  Glandale  that  he  will 
perish  ''without  losing  blood,  within  three  days."  As  a  mat- 
ter of  fact,  at  the  capture  of  Tournelles,  Glandale  falls  in 
the  Loire  and  is  drowned.     And  so  on. 

Whence  came  these  voices?     In  all  probability  from  her- 
self.   But  they  closely  touched  the  invisible  world. 
Jeanne  d'Arc  was  a  rare  type  of  these  sensitive  beings 


92  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

endowed  with  supra-normal  faculties;  but   there  are  many 
others  who  approach  this  state. 

These  manifestations  of  the  spirit  are  only  just  beginning 
to  be  studied  by  the  method  of  experiment;  again  we  ought 
to  state  that  in  this  order  of  phenomena  we  can  almost  never 
experiment,  but  only  observe,  which  greatly  reduces  the  field 
of  study.     Also,  the  conditions  of  organic,  earthly  life  are  so 
crude  that  we  are  in  much  the  same  situation  as  that  of  a 
man  who  tried  to  make  astronomical  observations  in  a  coun- 
try where  the  sky  was  almost  continually  overcast. 
f^  These  exceptional  conditions  are  the  more  to  be  regretted 
/  because  the  problem  of  the  soul,  which  is  the  same  as  that 
/   of  its  survival,  is  undeniably  the  most  interesting  and  im- 
I    portant  of  all  questions,  for  it  concerns  ourselves,  our  inner 
'-^    nature,  our  immortality  or  our  annihilation. 

We  shall  study,  in  the  next  chapters,  the  undeniable  cases 
of  mental  vision,  by  means  of  the  spirit,  as  well  as  the  vision 
of  future  happenings  before  they  occur,  and  we  shall  have 
there,  also,  convincing  evidence  of  the  transcendent  faculties 
of  the  soul. 

To  see  the  future  exactly,  or  to  see  what  is  happening  a 
thousand  miles  away, — what  could  be  more  incredible,  and  yet 
more  certain? 

The  power  of  foreseeing  the  future  will  be  studied  here 
in  a  special  chapter.  What  is  timef  How  is  the  future 
made? 

The  problems  worthy  of  our  attention  are  so  numerous 
and  so  vast  that  their  explanation  is  never  finished  and  our 
curiosity  is  constantly  renewed  by  their  study.  The  every- 
day banalities  of  life  do  not  satisfy  intellectual  beings,  for  they 
know  that  to  live  intellectually  is  to  live  twice  as  fully,  and 
they  love  to  live  by  thought.  Let  us  continue  our  comparative 
study. 

A  learned  schoolmaster.  Monsieur  Savelli,  at  Costa  in  Cor- 
sica, wrote  to  me  in  1912: 


SUPRA-NORMAL  FACULTIES  OF  THE  SOUL      93 

It  is  clear  that  these  questions  interest  readers  to  the  highest 
degree,  and  I  know  that  I  am  speaking  for  them  when  I  beg  you  to 
continue  your  teachings. 

The  question  of  the  nature  of  time  must  be  very  difficult  to  solve. 
To  a  seeker  who  ask^d  a  famous  mathematician  to  define  it,  the  latter 
replied:  "Let  us  speak  of  something  else!"  Nevertheless,  I  think 
it  my  duty  to  submit  to  you  some  very  disturbing  observations  which 
it  is  impossible  to  doubt. 

(1)  One  evening  my  father,  returning  home  with  a  friend,  was 
surprised  to  hear  cries  of  distress ;  women  were  weeping  and  exclaim- 
ing. They  thought  that  some  calamity  had  occurred,  that  perhaps 
some  one  had  been  killed :  they  looked  at  the  house  from  which  these 
lamentations  had  just  come  and  stopp^,  but  utter  silence  followed 
the  outcries.  The  next  evening  at  the"  same  hour,  when  he  passed 
the  house  again,  my  father  heard  the'same  groans.  This  time  they 
were  real.  A  child,  who  had  not  be*^  ill  the  evening  before,  had 
been  seized  with  croup  during  the  day7ind  had  just  died  very  sud- 
denly. This  event  took  place  at  Ville-de-Paraso,  a  neighboring  com- 
mune to  that  in  which  I  exercise  the  functions  of  a  teacher. 

(2)  Monsieur  Napoleoni,  a  retired  quartermaster,  has  told  me  the 
following  experience:  "We  were  coming  home  about  midnight, 
passing,  in  the  most  profound  silence,  two  isolated  houses,  when  we 
heard  loud  blows  repeated  at  regular  intervals  that  vibrated  in  the 
silence  of  the  night.  It  seemed  to  us  that  some  one  was  strikin'^ 
wood  with  a  hammer.  I  will  not  deny  that  my  hair  rose  on  my 
head  and  I  returned  home  very  much  stirred  by  this  inexplicable 
phenomenon.  Two  days  later,  I  chanced  to  be  in  the  same  spot 
where  those  strange  noises  had  astounded  me  and  I  heard  them  again : 
it  was  the  village  carpenter,  who  was  nailing  up  the  coffin  of  the 
shepherd  who  had  died  the  evening  before." 

(3)  The  day  on  which  the  Massoni  bandits  murdered  Dr.  Mala- 
spina  of  Costa,  my  uncle,  Costa  Michelangelo,  who  is  still  alive  and 
who  was  then  (1850)  a  pupil  in  the  lycee  of  Bastia,  had  the  sensa- 
tion of  being  seized  in  an  invisible  clutch  that  paralyzed  all  his  move- 
ments. The  maternal  grandparent  of  my  uncle  was  the  sister  of 
Dr.  Malaspina. 

(Letter  2230.) 


94  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

Of  these  three  events,  the  first  two  are  premonitions^  and 
the  third  is  a  sort  of  telepathic  sensation  of  which  one  can 
read  many  hundreds  of  examples  in  my  work  ''L'Inconnu." 
They  are  unexplained  and  inexplicable,  in  the  present  state  of 
science!  But  they  are  irrefutable  and  confirm  one  another; 
their  study  will  throw  light  upon  our  own  consciousness,  which 
is  still  so  little  advanced,  for  we  are  ignorant  most  of  all 
of  our  own  nature.     Let  us  therefore  not  neglect  it. 

We  are  beginning  to  understand  telepathic  transmissions 
through  the  discovery  of  the  wireless  telegraph,  but  nothing 
has  yet  put  us  upon  the  track  of  the  explanation  of  premoni- 
tory events  which,  although  incontestable,  are  so  difficult  to 
admit.  The  principal  difficulty  lies  in  the  contradiction  that 
seems  to  exist  between  the  vision  of  future  events,  of  which 
we  shall  give  absolute  proof  here,  and  our  sense  of  free  will. 

Without  taking  up,  for  the  moment,  the  question  of  these 
particular  cases,  and  in  order  to  keep  to  the  question  of  prin- 
ciple, I  shall  say  at  once  that  from  now  on  we  can  no  longer 
have  any  doubt  about  the  fact  that  in  certain  circumstances 
future  events  have  been  seen  and  described  in  advance,  ex- 
actlyand  explicitly.  To  this  statement  I  may  add,  in  the 
second  place,  that  this  fact  of  observation  must  be  reconciled 
with  free  will.  Time  is  not  what  it  seems  to  us.  It  does  not 
exist  in  itself.  Eternity  is  motionless  and  always  present. 
One  day  a  French  cardinal,  in  close  relations  with  Pope  Leo 
XIII,  was  discussing  this  question  with  me  during  a  walk 
in  a  garden  at  Nancy,  and  maintained  that  premonitions 
could  not  be  reconciled  with  free  will. 

"You  believe  in  the  existence  of  God?"  I  asked  him.  "I 
feel  sure  you  do  not  doubt  it.  You  believe  with  all  the. 
theologians,  and  with  Cicero,  as  well  as  with  your  predecessor, 
the  Bishop  of  Hippo,  that  God  knows  the  future?" — ''As- 
suredly, yes." — "You  also  admit  free  will  and  the  respon- 
1  We  shall  see  others  iu  Chap.  IX,  "Knowledge  of  the  Future." 


Q 


SUPRA-NORMAL  FACULTIES  OF  THE  SOUL      95 

sibility  of  Christians r'—*' Yes.''—* 'Well,  in  what  way  does 
the  admission  of  these  premonitory  events  differ  from  this 
doctrine?" 

As  for  time,  the  past  no  longer  exists,  the  future  does  not 
yet  exist :  only  the  present  exists.  But  what  is  the  present  ? 
The  present  hour?  Not  that.  This  very  mtoment?  No.  A 
second?  No.  A  tenth  of  a  second?  No.  A  hundredth  of 
a  second  ?  Not  that  either.  A  millionth  of  a  second  ?  Even 
that  is  very  long  for  an  electrician.  Let  us  admit  it,  how- 
ever, if  you  wish.  That,  then,  is  the  present,  reality.  You 
must  admit  that  it  is  not  very  substantial. 

As  time  does  not  exist  in  itself  and  is  measured  in  our 
spirit  only  by  our  sensations,  the  chain  of  events  is  like  a 
present  that  unrolls  continually,  and  to  watch  this  unrolling 
does  not  prevent  the  human  will  from  playing  its  part  in 
it. 

The  problem  remains,  none  the  less,  both  very  complex 
and  very  curious.  This  vision  of  the  future  will  be  espe- 
cially proved  in  Chapters  VIII  and  IX. 

Let  me  repeat  that  we  live  in  the  midst  of  a  world  of  which 
we  know  only  the  surface,  and  we  can  barely  guess  at  the 
inner  realities.  There  exist,  between  these  realities  and  our 
souls,  affinities,  relations,  an  intercourse  that  are  still  un- 
known. 

I  shall  conclude  this  chapter  with  a  letter  which  I  received 
while  I  was  classifying  the  documents  and  manuscripts  con- 
cerned with  this  work.  It  comes  from  an  eminent  mind 
whose  character  is  coldly  positive,  a  former  student  at  the 
Ecole  Polytechnique,  chief  engineer  of  bridges  and  high- 
ways, life  member  of  the  Astronomical  Society  of  France,  and 
an  impartial  judge  of  great  or  little  events.  Here  is  the 
letter : 


96  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

GOVERNMENT  OF  MOROCCO 

Bureau  of  Public  Works 

Chief  Engineer 

Tangier,  July  6,  1918. 
My  dear  Master  : 

As  you  have  made  a  special  study  of  "unknown  natural  forces," 
permit  me  to  inform  you,  without  comment  or  any  attempt  at  ex- 
planation, of  two  events,  one  of  which  took  place  yesterday,  the  other 
a  year  ago,  and  the  chief  interest  of  which  lies,  for  me,  in  the  fact 
that,  being  the  person  concerned,  I  can  guarantee  their  authen- 
ticity. 

First  event:  I  possess,  for  my  observations  of  the  heavens,  an 
electric  clock  from  Leroy,  a  clock  that  runs,  as  you  know,  by  means 
of  batteries  for  four  years  and  does  not  stop  until  the  batteries  are 
exhausted ;  this  clock  has  run  for  three  and  a  half  years  in  my  work- 
room and  has  never  suffered  the  least  derangement.  But  yesterday 
while  friends  were  enjoying  some  music  at  my  house,  in  another  room 
than  that  in  which  the  clock  stood,  I  suddenly  looked  at  my  watch 
and  noticed  that  it  was  twenty  minutes  before  midnight.  I  do  not 
know  why,  but  as  soon  as  I  had  consulted  my  watch,  and  for  the 
first  time  since  owning  the  clock,  I  began  to  think  that  the  batteries 
had  only  a  few  more  months  to  run,  and  that  perhaps  it  would  be 
well  for  me  to  set  about  replacing  them,  as  it  was  possible  that  they 
would  not  run  as  they  were  guaranteed  to  do,  for  the  full  four 
years;  then  I  thought  no  more  about  it. 

Half  an  hour  later,  when  my  friends  had  left,  I  came  back  into  my 
workroom,  and  what  was  my  stupefaction  to  find  that  my  electric 
clock,  which,  as  I  repeat,  had  run  for  three  and  a  half  years  without 
stopping  once,  had  ceased  running  at  exactly  twenty  minutes  before 
twelve ;  the  batteries  were  not  used  up  and  I  only  needed  to  push  the 
pendulum  to  set  it  going  again. 

Porche-Ban^s. 

I  can  imagine  no  better  than  could  the  observer  any  ex- 
planation for  this  curious  happening,  unless  it  is  that  our 
spirit  perceives  certain  things  hy  means  of  powers  that  are 
still  unknown.    We  might  suppose  that  when  the  pendulum 


SUPRA-NORMAL  FACULTIES  OF  THE  SOUL      97 

had  completely  stopped,  the  learned  engineer  was  uncon- 
sciously struck  by  this  stoppage  and,  also  unconsciously,  looked 
at  his  watch  and  thought  of  the  clock  entirely  by  chance! 
But  no ;  the  sensation  was  experienced  in  another  room,  where 
it  could  not  be  heard.  And,  for  that  matter,  what  is  chance  ? 
A  veil  before  unknown  explanations.  Why  did  the  clock 
stop,  as  the  battery  was  not  exhausted?  A  grain  of  dust? 
Dryness?  Electric  fatigue?  Other  imagined  hypotheses? 
These  interpretations  are  inadequate  to  explain  the  psychic 
correspondence. 

Here  is  the  second  event  spoken  of  in  the  same  letter. 

A  year  ago,  in  the  light  sleep  one  falls  into  toward  the  end  of 
night,  I  saw  in  my  dreams  a  certain  person  from  Tunis  whom  I 
scarcely  knew,  as  I  had  met  her  only  twice  during  the  eight  years 
that  I  had  passed  in  Tunis.  I  had  left  that  country  nine  years  before 
and  in  consequence  I  had  not  seen  her  for  fifteen  years.  I  repeat 
that  I  had  also  never  thought  of  her;  she  was  some  one  entirely 
indifferent  to  me,  with  whom  I  had  never  even  entered  into  any  rela- 
tions and  of  whom  I  had  no  reason  to  think.  It  was  absolutely  ex- 
traordinary that  her  image  should  have  come  back  to  me  in  a  dream. 

But  the  same  morning,  an  hour  after  arriving  at  my  office,  they 
brought  me  the  card  of  this  person,  who  had  arrived  for  a  trip  into 
Morocco  and  remembering,  as  vaguely  as  I  did,  that  she  had  met 
me  in  Tunis,  had  stopped,  as  she  passed  through,  to'  see  if  I  were 
still  here.  At  the  moment  of  my  dream  the  boat  which  was  bringing 
the  person  in  question  to  Tangier  was  at  the  entrance  of  the  harbor, 
but  I  suspected  nothing,  least  of  all  that  the  person  in  question  was 
on  board. 

I  do  not  know  whether  these  two  anecdotes  will  interest  you,  but  I 
guarantee  their  absolute  authenticity. 

You  know,  as  far  as  that  goe^,  that  I  am  a  "scientific  person"  and 
that  I  reason  out  m3^  sensations. 

If  one  calculates  the  probability  of  one  of  these  events,  still  more 
of  both  of  them,  being  produced  by  chance,  one  will  find  it  infinitely 
small. 

Porch^-Ban^s. 

(Letter  4041.) 


98  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

So  far  as  this  second  case  is  concerned,  we  have  the  be- 
ginning of  an  explanation  through  the  ether  waves,  of  which 
we  shall  speak  later  in  the  chapter  on  Telepathy. 

What  we  ought  to  admit,  without  the  least  doubt,  is  that  the 
science  of  the  future  should  seek  to  explain  the  powers  of 
the  soul  that  are  still  unknown  to  the  science  of  to-day,  or 
that  have  been  too  little  studied  until  now. 

The  following  pages  will  plunge  us  into  such  a  study, 
while  at  the  same  time  they  draw  the  necessary  distinctions; 
will  acting  through  mental  suggestion,  telepathy,  and  psychic 
transmissions  at  a  distance;  mental  vision,  by  means  of  the 
spirit;  vision  of  the  future.  These  indubitable  documents 
prove  a  spiritual  existence  of  the  soul  independent  of  the 
physical  powers  of  the  senses.  ') 
/^  The  soul  and  the  body  are  too  different  entities,  endowed  ^ 
(with  different  attributes.  ^.^ 


> 


THE  WILL,  ACTING  WITHOUT  THE  SPOKEN  WORD,  WITH- 
OUT A   SIGN,   AND   AT  A   DISTANCE 

Science  is  forced,  by  the  eternal  law 
of  honor,  to  look  squarely  at  any  prob- 
lem which  appears  frankly  before  it. 

Sib  William  Thomson, 

OF  the  many  different  manifestations  of  our  psychic 
being,  one  of  the  most  remarkable  is,  assuredly,  the 
action  of  the  human  will,  without  the  intervention 
of  the  spoken  word,  or  of  any  sign,  and  at  a  distance. 

The  will  is  an  essentially  immaterial  faculty,  distinct  from 
what  we  generally  mean  when  we  speak  of  the  properties  of 
"matter."  You  can  act  upon  the  brain  of  another  person 
through  the  force  of  your'  spirit.  In  a  theater,  in  a  church, 
several  yards  behind  him,  you  can  force  him  to  turn  without 
his  suspecting  your  action,  without  his  being  aware  of  your 
presence.  The  experience  is  far  from  rare,  and  after  eliminat- 
ing the  cases  due  to  chance,  there  remain  a  respectable  num- 
ber of  authentic  declarations,  even  where  an  unknown  person 
is  concerned. 

In  the  case  of  a  person  known  to  the  experimenter,  already 
in  touch  with  him,  the  effect  takes  place  far  more  frequently. 
It  proves  none  the  less  surely  the  action  of  the  will  at  a 
distance. 

The  materialistic,  critic  might  maintain  that  it  was  a  matter 
of  the  exercise  of  an  unknown  sense  belonging  to  the  brain 
and  that  this  exerciser  did  not  prove  its-  spiritual  origin.  The 
objection  is  easy  to  answer.  The  brain  is  a  material  organ.  It 
is  once  more  the  story  of  the  electric  apparatus.     Behind  the 

99 


100  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

apparatus,  at  the  back  of  the  brain,  there  is  a  personality. 
When  I  speak  it  is  because  I  think  speech;  language  is  the 
effect,  not  the  cause.  To  imagine  an  apparatus,  a  brain  en- 
dowed with  a  responsible,  mental  personality,  wilful,  ca- 
pricious, reasoning,  reflective,  is  to  raise  up  an  hypothesis 
that  would  have  to  be  proved.  Is  not  our  own  sensation  there 
to  make  us  understand  the  truth  ? 

In  the  exercise  of  the  five  senses,  sight,  hearing,  smell, 
taste,  touch,  the  vibratory  movement  goes  from  the  external 
world  to  the  brain,  being  transmitted  to  it  by  the  aid  of  the 
nerves — the  optic,  auditory,  olfactory,  tactile.  In  the  exer- 
cise of  the  will,  operating  at  a  distance,  in  the  transmission 
of  thought,  the  vibratory  movement  goes,  on  the  contrary, 
from  the  brain  to  the  exterior  world.  Within  the  brain  there 
is  the  active  cause,  the  soul. 

Entire  works  have  been  written  about  mental  suggestion, 
and  the  examples  which  prove  it  are  innumerable.  -4  myself 
have  observed  several,  in  the  past,  in  the  experiences  of 
Charcot,  at  La  Salpetriere,  and  of  Dr.  Luys,  at  La  Charite. 
One  of  the  most  striking  is,  perhaps,  the  experiments  of 
Pierre  Janet,  at  Havre,  on  a  good,  honest  peasant,  the  mother 
of  a  family,  not  in  the  least  neurotic.  What  he  ordered  her 
to  do,  while  he  was  several  miles  from  her,  she  understood 
mentally  and  obeyed  him  with  absolute  precision,  and  without 
there  being  any  way  in  which  she  could  have  been  made 
aware  of  it.^ 

Does  the  will  reveal  a  psychic  personality,  an  individuality, 
a  spirit,  a  soul?  Is  this  a  more  certain  interpretation  than 
that  which  admits  only  physico-chemical  powers  belonging 
to  the  brain  matter  ?  Does  the  ' '  I "  exist  ?  To  ask  the  ques- 
tion is  to  answer  it. 

1  One  can  read  these  details,  as  well  as  many  other  experiences,  in  the 
work  of  Dr.  Ochorowicz,  De  la  suggestion  mentale  (Paris,  1887).  See 
also  Jules  Li6geois,  De  la  suggestion  et  du  somnamhulisme  (Paris, 
1887)  ;  Pierre  Janet,  V Automatisme  psychologique  (Paris,  1903)  ;  Dr. 
Joire,  Annales  des  Sciences  psychiques,  1897. 


THE  WILL  101 

We  are  going  to  prove,  from  very  carefully  observed  ex- 
amples of  mental  suggestion,  that  through  orders  from  the 
mind,  transmitted  from  one  being  to  another,  without  words, 
without  gestures,  but  through  will  alone  the  human  personality 
clearly  manifests  itself. 

The  well-known  experiences  of  Dr.  Ochorowicz  will  enable 
the  reader  to  judge  impartially,  with  full  knowledge  of  the 
situation. 

The  doctor  had  under  his  care  a  lady  affected  with  hysteri- 
cal epilepsy,  in  which  the  malady  of  many  years  standing  had 
been  aggravated  by  an  access  of  suicidal  mania. 

This  lady,  twenty-seven  years  old,  strong  and  well  built, 
had  the  appearance  of  perfect  health.  Her  gay  and  active 
temperament  was  united  with  an  extreme  inner  moral  sen- 
sibility, which  was  not  externally  evident.  Her  character 
was  extremely  truthful,  profoundly  good,  with  a  tendency 
to  self-sacrifice.  She  had  remarkable  intelligence,  many  tal- 
ents, powers  of  observation,  a  weak  will  and  painful  inde- 
cision at  times,  at  others  an  exceptional  firmness;  the  least 
moral  fatigue,  any  little  unexpected  impression,  pleasant 
as  well  as  painful,  reverberated,  although  slowly  and  insen- 
sibly, in  the  vaso-motors  and  brought  on  an  attack,  a  paroxysm, 
or  a  nervous  fainting-fit. 

Dr.  Ochorowicz  writes : 

■  One  day,  or  rather  one  night,  when  her  attack,  including  the  phase 
of  delirium,  had  come  to  an  end,  the  patient  fell  peacefully  asleep. 
Suddenly  she  awoke  and  seeing  her  friend  and  me  beside  her,  she 
begged  us  to  go  away  and  not  to  tire  ourselves  uselessly  on  her  ac- 
count. She  insisted  so  much  that,  in  order  to  avoid  a  nervous  crisis, 
we  took  our  leave.  I  went  slowly  down  the  stairway — she  lived  on 
the  third  floor — and  stopped  several  times  to  listen,  troubled  by  a 
presentiment  of  evil,  for  she  had  wounded  herself  several  times  a 
few  days  before.  Once  in  the  court,  I  stopped  again,  wondering 
whether  or  not  I  ought  to  leave.  Suddenly  the  window  opened 
noisily  and  I  saw  the  body  of  the  patient  lean  quickly  out.    I  dashed 


102   -'*  '  • '  '     HEJATH  AND'  ITS  MYSTERY 

toward  the  spot  where  she  might  fall,  and  mechanically,  without 
attaching  any  importance  to  it,  I  concentrated  all  my  wnll  to  oppose 
her  fall.  It  was  mad.  I  merely  imitated  the  billiard  players  who, 
foreseeing  that  a  shot  is  going  to  miss,  try  to  stop  the  ball  by  gestures 
or  by  words. 

Nevertheless,  the  patient,  already  far  out,  stopped  and  drew  back, 
jerkily. 

The  same  manoeuver  was  repeated  four  or  five  times  and  finally  the 
patient,  as  if  wearied,  stood  motionless,  her  back  pressed  against  the 
frame  of  the  still-open  window. 

She  could  not  see  me ;  I  was  in  the  shadow ;  it  was  night.     At  this 

moment  Mademoiselle  X -,  the  patient's  friend,  ran  in  and  caught 

her  by  the  arms.  I  heard  them  struggling  and  ran  up  the  stairway  to 
help.  I  found  the  patient  in  a  paroxysm  of  madness.  She  did  not 
recognize  us  but  took  us  for  brigands.  I  succeeded  in  forcing  her 
from  the  window  only  by  exercising  the  ovarion  pressure,  which 
made  her  fall  on  her  knees.  Several  times  she  tried  to  bite  me,  and 
it  was  only  after  great  difficulty  that  I  succeeded  in  putting  her  back 
to  bed.     At  last  I  got  her  to  sleep. 

As  soon  as  she  was  in  a  hypnotic  state,  her  first  words  were,  "Thank 
you,  and  forgive  me." 

Then  she  told  me  that  she  had  been  determined  to  throw  herself 
from  the  window,  but  each  time  she  felt  herself  supported  from 
beneath. 

"What  do  you  mean  by  that?" 

"I  don't  know." 

"You  did  not  suspect  my  presence?" 

"No,  it  was  precisely  because  I  thought  you  had  gone  away  that  I 
wished  to  carry  out  my  plan.  However,  it  seemed  to  me  at  moments 
that  you  were  beside  me  or  behind  me  and  that  you  did  not  wish 
me  to  fall." 

Here  is*  another  experience  from  the  same  source : 

It  was  my  custom  to  put  the  patient  to  sleep  every  other  day  and 
to  leave  her  in  a  deep  sleep  while  I  took  notes.  After  an  experience 
of  two  months,  I  could  be  certain  that  she  would  not  stir  before  I 
approached  her  to  induce  the  real  state  of  somnambulism.     But  on 


THE  WILL  103 

this  day,  after  having  taken  several  notes  and  without  changing  my 
attitude  (I  was  a  few  yards  from  her  and  outside  her  field  of  vision, 
my  note-book  on  my  knees  and  my  head  leaning  on  my  left  hand), 
I  pretended  to  write,  scratching  my  pen,  but  inwardly  concentrating 
my  will  on  an  order  which  I  gave  mentally. 

I    ''Lift  the  right  hand." 

(I  look  at  the  patient  through  the  fingers  of  the  left  hand  pressed 
against  my  forehead.) 

One  minute:  no  action. 

Two  minutes:  agitation  of  the  right  hand. 

Three  minutes:  the  agitation  increases.  The  patient  rubs  her  lids 
and  lifts  her  right  hand. 

I  confess  that  this  experience  stirs  me  more  than  anything  ever 
has.     I  begin  again: 

II  "Rise  and  come  to  me." 

She  rubs  her  eyes,  stirs,  rises  slowly,  and  comes  to  me  with  diffi- 
culty, her  hand  outstretched. 

I  lead  her  back  to  her  place  without  speaking. 

III  "Draw  the  bracelet  off  the  left  wrist  and  hand  it  to  me." 
No  action. 

She  stretches  out  her  left  hand,  rises,  and  goes  towards  Mademoi- 
selle X ,  then  toward  the  piano. 

I  touch  her  right  arm  and  probably  push  it  a  little  in  the  direc- 
tion of  her  left  arm,  while  I  concentrate  my  thoug^ht  on  the  order 
given. 

She  draws  off  her  bracelet,  seems  to  think,  and  hands  it  to  me. 

IV  ''Rise,  approach  the  arm-chair  by  the  table,  and  sit  down  be- 
side us." 

She  rises,  rubs  her  eyelids,  and  w^alks  toward  me. 

"I  must  do  something  else,"  she  says. 

She  searches — touches  the  table — moves  a  cup  of  tea. 

She  draws  back,  takes  hold  of  the  arm-chair,  pushes  it  toward  the 
table  with  a  smile  of  satisfaction,  and  sits  down,  limp  with  fatigue. 

All  these  orders  have  been  given  mentally  and  without  gestures, 
without  pronouncing  a  single  word. 

There  are  in  the  works  of  Ochorowicz  forty-one  accounts 
of  experiences  of  the  same  order,  given  after  this  one. 


104  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

My  readers  are  already  familiar  with  those  which  I  have 
published  in  ' '  L  *Inconnu, '  *  in  the  chapter  on  the  psychic 
action  of  one  spirit  upon  another  (notably,  pages  296-316). 

These  conclusive  experiments  made  on  the  action  of  the 
will,  and  on  mental  suggestion,  cannot  be  attributed  to  matter, 
to  chemical  combinations,  to  mechanical  movements:  their 
cause  is  a  thought,  a  mental  cause,  a  spiritual  principle  acting 
under  a  still-unknown  form,  but  of  which  we  can  form  an 
image  by  means  of  the  wireless  telegraph  and  telephone. 

Such  cases  of  mental  suggestion  were  studied  long  since  by 
Mesmer,  and  before  him  by  Van  Ilelmont.  Here,  among 
others,  is  a  remarkable  experience  related  by  a  judicial  wit- 
ness, the  scholar  Seifert,  who  at  first  considered  Mesmer  a 
charlatan,  and,  principally  under  the  influence  of  the  follow- 
ing events,  ended  by  accepting  his  theory. 

The  scene  was  laid  in  1775,  in  Hungary,  in  an  old  castle  of 
Baron  Horetcky  de  Horka.  Mesmer  was  caring  for  the  baron 
by  hypnotism  and  was  treating  at  the  same  time  several 
other  invalids  who  came  to  consult  him.  Seifert  considered 
all  this  ''humbug." 

One  day  they  brought  in  some  papers;  in  one  of  them 
there  was  a  tale  concerning  Mesmer,  according  to  which  he 
had  provoked  convulsions  among  some  epileptics  while  he 
remained  hidden  in  a  neighboring  chamber  and  merely  moved 
his  fingers  in  the  direction  of  the  invalids.  Seifert  arrived  at 
the  castle,  the  paper  in  his  hand,  and  found  Mesmer  sur- 
rounded by  gentlemen.  He  asked  him  if  what  they  said  of 
him  in  this  paper  was  true,  and  Mesmer  confirmed  the  report. 
Then,  with  considerable  audacity,  Seifert  demanded,  or  al- 
most demanded,  proof  by  experiment,  of  this  influence  through 
a  wall. 

Mesmer  stood  a  few  feet  from  the  wall,  while  Seifert,  as  the  ob- 
server, placed  himself  in  the  half-opened  doorway  so  that  he  could 
see  at  the  same  time  both  the  hypnotist  and  his  subject. 


THE  WILL  105 

Mesmer  first  made  several  rectangular  movements  from  one  side 
to  the  other,  with  the  index  finger  of  his  left  hand,  in  the  presumed 
direction  of  the  invalid.  The  latter  soon  began  to  complain;  he 
touched  his  sides  and  seemed  to  be  in  pain. 

"What  is  the  matter  with  you?"  asked  Seifert.  "I  feel  uncom- 
fortable," he  said.  Not  satisfied  with  this  reply,  Seifert  demanded  a 
more  exact  description  of  what  he  felt.  "I  feel,"  said  the  subject, 
"as  if  everything  in  me  were  swinging  from  right  to  left."  In  order 
to  avoid  asking  questions  Seifert  told  him  to  describe  any  changes  he 
felt  in  his  body,  without  waiting  for  a  request.  A  few  moments 
later  Mesmer  made  some  oval  motions  with  his  fingers.  "Now  every- 
thing is  turning  about  me  as  if  in  a  circle,"  said  the  invalid. 

Mesmer  ceased  all  action  and  almost  at  once  the  invalid  declared 
that  he  no  longer  felt  anything.  And  so  it  went  on.  All  these 
statements  corresponded  perfectly  not  only  with  the  moments  of 
action  and  with  the  intervals  between,  but  also  with  the  character  of 
the  sensations  that  Mesmer  wished  to  provoke.^ 

I  have  seen  the  same  things  performed  by  my  regretted 
friend,  Colonel  de  Rochas,  at  the  Ecole  Polytechnique  in 
Paris,  by  Dr.  Barety  at  Nice,  and  by  other  experimenters. 
The  action  of  the  vv^ill  at  a  distance  is  not  subject  to  doubt, 
as  those  who  have  studied  this  subject  know  very  well. 

Van  Helmont,  a  great  physician  and  a  great  dreamer  of  the 
seventeenth  century,  had  propounded  the  question  before 
Mesmer,  and  he  is  very  explicit  on  this  point.  He  believes 
that  all  men  are  capable  of  influencing,  at  a  distance,  those 
like  themselves,  but  that  generally  this  force  remains  dor- 
mant in  us,  stifled  by  ''the  flesh."  To  succeed,  there  is  re- 
quired a  certain  agreement  between  the  operator  and  the  pa- 
tient. The  latter  must  be  sen^tive  and  so  practised  in  his 
sensibility  that,  under  the  influence  of  his  iniwr  imagination 
he  goes  forward  to  meet  the  action.  "It  is  especially  in  the 
pit  of  the  stomach  that  this  magic  action  makes  itself  felt,  for 

iDr.  J.  Kerner,  Frans:  Anton  Mesmer  (Frankfort,  1856),  quoted  in 
Ochorowicz,  Suggestion  mentale,  p.  402. 


106  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

the  sensations  of  the  stomach  are  more  delicate  than  those  in 
the  fingers  or  even  in  the  eyes.     Sometimes  the  patient  can- 
not bear  even  to  have  a  hand  placed  over  this  region. ' ' 
He  wrote ; 

I  have  waited  until  now  to  reveal  a  great  mystery;  that  there  is 
in  man  such  a  power  that  by  his  will  alone  and  by  his  imagination  he 
can  act  outside  himself,  and  impress  a  lasting  influence  on  an  object 
very  far  away.  This  mystery  alone  throws  sufficient  light  upon  many 
events  difficult  to  understand  and  which  are  related  to  the  magnetism 
of  all  bodies,  to  the  mental  power  of  man  and  his  domination  of  the 
universe.^ 

Van  Helmont  lived  from  1577  to  1644.  Let  us  open  the 
work  of  Kircher,  ''Magnes,  sive  de  Arte  magnetica,"  pub- 
lished at  Rome  in  1641,  at  the  chapter  on  animal  magnetism 
{Zo}oixayvr]TL(Tfio<s) .  We  shall  find  here  examples  of  ''sympathy 
and  antipathy, ' '  of  the  ' '  magnetic  power  of  the  human  mem- 
bers," of  the  "magnetism  of  music." 

These  psychic  experiences  do  not  date  merely  from  to-day. 
They  go  back  to  Jesus  Christ,  to  Pythagoras,  and  even  farther. 

But  what  is  mental  suggestion  ? 

The  hypnotizers  believe  that  theii>  will  concentrates  "the 
fluid"  and  afterward  projects  it  forth,  in  an  approximate 
direction,  like  a  package  of  opium.  This  fluid  is  so  intelligent 
and  so  amenable  that  it  rushes  out,  finds  the  right  way,  turns 
comers,  and  falls  upon  its  subject.  It  overwhelms  him,  and 
at  the  moment  when  the  subject  is  sufficiently  saturated,  the 
sleep  occurs,  whether  the  subject  be  near  or  remote.  This 
is  quite  clear,  as  clear  as  that  old  explanation  of  the  action 
of  opium,  according  to  which,  as  Moliere  said,  "It  puts  peo- 
ple to  sleep  because  it  possesses  the  power  of  putting  people 
to  sleep." 

Only,  "we  should  first  have  to  prove  that  the  fluid  exists," 

1  Van  Helmont,  Opera  oinnia  (Frankfort,  1G82),  p.  731.  Ochorowicz, 
Suggestion  mentale,  p.  405. 


THE  WILL  107 

wrote  Ochorowicz,  in  this  connection,  *'then  that  it  can  be 
projected,  then  that  it  can  find  its  path,  and  finally  that  it 
can  stop  exactly  in  the  nervous  system  of  the  subject/'  It 
seems  to  me  that  it  would  be  prudent  to  limit  ourselves  to 
the  expression  ''psychic  force,"  which  I  proposed  before 
1865.1 

There  can  be  no  doubt  of  the  psychic  action  of  one  spirit 
upon  another,  whatever  may  be  the  mode  of  transmission. 

Do  ideas  travel?  They  are  transmitted  by  the  vibrations 
of  ether.  We  know  already  that  ideas  send  their  dynamic 
complement  everywhere,  that  is  to  say,  all  about  the  emission. 
If  it  is  not  a  substance  which  is  transported,  it  is  a  wave 
which  spreads.  The  action  is  general,  but  it  remains  more 
or  less  unfelt  until  it  fi^ds  a  smtable  milieu  and  all  the  neces- 
sary conditions  for  a  reversi]ble  transmission.  The  wave  starts 
from ja j5dy,-^Ar7^^  J)rain,  B,) unit^^  conditions;  the  cor- 
responding idea  agts  in  i^_?^^  it  falls  asleep  if  the  hypnotist 
commands  irio  do  so. 

One  might  object  that  all  sensitive  brains  that  are  within 
the  sphere  of  action  ought  to  do  the  same.  No,  for  all  these 
brains  are  not  trained,  all  these  brains  are  not  in  touch  with 
the  operator. 

In  order  to  explain  mental  suggestion  and  the  transmission 
of  thought,  the  hypnotists  have  proposed  the  hypothesis  of  a 
transmission  by  induction  similar  to  that  of  one  electric 
current  on  another,  without  material  contact,  or  like  that  of 
the  Hertzian  waves,  as  in  wireless  telegraphy. 

Mental  action  at  a  distance  may  be  conscious  or  uncon- 
scious. 

What  physicists  proposed  timidly,  thirty  years  ago,  as 
matters  of  observation  that  might  be  well  discussed,  and  at 
which  we  have  seen  more  than  one  skeptic,  sure  of  his  knowl- 
edge, smile  disdainfully,  is  no  longer  open  to  discussion.  For 
we  see  similar  transmissions  produced  in  the  practice  of  wire- 

1  Les  Forces  naturelles  inconnues,  ed,  1865,  p.  135;  ed.  1907,  p.  11. 


108  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

less  telegraphy,  which  has  been  invented  since,  and  of  which 
the  following  is  a  resume : 

In  this  sort  of  telegraphy,  perhaps  the  most  marvelous  of  all  the 
phenomena  of  telegraphy,  we  make  use  of  the  Hertzian  waves  by  the 
intermittent  discharge  of  a  powerful  condenser  that  is  fed  by  a 
strong  electric  generator.  These  waves  spread  through  space  at  the 
rate  of  300,000  kilometers  a  second.  They  radiate  from  the  antenna 
that  is  joined  to  the  transmitting  apparatus  and  are  picked  up,  at 
a  distance,  by  means  of  another  antenna. 

The  antenna  consists,  essentially,  of  one  or  more  wires  that  are 
completely  isolated  from  any  electric  contact  with  any  external  ob- 
ject and  are  in  communication  only  with  the  transmitting  apparatus 
or  with  the  receiver. 

These  Hertzian  waves  do  not  act  upon  us;  not  one  of  our  senses 
can  discern  them.  Therefore  a  special  apparatus  is  necessary  to 
hear  them :  this  apparatus  is  a  detector.  In  the  detector  the  Hertzian 
wave  is,  so  to  speak,  transformed,  and  becomes  perceptible  to  our 
ears  by  means  of  a  telephone  receiver. 

These  waves  are  widely  separatedpne  from  another — like  the  waves 
produced  on  a  sheet  of  water  by  th§.JaiLQf_ajaolid^bodly-^by  a  cer- 
tain distance  that  is  called  the  wave-length.  This  wave-length  can 
be  varied  at  the  transmitter  by  means  of  special  apparatus.  But 
in  order  to  have  the  greatest  possible  intensity  of  the  waves,  on  their 
reception,  as  well  as  perfect  clearness  of  sound,  it  is  necessary  that 
the  receiving  apparatus  shoujfl  be  in  unison  and  accord  with  the 
transmitting  apparatus.  To'^Jeak  in  terms  of  wireless  telegraphy, 
the  apparatus  must  be  syntonized. 

This  accord  is  brought  about  at  the  receiving  post,  by  inserting 
between  the  antenna  and  the  detector  a  self-inducting  spool,  with  a 
regulating  slide. 

In  this  way  the  operators  find  the  positions  that  correspond  to  the 
greatest  wave-length  of  the  post  from  which  they  wish  to  receive, 
and  in  this  apparatus  for  attaining  precision  they  manage  to  elimi- 
nate completely  the  other  posts  that  are  sending  messages  at  the  same 
time, — but  messages  of  different  wave-lengths.  These  wave-lengths 
act  upon  the  receiving  apparatus  according  to  the  different  positions 


THE  WILL  109 

of  the  self -regulating  spools  and  according  to  the  different  capacities 
of  the  condensers. 

The  various  transmissions,  sent  in  different  wave-lengths,  move 
simultaneously  through  space,  without  any  ear  being  able  to  perceive 
them;  but  we  intercept  the  messages  we  wish  to  receive  by  regulat- 
ing the  slide ;  and  we  hear  what  we  wish  to  hear,  to  the  exclusion  of 
anything  else,  as  two  persons  speaking  together  understand  each 
other. 

This  quite  modem  invention  of  wireless  telegraphy  (and 
now  that  of  the  wireless  telephone)  helps  ns  to  understand 
the  method  of  transmission  of  thought  at  a  distance.  Science 
will  make  many  other  discoveries,  which  will  alter  our  in- 
terpretations of  phenomena.  What  is  certain  is  that  it  is 
wrong  for  us  to  deny  what  we  cannot  explain.  Without 
these  inventions  of  contemporary  physics,  the  human  will 
would  none  the  less  be  able  to  make  itself  felt  at  a  distance 
and  thus  prove  to  us  that  it  exists  and  makes  use  of  the  brain 
^s^of  an  apparatus. 

V*Clu6  day  during  the  war  with  Germany  of  1914-18,  I  was 
in  communication  from  my  observatory  at  Juvisy  with  the 
Eiffel  Tower  by  means  of  the  wireless  telegraph,  when  I  was 
surprised  to  hear  a  conversation  between  two  speakers  situ- 
ated I  knew  not  where,  whose  voices  were  as  clear  as  voices  in 
a  drawing-room  or  in  a  lecture  hall.  This  telephone,  which 
operated  without  any  conductor,  at  the  time  unknown,  seemed 
to  me  more  striking,  more  astounding  than  the  transmission  of 
the  little  telegraphic  shocks  of  the  Morse  system,  for  that  con- 
sists of  the  transmission  of  the  Hertzian  waves  across  the  ether 
and  at  such  distances  that  the  sounds  could  not  be  heard :  at 
the  telephone,  on  the  other  hand  (no  one  thinks  of  this),  it  is 
not  the  voice  which  is  transmitted  but  an  electric  wave  which 
becomes  a  voice  again. 

We  know,  on  the  other  hand,  that  the  transmission  of 
thoughts  between  two  people  more  or  less  separated  from 
each  other  is  experimentally  certain. 


110  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

We  know  also,  from  telepathic  observations,  that  the  spirit 
of  a  dying  person,  breathing  his  last,  far  away,  sometimes  acts 
with  such  intensity  that  the  brain  toward  which  his  thought 
is  turned  is  impressed  to  the  point  not  merely  of  hearing  him, 
but  even  of  seeing  him,  in  a  form  that  is  reconstituted  by  this 
sensation  and  at  times  to  the  accompaniment  of  fearful 
sounds. 

This  is  a  new  aspect  of  the  universe,  for  our  philosophical 
contemplation,  which  we  were  far  from  foreseeing  only  thirty 
years  ago. 

Inert  matter  disappears  under  the  invisible  radiation  of 
energy;  what  exists  in  cosmic  life  is  energy,  ethereal  force, 
movement. 

I  wrote  in  ^'L'lnconnu"  (page  378) : 

Without  doubt,  our  psychic  force  gives  birth  to  an  ethereal  move- 
ment which  is  projected  to  a  distance  like  all  the  vibrations  of  ether 
and  is  felt  by  those  brains  in  harmony  with  our  own.  The  trans- 
formation of  a  psychic  action  into  an  ethereal  movement,  and  back, 
may  be  similar  to  that  which  w^e  observe  in  the  telephone,  where  the 
receiving  disk,  which  is  identical  veith  the  sending  disk,  recreates  the 
sound-movement  that  was  transferred  not  by  sound  but  by  electricity. 
But  these  are  only  comparisons. 

The  action  of  one  spirit  on  another,  at  a  distance,  especially  in  such 
grave  circumstances  as  that  of  death — and  in  particular  of  sudden 
death — the  transmission  of  thought,  mental  suggestion,  communica- 
tion at  a  distance,  are  not  more  extraordinary  than  the  action  of  a 
magnet  on  iron,  the  attraction  of  the  moon  for  the  sea,  the  carrying 
of  the  human  voice  by  electricity,  the  discovery  of  chemical  construc- 
tion of  a  star  through  the  analysis  of  its  light,  and  other  marvels  of 
contemporary  science.  Only,  these  psychic  transmissions  are  of  a 
higher  order  and  may  set  us  on  the  road  to  knowledge  of  the  human 
being.  , 

These  lines  were  written  by  me  in  1899.  We  have  every 
reason  to  think  the  same  to-day,  and  even  to  strengthen  our 
comparisons,  which  have  been  confirmed  and  developed  by  the 


THE  WILL  111 

recent  discovery  of  the  wireless  telegraph,  and  above  all  by 
the  transmission  of  speech  by  the  wireless  telephone. 

A  case  of  will  acting  through  thought  alone  is  shown  by 
the  following  experiment  made  on  his  wife  by  my  friend  and 
colleague  Monsieur  Schmoll : 

On  June  9,  1887,  a  warm  and  stormy  day,  I  was  taking  my  siesta 
swinging  in  a  hammock  that  was  hung  in  the  dining-room  and  read- 
ing a  pamphlet  by  Monsieur  Edm.  Gurnet.  It  was  three  o'clock  in 
the  afternoon.  Not  far  from  me,  my  wife  was  resting  in  an  arm- 
chair; she  was  sleeping  heavily.  When  I  saw  her  thus,  the  idea  came 
to  me  to  give  her,  mentally,  the  order  to  wake.  So  I  looked  at  her 
fixedly  and,  concentrating  all  my  will  in  an  imperious  command,  I 
cried  out  to  her  in  my  mind :  "Wake  up !  I  wish  you  to  awake !" 
When  three  or  four  minutes  had  passed  without  my  obtaining  the 
least  result — for  my  wife  continued  to  sleep  peacefully — I  gave  up 
the  experiment,  saying  to  myself  that,  after  all,  I  should  have  been 
very  much  astonished  to  see  it  succeed.  I  tried  it  again,  however,  a 
few  minutes  later,  with  no  more  success  than  the  first  time.  At  that 
I  began  to  read  again,  and  had  soon  completely  forgotten  my  unsuc- 
cessful attempt. 

All  at  once,  ten  minutes  later,  my  wife  awoke,  rubbed  her  eyes, 
and,  looking  at  me  with  a  surprised  and  somewhat  annoyed  air,  said : 
"What  do  you  wanf?     Why  did  you  wake  me?" 

"I  have  n't  said  anything !" 

"But  you  have.  You  have  just  been  tormenting  me  to  make  me 
wake  up." 

"You  are  joking.     I  have  n't  opened  my  mouth." 

"Can  I  have  dreamed  it*?"  she  said  hesitating.  "Yes,  it  is  true.  I 
remember  now,  I  simply  dreamed  it  all." 

"Come,  what  did  you  dream?  Perhaps  it  was  interesting,"  I  said, 
smiling. 

"I  had  a  very  disagreeable  dream,"  she  went  on.  "I  thought  I  was 
at  the  cross-roads  of  Courbevoie.  It  was  windy  and  the  weather  was 
overcast.  All  at  once  I  saw  a  human  form — was  it  a  man  or  a 
woraaai? — wrapped  in  a  white  sheet,  roll  to  the  foot  of  the  slope. 
It  made  vain  efforts  to  rise;  I  wished  to  run  to  its  help,  but  I  felt 
myself  held  back  by  an  influence  which  I  did  not  at  first  notice,  but 


112  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

which  I  finally  understood  to  be  you,  who  were  determined  that  I 
should  abandon  the  images  of  my  dream.  'Come,  wake  up!'  you 
shouted  at  me.  But  I  resisted  you  and  I  was  perfectly  aware  of 
struggling  successfully  against  the  awakening  that  you  were  forcing 
upon  me.  However,  when  I  awoke,  just  now,  your  command,  'Come, 
wake  up!'  was  still  sounding  in  my  ears." 

My  wife  was  very  much  astonished  to  learn  that  I  had  really 
ordered  her,  in  my  mind,  to  awake.  She  did  not  know  what  book  I 
was  reading  and  psychic  problems  have  never  interested  her  very 
much.  She  has  never  been  hypnotized,  either  by  me  or  by  any  one 
else. 

A.    SCHMOLL, 

6  rue  de  Fourcroy,  Paris. 

I  have  many  other  observations  of  the  same  sort  among 
my  documents.  Certainly,  everything  here  cannot  be  ex- 
plained. Why  should  there  be  a  ten-minute  interval  between 
the  order  and  the  result  ?  Monsieur  Schmoll  is  used  to  scien- 
tific methods.  "We  owe  many  excellent  observations  of  the 
sun  to  him;  he  was  my  collaborator  at  the  founding  of  the 
Astronomical  Society  of  France  in  ^887.  The  event  reported 
can  neither  be  doubted  nor  attributed  to  coincidence. 

To  see  by  the  mind,  iiri^'te--miid7tg~Df  frequeilf  occurrence 
with  somnambulists,  as  can  be  proved  by  the  works  of  Deleuze, 
Dupotet,  Lafontaine,  and  Charpignon.  The  last  is  vSty  posi- 
tive on  this  point: 

We  have  many  times  formed  in  our  minds  fictitious  images,  and  the 
somnambulists  whom  we  questioned  have  seen  these  images.  We 
have  often  obtained  a  word,  a  sign,  an  action  because  of  a  mental 
demand.  Others,  when  they  addressed  questions  to  somnambulists  in 
foreign  languages  unknown  to  ^e  Hypnotized  patients,  have  ob- 
tained replies,  showing  a  knowledge  not  of  the  idiom  but  of  the 
thought  of  the  speaker,  for  if  the  experimenter  spoke  without  under- 
standing what  he  said,  the  somnambulist  remained  powerless  to 
grasp  the  sense  of  the  question. 

The  act  of  putting  a  subject  to  sleep,  at  a  distance,  and  suggesting 


THE  WILL  113 

to  him  in  this  state  acts  which  he  accomplished  quite  as  well  as  when 
under  the  influence  of  an  oral  suggestion,  was  successfully  tried 
many  times  by  the  hypnotists  of  old. 

My  friend  of  fifty  years,  Dr.  Macario,  relates  ^  how  one  eve- 
ning Dr.  Gromier,  after  having  put  to  sleep  a  hysterical 
woman  by  hypnotism,  asked  permission  of  her  husband  to 
make  an  experiment;  and  this  is  what  happened.  Without 
uttering  a  word  he  led  her  out  into  the  open  sea, — mentally, 
of  course.  The  invalid  was  at  ease  as  long  as  the  waters 
were  quiet;  but  the  hypnotist  soon  raised  a  frightful  storm 
in  her  mind,  and  the  invalid  began  to  utter  piercing  shrieks 
and  to  clutch  at  near-by  objects.  Her  voice,  her  tears,  the 
expression  of  her  face  indicated  great  terror.  Then,  still  in 
his  mind,  he  brought  the  waves  gradually  back  within  rea- 
sonable limits.  They  ceased  to  rock  the  ship,  and  as  they  grew 
less,  calm  returned  to  the  mind  of  the  somnambulist,  although 
she  still  panted  and  trembled  nervously  in  all  her  limbs. 
*' Never  take  me  on  the  ocean!"  she  cried  passionately,  a 
moment  later ;  "  it  frightens  me  too  much !  And  that  wretched 
captain  who  would  n  't  let  us  up  on  the  bridge ! ' '  This  ex- 
clamation astounded  us  the  more,"  said  Monsieur  Gromier, 
*' because  I  had  not  uttered  a  single  word  that  could  have 
shown  her  the  nature  of  the  experiment  I  intended  to  make. ' ' 

Macario  remarks: 

This  power,  the  transmission  of  thought,  explains  a  great  number 
of  somnambulistic  phenomena  that  one  would  be  tempted,  other- 
wise, to  attribute  to  supernatural  influences.  It  explains,  for  ex- 
ample, the  gift  of  languages  that  is  said  to  have  been  sometimes  ob- 
served in  somnambulists — that  is'  to  say,  the  power  of  understanding 
what  is  said  to  them  in  a  foreign  language  unknown  to  them  or  of 
replying  by  expressions  belonging  to  a  language  of  which  they  have 
no  knowledge;  for  if  it  is  true  that  the  somnambulist  perceives  your 

1  Dii  Sommeily  des  reves  et  du  somnambulisme  (Lyons  and  Paris, 
1857),  p.  185. 


114  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

thought,  it  makes  very  little  difference  to  him  whether  you  speak 
Greek,  Latin,  or  Arabic.  It  is  not  your  expression,  as  a  matter  of 
fact,  that  he  hears;  he  reads  your  thought  and  in  consequence  he 
understands  as  well  as  if  you  spoke  his  native  tongue.  Events  eon- 
firm  this  theory.  Monsieur  Gromier,  whom  I  have  quoted  above,  has 
several  times  asked  questions  in  a  language  unknown  to  the  somnam- 
bulist. At  first  the  latter  did  not  understand,  but  as  the  will  of  the 
hypnotist  persisted,  he  ended  by  understanding  and  by  replying 
suitably  to  the  question  put  to  him.  But  each  time  that  the  hypno- 
tist spoke  in  a  tongue  of  which  he  himself  was  ignorant, — that  is  to 
say,  when  he  used  expressions  of  which  he  himself  did  not  know  the 
meaning, — the  somnambulist  did  not  answer,  because  the  hypnotist 
pronounced  words  to  which  no  idea  was  attached. 

I,  for  my  part,  have  collected  undeniable  evidence  of  this 
much-disputed  comprehension  of  languages  unknown  to  the 
subject. 

Another  form  of  experimental  transmission  of  thought  con- 
sists in  making  a  drawing,  out  of  sight  of  the  subject,  which 
the  latter  must  reproduce  without  having  seen  it.  There  are 
numerous  cases  of  this.  (See,  among  others,  "L'Inconnu,'* 
pp.  349-354.) 

The  phenomenon  of  thought-transmission  is  an  established 
fact  and  unanimously  admitted  by  all  the  philosophers  who 
have  taken  the  trouble  to  study  it  conscientiously  and  thor- 
oughly, and  only  obstinate  and  superficial  minds  could  persist 
in  denying  it  after  so  much  experience  and  so  many  positive 
proofs. 

Telepathy  consists  essentially  in  the  event  of  an  intense 
physical  impression  manifesting  itself,  generally  unexpect- 
edly, in  a  normal  person  (that  is  to  say,  in  one  not  subject 
to  functional  troubles  and  hallucinations),  either  while  he 
is  awake  or  during  sleep,  an  impression  that  is  in  accord 
with  an  event  that  has  taken  place  at  a  distance. 

Let  us  note  that,  in  spontaneous  telepathy,  the  person  who 
receives  the  impression  is  usually  in  his  normal  state;  while 


THE  WILL  115 

he  who  sends  it  is  passing  through  a  state  of  abnormal  crisis, 
— an  accident,  agony,  fainting,  lethargy,  death,  etc. 

The  preceding  observations  prove  the  action  of  the  human 
will  without  the  spoken  word,  and  without  the  intervention  of 
the  physical  senses. 

The  action  of  the  spirit  upon  matter,  which  has  been  studied 
for  a  long  time,  is  nowhere  so  evident  as  in  the  phenomena 
produced  by  autosuggestion  upon  certain  troubles  of  the 
blood  circulation,  such  as  red-spots,  cutaneaus^-^cfilgestionp 
vesication,  hemorrhages,  bl^edT^g-^§tlgmata,  etc.  That  the' 
spirit  is  different  frofirtEebody,  that  it  controls  it ;  that  mind 
acts  upon  matter ;  that  thought,  that  even  the  most  subtle  idea 
produces  material^effects ;  that  the  mental  imagination  suffices, 
under  certain  conditions,  to  create  organs  or  to  alter  them,  is 
rendered  so  evident  by  so  great  a  number  of  varied  examples 
that  it  is  impossible  to  preserve  the  least  doubt  upon  this 
capital  point.  We  may  notice,  among  these  examples,  the 
stigmata,  with  a  bloody  flow,  fixed  upon  the  skin  by  an  idea, 
by  faith,  by  conviction  alone.  For  example,  there  is  Saint 
Francis  of  Assisi,  a  mystic  soul  of  an  extraordinary  piety, 
who  renounces  the  material  world,  retires  into  a  forest,  conse- 
crates himself  to  prayer,  brings  together  a  few  pious  men  to 
whom  he  gives,  through  humility,  the  name  of  the  Lesser 
Brothers  (Franciscans),  goes  to  preach  in  Syria,  in  Egypt, 
returns  to  Italy,  submits,  himself  to  a  rigorous  fast,  to  an 
ascetic  life,  in  consequence  of  which  he  is  the  dupe  of  (im- 
aginary) visions  in  which,  among  others,  there  appears  to  him 
a  seraph  with  many-colored  wings  who  binds  him  and  im- 
prints upon  his  body  the  stigmata  of  Jesus 'g  crucifixion:  his 
feet  and  his  hands  are  pierced  as  if  by  nails,  and  his  side 
opens  as  if  it  had  received  a  lance-thrust, — stigmata  that  per- 
sist. 

There  is  here  fully  evidenced  a  psychic  action  of  the  soul 
upon  the  body,  and  this  fact  is  of  such  importance,  from 
the  point  of  view  of  the  materialistic  physiology,  that  it  has 


116  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

been  denied,  flatly  denied.  *'A  religious  legend, '^  people 
have  said.  *'It  is  exaggerated,  it  is  not  true.''  As  it  took 
place  about  the  year  1220,  it  has  been  attributed  to  the 
credulity  of  the  Middle  Ages.  ''Who  were  the  witnesses?" 
has  been  asked.  Monks,  ardent  Christians,  who  accept  every- 
tliing  with  their  eyes  shut. 

But  this  example  of  a  canonized  saint,  to  whom  more  than 
one  miracle  is  attributed,  is  not  unique  of  its  kind.  The  re- 
iearches^hay£--ma4e  in  connection  with  this  work  have  fur- 
bished me  T^ith  a  great  number  of  others.  ,    , 

The  power  of  the  will,  of  mental  force,  of  the  soul,  of  the 
idea,  of  autosuggestion,  the  manifestation  of  the  action  of 
the  spirit  upon  matter  are  shown  with  striking  evidence 
in  the  physiological  phenomena  of  the  stigmata.  People  have 
denied  these  phenomena;  they  have  seen  in  them  only  fraud, 
deceit,  credulity.  That  was  an  error.  These  stigmata  are 
actually  produced.  Holes  are  formed  in  the  palms  of  the 
hands  of  those  suffering  from  hallucinations,  on  their  feet,  in 
their  sides,  and  these  wounds,  the  counterparts  of  those  of 
the  Crucified,  really  bleed.  These  examples  are  numerous  and 
incontestable,  superabundantly  verified. 

Here  are  a  few  of  them: 

A  young  girl,  born  on  October  16, 1812,  at  Kaltom,  the  Tyrol,  near 
Botzen,  Maria  Marl,  was  as  much  of  a  mystic  as  Saint  Francis  of 
Assisi.  She^  was  much  admired  in  her  village  and  she  made  her 
first  communion  at  the  age  of  ten,  with  so  much  fervor  that  she  had 
hardly  received  the  eucharistic  bread  when,  flooded  with  heavenly 
light  beyond  the  strength  of  nature  to  bear,  she  fell  drooping  into 
the  arms  of  her  mother  and  fainted.  Her  piety  became  more  ardent 
from  year  to  year.  She  passed  her  life  in  prayers,  in  adoration ;  she 
took  communion  constantly;  she  took  a  vow  of  chastity. 

There  happens  to  be  at  Kaltom  a  convent  of  Saint  Francis,  with 
sisters  of  the  third  order  (not  cloistered),  where  she  had  herself 
entered  under  the  name  of  Theresa,  in  honor  of  the  mystic  Saint 
Theresa.     She  was  eighteen  years  old,  her  body  suffered,  and  she 


THE  WILL  117 

was  happy  to  offer  her  sufferings  to  God.  A  privileged  victim,  she 
experienced  an  almost  daily  ecstasy.  She  would  fling  herself  on  her 
knees  at  the  foot  of  her  bed  and  remain  there,  unconscious,  for  entire 
days,  her  hands  clasped,  her  eyes  raised  to  heaven,  ecstatically  con- 
templating the  divine  Crucified.  After  the  second  of  February,  the 
date  of  the  Purification,  the  stigmata  appeared  on  her  hands,  on  her 
feet,  on  her  side,  as  was  witnessed  by  her  family,  by  her  confessor, 
by  her  doctor,  by  the  primate,  the  Archbishop  of  Trent,  by  inquiry  in 
behalf  of  the  Government,  and  by  a  number  of  persons.  Blood 
flowed  from  the  wounds  every  Friday,  when  she  was  present  in  her 
mind,  with  absolute  conviction,  at  the  Passion  of  Jesus  Christ. 

A  similar  case  of  stigmata  has  been  verified,  also  in  the  Tyrol,  upon 
Maria  Dominica  Lazzari,  an  ecstatic  visionary,  frequently  seized 
with  convulsions,  who  was  born  March  16,  1815,  at  Capriana  de 
Fiemme,  near  Cavaleri,  ten  hours  from  Trent.  From  the  age  of  nine- 
teen she  felt  and  showed  the  wounds  of  the  Passion,  which  she  saw 
with  her  inner  vision.  Blood  flowed  from  her  hands,  her  feet,  her 
side,  as  in  the  case  of  the  stigmata  of  Saint  Francis,  and  more,  on  her 
forehead,  marked  with  the  Crown  of  Thorns,  where  it  flowed, 
especially  on  Friday,  with  such  abundance  that  her  face  was  entirely 
bathed  in  it.     (Report  of  the  surgeon,  Dr.  Dei-Cloche.) 

A  third  "virgin  of  the  Tyrol,"  celebrated  at  the  same  period, 
Crescenzia  Nieklutsch,  born  June  15,  1816,  at  Cana,  who  lived  in 
Meran,  Trent,  and  Verona,  showed  the  same  symptoms.  She  was 
ecstatic,  like  those  already  mentioned.  When  she  was  nineteen  years 
of  age  the  stigmata  appeared  on  her  hands  on  the  day  of  Pentecost, 
June  7th,  a  few  days  later  on  her  feet,  and  finally  on  her  side. 
From  all  these  wounds  there  flowed  a  great  quantity  of  blood, 
especially  on  Friday.^ 

As  soon  as  we  seek  for  these  examples  of  autosuggestion, 
we  find  a  far  larger  number  of  them  than  we  should  expect. 
The  power  of  the  imagination  is  shown  with  especial  clear- 
ness in  the  stigmata  of  Catherine  Emmerich,  How  is  it 
possible  not  to  see  in  this  the  idea  acting  upon  matter? 

Despite  the  doctors  of  medicine,  who  could  make  nothing 

1  Of.  L'Extatique  de  Kaltern  et  les  stigmatis^ea,  by  Abb6  Nicolas,  of 
Cagnes,  an  eye-witness.     (Lyons,  1833.) 


118  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

of  it,  and  despite  the  doctors  of  physical  and  natural  science, 
who  authoritatively  denied  the  whole  thing,  the  stigmata  of 
Catherine  Emmerich  are  as  certain  as  the  leaves  of  the  elms 
under  which  these  men  argued. 

Let  us  examine  this  curious  subject.  I  shall  extract  the 
following  document  from  a  work  in  three  volumes  which  was 
sent  me  in  the  month  of  January,  1889,  by  Madame  Sophie 
Funck-Brentano,  a  '*  niece  of  the  waiter  of  visions,  Clement 
Brentano  de  la  Roche. ' '  ^ 

Anne  Catherine  Emmerich  was  born  in  the  hamlet  of  Flamske, 
near  the  little  town  of  Coesfeld,  in  Westphalia,  September  8,  1774. 
From  her  earliest  infancy  she  showed  an  extraordinary  piety. 

"One  day,"  she  said,  "I  was  seeking  to  meditate  on  the  lirst  article 
of  the  creed,  *I  believe  in  God  the  Father  Almighty'  (I  may  have 
been  five  or  six  years  old).  Visions  of  the  creation  appeared  before 
my  soul.  The  fall  of  the  angels,  the  creation  of  the  earth  and  of 
paradise,  that  of  Adam  and  Eve  and  their  disobedience, — everything 
was  shown  me.  I  imagined  that  every  one  saw  these  things  as  well 
as  the  objects  which  surrounded  us." 

(Her  imagination  was  precocious!) 

See  now  what  she  says  about  the  beginning  of  her  visions. 

It  was  about  four  years  before  her  entry  into  the  convent  and  con- 
sequently in  1798,  in  the  twenty-fourth  year  of  her  age.  Kneeling 
before  a  crucifix,  in  the  chapter  of  the  Jesuits  at  Coesfeld,  she  was 
praying  with  all  the  fervor  of  which  she  was  capable,  plunged  in  a 
revery  full  of  sweetness,  "When  all  at  once,"  she  said,  *I  saw  my 
heavenly  bridegToom  leave  the  tabernacle,  in  the  form  of  a  young 
man,  surrounded  by  splendor.  In  his  left  hand  he  held  a  crown  of 
flowers,  and  in  his  right  a  crown  of  thorns,  and  he  offered  me  the 
choice  between  them.     I  asked  for  the  crown  of  thorns,  which  he  him- 

1  Visions  (V Anne-Catherine  Emmerich  sur  la  Vie  de  Notre  Seigneur 
J esus-Christ  et  de  la  tres  sainte  Vierge  Marie,  collected  by  the  R.  P.  Fr. 
Joseph- Alvare  Duloy  (Paris,  1885),  3  vols.  See  also  La  douloureuse 
Passion  de  Notre- Seigneur  Jesus-Christ,  d'apres  les  meditations  de  la 
soeur  Emmerich,  Brentam,o  (Paris,  1835),  and  the  Nouvelle  Biographie 
g6n6rale  by  Hoefer,  Vol.  XV. 


THE  WILL  119 

self  placed  on  my  head,  and  with  my  two  hands  I  forced  it  deep  into 
my  forehead.  He  disappeared,  and  at  once  I  felt  violent  pains 
about  my  head.  Very  soon  mounds  showed  like  the  pricks  of 
thorns,  that  emitted  blood.''  So  that  her  suffering  might  remain 
secret,  Anne  Catherine  drew  her  cap  down  over  her  forehead. 

She  entered  the  convent  of  Dulmen  in  1802,  and  from  then  on  led 
a  life  of  ecstasy. 

One  day  her  heavenly  bridegroom  appeared  to  her  and  made  the 
sign  of  the  cross  upon  her.  Her  breast  was  at  once  marked  with  a 
red  double  cross,  about  three  thumbs  long  and  about  half  a  thumb 
wide.  On  December  20,  1812,  she  was  resting  on  her  couch,  motion- 
less, her  arms  extended  like  a  cross,  ravished,  in  ecstasy,  her  face  on 
fire.  She  was  contemplating  the  Passion  of  the  Savior,  and  her  ar- 
dent prayer  begged  the  favor  of  sharing  in  his  sufferings.  Suddenly 
a  light  descended  upon  her,  in  the  midst  of  which  she  saw  Christ 
crucified,  his  five  wounds  resplendent  as  suns.  The  heart  of  Anne 
Catherine  was  suspended  between  grief  and  joy;  at  the  sight  of  the 
sacred  stigmata  her  desire  to  feel  the  pain  of  the  Son  of  God  became 
so  violent  that  it  seemed  to  take  on  a  visible  form  and  to  penetrate 
into  the  wounds  of  the  Savior.  At  once,  from  each  one  of  them, 
there  sprang  three  rays  of  reddish-purple,  terminating  in  arrows, 
which  pierced  her  hands,  her  feet,  and  her  side.  Drops  of  blood 
escaped  from  the  wounds  which  had  just  been  made  in  her. 

From  that  time  on  she  suffered  all  the  inner  and  outward  pains 
of  Christ  in  his  Passion. 

It  is  impossible  to  deny  the  authenticity  of  these  events. 
Innumerable  visitors  came  from  all  over  Germany  and  else- 
where to  verify  them. 

As  the  noise  of  these  occurrences  spread  abroad,  when 
the  French  had  established  their  government  in  her  town, 
the  prefect  of  Munster,  accompanied  by  the  lieutenant  of 
police,  went  to  Dulmen,  to  assure  himself  of  the  state  of 
things.  They  had  to  admit  that  these  events,  physiological 
or  otherwise,  baffled  all  scientific  explanation.  The  prefect 
sent  eight  physicians  and  surgeons  from  the  army  to  visit 


120  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

the  seeress,  with  the  order  to  make  use  of  all  the  resources 
of  their  art  to  heal  the  wounds.  But  these  formed  again 
every  Friday. 

With  these  examples  we  can  compare  many  other  similar 
ones/  such  as  those  of  Saint  Theresa,  Saint  Catherine  of 
Ricci,  Archangela  Tardero,  Saint  Gertrude,  Saint  Lidwine, 
Saint  Helen  of  Hungary,  Saint  Ozanne  of  Mantua,  Saint  Ida 
of  Louvain,  Saint  Christine  of  Strumbelen,  Saint  Jeanne  of 
the  Cross,  Saint  Lucy  of  Mami,  Saint  Catherine  of  Siena, 
Pascthis  and  Clarisse  of  Cogis,  Catherine  of  Ranconioso, 
Veronica  Guilani,  Colombe  Schanolt,  Madeleine  Lorger,  Rose 
Serra,^  and  also  more  than  one  pious  man ;  but  as  it  is  not  our 
intention  to  write  a  work  on  this  subject,  let  us  limit  our- 
selves to  adding  to  the  preceding  cases  the  one  that  has 
most  caught  the  attention  of  contemporary  scholars,  that  of 
Louise  Lateau,  t|i.e-^am,ous  stigmatist  of  Bois-d'Haine,  Bel- 
gium, studied  in  18^9  by  Professor  Delboeuf  of  the  Uni- 
versity of  Liege.        — --3 

It  was  on  Friday,  April  2,  1868,  twelve  days  after  Easter, 
that  Louise  Lateau,  aged  eighteen  (she  was  born  January 
30,  1850),  who  had  reached  the  age  of  puberty  only  five  days 
before,  but  who  had  been  ill  and  languid  for  more  than  a  year, 
and  who  was  possessed  of  an  ecstatical,  ardent,  and  mystical 
imagination,  saw  her  first  stigma  appear,  that  on  her  left  side ; 
the  following  Friday  the  stigmata  appeared  on  her  left  foot, 
and  on  the  third  Friday  all  five  were  present.  The  stigmata 
of  the  crown  of  thorns  did  not  bleed  until  five  months  later. 

These  events,  as  we  have  said,  since  they  are  in  complete 
opposition  to  ordinary  physiology  which  considers  thought 
as  a  material  property  of  the  organism,  are  forcibly  denied 
by  the  classical  professors.     In  1877  the  celebrated  doctor, 

1  Among  others,  the  woman  who  received  the  stigmata  of  Saint  Francis 
in  1873,  and  the  cases  studied  in  the  Annales  des  Sciences  psychiqves 
of  1893,  p.  117. 

2Victoire  Claire,  of  Coux  (Ardeche).  Of  the  five  bleeding  wounds, 
1848-80:     Annales  des  Sciences  psychiques  of  1903. 


THE  WILL  121 

Herr  Virchow,  speaking  of  the  stigmata  of  Louise  Lateau,  pro- 
claimed pompously  that  this  baffling  mystery  was  either  a 
fraud  or  a  miracle,  eliminating  at  once  the  miracle  and  leaving 
as  possible  only  the  fraud.  But  as  for  us,  we  can  affirm  in  the 
name  of  free  science,  that  it  was  neither  a  fraud  nor  a  miracle. 

I  have  had  the  pleasure  of  counting  so  many  springs  that 
I  was  a  contemporary  of  the  creation  of  Lourdes  in  1858,  and 
heard  from  witnesses  living  in  the  country  the  amorous  story 

of  Madame  P and  Lieutenant  G (graduate  of  Saint- 

Cyr,  in  1857,  then  with  the  42d  of  the  line  at  Lourdes,  who 
died  as  chief  of  battalion  at  Tonkin),  which  gave  birth  to  the 
incident  of  the  grotto  and  of  the  little  idiot  Bemadette 
Soubiroux,  on  the  Shrove  Thursday  of  that  year,  an  incident 
which  has  had  such  marvelous  results,  despite  the  refusal 
at  first  of  the  honest  cure  of  Lourdes,  the  Abbe  Peyramale 

(the  confessor  of  Madame  P ),  to  admit  the  appearance 

of  the  Virgin.^  My  friend  Commandant  Mantin,  bom,  as 
I  was,  in  1842  (at  present  at  Pau),  is  still  here  to  affirm 
it.  Let  me  mention  also,  among  our  contemporaries.  Cap- 
tain de  G and  Monsieur  Pelizza.     The   '' miracles"   of 

Lourdes,  at  which  I  as  well  as  thousands  of  others  have  been 
present,  are  assuredly  one  of  the  most  curious  and  obvious 
manifestations  of  the  power  of  the  idea,  of  mental  exaltation, 
of  faith. 

The  same  is  true  to-day  of  those  of  Our  Lady  of  la  Salette, 
which  have  flourished  for  twenty  years,  despite  the  findings  of 

1  An  apparition  so  suspicious  in  all  its  details,  as  well  as  in  its 
principle.  Astounding  words:  "/  am  the  Immaculate  Conception.  .  .  . 
Go  and  bathe  and  eat  grass."  And  this- attitude:  the  Virgin  Mary,  hold- 
ing a  chaplct  in  her  hand,  "I  salute  you,  Mary,  full  of  grace ! "  And  her 
request,  "Do  me  the  kindness  to  come  here  for  fifteen  days!"  And  this 
other,  "I  desire  to  see  people."     And  so  on. 

The  story  of  Lourdes  had,  as  its  origin,  the  sudden  appearance  of  a 
beautiful  woman  in  the  grotto,  which  struck  the  imagination  of  the 
stupefied  child  and  gave  him  in  hallucinations  which  followed  the  con- 
viction of  having  seen  the  Holy  Virgin.  Such  seems*  to  be  the  most 
probable  explanation  of  this  event. 


122  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

the  civil  tribunal  of  Grenoble,  April  15,  1855,  proving  that 
this  Virgin  which  appeared  to  two  children  on  September  19, 
1846,  was  Mademoiselle  de  la  Merliere,  who  was  deliberately 
playing  this  comedy.  The  water  of  la  Salette  also  effected 
cures,  as  I  have  seen  with  my  own  eyes,  in  the  diocese  of 
Langres,  in  1854. 

These  various  miracles,  produced  by  autosuggestion,  have 
been  observed  from  antiquity  as  well  as  in  our  days,  among 
pagans  as  well  as  among  Christians.  We  can  also  see,  in  the 
museum  at  Dijon,  the  votive  offerings  sent  by  the  Romans 
to  the  goddess  Sequana,  at  the  source  of  the  Seine.  They 
were  found  in  a  temple  that  had  been  raised  to  this  divinity, 
in  a  valley  which  I  have  just  visited  recently,  not  far  from 
the  village  of  Saint-Seine.  Dr.  de  Sermyn  relates,  on  his 
part,  that  they  discovered,  not  very  long  ago,  among  the  ex^ 
cavations  carried  on  by  Monsieur  Cawadias  in  the  ruins  of  the 
temple  of  ^sculapius,  pedestals  bearing  commemorative  in- 
scriptions of  the  principal  miraculous  cures  which  were  pro- 
duced at  that  time.  These  pedestals  represent  the  sacred 
archives;  they  date  from  the  third  to  the  fourth  century  be- 
fore Christ.  It  appears  from  them  that  at  this  period,  and 
contrary  to  what  is  generally  supposed,  the  priests  in  the  serv- 
ice of  ^sculapius,  in  the  sanctuary,  did  not  prescribe  any 
remedy.  It  was  the  god  that  cured.  The  sick  saw  him  per- 
form very  daring  operations  on  their  bodies.  The  persons  who 
were  cured  declared  that  they  had  seen  the  divinity  come  and 
open  their  abdomens,  take  away  their  tumors,  and  feel  among 
their  entrails. 

Thus,  for  example,  a  man  who  had  cancer  of  the  stomach, 
tells  how  he  came  to  Epidaurus,  fell  asleep,  and  had  a  vision. 
' '  It  seemed  that  the  god  ordered  his  servitors,  who  accompan- 
ied him,  to  seize  him  and  hold  him  tightly  while  he  opened 
his  stomach.  The  man,  frightened,  fled,  but  the  servitors 
caught  and  bound  him.  Then  iEsculapius  opened  his  stomach, 
cut  out  the  cancer,  and,  after  having  carefully  sewed  every- 


THE  WILL  123 

thing  up  again,  released  the  man  from  his  bonds.     Imme- 
diately after,  the  man  awoke  and  found  himself  cured." 

We  see  that  always  and  everywhere  it  is  the  vision  that 
operates  on  the  body  of  the  invalid  as  a  surgeon  of  to-day 
would  do. 

All  the  sick  who  go  to  Lourdes  wish  to  be  cured  and  in 
consequence  have  the  image  of  the  cure  in  their  brains;  but 
few  of  them  are  actually  cured,  because  not  all  are  endowed 
with  the  suitable  nervous  system  to  see  their  desires  take 
shape  and  act  as  a  supernatural  being  endowed  with  marvel- 
ous powers  would  act. 

The  ardor  of  religious  conviction  is  a  Proteus  which  changes 
its  form  and  becomes  Apollo,  ^sculapius,  Jesus,  the  devil, 
the  Virgin  Mary, — a  good  or  an  evil  spirit  according  to 
the  convictions,  the  preconceived  ideas  of  the  conscious  self. 

I  will  add  that  perhaps  it  is  not  autosuggestion  alone  that 
is  concerned;  wandering  psychic  forces  make  their  influence 
felt  at  times. 

Let  us  continue  the  study  of  the  will. 

That  the  will  can  act  at  a  distance,  without  speech,  with- 
out any  material  telegraphic  or  telephonic  communication,  by 
the  very  force  of  this  will,  can  henceforth  no  longer  be  denied. 
We  can  appear  to  others.  Is  it  the  soul  which  moves  and  is 
transported  ?  Is  it  an  action  upon  the  brain  producing  a  real 
hallucination?  We  are  confronted  with  this  question  and 
our  duty  is  to  examine  it  frankly,  with  no  preconceived  ideas. 
We  shall  solve  it  by  means  of  experiment  through  these  ex- 
amples. 

Among  other  instructive  observations,  I  shall  bring  to 
the  attention  of  my  readers  the'  following  occurrence  which 
was  related  by  Mrs.  Russell,  of  Balgaum,  India,  the  wife  of 
the  inspector  of  public  instruction  in  the  district  of  Bombay. 
This  very  remarkable  experience  is  as  follows :  ^ 

1  See  HalUtcmations  UUpathiques,  example  IX,  p.  48. 


124  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

I  was  living  in  Scotland ;  my  mother  and  sisters  were  in  Germany. 
I  was  living  ^vith  a  very  dear  friend  and  every  year  I  went  to  Ger- 
many to  see  my  people.  It  happened  that  for  two  years  I  was  not 
able  to  see  my  family,  according  to  my  custom.  All  at  once  I  de- 
cided to  leave,  but  my  family  knew  nothing  of  my  intention.  I  had 
never  been  to  see  them  in  the  early  spring  and  I  had  not  time  to 
warn  them  by  letter.  I  did  not  want  to  send  a  telegram  for  fear  of 
frightening  my  mother.  The  thought  came  to  me  to  wish  with  all 
my  strength  to  appear  to  one  of  my  sisters,  in  such  a  way  as  to 
apprise  them  of  my  arrival.  I  thought  of  her  with  all  the  intensity 
possible,  I  wished  with  all  my  might  to  be  seen  by  one  of  them.  I 
believe  I  did  not  concentrate  my  thought  for  more  than  ten  minutes. 
I  left  by  the  Leith  steamship  one  Saturday  evening,  toward  the  end 
of  April,  1859. 

I  desired  to  appear  to  them  toward  six  o'clock  in  the  evening  of 
this  same  Saturday. 

I  reached  the  house  at  about  six  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  the  fol- 
lowing Tuesday.  I  entered  without  being  seen,  for  the  door  was 
open,  and  made  my  way  into  the  room.  One  of  my  sisters  was 
sitting  with  her  back  turned  to  the  door;  she  turned  about  when  she 
heard  me  and  on  seeing  me  stared  at  me^  turned  pale  as  death,  and 
dropped  what  she  held  in  her  hand.  I  had  said  nothing  until  now. 
Then  I  spoke :  "It 's  I,"  I  said.  "Why  are  you  so  frightened?"  At 
that  she  answered:  "I  thought  I  was  seeing  you  as  Stinchen 
[another  of  my  sisters]  saw  you  Saturday." 

In  answer  to  my  questions  she  told  me  that  on  Saturday  evening, 
toward  six  o'clock,  my  sister  had  distinctly  seen  me  enter  through  a 
door  into  the  room  where  she  was,  open  the  door  of  another  room 
where  my  mother  was,  and  shut  the  door  behind  me.  She  had  dashed 
after  what  she  believed  to  be  me,  calling  me  by  my  name,  and  was 
absolutely  stupefied  when  she  did  not  see  me  with  my  mother.  My 
mother  could  not  understand  my  sister's  excitement.  They  looked 
for  me  everywhere,  but  naturally  could  not  find  me. 

The  sister  who  had  seen  me — that  is  to  say,  who  had  seen  my  ap- 
parition— had  gone  out  on  the  morning  of  my  arrival.  I  sat  down 
on  the  steps  to  see  how  she  would  feel  when  she  saw  me,  myself,  on 
her  return.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  when  she  lifted  her  eyes  and  saw 
me,  seated  on  the  stairway,  she  called  my  name  and  almost  fainted. 


THE  WILL  125 

My  sister  has  never  seen  anything  supernatural,  either  before  or 
since,  and  I  have  never  repeated  these  experiments.  Nor  shall  I  ever 
do  so,  for  the  sister  who  was  the  first  to  see  me  when  I  actually  came 
to  the  house  fell  seriously  ill  from  the  shock. 

J.  M.  Russell. 

We  shall  return  to  this  subject  in  treating  of  the  doubles  of 
living  people.  Let  us  state  only,  at  this  moment,  that  the  in- 
quiry made  by  the  English  Society  of  Psychical  Eesearch,  and 
the  reputation  of  the  author  as  well  as  that  of  her  family,  vv^ho 
confirm  what  she  says,  do  not  permit  us  to  doubt  the  authen- 
ticity of  the  tale.  It  proves,  as  do  the  others,  that  the  will 
acts  at  a  distance. 

The  questions  that  we  have  just  asked  are  equally  per- 
tinent to  the  following  case,  which  is  vouched  for  by  the  Rev. 
W.  E.  Dutton,  of  Leeds,  England.^ 

Toward  the  middle  of  June,  in  1803,  I  was  walking  in  the  main 
street  of  Huddersfield,  in  broad  daylight,  when  I  saw  approaching  me 
at  a  distance  of  several  yards,  a  very  dear  friend,  who  I  had  reason 
to  believe  was  seriously  ill  at  his  home  in  Staffordshire.  I  had 
learned  of  his  illness  a  few  days  before  from  his  friends. 

As  the  figure  came  toward  me,  it  was  easy  to  examine  it,  and 
while  I  commented  to  myself  on  his  rapid  recovery,  I  never  suspected 
that  it  was  really  not  my  friend.  At  the  moment  of  our  meeting  the 
figure  looked  at  me  with  a  sad  and  penetrating  expression  and,  to  my 
great  astonishment,  neither  seemed  to  notice  that  I  was  offering  him 
my  hand  nor  answered  my  affectionate  greeting,  but  tranquilly  con- 
tinued on  his  way.  I  was  transfixed  with  astonishment  and  for  sev- 
eral seconds  incapable  of  speaking  or  walking.  I  have  never  been 
quite  certain  that  he  made  any  sound;  but  nevertheless,  this  very 
clear  impression  remained  in  my  mind:  "I  had  so  much  need  of 
you  and  you  would  not  come." 

When  I  had  recovered  from  my  astonishment,  I  turned  to  look 
once  more  after  the  retreating  figure,  but  everything  had  disappeared. 
My  first  impulse  was  to  telegraph,  then  the  idea  came  to  me,  and 

1  Hallucinations  Ulepathiques,  LXXXIX,  p.  266. 


126  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

was  at  once  put  into  execution,  to  go  and  see  if  my  friend  were 
really  alive  or  dead,  though,  for  that  matter,  I  felt  almost  certain 
that  the  latter  hypothesis  was  the  correct  one.  When  I  arrived  the 
following  day  I  found  him  alive  but  only  half -conscious.  He  had 
often  asked  for  me,  his  mind  was  apparently  fixed  in  the  idea  that  I 
would  not  come  to  see  him. 

As  far  as  I  could  discover,  he  must  have  been  asleep  at  the  hour 
when  I  saw  him  appear  the  day  before.  He  told  me  later  that  he 
imagined  he  had  seen  me,  without  knowing  exactly  how  or  where.  I 
cannot  explain  how  my  friend  appeared  to  me  dressed  and  not  as  he 
must  have  been  at  that  very  moment.  My  mind  at  the  time  was 
absorbed  with  other  matters  and  I  was  not  thinking  of  him.  I  may 
add  that  he  lived  several  months  longer. 

W.  E.  Button. 

"When  the  author  was  questioned  as  to  whether  or  not  he 
had  ever  had  other  hallucinations,  he  declared  that  he  had 
had  but  this  one. 

All  these  cases  of  magnetism,  of  hypnotism,  of  mental 
transmission,  of  autosuggestion,  of  doubles  of  the  living,  which 
we  have  merely  touched  upon  here  in  order  to  affirm  the 
principle  of  their  reality,  and  to  which  we  shall  return  later, 
establish,  beyond  any  possible  doubt,  the  action  of  the  spirit 
upon  the  physical  organism,  and  lead  us  to  conclude  that  the 
soul  exists  independently  of  the  body. 

Let  us  continue  our  experimental  study. 

But  before  going  further  I  wish  ta  answer  an  objection 
to  the  scientific  method  that  arises  quite  naturally  in  the 
critical  mind.  It  may  be  supposed  that  these  coincidences 
have  not  the  value  we  are  attributing  to  them,  as  for  every 
one  observed,  a  thousand  dreams,  a  thousand  presentiments 
have  no  consequence  whatever.  This  would  be  a  valid  ob- 
jection if  it  were  not  a  question  here  of  special  sensations, 
of  precise  facts,  of  circumstantial  details,  of  unforeseen  inci- 
dents, at  times  of  scenes  as  clear  to  the  sight  as  if  they  had 
been  photographed.     It  cannot  be  applied,  for  example,  to 


THE  WILL  127 

the  presentiment  of  Madame  Constans,  quoted  on  page  68, 
refusing,  in  spite  of  her  doctor,  to  take  a  dose  of  medicine 
that  would  have  poisoned  her ;  or  to  those  very  personal  cases 
of  Delaunay  and  of  Mademoiselle  Houssaye,  drowned  in 
the  sea  (page  70) ;  or  to  the  dramatic  death  of  Madame 
Arboussoff  (page  72),  etc.  Our  conviction  concerning 
psychic  transmissions  is,  on  the  other  hand,  gradually  strength- 
ened by  the  facts  themselves,  which  are  so  absolutely  character- 
istic. 


VI 

TELEPATHY  AND  PSYCHIC  TRANSMISSIONS  AT  A  DISTANCE 

Not  words!     Facts! 

IF  the  intervention  of  the  will,  without  any  word  or  si^, 
is  a  manifestation  of  the  personal  existence  of  the  soul, 
telepathy  and  mental  communications  at  a  distance  fur- 
nish more  evidence  that  is  no  less  demonstrable  of  this  truth. 

Cases  of  instantaneous  and  unexpected  perception  of  acci- 
deiifs,'of  sickness,  of  death,  from  a  distance  of  thousands  of 
miles,  occur  in  such  numbers  that  to-day  they  form  a  normal 
part  of  the  usual  material  of  psychological  studies.  Denied 
and  misunderstood  for  centuries,  they  form,  from  now  on,  an 
almost  classic  chapter. 

My  readers  are  familiar  with  them  and  I  do  not  wish  to 
repeat  what  I  have  already  published  on  this  subject.^  I  will 
limit  myself  to  recalling  on  principle  this  important  mental 
phenomenon  of  telepathy,  because  it  proves  the  existence  of 
the  soul,  and  to  simply  putting  before  their  eyes  a  few  new 
and  characteristic  events. 

In  a  chapter  in  "L'Inconnu,''  on  **The  Vision,  in  Dreams,  of 
Actual  Events,  at  a  Distance,"  I  believe  I  have  given  irre- 
futable proofs  by  authentic  and  remarkable  examples,  notably 
the  experience  of  Pierre  Conil,  the  writer,  who  saw  and  heard 
his  dying  uncle;  the  vision  of  his  brother's  bloody  head, 
as  seen  by  the  captain  of  a  vessel  returning  to  Marseilles; 
the  sight  of  a  ship  carrying  his  father  and  mother,  by  the 

1  In  UJnconnu  et  les  vrohl^mes  psychiques,  Les  Forces  fiaUireUes  in- 
connues,  Lumen,  Vranie,  Stelle,  Le  Fin  du  Monde,  etc. 

128 


TELEPATHY  AND  PSYCHIC  TRANSMISSIONS      129 

engineer  Palmero;  the  sight  of  a  young  girl  falling  from  a 
window,  by  Monsieur  Martin  Halle;  the  sight  and  descrip- 
tion of  a  cancer  operated  upon  by  Dr.  Cloquet,  etc. ;  on  the 
whole,  forty-six  proofs  of  the  telepathic  transmissions  of  sight 
at  a  distance,  or  in  the  interior  of  the  body,  upon  which  we 
do  not  need  to  dwell  here ;  with  this  conclusion :  Vision  from 
a  distance,  in  dreams  or  in  a  state  of  somnambulism,  can  no 
longer  be  denied.  We  have  read  there,  among  others,  of 
the  well-known  case  of  the  Princess  de  Conti  who  in  a  dream 
saw  that  a  remote  wing  of  her  palace  in  which  her  children 
were  sleeping  was  going  to  fall  and  rushed  to  save  them. 

We  shall  have  occasion  to  observe  other  events  which  will 
confirm  this  statement  more  and  more. 

Here  is  one  of  them,  exceedingly  curious,  and  of  a  most 
intimate  nature,  between  a  person  awake  and  a  person  asleep, 
which  was  sent  to  me  in  August,  1904,  by  Monsieur  A.  d'Argy, 
Commissioner  of  the  Marine,  in  retreat  at  La  Rochelle,  who 
begged  me  not  to  reveal  the  names. 

Madame  S of  La  Rochelle  was  living  in  1887,  in  the 

Vendee,  with  her  family.     At  the  time  she  was  engaged  to 

Monsieur  T .     There  was  an  intense  reciprocal  affection, 

and  an  active  correspondence. 

One  night,  toward  eleven  o'clock  Madame  S awoke,  hear- 
ing herself  called  despairingly  by  her  given  name.  She  recognized 
the  voice  instantly  and  felt  a  breath  on  her  face.  Mechanically  she 
put  out  a  hand  to  see  what  it  was,  thinking  that  some  one  was  actu- 
ally there. 

She  felt  nothing,  she  saw  nothing.  Very  much  frightened, 
she  called  her  mother,  who  was  sleeping  in  another  room,  and  told 
her  about  her  disturbing  hallucination.  She  had  at  the  same  time 
an  intense  feeling  of  some  misfortune  which  had  just  come  to  pass 
far  down  in  the  Basse-Pyrenees.  She  wrote  the  next  morning  to  her 
fiance,  but  received  no  reply.  The  letters  that  followed  met  with 
the  same  fate.  Several  months  passed  without  any  news.  Then 
Madame     S learned,    by    chance,    that    her   friend    had   been 


130  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

taken  to  prison  that  very  night,  on  very  grave  charges,  to  avoid  cre- 
ating a  scandal  in  a  little  town.  A  doctor  who  accompanied  the 
unfortunate  man  testified  that,  overwhelmed  and  seeing  all  his 
chances  for  happiness  disappear,  he  called  upon  his  fiancee  in  a  de- 
spairing voice. 

Their  relations  were  broken  forever.  Monsieur  T ,  who  mar- 
ried later  into  another  family,  died  three  or  four  years  ago. 

This  tale  is  scrupulously  exact. 

Argy. 

(Letter  1068.) 

This  case  of  communication  between  the  living  recalls  other 
cases  tliat  have  been  as  carefully  observed,  among  them  that 
of  a  woman  (Madame  Wilmot)  who  set  out  to  see  her  hus- 
band on  a  ship,  and  did  indeed  arrive  there  (see  "L'Inconnu,'' 
page  489),  and  hundreds  of  telepathic  transmissions  of  the 
same  order. 

There  are  innumerable  cases  of  many  sorts  of  similar  com- 
munications between  living  beings  at  a  considerable  distance. 
Among  those  that  have  been  sent  me  by  careful  observers  I 
shall  cite  especially  the  following,  which  I  owe  to  my  fellow- 
member  of  the  scientific  press,  Mr.  Warrington  Dawson,  at 
present  in  the  American  Embassy  at  Paris,  who  in  1901  was 
directing  an  American  agency  for  the  ^reat  newspapers  of 
Paris.  Here  is  a  letter  from  him,  dated  December  3,  1901 
(18  rue  Feydeau,  Paris) : 

Dear  Master: 

It  is  my  duty  to  axjquaint  you  with  a  very  curious  case  of  tele- 
pathy which  has  just  happened  to  me  and  which  may  help  to  ad- 
vance your  very  important  and  clear-sighted  investigations. 

On  Tuesday,  the  eighth  of  last  October,  I  was  occupied  in  my  office, 
at  18  rue  Feydeau,  in  writing  an  article  on  your  young  colleague, 
Mademoiselle  Klumpke  ^  (an  astronomer  at  the  Observatoire),  when  I 
stopped  for  lack  of  notes  on  an  interview  that  she  had  been  kind 
enough  to  give  me.     Remembering  that  these  notes  were  in  a  drawer 

1  Who  has  since  married  the  English  astronomer  Isaac  Roberts. 


TELEPATHY  AND  PSYCHIC  TRANSMISSIONS      131 

of  my  work  table  in  my  apartment,  36  rue  de  Varennes,  I  returned 
to  get  them.  I  climbed  up  to  my  floor — the  fourth  above  the  entresol 
— leaving  my  hat  on  a  table  in  the  entrance  hall,  as  I  always  did. 
Then  I  noticed  that  the  apartment  was  deserted,  although  my-  house- 
keeper was  supposed  to  remain  there  during  my  absence.  I  made 
a  gesture  of  annoyance,  saying,  "This  must  stop!"  then,  remember- 
ing that  my  mother  was  to  return  to  Paris  before  long  and  that  she 
could  arrange  these  matters  better  than  I,  I  shrugged  my  shoulders 
while  I  crossed  the  narrow  little  hall  to  enter  my  workroom.  Here 
I  sat  down  at  my  table  which  was  laden  with  papers  and  on  which 
stood  a  lamp.  It  was  about  two  o^clock  in  the  afternoon  of  the 
eighth,  and  I  am  certain  of  the  date,  for  the  same  evening  I  sent 
to  America  the  article  on  Ma.demoiselle  Klumpke,  of  which  I  am  send- 
ing you  a  copy,  bearing  the  date  of  October  eighth. 

You  can  read  in  this  article,  that  she  owes  her  initiation  into  astron- 
omy to  you,  and  that  you  were,  through  your  books,  her  first  master. 

What  was  my  astonishment  to  receive  through  the  mail  from 
America,  the  following  week,  a  letter  from  my  mother,  telling  me  all 
the  incidents  which  I  have  just  told  you,  as  they  had  been  seen  by 
one  of  our  friends,  Mrs.  George  Coffin  of  New  York. 

My  mother's  letter  bore  the  date  of  October  eleventh,  in  New  York, 
and  the  envelop  was  postmarked  with  that  date ;  the  letter  was  there- 
fore mailed  three  days  after  the  event  and,  as  it  takes  at  least  eight 
days  for  a  letter  to  go  from  Paris  to  New  York,  there  was  no  pos- 
sible way  to  learn  of  these  happenings  in  less  than  three  days  except 
by  cable,  and  certainly  no  one  would  dream  of  sending  such  unim- 
portant details,  especially  at  the  rate  of  one  franc,  twenty-five  cen- 
times a  word.  My  mother  wrote  on  October  eleventh,  Friday,  and 
said  that  she  had  seen  Mrs.  Coffin  the  preceding  Tuesday,  which  was 
therefore  the  ninth.  It  is  a  curious  fact  that  while  trying  to  see  me 
at  two  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  New  York  time,  Mrs.  Coffin  had  seen 
not  what  I  was  doing  at  that  moment  but  what  I  had  done  the  after- 
noon before  at  two  o'clock,  Paris  time. 

You  will  see  from  the  letter  that  Mrs.  Coffin  began  by  describing 
the  apartment.  As  it  had  never  been  photographed,  and  Mrs.  Coffin 
had  seen  my  mother  for  the  first  time  since  her  return  from  Europe 
only  a  few  minutes  before  describing  this  interior,  she  could  not  have 
known  of  the  arrangement  of  our  apartment. 


132  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

This  could  be  explained  by  suggestion,  as  my  mother  knew  of  it, 
but  my  mother,  who  is  used  to  Paris  ways,  would  never  think  of 
calling  a  floor  placed  four  flights  above  the  entresol  anything  but  the 
fourth  floor,  while  to  a  New  Yorker,  who  is  not  used  to  the  entresol, 
and  who  calls  the  ground  floor  the  first  floor,  it  would  be  the  sixth 
floor,  as  Mrs.  Coffin  says.  It  seems,  therefore,  from  this  fact  alone, 
that  Mrs.  Coffin  has  really  seen  the  apartment.  Moreover,  for  almost 
a  year,  that  is  the  only  time  that  I  have  happened  to  return  home  at 
that  hour  of  the  day.  Mrs.  Coffin's  astonishment  at  seeing  the  porce- 
lain stove,  an  object  unknown  in  America,  shows  her  usual  exactness 
in  this  vision  at  a  distance. 

During  the  long  years  that  my  family  has  known  Mrs.  Coffin  we 
have  often  amused  ourselves  by  asking  her  to  ^'see"  what  was  hap- 
pening to  people  who  interested  us  or  to  answer  questions  which  we 
wrote  on  bits  of  paper,  closed  and  sealed,  and  which  she  held  without 
looking  at  them.  Her  replies  have  always  been  clear  and,  when  we 
were  able  to  verify  them,  exact. 

Very  sincerely,  etc., 

Francis  Warrington  Dawson. 

(Letter  1003.) 

This  letter  was  accompanied  by  that  of  Mr.  Dawson's 
mother,  dated  New  York,  October  11th,  describing  exactly,  as 
dictated  by  Mrs.  Coffin,  the  apartment  in  Paris,  *'on  the  sixth 
floor,"  Mr.  Dawson's  visit  to  this  apartment,  his  annoj^ance 
over  the  servant 's  absence,  his  hat  placed  on  a  table,  the  search 
for  his  papers,  the  condition  of  his  bureau,  his  sitting  down 
to  write, — in  a  word,  all  the  details  of  what  he  had  done  in 
Paris. 

This  very  exact  sight  at  a  distance  is  absolutely  spontaneous 
and  incontestable.  But  what  is  more  singular  yet  is  that 
this  vision  went  back  to  the  day  before,  and  not  to  the  day 
and  moment  itself,  so  that  it  expresses  a  sort  of  double 
phenomenon  of  telepathy  in  time  and  space. 

Telepathetic  transmissions  between  living  people  are  not  so 
rare  as  one  who  is  ignorant  of  them  would  suppose.  The 
following  is  worthy  of  attention : 


TELEPATHY  AND  PSYCHIC  TRANSMISSIONS      133 

Commander  T.  W.  Aylesbury,  living  at  Sutton,  in  the 
country  of  Surrey,  England,  wrote  in  December,  1882 : 

At  the  age  of  thirteen,  I  fell  overboard  from  a  ship  that  was  ap- 
proaching the  isle  of  Bali,  to  the  west  of  Java,  and  I  was  almost 
drowned.  After  having  sunk  several  times,  when  I  came  up  to  the 
surface  of  the  water  I  called  my  mother,  at  which  the  boat's  crew 
was  very  much  amused;  and  they  teased  me  many  times  about  it, 
sparing  no  sarcasm.  Several  months  later,  on  my  return  to  England, 
I  told  the  whole  story  to  my  mother  and  said  at  once: 

"While  I  was  under  the  water  I  saw  you  all  sitting  in  this  room; 
you  were  working  on  something  white.  I  saw  you  all — Mother, 
Emily,  Eliza,  and  Ellen." 

His  mother  confirmed  his  statement.  "I  heard  you  call  me,"  she 
said,  "and  I  sent  Emily  to  look  out  at  the  window." 

The  time,  considering  the  difference  in  longitude,  corresponded  to 
the  hour  at  which  the  voice  had  been  heard. 

Another  letter  from  the  commander  completes  the  story : 

I  saw  their  faces, — the  faces  of  my  mother  and  my  sisters, — the 
room  and  the  furniture,  above  all  the  old-fashioned  Venetian  blinds. 
My  eldest  sister  was  seated  by  my  mother's  side. 

As  regards  the  time  of  the  accident,  it  was  very  early  in  the  morn- 
ing. I  remember  a  ship  had  capsized  the  day  before  and  had  been 
tossed  up  on  the  shore.  The  officer  gave  us  the  order  to  go  and  find 
it  and  to  bring  it  back  in  the  morning,  but  I  cannot  remember  the 
exact  hour.  The  situation  was  terrible  and  the  waves  broke  furi- 
ously. We  almost  turned  upside  down;  I  had  never  thought  myself 
so  near  my  end,  and  yet  I  have  been  in  many  a  tight  place.  But 
that  accident  made  such  an  impression  upon  my  mind  that  I  could  n't 
forget  a  single  detail,  nor  the  jokes  of  the  sailors:  "Boy,  why  are 
you  calling  your  mother?  Do  you  think  she  can  pull  you  out  of 
the  devil's  claws'?"  and  other  remarks  which  I  cannot  repeat. 

The  inquiry  elicited  a  letter  from  the  commander  ^s  sister. 
She  wrote : 

I  recall  the  incident  perfectly.     It  made  such  an  impression  upon 


134  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

me  that  I  shall  never  forget  it.  We  were  seated  and  working  peace- 
fully, one  evening,  when  first  we  heard  a  feeble  cry  of  "Mother!'' 
We  raised  our  eyes  and  said:  "Did  you  hear  some  one  cry 
'Mother'  ?"  The  words  had  hardly  left  our  lips  when  the  voice  called 
again,  "Mother!"  twice  in  succession.  The  last  cry  was  stamped 
with  terror,  it  was  like  a  cry  of  agony.  We  all  rose  and  my  mother 
said,  "Go  to  the  door  and  see  what  it  is."  I  ran  into  the  street  and 
searched  for  several  minutes,  but  everything  was  silent  and  I  saw 
no  one;  the  evening  was  fine,  without  a  breath  of  air.  Mother  was 
very  much  upset  by  this  experience.^ 

These  cases  of  transmission  of  thought  between  living  people 
have  nothing  in  common  with  normal  life  and  are  outside  the 
action  of  our  physical  senses.  From  all  the  evidence,  it  is 
the  spirit  which  acts  here. 

It  would  be  easy  to  cite  many  other  examples,  notably 
that  of  a  young  amazon  who,  having  leaned  over  too  far,  to 
open  a  barrier,  fell  from  her  horse  and  gave  a  cry  that  was 
heard  by  five  persons  seven  kilometers  away.^ 

I  have  received  ferocious  letters  from  well-meaning  ladies, 
evidently  inspired  by  their  spiritual  directors,  reproaching  me 
for  not  believing  in  the  Christian  dogmas  and  for  admitting 
the  truth  of  the  ''ridiculous  tales  of  telepathy,  of  sensations 
at  a  distance,  and  the  announcements  of  death,"  and  I  have, 
at  this  moment,  noted  one  of  them  especially,  sent  by  a  lady 
of  Salins,  which  is  almost  insulting  and  which  reached  me 
in  the  same  post  that  brought  me  the  following  (Letters  913 
and  914  of  my  collection),  which  contradict  and  singularly 
complement  each  other. 

Letter  913  declares  that  everything  about  telepathy  is  false, 
that  it  is  inexcusable  of  me  to  take  these  accounts  seriously. 
*  *  It  has  been  impossible  for  me  to  continue  reading  your  book 
*L'Inconnu,'  it  is  so  ridiculous;  it  is  truly  grotesque!'* 
Letter  914  says: 

1  Hallucinations  tSlSpathiques,  p.  365. 
z  Hallucinations  tiUpathiques,  p.  363. 


TELEPATHY  AND  PSYCHIC  TRANSMISSIONS      135 

For  the  inquiry  which  you  have  undertaken  I  have  made  it  my  duty 
to  bring  a  personal  contribution  to  that  most  important  work  of 
yours,  "L'Ineonnu  et  les  problemes  psychiques,"  a  basis  for  the  sci- 
ence of  the  future. 

In  the  winter  of  1878  I  was  living  at  Aurillac.  I  had  left  my 
wife  and  daughter  at  San  Servan,  Ille-et-Vilaine. 

On  December  22d,  while  I  was  in  a  cafe,  at  about  half-past  eight,  I 
was  seized  with  intolerable  anguish.  My  suffering  was  so  great  that 
I  went  out  and  returned  home,  where  I  wrote  my  wife  a  letter  which 
began  as  follows: 

"Sunday,  December  22,  9  o'clock. 

"I  was  in  the  cafe,  with  my  usual  companions,  when  I  suddenly 
rose  and  left,  although  they  begged  me  to  remain.  I  had  heard  an 
irresistible  call.  You  must  have  been  thinking  of  me,  earnestly 
calling  me,  perhaps  with  anguish.  Is  it  pain?  Is  it  danger?  Oh, 
tell  me  what  you  wanted  of  me  at  that  hour !  I  came  home  in  great 
distress,  all  upset.  There  was  a  pressing  call :  I  needed  to  be  alone 
to  write  you  and  confide  my  sorrow  to  you." 

The  rest  of  the  letter  does  not  concern  us. 

On  receiving  this  letter  on  the  morning  of  the  twenty-fourth,  my 
wife  was  astounded.  She  wrote  at  the  head  of  my  letter,  "The  day 
of  the  baby's  accident." 

This  is  what  had  happened  at  Saint  Servan: 

At  eight  o'clock  in  the  evening  of  the  twenty-second,  my  daughter, 
aged  six  weeks,  was  put  to  bed  with  a  hot-water  bottle  at  her  feet. 
Her  mother  went  to  bed  shortly  after.  A  few  minutes  later  the 
infant  gave  cries  of  distress,  and  they  discovered  that  the  hot-water 
bottle  had  leaked  and  the  child,  its  feet  scalded,  was  twisting  in  con- 
vulsions of  pain. 

My  wife  was  distracted,  and  did  not  regain  possession  of  herself 
until  after  the  doctor  came,  which  was  certainly  more  than  an  hour 
later. 

The  coincidence  of  these  events  and  their  perfect  agreement  can 
be  established,  thanks  to  the  dating  of  my  letter, — December  22d, 
nine  o'clock. 

I  had  dined,  as  was  my  custom,  from  seven  to  eight,  at  the  cafe ;  I 
had  taken  a  hand  at  cards :  the  time  required  to  take  me  to  the  cafe, 


136  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

about  159  meters  from  my  apartment,  that  necessary  to  settle  my- 
self for  writing,  everything  shows  that  I  heard  the  call  at  about  half- 
past  eight  at  the  earliest. 

The  child  had  been  put  to  bed  at  eight  o'clock,  and  the  scalding 
water  could  not  have  had  an  effect  later  than  half-past  eight,  for 
otherwise  the  water,  having  cooled,  would  not  have  instantly  caused 
the  blister  it  did.  My  wife  no  longer  remembers  if,  in  her  distrac- 
tion, her  thoughts  actually  turned  to  me  or  if  she  called  me.  She  is 
convinced  she  did,  but  her  actual  recollections  have  been  destroyed. 

Such  as  it  is,  this  experience,  so  clearly  proved  by  my  letter  of 
December  22d,  seems  to  me  literally  exact. 

I  will  add  that  the  nature  of  my  mind,  and  that  of  my  occupation, 
lead  me  toward  the  study  of  scientific  realities  much  more  than 
toward  events  of  the  mysterious  order  of  the  psychic  world.  I  have 
never  had  any  other  experience  of  this  nature. 

GiGON. 

Sous-Intendent  of  the  First  Class. 

Does  not  this  curious  tale  show  the  greatest  similarity  to 
that  of  Monsieur  Arboussoff  (Chapter  IV,  page  71)  and  that 
of  Monsieur  Garrison  (ibid,  page  75)  ?  All  reveal  the  pow- 
ers of  the  supra-normal  soul.     Let  us  continue. 

Here  are  some  more  cases  concerning  which  it  is  impossible 
to  doubt,  showing  telepathic  transmission  of  thought.  I  am 
taking  them  from  a  letter  which  was  sent  me  from  Passavant, 
Haute-Saone,  by  Dr.  Poirson  of  the  faculty  of  Paris. 

I  am  sending  you  accounts  of  three  events  of  a  somewhat  different 
order,  but  which  may  be  useful  to  you  in  your  studies  on  psychic 
phenomena.  I  can  guarantee  their  authenticity,  as  I  have  the  habit 
of  attributing  no  importance  to  events  of  this  order  unless  I  have 
observed  them  myself. 

A  About  two  months  ago,  happening  to  be  in  Belfort,  a  quarter 
of  Paris,  I  began  to  think  suddenly  and  with  singular  insistence  of 
one  of  my  colleagues  of  the  Jura,  of  whom  I  do  not  think  once  a 
year,  as  I  have  no  relations  with  him  except  in  a  professional  way. 
Moreover,  these  relations  date  from  thirteen  years  ago,  and  I  have 


TELEPATHY  AND  PSYCHIC  TRANSMISSIONS      137 

not  seen  him  since.  A  few  minutes  later  I  found  myself  face  to 
face  with  him  in  a  square,  and  as  he  had  come  on  a  bicycle,  down  a 
street,  at  right  angles  to  my  own,  it  was  impossible  that  I  should  have 
seen  him  from  a  distance.  That  is  a  fact:  I  do  not  explain  it,  but 
it  struck  me. 

B  As  I  am  a  doctor  by  profession,  I  am  often  disturbed  at  night. 
A  great  many  people  pass  before  my  door:  but  if  some  one  comes 
who  is  going  to  ring,  I  awake  of  my  own  accord  while  he  is  still 
twenty  meters  from  my  house;  I  know  beforehand  that  he  is  going 
to  ring. 

I  have  verified  this  not  once  but  a  hundred  times  in  the  past 
twelve  years.  In  order  to  be  entirely  exact,  I  must  say  that  if  I  am 
not  asleep — which  often  happens — I  am  entirely  incapable  of  fore- 
telling if  a  passer-by  is  going  to  stop  or  not ;  I  must  say  also,  that  if 
I  am  sleeping  very  heavily,  after  an  especially  fatiguing  day,  the 
phenomenon  does  not  occur. 

C  I  have  among  my  patients  a  hysterical  young  woman  in  whom 
I  can  induce  hypnotic  sleep  and  suggestion  with  extraordinary  ease. 
It  has  often  happened  that  I  have  fixed  the  hour  of  her  awakening 
and  of  her  rising,  which  she  observes  with  remarkable  exactness. 
This  does  not  seem  at  all  extraordinary  to  one  who  practises  a  little 
hypnotism,  but  here  is  something  else:  One  day  this  person's  hus- 
band, who  was  impatiently  awaiting  his  wife's  awakening,  was 
seized  with  the  whim  of  setting  forward  the  hands  of  the  watch  that 
was  placed,  as  usual,  on  the  table  by  the  bed.  As  it  was  only  half- 
past  six  in  the  morning  and  he  had  half  an  hour  to  wait,  he  turned 
the  hands  forward  to  half -past  seven.  He  was  surprised  to  see  his 
wife  rise  quickly  at  the  very  moment  when  the  large  hand  touched  the 
hour  of  seven.  This  man  came  himself  to  inform  me  of  what  had 
happened.  I  was  incredulous  and  wished  to  verify  it,  and  in  fact,  I 
have  verified  it  several  times. 

I  must  say  that  this  person,  when  asleep,  with  her  eyes  closed, 
easily  reads  the  time  from  my  watch,  even  if  I  vaiy  it,  but  only  if  I 
myself  am  looking  at  the  hands.  In  the  same  way,  she  easily  names 
any  object  which  I  grasp  behind  her,  hut  only  when  I  take  it  in  my 
hands. 

All  this  represents  facts  to  be  explained.  I  leave  you  the  task  of 
interpreting  them;  they  could  be  confirmed  for  you  by  those  con- 


138  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

cemed  if  they  were  not,  in  mentality,  a  little  behind  the  point  of  view 
held, by  us;  they  consider  me  somewhat  of  a  sorcerer,  and  would 
certainly  not  wish  to  be  mixed  up  with  these  stories. 

You  can  make  any  use  you  please  of  my  letter.  I  authorize  you 
to  publish  my  name,  for  I  am  not  afraid  of  the  laughter  of  the 
ignorant,  and  I  enjoy  that  of  imbeciles. 

I  am,  etc., 

Dr.  Poirson, 
Passavant,  Haute-Saone;  October  9,  1916. 
(Letter  3482.) 

The  first  of  these  three  cases  is  not  unusual,  and  it  is  one 
of  those  which  lead  us  to  consider  the  transmission  of  thought 
from  brain  to  brain,  like  a  wave  of  ether.  The  second  leads 
to  the  same  conclusion.  The  third  showa  a  suggestion  operat- 
ing despite  a  trick.  The  transmission  of  thought  is  evident, 
especially  in  the  case  of  the  doctor  who  altered  the  hands  of 
the  watch.  Everybody  knows  that  we  often  meet,  appar- 
ently by  chance,  a  person  of  whom  we  are  thinking.  We 
find  examples  of  it  everywhere.  Dr.  Foissac,  among  others, 
points  out  ^  some  of  these  coincidences  which  have  particularly 
struck  him.  But  they  are  not  rare,  although  they  have  not 
been  analyzed  until  now.     They  prove  psychic  radiation. 

Cases  of  telepathic  sight  and  hearing  are  more  frequently 
met  with. 

Among  the  numerous  observations  which  have  been  sent 
to  me,  I  will  quote  the  following  case  in  which  Madame 
Barthes,  the  widow  of  Dr.  Barthes,  of  Ivry,  actually  saw 
from  a  distance  an  accident  which  fortunately  had  no  serious 
consequences.     The  event  took  place  in   1874  in  Rumania. 

February  12,  1917. 
The  doctor  had  left  on  horseback  to  make  his  rounds,  and  his 
wife  had  gone  to  pass  the  afternoon  with  some  friends.     Suddenly, 
while  they  were  talking,  she  saw  her  husband  fall  from  his  horse  into 

1  La  Chance  ou  la  Destinee,  p.  589. 


TELEPATHY  AND  PSYCHIC  TRANSMISSIONS      139 

the  road,  and  she  gave  a  cry  of  fright.  They  laughed  at  her,  quite 
naturally,  but  when  the  doctor  returned  in  the  evening,  his  wife,  still 
under  her  impression  of  the  vision  and  to  the  great  astonishment  of 
the  rider,  asked  if  he  had  hurt  himself.  He  told  her  that  having 
slowed  his  horse  to  a  walk,  after  a  rather  stiff  climb,  he  had  passed 
the  bridle  over  his  arm  in  order  to  roll  a  cigarette,  when  the  animal 
suddenly  stumbled,  fell  on  its  knees,  and  flung  the  rider  to  the 
ground,  where  he  had  hurt  his  face,  his  shoulder,  and  his  arm.  The 
doctor,  who  was  acquainted  with  telepathy,  was  not  surprised  at  this 
vision. 

(Letter  4075.) 

Our  next  case  of  mental  vision  is  of  the  same  order.  Lom- 
broso  published  the  following  letter,  sent  him  by  his  colleague 
in  the  university,  Professor  De  Sanctis: 

I  was  once  at  Rome  with  my  family,  which  had  remained  in  the 
country.  As  the  house  had  been  robbed  the  year  before,  my  brother 
was  in  the  habit  of  sleeping  there.  One  evening  he  told  me  he  was 
going  to  the  Costanzi  Theater.  I  had  come  in  alone  and  was  begin- 
ning to  read  when  I  was  suddenly  seized  with  terror.  I  struggled 
against  it  and  was  beginning  to  undress,  but  I  remained  obsessed  by 
the  thought  that  the  theater  was  on  fire  and  my  brother  in  danger.  I 
put  the  light  out;  but,  growing  more  and  more  disturbed,  I  lit  it 
again,  contrary  to  my  usual  custom,  and  decided  to  await  my  brother's 
return  before  I  went  to  sleep.  I  was  truly  frightened,  just  as  a  child 
might  be.  At  half-past  twelve  I  heard  the  door  open,  and  what  was 
my  astonishment  when  my  brother  told  me  about  the  panic  that  had 
been  caused  by  the  outbreak  of  a  fire,  which  had  coincided  with  the 
hour  of  my  anxiety. 

A  very  remarkable  case  of  the  transmission  of  thought  is 
this,  which  was  reported  by  Dr.  Quintard  to  the  Society  of 
Medicine  at  Angers : 

A  child  of  seven,  Ludovico,  possessed  a  gift  for  solving  problems 

1  Whom  I  exhibited  at  Paris  in  1880,  and  whose  reputation  spread  over 
the  whole  world. 


140  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

similar  to  that  of  the  celebrated  Inaudi.^  The  child's  father  finally 
noticed  one  day,  first,  that  he  hardly  listened  to  the  reading  of  the 
problems  that  were  given  him,  and,  secondly,  that  his  mother's 
presence  was  the  one  condition  necessary  for  the  success  of  the  ex- 
periment. 

She  always  had  to  have  the  required  solution  under  her  eyes  or 
in  her  mind.  From  this  he  deduced  that  his  son  did  not  calculate 
but  divined,  or,  to  be  more  exact,  that  the  mother  transmitted  her 
thought  to  him ;  and  he  resolved  to  make  sure  of  the  matter.  Conse- 
quently, he  asked  her  to  open  the  dictionary  and  ask  the  boy  which 
page  she  was  looking  at,  and  the  boy  answered  at  once :  "It  is  page 
four  fifty-six,"  which  was  correct.  Ten  times  he  repeated  this  and 
ten  times  we  obtained  the  same  result. 

When  a  sentence  of  any  length  was  written  on  a  tablet  it  was 
enough  for  it  to  pass  under  the  mother's  eyes  for  the  child, 
when  questioned,  even  by  a  stranger,  to  be  able  to  repeat  the  whole 
of  it. 

All  these  observations  unite  in  proving  to  us  that  com- 
munication exists  between  mind  and  mind. 

A  case  of  vision  and  also  of  exact  hearing  from  a  distance, 
in  a  dream,  has  been  reported  to  me  by  one  of  my  corre- 
spondents, Monsieur  Maurice  RoUinet,  who  had  it  from 
Monsieur  Doutaz,  the  cure  at  Domdidier,  canton  of  Fribourg, 
Switzerland.     Here  it  is,  somewhat  abridged :  ^ 

It  was  in  the  middle  of  November  of  the  year  1859.  At  the  time 
I  was  eighteen  years  old.     I  went  to  bed  and  to  sleep. 

I  do  not  know  how  long  Morpheus  had  rocked  me  in  his  arms, 
when  a  strange  vision  appeared  before  my  mind.  I  saw  the  sor- 
rowful face  of  my  dear  old  father,  speaking  to  me  from  my  old 
home,  which  was  twenty-four  kilometers  from  the  town  near  Fri- 
bourg where  I  was  living:  *'My  dear  Joseph,"  he  said,  "it  is  with 
great  sorrow  that  I  am  writing  to  tell  you  that  your  poor  sister, 
Josephine,  is  dying  in  Paris." 

I I  have  published  it  in  the  Annales  des  Sciences  psychiques  of  October, 
1910. 


TELEPATHY  AND  PSYCHIC  TRANSMISSIONS      141 

I  was  awakened  by  this  vision  but  said  to  myself  at  once:  "Ah! 
bah !  it  is  a  dream !"    At  that  I  went  to  sleep  again. 

But  behold,  the  same  vision  appeared  again,  exactly  as  at  first, 
with  the  same  sorrowful  look  and  the  same  words:  "My  dear 
Joseph,"  etc.,  "but  your  mother  does  not  yet  know  the  sad  news." 

"This  time,"  I  said,  jumping  out  of  bed,  "I  no  longer  believe  it 's  a 
dream,"  and  under  the  painful  impression  of  a  sorrowful  reality, 
I  dressed  and  looked  at  my  watch :  it  was  half -past  twelve. 

When  day  had  come  I  set  out  for  the  college.  As  I  had  some 
material  to  get  from  my  room,  I  went  up  to  the  house,  which  was 
left  in  the  care  of  an  old  concierge.  I  had  barely  entered  when  I 
saw  the  good  old  man  coming  toward  me,  holding  a  small  package 
in  his  hand.  He  said  to  me:  "A  gentleman  who  has  just  arrived 
from  your  home  has  asked  me  to  give  you  without  delay  this  pres- 
ent sent  by  your  father,  for  it  is  of  the  utmost  importance."  I 
opened  the  package  at  once.  It  was  accompanied  by  a  letter  from 
my  father,  written  in  great  haste;  I  read:  "Dear  Joseph,  it  is  with 
great  sorrow  that  I  am  writing  to  tell  you  that  your  poor  sister 
Josephine  is  dying  in  Paris.  But  your  mother  does  not  yet  know 
the  sad  news.  The  telegram  reached  me  at  about  ten  o'clock  this 
evening.  I  did  not  think  I  ought  to  tell  your  mother,  for  the  mo- 
ment. It  is  now  eleven  o'clock.  At  half-past  twelve  our  deputy 
will  leave  for  the  Grand  Council.  I  will  put  this  in  the  package 
which  your  dear  mother  prepared  for  this  occasion.  Try  to  arrive 
here  without  fail  to-morrow  evening.  It  is  impossible  for  me,  at 
my  age,  to  fulfil  this  sorrowful  duty.    You,  alas!  will  represent 


This  account  is  accompanied  by  the  following  certificate, 
signed  by  the  narrator. 

The  undersigned  declares,  on  his ,  conscience,  that  the  account  is 
perfectly  exact  and  that  his  memory  of  this  event  is  as  clear  as  if  it 
had  taken  place  yesterday. 

Jos.  DouTAz,  Cure, 
Domdidier,  April  18,  1918. 

It  is  utterly  impossible  here  to  plead  a  chance  coincidence 


142  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

between  this  dream  and  the  event,  and  we  are  forced  to  admit 
that  the  father's  thought  was  carried  to  the  son,  with  the  very 
text  of  the  letter  which  he  was  sending  to  him.^ 

We  see  that  everything  unites  to  prove  the  value  of  the 
thesis  upheld  here:  The  action  of  the  soul  is  independent  of 
the  body. 

The  following  instance  of  telepathetic  sensation  has  been 
described  by  Dr.  Foissac  ("Chance  ou  la  Destinee,"  page 
599)  as  having  been  experienced  by  himself.  At  the  time  the 
importance  of  these  events  was  never  suspected : 

When  I  was  a  medical  student  and  interne  at  Dupuytren,  I 
dreamed  that  I  saw  my  father  attacked  with  an  illness  which  was 
bringing  him  to  the  grave.  I  awoke  in  great  distress,  which  I  tried 
to  overcome,  telling  myself  that  I  had  left  my  father  the  Sunday 
before  in  perfect  health ;  it  was  now  Wednesday.  I  told  myself  that 
it  was  really  a  weakness  to  grow  anxious  over  a  dream,  and  I  re- 
solved to  pay  no  attention  to  it.  But  the  image  of  my  dying  father 
was  continually  before  my  mind  and,  although  I  was  ashamed  of 
my  weakness,  in  order  to  escape  from  this  obsession  I  left  for  Saint- 
Germain,  where  I  found  my  father  ill  of  inflammation  of  the  lungs, 
which  carried  him  off  in  five  days. 

Telepathy  appears  under  all  forms.  It  is  not  rare  for  the 
daily  papers  to  receive  echoes  of  observations  of  this  sort. 
"The  Daily  Telegraph"  of  August  23,  1906,  published,  among 
others,  the  tale  of  one  of  its  correspondents.  His  little  daugh- 
ter, aged  three,  was  saying  her  prayers  and  refused,  that 
evening,  to  follow  her  usual  custom  and  pray  for  a  happy 
ending  to  the  voyage  of  her  grandmother,  who  had  left  Russia 
for  England.  "No,"  she  repeated,  "I  shall  not  pray  this 
evening  that  Grandmother  will  arrive  safely,  because  she  has 
arrived/' — "What  did  you  say?" — "Yes,  I  saw  the  boat  in 
the  harbor  and  she  is  very  well. ' '     The  correspondent  added 

1  Compare  with  a  similar  communication  between  my  father  and 
mother  {L'Inconnu,  p.  513). 


TELEPATHY  AND  PSYCHIC  TRANSMISSIONS      143 

that  she  had  made  a  note  of  the  date,  and  that  when  she 
received  word  from  her  mother,  she  learned  that  that  lady- 
had  really  arrived,  as  this  child  had  seen  in  her  dream 
the  day  before  she  had  refused  to  make  her  usual  prayer. 
She  observes  that  this  power  of  seeing  things  at  a  distance, 
in  dreams,  is  in  her  family,  and  that  she  herself  saw  one 
night  the  explosion  on  board  of  the  Great  Eastern.  Her 
husband  made  considerable  fun  of  the  dream  when  she  told 
him,  but  he  was  obliged  to  acknowledge  the  truth  of  it  the 
next  morning  when  the  papers  arrived. 

A  telepathetic  vision,  in  a  dream,  from  Strasburg  to  Paris 
has  been  described  to  me  by  an  old  friend,  Madame 
Dobelmann,  in  the  following  words : 

I  do  not  know,  dear  Master,  whether  or  not  I  have  mentioned  to 
you  an  instance  of  telepathy  which  I  experienced  in  January,  1901. 
We  were  already  living  in  Paris  when,  at  the  end  of  January,  we 
were  called  to  Strasburg,  my  husband  and  I,  for  the  funeral  of  my 
poor  invalid  mother.  Our  son  was  not  able  to  go  also,  because  of 
the  laws  of  exception  of  that  place.  I  was  much  affected,  as  can 
be  imagined,  by  the  swarm  of  memories  and  by  the  weather  (the 
air  was  full  of  whirling  snow),  so  that  I  had  very  agitated  dreams 
at  night.  One  night,  especially,  I  was  overcome  with  sharp  dis- 
tress and  dreamed  that  I  saw  my  youngest  son  caught  between  two 
rows  of  planks  which  had  fallen  on  him,  unable  to  free  himself  and 
calling  me,  "Mama!"  I  spoke  of  it  to  my  sister,  while  I  was  still 
very  much  oppressed  by  this  nightmare.  But  neither  she  nor  I 
dreamed  of  attaching  any  importance  to  it.  A  few  days  later,  on 
our  return  to  Paris,  the  servant  who  received  us  said:  "Monsieur 
Julien  is  much  better,  he  is  at  his  work." — "What,  has  he  been  ill?" 
— "Why,  yes,  he  had  to  stay  in  tl^e  house  several  days,  for  he  hurt 
his  leg.     Didn't  he  write  you?" 

On  my  son's  return  we  questioned  him,  and  he  told  me  that  he 
had  had  an  accident,  for  a  pile  of  boards  had  fallen  on  him;  but  it 
had  been  nothing  serious,  and  it  would  have  been  useless  to  frighten 
us.  "But  I  knew  it,"  I  said.  "I  dreamed  about  it  all  one  night  j 
and  the  curious  thing  is  that  the  place  did  not  at  all  resemble  your 


144  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

wood-yard.  You  were  in  the  midst  of  planks,  unable  to  get  up,  in 
a  great  unfamiliar  yard,  and  the  sun  was  shining  brightly." — 
"That 's  correct,"  replied  my  son ;  "the  sun  was  shining  on  that  day 
and  it  did  not  happen  in  my  place  but  in  a  neighbor's  yard,  which 
is  just  as  you  have  described  it  without  having  ever  seen  it.  But 
I  have  no  recollection  of  having  called  you." 

Had  my  son  called  me  at  night  in  his  sleep?  It  is  not  impossible, 
for  he  was  accustomed  to  dream  out  loud. 

I  must  add  that  this  is  the  one  and  only  time  that  such  a  thing 
has  happened  to  me. 

Valerie  Dobelmann, 

(Letter  2320.)  12  rue  Linne,  Paris. 

We  see  what  variety  exists  among  all  these  sincere,  simple, 
and  authentic  tales.  They  reinforce  one  another  and  prove 
to  us  that  our  body  does  not  contain  all  the  reality  that 
exists. 

Here  is  another  example  of  the  vision  at  a  distance,  in  a 
dream,  of  a  very  precise  incident. 

One  of  my  relatives,  Madame  Izouard — of  Marseilles, 
where  her  family  has  been  well  known  for  more  than  half  a 
century — told  me  of  a  very  curious  dream  which  I  begged  her 
to  describe  in  a  few  lines.  She  has  done  so  in  the  following 
letter. 

December  13,  1901. 
Dear  Master: 

I  was  living  at  Marseilles  when  this  event  took  place  at  Sorgues, 
a  small  town  in  the  department  of  Vaucluse.  I  saw  in  a  dream 
one  of  my  friends  in  the  hands  of  a  man  who  was  cutting  off  her 
beautiful  hair,  and  I  awoke  very  much  astonished. 

A  few  months  later  I  learned  that  the  lady  whom  I  had  seen 
undergo  this  disagreeable  operation  had  been  through  a  severe 
illness,  and  they  had  had  not  merely  to  cut  her  hair,  but  to  shave  the 
entire  head.  My  dream  had  occurred  at  the  same  moment,  which 
is  why  I  have  kept  an  unforgetable  memory  of  it. 

V.  Izouard. 

(Letter  1201.) 


TELEPATHY  AND  PSYCHIC  TRANSMISSIONS      145 

Distance  does  not  exist  for  the  spirit.  We  have  brought  up 
the  question  in  order  to  learn  whether  the  souls  of  the  seers 
are  transported  to  the  places  seen,  or  whether  the  person 
seen  acts  at  a  distance  upon  the  seer,  or  whether  there  is  not  a 
simultaneous  sensation  on  both  sides.  But  what  is  space  to 
thought? 

The  sight  of  an  accident,  an  illness,  a  death  at  a  distance 
is  not  so  rare  a  thing  as  might  be  imagined.  We  shall  have 
occasion  farther  on  to  examine  a  large  number  of  exact  and 
precise  cases  of  the  vision  of  death.  Let  us  describe,  in  con- 
nection with  telepathy,  the  following  striking  observation. 
I  have  taken  it  from  a  book  by  Mrs.  Crowe,  "The  Obscure 
Sides  of  Nature.'' 

A  certain  Mrs.  H ,  living  in  Limerick,  had  a  few  years  ago 

a  servant  named  Nelly  Hanlon,  whom  she  esteemed  very  much. 
Nelly  was  a  most  responsible  person,  who  rarely  asked  for  a  holiday, 

and  Mrs.  H was  all  the  more  disposed  to  grant  her  request  when 

she  asked  for  a  day  off  in  order  to  attend  a  fair  a  few  miles  away. 

But  Mr.  H ,  learning  on  his  return  of  Nelly's  plans,  said  they 

could  not  do  without  her,  as  he  had  invited  guests  to  dinner  on  that 
day,  and  Nelly  was  the  only  one  to  whom  he  could  trust  the  keys  of 
the  cellar.  He  added  that  business  matters  would  probably  not 
permit  him  to  return  in  time  to  go  after  the  wine  himself.     Mrs. 

H ,  who  did  not  wish  to  disappoint  Nelly,  to  whom  she  had 

given  her  consent,  said  that  she  herself  would  take  charge  of  the 
wine  for  that  day,  and  Nelly  set  off  in  the  morning,  overjoyed, 
promising  to  return  in  the  evening  if  it  was  possible  and  at  latest 
on  the  following  morning. 

The   day   passed   without   incident;    no   one   thought   of   Nelly. 

When  it  was  time  to  go  after  the  wine,  Mrs.  H took  the  key 

and  went  toward  the  cellar  staircase,  followed  by  a  servant  who 
carried  the  basket  for  the  bottles.  She  had  hardly  begun  to  descend 
the  steps  when  she  gave  a  great  cry  and  fell  in  a  faint.  They  car- 
ried her  to  her  bed,  and  the  girl  who  accompanied  her  told  the 
other  terrified  servants  that  they  had  seen  Nelly  Hanlon  at  the 
foot   of   the   staircase,   dripping   with   water.    When    Mr.    H 


146  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

arrived  they  told  him  the  same  tale:  he  scolded  the  servant  for  her 

foolishness,  and  Mrs.  H ,  who  had  been  well  cared  for,  regained 

her  senses.  As  she  opened  her  eyes,  she  sighed  deeply  and  ex- 
claimed. "Oh,  Nelly  Hanlon!"  and  as  soon  as  she  had  recovered 
enough  to  speak,  she  confirmed  what  the  servant  had  said:  she  had 
seen  Nelly  Hanlon  at  the  foot  of  the  stairway,  dripping  as  if  she 

had  just  come  out  of  the  water.     Mr.  H did  everything  in  the 

world  to  convince  her  that  it  was  an  illusion,  but  in  vain.  "Nelly," 
he  said,  "will  soon  return  and  will  laugh  at  you." 

Night  came,  then  the  morning,  but  no  Nelly.  Two  or  three  days 
passed.  They  made  inquiries  and  found  that  she  had  been  seen  at 
the  fair,  and  that  she  had  left,  toward  evening,  to  return  home. 
From  this  moment  all  trace  of  her  disappeared.  Finally  her  body 
was  found  in  the  river,  but  they  never  knew  how  the  tragedy  had 
occurred. 

It  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that  the  servant,  as  she  was 
drowning, — ^without  doubt  accidentally, — went  back  in  her 
mind  to  her  master,  to  whom  she  was  very  much  attached. 
This  telepathetic  view  is  especially  remarkable  for  its  pre- 
cision and  clearness. 

These  mental  visions  at  a  distance  sometimes  take  on  a 
symbolic  form  which  is  not  at  first  understood.  I  have  re- 
ceived the  following  letter  about  a  dream  that  occurred  at 
Berry,  240  kilometers  from  Paris: 

During  the  night  of  August  29th-30th  I  was  particularly  moved 
by  a  dream.  We  had  a  young  friend  who  had  been  married  for 
five  years  to  a  government  official.  The  young  couple  were  living 
at  Neuilly,  and  their  second  child,  then  about  fifteen  months  old, 
was  in  a  very  disturbing  state  of  health  because  of  intestinal  trouble, 
so  that  hardly  a  ray  of  hope  remained  to  the  parents. 

My  imagination  was  therefore  rather  concerned  with  this  little 
creature,  who,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  and  thanks  to  great  care  did 
survive  and  is  now  a  delightful  little  boy. 

This  being  disposed  of,  here  is  my  dream: 

I  was  in  the  room  of  my  young  friend;  she  was  standing,  clad  in 


TELEPATHY  AND  PSYCHIC  TRANSMISSIONS       147 

a  dressing-gown,  her  hair  almost  down,  her  back,  her  eyes  flowing 
with  tears,  her  whole  personality  showing  the  most  profound  dis- 
tress. Meanwhile  she  held  mechanically,  and  as  if  from  habit,  a 
child  whose  head  and  thin  little  body  drooped  languidly  over  her 
shoulder.  This  child,  the  image  of  suffering,  was  alive  and  utter- 
ing feeble,  plaintive  moans.  Soon  my  attention  was  attracted  by 
two  men,  bearing  a  bulky  object,  which  they  placed  in  the  middle 
of  the  room.  At  first  this  object  appeared  to  me  to  be  a  child's 
coffin  and  I  was  disturbed  to  think  that  after  all  the  sick  child  was 
still  living  and  in  his  mother's  arms.  After  a  period  that  I  could 
not  determine,  it  seemed  to  me  that  the  funereal  coffin  grew  slowly 
larger,  until  it  became  capable  of  holding  a  large  body.  In  fact, 
the  two  men  soon  placed  in  it  a  long  corpse,  wrapped  in  a  white 
sheet. 

The  young  wife  redoubled  her  tears  and  wracking  sobs,  and  with 
her  free  hand  pushed  back  those  with  her  who  tried  vainly  to  lead 
her  away  from  this  melancholy  sight.  She  refused  fiercely  to  go: 
children,  family,  nothing  existed  any  more  for  her  but  the  beloved 
dead  person,  whom  they  were  about  to  carry  away  and  whom,  she 
said,  nothing  in  the  world  could  replace. 

Like  many  dreams,  mine  ended  in  confusion,  and  on  my  awaken- 
ing there  remained  with  me  only  a  painful  impression,  with  the  very 
clear  recollection,  however,  of  the  details  of  the  principal  scene, 
and  I  told  my  servant,  while  I  helped  her  arrange  the  room,  that 
something  had  certainly  happened  to  our  friends,  whom  she  knew 
well.  I  thought  that  the  third  child,  whom  they  were  expecting, 
would  arrive  in  the  world  before  its  time. 

The  morning  of  the  next  day,  September  1,  my  husband  entered 
my  room  holding  in  his  hand  a  mourning  letter  and,  very  much 
agitated,  still  hoping  that  it  was  all  a  mistake,  he  stammered  rather 
than  read  an  invitation  to  the  funeral  services  of  our  friend,  aged 
thirty-six  years,  who  had  died  August  30,  1892. 

The  unfortunate  man  had  succumbed  to  an  attack  of  cholera,  a 
victim  in  his  full  youth  and  happiness  to  the  terrible  scourge  which, 
during  the  summer  of  1892,  as  you  can  remember,  touched  a  few  of 
the  townships  to  the  west  of  Paris. 

During  the  few  short  hours  in  which  they  despaired  of  saving 
the  sick  man,  his  young  wife  (and  I  knew  that  such  had  been  her 


148  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

longing)    had   thought  of  the   doctor-friend  my  husband  was  to 
them,  as  one  who,  she  believed,  could  have  found  means  to  save  him. 

Who  will  explain  this  mysterious  sympathy*?  The  truth  is  that, 
with  my  mind,  I  had  actually  seen  our  friend  put  into  his  coffin,  and 
that  everything  had  happened  as  I  have  described  it.  The  very  eve- 
ning of  August  30th,  as  he  had  died  between  four  and  five  o'clock  in 
the  afternoon,  the  body  had  been  placed  in  the  coffin,  as  a  sanitary 
measure,  and  that  at  a  rather  late  hour  in  the  evening. 

A.  Feron, 
Dun-sur-Auron,  Cher.:  June  6,  1899. 

(Letter  671.) 

How  is  it  possible  for  us  not  to  be  convinced  by  all  these 
experiments,  at  once  diverse,  positive,  and  harmonious? 

Apropos  of  vision  at  a  distance,  I  have  received  from  a  cor- 
respondent (Monsieur  Egisto  del  Panto,  of  Sesto  Fiorentino, 
Italy)  no  less  curious  a  note  than  the  following: 

On  taking,  one  day,  the  train  from  Toulouse  to  Paris,  I  observed 
in  my  compartment  a  middle-aged  gentleman  of  very  distinguished 
appearance,  with  whom  I  soon  fell  into  conversation.  We  dis- 
cussed philosophy,  socialism,  religion,  and  he  let  me  understand 
that  he  was  very  religious  and  that  he  had  become  so  through  a 
frightful  misfortune  which  had  befallen  him  some  time  before. 

He  told  me  that  it  was  the  first  time  he  had  talked  to  a  stranger 
of  this  terrible  unhappiness  which  had  come  to  him.  All  his  family, 
if  I  remember  rightly,  had  been  swept  away  by  a  flood  at  Toulouse. 
Well,  this  gentleman,  who  seemed  to  me  a  professor,  told  me  that 
several  days  after  this  catastrophe,  he  had  seen  in  a  dream  the 
spot  where  the  body  of  one  of  his  drowned  children  lay  under  the 
water,  and  that  when  he  went  the  next  day  to  look  for  it,  it  was 
found  in  exactly  that  spot.  It  is  impossible  to  admit  that  this  hon- 
est middle-aged  man  of  superior  intelligence  and  education,  with 
tears  in  his  eyes,  should  have  told  me  a  false  story. 

(Letter  1013.) 

Here  is  a  very  remarkable  example  of  vision  at  a  distance, 
in  a  dream,  of  a  most  unusual  accident.     I  take  it  from  the 


TELEPATHY  AND  PSYCHIC  TRANSMISSIONS      149 

work  ''Phantasms  of  the  Living/'  Volume  I,  page  338,  and 
from  its  French  translation,  "Les  Hallucinations  telepa- 
thiques,"  page  107.  Canon  Warburton  of  Winchester  wrote 
under  date  of  July  16,  1883  : 

I  had  left  Oxford  to  pass  a  day  or  two  with  my  brother,  Acton 
Warburton,  at  that  time  a  barrister.  When  I  reached  his  home 
I  found  a  message  from  him  on  the  table:  he  excused  himself  for 
being  absent  and  told  me  that  he  had  gone  to  a  ball  in  some  part 
of  the  West  End  and  that  he  intended  to  return  a  little  after  one 
o'clock.  Instead  of  going  to  bed  I  sat  and  dozed  in  an  arm-chair. 
At  exactly  one  o'clock  I  awoke  with  a  start,  crying  out,  "By  Jupiter ! 
he  has  fallen!"  I  saw  my  brother,  wlio  came  out  of  a  drawing- 
room  on  to  a  brilliantly  lighted  landing,  catch  his  foot  on  the  first 
step  of  the  stairway  and  fall  head  first,  breaking  the  fall  with  his 
elbows  and  hands.  I  had  never  seen  the  house  and  I  did  not  know 
where  it  was.  Thinking  very  little  of  the  accident,  I  went  to  sleep 
again.  A  half-hour  later  I  was  waked  up  by  the  abrupt  entrance 
of  my  brother,  who  exclaimed :  "Ah,  there,  you  are !  I  nearly  broke 
my  neck.  As  I  was  leaving  the  ball-room  I  caught  my  foot  and 
fell  full  length  down  the  stairway." 

Such  is  the  canon 's  tale ;  he  declares,  at  the  same  time,  that 
he  has  never  had  hallucinations. 

It  seems  to  me  that  this  is  not,  properly  speaking,  a  tele- 
pathetic  message  from  the  brother  of  the  narrator  (although 
he  may  have  thought  of  him  suddenly  with  intensity),  but 
rather  a  case  of  mental  vision,  caused  by  this  telepathic  excite- 
ment, especially  as  the  Reverend  Canon  Warburton  adds  later 
that  he  saw  a  landing  brilliantly  lighted  and  a  clock  and  tables 
arranged  for  refreshments,  which  corresponded  to  the  actual 
fact. 

I  have  published  a  case  very  much  resembling  this  (also  a 
fall  down  a  staircase)  in  "L'Inconnu"  (Volume  XXXI,  page 
479)  and  another  of  the  same  sort  (Volume  XL VI,  page  432). 

We  shall  especially  study  this  curious  fact  of  mental  vision 


150  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

in  the  following  chapter.  It  will  prove  with  even  more 
positive  evidence  than  the  preceding  chapters  the  existence 
of  transcendent  powers  of  the  soul. 

These  sights  at  a  distance,  these  telepathic  impressions,  can 
be  observed  equally  well  outside  of  dreams,  or  at  least  in 
half -waking  conditions.  Let  us  read,  for  example,  the  follow- 
ing observation  of  the  barrister  Richard  Searle,  sent  to  the 
Society  for  Psychical  Research  on  NoVember  2,  1883: 

One  afternoon  I  was  sitting  in  my  office  in  the  Temple  writing 
out  a  memorandum.  My  office  is  placed  between  one  of  the  win- 
dows and  the  chimney;  the  window  has  a  view  of  the  Temple.  Sud- 
denly I  noticed  that  I  was  looking  through  the  lower  pane,  which 
was  about  at  the  level  of  my  eyes,  and  I  saw  the  head  and  face  of 
my  wife.  She  had  fallen  backward,  her  eyes  closed,  her  face  livid, 
as  if  she  were  dead.  I  shook  myself,  tried  to  get  control  of  myself; 
then  I  got  up  and  looked  out  through  the  window:  I  saw  only  the 
houses  opposite.  I  came  to  the  conclusion  that  I  had  grown  drowsy 
and  then  fallen  asleep.  After  having  taken  a  few  turns  about  the 
room  to  rouse  myself  thoroughly  I  went  on  with  my  work  and 
thought  no  more  of  the  incident. 

I  returned  home  at  my  usual  hour.  That  evening,  while  I  was 
dining  with  my  wife,  she  told  me  that  she  had  lunched  with  a  friend 
living  in  Gloucester  Gardens,  and  that  she  had  taken  a  little  girl  with 
her  (one  of  our  nieces,  who  was  staying  with  us),  but  that  during 
lunch  or  immediately  afterward  the  child  had  fallen  and  cut  her 
face  so  that  the  blood  had  spurted  out.  My  wife  added  that  she 
herself  had  fainted.  What  I  had  seen  through  the  window  came 
back  to  my  mind,  and  I  asked  her  at  what  hour  it  had  happened. 
She  answered,  at  a  few  minutes  after  two.  It  was  at  the  very 
moment  of  my  vision.  I  must  add  that  it  is  the  only  time  my 
wife  has  fainted.  At  the  time  I  told  the  event  to  many  of  my 
friends. 

RiCfHARD  Searle. 

In  confirmation  of  this  incident  Mr.  Paul  Pierard,  of  27 
Gloucester  Gardens,  London,  wiites: 


TELEPATHY  AND  PSYCHIC  TRANSMISSIONS       151 

Some  ladies  and  children  had  met  at  my  house  one  afternoon. 
Mrs.  Searle,  of  Home  Lodge,  Heme  Hill,  had  come  with  her  little 
niece  Louise.  As  they  were  playing  a  noisy  game  and  running  a 
good  deal  about  a  table,  little  Louise  fell  from  her  chair  and  hurt 
herself  slightly.  The  fear  that  the  accident  was  serious  so  upset 
Mrs.  Searle  that  she  fainted.  The  next  day  we  met  Mr.  Searle,  who 
told  us  that  the  afternoon  before,  while  he  was  looking  over  some 
business  in  his  office,  6  Pump  Court,  the  Temple,  he  had  felt  a 
curious  impression  and  had  seen  the  image  of  his  unconscious  wife 
as  clearly  as  in  a  mirror.  This  vision  had  come  at  the  moment  of 
the  accident.     The  fact  is  undeniable. 

It  certainly  seems  that  there  was  here  an  instantaneous 
communica.tion  between  the  two  minds,  those  of  the  husband 
and  those  of  the  wife. 

Mental  vision,  through  telepathy,  of  events  taking  place 
at  a  distance  of  ten,  twenty,  fifty,  a  hundred,  or  two  hundred 
miles,  or  even  more,  is  not  doubted  by  those  who  have  studied 
this  subject. 

Here  is  an  example  related  in  February,  1901,  in  the  pro- 
ceedings of  the  English  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  and 
which  the  investigators  of  this  subject  have  seen  many 
times  since.^  This  is  a  case  of  very  exact  vision  at  a  distance 
of  230  kilometers.  The  writer,  Mr.  David  Fraser  Harris  of 
the  University  of  Saint  Andrew's,  tells  of  it  himself  in  the 
following  words: 

A  few  years  ago,  an  urgent  matter  of  business  prevented  me 
from  returning  to  London  at  the  end  of  the  week.  As  I  did  not 
care  to  spend  Sunday  in  Manchester,  I  went  on  Saturday  afternoon 
to  Matloch  Bath,  resolved  to  spend  my  Sunday  quietly  and  to  return 
home  by  a  morning  train  on  Monday. 

When  I  reached  my  destination,  a  little  family  hotel  near  the 
station,  I  asked  at  once  for  tea,  and  went  into  the  drawing-room  to 
warm  myself,  as  it  was  a  very  cold  day  in  January,  with  quantities 
of  snow,  and  the  thermometer  marked  a  respectable  number  of  de- 
grees below  zero. 

1  bage,  La  zone  frontiere;  Chevreuil,  On  ne  meurt  pas,  p.  45. 


152  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

I  found  that,  at  the  time,  I  was  the  only  guest  in  the  hotel,  and 
while  I  waited  for  my  tea  T  settled  myself  comfortably  in  a  big 
arm-chair  before  a  cheerful  fire.  It  was  not  yet  dark  enough  to 
light  the  gas,  nor  light  enough  to  read.  I  turned  my  back  on  the 
Avindow  and  thought  of  nothing  in  particular.  T  was  in  a  state  of 
passive  tranquillity,  when  all  at  once  I  lost  the  sense  of  where  I 
was.  Instead  of  the  wall  and  the  pictures  that  were  hung  on  it, 
I  saw  before  me  the  front  of  my  house  in  London;  my  wife  was 
standing  on  the  door-step  and  speaking  to  a  workman  who  held  a 
big  broom  in  his  hands. 

My  wife  seemed  much  distressed,  and  I  felt  an  instant  certainty 
that  the  man  was  in  a  wretched  condition  of  poverty.  I  did  not 
hear  their  conversation,  but  something  told  me  that  the  unfortunate 
man  was  asking  my  wife  to  help  him.  At  this  moment  the  servant 
brought  the  tea  and  the  vision  vanished.  The  impression  made  on 
me  by  this  vision  was  so  profound,  I  was  so  convinced  that  I  had 
seen  something  real,  that  after  I  had  finished  my  tea  I  wrote  my 
wife  to  tell  her  what  had  just  happened  to  me  and  to  beg  her  to 
find  out  about  this  man  and  to  help  him  as  much  as  possible. 

Now,  this  is  what  had  taken  place  in  London.  A  young  boy  had 
come  and  knocked  at  the  door  of  our  house.  He  had  spoken  to  the 
servant  and  had  offered  for  a  penny  to  sweep  the  snow  that  covered 
the  sidewalk  and  the  house  door-step.  While  the  boy  was  talking,  a 
poor  devil  in  tatters  came  up,  who  said :  "I  beg  you  to  give  me  the 
preference.  This  child  will  probably  spend  for  candy  the  penny 
you  give  him,  while  I  need  it  to  buy  bread.  I  have  a  wife  and 
four  children,  all  ill;  there  is  nothing  to  eat,  no  fire,"  etc.  The 
servant  begged  the  man  to  wait  while  she  went  to  tell  my  wife,  who 
came  to  speak  to  the  unfortunate  fellow.  He  repeated  that  he  had 
been  ill,  that  all  his  family  was  in  the  most  wretched  poverty,  but 
that  before  appealing  to  public  charity  he  wished  to  try  to  find 
some  sort  of  work.  It  was  this  scene  which  I  had  beheld  at  the 
very  moment  when  it  came  to  pass.  It  had  been  transmitted  to  me, 
probably  through  the  impression  which  the  misery  of  this  poor  man 
had  made  on  my  wife's  mind. 

Here  is  the  end  of  the  story.  My  wife  promised  the  man  that 
she  would  go  to  his  home  in  the  evening  and  see  what  she  could  do. 
She  found  he  had  told  the  truth.    My  wife  gave  what  she  could  in 


TELEPATHY  AND  PSYCHIC  TRANSMISSIONS      153 

food,  clothes,  money,  and  fuel.  It  is  useless  to  add  that  my  letter 
which  reached  her  Monday  morning  caused  her  the  greatest  sur- 
prise. A  few  days  later  I  saw  the  man  myself;  he  was  exactly  the 
one  I  had  seen  in  my  vision.  Later  he  found  a  position  as  milkman 
and  has  distributed  milk  in  our  quarter  for  at  least  two  years. 

David  Fraser  Harris. 

Is  there  not  in  this  actual  observation  an  absolute  proof 
of  a  power  of  the  soul  which  has  nothing  in  common  with  the 
material  eye,  the  retina,  the  optic  nerve,  or  the  brain?  Was 
it  not  the  spirit  which  alone  acted  here?  Was  it  not  psychic 
transmission  at  a  distance?  For  the  observer  not  only  saw 
the  scene  but  even  perceived  the  nature  of  the  conversation 
between  his  wife  and  the  beggar. 

Psychic,  mental  communications  between  living  people  often 
take  on  an  auditory  form,  as  we  have  already  noticed.  One 
hears  a  voice,  an  urgent  call,  and  this  voice,  this  call  cor- 
responds to  a  desire,  an  intention,  a  plan,  a  sort  of  far-away 
order,  which  it  is  wise  to  obey.  Here  is  a  remarkable  case, 
experienced  by  Dr.  Nicolas,  Count  Gonemys,  of  Corfu.^ 

In  1869  I  was  a  doctor,  with  the  rank  of  major,  in  the  Greek 
Army.  By  order  of  the  minister  of  war  I  was  attached  to  the  gar- 
rison of  the  Isle  of  Zante.  As  I  approached  the  island  where  I  was 
to  occupy  my  new  post  (I  was  about  two  hours  from  the  coast)  I 
heard  an  inner  voice  say  unceasingly  to  me  in  Italian,  ''Go  and  see 
Volterra."  This  phrase  was  repeated  so  often  that  I  was  stunned; 
although  I  was  in  good  health  at  the  time,  I  was  alarmed  by  it,  be- 
cause I  believed  it  an  auditory  hallucination.  There  was  nothing 
to  make  me  think  of  Monsieur  Volterra,  who  lived  in  Zante  and 
whom  I  did  not  even  know,  although  I  had  seen  him  once  ten  years 
before.  I  tried  to  stop  my  ears,  to  talk  with  my  fellow-travelers, 
to  no  avail:  the  voice  continued  to  make  itself  heard  in  the  same 
manner.  Finally  we  made  land.  I  went  straight  to  the  hotel  and 
occupied  myself  with  unpacking  my  trunks,  but  the  voice  did  not 
cease  to  torment  me.     A  little  later  a  servant  entered  and  told  me 

1  Hallucinations  tilepathiques,  p.  306. 


154  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

that  a  gentleman  was  at  the  door  and  wished  to  speak  with  me  at 
once.  "Who  is  if?"  I  asked. — "Monsieur  Volterra,"  was  the  an- 
swer. He  entered  all  in  tears,  full  of  despair,  and  begged  me  to 
follow  him,  to  see  his  son,  who  was  very  ill. 

I  found  the  young  man  in  a  delirium  of  madness,  naked,  in  an 
empty  chamber,  having  been  given  up  by  all  the  doctors  of  Zante 
five  years  before.  His  aspect  was  hideous  and  rendered  more 
frightful  by  continual  paroxysms,  accompanied  with  whistlings, 
bowlings,  hayings,  and  other  animal  cries.  Sometimes  he  twisted 
himself  on  his  stomach  like  a  serpent;  at  other  times  he  fell  on  his 
knees  in  a  state  of  ecstasy;  at  times  he  talked  and  quarreled  with 
imaginary  beings.  The  violent  periods  were  sometimes  followed 
by  prolonged  and  complete  syncopes.  When  I  opened  the  door  of 
his  room  he  flung  himself  upon  me  with  fury,  but  I  remained  mo- 
tionless and  seized  him  by  the  arm  while  I  looked  at  him  fixedly. 
At  the  end  of  several  seconds  his  glance  lost  its  fierceness,  he  began 
to  tremble  and  fell  to  the  floor,  his  eyes  shut.  I  made  some  mag- 
netic passes  over  him,  and  in  less  than  half  an  hour  he  was  in  a 
hypnotic  sleep.  The  treatment  lasted  two  and  a  half  months,  dur- 
ing which  I  observed  in  him  more  than  one  interesting  phenomenon. 
Since  his  cure,  the  patient  has  never  had  a  relapse. 

A  letter  from  Monsieur  Volterra  to  Count  Gonemys,  dated 
Zante,  June  6,  1885,  contains  a  complete  affirmation  of  what 
has  just  been  told  concerning  the  Volterra  family.  The  letter 
concludes  as  follows: 

Before  your  arrival  in  Zante,  I  had  no  relations  with  you,  al- 
though I  had  passed  many  years  at  Corfu  as  deputy  of  the  legisla- 
tive assembly.  We  had  never  spoken,  and  you  had  never  said  a 
word  to  my  son.  We  had  never  thought  of  you  or  asked  your  help 
until  I  came  to  see  you  when  you  arrived  at  Zante  as  an  army 
doctor,  and  begged  you  to  save  my  son. 

We  owe  his  life  first  to  you,  then  to  hypnotism.     I  think  it  my 
duty  to  assure  you  of  my  sincere  gratitude,  and  to  sign  myself 
Your  very  affectionate  and  grateful 

Demetrio  Volterra,  Count  Crissoplevri. 


TELEPATHY  AND  PSYCHIC  TRANSMISSIONS      155 

Additional  signatures : 
Laura  Volterra  [wife  of  Monsieur  Volterra]. 
DiONisio  D.  Volterra,  Count  Crissoplevri. 
Anastasio  Volterra  [the  recovered  invalid]. 
C.  Vassapoulis,  Witness. 
Lorenzo  Mercati,  Witness. 
Demetrio,  Count  Guerino,  Witness. 

Another  case  of  hearing  at  a  distance : 

Dr.  Balme  of  Nancy  was  caring  for  the  Countess  of  L , 

who  was  suffering  from  dyspepsia.  She  came  to  him  for 
consultation  and  he  never  went  to  her  house,  which  was  situ- 
ated outside  of  the  town.  Three  days  after  one  of  her  visits, 
on  May  19,  1899,  when  he  crossed  his  antechamber  after  re- 
turning home,  he  heard  these  words:  ''How  ill  I  feel,  and 
no  one  to  help  me!"     Then  he  heard  the  sound  of  a  falling 

body.     The  voice  was  that   of   Madame   de   L .    When 

he  tried  to  verify  his  impression,  he  found  that  no  one  in 
the  whole  house  had  seen  or  heard  this  lady.  He  retired  to 
his  workroom,  collected  his  thoughts  and,  having  placed  him- 
self in  a  light  state  of  hypnosis,  he  transported  himself  to 
the  lady's  presence.  He  saw  all  her  actions  and  gestures  and 
noted  them  minutely. 

Madame  de  L came  to  see  him  and  told  him  her  im- 
pressions, which  agreed  on  all  points  with  those  of  the  doctor. 
''After  you  had  retired  to  your  chamber,"  he  asked  her, 
"what  was  it  you  seemed  to  be  searching  for  about  you?" — 
"It  seemed  to  me  that  some  one  was  looking  at  me,"  she  an- 
swered. 

This  case,  which  is  worthy  of  having  been  watched  by  an 
experienced  observer,  led  Monsieur  Primot  to  the  following 
reflections : 

It  certainly  seems  to  have  been  a  telepathic  call  which 
came  from  the  invalid, — an  appeal  which  was  explained  by 
her  distress,  ajid  which  was  translated  by  the  recipient  into 


156  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

the  form  of  an  auditory  impression  exercised  upon  his  sub- 
consciousness. Dr.  Balme  replied  to  this  by  placing  himself, 
through  an  effort  of  autosuggestion,  in  a  state  of  hypnosis 
sufficient  to  make  possible  the  exteriorization  of  his  psychic 
center  of  perception,  and  by  that  very  means  his  telgesthetic 
excursion  to  his  patient's  home.  This  interpretation  is  con- 
firmed by  her  declaration  that  she  had  felt  his  presence.  *'It 
seemed  to  me,"  she  said,  "that  some  one  was  looking  at  me.'* 
In  other  words,  there  was  on  one  side  transmission  of  thought 
or  sensation — that  is  to  say,  telepathic  action,  from  the  invalid 
to  the  doctor — and  on  the  other  side,  in  response  to  the  trans- 
mitted thought,  exteriorization  by  the  doctor,  in  a  state  of 
semi-somnambulism,  and  the  transference  to  the  neighborhood 
of  the  patient  of  his  psychic  center  of  perception, — that  is  to 
say,  telsesthetic  action. 

Is  this  word  ''transfer"  exact  and  does  it  represent  the  ac- 
tual conditions  of  the  phenomenon  ?  Perhaps  the  psychic  or- 
ganism has  no  need  to  be  transferred  from  one  point  to  another 
in  order  to  see  and  feel  effectively  despite  distance.  But 
events  took  place  as  if  he  had  really  transferred  himself  and 
that  is  all  that  we  can  affirm  with  certainty.  At  bottom  it 
makes  little  difference,  for  in  whatever  manner  one  interprets 
them  they  are  none  the  less  a  striking  and  living  proof  of 
the  extraordinary  faculties  and  powers  that  belong  to  the 
psychic  organism.^ 

Such  hearing  at  a  distance  as  we  are  now  about  to  consider 
is  inadmissible  if  one  is  not  willing  to  recognize  that  the  mind, 
the  soul,  our  psychic  entity  (whatever  may  be  the  word  we 
use)  acts  outside  the  body  and  the  limits  of  the  senses. 

The  author  of  the  account,  Mr.  Rod  Fryer  (''Hallucinations 
telepathiques, "  page  293),  writes: 

January,  1883.  A  strange  event  took  place  in  the  autumn  of 
the  year  1879.     One  of  my  brothers  was  away  from  home,  when  one 

1  Primot,  Psychologie  d'une  conversion,  p.  448. 


TELEPATHY  AND  PSYCHIC  TRANSMISSIONS      157 

afternoon,  at  about  half-past  five,  I  was  astonished  to  hear  myself 
called  distinctly  by  my  name.  I  recognized  the  voice  of  my  brother 
so  clearly  that  I  ran  all  over  the  house  to  find  him ;  but  as  I  did  not 
find  him,  and  knowing  that  he  was  forty  miles  from  there,  I  ended 
by  believing  it  an  illusion,  and  thought  no  more  of  it.  When  my 
brother  arrived,  six  days  later,  he  told  me  that  he  had  just  escaped 
a  very  serious  accident.  As  he  was  getting  off  the  train  his  foot 
had  slipped  and  he  had  fallen  his  entire  length  on  the  platform. 
"What  is  very  curious,"  he  said,  "is  that  when  I  felt  myself  falling 
I  called  you."  This  fact  did  not  strike  me  at  the  moment,  but  when 
I  asked  him  at  what  hour  it  had  happened  he  named  an  hour  which 
exactly  corresponded  with  that  in  which  I  had  heard  him. 

When  he  was  questioned,  Mr.  John  E.  B.  Fryer,  the  victim 
of  the  accident,  wrote  as  follows: 

Newbridge  Road,  November  16,  1885.  I  was  making  a  trip  in 
1879  and  had  to  stop  at  Gloucester.  As  I  got  off  the  train  I  fell, 
and  an  employee  of  the  railroad  helped  me  to  rise.  He  asked  me 
if  I  had  hurt  myself  and  if  any  one  was  traveling  with  me.  I  an- 
swered, no,  to  both  questions  and  asked  him  why  he  was  so  much  in- 
terested.    He  answered :  "Because  you  called  out  the  name  *Rod.' " 

When  I  reached  home  I  related  the  incident,  and  my  brother  asked 
me  the  hour  and  the  day.  He  then  told  me  that  he  had  heard  me 
call  him  at  that  moment.  He  was  so  sure  that  it  was  my  voice  that 
he  had  searched  carefully  over  the  house. 

The  coincidence  is  so  striking  that  its  corollary  follows  with 
certainty.     This  voice  crossed  space  as  if  through  a  telephone. 

These  are  all  just  so  many  incontestable  phenomena  of 
telepathy,  of  psychic  transmission,  which  show  transcendent 
powers  of  the  soul  quite  different  from  those  of  which  we  have 
learned  through  physiological  psychology — sight  and  hearing 
at  a  distance  by  means  of  psychic  waves. 

I  do  not  wish  to  repeat  here  what  I  have  already  said  about 
the  transmission  of  thoughts.  The  fact  of  mind-reading  has 
been  proved  many  times  by  serious  experiments.    Here  is 


158  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

one  more  case  reported  by  Dr.  G.  de  Messimy,  and  observed 
by  him  in  a  patient  in  a  state  of  somnambulism : 

My  subject's  lucidity  went  so  far  as  even  to  read  the  thoughts 
of  those  present.  .  .  .  Having  placed  twelve  members  of  the  society 
before  the  subject  ...  we  asked  each  one  of  them  to  think  freely 
of  a  chosen  flower,  without  telling  its  name  to  any  one.  .  .  .  Then 
turning  toward  the  subject,  we  asked  him  to  name  out  loud  the 
flower  each  of  these  persons  had  thought  about,  and  he  named 
them  all,  without  the  least  hesitation  and  without  making  a  single 
mistake,  as  if  he  were  reading  from  a  book  of  human  thought. 

That  is  one  experience  from  among  a  hundred  of  the  same 
sort.^ 

The  transmission  of  thought  is  as  certain  as  the  transmission 
of  heat,  light,  electricity,  and  solar  magnetism. 

The  telepathic  vision  is  produced  without  the  help  of  the 
eyes.    Distance  and  material  obstacles  do  not  obstruct  it. 

It  is  as  indifferent  to  time  as  it  is  to  space.  One  sees  a 
present,  past,  or  future  event.  This  psychological  fact  makes 
use  of  the  power  of  the  spirit,  independent  of  its  organism. 

If,  in  opposition  to  the  deduction  affirmed  here  that  these 
presentiments,  these  telepathic  sensations  prove  the  existence 
of  the  soul  independently  of  the  body,  one  put  forward  the 
hypothesis  that  these  normal  faculties  may  belong  to  the 
brain  and  not  to  a  mental  principle,  and  that  they  no  more 
prove  the  individuality  of  the  soul  than  does  the  dog 's  sense  of 
smell  or  the  instinct  of  the  carrier-pigeon,  we  should  answer 
that  an  attentive  analysis  of  the  facts  brings  every  free  mind 
to  a  contrary  conclusion,  for  it  concerns  the  exercise  of  the 
thought  and  not  of  the  physical  organism.  We  are  here 
entirely  in  an  invisible  psychic  world.  Whether  one  at- 
tributes these  perceptions  to  the  ** unconscious,"  to  the  *' sub- 
conscious," or  to  the  ''subliminal,"  etc.,  the  name  matters 

1  See,   among   others,   Dr.   Dupouy,   Sciences  occultes  et  physiologic 
psychique  (Paris,  1898),  p.  125. 


TELEPATHY  AND  PSYCHIC  TRANSMISSIONS      159 

little.  What  we  feel  here  is  a  spiritual  entity  in  action;  it 
is  the  soul. 

It  is  not  the  retina  nor  the  optic  nerve,  nor  their  connections 
with  the  brain  that  are  employed.  All  the  imaginable  func- 
tions of  any  brain  substance  whatever  cannot  read  the  mind 
of  another,  nor  perceive  an  event  which  is  taking  place  at  the 
antipodes,  nor  a  scene  which  has  not  yet  come  to  pass. 

Are  these  transmissions  carried  out  through  ether?  If 
they  can  be  compared  to  light,  as  phenomena  of  the  vibratory 
order,  they  nevertheless  differ  from  it  because  light  diminishes 
according  to  the  square  of  the  distance,  while  thought  appears 
to  be  transmitted  integrally,  with  the  same  intensity.  Does 
an  appropriate  milieu  serve  for  the  transmission? 

The  modern  theory  of  ether  waves  has  been  proved,  but  has 
the  old  Newtonian  theory  of  the  emissions  themselves  been 
really  disproved?  Do  not  certain  emissions  manifest  them- 
selves? Is  not  the  repelling  action  of  the  sun  in  its  favor? 
Has  not  the  aurora  borealis  a  solar  emission  as  its  origin? 
Do  not  the  ions  and  electrons  traverse  space  ? 

We  are  going  to  examine,  in  the  following  chapter,  irre- 
futable proofs  of  mental  vision,  outside  of  telepathic  transmis- 
sions ;  but  it  is  very  difficult  to  decide,  in  many  cases,  whether 
telepathy,  the  correspondence  of  thought,  is  entirely  foreign 
to  this  vision  at  a  distance.  Here,  also,  among  a  hundred 
other  cases,  is  a  vision  of  death  at  a  time  when  this  seemed 
most  unlikely. 

The  author  of  the  following  letter  tells  how  he  saw,  in  a 
dream,  the  death  of  his  father; 

'Les  Moutiers:  October,  1911. 

For  two  years  I  have  intended  to  write  you  about  the  following 
event,  which  resembles  in  many  points  those  which  you  relate  in 
your  works.  I  shall  be  obliged  to  you  if  you  do  not  publish  my 
name. 

In  January,  1909,  I  was  a  notary  at  Saint-Martin-des-Noyers, 
Vend^,  and  I  had  just  been  negotiating  for  the  practice  at  Moutiers- 


160  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

les-Mauxfaits,  where  my  parents  were  living,  of  which  I  have  since 
become  the  incumbent. 

On  January  9, 1909,  I  had  come  to  Moutiers  to  spend  a  few  hours 
with  my  parents,  whom  I  left  in  good  health.  A  few  days  after- 
ward my  mother  sent  me  word  of  herself  and  my  father.  They  were 
both  well.  On  the  night  of  January  30th-31st,  I  dreamed  that  I 
arrived  at  my  parents'  home.  In  the  drawing-room  I  saw  a  crowd  of 
people  leaning  over  an  improvised  bed  and  I  saw  my  father  stretched 
out  on, a  mattress  which  had  been  placed  on  boards. 

I  began  to  weep,  which  awoke  my  wife,  who  was  sleeping  by  my 
side.  She,  in  turn,  woke  me  and  asked  what  was  the  matter  with 
me.  I  answered :  "It  is  nothing,  I  have  just  had  a  senseless  dream ; 
I  dreamed  that  Papa  was  dead." 

We  fell  asleep  again  without  anxiety,  after  having  noticed  that  it 
was  half -past  five  in  the  morning. 

The  next  day  I  learned  that  my  father  had  been  taken  ill  at 
eleven  o'clock  the  evening  before  and  had  died  at  half-past  five, 
at  the  precise  moment  when  I  had  had  this  nightmare:  they  had 
laid  him  out  on  a  bed  like  that  which  I  had  seen  in  my  dream,  and 
in  the  drawing-room,  as  the  apparition  had  shown  me. 

What  role  did  telepathy  play  in  this  vision  at  a  distance? 
Our  mass  of  documentary  evidence  is  really  too  rich.  The 
tree  of  the  new  science  has  a  quantity  of  branches,  each  one  of 
which  demands  a  special  study. 

Here  is  another  case  of  vision  at  a  distance,  remarkably  pre- 
cise for  a  child  of  seven,  which  was  sent  to  Professor  Richet 
by  Dr.  Jean,  a  major  in  the  medical  service  during  the  late 
war.^     He  wrote: 

About  ten  years  ago  I  had  under  treatment,  in  my  village,  at 
Cogolis,  Var,  a  young  patient  about  seven  years  old.  One  morning 
I  was  urgently  summoned  to  see  the  little  invalid.  The  frightened 
mother  told  me  that  the  child  had  had  a  sudden  paroxysm  of  de- 
lirium. He  had  awakened,  as  usual,  and  all  seemed  to  be  going  well, 
when  at  about  ten  o'clock  he  rose  up  in  his  bed,  terrified  by  a  sudden 

1  Annates  dea  Sciences  psychiques,  1919,  p.  20. 


TELEPATHY  AND  PSYCHIC  TRANSMISSIONS      161 

hallucination.  He  saw  water  everywhere  and  began  to  cry  for  help, 
for  his  father  was  drowning,  he  said.  His  father  was  away  from 
home.  He  had  gone  to  Nice,  where  his  brother  lived,  and  was  to 
spend  several  days  there.  When  I  arrived  the  child  was  calm,  but 
insisted  that  he  had  seen  his  father  drown. 

A  telegram  from  the  brother  soon  urgently  called  the  widow  (for 
such  she  really  was)  to  Nice,  where  she  learned  that  her  husband 
had  been  drowned  at  about  ten  in  the  morning,  in  trying  to  save  his 
brother,  who  had  been  seized  with  a  cramp  while  swimming  in  the 
ocean.    His  last  words  had  been,  "our  poor  children." 

One  more  occurrence.  A  teacher  in  the  department  of  the 
Var,  who  asked  me  not  to  print  his  name,  wrote  me : 

One  morning,  on  awaking,  one  of  my  relatives  said  to  his  wife, 
who  was  lying  beside  him :  "I  must  get  up  at  once,  I  have  just  seen 
that  some  thieves  have  entered  our  fields.  They  are  eating  and 
drinking.     I'm  going  after  them." 

"But  you  are  mad,"  said  his  wife.  "How  are  you  able  to  see  all 
that  from  here?    Lie  down." 

"No,  no!    I  saw  it." 

He  persisted,  took  his  gun,  ran  into  his  field,  and  brought  back 
as  prisoners  to  the  town  hall  two  tramps  who  had  broken  their  way 
in. 

F.,  at  S.,  Var,  January  23,  1912. 

(Letter  2217.) 

What  part  does  the  transmission  of  thought  play  here? 
Without  doubt,  the  thieves  must  have  been  thinking  about 
the  proprietor  and  must  also  have  thought  about  not  being 
caught.  On  the  other  hand,  it  may  have  been  a  case  of 
vision  at  a  distance,  without  telepathic  action,  and  we  could 
have  included  it  in  the  following  chapter.  All  the  cases  in 
this  collection  of  evidence  are  closely  related. 

We  usually  imagine  that  all  observations  of  telepathic  com- 
munication date  from  our  own  epoch.  This  is  an  error. 
Thus,  for  example,  we  can  read  in  a  work  printed  in  1752 


162  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

(''Dissertations,'*  by  Langlet-Dufresnoy,  Volume  II,  Part 
2,  page  88)  this  sentence:  ''In  dreams  objects  appear  to  us 
in  far-away  places,  through  the  affinity  of  the  spirit  with 
the  external  air.  Persons  a  hundred  leagues  away  have  known 
of  the  death  of  their  friends  at  the  moment  of  their  decease.** 

We  can  see  from  this  that  facts  recorded  by  Petrarch  and 
other  observers  were  already  accepted  by  certain  philosophers 
of  the  eighteenth  century,  just  as  we  accept  them  to-day.  We 
do  not  admit  their  interpretations.  Our  own  are  doubtless 
worth  a  little  more.  But  let  us  not  deceive  ourselves  too  much 
in  regard  to  their  intrinsic  value. 

We  imagine  also  that  such  strange  instances  are  rare,  most 
rare,  doubtful,  and  uncertain.  That  also  is  an  error.  My 
conversations,  during  half  a  century,  have  shown  me  that  at 
least  one  person  in  ten  knows,  either  for  himself  or  from 
those  near  to  him,  of  a  case  of  telepathy,  of  premonition,  of  a 
warning  of  death,  a  sight  of  the  future,  in  a  word  of  psychic 
action;  but  in  general — I  do  not  know  why — ^they  conceal 
them,  they  veil  them  as  one  would  something  that  cannot 
be  admitted.  This  is  all  the  result  of  a  false  education  and 
imaginary  fears. 

Telepathy  has  more  foundation,  a  more  universal  and  solid 
base  than  has  any  religion.  The  facts  on  which  has  been 
founded  the  Christian  religion,  with  its  different  sects 
(Catholicism,  Protestantism,  Orthodoxy,  etc.),  or  those  that 
are  at  the  basis  of  Judaism,  of  Islam,  of  Buddhism,  and  the 
other  religions  that  divide  humanity,  have  been  less  estab- 
lished, less  carefully  observed,  less  completely  demonstrated, 
than  the  psychic  facts  which  we  are  studying  in  this  work. 
It  is  therefore  easily  understood  how  certain  minds,  anxious 
to  reach  the  truth,  should  have  placed  their  hopes  in  the  posi- 
tive studies  we  are  pursuing  here,  as  others  have  placed  theirs 
in  religion. 

One  word  more.  In  the  same  way  that  the  spectral  analysis 
of  light  permits  us  to  discover  through  the  light-waves  the 


TELEPATHY  AND  PSYCHIC  TRANSMISSIONS      163 

chemical  constitution  of  bodies  lodged  in  the  atmosphere  of 
the  stars,  millions  of  millions  of  miles  from  our  eyes,  it  is  not 
impossible  that  an  analysis  of  psychic  radiations  should  per- 
mit us  to  enter  one  day  into  communication  with  the  life  and 
thoughts  of  beings  inhabiting  these  distant  regions. 

The  fact  of  the  communication  of  thought  by  mental  sug- 
gestion at  very  great  distances,  which  is  verified  to-day,  indi- 
cates the  possibility  of  a  sort  of  radiation  of  the  human  con- 
sciousness, from  one  star  to  another,  by  means  of  specially 
subtle  waves. 


VII 


OF   TELEPATHIC    TRANSMISSIONS 

Events  are  of  most  use  when  they  con- 
tradict rather  than  when  they  support 
the  established  theories. 

SiE  HuMPHBY  Davy. 

IF  events  that  cannot  be  disputed,  proving  the  action  of 
the  will  without  the  intervention  of  speech  or  of  any 
external  sign,  as  well  as  the  transmission  of  thought 
at  a  distance,  show  that  there  is  in  us  a  mental  being,  thinking, 
willing,  and  carrying  its  action  beyond  the  boundaries  of  our 
organic  senses,  the  no  less  certain  proofs  of  mental  vision 
are  going  to  bring  us  the  same  evidence,  independent  of  these 
events  but  confirming  and  completing  them. 

This  special  subject  is  in  itself  so  rich  and  so  backed  by 
evidence  that  when  I  was  studying  it,  a  few  years  ago,  I  was 
led  to  consecrate  to  it  a  whole  volume  which  is  not  yet  pub- 
lished. I  shall  select  here  a  few  significant  documents,  ex- 
clusive of  those  concerning  the  telepathic  transmissions  that 
we  have  just  examined,  which,  nevertheless,  can  at  times  be 
linked  to  them.  We  have  here,  for  our  study,  a  curious 
category  of  special  events. 

This  is  surely  one  of  the  unknown  faculties  of  the  soul  that 
it  is  most  interesting  to  examine.  Certain  beings  are  endowed 
with  it,  in  their  normal  state,  when  they  are  not  dreaming  or 
in  a  state  of  natural  or  artificial  somnambulism,  but  it  is 
especially  under  the  conditions  of  sleep  that  we  can  observe 
these  phenomena. 

This  vision  at  a  distance,  whether  it  be  direct,  or  through 

164 


VISION  WITHOUT  EYES  165 

reading  the  thought  of  the  brain,  seems  to  me  evidence  of 
the  existence  in  us  of  a  lucid,  immaterial,  distinctly  personal 
element.  To  pretend  that  brain  matter  secretes  thought  is 
sufficiently  audacious;  but  to  assert  that  the  brain  sends  out 
thought  to  seek  that  of  other  men,  to  comment  on  it  and 
to  understand  it,  is  even  more  extravagant.  It  is  to  confound 
the  effect  with  the  cause,  for  here  again  the  thought  shows  it- 
self as  cause  and  not  as  effect.  Its  personal  activity  is  evi- 
dent. 

If  there  is  an  assemblage  of  words  qualified  to  make  a  man 
of  science  roar  with  indignation,  it  is  assuredly  this:  *' Vision 
withoiU  eyes/'  but  with  the  forehead,  the  ear,  the  stomach, 
the  tips  of  the  fingers,  the  feet,  the  knees,  by  the  inner  vision, 
through  opaque  bodies,  or  at  the  distance  of  many  kilometers. 
What  an  untenable  assertion  and  what  a  paradox !  The  fore- 
head, the  stomach,  the  hands,  the  feet,  the  knees  are  not  organs 
of  vision :  vision  does  not  operate  through  them ;  it  is  the  mind 
that  sees. 

The  biologist  who  knows  the  marvelous  optic  apparatus  of 
the  eye,  so  excellently  adapted  to  the  reception  of  images, 
cannot  admit  that  these  images  can  be  perceived  without  this 
suitable  mechanism,  this  masterpiece  of  ancient  organic  evolu- 
tion, from  the  rudimentary  eye  of  the  trilobites  of  the  pri- 
mordial geological  ages  up  to  man. 

For  my  own  part,  I  was  unwilling  for  a  great  many  years 
to  undertake  any  examination  whatever  of  this  question,  de- 
spite all  that  was  affirmed  by  my  friends  the  psychologists, 
and  of  what  I  myself  had  come  across  in  the  works  on  hypno- 
tism. An  astronomer  is  the  last  person  who  would  be  dis- 
posed to  undertake  the  study-  of  suck  a  problem,  and  I  could 
not  help  thinking  of  the  somnambulists  of  the  country  fairs 
as  well  as  of  all  the  tricks  of  the  pretended  readers  of  thoughts, 
whose  drawing-room  exhibitions  amuse  us. 

Nevertheless,  after  my  investigation  of  1899  into  psychic 
phenomena,  I  was  led  to  publish,  in  the  eighth  chapter  of  my 


166  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

work  '^L'lnconnu,'^  forty-nine  examples  worthy  of  belief 
of  vision  in  dreams,  from  a  distance,  and  I  chose  the  part  of 
studying  freely,  and  without  any  preconceived  ideas,  this 
most  important  subject.  In  this  book  I  was  able  to  make  the 
following  statement :  "  It  is  possible  to  see  without  eyes,  hear 
without  ears,  not  from  hypersensitiveness  of  the  sense  of 
sight  or  hearing,  for  these  records  prove  the  contrary,  but  by 
an  inner,  psychic  sense,  a  mental  sense. ' ' 

Vision  from  a  distance  and  ''second  sight"  are  irrefutable 
evidence  of  this  transcendent  faculty  belonging  to  the  soul 
and  not  to  the  molecular,  chemical,  and  mechanical  agency  of 
the  brain. 

If  we  open  the  dictionaries  we  shall  find  nothing  opposite 
the  words  second  sight,  double  sight,  clairvoyance  but  the 
most  complete  skepticism  with  entdre  ignorance  of  their 
phenomena. 

The  events  which  we  are  about  to  examine  confirm  the 
premises  which  I  published  twenty  years  ago.  The  objections 
that  we  have  all  brought  forward,  attributing  these  phe- 
nomena to  mistakes,  illusion,  trickery,  pretense,  fraud,  jug- 
gling, and  anything  else  one  can  imagine,  disappear  in  smoke 
and  from  now  on  let  the  truth  shine  forth  in  all  its  brilliancy. 

The  same  thing  is  true  of  perception  by  the  sense  of  touch, 
which  is  admissible  only  in  certain  special  cases. 

The  thesis  which  I  maintain  here  is  of  the  utmost  importance 
from  the  philosophic  point  of  view,  for  it  results  in  the  sup- 
pression of  the  false  principle  of  Aristotle,  of  Locke,  of 
Condillac,  and  of  the  Sensationist  School.  ^^Nil  est  in  intel- 
lectu  quin  prius  fuerit  in  sensu/'  or,  in  other  words,  "Every- 
thing that  exists  in  our  consciousness  comes  to  us  through 
our  senses.''  But  if  it  is  possible  to  see  without  eyes,  the 
seeing  is  done  by  inner  psychic  faculties,  by  an  unknown 
force,  independent  of  sense  and  normal  vision.  In  this  way 
the  understanding  receives  impressions  that  have  not  reached 
us  through  the  senses. 


VISION  WITHOUT  EYES  167 

We  shall  prove  that  several  cases  of  sight  at  a  distance  or 
of  hidden  things  are  not  due  to  the  reading  of  the  thought 
in  the  brain  of  another;  however,  in  these  cases  also,  mind- 
reading  is  again  mental  vision.  I  am  not  very  fond  of 
neologisms,  and  it  seems  to  me  that  too  many  new  words 
are  being  created  in  the  psychic  sciences,  which  are  still  so 
rudimentary;  but  as  we  are  speaking  here  of  the  sight  of 
things  that  are  hidden  from  our  eyes,  the  word  cryptoscopy 
seems  to  be  pointed  out  to  indicate  this  sort  of  study  (xpvTrros, 
hidden,  aKoirtiv,  see). 

The  first  actual  observation  of  this  curious  psychological 
subject,  which  caught  my  attention  long  ago,  is  the  circum- 
stantial account  given  by  the  famous  encyclopedia  of  Diderot 
and  d'Alembert  after  the  word  Somnamhulism. 

This  account  is  guaranteed  by  a  witness  whom  we  are  al- 
most surprised  to  find  here,  the  Archbishop  of  Bordeaux. 
Here  is  the  very  tale  of  the  encyclopedist : 

This  prelate  told  me  that  when  he  was  in  the  seminary  he  had 
known  a  young  priest  who  was  a  somnambulist.  As  he  was  curious 
to  understand  the  nature  of  this  malady,  he  went  every  evening  to 
hi§  chamber  as  soon  as  he  knew  the  priest  was  asleep,  and  observed 
what  happened.  Well,  this  priest  arose,  took  some  paper,  and  com- 
posed and  wrote  sermons. 

When  he  had  finished  a  page,  he  read  it  over  aloud,  from  one 
end  to  the  other  (if  we  call  "reading"  this  action  which  was  done 
without  the  eyes) ;  and  if  something  displeased  him,  he  cut  it  out 
and  wrote  the  correction  in  above,  with  much  good  sense. 

1  had  seen  the  beginning  of  one  of  these  sermons,  that  for  Christ- 
mas. It  appeared  to  me  well  done  and  correctly  written;  but  there 
was  one  surprising  correction.  Having  put  in  one  place  "this  divine 
infant,"  he  thought,  on  reading  it  over,  that  he  had  better  put  the 
word  "adorable"  instead  of  "divine."  In  order  to  do  this  he  erased 
the  last  word  and  placed  the  first  exactly  above  it ;  afterward,  he  saw 
the  word  ce  [this]  could  not  go  with  adorable;  therefore  he  very 
cleverly  added  a  *  to  the  preceding  letters,  so  that  one  read  cet 
adorable  enfant  [this  adorable  child]. 


168  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

The  eye-witness  of  these  facts,  in  order  to  assure  himself  that  the 
somnambulist  made  no  use  of  his  eyes,  thrust  a  cardboard  under  his 
chin  in  such  a  way  as  to  shut  off  the.  sight  of  the  paper  on  the  table : 
the  somnambulist  continued  to  write  without  noticing  it. 

I  am  quoting  this  account,  which  is  already  old,  especially 
in  order  to  recall  *to  the  attention  of  my  readers  the  innumer- 
able instances  that  have  since  been  attested,  of  sight  at  a  dis- 
tance, independent  of  the  visual  organ,  by  subjects  in  a  state 
of  hypnotic  sleep,  either  natural  or  induced.  It  dates  from 
the  year  1778,  and  I  read  it  in  1856  (in  Diderot's  own  part  of 
the  country). 

These  examples  of  sight  in  the  darkness,  by  somnambulists 
or  the  hypnotized,  are  not  so  much  rare  as  completely  ig- 
nored. Many  persons  know  about  them.  For  my  part,  I 
had  occasion  to  meet, — in  1866,  at  the  Chateau  of  Clefmont,  in 
the  Haute-Mame, — a  young  girl  of  twenty  years  who,  without 
knowing  anything  about  it,  often  got  up  during  the  night  and 
continued  in  complete  darkness  some  work  begun  during  the 
day,  either  dressmaking  or  embroidery.  We  may  compare 
this  visual  power  to  that  possessed  by  cats,  by  bats,  by  owls, 
by  screech-owls,  but  in  their  case  it  would  not  be  mental 
vision.  These  animals  have  a  peculiar  retina,  and  several  of 
them  are  blind  during  the  day.  We  can  also  ask  ourselves, 
as  the  intercepting  screen  intercepts  nothing,  if  this  vision 
does  not  penetrate  through  opaque  bodies  as  the  eye  of 
photography  does  with  the  help  of  the  X-ray.  That  would  be 
a  rather  daring  hypothesis.  We  shall  see  that  it  does  not 
apply  to  the  following  experiences. 

Let  us  remain  for  the  moment  in  the  eighteenth  century. 

Science  is  indeed  slow  in  its  advance. 

In  1785,  at  the  time  of  Mesmer,  the  Marquis  of  Puysegur 
made  some  curious  and  painstaking  experiments  in  artificial 
somnambulism,  produced  by  hypnotism.  Let  us  recall  one 
among  them. 


VISION  WITHOUT  EYES  169 

He  had  hypnotized  a  young  lad,  fourteen  years  old,  named 
Ame.     Here  is  what  he  wrote  concerning  him: 

In  replying  to  my  question  as  to  where  the  seat  of  his  trouble 
was  he  told  me  that  a  year  before  he  had  strained  himself,  carrying 
some  stones  against  his  stomach,  and  that  for  six  months  a  humor 
had  been  gathering  which  caused  him  continuous  pain. 

"Do  you  believe  you  will  recover  soon?"  I  asked  him. 

"Yes,  Monsieur,"  he  answered,  taking  my  hand.  "Day  after  to- 
morrow, at  half -past  four  in  the  afternoon,  I  shall  be  cured."  The 
result  of  this  information  was  that  I  had  to  hypnotize  him  only  twice, 
— that  is  to  say,  the  next  day  at  half -past  ten,  and  a  second  time  the 
day  after. 

He  had  severe  pain  in  his  head.  Questioned  as  to  whence  came 
the  pain,  he  answered,  "From  the  stomach." — "Is  there  communica- 
tion between  the  stomach  and  the  brain?" — "Yes." — "What  is  it?" 
— "It  is  a  tube." — "What  route  does  it  take?"  For  his  only  answer 
he  indicated  the  path  of  the  great  left  sympathetic  nerve.  When 
asked  what  he  saw  his  pain  with,  he  answered,  "With  the  tips  of  the 
fingers" — "So  you  have  to  touch  yourself  to  know  about  -our 
pain?"— "Yes." 

The  next  day  the  young  man  gave  certain  information  about 
the  *' distinct  magnetic  properties  of  the  different  fingers  of 
the  hand."  We  do  not  need  to  examine  this  question  here. 
But  let  us  listen  to  Puysegur: 

What  this  boy*'  told  me  about  the  varying  powers  of  the  fingers 
to  produce  more  or  less  of  an  effect  upon  an  invalid,  struck  me 
particularly.  Monsieur  Mesmer  had  told  us  the  same  thing,  and 
certainly  this  young  boy  could  not  have  had  the  least  idea  of  it.  If 
this  phenomenon  actually  occurs;  we  shall  know  of  it  with  certainty 
only  because  of  the  agreements  in  the  reports  of  the  somnambulists. 

As  for  the  vision  of  the  somnambulists,  it  differs  a  great  deal. 
Little  Ame,  for  example,  said  he  needed  his  fingers  to  see,  or  rather 
to  feel  where  his  trouble  was.  He  is  the  only  one  who  has  told  me  of 
this  peculiarity;  all  the  rest  can  understand  themselves  very  well 
without  this  means  and  make  free  use  of  the  word  "see"  instead  of  the 


170  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

words  "know"  or  *'feel"  such  or  such  a  thing.  We  must  remember, 
however,  that  these  are  peasants  speaking.  When  I  have  happened 
to  put  educated,  or  partly  educated,  persons  into  a  state  of  hyp- 
notic sleep,!  have  always  heard  them  complain  of  the  poverty  of  the 
language  to  express  their  sensations,  and  make  use  of  the  expres- 
sion "to  know,"  "to  be  quite  sure"  of  what  they  were  telling  me, 
without  being  able  to  find  words  expressive  enough  for  their  ideas. 

Whatever  may  be  the  sort  of  sensation  which  the  most  simple  class 
of  men  designate  by  the  expression  "see,"  when  in  a  state  of  som- 
nambulism, I  believe  that  the  phenomena  of  our  vision  when  in  a 
natural  state  can  give  us  only  a  slight  idea  of  it.  Our  vision  is  noth- 
ing but  a  sensation  which  we  procure  from  external  objects.  It  is 
by  the  path  of  the  nerves  that  all  our  sensations  come  to  us ;  and  of 
all  our  nerves  only  that  which  we  call  the  optic  can,  by  its  con- 
struction, procure  for  us  the  sensation  of  sight.  All  external  objects, 
none  the  less,  present  themselves  equally  to  the  other  nerves;  but 
unless  there  is  immediate  contact,  they  produce  no  effect  whatever. 
If,  therefore,  in  the  state  of  somnambulism,  things  happen  differ- 
ently; if  the  somnambulist,  although  his  eyes  are  tightly  closed, 
walks,  avoids  the  objects  with  which  he  meets,  reads,  writes,  and, 
in  short,  does  all  he  can  and  even  more  than  he  can  in  his  natural 
state,  he  certainly  must  be  able  to  see, — not  by  the  optic  nerve,  as  it 
is  concealed,  but  by  means  of  other  nerves  which  have  become  so  sen- 
sitive that  they  bring  to  his  soul  a  sensation  absolutely  similar  to  that 
of  vision.  How  does  this  vision  operate?  What  are  the  nerves 
which  procure  it  in  this  singular  state?  This  I  do  not  venture  to 
determine;  but  quite  certainly  the  phenomenon  exists,  as  without 
it  the  somnambulists  would  not  see. 

But  I  do  not  believe  that  any  one  will  be  able  to  deny  them  this 
faculty.^ 

So  speaks  the  Marquis  of  Puysegur,  friend  of  Mesmer. 
We  shall  see  later  that  this  identification  of  sight  with  touch 
will  be  taken  up  by  other  experimenters,  apparently  without 
their  suspecting  the  existence  of  these  early  accounts.  As  for 
me,  I  shall  not  discuss  any  explanatory  hypothesis  at  present, 

1  Puys^gur,  Mdmoires  pour  servir  d  Vhistoire  et  a  VestahUssement  du 
ilagnetisme  animal  (Paris,  1786  and  1809),  p.  95-107. 


VISION  WITHOUT  EYES  171 

and  I  shall  be  satisfied  to  say  with  Newton,  ^ ^ Hypotheses  yion 
fingo.**  Let  us  first  examine  the  facts  themselves, — ^these  facts 
still  so  much  debated  to-day. 

These  observations  have  continued  during  the  hundred  and 
thirty-four  years  that  separate  us  from  the  previous  era.  A 
great  number  are  without  interest,  only  partially  verified,  full 
of  illusions  and  errors;  but  others  have  undeniable  value. 
They  prove  that  there  exist  processes  of  understanding  differ- 
ent from  the  normal  processes. 

My  readers  are  already  familiar  with  examples  of  this  sort, 
published  in  my  book  * '  L 'Inconnu. "  Some  of  them  are  so 
characteristic  that  I  cannot  help  giving  a  brief  account  of 
them  here. 

We  can  see  (page  496,  XLIII)  the  undeniable  anatomical 
observation  of  an  operation,  the  removal  of  the  breast,  per- 
formed by  Dr.  Cloquet  upon  Madame  Plantin,  who,  in  a 
hypnotic  state,  felt  absolutely  no  pain,  and  talked  tranquilly 
with  the  operator,  while  her  daughter,  Madame  Lagandee, 
also  in  a  hypnotic  state,  saw  the  interior  of  her  mother's 
body.  The  mother  died  the  next  morning  and  the  autopsy 
proved,  down  to  the  least  details,  the  exactitude  of  this  men- 
tal vision. 

**Do  you  think,''  asked  the  doctor,  ''that  we  can  keep 
your  mother  alive  for  long?" — ''No,  she  will  die  early  to- 
morrow morning,  without  pain  and  without  suffering." — 
"What  are  the  affected  parts?" — "The  right  lung  has  shrunk 
up ;  it  is  surrounded  by  a  membrane  like  glue ;  it  swims  in  a 
quantity  of  water.  But  it  is  especially  there,"  said  the 
somnambulist,  pointing  to  the  lower  corner  of  the  shoulder 
bone,  "that  my  mother  suffers.  The  right  lung  no  longer 
breathes ;  it  is  dead.  The  left  lung  is  sound ;  that  is  how  my 
mother  lives.  There  is  a  little  water  in  the  envelop  of  the 
heart  [the  pericardium]." — "How  are  the  organs  of  the  ab- 
domen?"— "The  stomach  and  the  intestines  are  healthy;  the 
liver  is  white  and  discolored  on  the  surface. ' ' 


172  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

The  next  day,  in  fact,  the  invalid  died,  and  an  autopsy  was 
performed.  Madame  Lagandee,  in  a  hypnotic  sleep,  repeated 
in  a  firm  and  unhesitating  voice  what  she  had  already  told 
Messieurs  Cloquet  and  Chapelain.  The  latter  then  led  her 
into  the  drawing-room  that  adjoined  the  room  in  which  they 
were  to  perform  the  autopsy,  the  door  of  which  was  tightly 
closed,  and  there,  following  the  knife  in  the  surgeon's  hand, 
she  said  to  those  who  were  staying  with  her:  ''Why  do 
they  make  an  incision  in  the  middle  of  the  chest,  since  the 
efiPusion  is  on  the  right?" 

The  information  given  by  the  somnambulist  was  found 
to  be  entirely  correct,  and  the  official  report  of  the  autopsy 
was  written  out  by  Dr.  Dronsart. 

The  narrator,  Briere  de  Boismont,  added  that  the  witnesses  ; 
of  this  event  are  all  alive  and  occupy  an  honorable  position 
in  the  medical  world.     Their  communications  have  been  in- 
terpreted in  different  ways,  but  a  doubt  has  never  been  raised 
as  to  their  veracity. 

Nevertheless,  I  have  seen  grave  "scholars"  burst  out  laugh- 
ing while  listening  to  these  "cock-and-bull  stories." 

So  we  have  here  an  undeniable  record  of  mental  vision. 
We  could  add  to  it  the  story  of  that  chambermaid  who,  having 
been  put  into  a  hypnotic  sleep  when  her  master  had  gone  down 
to  the  cellar  after  a  bottle  of  wine,  cried  out  that  he  had  just 
slipped  on  the  stairs  and  had  fallen.  When  he  came  up  he 
found  his  wife  aware  of  his  fall  and  of  the  details  of  his 
subterranean  trip :  the  somnambulist  had  related  them  as  they 
had  happened.     ( "  L 'Inconnu, "  page  499.) 

The  wife  of  a  cavalry  colonel,  who  was  hypnotized  by  her 
husband,  became  a  somnambulist;  during  the  course  of  the 
treatment  an  indisposition  obliged  the  husband  to  ask  an 
officer  of  his  regiment  to  help  him.  This  went  on  for  only 
eight  or  ten  days.  Some  time  after,  during  a  hypnotic  seance, 
the  husband,  having  put  his  wife  into  a  hypnotic  sleep,  asked 
her  to  think  about  this  officer,  of  whom  they  had  had  no 


VISION  WITHOUT  BYES  173 

'Ah,  the  unhappy  man!"  she  cried.     *'I  see  him! 

He  is  at  X .     He  wants  to  kill  himself !     He  is  taking  up 

a  pistol!  Run  quickly!"  The  colonel  mounted  his  horse, 
but  when  he  arrived  the  officer  had  already  committed  suicide. 
(Ihid.,  page  500.) 

We  have  also  seen  the  story  of  a  young  girl  who  was  oper- 
ated upon  in  1868  at  Strasburg  by  Dr.  Koerbele,  who  had 
described  in  minute  detail  to  this  incredulous  surgeon  a 
cyst  on  the  ovary,  which  was  later  found  by  the  operator 
and  agreed  exactly  with  the  description. 

These  numerous  and  widely  different  experiences,  which 
have  multiplied  since  the  time  of  Mesmer  up  to  our  day,  con- 
stitute a  veritable  library,  which  I  do  not  wish  to  expatiate 
upon.  But  despite  all  the  reserves,  all  the  discussions,  all  the 
negations,  all  the  battles  of  the  academies  of  medicine  of  all 
countries,  these  experiences  are  instructive.  I  have  followed 
them,  under  all  sorts  of  conditions,  for  more  than  half  a  cen- 
tury. 

I  shall  follow,  in  this  recital,  the  chronological  order. 

When  I  was  about  twenty,  at  the  age  when  you  think  you 
ought  to  conquer  the  world  and  when  you  feel  an  unquenchable 
desire  to  understand  and  solve  everything,  I  was  very  much 
interested  in  a  rather  odd  man,  the  writer  Henri  Delaage,  a 
mystic  dreamer,  an  occultist  initiated  into  the  sect  of  Saint- 
Martin,  the  ''unknown  philosopher,"  a  grandson  of  Choptal, 
who  was  one  of  Napoleon's  ministers.  His  conversation  was 
always  picturesque  and  often  instructive.  For  a  long  time, 
he  had  studied  very  attentively  the  phenomena  of  hypnotism. 
Here  are  some  of  the  events  of  which  he  knew  at  first  hand,  and 
of  which,  for  that  matter,  he  has  spoken  in  his  works : 

Alphonse  Esquiros,  who  was  amusing  himself  one  day  in  hypno- 
tizing his  own  mother,  asked  her  this  question:  "Does  chance  ex- 
ists Could  you,  for  example,  determine  the  chances  in  a  lottery  t" 
— "I  do  not  think  it  would  be  hard,"  she  answered. — "Try!"    Here 


174  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

the  hynotized  woman  seemed  to  make  a  great  effort;  her  struggle 
brought  a  slow  and  difficult  response.  "I  see  a  number,"  she  said 
at  last. — "What  is  it?" — "Eighty-nine.  It  is  good;  it  is  going  to 
appear."— -"Do  you  see  others?"— "No."— "Why?"— "God  does  not 
wish  it." 

The  number  89  did,  in  fact,  appear  at  the  next  draw- 
ing.^ 

The  formulas  change.  This  occurred  about  1848.  To-day 
we  should  no  longer  say,  ' '  God  does  not  wish  it, ' '  but  simply, 
*  *  I  see  nothing  more. ' ' 

This  may  all  have  been  due  to  chance  alone.  But  we 
shall  see  further  on,  in  the  chapter  on  ''Knowledge  of  the 
Future,"  a  premonitory  reading  of  four  numbers  by  Barton 
Larry.     Here  there  are  2,555,189  chances  against  1 ! 

Delaage  reports  also  the  following  happening,  which  took 
place  at  the  home  of  the  Vicomtesse  de  Saint-Mars,  with  the 
famous  Alexis,  a  clairvoyant  subject,  at  the  time  very  famous, 
who  had  been  hypnotized  by  Marcillet: 

Victor  Hugo  was  present  at  this  seance,  with  his  habitual  curi- 
osity, and  had  prepared  at  his  home  a  package,  hidden  in  the  midst 
of  which  was  a  single  word  printed  in  large  characters.  The  pack- 
age was  first  turned  about  in  all  directions  by  the  somnambulist, 
who,  at  the  end  of  a  moment,  spelled  out  '^P-o-l-i — poll.  I  do  not 
see  the  next  letter,  but  I  see  those  that  come  after :  i-q-u-e — eight  let- 
ters— no,  nine — t — politique;  that  is  surely  it.  The  word  is  printed 
on  light-green  paper;  Monsieur  Hugo  has  taken  it  from  a  pamphlet 
which  I  see  at  his  home."  Marcillet  at  once  asked  Victor  Hugo  if 
it  were  true,  and  the  poet  hastened  to  do  justice  to  the  lucidity  of 
the  subject.  From  this  time  on,  second  sight  counted  Victor  Hugo 
among  the  number  of  its  most  illustrious  defenders. 

In  our  epoch,  we  call  this  exercise  ''thought-reading,"  and 
we  think  we  have  found  an  explanation  in  this!     Let  us  ad- 

1  Henri  Delaage,  Les  Mysteres  du  Magnetisme,  p.  114. 


VISION  WITHOUT  EYES  175 

mit,  if  we  wish,  a  transmission  of  cerebral  waves ;  but  is  not 
that  mental  vision? 

Delaage  told  this  story  in  the  book  that  I  have  just  men- 
tioned. He  continues  it  in  the  following  account,  which 
brings  on  the  scene  one  of  our  contemporaries  of  the  last 
century  whom  I  also  knew : 

Alphonse  Karr,  one  of  the  men  whom  it  would  seem  almost  im- 
possible to  mystify,  because  the  sharpness  of  his  wits  is  proverbial 
in  Europe,  has  related  what  occurred  to  him  with  the  somnambulist 
Alexis : 

"I  had  come  accompanied  by  several  of  my  friends,  at  the  home 
of  one  of  whom  we  had  dined.  On  leaving  the  house  I  had  broken  a 
branch  of  flowering  white  azalea,  and  I  had  stuck  this  branch  in 
an  empty  champagne  bottle. 

"The  man  with  whom  we  had  dined  said  to  the  somnambulist,  ^Do 
you  wish  to  come  to  my  house  f — *Yes^ — 'What  do  you  see  in  my 
drawing-room?' — 'A  table  with  papers,  plates,  and  glasses  on  it.' — 
'There  is  also  something  on  this  table  which  I  placed  there  especially 
because  of  you :  try  to  see  it.' — 'I  see  a  bottle,'  said  Alexis.  'There 
is  some  fire ;  no,  it  is  not  fire,  but  it  is  like  fire.  The  bottle  is  empty, 
but  there  is  something  which  shines.  Ah!  it  is  a  champagne  bottle! 
Something  is  above  it,  it  is  the  stopper — the  end  that  is  in  the  bot- 
tle is  thinner  than  the  other  end.  It  is  white,  it  is  like  paper — • 
wait — '  and  he  drew  a  bottle  with  a  branch  of  azalea,  and  ex- 
claimed: 'Ah!  it  is  a  flower,  a  bouquet  of  flowers.  What  beauti- 
ful branches.' " 

In  these  two  experiences  it  is  difficult  not  to  agree  that  the 
somnambulist  saw  at  a  distance  without  his  eyes,  either  in  the 
brain  of  Victor  Hugo  or  of  Alphonse  Karr,  or  in  some  other 
manner.  Let  us  continue  a  little  longer  to  read  Delaage 's 
little  book,  which  is  almost  an  official  report  of  this  interest- 
ing period.  Let  us  remember  the  facts,  without  troubling 
about  the  theories: 

The  press  of  October  17,  1847,  contained  a  long  article  on  a 


176  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

hypnotic  seance  in  which  the  somnambulist  Alexis  had  read  not 
only  closed  books,  through  several  pages,  but  even  concealed  letters; 
in  a  word,  he  had  shown  that  the  magnetic  fluid,  by  illuminating  with 
a  supernatural  splendor  the  subject  which  had  been  magnetized,  per- 
mitted the  spirit  to  pierce  through  the  most  opaque  objects  with  an 
ease  that  left  far  behind  it  all  the  power  with  which  the  imagina- 
tion has  endowed  magic. 

This  seance  was  endorsed  with  the  name  of  Alexander  Dumas  and 
took  place  at  his  country  house  in  the  presence  of  honorable  men 
who  had  attested  the  truth  of  the  facts  related  in  the  written  report 
by  signing  their  names  to  it. 

The  astonishment  was  general.  Dumas,  curious  to  produce  the 
phenomena  of  which  he  had  been  a  witness,  let  us  persuade  him  to, 
himself,  magnetize  Alexis.  The  spirit  of  the  somnambulist  told  him 
the  history  of  a  ring  that  had  been  given  to  him;  told  him  the  day 
and  the  hour  when  the  man  who  had  confided  it  to  him  had  become 
its  possessor;  then,  like  those  invincible  birds  which  cleave  the  air, 
his  soul  borne  on  the  wings  of  another's  will,  he  described  with  ad- 
mirable precision  Tunis  and  its  environment,  of  which  the  name  alone 
was  known  to  him  in  his  waking  state:  in  a  word,  space  and  time 
had  been  conquered.  A  great  number  of  papers  copied  the  account 
of  these  seances;  others  protested.  As  they  were  not  able  to  attack 
the  honor  and  uprightness  of  the  men  who  certified  that  they  had 
seen  these  prodigies  with  their  own  eyes,  they  made  haste  to  ridicule 
them,  by  representing  them  as  honest  men  whose  simplicity  had  been 
exploited.  They  declared .  that  with  the  help  of  skilful  ingenuity 
Robert  Houdin  produced  the  same  marvels  every  evening  in  the 
rooms  of  the  Palais-Royal.  Unfortunately,  the  illustrious  pres- 
tidigitator had  already  written  a  letter  to  the  Marquis  de  Mirville, 
in  which  he  admitted  the  powerlessness  of  his  art  to  produce  these 
prodigies,  and  in  which  he  certified  on  his  honor  that  these  phenomena 
were  not  produced  by  any  subtlety  of  a  clever  sleight  of  hand. 

Here  is  an  extract  from  this  letter: 

"During  a  seance  at  the  home  of  Mareillet,  the  following  event 
took  place: 

"I  unsealed  a  pack  of  cards  which  I  had  brought  with  me,  and  the 
case  which  I  had  marked  so  that  it  could  not  be  changed.  I  shuffled 
them.    It  was  my  turn  to  deal.    I  dealt  with  all  the  precautions  of 


VISION  WITHOUT  EYES    -  177 

a  man  skilled  in  the  finesse  of  his  art.  It  was  a  useless  precaution. 
Alexis  stopped  me  by  pointing  out  a  card  which  I  had  just  placed 
before  him  on  the  table.  ^I  have  a  king/  he  said.  'You  know 
nothing  about  it,  as  the  trump  card  has  not  yet  appeared!' — 'You 
will  see,'  he  answered.  'Continue.'  I  did  in  fact  turn  up  the  eight 
of  spades,  and  his  card  was  the  king  of  spades.  The  game  was  con- 
tinued in  a  rather  curious  manner,  for  he  told  me  the  cards  that  I 
ought  to  play,  although  my  own  cards  were  at  the  time  hidden  un- 
der the  table  and  tightly  clasped  in  my  hand.  For  each  of  the  cards 
I  played  he  put  down  one  from  his  own  hand  without  turning  it 
over,  and  it  was  always  in  perfect  agreement  with  the  one  I  had 
played  myself. 

"I  therefore  returned  from  this  seance  as  astonished  as  I  well 
might  be,  and  persuaded  that  neither  chance  nor  skill  could  have 
produced  such  marvelous  results. 

"Be  good  enough  to  receive,  etc, 

"Robert  Houdin, 
"Paris:  May  15,  1847.'' 

The  celebrated  prestidigator  in  this  way  vindicated  hypnotism 
from  the  attacks  of  which  it  remained  the  perpetual  target,  by  de- 
claring publicly  that  his  art  was  powerless  to  realize  this  sort  of 
miracles.  He  proclaimed  his  convictions  in  obedience  to  his  con- 
science. 

Thus  spoke  Delaage.  Assuredly  the  somnambulist  did  not 
see  with  his  eyes  the  cards  that  were  held  hidden  under  the 
table  by  a  fellow-player,  who  had  already  been  warned,  and 
whose  value  as  a  critic  cannot  be  disputed. 

It  is  not  uninteresting  to  record  this  reminiscence  of  the 
souvenirs  of  Delaage,  despite  his  ideas  and  his  old-fashioned 
opinions.  I  have  been  far  from  sharing  all  of  these  opinions. 
Thus,  for  example,  he  wrote  (page  144) :  *'To  the  number 
of  privileges  lost  by  man  after  the  original  sin,  we  must  place 
in  the  first  line  the  possibility  of  having  intercourse  with 
spirits.*'  But  who  to-day  can  admit  original  sin?  A  little 
further  on  he  declares  that  the  doctrine  of  the  divinity  of 
Christ   cannot   be   attacked.     He   is   a  very   good    Catholic, 


178  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

though,  as  to  cabalistic  mysticism,  which  is  hardly  orthodox. 

We  no  longer  speak  the  language  of  this  epoch  (1847-67) ; 
we  no  longer  use  the  words  ''fluid  magnetism,"  ''devil," 
"soul  borne  on  the  wings  of  another's  will,"  "supernatural 
divination," — expressions  that  have  fallen  into  disuse;  but 
we  study  the  same  problems. 

The  difficulty,  in  this  study,  is  to  remain  impartial  and 
to  keep  an  absolute  independence.  This  does  not  generally 
happen.  Each  one  brings  to  such  an  examination  precon- 
ceived ideas  which  vitiate  the  freedom  of  the  reasoning. 

Apropos  of  seeing  a  hand  of  cards,  when  they  are  hidden, 
we  may  read  the  following  in  the  work  of  Podmore  ("Appari- 
tions and  Thought-Transference,"  published  in  1894  and  re- 
printed in  1915.  It  is  this  latter  edition  which  I  am  con- 
sidering) : 

The  celebrated  Alexis  Didier  pretended  to  read  when  blindfolded 
with  cotton  and  a  tight  bandage,  played  a  game  of  ecarte  by  naming 
the  cards  turned  down  on  the  table,  deciphered  the  words  in  a  closed 
envelope,  or  in  the  books  that  were  brought  him,  and  revealed  what 
had  been  shut  up  in  packages.  His  success  was  so  great  that  the 
famous  prestidigitator  Robert  Houdin  visited  him  in  1847  and  de- 
clared himself  convinced.  But  Alexis  was  a  professional  and  had 
an  associate  in  the  person  of  his  hypnotist,  Marcillet.  There  can 
hardly  be  any  doubt  that  all  these  events  ought  to  be  attributed  to 
the  exercise  of  a  normal  vision,  operating  under  unusual  and  im- 
perfectly understood  conditions.  It  is  probable  that  in  experiments 
of  this  sort  the  subjects  themselves  were  often  unconscious  of  the 
means  by  which  the  knowledge  reached  them  and  in  complete  good 
faith  declared  themselves  to  be  in  possession  of  supernatural 
powers.^ 

Frank  Podmore,  a  well-known  psychic  author,  one  of  the 
founders  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  is  convinced 
that  all  these  phenomena,  including  apparitions,  are  explained 

^  Apparitions  and  Thought-Transference  (London,  1915),  p.  175. 


VISION  WITHOUT  EYES  179 

by  thought-transference,  and  he  explains  them  all  by  this 
theory.  According  to  him,  Alexis  received  the  communica- 
tion through  his  hypnotist,  Marcillet,  or  from  his  partner, 
who  without  trickery,  but  by  looking,  innocently  transmitted 
their  cerebral  impressions. 

An  American  psychist  no  less  well  known  than  Podmore, 
James  Hyslop,  professor  at  Columbia  University,  has  also 
considered  this  same  game  of  cards,  and  here  is  his  interpre- 
tation :  ^ 

Alexis  Didier  mystified  even  Robert  Houdin,  the  prince  of  pres- 
tidigitators and  illusionists.  Didier  was  employed  by  a  man  who  had 
the  reputation  of  a  gentleman.  He  apparently  read  cards  turned 
face  down  upon  the  table,  sentences  put  of  a  closed  book,  etc.  But  in 
the  absence  of  any  verified  report  as  to  the  precautions  taken  to 
exclude  fraud,  we  have  really  no  reason  to  see  in  it  anything  exi 
traordinary :  it  is  simply  an  example  of  the  way  in  which  a  credulous 
public  can  be  duped. 

Thus,  Podmore  and  Hyslop  imagine  that  Victor  Hugo,  who 
studied  Alexis  in  order  to  get  positive  information,  Alphonse 
Karr,  whose  keen  and  critical  spirit  were  alike  known  to  me, 
Alexander  Dumas,  Henri  Delaage,  Robert  Houdin,  were  poor 
observers  and  let  themselves  be  duped.  '*It  would  appear 
from  them  that  Marcillet  saw  the  cards,  read  the  notes,  and 
communicated  it  all  to  his  subject,  either  by  skill  or  by  un- 
conscious transmission  of  thought."  But  it  was  not  at  all 
in  this  fashion  that  these  things  came  to  pass. 

They  have  also  supposed  that  there  were  tricks  of  sleight 
of  hand.  This  is  an  inadmissible  supposition,  according  to 
Kobert  Houdin  himself.  The  trick  of  which  I  have  spoken 
is  well  known,  for  that  matter,  and  I  have  seen  it  performed 
many  times  in  my  own  drawing-room,  by  the  successors  of 
Robert  Houdin,  Cazeneuve,  and  Jacobs.  In  this  game  of 
cards,  the  prestidigitator  always  conquers  his  adversary,  with- 

^  Enigmas  of  Psychical  Research  (Boston,  1906),  p.  274. 


180  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

out  any  mystery  of  second  sight.  But  in  this  case  the  game 
is  prepared;  the  cards  are  placed  in  a  certain  order;  the 
prestidigitator  shuffles,  but  very  skilfully,  without  changing 
the  order;  the  partner  cuts,  but  the  former  has  prepared  the 
cut ;  and  in  fact  it  is  all  very  simple  for  such  tapering  fingers 
as  those  of  Jacobs,  and  even  for  thick  fingers  like  those  of 
Cazeneuve.  In  my  drawing-room  I  have  had  such  good  ob- 
servers as  Admiral  Mouchez,  Felix  Tisserand,  directors  of 
the  Observatoire,  General  Parmentier,  Herve  Faye,  eminent 
scholars,  who,  despite  their  scientific  titles,  played  cards  very 
well  (I  have  never  known  how),  stupefied  by  the  fellow- 
player  who  at  once  took  their  tricks  and  knew  their  card  every 
time  in  advance.  But  this  trick  of  cards  cannot  be  carried 
out  with  a  pack  bought  from  a  shop,  and  still  unopened,  and 
as  for  affirming  that  Marcillet  was  the  confederate  of  Alexis, 
that  is  a  pure  supposition,  untenable  to  those  who  have  known 
of  the  powers  of  Alexis  in  a  state  of  hypnosis  (of  which  one 
can  learn,  among  other  sources,  from  the  Memoirs  of  Lafon- 
taine). 

It  is  quite  true  that  the  methods  of  observation  have  not  al- 
ways been  scrupulously  accurate  and  that  the  conclusions  have 
not  always  been  well  weighed;  but  that  is  not  a  reason  to 
reject  everything  and  to  refuse  to  separate  the  good  grain 
from  the  chaff.  The  supra-normal  faculties  of  Alexis  cannot 
be  disputed. 

On  the  whole,  to  Podmore  these  cases  of  mental  vision  are 
transmission  of  thought.  For  Hyslop  the  particular  case  is 
very  doubtful ;  the  other  cases  which  he  has  examined  seem  to 
him  both  certain  and  inexplicable  by  any  theory,  including 
telepathy,  and  he  has  a  tendency  to  attribute  them  to  com- 
munications from  the  souls  of  the  dead.  **  Spiritualistic  ele- 
ments are  generally  associated  with  clairvoyant  incidents." 

I  do  not  wish  to  maintain  any  hypothesis,  for  the  observa- 
tions are  not  yet  sufficient ;  science  is  not  made  in  a  day,  and 


VISION  WITHOUT  EYES  181 

astronomy  wandered  for  millions  of  years  before  reaching 
the  truth.  It  seems  to  me  that  what  is  necessary  before  every- 
thing is  to  establish  the  absolute  reality  of  still  disputed  facts. 
It  is  not  impossible  that  either  the  transmissions  of  subcon- 
scious thoughts  or  telepathic  cerebral  waves  are  concerned  in 
these  cases. 

This  sight  of  the  cards,  while  in  a  state  of  hypnosis,  cannot, 
despite  all  negations,  be  contested.  It  has  often  been  verified. 
We  find  in  a  certain  number  of  accounts,  worthy  of  all  con- 
fidence, the  corroboration  of  card-players  who  played  with 
their  eyes  tightly  closed. 

In  his  ''Lettres  sur  le  magnetisme  et  le  somnambulisme,  * ' 
published  in  1840,  Dr.  Frapart  wrote  what  follows  to  a 
friend : 

I  have  already  told  you  that  Monsieur  Ricard  had  promised  to 
bring  to  my  house,  provisionally,  Calyste,  his  best  somnambulist,  to 
put  him  to  sleep  before  the  persons  whom  I  should  invite,  and  to  make 
him  play  cards  with  his  eyes  bandaged:  then,  if  he  was  in  good 
condition,  to  put  him  through  other  experiments  quite  as  incompre- 
hensible and  marvelous. 

So  yesterday  the  seance  promised  by  Monsieur  Ricard  took  place, 
in  the  presence  of  sixty  persons,  all  of  whom,  except  for  Dr.  Teste, 
were  incredulous.     I  will  tell  you  about  what  happened. 

As  soon  as  Calyste  was  asleep,  or  seemed  asleep — for  I  know 
of  no  positive  sign  of  sleep — two  strangers  each  laid  a  handful  of  cot- 
ton wadding  on  his  eyes  and  over  these  a  large  silk  handkerchief, 
the  ends  of  which  were  brought  forward  toward  the  nose  and  tied. 
Then  we  made  sure  that  the  bandage  was  tightly  tied,  well  placed, 
and  that  along  its  lower  border — an  all-important  precaution — the 
cotton  formed  a  thick  pad  which  was  an  impenetrable  obstacle  to 
sight.  At  once  eight  packs  of  cards  were  brought  in,  still  intact;  we 
chose  one  by  chance,  tore  open  the  envelop,  and  began.  Monsieur 
Ricard  did  not  touch  the  somnambulist,  did  not  speak  to  him,  and 
it  would  have  been  impossible  for  him  to  see  the  hand  of  the  per- 
son who  was  playing.    When  matters  had  been  arranged  like  this, 


182  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

everything  went  on  as  if  between  two  skilful  and  wide-awake  per- 
sons. In  this  way  the  somnambulist  named  the  cards  which  he  held 
and  those  of  his  adversary. 

Such  is  the  fact.  Three  persons  took  turns,  each  of  them  playing 
two  games,  so  that  a  hundred  cards  passed  before  Calyste,  who 
often  named  them  and  always  saw  them,  as  he  always  played  what 
it  was  best  to  play. 

Was  this  experience  the  result  of  sleight  of  hand? 

But  we  were  all  of  us  upon  our  guard,  and  we  scrutinized  every- 
thing, fingered  everything,  analyzed  everything.  For  example,  did 
the  bandage  have  some  imperceptible  fissure?  No,  for  it  was  com- 
posed of  two  handfuls  of  cotton  wadding  and  of  a  silk  handker- 
chief which  skeptical  and  skilful  people  had  adjusted. 

Was  the  bandage  adjusted  in  such  a  fashion  that  the  somnambulist 
could  see  below  it?  Besides  the  cotton  placed  over  the  eyes  be- 
neath the  bandage,  some  had  been  pushed  in  from  below,  under  the 
bandage,  so  that  the  cotton  formed  a  wad. 

Had  the  cards  been  prepared?  No,  for  the  cases  of  all  the  packs 
still  carried  the  revenue  stamps. 

Did  not  the  somnambulist  recognize  the  cards  by  touching 
them?  No,  for  he  named  those  of  his  adversary  without  touching 
them. 

Did  not  the  hypnotist  have  some  means  of  communication  with 
the  somnambulist?  No,  for  the  hypnotist  did  not  speak,  did  not 
move,  did  not  look  at  the  cards,  and  did  not  touch  Calyste. 

Finally,  was  it  possible  for  some  one  by  some  sort  of  means  to 
show  Calyste  the  proper  play  from  his  own  hand?  No,  for  every 
one  remained  silent  in  anxious  expectancy,  which  was  soon  followed 
by  astonishment  and  admiration. 

Therefore,  we  were  as  certain  as  it  is  possible  to  be  that  we  were 
not  deceived  in  regard  to  the  bandage,  the  cards,  the  somnambulist, 
the  hypnotist  or  the  adversary  himself. 

We  see  that  this  experience  antedated  that  of  Robert  Hou- 
din,  reported  by  Delaage.  We  can  cite  many  others,  all  of 
which  resemble  one  another  in  this  sense,  that  those  who  deny 
the  whole  thing,  as  a  foregone  conclusion,  can  always  pre- 
tend that  the   experimenters  were   tricked   by  those  more 


VISION  WITHOUT  EYES  183 

skilful  than  they.  Such  idle  discussions  would  waste  our 
time. 

A  very  skeptical  magistrate,  Monsieur  Seguier/  went  incog- 
nito to  the  house  of  Alexis.  ** Where  was  I  at  two  o'clock 
this  afternoon?"  he  asked. 

"In  your  study.  It  is  cluttered  with  papers — ^twists  of 
tobacco — drawings — and  little  machines.  There  is  a  pretty 
little  bell  on  your  desk. ' ' 

**No,  there  is  no  bell  on  my  desk." 

**I  am  not  mistaken.  You  have  one — I  see  it — ^to  the  left 
of  the  writing-table — on  the  desk." 

*  *  By  Heaven !     I  must  go  to  the  bottom  of  this  thing ! '  * 

Monsieur  Seguier  rushed  home  and  found  a  little  bell  on 
his  desk  which  Madame  Seguier  had  placed  there  during  the 
afternoon. 

1  Seguier  was  not  a  man  to  let  himself  appear  a  fool.  For  nearly  forty 
years,  from  1811  to  1848,  he,  as  First  President,  had  been  at  the  head  of 
the  Paris  law  courts.  "He  was  quite  at  home  in  the  palace  and  let  it 
be  clearly  seen,"  wrote  Monsieur  Henri  Robert.  Under  Louis  Philippe 
he  was  a  little  old  man,  dry  and  lively.  He  heard  the  advocates  with 
visible  impatience.  The  mortier  over  his  eyes,  as  if  he  were  in  am- 
buscade behind  his  desk,  he  seemed  to  lie  in  wait  for  the  litigants.  He 
interrupted  the  lawyers,  criticized  them,  contradicted  them  sharply, 
altered  their  pleadings,  and  was  pitiless  toward  those  who  showed  them- 
selves mediocre  or  whom  he  considered  to  be  so.  He  also  distributed 
praise :  "Monsieur  Paillet  pleaded  yesterday  in  a  perfect  manner ;  I 
say  it  to  the  honor  of  all  the  bar."  He  had  once  replied  to  a  minister 
of  Charles  X,  Monsieur  de  Peyronnet,  "The  court  executes  judgments, 
but  does  not  perform  services."  One  day,  at  the  opening  of  an  audience, 
he  said:  "I  do  not  see  Monsieur  Gicquel.  Advocates  should  never  do 
.nything  but  attend  to  their  affairs."  "Mr.  President,"  the  barrister  who 
was  just  arriving  all  out  of  breath,  answered  from  the  back  of  the  room : 
"I  was  at  the  Cour  de  cassation^  occupied  in  defending  one  of  your  judg- 
ments."— ^"It  was  needless;  my  judgments  defend  themselves."  "Which 
has  not  prevented  them  from  just  being  reversed."  At  another  time  a 
barrister  asked  for  a  delay  because  his  child  had  just  died.  The  learned 
and  pompous  Seguier  refused  and  added:  "The  day  on  which  the  pre- 
siding judge  was  married  or  lost  his  wife  he  came  to  the  audience  just 
the  same,  and  when  a  priest  loses  his  father  he  ought  to  say  mass 
none  the  less.  We  will  hear  the  barrister  who  is  present  at  the  audi- 
ence." 


184  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

Such  is  the  simple  account.  Vision  at  a  distance!  Here 
there  was  evidently  no  reading  of  the  mind  of  the  questioner, 
or  suggestion,  of  thought;  which  does,  however,  seem  to  be 
the  case  in  the  instance  that  follows. 

Delaage  tells  how  the  Comte  de  Saint-Aulaire,  the  well- 
known  diplomat,  after  having  called  hypnotism  *' foolish 
trash"  came  to  make  honorable  amends.  He  wagered  he 
could  prove  it  was  impossible  for  Alexis,  in  spite  of  his  pre- 
tensions, to  read  a  well-concealed  paper,  and  he  went  to  him 
with  a  thick  envelop,  substantially  and  skilfully  fastened  and 
sealed. 

*'What  is  there  under  this  fold?"  asked  the  ambassador. 

*' There  is  a  paper  folded  four  times." 

*'And  on  this  paper?" 

**A  half -line  of  writing." 

*'Can  you  read  it?" 

*  *  Certainly.  And  when  I  have  read  it  you  will  retract  what 
you  have  written  ? ' ' 

**I  do  not  think  so." 

**I  am  sure  of  it." 

**If  you  succeed  I  will  promise  you  henceforth  to  believe 
whatever  you  wish. ' '  " 

''Then  believe  at  once,  for  you  have  written,  *I  do  not  be- 
lieve.' " 

The  fame  of  this  seer  is  readily  understood,  and  we  can 
understand  how  Delaage  should  have  written  his  special  lit- 
tle book  (1847)  ''Le  sommeil  magnetique  explique  par  le  som- 
nambule  Alexis."  We  may  read  some  curious  statements  in 
it :  * '  '  Plunged  into  an  artificial  sleep,  man  sees  through  opaque 
bodies,  from  considerable  distances.' — Signed,  Father  Lacor- 
daire."  And  this  other:  '*  *//  there  exists  in  the  world  a  sci- 
ence  which  makes  the  soul  visible,  it  is  undeniably  magnetism.* 
— Signed :  Alexander  Dumas. ' '  This  work  is  concerned  solely 
with  the  powers  of  Alexis. 


VISION  WITHOUT  EYES  185 

The  second  sight  of  the  somnambulist  Alexis,  hypnotized 
by  Marcillet,  has  been  appreciated  by  all  those  who  have 
studied  these  questions.  Here  is  one  of  his  most  remarkable 
revelations.  The  testimony  is  almost  official, — that  of  the 
manager  of  the  Mont-de-Piete  who  in  this  capacity  had  been 
the  victim  of  a  robbery,  the  author  of  which  was  discovered 
and  arrested  largely  through  the  revelations  of  the  famous 
medium.  The  account  is  contained  in  a  letter  that  Monsieur 
Prevost  himself  sent  to  the  editor  of  the  paper  "Le  Pays,'' 
in  the  following  words : 

It  was  in  1849,  in  August,  that  one  of  my  employees  disappeared, 
carrying  with  him  a  large  sum. 

The  most  active  search  of  the  police  was  without  success,  when 
one  of  my  friends,  Monsieur  Linstant,  a  lawyer,  went  to  consult 
Alexis,  without  letting  me  know  of  his  plan. 

"The  sum  stolen,"  said  the  somnambulist,  "is  very  considerable. 
It  almost  reaches  two  hundred  thousand  francs." 

That  was  correct.  Alexis  continued,  saying  that  the  dishonest 
clerk  was  named  Dubois,  and  that  he  saw  him  at  Brussels,  at  the 
Hotel  des  Princes,  whither  he  had  gone. 

Linstant  left  for  Brussels.  He  learned  on  his  arrival  that  Dubois 
had  indeed  stayed  at  the  Hotel  des  Princes,  but  that  a  few  hours  be- 
fore he  had  left  the  city. 

Alexis  declared  that  he  saw  Dubois  at  the  gambling-house  at  Spa, 
that  he  was  losing  a  great  deal  of  money  and  that  when  arrested 
he  would  not  have  any  left. 

That  very  evening  the  narrator  set  off,  but  at  Brussels  he  was  so 
delayed  by  the  legal  formalities  he  had  to  go  through  in  order  to  ar- 
rest his  thief  that  he  arrived  at  Spa  only  to  learn  that  the  man  he  was 
after  had  left  the  city  a  few -days  before. 

When  he  had  once  more  returned  to  Paris,  he  went  again  to  see 
Alexis. 

"You  haven't  much  patience,"  he  told  me.  "To  tell  the  truth, 
Dubois  went  to  Aix-la-Chapelle.  He  continued  to  play,  for  he  had 
lost  heavily ;  just  now  he  has  returned  to  Spa,  where  he  will  lose  in 
play  the  little  that  remains  to  him." 


186  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

I  wrote  immediately  to  the  authorities  of  Brussels  and  Spa,  and  a 
few  days  later  Dubois  was  arrested  at  Spa.  He  had  lost  everything 
in  gambling.^ 

We  see  that  not  only  was  the  medium  able  to  read,  with  his 
eyes  closed,  a  book  that  was  out  of  his  sight,  but  he  could 
even  follow  from  a  distance  the  peregrinations  of  a  thief. 

This  Alexis  had  such  an  extraordinary  reputation  as  a  seer, 
that  the  hypnotist  Lafontaine-,  who  had  often  had  disappoint- 
ments with  his  unprepared  subjects,  sent  from  Lyons  to  Paris 
for  him,  so  as  to  be  sure  of  succeeding  in  his  exhibitions.  We 
find  the  confirmation  of  these  tales  in  the  memoirs  of  Lafon- 
taine (Volume  II,  page  160  to  171).  They  merely  repeat  what 
has  been  published  above. 

What  surprises  us  most  is  that  this  ** mental  vision"  should 
have  for  so  long  a  time  been  acknowledged,  and  that  hardly 
any  one  now  admits  it.  Ignorance  is  universal.  I  should 
not  like  to  suppose  a  lack  of  honesty. 

The  naturalist  Alfred  Russell  Wallace  describes^  fourteen 
seances  of  Dr.  Edwin  Lee  at  Brighton,  in  private  houses,  with 
this  same  Alexis  Didier.  In  each  of  these  seances,  the  latter 
played  cards  with  his  eyes  bandaged,  often  named  the  cards  of 
his  opponents  as  well  as  his  own:  he  also  read  many  of  the 
cards  written  by  the  visitors  and  put  inside  envelops.  He 
deciphered  no  matter  what  line  asked  him  in  no  matter  what 
book,  eight  or  ten  pages  farther  on  than  the  open  page,  and 
described  the  contents  of  a  quantity  of  boxes,  cases,  and  other 
receptacles. 

Dr.  Lee  also  reports  a  game  of  cards  between  the  celebrated 
Robert  Houdin  and  Alexis,  and  added  the  following : 

Houdin  drew  a  book  from  his  pocket  and  asked  Alexis  to  read  a 
line  in  a  special  spot  eight  pages  farther  on.    The  clairvoyant  stuck 

1  Alphonse  Primot,  La  psychologic  (Tune  cotwersion.  du,  poaitivisme  au 
spiritualisme,  p.  152. 

2  The  Miracles  and  Modern  Spiritualism,  p.  95. 


VISION  WITHOUT  EYES  187 

a  pin  in  to  mark  the  line  and  read  four  words  that  were  found  on 
the  corresponding  line  on  the  ninth  succeeding  page. 

Houdin  declared  that  this  was  astounding  and  the  next  day  signed 
this  declaration:  "I  cannot  refuse  to  affirm  that  the  facts  related 
here  are  scrupulously  exact;  the  more  I  have  reflected,  the  more  I 
have  found  it  impossible  to  class  them  among  the  tricks  which  are 
the  objects  of  my  art." 

Russell  Wallace  points  out  (page  90)  other  cases  of  vision 
vouched  for  by  Dr.  Gregory  in  his  work  *' Letters  on  Magne- 
tism." For  example,  some  persons  on  their  way  to  the 
seance  to  see  these  phenomena,  bought  in  some  shop,  chosen 
by  themselves,  a  few  d(>zen  printed  mottos  shut  up  in  nut- 
shells. They  put  the  shells  in  a  sack,  and  the  clairvoyant  drew 
out  one  and  read  the  motto  enclosed  in  it.  The  nut  was 
broken  and  examined;  dozens  of  mottos  were  read  correctly 
in  this  way.  One  of  these  mottos  contained  ninety-eight 
words. 

Wallace  adds  that  as  he  has  in  his  hands  the  depositions  of 
Dr.  Gregory,  Dr.  Mayo,  Dr.  Lee,  Dr.  Haddock,  and  hundreds 
of  other  men  no  less  well  qualified  to  observe  and  no  less 
honorable,  affirming  similar  facts,  we  cannot  suppose  that  all 
these  persons  were  the  victims  of  tricks  it  was  impossible  to 
detect,  especially  in  the  case  of  skeptical  doctors  who  had 
come  to  diagnose  what  had  happened  and  a  master  of  sleight 
of  hand  as  clear-sighted  as  Robert  Houdin.  Either  every  one 
of  the  manifestations  of  second  sight  reported  by  observers 
(and  they  can  be  numbered  by  thousands)  is  the  result  of 
trickery,  or  we  have  the  irrefutable  proof  that  a  certain 
number  of  persons  possess  an  inner  sense  that  ought  to  be 
studied.  If  ordinary  sight  were  as  rare  as  second  sight,  it 
would  be  as  difficult  to  prove  its  reality  as  it  is  to  establish 
the  existence  of  this  marvelous  faculty.  The  evidence  of  the 
latter 's  existence  is  absolutely  conclusive,  to  whoever  examines 
it,  and  who  does  not  let  himself  be  deceived  by  the  childish 


188  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

idea  that  we  can  separate  a  priori  what  is  possible  from  what 
is  not  possible. 

These  experiments  have  been  made  a  hundred  times,  espe- 
cially between  1820  and  1860.  We  have  only  to  read  the 
pages  of  Dr.  Bertrand  (the  father  of  Joseph  Bertrand,  the 
celebrated  perpetual  secretary  of  the  Academy  of  Sciences) 
of  Petetin,  of  General  Noizet,  of  Lafontaine,  of  Dr.  Comet, 
and  of  numerous  experimenters  of  this  epoch  in  order  to  be 
convinced  of  their  value  and  of  their  absolute  authenticity. 
One  of  the  most  active,  Dr.  Frapart,  desired  especially  to 
convince  one  of  the  pontiffs  of  official  science  and  a  declared 
adversary.  Dr.  Bouillaud,  professor  of  the  Faculty  of  Medicine, 
and  sent  him  a  sort  of  imperial  mandate.  The  great  man  re- 
plied in  the  same  tone,  that  he  had  a  perfect  right  to  be  in- 
credulous and  that  it  was  not  the  fanatic  Frapart  who  should 
give  him  orders.     He  wrote: 

As  for  this  new  subject  of  hypnotism,  of  which  you  speak,  and 
which  seems  to  you  destined  to  bring  about  the  great  work  of  my 
conversion,  I  do  not  in  the  least  refuse  to  witness  its  miracles. 
However,  if,  after  I  had  seen  them,  I  should  happen  to  reply  to  you 
with  this  famous  doctrine  of  a  philosopher  of  my  own  sort;  "I  be- 
lieve because  you  have  seen,  hut  if  I  had  seen  I  sJiould  not  have 
believed"  if,  I  say,  I  should  reply  to  you  in  this  way,  how  could 
you  object?  The  experience  of  which  you  tell  me  could  not,  in- 
deed, prove  a  physical  vrnpossihility,  such  as  sight  without  eyes; 
and,  as  I  have  said  at  the  Academy,  in  such  cases  it  is  best  to  follow 
the  example  of  the  Academy  of  Sciences  when  it  is  informed  that  the 
square  of  the  circle  has  been  found. 

Considering  the  at  once  upright  and  aggressive  character 
of  Frapart,  we  can  imagine  that  this  sentence  did  not  fall 
on  deaf  ears:  ''If  I  had  seen  I  should  not  have  believed, 
because  it  is  a  physical  impossibility. ' '  Therefore,  he  began  to 
jeer  at  it  without  much  regard  for  the  official  character  of 
the  learned  professor,  who  reolied  in  his  turn: 


VISION  WITHOUT  BYES  189 

This  is  my  last  word:  1  don't  believe — and  never  shall  believe — 
that  one  can  see  without  the  add  of  one's  eyes.  It  is  not  at  all,  as 
you  say,  because  the  thing  is  extraordinary  that  I  do  not  and  will 
not  believe  in  it;  it  is  because  it  is  supernatural,  and,  what  is  more, 
against  nature.  I  believe,  on  the  other  hand,  in  many  extraor- 
dinary facts.  If  I  do  not  believe  in  these,  it  is  not  because  I  do 
not  understand  them,  it  is  because  they  are  evidently,  clearly, 
physiologically  impossible. 

To  these  arguments  Frapart  replied,  in  1838,  as  all  men  of 
sense  reply  to-day: 

It  does  not  become  any  one,  even  the  greatest  genius,  to  define  the 
limits  of  the  possible,  because  the  possible  is  as  infinite  as  space  and 
time;  and  although  we  have,  so  to  speak,  surrounded  it  with  our 
theories,  at  each  instant  it  surpasses  them  and  laughs  at  us.  More- 
over, does  not  experience  teach  us  that  what  seems  impossible  to- 
day will  perhaps  be  evident  to-morrow?  For  instance,  the  discov- 
ery of  America,  also  of  gunpowder,  also  of  the  circulation  of  the 
blood,  also  of  galvanism,  also  of  the  compass,  also  of  printing,  also 
of  lightning-conductors,  also  of  aerostats,  also  of  vaccine,  also  of 
medicaments,  etc.  And  does  not  reason  tell  us  that  there  is  nothing 
absolutely  false  but  what  is  contradictory  or  absolutely  true  but 
what  is  evident? 

Therefore  we  can  say  that  it  is  obviously  impossible  to  recognize 
a  triangle  without  three  angles,  or  a  stick  without  two  ends,  because 
these  things  are  contradictory,  but  we  cannot  say  that  it  is  obviously 
impossible  to  watch  a  man  who  reads  by  the  nape  of  his  neck,  or 
another  who  hears  by  the  epigastrium,  or  a  third  who  sees  things  a 
hundred  leagues  away,  a  fourth  who  foretells  the  future,  a  fifth  w^ho 
is  insensible  to  pain,  a  sixth  who  describes  his  own  sickness  or 
that  of  others,  finally  a  seventh  who  has  the  instinct  for  remedies. 

No,  no  one  can  say,  under  pain  of  offending  reason,  that  these 
facts  are  evidently  impossible,  because  no  one  has  the  right  or  the 
power  to  say  to  the  possible :     "Thou  shalt  go  no  further." 

It  is  true  that  these  phenomena  are  very  extraordinary;  for  all 
that^  are  they  more  extraordinary,  more  marvelous,  more  inexplicable 
than  those  which  we  notice  every  day?    In  nature,  is  not  everything 


190  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

mystery?  is  not  everything  marvel?  But  there  are  marvels  that  are 
known  to  every  one,  and  there  are  others  that  are  uncommon.  We 
imagine  we  understand  the  former,  for  we  see  them  unceasingly,  and 
we  deny  the  latter  because  we  see  them  only  rarely ;  and,  for  all  that, 
we  explain  neither  the  one  set  nor  the  other  j  we  verify  them,  that  is 
all. 

This  reasoning  of  Dr.  Frapart's,  at  the  time  not  understood, 
was,  according  to  all  the  evidence,  superior  to  the  systematic 
blindness  of  Dr.  Bouillaud,  despite  the  official  superiority 
of  the  latter  over  his  modest  confrere.  The  Academy  of  Medi- 
cine, of  which  he  represented  the  dominant  idea,  remained 
obstinately  on  the  side  of  truth. 

Professor  Bouillaud,  who  was  a  member  of  the  Academy  of 
Medicine,  of  the  Academy  of  Science,  and  of  all  the  most 
accredited  learned  societies,  was  a  particularly  remarkable 
type  of  those  very  small  souls  shut  up  in  the  narrowest  possi- 
ble brains  that  one  can  imagine,  firmly  set  in  their  religious 
beliefs  and  absolutely  incapable  of  reasoning  freely.  He  was 
the  hero  of  the  anecdote  which  I  related  in  *'L'Inconnu,'* 
concerning  the  invention  of  the  phonograph.  On  March  11, 
1878, 1  was  present  at  the  meeting  of  the  Academy  of  Sciences, 
that  day  of  hilarious  memory,  when  the  physicist  Du  Moncel 
presented  Edison's  phonograph  to  the  learned  assembly. 
When  the  presentation  had  been  made  the  apparatus  began 
to  recite  docilely  the  sentence  registered  on  its  record.  Then 
we  saw  an  academician  of  ripe  age,  his  mind  imbued,  saturated 
even,  with  the  traditions  of  the  classical  culture,  revolt  nobly 
against  the  audacity  of  the  innovator;  we  saw  him  hurl  him- 
self upon  Edison's  representative  and  seize  him  by  the  throat, 
crying  out:  "Wretch!  we  are  not  going  to  let  ourselves  be 
duped  by  a  ventriloquist ! ' '  This  member  of  the  Institute  was 
Monsieur  Bouillaud.  The  most  curious  part  of  it  is  that 
six  months  later,  on  September  30th,  at  a  similar  meeting, 
he  esteemed  it  an  honor  to  declare  that  after  a  mature  ex- 
amination he  was  convinced  that  there  was  nothing  to  it  but 


VISION  WITHOUT  EYES  191 

ventriloquism  and  that  **we  cannot  admit  that  a  vile  metal 
can  replace  the  noble  apparatus  of  human  phonation."  The 
phonograph  was  to  him  only  an  acoustic  illusion.  Such  peo- 
ple are  ''fastened  to  the  rear  of  the  chariot  of  progress"  and 
delay  everything  by  impeding  its  forward  march  and  succeed- 
ing in  hiding  the  light  under  a  bushel,  for  their  official  titles 
impose  upon  the  sheeplike  masses. 

This  great  man  was  the  physician  of  Arsene  Houssaye, 
and  we  can  read  in  the  ''Confessions"  of  this  charming 
writer  that  he  was  responsible  for  the  death  of  his  delight- 
ful wife  and  their  child, — and  also  of  the  second  wife. 

Such  is  the  "scientific  reasoning"  of  certain  scholars.  We 
could  wish  that  the  title  of  Member  of  the  Institute  conferred 
intelligence  upon  its  elect  and  opened  their  minds. 

These  remarks  called  forth  by  Bouillaud  could  be  applied 
to  his  colleagues  in  the  Academy,  Chevreuil  and  Babinet, 
in  regard  to  the  problem  of  physics. 

My  regretted  friend  Dr.  Macario  wrote  in  1857  ^  that '  *  vision 
through  opaque  bodies  and  at  unlimited  distances,  which  is 
not  admitted  by  scholars  and  which  is  contrary  to  all  the 
known  physiological  laws,  as  well  as  inexplicable,  seemed 
nevertheless  to  be  certain";  and  he  noted  the  following  as 
confirming  it: 

Dr.  Bellenger  was  convinced  of  this  by  repeated  experiences. 
Many  times  he  has  written  out  in  his  home,  without  any  witness,  a 
sentence  on  a  sheet  of  paper  which  he  has  folded  and  refolded  and 
placed  inside  two  or  three  wrappings,  carefully  sealed.  The  som- 
nambulist has  been  able  to  read  the  enclosed  sentence  through  the 
opaque  sheets,  or  to  write  it  on-  the  back  of  the  envelop. 

This  phenomenon  had  already  been  verified  in  1831  by  a  commis- 
sion of  the  Academy  of  Medicine.  In  fact,  one  reads  in  its  reports : 
"Monsieur  Ribes,  a  member  of  the  Academy,  presented  a  catalogue 
which  he  drew  from  his  pocket.  The  somnambulist  (it  was  Mon- 
sieur Petit  d'Athis,  hypnotized  by  Monsieur  du  Potet),  after  several 

1  Du  Sommeil,  des  reves  et  du  somnambulisme,  p.  195. 


192  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

efforts  which  seemed  to  tire  him,  read  quite  distinctly:  "Lavater. 
It  is  very  hard  to  understand  men."  These  last  words  were  printed 
in  very  small  characters.  They  placed  under  his  eyes  (which,  of 
course,  were  shut)  a  passport;  he  recognized  it  and  called  it  a  ^'pass- 
man";  they  substituted  for  the  passport  a  permission  to  carry  arms 
which,  as  we  know,  almost  exactly  resembles  a  passport,  and  they 
showed  it  to  him  on  the  blank  side.  Monsieur  Petit  could  only 
recognize  that  it  was  a  framed  piece  of  paper,  very  much  like  the 
other.  They  turned  it  over,  and  after  a  few  minutes  of  hesitation 
he  said  what  it  was  and  read  very  distinctly  these  words :  "By  law," 
and  at  the  left,  "Permission  to  carry  arms."  They  showed  him 
an  open  letter;  he  said  he  could  not  read  it,  as  he  did  not  under- 
stand English.     It  was  in  fact,  a  letter  written  in  that  language. 

All  these  experiments  greatly  fatigued  Monsieur  Petit.  They  let 
him  rest  a  little,  then,  as  he  was  fond  of  cards,  they  suggested  that, 
in  order  to  rest  himself,  he  should  take  a  hand  at  cards.  Monsieur 
Eeynal,  former  inspector  of  the  university,  played  a  hundred  points 
at  piquet  with  him,  and  lost.  Several  times  they  tried  unsuccessfully 
to  trick  him  into  a  mistake  by  changing  the  cards. 

A  law  student.  Monsieur  Paul  Villegrand,  paralyzed  on  the  left 
side,  who  was  put  into  a  hypnotic  sleep  by  Dr.  Foissac,  also  read  with 
his  eyes  shut.  The  lids  were  kept  constantly  closed  by  the  experi- 
menters in  turn ;  they  handed  him  a  new  pack  of  cards,  breaking  the 
revenue  stamp  and  shuffling  them,  and  Paul  recognized  the  king  of 
spades,  the  ace  of  clubs,  the  seven  of  diamonds,  the  queen  oC  diamonds 
and  the  eight  of  diamonds. 

They  .presented  him,  while  his  eyes  were  held  shut  by  Monsieur 
Segelas,  with  a  volume  which  Monsieur  Husson  had  brought  with  him. 
He  read  the  title,  "History  of  France,"  but  he  could  not  read  the 
intervening  lines  and  he  read  on  the  fifth  only  the  name  "Anquetil," 
which  was  preceded  by  the  preposition  "by."  They  opened  the  book 
at  page  89  and  he  read  on  the  first  line  "the  number  of  his — "  he 
passed  over  the  word  troupes  and  continued :  "at  the  moment  when 
they  thought  him  the  most  occupied  with  the  pleasures  of  the  carni- 
val," etc.^ 

1  It  was  this  same  Villegrand  who  convinced  Broussais.  The  latter 
wrote  secretly  a  little  note,  placed  his  fingers  on  the  lids  of  the  som- 
nambulist, gave  the  note  to  Dr.  Frapart,  who  afterward  gave  it  to  Ville- 


VISION  WITHOUT  EYES  193 

These  facts,  which  were  clearly  established  in  the  report  drawn  up 
in  the  name  of  the  Academy  of  Medicine  by  Monsieur  Husson,  carry 
with  them  the  sanction  of  science  and  impartiality.  But,  strictly 
speaking,  it  could  be  maintained  that  the  somnambulists  had  seen 
these  sentences  in  the  minds  of  the  experimenters.  That  may  be  true 
so  far  as  concerns  some  of  the  experiments  made  by  the  Academy, 
but  this  explanation  cannot  be  applied  to  the  following  facts,  for 
here  the  experimenters  did  not  themselves  know  the  sentences  which 
they  caused  the  somnambulists  to  read : 

Quite  recently,  one  of  my  friends,  Dr.  N ,  who  is  surely  incap- 
able of  wishing  to  impose  on  any  one,  found  himself  at  an  evening 
reception  where  there  were  many  artists  and  men  of  letters ;  all  these 
persons  knew  one  another  intimately.  Among  them  was  Alexis,  the 
celebrated  somnambulist.    Monsieur  Marcillet  hypnotized  him  and 

this  is  what  occurred.     My  friend  Dr.  N went  into  an  adjoining 

room  to  find  a  book  with  its  leaves  still  uncut ;  then,  without  opening 
it,  he  asked  the  somnambulist  to  read  such  and  such  a  line  on  such 
and  such  a  page.  The  somnambulist  hesitated,  seemed  to  make  a 
great  effort,  then  asked  for  a  pen  and  wrote  the  line  indicated;  at 
that  they  cut  the  leaves  of  the  book,  found  the  page  and  the  line, 
and  every  one,  transfixed  with  astonishment,  learned  that  the  experi- 
ment had  succeeded  perfectly;  only  the  sentence  in  the  book  was 
written  in  English,  and  the  somnambulist,  in  transcribing  it,  had 
translated  it  into  French.  It  was  a  curious  fact  that,  a  few  minutes 
later,  this  same  somnambulist  could  not  read  the  word  "Paris,"  written 
in  large  letters  on  a  sheet  of  paper  that  had  been  folded  twice. 

Here  we  surely  cannot  invoke  the  transmission  of  thought,  as  no 
one  had  opened  this  uncut  book. 

Thus  spoke  Dr.  Macario,  more  than  half  a  century  ago. 
That  which  they  sometimes  accuse  us  of  affirming  a  little 
audaciously  has  been  known  -for  a  long  time.  If  I  have  quoted 
these  old  affirmations  of  1850,  1840,  1830,  and  even  1786 
(Puysegur)  and  1778  (Encyclopedia,  Vol.  XXXI),  it  is  in 
order  to  show  that  these  psychic  phenomena  have  been  proved 

grand,  who  read  unhesitatingly  the  three  lines  written  there.  (See 
Moutin,  Le  Magndtisme  humain,  p.  290.) 


194  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

for  many  years — we  might  say  for  many  centuries.  But  let 
us  continue.     The  mine  is  rich. 

I,  for  my  part,  have  often  had  occasion  to  hear  accounts  of 
**  mental  vision '^  and  to  verify  them  personally. 

In  the  course  of  the  summer  of  the  year  1865  I  stayed,  dur- 
ing a  month  of  vacation  at  Sainte-Adresse,  on  the  slope  of  Cape 
la  Heve,  to  the  west  of  Havre  (5  rue  des  Pecheurs),  and  I 
had  opposite  me  a  celebrated  doctor  who  bore  the  rather  as- 
tronomical name  of  Comet.  His  wife  had  given  him  curious 
examples  of  this  power.  She  was  subject,  at  certain  periods, 
to  somnambulism,  during  which  she  read  with  her  eyes  shut, 
through  opaque  bodies,  named  the  smallest  objects  that  were 
shown  her  shut  up  in  the  hand,  divined  thoughts,  saw  un- 
expected actions  taking  place  in  the  apartments  adjoining 
hers,  named  exactly  the  days  and  hours  on  which  her  next 
attacks  were  to  seize  her,  and  prescribed  the  medicines  that 
were  to  cure  her. 

We  can  read  the  history  of  Madame  Comet 's  cure  by  means 
of  her  hypnotic  revelations,  as  well  as  the  account  of  the  sight 
of  her  internal  organs,  in  the  ''Lettres  sur  le  magnetisme,"  by 
Dr.  Frapart,  which  can  leave  no  doubt  about  the  actuality  of 
these  events.  The  observations  of  Dr.  Comet  are  followed  by 
similar,  declarations  made  by  Dr.  Alphonse  Teste,  also  about 
his  wife.  All  these  inquiries  date  from  the  year  1840.  The 
author  wrote  that  it  would  be  necessary  to  wait  fifty  years 
before  science  officially  recognized  the  value  of  them.  He 
was  mistaken.  In  1890,  the  prejudices  due  to  ancient  ig- 
norance were  not  dissipated.    And  they  are  not  now. 

Time  passes  quickly,  for  that  matter,  and  humanity  is 
slow  in  its  progress.  I  said  on  the  first  page  of  this  work  that 
I  had  begun  this  study  more  than  half  a  century  ago.  The 
lines  which  we  have  just  read,  and  the  year  1865,  are  the 
proof  of  it. 

Among  the  numerous  experiments  which  can  help  us  in 


VISION  WITHOUT  EYES  195 

the  solution  of  the  problem  we  are  studying  here,  I  shall  cite 
a  very  curious  one  reported  in  one  of  his  works  ^  by  Dr. 
Gibier,  a  former  interne  of  the  Paris  hospitals.  It  took  place 
in  April,  1885,  and  he  has  often  repeated  it  before  witnesses, 
whom  he  names.  This  reading,  independently  of  the  organs 
of  sight,  was  done  in  a  state  of  hypnotism  (the  modern  name 
for  magnetism  and  mesmerism).  Here  is  the  account  of  the 
experiment : 

The  subject  was  a  young  woman  of  about  twenty,  of  Jewish  de- 
scent. Once  she  was  asleep,  and  in  an  intermediate  state  of  ama- 
terialization,  which  was  not  lethargy,  nor  somnambulism,  nor  even  a 
talking  trance,  but  rather  what  the  professional  hypnotists  call  "lucid 
somnambuHsm,"  I  put  a  pad  of  cotton  over  each  eye;  then  over  them 
a  large,  thick  napkin  or  silk  handkerchief  that  was  tied  behind  the 
nape  of  the  neck.  The  first  time  I  attempted  the  test  of  which  I  am 
speaking,  I  was  very  much  astonished  at  its  success :  I  must  say  that 
at  the  time  I  did  not  have  the  experience  which  a  long  series  of  inves- 
tigations have  since  given  me,  and,  I  must  add,  long  and  continuous 
studies  of  the  question  as  well. 

I  took  from  my  library  the  first  book  that  I  laid  my  hand  on :  I 
opened  it  by  chance.  When  I  had  held  it  a  moment,  the  cover  upper- 
most, without  looking  at  it,  about  two  centimeters  above  the  hair  of 
the  hypno-magnetized  young  woman,  I  asked  her  to  read  the  last  line 
of  the  page  on  the  left.  After  a  moment  of  waiting  she  answered: 
"Ah,  yes,  I  see — wait."  Then  she  continued:  " 'Identity  leads  to 
unity,  for  if  the  soul — ^ "  She  stopped  and  added :  "I  can't  do 
more ;  that  is  enough ;  it  tires  me."  I  yielded  to  her  and  turned  over 
the  volume.  It  was  a  book  on  philosophy,  and  the  first  line,  less  two 
words,  had  been  perfectly  seen  and  read  by  the  amaterialized  invis- 
ible spirit  of  my  sleeper. 

It  is.  quite  natural  to  be  prudent  about  admitting  the  truth 
of  such  statements.  For  a  long  time  I  myself  attributed  the 
success  of  these  experiments  to  simple  trickery,  and  I  had  had 
direct  proof  of  it,  in  my  own  house,  especially  one  day  when 

1  Analyse  des  choaes  (Paris  and  Philadelphia,  1890),  p.  137. 


196  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

a  very  elegant  woman  of  the  world,  playing  the  role  of 
medium,  had  found  means,  under  the  pretext  of  indisposition, 
to  go  and  rest  an  hour  in  my  library,  and  had  profited  by 
it  in  order  to  consult  an  ancient  book  so  as  to  be  able  to  read 
it  later,  in  a  state  of  pretended  somnambulism  (reading  from 
such  a  page  and  such  a  line  in  such  a  book).  But  it  is  quite 
certain  that  trickery  is  not  practised  to-day,  and  that  there 
cannot  even  be  a  question  of  it  in  the  experiences  which  I  have 
just  offered  as  examples.    Do  not  let  us  be  wilfully  blind. 

We  shall  admit  that  these  are  most  varied  experiences,  and 
that  they  all  prove  the  existence  of  mental  vision  by  means 
of  a  psychic  faculty  independent  of  normal  vision.  We  have, 
indeed,  an  embarrassment  of  riches  from  which  to  choose 
the  proof  of  these  phenomena. 

Let  us  compare  some  other  experiences. 

Let  us  open,  for  example,  that  carefully  verified  work  of 
Sir  Oliver  Lodge  on  *' Human  Survival"  (page  110)  and 
quote  the  curious  spiritual  communication  of  Stainton  Moses 
(which  I  abridge) : 

Mr.  Stainton  Moses,  professor  at  the  University  College 
of  London,  had  acquired  the  habit  of  writing  automatically, 
like  a  medium,  in  the  solitude  of  each  morning.  A  great 
number  of  writings  that  have  been  obtained  in  this  way 
have  been  published  and  are  familiar  to  those  who  study 
these  problems;  but  the  following  incident  is  of  a  surprising 
character  and  offers  a  singularly  striking  example  of  the  power 
of  vision  at  a  distance. 

The  present  text  was  obtained  by  Mr.  Stainton  Moses,  when 
he  was  at  a  seance  in  Dr.  Speer's  library  and  his  hand  wrote 
automatically,  in  supposed  conversation  with  invisible  speak- 
ers.    Here  is  this  episode. 

Stainton  Moses,  speaking  to  the  so-called  spirit :  ^  *  Can  you 
readr' 

Reply:  **No,  friend,  I  cannot,  but  Zachariah  Legray  as 
well  as  Rector  can." 


VISION  WITHOUT  EYES  197 

S.  M. :    * '  Is  one  of  these  spirits  here  ? ' ' 

Reply:    *'I  will  go  and  find,  one." 

(They  wait  some  time.) 

** Rector  is  here." 

S.  M.:     ''Can  you  read?" 

(The  writing  changes.) 

Reply:     **Yes,  friend,  but  with  difficulty." 

S.  M. :  "Will  you  write  for  me  the  last  line  of  the  first 
book  of  the^neid?" 

Reply:     "Wait— 

'^  ^Omnibus  errant  em  terris  et  fliUctihus  cesias,'* 

Stainton  Moses  verifies  the  quotajtion,  which  is  exact,  but 
thinks  at  once  that  he  may  have  known  and  unconsciously  pre- 
served it  in  his  memory.  He  therefore  asks  another  ques- 
tion : 

"Can  you  go  into  the  library,  locfk  at  the  next  to  the 
last  volume  on  the  second  shelf,  and  read  me  the  last  para- 
graph of  page  ninety-four?  I  do  not  know  what  the  book 
is  and  I  am  even  ignorant  of  its  title." 

After  a  short  lapse  of  time,  Mr.  Stainton  Moses,  still  writing 
automatically,  himself  traced  the  following  words:  ''I  shall 
prove  by  a  short  historical  recital  that  the  papacy  is  a  novelty 
which  arose  gradually  and  has  grown  great  since  the  primi- 
tive times  of  pure  Christianity,  not  merely  since  the  apostolic 
age  but  even  since  the  lamentable  union  of  the  Church  and 
State  by  Constantine. " 

The  volume  in  question  was  found  to  be  a  curious  work  bear- 
ing a  rather  fantastic  title:  *^Antipopopriestian,  an  attempt 
to  liberate  and  purify  Christianity  from  popery,  politikir- 
holatry  aaid  priest  rule,''  by  Roger. 

If  that  is  not  reading  by  the  spirit,  what  is  it  ? 

Now,  who  was  it  who  read?  Was  it  Stainton  Moses  him- 
self, unconsciously?  But  how?  Was  a  spirit  distinct  from 
himself  directing  his  hand?    Let  us  limit  ourselves  here  to 


198  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

verifying  the  fact ;  it  was  the  spirit  which  read,  it  was  not  the 
material  eye. 

Let  us  recall,  in  this  connection/  the  experiences  of  Sir 
William  Crookes,  consisting  in  the  reading  of  sentences  un- 
known to  him  and  to  the  medium.  This  medium,  a  lady, 
gave  communications  by  means  of  a  little  board  to  which  a 
pencil  was  attached  and  which,  conducted  by  her  hand,  slipped 
over  a  paper. 

I  hoped  to  discover  the  means  of  proving  that  what  she  wrote  was 
not  due  to  the  unconscious  action  of  her  brain.  The  planchette,  as  it 
always  does,  affirmed  that  although  it  was  put  in  action  by  the  brain 
and  arm  of  this  lady,  the  intelligence  which  directed  it  belonged  to 
an  invisible  being,  who  played  upon  the  brain  of  the  lady  as  on  a 
musical  instrument  and  in  this  way  moved  her  muscles. 

Therefore,  I  said  to  this  intelligence:  "Do  you  see  what  there  is 
in  this  room*?"  "Yes,"  wrote  planchette.  "Do  you  see  that  news- 
paper and  can  you  readf  I  added,  putting  my  finger  on  a  number  of 
"The  Times"  which  was  on  the  table  behind  me,  but  without  looking 
at  it.  "Yes,"  answered  planchette.  "Well,"  I  went  on,  "write  me  out 
the  word  which  is  now  covered  by  my  finger  and  I  will  believe  you." 
Planchette  began  to  move  slowly  and,  not  without  great  difficulty, 
wrote  the  word  "however."  I  turned  about  and  saw  that  this  word 
was  covered  by  the  tip  of  my  finger. 

When  I  made  this  experiment  I  had  carefully  avoided  looking  at 
the  paper  and  it  would  have  been  impossible  for  the  lady,  even  if 
she  had  tried,  to  see  a  single  one  of  the  printed  words,  for  she  was 
seated  at  a  table,  the  paper  was  on  another  table  behind  me,  and  my 
body  hid  it  from  her  sight. 

These  readings  by  mediums  seem  to  indicate  the  action  of 
exterior  intelligences. 

A  very  characteristic  supra-normal  vision  was  given  to 
Monsieur  Maxwell,  doctor  of  medicine,  general  advocate  of 
the  court  of  appeals  at  Bordeaux,  by  a  very  sensitive  subject, 

1  See  Les  Forces  naturelles  inconnues,  p.  447. 


VISION  WITHOUT  EYES  199 

Madame  Angullana,  whom  he  had  just  hypnotized  for  experi- 
mental purposes.^ 

Madame   Angullana  pretended  to   have  gone  out  of  the  house. 

I  begged  her  to  go  and  see  what  Monsieur  B ,  one  of  my  friends 

who  was  well  known  to  her,  was  doing.  It  was  twenty  minutes  past 
ten  in  the  evening.     To  our  great  surprise  she  told  me  that  she  saw 

Monsieur  B ,  half-clad,  walking  barefoot  over  stone.     This  seemed 

quite  senseless  to  us.  Nevertheless,  I  took  occasion  to  see  my  friend 
the  next  day.    Although  he  was  well  versed  in  phenomena,  Monsieur 

B appeared  greatly  astonished  and  said  these  very  words  to  me : 

"Yesterday  I  was  not  well.  One  of  my  friends,  who  lives  with  me, 
advised  me  to  try  the  Kneipp  cure  and  urged  me  so  insistently  that, 
in  order  to  satisfy  him,  I  tried  it  for  the  first  time  yesterday  evening, 
walking  barefoot  over  cold  stone." 

To  these  observations  I  will  add  the  following  recent  one, 
which  we  owe  to  the  celebrated  American  physicist  Edison,  and 
the  value  of  which  as  a  critical  experiment  cannot  be  con- 
tested by  any  one.    Here  is  a  report  written  by  himself.^ 

The  man  of  whom  I  am  going  to  speak  was  sent  to  me  by  one  of 
my  oldest  friends,  who  said  to  me  by  way  of  introduction:  "This 
man  Reese  is  able  to  do  certain  strange  things.  I  should  like  you  to 
know  him.     Perhaps  you  will  be  able  to  explain  his  powers." 

I  appointed  a  meeting.  Reese  arrived  at  my  laboratory  on  the  day 
set.  I  had  some  of  my  workmen  called  in,  in  order  to  experiment 
with  them.  Reese  asked  one  of  them,  a  Norwegian,  to  go  into  an  ad- 
joining room  and  write  on  a  bit  of  paper  the  maiden  name  of  his 
mother,  her  place  of  birth,  and  several  other  things.  The  Norwegian 
did  so,  folded  the  paper,  and  kept  it  in  his  closed  hand.  Reese  told 
us  the  exact  contents.  He  added  later  that  the  young  man  had  a 
ten-crown  piece  of  money  in  his  pocket,  which  was  true. 

After  he  had  made  several  similar  experiments  with  other  em- 
ployees, I  asked  him  to  make  one  like  them  with  me.  Then  I  went 
into  another  building  and  wrote  these  words : 

1  See  Maxwell,  Lea  Ph^nomenes  psychiques,  p.  193. 

2  See  Armales  des  Sciences  psychiques,  May,  1916. 


200  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

1      "Is  there  anything  better  than  hydroxid  of  nickel  for  an  alkaline 

I  battery?" 

/       I  was  then  experimenting  with  my  alkaline  electric  battery,  and  I 

(  was  a  little  afraid  of  not  being  on  the  right  path.  After  having 
written  the  above  sentence,  I  took  up  another  problem  and  gave  all 
my  attention  to  solving  it,  so  as  to  throw  Reese  off  the  scent  if  he  was 
trying  to  read  in  my  mind  what  I  had  written.  I  then  came  back 
into  the  room  where  I  had  left  him. 

The  moment  I  entered  the  room  he  said:     ^'No,  there  is  nothing 
better  than  hydroxid  of  nickel  for  an  alkaline  battery.^' 
He  had  read  my  question  exactly. 

I  do  not  pretend  to  be  able  to  explain  this  faculty.  I  am  convinced 
that  the  needs  of  civilization  will  produce  some  great  discovery  by 
means  of  men  endowed  with  this  power.  The  rare  seers  of  the 
present  generation  will  become  the  multitude  of  the  coming  genera- 
tions. The  normal  intelligence  of  the  future  will  rapidly  develop 
and  complete  the  work  of  the  normal  intelligence  of  to-day. 

About  two  years  after  the  experiences  which  I  have  just  related, 

i  the  door-boy  of  my  laboratory  entered  and  told  me  that  Reese  was 
in  the  waiting-room  and  wished  to  see  me.     I  took  my  pencil  and 

I  wrote  in  microscopic  letters,  *'Keno,"  folded  the  paper,  and  put  it  in 

I  my  pocket.     Then  I  told  the  boy  to  bring  in  Reese. 

j      "Reese,  I  have  a  scrap  of  paper  in  my  pocket.     What  is  written 

i  on  itr 

i     Without  an  instant's  hesitation  he  answered,  "Keno." 

Some  time  after  the  experiments  made  in  my  laboratory,  Dr.  James 
Hanna  Thompson,  a  well-known  alienist,  arranged  for  a  fully  repre- 
sentative seance  at  his  home.  He  went  into  his  library,  wrote  some 
words  on  little  sheets  of  paper,  and  hid  them.  Reese  remained,  talk- 
ing, in  the  drawing-room  nntil  Thompson  returned  and  then  said 
to  him : 

"At  the  back  of  the  drawer  to  the  left  of  your  table  is  a  bit  of 
paper  on  which  is  written  the  word  'opsonic'  Under  the  book  lying 
on  your  table  there  is  a  bit  of  paper  bearing  another  word  'ambi- 
cepter.'     On  another  little  paper  is  written  the  word  'antigen.' " 

The  information  given  by  the  seer  was  entirely  correct.  Thompson 
l^as  stupefied,  and  confessed  that  he  yielded  to  the  evidence. 

A  few  years  ago  I  undertook  a  series  oi  experiments  to  attempt  to 


VISION  WITHOUT  EYES  201 

transfer  the  thought  of  one  person  to  another  by  all  sorts  of  means, 
but  without  the  least  result.  Also,  I  tried  to  solve  the  phenomenon 
by  the  help  of  an  electric  apparatus  fastened  to  the  head  of  the  op- 
erators. Four  among  us  first  stayed  in  different  rooms,  joined  by  the 
electric  systems  of  which  I  have  just  spoken.  Afterward  we  sat  in 
the  four  corners  of  the  same  room,  gradually  bringing  our  chairs 
closer  together  toward  the  center  of  the  room,  until  our  knees  touched, 
and  for  all  that  we  obtained  no  result. 

But  Reese  has  no  need  of  any  apparatus  or  of  any  special  con- 
dition in  order  to  function. 

So  spoke  Edison.  All  those  who  experimented  with  him 
testified  to  the  same  things,  particularly  Monsieur  Schrenck- 
Notzing,  who  made  a  special  study  of  it. 

A  curious  episode  in  the  life  of  this  **seer"  is  an  encounter 
he  had  with  the  law,  in  which,  having  been  accused  of  fraud, 
at  the  end  of  the  trial  he  invited  the  judge  to  write  some  ^ords 
himself  upon  a  paper  and  to  keep  the  paper  in  his  hand.  He 
then  read  everything  that  had  been  written  by  the  judge. 
Needless  to  say,  he  was  acquitted. 

I  have  gathered  together  these  instances  of  ^'mental  vision" 
by  the  hundreds. 

One  of  the  most  remarkable  is  assuredly  that  of  Professor 
Graissert  of  Montpellier,  who,  having  hidden  four  lines  writ- 
ten by  himself,  in  a  thick  envelop  tightly  sealed,  saw  these 
lines  read  three  hundred  meters  away,  by  Dr.  Ferroul's 
medium  ('^Annales  des  Sciences  psychiques,"  1897;  page 
322). 

We  have  here  a  mine  of  unsuspected  riches.  I  shall  also 
mention  in  this  place  the  following  tale  which  was  brought 
to  me  by  my  learned  colleague  of  the  Astronomical  Society 
of  France,  M.  H.  Daburon,  with  this  profession  of  faith:  **I 
know  of  no  more  captivating  matter  than  the  study  of  the 
soul,  undertaken  in  your  work  'L'Inconnu,'  and  I  wish, 
with  all  readers  in  love  with  truth,  that  this  great  work 


'202  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

might  have  successors.  Also,  it  interests  me  to  point  out  to 
you,  if  you  do  not  know  it  already,  the  following  fact,  which 
is  an  extract  from  the  correspondence  of  the  Duchess  of  Or- 
leans, Princess  Palatine. ' '     Here  is  this  letter : 

About  ten  years  ago  a  French  gentleman  who  had  been  a  page  to 
the  Marshal  d'  Humieres,  and  who  had  married  one  of  my  ladies  in 
waiting,  brought  with  him  to  France  a  savage  from  Canada.  One 
day  while  they  were  at  table  the  savage,  his  face  convulsed,  began  to 
weep.  Longueil,  as  the  gentleman  was  called,  asked  him  what  was 
the  matter  with  him  and  if  he  was  in  pain.  The  savage  only  wept 
more  bitterly.  Longueil  insisted  and  the  savage  said :  "Do  not  force 
me  to  tell  you,  for  it  is  you  it  concerns,  and  not  me."  When  he  was 
urged  more  than  ever,  he  ended  by  saying,  "I  saw  from  the  window 
that  your  brother  had  been  murdered  in  such  a  spot  in  Canada." 
Longueil  began  to  laugh  and  answered:  "You  have  gone  mad!" 
The  savage  answered,  "I  am  not  at  all  mad;  write  down  what  I  am 
telling  you  and  you  will  see  if  I  am  mistaken."  Longueil  wrote  it 
down,  and  six  months  later,  when  the  ships  arrived  from  Canada,  he 
learned  that  his  brother's  death  had  occurred  at  the  exact  moment 
and  in  the  very  spot  where  the  savage  had  seen  it  in  a  vision  through 
the  window.     This  is  an  entirely  true  tale. 

Versailles,  March  2,  1719. 

The  Princess  Palatine  did  not  pass  as  one  easily  duped, 
at  the  court  of  her  husband,  the  Duke  of  Orleans,  regent  of 
the  kingdom;  and  at  the  time  of  the  regency  Paris  and  Ver- 
sailles were  assuredly  far  from  mysticism.  The  fact  reported 
here  ought  to  be  considered  authentic.  How  did  the  Canadian 
seer  see  *'in  the  air"?  As  one  reads  in  a  crystal  ball  or  in 
a  glass  of  water ;  that  is  to  say,  it  was  the  spirit  of  the  sooth- 
sayer which  was  operating.  It  does  not  seem  that  any  other 
conclusion  can  be  drawn  from  these  observations. 

Gratien  de  Semur,  a  remarkably  skeptical  writer  and  a 
scoffer  who  had  ridiculed  the  story  of  Pliny's  ghost,  as  well  as 
that  of  the  assassin  of  Cicero,  published  in  1843  a  very  amus- 
•ing  book,  entitled  "Traite  des  erreurs  et  des  prejuges,"  in 


VISION  WITHOUT  EYES  203 

which  he  made  an  exception  of  a  telepathic  sensation  which  had 
occurred  in  his  own  neighborhood.  (He  was  far  from  sus- 
pecting the  future  creation  of  this  word  and  the  value  of 
these  sensations.)     Here  is  his  account,  with  his  commentary: 

In  our  childhood  we  had  often  seen,  in  our  family,  a  lady  about 
forty  years  old,  who  was  named  Madame  de  Saulce.  Her  hus- 
band was  a  rich  planter  in  Santo  Domingo.  Both  of  them  had  come 
to  live  in  France  at  the  time  of  the  Revolution.  Monsieur  de  Saulce 
made  many  trips  to  the  islands,  during  which  he  left  his  wife  in 
Paris.  Madame  de  Saulce  was  a  very  good  woman,  quite  simple, 
not  at  all  nervous,  having  no  belief  in  those  foolish  imaginings  that 
easily  affect  us.  During  her  husband's  last  trip  she  was  at  a  gather- 
ing one  evening  where  she  was  playing  a  game  of  cards.  All  at  once 
she  cried  out,  falling  back  in  her  seat,  "Monsieur  de  Saulce  is  dead !" 
Every  one  hastened  to  her  and  pointed  out  that  such  a  vision  must 
certainly  be  false,  and  her  reason  once  more  resumed  control.  Nev- 
ertheless, when  she  was  alone,  she  could  not  entirely  shake  off  the 
presentiment  that  stifled  her,  and  she  waited  for  news  of  her  husband 
with  fearful  anxiety.  She  received  reassuring  letters,  but  their  date 
preceded  the  day  of  her  vision.  Finally  a  letter  came  from  Santo 
Domingo,  sealed  in  black,  a  letter  which  was  not  addressed  in  Mon- 
sieur de  Saulce's  handwriting.  The  letter  was  from  another  planter 
and  sent  to  a  third  person,  to  lessen  the  violence  of  the  shock :  Mon- 
sieur de  Saulce  was  dead,  murdered  by  negroes  on  the  very  day  on 
which  Madame  de  Saulce  had  received  the  terrible  blow.  This 
double  ev^t,  attested  by  more  than  twenty  persons  of  good  standing 
in  the  community,  was  one  of  those  which  most  impressed  me  during 
my  early  years.  Ten  years  had  passed  since  then,  when  we  saw 
Madame  de  Saulce  again,  still  dressed  in  the  eternal  mourning  to 
which  she  had  vowed  herself. 

The  narrator  adds : 

What  can  we  say  about  such  happenings?  Nothing  can  prove  their 
reahty  or  their  falsity ;  we  must  believe  or  not  believe.  Nevertheless, 
we  can  apply  to  them  the  conclusions  drawn  from  similar  examples, 
which  such  an  authority  as  Sully  has  put  beyond  all  doubt.    "It  is 


204  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

only  too  certain,"  wrote  Sully  in  his  Memoirs,  "that  Henry  IV  had  a 
presentiment  of  his  cruel  destiny.  The  more  closely  he  saw  the  mo- 
ment of  the  coronation  approaching,  the  more  he  felt  fright  and 
horror  redouble  in  his  heart.  He  would  come  and  unfold  it  all  to 
me,  in  that  state  of  bitterness  and  despondency  for  which  I  used  to 
blame  him  as  for  an  unpardonable  weakness.  His  own  words  will 
make  a  quite  different  impression  from  anything  that  I  could  say. 
*Ah!  my  friend,^  he  said,  'how  this  coronation  displeases  me!  I  do 
not  know  what  it  is,  but  my  heart  tells  me  that  some  misfortune  will 
come  to  me.'  He  would  sit  down  as  he  said  these  words,  and  give 
himself  up  to  all  the  blackness  of  his  thoughts,  tapping  his  fingers 
on  the  case  of  his  spectacles  and  musing  profoundly." 

Sully's  declaration  alone  would  be  enough  to  keep  us  from  doubting 
the  presentiment  which  made  Henry  IV  feel  in  his  heart  the  point  of 
the  dagger  which  was  to  kill  him;  we  can,  however,  support  it  by 
other  authorities,  almost  equally  reliable.  UEstoile  and  Bassom- 
pierre,  in  their  Memoirs,  report  the  same  incidents.  Let  us  hasten, 
nevertheless,  to  add  that  the  rare  examples  of  justified  presentiments 
ought  to  be  received  only  as  exceptions.^ 

Such  is  the  tale  of  Gratien  de  Semur,  and  we  feel  that  he 
published  it  reluctantly.  His  recollections  have  their  place 
in  this  book.  He  is  more  disposed  to  deny  everything  than 
to  accept  anything.  These  two  extremes  are  false.  Reason 
invites  us  to  follow  an  independent  path,  at  an,  equal  distance 
from  the  two  usual  human  errors. 

Here  are  still  other  observ'ations,  no  less  curious : 

Professor  Gregory  of  Edinburgh  had  visited  a  friend  in  a  city 
thirty  miles  distant,  and  had  there  met  a  lady  who  had  been  hypno- 
tized by  this  friend,  and  who  was  unknown  to  Professor  Gregory. 
He  found  that  she  described  all  the  details  of  his  house  with  striking 
precision.  The  idea  then  came  to  Gregory  to  make  the  following 
experiment : 

Hs  asked  her  to  go  to  Greenock,  about  forty-five  miles  away, 
where  his  son  was.  She  saw  and  described  him  exactly  even  though 
she  had  never  seen  him  nor  heard  him  spoken  of,  and  she  described 

1  Erreura  et  prSjug^g,  p.  137. 


VISION  WITHOUT  EYES  205 

the  cottage  where  he  was  busy  playing  with  a  dog.  This  dog,  she 
said,  was  a  very  young  Newfoundland,  black,  with  white  spots.  The 
boy  and  the  dog  seemed  to  be  having  a  very  good  time  together  and 
the  dog  stole  his  hat.  There  was  a  gentleman  there  reading  a  book, 
not  very  old  but  with  white  hair,  a  Presbyterian  clergyman.  As 
Gregory  asked  the  medium  to  go  into  the  house,  she  described  the 
drawing-room,  the  dining-room,  the  kitchen,  where  a  young  servant 
was  preparing  dinner  and  a  leg  of  mutton  was  roasting  over  the 
fire  but  was  not  yet  done.  There  was  also  another  servant.  The 
gentleman  came  to  the  door,  the  boy  continued  to  play  with  the 
dog,  and  then  ran  to  the  kitchen,  which  was  on  the  upper  story  of 
the  summer-house,  and  began  to  eat. 

The  professor  immediately  wrote  down  all  the  details  he  had  re- 
ceived and  sent  them  to  his  friend,  who  recognized  most  of  them  as 
correct.  There  could  not  have  been,  he  noticed,  any  transmission 
of  thought,  as  he  was  not  familiar  with  the  place  where  his  son  was 
and  where  the  hypnotized  woman  had  been  sent.^ 

Many  observations  similar  to  the  preceding  ones  are  here 
on  my  work  table.  But  we  must  know  where  to  stop.  The 
result  of  this  research  is  the  affirmation  that  the  human  heing 
can  see  without  eyes,  with  the  spirit. 

But  I  will  confess  that,  in  admitting  this  transcendent 
sight,  I  am  in  disagreement  with  scholars  whom  I  have  known 
personally  and  sincerely  esteemed,  among  others  Alfred 
Maury,  of  the  Institute  (see  my  Memoirs).  He  does  not 
admit  this  faculty;  he  believes  in  a  hyper-sensitiveness  of 
the  sense  of  sight,  which  has  been  verified  by  him  in 
somnambulists,-  and  which  does  indeed  exist,  but  which  we 
cannot  generalize  about  and  which  does  not  at  all  apply  here. 

In  certain  cases  we  can  assuredly  compare  this  function 
of  the  sight  to  the  visual  power  of  the  nocturnal  animals, 
which  see  very  well  in  the  dark,  such  as  cats,  owls,  screech- 
owls,  moths,  the  reptiles  that  live  in  caverns,  the  deep-sea 
fishes,  etc. 

1  Hyslop,  Enigmas  of  Psychical  Research,  p.  278. 
-iLe  Sommeil  et  les  Reves  (1878),  p.  205. 


206  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

Light  has  its  degrees  and  seems  never  to  descend  to  zero. 

Certain  men  are  nyctalopes. 

Such  was  the  Emperor  Tiberius.  When  he  chanced  to 
awake  during  the  night,  he  could  make  out  all  the  objects  in 
his  chamber;  his  eyes  were  very  large:  '*Erat  praegrandibus 
oculis,"  we  read  in  Suetonius,  **qui  cum  mirum  est,  noctu 
etiam  et  in  tenebris  viderent ;  ab  breve  et  cum  a  somno  potuis- 
sent  deinde  nebescebant. '  * 

The  Abbe  Mussaud,  a  professor  at  the  college  of  La  Rochelle 
in  1820,  author  of  a  curious  little  book  called  ''Roman  I'op- 
tique,"  reports  that  he  knew  a  lady  in  that  city  whose  eyes 
had  this  quality  and  who  could  see  quite  well  in  the  darkness, 
not  merely  for  a  few  moments,  as  Tiberius  did,  but  for  a  long 
time,  distinguishing  even  a  pin  on  the  ground.  Her  eyes  also 
were  very  large.  Nevertheless,  this  visual  power  was  not 
permanent,  and  showed  only  at  certain  periods  of  suffering 
and  languor. 

On  January  3,  1899,  when  I  was  dining  with  my  friend 
Bartholdi,  the  great  sculptor,  the  daughter  of  Dr.  Chaillou, 
Madame  Peytal,  told  me  that  her  cousin  Mademoiselle  Varanne 
was  gifted  with  this  faculty.  They  heard  her  reading  aloud 
one  night  and  discovered  her  sitting  on  her  bed,  without  a 
light,  reading  a  pamphlet  by  Paul-Louis  Courier,  which  she 
had  taken  from  the  doctor's  library.  She  was  a  somnam- 
bulist. 

I  could  name  from  among  my  scientific  correspondents  a 
learned  and  distinguished  lady,  gifted  with  extraordinary 
psychic  powers — ^]\Iadame  d'Esperance,  a  member  of  the  As- 
tronomical Society  of  France— who,  in  addition  to  these  quali- 
ties, sees,  writes,  and  draws  in  total  darkness.  At  the  time  of 
her  classical  studies,  when  she  was  a  young  girl,  she  had 
written  a  composition  during  the  night,  in  a  state  of  somnam- 
bulism, without  suspecting  it.^     Her  colleague  and  friend, 

1  See  her  work,  Au  Pays  de  VOmbre,  p.  63. 


VISION  WITHOUT  EYES  207 

Madame  Hoemmerle,  the  translator  of  Carl  du  Prel,  knew  of 
more  than  one  similar  example. 

Dr.  Liebault,  who  has  dealt  rather  thoroughly  with  this 
question  in  his  learned  work  on  *'Le  sommeil  provoque  et  les 
etats  analogues'*  seems  to  admit  only  a  hypersensitiveness  of 
the  organ  of  sight,  and  quotes  on  this  subject  some  experi- 
ments made  by  himself — as  well  as  by  A.  Bertrand,  Encontre, 
Macario,  Archambault,  Mesnet, — upon  somnambulists  who 
read  in  the  dark,  thanks  to  the  dilation  of  the  pupil  of  the  eye 
and  the  accumulation  of  the  power  of  attention  in  the  optic 
nerve.  This  power  of  seeing  at  night  is  unlimited,  but  it  ap- 
plies to  only  a  small  part  of  our  problem ;  it  does  not  apply  to 
the  description  either  of  a  house  far  away,  or  of  a  scene  taking 
place  a  thousand  kilometers  distant,  or  to  reading  in  a  closed 
book,  or  to  the  greater  part  of  our  examples. 

The  hypnotized  subjects  who  see  without  eyes  and  imagine 
that  they  see  ,with  their  foreheads,  with  the  epigastrium,  or 
with  a  foot,  are  under  an  illusion:  it  is  their  spirit  which 
sees. 

They  sometimes  also  pretend  to  see  with  the  ear.  Lombroso 
relates  that  in  1892  he  had  to  struggle,  in  his  medical  prac- 
tice, with  a  phenomenon  which  he  had  never  met  with  before. 
He  writes: 

I  had  under  my  care  the  daughter  of  a  high  official  of  my  native 
city;  this  person  was  often  seized,  at  the  age  of  puberty,  with  a 
violent  attack  of  hysteria,  accompanied  by  symptoms  which  neither 
pathology  nor  physiology  could  explain.  At  times  her  eyes  lost  the 
power  of  seeing;  on  the  other  hand,  the  invalid  saw  with  her  ears. 
With  her  eyes  bandaged,  she  was  able  to  read  several  lines  of  print 
which  were  held  to  her  ears.  When  we  placed  a  magnifying-glass 
between  her  ear  and  the  sun  she  felt  what  resembled  a  bum  on 
her  eyes  and  cried  out  that  we  wished  to  blind  her.  She  prophesied, 
in  particular,  with  mathematical  exactitude,  everything  that  was 
going  to  happen  to  her.     She  said  once  that  in  a  month  and  three 


208  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

days  she  would  feel  an  irresistible  desire  to  bite.  I  watched  over 
her,  tried  to  distract  her,  and  put  all  the  clocks  in  the  house  behind 
time  in  order  to  deceive  her  about  the  hour,  and  despite  that,  at 
the  appointed  day  and  hour,  she  was  seized  with  the  desire  to  bite, 
and  did  not  grow  calm  until  she  had  shredded  with  her  teeth  several 
kilograms  of  paper. 


Although  these  facts  were  not  new,  they  were  none  the 
less  singular,  and  inexplicable  by  any  of  the  established 
physiological  and  pathological  theories. 

We  have  good  reason  to  say  that  the  new  world  which 
we  are  exploring  here  is  even  more  surprising  than  that 
of  Christopher  Columbus!  As  for  seeing  by  means  of  the 
ear,  it  seems  to  me  that  that  is  an  essentially  psychic  phe- 
nomenon, to  which  the  acoustic  nerve  is  as  foreign  as  the 
optic  nerve. 

Why  should  it  be  the  forehead,  the  nose,  the.  chin,  the 
stomach,  the  navel,  the  leg,  or  the  foot  with  which  they  saw 
rather  than  their  mental  being,  gifted  with  an  inner  organ, 
a  sort  of  organ  of  actual  dream?  The  X-rays  pass  through 
the  body.  Place  yourself  entirely  clothed  before  the  radi- 
ographic screen  and  your  skeleton  will  appear  on  the  screen. 

What  is  this  inner  faculty?  Can  we  attribute  it  to  the 
brain?  Or  ought  we  to  see  in  it  a  faculty  of  the  soul,  inde- 
pendent of  organic  anatomy?    Let  us  ask  the  question  again. 

The  brain  is  undeniably  associated  with  all  our  thoughts. 
The  -  sentiment  of  the  purest  truth,  the  spirit  of  sacrifice, 
complete  abnegation,  mystic  adoration  of  the  divinity, — all 
that  we  can  imagine  as  most  detached  from  the  material, — 
become  thought  only  by  means  of  the  human  being  and  the 
help  of  the  brain.  But  the  brain  is  not  the  author  of  these 
thoughts :  it  is  only  the  instrument.  If  I  wish  to  lift  my  arm,  ^ 
if  I  wish  to  take  an  oath,  if  I  deliberate,  it  is  my  spirit  which  1 
acts.  The  cause  of  the  action  is  in  it  and  not  in  the  nervous 
and  muscular  system  which  obeys  it  automatically.    It  is  our 


VISION  WITHOUT  EYES  209 

spirit  which  thinks,  wills,  seeks,  loves,  decides.  It  is  not 
our  molecular  cerebral  system. 

Mental  vision  takes  place  by  means  of  the  spirit,  of  the 
soul.  The  faculties  at  work  here  are  still  unknown  to  us. 
I  supposed  at  first  that  the  brain  might  be  the  cause  of  all 
these  phenomena,  that  it  emitted  invisible  waves  which  were 
transmitted  at  a  distance,  and  that  these  manifestations  did 
not  prove  the  individual  existence  of  our  mental  being.  But 
this  hypothesis  is  entirely  insufficient,  for  the  personal  action 
of  the  spirit  is  clearly  revealed  in  this  analysis. 

We  have  stated  above  that  many  experimenters,  and  not 
the  least  of  them,  attribute  this  supra-normal  faculty  of  read- 
ing a  hidden  text  to  a  foreign  spirit  which  communicates 
with  the  experimenter  through  the  medium.  This  is  not  inad- 
missible. But  it  is  going  far  afield  after  an  explanation,  it 
is  putting  off  the  difficulty ;  and  what  would  be  the  nature  of 
the  unknown  spirit? 

As  many  of  my  readers  know,  I  have  outlined  this  same 
hypothesis  in  serveral  of  my  works, — merely  as  an  hypothesis, 
of  course,  for  it  is  far  from  having  been  proved.  It  is  against 
the  principles  of  scientific  method  to  create  more  or  less  im- 
aginary explanations.  It  tries  to  remain  always  in  the  sphere 
of  what  is  known.  But  it  is  forced  to  declare  itself  inade- 
quate before  incomprehensible  events,  and  after  having  sub- 
stituted the  physiological  theory  of  hallucinations  for  a  com- 
plete denial  of  the  phenomena,  it  finds  it  is  still  unsatisfied, 
and  is  obliged  to  seek  for  something  else. 

It  seems,  however,  that  our  own  spirit,  such  as  we  know  it, 
does  not  always  offer  a  trujy  satisfactory  explanation,  and 
that  occult  forces  may  be  concerned. 

My  different  works  have  established,  by  a  positive  train,  of 
reasoning,  generally  accepted,  that  the  universe  is  a  dynamism 
and  that  the  atoms  are  regulated  by  immaterial  forces. 

Frank  Podmore,  a  well-known  psychic  author  of  whom  we 
have  already  spoken,  is  convinced  that  all  these  phenomena. 


2ia  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

including  apparitions,  are  explained  by  the  transmission  of 
thought,  and  refers  them  all  to  this  theory.  I  confess  that  for 
my  part  I  cannot  see  any  transmission  of  thought  in  the  act 
of  the  seminarist  of  Bordeaux,  writing  his  sermon  in  total 
darkness  and  with  his  eyes  masked  by  a  screen;  or  in  the 
somnambulist  describing  an  internal  malady  and  seeing,  from 
a  closed  chamber,  the  details  of  the  dissection  of  her  mother's 
body;  or  in  Alexis,  reading  the  cards  before  they  had  been 
turned  and  playing,  in  spite  of  a  tight  bandage,  games  which 
he  always  won ;  or  in  a  medium  following  a  thief  from  Paris 
to  Brussels  and  to  Spa ;  or  in  the  experience  of  Stainton  Moses 
writing  out  a  sentence  taken  from  a  book  with  which  he 
was  not  familiar;  or  in  that  of  Crookes  with  the  unknown 
word  that  was  divined,  etc. 

We  are  very  far  from  knowing  everything.  We  do  not 
pretend  to  explain  everything.  **Know  thyself,''  said  So- 
crates. This  ought  still  to  be  our  motto.  We  do  not  know 
our  inner  selves  any  better  than  we  did  two  or  three  thou- 
sand years  ago. 

But  our  soul  does  not  seem  so  simple  as  we  are  taught. 
Polypsychism  is  not  a  vain  word.  What  are  the  divisions 
of  the  personality?  What  are  the  unconscious,  the  subcon- 
scious, the  subliminal? 

A  rather  ancient  and  indisputable  example  of  vision  at  a 
distance,  certified  by  a  great  number  of  witnesses,  whose 
assertions  have  been  discussed  at  length,  is  offered  us  by  the 
historian  Philostratus,  in  his  life  of  Apollonius  of  Tyana,  a 
contemporary  of  Jesus  Christ.  When  he  was  at  Ephesus  he 
saw,  with  his  inner  vision,  the  assassination  of  the  Emperor 
Domitian  at  Rome. 

We  know  how  this  extravagant  and  bloody  tyrant  died.  It 
was  his  own  best-loved  freedmen,  who  decided  with  his  wife, 
the  Empress  Domitia  Longina,  that  he  was  as  dangerous  in  his 
friendships  as  in  his  hates,  and  murdered  him  in  his  own 
home.    The  vision  of  Apollonius  took  place  at  the  very  mo- 


VISION  WITHOUT  EYES  211 

ment  when  the  tragic  attack  was  being  made.  Here  is  the 
astonishingly  circumstantial  account  given.  Philostratus  tells 
us: 

It  was  at  noon.  Apollonius  happened  to  be  in  one  of  those  little 
parks  on  the  outskirts  of  Ephesus,  speaking  on  grave  philosophical 
subjects  before  hundreds  of  listeners.  At  a  certain  moment  his 
voice  dropped  as  if  he  had  been  seized  by  a  sudden  and  profound 
emotion.  Nevertheless  he  continued  his  discourse,  but  more  slowly, 
visibly  troubled  by  the  rush  of  ideas  which  were  turning  his  mind 
from  those  with  which  he  was  occupied.  Then  he  stopped  com- 
pletely, words  seemed  to  fail  him,  as  with  a  man  who  seeks  to  see 
the  issue  of  an  event.  Finally  he  cried  out:  "Be  of  good  courage, 
Ephesians!  The  tyrant  has  been  killed  to-day.  What  am  I  say- 
ing? To-day?  By  Minerva!  he  has  just  been  killed  at  this  very 
instant  whefti  I  stopped  speaking."  The  Ephesians  thought  that 
Apollonius  had  lost  his  mind,  they  wished  ardently  that  he  might  have 
spoken  the  truth,  but  they  feared  lest  some  danger  might  come 
to  them  from  this  speech.  "I  am  surprised,"  said  Apollonius, 
"if  you  do  not  yet  believe  me:  Rome  herself  does,  not  yet  know  all 
about  it.  But  noW  she  is  learning  of  it;  the  news  spreads;  already 
thousands  of  men  know  it.  It  'makes  twice  that  number  of  men 
— four  times  as  many — the  whole  people  wild  with  joy.  The  noise 
of  it  will  come  even  here.  You  need  not  believe  me  until  the  moment 
when  you  are  informed  of  the  event,  and  put  off,  until  then,  the 
sacrifice  you  should  offer  the  gods  on  this  occasion;  as  for  me,  I 
am  going  to  render  thanks  to  them  for  what  I  have  seen." 

The  Ephesians  remained  incredulous;  but  soon  messengjers  arrived 
to  announce  the  good  news  aiid  bear  witness  to  the  correct  divina- 
tion of  Apollonius,  for  the  murder  of  the  tyrant,  the  day  on  which 
it  had  occurred,  the  hour  of  noon,  all  these  details  agreed  perfectly 
with  those  which  the  gods  had  Shown  him  the  day  of  his  discourse 
to  the  Ephesians. 

Thus  speaks  Philostratus. 

At  this  period  nx)  more  was  nece^ary  to  cause  Apollonius 
to  pass  for  a  demigod.  Moreover,  when  Pope  Pius  V  was 
made  a  saint,  the  same  ** miracle"  was  attributed  to  him — 


212  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

that  is,  the  sight  from  a  window  of  th-e  Vatican  of  the  Battle 
of  Lepanto,  October  7,  1571,  and  his  exclamation  to  those 
around  him :  '  *  Let  us  go  to  the  altar  to  give  thanks  to  God ; 
our  army  has  just  won  a  great  victory. ' ' 

History  is  full  of  these  examples  of  second  sight.  Comines,- 
the  chronicler  of  Louis  XI,  reports  that  at  the  hour  when 
Charles  the  Brave  was  killed  at  the  Battle  of  Nancy  the  king 
was  hearing  mass  in  the  church  of  St.  Martin  of  Tours,  and 
that  the  king's  chaplain,  Angelo  Cato,  later  Archbishop  of 
Vienna,  said  to  him,  while  giving  him  the  pax  to  kiss: 
*'God  gives  you  peace:  your  enemy,  the  Duke  of  Bourgogne, 
has  just  been  killed  and  his  army  is  in  flight." 

These  tales  of  Apollonius,  of  Pius  V,  of  Comines  and  of 
a  hundred  others,  have  suffered  the  fate  of  all  human  things. 
In  the  eighteenth  century  people  quite  simply  denied  them. 
In  the  nineteenth  they  were  merely,  hallucinations.  To-day, 
after  all  the  facts  have  been  brought  together,  it  is  impossible 
for  us  to  refuse  to  admit  this  vision  at  a  distance,  since  we 
know  with  certainty  of  a  great  number  of  similar  cases. 

These  events  are  more  ancient  and  more  numerous  than  we 
think.     But  we  are  generally  ignorant  of  them. 

Thoughts  travel  across  space.  How?  Emission,  or  wavies? 
From  the  sun  to  the  earth  there  circulate  the  electric  par- 
ticles, flung  out  from  the  central  star,  which  produce  here 
the  phenomena  of  magnetism,  of  the  aurora  borealis,  of  tele- 
phonic disturbances.  They  are  emissions.  A  flung  projectile 
carries  with  it  a  certain  energy.  The  transmission  of  sound- 
waves through  the  atmosphere,  or  of  light-waves  through  the 
ether,  waves  which  in  themselves  are  neither  sonorous  nor 
luminous,  come  from  a  source  of  energy.  How  is  gravity 
transmitted  through  space?  This  force  is  prodigious:  with 
its  hands  it  upholds  all  the  worlds:  the  earth  which  weighs 
five  septillions,  nine  hundred  and  ninety  sextillions  of  tons; 
Jupiter,  three  thousand  times  larger;  the  sun,  three  hundred 
thousand  times  heavier  than  our  globe ;  all  the  stars,  each  one 


VISION  WITHOUT  EYES  213 

of  which  is  a  sun.  From  the  greatest  to  the  smallest  these 
worlds  act  and  react  upon  one  another,  and  Sirius,  at  eighty- 
three  thousand  millions  of  kilometers  from  here,  exercises  a 
distant  influence  upon  our  planet  itself.  What  is  the  nature 
of  this  physical  telepathy?  Waves  of  gravitation  do  not 
exist.  It  is  possible  that  thought  has  no  common  measure 
with  matter,  space,  and  time,  of  which,  after  all,  we  can 
have  no  precise  idea.  Our  brain  cells  bathe  in  the  unknown ; 
we  are  unconsciously  related  to  all  that  exists,  to  all  natural 
forces,  known  and  unknown,  by  an  inextricable  network  of 
waves  and  vibrations,  and  thought  itself  is  an  agent  acting 
through  space. 

In  these  accounts  there  is  no  imagination,  nor  illusion,  nor 
trickery.  They  are  as  exact  as  a  meterological  or  an  as- 
tronomical observation.  These  studies  have  the  rights  of 
citizenship  in  science. 

Otir  spiritual  being,  our  mental  being  can  see  without  the 
eyes  of  the  body.  I  have  brought  these  accounts  together, 
during  many  years,  in  order  to  be  convinced  myself,  and  as 
I  suppose  that  my  readers  are  as  hard  to  satisfy  as  I  am,  I 
continue  to  lay  before  them  the  result  of  my  researches. 

We  have  only  an  embarrassment  of  choices  among  these 
reports,  which  are  as  varied  as  they  are  undeniable.  Here  is 
one  more  which  I  should  regret  not  to  include,  as  a  no  less 
convincing  proof  of  our  argument.  This  "mental  vision" 
was  published  by  Dr.  Fanton,  of  Cannet,  Maritime  Alps,  in 
the  ''Annales  des  Sciences  psychiques"  for  the  month  of  De- 
cember, 1910.  It  concerns  a  young  woman,  passionately  de- 
voted to  dancing,  who  after  various,  occurrences,  became 
abominably  hysterical,  entirely  shameless,  and  seriously  ill. 
She  lived  at  Marseilles  and  her  husband  was  at  Geneva.  Here 
is  the  incident : 

Dr.  Fanton,  who  was  caring  for  her  (October,  1885),  received  a 
telegram  from  her  husband  saying  that  he  was  leaving  Geneva  that 


mi 


214  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

very  evening  by  the  seven  o'clock  train,  which  ought  to  pass  Culoz 
at  nine,  reach  Lyons  at  ten,  and  Marseilles  the  next  day  toward 
five  o'clock.  On  the  envelop  of  the  telegram  one  could  make  out 
the  words  "Minister  of  War,"  although  they  were  partly  covered  by 
a  spot  of  ink. 

It  was  seven  in  the  evening  when  the  doctor  was  called  by  the 
patient's  family  for  a  violent  crisis.  However,  he  did  not  hurry 
about  answering,  and  took  the  time  to  eat  his  evening  meal,  in  the 
course  of  which,  he  said,  they  served  him  an  omelette  aux  fines  herhes. 

His  patient's  home  was  about  three  hundred  and  fifty  meters  from 
his  own.  "On  my  arrival,"  he  said,  "I  saw  eight  persons  about  the 
invalid  who  were  witnesses  of  the  following  events  and  of  whom 
six  are  still  living." 

She  had  just  said  to  them :  "He  does  n't  hurry  about  coming. 
At  last,  he  is  making  up  his  mind."  And  a  little  later,  "He  is  at  the 
door,  he  is  ringing."  At  once  the  bell  sounded.  On  my  entry  into 
the  room  the  sick  woman  received  me  with  a  great  burst  of  laughter 
and  addressed  me  thus:  "Ah!  you  don't  hurry  when  I  send  for 
you!  You  send  word  that  you  are  not  at  home,  and  yet  you  have 
supper  and  eat  an  omelette  aux  fines  herhes." 

She  continued:  "It  is  useless  for  you  to  seek  excuses.  I  know 
what  you  were  doing.  You  had  better  give  me  that  telegram  from 
Alfred  which  you  have  with  you;  he  might  as  easily  have  sent  it  to 
me."  At  the  end  of  a  moment  the  sick  woman  repeated  in  a  loud 
and  very  intelligible  voice  the  whole  of  the  telegram  which  was 
still  lying  at  the  bottom  of  my  pocket  and  of  which  no  one  but 
myself  knew  among  those  present.  This  scene  took  place  with  such 
rapidity  that  I  was  completely  taken  aback  by  it,  and  the  witnesses 
themselves  were  so  thunderstruck  that  I  was  a  moment  in  recover- 
ing myself  before  telling  those  present  that  what  the  patient  said 
was  correct  and  showing  them  the  telegram  which  I  had  received 
half  an  hour  before. 

How  was  Madame  A able  to  know  the  contents  of  that  tele- 
gram, when  she  had  not  been  warned  of  her  husband's  return  and 
still  less  of  the  hours  and  itinerary  of  his  journey?  That  is  what 
we  attempted  to  explain,  without  being  able  to  do  so.  All  at  once 
a  new  outburst  of  laughter,  still  louder  and  gayer,  broke  from  the 
invalid,  interrupted  by  these  words:     "He  is  sleeping,  he  is  staying 


VISION  WITHOUT  EYES  215 

in  the  train.  He  will  not  get  here.  No!  No!"  Then  the  laughter 
passed  into  suffocation  and  ended  in  a  stammering,  in  which  we 
made  out,  quite  clearly:  "He  is  asleep,  be  is  staying  on  the  train, 
he  will  not  get  here."    It  was  then  nine  o'clock. 

In  the  morning,  at  about  the  hour  when  the  train  was  due  which 
was  to  bring  her  husband,  I  went  to  meet  him  with  two  of  our 
friends.  I  especially  urged  all  those  who  remained  with  the  in- 
valid to  uotice  very  exactly  and  in  the  smallest  detail,  all  that 
might  happen  during  our  absence,  and  in  the  same  way  we  others 
proposed  to  notice  all  our  acts  and  gestures.  The  husband  was  not 
on  the  train  from  Lyons  and  we  returned  to  my  patient. 

A  little  after  our  departure  a  telegram  had  come  from  Grenoble 
saying  that  the  husband  would  not  arrive  until  the  afternoon,  as  he 
had  missed  the  train. 

I  left  her  at  about  eleven  o'clock. 

In  the  afternoon  I  went  to  meet  her  husband;  before  he  had  seen 
any  one,  and  without  letting  him  suspect  anything,  I  questioned 
him.  I  learned  from  his  own  words  that  at  nine  in  the  evening 
he  had  passed  through  Culoz,  without  awakening,  in  a  car  for 
Chambery,  and  that  he  had  awakened  in  the  latter  town.  When 
he  found  he  would  reach  Marseilles  seven  hours  late,  because  of  this 
change  in  his  journey,  he  had  telegraphed.  I  made  him  repeat  this 
tale  in  the  presence  of  several  persons  who  had  watched  with  his 
wife  the  night  before,  and.  we  were  able  to  prove,  by  the  tale  we 
told  him  in  our  turn,  that  she  had  followed  him  during  his  trip, 
the  vicissitudes  of  which  she  had  described  to  us. 

At  that  time  Dr.  Fanton  was  not  familiar  with  the  subject 
which  we  are  studying  here  and  was  veritably  thunderstruck. 
We  know,  to-day,  that  this  power  of  the  soul  is  undeniable: 
we  can  see  by  means  of  the  spirit,  not  only  by  means  of  the 
optic  nerve  or  the  retina. 

Let  us  also  listen  to  Dr.  Osty,  concerning  certain  facts 
recently  studied  by  him : 

In  February,  1914,  Madame  Camille,  who  was  exercising  the  pro- 
fession of  a  medium  at  Nancy,  gave,  during  a  hypnotic  sleep,  in- 
dications which  resulted  in  the  recovery  of  the  body  of  Monsieur 


216  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

Cadiou,  who  had  been  missing  since  December  30th,  without  there 
having  been,  until  then,  the  least  hint  as  to  the  cause  of  his  dis- 
appearance. There  was  at  once  a  great  noise  in  the  papers.  Police 
and  magistrates  could  not  conceal  their  annoyance.  The  "strong- 
minded,"  the  shrewd,  those  whose  superior  intelligence  shone  in 
their  expressions,  did  not  hesitate  an  instant  to  accuse  the  somnam- 
bulist of  being  an  accomplice,  paid  by  those  interested  to  mislead 
justice. 

Professor  Bernheim,  interviewed  by  a  reporter  of  the  "Matin," 
declared  that  divination  did  not  exist.  "I  have  never  been  able  to 
establish,"  he  said,  "in  the  course  of  my  long  career,  phenomena  of 
vision  at  a  distance  or  of  divination;  all  my  scientific  education  re- 
volts against  the  existence  of  such  phenomena  and  until  there  is 
serious  verification  I  shall  contest  the  truth  of  them." 

Nevertheless,  nothing  was  more  certain  than  this  hypnotic  revela- 
tion.^ 

A  month  later,  on  March  19,  1914,  Monsieur  Andre  Rifaut,  the 
caretaker  of  the  chateau  of  Boursault,  disappeared.  Men  ransacked 
the  woods  and  the  lakes  formed  by  the  overflowing  of  the  Mame. 
The  police  and  a  company  of  the  Rheims  militia  made  an  active 
search,  but  the  judicial  inquiry  remained  without  results. 

Then  the  brothers  Rifaut  did  as  the  Cadiou  family  had  done  and 
had  recourse  to  several  mediums,  who,  with  one  accord,  declared 
that  the  caretaker  had  been  murdered  and  thrown  into  the  water. 
Madame  Camille,  who  was  one  of  the  three,  spoke  thus,  on  March 
24th,  according  to  the  "Journal": 

"You  are  seeking  for  a  relative.  I  see  him.  After  having  ex- 
changed some  papers  with  a  man  clad  in  a  uniform,  he  goes  on 
into  the  night  along  a  deserted  road.  There  is  a  river  a  little  farther 
on.  He  approaches  his  home.  A  man  comes  up  and  strikes  him 
on  the  back  of  his  head  with  a  club.  The  unfortunate  man  falls, 
stunned.  His  murderer  picks  him  up  and  goes  to  throw  him  in  the 
river.  I  see  his  body.  It  will  be  found  in  a  few  days,  far  from 
this  spot." 

On  April  12th,  the  body  of  Monsieur  Rifaut  was  picked  up  by 
some  fishermen,  who  found  it  floating  down  the  current  at  Jaul- 

1  It  happens  that  the  case  is  decided  on  the  day  on  which  I  am  correct- 
ing this  proof   (October  29,  1919). 


VISION  WITHOUT  EYES  217 

gonne,  Aisne.  Dr.  Petit,  the  coroner,  formally  decided  there  had 
been  death  by  violence.  According  to  his  evidence,  the  caretaker 
of  the  chateau  of  Boursault  had  been  struck  down,  the  skull  had 
been  driven  in,  and  the  unfortunate  man  was  dead  before  he  was 
thrown  into  the  water.^ 

The  following  fact  is  perhaps  even  more  striking: 

On  March  1,  1914,  Dr.  Osty  received  a  letter  which  told  him  that 
in  the  little  commune  of  Cher,  an  old  man  of  eighty-two.  Monsieur 
Etienne  Lerasle,  had  disappeared  and  that  all  search  for  him  had  been 
vain.  Madame  Morel,  who  lived  in  Paris  and  was  possessed  of  second 
sight  (I  myself  have  had  occasion  to  consult  her),  to  whom  the 
doctor  had  brought  a  silk  handkerchief  that  had  belonged  to  Mon- 
sieur Lerasle,  followed  the  walk  he  had  taken  through  a  wood  and 
saw  him  stretched  out  dead  on  the  ground,  having  stopped,  worn 
out,  and,  in  fact,  determined  to  die.  It  was  the  second  of  March. 
For  fifteen  days  his  family  and  the  village  people — eighty  men — on 
the  demand  of  the  mayor  had  explored  the  forest  without  finding 
anything.  From  the  detailed  directions  of  the  medium,  they  fol- 
lowed the  paths  described  by  her  and  reached  the  corpse  in  the  at- 
titude in  which  she  had  seen  it:  she  had  followed  him  as  far  as 
that,  tapping  with  his  cane,  as  was  his  habit,  and  stretching  himself 
out  near  a  great  tree  and  a  brook,  never  to  rise  again.^  Madame 
Morel  had  never  heard  either  of  this  good  man  or  of  this  country 
about  Cher;  her  psychic  power — ^which  we  mention  here  as  one  of 
the  proofs  of  the  existence  of  our  mental  element,  independent  of 
the  physical  organism — was  able  to  reach  the  old  man  leaving  his 
home,  see  the  past,  and  feel  the  future.  All  this  was  not  shut  up 
in  the  fold  of  the  silk  handkerchief,  assuredly,  but  the  handkerchief 
served  to  establish  a  communication  between  the  medium  and  the 
man  to  be  discovered.  There  is  here  neither  telepathy  nor  transmis- 
sion of  thought:  no  one  knew  anything.  There  was  vision  at  a  dis- 
tance, without  eyes,  as  in  all  the  examples  mentioned  in  this  chap- 
ter. 

1  Annates  des  Sciences  psychiques,  April,  1914. 

2  For  all  the  details,  including  the  plan  of  the  wood  and  of  the  walk, 
see  the  Annales  des  Sciences  psychiques  of  April,  1914.  See  pIso  the  very 
competent  works  of  Monsieur  Duchatel  on  psychometry. 


218  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

These  are  facts  of  observation  that  we  cannot  confound 
with  the  usual  banalities  of  the  *' extra-lucid  seers"  and  the 
fortune-tellers  by  cards.  Let  us  exclude  nothing  and  exam- 
ine everything.  We  see  without  eyes.  Cryptoscopy  ought 
to  be  admitted  as  a  new  branch  of  the  tree  of  science. 

Is  it  known  that  a  blind  person  can  see,  read,  draw,  paint  ? 
Here  is  an  example  observed  in  1849  at  the  village  of  Saint- 
Laurent-sur-Sevres,  Maine-et-Loire,  by  a  doctor  who  names  his 
witnesses : 

A  doctor  of  the  neighborhood  had  gone  to  visit  two  convents  in 
this  village,  one  of  men  and  one  of  women.  **We  were  received," 
he  writes,  "in  the  most  cordial  manner  by  Father  Dallain,  the  Su- 
perior of  the  former,  who  also  had  authority  over  the  second.  After 
we  had  walked  about  in  the  two  convents,  he  said  to  us:  *I  now 
wish  to  show  you,  gentlemen,  one  of  the  most  curious  things  in  the 
ladies'  convent.'  And  he  had  an  album  brought  in  in  which  we  ad- 
mired some  very  perfect  water-colors.  There  were  birds,  landscapes, 
and  marines.  These  very  successful  drawings,'  he  said,  4iave  been 
made  by  one  of  our  young  nuns  who  is  blind.'  And  this  is  what 
he  told  us  about  a  charming  bunch  of  roses,  one  bud  of  which  was 
blue.  'Some  time  ago,  in  the  presence  of  the  Marquis  of  La  Roche- 
jaquelein  and  several  other  visitors,  I  called  in  the  blind  nun  and 
asked  her  to  sit  down  at  a  table  and  draw  something.  We  spread 
out  colors  for  her  and  gave  her  pencils,  brushes,  paper,  and  she  at 
once  began  on  the  bouquet  which  you  see.  While  she  was  working 
they  several  times  placed  an  opaque  body,  cardboard  or  board,  be- 
tween her  eyes  and  the  paper  and  the  brush  continued  to  move  with 
the  same  regularity.  To  the  observation  that  the  bunch  was  a  little 
slim,  she  replied :  "Very  well,  I  will  make  a  bud  come  out  from  the 
joint  of  this  branch."  While  she  w^as  working  at  this  correction 
some  one  replaced  the  carmine  with  the  blue;  and  she  did  not  notice 
the  change,  and  that  is  why  you  see  a  blue  bud.' 

"The  Abbe  Dallain,"  adds  the  narrator,  "was  as  remarkable  for 
his  science  and  his  fine  intelligence  as  for  his  great  piety,  and  I 
have  never  met  any  one  who  has  inspired  more  affection  and  venera- 
tion." 1 

1  Revue  spirite  (1864),  p.  72. 


VISION  WITHOUT  EYES  219 

From  the  language  of  the  blind  young  woman,  it  is  cer- 
tain that  she  saw;  otherwise  she  would  never  have  said:  **I 
am  going  to  make  a  bud  grow  from  the  joint  of  this  branch. ' ' 
But  what  is  no  less  certain  is  that  she  did  not  see  with  her 
eyes,  for  she  continued  her  work  despite  the  obstacle  that  was 
placed  before  it.  She  saw  with  the  sight  of  the  soul,  as  the 
sight  of  the  body  had  been  taken  away.  After  all,  the 
somnambulists  see  in  this  way;  why  should  not  a  blind  per- 
son see,  in  a  similar  condition?  Was  she  not  in  a  state  of 
awakened  somnambulism? 

As  for  the  color  blue,  put  in  the  place  of  the  red,  she  may 
have  been  thinking  only  of  the  position  of  the  bud  or  may 
not  have  noticed  it,  or  may  not  have  seen  it  as  color. 

In  the  face  of  all  these  facts  we  can  no  longer  deny  the 
possibility,  for  the  human  organism,  of  sight  without  eyes, 
through  opaque  bodies,  as  well  as  through  time  and  space.^ 

Those  who  deny  this  really  make  us  laugh  when  they  state 
learnedly  that  there  is  nothing  here  but  illusion,  error,  mysti- 
fication, hallucinations,  and  other  nonsense;  that  they  know 
the  laws  of  nature  and  that  the  universe  does  not  hide  any- 
thing from  them;  that  the  soul  does  not  exist;  that  there  is 
no  spirit  either  in  man  or  in  the  cosmos ;  and  that  everything 
is  explained  by  matter  and  its  properties. 

These  are  very  simple-minded  "  reasoners. ' ' 

The  cases  reported  in  this  chapter  on  sight  without  eyes,  by 
means  of  the  spirit,  are  as  certain  as  astronomical,  meteorologi- 
cal, physical,  geological,  and  anthropological  observations,  and 
others  of  which  the  most  exacting  science  is  composed ;  as  cer- 
tain and  as  irrefutable  as  the  psychic  or  spiritual  phenomena, 
or  those  procured  through  mediums,  which  have  been  care- 

1  We  can  find  other  no  less  characteristic  events  in  Les  Forces  natu- 
relies  inconnues,  especially  on  pages  510,  515,  517,  518.  The  progress  of 
science  has  suppressed  the  paradox  of  vision  through  opaque  bodies,  by 
the  discovery  of  the  Roentgen  rays,  a  fact  that  ought  to  be  instructive 
to  impenitent  unbelievers. 


220  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

fully  observed  and  registered  by  photography,^  although  these 
require  a  particularly  careful  attention,  as  they  are  not  in 
accord  with  our  present  ideas  on  physics,  weight,  and  human 
physiology. 

But  what  forces  are  in  action?  Incontestably,  indisput- 
ably, there  is  something  there,  and  something  transcendent, 
outside  our  little,  ordinary  life  of  flesh  and  blood,  of  muscles 
and  nerves. 

Our  corporeal,  material  existence  can  disintegrate,  without 
bringing  about  the  destruction  of  this  psychic  element,  which 
is  independent  of  it.  This  is  a  scientifically  admissible  possi- 
bility. "What  does  appear  altogether  extraordinary,  is  that 
the  events  reported  here  have  been  observed  for  many  long 
years,  for  centuries,  without  any  one's  taking  any  account  of 
them,  that  the  reality  of  the  soul's  existence  was  positively 
established  in  1819,  by  the  Abbe  Faria,  through  these  same 
phenomena,  in  his  book  on  "La  Cause  du  Sommeil  lucide,"  and 
yet  that  only  now  do  we  seem  to  be  making  these  discoveries ! 
Do  well-informed  men  continue  to  be  in  a  very  small  minority  ? 

The  vision  of  the  future,  the  knowledge  of  future  events,  is 
going  to  furnish  us  with  a  demonstration  even  more  irrefutable 
than  all  that  has  preceded  it. 

1  See  Les  Forces  naturelles  inconnues. 


VIII 

THE  SIGHT  OP   FUTURE  EVENTS;   THE  PRESENT  FUTURE; 
THE  ALREADY   SEEN 

A  presumptuous  skepticism  which  re- 
jects facts,  without  examining  them  to 
see  if  they  are  real,  is  more  blameworthy 
in  certain  respects  than  an  irrational 
credulity. 

A.  VON  Humboldt. 

AMONG  the  unknown  faculties  of  the  soul  that  we 
ought  to  study  if  we  desire  to  create  an  experi- 
mental psychology  founded  on  facts  of  positive  ob- 
servation I  wish  to  speak  now  of  that  which  permits  us  to 
see  the  future,  to  see  what  does  not  yet  exist ! 

In  the  same  way  in  which  the  soul  sees  across  space  it  sees 
across  time. 

I  have  written  a  book  (not  yet  printed)  on  this  subject, 
"La  Vue  de  Tavenir," — genuine  premonitions,  authentically 
established,  premonitive  dreams,  events  foreseen  with  a  great 
accuracy  of  detail,  the  conflict  between  the  vision  of  the  future 
and  human  liberty,  between  determinism  and  free  will.  My 
intention  is  not  to  expatiate  on  this  vast  subject,  but  as  we 
are  concerned  with  proving  the  special  faculties  of  the  soul, 
it  is  a  good  opportunity  to  add  to  the  preceding  accounts  of 
''mental  vision"  those  which  follow  and  which  are  no  less 
worthy  of  attention.  Especially  noteworthy  is  what  is  called 
"the  already  seen,"  a  pheilomenon  very  much  disputed, 
very  much  discussed,  but  incontestable  in  the  opinion  of  those 
who  have  studied  the  question  and  have  had  time  to  exam- 
ine the  accounts  carefully. 

Future  events  can  undoubtedly  be  seen  in  advance,  and 
with  great  exactness. 

221 


222  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

We  shall  here  approach  this  grave  question  not  by  meta- 
physical considerations  but  by  the  experimental  method. 

My  attention  was  first  called  to  this  phenomenon  in  the 
spring  of  1870,  by  the  account  which  we  are  going  to  read 
of  an  observation  made  by  a  person  endowed  with  a  clear 
and  judicious  mind,  the  Princess  Emma  Carolath,  who,  being 
very  fond  of  France,  used  to  come  to  Paris  every  year  and 
liked  to  talk  with  me  about  these  great  problems.  The  un- 
expected war  between  France  and  Germany  touched  her  quick 
sensibility  and  the  young  woman  barely  survived  this  in- 
ternational disaster — a  preface  to  the  cataclysm  of  1914. 
This  letter  is  one  of  the  last  which  I  received  from  her,  and 
the  premonitory  dream  is  remarkably  explicit.  I  have  al- 
ready spoken  of  it  in  my  work  ' '  L 'Inconnu " ;  it  dates  from 
about  twelve  years  before  1870.  Here  it  is,  somewhat 
abridged : 

I  had  just  fallen  asleep,  very  anxious  over  the  health  of  some 
one  I  loved,  when  I  found  myself  carried  in  a  dream  to  an  unknown 
castle,  into  an  octagonal  cabinet  hung  in  red  damask.  There  was  a 
bed  in  which  lay  sleeping  the  person  whose  health  disturbed  me. 
A  lamp,  hanging  from  the  arch  of  the  canopy,  flooded  with  light  the 
pale  but  smiling  face,  framed  in  thick  masses  of  black  hair.  At 
the  bed's  head  was  a  picture,  the  subject  of  which  was  so  strangely 
engraved  on  my  memory  that  on  my  awakening  I  could  have  drawn 
it:  it  was  a  Christ  crowned  with  roses  by  a  heavenly  spirit,  with 
verses  by  Schiller,  which  I  read. 

Two  years  later  we  went  for  a  country  visit  to  a  castle  in  the 
depths  of  Hungary.  I  stopped,  trembling,  when  I  entered  the  apart- 
ment which  had  been  set  aside  for  us :  I  was  in  the  octagonal  cabinet, 
hung  in  red  damask,  before  the  bed  and  before  the  picture  of  Christ 
crowned  with  roses,  with  the  verses  of  Schiller.  This  picture  had 
never  been  copied  or  reproduced,  and  it  was  impossible  that  I 
should  have  seen  it  otherwise  than  in  the  dream — any  more,  for  that 
matter,  than  I  could  have  seen  the  octagonal  cabinet. 

Emma,  Princess  Carolath, 
Weisbaden:  March  5,  1870. 


THE  SIGHT  OF  FUTURE  EVENTS  223 

Since  this  already  far-away  period  of  1870  my  attention 
has  often  been  called  to  this  sort  of  event,  which  I  have  been 
led  to  examine  with  particular  care.  The  work  which  I  am 
to-day  laying  before  the  reader,  therefore,  represents  almost 
fifty  years  of  varied  observations,  and  I  present  it  with  all 
the  confidence  that  this  slow  elaboration  justifies. 

One  can  object  to  this  dream,  as  to  other  similar  ones,  that 
it  was  not  written  down  and  dated  by  a  canceled  postage- 
stamp  before  its  verification, — which  would  assuredly  have 
been  absolute  proof, — and  that  in  the  mind  of  the  narrator 
it  might  have  been  made  to  conform  to  the  incident  as  ob- 
served, so  that  her  so-called  verification  would  be  fallacious. 
But  this  objection  has  scarcely  any  value,  as,  contrariwise, 
it  was  this  unexpected  verification  which  struck  the  ob- 
server. 

"We  attach  no  importance  to  these  dreams  unless  they  are 
realized,  and  we  do  not  take  the  precaution  to  write  them 
down  in  advance.  It  can  also  be  objected  that  we  see  in 
dreams  many  scenes  and  countries  which  we  never  actually  see 
again;  that  we  see  only  coincidences  which  have  occurred 
more  or  less  by  chance,  and  that  for  one  coincidence  which 
appears  there  are  a  thousand  which  do  not  come  to  pass.  To 
suppose  that  at  sight  of  a  room,  a  house,  a  landscape,  a  sort 
of  sudden  and  fugitive  dream  may  traverse  the  brain  and 
give  the  impression  of  the  already  seen,  is  another  hypothesis 
and  explanations  have  been  proposed  for  such  apparent  ex- 
teriorizations. Further  on  we  will  discuss  the  objections  and 
we  will  examine  all  the  explanations.  For  the  present,  let 
us  note  that  there  are  different  sorts  of  physiological  dreams, 
and  that  we  are  concerned  here  not  with  more  or  less  vague 
dreams,  but  with  precise  visions  which  strike  the  attention 
enough  to  be  retained  in  all  their  details.  But  let  us  not 
discuss  it  just  now.  Let  us  bring  forward  the  facts.  The 
impartial  reader  will  be  the  best  judge.  Our  duty  is  to  estab- 
lish the  facts  liberally  and  with  no  preconceived  idea.    Hy- 


224  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

potheses  do  not  constitute  science :  it  is  observations  that  do  so, 
in  the  psychic  sciences  as  well  as  in  the  physical  and  natural 
sciences. 

I  do  not  wish  to  reconsider  here  the  numerous  examples 
(195)  published  in  ''L'Inconnu,''  showing  so  clearly  a  vision 
of  the  future.  But  since  that  time  (1899)  I  have  received  a 
great  number  of  others  which  may  interest  readers  who  are 
concerned  about  the  same  problems. 

The  already  seen  forms  a  part  of  the  still  unexplained 
phenomena  of  the  vision  of  the  future  which  we  will  study  in 
this  chapter  as  a  function  of  the  soul,  substantiating  its  in- 
trinsic reality. 

Generally  this  impression  of  the  already  seen  is  considered 
an  illusion;  it  has  been  called  ''false  recognition,"  ''perver- 
sion of  memory,"  "paramnesia,"  "ancestral  memory,"  and 
other  hypothetical  names.  I  invite  seekers  after  truth  to 
meditate  on  the  following  assemblage  of  carefully  made  ob- 
servations. 

And  first  of  all,  there  is  this  one,  which  alone  would  suffice 
to  prove  the  reality  of  which  we  have  spoken. 

The  already  seen,  clearly  and  literally  presented  by  pre- 
monitory dreams,  is  a  fact  that  cannot  be  denied,  however  in- 
explicable it  may  still  be  in  the  present  state  of  our  psychology. 
Here,  for  example,  is  an  honest  and  irrefutable  account,  by 
Canon  Garnier,  a  worthy  priest  of  the  diocese  of  Langres,^ 
and  former  professor  at  the  little  seminary  where,  as  we  shall 
see,  an  event  of  this  sort  occurred  which  it  is  impossible  to 
doubt. 

It  was  in  1846,  during  the  second  year  of  my  work  in  the 
upper  seminary.  One  night  I  traveled  in  spirit  during  my  sleep. 
The  -road  which  I  followed — white,  smooth,  and  sparsely  bordered 
with  trees — seemed  to  descend  the  side  of  a  mountain,  by  a  gentle 
slope,  and  reach  a  plain  that  stretched  away  out  of  sight.     The,  sun 

1  Where  I  studied  Latin  from  eleven  to  fourteen  years  of  age.  See  my 
Memoirs. 


THE  SIGHT  OF  FUTURE  EVENTS     225 

was  sinking  toward  the  horizon,  as  it  was  between  four  and  five  in 
the  afternoon,  and  shed  its  peaceful  light  over  the  country-side,  with 
delicate  shadings  of  color  and  shadow  that  are  easier  to  imagine 
than  to  describe. 

I  found  that  I  had  suddenly  stopped  short,  without  knowing  how 
or  why,  at  a  spot  where  another  road  cut  at  right  angles  that  which 
I  was  following.  For  all  that,  there  was  nothing  unusual  about  it 
that  coiild  have  caught  the  eye  of  the  traveler,  nor  even  attracted 
his  attention.  Nevertheless,  I  still  see  myself  standing  there, 
straight  as  a  statue,  contemplating  with  especial  satisfaction 
nothing  much — one  of  those  country  scenes  which  we  see  every 
day. 

To  the  left,  I  noticed,  the  road  crossed  mine  and  passed  around  the 
mountain,  where,  consequently,  there  had  been  built  a  little  wall  about 
a  meter  high  which  ran  along  the  road,  to  sustain  the  earth. 

Along  this  wall  were  planted  three  large  trees  which  threw  a 
dense  shade. 

About  thirty  feet  from  the  spot  where  I  was  standing,  opposite 
me,  in  a  well-leveled  court,  there  rose,  close  to  the  road,  a  charming 
little  house,  white  as  chalk  and  bathed  in  sunshine.  The  only  win- 
dow, which  faced  the  road,  was  open:  behind  the  window  sat  a 
woman  well  but  simply  dressed.  Red  predominated  among  the 
bright  colors  of  her  clothes.  On  her  head  was  a  white  cap  of 
some  very  light  material  with  openwork  embroidery,  of  a  form 
that  was  unknown  to  me.  This  woman  seemed  about  thirty  years 
old. 

Standing  before  her  was  a  young  girl  of  ten  or  twelve  years, 
whom  I  took  to  be  her  own.  She  was  attentively  watching  her 
mother,  who  was  knitting  and  showing  her  how  it  was  done:  she 
was  barefoot,  her  hair  down  her  back,  and  was  dressed  somewhat 
like  the  mother.  By  the  side  of  the  young  girl  were  three  children 
rolling  on  the  ground :  a  small  boy  who  might  have  been  four  or  five 
years  old  was  on  his  knees,  showing  something  to  his  two  little  broth- 
ers, smaller  than  he,  to  amuse  them ;  these  were  flat  on  their  backs  be- 
fore the  eldest,  and  all  three  were  absorbed  in  their  admiration.  The 
two  women  had  given  me  a  rapid  glance  when  they  saw  me  stand- 
ing there  and  looking  at  them,  but  they  had  not  stirred.  Evidently 
they  often  saw  travelers  passing. 


226  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

A  large  dog  stretched  his  length  beside  them  and  scratched  tim- 
self  from  time  to  time,  to  put  the  fleas  to  rout. 

Through  the  wide-open  door  I  saw  three  men  seated  on  beaches 
about  a  table,  two  on  one  side  and  one  on  the  other,  at  the  very 
back  of  the  room,  playing  and  drinking.  They  looked  like  work- 
men employed  in  the  neighborhood.  They  wore  the  linen  apron 
and  the  pointed  hat  of  the  Abruzzi. 

On  the  other  side,  at  the  right,  three  sheep  were  browsing  on  the 
unappetizing  grass;  occasionally  they  butted  one  anotler  in  a 
friendly  way.  To  the  side  two  horses,  one  bay  and  the  other  white, 
were  fastened  to  the  wall.  A  pretty  little  colt  wandered  here  and 
there  to  amuse  himself,  and  went  toward  the  table  of  the  players, 
without  doubt  to  take  a  lesson  and  to  brush  their  hair  with  his  nose. 
The  young  innocent  received  a  good  cuff  as  his  reward. 

I  also  noticed  four  or  five  hens  and  a  fine  cock  with  a  magnificent 
tail,  the  sort  of  cock  whose  green-and-black  plumes  decorate  the 
caps  of  the  Italian  mountaineers.  These  poor  fowls  were  seeking 
their  pittance  in  the  court,  where  the  grass,  dried  by  the  sun,  hardly 
covered  the  white  dust. 

Such  was  the  simple  country  scene  which  I  was  watching,  in  com- 
plete content,  for  the  space  of  ten  minutes  perhaps,  and  which  dis- 
appeared suddenly  as  it  had  come.  Before,  I  had  seen  nothing; 
afterward  I  saw  nothing,  and  I  believed  it  drowned  in  the  flood  of 
forgetfulness  for  all  eternity. 

This  is  how  it  came  once  more  to  life,  and  was  stamped  for  ever 
on  my  memory  and  imagination. 

I  still  see  this  little  comer  of  the  earth,  as  I  see  the  clock-tower 
of  my  village. 

In  1849  I,  with  two  friends,  took  a  trip  into  Italy. 

Arrival  at  Marseilles,  a  step  to  Genoa,  a  brief  call  at  Leghorn, 
Siena,  Florence,  then  a  quick  advance  upon  Rome. 

We  pass  through  a  hamlet  in  the  Apennines.  A  good  coach  re- 
ceives our  august  persons.  Four  or  five  horses  draw  the  coach,  and 
set  off  like  lightning,  with  a  great  ringing  of  their  thousand  little 
bells;  the  vetturlno,  or  postilion,  wearing  an  African  helmet,  or 
rather  harlequin  hat,  cracks  the  whip  eternally, — as  though  he  would 
throw  his  arm  out  of  joint! — brings  all  the  curious  into  the  street, 
and  exhibits  his  prowess  to  the  eyes  of  the  multitude.     There  is  not 


THE  SIGHT  OF  FUTURE  EVENTS  227 

time  enough  to  admire  our  Lordships;  our  carriage  does  not  run, 
it  flies. 

But  after  leaving  the  city  all  ardor  disappears,  we  sink  into  a  dead 
calm,  we  reach  the  crest  of  the  mountain.  There  is  a  halt  of  five 
minutes;  four  proud  coursers  replace  our  Rosinantes;  whip  up, 
coachman ! — our  carriage  flies  along  with  the  dust,  we  descend  like  a 
storm,  recommending  our  souls  to  God.  (There  was  good  reason, 
for  I  am  yet  unable  to  imagine  how  we  ever  managed  to  find  our- 
selves still  whole  and  with  all  our  limbs  after  so  mad  a  ride.) 

Finally  the  carriage  slows  down  to  a  reasonable  speed  and  ar- 
rives at  a  relay  station  without  mishap. 

During  this  stop,  I  look  out  of  the  carriage  door  and  sweat 
comes  out  on  me;  my  heart  beats  like  a  tambourine,  and  I  mechan- 
ically put  my  hand  to  my  face,  as  if  to  remove  a  veil  which  troubles 
me  and  prevents  me  from  seeing:  I  rub  my  nose,  my  eyes,  like  a 
sleeper  who  awakens  suddenly  after  a  dream.  I  really  think  I  am 
dreaming,  and  yet  my  eyes  are  wide  open;  I  assure  myself  that  I 
am  not  mad  nor  yet  the  victim  of  a  most  singular  illusion.  Before 
my  eyes  is  the  little  country  scene  which  I  saw  long  ago  in  my 
dream.     Nothing  has  changed! 

The  first  thought  that  comes  to  me,  after  I  get  back  my  wits, 
is  this:  I  have  already  seen  this.  I  do  not  know  where,  but  I  am 
quite  sure  of  it, — that  is  certain.  For  all  that,  I  have  never  been 
here,  as  this  is  the  first  time  I  have  been  in  Italy.  How  does  it 
happen? 

Sure  enough,  there  are  the  two  roads  that  -cross,  the  little  wall 
which  holds  the  earth  up  at  the  side  of  the  court,  the  trees,  the 
white  house,  the  open  window;  the  mother  knitting  and  her  daugh- 
ter watching  her,  the  three  little  fellows  amusing  themselves  with 
the  dog,  the  three  workmen,  drinking  and  playing,  the  colt  who  goes 
to  take  a  lesson  and  receives  a  cuff,  the  two  horses,  the  sheep. 
Nothing  is  changed:  the  people  are  exactly  those  I  saw,  as  I  saw 
them,  doing  the  same  things  in  the  same  attitudes,  with  the  same 
gestures,  etc.  How  is  that  possible?  But  the  fact  is  certain,  and 
for  fifty  years  I  have  wondered.  Mystery!  First  I  saw  it  in  a 
dream;  secondly,  I  saw  it  in  actual  reality,  three  years  after. 

Abb6  Garnier,  Canon. 

(Letter  901.) 


228  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

Such  is  the  literal  text.  I  have  given  it  in  full,  instead  of 
in  a  summary,  for  each  detail  is  interesting. 

If  we  admit  this  account — it  seems  very  difficult  to  refuse 
to  do  so,  as  the  author  is  not  a  mere  nobody,  nor  a  joker,  nor 
an  illusionist — ^we  have  before  us  two  recorded  facts:  first, 
a  dream  that  occurred  under  known  conditions,  in  a  room  of 
the  large  seminary  of  Langres,  and  secondly,  a  view  of  this 
dream  in  panorama,  three  years  later. 

The  psychologists  who  teach  that  the  already  seen  is  an 
illusion  are  in  error.  The  scene  observed  has  really  been 
seen  in  advance. 

Without  doubt,  in  fifty  years  one  can  imagine  a  more 
complete  identification  of  the  two  scenes,  that  of  the  dream 
and  that  of  the  trip ;  it  happens  quite  naturally  in  the  mind 
of  the  narrator.  But  the  foundation  remains.  There  have 
indeed  been  two  successive  sights, — one  in  a  dream,  the  other 
in  reality, — and  the  first  had  too  sharply  struck  the  young 
abbe  for  there  to  be  any  doubt  of  it. 

This  story  recalls  the  premonitory  dream  at  Niort  of  Saint- 
Maixent  with  which  my  readers  are  already  familiar. 
Monsieur  Groussard,  cure  of  Sainte-Radegonde,  when  he  was 
in  school  at  Niort  at  fifteen  years  of  age,  dreamed  that  he 
was  at  Saint-Maixent  (a  town  which  he  did  not  know  by 
name)  with  his  schoolmaster,  in  a  small  square,  near  a  well 
opposite  to  which  was  a  pharmacy,  and  that  he  saw  coming 
toward  him  a  lady  of  the  neighborhood  whom  he  remembered 
to  have  seen  once  at  Niort.  This  lady  accosted  him  and 
spoke  to  him  of  matters  which  he  found  so  extraordinary 
that,  as  soon  as  it  wajs  morning,  he  told  the  patron,  as  they 
called  the  head  of  the  institution.  The  latter,  very  much 
astonished,  made  him  repeat  the  conversation.  A  few  days 
later,  having  business  at  Saint-Maixent,  the  patron  took  the 
boy  with  him.  No  sooner  amved  they  found  themselves 
in  the  square  seen  in  the  dream,  at  two  points  marked  on 
a  map  which  Monsieur  Groussard  sent  me,  and  saw  coming 


THE  SIGHT  OF  FUTURE  EVENTS  229 

toward  them  the  lady  in  question,  who  held  with  the  patron, 
absolutely  word  for  word,  the  conversation  of  which  the 
scholar  had  told. 

These  events  are  more  frequent  than  are  often  imagined. 
For  my  part,  I  have  been  told  of  a  great  number.  Here 
is  one  in  which  an  exact  sight  of  the  scene  to  come  is  shown 
very  clearly : 

In  June,  1898,  I  was  living  with  an  uncle  whom  I  dearly  loved. 
As  his  health  had  become  uncertain,  we  thought  we  ought  to  change 
our  apartment  for  a  house  with  a  southern  exposure  and  surrounded 
by  a  garden. 

The  evening  before  we  moved,  at  eleven  o'clock,  I  was  thinking 
(very  wide  awake)  alone  in  my  room,  of  the  grief  I  felt  in  leaving 
the  well-loved  apartment,  when  all  at  once  I  saw  the  garden  of  our 
new  dwelling  as  it  was  at  the  time,  very  shady  and  full  of  flowers; 
then  it  became  clearer,  it  seemed  larger,  and  I  saw  it  as  it  must 
appear  in  winter.  The  only  verdure  left  was  the  green  arbor  of 
ivy.  And  at  the  same  time  I  saw  two  undertaker's  men,  one  large 
and  one  short,  going  down  the  path  which  led  to  the  street. 

This  vision,  which  was  very  intense,  struck  me  greatly  at  first, 
then  I  thought  no  more  about  it  in  the  midst  of  the  cares  which 
my  uncle's  condition  caused  me.  But  seven  months  later,  in  Janu- 
ary, my  uncle  died,  and  the  day  of  his  burial,  a  few  minutes  be- 
fore the  body  was  taken  away,  I  saw  the  undertaker's  two  men,  one 
large  and  one  small,  going  down  the  path  in  the  same  spot  where 
my  vision  had  shown  them  to  me. 

Be  good  enough  to  excuse,  dear  master,  the  great  liberty  I  have 
taken  in  writing  to  you  and  receive  my  most  respectful  salutations. 

Marie  Lebas, 
15  rue  Corneille,  Le  Havre. 

(Letter  920.) 

This  letter  had  evidently  but  one  aim,  and  that  quite  dis- 
interested— to  let  me  know  of  a  case  of  vision  of  the  future 
which  was  exactly  verified.  We  can  imagine  that  the  author 
foresaw  the  death  of  her  uncle;  but  that  is  all.     To  have 


z 


230  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

seen  what  came  to  pass  seven  months  later,  the  winter  land- 
scape, the  two  funereal  men,  is  outside  the  scope  of  rational 
normality.  This  already  seen  cannot  be  explained,  as  people 
pretend,  as  a  vision  at  the  moment  of  the  event,  for  the 
author  experienced  it  one  evening-  in  June,  1898,  and  the 
event  took  place  in  January,  1899. 

The  evidences  of  the  already  seen  are  very  numerous.  The 
following  account  was  sent  me  by  a  reader  of  an  article,  '*La 
Glane,"  in  ''La  Nouvelle  Mode,"  for  May  26,  1918: 

I  dreamed  that  I  was  on  my  vacation,  at  the  place  where  I  usually 
go,  but  the  room  which  was  given  me  was  different  from  my  own  and 
behind  a  clothes-press  I  saw  spreading  flames.  A  stupid  dream,  I 
forgot  it. 

Six  months  later  I  reached  my  destination.  I  was  led  into  a  very 
small  summer-house.  Although  I  had  never  seen  it  before,  I  recog- 
nized this  little  corner  which  was  meant  for  me.  The  clothes-press, 
in  the  same  spot,  recalled  the  fire.  I  spoke  of  it  and  they  reassured 
jne.  For  ten  years  no  fire  had  harmed  the  neighborhood.  I  had 
begun  to  lose  my  fear,  when,  toward  the  fourth  week,  the  tocsin 
sounded.  An  immense  fire  consumed  a  farm  not  far  from  my 
dwelling,  made  worse  by  the  straw  and  rubbish,  and  even  licked  the 
wall  where  the  clothes-press  stood. 

AlMEE  ROGE. 

Once  more,  these  premonitions  are  neither  so  exceptional 
nor  so  uncertain  as  is  supposed. 

In  his  carefully  verified  work  on  ''Premonitory  Phenomena" 
the  Italian  scholar  Bozzano  reports  the  following  occurrence 
which  is  quite  typical  as  regards  the  "already  seen."  The 
Chevalier  Giovanni  de  Figueroa,  one  of  the  best  and  most 
renowned  fencing-masters  of  Palermo,  relates  what  happened 
to  himself: 


One  night  in  the  month  of  August,  in  the  year  1910,  I  awoke 
under  the  impression  of  a  dream  which  had  been  so  vivid  that  I 


THE  SIGHT  OF  FUTURE  EVENTS  231 

roused  my  wife  and  told  her  immediately  all  these  strange,  curious, 
and  precise  details. 

I  was  somewhere  in  the  country,  on  a  white  and  dusty  road,  by 
which  I  was  entering  a  vast  cultivated  field.  In  the  center  of  this 
field  there  rose  a  rustic  building  with  a  ground  floor  for  shops  and 
stables.  To  the  right  of  the  house  I  saw  a  sort  of  hut  formed  of 
armfuls  of  leaves  and  dried  wood,  and  there  was  also  a  cart,  the 
sides  of  which  were  taken  down,  and  on  it  a  harness  for  a  beast  of 
burden. 

Then  a  peasant,  whose  face  has  remained  sharp  and  clear  in  my 
memory,  clad  in  dark-colored  trousers,  his  head  covered  with  a  soft 
hat,  approached  me  and  invited  me  to  follow  him,  which  I  did.  He 
led  me  behind  the  building,  and  through  a  low  and  narrow  door 
we  entered  a  little  stable,  four  or  five  meters  square,  or  more,  full 
of  dirt  and  manure.  In  this  little  stable  there  was  a  short  stone 
stairway  which  turned  inward  above  the  entrance  door.  A  mule  was 
fastened  to  a  movable  trough  and,  with  his  hind  quarters,  obstructed 
the  passage  by  which  one  reached  the  first  steps  of  the  stairs.  The 
peasant  having  assured  me  that  the  animal  was  gentle,  I  made  him 
move  and  climbed  the  stairway,  at  the  top  of  which  I  found  myself 
in  a  little  chamber,  or  attic,  with  a  wooden  floor;  and  I  noticed, 
hanging  from  the  ceiling,  winter  watermelons,  green  tomatoes,  onions, 
and  green  corn. 

In  this  same  room,  which  served  as  an  anteroom,  was  a  group  of 
two  women  and  a  little  girl.  One  of  these  two  women  was  old  and 
the  other  young;  I  supposed  that  the  latter  was  the  mother  of  the 
child.  The  features  of  these  three  persons  also  remained  engraved 
on  my  memory.  Through  the  door  which  opened  into  the  adjoining 
chamber  I  noticed  a  double  bed,  very  high,  such  as  I  had  never  seen. 

That  was  the  dream. 

In  the  following  month  of  October  I  went  to  Naples  to  assist  our 
fellow-citizen.  Monsieur  Amedeo  Brucato,  in  a  duel. 

This  is  not  the  time  to  tell  of  the  incidents,  the  annoyances,  and 
the  mishaps  that  assailed  me  because  of  this  assistance;  I  will  only 
say,  so  far  as  concerns  the  dream,  that  the  affair  led  me  into  a  duel 
of  my  own. 

This  duel  took  place  on  October  12th,  the  day  when,  with  my  sec- 


232  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

onds — Captain  Bruno  Palamenghi,  of  the  4th  Bersaglieri,  in  garri- 
son at  Naples,  and  Francesco  Busardo — I  went  to  Marano  by  auto- 
mobile, where  I  had  never  been  in  mj'  life  and  which  I  did  not  even 
know  existed.  I  had  barely  penetrated  a  few  hundred  meters  into 
the  flat  country  when  I  was  sharply  struck  with  the  road,  broad-  and 
white  with  dust,  which  I  recognized  as  having  seen, — but  when,  or 
on  what  occasion?  We  stopped  at  the  edge  of  a  field  which  was 
not  unknown  to  me,  because  I  had  already  seen  it.  We  got  down 
from  the  automobile  and  went  into  a  field  to  a  path  bordered  with 
thickets  and  plants,  and  I  said  to  Captain  Bruno  Palamenghi,  who 
was  by  my  side:  "I  know  this  spot,  this  is  not  the  first  time  I 
have  come  here;  at  the  end  of  the  path  there  ought  to  be  a  house; 
there,  at  the  right,  there  is  a  wooden  hut."  It  was,  indeed,  all  there, 
and  also  the  cart  with  the  lowered  sides,  containing  a  harness  for 
a  beast  of  burden. 

An  instant  later  a  peasant  in  black  trousers,  with  soft  black  hat, 
exactly  like  him  I  had  seen  two  months  before  in  my  dream,  came 
to  invite  me  to  follow  him  into  the  house  and,  instead  of  follow- 
ing him,  I  preceded  him  to  the  door  of  the  stable,  which  I  already 
knew,  and,  on  entering,  saw  the  mule  fastened  to  the  trough ;  then 
I  looked  at  the  peasant,  to  ask  him  if  the  beast  was  harmless,  for 
his  hind  quarters  prevented  me  from  climbing  the  little  stone  stair- 
way, and  he  assured  me,  as  in  the  dream,  that  there  was  no  danger. 
Having  climbed  the  stairs,  I  found  myself  in  the  attic,  where  I 
recognized  the  watermelons  up  under  the  ceiling,  the  green  tomatoes, 
the  onions,  the  green  corn,  and,  in  the  little  room,  in  an  angle  at 
the  right,  the  old  woman,  the  young  one,  and  the  child,  as  I  had 
seen  them  in  my  dream. 

In  the  neighboring  chamber,  which  I  had  to  enter  in  order  to 
remove  my  things,  I  recognized  the  bed  that  had  so  much  aston- 
ished me  in  my  dream  because  of  its  height,  and  I  laid  my  vest  and 
hat  on  it. 

I  had  spoken  of  my  dream  to  several  of  my  friends  in  the  armory, 
in  the  fencing-ring,  and  elsewhere ;  jDersons  who  can  all  vouch  for  it : 
Captain  Palamenghi,  the  lawyer,  Tomasso  Forcasi,  Monsieur  Amedeo 
Brucato,  Count  Dentale  Diaz,  and  Monsieur  Roberto  Giannina  of 
Naples  were  witnesses  to  my  precise  knowledge  of  the  spot  and  the 
persons  who  had  their  place  in  the  events  of  the  duel. 


THE  SIGHT  OF  FUTURE  EVENTS  233 

My  word  as  a  man  of  honor  will  suffice,  I  believe,  to  assure  the 
truth  of  these  things;  nevertheless,  if  it  were  absolutely  necessary 
to  have  recourse  to  the  evidence  of  the  witnesses  I  should  have  no 
difficulty  in  writing  one  by  one  to  the  friends  I  have  named  and  I  am 
sure  they  would  not  fail  to  respond  to  my  wish. 

These  are  the  facts;  the  interpretation  of  them  concerns  the 
scholars. 

Giovanni  de  Figueroa. 

*'This  episode,*'  writes  Bozzano,  "is  particularly  worthy  of 
attention  because  its  authenticity  cannot  be  held  in  doubt, 
as  the  man  who  told  it  is  a  person  who  knows  the  value  of  a 
word  of  honor,  and  the  fact  that  he  told  about  the  dream  be- 
fore its  realization  excludes  'the  hypothesis  that  the  impres- 
sion of  the  already  seen  could  be  reduced  to  a  trick  of  the 
memory. ' ' 

Bozzano  is  a  spiritualist  and  is  convinced  of  reincarnation. 
For  him  the  life  of  the  spirit  reconciles  these  apparent  con- 
tradictions. 

It  does  not  seem  to  me  that  the  explanation  of  the  mystery 
has  actually  been  given.     It  ought  still  to  be  studied. 

To  see  something  that  does  not  exist,  that  will  not  exist 
except  in  the  future — three  years,  three  months,  or  three  days 
after;  it  makes  little  difference — is  inadmissible  to  all  those 
who  are  not  familiar  with  our  studies,  although  it  may  be 
certain  to  us.  My  records  on  this  point  are  numerous.  Here 
is  another: 

Monsieur  Pletneff,  a  government  official  of  Tver,  Russia, 
assessor  of  the  college,  wrote  me  in  1899  (Letter  777)  that  he 
had  seen  in  a  dream  his  friend  Oseroff  carried  in  a  coffin 
surrounded  by  relatives  and  friends,  that  he  was  ignorant 
at  the  time  of  where  Oseroff  was  living  and  of  what  his 
state  of  health  was,  and  that  *' almost  the  same  day"  he 
had  died  at  Victni-Valotchek,  a  city  of  the  department  of 
Tver. 

This  same  letter  states  that  one  of  the  chancellors  of  the 


234  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

department  of  Tver,  Monsieur  Ivan  Sasonoff,  very  much 
esteemed  by  the  writer  of  the  letter,  was  passing  one  day  be- 
fore a  house  and  saw,  while  he  was  entirely  awake,  a  stone 
stairway  on  the  outside  which  did  not  exist.  Monsieur  Plet- 
neff,  having  passed  there  twice  on  the  same  day,  made  quite 
sure  that  this  exterior  stairway  really  was  not  there.  But  on 
passing  by  three  or  four  days  later  he  noticed  that  they  had 
brought  white  stones  and  were  tearing  down  the  old  stair- 
way in  order  to  build  a  new  one. 

Therefore,  this  non-existing  stairway  was  seen  before  it 
was  built,  and  the  observer  passing  by  there  would  naturally 
have  been  convinced  that  he  had  already  seen  it. 

Here  is  another  event  no  less  odd : 

Professor  Boehm,  who  used  to  teach  mathematics  at  Marburg,  was 
spending  an  evening  with  friends,  when  he  was  seized  with  the  con- 
viction that  he  ought  to  return  home.  As  he  was  peacefully  taking 
his  tea,  he  resisted  this  impression,  which,  however,  came  back  with 
such  force  that  he  was  obliged  to  yield.  When  he  reached  home  he 
found  everything  as  he  had  left  it,  but  he  felt  himself  driven  to 
change  the  place  of  his  bed;  however  absurd  this  mental  command 
seemed  to  him,  he  felt  that  he  ought  to  do  it,  so  he  called  the  servant, 
and,  with  his  help,  pulled  the  bed  to  the  other  side  of  the  room. 
When  that  was  done,  he  felt  quite  at  his  ease,  and  returned  to  fin- 
ish the  evening  with  his  friends.  They  separated  at  ten  o'clock; 
he  returned  home  and  went  to  sleep.  He  was  awakened  in  the 
middle  of  the  night  by  a  great  noise  and  discovered  that  a  heavy 
beam  had  fallen,  carrying  with  it  part  of  the  ceiling,  and  was  lying 
on  the  spot  which  his  bed  had  occupied. 

What  is  the  mysterious  force  which  warns  us  in  this  way? 
Yes,  I  repeat  that  all  this  seems  inadmissible — to  see  what 
does  not  exist!  The  scene  observed  by  the  Abbe  Gamier  in 
1849  did  not  exist  in  1846,  the  young  woman  was  three  years 
younger,  one  of  her  children  was  not  born ;  the  uncle  of 
Madame  Lebas  was  not  in  his  grave  seven  months  before  his 
death ;  the  scene  of  the  month  of  October  at  Marano  did  not 


THE  SIGHT  OF  FUTURE  EVENTS  235 

exist  in  the  month  of  August,  etc.    But  can  we  deny  these 
facts  of  observation? 

This  work  had  already  gone  to  press  when  I  received  the 
following  letter  in  response  to  an  oral  communication  which 
had  especially  interested  me.  According  to  a  generally 
adopted  rule  I  had  begged  the  author  to  accompany  his 
account  with  evidence,  establishing*  the  priority  of  his  dream 
to  the  occurrence  itself. 

Paris:  September  9,  1919. 
As  I  promised  you,  I  am  sending  you,  under  this  cover,  accom- 
panied by  two  testimonials,  the  account  of  the  premonitory  dream 
which  you  showed  a  desire  to  publish.    I  am  very  happy  to  send  you 
this  exact  observation  and  beg  you  to  accept,  etc. 

A.  Saurel. 

In  1911  I  dreamed  I  was  in  a  new  country-side,  in  a  land  that  I 
felt  was  unknown  to  me. 

On  a  little  eminence,  the  gentle  slopes  of  which  were  covered  with 
fresh  meadows,  I  saw  a  large  building  of  medieval  appearance,  half 
small  country-seat,  half  fortified  farm.  High  walls,  weathered  by 
storms,  surrounded  the  buildings  with  their  unbroken  girdle.  Four 
massive  towers,  not  very  high,  flanked  the  corners.  Before  the 
principal  part  and  through  the  meadow  there  ran  a  pretty  brook, 
with  clear,  babbling  waters. 

Men — soldiers — were  fetching  water  from  it.  Others  were  light- 
ing fires  not  far  from  stacks  of  guns  ranged  along  the  walls.  These 
men  were  clad  in  a  curious  pale-blue  uniform  which  I  did  not  know, 
and  wore  a  helmet  which  seemed  to  me  of  a  strange  shape. 

I  saw  myself  clad  in  the  uniform  of  an  officer  and  giving  the 
orders  of  the- camp. 

By  one  of  those  odd  phenomena  which  many  persons  have  ex- 
perienced, I  thought,  while  attending  to  these  affairs:  "What  an 
absurd  situation !     Why  am  I  here  and  in  this  costume  ?" 

As  this  dream  had  left  me,  on  my  awakening,  with  a  very  clear 
and  precise  impression,  I  did  not  cease  to  be  interested  in  the  ab- 
sence of  those  incoherent  or  ridiculous  details  which  people  our 


236  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

sleep,  and  by  this  appearance  of  harmony  and  logic  in  the  absurd; 
for  absurd  it  seemed  to  me,  this  situation  as  officer  in  an  unknown 
army. 

During  the  day  I  spoke  to  those  about  me  of  this  dream  and  of 
the  blue  soldiers  which  animated  it.     Then  I  thought  no  more  of  it. 

But  the  war,  which  overthrew  so  many  existences,  made  me,  after 
a  series  of  incarnations,  a  lieutenant  of  infantry.  My  regiment 
happened  to  be  resting  close  to  the  front  in  the  Aube.  I  was  taking 
forward  my  recruits  of  the  class  of  1919. 

The  battalion  had  been  marching  since  early  morning.  The  heat 
which  faded  the  tender  green  of  the  tall  rye  made  itself  keenly  felt 
by  my  poor  young  greenhorns.  The  cloud  of  dust  raised  on  the 
road  by  the  thousands  of  weary  feet  did  not  permit  me  to  see  where 
we  were.  I  had  received  the  order  to  camp  under  the  walls  of  "the 
chateau,"  which  was,  the  quartermaster  told  me,  two  hundred  meters 
to  the  right.  After  having  given  my  orders  to  the  chiefs  of  sec- 
tion, I  w^ent  to  join  the  major. 

A  few  minutes  later  I  rejoined  my  company  around  the  poplar 
walk  which  hid  the  chateau  from  me. 

The  country-side  which  appeared  after  I  had  passed  the  last  in- 
tervening tree,  struck  me  immediately.  It  was  the  same  gently  slop- 
ing meadow,  all  gay  with  the  flowers  which  June  scatters  every- 
where; the  walls,  the  towers — all  was  exactly  like  that  which  I  had 
seen  seven  years  before  in  my  dream.  All  it  lacked  were  the  pretty, 
noisy  brook  and  the  monumental  gateway. 

As  I  was  noting  this  difference  between  the  dream  and  the  reality, 
an  adjutant  came  to  ask  me  where  the  troop  should  go  to  get  water. 
"To  the  brook,"  I  answered,  laughing.  The  non-commissioned  of- 
ficer looked  at  me  in  astonishment.  I  added :  "Yes,  if  it  is  n't  on 
this  side  it  must  surely  be  on  the  other  side  of  the  building.  Come 
with  me." 

When  we  had  rounded  the  tower  at  the  north  corner  I  saw,  with- 
out astonishment,  the  gay  brook  running  over  the  mossy  stones  and, 
toward  the  middle  of  the  wall,  the  large  gateway  just  as  I  had 
seen  it  in  my  dream  with  its  pillars  of  old  brick. 

The  two  leading  sections  had  already  solved  the  problem  of  water. 
Stacks  of  guns  stood  at  the  foot  of  the  walls,  in  the  shadow  of  which 
many  of  my  men  were  already  enjoying  deeply  desired  rest. 


THE  SIGHT  OF  FUTURE  EVENTS  23J 

The  tableau  thus  formed  was  that  of  the  dream  of  1911.  Noth- 
ing sensational  took  place  in  this  spot;  therefore,  this  dream  con- 
sisted of  nothing  but  a  startling  view  into  the  future,  showing  me, 
notably,  my  future  situation  as  an  officer,  which  it  was  impossible 
to  suspect  in  1911. 

A.  Saurel. 

(Letter  4106.) 

This  premonitory  dream  was  exceptionally  precise.  Mon- 
sieur Saurel  saw,  in  1911,  an  episode  of  the  war  of  1914-18, 
in  which  he  served  as  an  officer.  It  is  a  case  similar  to  that 
related  in  *'L'Inconnu"  (555) — the  case  of  Monsieur  Regnier 
who  in  1869  saw  himself  figuring  in  an  episode  of  the  war 
of  1870.  In  this  case,  as  in  all  similar  ones,  the  question 
arises:  If  one  has  seen  a  year  in  advance,  or  seven  years 
in  advance,  or  three  years  in  advance,  as  in  the  case  of 
the  Abbe  Gamier  which  has  just  been  quoted,  a  scene  which 
was  to  take  place  at  the  time  when  it  did  take  place,  then 
the  free  will  of  man  does  not  exist  and  the  true  doctrine  is 
absolute  fatalism.  At  such  a  date  in  1849  the  Italian  woman 
had  to  be  in  the  house  on  the  road  to  Rome,  with  three  little 
children,  drinking  workmen,  a  gamboling  colt,  etc. ;  at  such  a 
date  in  1870,  Monsieur  Regnier  had  to  be  a  soldier  facing 
the  Prussians  and  Bavarians  and  hurl  himself,  bayonet  in 
hand,  upon  the  aggressors;  at  such  a  date  in  1918  Monsieur 
Saurel  had  to  send  the  soldiers  to  get  water  in  front  of  the 
unknown  tower.  And  the  same  is  true  of  hundreds  of  simi- 
lar cases  of  prevision.  What  remains  of  our  free  will,  of  our 
personal  liberty  ?  Is  there  not  here  an  absolute  contradiction  ? 
Is  it  possible  to  admit  at  one  and  the  same  time  the  liberty  of 
our  actions  and  the  sight  of  the  future  ? 

This  question  will  be  fully  discussed  in  the  following  chap- 
ter. Suffice  it  to  say,  at  present,  that  it  is  extremely  subtle, 
but  can  nevertheless  be  solved  by  the  reconciliation  of  two 
apparently  contradictory  terms,  by  imagining  that  the  human 
will  is  one  of  the  factors  employed  in  the  production  of  these 


238  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

events ;  that  something  will  always  happen,  but  that  it  is  not 
inevit^le,  for  all  that;  and  that  one  sees  simply  what  will 
happen,  thought  transcending,  suppressing  time,  time  not 
existing  in  itself,  and  the  past  and  the  future  being  able  to 

ist  together  in  an  eternal  present. 

If  one  refused  to  admit  this  reconciliation  one  would  be 
obliged  to  admit  that  Bismarck  was  not  responsible  for  having 
falsified  the  despatch  from  Ems  in  order  to  precipitate  France 
into  the  German  abyss  opened  before  her,  and  that  in  1914 
William  II  had  no  responsibility  for  the  Austrian  trickery 
in  the  exploitation  of  the  murder  of  Sarajevo.  Otherwise,  we 
should  have  to  admit  that  there  are  no  bad  men, — profligates, 
knaves,  impostors,  murderers, — nor  any  good  men  either, — 
humanitarian,  devoted,  honest,  sacrificing  themselves  to  the 
moral  and  intellectual  welfare  of  humanity. 

"We  shall  speak  of  this  subject  in  detail  in  the  next  chapter, 
in  connection  with  the  communication  which  was  made  me 
in  1911  by  Frederic  Passy. 

Because  of  the  astonishment  which  such  experiences  as 
these  cause  us,  we  seek  for  all  the  hypotheses  contrary  to  the 
admission  of  the  facts.  We  imagine,  for  example,  in  order 
to  explain  the  sensation  of  the  already  seen,  that  the  impres- 
sion produced  on  the  retina  by  a  country-side  or  a  scene  is 
simultaneously  registered  in  the  memory  and  in  the  conscious- 
ness, and  we  suppose  that  by  means  of  even  a  very  slight 
delay  (the  fraction  of  a  second)  the  storing  of  the  image 
takes  place  in  the  memory  before  the  conscious  perception 
is  felt.  In  this  case,  the  sense  of  memory  having  been  struck 
a  fugitive  instant  before  that  of  the  real  vision,  we  think 
that  we  have  already  seen  the  present  scene,  in  some  unde- 
termined former  time;  for  even  the  tenth  of  a  second,  as 
is  proved  by  dreams,  can  give  the  impression  of  a  very 
long  time.  Another  hypothesis  assumes  that  the  perception 
of  a  scene  which  one  believes  one  has  already  seen,  can  be 
compared  to  the  optical  phenomenon  of  double  refraction. 


THE  SIGHT  OF  FUTURE  EVENTS  239 

which  causes  one  image  reaching  two  faces  of  a  prism  to  be 
refracted  on  two  different  planes:  there  would  be  one  pro- 
jection on  the  plane  of  the  past  and  one  on  the  plane  of  the 
present;  for  an  instant  our  soul  would  see  double. 

These  explanations  are  most  ingenious;  but,  on  the  one 
hand,  they  are  not  proved — not  at  all — and  remain  in  the 
realm  of  pure  imagination,  which  has  nothing  to  do  with 
scientific  exactness;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  facts  con- 
tradict them,  when  they  have  been  previously  related,  as  in 
the  case  of  the  square  of  Saint-Maixent,  which  was  seen  sev- 
eral days  in  advance  by  a  young  scholar  of  Niort  who  was  not 
familiar  with  it  (see  page  228)  ;  of  the  child  seized  with 
croup,  an  event  seen  the  day  before  ("L'Inconnu,"  page 
550)  ;  of  the  despairing  patient  of  Dr.  Liebault  (see  page 
309);  of  the  election  of  Casimir-Perier  (page  270),  etc. 
In  these  cases  the  explanation  just  given  lacks  common  sense. 
I'erhaps  it  is  sometimes  applicable,  but  rarely,  if  it  is  true 
at  all. 

We  must  therefore  look  for  something  else.^ 
Professor  Ribot  of  the  Institute  has  further  treated  this 
subject  in  his  work  on  '*Les  Maladies  de  la  Memoire."    He 
writes : 

It  sometimes  happens,  in  a  foreign  country,  that  the  sudden  turn 
of  a  path  or  of  a  river  brings  us  face  to  face  with  a  landscape  which 
it  seems  to  us  we  have  seen  before.  When  we  are  introduced  for 
the  first  time  to  a  person,  we  feel  that  we  have  already  met  him. 
In  reading  new  thoughts  in  a  book  we  feel  that  they  have  already 
been  presented  to  the  mind. 

The  author  thinks  that  this  illusion  is  explained  by  the 
following  hypothesis ; 

1  A  great  number  of  authors  have  analyzed  this  subject  without  ap- 
proaching the  solution,  such  as  Dugas,  Lalande,  Vignoli,  Wigan,  Mauds- 
ley,  Anjel,  Binet,  Fouill^,  Pi^ron,  Vaschide,  Soury,  P.  Lapie,  but  none 
have  divined  it  with  the  exception  of  Bozzano  and  C.  de  Visme.  See 
La  Revue  des  etudes  paychiques  for  1901. 


240  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

The  impression  received  evokes  from  our  past  similar  impressions, 
vague,  confused,  barely  glimpsed,  but  they  suffice  to  make  us  believe 
that  the  new  state  is  a  repetition.  There  is  at  bottom  a  quickly  felt 
resemblance  between  two  states  of  consciousness  which  lead  us  to 
identify  them.  It  is  an  error,  but  it  is  only  partly  an  error,  be- 
cause there  is  indeed  in  our  past  something  which  resembles  a  first 
experience. 

This  explanation  is  certainly  not  satisfactory.  It  does  not 
explain  any  of  the  events  which  I  have  just  described.  The 
author  remarks  elsewhere,  very  honestly,  that  it  does  not  ap- 
ply to  such  cases  as  the  following  which  he  gives: 

A  sick  man  called  Sander,  on  learning  of  the  death  of  a  person  of 
his  acquaintance,  was  seized  with  an  indefinable  terror,  because  it 
seemed  to  him  that  he  had  already  experienced  this  impression. 
*'I  felt  that  already,  some  time  before,  while  I  was  lying  here  in 

this  same  bed,  X had  come  and  told  me,  'Muller  died  some  time 

ago.'     He  could  n't  die  twice !" 

Monsieur  Ribot  must  have  been  very  much  embarrassed 
to  explain  physiologicall3^  these  curious  facts.  He  has  also 
quoted  the  following  example,  which  much  resembles  the 
former : 

Wigan  in  his  book  on  "La  Dualite  de  I'esprit,"  which  he  pretends 
to  explain  by  the  two  hemispheres  of  our  brain,  reports  that  while 
he  was  present  at  the  funeral  services  of  the  Princess  Charlotte,  in 
the  chapel  at  Windsor,  he  had  all  at  once  the  feeling  of  having 
already  been  a  witness  of  the  same  spectacle.  The  illusion  was 
fugitive. 

No  hypothesis  is  acceptable.  People  used  to  suppose  that 
the  illusion  of  the  already  seen  might  be  one  of  the  unconscious 
memories  inherited  from  our  ancestors,  who  might  have  known 
what  we  see  at  present.     This  also  is  inadmissible. 

Assuredly,  any  explanation  is  almost  impossible.  Monsieur 
Ribot  qualifies  these  coincidences  as  the  actions  of  "false 


THE  SIGHT  OF  FUTURE  EVENTS  241 

But  that  is  not  an  explanation.  He  mentions, 
further  on,  the  following  incident,  taken  from  a  work  by  Dr. 
Arnold  Pick,  which  is  no  less  inexplicable : 

An  educated  man,  who  was  very  intelligent  about  his  illness  and 
who  has  given  a  written  description  of  it,  was  attacked,  toward  tha 
age  of  thirty-two,  by  a  peculiar  mental  state.  If  he  was  present  at 
a  fair,  if  he  was  visiting  some  spot,  if  he  met  some  one,  this  hap- 
pening with  all  its  circumstances  seemed  so  familiar  to  him  that  he 
felt  sure  he  had  already  gone  through  the  same  experiences,  had 
been  surrounded  by  precisely  the  same  persons,  or  the  same  ob- 
jects, with  the  same  sky  and  the  same  weather,  etc.  If  he  under- 
took some  new  work  it  seemed  to  him  that  he  had  already  performed 
it  and  under  the  same  conditions.  This  feeling  sometimes  occurred 
the  same  day,  or  at  the  end  of  a  few  minutes  or  hours,  sometimes 
the  following  day  only,  but  with  perfect  clearness.^ 

That  is  evidently  a  pathological  case. 

"In  these  phenomena  of  false  memory,''  writes  Monsieur 
Ribot,  '*  there  is  an  anomaly  of  the  mental  mechanism  which 
escapes  us."  But  this  designation  ''false  memory"  explains 
nothing  to  us.  The  learned  physiologist,  nevertheless,  tries 
to  understand,  and  he  has  good  reason  to  try.  ''We  can 
admit,"  says  he,  "that  the  mechanism  for  the  localization  as  to 
the  past  works  backward,"  and  he  proposes  the  explanation 
which  follows: 

The  image  thus  formed  is  very  intense,  of  an  hallucinatory  nature ; 
it  imposes  itself  as  a  reality  because  nothing  rectifies  this  illusion. 
As  a  result,  the  real  impression  is  thrown  into  the  background,  with 
the  indistinct  character  of  memories;  it  is  localized  in  the  past, 
wrongly  if  we  consider  things  objectively,  rightly  if  we  consider 

1  Apropos  of  memory,  Monsieur  Ribot  cites  assuredly  one  of  the  most 
curious  examples  that  has  been  observed:  an  imbecile  recalled  the  day  of 
each  burial  made  in  the  parish  for  thirty-five  years.  He  could  repeat 
with  unvarying  exactness  the  name  and  age  of  the  deceased,  as  well  as 
those  who  had  worn  mourning.  Outside  of  this  mortuary  register  he  did 
not  have  an  idea;  he  could  not  answer  the  simplest  question  and  was 
not  even  capable  of  remembering  it. 


242  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

things  subjectively.  This  hallucinatory  state,  in  fact,  while  very 
vivid,  does  not  efface  the  real  impression,  but  as  it  springs  from  it, 
as  it  has  been  produced  by  it  too  late,  it  must  appear  like  a  second 
experience.  It  takes  the  place  of  the  real  impression,  it  seems  the 
most  recent,  and  such  it  is,  in  fact.  To  us,  who  judge  it  from  with- 
out and  in  accordance  with  what  has  come  to  pass  externally,  it  is 
false  that  the  impression  was  received  twice;  to  the  sick  man,  who 
judges  according  to  the  ideas  of  his  consciousness,  it  is  true  that  the 
impression  was  received  twice,  and  within  these  limits  his  state- 
ment is  incontestable. 

We  will  confess  that  these  ''explanations''  of  the  learned 
professor  explain  nothing  at  all.  There  is  here  a  series  of 
psychic  phenomena  that  are  very  different  from  one  another, 
and  to  vrhich  the  same  theory  could  not  apply. 

To  Monsieur  Ribot  the  memory  is  in  its  essence  a  biological 
fact,  and  by  accident  a  psychological  fact.  As  the  number 
of  brain  cells  is  somewhere  between  six  hundred  millions  and 
twelve  hundred  millions,  and  that  of  the  brain  nerves  has 
been  reckoned  at  four  or  five  thousand  millions,  the  brain  can 
be  considered  as  a  laboratory  full  of  movement,  where  a  thou- 
sand labors  go  on  at  the  same  time :  the  memory-impressions 
are  surely  numerous  enough.  But  certain  impressions  are, 
as  we  have  just  seen,  psychic  rather  than  physical.  If  it  is 
only  by  accident  that  memory  appertains  to  the  psychic 
world,  this  accident  is  perhaps  the  one  thing  essential  to  the 
discovery  of  the  invisible  world,  just  as  the  apparent  dis- 
orders, the  disturbances  in  the  universal  gravitation,  are  the 
most  fertile  source  of  discovery  in  astronomy.  We  have  had 
proof  of  this  in  the  discovery  of  the  planet  Neptune,  through 
the  perturbations  of  Uranus,  in  that  of  the  companion  of 
Sirius,  etc.  No,  the  already  seen  is  not  a  physiological  fact  of 
the  brain ;  it  is  a  metaphysical  phenomenon,  the  realization  of 
what  has  been  already  seen. 

Let  us  now  enter  fully  into  the  problem  of  the  knowledge 
of  the  future. 


IX 

KNOWLEDGE  OF   THE  FUTURE 

Will  sits  by  the  side  of  destiny  as  the 
directing  power. 

Golden  Veeses  of  Pythagoras. 

WHAT  we  have  been  considering  relative  to  the  al- 
ready  seen  is  the  natural  introduction  to  that 
which  follows.  We  shall  now  study  observations 
verifying  the  premonitory  visions  that  establish  the  knowl- 
edge of  the  future. 

I  have  published  under  this  title,  in  **La  Revue,  "^  of 
March  1  and  of  April  1,  1912,  the  principal  documents 
proving  that,  under  certain  conditions,  the  future  has  been 
seen  and  known  in  advance.  Many  writers  have  taken  up 
this  subject  since  the  publication  of  these  documents — and 
have  reproduced  them  without  always  taking  the  trouble  to 
mention  my  work ;  but  that  is  an  insignificant  detail.  What 
particularly  interests  us  here  is  to  know  that  the  future  has 
been  known,  described,  announced,  often  with  detailed  pre- 
cision, and  that,  therefore,  there  is  in  the  human  being  a 
psychic  principle  endowed  with  faculties  independent  of  the 
properties  of  matter,  a  soul  as  distinguished  from  the  body. 

I  shall  first  point  out  the  case  of  premonition  by  dream 
which  I  published  in  1911,  in  the  ''Annales  des  Sciences 
psyehiques,"  then  in  *'La  Revue,''  of  which  I  have  just 
spoken.     Here  is  the  curious  account : 

Monsieur  Frederic  Passy,  the  venerable  member  of  the  In- 
stitute whose  long  career  has  been  so  honorably  consecrated 
to  the  cause  of  pacifism  as  opposed  to  the  imbecility  of  human 

1  Formerly  the  Revue  dea  revues,  now  the  Re^me  mondiale 

243 


244  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

war/  came  to  see  me  one  fine  day  in  the  month  of  January, 
1911,  having  valiantly  climbed  my  five  flights  despite  his 
eighty-nine  years.  It  was  one  of  his  last  visits  and  the  in- 
cident described  surely  merited  its  selection  by  him. 

''I  did  not  find  it  in  your  'L'Inconnu,'  '^  he  said,  ''and  I 
feel  sure  it  will  interest  you,  as  it  comes  from  a  scrupulous 
writer,  a  man  of  incontestable  integrity,  the  Quaker  Etienne 
de  Grellet.  I  am  giving  you  his  account,  as  I  have  copied  it 
down,  of  his  trip  into  Russia.  During  his  stay  at  St.  Peters- 
burg the  Countess  Toutschkoff  told  what  follows  to  the  Quaker 
traveler : 

"About  three  months  before  the  entry  of  the  French  into  Russia 
the  general  her  husband  was  with  her  on  their  estate  in  Toula.  She 
dreamed  that  while  she  was  in  a  hotel  in  an  unknown  city,  her 
father  entered,  holding  her  only  son  by  the  hand,  and  said  to  her 
these  exact  words: 

'^^Your  happiness  is  ended,  your  husband  has  fallen.  He  fell  at 
Bbrodino/ 

"She  awoke  in  great  distress,  but  seeing  her  husband  near  her  she 
realized  that  it  was  a  dream  and  succeeded  in  falling  asleep  again. 

"The  dream  occurred  again  and  was  followed  by  so  much  melan- 
choly that  it  was  long  before  she  recovered. 

"The  dream  occurred  a  third  time.  At  this  she  experienced 
such  anguish  that  she  awoke  her  husband  and  asked  him,  'Where  is 
Borodino?' 

"He  did  not  know.  In  the  morning  they  both  began  to  search, 
with  their  father,  on  the  map  of  the  country,  but  failed  to  find  it. 
At  that  time  it  was  a  very  obscure  spot,  but  it  became  famous 
through  the  bloody  battle  which  was  fought  near  it.  Nevertheless, 
the  impression  which  the  countess  had  received  was  profound  and 
her  anxiety  was  great.  Then  the  theater  of  the  war  moved  away; 
but  soon  it  approached  again. 

"Before  the  French  armies  reached  Moscow,  General  Toutschkoff 
was  put  at  the  head  of  the  reserve  army.     One  morning  the  father 

1  As  for  me,  I  have  consecrated  myself  to  the  same  protests  since  my 
first  work  (1862),  when  I  was  twenty  years  old.  Quite  uselessly,  also, 
so  universal  is  human  stupidity. 


KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  FUTURE  245 

of  the  countess,  holding  her  young  son  by  the  hand,  entered  the 
room  in  the  hotel  where  she  was  living.  He  was  sad,  as  she  had 
seen  him  in  her  dream,  and  he  said  to  her: 

"  'He  has  fallen,  he  has  fallen  at  Borodino/ 

"She  saw  herself  in  the  same  room,  surrounded  by  the  same  ob- 
jects with  which  she  had  been  surrounded  in  her  dream. 

"Her  husband  had,  indeed,  been  one  of  the  numerous  victims  of 
the  bloody  battle  waged  upon  the  banks  of  the  river  Borodino, 
which  gave  its  name  to  a  little  village." 

(An  exact  copy) 

Frederic  Passy. 

This  premonitory  dream,  so  tragically  precise,  is  assuredly 
most  characteristic. 

Can  it  be  supposed  that  it  had  been  formulated  afterward 
in  the  mind  of  the  narrator?  No,  as  its  realization  had 
aroused  in  him  an  unforgetable  emotion,  and  three  months 
before  its  realization  they  had  searched  for  this  place  on  the 
map  of  Russia. 

It  presents  all  the  qualities  of  authenticity.  But  then,  as 
I  have  remarked,  if  the  death  of  the  general  at  Borodino  was 
seen  several  months  in  advance,  were  this  death  and  this  bat- 
tle therefore  inevitable?  And  in  such  case  what  becomes  of 
free  will?  Napoleon,  then,  was  forced  to  make  the  fatal 
Russian  campaign  and  was  not  responsible?  Are  human 
liberty  and  responsibility  only  an  illusion? 

We  shall  later  analyze  these  undoubtedly  confusing  conse- 
quences. What  shall  we  think?  Fatalism  seems  in  discord 
with  all  human  progress.  But  it  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that 
fatality  and  determinism  are  identical. 

In  regard  to  this  a  young  girl  of  Naples,  Mademoiselle  Vera 
Kunzler,  sent  me  in  the  month  of  April,  1917,  a  letter  full 
of  distress  because  of  some  sentences  of  mine  which  she  had 
read  concerning  the  incontestable  cases  of  the  sight  of  the 
future,  begging  me  to  explain  how  it  was  possible  to  reconcile 
these  carefully  observed  facts,  which  I  vouched  for,  with  free 


246  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

will,  our  sense  of  liberty,  and  our  responsibility.  She  was  all 
the  more  insistent  because  she  was  still  under  the  shock  of  a 
profound  emotion,  caused  by  a  tragic  prediction  which  had 
recently  been  realized  in  her  own  family. 

I  replied  to  her  that  fatalism  and  determinism  are  two 
doctrines  absolutely  different  from  each  other,  and  that  it  was 
necessary  not  to  confuse  them,  as  is  generally  done.  In  the 
first,  man  is  a  passive  being  who  awaits  events  which  are  in- 
evitable. In  the  second,  on  the  contrary,  man  is  active  and 
forms  a  contributing  cause.  One  does  not  see  what  must 
happen  but  what  will  happen.  Something  will  always  happen. 
It  is  this  something  which  we  see,  without  its  being  inevitable, 
for  all  that.  The  distinction,  it  is  true,  is  extremely  subtle, 
but  it  seemed  to  me  that  her  young  soul  of  seventeen  years, 
pure  and  free  of  all  preconceived  ideas,  and  of  a  sensitiveness 
which  in  her  correspondence  struck  me  as  particularly  deli- 
cate, would  perceive  this  distinction,  if  she  gave  it  the  neces- 
sary attention.  I  begged  her  at  the  same  time  to  let  me 
know  of  the  prophecy  which  had  been  realized  and  which  had 
so  profoundly  troubled  her. 

Here  is  her  letter,  which  I  reproduce  textually : 

Dear  great  Master  : 

How  happy  I  was  to  receive  your  kind  letter!  It  was  doubly 
welcome,  first  because  it  came  from  you,  and  after  that  because  it 
brought  me  a  little  light  on  the  ideas  which  are  whirling  in  my  brain. 
I  have  spent  a  good  deal  of  thought  on  your  letter,  and  I  have  well 
understood  what  you  had  the  goodness  to  explain  to  me:  what  will 
happen  may  be  seen,  but  is  not  inevitable.  It  has  brought  me  in- 
finite relief,  for  I  felt  myself  going  mad  over  the  thought  that  we 
are  no  longer  masters  of  anything  at  all,  not  even  of  our  own 
minds. 

You  would  like  to  know,  dear  Master,  what  the  event  is  which 
led  me  to  believe  in  predestination.  I  will  tell  you  of  it  as  best  I 
can. 

It  was  in  the  spring  of  1910,  seven  years  ago.    At  the  time  we 


KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  FUTURE  247 

were  very  intimate  with  a  German  lady,  named  Helene  Schmidt.  She 
was  a  medium  of  extraordinary  power,  and  as  Mama  was  very  much 
interested  in  spiritualistic  seances,  she  asked  her  one  day  to  hold 
one  of  these  seances. 

I  was  not  present,  for  at  the  time  I  was  a  little  girl,  about  twelve 
years  old,  and  I  was  at  school,  but  Mama  and  our  old  servant  have 
often  described  the  incident  to  me. 

Helene  Schmidt  had  only  to  place  her  hands  upon  the  table  for 
it  to  begin  at  once  to  rock  violently.  You  know,  Master,  the  man- 
ner of  communicating  with  spirits,  if  there  are  spirits.  When  the 
table,  a  large  and  heavy  dining-table,  which  it  would  have  been  im- 
possible to  lift  by  muscular  force  alone,  began  to  rap  regular  blows, 
indicating  that  a  spirit  was  present.  Mama  asked  its  name;  it  named 
itself  by  the  alphabet,  saying  it  was  called  Anton.  The  medium  was 
absolutely  unacquainted  with  this  name  and  she  had  no  knowledge 
either,  who  was  in  question  when  it  was  mentioned.  Anton,  I  will 
add,  was  Anton  Fiedler,  an  Austrian,  the  first  husband  of  one  of 
my  aunts,  a  sister  of  Mama's,  who  had  married  as  a  second  husband 
Adolphe  Riesbeck.  Helene  Schmidt  was  even  ignorant  of  the  ex- 
istence of  all  these  people.  As  this  Anton  Fiedler  had  been  my 
aunt^s  nearest  relative.  Mama  thought  of  asking  something  about 
her  future.  To  the  first  question,  "Will  Riesbeck  always  keep  his. 
fortune?"  the  spirit  answered  brusquely,  ^'No." 

"In  how  many  years  will  he  lose  itf 

The  table  struck  two  blows — "Two  years." 

Mama  then  asked,  "Will  he  live  long  after  having  lost  his  for- 
tune?" and  the  reply  was  clear  and  precise,  "Five  years."  Then 
Mama  wished  to  know  how  he  would  die,  but  the  spirit  answered 
only  that  my  uncle  would  die  suddenly.  To  the  questions  as  to 
whether  he  would  die  of  sickness,  accident,  suicide,  shipwreck,  or 
as  the  victim  of  a  crime  it  answered,  "No."  It  was  impossible  to 
know  how  he  would  die :  at  that  time  no  one  thought  of  war,  other- 
wise a  question  concerning  it  would  also  have  been  asked.  All  that 
we  were  able  to  obtain  from  Anton  Fiedler  was  the  reply  to  this 
inquiry:  "How  old  will  Riesbeck's  son  be  when  he  dies?"  And 
the  table  answered  very  distinctly :  "Seventeen  years."  Then  every- 
thing ceased. 

Dear  Master,  I  do  not  permit  myself  to  comment  j  I  tell  you 


248  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

simply  what  happened.  Mama  did  not  at  once  tell  this  to  my 
aunt,  for  fear  that  she  would  repeat  it  to  her  husband.  For  that 
matter,  she  did  not  believe  in  such  things.  Unfortunately,  every- 
thing that  had  been  foretold  happened  with  the  most  frightful  pre- 
cision: In  the  spring  of  1912 — that  is  to  say  exactly  two  years 
after  the  prophecy — my  uncle  Riesbeck  lost  his  fortune  on  the  stock 
exchange  in  a  daring  speculation.  Some  time  after.  Mama  told 
my  aunt,  who  was  and  still  is  at  Geneva,  of  the  prophecy  which 
had  been  made  to  her  and  told  her  the  second  part  of  it. 

My  aunt  replied,  as  any  one  else  would  have  replied  in  her 
place, — that  it  was  all  nonsense  and  that  we  must  not  have  faith 
in  it. 

Nevertheless,  the  second  part  of  the  prophecy  has  also  been  realized. 
Mama  and  I  often  spoke  of  this  seance  and  I  said  to  her:  ^'If  the 
spirit  spoke  the  truth,  my  uncle  ought  to  die  at  the  beginning  of 
the  year  1917." 

Well,  Master,  Adolphe  Riesbeck  died  at  the  front  on  February 
12,  1917, — a  sudden  death,  a  bullet  in  the  head, — when  my  cousin 
Mario  was  nearly  eighteen.  And  this  death  of  which  the  spirit  could 
not  tell  us  precisely,  which  was  not  sickness,  nor  accident,  nor  crime, 
nor  any  of  the  known  deaths,  this  death  was  death  in  battle,  of 
which  no  one  was  thinking  then. 

I  am  sending  you  in  this,  dear  Master,  a  portion  of  a  letter  which 
my  poor  aunt  sent  us  at  the  time  of  her  husband's  death.  It  is 
written  in  German,  but  I  believe  you  know  that  language,  and  I 
shall  ask  Mama  to  add  her  signature  to  my  letter. 

I  hope  this  strange  prophecy  brings  a  modest  contribution  to  your 
researches.  I  promise  myself  the  greatest  pleasure  in  reading  the 
book  which  you  have  said  you  would  publish  after  the  war  on  the 
^'Prevision  of  the  Future." 

I  am  happy,  dear  Master,  to  know  that  everything  is  not  inevit- 
able, for  the  thought  which  tormented  me  was  this:  The  death  of 
my  dear  uncle  was  predestined,  when  the  bullet  which  was  to  kill 
him  was  not  even  cast. 

Pardon  me  for  trespassing  on  your  precious  time,  and  it  is  the 
thought  of  this  which  often  restrains  me  from  writing  to  you  as  I 
should  love  to  do.  But  on  my  part  I  have  been  very  happy  to  an- 
swer your  request.    All  that  I  write  you  is  absolutely  true. 


KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  FUTURE  249 

I  salute  you,  Master,  respectfully  and  caramente,  an  Italian  word 
which  you  will  surely  understand. 

Your  goddaughter  of  the  Astronomical  Society  of  France, 

Vera  Kunzler. 
I  certify  that  my  daughter's  account  is  exact  in  all  its  details. 

E.  Kunzler. 

It  would  be  superfluous,  for  my  readers,  to  add  any  com- 
ment to  this  account,  the  complete  sincerity  of  which  cannot 
be  doubted.  The  feelings  of  profound  anguish  and  infinite 
curiosity  expressed  in  the  first  letter  which  the  narrator  sent 
me  had  already  convinced  me  of  it.  We  have  here  a  typical 
example  of  the  prevision  of  the  future. 

As  for  its  apparently  paradoxical  agreement  with  determin- 
ism, we  are  going  to  speak  of  that. 

Such  facts  can  no  longer  be  denied.  All  negation  would 
be  a  flagrant  proof  of  ignorance — or  of  another  state  of  mind 
even  less  excusable. 

In  this  connection,  the  premonition  of  General  Toutschkoft* 
and  my  commentary  having  been  published  by  "La  Revue"  of 
March  and  April,  1912,  Frederic  Passy  sent  me  the  follow- 
ing letter: 

Neuilly:  April  27,  1912. 
My  dear  Flammarion  : 

I  am  among  those  who  hesitate  to  believe  in  the  possibility  of 
the  premonitions  of  which  you  speak  in  your  articles;  because  I 
see  in  them  a  negation  of  that  liberty  which  no  longer  exists  if 
events  are  absolutely  determined  in  advance.  For  all  that,  I  my- 
self furnished  you  with  one  of  the  incidents  which  you  have  cited. 

I  must  tell  you  that  you  will  find  another  in  the  book  of  Monsieur 
G.  Lenotre,  "The  Marquis  de  la  Rouerie  and  the  Breton  Conspiracy 
of  1790-1793." 

Madame  de  Saint- Aulaire — the  daughter  of  Monsieur  de  Noyan, 
one  of  the  conspirators — announced  one  morning  to  her  father,  who 
did  not  in  the  least  believe  it,  that  he  would  be  arrested  and  taken 
before  the  revolutionary  tribunal  in  Paris,  but  that  she  would  sue- 


250  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

ceed  in  saving  his  life.  The  incident  is  vouched  for  not  only  by 
her — who  died  long  afterward — but  by  her  son,  at  the  time  about 
fifteen  years  of  age,  who  was  to  be  an  important  personage  under 
the  Restoration  and  under  Louis  Philippe  as  a  member  of  the  French 
Academy. 

You  will  judge  for  yourself  what  we  ought  to  think  of  this  event. 

Frederic  Passy. 

This  premonition  was  precisely  realized.^ 

The  question  of  human  liberty  deserves  to  be  analyzed. 

We  still  read  with  real  esthetic  pleasure  the  works  of  our 
eminent  geometrician  Laplace,  one  of  the  greatest  and  most 
penetrating  of  the  minds  which  are  the  pride  of  France, 
and  at  the  same  time  one  of  our  purest  writers.  This  is  what 
he  wrote,  concerning  free  will,  in  his  *'Essai  philosophique 
sur  les  probabilites. "  (It  is  the  second  edition,  of  1814, 
which  I  have  before  me) ; 

All  events,  even  those  which,  through  their  insignificance,  seem 
to  have  no  part  in  the  great  laws  of  nature,  are  as  necessary  a  con- 
sequence of  them  as  the  movement  of  the  sun.  In  the  ignorance  of 
the  bonds  that  unite  them  to  the  entire  system  of  the  universe,  they 
have  been  supposed  to  depend  upon  final  causes  or  upon  chance, 
according  to  whether  they  occurred  or  succeeded  one  another  with 
regularity  or  without  apparent  order,  but  these  imaginary  causes 
have  been  successively  withdrawn,  with  the  limits  of  our  knowledge, 
and  have  disappeared  entirely  before  the  healthy  philosophy  which 
sees  in  them  only  the  expression  of  the  ignorance  of  which  we  are 
the  veritable  causes. 

The  actual  events  have,  with  what  preceded  them,  a  relation  that 
is  founded  upon  the  self-evident  principle  that  a  thing  cannot  begin 
to  be  without  a  cause  which  has  produced  it.  This  axiom,  known 
as  the  principle  of  sufficient  reason,  extends  even  to  the  slightest 
events.  The  freest  possible  will  cannot,  without  a  determining  mo- 
tive, give  them  birth  for  if,  when  all  the  circumstances  of  the  two 
positions  were  exactly  the  same,  it  acted  in  one  and  refrained  from 

1 1  know  of  another  case  similar  to  it,  reported  by  Lombard  de  Langres. 


KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  FUTURE  251 

acting  in  the  other,  its  choice  would,  in  fact,  be  without  cause:  it 
would  then  be,  said  Leibnitz,  the  blind  chance  of  the  Epicureans. 
The  contrary  opinion  is  an  illusion  of  the  mind,  which,  losing  sight 
of  the  fugitive  reasons  for  the  choice  of  the  will  among  indifferent 
things,  persuades  itself  that  it  has  determined  itself  and  without 
any  reasons. 

We  ought,  therefore,  to  see  the  present  state  of  the  universe  as 
the  result  of  its  former  state  and  as  the  cause  of  that  which  will 
follow.  An  intelligence  which,  at  a  given  instant,  could  understand 
all  the  forces  with  which  nature  is  animated,  and  the  respective 
situations  of  the  beings  which  compose  it,  if  it  was  vast  enough  to 
submit  these  data  to  analysis,  and  could  include  in  the  same  formula 
the  movements  of  the  greatest  bodies  of  the  universe  and  those  of  the 
least  atom — to  such  an  intelligence  nothing  would  be  uncertain,  and 
the  future  as  well  as  the  past  would  lie  open  before  it.  In  the  per- 
fection which  it  has  been  able  to  bring  to  astronomy,  the  human 
mind  offers  a  feeble  outline  of  this  intelligence.^ 

We  shall  discuss  this  reasoning  in  a  moment. 

We  are  accustomed  to  attribute  the  paternity  of  this  to 
Laplace.  But  all  thinkers  had  uttered  it  before  him,  and 
nothing  is  more  natural :  it  almost  dates  from  La  Palice.  The 
first  edition  of  this  book  on  probabilities,  consists  of  a  course 
given  by  Laplace  in  1795  at  the  Normal  School  founded  by 
the  Convention. 

But  in  1787  Immanuel  Kant  had  written  in  his  *' Critique  of 
Pure  Reason' ': 

From  the  point  of  view  of  time  and  its  regular  order,  if  we 
could  penetrate  into  the  soul  of  a  man  so  that  it  will  reveal  itself 
by  acts  internal  as  well  as  external,  if  we  could  understand  all  its 
motives,  even  the  slightest,  and  at  the  same  time  all  the  external 
influences,  we  could  calculate  the  'future  conduct  of  this  man  with 
all  the  certainty  of  an  eclipse  of  the  sun  or  of  the  moon.^ 

Kant  is  not  the  inventor  of  this  argument,  either.    We 

(1  Laplace,  Essai  phUosophique  sur  lea  probahilit^s  (Paris,  1814),  p.  2. 
2  French  edition,  p.  289.     Foissae,  La  Charice  et  la  Destineej  p.  212. 


252  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

find  it  among  the  most  ancient  authors,  as  far  back  as  the 
Romans,  as  far  back  as  Cicero,  for  example.  In  his  treatise 
on  ^' Divination,^  he  has  his  brother,  Quintus,  explain  the 
connection  between  the  sight  of  the  future  and  fatality.  He 
says: 

In  order  to  account  for  divination,  it  is  necessary  to  go  back  to 
the  Divinity,  to  destiny,  to  nature.  Reason  obliges  us  to  confess 
that  everything  is  governed  by  destiny.  I  call  destiny  that  which 
the  Greeks  named  ei>ap^eVi; ;  that  is  to  say,  an  order,  a  series  of  causes 
joined  together  and  producing  results.  There  is  that  perpetual 
truth  the  source  of  which  is  in  eternity  itself.  According  to  this 
there  is  nothing  in  the  future  for  which  nature  does  not  already  con- 
tain sufficient  causes.  Thus  destiny  would  be  the  eternal  cause  of  all 
things,  the  cause  which  construes  past,  present,  and  future  events. 
It  is  thus  by  means  of  observation  that  we  can  learn  what  are  usually 
the  consequences  of  each  cause.  Without  it  is  this  chain  of  causes 
and  effects  which  explains  inspirations  and  dreams. 

Let  us  add  that  since  everything  is  ruled  by  destiny,  if  a  mortal 
could  exist  capable  of  conceiving  the  connection  between  all  causes 
he  would  never  be  mistaken.  In  fact,  he  who  knew  all  the  causes 
of  events  could  not  fail  to  understand  all  the  future. 

This  mode  of  reasoning  i^  impeccable  in  itself  and,  I 
repeat,  what  Monsieur  de  La  Palice  says  approaches  the 
truth.  That  there  are  no  effects  without  cause,  is  evident. 
But  the  conclusion  of  fatality,  or  of  absolute  determinism,  is 
not  backed  by  the  same  evidence  as  this  reasoning  of  simple 
good  sense. 

Despite  my  profound  admiration  for  Laplace,  on  whose 
works  I  was  brought  up,  I  confess  that  I  cannot  share  his 
absolute  negation  of  free  will.  My  readers  already  know 
what  I  have  written  concerning  this  thorny  point,  in  my 
Memoirs. 

"The  freest  will  in  the  world  cannot  act  without  a  de- 
termining motive."    Doubtless.    But  among  the  causes  con- 

1  De  Divvnationef  lib.  I,  cap.  55. 


KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  FUTURE  253 

cerned  in  the  choice,  our  own  personality  exists,  and  that  is 
not  a  negligible  cause. 

This  personality  acts,  one  would  say,  according  to  its 
predominant  motive,  and,  is  itself,  due  to  former  causes, — 
that  is  incontestable.  Nevertheless  it  exists,  along  with  our 
character,  and  what  is  here  perhaps  even  more  important, 
even  irrefutable,  is  that  we  feel  very  strongly,  that  we  ex- 
amine, weigh,  consider  within  ourselves,  when  the  matter  is 
worth  the  trouble,  and  that  we  decide  with  a  full  sense  of  our 
responsibility. 

There  are  times,  I  admit,  when  the  scales  are  just  in 
balance,  and  the  smallest  added  weight  may  tip  them;  but 
this  little  weight  may  be  our  own  fancy,  our  whim,  our. will, 
even* our  own  pleasure  in  frustrating  a  foreseen  result, — in 
a  word,  to  the  extent  of  the  exercise  of  our  liberty.  No  one 
has  the  authority  to  declare  that  all  this  is  '*an  illusion '^  of 
our  mind,  or  to  state  this  hypothesis  as  a  demonstrated  truth. 
The  principle  of  the  '^sufficient  reason"  is  within  ourselves, 
when  we  discuss  it  before  the  tribunal  of  our  conscience. 

That  we  decide  in  accordance  with  the  predominant  motive 
does  not  prove  that  we  do  not  act  according  to  our  character. 
Our  own  will  is  associated  with  this  character,  without  being 
the  slave  of  it.  In  his  treatise  on  ''The  Heavens"  Aristotle 
wrote  (Book  II,  chapter  13)  :  "It  is  like  the  case  of  a  man 
who,  being  both  very  hungry  and  very  thirsty,  finds  himself 
at  an  equal  distance  from  food  and  drink;  necessarily  he 
would  remain  motionless."  Dante  said  the  same  thing  in 
the  Fourth  Book  of  the  "Paradiso":  ^^ Intra  duo  cihi,  distanti 
€  moventi.  B'un  modo  prima  si  morria  di  fame, — che  liber 
uomo  t'un  recasse  a  denti.'*  Buridan  has  the  credit  of  hav- 
ing expressed  this  reasoning,  putting  a  donkey  in  place  of 
the  man. 

There  is  no  doubt  in  any  one 's  mind  that  neither  the  donkey 
nor  the  man  would  die  of  hunger.  There  is  nothing  of  the 
mechanical  in  nature. 


254  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

Is  there  absolute  incompatibility  between  prevision  and  free 
will  ?  That  is  what  is  generally  stated,  and  by  ancient  writers 
as  well  as  by  modems. 

The  author  of  the  ''L'Histoire  de  la  Divination  dans  Tanti- 
quite, ' '  Monsieur  Bouche-Leclercq  of  the  Institute,  writes  that 
an  uncertain  future,  depending  upon  free  will,  does  not  agree 
with  the  idea  of  the  fixed  laws  inspired  by  the  sight  of  the 
universal  order,  and  that  the  popular  instinct,  anticipating 
the  philosophical  theories,  has  been  insuperable  in  its  inclina- 
tion to  consider  the  future  as  unavoidable  (Volume  I,  page 
15) ;  that  the  future  cannot  be  foreseen  just  because  it  is  in- 
evitable'^ (ibid.);  that  there  is  ''an  unending  conflict  be- 
tween prevision  and  liberty  and  that  the  one  sets  aside  the 
other''  (ibid.,  page  16).  Sextus  Bmpiricus  has  shown  that 
since  future  events  must  occur  either  necessarily  or  by  chance 
or  be  produced  by  free  agents,  divination  is  useless  in  the 
first  case  and  impossible  in  the  second  case  (ibid.,  page  79). 

In  his  "Essay  on  Free  Will"  Schopenhauer  writes:  '*If 
we  do  not  admit  the  rigorous  necessity  of  all  that  happens  by 
virtue  of  a  causality  which  compels  all  events  without  ex- 
ception, any  prevision  is  impossible  and  inconceivable"  (page 
124). 

Evidently  there  is  general  belief  in  an  incompatibility,  an 
undetermined  contradiction  between  free  will  and  prescience, 
because  we  confound  ''Divine  Prescience"  with  necessity. 
That  is  an  error. 

In  the  conversations  of  Goethe  with  Eckermann,  we  may 
read,  under  the  date  of  October  13,  1825 : 

What  do  we  know,  and  with  all  our  intelligence  where  do  we  stand 
to-day? 

Man  is  not  born  to  solve  the  problem  of  the  world,  but  to  seek  to 
understand  the  extent  of  the  problem  and  to  keep,  thereafter,  well 
within  limits  of  that  which  he  is  able  to  conceive. 

His  faculties  are  not  capable  of  measuring  the  universe,  and  to 
wish  to  approach  the  totality  of  things  with  the  intelligence,  when 


KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  FUTURE  255 

it  has  so  restricted  a  point  of  view,  is  labor  lost.  The  intelligence 
of  man  and  the  intelligence  of  the  Divinity  are  two  very  different 
things. 

As  soon  as  we  grant  liberty  to  man,  that  is  the  end  of  the  om- 
niscience of  God;  and  if,  on  the  other  hand,  God  knows  what  I 
shall  do,  I  am  not  free  to  do  anything  but  what  he  knows.  I  cite 
this  dilemma  only  as  an  example  of  the  little  we  know,  and  to 
show  that  it  is  not  good  to  touch  upon  divine  secrets. 

Also,  among  the  highest  truths  we  ought  to  express  only  those 
which  serve  the  good  of  the  world.  The  others  we  ought  to  keep  to 
ourselves,  but  like  the  gentle  rays  of  a  hidden  sun  they  may  spread 
and  they  will  spread  their  light  on  what  we  do. 

Goethe  did  not  dare  go  further.  Why  ?  Let  us  find  out. 
_  jEveiit&  xmd  happenings  generally  influence  us  more  than  we 
believe.  Let  each  one  analyze  attentively  the  acts  of  his  life 
and  he  will  readily  recognize  this.  Our  free  will  finds  play 
only  in  a  very  restricted  compass  of  activitx^  *'Man  pro- 
poses and  God  disposes,**  goe^s  an  old  saying.  This  is  not 
entirely  exact.  God,  or  Destiny — Fatum,  as  the  Latins  called 
it — leaves  us  a  little  liberty. 

The  proverb  that  is  the  opposite  of  the  preceding  one — 
each  proverb  has  its  opposite — puts  it  this  way : 

''Heaven  helps  those  who  help  themselves.'* 

Yes,  man  proposes  and  events  dispose:  but  at  the  same 
time  we  are  the  builders  of  our  own  destiny. 

In  short,  truth  does  not  exist  in  the  metaphysics  of  the 
philosophers  who  expatiate  upon  the  fatality  of  destiny,  but 
in  the  common  and  practical  good  sense  which  is  summed  up 
in  the  universal  adage  of  six  words  which  I  have  just  quoted. 

My  explanation  is  essentially  careful  to  remain  in  the 
exclusive  domain  of  the  positive  facts  of  observation,  without 
having  recourse  to  any  hypothesis.  When  we  are  told  that 
our  feeling  of  free  will  is  an  illusion,  that  is  an  hypothesis. 
I  am  sitting  down  at  my  desk,  and  I  ask  myself  what  I  shall 
do ;  I  ponder.     I  reason,  I  decide  on  this  or  that.     I  am  assured 


256  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

that  I  am  the  dupe  of  circumstances  external  to  my  will. 
I  maintain,  on  the  contrary,  that  if  I  had  no  reason,  I  should 
let  events  occur  as  they  might,  and  that  liberty  consists  pr^^ 
cisely  in  the  choice  of  what  seems  preferable  to  me.  It  i\ 
not  absolute,  no  matter  how  much  we  might  wish  it  to  be,  it  is 
relative ;  w^e  are  constantly  upset  in  our  plans ;  there  are  even 
some  days  when  nothing  goes  right.  It  is  very  imperfect,  but 
it  is  our  incontestable  sensation,  and  we  have  not  the  right  to 
suppress  it  in  order  to  substitute  a  hypothesis  for  it.  It  is 
as  evident  as  the  day.  It  is  an  appearance,  they  may  say. 
Yes,  an  appearance  like  the  sun,  like  a  landscape,  like  a  tree, 
like  an  arm-chair,  like  a  house, — things  which  we  know  through 
the  impressions  they  make  upon  us, — ^but  this  appearance 
is  confounded  with  the  reality. 

There  is  in  it  a  fact  of  daily  observation,  constant,  legiti- 
mate, irrefutable. 

Oh !  assuredly,  we  are  often  very  passive  and  form  no  radi- 
cal determination.  And  the  objection  is  offered  that  when 
we  debate  within  ourselves  and  make  up  our  minds  after  ripe 
reflection,  it  is  always  in  accordance  with  a  predominating 
motive,  so  that  our  pretended  liberty  is  like  a  pair  of  scales, 
one  pan  of  which  will  sink  according  to  the  weight  placed 
in  it.  Beyond  a  doubt,  we  ourselves  make  up  our  minds, 
when  we  reason  coldly  weighing  the  pros  and  cons,  to  that 
which  seems  preferable  to  us.  But  it  is  precisely  in  that  that 
our  reason  acts,  and  no  sophistry  can  suppress  this  conviction 
in  us.  We  even  feel  that  in  the  opposite  case  we  should  be 
unreasonable;  and  when,  at  times,  we  are  led  to  act  agkinst 
our  judgment,  we  feel  we  have  been,  in  some  respects,  forced 
to  it. 

As  for  free  will,  is  not  the  following  declaration,  which 
Juvenal  put  in  the  mouth  of  an  imperious  woman,  the  best 
argument  ? 

Sic  nolo;  sic  juheo;  sit  pro  ratione  voluntas.  "I  wish  it,  I 
order  it;  my  will  is  my  only  reason." 


KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  FUTURE  257 

'^Because  such  is  our  pleasure/*  said  Louis  XIV,  with  a 
N^pride  which  was  to  destroy  royalty. 

>^  Without  doubt,  is  the  reply,  we  are  endowed  with  a  certain 
V  liberty  of  action ;  we  can  choose,  we  can  determine  according 
to  the  preponderant  motive ;  but  to  seek  for  absolute  free  will ! 
Is  not  each  one  of  us  led  according  to  his  temperament,  his 
ideas,  his  preferences,  and  also  according  to  circumstances 
and  the  chain  of  events?  How  can  we  free  ourselves 
from  the  chain?  We  begin  works,  big  or  little,  without 
knowing  whither  they  will  lead  us.  Let  each  one  examine 
his  own  life  and  see  clearly  how  feeble  is  his  personal  lib- 
erty. We  are  carried  along  in  the  whirlwind.  Man  pro- 
poses and  destiny  disposes.  This  destiny  is  the  universal 
spirit  of  which  we  form  but  a  minute  portion.  But  we,  also, 
are  spirits. 

Absolute  free  will?     No,  relative  free  will. 

Undoubtedly,  our  liberty  is  much  more  restricted  than  it 
appears  to  superficial  minds.  The  cosmic  progress  of  the 
universe  leads  us  on.  We  live  under  the  influence  of  as- 
tronomical conditions,  of  meteorological  conditions,  of  heat,  of 
cold,  of  climate,  of  electricity,  of  light,  of  our  surroundings, 
of  our  heredity,  of  our  education,  of  our  temperament,  of  our 
health,  of  our  strength  of  will,  etc.  Our  liberty  is  comparable 
to  that  of  a  passenger  on  a  ship  which  bears  him  from  Europe 
to  America.  His  voyage  is  traced  in  advance.  His  liberty 
stops  short  at  the  ship 's  railing.  He  can  walk  upon  his  float- 
ing edifice,  talk,  read,  smoke,  sleep,  play  cards,  etc.;  but  he 
cannot  leave  his  moving  home.  The  sketch  of  our  existence 
is  traced  in  advance,  like  the  movements  of  the  portions  of 
a  machine,  and  we  have  a  role  to  fill,  with  a  certain  amount 
of  personal  action.  This  conditional  liberty  is  certainly  very 
limited,  but  it  exists  all  the  same.  You  are,  let  us  suppose, 
at  a  friend's  table.  You  are  offered  certain  dishes,  you  can 
choose  between  white  and  red  wine,  between  Burgundy  and 
Bordeaux,  beer  and  pure  water,  and  you  know  perfectly  that 


258  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

you  are  free  to  choose,  with  due  regard  for  your  stomach, 
and  by  making  use  of  your  reason. 

If  we  observe  with  care,  at  any  moment,  our  least  acts,  we 
shall  see  clearly  that  our  liberty  is  extremely  limited,  that 
what  we  decide  to  do  in  the  morning,  when  we  awaken,  may 
be  disturbed  for  a  thousand  causes,  but  that  nevertheless  our 
principal  intention  will  be  more  or  less  realized,  and  that  our 
choice  will  be  felt. 

It  is  the  same  with  great  things  as  with  little;  our  most 
important  acts  are  determined  both  by  circumstances  and 
our  will. 

We  can  admit  the  premonitory  sight  of  the  future  without 
compromising,  for  all  that,  the  principle  of  free  will  and  of 
human  responsibility.  The  present  never  stops:  it  is  con- 
stantly continued  by  the  future.  Something  will  always  hap- 
pen ;  it  is  not  inevitable  for  all  that,  if  it  is  granted  that  the 
human  will  forms  a  part  of  the  chain  of  events,  and  that  this 
will  enjoys  a  relative  liberty ;  what  it  decides  becomes  real,  but 
it  might  not  have  decided;  the  future  is  the  succession  of 
the  past,  and  seeing  it  does  not  differ  essentially  from  seeing 
the  past.  This  fact  does  not  at  all  prevent  us  from  admitting 
that  the  human  will  is  one  of  the  causes  of  action  in  events. 
Something  else  might  have  happened  than  what  did  happen, 
and  it  is  this  other  thing  which  would  be  seen  in  premonitions. 

What  happens  is  the  result  of  the  chain  of  causes,  whether 
it  is  a  revengeful  force  which  orders  its  adversaries  to  be  shot 
or  guillotined,  as  Paris  saw  it  in  1793  and  1871  (and  as  it 
has  been  seen  almost  everywhere  on  our  lovely  planet),  or 
whether  it  is  a  philanthropic  force  which  interposes  i'n  the 
midst  of  a  revolution  to  stop  its  excesses  or  to  direct  its 
progress.  What  happens  does  not  prevent  the  existence  of 
good  and  evil,  of  the  tyrant  and  the  victim,  the  just  and  the 
unjust,  the  brutal  and  the  thoughtful,  the  intelligent  and 
the  idiotic,  the  bloodthirsty  and  the  pacifistic,  the  explaiters 
and  the  exploited,  the  robber  and  the  robbed. 


KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  FUTURE  259 

To  see,  by  any  process  whatever,  what  will  happen  through 
the  succession  of  effects  and  causes,  can  b©  reconciled  with 
the  existence  of  all  the  effective  causes,  including  liberty. 

The  future  is  no  more  a  mystery  than  the  past.  If  I  cal- 
culate to-day  that  the  movements  of  the  moon  about  the 
earth  and  the  movement  of  the  e'arth  about  the  sun  will  lead 
our  globe  and  its  satellite  in  a  direct  line  (sun — moon — earth) 
with  France,  upon  the  passing  of  the  shadow  of  the  moon,  on 
August  11,  1999,  at  half-past  ten  in  the  morning,  and  that  a 
total  eclipse  of  the  sun  will  be  observed,  to  the  north  of  Paris 
during  two  minutes,  there  is  no  more  mystery  in  this  predic- 
tion than  in  the  retrospective  reckoning  of  the  eclipse  of  the 
sun  which  took  place  over  Peripagnan,  on  July  8,  1842.  At 
the  moment  of  the  eclipse  of  1842,  which  was  made  famous 
by  the  observations  of  Arago  in  his  native  town,  I  was  four 
months  and  eleven  days  old ;  at  the  moment  of  that  of  August 
11,  1999,  I  shall  have  been  dead  a  long  time:  but  that  has 
no  importance  whatever:  what  is  to-day  the  futoire  for  me, 
for  you,  for  thoae  now  living,  will  be  the  present  of  others 
and  will  th.en  become  the  past. 

One  may  object  that  the  comparison  of  astronomical  events 
with  human  happenings  is  not  complete,  as  it  is  granted  that 
there  is  no  liberty  in  the  movements  of  the  stars  and  that 
with  them  fatalism  is  absolute.  But  we  can  answer  that  if 
free  will  is  included  in  the  number  of  active  causes,  its  effects 
will  be  felt  none  the  less. 

There  is  no  doubt  that  everything  which  happens  is  the 
necessary  result  of  active  causes,  including  the  most  abject 
crimes,  including  the  burning  of  Rome,  including  the  martyr- 
dom of  the  Christians  by  Nero^  including  the  violation  of  Bel- 
gium by  the  Germans,  the  assassinations  of  its  citizens,  the 
burning  of  Louvain,  the  bombardment  of  the  cathedral  of 
Rheims,  the  infamous  massacres  of  the  last  German  war. 
But  each  actor  forms  part  of  the  active  cause  and  is  partly 
responsible.     The  events  ajie  a  mechanical  series^  which  in- 


260  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

eludes  the  sentence  of  Jeanne  d'Arc  to  the  flames  by  Bishop 
Cauchon,  on  the  accusation  of  witchcraft,  and  her  later  canon- 
ization by  other  bishops;  which  includes  the  chemist  Lavois- 
ier, the  astronomer  Bailly,  the  poet  Andre  Chenier,  the  philoso- 
pher Condorcet,  victims  of  the  blind  and  ferocious  revolu- 
tionists. All  these  things  are  brought  about  by  determining 
causes,  but  they  are  not  inevitable,  and  the  course  of  events 
might  have  been  different.  To  conclude,  from  this,  that  re- 
sponsibilities do  not  exist  means  chaos.  The  Emperor  of  Ger- 
many who,  in  unchaining  the  war  of  1914,  caused  the  death 
of  twelve  million  human  beings,  is  not  to  be  compared  to  Saint 
Vincent  de  Paul ;  neither  the  one  nor  the  other  is  an  automa- 
ton, a  slave  of  fatalism.^ 

To  suppress  liberty  would  be  to  suppress  all  responsibility, 
all  moral  valuation,  to  equalize  the  good  and  the  wicked,  to 
which  our  inner  certainty  is  opposed.  In  this  case  we  should 
have  to  give  up  our  clearest  and  most  evident  ideas. 

Every  one  has  before  him  his  own  unknown  fate;  but 
events  will  come  to  pass,  despite  the  more  or  less  developed 
free  will  of  each  person,  and  even  because  of  this  free  will.  In 
human  life  all  men  act  in  various  ways,  and  the  consequences 
result  from  all  this. 

There  are  fools  and  wise  men  (perhaps  more  fools  than  wise 
men)  who  are  certainly  not  dominated  by  reason,  and  those 
especially  in  the  administration  of  countries. 

1  There  are  wicked  people  who  know  quite  well  they  are  doing  evil  and 
do  it  on  purpose.  I  have  had  the  proof  of  it  more  than  once,  although 
the  whole  of  my  life  has  been  consecrated  to  the  good  of  humanity.  I 
have  never  forgotten  that  at  the  time  when  I  was  giving  a  regular 
course  in  popular  astronomy  to  the  workmen  of  Paris,  at  the  Ecole 
Turgot  (1865-1870),  a  course  free  for  them  as  for  me,  I  had,  although  I 
was  in  want  of  sesterces,  cherished  the  ambition  of  buying  a  pretty 
little  statuette  of  the  Venus  de  Medici,  which  I  had  noticed  in  a  shop  of 
plaster  casts.  She  had  cost  me  fifteen  francs.  I  was  carrying  her  away, 
over  my  heart,  in  happy  satisfaction,  when  a  gamin  flung  himself  upon 
my  neck  from  behind  and  uttered  cries  of  joy  at  seeing  my  pretty  little 
statuette  broken  into  fragments  on  the  sidewalk.  Yet  it  was  to  teach 
these  humble  brothers  that  I  was  giving  my  course. 


KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  FUTURE  261 

Even  while  each  of  us  has  before  him  his  unknown  fate, 
we  each  create  this  fate:  we  act  according  to  our  facul- 
ties, our  possibilities,  our  heredity,  our  education,  our  judg- 
ment, our  hearts,  and  knowing  quite  well  that  we  enjoy  rela- 
tive liberty  and  can  make  decisions.  We  are  the  artisans 
of  our  destiny. 

Whatever  we  may  do,  the  hour  of  our  death  is  already  de- 
termined. Why?  Because  events  will  succeed  one  another, 
including  our  caprices,  our  weaknesses,  our  imprudences,  our 
mistakes,  including  all  that  will  come  to  pass  about  us.  We 
act,  naturally,  according  to  our  possibilities  and  our  mentali- 
ties. An  honest  man  will  not  be  made  to  lie ;  a  generous  man 
will  not  become  avaricious.  The  action  of  each  one,  limited 
by  his  faculties,  exists  none  the  less,  and  there  are  cases 
when  weeks,  when  months  of  reflection  are  necessary  for  us 
to  make  our  decisions.  Nevertheless,  our  acts  are  linked  to- 
gether, and  seeing  them  in  advance  does  not  alter  the  chain. 

It  seems  to  me  that  Bozzano,  the  laborious  analyst  of  psychic 
phenomena,  has  rationally  defined  this  apparent  antimony 
in  writing:  ^^Ni  libre  arhitre  ni  determinisme  absolus  dur- 
ing the  incarnate  existence  of  the  spirit,  but  conditional 
liberty. '^ 

You  might  still,  perhaps,  object  that  if  what  happens  must 
necessarily  happen,  it  is  superfluous  to  torment  ourselves  in 
order  to  succeed  in  anything  whatever,  to  try  to  carry  off  the 
victory  in  a  competition,  to  go  after  the  doctor  for  a  sick 
person,  to  struggle  against  an  adversary,  etc.  This  objection 
proves  precisely  our  action  in  the  order  of  things.  However 
much  of  a  fatalist  you  may  believe  yourself,  you  run  as 
quickly  as  possible  after  the '  doctor,  you  serve  the  country 
against  the  invader,  you  call  the  fire  department  to  put  out  a 
fire,  you  put  out  a  fire  which  has  started  from  a  spark  falling 
on  your  papers  in  your  workroom,  etc.  You  have  reason  and 
you  make  use  of  it.  This  does  not  at  all  prove  that  you  lack 
it  and  that  you  are  an  automaton. 


262  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

Does  not  the  best  proof  that  we  have  of  our  liberty,  of  our 
powers  of  free  choice,  of  conscious  decision  reside  in  the  inti- 
mate, absolute  feeling  we  have  of  it,  against  which  no  sophism 
can  prevail?  You  know  that  you  can  make  any  gesture  you 
please.  It  is  no  use  to  tell  you  that  the  fancy  to  lift  your 
finger  is  preceded  by  a  series  of  antecedent  ideas;  this  fancy 
is  itself  real  and  comes  from  nothing  but  our  mind  endowed 
with  mental  liberty. 

The  future  is  determined  by  circumstances,  including  human 
liberty,  including  even  the  rancor  of  the  unjustly  beaten 
animal,  and  a  thousand  special  instances  of  which  we  scarcely 
think. 

The  human  'personality  is  a  party  to  active  motives  in  the 
m>arch  of  human  events. 

There  is  the  solution  of  the  problem  stated  by  Cicero,  Saint 
Augustine,  Laplace  and  their  followers. 

An  extremely  subtle  distinction  must  be  made  here  in  order 
not  to  confound  the  inevitable  chain  of  human  events  with 
fatalism.  What  happens  is  not  inevitable,  although  it  is  the 
necessary  result  of  its  causes.  A  man  receives  a  blow  in  the 
back  from  the  fist  of  a  hurried  passer-by  in  the  midst  of  a 
crowd:  he  might  not  have  received  it,  for,  on  one  hand,  he 
might  not  have  gone  out  of  his  house  on  that  day  or  he  might 
not  have  taken  that  direction,  and  the  man  who  assaulted 
him  might  not  have  been  there  himself.  Things  would  have 
happened  differently,  that  is  all,  and  the  event  would  have 
been  something  else.  Nevertheless,  a  premonitory  vision 
might  have  been  seen  of  what  would  happen,  without  this 
vision's  proving,  for  all  that,  the  absence  of  free  will  in 
the  two  actors.  We  cooperate  in  the  march  of  events.  It  is 
not  modest  to  speak  of  ourselves,  but  it  is  just  there  that  we 
are  the  best  judges;  and  I  shall  permit  myself  to  use  an 
example  which  I  know  about  exactly.  For  many  years  I  have 
struggled  to  spread  the  knowledge  of  astronomy  in  the  world, 


KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  FUTURE  263 

and  I  have  in  a  measure  succeeded.  Illiistrious  friends 
of  science  and  progress  have  given  me  the  most  precious  assist- 
ance in  the  foundation  and  gradual  organization  of  the  As- 
tronomical Society  of  France.  No  one  could  ejfface  from  my 
mind  the  different  struggles  which  I  have  undergone  or  make 
me  admit  that  that  was  not  a  personal  work  of  my  own:  I 
know  something  about  it,  and  all  organizers  are  in  my  posi- 
tion. Will  is  not  a  vain  word.  Each  one  can  make  the  same 
reflections  over  what  concerns  him.  We  act  and  the  future 
is  made  of  our  conseclitive  actions.  That  is  not  fatalism.  It 
is  even  the  opposite.  AFatalism  is  the  doctrine  of  the  drowsy ; 
fatalists  await  events,  which  they  suppose  must  come  to  pass 
nevertheless  and  in  spite  of  everything.  The  contrary  is  the 
case,  we  work  and  we  cooperate  in  the  march  of  events.  Far 
from  being  passive,  we  are  active,  we  ourselves  construct  the 
edifice  of  the  future.  Determinism  ought  not  to  be  con- 
founded with  fatalism.  The  latter  represents  inertia,  the 
former  represents  action.^ 

Fatalism  is  Oriental,  Turkish;  determinism  is  European. 
There  is  an  abyss  between  the  two  civilizations. 

To  see  the  future  is  simply  to  see  what  is  going  to  happen. 
It  is  not  to  JoTisee,  it  is  to  see.  In  astronomy  we  calculate 
the  orbit  of  a  comet,  for  example,  the  normal  theoretic  orbit, 
the  curve — eliptic,  parabolic,  or  hyperbolic — in  space.  But 
it  is  possible  for  the  comet  to  pass  in  the  neighborhood  of  a 
large  planet,  the  attraction  of  which  will  influence  it.     This 

1  We  see  that  the  greater  number  of  contemporary  writers  imagine  that 
the  discussion  of  determinism  is  a  philosophical  theory  of  modern  inven- 
tion. That  is  not  at  all  true.  Let  us  open  Volume  I  of  the  Palingenesie 
philosophique  of  Charles  Bonnet  (Geneva,  1770),  at  page  33;  there  we 
read:  "I  have  never  said,  because  'I  have  never  thought,  that  motives 
determine  the  action  of  the  soul,  as  a  body  determines  the  movements 
of  another  body.  The  body  does  not  possess  action  of  itself:  the  soul 
contains  within  itself  a  principle  of  activity,  which  it  only  holds  from 
Ilim  who  made  it.  To  speak  exactly,  motives  do  not  determine  it,  but  it 
determines  itself  in  view  of  the  motives,  and  this  metaphysical  distinc- 
tion is  important." 


.^^         nv 


264  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

disturbance  will  modify  its  course,  and  our  sight  of  the  comet, 
concerning  its  position,  will  not  be  exact  and.  precise  unless  we 
allow  for  this  disturbing  influence.  .^ 

All  influences  have  their  effect  upon  events.  That  of  man 
is  not  more  negligible  than  the  planetary  disturbances,  al- 
though it  enjoys  a  certain  independence. 

Therefore  it  is  not  impossible  to  reconcile  our  feeling  of 
liberty  with  a  premonitory  knowledge  of  human  events. 

Suppose  an  observer  is  placed  near  the  top  of  a  mountain 
at  the  foot  of  which  there  stretches  away  a  vast  plain.  He 
sees  a  man  following  a  path  which  leads  to  a  village,  and  he 
divines  that  this  traveler  is  going  to  the  village  for  some 
business  or  other.  In  what  way  would  the  fact  of  seeing  his 
action  contradict  the  liberty  of  the  individual? 

The  free  will  of  the  actor  is  not  in  contradiction  with  the 
sight  of  the  observer.  The  anticipated  sight  of  an  event  does 
not  influence  this  event.  From  the  mountain  on  which  we 
suppose  ourselves,  we  see,  for  example,  two  trains  rush  quickly 
into  each  other,  through  an  error  in  switching.  A  disaster 
is  imminent.  Our  sight,  our  prevision  goes  for  nothing;  the 
fact  of  seeing  it  is  entirely  foreign  to  the  ^^ct  of  the  event. 

To  see  events  unroll  in  the  future  as  we  see  those  that  have 
unrolled  in  the  past,  does  not  prevent  the  determining  causes, 
including  the  human  will,  from  having  their  effect. 

Has  it  never  happened  that  while  reading  a  novel  you  have 
divined  exactly  the  rest  of  the  story?  And  does  not  the 
greatest  skill  of  a  writer  consist  in  giving  such  an  appearance 
of  truth  to  his  imaginary  personages  and  to  interest  the  reader 
so  keenly  in  them,  that  he  is  impatient  to  know  the  rest  ?  For 
example,  the  prince  of  story-tellers,  Alexandre  Dumas,  gave 
us  ' '  Joseph  Balsamo ' '  after  ' '  The  Queen 's  Necklace. ' '  While 
reading  the  list  of  the  innumerable  works  of  this  author,  you 
may  have  remarked  the  title  of  "The  Countess  of  Charny.'' 
Well,  without  having  read  this  last  romance,  without  know- 
ing who  this  countess  may  be,  has  it  not  happened  that,  while 


KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  FUTURE  265 

you  were  reading  the  twelfth  chapter  of  ''The  Queen's  Neck- 
lace" and  the  description  of  the  beautiful  qualities  of  Mon- 
sieur de  Charny,  given  by  Marie  Antoinette  to  Andree  de  Ta- 
vemey,  who  is  very  pale  and  deeply  moved, — has  it  not  hap- 
pened that  you  have  divined,  in  a  sudden  flash,  that  Mademoi- 
selle de  Tavemey,  who  was  in  love,  would  become  the  Countess 
of  Charny  ?     Have  you  not  divined  the  future  ? 

Certain  persons  who  disagree  might  invite  me  to  notice  that 
the  characters  of  Alexandre  Dumas  are  puppets  whom  he 
moves  at  his  will,  and  that  my  comparison  is  valueless  be- 
cause it  could  be  used  to  prove  just  the  contrary  of  my  thesis, 
and  lead  us  to  conclude  that,  far  from  being  free  individuals, 
men  and  women  are  only  puppets  in  the  hand  of  the  author 
whom  we  name  God,  Destiny,  or  Chance. 

This  objection  would  not  be  well  founded.  In  arranging 
his  romances  after  his  own  fashion,  Alexandre  Dumas  evi- 
dently did  what  he  wished,  what  pleased  him,  what  he  pre- 
ferred, what  seemed  to  him  most  interesting  to  his  readers,  and 
his  imagination  played  the  most  important  role.  His  per- 
sonages, imaginary  or  real, — Andree  de  Taverney,  the 
Countess  of  Charny,  the  bailiff  of  Suffren  and  his  nephew 
Charny,  Marie  Antoinette,  the  Cardinal  de  Rohan — appear 
upon  the  scene  following  the  caprices  of  his  prodigious  talent 
as  a  story-teller.  I  knew  Alexandre  Dumas,  with  his  large 
face  and  his  scrubby,  shaggy  wig,  and  I  can  see  him  burst  into 
peals  of  laughter,  his  own  hearty  laughter,  at  some  psychologist 
of  the  Ecole  come  to  oppose  grave  determinism  to  his  amus- 
ing fantasies,  and  to  tell  him  that  he  had  been  fatally  forced 
to  write  what  he  had  imagined. 

From  this  assemblage  of  considerations  we  can,  it  seems 
to  me,  draw  an  indisputable  conclusion.  The  cases  of  spon- 
taneous vision  of  future  events  are  so  numerous  and  so  ade- 
quate that  the  hypothesis  of  casual  coincidence  is  a  hypo- 
thesis devoid  of  value  and  must  be  absolutely  rejected.     Those 


^ 


266  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

who  have  sufficiently  studied  the  question  have  no  doubt  at 
all  of  this  subliminal  view.  There  is  no  actual  scientific  ex- 
planation of  it,  but  it  does  not  abolish  liberty. 

Despite  appearances,  and  no  matter  what  may  be  thought 
of  it  by  philosophers  who  have  not  made  sufficiently  thorough 
study  of  this  special  question,  the  sight  of  the  future  is  not 
at  all  in  contradiction  with  the  utmost  extent  of  human  liberty 
and  free  will.  We  see  what  is  going  to  happen,  we  abolish 
time,  which,  for  that  matter,  does  not  exist  in  itself,  as  it  is 
a  transitory  product  of  the  movements  of  our  planet.  It  is 
thus,  simply,  an  idea  which  is  abolished.  We  see  what  is 
going  to  happen  as  we  can  see  what  has  happened.  If  will, 
caprice,  circumstances  had  brought  something  else,  it  would 
have  been  this  other  thing  which  was  seen.  Knowledge  of  the 
future  no  more  compromises  liberty  than  does  the  knowledge 
of  the  past. 

In  absolute  space  time  does  not  exist.  If  the  earth  re- 
volved twice  as  fast  the  days  would  be  half  as  long.  These 
measurements  are  relative,  not  fundamental.^  Let  us  not  con- 
found the  succession  of  events,  that  which  to  our  human 
impressions  constitutes  ''time,"  with  the  absolute.  Astron- 
omy has  already  invited  us  to  make  this  distinction.  This 
evening,  for  example,  look  at  Sirius,  Vega,  and  Aldebaran; 
you  see  them  not  as  they  are  but  as  they  no  longer  are,  as 
they  were, — the  first,  eight  years  ago,  the  second,  twenty- 
five  years  ago,  the  third,  thirty-two  years  ago.  Our  actual 
present  coexists  with  their  past.  We  saw  in  the  heavens,  on 
February  22,  1901,  a  sidereal  conflagration  which  had  taken 
place  about  1551.  The  stars,  as  we  see  them  at  this  moment, 
no  longer  exist.  The  actual  time  of  Jupiter  and  Saturn  is 
not  that  of  this  world. 

1  We  are  familiar  with  a  great  number  of  lobservations  concerning  the 
relativity  of  our  impressions  of  time,  which  has  nothing  absolute  about 
it.     Here  is  one  among  a  thousand. 

My  regretted  friend,  Alphonse?  Bu6,  has  often  related  to  me,  and  always 


KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  FUTURE  267 

The  metaphysicians  are  accustomed  to  associate  space  and 
time,  which  have,  in  truth,  a  certain  relation,  and  to  attribute 
common  properties  to  them.  That  is  an  error.  Spaice  exists 
in  itself.  It  is  absolute,  infinite,  eternal,  even  though  it  may- 
be empty,  for  emptiness  is  still  pure  space.  Time,  on  the 
contrary,  does  not  exist  in  itself.  It  is  created  by  the  move- 
ments of  the  stars  and  the  succession  of  things.  If  the  earth 
were  motionless,  if  the  stars  were  not  possessed  of  move- 
ments, there  would  be  no  time,  but  there  would  still  be  space. 
In  the  absolute  space,  between  the  worlds,  there  is  no  time. 

I  have  discussed  this  question  more  than  once,  during  fifty 
years,  with  our  most  eminent  contemporary  philosophers,^  and 
I  can  testify  that  most  of  them  prefer  to  sacrifice  the  possibil- 
ity of  our  foreseeing  the  future  rather  than  sacrifice  liberty. 
They  have  not  surmised  that  harmony  can  exist  between  the 
two.  I  hope  that  this  harmony  has  been  established  here. 
In  any  case  we  should  not,  we  cannot  deny  the  facts  of  ob- 
servation.   Let  us  return  to  these  facts. 

There  was  published  in  1912  a  French  translation  of  the 
work  of  the  German  philosopher  Schopenhauer  on  '*  Animal 
Magnetism  and  Magic,"  published  by  him  at  Frankfort,  in 

in  the  same  words,  the  following  observation  on  the  relativity  of  our 
impressions  of  time: 

He  was  on  horseback,  in  Algeria,  and  following  the  edge  of  a  very 
steep  ravine.  For  some  reason,  which  he  was  not  given  the  time  to  find 
out,  his  horse  made  a  misstep  and  fell  with  him  into  the  ravine,  from 
which  he  was  picked  up  unconscious.  During  this  fall,  which  could 
hardly  have  lasted  two  or  three  seconds,  his  entire  life,  from  his  child- 
hood up  to  his  career  in  the  army,  unrolled  clearly  and  slowly  in  his 
mind,  his  games  as  a  boy,  his  classes,  his  first  communion,  his  vacations, 
his  different  studies,  his  examinations,  his  entry  at  Saint-Cyr  in  1848, 
his  life  with  the  dragoons,  in  the  war  in  Italy,  with  the  lancers  of  the 
Imperial  Guards,  with  the  spahis,  with  the  riflemen,  at  the  Chateau  of 
Fontainebleau,  the  balls  of  the  Empress  at  the  Tuileries,  etc.  All  this 
slow  panorama  was  unrolled  before  his  eyes  in  less  than  four  seconds,  for 
he  recovered  consciousness  immediately. 

1  See  what  we  have  already  written  above  (Chap.  IV,  p.  116)  in  regard 
to  a  conversation  with  a  French  cardinal  concerning  divine  prescience 
and  free  will. 


268  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

1836,  as  well  as  related  writings  on  spirits  and  premonitory 
dreams,  published  by  Mm  in  Berlin,  in  1851.  Here  is  what 
we  read,  in  this  book: 

Dreams  often  announce  important  events,  but  at  times  also  insig- 
nificant things,  the  realization  of  which  is  not  worth  the  attention  of 
a  thinker.  I  myself  have  been  convinced  of  this  by  an  irrefutable 
experience.  I  wish  to  tell  of  this  experience  because  it  clearly  ex- 
hibits at  thef  same  time  the  rigorous  necessity  of  what  happens,  even 
of  what  is  most  accidental. 

One  morning  I  was  writing  with  great  care  a  long  and  most  im- 
portant business  letter  in  English.  When  I  reached  the  end  of  the 
third  page,  I  took  the  ink-well,  instead  of  the  sand-box,  and  poured 
it  over  the  paper;  the  ink. ran  off  the  desk  to  the  floor.  The  servant 
came  in  at  my  ring,  brought  a  pail  of  water,  and  began  to  wash  the 
floor  to  get  off  the  spots.  While  she  was  doing  this  she  said:  "I 
dreamed  last  night  that  I  took  some  ink  spots  off  here  by  rubbing  the 
boards." — "That 's  not  true !"  I  answered  her. — "It  is  true,  and  I  have 
already  told  it  to  the  other  servant,  who  sleeps  with  me." 

Just  then  the  other  servant,  who  was  about  seventeen  years  old, 
chanced  to  come  in,  to  call  the  one  who  was  washing  the  boards.  I 
went  toward  her  and  asked  her:  "What  did  she  dream  last  night?" 
— Answer :  "I  don't  know."  Then  I  said :  "But  she  told  you  about 
it  when  she  woke  up."  Whereupon  the  young  girl  replied:  "Oh, 
yes !  she  dreamed  that  she  washed  an  ink  spot  off  the  floor  here." 

This  tale,  the  absolute  truth  of  which  I  vouch  for,  places  the  reality 
of  this  sort  of  dreams  beyond  doubt.  It  is  no  less  remarkable  because 
it  concerned  an  act  which  can  be  qualified  as  involuntary,  as  it  oc- 
curred entirely  against  my  will,  resulting  from  a  very  insignificant 
mistake  of  my  hand.  And  nevertheless,  this  act  was  so  necessary  and 
so  inevitably  determined  that  its  effect  existed,  several  hours  in  ad- 
vance, as  a  dream  in  the  consciousness  of  another.  Here  appears  in 
the  clearest  manner  the  truth  of  my  proposition:  everything  that 
happens,  happens  of  necessity."  ^ 

I  should  not  have  classed  this  tale  among  my  positive  docu- 

1  Schopenhauer,  M ^moires  sur  les  sciences  accultes  (Leymaire,  edi- 
teur),  p.  170. 


KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  FUTURE  269 

ments,  and  I  should  have  left  it  in  the  category  of  doubtful 
cases  (for  the  testimony  of  servants  is  often  to  be  suspected, 
and  more  than  one  takes  a  certain  pleasure  in  deceiving  his 
master),  if  Schopenhauer  were  not  the  author  and  if  he  had 
not  offered  it  himself  in  support  of  his  convictions  concern- 
ing necessity.  He  declared  he  was  canvinced  of  the  truth- 
fulness of  his  two  servants,  and  in  his  mind  there  was  no 
doubt  about  the  reality  of  the  premonitory  dream. 

But  he  was  mistaken  in  the  interpretation.  He  was#not  at 
all  forced  to  upset  his  inkstand.  The  event  was  seen  because 
it  was  what  happened. 

This  story  of  the  German  philosopher's  servant  reminds  me 
of  a  similar  vision  of  another  servant  which  was  told  in 
the  review, ' * Uebersinnliche  Welt,"  of  Berlin  (August,  1904), 
which  I  give: 

Monsieur  Buchberger,  Councilor  of  Justice,  chanced  to  be  at  Ober- 
mais.  One  morning  at  about  five  o'clock  he  had  a  dream,  which 
showed  him  his  house  at  Olmutz  and  his  servant,  her  clothes  on  fire, 
upon  which  a  stream  of  water  was  directed.  Next  he  saw  the  body 
of  the  unfortunate  woman,  whose  skin  was  still  quite  white,  and  then 
he  awoke. 

A  short  time  afterward  Monsieur  Buchberger  returned  home  and 
when  he  had  reached  the  house  his  wife  told  him  that  their  servant 
had  died  as  a  result  of  burns.  On  the  same  day  that  he  had  had  his 
dream,  but  at  ten  o'clock  in  the  morning,  as  she  was  warming  some 
varnish,  it  had  caught  fire  and  had  set  fire  to  the  servant's  clothes. 
They  had  caught  her  as  she  ran  about  the  room,  flung  her  to  the 
ground,  and  succeeded  in  putting  out  the  fire  with  water;  then  she 
had  been  taken  to  a  hospital  where  a  few  days  later  she  had  died. 

It  is  noticeable  that  this  dream  occurred  at  five  o'clock  in  the 
morning,  while  the  accident  did  not  happen  until  ten  o'clock.  This 
is  much  the  same  as  the  case  of  Schopenhauer. 

The  account  is  signed  by  Monsieur  Buchberger,  Councilor  of 
Justice  at  Graz-Rucherlberg. 

The  principal  fact  that  ought  to  strike  us  and  acquire  in 


270  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

our  eyes  the  character  of  a  certainty,  is  simply  this  paradoxical 
affirmation, — that  the  future,  which  does  not  yet  exist  and 
which  will  result  from  the  chain  of  a  series  of  little  consecutive 
causes,  can  nevertheless  be  seen  as  if  it  had  already  been 
realized. 

It  is  not  merely  in  premonitory  dreams  that  the  future  can 
be  seen,  but  also  in  certain  states  of  the  soul  that  are  difficult  to 
define.  One  of  the  most  curious  examples  that  I  know  of  this 
exact  vision  of  the  future  is  the  observation  reported  by  my 
learned  colleague  of  the  Metaphysical  Institute,  Dr.  Geley, 
whose  works  are  well  known  to  my  readers.  Here  it  is,  liter- 
ally:^ 

On  June  27,  1894,  at  about  nine  o'clock  in  the  morning,  Dr.  Gallet, 
who  was  at  the  time  a  student  of  medicine  at  Lyons,  was  working  in 
his  room,  in  the  company  of  a  fellow-student,  now  Dr.  Varay,  himself 
a  doctor  of  medicine  at  Anneey. 

At  the  time  Gallet  was  very  much  occupied  and  preoccupied  with 
the  preparation  for  an  examination  that  was  about  to  occur,  the  first 
examination  for  the  doctor's  degree ;  and  he  was  not  thinking  of 
anything  but  this  examination. 

In  particular,  he  took  absolutely  no  interest  in  politics,  gave  only 
a  hasty  glance  to  the  papers,  and  in  the  past  few  days  had  discussed 
only  superficially  and  incidentally  the  election  of  the  President  of 
the  Republic,  which  was  to  take  place  on  this  very  day.  The  electoral 
congress  was  to  meet  at  noon  at  Versailles. 

All  at  once,  Gallet,  who  was  entirely  absorbed  in  his  work,  was 
dictatorially  diverted  from  it  by  an  obsessing  thought.  An  unex- 
pected phrase  was  imposed  on  his  mind  with  such  force  that  he 
could  not  help  writing  it  down  with  a  pen  in  his  note-book.  This 
phrase  was,  literally: 

^'Monsieur  Casimir-Perier  is  elected  President  of  the  Republic  by 
451  votes" 

This  took  place,  I  repeat,  before  the  meeting  of  the  congress.  We 
must  notice,  however,  a  curious  thing,  the  phrase,  of  which  Dr.  Gallet 

1  This  has  been  published  with  all  its  details  in  the  Annales  des  Sci- 
ences psychiques,  October,  1910. 


KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  FUTURE  271 

has  the  most  distinct  memory,  indicates  the  present  and  not  the 
future. 

Stupefied,  Dr.  Gallet  called  his  comrade  Varay  and  held  out  to 
him  the  papifer  on  which  he  had  just  written. 

Varay  read,  shrugged  his  shoulders  and,  as  his  friend,  very  much 
interested,  became  insistent,  declaring  he  believed  in  the  premonition, 
begged  him,  a  little  coldly,  to  let  him  work  in  peace. 

After  lunch  Gallet  went  aut  to  attend  a  class  at  the  Faculty.  On 
his  way  he  met  two  other  students.  Monsieur  Bouchet,  now  a  doctor 
at  Cruseilles,  Haute  Savoie,  and  Monsieur  Debome,  now  a  pharma- 
cist at  Thonon.  He  announced  to  them  that  Casimir-Perier  would 
be  elected  by  451  votes.  Despite  the  laughter  and  mockery  of  his 
comrades,  he  continued  several  times  to  affirm  his  conviction. 

When  they  came  out  of  the  class  the  four  friends  met  again  and 
went  to  refresh  themselves  on  the  terrace  of  a  neighboring  cafe.  At 
this  moment  the  newsboys  arrived  with  the  special  editions  which  an- 
nounced the  result  of  the  presidential  election,  crying: 

"Monsieur  Casimir-Perier  is  elected  by  four  hundred  and  fifty-one 
votes !" 

We  can  assuredly  believe  the  word  of  Dr.  Geley.  But  he 
has  been  careful  to  add  to  his  tale  irrefutable  confirmations, 
the  signed  statements  of  the  witnesses : 

1  The  affidavit  of  Dr.  Varay,  former  interne  at  the  hos- 
pitals of  Lyons. 

2  The  affidavit  of  Monsieur  Debome,  pharmacist  at  Thonon. 

3  The  affidavit  of  Dr.  Bouchet,  physician  at  Cruseilles. 
Therefore,  no  one  is  justified  in  disputing  this  event. 

It  is  well  to  notice  that  the  election  of  Casimir-Perier,  by 
a  majority  of  only  twenty-eight  votes,^  was  unexpected  and 

1  Here  is  the  official  result  of  the  ballot : 

Votes  taken  845 

Absolute  majority 423 

Obtained : 

Casimir-Perier  (elected)    451 

Brisson     195 

Dupuy  97 

General  F^vrier   53 

Others  22 


272  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

that  people  had  rather  counted  on  the  success  of  Monsieur 
Brisson  or  of  Monsieur  Dupuy. 

To  see  in  this  only  another  simple  coincidence  passes  the 
limits  of  a  reasonable  skepticism.  These  cases  strengthen  one 
another.  If  there  were  only  one,  isolated  and  lost  in  the 
number  of  possibilities,  we  might  doubt.  But  such  a  mass  as 
we  have  proved  here  leaves  in  the  mind  the  absolute  certainty 
of  the  reality  of  these  previsions,  however  inexplicable  they 
appear  in  the  present  state  of  science. 

Here,  also,  the  involuntary  medium  saw  what  happened; 
but  the  election  of  Casimir-Perier  was  not  inevitable,  for  all 
that.  Each  one  of  the  945  voters  certainly  made  his  influence 
felt,  even  more  than  Schopenhauer  did  when  he  upset  his 
ink;  each  one  acted  according  to  his  judgment.  This  very 
example  is  a  piece  of  typical  evidence  against  fatality. 

Let  us  continue  our  free  examination. 

Monsieur  Cesar  de  Vesme,  the  learned  director  of  the  *'An- 
nales  des  Sciences  psychiques,"  told  me  in  1901  of  the  follow- 
ing extraordinary  prediction : 

In  the  first  days  of  the  year  1865,  a  certain  Vincent  Sassaroli  went 
to  live  at  Sarteano,  a  commune  of  6,000  inhabitants. 

As  there  existed  in  this  neighborhood  a  good  musical  band  com- 
posed of  thirty-four  performers.  Monsieur  Joseph  Frontini  who  was 
in  charge,  being  obliged  to  flee  the  country  for  political  reasons,  in- 
vited him  to  become  director  of  it. 

Monsieur  Sassaroli  accepted  the  offer,  and  he  was  at  once  presented 
to  this  body  of  musicians,  in  the  room  where  they  practised,  on  the 
third  floor  of  a  house  belonging  to  Canon  Dom  Bacherini.  After 
the  rehearsal  and  in  the  presence  of  the  whole  society,  he  announced 
to  Monsieur  Frontini  that  the  apartment  in  which  they  were  was 
going  to  crumble  with  the  rest  of  the  building,  from  the  roof  down 
to  the  ground  floor;  he  added  that  he  seemed  to  see  the  debris  of  the 
ruined  house  bury  and  crush  all  those  present,  including  himself. 

At  these  words  they  all  looked  at  one  another  speechless,  wondering 
whether  the  new  director  were  joking  or  if  he  had  gone  mad;  but 


KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  FUTURE  273 

Monsieur  Sassaroli,  imperturbable,  insisted  on  mentioning  the  very 
day  and  hour  on  which  the  catastrophe  would  take  place. 

At  these  last  words  those  present  no  longer  doubted  that  the  un- 
happy man  was  out  of  his  mind.     They  withdrew,  laughing. 

Naturally  this  absurd  story  spread  at  once  through  the  country 
and  every  one  laughed  immoderately. 

At  this,  Monsieur  Frontini,  seeing  that  Sassaroli  had  become  a 
laughing-stock  and  still  persuaded  that  his  fixed  idea  would  lead  him 
straight  into  madness,  made  every  effort  to  bring  him  back  to  reason. 
With  the  consent  of  Canon  Joseph  Bacherini,  he  had  the  building  in 
question  carefully  examined  from  roof  to  foundations  by  architectural 
experts,  who  declared  that  the  house  did  not  show  the  least  sign  of 
deterioration.  Fortified  by  this  judgment,  he  reported  it  to  Monsieur 
Sassaroli,  counseling  him  to  insist  no  longer  on  his  foolish  prediction, 
and  wishing  him  as  long  a  life  as  that  of  the  solid  building  of  which 
they  were  speaking. 

It  was  labor  lost:  Monsieur  Sassaroli  answered  that  he  could  not 
share  the  wish,  as  in  that  case  he  would  have  only  four  days  left  to 
live. 

Such  obstinacy  could  only  increase  the  doubts  as  to  the  maestro's 
sanity,  and  they  began  to  keep  an  eye  on  him  and  to  watch  him,  lest 
he  should  commit  some  enormity. 

In  the  cafes,  in  the  homes,  people  spoke  of  nothing  but  this  non- 
sense, which  made  the  whole  countryside  laugh. 

At  last  the  great  day  arrived.  In  the  evening,  as  it  happened  to 
be  one  of  the  days  fixed  for  practice,  the  musicians  came  together 
in  the  room  as  their  custom  was,  and  while  they  were  waiting  for  the 
director  they  passed  their  time  laughing  at  him.  Monsieur  Sassaroli 
soon  arrived  and,  refusing  to  hear  of  work  that  evening,  very  much 
agitated  because  the  hour  of  the  catastrophe  was  approaching,  he 
protested  to  such  purpose  that  he  succeeded  in  persuading  all  those 
who  were  present  to  leave.  As  they  went  down  the  stairway,  which 
was  built  over  massive  arches,  Monsieur  Sassaroli,  who  went  ahead 
of  them  all,  repeated  continually :  "Gently,  walk  gently,  the  weight 
of  all  of  us  might  hasten  the  fall." 

We  can  imagine  the  jokes  and  laughter  of  these  thirty-four  persons, 
who,  feeling  convinced  that  they  were  following  a  madman  and 
taking  part  in  an  absurd  farce,  went  down  the  long  flights  of  steps, 


274  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

one  after  another.  At  last  they  came  out  into  the  street.  A  few 
moments  later,  and  at  exactly  the  hour  foretold,  the  house  crumbled 
from  top  to  bottom. 

We  can  all  picture  to  ourselves  the  sensation  such  an  event  created 
in  the  countryside. 

The  report  from  which  we  have  taken  this  abridged  account,  was 
written  by  Monsieur  Joseph  Frontini,  whose  father,  the  president  of 
the  municipality,  had  been  the  first  to  congratulate  Monsieur  Sassaroli 
the  day  after  the  catastrophe.  There  are  also  three  affidavits,  the 
first  from  all  the  members  of  the  family  with  whom  Monsieur  Sassa- 
roli lodged,  the  second  from  the  guardian  of  the  theater;  and  the 
third  from  the  family  living  in  the  house  adjoining  the  theater,  all 
certifying  to  the  event. 

Really,  how  can  one  still  doubt  in  the  presence  of  an  oc- 
currence so  absolutely  convincing?  Would  it  not  be  a  case 
for  applying  to  the  incredulous  the  biblical  stigma:  Oculos 
hdbent  et  non  vident;  aiires  habent  et  non  aiidiunt,  "Eyes 
have  they  and  see  not,  ears  have  they  and  hear  not"?  To 
deny,  always  to  deny,  to  deny  notwithstanding:  what  does 
that  prove? 

Very  well,  let  us  be  still  unsatisfied :  we  have  not  the  weight 
of  enough  proof  in  our  scales.     Here  is  more  weight. 

One  of  the  most  astonishing  examples  of  the  exact  vision 
of  the  future  that  I  know  of,  one  of  the  strangest  and  most 
characteristic,  of  those  due  to  hypnotic  lucidity,  is  this,  re- 
ported by  Dr.  Alphonse  Teste  in  his  "Manuel  pratique  du 
magnetisme  universel."  This  is  not  a  work  of  yesterday, 
as  it  was  published  in  1841,  but  it  is  none  the  less  valuable  for, 
as  Moliere  says,  time  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  matter. 
Here  is  this  truly  fantastic  case : 

On  Friday,  the  eighth  of  last  May,  I  hypnotized  Madame  Hortense 

M .     On  the  day  of  which  I  speak,  this  lady  was  in  a  state  of 

admirable  lucidity.  I  was  alone  with  her  and  her  husband,  and  she 
seemed  especially  preoccupied  with  her  personal  future.  Among 
other  unexpected  things  she  said  this  to  us : 


KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  FUTURE  275 

"I  have  been  pregnant  for  fifteen  days,  but  the  child  will  not  be 
born  at  the  proper  time;  this  causes  me  bitter  grief.  On  next  Tues- 
day, the  twelfth  of  the  present  month,  I  shall  be  frightened  by  some- 
thing and  fall,  and  as  a  result  I  shall  have  a  miscarriage." 

I  confess  that  in  spite  of  all  I  have  seen,  one  of  the  points  in  this 
prophecy  roused  my  senses. 

"What  will  you  be  afraid  of,  Madame  V  I  asked,  with  an  expression 
of  interest  which  was  far  from  feigned. 

*'I  don't  know  at  all." 

"But  from  what  direction  will  it  come?  where  will  you  fall?" 

"I  cannot  tell  you,  I  know  nothing  about  it." 

"Is  there  no  way  of  avoiding  all  this?" 

"None." 

"If,  however,  we  should  not  leave  you?" 

"It  will  make  no  difference." 

"And  will  you  be  very  ill?" 

"Yes,  for  three  days." 

"Do  you  know  exactly  what  will  happen  to  you?" 

"On  Tuesday,  at  half -past  three,  just  after  I  have  been  frightened, 
I  shall  have  a  fainting-fit  which  will  last  eight  minutes.  Afterward, 
I  shall  be  seized  with  violent  pains  in  my  back  which  will  last  all 
the  rest  of  the  day  and  continue  all  night.  Wednesday  morning  I 
shall  begin  to  lose  blood.  This  flow  will  increase  rapidly  and  become 
very  abundant.  However,  there  is  nothing  to  worry  about,  for  it  will 
not  kill  me.  On  Thursday  morning  I  shall  be  much  better,  I  shall 
even  be  able  to  leave  my  bed  for  almost  the  whole  day,  but  at  about 
half -past  five  in  the  evening  I  shall  have  a  new  loss  of  blood  which 
will  be  followed  by  delirium.  Thursday  night  will  be  good,  but  by 
Friday  night  I  shall  be  quite  out  of  my  head." 

Madame  Hortense  said  no  more,  and  without  taking  everything  she 
said  literally,  we  were  so  much  impressed,  that  we  did  not  dream  of 
questioning  her  further.  Nevertheless  her  husband,  who  was  very 
much  disturbed,  asked  her  with  indescribable  anxiety  if  she  would 
be  out  of  her  head  for  long. 

"For  three  days,"  she  answered  with  perfect  calm. 

Then  she  added  with  a  sweetness  that  was  full  of  grace :  "Come, 
don't  be  anxious!  I  shall  not  stay  out  of  my  head  and  I  shall  not 
die  J  I  shall  suffer,  that 's  all." 


276  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

Madame  Hortense  was  awakened,  and,  as  is  usual,  retained  no 
memory  of  what  had  happened.  When  I  was  alone  with  her  hus- 
band, I  especially  urged  him  to  keep  secret  from  his  wife  all  these 
occurrences  which,  although  they  were  perhaps  imaginary,  would  be 
quite  capable  of  depressing  her  painfully  if  she  were  aware  of  them ; 
besides,  in  the  interests  of  science,  it  was  important  for  her  to  be 

left  in  ignorance  of  them.    Monsieur  H promised  everything, 

and  I  know  his  character  well  enough  to  feel  sure  tjiat  he  kept  his 
promise.  As  for  me,  I  had  carefully  taken  notes  of  all  the  predicted 
events,  and  the  next  day  I  had  occasion  to  speak  of  them  to  Dr. 
Amedee  Latour. 

The  fatal  Tuesday  arrived;  fear  for  Madame  H was  the  only 

thing  that  occupied  me.  When  I  reached  their  home  she  was  lunch- 
ing with  her  husband  and  seemed  in  the  best  possible  spirits. 

"My  good  friends,"  I  said  as  I  entered,  "I  am  at  your  disposal 
until  evening,  if  it  does  not  disturb  you." 

"You  are  heartily  welcome,"  answered  Madame  Hortense,  "but  on 
one  condition,  which  is  that  you  ,will  not  talk  too  much  about 
hypnotism." 

"Madame,  I  will  not  speak  of  it  at  all,  if  you  will  consent  to  sleep 
for  me  only  ten  minutes." 

She  accepted,  and  shortly  after  lunch  I  put  her  to  sleep. 

"How  are  you,  Madame?" 

"Very  well.  Monsieur,  but  not  for  long." 

"How  is  thatf' 

She  repeated  her  conclusive  statement  of  Friday :  "Between  three 
and  four  o^clock,  I  shall  be  frightened  by  something,  I  shall  fall,  a 
copious  loss  of  blood  will  result." 

"What  will  frighten  you?" 

"I  don't  know." 

"Nevertheless,  try  to  find  out." 

"I  know  nothing  about  it." 

"Is  there  no  way  to  escape  this  fatality?" 

"None." 

"This  evening,  Madame,  I  shall  be  able  to  contradict  you." 

"This  evening,  doctor,  you  will  be  very  anxious  about  my  health, 
for  I  shall  be  very  ill." 


KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  FUTURE  277 

I  had  nothing  to  answer  to  that,  for  the  moment.  It  was  necessary 
to  wait  and  I  waited. 

When  she  was  awakened  a  few  minutes  later,  Madame  Hortense 
remembered  nothing;  her  face,  which  had  been  saddened  by  the 
visions  of  her  dream,  took  on  again  all  its  natural  serenity.  As  she 
had  done  before  she  went  to  sleep,  she  talked  and  jested  with  us,  with 
no  mental  reservations,  and  once  more  resumed  those  gay  sallies  which 
were  so  natural  to  her  and  which  she  knew  so  well  how  to  utter.  As 
for  me,  I  was  in  a  state  of  mind  impossible  to  describe :  I  was  lost 
among  conjectures  and  hypotheses  which  sometimes  shook  my  faith : 
I  suspected  everything,  I  suspected  myself. 

Having  quite  made  up  our  minds  not  to  leave  her  for  a  second,  we 
kept  watch  of  her  least  movements ;  we  closed  the  windows  tightly  for 
fear  some  accident  occurring  in  the  street  or  in  the  neighboring  houses 
should  make  the  prophecy  come  true.  Finally,  if  any  one  rang,  one 
of  us  went  into  the  hall  to  see  who  it  was. 

It  was  a  little  after  half -past  three.  Madame  Hortense,  who  was 
much  astonished  at  the  little  attentions  with  which  she  saw  herself 
beset  and  who  could  not  penetrate  the  mystery  of  our  precautions, 
said  to  us,  as  she  rose  from  the  arm-chair  in  which  we  had  made  her 
sit  down: 

"Will  you  permit  me,  gentlemen,  to  remove  myself  a  moment  from 
your  inconceivable  solicitude?" 

"Where  do  you  intend  to  go,  madame?"  I  cried,  with  an  air  of 
anxiety  which  I  could  not  hide. 

"But,  good  heavens.  Monsieur,  what  is  the  matter  with  you?  Do 
you  think  I  have  plans  of  suicide?" 

"No,  Madame,  but — " 

"But  what?" 

"But  what?  I  know  I  am  indiscreet,  but  the  truth  is  I  am  con- 
cerned over  your  health." 

"Then,  Doctor,"  she  answered  laughing,  "all  the  more  reason  for 
letting  me  go  out !" 

I  understood. 

The  reason  was  plausible,  there  was  but  little  ground  for  insisting. 
Nevertheless,  my  friend  wished  to  see  the  thing  through  and  said  to 
his  wife: 


278  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

"Will  you  permit  me  to  go  with  you  as  far  as  there?" 

"What !     So  it 's  a  wager  then !" 

"Precisely,  Madame,  a  wager  between  us,  which  I  shall  certainly 
win,  although  you  have  sworn  to  make  me  lose." 

Madame  Hortense  looked  from  one  to  the  other  of  us  and  remained 
dumbfounded!  She  accepted  the  arm  her  husband  offered  her  and 
went  out  with  a  peal  of  laughter. 

I  laughed  also,  yet  for  all  that  I  felt  I  know  not  what  presentiment 
that  the  decisive  moment  had  come.  It  is  so  true  that  this  idea  had 
taken  possession  of  me  that  I  did  not  dream  of  reentering  the  draw- 
ing-room but  stayed  like  a  Swiss  at  the  door  of  the  antechamber 
where  I  had  no  reason  to  be. 

All  at  once  there  was  a  piercing  cry  and  the  sound  of  a  body  falling 
on  the  landing.  I  dashed  upstairs.  At  the  door  of  the  bath-room  my 
friend  held  his  wife  fainting  in  his  arms. 

It  was  indeed  she  who  had  cried  out.  The  noise  I  had  heard  had 
been  that  of  her  fall.  At  the  moment  when  she  had  left  the  arm  of 
her  husband  to  enter  the  room,  she  had  suddenly  come  upon  a  rat — 
there  where  they  swore  'they  had  never  seen  a  single  one  in  twenty 
years — and  had  been  so  suddenly  and  terribly  frightened  that  she  had 
fallen  backward,  without  its  being  possible  to  catch  her. 

After  that  events  took  place  as  she  had  foretold  they  would. 

Who,  after  such  happenings,  would  still  dare  to  set  a  limit  to  what 
is  possible  or  to  define  human  life? 

We  cannot  doubt  the  veracity  of  the  author.  He  was  him- 
self too  profoundly  impressed  by  this  stupefying  clairvoy- 
ance for  us  to  fail  to  be  as  impressed  as  he.  To  deny  every- 
thing, as  is  often  done,  would  be  to  deny  the  whole  history 
of  humanity. 

Was  I  not  right  in  calling  it  one  of  the  most  extraordinary 
cases  in  the  whole  series  which  we  are  studying  at  this  mo- 
ment, and  which  is  so  rich  in  variety?  Here  also,  it  is  im- 
possible to  apply  the  banal  explanation  of  chance.  At  the 
most  one  might  suppose  that  the  sick  imagination  of  the 
narrator  produced  everything  through  subconscious  autosug- 
gestion, and  that  she  herself  created  this  future  which  she  saw ; 


KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  FUTURE       ,        279 

but  what  an  untenable  hypothesis! — a  hypothesis,  for  that 
matter,  diametrically  opposed  to  the  preceding  case,  the  col- 
lapse of  the  theater,  as  well  as  to  those  that  follow. 

It  is  certainly  quite  right  for  us  to  receive  cautiously  the 
accounts  of  persons  who  assure  us  that  they  have  foreseen 
extraordinary  events:  for  all  that,  there  has  been  evidence 
that  it  is  impossible  to  doubt,  and  to  this  class  belongs  an 
account,  rather  banal,  but  curious  in  a  way,  which  was  brought 
in  by  my  friend.  Colonel  Rochas,  and  which  happened  to  our 
famous  surgeon.  Baron  Larrey,  who  told  it  to  him.  All  in 
one  night  he  dreamed  four  numbers  for  the  lottery  and  the 
next  morning,  as  he  was  in  haste  to  begin  his  calls,  he  asked 
Madame  Larrey  to  make  the  bets  on  them  herself.  But  what 
was  his  annoyance,  when  he  returned  home,  to  find  that  the 
numbers  had  appeared — and  that  his  commission  had  been 
forgotten ! 

It  is  impossible  to  attribute  this  concidence  to  chance,  the 
player  had  2,555,189  chances  against  him. 

One  number,  yes;  perhaps  even  two,  but  four!  To-day 
we  know  that  the  future  can  be  seen. 

This  event  is  as  interesting  as  the  preceding  ones.  I  used 
to  know  Baron  Larrey,  as  distinguished  as  a  man  of  the  world 
as  he  was  honest  as  a  scholar.  His  testimony  is  that  of  a 
man  of  honor. 

Let  us  notice,  in  this  connection,  that  the  examples  which 
I  am  submitting  to  the  impartial  attention  of  my  readers 
have  the  most  diverse  origins.  It  is  not  merely  a  question 
of  premonitory  dreams,  or  of  divinations  in  a  state  of  somnam- 
bulism, or  of  palmistry,  or  of  fortune-telling  with  cards,  or  of 
any  special  series  whatever.  All  the  forms  of  brain  activity 
are  represented,  as  are  all  social  conditions  and  all  countries. 
It  would  therefore  be  impossible  to  object  that  there  was  any 
suggestive  influence  of  any  sort  whatever. 

Let  us  continue  our  study. 

One  of  the  most  tragic  examples  of  premonitory  dreams  of 


280  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

death  that  I  know  is  that  of  Dr.  de  Sermyn,  of  the  death  of  his 
own  son.    Let  us  hear  his  account  of  it : 

My  first  child  was  just  beginning  his  fourth  year.  I  had  a  quite 
particular  attachment  for  him,  such  as  I  have  felt  for  none  of  my 
other  children.  His  glance  and  his  smile  seemed  to  me  angelic,  and 
I  believed  his  intelligence  was  exceptional  for  his  age.  He  was  my 
joy  and  my  consolation,  and  the  thought  that  I  was  to  see  him  and 
talk  with  him,  when  I  returned  home,  filled  me  with  happiness.  I 
forgot  then  all  my  fatigue  and  care. 

One  night  I  dreamed  that  I  was  holding  the  child  in  my  arms  be- 
fore a  lighted  stove.  Suddenly  he  slipped,  I  know  not  how,  and  fell 
into  the  flames.  Instead  of  hastening  to  pull  him  out  of  the  fire  I 
precipitately  closed  the  stove  doors. 

What  led  me  to  act  thus  was  the  following  reasoning.  I  said  to 
myself :  "If  I  pull  the  child  out  of  the  fire,  he  will  die  in  a  few  days 
in  frightful  suffering,  because  of  his  many  and  deep  burns ;  but  if  I 
close  the  stove  he  will  die  quickly,  perhaps  in  a  minute,  in  any 
case  he  will  not  suffer  long." 

Strange  and  stupidly  cruel  reasoning,  but  in  my  dream  this  idea 
seemed  luminous  to  me  and  my  act  a  duty. 

When  I  had  thus  closed  the  two  doors  of  the  stove  I  heard,  with 
inexpressible  anguish,  the  movements  of  the  child  roasting  inside. 

"Oh,  my  God !"  I  said,  "make  him  die  quickly !  I  cannot  bear  to 
hear  him  suffer." 

I  awoke  with  a  start,  my  forehead  bathed  in  cold  sweat,  my  heart 
beating  madly.  I  first  sat  down  on  my  bed,  saying ;  "Thank  heaven 
it  is  only  a  dream!" 

Then  I  ran  into  the  child's  room.  He  was  sleeping  peacefully. 
His  breathing  was  regular,  his  pulse  normal,  his  skin  fresh.  Never- 
theless, I  tried  in  vain  to  calm  myself.  It  was  useless  to  say  to  my- 
self :  "Imbecile,  donkey,  it  is  only  a  dream,  the  child  is  wonderfully 
well." — ^"Go  back  to  bed,  then,  and  sleep,"  said  the  voice  of  my  reason. 
I  went  to  bed  but  without  being  able  to  conquer  my  anxiety,  without 
being  able  to  get  rid  of  an  evil  presentiment.  The  first  thing  I  did, 
when  I  awoke  in  the  morning,  was  to  go  and  examine  the  child.  He 
talked,  he  was  gay,  he  was  bursting  with  health. 

"Go  and  work,"  said  the  mockmg  voice  of  my  conscious  self  j 


KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  FUTURE  281 

"there  is  nothing  the  matter  with  the  child ;  your  dream  was  stupid. 
Does  one  throw  one's  child  into  the  stove  and,  when  it  is  in,  shut  it 
in  that  it  may  die  the  more  quickly*?" 

How  could  I  guess  that  my  subconscious  mind,  which  said  nothing 
but  tormented  me,  obsessed  me,  possessed  the  truth  and  knew  what 
was  going  to  happen? 

In  the  morning  the  child  awoke  gay  and  happy,  as  usual;  he  ate 
breakfast  with  a  good  appetite  and  I  went  out  reassured. 

I  returned  home  about  noon.  The  child  was  lying  on  a  couch, 
drowsy.  His  pulse  was  rapid,  his  skin  burning,  his  breathing  quick. 
I  was  very  much  disturbed.  My  wife  noticed  it  and  questioned  me 
anxiously,  but  I  restrained  myself  and  tried  to  hide  my  secret  alarm. 
Nevertheless,  I  began  to  listen  attentively  to  the  little  boy's  breathing 
and  I  was  able  to  detect  the  existence  of  bronchitis  which  extended 
to  both  lungs,  as  well  as  a  slight  crepitation  at  their  base.  At  this  I 
could  not  help  exclaiming,  "It  is  serious,  very  serious !  I  believe  the 
child  is  lost." 

Just  then  a  doctor,  who  was  related  to  us,  was  passing  on  horse- 
back.    My  wife  rushed  to  the  window  and  called  him. 

''Doctor,"  she  said  when  he  entered,  "I  beg  you  to  examine  our 
child,  who  is  ill;  my  husband  says  he  is  lost." 

Dr.  W was  the  fashionable  practitioner  of  the  moment.     He 

was  an  excellent  talker,  rather  witty,  and  not  exactly  tender  toward 
the  young  doctors  for  whom  he  did  not  seem  to  have  much  respect. 

He  examined  the  child,  smiling.  "And  how  long  has  he  been  illf 
he  asked. 

"Hardly  an  hour,  Doctor,"  cried  my  wife.  "This  morning  he  was 
perfectly  well." 

"And  Monsieur  thinks  he  is  lost f  he  asked,  pointing  to  me.  "Ah! 
these  young  men !" 

"Come,"  he  went  on,  addressing  me,  "you  can  have  no  serious  rea- 
son for  alarming  a  mother  in  this  way.  This  child  has  hardly  been 
ill  an  hour,  and  your  diagnosis  as 'well  as  your  prognosis  is  already 
made.     That  is  n't  reasonable. 

"Nonsense,  Madame,  calm  yourself,"  he  added,  addressing  my  wife. 
"Put  the  child  to  bed,  give  him  something  hot  to  drink,  cover  him  up 
well,  try  to  make  him  perspire,  and  I  will  stop  in  during  the 
evening." 


282  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

I  understood  perfectly  the  absurdity  of  my  conduct,  and  how  ridicu- 
lous I  must  appear  in  the  eyes  of  the  celebrated  doctor,  but  how 
could  I  confess  that  I  was  acting  through  belief  in  a  dream?  He 
would  have  taken  me  for  a  simpleton. 

I  lowered  my  head  without  replying  to  his  just  reproaches,  but  as 
he  was  about  to  leave  I  exclaimed,  "I  beg  you.  Doctor,  not  to  fail  to 
return  this  evening." 

Was  it  the  beseeching  tone  of  my  voice  which  struck  him?  He 
stopped,  looked  at  me  fixedly  for  a  few  seconds,  and  then  went  slowly 
toward  the  child  and  began  to  examine  him  a  second  time,  more 
attentively  than  at  first. 

Without  doubt  he  said  to  himself:  "Here  is  a  father  who  is  a 
doctor,  and  who  seems  to  be  very  anxious  over  the  state  of  his  child. 
Has  he  discovered  some  terrifying  symptom  which  has  escaped  me?" 

When  he  had  finished  his  examination,  he  said  to  me :  "It^s  quite 
true  one  can  distinguish,  here  and  there,  a  few  hissing  rattles  in 
both  lungs,  and  you  seem  to  believe  that  serious  bronchial  pneumonia 
is  about  to  appear.  But  at  this  moment  we  cannot  be  certain  of  any 
such  eventuality.  All  that  we  can  actually  say  is  that  there  exists 
light  bronchial  pneumonia  which  may  perfectly  well  disappear  in  a 
few  days.  But  even  if  we  admitted  the  beginning  of  bronchial  pneu- 
monia, what  reason  would  you  have  to  say  that  the  child  was  lost? 
All  cases  of  bronchial  pneumonia  are  not  fatal.  Come,  be  reasonable. 
I  will  return." 

Despite  all  the  care  of  Dr.  W the  state  of  the  child  grew  worse 

hourly.     On  the  fourth  day  he  was  choking  desperately. 

When  I  saw  him  suffering  so  cruelly  and  foresaw  the  end,  I  ex- 
perienced the  same  anguish  which  I  had  felt  in  my  dream.  I  said 
once  more,  in  my  heart :  "My  God !  make  him  die  quickly !  If  this 
agony  lasts  it  will  drive  me  mad." 

Since  this  dream,  which  announced  the  death  of  my  son  George, 
nothing  has  been  able  to  take  away  the  conviction  that  our  mind 
acquires,  during  sleep,  the  power  of  foreseeing  certain  future  events. 

But  whence  came  the  form  under  which  the  prediction  of  my 
child's  death  was  produced?  Why  the  stove  into  which  I  dropped 
my  child?  Why  this  strange  mise-en-scenef  Whence  came  the  idea 
of  closing  the  doors  so  that  he  might  die  more  quickly?  This  act 
cannot  be  reconciled  with  the  horror  I  felt  in  performing  it. 


KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  FUTURE  283 

1  have  often  thought  about  this  and  here  is  the  most  probable 
explanation  I  can  find : 

I  had  gone  to  bed  very  late,  on  that  night.  I  had  been  reading, 
stretched  out  in  an  arm-chair  before  a  iSre,  which  I  often  stirred. 
My  nerves  had  evidently  kept  the  impression  of  the  burning  coals  and 
of  a  stove  with  two  doors  that  one  could  open  and  shut  at  will.  It 
seems  to  me  that  we  can  attribute  to  this  excitation  of  the  brain  the 
illusion  of  a  blazing  stove  in  which  my  child  writhed  and  which  I 
tried  to  close  in  order  to  put  an  end  to  his  agony. 

This  premonitory  dream  clearly  shows  our  dual  mentality.  We 
do  not  like  to  put  our  faith  in  a  dream,  especially  when  it  foretells 
something  disagreeable.  Reason  revolts  in  such  a  case,  without,  how- 
ever, being  able  to  dominate  the  profound  and  anguished  feeling  of 
the  subconscious.^ 

The  narrator  adds  that  he  has  often  thought  of  this  strug- 
gle between  his  conscious  and  his  subconscious  self.  The  latter 
was  sure  that  the  dream  would  inevitably  be  realized.  How- 
ever, reason  revolted  against  it  and  clung  to  a  wavering  hope, 
as  a  man  flung  in  the  ocean  grasps  a  floating  bit  of  wreck- 
age. 

Our  secret  intuitions  often  have  their,  reason  for  being,  and 
we  are  wrong  to  despise  them  without  seeking  for  their  cause. 
A  presentiment  might  at  times  be  a  forgotten  dream. 

Whatever  may  be  the  explanation,  the  fact  is  there,  as  it 
has  been  observed,  irrefutable.  This  father  was  impressed  by 
a  physiological  state,  at  the  time  unknown,  of  his  child,  and 
believed  in  advance  in  his  inevitable  death.  This  is  a  very- 
characteristic  proof  of  the  human  soul's  power  of  premoni- 
tion, of  the  existence  of  a  real  psychic  world,  suggesting  the 
conclusion  that  the  apparent  vital  organism  is  not  all.  There 
is  something  indefinable  in  us  which  we  ourselves  do  not 
recognize. 

An  abominably  dramatic  event — the  exact  vision,  in  a  dream, 
1  Contribution  d  V4tude  de  facultis  c4r^br(ile$  m^connues,  p.  29, 


284  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

just  six  hours  in  advance,  of  the  accidental  death  of  his  son, 
crushed  by  an  automobile,  on  the  very  day  when  he  was 
going  to  pass  his  baccalaureate  examination,  after  brilliant 
work  in  his  studies,  and  when  he  was  in  excellent  health — was 
described  to  me  in  a  long  letter  by  one  of  my  oldest  readers. 
This  dream  had  shown  him  all  the  details  of  the  accident — the 
carrying  away  of  the  body,  the  appearance  of  the  wounds, 
and  the  despair  of  the  family — as  clearly  as  in  a  photograph, 
or  rather  a  cinematograph.     (Letter  2218.) 

At  the  earnest  request  of  the  afflicted  family,  I  shall  limit 
myself  here  to  mentioning  the  case  of  the  premonition,  for 
our  general  instruction,  without  indicating  names  or  over- 
painful  circumstances.  But  I  must  say  that  this  living  drama, 
in  itself  alone,  eliminates  all  the  explanations  of  so-called 
coincidences  and  would  suffice  to  prove  that  at  times  the 
future  is  foreseen  with  the  most  absolute  precision. 

I  am  sure  that  my  readers  will  agree  with  me  if  I  say  that 
from  now  on  the  denial  of  these  facts  will  prove  only  the 
ignorance  of  those  who  deny  them  or  their  unreasonable 
obstinacy. 

A  premonitory  vision,  equally  remarkable,  of  a  coming 
event  was  told  me  by  an  attentive  observer  of  these  unex- 
plained phenomena.     The  author  wrote  me : 

This  was  a  sort  of  premonitory  waking  dream,  and  I  think  I  ought 
to*  tell  you  of  it,  because  it  may  add  a  bit  of  evidence  to  what  you 
are  already  collecting  for  your  important  researches.  You  yourself 
may  judge  of  its  value. 

Quite  recently,  in  a  drawing-room,  when  the  conversation  turned 
on  those  psychic  studies  of  which  you  are  making  so  thorough  an 
examination,  a  lady  who  is  one  of  our  relatives  told  us  the  following 
story : 

"Once  when  I  was  leaning  out  of  my  balcony,  I  suddenly  saw  my- 
self in  the  street  in  deep  mourning,  following  a  hearse.  The  impres- 
sion was  so  strong  that  I  went  to  my  dressmaker  the  same  day  to 
revoke  the  order  for  a  dress,  as  I  could  not  stop  thinking:    /Some 


KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  FUTURE  285 

great  misfortune  is  going  to  happen  to  me.'  Well,  four  days  later, 
my  child,  a  little  boy  four  years  old,  fell  from  the  top  of  the  stair- 
case and  was  instantly  killed." 

This  was  what  I  heard  with  my  own  ears,  from  a  woman  in  mourn- 
ing, still  under  the  impression  of  what  had  happened  to  her.  There 
could  not  have  been  any  question  of  error  or  imposture. 

P.  Drevet, 
Lieutenant  in  the  14th  Infantry,  at  Grenoble. 
(Letter  985.) 

This  principle  often  takes  the  form  of  a  communication  from 
a  spirit  through  a  medium,  as  if  this  spirit  ^saw  the  future 
exactly,  especially  the  death  of  the  subject  in  question.  My 
regretted  colleague  and  friend  William  Stead,  editor  of  ' '  The 
Review  of  Reviev^s,"  who  was  a  victim  of  the  shipwreck  of 
the  Titanic,  received  one  day,  from  his  ''spirit  Julia,"  a 
singularly  astounding  prediction.     He  wrote :  ^ 

A  few  years  ago,  I  had  as  an  employee  a  lady  of  truly  remarkable 
talent,  but  of  a  variable  character  and  of  less  than  robust  health. 
She  became  so  impossible  that  in  January  I  was  seriously  thinking 
of  letting  her  go,  when  "Julia"  wrote  by  my  hand :  ''Be  patient  with 
E.  M.     She  will  come  and  join  us  here  before  the  end  of  the  year." 

I  was  stupefied,  for  nothing  led  me  to  suppose  that  she  was  going 
to  die.  I  followed  the  advice,  saying  nothing  of  the  message,  and 
continued  to  employ  this  lady.  It  was,  if  I  remember  rightly,  about 
the  fifteenth  or  sixteenth  of  January  that  this  warning  was  given  me. 

It  was  repeated  to  me  in  February,  March,  April,  May,  and  June : 
''Remember  that  E.  M.  will  have  ceased  to  live  before  the  end  of  the 
year." 

In  July  she  swallowed,  by  accident,  a  small  tack.  It  lodged  in 
the  intestines  and  she  fell  seriously  ill.  The  two  doctors  who  cared 
for  her  had  no  hope  of  saving  her.  In  the  interval  "Julia"  wrote  to 
me  with  my  hand. 

"Without  doubt,"  I  said  to  her,  "this  is  what  you  foresaw  when 
you  warned  me  that  she  would  die." 

1  Annales  des  Sciences  psychiques,  1909,  p.  120, 


286  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

To  ray  extreme  surprise,  the  answer  was:  "No,  she  will  recover 
from  this,  but  all  the  same,  she  will  succumb  before  the  end  of  the 
year." 

E.  M.  recovered  suddenly,  to  the  great  astonishment  of  the  doctors, 
and  was  soon  able  to  take  up  again  her  accustomed  work.  In  August, 
September,  October,  and  November  word  of  her  approaching  death 
was  again  sent  me  by  the  help  of  my  hand.  In  December  she  was 
seized  with  influenza. 

'^s  it  this?"  I  asked  ''Julia." 

'Wo,  in  this  case  it  will  not  come  from  a  natural  cause;  but  what- 
ever it  is,  it  will  come  before  the  end  of  the  year." 

I  was  alarmed,  but  I  knew  I  could  not  hinder  the  event.  The 
year  passed  and  she  still  lived.  "Julia"  wrote:  "I  may  have  been 
mistaken  by  a  few  days,  but  what  I  said  is  true." 

Toward  the  tenth  of  January,  "Julia"  wrote  me:  "You  will  see 
E.  M.  to-morrow;  say  good-by  to  her.  Make  all  the  necessary  ar- 
rangements.    You  w^ill  never  see  her  again  on  this  earth." 

I  went  to  find  her.  She  was  feverish,  with  a  bad  cough.  They 
were  about  to  take  her  to  a  hospital. 

Two  days  later  I  received  a  telegram  informing  me  that  she  had 
flung  herself  from  a  window  of  the  fourth  floor,  in  an  access  of 
delirium,  and  had  been  picked  up  dead.  The  date  had  overpassed, 
by  a  few  days,  the  twelvemonth  of  which  the  first  message  had  spoken. 

I  am  able  to  prove  the  authenticity  of  this  tale  by  the  manuscripts 
of  the  original  messages  themselves,  as  well  as  by  the  signed  affi- 
davits of  my  two  secretaries. 

It  would  seem,  indeed,  that  the  "spirit"  must  have  knov^n 
in  advance  the  time  of  her  death  and  even  that  this  death 
would  be  accidental.  But  can  the  prediction  be  surely  at- 
tributed to  a  spirit?  This  is  not  proved.  I  knew  Stead 
well  enough  to  have  noticed  his  rare  psychic  powers,  al- 
though he  did  not  make  use  of  them  for  his  own  security. 

This  premonition  is  assuredly  most  remarkable.  Who  is 
this  "Julia,"  so  well  knovni  to  the  psychists  who  have  kept 
up  with  Stead's  writings?  A  spirit?  The  subconscious? 
Special  mental  faculties?    We  do  not  know.     But  it  is  not 


KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  FUTURE  287 

the  material  of  the  brain  which  sees  the  future  in  this 
way. 

In  his  work  **Lucidite  et  intuition,'^  which  is  so  judiciously 
thought  out  and  so  carefully  certified,  Dr.  Eugene  Osty  has 
given  on  his  part  the  following  case  of  intuitive  auto-percep- 
tion: 

,^x^ Madame  D ,  a  lucid  subject,  who  was  given  to  automatic  writ- 
ing, was  astonished,  at  a  certain  period  of  her  life,  to  see  that  her 

hand  continually  traced  the  word  "R ,"  a  name  which  she  had 

never  heard  and  which  seemed  to  her  to  have  no  significance.  For 
several  months,  in  the  midst  of  her  occupations,  whether  her  hand  was 
lying  on  a  table  or  whether  she  was  getting  ready  to  write  a  letter,  the 
same  word  was  traced.  She  ended  by  considering  this  involuntary 
movement  just  a  bad  habit,  and  paid  no  attention  to  it. 

One  evening  her  husband  told  her  that  he  had  just  signed,  on  the 

spur  of  the  moment,  a  contract  as  engineer  at  R ,  a  small  town 

in  the  province  of  Oran. 

Later  her  hand  began  to  write  "June."     Madame  D then  tried 

to  get  some  explanation  of  this  date,  by  means  of  automatic  writing. 
The  only  reply  to  her  questions  was  always  "June."  June  arrived 
and  Madame  D had  the  sorrow  of  seeing  her  husband  die. 

Then,  soon  after,  her  hand  obstinately  traced  this  other  date: 
"March."  We  can  imagine  the  terror  that  was  then  felt  by  this  un- 
happy intuitive  woman,  who  wondered  with  what  other  terrible  blow 
destiny  would  strike  her.  Believing  that  in  the  automatic  writing 
her  hand  was  the  slave  of  some  disincarnated  spirit,  she  addressed 
the  most  urgent  prayers  to  the  occult  being,  begging  to  be  spared  the 
agony  of  the  mysterious  menace.  And  her  hand,  in  reply  to  the 
torture  of  her  heart,  still  wrote  the  single  word  "March." 

The  fatal  and  dreaded  period  arrived.  In  the  same  month  Madame 
D lost  her  daughter  and  her  mother. 

This  mysterious  history  greatly  resembles  the  preceding 
one.  There  are  many  similar  cases  which  I  lack  space  to 
include  here.  Can  they  be  explained,  the  ones  by  the  others? 
Subconsciousness?  Psychic  force?  External  spirit?  Des- 
tiny ?    What  word  ought  our  ignorance  to  apply  to  them  ? 


288  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

The  following  account  of  a  singular  warning  was  sent  me  by 
a  young  student  of  Morbihan : 

Dear  Master  : 

It  is  my  duty  to  let  you  know  of  a  premonition  that  has  occurred 
in  our  family. 

In  1896,  my  grandfather,  Commandant  Dufilhol,  officer  of  the 
Legion  of  Honor,  who  met  you  in  the  home  of  Monsieur  Allan  Kardec 
in  1862,  was  living,  with  my  mother,  near  Vannes. 

One  day  he  was  going  down  the  entrance  stairs  of  the  chateau,  by 
himself,  to  rejoin  Mama  at  the  stables. 

Suddenly  a  voice  said  at  his  ear :     "A  death  in  the  family.'^ 

Surprised  and  agitated,  my  grandfather  thought :  "It  is  I.  I  am 
the  eldest." 

"No,"  answered  the  voice,  "Adolphe  Planes.'' 

My  grandfather  arrived  at  the  stables  so  pale  that  my  mother  asked 
him  if  he  felt  ill.  He  answered  no,  and  told  her  of  the  warning  that 
he  had  just  received. 

Both  of  them,  very  much  saddened,  wrote  for  news  of  Adolphe 
Planes,  my  young  uncle,  who  at  the  time  was  professor  of  English 
at  Nice. 

The  reply  was  satisfactory,  and  my  relatives  were  somewhat  re- 
assured. 

Two  months  later,  my  uncle  passed  his  examination  for  a  fellow- 
ship; the  test  had  been  hard  and  fatiguing.  At  the  moment  when 
the  examiner  said  to  him,  "Monsieur  Planes,  you  are  received,  with 
all  our  congratulations,"  my  poor  uncle  swayed  and  lost  conscious- 
ness. 

Eight  days  later  he  died  of  meningitis,  in  the  arms  of  my  grand- 
father. 

He  was  twenty -six  years  old.     The  voice  had  not  been  mistaken. 

The  memory  of  her  brother's  premature  death  is  still  so  cruelly 
painful  to  my  mother  that  she  would  never  have  authorized  me  to 
write  if  it  had  not  been  as  a  help  to  your  researches. 

Adrien  Dufilhol, 
Saint-Raoul-Guer :  August  3,  1918. 

(Letter  4042.) 


KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  FUTURE  289 

Premonitory  auditions  are  more  rare  than  premonitory 
visions,  but  their  number  is  large  enough  for  us  to  lack  the 
right  to  deny  them.  To  attribute  them  to  chance  is  no  more 
satisfactory. 

Several  readers  wrote  me  from  New  York,  in  August,  1919, 
that  the  accident  to  Mr.  William  Cooper,  the  celebrated  manu- 
facturer, who  was  crushed  by  a  trolley  car,  had  been  seen 
from  Philadelphia  by  his  mother,  Mrs.  Ella  Cooper. 

Twice  that  very  night,  she  dreamed  that  she  saw  her  son 
falling  in  the  street,  crushed  in  this  fashion,  and  this  re- 
peated dream  had  so  alarmed  her  that  she  could  not  prevent 
herself  from  taking  the  train  from  Philadelphia  to  New  York. 
Exactly  at  the  hour  of  her  arrival,  in  the  morning,  having 
taken  a  Thirty-Fourth  Street  car,  as  she  was  crossing  Seventh 
Avenue  she  saw  a  crowd  about  a  man  who  had  just  been  run 
over  by  a  trolley  car.     It  was  her  son. 

These  letters  read :  ' '  This  accident  which  will  probably  re- 
sult in  the  death  of  Mr.  William  Cooper."  Did  death  follow? 
I  do  not  know;  but  the  premonitory  dream  is  no  less  re- 
markable. 

We  can  have  no  doubt  that  this  mother  was  warned  of  what 
was  about  to  happen  to  her.  How?  By  whom?  By  what? 
By  what  means  ?  That  is  the  object  of  the  researches  in  this 
book. 

There  it  was  a  mother  who  saw  her  son  run  down.  Here 
is  an  experience  somewhat  similar,  which  took  place  by  means 
of  an  intermediary.  The  following  account  was  sent  me  from 
Biarritz,  July  9,  1917,  in  reply  to  the  desire  that  I  had  ex- 
pressed to  Madame  Storms  Castelot,  my  learned  colleague  of 
the  Astronomical  Society  of.  France,  who  had  told  me  the 
dream,  to  receive  a  first-hand  account  from  the  one  who  had 
experienced  it.  It  was  the  vision,  three  days  in  advance,  of 
a  sudden  death. 

Extract : 


.  290  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

In  spite  of  all  the  sadness  which  such  a  communication  awakes  in 
me,  I  can  solemnly  declare  to  you  that  the  death  of  my  son  Jean  was 
announced  to  me  on  the  Thursday  before  the  Sunday  on  which  my 
dear  child,  who  was  abroad  with  his  brother  Louis,  left  us  for  ever. 
Here  is  this  very  simple  dream: 

I  saw,  in  an  unknown  house,  my  son  Louis  in  tears,  and  when  I 
asked  him  the  reason  for  his  grief,  he  answered  me:  "Oh!  Mama, 
Jean  is  dead !"  My  dear  child  was  nineteen  years  old,  superbly  well, 
and  nothing  could  have  led  us  to  foresee  so  terrible  an  end!  An 
embolism,  during  a  peaceful  bicycle  ride,  in  company  with  his  brother 
and  an  uncle.  Long  after,  I  learned  that  the  Thursday  on  which  I 
had  had  this  frightful  presentiment,  my  child  had  had  an  attack  of 
fainting,  caused  by  a  cut  in  his  finger — a  strange  coincidence!  .  .  . 

Another  strange  coincidence;  this  last  concerns  myself. 

Once  when  I  happened  to  be  in  Hamburg,  on  one  of  my  numerous 
concert  tours,  I  was  seized  on  the  morning  of  one  of  the  concerts  with 
such  a  frightful  pain  in  the  neck  that  it  threatened  to  prevent  my 
keeping  my  engagement  for  the  evening.  I  hurried  off  to  a  medical 
specialist  who  treated  these  disagreeable  little  ailments  with  elec- 
tricity. But  almost  at  once  I  fainted  from  the  effects  of  running. 
The  same  day  I  received  a  telegram  from  Paris,  from  my  mother, 
telling  of  her  anxiety  on  seeing  me  in  a  faint  in  a  dream.  That 
astonished  me !  In  fact,  my  mother  had  all  her  life  a  veritable  gift 
of  second  sight,  as  the  expression  goes. 

B.  Marx-Goldschmidt. 

(Letter  3750.) 

This  letter  was  countersigned  by  the  brother  of  the  dead 
man. 

We  see  that  these  sorts  of  intuitions  were  not  rare  in  this 
family.     The  same  is  true  of  the  following  case. 

It  was  from  the  Argentine  Republic  that  I  received  the 
story  of  the  remarkable  premonitory  dream  given  here: 

Rosario  de  Santa  Fe;  September  15,  1899. 
I  think  it  is  my  duty,  illustrious  Master,  to  report  to  you  the 
following  event  which  quite  certainly  took  place  in  my  family,  and 


KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  FUTURE  291 

which  may  help  bring  you  light  which  you  will  later  spread  through 
the  world. 

One  of  my  great-aunts  was  noted  for  her  presentiments  and  mental 
visions. 

In  1868  she  saw  in  a  dream  an  interior  which  was  a  whole  revela- 
tion.    This   tableau   represented   an   apartment,   where   one   of  her 

friends,  Madame  B ,  seated  in  an  arm-chair  near  a  fireplace  in 

which  blazed  a  great  fire,  was  caressing  a  small  child  which  she  held 
in  her  arms,  while  a  servant  dried  some  linen  before  the  flames.  This 
dream  was  related  to  several  persons  without  any  one's  thinking  much 

about  it,  for  Madame  B ,  the  mother  of  a  numerous  family,  had 

passed  her  fortieth  year,  and  as  she  had  had  no  children  for  seven 
years  she  did  not  appear  likely  to  have  any  more. 

However,  what  had  at  first  seemed  impossible  was  realized  a  year 
later  and  'one  evening  when  my  great  aunt  was  going  to  congratulate 
the  mother  on  the  birth  of  her  last  born,  she  saw  in  reality  her  former 
dream.  The  apartment,  the  arrangement  of  the  furniture,  the  lighted 
chimney,  the  servant  drying  clothes  before  the  fire — in  short,  all  the 
details  of  the  dream — were  faithfully  reproduced.  The  prophecy  had 
been  entirely  fulfilled. 

Accept,  Monsieur,  the  respectful  homage  of  your  far-away  reader 
and  my  best  wishes  for  you  and  for  our  dear  France. 

Emilio  Becher, 
At  Rosario  de  Santa  Fe,  Argentine  Republic. 

(Letter  799.) 

Still  another  occurrence. 

I  received  from  Sweden,  in  December,  1899,  the  following 
story  from  a  well-known  Protestant  minister: 

There  is  here,  at  this  moment,  a  visitation  of  the  bishops.  One  of 
the  persons  who  was  to  have  been  present  last  week  at  this  reunion 
(the  meeting  of  the  bishops  was  to  'have  begun  on  Tuesday,  the  third 
of  December,  in  the  parish  of  Sjustorp,  at  Medelpad)  dreamed  on  the 
night  of  the  preceding  Saturday  that  he  was  called  to  the  telephone 
and  that  a  minister  from  Medelpad,  who  gave  his  name,  told  him  that 
there  would  be  no  visitation  on  that  day,  as  some  one  had  just  died. 
But  whoever  it  was  that  telephoned  him  from  the  world  of  dreams 


292  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

did  not  tell  him  the  name  of  the  person  who  had  died.  The  dreamer 
remembered  all  this  very  clearly  the  next  morning.  What  was  his 
amazement  when  at  noon  he  actually  learned,  by  telephone,  that  the 
wife  of  the  bishop  had  died  suddenly  that  very  morning,  and  that  the 
visitation  could  not  take  place,  as  this  period  of  mourning  would 
prevent  his  fulfilling  his  duties  as  a  visitor. 
(Letter  854.) 

What  was  the  agent  of  this  psychic  phenomenon  ? 

The  dead  woman?  That  is  not  probable.  The  minister, 
who  made  his  communication  in  a  dream  over  a  so-called  tele- 
phone? Perhaps.  But  by  what  mental  current,  by  what 
process?  The  thought  of  the  bishop  himself,  radiating  afar? 
Mysteries  of  telepathy ! 

Still  another  case  as  tragic  as  that  of  Dr.  de  Sermyn :  Dr. 
Foissac  tells  us^  how  one  evening  in  the  spring  of  1854,  the 
Abbe  Deguerry,  the  cure  of  the  Madeleine,  the  Count  of  Las 
Cases,  a  senator,  Messieui's  Longet  and  Marshall-Hall,  of  the 
Academy  of  Sciences,  had  a  very  animated  discussion  in  his 
salon  on  the  marvelous  and  on  prophetic  visions,  and  that  the 
last  of  these  four  persons  related  the  following : 

A  year  ago,  when  I  was  in  Edinburgh,  I  went  out  into  the  neigh- 
boring country-side  to  visit  one  of  my  old  friends,  Mr.  Holmes.  I 
found  every  face  full  of  sadness.  Mr.  Holmes  had  that  very  day 
been  present  at  a  burial  at  a  castle  in  the  neighborhood;  he  told  me 
that  the  son  of  the  master  of  the  castle  had  often  frightened  his  fam- 
ily by  manifestations  which  they  attributed  to  second  sight.  At  times 
they  saw  him  gay  or  sad  without  cause,  his  glance  profoundly  melan- 
choly, uttering  words  without  meaning,  or  describing  strange  visions. 
They  tried,  but  in  vain,  to  combat  this  disposition  by  a  great  deal 
of  exercise  and  a  system  of  varied  studies,  in  accordance  with  the 
advice  of  a  very  enlightened  doctor. 

Eight  days  before,  when  the  family  was  all  together,  they  had  sud- 
denly seen  young  William,  who  was  barely  twelve  years  old,  turn 
pale  and  become  motionless;  they  listened  and  heard  these  words: 

1  La  Chance  ou  la  Destin^e  (Paris,  1876),  p.  544. 


KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  FUTURE  293 

"I  see  a  child  asleep,  lying  in  a  velvet  box  with  a  sheet  of  white  satin 
and  wreaths  and  flowers  all  around.  Why  are  my  parents  weeping? 
That  child  is  I."  Filled  with  terror,  the  father  and  mother  seized 
their  son,  whom  they  covered  with  tears  and  kisses.  He  came  to 
himself  and  devoted  himself  with  high  spirits  to  games  suitable  to 
his  age. 

The  week  had  not  passed  when  the  family,  seated  in  the  shade, 
after  lunch,  looked  for  William,  who  had  been  there  a  moment  before. 
They  did  not  see  him  and  called;  no  voice  answered.  The  family, 
the  tutor,  the  doctor,  the  chaplain,  the  servants  searched  all  over  the 
park;  there  was  a  medley  of  a  thousand  cries  of  distress:  William 
had  disappeared.  After  an  hour  of  search  and  anguish,  the  child 
was  found  in  a  pond  where  he  had  been  drowned  while  trying  to  seize 
a  boat  which  the  wind  had  driven  away  from  the  bank.  For  several 
hours  they  did  everything  possible  to  brings  him  back  to  life.  The 
fatal  prediction  was  fulfilled. 

We  shall  have  occasion,  in  the  second  part  of  this  work, 
abounding  with  records,  to  return  to  these  phenomena  ac- 
companying death;  but  we  are  confining  ourselves  here  to 
the  study  of  the  metaphysical  events  bearing  witness  to  the 
transcendent  faculties  of  the  soul.  This  child  had,  from  all 
the  evidence,  seen  his  coffin. 

What  is  also  one  of  the  most  singular  premonitions  of 
death  can  be  read  in  the  autobiography  of  Baron  Lazare 
Hellembach.  Here  it  is,  as  we  find  it  in  the  *'Annales  des 
Sciences  psychiques,"  1877  (page  124) : 

I  had  the  intention  of  asking  the  collaboration  of  the  chief  of  the 
chemical  department  of  the  geological  institution  at  Vienna,  Monsieur 
Hauer,  director  of  mines,  concerning  some  researches  which  I  had 
made  in  crystallography.  I  had  sp'oken  to  him  of  it  incidentally,  as 
the  laboratory  was  near  my  home  and  Hauer  was  well  known  in  the 
scientific  world — we  may  say  throughout  the  whole  of  Europe — as  an 
expert  in  his  subject.  I  had  always  put  off  my  visit,  but  finally  I 
c  ecided  to  make  it  the  following  morning.  That  very  night  I  dreamed 
i  saw  a  man,  pale  and  trembling,  supported  by  the  arms,  by  two  men. 


294  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

I  paid  no  attention  to  this  dream  and  I  went  to  the  geological  insti- 
tution; but  as  the  laboratory  was  in  a  different  place  from  where  it 
had  been  in  former  years,  I  mistook  the  door,  and,  finding  the  right 
door  locked,  I  looked  through  a  window  and  saw  the  exact  scene 
shown  in  my  dream;  they  were  supporting  Hauer,  who  had  just 
poisoned  himself  with  cyanide  of  potassium ;  they  were  carrying  him 
into  the  vestibule,  just  as  I  had  dreamed. 

Baron  Hellembach  add3  the  following  observations: 

If  I  had  arrived  a  few  minutes  earlier,  I  could  surely  have  pre- 
vented this  act,  as  the  suicide  was  caused  by  family  and  money 
troubles,  and  my  proposition  would  have  given  Hauer  a  new  phase 
of  work  as  well  as  material  help.  This  circumstance  stirred  me 
deeply;  the  more  so  because  I  understood  the  great  loss  I  had  sus- 
tained from  the  point  of  view  of  my  ideas  and  my  plans,  and  realized 
that  my  efforts  had  gone  for  naught. 

It  is  quite  natural  that  this  death,  which  swept  away  my  plans, 
should  have  made  a  deep  impression  on  me;  it  was  perhaps  for  this 
reason  that  on  my  awakening,  my  consciousness  should  have  kept 
a  fragment  of  clairvoyance. 

Prom  the  point  of  view  of  telepathy,  we  might  think  that 
the  suicide,  who  had  very  probably  premeditated  his  desperate 
act  during  the  night  which  preceded  it,  had  provoked  the 
dream  of  Baron  Hellembach.  But  this  would  not  explain  the 
essential  element  of  the  dream,  the  sight  of  a  man  with  a 
livid  face,  dying,  supported  by  the  arms  hy  two  other  men. 

To  introduce  once  more  the  hypothesis  of  chance  events 
would  really  be  too  much. 

We  can  remark  here  that  all  these  facts  show  more  and 
more  clearly  the  truth  of  our  affirmation  that  the  soul  can  see 
the  future  by  means  of  occult  powers.  Still  another  case  of 
premonition,  no  less  moving,  occurred  in  1905  in  the  Republic 
of  San  Marino. 

A  certain  Marino  Tonelli,  twenty-seven  years  old,  who  used  to 
sell  eggs,  was  in  the  habit  of  visiting  all  the  neighboring  markets. 


KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  FUTURE  295 

among  others  that  of  Rimini.  The  evening  of  June  13th,  as  he 
happened  to  be  in  that  last-named  town,  he  made  the  mistake  of  tak- 
ing too  many  drinks, — a  thing  which,  in  fact,  was  not  usual  with 
him.  He  returned  home  in  his  modest  wagon,  fortunately  with  his 
egg-baskets  empty.  It  appears  that  the  young  merchant  was  almost 
sunk  in  a  stupor,  for  when  he  had  reached  a  certain  spot  known  as 
Costo  di  Borgo,  where  the  road  is  tortuous  and  descends  rapidly,  he 
felt  a  violent  shock  and  found  himself  stretched  out  in  a  field  at  the 
bottom  of  a  little  ravine,  down  which  he  had  rolled.  He  saw  then 
that  the  wagon  was  half  overturned  on  the  edge  of  the  road,  and  the 
horse,  almost  suspended  in  the  air,  was  struggling  while  in  a  very 
critical  position.  As  soon  as  he  found  he  was  not  hurt,  the  young 
man  seized  the  animal  and  with  the  help  of  some  persons  who  had  run 
up,  managed  to  pull  the  wagon  also  out  of  the  ravine. 

While  the  business  of  rescue  was  going  on,  what  should  appear 
before  the  eyes  of  Monsieur  Tonelli  but  the  figure  of  a  woman  who, 
in  the  moonlight,  seemed  to  be  his  mother.  Great  was  the  young 
man's  astonishment;  he  could  no  longer  doubt  when  he  heard  her 
dear  voice  and  felt  himself  embraced  by  the  old  woman.  She  wept 
with  relief,  asked  him  if  he  had  not  hurt  himself  and  added:  "I 
saw  you.  Your  wife  and  the  two  children  were  already  asleep,  but  I, 
I  felt  an  agitation,  a  strange,  extraordinary  uneasiness,  which  I  could 
not  explain  to  myself.  All  at  once,  I  saw  this  road  appear  before  me, 
exactly  this  spot,  with  the  ravine  at  the  side;  I  saw  the  wagon  over- 
turned and  you  flung  into  the  field;  you  called  me  to  help  you,  you 
prayed,  and  seemed  to  be  dying!  This  last  is  not  true,  thank  God; 
but  all  the  rest  is  just  as  I  saw  it.  In  short,  I  felt  the  irresistible 
need  to  come  here,  and  without  awakening  any  one,  bracing  myself 
against  the  fear  of  the  loneliness,  the  darkness,  and  the  stormy 
weather,  here  I  am  after  having  walked  four  kilometers;  I  should 
have  walked  a  thousand  to  come  and  help  you." 

The  editor  of  the  "Messaggiero,"  who  published  this  tale,  ends  it 
by  saying:  "Such  were  the  exact 'facts  as  I  heard  them  from  the 
lips,  still  trembling  with  emotion,  of  these  good  people." 

Following  this  publication  in  the  "Messaggiero"  an  inquiry  was 
made  by  Professor  A.  Francisci,  who  asked  him  [the  editor]  please 
to  submit  to  the  hero  of  this  adventure  a  little  questionnaire  destined 
to  throw  light  on  certain  points  which  the  story  in  the  Roman  paper 


296  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

had  left  in  darkness.     Here  are  the  questions,  with  the  replies  that 
were  made  to  them : 

1  Was  it  the  first  accident  on  the  road  that  had  happened  to 
Monsieur  Tonelli,  especially  lately? 

Answer:    Yes. 

2  Was  the  spot  called  Costo  di  Borgo  the  only  dangerous  point 
on  this  road?  Was  it  at  least  the  most  dangerous  of  all?  On  the 
roads  over  which  Monsieur  Tonelli  usually  passed,  returning  from  the 
markets,  were  there  other  spots  as  dangerous  ? 

Answer:  Along  this  road  there  were  many  spots  much  more 
dangerous,  as  well  as  on  the  other  roads  which  Monsieur  Tonelli  was 
in  the  habit  of  going  over. 

3  When  Madame  Maria  Tonelli  began  to  be  anxious,  was  the  usual 
hour  of  her  son^s  return  already  past  ?  Was  it  at  least  past  when  she 
decided  to  go  to  that  spot? 

Answer:     It  was  a  little  past  the  usual  hour. 

4  Did  the  anxiety  of  the  mother  and  the  vision  of  the  accident 
occur  when  Monsieur  Tonelli  had  already  fallen? 

Answer:  The  anxiety  of  the  mother  preceded  by  several  hours  the 
vision  of  the  accident,  and  the  latter  occurred  three  quarters  of  an 
hour  after  the  vision,  so  that  the  mother  had  the  time  to  traverse  on 
foot  the  four  kilometers  which  separated  the  house  of  the  Tonellis 
from  the  spot  called  Costo  di  Borgo. 

5  Did  Monsieur  Tonelli  remember  having  thought  of  his  mother  at 
the  time  of  the  accident? 

Answer:  He  states  that  he  thought  of  her  with  great  affection,  as 
well  as  of  other  members  of  his  family,  but  especially  of  her. 

6  Has  any  other  supernatural  experience  ever  occurred  to  Madame 
Tonelli  or  her  son? 

Answer:    No. 

This  examination  of  Professor  Francisci's  establishes  be- 
yond all  doubt  the  authenticity  of  this  case,^  which  greatly 
resembles  the  one  we  related  above  (page  105).  This  vision 
of  an  accident  before  it  had  happened  was  a  vision  seen  by 

1  See  Annates  des  Sciences  psychiques,  August,  1905. 


KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  FUTURE  297 

the  spirit  of  the  mother.     That  which  preceded  it,  the  child's 
vision  of  his  coffin,  was  a  sort  of  personal  presentiment. 

-I  have  already  recalled  (Chapter  IV)  the  presentiment  of 
the  astronomer  Delaunay,  director  of  the  Observatoire  in 
Paris,  in  an  interim  (1870-72)  between  the  two  administra- 
tions of  Le  Verrier,  who  was  drowned  in  the  harbor  at  Cher- 
bourg, where  he  had  gone  almost  in  spite  of  himself.  And  I 
followed  this  recollection  with  that  of  the  sister  of  Arsene 
Houssaye,  carried  off  by  a  ground-swell  on  the  coast  of  Pen- 
marc 'h.  Here  is  a  case  of  the  same  sort,  even  more  significant 
and  more  remarkable  for  its  decisiveness.  Baron  Joseph 
Kronhelm,  of  Podolia,  Russia,  is  responsible  for  the  following 
account  of  the  death  of  a  high  official  of  the  ministry  of  the 
Russian  Marine,  which  occurred  in  the  month  of  June,  1895,  as 
the  result  of  a  collision  between  two  boats  on  the  Black  Sea : 

At  the  beginning  of  the  year  1895  Madame  Lukawski  was  awakened 
one  night  by  the  groans  of  her  husband,  who,  in  his  sleep,  uttered  the 
cry:  "Help!  Save  me!"  and  struggled  with  the  movements  of  a 
drowning  person.  He  was  dreaming  of  a  terrible  catastrophe  at 
sea,  and,  as  soon  as  he  was  completely  awake,  he  told  how  he  had  been 
on  board  of  a  great  ship  which  sank  suddenly  after  a  collision  with 
another  ship;  and  that  he  had  seen  himself  thrown  into  the  sea  and 
swallowed  up  by  the  waves.  When  he  had  finished  his  tale,  he  said: 
"I  am  convinced,  now,  that  the  sea  will  cause  my  death."  And  so 
strong  was  his  conviction  that  he  began  to  put  his  affairs  in  order,  like 
a  man  who  knows  his  days  are  numbered.  Two  months  had  passed 
and  the  impression  caused  by  the  dream  had  already  grown  weaker, 
when  an  order  came  for  the  minister  to  prepare  to  leave,  with  all  his 
subordinates,  for  a  port  on  the  Black  Sea. 

At  the  moment  of  bidding  his  wife  farewell,  at  the  station  in  Peters- 
burg, Lukawski  said  to  her:  "Do  you  remember  my  dream?" — "My 
God!  Why  do  you  ask  me?" — "Because  I  am  sure  that  I  shall  not 
come  back,  and  that  we  shall  see  each  other  no  more."  Madame 
Lukawski  forced  herself  to  be  calm,  but  he  continued,  with  deep  sad- 
ness :    "You  may  say  what  you  wish,  my  convictions  will  not  change. 


298  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

I  know  that  my  end  is  near  and  that  nothing  can  prevent  it.  Yes — 
yes,  I  see  the  harbor  again,  the  ship,  the  moment  of  the  collision,  the 
pasnic  on  board,  my  end — everything  lives  again  before  my  eyes." 
And  after  a  short  pause  he  added :  "When  the  telegram  reaches  you 
announcing  my  death,  and  you  put  on  mourning,  I  beg  you  not  to 
put  over  your  face  the  long  veil  which  I  detest."  Quite  incapable  of 
replying,  Madame  Lukawski  burst  into  tears.  The  whistle  of  the 
train  gave  the  signal  for  departure;  Monsieur  Lukawski  embraced 
his  wife  tenderly,  and  the  train  disappeared. 

After  two  weeks  of  extreme  anxiety,  Madame  Lukawski  learned 
from  the  papers  of  the  collision  of  the  two  ships  Wladimir  and 
Sineus;  it  had  taken  place  in  the  Black  Sea.  Full  of  despair,  she 
telegraphed  to  obtain  information  from  Admiral  Zelenoi  at  Odessa, 
and  received  this  answer :  "No  news  just  at  present  of  your  husband, 
but  it  is  certain  that  he  was  on  board  the  Wladimir/'  The  announce- 
ment of  his  death  reached  her  a  week  later. 

It  should  be  added  that  in  his  dream  Monsieur  Lukawski  had  seen 
himself  struggling  with  a  passenger  for  his  life,  an  incident  which 
was  realized  with  scrupulous  exactitude.  In  the  catastrophe,  a  pas- 
senger on  the  Wladimir,  Monsieur  Henicke,  had  flung  himself  into  the 
sea  with  a  life-buoy.  Monsieur  Lukawski,  already  in  the  water, 
started  for  the  buoy  as  soon  as  he  saw  it,  and  the  other  cried  out  to 
him:  "Do  not  take  hold  of  it;  it  will  not  support  two  persons;  we 
shall  be  drowned  together."  But  Lukawski  seized  hold  of  it  none  the 
less,  saying  that  he  did  not  know  how  to  swim.  "Then  take  it,"  said 
Henicke.  "I  am  a  good  swimmer  and  I  shall  get  along  all  the  same." 
At  this  moment  a  great  wave  separated  them ;  Monsieur  Henicke  was 
able  to  save  himself,  but  Lukawski  went  to  meet  his  fate.  "Light," 
1899,  p.  45. 

In  repeating  this  tale,  Monsieur  Bozzano  ^  points  out  that 
the  conjunction  of  so  many  circumstances  that  could  not  be 
foreseen,  entirely  eliminates  the  hypothesis  of  chance  coinci- 
dence, and  compares,  in  this  connection,  other  explanatory 
theories,  reincarnation,  fatalism,  spirits.  We,  as  a  matter 
of  fact,  simply  wish  to  convince  ourselves  of  the  existence  in 

1  Des  Phenomenes  pr^monitoires,  p.  77. 


KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  FUTURE  299 

us  of  a  psychic  element  endowed  with  the  supra-normal  power 
of  seeing  the  future. 

What  we  wish  is  to  prove  that  the  future  virtually  exists 
in  the  causes  that  bring  it  about,  and  under  certain  psycho- 
logical conditions  it  can  really  be  seen  exactly. 

We  find  examples  of  this  vision  of  the  future  in  all  ages; 
but  they  have  never  been  interpreted  as  they  deserve  to  be; 
no  one  has  ever  seen  in  them  the  manifestation  of  the  inner 
powers  of  the  human  soul.  Here  is  one,  little  known,  of  the 
famous  Captain  Montluc,  which  we  can  read  at  the  end  of 
Book  IV  of  his  '  *  Commentaries. ' '  We  know  that  he  received 
the  baton  of  Marshal  of  France,  and  no  one  has  forgotten 
that  Henry  II  was  mortally  wounded,  in  1559,  in  a  tourna- 
ment, as  he  was  jousting  against  Montgomery.  Here  is  what 
Montluc  tells  of  his  vision: 

The  night  before  the  day  of  the  tournament,  in  my  first  sleep,  I 
dreamed  that  I  saw  the  King,  seated  on  the  seat,  his  face  all  covered 
with  drops  of  blood,  and  it  seemed  to  me  that  it  was  thus  that  they 
paint  Christ  when  the  Jews  lay  the  crown  of  thorns  upon  him  and 
he  holds  his  hands  clasped.  I  looked  at  him  carefully.  The  face 
seemed  his,  but  I  could  not  discover  his  trouble  or  see  anything  but 
the  blood  on  his  face.  It  seemed  to  me  that  I  heard  some  say,  "He 
is  dead,"  and  others,  "He  is  not  yet  dead!"  I  saw  the  doctors  and 
surgeons  come  from  and  go  to  his  room.  And  it  must  be  that  my 
dream  lasted  a  long  time,  for  when  I  awoke  I  discovered  something 
which  I  had  never  believed  before, — that  a  man  can  weep  while  he 
sleeps, — for  I  found  my  face  all  covered  with  tears  and  my  eyes  still 
shedding  them,  and  I  had  to  let  them  continue,  for  I  could  not  keep 
from  weeping  for  a  long  time  after.  My  wife  thought  to  comfort 
me,  but  I  could  believe  only  in  his  death.  Many  who  are  now  living 
know  that  this  is  not  a  mere  tale,  for  I  spoke  of  it  as  soon  as  I  was 
awake. 

Four  days  later  a  messenger  arrived  at  Nerac,  who  carried  a  letter 
to  the  King  of  Navarre,  from  Monsieur  the  Constable,  in  which  he 
gave  information  as  to  the  King^s  wound  and  of  the  small  hope  for 
his  life. 


y 


300  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

The  most  surprising  thing  about  the  work  which  we  are 
undertaking  here  is  that  all  this  should  have  passed  unno- 
ticed for  so  many  centuries,  and  should  have  even  been  dis- 
dained, denied,  laughed  at,  and  despised. 

I  have  found  a  curious  letter  of  the  year  1615,  from  Nicolas 
Pasquier  to  his  brother,  the  counselor  to  the  king  and  sheriff 
of  the  city  of  Paris,  on  the  death  of  their  father,  Etienne 
Pasquier,  born  in  1529,  died  in  1615,  whose  death  was  an- 
nounced in  a  premonitory  dream  exactly  a  year  before,  to 
the  day.     Here  is  this  document.^ 


I  have  received  your  letters  this  third  of  September,  1615,  on  the 
death  of  our  father,  which  took  place  the  thirtieth  of  August,  about 
two  hours  after  midnight.  I  have  something  memorable  to  tell  you 
on  this  subject.  Last  year,  on  the  night  of  the  same  thirtieth  of 
August,  about  five  o^clock*  in  the  morning,  I  dreamed  that  I  was  with 
our  father,  who  was  lying  in  bed,  from  which  he  rose  and  fell  on 
his  knees  to  pray  to  God.  This  he  did  devoutly,  his  clasped  hands 
lifted,  his  eyes  raised  to  heaven.  When  his  prayer  was  finished,  he 
changed  color  and  fell  dead  in  my  arms.  I  awoke  trembling,  and 
told  the  dream  to  my  wife,  and  in  order  to  keep  it  fresh  in  my 
memory,  as  I  was  already  up,  I  set  it  down  in  writing.  Consider  the 
two  coincidences  in  this  case,  the  one,  that  I  saw  the  death  of  our 
father  one  year,  to  the  very  day,  before  his  decease,  the  other  that, 
the  very  day  he  died  I  came  across  this  paper  which  I  had  not  thought 
of  since.  If  you  analyze  this  dream  you  will  find  that  everything  that 
took  place  at  the  time  of  his  death  was  foreseen  by  me ;  that  he  would 
not  be  ill  for  long,  and  he  was  ill  for  only  ten  hours ;  that  he  would 
die  a  good  Christian,  as  he  did ;  that  all  his  senses  would  remain  sound 
and  healthy  up  to  his  last  breath.  In  conclusion,  his  death  was  like 
his  life;  just  as  he  had  enjoyed  great  peace  for  eighty-six  years,  two 
months  and  twenty- three  days,  so  his  death  was  peaceful,  without 
sorrow,  difficulty  or  pain. 

Yes,  all  of  these  psychic  facts  have  been  known  for  cen- 
1  Lenglet-Duf resnoy :     Recueil  de  dissertations   (1752),  II,  ii,  p.  1. 


KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  FUTURE  301 

turies.  The  Latin  authors  have  told  us  that  the  assassination 
of  Julius  Caesar  had  been  announced  to  him  that  morning  by 
his  wife  Calpurnia;  that  Brutus  foresaw  his  defeat  in  the 
Battle  of  Philippi  which  was  foretold  by  his  ''genius";  that 
Arterius  Rufus  had  seen  in  a  dream  the  net-fighter  who  was 
to  stab  him/  etc.  But  all  this  has  remained  misunder- 
stood. 

And  the  premonition  of  the  tragic  death  of  Henry  IV, 
reported  by  his  confidant  Sully  ?     And  so  many  others ! 

Astronomy  has  had  its  Copernicus,  its  Kepler,  its  Newton. 
The  psychic  sciences  have  not  yet  had  their  Hipparchus,  their 
Ptolemy,  their  Aristarchus ;  they  await  their  Copernicus. 

We  have  only  to  read  a  little  to  find  everywhere  these  ob- 
servations which  we  are  just  now  beginning  to  take  seriously. 

One  of  the  profoundest  and  most  original  scholars  of  the 
seventeenth  century,  Pierre  Gassendi,  the  friend  of  Galileo 
and  of  Pereisch,  has  told  of  the  following  premonitory  dream : 

Monsieur  Pereisch  set  out  one  day  on  a  trip  to  Nimes  with  a  friend, 
a  certain  Monsieur  Rainier.  The  latter,  noticing  in  the  night  that 
Pereisch  was  talking  in  his  sleep,  awoke  him  and  asked  him  what  was 
the  matter  with  him.  He  answered:  "I  dreamed  that  we  had 
reached  Nimes,  and  that  one  of  the  jewelers  offered  me  a  medal  of 
Julius  Caesar  for  four  ecus.  Just  as  I  was  about  to  give  him  the 
money  you  awoke  me,  to  my  great  regret." 

When  they  had  reached  Nimes,  and  as  they  were  walking  about 
the  town,  Monsieur  Pereisch  recognized  the  jeweler's  shop  which  he 
had  seen  in  his  dream.  He  entered  and  asked  if  he  had  nothing  curi- 
ous to  sell  him  and  received  the  answer:  "Yes,  a  medal  of  Julius 
CsBsar."  When  asked  how  much  it  was  worth,  the  merchant  an- 
swered, "Four  ecus."  Monsieur  Pereisch  hastened  to  pay  him  and 
was  delighted  to  see  his  dream  happily  realized. 

Here  the  fulfilment  of  the  premonition  seems  to  have  been 
1  See  Valerius  Maximus :     De  Somnis  Romanorum. 


302  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

determined  by  the  memory  of  the  premonition  itself,  for 
Pereisch  recognized  the  jeweler's  shop  which  he  had  seen  in 
his  dream. 

Dr.  E.  Osty,  who  was  especially  versed  in  this  subject  of 
lucidity,  held  a  conference,  duly  recorded  at  the  general  In- 
stitute of  Psychology,  on  March  24,  1919.  I  will  select  from 
this  the  following  case  which  had  occurred  to  him  personally.^ 
He  reports: 

In  1919  a  lucid  subject  which  I  was  using  for  the  first  time  de- 
scribed my  life  in  this  way: 

"You  are  living  in  a  little  town  in  the  center  of  France — T  see 
the  house  where  you  live,  on  a  small  square — but  your  work  is  not 
there.  You  go  for  your  work  to  a  house  where  you  have  a  desk — 
there  you  handle  a  great  many  sheets  of  paper.  How  many  sheets 
of  paper  you  touch!  They  bring  them  to  you  from  another  office 
room,  next  to  yours,  where  several  men  are  writing.  There  is  a  per- 
petual going  and  coming  between  the  room  in  which  they  are  and 
your  own.  You  look  at  the  papers  they  bring  you  and  give  them 
back  to  them.  People  also  come  from  outside  bringing  you  papers. 
You  look  at  them,  you  write  and  you  give  them  back.  How  many 
papers  you  touch! — how  many  sheets  of  paper!" 

All  this  was  false.  My  existence  at  the  time  was  composed  of  little 
else  than  the  practice  of  medicine,  and  personal  work  in  psychology. 
All  this  came  true  after  August,  1914,  when  I  became  head  doctor 
of  the  hospital  and  of  the  post  at  Vierzon.  During  the  first  two 
years  of  the  war,  the  fragmentary  vision  of  the  medium  became  one 
aspect — I  should  even  say  the  principal  and  most  characteristic  aspect 
— of  my  daily  life.     I  was  immersed  in  administrative  red-tape. 

This  vision  of  the  future  was  exact,  like  a  window  opened 
on  a  future  scene.  It  is  quite  remarkable  that  these  personal 
visions  are  so  frequent,  while  general  events  and  especially 
the  frightful  political  catastrophe  of  the  German  war  of 
1914-18,  are  not  the  subject  of  any  characteristic  foresight  of 


Bulletin  de  I'lnstitut  general  psycho! o<jique,  January-June,  1919. 


KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  FUTURE  303 

this  kind.  It  would  seem  that  the  vision  concerned  only  the 
sensations  passing  from  soul  to  soul. 

My  laborious  and  much  regretted  friend,  Dr.  Moutin,  who 
made  remarkable  experiments  in  hynotism  at  my  house,  in 
1889,  of  which  I  shall  have  occasion  to  speak  later,  was 
occupied  in  1903  with  analytical  studies  in  spiritualism, 
among  which  is  worth  noting  the  singular  example  given 
here: 

During  a  seance,  held  on  August  19th,  of  which  he  kept  the  written 
account,  following  his  excellent  habit,  a  spirit  manifested  itself  at  the 

table,  saying  that  it  was  a  lady,  Hermance  V ,  who  had  recently 

died.  The  doctor  had  known  this  lady  and  her  husband  for  a  long 
time.     The  following  statement  astonished  him  very  much: 

"My  husband  will  remarry  next  September.  Before  he  marries 
he  will  come  to  Paris,  but  will  not  have  time  to  make  you  a 
visit." 

"What  you  tell  me  is  impossible.    I  know  V and  I  know  all 

the  affection  he  had  for  his  wife ;  I  could  never  believe  that  he  would 
remarry  four  months  after  her  death." 

"It  is  true,  nevertheless,  and  in  a  few  days  you  will  receive  the 
confirmation  of  what  I  say." 

"Then  it  is  interest  which  guides  him  and  not  affection?" 

"Interest  has  nothing  to  do  with  it;  you  know  well  that  Lucien 
[this  was  the  first  name  of  V ]  cannot  live  alone." 

"Will  he  marry  a  woman  of  his  own  age?" 

"No,  a  young  girl,  twenty-three  years  of  age,  and  shortly  after  his 
marriage  he  will  leave  Provence  and  come  to  Paris." 

"How  is  that  possible,  with  the  position  which  he  occupies  in  the 
Midi?    It  is  quite  inadmissible." 

"Unfortunate  circumstances,  especially  a  large  loss  of  money, 
forced  him  to  come  to  Paris,  to*  seek  a  new  situation." 

"We  shall  see  if  your  prediction  is  realized ;  I  doubt  it  very  much. 
But,  admitting  that  what  you  say  is  true,  do  you  see  this  union  with 
displeasure?" 

"On  the  contrary,  since  Lucien  cannot  live  alone." 

At  these  last  words  the  table  remained  quiet.    After  a  few  minutes 


304  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

of  waiting  I  asked  if  the  communication  were  ended :  ^'Yes/'  was  tlie 
answer. 

Madame  V did  not  appear  again,  and  that  was  the  only  mani- 
festation which  she  gave. 

In  the  present  case  nothing  could  have  made  any  one  expect  these 
revelations,  nothing  could  make  us  take  this  communication  seriously. 
The  members  of  my  family  and  I  were  the  only  ones  who  knew  the 
dead  woman,  and  we  were  far  from  believing  what  she  had  just  told 
us;  the  other  persons  who  were  present  at  our  meetings  had  never 
even  heard  the  name  of  V . 

A  few  days  later,  on  August  27th  I  received  a  letter  from  my 

friend  V in  which  he  announced  his  approaching  marriage,  in 

September,  to  Mademoiselle  X and  told  me  some  things  about 

his  future  which  exactly  coincided  with  what  we  had  already  been 
told  on  August  19th. 

In  March,  1904,  Monsieur  V came  to  see  us  and  told  us  that 

he  had  come  to  live  in  Paris ;  I  told  him  of  Hermance's  communica- 
tion, and  he  was  so  astonished  that  although  he  did  not  doubt  our 
statements,  he  wished  to  see  the  written  account  of  this  seance,  and 
he  was  able  to  ascertain  that  everything  his  first  wife  had  said  had 
been  literally  correct — his  trip  to  Paris  before  his  second  marriage, 
his  change  of  position.  He  was  petrified  with  astonishment,  and  af- 
firmed the  reality  of  the  concluding  facts  which  we  do  not  hesitate  to 
give  as  proof  of  the  preservation  of  personality  after  death,  and  as 
a  patent  proof  of  the  identity  of  Madame  Hermance  V . 

Dr.  Moutin  presents  this  event  as  the  most  important  of 
those  v^hich  brought  about  his  spiritualistic  convictions.  Does 
it  really  possess  the  positive  value  which  he  attributed  to  it? 

It  has  been  demonstrated  that  our  thoughts  can  take  effect 
either  consciously  or  unconsciously,  to  adduce  these  typical 
statements  of  fact.  Dr.  Moutin  and  his  family^  knew  Madame 
Hermance  V.  The  idea  that  her  husband,  who  had  become 
a  widower,  might  marry  again  was  not  in  the  least  extraordi- 
nary. On  the  other  hand,  the  thoughts  of  the  widower  may 
have  had  something  to  do  with  the  event,  as  he  already  had 
the   intention   of   remarrying   and   he   announced   it   to   his 


KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  FUTURE  305 

friends  eight  days  after  this  seance.  Did  not  the  plan  of  leav- 
ing the  country  for  Paris  already  occupy  his  mind? 

It  seems  to  me  that  the  identity  of  the  dead  woman  is  far 
from  certain  and  that  the  manifestation  may  well  have  been 
due  to  other  psychic  causes.  Nevertheless,  it  seems  to  me 
prohdhle.  This  is  not  the  place  to  discuss  this  important 
problem,  and  I  only  mention  the  case  as  an  example  of  the 
exact  announcement  of  a  future  event. 

I  will  add,  however,  that  in  this  particular  case,  as  in 
similar  ones,  the  first  wife  of  the  friend  of  Dr.  Moutin  may 
have  had,  even  in  her  lifetime,  an  intuition  of  this  second 
marriage  and  may  have  approved  of  it,  which  would  be  in 
favor  of  her  identity.  We  shall  return  to  this  subject  in 
the  third  part  of  this  work,  when  we  discuss  the  manifesta- 
tions of  the  dead. 

The  famous  cure  of  Ars,  the  Abbe  Vianney  (1786-1859), 
has  given  several  examples  of  his  power  of  seeing  the  future. 
Here  is  one  of  them  which  I  take  from  his  biography :  ^ 

Sister  Marie- Victoire,  the  founder  of  a  rescue  home  for  young  girls, 
was  at  Ars,  at  the  beginning  of  her  work,  with  two  companions,  one 
of  whom  is  at  present  her  assistant.  One  morning  before  their  de- 
parture, when  they  all  three  prepared  to  hear  the  mass  of  Monsieur 
Vianney,  he  approached  them,  and  addressing  Sister  Marie- Victoire, 
who  had  not  then  taken  her  vows,  he  said  to  her:  "You  must  leave 
quickly." — "But  Monsieur  le  cure,"  she  answered,  taken  by  surprise, 
"we  wished  first  to  hear  the  holy  mass." — "No,  my  daughter,  leave 
instantly,  for  one  of  you  is  going  to  fall  ill.  If  you  delay  you  will 
be  obliged  to  remain  here,  you  will  not  be  able  to  go  away."  In  fact, 
a  short  distance  from  the  district  where  they  lived,  one  of  the  travel- 
ers— she  who  has  since  become  Sister  Marie-Frangoise — ^began  to  feel 
so  ill  that  her  two  companions  werfe  forced  to  carry  her  in  their  arms 
as  far  as  her  home.  This  was  the  beginning  of  an  illness  which  noth- 
ing had  presaged. 

The  Abbe  Vianney  was  gifted  with  excellent  psychic  facul- 
1  Le  Cur4  d'Ars,  by  the  Abb6  Alfred  Monnin,  II,  500. 


306  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

ties.  He  attributed  to  the  devil  certain  manifestations  of 
an  inferior  order,  such  as  unexplained  noises ;  but  nothing  has 
been  less  clearly  demonstrated  than  the  existence  of  the 
devil. 

This  premonition  was  of  service.  The  greater  part  of  the 
time  they  are  of  no  use  at  all  and  prevent  nothing.  Here 
is  one,  however,  which  saved  the  life  of  a  child. 

The  English  Society  for  Psychical  Research  has  reported, 
among  others,  a  case  of  a  very  precise  vision  of  the  future, 
which  saved  the  life  of  a  little  girl  who  was  going  to  play 
near  the  railroad  in  Edinburgh,  where  an  accident  due  to  a 
locomotive  killed  three  men  and  would  have  crushed  the 
child.  The  mother  writes  the  following  account  of  this  curi- 
ous escape : 

I  had  told  my  daughter  that  I  would  let  her  go  out  to  walk  from 
three  until  four  o'clock;  and  as  she  was  alone  I  advised  her  to  go 
into  the  "railway  garden"  (a  name  which  we  had  given  to  a  narrow 
strip  of  land  between  the  sea  and  the  railway).  A  few  minutes 
after  she  had  left  I  distinctly  heard  an  inner  voice  saying  to 
me,  "Send  for  her  at  once,  or  something  frightful  will  happen  to 
her." 

I  thought  it  was  a  matter  of  autosuggestion,  and  I  wondered  what 
could  possibly  happen  to  her  on  such  a  fine  day,  so  I  did  not  send  for 
her. 

Nevertheless,  a  few  moments  later,  the  same  voice  began  to  say 
the  same  words  to  me,  but  more  imperiously.  I  still  resisted,  and  I 
used  I  all  my  imagination  to  divine  what  could  happen  to  the  child. 
I  thought  of  an  encounter  with  a  mad  dog,  but  the  thing  was  so  im- 
probable that  it  would  have  been  absurd  to  recall  her  for  such  a  silly 
fancy;  and  although  I  was  beginning  to  feel  anxious  I  resolved  to 
do  nothing  about  it,  and  tried  to  think  of  other  things.  I  succeeded 
for  several  minutes,  but  soon  the  voice  renewed  its  intimation  with  the 
same  words,  "Send  after  her  immediately,  or  something  frightful  will 
happen  to  her."  At  the  same  time  I  was  seized  with  violent  trem- 
bling, and  with  an  impression  of  extreme  terror.  I  got  up  quickly, 
rang  the  bell,  and  told  the  servant  to  go  at  once  after  my  daughter, 


KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  FUTURE  307 

repeating  mechanically  the  words  of  the  intimation,  "otherwise  some- 
thing frightful  will  happen  to  her." 

At  the  end  of  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  the  servant  returned  with  the 
child,  who,  disappointed  at  being  recalled  so  soon,  asked  if  I  really 
intended  to  keep  her  in  the  house  all  the  afternoon.  "No,"  I  an- 
swered, "and  if  you  will  promise  me  not  to  go  again  into  the  ^railway 
garden'  you  may  go  where  you  wish — to  your  uncle's,  for  example — 
or  you  may  play  in  the  garden  with  your  little  cousins."  I  thought 
that  within  those  four  walls  she  would  be  safe,  for  although  the 
child  had  come  back  safe  and  sound,  I  felt  clearly  that  the  danger 
still  existed  in  the  spot  where  she  had  been  before,  and  I  wished  to 
prevent  her  from  returning  there. 

Well,  it  was  precisely  at  that  point  that  the  locomotive  and  the 
tender  ran  off  the  tracks,  breaking  the  walls  and  crashing  against  the 
very  rocks  on  which  the  child  was  accustomed  to  go  and  sit. 

This  extraordinary  escape  has  been  attested  to  by  all  the 
family  and  the  neighbors.  It  occurred  in  the  month  of  July, 
1860,  and  was  published  in  the  "Journal  of  the  Society  for 
Psychical  Research"  (Volume  VIII,  March,  1897)  and  by  me 
in  **La  Revue"  for  May,  1912.  Its  veracity  cannot  be  at- 
tacked. 

I  v^rill  add  here,  with  Bozzano,  a  no  less  remarkable  pre- 
monition which  saved  the  lives  of  a  whole  family,  and  which 
was  also  caused  by  a  mysterious  voice.  It,  too,  is  taken  from 
the  ''Journal  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research"  (Volume 
I,  page  283).  Captain  MacGowan  himself  reported  the  event 
to  Professor  Barrett: 

In  January,  1877,  when  I  chanced  to  be  in  Brooklyn  with  my  two 
young  sons,  who  were  on  their  vacation,  I  promised  to  take  them  to 
the  theater  on  a  certain  evening.  ■  The  day  before  I  had  already 
picked  out  and  paid  for  the  three  seats. 

On  the  morning  of  the  appointed  day  I  began  to  notice  an  inner 
voice  which  repeated  insistently :  "Don't  go  to  the  theater;  take  your 
sons  back  to  school."  Despite  my  efforts  to  distract  myself,  I  could 
not  prevent  this  voice  from  continuing,  and  repeating  the  same  words 


308  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

in  a  more  imperious  tone  than  ever;  and  to  such  an  extent  that  by 
noon  I  had  decided  to  inform  my  friends  and  children  that  we  could 
not  go  to  the  theater.  But  my  friends  reproached  me  for  this  de- 
termination, pointing  out  that  it  was  cruel  to  deprive  the  children  of 
a  pleasure  that  was  so  unusual  for  them,  and  so  impatiently  awaited, 
after  having  made  them  a  promise,  and  that  caused  me  to  change  my 
mind  again. 

However,  during  the  whole  afternoon,  this  inner  voice  did  not  cease 
from  repeating  the  order,  with  an  insistence  so  impressive,  that  when 
evening  had  come,  and  one  hour  before  the  beginning  of  the  play,  I 
peremptorily  told  my  sons  that  instead  of  going  to  the  theater  we 
were  going  to  New  York,  and  we  left. 

Well,  it  happened  that  that  very  evening  the  theater  was  entirely 
destroyed  by  fire,  and  that  305  persons  perished  in  the  flames. 

If  we  had  been  at  the  theater,  my  sister,  who  was  there,  would 
have  perished  as  well  as  we,  for  we  should  have  gone  out  by  a  stair- 
case on  which  every'one  was  crushed  to  death. 

I  have  never  in  my  life  had  another  presentiment,  and  I  have 
not  the  habit  of  changing  my  mind  without  good  reasons,  and  on  this 
occasion  I  did  it  with  the  greatest  reluctance,  quite  in  spite  of  myself. 

What  was  the  cause  which  obliged  me,  against  my  will,  not  to  go 
to  the  theater,  after  having  paid  for  the  three  tickets  and  arranged 
everything  for  passing  the  evening  pleasantly? 

Captain  MacGowan  explained  to  Professor  Barrett  that 
the  inner  voice  ^  had  sounded  very  clearly  to  him,  *'as  if 
some  one  had  really  been  speaking  from  the  inside  of  the 
body,'^  and,  that  it  had  persisted  from  breakfast-time  up  to 
the  moment  when  he  took  his  children  to  New  York.    His 

1  What  Was  this  voice  ?  We  have  heard  of  others  in  the  preceding 
cases,  that  of  the  lady  from  Edinburgh  a  few  minutes  ago,  then  the  tele- 
phonic voice  of  the  Swedish  pastor,  that  of  Monsieur  Dufilhol,  the  inner 
voice  announcing  the  election  of  Casimir-Perier,  Monsieur  Fryer  hearing 
his  brother  sixty-four  kilometers  away,  the  telepathic  sound  heard  by 
Dr.  Balme,  that  of  Dr.  Nicholas  at  Zante,  the  voice  of  a  father  to  his 
son,  one  hundred  kilometers  away,  a  mother  hearing  her  son  from  Eng- 
land to  Java,  weeping  heard  twenty-four  hours  in  advance,  the  voices  of 
Jeanne  d'Arc,  the  young  girl  in  the  bath,  the  phantom  of  Monsieur 
Marechal;  voices  evidently  fictitious  but  of  psychic  origin. 


KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  FUTURE  309 

sister  still  preserves  the  three  tickets  which  he  had  bought 
the  day  before.^ 

These  events  are  so  convincing,  so  thoroughly  demonstrated, 
that  they  strongly  confirm  one  another  and  together  from  a 
mass  of  evidence  that  no  force  would  be  able  to  destroy. 

It  seems  superfluous  to  add  other  examples  to  the  preceding 
ones.  However,  there  are  some  so  typical  that  it  would 
be  a  pity  not  to  recall  them,  to  anchor  fast  the  idea  of  truth 
in  the  minds  of  the  most  stubborn.  The  following  observa- 
tion, which  is  so  carefully  reported  by  the  very  exact  experi- 
menter Liebault,^  in  his  "  Therapeutiques  Suggestives, '  ^  is 
especially  remarkable. 

The  learned  doctor  of  Nancy  tells  how  on  January  7, 
1886,  at  four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  (according  to  his  au- 
thentic d,aily  memorandum  book)  one  of  his  clients.  Monsieur 

de  Ch came,  in  a  state  of  nervousness  easily  understood, 

to  consult  him.     Let  us  hear  the  story: 

Six  years  before,  on  the  twenty-sixth  of  December,  1879,  as  he  was 
walking  in  a  street  in  Paris,  this  young  man  had  seen,  written  over  a 
door:  *'Mme.  Lenormand,  Necromancer,"  and,  pricked  by  curiosity, 
had  gone  in. 

On  examining  his  hand  the  prophetess  had  told  him:  "You  will 
lose  your  father  in  a  year,  to  the  day.  You  will  soon  be  a  soldier  (he 
was  then  nineteen)  but  you  will  not  remain  one  very  long.  You  will 
marry  young  and  have  two  children.     You  will  die  at  twenty-six." 

This  amazing  prophecy,  which  Monsieur  de  Ch confided  to 

his  friends  and  to  some  of  his  family,  he  did  not  at  first  take  seri- 
ously; but  when  his  father  died  on  the  twenty-seventh  of  December, 
1880,  after  a  short  illness,  just  a  year  after  the  interview  with  the 
fortune-teller,  this  misfortune  rather  shook  his  incredulity;  when  he 
became  a  soldier  for  only  seven  months;  when,  having  been  married 
shortly  after,  he  became  the  father  of  two  children,  and  was  on  the 
point  of  becoming  twenty-six,  definitely  shaken  by  fear,  he  believed 
that  there  only  remained  a  few  days  of  life  for  him.     It  was  then 

1  See  Bozzano,  Des  Phenomenes  pr^monitoires,  p.  408. 

2  See  L'Inconmi,  p.  564 


310  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

that  he  came  to  consult  Dr.  Liebault,  and  to  ask  him  if  it  would  not 
be  possible  to  conjure  fate.  For,  he  thought,  as  the  four  first  events 
of  the  prophecy  had  come  to  pass,  the  fifth  must  inevitably  be  real- 
ized !     The  doctor  writes : 

That  very  day  and  on  the  following  days,  I  tried  to  put  M.  de 
Ch into  a  deep  sleep,  so  as  to  dissipate  the  black  impression  en- 
graved on  his  mind — that  of  his  approaching  death,  which  he 
imagined  would  take  place  on  the  fourth  of  February,  the  anni- 
versary of  his  birthday,  although  the  prophetess  had  not  been  definite 
on  this  point.  I  could  not  produce  even  the  lightest  sleep,  so  greatly 
agitated  was  he.  However,  as  it  was  urgently  necessary  to  take  away 
his  conviction,  for  we  have  seen  predictions  fulfilled  to  the  letter  by 
autosuggestion,  I  proposed  to  him  to  consult  one  of  my  somnambu- 
lists, an  old  man  called  the  Prophet,  because  he  had  announced  the 
precise  moment  of  his  own  recovery  from  a  four-year-long  attack  of 
rheumatism  and  even  the  time  of  his  daughter's  recovery. 

Monsieur  de  Ch accepted  my  proposal  with  eagerness,  and  did 

not  fail  to  appear  promptly  at  the  rendezvous.  As  soon  as  he  was 
in  rapport  with  this  somnambulist,  his  first  words  were:  ^'When 
shall  I  dief  The  experienced  sleeper,  suspecting  the  young  man's 
trouble,  answered,  after  having  made  him  wait:  "You  will  die — 
you  will  die — in  forty-one  years."  The  effect  of  these  words  was 
marvelous.  Immediately  the  patient  became  gay,  expansive,  full  of 
hope;  and  when  he  had  passed  the  fourth  of  February,  the  day  so 
greatly  feared  by  him,  he  believed  himself  saved. 

I  thought  no  more  of  all  this  Avhen,  at  the  beginning  of  October,  I 
received  a  letter  announcing  that  my  unfortunate  client  had  passed 
away  on  the  thirtieth  of  September,  1886,  in  his  twenty-seventh  year, 
that  is  to  say,  when  he  was  twenty-six,  as  Madame  Lenormand  had 
foretold.  And  in  order  that  it  may  not  be  supposed  that  there  is  any 
error  on  my  part,  I  preserve  this  letter,  as  well  as  my  register:  they 
are  two  written  and  underdahle  pieces  of  evidence. 

Such  is  the  account  of  Dr.  Liebault,  whose  works  are  well 
known.  Analyze,  dissect  this  series  of  incidents  with  all  im- 
aginable skepticism,  with  the  greatest  surgical  decisiveness, 
and  even  if  you  should  think  that  there  was  nothing  surpris- 
ing that  the  fortune-teller  should  have  predicted  to   this 


KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  FUTURE  311 

young  man  nineteen  years  old  that  he  would  be  a  soldier  and 
would  marry,  still  four  coincidences  would  have  to  be  ex- 
plained: first,  the  death  of  his  father  at  the  end  of  exactly 
one  year;  secondly,  his  release  from  military  service  before 
the  usual  time;  third,  the  birth  of  two  children;  fourth,  his 
own  death  at  twenty-six  years.  It  seems  to  me  that  this  tale 
alone  would  almost  suffice  to  establish  our  contention.  It 
would  perhaps  show  us  also  that  it  is  imprudent  to  ask  these 
questions,  even  when  one  does  not  believe  in  them,  because 
one's  peace  of  mind  suffers  inevitably,  and  it  is  not  necessary 
to  arouse  anxiety. 

But  is  one  always  the  master?  We  must  confess  that  the 
whole  of  this  study  of  the  conditions  of  death  bristles  with 
interrogation  points.  The  following  case  also  is  most  odd. 
How  can  it  also  be  explained  ? 

On  the  night  of  May  24^25,  1900,  Monsieur  Renou,  who  at  the 
time  was  twenty-eight  years  old,  and  living  in  a  large  city  in  the 
north  of  France,  dreamed  that  when  he  was  at  his  barber's  the  lat- 
ter's  wife  told  his  fortune  by  cards.  Let  us  mention  in  passing  that 
the  person  in  question  had  never  shown  proof  of  this  social  talent. 
She  then  said  to  him :     "Your  father  will  die  on  the  second  of  June." 

On  the  second  of  May,  in  the  morning.  Monsieur  Renou  told  this 
dream  to  his  family.  At  the  time  he  was  living  with  his  parents, 
and  all  these  good  people,  who  were  most  skeptical  about  this  sort 
of  warning,  laughed  at  it  without  attaching  any  importance  to  it. 

Monsieur  Renou,  the  father,  had  had,  at  long  intervals,  a  few  at- 
tacks of  asthma;  but  at  this  moment  he  was  very  well.  On  the  first 
of  June,  while  he  was  present  at  the  funeral  of  a  person  of  his 
acquaintance,  he  told  the  dream  to  one  of  his  friends,  and  concluded 
gaily :     "If  I  must  die  to-morrow,  I  have  n't  much  time  to  lose." 

The  entire  day  passed  without  his  feeling  indisposed. 

In  the  evening,  one  of  his  sons,  a  soldier  at  Verdun,  came  home  on 
furlough.  The  whole  reunited  family  talked  joyously,  well  on  into 
the  evening. 

At  half-past  eleven.  Monsieur  Renou,  the  father,  went  to  bed,  not 
in  the  least  indisposed.     At  midnight  he  was  suddenly  seized  with 


312  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

an  attack  of  breathlessness :  intense  dyspnoea,  a  violent  cough,  a 
mossy  and  bloody  expectoration.  They  ran  for  a  doctor:  it  was  too 
late,  all  was  over.  At  twenty  minutes  past  midnight — therefore,  on 
the  second  day  of  June — he  died. 

This  tale,  in  which  only  the  name  is  changed,  at  the  re- 
quest of  the  family,  was  published  in  ' '  Les  Nouveaux  Horizons 
de  la  science"  (Douai,  June,  1905).  Dr.  Samas,  who  reported 
this  event,  searched  for  the  explanation.  Skeptics  will  make 
an  easy  matter  of  it,  he  says,  by  objecting  that  there  was  noth- 
ing but  mere  coincidence :  Monsieur  Renou,  already  affected 
with  heart  trouble,  consequently  impressed  by  this  dream ;  the 
return  of  his  son, — the  second  cause  for  emotion ;  his  already 
over-excited  imagination  determined,  by  reflex  action,  the  ulti- 
mate crisis.  But  we  have  just  seen  that  neither  he  nor  any 
other  member  of  his  family  attached  the  least  importance 
to  this  strange  dream.     Then —  ? 

Let  us  consider,  also,  the  following  premonitory  dream  of 
death,  which  was  associated  with  an  apparition. 

On  March  8,  1913,  I  received  this  important  account  from 
Madame  Suzanne  Bonnefoy,  president  of  the  Union  of  French 
"Women,  of  the  French  Red  Cross,  at  Cherbourg,  the  wife  of 
the  head  doctor  of  the  Maritime  Hospital : 

I  feel,  dear  Master,  that  I  must  tell  you  a  case  of  personal  pre- 
monition, which  may  be  of  use  if  added  to  the  list  of  your  psychic 
documents. 

On  the  eighteenth  of  last  January,  at  about  eight  o'clock  in  the 
morning,  the  servant  of  Monsieur  Feron,  an  attorney,  living  in  rue 
Christine,  and  first  deputy  of  the  town  of  Cherbourg,  came  to  tell 
me  of  the  sudden  death  of  his  master,  which  had  occurred  ten  hours 
before.  The  affection  which  I  bore  Monsieur  Feron  was  rather  that 
of  a  sister  than  of  a  friend.  Very  much  moved,  I  ran  to  offer  my 
services  to  his  wife  Madame  Feron,  who,  having  been  married  for 
twenty-eight  years  to  a  husband  who  constantly  petted  her,  was  in 
despair  and  wished  to  die.     "And  to  think,"  she  cried  on  seeing  me, 


KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  FUTURE  313 

"that  for  a  month  he  has  repeated  constantly  that  he  would  never 
see  the  end  of  January.  Just  lately,  he  had  been  to  the  burial  of 
one  of  his  friends,  and  had  had,  on  the  following  night,  a  very 
strange  dream,  in  which  this  friend  had  appeared  and  had  said  to 
him :     'On  such  a  day  you  will  come  and  join  me/  " 

As  Madame  Feron  finished  this  tale,  broken  with  sobs,  Madame 
Leflambe,  who  lives  here,  on  the  Place  Napoleon,  entered.  Madame 
Feron  repeated  her  tale,  and  added : 

"My  husband,  in  consequence  of  a  dream,  predicted  not  only  the 
death  of  his  mother  but  also  of  your  husband,  Madame.  When  you 
were  leaving  for  Vichy,  in  1911,  where  Monsieur  Leflambe  had  in- 
sisted that  you  should  go  for  your  health,  he  said  to  me:  'Our 
friend,  Monsieur  Leflambe,  is  going  to  Vichy  for  his  wife's  health, 
but  he  will  not  return.'  Monsieur  Leflambe,  who  was  very  well  when 
he  left,  contracted  there  a  fatal  case  of  pneumonia. 

"On  coming  down  from  this  visit,  of  which  I  am  telling  you  very 
simply,  I  met  the  servant :  'Monsieur  Feron,'  I  said  to  him,  'was  at 
the  Town-hall  only  last  evening,  very  well  and  not  knowing  he  was 
to  die  so  soon!' — 'Oh,  Madame,'  he  answered,  'on  the  contrary. 
Monsieur  Feron  told  us  that  he  had  dreamed  that  he  would  never 
see  the  end  of  January,  and  he  seemed  very  much  struck  by 
it.' " 

Monsieur  Feron  was  taken  suddenly  ill  in  the  street  and  died  in 
half  an  hour,  carried  off  by  a  heart  attack.  Very  much  respected 
at  Cherbourg,  he  enjoyed  a  comfortable  fortune,  excellent  health,  and 
everything  in  life  smiled  upon  him. 

Yesterday,  the  fifth  of  March,  I  was  talking  once  more  with 
Madame  Feron,  of  this  singular  premonition.  She  told  me  that  he 
felt  sure  he  had  already  lived  another  life  than  this. 

Suzanne  Bonnefoy, 
13  rue  de  la  Polle,  Cherbourg. 

(Letter  2325.) 

When  I  chanced  to  be  in  Cherbourg,  in  September,  1914, 
Monsieur  and  Madame  Bonnefoy  confirmed  to  me  this  most 
curious  case,  and  I  had,  moreover,  an  independent  and  spon- 
taneous confirmation  from  Monsieur  Biard,  director  of  the 
"Reveil  de  la  Manche,"  who  had  been  struck  by  the  sudden 


314  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

death  of  the  mayor's  deputy,  and  who  knew  the  circum- 
stances. These  facts  exist ;  it  serves  no  purpose  to  deny  them. 
They  ought,  on  the  contrary,  to  instruct  us. 

Here  is  another  of  the  same  order: 

Monsieur  Harley,  a  merchant  at  Pont-Audemer  (Eure) 
wrote  to  me  on  the  thirteenth  of  April,  1918  (Letter  4024), 
that  Dr.  Castara  had  one  night  seen  a  man  push  aside  the  cur- 
tains of  his  bed  and  announce  to  him :  first,  a  good  situation, 
and,  secondly,  his  death  at  the  age  of  forty  years;  that'on 
the  date  fixed  he  had  gathered  all  his  friends  together  at  a 
great  dinner,  at  which  his  grandfather  and  grandmother  were 
present,  congratulating  himself  on  the  end  of  the  night- 
mare, and  that  at  midnight,  he  had  been  seized  with  a  raging 
toothache  and  had  fallen  dead. 

Still  another  event: 

The  well-known  naturalist,  Edwin  Reed,  director  of  the 
Museum  of  Natural  History  of  the  city  of  Conception,  Chile, 
enjoyed  excellent  health  a  little  while  before  his  death.  Two 
months  before  his  decease,  he  dreamed  that  on  reaching  the 
end  of  an  avenue  where  he  was  walking,  he  saw  a  tomb  with 
a  cross  and  read  on  it  the  following  inscription:  ''Reed, 
naturalist,  November  7,  1910."  Mr.  Reed  jokingly  related 
this  strange  dream  on  different  occasions  to  several  friends. 

A  short  time  after,  Madame  de  R ,  the  daughter-in-law 

of  Mr.  Reed,  who  was  living  at  Mendoza,  dreamed  one  night, 
as  she  was  about  to  celebrate  the  anniversary  of  her  marriage, 
which  fell  on  that  very  day,  the  seventh  of  November,  that 
all  the  presents  which  reached  her  on  that  day  were  funeral 
wreaths. 

Well,  Mr.  Reed  died  November  7,  1910. 

During  the  days  which  preceded  his  death  he  recalled  that 
date  to  those  about  him,  without  seeming  to  attach  the  least 
importance  to  it.^ 

i  Revista  de  Estudios  Psiquicos  (Valparaiso).  Annates  des  Sciences 
psychiques,  April,  1911. 


KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  FUTURE  315 

I  could  cite  a  great  number  of  events  similar  to  the  pre- 
ceding ones,  proving  that  the  future  can  be  seen.  That  is 
not  the  aim  of  this  book,  and  I  have  consecrated  a  special 
book  to  them  which  will  be  published  shortly.  The  examples 
which  we  have  before  us  are  more  than  sufficient  for  this 
chapter,  which  was  simply  but  expressly  destined,  as  were  the 
former  ones,  to  point  out  the  existence  of  faculties  of  the  soul 
independent  of  the  exercise  of  the  material  senses.  To  add 
more  evidence  here  could  give  no  better  proof  of  these  faculties. 

It  seems  to  me  that  the  attentive  reader  of  these  pages 
can  no  longer  doubt  the  existence  of  the  soul  and  its  purely 
psychic  faculties. 

Before  the  knowledge  of  telepathy,  in  the  past  ages,  they 
attributed  these  sorts  of  warnings  to  angels  or  demons,  or, 
fifty  years  ago,  to  disembodied  spirits.  To-day  we  can  think 
that  there  is  telepathic  transmission  from  brain  to  brain, 
that  cerebral  waves  overcome  distances.  This  is  possible; 
but  it  is  also  possible  that  the  science  of  the  future  will  smile 
at  our  present  theories  as  we  smile  at  those  of  the  ancients. 
Whatever  may  be  the  explanation,  premonitory  dreams,  visions 
of  the  future,  in  various  ways,  are  authentic,  investigations 
have  confirmed  them,  and  that  is  what  concerns  us  here. 

We  might,  in  this  account  of  the  statements  relating  to  a 
vision  of  the  future,  have  spoken  of  the  premonitions,  the 
previsions,  the  predictions  calculated  by  astrology,  however 
inexplicable  they  also  may  be.  That  our  destiny  can  be 
read  in  the  stars  seems  inadmissible  and  absolutely  illogical 
to  our  understanding,  since  the  geocentric  and  anthropocentric 
appearances  have  been  demonstrated  by  modern  astronomy  to 
be  false.  However,  there  are  singular  examples  of  the  real- 
ization of  these  predictions.  We  lack  space  to  give  them  here, 
but  I  shall  cite  briefly  a  few  of  incontestable  authenticity, 
which  we  owe  to  men  of  the  highest  standing,  celebrated  as- 
tronomers. 


316-  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

David  Fabricius,  a  Protestant  pastor  (bom  at  Essen  in 
1564;  died  at  Resterhaft  in  1617),  the  astronomer  to  whom 
we  owe  the  discovery  of  Mira  Ceti,  "the  Marvelous,"  a  vari- 
able star  of  the  Whale,  had  intercourse,  through  his  studies, 
with  Tycho  Brahe  and  Kepler,  and,  like  them,  was  occupied 
with  astrology,  which,  by  the  way,  he  believed  in.  He  himself 
calculated,  from  the  constellations,  that  the  seventh  day  of 
May  would  be  fatal  to  him.  On  that  day  he  had  taken  every 
possible  precaution  to  prevent  any  sort  of  accident.  Finally, 
at  ten  o'clock  in  the  evening,  after  very  absorbing  work, 
he  thought  he  might  take  the  air  for  a  moment  in  the  court 
of  his  parsonage.  But  scarcely  had  he  arrived  there  when  a 
peasant  named  Jean  Hoyer,  who  thought  he  had,  been  desig- 
nated as  a  thief  in  a  sermon  by  Fabricius,  came  out  from  the 
spot  where  he  was  hiding  and  with  a  blow  of  his  pitchfork 
broke  the  skull  of  the  unfortunate  pastor,  who  died  that  very 
night. 

We  read  of  his  friend  Tycho  Brahe,  that  he  also  read  in  the 
stars  that  a  certain  day  would  be  disastrous  to  him.  In 
vain  he  surrounded  himself  with  every  precaution :  he  was  at- 
tacked in  the  darkness  by  a  personal  enemy  called  Mauderup 
Parsberg,  who  cut  off  part  of  his  nose,  which  obliged  the 
illustrious  astronomer  to  wear  a  silver  nose.  And  in  fact,  we 
always  see  in  his  portraits  his  nose  marked  by  an  oblique  cut. 

Jean  Stoeffler,  born  in  1472,  died  in  1530,  greatly  devoted  to 
astrological  calculations,  found  them  true,  at  least  for  him- 
self. The  examination  of  his  horoscope  had  given  him  the 
conviction  that  he  would  die  on  a  certain  day  from  the  blow 
of  a  heavy  object  which  would  fall  on  his  head.  He  did  not 
go  out  on  that  day,  received  a  few  friends,  and  thought  he 
had  finished  the  day  without  mishap,  when,  wishing  to  reach 
a  certain  book  that  was  placed  on  an  insecure  shelf,  he  re- 
ceived the  board  and  all  its  books  on  his  head,  and  did  indeed 
die  in  consequence  of  the  blow. 


KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  FUTURE  317 

These  three  examples  suffice  to  represent  here  very  numer- 
ous coincidences  which  could  not  be  due  to  chance.  The 
stars  themselves  count  for  no  more  in  these  interpretations 
than  do  the  cards  in  the  hands  of  the  fortune-tellers.  When 
Fabricius,  Tycho  Brahe,  Stoeffler  made  these  predictions,  they 
were  led  by  a  secret,  supra^normal  power  of  intuition. 

The  same  thing  was  true  of  the  niece  of  Prince  Radziwill,  as 
is  reported  by  the  translator  of  the  Souvemrs  of  the  Marquise 
de  Crequi  (1834)  : 

Prince  Radziwill  had  adopted  one  of  his  nieces,  an  orphan.  He 
lived  in  a  castle  in  Galicia,  and  this  castle  had  a  very  large  room 
which  separated  the  apartments  of  the  prince  from  those  of  the 
children;  so  that  in  order  to  communicate  with  them,  one  had  to 
cross  this  room,  or  pass  through  the  court. 

The  young  Agnes,  who  at  the  time  was  five  or  six  years  old,  al- 
ways uttered  piercing  cries  whenever  she  was  made  to  cross  the 
large  room.  She  pointed  out,  with  an  expression  of  terror,  an 
enormous  picture  hung  over  the  door,  which  represented  the  Cumasan 
Sybil.  They  tried  for  a  long  time  to  overcome  this  repugnance, 
which  they  attributed  to  some  childish  obstinacy;  but  since  serious 
accidents  resulted  from  the  use  of  force  they  finally  no  longer  allowed 
her  to  enter  the  room,  and  for  ten  or  twelve  years  the  young  girl 
preferred  to  cross  the  vast  courtyard  or  the  gardens,  even  in  snow 
and  cold,  rather  than  pass  through  that  doorway  which  made  so 
disagreeable  an  impression  on  her. 

The  time  had  come  to  marry  the  young  countess,  and  when  she 
was  engaged  there  was  one  day  a  great  reception  at  the  castle.  The 
company  wished,  in  the  evening,  to  play  some  lively  game,  and  they 
went  into  the  big  hall,  where,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  wedding  ball 
was  to  take  place.  Excited  by  the  young  people  about  her,  Agnes 
did  not  hesitate  to  follow  her  guests  ^  but  hardly  had  she  crossed  the 
threshold  ©f  the  door  when  she  confessed  her  terror  and  wished  to 
draw  back.  They  had  made  her  go  in  first,  according  to  custom,  and 
her  fiance,  her  friends,  her  uncle,  laughing  at  her  childishness,  shut 
the  door  upon  her.     The  poor  young  girl  wished  to  resist,  and  while 


318  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

shaking  one  of  the  doors,  she  caused  the  picture  above  to  fall.  This 
enormous  mass  broke  her  skull  with  one  of  its  corners,  and  killed 
her  on  the  spot.^ 

I  shall  cease  giving  these  examples,  as  this  book  must  have 
an  end,  apologizing  for  having  multiplied  them  a  little  too 
eagerly;  and  as  my  readers  are  by  now  certainly  convinced. 

Conclusion :  The  future  can  he  seen. 

In  the  present  state  of  human  knowledge  it  would  be  use- 
less to  try  to  explain  how  this  vision  rises  in  our  minds,  as 
well  as  the  sensations  which  are  related  to  it. 

We  may  think  that  the  subconscious,  the  psychic  being,  in 
the  exercise  of  its  supra-normal  faculties,  such  as  certain  forms 
of  clairvoyance,  and,  notably,  prescience,  crosses  the  limits 
of  time  and  space,  that  is  to  say,  the  laws  which  regulate 
our  material  world.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  future  events 
seem  to  it  to  be  on  the  same  plane  as  the  present  and  the 
past.  It  draws  its  power  from  laws  that  are  still  unknown. 
And  this  fact,  however  inexplicable  it  may  be,  has  nothing  in- 
admissible about  it,  if  this  psychic  being  or  organism  consti- 
tutes the  total  and  permanent  personality  of  the  human  being, 
a  personality  nourished  by  the  most  diverse  and  mysterious 
sources.  In  this  order  of  ideas  there  would  therefore  be  no 
temerity  in  supposing  that,  under  certain  conditions  favored 
by  sleep,  hypnoses,  or  such  and  such  personal  predispositions, 
the  influences  that  have  come  from  the  invisible  world  could 
invade  the  subconscious  and  inspire  it  with  knowledge  of  which 
it  makes  proof  by  the  discovery  of  past,  present,  or,  above  all, 
future  events.  During  life,  as  well  as  after  death,  the  soul 
is  immersed  in  the  ethereal  atmosphere  of  the  invisible  world. 

The  rigorous  examination  of  facts,  the  closest  logic,  lead  us 
to  conclude  that  it  is  impossible  to  attribute  to  matter,  to 
the  brain,  to  the  cerebral  molecules,  to  any  chemical  or  me- 
chanical combinations  whatever,  the  intellectual  power  of  see- 

1  Charpignon,  Physiologie  et  m^taphysique  du  Magn^tisme,  p.  352. 


KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  FUTURE  319 

mg  without  the  eyes,  of  foreseeing  future  events,  of  knowing 
what  is  passing  at  a  distance,  or  what  will  happen  in  the 
future,  facts  outside  the  corporeal  organism  and  the  essentially 
mental  organism.  These  observations  prove  the  existence  of 
the  spirit,  endowed  with  intrinsic  faculties,  independent  of  the 
physical  vsenses. 

During  the  earthly  existence,  the  soul  is  associated  with  a 
brain  appropriate  to  its  functions.  Mens  sana  in  corpore 
sano. 

If  the  soul  is  not  a  production  of  the  brain,  if  it  is  distinct 
from  the  cerebro-spinal  nervous  system,  if  it  exists -in  itself, 
there  is  no  reason  why  it  should  disintegrate  with  it. 

Certain  phenomena,  such  as  the  reading  of  unknown  texts, 
testify  to  the  existence  of  a  spirit  endowed  with  special  facul- 
ties. This  spirit  may  be  our  own,  and  it  has  not  been  proved 
that  there  has  been  the  intervention  of  spirits  foreign  to  those 
of  the  experimenters.  Nevertheless,  the  hypothesis  remains., 
For  if  the  spirit  survives  death,  it  still  exists  somewhere,  and' 
if  our  spirit  can  discover  hidden  things  during  its  lifetime, 
why  should  it  lose  this  power  after  death  ? 

For  the  very  reason  that  we  attribute  the  production  iqf ' 
these  phenomena  to  the  action  of  our  spirit,  we  ought  to  ac- 
cept also  the  possibility  of  its  ulterior  action,  and  compare 
the  two  hypotheses,  in  order  to  estimate  which  is  the  simpler. 

But  the  fact  that  these  readings,  these  divinations,  these 
previsions,  these  psychic  actions,  these  spiritualistic  com- 
munications, are  realized  without  our  expecting  them,  in  com- 
plete unconsciousness  on  our  part,  places  before  us  a  complica- 
tion as  great  as  the  hypothesis  of  spirits  external  to  our 
own. 

It  seems  quite  likely  that  the  two  elements  are  brought 
into  action — our  own  metaphysical  faculties  and  at  times  the 
action  of  invisible  spirits.    Let  us  not  be  exclusive. 

We  go  forward  in  complete  mystery,  and  this  mystery  is 
imposed  upon  our  thirst  for  knowledge. 


320  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

To  admit  only  the  facts  that  can  be  explained  in  the  pres- 
ent state  of  knowledge  is  a  great  error.  Not  to  be  able  to 
explain  an  observation  proves  nothing  against  its  authenticity. 
Scholars  ought  always  to  have  before  their  minds  the  follow- 
ing remarks  of  Arago,  concerning  the  history  of  aerolites : 

The  Chinese  believed  that  the  appearance  of  aerolites  was  closely 
connected  with  contemporary  events,  and  it  was  for  this  reason  that 
they  made  lists  of  them.  I  do  not  know,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  whether 
we  have  much  right  to  laugh  at  this  supposition.  Were  the  scholars 
of  Europe  any  wiser  when,  refusing  to  believe  the  evidence  of  the 
events,  they  stated  that  it  was  impossible  for  stones  to  fall  from  the 
atmosphere?  Did  not  the  Academy  of  Sciences  declare  in  1769 
that  the  stone  picked  up  at  the  moment  of  its  fall,  near  Luce,  by 
several  persons  who  had  followed  it  with  their  eyes  until  it  reached 
the  ground,  had  not  fallen  from  the  skies'?  Finally,  was  not  the 
formal  written  account  of  the  municipality  of  Julliac,  stating  that  on 
July  24,  1790,  there  fell  in  the  fields,  on  the  roofs  of  the  houses,  in 
the  streets  of  the  village  a  great  quantity  of  stones,  treated,  in  the 
journals  of  the  period,  as  a  ridiculous  tale,  fit  to  arouse  the  pity  not 
only  of  scholars  but  of  all  reasonable  people? 

The  physicists  who  will  admit  only  those  facts  for  which  they 
perceive  an  explanation,  certainly  hinder  more  the  advance  of  science 
than  the  men  who  can  be  reproached  for  too  great  credulity. 

How  mstny  times  have  I  repeated  that  it  is  a  total  mistake 
to  believe  that  a  fact  which  cannot  be  explained  ought  not 
to  be  admitted?  To  understand  or  not  to  understand  a 
phenomenon  proves  nothing  against  its  existence.  So  said 
Cicero  long  ago.^ 

1  "Cwr  fiat  quidque,  .qucerisf  Recte  omnino;  sed  non  nunc  id  agitur: 
fiat,  necne  fiat,  id  quceritur.  Ut  si  magnetem  lapidem  esse  dicam,  qui 
ferrum  ad  se  alliciat  et  attrahat;  rationem,  cur  id  fiat,  affere  nequeam: 
fieri  omnino  negesf  [You  wish  to  have  the  explanation  of  these  things? 
Very  well;  but  that  is  not  the  question:  are  they  real,  yes  or  no?  That 
is  what  we  wish  to  know.  What !  I  might  tell  you  that  the  magnet  is 
a  body  which  attracts  iron  and  attaches  itself  to  it :  but  because  I  could 
not  give  you  the  explanation  of  it,  would  you  deny  it?]"  {De  Divina- 
tione,  lib  I,  cap.  39.) 


KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  FUTURE  321 

An  incomprehensible  fact  is  still  a  fact,  but  an  incompre- 
hensible explanation  is  not  an  explanation.  The  mental  facul- 
ties which  we  have  just  watched  in  operation,  prove  that  there 
is  in  the  human  being  a  psychic  element  distinct  from  the 
physical  organism,  seeing  across  time  and  space,  penetrating 
the  invisible  world,  and  to  which  the  future  as  well  as  the 
past  can  appear  as  present. 

We  are  studying  here  the  world  of  the  soul  which  it  is  no 
longer  permissible  to  misunderstand. 

To  solve  the  mystery  of  death,  to  establish  the  survival  of 
the  soul,  we  first  had  to  prove  that  the  soul  does  exist,  in- 
dividually, an  existence  proved  by  special,  extra-corporeal 
faculties,  which  cannot  be  included  among  the  properties  of 
the  material  brain,  or  among  chemical  or  mechanical  reactions ; 
faculties  essentially  spiritual,  such  as  the  will,  acting  without 
the  spoken  word;  autosuggestion,  producing  physical  effects; 
presentiments;  telepathy;  intellectual  transmissions;  reading 
in  a  closed  book ;  the  sight  by  the  spirit  of  a  far-off  country,  of 
a  future  scene  or  event — all  phenomena  outside  the  sphere 
of  our  physical  organism,  lacking  any  common  measure  with 
our  organic  sensations  and  proving  that  the  soul  is  a  substance 
which  exists  in  itself. 

I  hope  that  this  proof  has  been  rigorously  made. 

Psychic  observations  prove  that  the  universe  is  not  limited 
to  things  that  can  be  reached  by  the  five  or  six  senses  derived 
from  our  animal  inheritance.  There  are  other  orders  of  crea- 
tion. 

Since  the  personal  existence  of  our  spiritual  entity  has 
been  thus  established,  we  shall  now  study,  with  the  same 
experimental  method,  the  phenomena  associated  with  death  it- 
self, the  manifestations  of  the  dying,  the  apparitions  of  the 
living  and  the  dead,  the  constitution  of  the  psychic  being, 
haunted  houses,  communications  from  the  dead,  the  proofs  of 
the  survival  of  the  psychic  atom,  the  ethereal  body.  What  has 
preceded  belongs  to  life. 


322  DEATH  AND  ITS  MYSTERY 

We  are  coming  now  to  what  concerns  death,  and  to  what  goes 
on  after  the  last  corporeal  hour.  This  new  spiritual  synthesis 
is  thus  composed  of  three  parts  that  succeed  one  another 
logically :  Before  Death,  At  the  Moment  of  Death,  and  After 
Death. 

I  Before  Death:    Proofs  of  the  existence  of  the  soul. 

II  At  the  Moment  of  Death:  The  manifestations  and  ap- 
paritions of  the  dying;  doubles;  phenomena  of  occultisn)i^ 

III  After  Death:  The  manifestations  and  apparitions  of 
the  dead;  the  soul  after  death. 

The  second  and  third  parts  are  already  completed,  as  well 
as  this,  and  will  be  published  consecutively. 

The  sole  aim  of  this  work,  the  sole  ambition  of  the  author, 
is  that  the  whole  may  bring,  so  far  as  is  possible,  in  the 
present  state  of  positive  science,  the  satisfaction  longed  for 
in  so  many  legitimate  aspirations  toward  the  understanding 
of  the  truth. 

This  first  volume  of  a  very  complex  work  proves  the  exist- 
ence of  the  human  soul  independently  of  the  bodily  organism. 
In  this,  it  seems  to  me,  we  have  acquired  a  fact  of  the  very 
highest  importance  for  the  whole  doctrine  of  philosophy. 


RETURN     CIRCULATION  DEPARTMENT 
T0^^>     202  Main  Library 


LOAN  PERIOD  1 
HOME  USE 

2 

3    ■■;• 

4 

5 

6 

ALL  BOOKS  MAY  BE  RECALLED  AFTER  7  DAYS 

Renewals  and  Recharges  may  be  made  4  days  prior  to  the  due  date. 

Books  may  be  Renewed  by  calling     642-3405. 


DUE  AS  STAMPED  BELOW 

AUTO.  DISC. 

OCT  2  3  1986 

APR  i  2^  1998: 

APR  2  2  2001 

FORM  NO.  DD6, 


UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA,  BERKELEY 
BERKELEY,  CA  94720 


®s 


Berkt 


/ 


/ 


Berkeley 


Gf/lffWL 


I-IBRHHY 


UWJI^SqrY  OF  CALIFORNIA  UBRARY
