A Voyage to Terra Australis, Vol. I (Matthew Flinders, 1814)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1814 first edition (https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.24939). Flinders' circumnavigation of Australia in HMS Investigator (1801–03) — the voyage that named Australia.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

V O YA G E 

TO\ 

TERRA AUSTRALIS: 

I • 

undertaIcen for the purpose of completing the discovery of that 

VAST COUNTRY, 

AND PROSECUTED IN THE YEARS 

1801 , 1802 , AND 1803 , V 

IN 

HIS MAJESTY’S SHIP THE INVESTIGATOR, 

AND SUBSEQUENTLY IN'tHE ARMED VESSEL PORPOISE AND 

CUMBERLAND SCHOONER. 

WITH AN ACCOUNT OF THB 

SHIPWRECK OF THE PORPOISE, 

• .• 

ARRIVAL OF THE CUMBERLAND AT MAURITIUS, AND IMPRISONMENT OF THE 
COMMANDER DURING SIX YEARS AND A HALF IN THAT ISLAND. 


BY MATTHEW FLINDERS, 


COMMANDER OF THE INVESITGATOR. 

9 

- -s. 


IN TWO VOLUMES, WITH AN ATLAS. 

VOL. I. 

LOND^^: 

PRINTED BY W.'XlTLMER AND CO. CLEVELAND- ROW, 

AND PUBLISHED^ BY G. AND W. NICOL, BOOKSELLERS TO HIS MAJESTY, 

PALL-MALL. 


1814 . 




TO 


THE RIGHT HON. GEORGE ji>HN, EARL SPENCER, 
THE RIGHT HON. JOHN, EARL OF ST. VINCENT, 

THE RIGHT HON. CHARLES PHILIP YORKE, 

AND THE 

RIGHT HON. ROBERT SAUNDERS, VISCOUNT MELVILLE, 

WHO, AS 

FIRST LORDS COMMISSIONERS OF THE ADMIRALTY, 

SUCCESSIVELY HONOURED THE INVESTIGATOR’S VOYAGE 

with their patronage, 

THIS ACCOUNT, OF IT IS RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED, 

BY 

THEIR yLORDSHIPS 

MOST OBLIGED, AND 
MOST OBEDIENT HUMBLE SERVANT, 

MATTHEW FLINDERS. 

London, May 20, 181^. 

♦A 


VOL. I. 






P R E FAG>®i: 




HThe publication in 1814 of a voyage commeno^ln 1861, of 
which all essential parts were concliided| wid^ tlo^ ytaurs, 
requires some explanation. Shipwreck and a long imprisaonuint 
prevented my arrival in England until the latter end ofjt^io; 
much had then been done to forward the accouir|, and ^e tdiarts 
in particular were nearly prepSared for the engraver ; but It'WkS de- 
sirable that the , astronomical observadqns, upon which so much 
depended, should undergo a re-calculation, and the lunar ^stances 
ha A the advantage of -l^ing compared with the observations made 
^the same time'at Greenwich; and in July 1811, the necessary 
authority was obtained from the Board of Longitude. A consider- 
able delay hence arose, and it was prolonged by the Greenwich 
observations beiig found to diiier so much from the calculated 
places of the sui and moon, given in the Nautical Almanacks of 
1801, a and 3, ss to make considerable alterations in the longitudes 
of places settlec .during the voyage ; and a reconstruction of all 
^htsicharts becoiiing thence indispensable to accuracy, I wished also 
to employ in itconjpctions of another kind, which before had been 
ad^ted only b some particular instances. 

<A va^iet5^o^obs^ Nations with the compass had shown t|ie mag- 
netic needle tf i^ififer from itself sometimes as much as six, aE^even 
s^Cn degree!, in or fery near the same place, and the d’^rences 
appeared to Ip subject to regular laws ; but it was so extraordinary 



tv 


PREFACE. 

in the ptrosent advanced state of navigation, tha,t ^they j^ould not 
have be^ before discover^pd and a mode of preventingj/or correct- 
dKih ajfoertained, that my deductions, and almost the facts were 
diknisted ; and in the first construction of the charts I had feared 
to deviate much from the* usual ^practice. Application ^was now 
made to the Admiralty for experiments to be tried with the compass 
on board different ships ; and the results in five cases bCing con- 
formable to one of the three laws before deduced, which alone was 
susceptible of proof in England, the whole were adopted without 
reserve, and the variations and bearings taken throughput the voy- 
age underwent a systematic correction. From these causes the 
reconstruction of the charts could not be commenced before 1813, 
which, when the extent of them is considered, will explain why the 
publication did not take place sooner; but it is hoped that the 
advantage in point of accuracy will amply compensate the delay. 

Besides correcting the lunar distances and the variations and 
bearings, there are some other particulars, both in the account ofVhe 
voyage and in the Atlas, where the practice of former navigators has 
not been strictly followed. Latitudes, longitudes, and bearings, so 
important to the seaman and wninteresting to ths general reader, 
have hitherto been interwoven in the text ; they are here commonly 
separated from it, by which the one will be enabled to find them 
more readily, and the other perceive at a glanc| what may be 
passed. I heard it declared that a man who pul^ished a quarto 
Volume without an index ought to be set in the pillory, and b^ing^ 
unwilling to incur the full rigour of this sent^ce, V runnip^ title 
has been affixed to all the pages; on one side is»expr^ed the coun- 
try or coast, and on the opposite the partiaij^r piry where 
ship '^s^ at anchor or which is the immediate subjeqj ^^amination ; 
this, it is, hoped, will answer the main purpose of aifa^c>% with- 
out sweliyig the volumes. Longitude is one of the npgt essential. 



V 


PREFACE. 

but at the same time least certain d^ta in hydrography ; t]|e man of 
science therefore requires something mpre |than the gen4‘al resist * 
of observations before giving his unqualified assent to th^r accuracy, 
and the progress of kno^yledge has of late been such, that a com- 
mander no^\ wishes to know the fbundation upon which he is to 
rest his confidence and the safety of his ship ; to comply with this 
laudable de«re, the particular results of the observations by which 
the most important points on each coast are fixed in longitude, as 
also the means used to obtain them, are given at the end of the 
volume wherein that coast is described, as being there of most easy 
reference. 

The deviations in the Atlas from former practice, or rather the 
additional marks used, are intended to make the charts contain as 
full a journal of the voyage as can be conveyed in this form ; a 
chart is the seaman’s great, and often sole guide, and if the infor- 
.matiop in it can be rendered more complete without introducing 
confusion, the advantage will be admitted by those who are not 
oppo'sers of all improvement. In closely following a track laid 
down upon a chart, seamen often run at night, unsuspicious of 
danger if none be marked; but some parts of that track were 
run in the night also, and there may consequently be rocks or 
shoals, as near even as half a mile, which might prove fatal to them ; 
it therefore seems proper that night tracks should be distinguished 
from those of the day, and they are so in this Atlas, I believe, for 
the first time, A distinction is made between tfie situations at noon 
where the latitude vv^^s observed, and those in which n6ne could be 
'obtajned^; and the positions fixed in longitude by the time keepers 
rare also marked in jbe track, as are the few points where a latitude 
was obtained irom the moon. 

It has ^fte^red to ifte, that to show the direction and strength of 
the winds, with the kind of weather we had when running al^ng 



VI 


PREFACE. 


these cotasts, vrould be an useful addition to the charte; not only as 
it wouM enable those jwho may navigate by them amne to form ^a 
judgmen^ of what is to be expected at the same season, but also that 
it may be seen how far circumstances prevented several parts of 
the coast being laid do\^n so correctly as others, l^is has heen 
done by single arrows, wherever they could be marked without 
confusion ; they are more or less feathered, proportionate to the 
strength of wind intended to be expressed, and the arrows them- 
selves give the direction. Under each is a short or abridged word, 
denoting the weather ; when this weather prevailed in a more than 
usual degree a line is drawn under the word, and when in an ex- 
cessive degree there are two lines. Single arrows being thus 
appropriated to the winds, the tides and currents are shown by 
double arrows, between which is usually marked the rate per hour. 

On the land, the shading of the hills gives a general idea of their 
elevation, and it has been assisted by saying how far particulax hills 
and capes are visible from a ship’s deck^n fine weather; thh; will 
be useful to a seaman on first making the land^ be a better critfcrion 
to judge of its height, and those hills not so marked may be more 
nearly estimated by comparison. Behind different parts of the 
coast is given a short description of their appearance, which it is 
conceived will be gratifying to scientific, and useful to professional 
men. The capes and hills whose positions are fixed by cross 
bearings taken on shore or from well ascertained .points in the track, 
as also the stations whence bearings were observed with a theodolite, 
have distinguishing marks ; which, with all^others not before in 
common use, are explained on the General Chart, Plate. I.. . 

To have laid down no more than the lands <^id dangers seen h: 
t^e Investigator and other vessels under my command, woul^ have 
left several open spaces, and obliged the sedman to have recourse 
to ^ther charts where the difference of positions* might have 



PREFACE. 


▼n 


perplexed; tlie discoveries and examinations of former navigators 
which come within the sphere of each<she^t, are therefore incoipo^ 
rated with, or added to mine, but so marked as to be distinctly 
known. In making the combination, alterations in their longitudes 
weft’e frequently necessary to agreement ; and that they might be 
made with every regard to accuracy, the charts of the former 
discoveries were compared with the astronomical observations, 
narratives, or manuscript journals, when such could be had, and the 
alterations introduced where there seemed to be the best authority. 
This has been done with the charts of the east coast of New South 
, Wales, published by Mr. Dalrymple from the manuscripts, as it 
should appear, of captain Cook ; and since it may be thought pre- 
sumptuous in me to have made alterations in any work of so great 
a master, this case is selected for a more particular explanation. 

Time keepers were in their infancy in 1768, when captain Cook 

sailed upon his first voyage, and he was not then furnished with 

^ • 

them ; hrs longitude was therefore regulated only by occasional 
observations of lunar distances and some few of Jupiter's satellites, 
which even in the present improved state of instruments and tables, 
require to be connected by time keepers before satisfactory conclu- 
sions can be drawn. Errors of gp'eater or less magnitude were 
thence unavoidable ; at Cape Gloucester, where I quitted the East 
Coast, my longitude was ao^' greater than captain Cook's chart,— at 
Cape York where the survey was again resumed, it was 585-'; and 
to incorporate the intermediate parts, it was necessary not only to 
carry his scale of longitude ao^-' more west, but also to reduce the 
extent bf 'the coast. The chart was compared with the narrative 
and chart in HawKesworth, and the log book of the Endeavour 
with them all ; when it was found that reductions might be made 
in various places upon one or more of the above authorities, for 
differences between them tvere frequent and sometimes comlderable. 



vni 


PREFACE. 


and in one instance alone a reduction of ist' in the chart was obtained. 
It is said in Hawkesworth (III, soa), “ As soon as we got within 
side the reef (through Providential Channel) we anchored in 
nineteen fathom;’* and afterwards (p. S04), that* the channel 
** bore E. N, E. distant ten or twelve miles.” In the ^first chart 
the distance is 14|- miles, and nearly the same in that which accom- 
panies the narrative; but in the log book it is said to be miles only, 
which corresponds with having anchored as soon as they got within 
the reef, and has been adopted. In some cases it was not erfsy to 
make a choice between these different authorities ; but I have com- 
monly followed the narrative and log book when they were found 
to specify with precision, and they generally produced such 
corrections to the chart as brought the longitudes of places nearer 
to my positions. Captain Cook's track in Plates XI. XII. and XIIL 
is laid down afresh from the log book ; and many soundings, with 
some other useful particulars not to be found in the original c^art, 
are introduced, for the benefit of any navigator who m&y follow 
the same route. 

The reconstruction of the charts in the Atlas was done upon 
various scales, but that no error might escape unseen, the least was 
of len inches to a degree of longitude ; they were then reduced 
by Mr. Thomas Arrowsmith to four inches, this being thought 
sufficiently large for a general sailing scale ; and each reduced 
sheet was scrupulously compared by me with the original before 
it went into the engravers h^nds, and the proof impressions ^ith 
the drawing until no errors were found. To those who may read 
this voyage with a view to geographical information, a frequent 
reference to the Atlas is earnestly recommended ; for many par-^ 
ticulars are there marked which it would have bee.n tedious to 
describe, and should any thing appear obscure in the narrative the 
charts will- generally afford an elucidation. 



PREFACE. 


ix 


From the general tenour of the explanations here given, it will 
perhaps be inferred that the perfectiorf of the Atlas has been the 
principal object of concern ; in fact, having no pretension to author- 
ship, the writing of the'narrative, though, by much the most trouble- 
softie part of my labour, was not that upon which any hope of 
reputatiorf was founded ; a polished style was therefore not attempted, 
but some pains have been taken to render it clearly intelligible. 
The first quire of my manuscript was submitted to the Judgment 
of a few literary friends, and I hope to have profited by the cor- 
rections they had the kindness to make ; but finding these to bear 
more upon redundancies than inaccuracy of expression, I determined 
to confide in the indulgence of the public, endeavour to improve 
as the work advanced, and give my friends no further trouble. 
Matter, rather than manner, was the object of my anxiety ; and if 
the reader shall be satisfied with the selection and arrangement, 
and "not think the information destitute of such interest as might 
be expected from, the subject, the utmost of my hopes will be 
accomplished. 


N. B. Throughout this narrative the variation has been allowed upon 
the bearings y and also in the direction of winds, tides, &c.; the w'hole 
are therefore to be considered with reference to the true poles of the 
earth, unless it be otherwise particularly expressed ; and perhaps in 
some few cases of tl?e ship's head when variations are taken, where 

m 

the expVession by compass, or magnetic, may have been omitted. 


VOL. I. 


B 




TABLE OF CONTENTS 


IN THE FIRST VOLUME. 
INTRODUCTION. 


PRIOR DISCOVERIES IN TERRA AUSTRALIS. 

SECTION I. 

NORTH COAST. 

2VeIiiuinary Remarks : Discoveries of the Duyfhen ; of Torres; Carstens; Pool; Pieterscn; 
Tasman; and of three Dutcki vessels. Of Cook ; M^Cluer; Bligh ; Edwards; Bli^h 
and Portlock ; and Bainpton and Alt. Conclusive Remarks. Page vii to xlviii 


SECTION U. 


WKSTERN COASTS. 

Preliminary Ohservaiions. Discoveric*s of Hartog : Edel : of the ship Leeuwin : the 
Vianen : of Pelsert : Tasman: Dampier : Vlaming: Dumpier. Conclusive Remarks. 

xhx to Ixvii 


SECTION III, 


SOUTH COAST. 

IWscovery of Nuyts. Examination of V’^ancouvci , of D’Entrecasteaux. Conclusive 
Remarks. - - Ixviii to Ixxiv 

SECTION IV. 


BAST COAST, WITH VAN HlKMlfiN’s LAND 

PART I. 

• 

Preliminary Observations, ^discoveries of Tasman ; of Cook ; Marion ; and Fumeaux- 
Observations of Cook ; IJligh ; and Cox. Discovery of D’Entrecasteaux. Hayes. 

^ Ixxv to xciv 

PART II. 

PrelimiiAry Informatioh. Boat expeditions of Bass and Flinders. Clarke. &hoi;^land* 
Discoveries of Bass to the ^uthward of Port Jackson ; of Flinders ; and of Flinders 
«nd Bass. Examinations to the northward by Flinders. Conclusive Remarks. 

xcv to cciv 



CpNTENTS OF VOLUME I. 


BOOK 1. 

TRANSACTIONS FROM TBB BBOINNINO OF THE VOTAGB TO THE DEPARTCRE 

FROM PORT JACKSON. 

CHAPTER I. 

• 0 

Appointment to the Investigator. Outfit of the ship. Instruments, books, and Charts 
supplied, with articles for presents and barter. Liiberal conduct of the Hpn. East-India 
Company. Passage round to Spithead. The Roar sand. Instructions for the execution 
of the voyage. French passport, and orders in consequence. Officers and company of 
the Investigator, and men of science who embarked. Account of the time keepers. 

Page 1 to 16 

CHAPTER II. 

Departure from Spithead. Variation of the compass. The Dezertas. Arrival at Madeira. 
Remarks on Funchal. Political state of the island. Latitude and longitude. Departure 
from Madeira. The island St. Antonio. Foul winds ; and remarks on them. The ship 
leaky. Search made fcM* Isle Sable. Trinidad. Saxemberg sought for. Variation of the 
compass. State of the ship’s company, on arriving at the Cape of Good Hope. Refit- 
ment at Simon’s Bay. Observatory set up. The astronomer quits the expedition. 
Rates of the time keepers. Some remarks on Simon’s Bay. - 17 to 43 

CHAPTER III. 

Departure from False Bay. Remarks on the passage to Terra Australis. Gravity of oea 
water tried. Cape Leeuwin, and the coast from thence to King George’s Sound. Arri- 
val in the Sound. Examination of the harbours. Excursion inland. Country, soil, and 
productions. Native inhabitants : Language and anatomical measurement. Astrono- 
mical and nautical observations. - - 44 to 7^ 

CHAPTER IV. 

Departure from King George’s Sound. Coast from thence to the Archipelago of the 
Recherche. Discovery of Lucky Bay and Thistle’s Cove. The surrounding country, and 
islands of the Archipelago. Astronomical and nautical observations. Goose-Island 
Bay. A salt lake. Nautical observations. Coast from the Archipelago to the end of 
Nuyts* Land. Arrival in a bay of the unknown coast. Remarks on the preceding 

examination ^ 73 to 103 

CHAPTER V. 

Fowler’s Bay. Departure from thence. Arrival at the Isles of St. Francis. Correspondencp 
between the winds and the marine barometer. Examination of the other parts of Nuyts’ 
Archipelago, and of the main coast. The Isles of St. Peter. Return to St. Francis. 
General remarks on Nuyts’ Archipelago. Identification of the islands in the Dutch 
chart. 104 to 119 



CONTENTS OF VOLUME I. 


CHAPTER VI. 

Prosecution of the discovery of the unknown coast. Anxious Bay. Anchorage at 
Waldegrave's and at Flinders* Islands. The Investigator*s Group. Coffin's Bay. 
Whidbey's Islesi. Differences in the magnetic needle. Cape Wiles. Anchorage at 
Thistle's Tsljmd. Thorny Passage. Fatal acciderft. Anchorage in Memory Cove. 
Cape Catastrophe, and the surrounding country. Anchorage in Port Lincoln, and 
refitment of the ship. Remarks on the country and inhabitants. Astronomical and 
nautical observations. • • Page 120 to 151 

CHAPTER VII. 

Departure from Port Lincoln. Sir Joseph Banks’ Group. Examination of the coast, 
northward. The ship found to be in a gulph. Anchorage near the head of the gulph. 
Boat expedition. Excursion to Mount Brown. Nautical observations. Departure from 
the head, and examination of the east side of the gulph. Exteivsive shoal. Point Pearce. 
Hardwicke Bay. Verification of the time keepers. General remarks on the gulph. 
Cape Spencer and the Altln'ipe Isles. New land discovered: Anchorage there. General 
remarks on Kanguroo Island. Nautical observations. - 152 to 173 

CHAPTER VIII. 

Departure from Kanguroo Island. Examination of the main coast, from Cape Spencer 
eastward. The Investigator’s Strait. A new gulph discovered. Anchorage at, and 
lamination of the heacL Remarks on the surrounding land. Return down the gulph. 
Troubridge Shoal. Yorke’s Peninsula. Return to Kanguroo Island. Boat expedition 
to Pelican Lagoon. Astronomical observations. Kanguroo Island quitted. Back-stairs 
Passage. Tlic coast from Cape Jervis, eastward. Meeting, and communication with 
Le G4ographe. Remarks upon the French discoveries on the South Coast. 174 to 193. 

CHAFFER IX. 

Examination of the coast resumed. Encounter Bay. The capes Bernouilli and Jaffii. 
Baudin's Rocks. Differences in the bearings on tacking. Cape Buffon, the eastern 
limit of the French discovery. The capes Northumberland and Bridgewater of captain 
Grant. Danger from a south-west gale. King’s Island, in Bass’ Strait : Anchorage 
there. Some account of ^hc island. Nautical observations. New Year’s Isles. Cape 
Otway, and the north-west entrance to Bass’ Strait. Anchorage in, and examination 
of Port Pliillip. The country and inhabitants. Nautical observations. 194 to 220. 

CHAPTER X. 

Departure from Port Phillip. Cape Schanck. Wilson’s Promontory, and its isles. Kent’s 
Groups, and Furneaux’s Isles. Hills behind the Long Beach. Arrival Poit jack- 
son. Health of the ship’s company. Refitment and sup]fly of the ship. Price of 



CONTENTS OF VOLUME I. 


provisions. Volunteers entered. Arrangement for the succeeding part of the voyage. 

^ French ships* \Astronomical and nautical observations. Page 22 1 to 239 

CHAPTER XL 

Of the winds and currents on the south coast of Terra Australis, and in Bass* Strait. 
Uusual progress of the gales. Proper seasons for sailing eastward, and for going 
westward: best places of shelter in either case, with some instruc^tions for* the 
Strait. - - - . - - 240 to 251 

APPENDIX. 

Account of the observations by which the Longitudes of places on the north coist of 
Terra Australis have been settled. 255 to 269 


IN THE SECOND VOLUME. 

BOOK II. 

TRANSACTIONS DURING THE CIRCUMNAVIGATION OF TERRA AUSTRALIS, FROM THE 
TIME OF LEAVING PORT JACKSON TO THE RETURN TO THAT PORT. , 

CHAPTER I. 

Departure fnini Port Jackson, with the Lady Nelson. Examiijation of various parts of 
the East Coast, from thence to Sandy Cape. Break- sea Spit. Anchorage in Hervey’s 
Bay, where the Lady Nelson joins after a separation. Some account of the inhabi- 
tants. Variations of the compass. Run to Bustard Bay. Port Curtis discovered, and 
examined. Some account of the surrounding country. Arrival in Keppel Bay, and 
exntiiiration of its branches, one of which leads into Port Curtis. Some account of 
the natives, and of the country round Keppel Bay. Astronomical and nautical 
observations. - - - - - 1 to 32 

CHAPTER II. 

The Keppel Isles, and coast to Cape Manifold. A new port discovered and examined. 
Harvey’s Isles. A new passage into Shoal-water Bay. View from MouUt Westall. 

' A boat lost. The upper parts of Shoal- water Bay examined. Some account of the^ 
country and inhabitants. General remarks on the bay. Astronomical and hautlcal 
, observations. - - - - - 33 to 52 

. V CHAinBRIII. 

Departure from Shoal-water Bay, and anchorage in (Thirsty Sound. Magnetical obser- 



CONTENTS OF VOLUME II. 


vations. Boat excursion to the nearest Northumberland Islands. Remarks on 
Sound. Observations at West Hill, Broad Sound. Anchorage near Upper Blead. 
Expedition to the head of Broad Sound : another round Long Island. Remarks on 
Broad Sound, and the surrounding country. Advantages for a colony. Astronomical 
observations, aitd remarks on the high -tides. - * Pftge 5«Sto 7^ 

CHAPTER IV. 

The Percy Isles : anchorage at No. 2. Boat excursions. Remarks on the Percy Isles ; 
with nautical observations. Coral reefs: courses amongst them during eleven days 
search for a passage through, to sea. Description of a reef. Anchorage at an eastern 
Cumberland Isle. The Lady Nelson sent hack to Port Jackson. Continuation of 
coral reefs; and courses amongst them during three other days. Cape Gloucester. An 
opening discovered, and the reefs quitted. General remarks on the Great Barrier; 
with some instruction relative to the opening. - 77 to 104 

CHAPTER V. 

Passage from the Barrier Reefs to Torres* Strait. Reefs named Eastern Fields. Pan- 
dora’s Entrance to the Strait. Anchorage at Murray's Islands. Communication with 
the inhabitants. Half-way Island. Notions on the formation of coral islands in general. 
Prince of Wales’s Islands, with remarks on them. Wallis’ Isles. Entrance into the 

Gulph of Carpentaria. Review of the passage through Torres’ Strait, 105 to 123 

• 

. CHAPTER VI. 

Examination of the coast on the cast side of the Gulph of Carpentaria. Landing at 
Coen River. Head of the Gulph. Anchorage at Svreers’ Island. Interview with 
Indians at Horse-shoe Island. Investigator’s Road. The ship found to be in a state 
of decay. General remarks on the islands at the Head of the Gulph, and their inhabi- 
tants. Astronomical and nautical observations. - - - 124 to 150 

CIIAFFER VII. 

Departure from Sweers’ Island. South side of C. Van Diemen examined. Anchorage 
at Bountiful Island : turtle and sharks there. Land of C. Van Diemen proved to be 
an itdand. Examination of the main coast to Gape Vanderlin. That cape found to be 
one of a group of islands. Examination of the islands ; their soil, &c. Monument 
of the natives. Traces of former visitors to these parts. Astronomical and nautical 
observations. - • - - - 152 to 176 

CHAPTER VIII. 

Departure from Sir Edwaid Pellew’s Group. Coast from thence westward. Cape 
Maria found to be an island. Limmen’s Bight. Coast northward to Cape Barrow: 



CONTENTS OF VOLUME IL 


laoding on it. Circumnavigation of Groote Eylandt. Specimens of native art at 
Chasm Islandf Anchorage in Nofth--west Bay, Groote Eylandt ; with remarks and 
nautical observations. Blue^mud Bay. Skirmish with the natives. Cape Shield. 
Mount Grindall. Coast to Caledon Bay. Occurrences in that bay, with remarks on 
the country and inhabitants. Astronomical and nautical observations. 177 to 21B 

CHAPTER IX. 

Departure from Caledon Bay. Cape Arnhem. Melville Bay. Cape Wilberforce, and 
Bromby’s Isles. The English Company’s Islands : meeting there wfth vessels from 
Macassar. Arnhem Bay. The Wessel’s Islands. Further examination of the North 
Coast postponed. Arrival at Coepang Bay, in Timor. Remarks and astronomical 
observations. - • - - - • 219 to 259 


CHAPTER X. 

Departure from Timor. Search made for the Trial Rocks. Anchorage in Goose-Island 
Bay. Interment of the boatswain, and sickly state of the ship’s company. Escape 
from the bay, and passage through Bass’ Strait. Arrival at Port Jackson. Losses in 
men. Survey and condemnation of the ship. Plans for continuing the survey; but 
preparation finally made for returning to England. State of the colony at Port Jackson. 

260 to 281 


CHAPTER XL 


Of the winds, currents, and navigation along the east coast of I’erra Australis, both 
without and within the tropic ; also on the north coast. Directions for sailing fiom 
Port Jackson, through Torres’ Strait, towards India or the Cape of Good Hope. Ad- 
vantages of this passage over that round New Guinea. - - 282 to 294 


BOOK III. 

OCCURRENCES FROM THE TIME OF QUITTING PORT JACKSON IN 180S, TO ARRIVING IN 

ENGLAND IN 1810. 


CHAPTER I. 

Depaiture from Port Jackson in the Porpoise, accompanied by the Bridgewater and Catu. 
The Cato’s Bank. Shipwreck of the Porpoise and Cato in the night. The crews get 
on a sand bank; where they are left by the Bridgewater. Provisions saved. Regulations 
on the bank. Measures adopted for getting back to Bort Jackson. Description of 
Wreck-Reef Bank. Remarks on the loss of M. de laP^rouse. - 295 to 314 



CONTENTS OF VOLUME II. 


CHAPTER 11. 

Departure from Wreck-Reef Bank In a boat. Boisterous weather. The Coast of New 
South Wales reached, and followed. Natives at Point Look-out. Landing near 
Smoky Cape ; and again near Port Hunter. . Arrival at Port Jackson on the thirteenth 
day. Return to Wreck Reef with a ship and two schooners. Arrangements at the 
Bank. Account of the reef, with nautical* and other remarks. - Page 315 to 335 


CHAPTER III. 

Passage in the Cumberland to Torres* Strait. Eastern Fields and Pandora’s Entrance. 
New channels amongst the reefs. Anchorage at Half-way Island, and under the York 
Isles. Prince of Wales’s Islands further examined. Booby Isle. Passage across the 
Gulph of Carpentaria. Anchorage at Wessel’^s Islands. Passage to Coepang Bay, in 
Timor; and to Mauritius, where the leakiness of the Cumberland makes it necessary 
to stop. Anchorage at the Baye du Cap, and departure for Port Louis. 334 to 353 

CHAPTER IV. 


Arrival at Port Louis (or North-West) in Mauritius. Interview with the French governor. 
Seizure of the Cumberland, with the charts and journals of the Investigator’s voyage ; 
and imprisonment of the commander and people. Letters to the governor, with his 
answer. Restitution of some books and charts. Friendly act of the English interpreter. 
Propositions made to the governor. Humane conduct of captain Biergeret. Reflec- 
Jtions on a Voyage of discovery. Removal to the Maison Despeaux or Garden Prison. 

• 359 to 389 


CHAPTER V. 


Prisoners in the Maison Despeaux or Garden Prison. Application to admiral Linois. 
Spy-glasses and swords taken. Son^e jiapers resturecl. Opinions upop the detention of 
the Cumberland. Letter of captain Baudin. An English squadron arrives off Mau- 
ritius : its consequences. Arrival cf a French officer with despatches, and observations 
thereon. Passages in the Monitcur, with remarks. Mr. Akcn liberated. Arrival of 
cartels from India. Application made by the marquis Wellesley. Diffeient treatment 
of English and French prisoners. Prizes brought to Mauritius in sixteen months. 
De|||||fture of all prisoners of war. Permission .to quit the Garden Prison. Astrono- 
miem observations. / • - - - - 390 to 41/ 

. CHAPTER VI. 

Parole given. Journey into the interior of Mauritius. The governor’s country seat. 
Residence at the Refuge, in that Part of Wilhems Plains called Vacouasjt Its situa- 
tion and climate, with the mountains, rivers, cascades, and views near it. The Mare 
atix Vacouas and Grand HBassin. State of cultivation and produce of Vacouas ; its 
black ebony, ^ame, and wild fruits ; and freedom from noxious insects. 418 to 438 
VOL. II. * C 



CONTENTS OF VOLUME II. 


CHAPTER VII. 

Occupations at Vacouas. Hospitality, of the inhabitants. Letters from England. Re« 
fusal^to be sent to France repeated* Account of two hurricanes, of a subterraneous 
stream "and circular pit. Habitation of La P^rouse. Letters to the French marine 
minister, National Institute, &c. Letters from Sir Edward Pellew. Caverns in the 
Plains of St. Pierre. Visit to Port Louis* Narrati\re transmitted to England. Letter 
to captain Bergeret on his departure for France. - - Pa^e 4S9 to 45S 

CHAPTER VIII 

Effects of repeated disappointment on the mind. Arrival of a cartel, and of letters from 
India. Letter of the French marine minister. Restitution of papers. Applications for 
liberty evasively answered. Attempted seizure of private letters. Memorial to the 
marine minister. Encroachments made at Paris on the Investigator’s discoveries. 
Expected attack on Mauritius produces an abridgment of Liberty. Strict blockade. 
Arrival of anotlier cartel from India. State of the public finances in Mauritius. 
French cartel sails for the Cape of Good Hope. - . 456 to 477 

CHAPTER IX. 

A prospect of liberty, which is officially confirmed. Occurrences during eleven weeks 
residence in the town of Port Louis anl on board the Harriet cartel. Parole and cer- 
tificates. Departure from Port Louis, and embarkation in the Otter, Eulogium on 
the inhabitants of Mauritius. Review of the conduct of general De Caen. Passage 
to the Cape of Good Hope, and after seven weeks stay, from thence to England. 
Conclusion. 473 jq 49^ 


APPENDIX. 

No. I. 

Account of the observations by which the Ltongitudes of places on the east and nortl/ 
coasts of Terra Australis have been settled. - ... 493 to 51 1 

No. II. 

On the errors of the compass arising from attractions within\the ship, and others from 
the magnetism of land ; with precautions for obviating ^heh effects in marine sur- 
veying. - - - ‘ - 512 to 532 

No. III. 

General Remarks, geographical and systematical, on the Botany of Terra Australis. By 
Rcxbart Hrcavn, F. R.S. Acad. Reg. Scient. JBeroKn^ Corresp. Naturai-ist to 

THE VOYAGE. ^ ^ 533 



A LIST OF THE PLATES, 

WITH DIRECTIONS TO THE BINDER. 


IN VOLUME I. 

View from the South side of King George’s Sound. 

Entrance of Port Lincoln^ taken from behind Memory Cove. 
View on the north side of Kangaroo Island. 

View of Port Jackson^ taken from the South Head* 


to face p. GO 
138 
184 
- 227 


IN VOLUME II. 

View of Port Bowen, from behind the Watering Gully. • - . 

View of Murray’s Islands^ with the natives offering to barter. - - - 1 10 

.View in Sir Edward Pellew’s Group — Gulpli of Carpentaria. - 172 

View of Malay Road, from Pobassoo’s Island. - - . . 233 

View of Wreck- Reef Bank, taken at low water. - - - 312 


IN THE ATLAS. 


Plate. 

I. General Chart of Tkrra Australis and the neighbouring lands, from latitude 7* 
to 441** south, and longitude 102® to if>0‘ cast. 

II. Particular chart of the South Coast, from Cape Leeuwin to the Archipelago of the 
* Recherche. 

III. Ditto from the Archipelago of the Recherche to past the head of the great Aus- 

tralian Bight. 

IV. Ditto from the head of the great Australian Bight to past Encounter Bay. 

V. Hito from near Encounter Bay to Cape Otw.y at the west entrance of Bass* Strait. 

VI. Ditto from Cape Otway, past Cape Howe, to Barmouth Creek. 

VII. Part^ular chart of Vcfti Diemen’s Land. 

VIIL Particular chart of the East Coast, from Barmouth Creek to past Cape Hawke. 

• IX. J^itto from near Cape Hawke to past Glass-house Bay. 

X. Ditto from Glass-house Bay to Broad Sound. 

XI. Ditto from Broad Soudd to Cape Grafton. 

XIL Ditto fron\ Cape Grafton to t^e Isle of Direction. 



LIST OF PLATFS IN THE ATLAS. 


XHI. Particular chart of the East Coast from the 1. of Direction to Cape York^ and of 
' the North Coast from thence to Pera Head ; including Torres’ Strait and parts of 

New Guinea. 

XIV. A particular chart of the North Coast, from Torres’ Strait to Point Dale and the 

Wessel’s Islands, including the whole of the Gtilph of Carpentaria. 

XV. The north»west side of the Gulph df Carpentaria, on a large scale.* , . 

XVI. Particular chart of Timor and some neighbouring islands. 

XVII. Fourteen views of headlands, &c. on the south coast of Terra Aystralis. 

XVIII. Thirteen views on the east and north coasts, and one of Samow Strait. 

And 

Ten plates of selected plants from different parts of Terra Australis. 


THE READER IS REQUESTED TO CORRECT THE FOLLOWING 

ERRATA. 


Vol. 1. Page xcVf xcvi, various places, /or Philip, read Phillip. 

cix, margin, /or PL Vll, read PL VI. 
cxxi, line 26, insert in the margip (Atl. PL VI.) 

cl^lpciii, 24, insert in the margin (Atl. Pi. VII.) 

13,— 13, for ttirrc, read suivre, « 

123,— title, for From Muyts' Archipelago^ read InvcHtigatorU Group, 
r48, 18, for heat, read head^ 

163, 3 1,/or Point Donington, read Cape Donington. 

200, 8, /or 7® 5|®, read respectively 6^, 6* 64'. 

12, /or 5” 36' reod6® 33'. 

266,— diminished, rood corrected. 

VoL II. 73, second, read first. 

160, 3, 4, for three hours and a quarter before the moon came to, read 

nine hours and three quarters after the moon passed. 

227, title, for Gulph of Carpentaria^ read Melville Bay, 

471, SO, /or Coraline, read Caroline. 



INTRODUCTION. 


The Voyages which had been made, during the seventeenth and 
eighteenth centuries, by Dutch and by English navigators, had 
successively brought to light various extensive coasts in the southern 
hemisphere, which were thought to be united; and to comprise a 
land, which must be nearly equal in magnitude to the whole of 
Europe. To this land, though known to be separated from all 
other grfeat portions of the globe, geographers were disposed to 
give the appellation of Continent ; but doubts still existed, of the 
continuity of its widely extended shores ; and it was urged, that, as 
our knowledge of some parts was not founded upon well authenti- 
cated information, and we were in total ignorance of some others, 
these coasts might, instead of forming one great land, be no other 
than parts of different large islands. 

The establishment, in 1788, of a British colony on the easternmost, 
and last discovered, of these new regions, had added that degr^ of 
interest to the question of their continuity, which a mother country 
takes in Savour, even, of her outcast children, to know the form, 
extent, and general nature of the land, where they may be placed. 
The questioA had, therefore, ceased to be one in which geography 
was alcxie concerned : it claimed the paternal consideration of the 
father of all his people, and the interests of the national commerce 
seconded the call for investigation. 

VOL. I. B 



INTRODUCTION. 


Accordingly, the following voyage was undertaken by command 
of His Majesty, in the year 1801 ; in a ship of 334, tons, which 
received the appropriate name of the Investigator ; and, besides the 
great objects of clearing up t^e doubt respecting the unity of these 
southern regions, and of opening therein fresh sources to commerce, 
and new ports to seamen, it was intended, that the Voyage should 
contribute to the advancement of natural knowledge in various 
branches ; and that some parts of the neighbouring seas should be 
visited, wherein geography and navigation had still much to desire. 

The vast regions to which this voyage was principally directed, 
comprehend, in the western part, the early discoveries of the Dutch, 
under the name of New Holland ; and in the east, the coasts 
explored by British navigators, and named New South Wales, ft 
has not, however, been unusual to apply the first appellation to both 
regions; but to continue this, would be almost as great an injustice 
to the British nation, whose seamen have had so large a share in the 
discovery, as it would be to the Dutch, were New South Wales to 
be so extended. This appears to have been, felt by a neighbouring, 
and even rival, nation ; whose writers commonly speak of these 
countries under tlie general term of Terres Australes. In fact, the 
original name, used by the Dutch themselves until some time after 
Tasman’s second voyage, in 1644,, was Terra Australis ^ or Great 
South Land; and when it was displaced by New Holland, the new 
term was applied only to the parts lying westward of a meridian 
line, passing through Arnhem’s Land on the north, and near the 
isles of St. Francis and St. Peter, on the south : all to the eastward, 
including the shores of the Gulph of Carpentaria, still remained as 
Terra Australis. This appears from a charjt published by Thevenot, 
in 1663 ; which, he says, was originally taken from 'that done in 
inlaiH work, upon the pavement of the new Stadt-House af Amster- 
dam. * The same thing is to be inferred^ from the notes of Burgo- 

• « La carte que Von a raise icy, tire sa premiere origine de ceile que I’on a fait taillcr 



INTRODUCTION. 

master Witsen, in 1705 ; of which there will be occasion to speak 
in the sequel. 

It is necessarjf’ however, to geographical precision, that so soon 

as New Holland and New South Wales were known to form one 

• • 

land, there should be a general name applicable to the whole ; and this 
essential point having been ascertained in the present voyage, with 
a degree of certainty sufficient to authorise the measure, I have, 
with the concurrence of opinions entitled to deference, ventured 
upon the re-adoption of the original Terra Australis ; and of this 
term I shall hereafter make use, when speaking of New Holland 
and New South Wales, in a collective sense ; and when using it in 
the most extensive signification, the adjacent isles, including that of 
Van Diemen, must be understood to be comprehended. 

There is no probability, that any other detached body of land, of 
nearly equal extent, will ever be found in a more southern latitude ; 
the name Terra Australis will, therefore, remain descriptive of the 
geographical importance of this country, and of its situation on the 
globe: it has’ antiquity to recommend it; and, having no reference 
to either of the two claiming nations, appears to be less objectionable 
than any other which could have been selected.* 

In dividing New South Wales from New Holland, I have been 
guided by the British patent to the first governor of the new colony, 
at Port Jackson. In this patent, a meridian, nearly corresponding 
to the ancient line of separation, between New Holland and Terra 
Australis, has been made the western limit of New South Wales ; 
and is fixed at the longitude of 135* east, from the meridian of 
Greenwich. From hence, the British territory extends eastward, 

• 

de pieces rapport6es, sur le pav6 dc la nouvelle Maison-de-Ville d ’Amsterdam/^ 
ti(ms de divers Voyages cwrief/ar.— Avis. 

♦ Had f permitted myself any innovation upon the original term, it would have been 
Co convert it into Australia; as being more agreeable to the ear^ and an assimilation to 
Che names of the other great portions of the earth. 



IV 


INTRODUCTION. 


to the islands of the Pacij^y or Great Ocean : its northern limit is at 
Cape Tork; and the extremity of the southern Van Diemen’s Land^ 
is its opposite boundary. 

The various discoveries which had been made upon the coasts of 
Terra Australis, antecedently to the present voyage, are of dates as 
widely distant, as are the degrees of confidence to. which they are 
respectively entitled ; the accounts, also, lie scattered through 
various books in different languages ; and many are still in manu- 
script. It has, therefore, been judged, that a succinct history of these 
discoveries would be acceptable to the public ; and would form an 
appropriate introduction to a voyage, whose principal object was to 
complete what they had left unfinished. Such a history will not 
only, it is hoped, be found interesting, but, from the occasions it will 
furnish to point out what remained to be done at the beginning of 
the nineteenth century, will satisfy a question which may be asked : 
Why it should have been thought necessary to send another expedi- 
tion to explore the coasts of a country, concerning whicTi it has 
been said, near thirty years ago, — “ It is no longer a doubt, that we 
have now a full knowledge of the wKole circumference of this vast 
body of land, this fifth part of the world.”* An expression, which 
the learned writer could have intended to apply only to the general 
extent of the new continent, and not to the particular formation of 
every part of the coasts; since the chart, which accompanies the 
voyage of which he was writing the introduction, represents much 
of the south coast, as being totally unknown. 

In tracing a historical sketch of the previous discoveries, I shall 
not dwell upon such as ‘depend upon conjecture and probability, 
but come speedily to those, for which there^are authentic documents. 
In this latter, and solely important, class, the articles exfracted from 
voyages, which are in the hands of the public, will be abridged^to 
their leading heads; and the reader referred, for the details, to 

* CooKt third Voyage, Introduction, p. xv. 



INTRODUCTION. 


the original works ; but in such articles as have either not appeared 
before, or but very imperfectly, in an English dress, as also in those 
extracted from unpublished manuscripts, a wider range will be 
taken : in these, so far as *the document^ go, on the one hand, and 
the limits of an introduction can allow, on the other, no interesting 
fact will be omitted. 

Conformably to this plan, no attempt will be made to investigate 
the claims of the Chinese to the earliest knowledge of Terra 
Australis; which some, from the chart of Marco Polo, have thought* 
they possessed. Nor yet will much be said upon the plea advanced 
by the Abbe Prevost,* and after him by the President Debrosses,'!' 
in favour of Paulmier de Gonneville, a French captain ; for whom 
they claim the honour of having discovered Terra Australis, in 1504. 
It is evident from the proofs they adduce, that it was not to any part 
of this country, but to Madagascar, that Gonneville was driven ; 
and from whence he brought his prince Essomeric, to Normandy. 

Within these few years, however, two curious manuscript charts 
have,been brought to light ; which have favoured an opinion, that 
Terra Australis had really been visited by Europeans, nearly a 
century before any authentic accounts speak of its discovery. One 
of these charts is in French, without date; and from its almost exact 
similitude, is probably either the original, or a copy of the other, 
which is in English ; and bears, with the date 1543, a dedication to 
the King of England.;|; In it, an extensive country is marked to 
the southward of the Moluccas, under the name of Great Java ; 
which agrees nearer with the position and extent of Terra Australis, 
than with any other land ; and the direction given to some parts of 

• Bistoire ^inhrale des Voynges, Tome XVI. (tl la Haye) p. 7 — 14. 

t Batoire des Navigations aux Terres Australes. Tome I. p. 102—120. 

% A more particul^ account of these charts, now in the British Museum, will be found 
in Captain JBuruey’s " History of Discoveries in the South Sea>’ Vol. I. p. 379—383. 
An opinion is there expressed concerning the early discoveries in these regions, which is 
entitled to respectful attention. 



INTRODUCTION. 


the coast, approaches too near to the truth, for the whole to have 
been marked from conjecture alone. But, combining this with the 
exaggerated extent of Great Java in a southern direction, and the 
animals and houses painted upon the shores, such as have not been 
any where seen in Terra Australis, it should appear to have been 
partly formed from vague information, collected, probably, by the 
early Portuguese navigators, from the eastern nations; and that 
conjecture has done the rest. It may, at the same time, be admitted, 
that a part of the west and north-west coasts, where the coincidence 
of form is most striking, might have been seen by the Portuguese 
themselves, before the year ,1540, in their voyages to, and from, 
India. 

But quitting those claims to original discovery, in which conjec- 
ture bears so large a share, we come to such as are supported by 
undeniable documents. Before entering upon these, it is proper to 
premise, that, instead of following precisely the order of time, these 
discoveries will be classed under the heads of the different coasts 
upon which they were made: an arrangement which will obviate 
the confusion that would arise from being carried back from one 
coast to another, as must, of necessity, be the case, were the chrono- 
logical order to be strictly followed. 

The discoveries made in Terra Australis, prior to the Investigator's 
voyage, will, therefore, be divided into four Sections, under the 
following heads: 1. The North Coast; 2. The Western Coasts; 
3, The South Coast; and, 4. The East Coast with Van Diemen's 
Land. But the articles in the fourth Section, being numerous and 
more extensive, will be divided into two parts : Part I. will contain 
the early discoveries, and such of the later,, as were made indepen- 
dently of the British colony in New South Wales; and Part II. 
those which were made in vessels sent from that colony; apd whfch 
may be considered as a consequence of its establishment. 



[ vii ] 


PRIOtl DISCOVEklES IN TERRA. AUSTRALIS. 

SECTION I. 

NORTH COAST. 

Preliminary Remarks: Discoveries of the Duyfhen; of Torres; Carstens ; 

Pool; Pietersen ; Tasman; and of three Dutch Vessels. Of Cook; 

M‘. Cluer; Bligh; Edwards; Bligh and Portlock; and Bampton 
and Alt. Conclusive ikemarks. 

The late Hydrographer to the Admiralty, Alexander Dalrymple, Preliminary 
Esq., in his curious Collection cenceming Papua, published, with a 
translation, a ‘paper which furnishes more regular and authentic 
accounts of the early Dutch discoveries in the East, than any thing 
with which the public was before acquainted. This interesting 
paper was procured by the Right Hon. Sir Joseph Banks ; and is a 
copy of the instructions to commodore Aukl Jansz Tasman, for his 
second voyage of discovery : It is dated January 29, 1644, from the 
dastle of Batavia, and signed by the governor-general Antonio Van 
Diemen, and by V under Lyn, Maatsuyker, Schouten, and Sweers, 
members of the council. The instructions are prefaced with a 
recital, in chronological order, of the previous discoveries of the 
Dutch, whether made from accident or design, in Nova Guinea, 
and the Gr?at South Land ; and from this account, combined with 
a passage from Saris,* it appears, that — 

On the 18th of November 1605, the Dutch yacht, the Duyfhen yTh&ifuypm. 
was dispatched from Bantam to explore the islands of New Guinea ; 


*■ Purchasj Vol, L p. 385. 



VIII 


INTRODUCTION. 


. \Prior DUeoveries. 


TbRBvyfhm. and that she sailed along, what was thought to be, the west side of 
1606. country, to 1 3^° of south latitude. “ This extensive country 

“ was found, for the greatest part, desart ; but; in some places, 
“ inhabited by wild, cruel, black savagfes ; by wliom some of the 
“ crew were murdered. For which reason they could not learn 
“ anything of the land, or waters, as had been desired of them; 
“ and, from want of provisions and other necessaries, they were 
“ obliged to leave the discovery unfinished : The furthest point of the 
“ land, in their map, was called Cape Keer-Weer," or Tum-again. 

(Atlas, PL I.) The course of the Duyfhen, from New Guiaea, was southward, 

along the islands on the west side of Torres’ Strait, to that part of 
Terra Australis, a little to the west and south of Cape York; but 
all these lands were thought to be connected, and td form the west 
coast of New Guinea. Thus, without being conscious of it, the 
commander of the Duyfhen made the first authenticated discovery 
of any part of the great South Land, about the month of March 
1606 ; for it appears, that he had returned to Banda in, or before, 
the beginning of June, of that year. ' 

Torres. Luis Vaes de Torres, a Spanish navigator, was the next person 
who saw Terra Australis ; and it is remarkable, that it was near 
the same place, and in the same year; and that he had as little 
knowledge of the nature of his discovery, as had the Duyfhen. 

Torres was second in command to Pedro Fernandez de Quiros ; 
when he sailed with three vessels, from the port of Callao in Peru, 
in the year 1605. One of the purposes of their expedition was to 
search for the Tierra Austral"; a continent which was supposed 
to occupy a considerable portion of that part of the southern 
hemisphere lying westward of America. 

After the discovery of several islands, Quiros came to a l^pd 
which he named Australia del Espiritu Santo, supposing it to 
be a part of the great Southern Continent ; but this, on his separa* 
tion from the admiral, Torres found could be na other than an 



INTRODUCTION. 


iSferift Coo#*.] 


island ; and then continued his course westward, in prosecution of 
the research. 

About the month of August 1606, and in latitude iii* south, he 
fell in with a coast, which he calls “ the beginning of New Guinea;" 
and which appears to have been the south-eastern part of the land, 
afterwards napied Louisiade, by Mons. de Bougainville, and now 
known to be a chain of islands. Unable to pass to windward of 
this land, Torres bore away along its south side; and gives, himself, 
-the following account of his subsequent proceedings. 

“ We went along 300 leagues of coast, as I have mentioned, 
“ and diminished the latitude 24^*, which brought us into From 
“ hence we fell in with a bank of from 3 to 9 fathoms, which 
“ extends along the c6ast above i8o leagues. We went over it 
along the coast to 7^ S. latitude, and the end of it is in 5*. We 
“ could not go further on for the many shoals and great currents, 
so we were obliged to sail S. W. in that depth to ii*. S. latitude. 
There is all over it an archipelago of islands without number, by 
“ which we passed, and at the* end of the 11th degree, the bank 
“ becWe shoaler. Here were very large islands, and there appeared 
“ more to the southward: they were inhabited by black people, 
“ very corpulent, and naked ; their arms were lances, arrows, and 
clubs of stone ill fashioned. We could not get any of their arms. 
“ We caught in all this land 20 persons of different nations, that 
with them we might be able to give a better account, to Your 
“ Majesty. They give much notice of other people, although as 
yet they do not make themselves well understood. 

We were upon this bank two months, at the end of which time 
“ we found ourselves in 25 fathoms, and in 5® S. latitude, and 10 
“ leagues from the coast.* And having gone 480 leagues, here the 
“ coast goes to the N. E. I did not reach it, for the bank be9ame 
“ very shallow. So we stood to the north.”* 

* See tbe letter of Torres, datetl Manila, July 1 2, 1607, in VoL II. Appendix, No 1. to 
Burney’a ** HUtorjf of Diseoveriee in the Soutk Seat” firom wluclr interesting work tbb 
sketch of Torres' voyage is extracted. 

VOL. I. * C 


ix 


Toaaxi. 

’ 1606 . 



X 


INTRODUCTION. 


[Prior Ducooeriei. 


Torrr»« 

1606. 


Zeachew* 

1618. 


Caestens. 

1623. 


It cannot be doubted, that the “ very large islands" seen by Torres, 
at the 1 ith degree of soUth latitude, were the hills of Cape York ; 
or that his two months of intricate navigation were employed in 
passing the strait which divides Terra Australis and New Guinea. 
But the account of this and oflier discoveries, which Torres himself 
addressed to the King of Spain, was so kept from the world, that 
the existence of such a strait was generally unknown, until 1770; 
when it was again discovered and passed by our great drcumnavi- 
gator Captain Cook. 

Torres, it should appear, took the precaution to lodge a copy of 
his letter in the archives of Manila ; for, after that city was taken 
by the British forces, in 176a, Mr. Dalrymple found out, and drew 
from oblivion, this interesting document of early discovery; and, as a 
tribute due to the enterprising Spanish navigator, he named the pas- 
sage Torres* Strait ; and the appellation now generally prevails. 

Zeachen is said to have discovered the land of Arnhem and the 
northern Van Diemen's Land, in f6i8; and he is supposed, from 
the first name, to have been a native of Ariihem, in Holland ; and 
that the second was given in honour of the governor-general of the 
Indies.* But there are two important objections to the truth of this 
vague account : first, no mention^is made of Zeachen in the recital 
of discoveries which preface the instructions to Tasman; nor is there 
any, of the North Coast having been visited by the Dutch, in that 
year: secondly, it appears from Valentyn’s lives of the governors 
of Batavia, that Van Diemen was not governor-general until 
January 1, i 6 $ 6 . 

The second expedition, mentioned in the* Dutch recitai, for the dis- • 
covery of the Great South Land, ‘‘ was undertaken in a yacht, in the 
year 16 17, “ with little success ;" and the journals and remarks were 
not to be found. In January 1623, the yachts Peru and Arnhem, 

* HUtfdet Navigations aux Torres Aust» Tome p. 432, 



INTRODUCTION. 


xi 


North Coait.'] 

under the command of Jan Carstens, were despatched from Amhoina^ Cahsteot. 
by order of His Excellency Jan Pieterz Coen. Carstens, with eight of 
the Arnhem’s crew, was treacherously murdered by the natives of 
New Guinea; bift the vessels prosecuted the voyage, and discovered 
“ the great i^ands Arnhem and the SpuLf.”* They were then 
untimely separated,” and the Arnhem returned to Amboina. The 
Pera persisted j and “ sailed along the south coast of New Guinea, 

” to a flat cove, situate in lo* south latitude ; and ran along the 
“ West Coast of this land to Cape Keer-Weer ; from thence dis- 
“ covered the coast further southward, as far as 17®, to Staten 
** River. From this place, what 'more of the land could be dis- 
“ cemed, seemed to stretch westward the Pera then returned to 
Amboina. “ In this discovery were found, every where, shallow 
** water and barren coasts ; islands altogether thinly peopled by 
“ divers cruel, poor, and brutal nations ; and of very little use to 
** the (Dutch East-India) Company.” 

• 

Gerrit Tomaz Pool was sent, in April 1636, from Banda, with pool. 
the yachts Klyn Amstefdam and Wezel, upon the same expedition as 
Carstens ; and, at the same place, on the coast of New Guinea, he 
met with the same fate. Nevertheless “ the voyage was assiduously 
“ continued under the charge of the supra-cargo Pieterz Pietersen ; pietkrsbk. 
“ and the islands Key and Arouw visited. By reason of very strong 
“ eastwardly winds, they could not reach the west coast of New 
“ Gwnea (Carpentaria) ; but shaping their course very near south, 

« discovered the coast of Arnhem, or Van Diemen’s Land, in ii* 

** south latitude; and sailed along the jshore for lao miles (so 
mijlen), without seeing any people, but many signs of smoke. “ 

» 

• Id the old charts, a river Spult is marked, in the western part of Arnhem’s Land ; 
and it seaiqs probable, that the land in its vidnity is here meant by Tm* Spolt. * 



xii 


INTRODUCTION. 


[Prior Discoverieg. 


Tasman. This is all that appear^ to have been known of the North Coast, 

1644 

when Abel Jansz Tasman sailed upon his second* voyage, in 1644,; 
for the instructions to him say, that after quitting Point Ture, or 
“ False Cape, situate in 8° on* the south coast of Ne^ Guinea, you 
“ are to continue eastward, along the coast, to g* south latitude ; 
“ crossing prudently the Cove at that place. Looking about the 
“ high islands or Speult's River, with the yachts, for a harbour ; 
“ despatching the tender De Brack, for two or three days into the 
“ Cove, in order to discover whether, within the Great Inlet, there 
“ be not to be found an entrance into the South Sea.* From this 
“ place you are to coast along the west coast of New Guinea, 
“ (Carpentaria,) to the furthest discoveries in 17“ south latitude; 
“ following the coast further, as it may run, west or southward. 

“ But it is to be feared you will meet, in these parts, with the 
“ south-east trade winds ; from which it will be difficult to keep the 
“coast on board, if stretching to the south-east; but,<.notwith- 
“ standing this, endeavour by all nieans to proceed ;• that we may 
“ be sure whether this land is divided from fhe Great Known South 
“ Continent, or not." 

The Dutch had, by this time, acquired some knowledge of a part 
of the south coast of Terra Australis; of the west coast; and of a 
part of the north-west; and these are the lands meant by “ the 
“ Great Known South Continent." Arnhem's, and the northern 
Van Diemen’s Lands, on the North Coast, are not included in the 
expression; for Tasman was directed “ from De Witt’s Land (on 

• Tlie Great Inlet or Cove, where the passage was to be sought^ is the north-west part 
of Torres’ Strait. It is evident, that a suspicion was entertained, in 1644, of such a 
strait; but that the Dutch were ignorant of its having been passed. The^‘ high islands” 
are tlu^se which lie in latitude 10®, on the west side of the strait. Speult's River appears 
to bt the opening betwixt the Prince of Wales* Islands and Cape York) through wiiich 
captain Cook afterwards passed, and named it Endeavour's Strait; This Speulfs River 
cannot, I conceive, be the same with what was before mentioned under the name of The 
Spult. 



North Coa«f.] 


INTRODUCTION. 


ziii 


“ the North-west Coast,) to run across, very near eastward, to Tasm/in. 
** complete the discovery of Arnhem’s and Van Diemen’s Lands; and 

to ascertain perfectly, whether these lands are not one and the same 
“ island.” 

It is' a great obstacle to tracing cdrrectly the progress of early 
discovery in Terra Australis, that no account of this voyage of 
Tasman has ever been published ; nor is any such known to exist. 

But it seems to have been the general opinion, that he sailed round 
the Gulph of Carpentaria; and then westward, along Arnhem’s and 
the northern Van Diemen’s iMnds ; and the form of these coasts in 
Thevenot’s chart of 1663, and in those of most succeeding geo- 
graphers, even up to the end of the eighteenth century, is supposed 
to have resulted from^his voyage. The opinion is strengthened by 
finding the names of Tasman, and of the governor-general and two 
of the council, who signed his instructions, applied to places at the 
head of the Gulph ; as is also that of Maria, the daughter of the 
governor, to whom our navigator is said to have been attached. In 
the notes, also, of Burgomaster* Witsen, concerning the inhabitants 
of Nova Guinea and fioLLANOiA Nova, as extracted by Mr. Dal- 
rymple; Tasman is mentioned amongst those, from whom his 
information was drawn. 

The President De Brosses* gives, from the miscellaneous tracts Three jy^uh 
of Nicolas' Struyck, printed at Amsterdam, 1753, the following 
account of another, and last voyage of the Dutch, for the discovery 
of the North Coast. 

“ March 1, 1705, three Dutch vessels were sent from Timor, with 
“ order to explore the north coast of New Holland, better than it 
“ had before been done. They carefully examined the coasts, san 4 
“ b/inks, and reefs. In their route to it, they did not meet with, any 
“ land, but only some rocks above water, in 11" 58' south latitude:” 

(probably the south part of the great Sahul Bank; which, according 
to captain Peter Hey wood, who saw it in 1801, lies in ii* 40'.) 

♦ Hut. des Nav. axis Terres Amt. Tome I. page 439, 



*jv introduction. . [Prior Di»coverie$. 

Three Dutch “ They saw the west coast of New Holland 4* to the eastward of 

Timor. From thence they continued their route 
“ towards the north ; and passed a point, off which lies a bank of 
“ sand above water, in length more than jive German miles of fifteen 
“ to a degree. After which,* they made sail to the*east, along the 
“ coast of New Holland ; observing every thing with care, until 
“ they came to a gulph, the head of which they did hot quite reach. 
“ I (Struyck) have seen a chart made of these parts." 

What is here called the West^ must have been the North-west 
Coast ; which the vessels appear to have made somewhat to the 
south of the western Cape Van Diemen. The point which they 
passed, was probably this same Cape itself; and in a chart, published 
by Mr. Dalrymple, Aug. 27, 1783, from a Dlitch manuscript (pos- 
sibly a copy of that which Struyck had seen), a shoal, of thirty 
geographic miles in length, is marked as running off', from it ; but 
incorrectly, according to Mr. M®. Cluer. The gulph here mentioned, 
was probably a deep bay in Arnhem’s Land ; for had if been the 
Gulph of Carpentaria, some particular mention of the great change 
in the direction of the coast, would, doubtless, have been made. 

From this imperfect account of the voyage of these three vessels, 
very little satisfactory information is obtained ; and this, with some 
few exceptions, is the case with all the accounts of the early Dutch 
discoveries ; and has usually been attributed to the monopolizing 
spirit of their East-India Company, which induced it to keep secret, 
or to destroy, the journals. 

Cook. The north coast of Terra Australis does not appear to have been 
seen by any succeeding navigator, until the year 1770 ; when our 
eelebrated captain James Cook passed through Kndedvoufs Strait, 
between Cape York and the Prince of Wales’ Islands ; and besides 
clearing up the doubt which, till then, existed, of the actu'al separa- 
tion of Terra Australis from New Guinea, his more accurate observa- 
tions enabled geographers to assign something like a true place to 
the former discoveries of the Dutch, in these parts. Captain Cook 



INTRODUCTION. 


XV 


NorOi Coast^ 

did not land upon the main ; but, at Possession Island, he saw ten Cook. 
natives : “ Nine of them were armed with such lances as we had 
“ been accustomed to see, and the tenth had a bow, and a bundle of 
« arrows, which we had never seen in the possession of the natives 
“ of this country before.”* 

At the end of the year 1791, lieutenant John M*. Cluer of the M'.Ccueb. 
Bombay marine, in returning from the examination of the west side 
of New Guinea, made the Land of Arnhem, in longitude 135^*, east 
of Greenwich. He then sailed westward, along the shore, to lag* 55'; 
when the coast was found to take a southern direction. The point 
of turning is placed in 1 1* 15' south latitude ; and is, doubtless, the 
Cape Van Diemen of#he old charts, and the west extremity of the 
north coast of Terra Australis. 

It does not appear that any other account has been given of this 
navigation, than the chart published by Mr. Dalrymple, in 1793. 
According to it, though lieutenant M'. Cluer constantly had soundings, 
in from 7 to 40 fathoms ; yet he was generally at such a distance 
from the land, that it wfts not c^ten seen ; and, consequently, he was 
unable to identify the particular points No landing seems to have 
been effected upon the main ; but some service was rendered to navi- 
gation, by ascertaining the positions of several small islands, shoals, 
and projecting parts of the coast; and in conferring a certain degree 
of authenticity upon the discoveries of the early Dutch navigators. 

Lieutenant M*. Cluer is the last person, who can strictly be said 
to have added to our knowledge of the north coast of Terra 
Australis, previously to the time in which the voyage of the Investi- 
gator was planned ; but several navigators had followed captain 
Cook through Torres’ Strait, and by considerably different routes : 
these it will be proper to notice ; as their discoveries are intimately 
connected with the present subject. 

* Hawkeswerth’s Voyages, Vol. III. page 211. 



XVl 


INTRODUCTION. 


[/Vwr Di$covme$. 


Blioh. After the mutineers of the Bounty had forced their commander, 

1789 t 

lieutenant (now rear-admiral) William Bligh, -to embark in the 
launch, near the island Tqfoa; he steered for Cbepang, a Dutch 
settlement, at the south-west ‘end of Timor. In theVay, he made 
the east coast of New South Wales, in about of $outh latitude ; 
and, sailing northward, passed round Cape York and the Prince of 
Wales' Islands. 

It was not to be supposed, that captain Bligh, under the circum- 
stances of extreme distress, of fatigue, and difficulty of every kind, 
could do much for navigation and geography ; yet, he took views 
and made such observations and notes, as enabled him to construct 
a chart of his track, and of the lands and reef«seen from the launch. 
And as captain Bligh passed to the north of the Prince of Wales’ 
Islands, whereas captain Cook had passed to the south, his interest- 
ing narrative, with the accompanying chart, made an useful addition 
to what little was yet known of Torres' Strait* 

Edwa«d8. Captaik (now admiral) Edwak© Edwards of His Majesty’s 
frigate Pandora, on his return from the island Taheity,-f made the 
reefs of Torres’ Strait, on Aug. *5 ; in about the latitude io» south, 
and two degrees of longitude to the east of Cape York. Steering 
from thence westward, he fell in with three islands, rather high, 
which he named Murray’s ; lying in latitude 9* 57' south, and 
longitude 143® 4s' east and some canoes, with two masts, were 
seen running within side of the reef which lay between the islands 
and the ship. This reef was of considerable extent ; and, during 

* Bligh’s “ Voyage to the South Seas in B. M. Ship Bounty,” page 218— »221. 
t Commonly written Otaheite; but the O is either an article or a preposition, and 
forms no part of the name : Bougainville writes it Taiti. ^ ‘ 

J In Plates I. and XIII. Murray's Islands are laid down according to their situations 
.afterwards ascertained in the Investigator; and the reefe, seen by the Pandora, are placed 
in their relative positions to those islands. 



North Coast: Torres' ^ait.'\ INTRODUCTION. 

the whole of August *6, captain Edwards ran along it to the 
southward, without finding any passage thhjugh. On the *7th, the 
search was continued, without success ; but on the a8th, a boat was 
despatched to examine an opening in the reef ; and the ship stood 
off and on, waiting the result. At five in the evening, the boat 
made a signal for a passage being found ; but fearing to venture 
through, so near sunset, without more particular information, 
captain Edwards called the boat on board. In the mean time, a 
current, or tide, set the Pandora upon the reef ; and, after beating 
there till ten o'clock, she went over it into deep water ; and sunk in 
15 fathoms, at daylight of the agth. 

A dry sand bank was perceived within the opening, at the distance 
of four miles ; and thither the boats repaired with the remaining 
officers and people : thirty-nine men having lost their lives in this 
melancholy disaster This opening was ascertained to lie in latitude 
11® *4', and longitude 143® 38' ; and is represented as very practicable 
for ships. • 

Not being able to save any thing from the wreck, captain Edwards, 
almost destitute of provisions and water, set sail on Aug. 30, with 
his squadron of four boats ; and steered for the north-east part of 
Terra Australis. No reefs, or other dangers, Appear to have been 
encountered in the way to the coast ; but in the course northward, 
along it, some islands and reefs were seen. From one part of the 
coast, two canoes with three black men in each, paddled hard after 
the boats ; but though they waved and made many signs, it was 
not thought prudent to wait for them. At one of the York Isles, 
the natives, for some trifling presents, filled a keg of water for 
captain Edwards ; but refused to bring down any more ; and, soon 
afterward, they let fly a shower of arrow s amongst the unfortunate 
sufferers. Happily no person was wounded; and the aggressors 
were put to flight, by a volley of musketry. 

At the Prince of Wales’ Islands, good water was found; and 
much alleviated the distress of captain Edwards and his people. 

VOL. I. D 


xvii 

Edwards. 

1791 . 



xviu INTRODUCTION. {Prior Discoverieg. 

c 

Edwauds. They heard here the howling of wolves, ( probably of wild dogs, ) 
and “ discovered a mordi, or rather heap of bones. There were 
“ amongst them two human skulls, the bones of some large animals, 
“ and some turtle bones. They were heaped tog;ether in the form 
“ of a grave ; and a long paddle, supported at each fend by a bifur- 
“ cated branch of a tree, was laid horizontally aloqg it. Near to 
“ this, there were marks of a lire having been recently made ; and 
“ the ground about was much footed and worn.”* 

A few small oysters, a harsh austere fruit, resembling a plum, 
and a small berry of a similar taste to the plum, were all that could 
be found for food. 

“ There is a large sound formed here, to which,” says Mr. Hamil- 
ton, “ we gave the name of Sandwich’s Sound; and commodious 
“ anchorage for shipping in the bay, to which we gave the name of 
“ fVolf’s Bay, in which there is from five to seven fathoms all 
“ round. Near the centre of the sound is a small, dark-coloured, 
“ rocky island.” 

Sept. a. In the afternoon, captain Edwards passed out to the 
northward, with his little squadron, from’ amongst the Prince of 
Wales' Islands; and the same evening, by steering westward, 
cleared all the islands and reefs of Torres' Strait : on the 14th he 
reached Timor. 

The track and discoveries of the Pandora, in Plate XIII. are taken 
from a chart published in 1798, by Mr. Dalrymple, upon the 
authority of one constructed by lieutenant Hayward; but it does 
not contain the track of the boats after the loss of the Pandora. 
This chart, and the account given by Mr. Hamilton, which, though 
more than sufficiently explicit upon some points, is very defective in 
what concerns navigation and geography ; are all that appears to 
have been published of this voyage. 

* See “ y# Voyage round the World in H. M. frigate Pandora,” by Geoige 
Hamilton, Surgeon.; page 123, et seq. 



North Coa$t: Torres' INTRODUCTION. 


XU 


Neither the great extent of the reefs, lo the eastward of Cape Blioh nnd 
York, nor the loss of the Pandora, were known in 1792; when 
captain William Sligh came a second time to Torres’ Strait, with 
His Majesty's ship Providence, and the brig commanded by 

lieutenant (now captain) Nathaniel Portlock. The objects of his 
mission were, to transport the bread-fruit plant from Taheity to the 
West Indies; and, in his way, to explore a new passage through 
the Strait; in both of which he was successful. 

A chart of the discoveries made in Torres' Strait, was lodged, by (AtPlXlll.) 
captain Bligh, in the Admiralty Office; and is incorporated with 
other authorities, in Plate XIII. of the accompanying Atlas. No 
account of this voyage havimr yet been published; it is conceived, 
that the following brief relation of the passage through the strait, 
will be acceptable to the nautical reader; and, having had the 
honour to serve in the expedition, I am enabled to give it from my 
own journal, with the sanction of captain Bligh. 

Aug. 31. Latitude at noon 9* 25' south; longitude from fifteen 
sets of distances of the sim west; and star east, of the moon, taken on 
the 24,th, 25th, and 26th, preceding, 14.5'* 92', and by time keepers, 

145° S3' east. No land seen since passing Louixiade the preceding 
day; but many birds and fish, and much rock weed. At dusk, 
having steered W. ^ S. 37 miles, breakers were seen a-head, at the 
distance of two miles; and the vessels hauled to the wind; no 
bottom at 94 fathoms. 

Sept. 1 . They bore away W. by S. ; but hauled up gradually to 
South, on account of the breakers ; and not being able to weather 
them, tacked to the N. E. At noon, latitude 9° 37' south, longitude 
by time keepers, 144° 59' east:* part of the reef, which was named 
after captain Portlock, seen in the N. N.W. from the mast head; 

* In Plate XIII. some small alterations are made in the longitudes given by captain 
Bligh’s time keepers, to make tBcm correspond with the corrected longitudes of the 
Investigator and Cumberland. 



XX 


INTRODUCTION. 


[/¥ior Diicovmei. 

BLioHtmd At' four o’clock, the vessels edged away round the north end of 
PoHTwcK. Reef, which, at* dusk, bore South, about two leagues; and 

the wind was then hauled for the night. 

Sept, s. The breakers bore South, four or fivd miles; and cap- 
tain Bligh steered westward : the Assistant leading. ' At noon, the 
latitude being 9“ a6', longitude, by time keepers, ^44° 23', other 
breakers were seen a-head, and the vessels hauled the wind ^to the 
southward ; but finding another reef in that direction, with a dry 
bank upon it, they tacked to the N. E, at half past one ; and got 
ground, for the first time, in 64 fathoms, coral bottom. During the 
following night, they stood off and on, constantly getting soundings^ 
No breakers were in sight in the morning of Sept. g. At seven, 
a boat was sent a-head ; and the vessels bore away after her to the 
N. W., in order to try the New-Guinea side of the Strait. At noon, 
their course was interrupted by a reef, which was named Bond’s 
Rerf, extending from W. N. W. to North, and distant four or five 
miles: observed latitude 9** 6', longitude 144" jg'. The north side 
of the Strait being judged impracticable, the wind was again hauled 
to the southward ; and, at dusk, the vessels ’anchored in 37 fathoms, 
fine grey sand ; five or six miles north of a reef, upon which was a 
dry bank, called Anchor Key. An island of considerable height, 
bearing S. W. by W. ten leagues, was then seen froap the mast head : 
Captain Bligh gave it the name of Damley’s Island; and to the space 
between Portlock’s- and Bond’s Reefs, by which the vessels had 
entered the Strait, that of Bligh’ s Entrance. 

Sept. 4. A boat was sent to the S. S. W., and the vessels followed. 
Other high lands ( Murray’s Isles ) were seen to the southward ; and 
a reef with a sand bank on it, to the west. At noon, the latitude 
was 9* 32' south, and longitude 143® 59’ east: Damley’g Island bore 
S. 74® to 82* W., four leagues; and the largest of Murray’s Isles, 
S. 13® to 21° E.: the western reef was about three miles distant, 'but 
nothing was visible a-head in the S. by W. At four o’clock, the 
vessels anchored in 21 fathoms, sandy bottom; with Darnley's 



NorOiCoMt: Torres' Strait, INTRODUCTION. xx 

• 

Island bearing N. 6o° W,, three leagues. Betwixt a sand-bank, BtroRand 
called Capoe Key, which bore S. 6o* W., two leagues, and a reef 
lying in the W. by S., there appeared to be a passage, which the 
boats were sent td examine. 

On the 5th, Tioats were again sent td sound the passage. Several 
large sailing cjinoes were seen ; and the cutter making the signal 
for assistance, the pinnace was sent to her, well manned and armed. 

On the return of the boats in the afternoon, it appeared, that, of four 
canoes which used their efforts to get up to the cutter, one suc- 
’iceeded. There were in it fifteen Indians, black, and quite naked ; 

^ im^hey made signs which were interpreted to be amicable. These 
; signs the officer imitated ; but not thinking it prudent to go so near 
„ as to take a green cocoa-nut, which was held up to him, he con- 
tinued rowing for the ship. A man, who was sitting upon the shed 
erected in the centre of the canoe, then said something to those 
below ; and immediately they began to string their bows. Two of 
them hadialready fitted arrows, when the officer judged it necessary 
to fire in his own defence. Six muskets were discharged ; and the 
Indians fell flat into the1)ottom.of the canoe, all except the man on 
the shed : the seventh musket was fired at him, and he fell also. 

During this time, the canoe dropped astern ; and the three others 
having joined her, they all gave chase to the cutter, trying to cut her 
oflT from the ship ; in which they would probably have succeeded, 
had not the pinnace arrived, at that juncture, to her assistance. I'he 
Indians then hoisted their sails, and steered for Damley's Island. 

No boats could have been manoeuvred better, in working to wind- 
ward, than were these long canoes by the paked savages. Had the 
four been able to reach the cutter, it is difficult to say, whether the 
superiority of our arms would have been equal to the great differ- 
ence of numbers ; considering the ferocity of these people, and^the 
skill with.which they seemed to manage their weapons. 

September 6. Two bo^ts were sent a-head ; and the vessels fol- 
lowed them, between Canoe Key and the reef lying from it half a mile 



xjjii introduction. [IVior Ihscoveneg. 

piioB and to the north. After running twelve miles beyond this narrow pass, 
they anchored in 13 fathhms ; the latitude being ,9 37 > longi- 
tude 143*41'. In the afternoon, they proceeded five miles further, 
to the N. N. W. ; and Darnley's Island then bore S. 74* to 55* E. 
two leagues : except on the north side, this island appeared to be 
surrounded with reefs and sand banks to a considerable distance. In 
sailing from Canoe Key, the vessels had left, on the larbord hand, a 
long chain of reefs and banks ; at the north-west end of which, were 
three low, woody islands : the nearest of these, bearing S. 41® W, 
two or three miles from the anchorage, was named Nepean Island. 
The view to the northward, from W, by N. to E, by S,, was free 
from dangers ; but in every other direction there were reefs, islands, 
or dry banks. 

This day, several canoes from Darnley’s Island came off to both 
vessels. On approaching, the Indians clapped upon their heads, and 
exclaimed Whou ! Whou ! Whoo ! repeatedly, with much vehe- 
mence ; at the same time, they held out arrows and other •weapons, 
and asked for toore-iooree ! by which they meant iron.** After much 
difficulty, they were persuaded to come along-side ; and two men 
ventured into the ship. They had bushy hair, — were rather stout 
made, — and nearly answered the description given of the natives of 
New Guinea.-f The cartilage, between the nostrils, was cut away in 
both these people ; and the lobes of their ears slit, and stretched to 
a great length, as had before been observed in a native of the Fejee 
Islands. They had no kind of clothing; but wore necklaces of 
cowrie shells, fastened to a braid of fibres; and some of their com- 
panions had pearl-oyster .shells hung round their necks. In speaking 
to each other, their words seemed to be distinctly pronounced. 

Their arms were bows, arrows, and clubs, which they bartered 
for pvery kind of iron work with eagerness ; but appeared to^set 

• The name for iron at Taheity, is eure-euree, or ooree, or, according to Bougain- 
Wlle, aouri. * 

t See a Foyage to Nieto Guinea, by Captain Thomas Forrest. 



NorthCoast: Torres' ^ait.-] INTRODUCTION. 


xxiii 


little value on any thing else. The bows are made of split bamboo ; Bugh and 
and so strong, that no man in the ship could bend one of them. The 
string is a broad slip of cane, fixed to one end of the bow; and fitted 
wath a noose, to go over the other end, when strung. 'I'he arrow is 
a cane of about four feet long, into which a pointed piece of the 
hard, heavy, easuarina wood, is firmly and neatly fitted ; and some 
of them were barbed. Their clubs are made of the easuarina, and 
are powerful weapons. The hand part is indented, and has a small 
knob, by which the firmness of the grasp is much assisted ; and the 
heavy end is usually carved with some device : One had the form of 
a pairrot's head, with a ruff' round the neck ; and was not ill done. 

Their canoes are about fifty feet in length, and appear to have been 
hollowed out of a single tret ; but the pieces which form the gun- 
wales; are planks sewed on with the fibres of the cocoa nut, and 
secured with pegs. These vessels are low, forward, but rise abaft; 
and, being narrow, are fitted with an outrigger on each side, to 
keep theih steady. A raft, of greater breadth than the canoe, ex- 
tends, over about half the lengfh; and upon this is fixed a shed 
or hut, thatched with palm leaves. These people, in short, appeared 
to be dextrous sailors and formidable warriours; and to be as much 
at ease in the water, as in their canoes. 

Sept. 7. The boats having found deep water round the north end 
of the three low islands, the vessels followed them ; but anchored 
again, soon after noon, in latitude 9“ 31', and longitude 143*31'; 
being sheltered by the two western islands, named Stephens’ anACamp- 
bell’s, and the reefs which surround them. There were then no less 
than eight islands in sight, at different distances ; though none further 
to the westward than W. S. W. All these, except Damley’s Island, 
first seen, were small, low, and sandy ; but generally well covered 
wit^ wood in the central parts. 

On the'Sth, the vessels steered westward, with the usual precau- 
tions. No land, or other obstruction, had been seen in that quarter ; 
but, at ten o'clock, they were forced to haul the wind to the south- 



INTRODUCTION. 


Kiv 


[Pnor Dticoveries. 


Buor Md ward, their <k)urse being: impeded by reefs ; upon one of which, was 

PORTLOCK. f J 

Pearce* $ sandy Key. At noon, they had anchored in 15 fathoms, under 
the lee of Dalrymple's Island, the westernmost before seen ; but two 
other islands were th^n visible in the S. by W. ; and reefs extended . 
from N. 4,*, to S. 55® W., at the distance of three or four miles. The 
latitude here was 9*3/; and longitude, from six sets of distances 
of the sun and moon, 143* 31'; but, by the time-keepers, 143* 15' 
east. 

Several canoes were lying upon the shore of Dalrymple's Island; 
but no natives could be distinguished from the ships, ^hen the 
boats returned, however, from sounding, in the afternoon, they came 
out upon the beach; waving green branches and clapping upon 
their heads, in token of friendship. Boats were afterwards sent to 
them, and were amicably received ; the natives running into the 
water to meet them, and some getting into one of the boats. They 
eagerly asked for toore- tooree ; and gave in exchange some orna- 
ments of shells, and a kind of plum somewhat resemblirijg dijambo. 
When the boats pushed off from the shore, the natives followed into 
the water, and appeared anxious to detain them ; but offered no 
violence. A moderately-sized dog, of a brown, chestnut colour, was 
observed amongst the party. 

Sept. 9. The vessels steered after the boats, between the cluster of 
islands to the southward, and an extensive reef to the west ; with 
soundings from 15 to 10 fathoms. At noon, the latitude was 9* 48', 
longitude by timekeepers 1 43* 6 * ; and two other islands came in 
sight to the westward. Before two o'clock, an extensive reef, partly 
dry, to which the name^of Dungeness was given, made it necessary 
to heave to, until the boats had time to sound ; after which, captain 
Bligh bore away along the north side of the reef, and anchored a 
mile from it, in 17 fathoms, hard bottom. In this situation. Daft- 
ness Island, which is low and very woody, bore N. 64**to 87" W. 
three miles ; and a small sandy isle, named Warrioun Island, N. (T 
to 1® W. fouf guiles : this last appeared to stand upon the great 



NorACoait: Tarred Strait.'\ INTRODUCTION. xxv 

western reef, and was surrounded with dry sands. Besides these, Bhoh aud 

I^O^RTIjO CK 

there were other low isles, called the Six Sisters, in sight, to the 1792. 
south-east; and a -Jong, flat island, bearing S. 33" to 46* W. over the 
dry Dungeness Reef ; in the west, also, there were islands visible, at 
a greater distance, and much higher, than the others. The Strait, 
instead of becoming clearer, seemed to be more and more embar- 
rassed with dangers, as the vessels proceeded westward. The lati- 
tude .of this anchorage was 9® 50'^ south, and the longitude 142*55' 
east. 

, iSe^ iO. The boats sounded the channel to the north-west, between 
:J]|ttigeness and Warriours Islands ; and finding sufficient water, the 
vessels got under way, at noon, to follow them. There were many 
natives collected upon the shore of Dungeness Island, and several 
canoes from Warriours Island were about the brig. Presently, captain 
Portlock made the signal for assistance; and there was a discharge of 
musketry and some guns, from his vessel and from the boats. Canoes 
were also' coming towards the Providence ; and when a musket was 
fired at the headmost, the native’s set up a great shout, and paddled 
forward in a body ; nor was mdsketry sufficient to make them desist. 

The second great gun, loaded with round and grape, was directed 
at the foremost of eight canoes, full of men ; and the round shot, 
after raking the whole length, struck the high stern. The Indians 
leaped out, and swam towards their companions ; plunging con- 
stantly, to avoid the musket balls which showered thickly about 
them. The squadron then made off, as fast as the people could 
paddle without shewing themselves; but afterwards rallied at a 
greater distance, until a shot, which passed over their heads, made 
them disperse, and give up all idea of any further attack. 

in passing the deserted canoe, one native was observed still sitting 
in iti The other canoes afterwards returned to him ; and» with 
glasses, signals were perceived to be made by the Indians, to their 
friends on Dungeness Isl!md, expressive, as was thought, of grief 
and consternation. 


VOL. I. 


E 



ttvi INTRODUCTION. [Prior Dueoverie^. 

Bi-ioHand ifo aiTows fell on board the Providence; but three men were 

PORTLOCK. V j j* j rnU 

1798. wounded in the Assistant, and one of them afterwards died : The 
depth to which the arrows penetrated into the decks and sides of the 
brig, was represented to be truly astonishing. 

The vessels passed between Dungeness and Wairiours Islands, 
with from 19 to 13 fathoms ; and anchored, at four .o'clock, under 
the lee of Dungeness Island and Reef. The passage to the west- 
ward then appeared clearer; three high islands, bearing fromS. 6o* 
W. three leagues, to N. 76" W. five leagues, forming the sole visibly 
obstructions. 

Sept. 1 1 . Captain Bligh proceeded on his course to the W.. 1 SrW., 
and passed two islands, to which the descriptive names of Turtle- 
backed Island and the Cap were given ; and, soon after noon, the 
vessels anchored in 7 fathoms, soft bottom. There was a dry sand 
bearing N. 63® W. two or three miles ; between which, and the 
third high island, called The Brothers, bearing S. 55® to 69® W, three 
miles, it was judged necessary for the boats to sound, bfefore pro- 
ceeding filrther. This anchorage was in latitude 9* '43', and longi- 
tude 14a® 40'; and, besides the islands already mentioned, there was 
in sight a mountainous island, to which the name of Banks was given, 
bearing S. 43° W., twelve or thirteen leagues; also Burke’s Island, 
S. 13“ W. eight or ten leagues; and Mount Cornwallis, on another 
island, N. ag W. six or eight leagues ; and from behind this last, to 
N. 7“ W., there extended a level land, which was supposed to be a 
part of the coast of New Guinea. 

Sept. 13 . The vessels followed the boats to the westward; but 
were interrupted by reeft, and obliged to anchor again before noon. 
The water had shoaled gradually, and there was then only 6 fathoms: 
the bottom a coarse, coral sand. Two other islandiT were then in 
sight : a low one, named Tum-again Island, bore N. 53* W. about 
four leagues ; and Jervis* Island, which is rather high, S. 4S® W. nine 
leagues. A reef, with a dry sand upon if, extended from S. 7" E.<d 
63® W. four of five miles ; another was distant three miles to the 



xxyii 


NorACoatt: Strait. '] INTROIHJCTION. 

• 

west; and a third boreN. i8“ W. five miles. The latitude of the 
anchorage was 9*41' south, and longitude f4«* 24' east. 

A fresh gale from south-east did not allow the Providence and 
Assistant to p^^cebd onward for three days. In the mean time, the 
passage'between the reefs to the N. W!, was sounded by the boats ; 
and found to contain about 5 fathoms, regularly, upon hard ground. 
They were also sent to examine the passage round the southern 
reefs ; and this being deeper, with a superior bottom, it was chosen 
as the preferable route. 

J ij^t. Jo. The vessels passed to windward of the southern reef ; 

sli^red south-westward, as it trended, in from 7 to 5 fathoms 
water, until half past noon; when they anchored in latitude 10“ 3^ 
and longitude, by time-keeper, 142* 14'. The sole direction in which 
the eye could range without being obstructed, was that whence the 
vessels had come; every where else the view was arrested by rocks, 
banks, ahd islands. The most extensive of these, was Banks* 
Island, extending from S. 14" E. to 62* W,, two or three leagues; 
with a high hill ’upon it named Mount Augustus, which bore S. 4* E. :* 
Another large island, named M&lgrave’ s, extended from behind the 
last to a cluster of rocks, whose extreme bore W. N. The 
nearest land, bearing S. 24* E., one mile and a half, was the north- 
westernmost of three small isles ; and to this, the second lieutenant 
was sent, for the purpose of taking possession of all the islands 
seen in the Strait, for His Britannic Majesty George III., with the 
ceremonies used on such occasions: the name bestowed upon the 
whole, was Clarence’s Archipelago. 

"North Possession Island was found to be little else than a mass of 
rocks surrounded by a reef ; but it was covered with a variety of 

* This mountain, in latitude 10® 12' south, longitude 142* 13' east, was seen by 
ttq;>taiQ Bligh/rom the Bounty’s launch, and marked in his chart, {Voyage, 8jc. p. 220.) 
It appears to be the same ishnd indistinctly laid down by captain Cook, in latitude 10" IC, 
lofll|itade 141* 14' ; and is, also, one of those, to which the term Hoge Landt is applied 
is l%ev^ot’s chart of 1663. 


Bliob and 
PohTLOCK. 
1792. 



icxviii 


INTRODUCTION. 


[Prior Disi^ivorito. 


Blioh and 
Port LOCK. 
1792. 


trees and shrubs. Amongst them was a cluster of cocoa-nut trees, 
bearing a small, but delicious, fruit ; and the tree bearing a plum, 
such as had been seen at Dalrym pie's Island. .Besides these, the 
botanists found the peeha and nono of Taheity ; and'twd new plants, of 
the size of the common mulberry. One, of the class polyadelpBa, bears 
a scarlet, bell-shaped flower, large as the China rose.; the other was 
a species of erythrina, bearing clusters of butterfly-shaped flowers, of 
a light yellow, tinged with purple : both were entirely destitute of 
leaves, and their woods remarkably brittle. 

There did not appear to be any fixed inhabitants upon Posses^n 
Island ; but from a fire which had been recently extinguished;! ‘I^d 
the shells and bones of turtle scattered around, it was supposed to 
have been visited not many days before. The bushes were full of 
small, green ants ; which proved exceedingly troublesome to those 
who had sufficient hardihood to penetrate their retreats. Another, 
and larger species of ant, was black ; and made its nest by bending 
and fixing together the leaves, in a round form, so as to be impene- 
trable to the wet. These, and a small kind of lizard, were all the 

. 

animals found upon the island. 

Sept. 17, The boats led to the westward, steering for a passage 
between Mulgrave’s and Jervis' Islands ; but seeing it full of rocks 
and shoals, the vessels anchored a little within the entrance, in 10 
fathoms, coarse ground ; until the boats should sound a-head. The 
latitude here was 10° 3', and longitude 148° 03'. The flood tide, 
from the E. N. E., was found to set through between the islands, at 
the rate of four miles an hour ; and the breeze being fresh, and 
bottom bad, the situation was considered to be very unsafe. 

Whilst the boats were sounding, several Indians in three canoes, 

t 

were perceived making towards them; but on a swivel shot 
being fired over their heads, they returned to Mulgrave's Island, on 
the south side of the passage. On the signal being madb for good 
anchorage further on, the Assistant led* to the W. by S. ; but on 
Teaching the boats, the bottom was found much inferior to what had 



NorthCoast: Twres'StraiQ INTRODUCTION. 

been imagined; the approach of night, however, oblig^ captain 
Bligh to anchor, soon afterward, in 8 fathoms. 

In this situation, the vessels were so closely surrounded with 
rocks and reefs* as scarcely to have swinging room ; the bottom 
was rocky; the wind blowing a fresh gale; and a tide running 
between four and five knots an hour. This anxious night was, 
however, passed without accident; and next morning, Sept. i8, the 
route was continued through the passage, bet\yeen reefs and rocks, 
, which, in some places, were not three quarters of a mile asunder : 
the smallest depth was 4 fathoms. 

On clearing this dangerous pass, which captain Bligh named, 
Bligh’s Farewell^ he anchored in 6 fathoms, sandy bottom; the 
wind blowing strong at S. E. with thick weather. The latitude here 
was 10° 5', and longitude 141“ 56'. From north nearly, round by 
the east, to S. 8° E., there was a mass of islands, rocks, and reefs, at 
various distances; but in the western half of the compass, no danger 
was visible; and as far as three miles to the W.N.W., the boats 
found good soundings in 6 and* 7 fathoms. 

Sept. 19. The wind'moderated ; and the vessels steered W. by S. 
until noon, with a depth gradually increasing from 6 to 8 fathoms. 
The latitude was then 10® 8 j south, longitude, by time keeper, 
141° 31' east, and no land was in sight; nf>r did any thing more 
obstruct captain Bligh and his associate, in their route to the island 
Timor. 

Thus, was accomplished, in nineteen days, the passage from the 
Pacific, or Great Ocean, to the Indian Sea; without other misfortune 
than what arose from the attack of the natives, and some damage 
done to the cables and anchors. Perhaps no space of gi® in 
length, presents more dangers than Torres' Strait; but, with 
caution and perseverance, the captains Bligh and Portlock p/oved 
them to* be surmountable ; and within a reasonable time : how far 
it may be advisable to /ollow their track through the Strait, will 
appear more fully hereafter. 


xxix 

Bligh and 
Portlock. 
1792. 



xxz 

Bliob and 

POBTLOCK. 

im. 


Bamftov 
and Alt. 
1793. 


INTRODUCTION. IPHor DitcoveriH. 

f 

In the Voyage to the South Seas in H. M. ship Bounty, page » 90 , 
captain Bligh says, “ I*caiinot with certainty reconcile the situation 
“ of some parts of the coast (near Cape York) that I have seen, to 
** his (captain Cook’s) survey and from the situation of the high 
islands on the west side of the* Strait, which had been Seen from the 
Bounty's launch, and were now subjected to the correction of the 
Providence's time-keepers; he was confirmed in the opinion, that 
some material differences existed in the positions of the lands nea|* 
Cape York. 

■ The last passage known to have ^been made through Torref 
Strait, previously to the sailing of the Investigator, was by Messieurs 
William Bampton and Matthew B. Alt, commanders of the ships. 
Hormuzeer and Chesterjield. Their discoveries were made public, in 
two charts, by Mr. Dalrymple, in 1798 and 1799 ; and from them, 
and captain Bampton's manuscript journal; the south coast of New 
Guinea, and most of the reefs and islands near it, are laid* down in 
Plate XIII. ; after having been adjusted to the observations of 
captain Bligh, and to those subsequently made by me in the Investi- 
gator and Cumberland. The journal was obtained through the 
kindness of Mr. Arrowsmith ; and, though no courses and distances 
be given, and the differences from the charts be sometimes con- 
siderable, it is yet so interesting in many points, that I have judged 
the following abridgement would be acceptable, as well to the 
general, as to the nautical, reader. 

The Hormuzeer and Chesterfield sailed together from Norfolk 
Island ; with the intention of passing through Torres’ Strait, by a 
route which the commanders did not know to have been before 
attempted. June ao, 1793, in the evening, being in latitude 10° 24' 
south, and longitude 144,* 14' east (by captain Bampton's chart^, a 
dry reef was seen extending from W. i S. to N. W. by W., distant 
four or five miles, and breakers from the mast head at-N. by E. f E. ; 
An island (Murray’s), whidi appeared to be large and woody, was 



xxxi 


North Cotta: Tbrre/JOrait.'l INTRODUCTION. 

also seen, and bore N. W. i W. The ships got ground in 6o fathoms, 
and hauled the wind to the eastward, till midnight ; when, having 
tio bottom at 70 fathoms, they lay to, till morning. 

June 81. The Hormuzeer's long boat w^ sent a-head; and, at 
ten o'clock, the ships bore away northward. At noon, the latitude 
was 9*30'. The course was altered, at three, to the north-west; 
and at dusk, they hove to, for the night : soundings from 70 to 56 
fathoms. The same course being resumed on the sand, the latitude, 
. noon, was 8® 48'; and the depth 30 fathoms, on a bottom of sand, 
mud, and shells. From noon to five p. m., when they anchored, 
the ships appear to have steetfed W. by S. The land had been seen 
at one o'clock ; and at two, the water had shoaled suddenly, from 
30 to 10 fathoms, and afteriMirds diminished to 5, which continued 
to the place of anchorage. The land was part of the coast of New 
G iJiNEA ; and the extremes were set at W. by N. | N. and N. W. ^ N., 
six or seven leagues, (in the chart, miles.) The flood tide here, 
set two miles per hour;, towards the land ; and the rise, by the lead 
line, was nine feet. 

June 23. The ships got under way with the weather, or ebb, 
tide, a little before noon ; latitude 8* 52'. At four o'clock, the wind 
blew strong at south-«east, with thick weather; and they anchored in 
9 fathoms, blue mud ; having made a course of E. N. E. nearly 
parallel to the coast. They remained here till the next afternoon ; 
when the Hormuzeer having parted her cable, both ships stood 
to the north-eastward, along the land, until midnight; at which 
time they wore to the south-west, in 30 fathoms. At daylight of 
the 25th, the depth had decreased to 16 fathoms; and they stretched 
north-eastward again, with little variation in the soundings. The 
latitude, .at noon, was 8® 10'; and the ships continued their course 
upon a imd, keeping as much to the east as possible; and* the 
soundings having increased to 30 fathoms, at dusk, they hove to ; 
but stretched off, at midnight, on coming into to fathoms. In the 
morning of June 26, they were standing to the eastward ; but the 


^AMPTOW 

and Alt* 
1793. 



txxii . INTRODUCTION. . {Prior Dwcoverust. 

Hampton wind becoming light at nine o'clock, Mr. Bampton anchored in g 
**17931^ fathoms, on a muddy bottom, in latitude 7" 55' south. The coast of 
New Guinea was then seen to extend from N. N. W‘. ^ W. to E. N. E. ; 
and the south end of a reef, running off from the western extreme, 
bore W. by S. i S., two leagues. 

The land here forms a large, unsheltered bay ; and an opening 
nearly at the head, bearing N. ^E., appeared like the entrance of a 
considerable river ; but an officer, who was sent in a boat to sound, 
saw breakers stretching across. The soundings were regular, from 
9 to 6 fathoms, within a mile or two of the shore; when there was 
only twelve feet; and the surf which rolled in, made it impossible 
to land. The country round the bay is described as level and open, 
and of an agreeable aspect. 

On the return of the boat the ships weighed, and stretched south- 
ward until June 27, at noon. The latitude was then 9" 1'; and a 
sand bank was seen from the mast head, bearing S. W. ~ W. They 
then wore to the north-eastward ; and continued upon that course 

until the 28th, at dusk; when the land of Ngw Guinea being in sight 

« 

as far as E. by N., the same, apparently, which had been set from 
the anchorage on the eSth, they stretched off till two in the morn- 
ing ; and then in again, towards the land. 

Captain Bampton had followed the coast of New Guinea thus far, 
in the hope of finding a passage to the northward, between it and 
Louisiade ; but the trending of the land so far to the east, and the 
difficulty of weathering it, from the current being adverse, obliged 
him to give up that hope. A consultation was then held ; and a 
determination made to attempt the passage through the middle of 
Torres’ Strait. 

At the time the ships hauled their wind to the southward, the 

f 

. latitude was 8® 3'; the longitude, from three distances of the«8un 
and moon, 145® 23'; and the depth of water 40 fathoms, on a muddy 
bottom. They had no soundings from that time to July 1 , at one 
a. m.,; when tliere was 35 fathoms. At daylight, land, which was 



North Coast: Torres' S^ait.'] INTRODUCTION. xxxiii 

the Damley’s Island of captain Bligh, bore S. W. by S. severTor eight 
leagues ; a dry sand was seen in the W. N. W. , ( probably W. S. W. ) ; irw. 

and a reef, which appears to have been that of Anchor Key, was six 
or seven miles distant in the S. E. At four in the afternoon, when 
Darnley’s Island bore W. by N. ^ N. live leagues, and Murray's 
Island S. E. ^ E- (probably S. S. E. ^ E. ) the ships anchored in 22 
fathoms, marly bottom ; and the boats were sent towards the first 
island to sound, and see if it were inhabited. The latitude observed 
at this anchorage, was 9® 40' south, and longitude from three dis- 
tances of the sun and moon 142° 58' 30" east. 

July 2. The boats returned.' Between the ships and the island, 
they had passed over five different reefs, separated by narrow 
channels of 11 to 14 fathoms deep. The natives of the island 
came down in considerable numbers; and exchanged some bow's 
and arrows, for knives and other articles. They were stout men ; 
and somewhat above the common size of Europeans. Except in 
colour, whifch was not of so deep a cast, they bore much resemblance 
to the ^natives of Port Jackson ; ‘and had scars raised upon their 
bodies in the same manner. The men were entirely naked; but 
the women, who kept at a distance and appeared small in .size, wore 
an apron of leaves, rea<Jiing down to the knee. Many cocoa-nut 
trees were seen in the lower pjuts of the island. 

When the boats returned, they were followed by four canoes. 

One of them went along-side of the Chesterfield; and an Indian 
ventured on board, on a sailor going into the canoe, as a hostage for 
him. Most of these people had their ears perforated. The hair 
was generally cut short; but some few had* it flowing loose. It is 
naturally black ; but from being rubbed with something, it had a 
reddish, or burnt appearance. These Indian.-!, .so far as they could 
be understood, represented their island to abound in refreshmente ; 
and it was, 'therefore, determined to send another boat to make fur- 
ther examination. 

. July 3. Mr. Shaw, chief mate of the Chesterfield, Mr. Carter, 

VOL. I. F 



xxxir 


INTRODUCTION. 


[Prior Diicoveritt. 


Bampton and captain Hill of the New-South-Wales corps, who was a pas- 
“ senger, went away armed, with five seamen in a whale boat ; and 
were expected to return on the following day; but the 4th, 5th, and 
6th, passed, without, any tidings of them; although many signal 
guns had been fired. 

On the 7th, two boats, manned and armed, unde?* the command 
of Mr. Dell, chief mate of the Hormuzeer, were sent in search of 
the whale boat. On reaching the island, Mr. Dell heard conch 
shells sounding in different parts ; and saw eighty or ninety armed 
natives upon the shore. To the inquiries, by signs, after the miss- 
ing boat, they answered that she was gone to the westward ; but 
none of them would venture near; nor did they pay attention to a 
white handkerchief which was held up, and had before been con- 
sidered a signal of peace. 

As the boats proceeded in their search, round the island, the 
natives followed along the shore, with increasing numbers. One 
man, who was rubbed with something blue, and appeated to be a 
chief, had a small axe in his hand'; which was known, from the red 
helve, to have belonged to Mr. Staw. On reaching the bay in the 
north-west side of the island, Mr. Dell remarked that the natives 
disappeared; all except about thirty, who were very anxious in 
persuading him to land. They brought down women ; and made 
signs, that the boat and people whom he sought, were a little way 
up in the island. He, however, rowed onward; when the beach 
was immediately crowded with people, who had been lying in 
ambush, expecting him to land. 

After having gone entirely round the island, and seen nothing 
of the object of his research, Mr. Dell returned to the first cove ; 
where a great concourse of natives, armed with bows, arrows, clubs, 
and lances, were assembled at the outskirt of the wood. By offer- 
ing knives and other things, a few were induced to approach the 
boat; and the coxswain seized one of them by the hair and neck, 
with the intention of his being taken off to the ships, to give an 



NorACoMt: Torres' Strmt.-] INTRODUCTION. xxxv 

• 

account of the missing boat and people. A shower of arrows in- Bimptok 
stantly came out of the wood ; and a firing was commenced, which 
killed one Indian,. and wounded some others. In the mean time, 
the coxswain fouifd it impossible to keep the man, from his hair and 
body being greased ; and the boat's drew was too much occupied 
to assist him. , 

July 8. The two commanders having heard the report of Mr. 

Dell, proceeded with the ships, round the northern reefs and sand 
banks, to the bay on the north-west side of Darnley’s Island, which 
was named Ttvacherous Bay. On the 9th, in the afternoon, they 
anchored with springs on the cables, in 13 fathoms, sand, mud, and 
shells; the extremes of the island bearing E. ^-N. to S. W. by S., 
and the nearest part distant a quarter of a mile. A boat was sent on 
shore ; and returned, at sunset, with a few cocoa nuts ; but without 
having seen any of the inhabitants. 

July 10. An armed party of forty-four men landed from the 
ships, under the command of Mr. Dell. After hoisting the union 
jack, and taking possession of this, and the neighbouring islands 
and coast of New Guinea, *in the name of His Majesty, they examined 
the huts, and found the great Coats of captain Hill, Mr. Carter, and 
Mr. Shaw ; with several other things which had belonged to them, 
and to the boats’ crew ; so that no doubt was entertained of their 
having been murdered. In the evening, the party, arrived from 
making the tour of the island; having burnt and destroyed one- 
hundred-and-thirty-five huts ; sixteen canoes, measuring from fifty 
to seventy feet in length ; and various plantations of sugar cane. 

The natives appeared to have retired to the hills in the centre of the 
island ; as not one of .them could be discovered. 

Darnley’s Island was judged to be about fifteen miles in circum- 
ference. It is variegated with hills and plains; and the richness; of 
the vegeta^pn bespoke it to be very fertile; it appeared, however, 
to be scantily supplied with fresh water, there being only one small 
place where it was found near the shore. The plantations of the 



xsxvi 


INTRODUCTION. 


[/Vior Di$coi^rie$. 


B/iotton 
and ALt. 
1793. 


natives, which were extensive and numerous in the plains, contained 
yams, sweet potatoes, I)lantains, and sugar canes, inclosed within 
neat fences of bamboo ; and cocoa-nut trees were very abundant, 
particularly near the habitations. The hills, which mostly occupy 
the middle of the island, we*re covered with trees ahd bushes of a 
luxuriant growth ; and upon different parts of the shores, the man- 
grove was produced in great plenty. 

The habitations of the Indians were generally placed at the heads 
of the small coves ; and formed into villages of ten or twelve huts 
each, inclosed within a bamboo fence of, at least, twelve feet high. 
The hut much resembles a haycock, with a pole driven through it; 
and may contain a family of six or eight people. The covering is 
of long grass, and cocoa leaves. The entrance is small; and so 
low, that the inhabitants must creep in and out*; but the inside was 
clean and neat ; and the pole that supports the roof, was painted red, 
apparently with ochre. 

In each of the huts, and usually on the right hand side going in, 
were suspended two or three human skulls ; and several strings of 
hands, five or six on a string. These wefe hung round a wooden 
image, rudely carved into the representation of a man, or of some 
bird ; and painted and decorated in a curious manner : the feathers 
of^e Emu or Cassuary generally formed one of the ornaments. 
In one hut, containing much the greater number of skulls, a kind of 
gum was found burning before one of these images. This hut was 
adjoining to another, of a different form, and much more capacious 
than any of the others. The length was thirty feet, by fifteen in 
breadth ; and the floor .was raised six feet from the ground. The 
hut was very neatly built of bamboo, supported by long stakes, 
and thatched with cocoa leaves and dried grass. It was judged to 
be ihe residence of the chief of tiie island ; and was the sole hut in 
which there were no skulls or hands ; but the adjoining one* had 
more than a double proportion. 

The corpse of a man, who had been shot, was found disposed of 



xxxvtt 


Nor^Cooit: Ihrrea' Strait.'] INTRODUCTION. 

• 

in the following manner/ Sx stakes were driven into the ground^ 
about three feet from each other, and sijf feet high. A platform 
of twigs was worked upon them, at the height of five feet; and 
upon this, the body was laid, without covering ; but the putrid state 
of the corpse, ‘did not allow of a close'inspection. 

Upon the rqefs which surround the island, square places, of about 
fifty feet every way, were formed, by piling up stones of two or 
three feet high. The tide flows over these ; and, on the ebb, the 
Indians go down and take out the fish. On all parts of the reefs, 
there were bamboos set up, with pendants of dried leaves; but 
whether they were intended as beacons for the canoes, or to point 
out the boundaries of each fishery, could not be ascertained. 

The description of the canoes is nearly the same as that given in 
the voyage of Bligh and Portlock ; but Mr. Bampton says, “ some 
of them were ingeniously carved and painted, and had curious 
figures at each end.” The weapons of these people are bows, 
arrows, dubs of about four feet long, and spears and lances of 
various kinds, made of black, hard, wood. Some of the lances were 
jagged, from the sharp ‘point to a foot upward ; and most of them 
were neatly carved. 

The sole quadrupeds seen, were rats, mice, and lizards ; which, 
when the huts were set on fire, ran from them in great numj^rs. 
Land birds were numerous in all parts of the island ; and upoiTthe 
reefs were many curlews, large yellow-spotted plover, king’s fishers, 
sand pipers, red bills, and gulls. 

Captain Bampton lays down Darnley's Island, which the natives 
call Wamvax, in latitude 9*39' 30" south, ^nd longitude 142" 59' 15" 
east; but in his chart, the centre is placed in 9° 34' south, and 143° 1' 
east. He much regretted that he could not land again, to examine 
the interior parts of this fine island ; but his long boat having drifted 
out*of sight, without water, provisions, or compaSs, it was judged 
necessary for the ships to, weigh, and look after her. 

July 11. The Hormuzeer stood to the northward, with sound- 


Bamptok 
artd Alt^ 
1793. 





nOTRODUCTlON. 


{Prior Bucovorint. 

Bamptoii mgs of 15 to 19 fathoms. After three hours run, with a fresh 
breeze, a reef and sand *bank were seen a-head, and the ship was 
veered to the south-west. Another reef and bank were descried, 
soon afterward, in the west ; and, at the same time’, a signal for see- 
ing the long boat was made By the Chesterfield. In the afternoon, 
the boat was picked up, and both ships anchored under Stephens' 
Island. 

An armed party was immediately sent on shore, to obtain intelli- 
gence, if possible, of the lost whale boat. The natives were 
assembled in hostile array, upon the hills, sounding their conchs ; 
but, after lancing a few arrows, they fled. Several were wounded 
by the shots fired in return ; but they succeeded in escaping to a 
canoe at the back of the island, and getting off; all except one boy, 
who was taken unhurt.* In the huts, which were burnt, several 
things were found; and amongst them, a sheet of copper, which 
belonged to the Chesterfield. 

July la. Stephens’ Island was traversed all over; and a spike 
nail, with the king’s broad arrow upon it, was brought on board, and 
excited many conjectures as to whence it cdme.-f The plantations, 
huts, images, skulls, and hands, were found similar to those of 
Damley's Island. Amongst the trees, there was one resembling an 
almand, the nuts of which were good. 'The cocoa nut grows abun- 
dantly; especially in the south-eastern part, where the trees formed 
a continued grove. The sole quadruped seen, except rats, was a 
pretty animal of the opossum tribe. It was found in a cage; and 
had probably been brought, either from New Guinea, or New South 
Wales.X 

* It does not appear in the journalv when^ or where this boj was set on shore ; nor is 
any further mention made of him. 

t it had probably been obtained from the crews of either the Providence or Assitfant; 
which had anchored under Stephens* Island, nine months before. ^ 

t Mr. Hampton’s description of this animal is briefy as follows. Size and shape, of 
the opossum* Colo^ir, yellowish white with brown spots. End of the tail,*deep Ted: 



NorACwut: Tarrei' Strait:] INTRODUCTION. 


XXXIX 


July 13. A boat was sent to Campbell’s Island ; but it did not Bampto* 
contain either plantations, cocoa-nut tre’es, or fixed inhabitants. 

This, as also Stepheris’ and Nepean's Islands, are mostly low and 
sandy; and surrbunded with extensive reefs, upon which, it was 
thought, the Ihdians pass from one island to the other, at low water. 

In the afterpoon, the ships proceeded to the westward; but meet- 
ing with many reefs, they hauled more to the north, and discovered 
Bristow Island, lying close to the coast of New Guinea. Their 
attempts to find a passage here, were fruitless ; and after incurring 
much danger, and the Chesterfield getting aground, they returned 
to their former anchorage, in the evening of July si. The banks, 
reefs, and lands, seen during these eight days, will be found marked 
in Plate XIII. 

Two canoes immediately came off" from Stephens' Island ; and 
one of the natives remained on board the Hormuzeer till eight 
o’clock. He seemed to be without fear ; and when inquiry was 
made after the lost boat and people, he pointed to a whale boat, and 
made signs that such an one had been at Darnley’s Island ; and that 
six of the people were "killed.* Many presents were made to this 
man ; and he was clothed, and sent on shore in one of the boats. 

prehensile. Eyes, reddish brown i red when irritated. No visible cars. Used 
in feeding : five nails to each. Habit^ dull and slothful ; not savage. Food^ maize^ 
boiled rice, meat, leaves, or any thing offered. Odour, very strong at times, and dis- 
agreeable. 

* Captain Hill and four of the seamen were murdered by the natives. Messieurs 
Shaw and Carter were severely wounded ; but with Ascolt, the remaining seaman, they 
got into the boat, cut the grapnel rope, and escaped. ’They were without provisions or 
compass ; and it being impossible to reach the ships, which lay five leagues to windward, 
they bore away to the west, through the Strait; in the hope of reaching Timor. On the 
tenth day, they made land ; whicli proved to be Timor-laoet. They there obtained some 
relief to their great distress ; and went on to an island called by the natives, Sarrett; 
where Mr. Carter died : Messieurs Shaw and Ascolt sailed in a prow, for Bauda, in the 
April following. See Collins' Account of the English Colony in New South Wales. 

Vol. I. page 464, 465. 



xl 


introduction. 


{Prior Dtocoverioti 

Bampton July a®. The ships’ crews beginning to feel the want Of fresh 
1709. water, people were sent*6n shore to dig a well ; and the natives; 
though they still appeared shy and suspicious, ‘gave them some 
assistance. On the 84th, the boats had discovered a passage to the 
south-westward ; and as the well produced little water, and no pro- 
Jwision could be obtained, it was determined to prqceed onward, 
through the Strait, without further delay. 

They weighed the same afternoon ; and anchored, at dusk, in 14 
fathoms ; Campbell’s Island bearing N. E. by E. to E. by N. N. ; 
and many other small isles being in sight to the south-west and 
southward. Next day, the 85th, they steered S. by W. W., from 
seven in the morning to six in the evening when they anchored in 
17 fathoms, having islands in sight nearly all round : the nearest 
at the distance of f^ye or six miles. These islands were small ; 
but inhabitants were seen on the greater number ; and two canoes 
went olF to the Chesterfield. 

c 

July 26. The ships proceeded westward, very slowly ; ‘the wind 
being at south-west. In the morning of the 27th, they were at anchor 
in 11 fathoms ; Dungencss Island bearing’ W. by N. to N. W. by 
W. i W., about six miles; and Warriors Island N. N. W. i W. eight 
miles. Mr. Dell had passed the preceding night upon one of the 
Six Sisters, which was called Dove Islandi' hearing from the ship, 
S. S. E. six miles. A fire on the beach, with two fish broiling upon 
it, bespoke the presence of inhabitants ; but on searching the island 
over, none could be discovered : it was thought that they had fled 
to a larger island, it being connected with this by a reef, which dries 
at low water, Mr. Dell had a seine with him, and caught a dozen 
fine fish ; but the object of remaining all night, that of taking turtle, 
did not succeed ; although large shells of them were found upon 
the shore. 

Dove Island is about one mile and a half in circumferance ; and 
covered with trees and shrubs, the fragrapee of whose flowers per- 
fumed the air. Amongst other birds, two beautiful doves were shot. 



NorA CoMt: 'Forres' Strait.'^ INTRODUCTION. 


zli 


The plumage of the body was green ; the head, bill, and legs, red ; 
the tail, and under sides of the wings, yellow*. No huts, plantations, 
or other signs, of fixed inhabitants were seen ; nor was there any 
fresh water. • ^ 

On the return of the boat, the vessels weighed ; and the wind 
being at W. S. yV., they worked through, between Dungeness and 
Warriors Islands, with the flood tide. They then anchored in n 
fathoms ; the first Island bearing S. S. E. to S i W. three leagues, and 
the second E. by S. ' S. 

July a8. Having a fresh breeze at E. S. E., the long boat was 
sent a-head, and the ships followed, to the westward. They passed 
Turtle-backed Island, the Cap, and the Brothers, on one side, and 
Nichols' Key on the othv^r : the soundings gradually shoaling from 
12 to 7 fathoms. Upon the Cap, Mr. Bampton “ saw a volcano 
“ burning with great violence,” which induced him to give it the 
name of Fire Island; not knowing that it had before been named. 
At noon, die Brothers, with the Cap and Turtle-backed Island 
behind, bore S. E. by S. to S Er four miles ; and Mount Corn- 
wallis N. 16* W. 

The water continued to shoal ; and at three p. m., the ships 
anchored in 5 fathoms, sand, shells, and stones ; the Brothers bear- 
ing E. by S. i S. five leagues, and Mount Cornwallis N. by E. i E. 
There were two large islands in sight in the S. S. W. ^ W. to S. W. 
i S., at the distance of eight or ten leagues ; and many nearer reefs 
in the same direction. 

July 29. The long boat was sent to sound in the north-west ; 
and when the ebb tide slacked, the ships followed : wind at E. S. E. 
The soundings increased from 5 to 7 fathoms ; and afterwards varied 
between these- depths, until noon; when the latitude obs^ved was 
9* 42' south.* The Brothers then bore S. 64“ E. ; Mount Cornwallis 
N. 3^ E; and a long, low island (Turn-again, of Bligh,) N. 35“ to 

* This latUude is from 4' to S' more south than captain Bligh’s positions ; and the same 
diffeittnce dMurs in all the observations, where a comparison can be m^de. 

G 


Bampton 
and 'Alt, 
1793 . 


VOL. I. 



xlii 


INTRODUCTION. 


Bampjon 
and Alt. 
1937. 


[Prior Dueovorm. 

58® W. At three p. m. the reefs were so numei^us, that' the ships 
were obliged to anchor, until the boats could sound for a passage : 
the depth here was 4^ fathoms, on a bottom of rotten stones and 
coral. * . 

r 

July 31. They weighedj^^P^ hauled the wind eastward, to pass 
round Tum-again h^rmg away occasionally to avoid small 

reefs : the soundings 'to 4,^^Vathoms. After passing round, they 
anchored in 5 fathoms; amdi^.the boats should sound between the 
reefs which appeared'on every side : Turn-again Island then bore 
S. 56“ to 83* W. about^t*(|^ :leagu^y Mount Cornwallis N. ^6“E., the 
Brothers S. 50® ‘E. the latitude '^sbrK^^was 9“ 32', and longitude 
from four sights of the sun and mowx^ :a4o“ 58^ east. Next after- 
noon, in proceeding to the north-westward, the Chesterfield struck 
upon a bank in eight feet water; but the coral giving way to the 
ship, she went over without injury. In the evening, they, both an- 
chored in 4 y fathoms, gravel and shells Mount Cornwallis bearing 
E. ^ S., and a long tract of land from N. W. by N. to N. E., at the 
distance of five or six leagues. Tum-again Island bore S. S. E. E. 
to S. i W., four miles ; and thither the 5 hips ran on Aug. 3., and 
anchored in 3^ fathoms, fine sand, within a quarter of a mile of the 
shore ; the extremes bearing S. 58? E. to W. The purpose for 
which they came to this island, was to |ix)cure wood, water, and 
refreshments ; during the time necessary for the boats to explore a 
passage through the innumerable reefs and banks, which occupy 
this part of the Strait. 

Messieurs Bampton and Alt remained here seventeen days ; being 
afraid to move with the strong south-east winds which blew during 
the greater part of the time. Turn-again Island is flat, low, and 
swamp3K and about three miles in length, by half that space in 
breadth. ( Mr. Bamptoti’s chart makes it the double of these dimen- 
sions ; and, generally, the islands in it exceed the descqption^of the 
journal in about the same proportion : ^the journal seettts to be the 
preferable authority. ) The reefs which surround Tum-again Island, 



Ntr&Coatt: Torrei Strait] INTRODUCTION. xliii 

♦ A 

extend a great (Jistance to the east and west; particularly in the Bamptoh 
latter direction, where there are many dry* sand banks. The island 
is mostly over-run with mangroves ; and at die top <rf the flood, the 
wood cutters were obliged to work in the wAter ; and were, at all 
times, exceedingly annoyed with musketoes. * The island is said, in 
the joiimal, to.be in 9® 34,^ south and^i40*;jg^^^tet; which is 3' to the, 
south and 1® 34' west of its situation in‘*the ch^ of captain Bligh. 

No other refreshment than smaH. quatldti^; of fish, crabs, and 
shell-fish, being procurable here,- the ships- ci«ws t^^ere further re- 
duced in their short allowance; ^With'i^)q«ct tq fresh water, their 
situation was still worse r^lS^Aihe fc^ be obtained upon Tum-again 
Island; and had not captain Bampton ingeniously contrived a still, 
their state would have been truly deplorable. He caused a cover, 
with a hole in the centre, to be fitted by the carpenter upon a large 
cooking pot ; and over the hole he luted an inverted tea kettle, with 
the spout cut off. To the stump of the spout, was fitted a part of 
the tube of a speaking trumpet ; and this was lengthened^by a gun 
barrel, which passed through a cask of salt water, serving as a cooler. 

From* this machine-, good fresh water, to the amount of twenty-five 
to forty gallons per day, was procured ; and obtained a preference 
to that contained in the few casks remaining in the Hormuzeer. 

By Aug. 80., when the weather had become more moderate, the 
boats had sounded amongst the reefs in all directions ; but tliere 
appeared to be no practicable passage out of this labyrinth, except 
to the north-west. In that direction the ships proceeded three hours, 
in from 6 to 3 fathoms. Next afternoon, they steered westward, 
with the flood tide; and again anchored .in 3 fathoms, sand and 
gravel. The coast of New Guinea then extended from N. by E. ^ E. 
to N. W. N. ; and the north-west end of a long island, to which 
the name of Talbot was given, bore N. by E. j E. nine or ten miles. 

Aug. At day-light they followed the long boat to the west- 
ward, in soundings from^Sj to 4 fathoms. At seven o'clock, the 
Hormuzeer grounded in s fathoms ; upon a bank whence Talbot's 



INTRODUCTION. 


Xliv 


[Prior Diteoveriei. 


BAurroK Island bore N. N. E. to E. N. E., eight or ten miles, and where the 

ftDil 

1793. observed latitude was sif south. She remained upon this bank 
until the morning of the a^th ; when Mr. Bampton got into a chan- 
nel of 13 fathoms, which had been found by the boats, and the ship 
did not appear to have recfeive^^ other damage, than the loss of 
the false keel. The still continued to be kept at work, day and 
night. 

Aug. 37. Messieurs Bampton and Alt proceeded onward in a 
track which had been sounded by the boats. At sunset, they came 
to, in 4 fathoms ; the extremes of New Guinea then bearing N. W. 
by W. to N. E. by E., three or four leagues. Sonle further progress 
was made next morning ; and at nocai, when at anchor in fathoms, 
and in latitude 9* adj', an island was discovered bearing S. W. S. 
five or six leagues ; which received, eventually, the name of Deli- 
verance, Island. 

Aug. 39. The Hormuzeer grounded at low water ; from which 
it appeared that the tide had fhllen twelve feet, though then at the 
neaps. When the ship floated, they made sail to the westward ; and 
deepened the water to 9 and la fathoms." At noon, it had again 
shoaled to 6 ; Deliverance Island bearing S. S. W. i W. nine or ten 
miles, and New Guinea N. W. to N. by E. ~ E. four or five leagues : 
latitude observed 9“ 25' south. After preceding a little further 
westward, they anchored in 5 fathoms. 

Aug. 30. The soundings varied as beforfe, between 4 and 10 
fathoms ; the bottom, rotten coral intermixed with sand. At noon, 
when the latitude was 9® 21', Deliverance Island was just in sight 
from the deck, in the S. by S. ; and the extremes of New Guinea 
bore N. E. by E. to N. W. y W., ten or twelve miles.* In the after- 
noon, the depth again decreased to 4 fathoms, and obliged them to 
ancjior until morning. On the 3 1st, the ships appear to have steered 

t. 

• Mr, Bamptoa’s chart and journal are more at variance here than in the preceding 
parts of the Strait^ and I have found it very difficult tQ a^ust them; but have attempted 
it in Plate XIIL 



yhrth CoastJ INTRODUCTION. 

south-westward, leaving on the starbord hand a very extensive 
bank, on which the long braat had a fatholns water : the soundings 
from the Hormuzeer were from 3 to 7 fathoms. At noon, the lati- 
tude was 9“ 87', rfnd no land in sight. The soundings then increased 
gradually ; and at sunset, no bot^m fcould be found at 40 fathoms. 
A swell coming from S. S. W. announced an open sea in that direc- 
tion ; and that the dangers of Torres’ Strait were, at length, 
surmounted. 

This passage of the Hormuzeer and Chesterfield in seventy-two 
days, with that made in nineteen y by the captains Bligh and Port- 
lock, displayed the extraordinary dangers of the Strait ; and appear 
to have deterred all other commanders from following them, up to 
the time of the Investigator. Their accounts confirm the truth of 
Torres having passed through it, by shewing the correctness of the 
sketch contained in his letter to the King of Spain. 

The sole remaining information* relative to the North Coast of 
Terra Australis, was contained ‘in a note, transcribed by Mr. Dal- 
rymple, from a work bf burgomaster Witsen upon the Migration 
of Mankind^ The place of which the burgomaster speaks, is evi- 
dently on the coist of Carpentaria, near the head of the Gulph ; 
but it is called New Guinea; and Jw wrote in 1705. The note 
is as follows ; but upon whose authority it was given, does not 
appear : 

“ In 16° 10' south, longitude 159® 17'" (east of TenerifFe, or be- 
tween 14a® and 143® east of Greenwich,) “ the people swam on 
“ board of a Dutch ship ; and when they received a present of a 
“ piece of linen, they laid it upon their head in token of gratitude : 
“ Every where thereabout, all the people are malicious. They use 
arrows, and bows of such a length, that one end rests on the ground 
*‘^when. shooting. They have also hazeygaeys and kalawaeys, and 
attacked the Dutch ; but did not know the execution of the guns.” 
On summing up the whole of the knowledge which had been 


xIt 

Hampton 
igid Alt. 

1793. 


Conclusive 

Remarks. 



INTRODUCTION. 


CoDdutWe 

Reaunrlw. 


[Prior Dite om nt* . 


acqimcd of the North Coast, it will ^pear, that natural history, 
geography, and navigation had still niuch* 4 o learn of this part of the 
world ; and more particularly, that they required the accomplish- 
ment of the following objects : 

ist. A general mrv^ of T6rr||’ Strait. The navigation from 
the Pacific, or Great Ocean to all parts of India, and to the Cape of 
Good Hope, would be greatly facilitated, if a passage through the 
&rait, moderately free from danger, could be discovered ; since five 
GT six weeks of the usual route, by the north of New Guinea or the 
more eastern islands, would thereby be saved. Notwithstanding 
the great obstacles which navigators had encountered in some parts 
of the Strait, there was still room to hope, that an examination of 
the whole, made with care and perseverance, would bring such a 
passage to light. A survey of it was, therefore, an object much to 
be desired ; not only for the merchants and seamen trading to these 
parts, but also from the benefits which would certainly accrue there- 
from to general navigation and geography. • 

and. An examination oj the shores of the Gulph of Carpentaria. 
The real form of this gulph remained in as great doubt with’ geo- 
graphers, as were the manner how, and time when it acquired its 
name.* The east side of the Gulph had been explored to the latitude 
of 17®, and many rivers were there marked and named ; but how 
far the representation giydn of .it by the Dutch was faithful, — ^what 
were the productions, and what its inhabitants, — were, in a great 

* 1 am aware that the ({resident de Brosses says, This same year also (1628) Cab- 
PBNTABiA was thus named hy P. Carpenter, who discovered it when general in the s^- 
vice of the Dutch Coropwy. He returned from India to Europe, in the month of June 
1628, with five sjiips richly laden.” , {Mist. de$ iVov. tmx Terres Amt. Tome T. 4SS}. But 
the president here seems to give eidvr bis own, or the Abb4 Prdvost’s oonjectnres, for 
matters of fact. We have seen, that the coast called Carpentaria was discovered long 
before' 1628; and it is, besides, little probable, that Carpenter should have been making 
discoveries with five ships, richly lade^ and homeward bound. This name of Carpentarin 
does not once appear in Tasman’s Instructions, dated in £644 ; but is found inThevenot’s 
chart of 166S. 



ISfefA INTRODUCTION. xlvU 

measure, u»certain. Or rather it was certain, that those early nayit Conclusive 

, 1 ^ Remarks. 

gators did not possess the means of nxmg the positions and forms ‘ 
of lands, with any thing like the accuracy of modem science ; an.d 
that they could have known very little of the productions, or inha- 
bitants. Of the rest of the Gulph^no one could say, with any confi- 
dence, upon what authority its form had been g^ven in the charts ; 
so that conjecture, being at liberty to appropriate the Gulph of Car- 
pentaria to itself, had made it the entrance to a vast arm of the s^, 
dividing Terra Australis into two, or more, islands. 

3rd. ^ more exact investigation of the hays, shoals, islands, and coasts 
^Arnhem’s, and the northern Van Diemen's, Lands. The infor- 
mation upon these was attended with uncertainty ; first, because the 
state of navigation was very low at the time of their discovery ; and 
second, from want of the details and authorities upon which they 
had been laid down. The old charts contained large islands lying 
off the coast, under the names of T' Hoog Landt or Wessel's Eylandt, 
and Crocedils Eylanden ; but of which little more was known than 
that, if they existed, they must lie to the eastward of 135® from 
Greenwich. Of the R.® Spult, and other large streams represented 
to intersect the coast, the existence even was doubtful. That the 
coast was dangerous, and shores sandy, seemed to be confirmed by 
Mr M®Cluer's chart ; and fha,t.they were peopled by “ divers cruel, 

“ poor, and brutal nations,” was ceitjunly not improbable, but it 
rested upon very suspicious autliprity. The Instructions to Tasman 
said, in 1644, “ Nova Guinea: has. been found to be inhabited by 
“ cruel, wild, savages ; and as it is uncertain what sort of people the 
“ inhabitants of the South Lands are, it may be presumed that they 
are also wild and barbarous savages, rather than a civilized people.” 

This uncertainty, with respect lo the natives of Arnhem's and the 
northern Van Diemen's Lands, remained, in a great degree, at the 
erill of tjie eighteenth century. . 

Thus, whatever could bear the name of exact, whether in natural 
history, geography, or navigation, was yet to. be learned of a 



xhriii 

Condtnive 

Remarks. 


INTRODUCTION. ^ \Prwf Disemrwi. 

country possessing five hundred leagues of sea-coast; and placed' 
in a climate and neighbcflirhood, where the richest productions of 
bo^ the vegetable and mineral kingdoms were known to exist. A 
voyage which should have had no other view, than the survey of 
Torres' Strait and the thorough investigation of the North Coast of 
Terra Australis, could not have been accused of wanting an object 
worthy of national consideration, 



£ xlix 3 


PRIOR DISCOVERIES IN TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


SECTION II. 

WESTERN COASTS. 

Preliminary Observations. Discoveries of Hartog: Edel: of the Ship 
jCeeuwin: the Vianen: of Pelsert: Tasman: Dampier: V laming: 

Dampier. Conclusive Remarks. 

Under the term Western Coasts, is comprehended the space PreUminary 
from the western extremity of the northern Van Diemen’s Land to 
the North-west Cape of New Holland ; and from thence, southward (Atlas, pi.i.) 
•to Capl Leeuwin. The first is usually termed the North-west, and 
the second the West Coast: Taken together, they present an extent 
of shore of between seven and eight hundred leagues in length ; 
lying in the fine plimates comprised between the iith and 35th 
degrees of south latitude. 

The recital of discoveries in Tasman's instrucdons speaks of the 
first knowledge gained of these coasts in the following terms : “ In 
“ the years 1616, 1618, i6ig, and 162s, the west coast of this Great 
“ unknown South Land, from 35* to 22* south latitude, was discovered 
“ by outward-bound ships ; and among them by the ship Endragt.” 

The recital gives no further particulars ; but from thence, and from 
a manuscript chart by Eessel Gerrits, 1627,* there seems to be suffi- 
cient authority for attributing the first authenticated discovery of any 

part of the Western Cbasts to Dirk Hartog, commander of the ship Haktoo. 

• 1616 * 

* See Dalrymple'e Collection concerning Fapua^ note^ ^ege 6. 

VOL. r. H 



HASToa. 

16 ie^. 


Edel. 

1619. 


INTRODUCTHM CBW DUwmk*. 

Endra^tf outward-bound from Holland to India. He appears to 
have first seen the West Coast in latitude about 86*^ south ; and to 
have sailed northward along it, to about 83“ ^ giving the name 
Landt de Endragt, to the country so discovered. An important 
part of his discovery was T)irk Hartog’s Road ( at the entrance of a 
sound afterwards. called Shark's Bay, by Dampier^, lying a little 
south of 25". Upon one of the islands which form the road there 
was found, first in 1697, and afterwards in 1801, a plate of tin, 
bearing the following inscription. 

Anno i6j6,'the a.^th of October arrived here the ship Endragt 
** of Amsterdam ; the first merchant Gillis Miehais of Luik, Dirk 
** Hartog of Amsterdam, captain. They sailed from hence».for 
** Bantam, the 27th D*." On the lower part, as far as could "be 
distinguished in 1697, was cut with a knife, “ The under merchant 

Jan Stins; chief mate Pieter Dookus of Bill. 1616.” 

The Mauritius, another outward-bound ship, appears to have 
made some further discovery upon the West Coast, in July 1618, 
particularly of Willem's River, near the North-west Cape; but no 
further particulars are known. 

In Campbell’s edition of- Harris’ Voyages (p. 325), it is said, 
** The next year the Land of Edel was found, and received its 
“ name from the discoverer.” The president De Brosses says 
nearly the same thing (Tome I. p. 432); whence, combining this 
’Rdth the Dutch recital and the chart of Eessel Gerritz, it should 
appear that J. de Edei^ commanded an outward-bound ship ; and, 
in July 1619, accidaitally* fell in with that part of the West Coast 
to which his name is applied. The extent of Edejis discovery 
appears, from Theveiiot's chart, to^have been from about the latitude 
89", northward to 96^*, where the Land of Endragt cqpameAces; 
but in a chart of this coast, by Van Keulen, the name is extended 
southward to 39“ so', past the island Rottenest, which, according 



Gnuit,] ISTR^mCTION. M 

to Thevenot, should rather have been the discovery of the ship bml. 
Leeuwin. 

The great reef lying off the coast of Edel, called Houtman’s 
Abrolhos, was discovered at the same time; probably by Edel, or by 
some ship in the same squadron. 

I do not find it any where said who commanded the Leeuwin, or ThitLeemm. 
lioness; but it should appear, that this was also one of the out- 
ward-bound ships which fell in with the West Coast. In Thevenot's 
chart, Leeuwin’s Land comprehends about ninety leagues of the 
south-west extremity of New Holland; and, from the latitude of 35®, 
extends northward to about 31* ; but in later publications, it has 
been much restricted in its northern limit,j^ apparently, upon the 
authority of Van Keulen. 

T'he next discovery upon the Western Coasts was that of the The rumeu. 

1 

ship Vianen*, one of the seven which returned to Europe under the 
command of the governor-general Carpenter. The Dutch recital 
speaks *of this discovery In the following terms. The coast was 
seen “ again accidentally in the year 1628, on the north side, in the 
“ latitude 21* south, by the ship Vianen, homeward bound from 
“ India ; when they coasted two-hundred miles, without gaining 
** any knowledge of this Great Country; only observing a foul wd 
“ barren shore, green fields, and very wild, black, barbarous 
“ inhabitants." 

This was the part called De Witt’s Land; but whether the 
name were applied by the captain of the Vi^en does not appear in 
the recital. De Brosses says, “ Williaip de Witt gave his own 
** name to the country which he saw in 1628, to the north of 
** Remessen's River; and which a Dutch captain, had, to 
** hi^ misfortune, discovered in the month of January in the same 

year; wKen he was driven upon this coast of De Witt, in ai* of 
** latitude, and lost all Ins richc^.’’ The confusion that reigns in the 



lii * INTROt^Cbl 46 N. tiVM)f 

Hut rtaneH. president's account does not render It improbable, that the country 

might have received its name in the way he describes, and in the 

year i6a8 ; for, in 1644, De Witt's Land is used as a known term 

for this part of the North-west Coast. 

« 

Pblbixt. Thus far, the parts of the Western Coasts have been distinguished 
by little else than the dates and limits of their discovery ; for, in 
fact, this is all that has reached us from these early navigators. 
The following account is of a different character: it is extracted 
from the twenty-first piece in Thevenot’s collection; and, in the 
table of contents, is said to be translated from the Dutch. 

The Batavia, commanded by Francisco Pelsert, struck, in the 
night of June 4, iSag, upon a reef, “ called by our Flemings the 

Abrolhos or Rocks of Frederick Houtfnan,’* lying off* the west coast 
of New Holland. At daylight, an island was seen about three 
leagues distant, and two islets, or rather rocks, somewhat nearer, 
to which the passengers and part of the crew were s6nt. There 
being no fresh water to be found upon these islands, Pelsert had a 
deck laid over one of the boats; and, on June 8, put to sea, in order 
to make search upon the opposite main land : his latitude, at noon, 
was a8* 13' south. 

A short time after quitting the Abrolhos, captain Pelsert got sight 
of the coast, which, by estimation, bore N. by W. eight leagues 
from the place of shipwreck.* He had 95 to 30 fathoms, and stood 
off* till midnight, when he again steered for the land ; and in the 
morning of the 9th, it was four leagues off*. He ran that day from 
five to seven leagues, sometimes to the north, sometimes to the west ; 
the direction of the '^ast being N. by W. : it appeared to be rocky, 
—without trees, — and about the same height as the coast of Dover. 

• .1^ 

^ Tbevenot sajs six milles, and does not explain what kind of miles they are^but it 
is most probable that he literally copies bis original^ and that they are iVitch miles of 
fifteen to a degree. Van Keules^ In speaking of Hontman's Ahrolhos^ aajs, page 19^ 
^ This shoal i^ aa we believe^ 11 or 12 l^^es {6 5 9 ni^ten) bom the coast. 



Western Co<uU.l IN^R^^UCTION. liii 

A small, sandy bay was seen, into wljich Pelsert desired to enter; y*i,8EHT. 
but finding too much surf, and the weather becoming bad, he was 
obliged to haul further off, 

July lo. He kept in the same parallel, upon a wind ; the weather 
being bad, and his boat very leaky.* Next* day, the wind was at 
W. S. W., and more moderate. He then steered north ; for the sea 
was too high to approach the shore in safety. Ori the 12th, Pelsert 
observed the latitude to be 27", and steered along the coast with a 
fair wind at S. E. ; but the shore was too steep to admit of landing ; 
neither could he find any bay or island .to break off the sea. At a 
distance, the land seemed fertile and covered with plants. The lati- 
titude, on the 13th, ‘was 25“ 40', which shewed a current setting to 
the northward. Here Pelsert found himself a-breast of an opening, 
where the coast trends to the north-east ( apparently into Shark's 
Bay). The course this day was nearly north; the shore consisted 
of reddish rock, of an equal height^ and there being no island in 
front, the waves, which broke high upon it, prevented landing. 

June 14, The wind was at east; and at noon, the latitude iyas 
obse'rved to be 24“. The tides (or rather the current) took ’the 
boat further to the north than was desired ; for Pelsert then carried 
but little sail, in the hope to find a landing place without going 
further. Perceiving some smokes at a distance, he rowed towards 
them ; but the shore proved to be steep, with many rocks, and 
the sea broke high against it. At length, six of his people leaped 
overboard, and with much labour and risk got through the surf, 
whilst the boat remained at anchor, in 25 fathoms. The sailors 
employed the rest of the day in seeking for water ; and on looking 
about on every side, they saw four natives creeping towards them 
on their hands and feet. One of “ our people" having appeared on 
an OToinence, near them, the natives rose up and took to flight ; so 
that those who were in the boat could see them distinctly, 'ifhese 
men were wild, black, and altogether naked ; not covering even those 
parts which almost all savages conceal. 



liy 

Pblsbkt^ 

10S9.' 


QO^tiOA^XCTION. [Prior Dinfovoriet. 

k. 

The six sailors, losing all hope of . finding water, swam hack to 
the boat, wounded and bruised by the blows they had received 
from the waves and rocks. The anchor, was then weighed, and 
Pelsert continued his course, under easy sdl, along the coast ; but 
keeping without side of the shoals. The 15th in the morning, they 
discovered a cape, off which lay a chain of rocks, running out four 
miles into the sea ; and behind this was another reef, close to the 
shore. The water being tolerably still between them, Pelsert thought 
to pass through ; but the reefs joined round further on, and obliged 
him to return. At noon, an opening was seen, where the water was 
smooth, and they went into it, but with considerable danger; for, 
the depth was no more than two feet, and the bottom stony. On 
landing, the people dug holes in the sand ; but the water which 
oozed in was salt. At length, fresh rain water was found in the 
cavities of the rocks, and afforded them great relief ; for they had, 
hitherto, been confined to a piqj of water each. They staid on shore 
that night, and collected full forty gallons. Ashes and the remains 
of Cray fish were found ; which shewed that the natives had been 
there no long 4 ime before. ' 

July 1^. They sought to collect more water, but were unsuc> 
cessful; and none could be expected in the sandy, level country 
behind the coast. This plain was destitute of both grass and trees, 
and covered with ant hills so large, that they might have been taken 
for the houses of Indians. The Quantity of flies was such, that the 
people had great difficulty in keeping them off. Eight savages, with 
with each a stick (probably a spear) in, his hand, were seen at a 
distance. They came within musket shot ; hut on the Dutch sailors 
going towards them they took to flight. 

Captain Pelsert, being at length convinced of the. impossibility of 
procuring more water, determined to quit this coast. At noon, he 
got withoutside of the reef % a second opening more to the north; 
for, having observed dhe latitude to be as* 1/, his intention was to 
seek for the Biver of ^ob Remessens (near the North-west Cape) ; 



Iv 


moern li<J IkODWWIUN. 

but the wind veering to north-east, he could no longer follow the 
direction of the coast. Considering, then, that he was more than 
four hundred miles from the place of shipwreck, and that scarcely 
water enough hati been found for themselves, Pelsert resolved to 
make the best of his way to Batavia, to solicit assistance from the 
go vemor-general . 

In the mean time, some one of the people left upon the islands of 
the Abrolhos thought of tasting the water in two holes, which, from ’ 
its rising and falling with the tide, wa.s believed to be salt ; but, to 
their great surprise and joy, it was found good to drink, and never 
failed them afterwards. 

On Pelsert’s return to the Abrolhos in the yacht Sardam, he was 
under the necessity of executing some atrocious conspirators, and 
two were set on shore upon the opposite main land.* Tasman was 
directed by his instructions, in 1644, to “ inquire at the continent 
“ thereabout, after two Dutchmen ; who, having forfeited their lives, 
« were put on* shore by the commodore Francisco Pelsert, if still 
“ alive. In such case, you may make your inquiries of them about 
the situation of those countries ; and if they entreat* you to that 
“ purpose, give them passage hither." 

It is not from any direct information, that Abel Jansz Tasman 
is placed as the next discoverer upon the western coasts of Terra 
Australis ; for, as has been already observed, no account of his second 
voyage has ever been made public, or is any such known to exist. 

It is, however, supposed, with great probability of truth, that, after 
the examination of the North Coast, he pursued his course westward 
along the shore to the North-west Cape, conformably to his instruc- 
tions ; but that he did not go further southward along the Land of 

• 

• Jtox an account of the miseries and horrors which took place on the Islands of the 
Abr^dhos d'iiing the aWnce of Pelsert, the English reader .js referred to V<»1. 1, p. 320 
to 325 of Can^belVi edition of Harris Voyages; but the nautical details there given 
are very incorrect • 


Pblsbrt. 

1619. 


Tasman. 

16*44. 



Ivi iNTllODtJCTIOltf. [Prior Ditcovritt, 

Tmuux. Endragt than to the tropic of Capricorn, where he quitted his exa-' 

1 dAA * 

’ mination, and returned to Batavia. 

The chart published by Thevenot, in 1663, gives a form to the 
Western Coasts, and joins them to the northern Van Diemen's Land; 
but it is evident from Tasman's instructions, that the part between 
' De Witt's Land and Cape Van Diemen was unknown to the Dutch 
government at Batavia in 1644. And since there is no account of 
its having been •seen during the intermediate nineteen years, it may 
be concluded, that the North-west Coast was first explored by him ; 
and Dampier says (Vol. III. p. 96), that he had Tasman's chart of 
it ; though none bearing his name can now be found.* 

The notes of burgomaster Witsen shew, that the North-west 
Coast was visited by Tasman ; and as they give the earliest infor- 
mation of the inhabitants, and are curious in themselves, they are 
here transcribed from Mr. Dalrymple's Papua. 

“ In lat. 13" 8' S. Ion. 146* 18"' (probably about east of 

Greenwich), “ the coast is barren. The people are Bad ahd wicked, 
“ shooting at thf Dutch with arrows, without provocation, when 
** thqy were coming on shore : It is here very populous." 

“ In 14* 58' S. Ion. 138*59' (about 135“ east), the people are 
** savage, and go naked : none can understand them." 

“ In Hollandia NovA,*h in 17° la' S. (Ion. lai® or laa" east) 
Tasman found a naked, black people, with curly hair ; malicious 
" and cruel, using for arms, bows and arrows, hazeygaeys and 
“ kalawaeys. They once came to the number of fify, double 
“ armed, dividing themselves into two parties, intending to have 

* The F^ch editor of the Voyttge de Decmveries aux Terres Autiralee, publkbed 
in I 807 , Vol. I. p. 128, attributes the formation of the North-west Coast in the common 
charts to the expedition of the three Dutch vessels sent from Timor in 1705. But this 
a mistake. Ifli the chart of Thevenot, bis countryman, published fortp~itaa |^<ars 
previously to that expedition, which has been mostly followed by succeeding'geographers. 

t This expression indicates, that the before-mentioned places were not then inclu^^ 
voder the term Now Houakd by Witsen: he wrote in'1705. ' 



Ouufy.] INTl^DUC'KON. 

“ surprised the Dutch, who had landed twenty-five men ; but the 
“ firing of guns frightened them so that they fled. Their prows are 
“ made of the bark of trees : their coast is dangerous : there are 
“ few vegetables :* the people use no houses." 

“ In 19“ 35' S. long. 134" (about 120"* apparently ), the inhabitants 
“ are very numerous, and threw stones at the boats sent by the 
“ Dutch to the shore. They made fires and smoke all along the 
“ coast, which, it was conjectured, they did to give, notice to their 
“ neighbours of strangers being upon the coast. They appear to live 
“ very poorly ; go naked ; eat yams and other roots." 

The buccaneers with whom our celebrated navigator, William 
Dampier, made a voyage round the world, came upon the north- 
west coast of Terra Australis, for the purposes of careening their 
vessel, and prcnuring refreshments. They made the land in the 
latitude of 16“ 30', due south from a shoal whose longitude is now 
known to ’be 122;^“ east. From thence, they ran along the shore, 
N. E. by E. twelve leagues, to a bay or opening, where a convenient 
place was found for theih purpose. Dampier's description of the 
country and inhabitants of the place, where he remained from Jan. 5. 
to March 12., is contained in the account of his voyages, Vol. I. 
page 462 to 470 ; and renders it unnecessary to do more than to 
mark its coincidence or disagreement with what is said, in the above 
note from Tasman, of the inhabitants and country near the same 
part of the coast. 

Dampier agrees in the natives being “ a naked, black people, with 
“ curly hair," like that of the negroes ; buj; he says they have “ a 
“ piece of the rind of a tree tied like a girdle about their waists, and 
“ a handful of long grass, or three or four green boughs full of 
“ leaves, thrust under their girdle, to cover their nakedness." Also, 

“ thfit the (wo fore teeth of the upper jaw are wanting ift all of them, 

“ men and women, old and young : neither have they any beards ;" 
which circumstances are not mentioned in the note from Tasman. 

VOL. I. I ‘ ‘ 


Ivii 


Tasmak. 

r644. 


Dampier* 

1688 . 



INTRODUCTION. 


iTiii 


Dampish. 

1668. 


Vl AMINO. 

1696. 


[iVtor Discoveries. 


Dampier did not see either bows or arrows amongst them ; but says, 
“ the men, at our first coming ashore, threatened us with their lances 
“ and swords ; but they were frightened by firing one gun, which 
“ we did purposely to scar them." Of “ their 'prows made of the 
“ bark of trees," he saw nothing. On the contrary, he “ espied a 
“ drove of these men swimming from one island jto another; for 
“ they have no boats, canoes, or hark logs.” The English navigator is 
silent as to any dangers upon the twelve leagues of coast seeii by 
him ; but fully agrees in the scarcity of the vegetable productions, 
•and in the circumstance of the natives using no houses. 


The relation of Willem de Vlaming’s voyage to New Holland 
was published at Amsterdam in 1701 ; but not having been fortu- 
nate enough to procure it, I h^ve had recourse to Valentyn, who, in 
his Description of Banda, has given what appears to be an abridg- 
ment of the relation. What follows is conformable to the sense of 
the translation which Dr. L. Tiarks had the goodness to makerfor 
me; and the reasons for entering more into the particulars of this 
voyage than usual are, the apparent correctness of the observations, 
and that no account of them seems to have been published in the 
English language.^ 

A Dutch ship, called the Ridderschap, having been missing from 
the time she had left the Cape of Good Hope, in 1684, or 1685, it 
was thought probable she might have been wrecked upon the Great 
South Land, and that some of the crew might (in i 6 g 6 ) be still 
living. Accordingly, the commodore Willem de Vlaming, who was 
going out to India with the Geelvink, Nyptang, and Wezel, was 
ordered to make a search for them. t 

On Dec. a8, the ships got soundings in 48 fathoms, coral bottom ; 
in latitude 31* 53', and longitude 133* 44' (east, apparently, from the 

Vi 

• The Abhi Prhiost in his Hist. gen. des V nyages, Tome XVI. (i la Maye) p. 79-— 
81, has given some account of Vlaming’s voyage in R’enchj but tlie observations on the 
coast between Shark’s Bay and Willem’s River are there wholly omitted. 



fVestem CoasU.] INTRODUCTION. 

Peak of Teneriffe, i 6 ° 45' to the west of Greenwich) ; where the 
variation was observed to be 10“ 38' west: they afterwards had 25 
fathoms, on better* ground. On the 29th, they anchored under the 
island Rottenest, Which lies in lat. 31“ 50', long. 134° 35' and next 
day, a piece of wood, which had some ’time been fixed to the deck 
of a ship, was found upon the shore ; but the nails were then rusted 
away. Fire wood was abundant here. 

5. Vlaming went on shore (to the main coast), with eighty- 
eight toied men, and walked inland to the eastward. There were 
a few large, and some small trees, from which dropped a kind of 
gum-lac ; but they found nothing which could be used as food : the 
birds were small cockatoos and green parrots, and both were very 
shy. At the end of three hours walk they came to a piece of 
water, which was salt, and upon the beach were footsteps of full- 
grown persons and of children. No men were seen, but they ob- 
served many smokes ; and found three deserted huts, so low and ill- 
constructed as to be inferior to those of the Hottentots. 

On the 6th, they divided themselves into three parties : one took 
to the north, another to* the south, and the third went four miles 
east, more into the interior; but, except one or two tlecayed huts,, 
they met with nothing. Being returned to the salt lake without 
finding fresh water, they dug a pit near the side of it, and obtained 
wherewith to relieve their thirst. The lake had fallen a foot, which 
shewed it to have a communication with the sea ; and they after- 
wards found the outlet, a little to the southward. No noxious ani- 
mal of any kind was seen ; and after remaining on shore all night, 
they returned on board on the 7th. The ships were then anchored 


• The account in Fa7i Keuleri is somewhat dlOcrent. He Lays we steered for the 
Land of Endragt ; and on Dec. 28, got soundings in 63 fathoms, sandy bottom. iThe 
ensuing we had 30 fathoms, and the coast was then in sight. The Island Rottenest, 
in 32° south latitude, was the land we steered for ; and we had from 30 to 10 fathoms: 
" in which last we anchored on a ?wiady bottom/" 


lix 

Vlabiino. 

1696. 


1697 . 



lx 

Vlamiko. 

1697 - 


INTRODUCTION. [iVior Diacoveries. 

nearer to the land, with the entrance of the lake or river bearing 
S. E. by E. The commodore afterwards went up this river, to the 
distance of fourteen or sixteen leagues, and caught some smelts, 
as also several black swans, of which two wfere taken alive to 
-Batavia.* 

Having clearly ascertained the latitude (of the ships at anchor, 
most probably,) to be 31“ 43' south, and discovered a reef four jgeo- 
graphic miles in length, and two miles from the shore, theypHa 
from thence on Jan. 13. The wind was from the southwaiWI ; and 
whilst the ships steered N. by W., parallel to the coast, the boats ran 
along within them, to examine it more closely. On the 15th, the 
people from the boats reported that they had seen neither men nor 
animals, and very few trees; but had met with a reef near the 
shore, in 30® 17'; and many shoals, both under and above water. 

Fires upon the land were seen from all the ships in the night of 
Jan. 16 ; and next day, a boat was sent with armed people; but they 
returned with nothing, except some sea-mews which had been caught 
upon the islands and shoals lying -along the coast. On the 18th, the 
ships were in latitude 30° 30', and found the variation to be 9’ ai' 
west ; and the 20th, some small islands were seen, and shrubs ob- 
served on the main land. On the 33rd, they were near a steep head, 
in 28* 8', and sent a boat to the shore ; but the high surf prevented 
landing. People were perceived walking on the downs, but at too 
great a distance to distinguish more than that they were of the 
common stature,* black, and naked.-f- The boat got on shore soon 
afterward, when some brackish water was found ; and having landed 
again on the 27th, the people saw some huts, as 4ilso the footsteps 
of men, and some birds ; but there was no other vegetation than 


• This appears to be the first mention made of the black swan : the river was%amed 
Bklck-Swan River. ^ 

t It was near this place that captain Pelsert put the two .0utcb conspirators on 
diore in 1629. Vlaming appears to hare passed wi^in Houtman’s AbroUuts without 
seeing them. 



ff^estem Coa»U,2 


INTRODUCTION 


Ixi 


small shrubs. Some very indifferent water was the sole useful thing Vlamino 
met with, and it was too far off for any to Be taken on board. ’ 

Jan. 30. The boats were again sent on shore, and discovered two 
inlets, of which fhe southernmost, in latitude 26° 16', was three 
miles in width. On Feb. 2, they found two other openings, very 
deep, one of \\hich ran up northward, and the other to the cast, far 
inl^d. They went eleven leagues up the first of these, and found 
mbkit -had another communication with the sea, to the N. N. W.* 

On the; '3rd, a boat brought the above accoipit; and also, that the 
chief mate of the Geelvink had found a plate of tin, with an inscrip- 
tion commemorating the arrival and departure of Dirk Hartog. ( See 
the inscription under the article Hartog, preceding. ) This Road of 
Dirk Hartog’s Bay, where the plate had been set up, is in 25“ 24,'; 
and the west variation was 8° 34,'. 

No mention is made by Valentyn of the ships entering the road, 
nor of their departure from it; but it should seem that they anchored 
on Feb. 4! On the 5th, commodore Vlaming and the commander 
of the Nyptang went with three boats to the shore, which proved to 
be an island. They fouhd also a river, and went up it four or five 
leagues, amongst rocks and shoals ; when they saw much water 
inland, as if the country were drowned, but no men, nor any thing 
for food ; and, wherever they dug, th(; ground was salt. They 
afterwards came to another river, w'hich they ascended about one 
league, and found it to terminate in a round basin, and to be 
entirely salt w'ater. No men were seen, nor any animals, except 
(fivers w'hich were very shy;. and the country was destitute of grass 
and trees. Returning downward on the lojth, they saw footsteps of 
men and children, of the common size, and observed the point of 
entrance into the river to be of a very red sand. 

Tfie ships appear tc> have left Dirk Hartog’s Road on Feb. ^12. 

These two openings, which in the original are called rivers, were nothing more tlian 
the entrance infe Shark's Bay. A small island, lying a little within the entrance, proba- 
bly made it be taken for two openings. 



Ixii 


Vlaming. 

1697 . 


Dampier. 

1699 . 


INTRODUCTION. [Bw Di$covme$. 

In the evening, the west variation was observed to be 7° ai^; and 
on the igth, they saw a 'cliffy point from whence three shoals, con- 
nected by a reef, stretch out to the N, N. E. The shore here, in 
latitude 34° 43', lies S. by E. and N. by W. On the i6th, they 
passed round the point, and 'steered southward along the inner side 
of this land ; and having doubled its south end, found that it was 
an island ; their latitude was then 34® 54'^ 

Feb. 17. The variation was observed to be 5* west, in latit^d^ 
33® 59'. Eight miles ^south of this situation they saw a bay with a 
rugged point ; but to the northward the land was low : the west 
variation was 7® 3', in the evening. They discovered some reefs 
on the 19th, lying three geographic miles off shore ; and also a 
point or cape ( the North-west Cape ) from which a reef extended 
two miles to the N. N. W. On the north side of this cape is a bay, 
where the Geelvink anchored; and a little furtlier on (eastward), 
the other two vessels found an opening like a river y whose entrance was 
twelve miles wide. They went into it, but could no where find anchor- 
age. The bay is called Willem’s Rivfr; and the two vessels after- 
wards there joined the Geelvink : it is in S’!” s8*. The same day it 
was determined to sail for Batavia, every thing having been done 
that the commodore’s orders required; and, on the sist, they de- 
parted accordingly. 

Thus the West Coast, from the island Rottenest to the North-west 
Cape, was examined with care by Vlaming ; and it is most probable, 
that the chart in Van Keulen, which Mr. Dalrymple republished, 
and was the best known at the end of the eighteenth centuiyi 
resulted from this same voyage. 

Captain William Dampier visited, a second time, the western 
coasts of Terra Australis ; being then sent out purposely for disco- 
very, in his Majesty’s ship the Roebuck. 

In the night of Aug. 1, 1699, he struck soundings upon the 
northern part of the Abrolhos shoal, in latitude about 37° 40' south. 



msterk CoMt$.] INTRODUCTION. Ixiii 

Next morning he saw the main coast, and ran northward along it ; Dvmpier. 
discovering, in lo', an opening two leagues wide, but full of rocks 
and foul ground. Aug. 6, he anchored ( in D/rk Hartog’s Road) at the 
entrance of a sound, which he named Shajik’s Bay, in latitude 
25° 5' south. He remained there eight days, examining the sound, 
cutting- wood upon the islands, fishing, &c. ; and gives a description 
of what was seen in his usually circumstantial manner.* 

An animal found upon one of the islands is described as “a sort 
“ of raccoon, different from that of the West Indies, chiefly as to 
“ the legs ; for these have very short fore legs ; but go jumping 
“ upon them” (not upon the .short fore, but the long hind, legs, it 
is to be presumed), “ as the others do ; and like them are very good 
“ meat.” This appears :o have been the small kanguroo, since found 
upon the islands which form the road ; and if so, this description is 
probably the first ^ver made of that singular animal, 

Leaving Shark's Bay on Aug. 14, captain Dampier steered north- 
ward, along the coast ; but at too great a distance to make much 
observation upon it, until he got round the North-west Cape. On the 
sand, he saw an extensive cluster of islands; and anchored, in lati- 
tude 20“ si', under one of the largest, which he called Rosemary 
Island. This was near the southern part of De Witt’s Land ; but, 
besides an error in latitude of 40', he complains that, in Tasman’s 
chart, “ the shore is laid down as all along joining in one body, or 
“ continent, with some openings like rivers ; and not like islands, as 
“ really they are.” — “ By what we saw of them, they must have 
“ been a range of islands, of about twenty leagues in length, stretch- 
“ ing from E. N. E. to W. S. W. ; and for ought I know, as far as to 
“ those of Shark’s Bay ; and to a considerable breadth also, for we 
“ coijld see nine or ten leagues in amongst them, towards the con- 
“ tinent or main land of New Holland, if there be any such thing 

• For the full account of Dany)ier’s proceedings and observations, with views of the 
land, see his Fbyages, Vol. III. page 81 , et seg. 



INTRODUCTION. 


Ixiv 

Dampibr. 

]« 99 . 


{Prior Ducoverieg. 


" hereabouts : And by the great tides I met with awhile afterwards, 
*' more to the north-east, I had a strong suspicion that here might 
“ be a kind of archipelago of islands ; and a passage, possibly, to the 
“ south of New Holjand and New Guinea, into the great South 
“ Sea, eastward." 

Not finding fresh water upon such of the islands as were visited 
that day, captain Dampier quitted his anchorage next moving, 
and “ steered away E. N. E., coasting along as the land lies.” He 
seems to have kept the land in sight, in the day time, at the distance 
of four to six leagues ; but the shore being low, this was too far 
for him to be certain whether all was main land which he saw ; and 
what might have been passed in the night was still more doubtful. 

Aug. go, being in latitude i8° ai', and the weather fair, captain 
Dampier steered in for the shore ; and anchored in 8 fathoms, about 
three-and-half leagues off. The tide ran “ very^swift here ; so that 
“ our nun-buoy would not bear above the water to be seen. It flows 
“ here, as on that part of New Holland I described formerly, about 
“ five fathoms.” 

* 

He had hitherto seen no inhabitants ; but now met with several. 
The place at which he had touched in the former voyage “ was not 
“ above foit^ or fifty leagues to the north-east of this. And these 
“ were much the same blinking creatures (here being also abun- 
“ dance of the same kind of flesh flies teizing them), and with the 
** same black skins, and hair frizzled, tall and thin, &c., as those 
“ were. But we had not the opportunity to see whether these, as 
“ the former, wanted two of their fore teeth.” One of them, who 
was supposed to be a chief, “ was painted with a circle of white 

paste or pigment about his eyes, and a white streak dovm his nose, 
** from his forehead to the tip of it. And his breast, and some part 
“ of his arms, were also made white with the same paint.” 

Neither bows nor arrows were observed amongst these peo)f>le ; 
they used wooden lances, such as Dampier had before seen. He 
saw no houses at either p](|iE;, and believed they had none; but 



We$tem Voa$U^ INTRODUCTION. 

” there were several things like haycocks, standing in the savannah ; 
** which, at a distance, we thought were houses, looking just like the 
“ Hottentots' houses at the Cape of Good Hope ; but we found them 
** tabe so many rocks.* 

The land near the sea-coast is described as equally sandy with 
the parts before visited, and producing, amongst its scanty vegeta- 
tion, ijothing for food. No stream of fresh water was seen, nor 
could any, fit to drink, be procured by digging. 

Quitting this inhospitable shore, captain Dampier weighed his 
anchor on September 5, with the intention of seeking water and 
refreshments further on to the north-eastward. The shoals obliged 
him to keep at a considerable distance from the land ; and finally, 
when arrived at the latitude 16® 9', to give up his project, and direct 
his course for Timor. 

With the voyage of Dampier terminates the information gained of 
the Western Coasts, previously to the year 1801. Monsieur de St. 
Alouarn had, indeed, seen some pbints or islands, in the year 1772, 
when he commanded the {^rench Jlute he Gros Ventre ; but the par- 
ticulars are not generally known, being, in all probability, of little 
importance. 

The summary of the knowledge possessed by the public, and the 
objects to which investigation might be usefully directed in these 
parts of Terra Australis, were as follow. The outline of the north- 
west coast was known upon the authority, as generally believed, of 
Tasman ; with some points corrected by Dampier. The accuracy of 
Tasman’s chart was, however, very much called in. doubt ; instead 
of being a continued shore, as the Dutch chart represented it, Dam- 
pier found the southern parts of De Witt’s Land to consist of a range 
of islands. And he giv.es it as his opinion, that the northern partof 

a 

* Dampier could not have examined these rocks closely ; for there can be little doubt 
that they were the ant hills described by Pelsert as being so large^ that they might have 

been taken for the houses of Indians/’ 


Uv 

Dampiui. 

1 ^ 09 . 


Conclusive 

Kemarks. 


VOL. I. 


K 



Ixvi lNtk6l)tre*M3^N: 

j)Aur\BM. New liblland was separated from the lands to the southward, by a 
striit ; ** unless," says he, the high tides and indraught thereabout 
** should be occasioned by the faiouth of some 'large river ; which 
** hath ofteh low lands on each side of the outlet, and many islands 
“ and shoals lying at its entrance : but I rather thought it a channel, 
“ or strait, than a river." This opiniofi he supports»by a fair induc- 
tion from facts ; and the opening of twelve miles wide, seen near the 
same place by Vlaming’s two vessels, and in which they could find 
no anchorage, strongly corroborated Dampier’s supposition. 

Later information had demonstrated, that the supposed strait could 
not lead out into the Great Ocean, eastward, as the English navigator 
had conjectured ; but it was thought possible, that it might com- 
municate with the Gulph of Carpentaria, '^and even probable that a 
passage existed from thence to the unknown part of the South Coast, 
beyond the Isles of St. Francis and St. Peter. 

But whether this opening were the entrance to a strait, separating 
Terra Australis into two or more islands, or led into a mediter- 
ranean sea, as some thought ; or whether it were the entran.ee of a 
large river, there was, in either case, a great geographical question 
to be settled, relative to the parts behind Rosemary Island. 

If Tasman’s chart were defective at De Witt's Land, it was likely 
to be so in other parts of the same coast ; where there was no 
account, or belief, that it had been examined by any other person 
further north than the latitude An investigation of the 

whole North-west Coast, with its numerous islands and shoals, was, 
therefore, required, before it could enter into the present improved 
systems of geography and navigation. 

The chart of the West Coast, as far south as Rottenest, was 
founded upon much better authority ; but for its formation from 
thence to Cape Leeuwin there were no good documents. In this 
part, there was room even for discovery ; and the vfiiole coast 
required to be laid down with more accuracy than had beep attain- 
able by the Dutch navigators. 



IVesiem tOxwff*! ; Ixvii 

As to the soil and vegetable productions upon several points near Conclusive 
the sea, from Rottenest, northward to i6^, there was tolerably 
good general information ; the inhabitants, also, had been seen ; 
and, at one place, fconynunication with them had, been obtained. The 
accounts did, cort^iinly, not give any flattering prospect, that much 
interesting knawledge was likely to be acquired under these heads, 
unless a strait, or inland sea, were found ; but the accounts were 
not only conf ned as to place, but, with the exception of Dampier's, 
were very imperfect ; and the great extent of the coasts, in the richest 
climates of the world, excited hopes that a close investigation would 
not only be of advantage to natural history, but would bring to light 
something useful in the mineral or vegetable kingdoms. 

In the case of penetrating the interior of Terra Australis, whether 
by a great river, or a strait leading to an inland sea, a superior 
country, and pei haqjs a different people, might be found, the know- 
ledge of which could not fail to be very interesting, and might 
prove advantageous to the nation making the discovery. 



[ Ixviii ] 


Nutts. 

16527 . 

(Atl. PI. 1.) 


PRIOR DISgOVERIES IN TERRA Al^STRALIS. 

SECTION III. 

SOUTH COAST. 

JXscoveiy of Nuyts. Examination of Vancouver: of D'Entrecasteaux. 

Conclusive Remarks. 

No historical fact seems to be less disputed, than that the South 
Coast of New Holland was first discovered in January i6»7 : whe- 
ther it were the aSth, according to De Hondt, or the i6Ui, as is 
expressed on Thevenot’s chart, is of very little import. It is generally 
said, that the ship was commanded by Pieter Nuyts ; but as Nuyts, 
on his arrival at Batavia, was sent ambassador to Japan, and after- 
wards made governor of Formosa, it seems more probable that he 
was a civilian, perhaps Company’s fir»t merchant on board, rather 
than captain of the ship : the land discovered has, however, always 
borne his name. 

The Dutch recital says, — “ In the year 1627, the South Coast of 
“ the Great South Land was accidentally discovered by the ship the 
“ Guide Zeepaard, outward-bound from Fatherland, for the space of 
“ a thousand miles.” 

This discovery has always been considered as of importance. A 
memoir was published at Amsterdam in 1 7 18, “ to prove, that Nuyts’ 
“ Land, being in the fifth climate, between 34,® and 36“ of latitude ; 
“ it ought to be, like all other countries so situated, one of the niost 
“ habitable, jnost rich, and most fertile parts of the world.’** The 
* deu Nat;, attar Terres uiwtrales^ Tome I. page 42d. 



INTRODUCTION. 


JShtUk CltMM/.] 


Ixix 


journal of this discovery seems to have been lost ; or possibly was Nott*. 
either suppressed or destroyed, according fo what is thought to have 
been the Dutch policy of that time. It was, therefore, from the 
chart, and the above passage in the recital, alone, that any particulars 
could be drawn. If the extent of a tHousand miles were taken to be 
in a straight jine, and to commence at Cape Leeuwin, the end of 
Nuyts’ Land would reach nearly to the longitude of 135* east of 
Greenwich ; but if, as was probable, the windings of the shore were 
included, and a deduction made of one-*ixth to one-seventh in the 
distance, then the Isles of St. Francis and St. Peter might be ex- 
pected to be found between the i33nd and 133rd degrees of east 
longitude. 


With the exception of Mons. de St. Alouarn; who is said to have Vakcouve*. 
anchored near Cape Leeuwin in 1772, the south coast of Terra 
Australis!, though occupying much attention from geographers, seems 
to have been left unvisited from 1627 to 1791. In this year, captain 
George Vancouver, being orr his way to North-west America, 
made the South Coast* on Sept. 26, at Cape Chatham, in latitude 
35* 3' south, and longitude 116" 35' east, not many leagues beyond 
where Nuyts appears to have commenced his discovery. He sailed 
eastward, from thence, along the sliore, till the eSth; when he 
anchored in a sound, to which was given the name of King George 
THE III. 

The country in the neighbourhood of the Sound, and of its two 
harbours, was found to be agreeably variegated in form; to be 
clothed with grass and wood ; and, though generally more barren 
than fertile, yet affording many spots capable of cultivation. No 
oonsiderable river was discovered ; but fresh water was every where 
abundant for domestic purposes ; and the climate was judged to be 
a# healthy as the temperature was found to be agreeable. Kan- 
guroos ®d not appear tew be scarce; nor were the woods ill tenanted 
by the feathered tribes; and reptiles and other noxious animals were 



VAKCpT|m 


D’Entre- 

casteaux. 

1792. 


INTRODUCTION. [ Aw P^coMr>#». 

. Dot;>n|imc^us. Amongst the aquatic bijrdsi black swans and wild 
4ucks held a distinguished place ; but, like the land animals, were 
very shy : sea and shell fish were in tolerable abundance. 

None of the inhabitants were seen ; but from the appearance of 
$ 

their deserted huts, they were judged to- be the same miserable race 
as those of the North-west and East Coasts. No mvks of canoes, 
nor the remains of fi§h, even shell fish, were found near their habi- 
tations; and this circumstance, with the shyness of the birds and 
quadrupeds, induced a belief that the natives depended princ^ally 
qpon the woods for their subsistence. 

Captain Vancouver quitted King George’s Sound on Oct. ii, and 
proceeded eastward in the examination of the coast ; but unfavour- 
i4ble winds prevented him from doing this so completely as he wished, 
and some parts were passed unseen; and the impediments to his 
progress at length caused the examination to be quitted, in favour of 
piros^cuting the main design of his voyage. The last land’seen was 
Termination Island, in latitude 34,® 3a' and longitude laa^^S'. The 
ooast to the north of this island appeared much broken; but, 
though in Nuyts’ chart a considerable group of islands were laid 
down in about that situation, captain Vancouver rather supposed it 
to be a continued main land.* 

So far as this examination extended, the general form of the coast 
was found to correspond with that of the old chart; nor was any 
material error found Nuyts’ latitude. A further, and more 
extended confirmation of the Dutch navigator’s discovery, and of its 
having been well Isud down, considering the period at which it was 
done, was obtained in the following year. 

Xhe French rear-admiral Bauiiiy D'Entrecasteaux, having bqfSt 
sent, out with the ships La Recherche and L’Espdrance in search of 
the unfortunate La Perouse, made the south coast of NeW'Hollaiid 

* For captain Vancouver’s account proceedings and observations on the South 
Coast, see his Voyage round the Wot^dy Yol. I. p^, 38-47* : t 



INTRODUCTION. 




ixxi 


on Dec. 5, 179^*, about twenty-eight leagues to the north-west of ttrpmKB* 
Cape Chatham.* The coast, fixan the SoutVwest Cape to the long!- 
tude of Termination Island, was explored by the ^miral, with all 
■tile minuteness that the state of the weather could permit ; and he 
was, generally, able to keep the shore closer* abord than captain 
VancouWhad done, and to supply the deficiencies in his chart. The 
broken land to the north of Termination Island was found to be 
conformable to what Nuyts had laid down : it made part of a very 
extensive group of islands, one of which affi>rded timely shelter to 
the French ships on Dec. 9, from a gale which had arisen at south- 
west. 

They remained a week at this anchorage, whilst the naturalists 
explored the surrounding country, and the surveyors examined such 
of the islands as were visible from the ships. Seals, pinguins, and 
some kanguroos were seen ; but no fresh water, accessible to ship- 
ping, coiSld any where be found ; the country within their reach 
being sandy and sterile. From Dec. 17 to 24, the ships were oc- 
cupied in coasting eastward,' along the outskirt of the group of 
islands, and then found it to terminate at 2j* of longitude from its 
commencement. The main land at the back of the islands had been 
generally visible, but at too great a distance for the precise form of 
the coast to be ascertained, or to allow of fixing the positions of, or 
even seeing, many of the inner islands and reefs. 

This group is the first of the two marked upon the chart of Nuyts; 
and admiral D’Entrecasteaux praises the general accuracy of the 
Dutch navigator, in that “ the latitude of Point Leeuwin, and of 
“ the coast of Nuyts' Land, were laid down with an exactness, sur- 
“ prising for the remote period in which they had been discovered.” 

This liberal acknowledgment renders it the more extraordinary, 

/ When the Investigator sailed^ the journal of M. Labillardiire^ naturalist in D’Entre* 
casteaux’s ^pedition^ was the sole account of the voyage made public ; but M. dk Rosssr 
one of the princi]^ officen^ has*!since published the voyage from the journals of the rear- 
admind^ and it is from this last that what follows is extracted. 



INTRODUCTION. 


Ixxfi 


[Prior Dwcovertw. 


D'Eiret»« that in the appellation which it was judged proper to give to this 
*^**my* extensive group, the French admiral Jiad not rather thought of doing 
honour to the original discoverer, or to the Gulden Zeepaard, than to 
his own ship ; more especially, as his examination v?as far from being 
complete. * This would have teen more conformable to his general 
practice; but Archipel de la Recherche was the name adopted. 

Beyond the archipelago, the South Coast was found to trend 
east-north-eastward ; without any island lying off it, or presenting 
any place of shelter. The shore was either a steep calcareous cliff, 
of an equal height, or low and sandy, with a few naked hillocks 
behind ; and above these, no hill, nor any thing of the interior 
country, could be discerned. “ It is not surprising,” says D'Entre- 
casteaux, “ that Nuyts has given no details of this barren coast ; foi* 
“ its aspect is so uniform, that the most fruitful imagination could 
“ find, nothing to say of it.” 

1793. Frustrated in his expectation of procuring fresh water, and having 
no more than sufficient, at a short allowance, to reach Van Diemen's 
Land, the admiral abandoned the irivestigation of the South Coast, 
on Jan. 3 ; being then in latitude 31® 49' south, and longitude 
131* 38^ east of Greenwich. 

In the otherwise excellent charts constructed by M. Beautemps- 
Beaupre, geographical engineer on board La Recherche, there is 
an extraordinary omission,. arising either from the geographer, or 
the conductor of the voyage. In the first la" of longitude no sound- 
ings are marked along the coast; whilst, in the last 5“, they are 
marked with tolerable regularity : the cause of this difference is 
not explained. 

In comparing the French chart with that of Nuyts, it appeared 
that the rear-admiral had not proceeded so far along this coast as 
the Dutch navigator had done ; for he did not see the islands of St. 
Francis and St. Peter, nor the reef marked about thirty leagues \o 
the west of them. The point, ^however, where D^Entrecasteaux’s 
examination terminated, was, in all probability, within a few leagued 



INTRODUCTION. 


Ixxiii 


South CoaKt!\ 

of that reef ; and the end of Nuyts’ discovery would be between 133* 
and 134* to the east of Greenwich. 

The South Coast was not known, in 1801, to have been visited 

« * 

by any other than the three navigators, Nuyts, Vancouver, and 
D’Entrecasteaux.* The coast line, from Cape Leeuwin to near the 
longitude of 132°, was generally so well ascertained, and the charts 
of Vancouver .and D'Entrecasteaux appeared to be so good, that little 
remained in this space for future visitors to discover. At two places, 
the country and productions near the sea-side had also been examined; 
though no communication had any where been obtained with the in- 
habitants. It was known also from Nuyts, that at 133" or 134“ of east 
longitude, commenced a second archipelago; and that the coast 
began there to assume an irregular form ; but in what direction it 
trended, whether to the south-eastward for Bass’ Strait, or northward 
for the Gulph of Carpentaria, was altogether uncertain. 

The great point, then, which required to be ascertained, was the 
form of the land from longitude 133° to 146“ east, and from south 
latitude 32“ to 38!^" ; comprising a space of two hundred and fifty 
leagues in a straight line. What rendered a knowledge of this part 
more particularly interesting, was the circumstance of no consider- 
able river having been found on any of the coasts of Terra Australis 
previously explored but it was scarcely credible that, if this vast 
country were one connected mass of land, it should not contain some 
large rivers ; and if any, this unknown part was one of two remaining 
places, where they were expected to discharge themselves into the sea. 

The apparent want of rivers had induced some persons to think, 
that Terra Australis might be composed of two or more islands, as 
had formerly been suspected by the Dutch, and by Dampier ; whilst 
others, believing in the continuity of the shores, thought this want 
might arise from the interior being principally occupied by a medi- 

* It afterwards appeared, that lieutenant James Gi4nt had discovered a part of it in 
1^0, in his way to Port Jackson with His Majesty’s brig Lady Nelson. 

VOL. I. L 


D'Ehtbb* 

CBSTtAVX. 

1793 . 


Conclusive 

Remarks. 



Ixxiv 


INTRODUCTION. 


{Prior Discoveriet. 


ConcluBire 

Remarks. 


tert^nean sea ; but it was generally agreed, that one end of the se- 
parating channels, or otherwise the entrance, if such existed, into 
the supposed sea, would most likely be found in this unexplored part 
of the South Coast. 

Besides the solution of this important geographical problem, some- 
thing remained to be done upon the parts already ^en. The main 
land behind the first archipelago, as also the inner islands, were yet 
to be examined for harbours, where refreshment for ships might be 
obtained ; a comparison of the persons and usages of the inhabitants, 
with those in other parts of this vast country, was desirable ; and, 
although little utility could be drawn from the known productions at 
the two points visited, it might reasonably be hoped, that an investi- 
gation of a coast so extensive, would not fail to produce much use- 
ful information. 

Many circumstances, indeed, united to render the south coast of 
Terra Australis one of the most interesting parts of the globe, to 
which discovery could be directed at the beginning of the nineteenth 
century. Its investigation had formed a part of the instructions to 
the unfortunate French navigator La Perouse, and afterwards of those 
to his countryman D’Entrecasteaux ; and it was, not without some 
reason, attributed to England as a reproach, that an imaginary line 
of more than two hundred and fifty leagues extent, in the vicinity of 
one of her colonies, should have been so long suffered to remain 
traced upon the charts, under the title of Unknown Coast. This 
comported ill with her reputation as the first of maritime powers ; 
and to do it away was, accordingly, a leading point in the instructions 
given to the Investigator. 



C Ixxv ]] 


PRIOR DISCOVERIES IN TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


SECTION IV, 

EAST COAST, WITH VAN DIEMEN’S LAND. 

PART I. 

Preliminary Observations. Discoveries of Tasman ; of Cook ; Marion ; 
and Fumeaux. Observations of Cook ; Bligh ; and Cox. Discovery of 
D’Entrecasteaux. Hayes. 

V A N Diemen’s Land would more properly have been arranged Treiiminary 
under the head of the South Coast ; but the later discoveries here 
have so intimate a connexion with those on the East, as to render it 
impossible to separate them without making repetitions, and losing 
perspicuity in the narrative. 

The anxiety of the Dutch government at Batavia, to know how 
far the South Lands might extend towards the antarctic circle, was 
the cause of Tasman being sent with two vessels, to ascertain this 
point; and the discovery. of Van Diemen’s Land was one of the 
results. It was not, however, the policy of thd Dutch government 
to make discoveries for the benefit of general knowledge ; and ac- 
cordingly this voyage “ was never,” says Dr. Campbell, “ published 
“ intire ; and it is probable, that the East-India Company never 
iiftended it should be published at all. However, Dirk Rembrantz, 

“ moved by the excellency and accuracy of the work, published in 
“ Low Dutch an extract of captsun Tasman’s joura^ which has 



Ixxvi 


INTRODUCTION. [Prior Dtscoveriet. 


Preliminary evcp sincc been considered as a great curiosity ; and as such, has 
“ been translated into many languages."* 

If a judgment may be formed from the translations, Rembrantz 
must have omitted great part of the nautical detdils concerning Van 
Diemen’s Land, a defect which is remedied in the following account. 
It is taken from a journal containing, besides the dajly transactions 
and observations throughout the whole voyage, a series of thirty- 
eight manuscript charts, views, and figures. The expression hy me, 
which often occurs in it, and followed by the signature Abel Jansz 
Tasman, shews that if this were not his original journal, it is a copy 
from it : probably one made on board for the governor and council 
of Batavia. With this interesting document, and a translation made 
in 1776, by Mr. C. G. Woide, chaplain of His Majesty’s Dutch 
chapel at St. James’s, I was favoured by the Right Hon. Sir Joseph 
BANKS.- f- 


Tasman. Captain Abel Jansz Tasman sailed from Batavia on Aug. 14, 

1642 * ' ^ ^ 

164*, with the yacht Heemskerk and fly-boat Zeehaan ; and, after 
touching at Mauritius, steered south and eastward upon discovery. 
Nov. 34, at four p. m., hjigh land was seen in the E. by N., supposed 
Piat^' VII distant forty miles. The ships steered towards it till the evening ; 

when there were high mountains visible in the E. S. E., and two 
smaller ones in the N. E. They sounded in 100 fathoms, and then 
stood off from the land, with the wind at south-east. 

In the morning of Nov. 25., it was calm ; but on a breeze spring- 

♦ Complete Collectim of Voyages and Travels^ originally published by John Harris^ 
2>. />. and F. M, S, London, 1744. Vol. I. page 325, 

t I am proud to take this opportunity of publicly expressing my obligations to the 
Right Hon. President of the Royal Society ; and of thus adding my voice to the many 
who, in the pursuit of science, have found in him a friend and patron. Such he proved 
in the commencement of my voyage, and in the whole course of its duration ; in the dis- 
tresses which tyranny heaped upon those of accident ; and after they w^ere overcome.' His 
extensive and valuable library has been laid open ; and has furnished much that no time 
or expense, within my reach, could otherwise have procured. 



Ixxvii 


East Coast, ^ V. D.'s Land.-] INTRODUCTION. 

ing up from the southward, Tasman steered for the land ; and at 
five/>. m., when it was twelve miles distant, sounded in 6o fathoms, 
coral bottom : at "four miles off, the bottom was fine white sand. 
The latitude was ‘then 4a" 30' south ; the mefn of all their longitudes 
163* 50' east (of Teneriffe apparently); and the compass had no 
variation. The coast here lies S. by E. and N. by W. It is of an 
even height ; and was named Antony Van Diemen’s Land, in 
honour of the governor-general, “ our master, who sent us out to 
“ make discoveries. The islands round about, as many of them as 
** were known to us, we called in honour of the Council of India." 

The ships stood off again for the night, with a light breeze at 
S. S. E. On the 26th, the wind was from the eastward, and wea- 
ther rainy, so that no land could be seen ; but its distance was 
supposed to be twelve or thirteen leagues. At noon, the latitude 
from dead reckoning was 43° 36', and longitude 163* 2' ; the course 
having been S. S. W. 72 miles.* In the evening the wind shifted 
to the north-east, and their course was directed E. S. E. : the vari- 
ation,was then half a decree wes't. 

Nov. 27, the land was again seen. At noon, a course of S. E. by E. 
52 miles, gave the latitude by estimation 44" 4' south, and longitude 
164® 2' east. The weather was thick and rainy, and the wind still 
from the north-eastward ; and at the fi>urth hour of the night, the 
vessels lay to, not venturing to run in the dark. In the morning 
of the 28th, it was foggy, with rain. They made sail to the east ; 
but on seeing the land fromN. E. to N.N. E., hauled up for it. 
From what could be ■ perceived of the coast, it extended S. E. by 
E. and N. W. by W., and seemed to decrease in height to the east- 
ward. At noon, the latitude by estimation was 44® 1 ', longitude 
165" 2' ; and the course steered, E. by S. 44 miles. The wind was 

S This and the following courses and distances run from one noon to another, do not 
always agree with the latitudes and longitudes ; but the differences are not great : They 
prbbably arose from the distances being marked to the nearest Dutch mile on the log 
board; whereas the latitude and longitude are taken to minutes of a*d^ee. 


Tasmak. 

• 1642 . 



IxZTiii 


INTRODUCTION. 


{Prior Di$ewerie». 


Tasmak. then at north-west ; and in the evening, they came near three small 
islands, one of which was shaped like a lion’s head, and lies twelve 
miles from the continent (t^a was the Mew stone, of Furneaux). 
The wind was from the eastward in the night, and the ships lay to. 

Nov. »g, they were still Ilear the cliffy, lion-head-shaped island. 
The wind was light and fair, and they steered parallel to the coast, 
which lies here east and west. At noon, having made a course of 
E. N. E. 48 miles, the latitude was judged to be 43* 53', longitude 
166“ 3'. They had, a little before, passed two cliffy islets lying to 
seawards of which the westernmost {Swilly of Furneaux) is like 
Pedra Blanca near the coast of China : the easternmost ( Eddystone 
of Cook ) resembles an awkward tower, and is about- sixteen miles 
from the main land. Continuing to coast along the shore, they 
came, at five in the evening, to a bay, into which it was resolved 
in council to enter ; but when almost in it, a high wind rose, and 
obliged them to Tshorten sail and stand out to sea. At daylight of the 
30th, they found themselves driven so far off by the storm (whence 
the name of Storm Bay, applied m the chart), that the land, was 
scarcely visible. At noon, the general course had been E. by N. 
80 miles ; the latitude was found to be 43“ 41', and longitude by 
estimation (corrected) 168® 3': the needle pointed here, true North. 
The land was in sight to the north-west, and the wind strong, but 
variable, from the northward. The ships steered westward for a 
short time ; but the weather being too stormy to admit of approach- 
ing the land, they went upon the other tack ; and kept as much to 
the northward, under easy sail, as the wind would permit. 

Dec. 1 , the wind was more moderate ; and on its veering to 
W. S. W., the ships steered towards the shore. At noon, their 
course, made good was N.N.,W. 32 miles ; the latitude was 43“ 10' 
and 'longitude 167® 55'. It then fell calm, and a council of officers 
from the two vessels was called, in which it was resolved, if wifid 
and weather permitted, “ to get a knowledge of the land, and some 
refreshments.'* An eastern breeze s|nrung up soon afterward 



Eatt Coast, ^ V. D.'s iJmd.'] INTRODUCTION. 

and they got to anchpr, an hour after sunset, “ in a good port, in 
“ as fathoms, whitish gbod-holding sand ; wherefore we ought to 
“ praise God Almighty.’,' This por^ called Frederik Hendrik’s 
Bay, in the chart.* 

Next morning early, two armed boafs were sent to an inlet (the 
inner bay), situate four or five miles to the north-westward of the 
ships, in order to search for fresh water. Wood, and refreshments. 
They returned in the afternoon, and the officers gave the following 
account. 

They rowed four or five miles round the point of the inlet, 
along a high and level shore. Wild greens were plentiful ; some 
resembled those at the Cape of Good Hope, “ and may be used 
“ in place of wormwood others were long and saltish, and like 
sea parsley. They found many dry gullies, and one watering place 
in which the water was good, but obtained with difficulty, and in 
very small quantities. Some human voices were heard, and a sound 
like that of a trumpet, or little gong, which was not far off ; but 
they could see no person. Amohgst the trees, two were remarked 
whose thickness was two, or two and a half fathoms, and the first 
branches from sixty to' sixty-five feet above the ground. The bark 
had been taken off with a flint stone, and steps were cut, full five feet 
one from the other; whence the natives were presumed to be very 
tall, or able to get up these trees by some artifice. They supposed the 
steps to be made for the purpose of getting at the nests of 
birds; and that some of them had not been cut above four days 
before. They observed traces on the ground, as if made by the 
claws of a tiger; and saw the excrements, as was thought, of 
quadrupeds. Some well-looking gums, which dropped from the 
trees and somewhat resembled gum-lac, were brought on board. 

Off the east point of the (inner) bay, they found thirteen to four- 
tedh feet water ; and that the tide flowed about three feet. They 
there saw a number of men, of wild ducks, and geese ; but inland 


Ixxix 


Tasmah. 

iOi'i. 



INTRODUCTION. 


[Prior D i $e o€t rie». 


Vxhi 

XAiMikK. none were seen, though their noise was heiu^.^ Muscles were found 
stidcing to bushes, in different places.. The coun^jry was covered 
with trees ; but so thinly scathed, that one might see every where 
to a great distance anv>ngs^ them, and djsth^uish'men and animals. 
Several of the trees were much burnt about the foot ; and the 
“ ground was here and there like little s(j^are$ [viuysterchen)^ and 
“ become as hard as* stone, by fire.”* ' * 

A short time before the boats retumed,% ithick smoke had been 
observed mpon the continent, to the west of where the ships lay at 
anchor ; and front- the people staying so much longer than t^y had 
been ordered, it was thought to have been made by them, as Isignal. 
But on inquiry, they answered in the negative ; and said that they, 
also, had seen smoke in several places ; and bushes — ( here seems 
to be a line omitted. ) “So that without doubt, here must be ex- 
“ ceedingly tall people.” . 

Dec. 3. A boat was sent to the south-east part of the ( outer ) b^, 
and found fresh Avater ; but it broke through the low shore to tKe 
.sea, and was brackish ; arid the soil was too rocky to dig wells. In 
the afternoon, commodore Tasman went^ with several officers from 
both vessels in two boats, to the south-easihextremity of the bay; 
taking with them the Prince’s flag, and a post .upon wjiich was cut 
a compass', to be erected on shore. One of the boats was obliged to 
return, from the bad weather ; but the shallop went to a little cove 
S. W. of the ships. The surf being there too high to admit of 
landing, the firi^pirpenter, Pieter Jacobsz, swam on shore with the 
post and Prince’s flag ; and set it up near the last of four remark- 
able trees, which stood in the form of a cresoent, in -the middle of the 
cove. “ When the first carpenter had done this, in the sight of me 
“ Abel J. Tasman, of tht master Gerrit Jansz, and under-merchant 
“ Abraham Goomans, we went with ffie shallop as near as possible 
“ to the shore) and the said carpenter swam back, through the snrf. 
then returned on board; and left ^his as a memorial to the 



Eaa eboK, 4* r. D:* Land.-] INTRODCtJTlON. Ixxxi 

posterity of the inhabitants of this country. They did not shew TMMix. 

♦* themselves ; but we suspected^ some to iSe not far from thence, 

** watching carefully our d^gs." 

The wind was fifem t|i^i^rthwai^ all |his, ^y ; and at sunset, it 
blew a storm. The variation at anchor was obseijved to be 3“ east ; 
the latitude was. 43“ south|^d Jipn^itude ,167-® east ( from Teneriffe. ) 

Dec. 4. The wind^was more^iwd^te, ^d.came from the west- 
ward, off the land. Tfie^chors'W^e then yreighed, but^ the flukes 
of one were bfokefa. quitting Frederik* Hfijidrik^s Bay, the 
ships sj^red northvi^rd as^uch as possible, to look for a watering 
place. At noon, jKe^ couVse had been N. E. 3* miles ; the latitude 
was 4a* 40', and longitude jd8*. In the evening, they saw a round 
mountain* about eleven^ leagues to tl^ N. N. Wi ; and during the 
whole day, several smokes^ were visible along the coast. “ Here,” 
says Tasman, “ I shoul^ give a descijption of the extent of the 
“ coast, and the islands near it, but I hope to be excused, and refer, 

“ for brevity's sake, to the chart made of it^^and herewith joined.” 

The ships kept close to the Wind all lUght, as they did in the 
morning of Dec. 5, when it was N. W. by W. The high round 
mountain was then seeft bearing wopt, eight leagues, and this was 
the furthest land visible, nor did the wind allow them t^ come in 
with it again. At noon, the latitude was judged to be 4I* 34', and 
longitude 169°; the course for the last day having been N. E. by N. 

80 miles. Tasman then steered “ precisely east;war(|, to make furi" 

“ ther discoveries,” agreeably to a resolution o^ 0 e council, taken 
in the morning.' 

The copy of I'^smai^s charts, given in the Atlas, Plate III. 
of D’Entrecasteaux's Voyage, an^ taken from Valentyn, is cqp- 
formable to the manuscript charts in the Dutch journal. 'There is, 
however, an error of one degree too much east, in the scale* of 
longitude; and Pedra Blanca is erroneously written against the 
^dystone, in the general chart. In the plan of Frederik Hendbnl^ 

‘Bay, the name is placed w’ih:n the inner bay, instead of beipg 
ypi. I. M 



INTRODUCTION. 


Ixxxii 


[Prior 


Taskaw. 

1648. 


written., as in tha original, on the pdnt of land between the MUier 
and outer bays: I conceive the jiame was intended to comprise 


both.* 


^770 Moiie than a century hadf elapsed after tins celebrated voyage of 
Tasman, and the eastern limit of Terra.' Australis remained still 

^ ’A- • * , 

unknown. But the British nation was dieh tkking the lead in dis> 
covery ; agd^he new and liberal principles bpon whigh His Majesty, 
George fliT ordered it to be prosecuted, was^a sure indication that 
so considerable a part of the globe would not long escape attention. 
Captain James Cook, accompanied by Mr. Gj^en,ov^as.sent in the 
Endeavour to observe, at Taheity, the transit of Vei^ over the sun's 
disk; and after acoomplishing riiat object, and n^^king a survey of 
New Zealand, he continued his course westward,;in orderlfo explore 
the east side of the Terra Attstralis Incognipi. 

(Atiu,FLl.) In the morning of April ig, 1770, the land was seen bearing from 
noTth«east to west ; the furthest part, in the latter direction, being 
judged to lie in 38“ south, and 14,8* 53' east. But captain Cook 
could hot determine whether it'vdid, or did not, join to Tasman's 
Fan Diemen's Land. 

It would be superfluous, here, to follow our great navigator in his 
discoveries along the coast, northward to Botany Bay and from 
thence to Cape Tork. Such an abstract as suits the plan of this 
Introduction would be little satisfactory to the reader; when, by 
an easy referdri^ to the original narrative, so much interesting 
information upon this new coimtry, its productions, and inhabitants, 
may be obtained.* 

This voyage of captain Cook, whether considered in the extait of 
his discoveries and the. accuracy with which they were traced, or in 
the labours of his scientific associates, far surpassed all that had 

* In Vol. ni. just published, of captain Buroey’s ^stary of Discoveriet in the South 
a copy is given of Tasman’s charts, as they in the odgind. 

t Hmoketworth’t Feyogos, Vol. Ill* page X7s et 



Ixxxiii 


eoaCooBt^^VD.^sLand.} INTRODUCTION. 

gone before. The general plan of the voyage did not, however, cook. 
permit captain Cook to alter minutely into tfie details of every part; 
and had it been otherwise, die very extent of his discoveries would 
have rendered it impossible. Thus, some portjons of the east coast 
of Terra Australis were jpassed in the night, -many openings were 
seen and left vnexamin^, ajtid the islands and reei^ lying at a 
distance from the shore could, generally, be no more than indicated: 
he leaped the harvest o/^discovery, but the gleanings pf the ^Id 
remained to be gathered. 

The first visitor to Van Diemen's Land, after Tasman, its dis- Maeiow. 
coverer, was captain Marion. He commanded the Mascarin and 
Manpiis ^ Castries^ from the Isle Mauritius; and* one of the objects 
of his expedition, was the ^discovery of the supposed Southern 
Continent. This voyage possesses a considerable degree of in- 
terest, and was published at Paris in 1783; but not being generally 
known in England, tl|e parts which relate to Van Diemen's Land, 
are here given in abridgment. 

March 3, 177®, M. Clarion hiade the west side, in latitude 
42“ 56', half a degree south of Tasman's first land fall ; and behind 
a point in 43® 15', he saw an opening leading to the northward, but 
of which no particular mention is made. Steering eastw^d, round 
all the rocks and islets lying off the south coast, he arrived, on the 
evening of the 4th, in Predmk Hendrik’s Bay ; and anchored in 
fathoms, sandy bottom. The great sandy cove of the outer bay 
bore from thence, S. 95' W. one league and a half ; the extreme of 
Mana's Island, N,E, by N. ; and the northernmost part of the mjun 
land, N. ^ W. six leanest (these bearings appear to be as taken, by 
the compass). The latitude observed here, was 4*® 50' south, and 
long^ude 145* «o' east of Greenwich ; the first being 10', anil*tbe 
lc» 4 ?tude above 3* less, than given by Tasman.* 

The fires and smokes, seen by day and night, bespoke the country 

* Accordiof to captain Cook^ the longitude ihoold be f48* ID's 



Ixxxiv 


INTRODUCTION. 


Maxior. 

1778 . 


{Prior Dwcoumma, 

to be ^ell inhaWted; and, on anchoring, there were about 
men assembled upon the shore. On the boats being sent next 
morning, .the natives went to them without distrust; and, having 
piled together some pieces of wood, presented a*lighted stick to the 
new comers, and seemed to ask them to set fire to the pile. Not 
knowing wl^at this ceremony meant, they complied ; and the act 
seemed neither to excite surprise, nor to cause any alteration in the 
conduct of the natives : they continued toTemain about the French 
paity, with their wives and children, as before. 

These people were of the common stature, of a Mack colour, and 
were all naked, both men and women ; and some of the latter had 
children fastened to their backs, with ropes made of rushes. All 
the men were armed with pointed sticks (spears), and \i^h stones 
which appeared to have been sharpened in the manner oFaxe heads. 
They had, in general, smaU eyes, and the white duller than in 
Europeans ; the mouth very wide, the teeth white, and flat noses. 
Their hair, which resembled the wool of the Caflfres, was separated 
into shreds, and powdered with fed ochre. They were generally 
slender, tolerably well made, kept their shoulders back, and upon 
their prominent chests, several had marks raised in the skin. Their 
language appeared harsh ; the words seeming to be drawn from the 
bottom ot the throat. 

The French tried to vrin them by little presents, but they rejected 
with disdain every thing that was offered ; even iron, looking-glasses, 
handkerchiefs, and cloth. They were shown ducks and fowls, 
which^had been carri^ from the ships ; and it was endeavoured to 
make them imderstandj that such would be glj^iy purchased of 
them ; but they took these animals, witlit:Mdl^h they seemed to be 
unacquainted, and threw them away in anger. t 

The party had been' about an hour with the savages when captain 
Marion went on shore. One of the natives stepped forward, imd 
offered him a fire-brand to be applied to a small heap of wood ; and 
the captam, supposing it was a ceremtmy necessary to prove that he 



Satt Coast, 4* V. D:$ I^a'nrf ] INTRODUCTION. 

cafme with friendly intentions, set fire to the heap without hesitation. 
This was no sooner done, than they retired precipitately to a small 
hill, and threw a shower of stones, by which captain Marion and the 
commander of the Castries \yere both wounded. Some shots were 
then fired ; and the French, returning to their boats, coasted along 
the bejich to an open place in the middle of the bay, where there 
was no hill or eminence frpm whenSe they could be annoyed. The 
savages sent their women and children into the woods, and followed 
the boats along shore ; and on their putting in to ■'land, one of the 
natives set up a hideous cry, and immediately a shower of spears 
was discharged. A black servant was hurt in the leg ; and a firing 
then commenced, by which several of the natives were wounded, and 
one killed. They fled to the woods, making a frightful howling, 
but carried off such of the wounded as were unable to follow. Fif- 
teen men, armed with muskets, pursued them ; and on entering 
amongst the trees, they found a dying savage. This man was a 
little more than five feet seven inches high ; his breast was marked 
like those of the Mozambique Ga’ffres, and his skin appeared as black ; 
but on washing off the sctot and dirt, his naturqji colour appeared to 
be reddish. The spears, which it was feared might have been poi- 
soned, were proved not to be so by the facility with which the wound 
of the black servant was healed. 

After the flight of the savages, captain Marion sent two officers 
with detachments, to search for water, and for trees proper to make 
a foremast and bowsprit for the Castries ; but after traversing two 
leagues of country without meeting a single inhabitant, they returned 
unsuccessful in both pursuits ; nor could any fresh water be found 
during the six dayst^vvfilch the ships remained -in* Frederik Hen- 
drik's Bay. 

The;!and h^re is quite sandy, but covered with brush- wood,* and 
with small trees which the savages had mostly stripped of the bark 
for cooking th^ir jshell fish. The greater part of the trees were 
burnt at the foot ; but amongst them there was a kind of ' pine, less 


Ixxxv 


Marion. 
' 177 «* 



Ilacxvi 


INTRODUCTION. 


[IVtor Disiweritd. 

Makioh. than*otirg, which was pprfectly preserved; apparently from the 
natives finding them to be of use in some way or other.* 

There were marks of fire almost every where ; and in many places 
the earth was covered. with aphes. Where it was not burilt, there 
was plenty of grass, ferns like those of Eurgpe, sorrel, and alUluia. 
From the few animals seen, it was thought that the fires made by the 
natives near the coast, drove them inland.- The shooters met with a 
tiger cat, and saw many holes in the ground, like those of a warren. 
They killed cr^s, blackbirds, thrushes, doves, a white-bellied pa- 
roquet whose plumage resembled that of the same bird at the River 
Amazons, and several kinds of sea birds, principally pelicans, and 
the black-bodied red bill. 

The climate was cold, although in the end of summer ; and it ex- 
cited surprise, that the savages could go naked ; the more so, as the 
nearest approach to houses consisted of branches of trees,4set up 
behind the fire places to break off the wind. The many heaps of 
shells seemed to bespeak, that the usual food of these people was 
muscles and other shell fish. 

Many large rays were caught by the French, as also sea cats, old 
wives, and several other fish whose names were not known. They 
found also plenty of cray-fish, lobsters, very large crabs, and good 
oysters ; and the curious picked up sea stars, sea eggs, and a variety 
of fine and rare shells. 

Finding he was only losing time in searching for water in this 
wild country, captain Marion determined to make sail for New Zea- 
land, where he hoped to* succeed better, and also to obtain masts for 
the Castries. He accordingly left Van Diemen's Land on the loth 
of March ; and the account of it concludes With the observation, that 
they had very bad weather on the west coast, but on the side 
the sky was much clearer and vrinds more moderate. 

The chart of Mons. Craaf^if, which accompanies the voyage, appears, 
though on a very small scale, to possess k considei^ble degree of 

t 

* It is more probable, that these trees are able to resist the fire better than the oth^. 



^ V, D:» Land.] INTRODUCTION. 

etactness in the form of the land. The wide opening, called Storm 
Bay, is distinctly marked ; as is another bay to the westward, with 
several small islands in it, the easternmost of which are the LoreeVs 
Eylandm of Tasman. 

A YEAR after Marion had quitted Frederik Hendrik's Bay, Van 
Diemen’s Land was visfted by captain Tobias Furneaux, in His 
Majesty’s ship Adventure. He made the South-west Cape on March g, 
and steered eastward, close to the islands and rooks called Maat- 
suyker's, by Tasman ; and behind which lay a bold shore, which 
seemed to afford several anchoring places. Some of these rocks 
resembled, says captain Furneaux, “ the Mewstone, particularly one 
“ which we so named, about four or five leagues E. S. E. ~ E. off 
“ the above cape, which Tasman has not mentioned, or laid down in 
“ his draughts.”* This is nevertheless the lion-head-shaped island, 
particularly mentioned by Tasman, as lying twelve miles out from 
the coast : the mistake arose from the imperfection of the accounts. 

After passing Maatsuykerj || ples, captain Furneaux sent a boat to 
the main land, on the loth, and the people found places where the 
natives had been, and where pearl scallop shells were scattered 
about. ” The soil seemed to be very rich ; the country well clothed 
** with wood, particularly on the lee sides of the hills ; plenty of 
“ water which falls from the rocks in beautiful cascades, for two or 
“ three hundred feet perpendicular, into the sea ; but they did not 

see the least sign of any place to anchor in with safety.” 

On the return of the boat, captain Furneaux made sail, and came 
to “ the westernmost point of a very deep bay, called by Tasman 
“ Stoiyny Bay. From the west to the east point of this bay there 
** are several small islands, and black rocks wliich we called the 
“ Friars.” From the Friars he followed the coast N. by E.ffbur 
leagues, and thp same evening anchored in Adventure Bay. “ We 
** first took this bay,” says the captain, “ to be that which Tasman 

* CoqVs Second Voyage^ Vol. I. p, 109* * 


Ixxxvff 


MARtOX. 

• irr*. 


faKKBAUZ. 

1773. 



^xxviti 


INTRODUCTION. 


[Prior Ducoveriet: 


Fukneaux. “ called Frederick Henry Bay; but afterwards found that hrs is' laid 
It do^vn five leagues to the northward." 

Captain Fumeaux here mistook the Storm and Frederik Hendrik’s 
Bays of Tasman ; and. he has been followed in this error by all the 
succeeding navigators of the same nation, .which has created not a 
little confusion in the geography of this part of the world. 

The bay supposed to have been Storm Bay, has no name in 
Tasman’s chart ; though the particular plan shews that he noticed 
it, as did Marion more distinctly. The rocks marked at the east 
point of this bay, and called tfie Friars, are the Boreel's Eylanden of 
Tasman ; and the true Storm Bay is the deep inlet, of which Adven- 
ture Bay is a cove. Frederik Hendrik’s Bay is not within this inlet, 
but lies to the north-eastward, on the outer side of the land which 
captain Fumeaux, in consequence of his first mistake, took to be 
Maria’s Island, but which, in fact, is a part of the main land. All 
this* is evident from a close comparison of the forms of the land in 
the two charts, and is corroborated by the differences of longitude 
from the* Mewstone. 

t ’ 

Adventure Bay proved to be a valuable discovery, being a good 
and well-sheltered anchorage, where wood and water were abundant, 
and procurable without much difficulty. The country was found to 
be pleasant ; the soil black and rich, though not deep ; the sides of 
the hills covered with large trees of the evergreen kind, growing to 
a great height before they spread out into branches. There were 
several species of land birds ; and the aquatic fowl were ducks, teal, 
and the sheldrake. An opossum was seen, and the excrement of 
another quadruped, judged to be of the deer kind. Sea fish were 
caught, but not in plenty. The lagoons abounded with trout and 
several other sorts of fish. No natives came down to the ships ; but 
theii fires were seen at a distance, and several of their miserable huts 
were examined. Not the least mark of canoe or boat was seen, ahd 
it was generally thought they had none ; being altogether, from 
** what we could judge, a very ignorant and wretched set of people j 



East Coast, ^ V. D'.s Land:] INTRODUCTION. 

thou^ natives of a country capable of producing every necessary 
“ of life, and a climate the finest in the world. We found not the 
“ least sign of any. minerals or metals." 

After remaining five days in Adventure Bay, captain Fumeaux 
sailed along the coast to the northward,'in order to discover whe- 
ther Vap Diemen’s Land were joined to New South Wales. He 
passed the Maria’s, Schouten’s, aijd Vanderlin’s Islands of Tasman, 
at some distance ; and then, closing more in with the coast, he found 
the land to be low and even, and of^ an agreeable aspect, “ but no 
“ signs of a harbour or bay, where a %hip might anchor in safety." 
In latitude 40* 50', the coast, from running nearly north, turned to 
the westward, and, as captain Furneaux thought, formed a deep bay. 
From thence to “ 39° 5^ ', is nothing but islands and shoals ; the 
“ land high, rocky, and barren." In the course northward, past these 
islands, he had regular soundings, from 15 to 30 fathoms, though 
no land was visible; it was, however, seen again (or thought to be 
so) in latitude 39®, and nearly due north from the islands. The 
bottom then becoming uneven, oUr navigator discontinued his course, 
and steered for New Zealand. 

Whether Van Diemen's Land were, or were not, joined to New 
South Wales, was a question not yet resolved ; but captain Furneaux 
gave it as his opinion, “ that there is no strait between New Hol- 
“ land and Van Diemen’s Land, but a very deep bay.” 

The next visitor to Van Diemen's Land was captain James Cook, 
with his Majesty's ships Resolution and Discoveiy. _ He made the 
South-west Cape on Jan, 94, 1777, steered eastward along the 
shore, as captain Furneaux had done, but generally at a greater 
distance ; on the 26th he anchored in Adventure Bay. 

Captain Cook’s account of this bay agrees riearly with that of 
Fithieaux ; but^he there procured abundance of fish, and had fre- 
quent communication with the natives : his description of them coin- 
cides, generally, with what has been recited in Marion’s voyage. 
y ou h N 


Ixxxix, 

Fufnraux. 


Coox* 

1777. 



INTRODUCTION. 


*xe 


Cook. 

177 /. 


[Prior Diseoverie§. 


The most striking differences betwixt these people and those captain 
Cook had seen on the east coast of New South Wales, were in 
their language, in having no canoes, and in the different texture 
of the hair : in those it was “ naturally long and black, though it be 
“ universally cropped short whilst in Adventure Bay, “ it was as 
“ woolly, as that of any native of Guinea."* In these particulars, as in 
some others, they agreed with Dampier's description of the people 
on the North-west Coast, who were without canoes, and had woolly 
hair. 

The following articles, to the conclusion of Part I. of this Section, 
are placed somewhat out of their chronological order, for the con- 
venience of classing together all the discoveries which had no con- 
nection with the British settlement in New South Wales. Those 
made in vessels from that settlement, or which may be considered as 
a consequence of its establishment, will compose Part II. in unin- 
terrupted oiifler. 


Blioh, Captain William BLiGHputinto Adventure Bay with his Majesty’s 
ship Bounty in 1788, and with the Providence and Assistant in 1792 ; 
for the purpose of obtaining wood and water. These were procured 
with facility, as also plenty of fish ; and many useful seeds and trees 
were planted. 

No discoveries being made here, beyond jhose of Furneaux and 
Cook, the reader is referred to captain Bligh’s Voyage to the South 
Seas, p. 45 to 54, for his observations on the country and inhabitants. 
There is, however, one remarkable circumstance recorded of these 
people, which is, that when presents wrapped up in paper were 
thrown to them, “ they took tlie articles out, and placed them on 
“ their heads a ceremony which is similar to that recorded by 
Wiisen, of the inhabitants on the east side of the Gulph of 
Carpentaria. 


^ See Cook’s Third Voyage^ Vol. I* p. 93- 11 7* 



Ea$t Coa$t, Sf V. D\» Land.-] INTRODUCTION. 


zci 

The brig Mercury, commanded by John Henry Cox, Esq., an- Cox. 
chored at the entrance of a deep bay on the south side of Van 
Diemen's Land, on July 3, 1789. This bay was then first discovered, 
and lies N. by W. ten miles from the Mewstone.* The country was 
found to be agreeably interspersed with hills and vallies, and some 
of the hills were luxuriantly clothed with trees to their very summits. 

About four miles from the vessel, there was a stream of fresh water; 
and close to it stood a hut, or rather hovel, neatly constructed of 
branches of trees and dried leaves. “ Around it were scattered a 
“ great quantity of pearl, escalop, oyster, and other shells, which had 
“ been lately roasted.” The faeces of some large animal were met 
with in every direction ; but neither the animal itself nor any of the 
natives could be found. 

July 5. A heavy swell from the southward obliged Mr-. Cox to 
get underway; and he worked along shore to the eastward. His 
intention was to put into Adventure Bay ; but being sct||;o the north- 
ward of his reckoning, on the 8th, he discovered, and came to an 
anchor in Oyster Bay, on the* inner side of Maria’s Island, the 
shelter there being found secure, and wood and w ater plentiful. This 
bay lies in 42* 42' south, and 148" 25' east, and not more than three 
or four leagues to the northward of Tasman’s Frederik Hendrik’s 
Bay ; though Mr. Cox, following in the error of captain Furneaux, 
seems to have had no idea of this proximity. 

Some communication was obtained with the inhabitants of the 
island ; but as nothing in this, or in other respects, was found 
materially different to what was observed by Mons. Marion and 
captain Cook in the neighbouring bays, it is unnecessary to enter 
into the details. 

The French rear-admiral, Bruny D'Entrecasteaux, made the h entru- 
ccAst of Van Diemen's Land with the intention of procuring wood 

• Observations, 8fc., made during a voyage in the brig Mercury ; by Lieut. G. 
ilortimer of the Marines. London, 1791. 



xcii 


INTRODUCTION. 


{Prior Discoveriet. 


D’Entkr- and water at Adventure Bay ; “ but deceived by the forms of 
“ the coast, which resemble each other, he entered Storm Bay," 
April 20, 1792.* This is not, however, the Storm Bay of Tasman; 
but thafr^hich was ta)cen for such by captain Funieaux, 

The error was soon detected; but finding shelter and good 
anchoring ground, the admiral determined to remain where he was, 
and to examine the inlet. The result mQSt amply repaid his labour, 
by opening to him the most important discovery which had been 
made in this country from the time of Tasman. Instead of an open 
bay, this inlet was found to be the entrance into a fine navigable 
channel, running more than ten leagues to the northward, and 
there communicating with the true Storm Bay. It contains a series 
of good harbours, or is itself, rather, one continued harbour, from 
beginning to end. 

This new passage obtained the name of Canal de D'Entrecas- 
teaux ; and* after passing through it with his ships, the admiral 
steered across Storm Bay, passing to the southward of the land 

which Furneaux and Cook had taken for Maria’s Islands. At the 

# * *■ 

head of Storm Bay other openings were seen ; but the wind from 
the north and the pressure of time, did not allow him to examine 
them at that period. 

1795 . On Jan, 21, of the following year, admiral D’Entrecasteaux 
anchored again in one of the ports on the west side of the entrance 
to his newly discovered: channel^ and after completing the wood 
and water of his two ships. La Recherche and L’ Esperance, pursued 
his former course up .the passagej sending boats to complete the 
surveys of the different ‘harbours on each side. A boat was also 
sent to explore the two openings in the head of Storm Bay. The 
westernmost proved to' be a . river, up which the boat ascended 
twenty miles to the northward ; and so far it was navigable for ships. 
It was not pursued ft^tther; so that the distance, to which tiiis 

* Voyage de If Entreeosteattx, ridigkpar M.de Jtossel: A Paris 1808. Tomb I. 
p. 46. 



East Coast, Sf' V. D. s Land.-] INTRODUCTION. 

Riviere du Nord might penetrate into the country, was uncertain. 
The eastern opening led northward into a wide, open bay ; and this 
into another large expanse of water to the eastward, but which was 
not examined. It was thought, however, that^this eastern^bay com- 
municated with that of Frederik Hendrik ; and on this supposition 
(which has not proved correct), the land which Furneaux and Cook 
had erroneously thought tor be Maria's Island, was named 1/e d’Abel 
Tasman. 

The charts of the bays, ports, and arms of the sea at the south- 
east end of Van Diemen’s Land, constructed in this expedition by 
Mons. Beautemps-Beaupre and assistants, appear to combine scien- 
tific accuracy and minuteness of detail, with an uncommon, degree 
of neatness in the execution : they contain some of the finest speci- 
mens of marine surveying, perhaps ever made in a new country. 

Admiral D’Entrecasteaux gives a very favourable account of the 
disposition of the native inhabitants on the shores of jhe channel ; 
and he had frequent communications with them. In person and 
manner of living, they agree wfth those described by Marion and 
Cook ; but the vocabulary of their language is somewhat different ; 
and bark canoes, which preceding navigators had thought them not 
to possess, were found in the channel. The description of the 
country is, generally, favourable; though somewhat less so than’ 
that of captain Cook at Adventure Bay. The climate was thought 
good, though moist ; and the supplies of wood, water, and fish, for 
shipSj were abundant; but the preference, in these respects, was 
given to Adventure Bay, even by the French admiral. 

Mons. Ldbillardiere, in his previously ppblished account of D'En- 
trecasteaux’s voyage, says, that he found a small vein of coal near 
the South Cape ; and that lime-stone rocks exist on the west-side of 
Adventure Bay. These circumstances are omitted by M. de Rossel ; 
as* is also the remark, that although the natives had their teeth 
perfect, in general, yet in some near the bay, one, and sometimes 
two of the upper front teeth were wanting. The same thing was 


zeiii 

D’Entrk- 

castea.uk. 

179a. 



INTRODUCTION. 


xdr 

D’Entrb- 

CASTEAUX. 

1793 . 


Hayes. 

1794. 


U^rior Discoveries. 


observed by Dampier, of the inhabitants on the north-west coast of 
Terra Australis ; and this coincidence, together with their similarity 
of person, particularly in the woolly hair, is sufficiently remarkable 
to induce^ a belief, that these people," placed at tW two extremities 
of this vast country, have yet one common origin; although the 
intermediate inhabitants of the East Coast differ in some essential 
particulars. 


Captain John Hayes, of the Bombay marihe, visited Storm Bay 
and D’Entrecasteaux's Channel, with the private ships Duke and 
Dutchess from India, in 1794,. He went much further up the Riviere 
du Nord, than the boat from the French ships had done, and gave 
it the name of the Derwent River. This name is likely to efface 
the first appellation, and with some degree of propriety; both from 
the superior extent of captain Hayes’ examination, and from North 
River hemg an equivocal term for a stream at the south end of Van 
Diemen's Land. 

That captain Hayes had somq intimation of the French disqovery 
is evident, but not knowing the distinctive appellations given, he 
took upon himself to impose names every where. Succeeding 
visitors have gone with his sketch in their hands, whilst the charts of 
D'Entrecasteaux were unknown in that part of the world; from 
whence, and still more from those names having now become familiar 
to the settlement established in the Derwent River, it will be difficult, 
if not impdssible in many cases, for the original discoverer to be rein- 
stated in his rights. 

The head of the Derwent is the sole part where captain Hayes' 
sketch conveys information, not to be found much more accurately 
delineated in the charts of D'Entrecasteaux. 



t: xcv 3 


PRIOR DISCOVERIES IN TERRA AUSTRALIS. 

SECTION IV 

EAST COAST, WITH VAN DIEMEN’S LAND. 

PART II. 

Preliminary Information. Boat Expeditions of Bass and Flinders. . 

Clarke. Shortland. Discoveries of Bass to the southward of Port 
Jackson ; of Flinders ; and of Flinderg and Bass. Examinations to 
the northward by Flinders. Conclusive Remarks. 

The year 1788 will ever be a memorable epoch in the history of Preliminary 
Terra* Australis. On Jaft. 18, captain ( now vice-admiral ) Arthur 
Philip arrived in Botany Bay, with Hi.s Majesty’s brig Supply ; and 
was followed by the Syrius, captain John Hunter, six sail of trans- 
ports, and three store ships. The purpo.%e of this armament was to 
establish a colony in New South Walds, over wliich extensive 
country captain Philip was appointed Governor and Captain-general. 

Botany Bay proved to be an unfavourable situation for the new colony ; 
it was, therefore, abandoned in favpur of Port Jackson, which lies 
three leagues to the northward, and was found to be one of the finest 
harbours in the world. 

A history of this establishment at the extremity of the globe, in a 
country where the .astonished settler sees nothing, not even the grass 
under his feet, which is not different to whatever had before met his 
eye, could not but presenj objects of great interest to the European 
reader ; and the public curiosity has been gratified, by the perusal 
of various respectable publications, wherein the proceedings of the 



XQVI 


INTRODUCTION. 


[/Vi'or Dueoveries. 

prtiiminirf cdlojiistb, the country ropnd Port Jackson, its productions, and native 

are delineated with accuracy, and often with minuteness. 
The subject to be here treated is the progress of maritime geogra- 
phical discovery, wliieh resulted from the new establishment; and as 
the different expeditions made for this purpose are in many cases im* 
perfectly, and in some altogether unknown, it has been judged that 
a circumstantial account of them would be useful to seamen, and not 
without interest to the general reader; These expeditions are, more- 
over, intimately connected with the Investigator’s vd^age, of which 
they were, in fact, the leading cause, 

(Atlas, The first advantage to maritime geography which arose from the 
Plate VIII.) settlement, WSs a survey of Botany and Broken Bays and ^ort 
Jackson, with most of the rivers falling into them. Botany Bay had, 
indeed,'been examined by captain Cook ; but of the other two harbours, 
the entrances alone had been seen. This survey, including the inter- 
mediate parts of the coast, was made by captain John Hunter, and 
was published soon after its transmission to England by govenor 
Philip. 

In the beginning of 1795, captain (now vice-admiral) Hunter 
sailed a second time for New South Wales, to succeed captain Philip 
in the government of the new colony. He todk with him His Ma- 
jesty's armed vessels Reliance and Supply ; an(} the author of this 
account, who was then a midshipman and had nbt long before re- 
turned from a voyage to the South Seas, was led hy his passion for 
exploring new countries, to eirfbr^ace the opportunity of going out 
upon a station which, of all otHfers, presented the most ample field 
for his favourite pursuit.' 

On arriving at Port Jackson, in September of the same year, it 
appeared that the investigation of the coast had not been greatly 
extended beyond the three harbours ; and even in these, some of the 
rivers were not altogether explored. Jervis Bay, indicated hut*not 
named by captain Cook, had been entered by lieutenant Richard 
Bowen ; and td the north, Port Stepher^ had lately been examined by 



Easi Coast, Sf V. p:$ Ltmd.'] INTRODU^OK 

Mr C. Grimes, land surveyor of the colony,- .and by -capfeln 
W. R. Broughton of H. M. ship Providence ;• but the-intermedrate 
portions of coast, both to the north and south', we^-e little further 
known than from captain Coca’s general char^f, and none of the 
more distant openings, marked but not explored by that celebrated 
navigator, had been seen. 

In Mr. George Bass, surgeon of the Reliance, I had the happiness 
to find a man whose ardour for discovery was not to be repressed by 
any obstacles, nor deterred by danger; and with this friend a deter- 
mination was formed of completing the examination of the east coast 
of New South Wales, by all such opportunities as the duty of the 
ship, and procurable means, could admit. 

Projects of Ijhis nature, 'vhen originating in the minds of young 
men, are usually termed romantic ; and so far from ariy good being 
anticipated, even prudence and friendship join in discouraging, if not in 
"opposing them. Thus it was in the present case ; so that a little boat 
of eight feet* long, called Tom Thumb, with a crew composed of our- 
selves and a boy, was the best equipfaent to be^rocured for the first 
outset. In the month following the arrival of (the ships, we proceeded 
round in this boat, to Botany Bay ; and ascending George's River, 
one of two which falls into the bay, explored its winding course 
about twenty miles beyond where governor Hunter’s survey had 
been carried. 

The sketch made of -this river and presented to the governor, with 
the favourable report of the land on i^ borders, induced His Excel- 
lency tp examine them himself shortly afterward ; and was followed 
by establishing there a new branch of the colony, under the name of 
Banks’ Town. 

A voyage to Norfollfc Island interrupted our further proceedings, 
until March 1796. Mr. Bass and myself then went again in Tom 
to explore a large river, said to fall into the sea some miles 
to uiie south of Botany Bay and of which there was no indication in 
captain Cook’s chart. 

VOL. j. 


xcvji 

Preliminasy 


Bass and 
Flinpru^. 
1795 * 


1796 . 


o 



:cviii INTRODUCTION. [Prior Discwertei. 

Ba 8« wid We sailed out of Poi;;t Jackson early in the morning of March 25, 

and stood a little offto sea to be ready for the sea breeze. On coming 

in with the hand in the evening, instead of being .near Cape Solander, 

we found our'elves, under the cliffs near Hat* Hill, six or seven 

« 

leagues to the southward, whither the boat had been drifted by a 
strong current. Not being able to land, and the sea breeze coming 
in early next morning from the northward, we steered for two small 
islets, six or seven miles further on, in order to get shelter; but 
being in want of water, and seeing a place on the way v/here, though 
the boat could not land, a cask might be obtained by swimming, the 
attempt was made, and Mr. Bass went on shore. Whilst getting oft' 
the cask, a surf arose further out than usual, carried the’boat before 
it to the beach, and left us there with our arms, ammunition, clothes, 
and provisions thoroughly drenched, and partly spoiled. The boat 
was emptied and launched again immediately ; but it was late in the 
afternoon before every thing was rafted off, and we proceeded to 
the islets. It was not possible, to land there ; and we went on to two 
larger isles lying neay a projccialilg point of the main; which has four 
hillocks upon it presenting the form of a double saddle, and proved 
to be captain Cook's Red Point. The isles were inaccessible as the 
others ; and it being dark, we were constrained to pass a second 
night in Tom Thumb, and dropped our stone anchor in 7 fathoms, 
imder the lee of the point. 

The sea breeze, on the 27th, still opposed our return ; and learning 
from two Indians that no wa^r could be procured at Red Point, we 
accepted their offer of piloting us to a river which, they said, lay a 
few miles further southward, and where not only fresh water was 
abundant, but also fish and wild ducks. These men were natives of 
Botany Bay, whence it was that we understood a little of their lan- 
guage, whilst that of some others was altogether unintelligible. Their 
river proved to be nothing more than a small stream, whic|j de- 
scended from a lagoon under Hat H^l, and forced a passage for 
itself through the beach ; so tiiat vre j^tered it with diflSculty even 



EastCoa^,SfV.D:sLand.^ INTRODUCTION. xcix 

in Tom Thumb. Our two conductors then quitted the boat to walk Bass aad 
along the sandy shore abreast, with eight dr ten strange natives in 
company. 

After rowing a mile up the stream, and finding it to become more 
shallow, we began to entertain doubts’ of securing a retreat from 
these people, should they be hostilely inclined ; and fhey had the 
reputation at Port Jackson of being exceedingly ferocious, if not can- 
nibals. Our muskets were not yet freed from rust and sand, and 
there was a pressing necessity to procure fresh water before attempt- 
ing to return northward. Under these embarrassments,' we agreed 
upon a plan of action, and went on shore directly to the natives. 

Mr. Bass employed some of them to assist in repairing an oa^ which 
had been broken in our di "taster, whilst I spread the wet powder out 
in the sun. This met with no opposition, for they knew not what the 
powder was ; but >vhen we proceeded to clean the muskets, it excited 
so much alarm that it was necessary to desist. On inquiring of the 
two friendly natives for water, they pointed upwards to the lagoon ; 
but after many evasions our barisa* was filled at a hole not many 
yards* distant. 

The number of people had increased to near twenty, a^d others 
were still coming, so that it was nccesssary to use all possible expe- 
dition in getting out of their reach. But a new employment arose 
upon our hands : we had clipp'^d the hair and beards of the two 
Botany-Bay natives at Red Point ; and they were shewing themselves 
to the others, and. persuading them to follow their example. Whilst, 
therefore, the powder was drying, I began with a large pair of 
sdssan to execute my new office upon the eldest of four or five chins 
presented to me ; and as great nicety was not required, the shearing 
of a dozen of them djd not occupy me long. Some of the more timid 
were sdsTBCied at a formidable instrument coming so near to their 
nqses, and would scarcely be persuaded by their shaven friends, to 
aUow the operation to be finished. But when their chins were held 

* A small easily containing six or eight gallons. 



c 


INTRODUCTION. 


[Prior DiscoteriMi 

Sass and up a second time, their fear of the instrument,— the wild stare of their 
eyes,— and the smile which they forced, formed a compound upc«i 
the rough savage countenance, not unworthy the pencil of a Hogarth. 
1 was almost tempted to try what effect a little sifip would produce ; 
but our situation was too crifical to admit of such experiments. 

Every thing being prepared for a retreat, the natives became voci- 
ferous for the boat to go up to the lagoon ; and it was not without 
stratagem that we succeeded in getting down to the entrance of the 
stream, where the depth of water placed us out of their reach. 

Ourjjxamination of the country was confined, by circumstances, to 
a general view. This part is called Alowrie, by the natives, and is 
very low and sandy near the sides of the rivulet. About four miles 
up it, to the north-west, is the lagoon ; and behind, stands a semi- 
circular range of hills, of which the highest is Hat Hill. The water 
in the lagoon was distinctly seen, and appeared to be iseveral miles 
in circumference. The land round it is probably fertile, and the 
slopes of the back hills had certainly that appearance. . Tlie natives 
were in nothing, except language, different from tliose at Port Jack- 

j * 

son ; butthcir dogs, which are of the same species, seemed to be more 
numero^ and familiar. 

Soon after dark the sea breeze was succeeded by a calm ; and at 
ten o'clock we rowed out of the rivulet, repassed Red Point, and at 
one in the morping came to an anchor in 5 fathoms, close to th? 
northernmost of the two first rocky islets.* In the afternoon of 
the a8th, we got on shore under the high Jand to the norA of Hat 
Hill, and were able to cook provisions ^d take some repose without 
disturbance. The sandy beach was our bed ; arid ifter much fatigue, 
and passing three nights of cramp in Tom Thumb, it waa to us a 
bed of dowii. 

* These islets seeayo are marked as recks under water in Cook’s 

chart. In it, also, tliere ue three islets laid down to the south of Red Point, whii^ mvst 
be mcaut for the double islet lying dinctly off it, for there are no others. The cause of . 
the point being named rec^ eaci^ed our sotioe. . * 



Ea*t Coast, Sf V. D:$ Land.l INTRODUCTION. < 

The shore in this part is mostly high and cliify ; and under the JIa«s and 
cliflFs were lying black lumps, appafently of slaty stone, rounded by 
attrition. These were npt particularly noticed, but Mr, Clarke, in his 
disastrous journey along the coast, afterwards, made fires of them; 
and on a subsequent examination, Mr. Bass found a stratum of coal to 
run through the whole of these cliffs. 

March sp. By rowing hard we got four leagues nearer home ; and 
at night dropped our stone under another range of cliffs, more re- 
gular but less high than those near Hat Hill. At ten o’clock, the 
wind, which had been unsettled and driving electric clouds iri all 
directions, burst out in a gale at south, and obliged us to get up 
the anchor immediately, and run before it. In a few minutes the 
waves began to break ; and the extreme danger to which this ex- 
posed our little bark, was increased by the darknesls of the night, 
and the uncertainty of finding any place of shelter. The shade of 
the cliffs over, our heads, and the noise of the surfs breaking at their 
feet, were ’the directions by which our course was steered parallel 
to the coast. 

Mr. Bass kept the sheet of the sail in his hand, dra^ng in a few 
inches occasionally, when he saw a particularly heavylsea following. 

I was steering with an oar, and it required the utmost exertion and 
care to prevent broaching to; a single wrong movement, or a 
moment's inattention, would have sent us to the bottom. The task 
of the boy was* to bale out the water which, in spite of every care, 
the sea threw in upon us.' 

After running near an hour in this critical manner, some high 
breal»tS/i1flrere distinguished, a-head ; and. behind them there* ap- 
peared shade of cliffs. It was necessary to determine, on the 
instant, \V]^t was to be done, fpr our bark could not live ten minutes 
longer. ,0*1 coming to what appeared to be the extremity of 4^e 
breaker the boat's head was brought to the wind in a favourable 
moment, the mast and sail taken down, and the' oars got out. 

Pulling then towards the reef during the intervals of the heaviest 
seas, we found it to terminate in a point ; and in three minutes were 



lii INTRODUCTTON. Dueovetiet. 

bausimI in ffljioolih water under its lee. A white appearance, further haclcj 
ksept us a short time in suspense ; hut a nearer approach shewed it 
to he the heach of a well-sheltered cove, in which we anchorM for 
the rest of the night. , So sudden a ch^ge, from ‘extreme danger to 
comparatively perfect safety, excited reflections which kept us some 
time awake; we thought Providential Cove a well-adapted name for 
this place ; hut hy the natives, as we afterwards, le^ed*, it is called 
Watta-‘Movolee. 

On landing n^t morning, March 30, water was found 5 t the back 
of the beach, The coimtry round the cove is, in'^bneral, sandy and 
barren. No natives Vere seen, but their traces were* recent. The 
extremity o£ the reef, which afforded us such signal shelter, bore 
S. E. by “E. from the centre of the beach, the north "head of the cove 
E. N. E. ; and except at the intermediate five points ^f the compass, 
Watta-Mowlee affords shelter fer - large Jioats, with aiiahdrage on a 
fine sandy bottom. 

Between three and four miles to the northward of this cove, we 
found the river, or rather port, which was the original place of our 
destination ; and it having been a pilot named Hacking, from whom 
the first information of it had been received', it was named after him : 
by the natives it is called Deeban. 

April 1st, was employed in the examination of the port. It is 
something more than one mile wide in the entrance ; but spojti con- 
tracts to half that space, and becomes shallow. Neither have the 
three arms, into which ii afterwards branches out, any deep channel 
into them ; although, within the seOt^d branch, there are from 3 to 
8 fathoms. Finding there was no part accessible to a slupi 'beyond 
two miles from the entrance, nor any prospect of incrpuimg our 
small stock of provisions,^ PorJt Hacking was quitted ^^y in the 
morning of April a. 

The shores of the port are mostly rocky, particularly on the north 
side ; but there is no want of grass or .wood ; and without doubt 
there are many culturable spots on the sides of the streams which 
descend, apparently from the inland mountains, into the uppermost 



Ea$t Coaft, Sf V. Z).’« Land!] INTRODUCTION. 


CIJ 


branph. Two natives came down to a friendly manner, and and 
'seemed not to be unacquainted with Europeans. Their language i;»6. 
^fibred somewhat from the Port-Jackson dialect; but with the 
assistance of signs^ we >^ere able to make ourselves understood. 

After sounding the entrance tif Port Hacking in going out, and 
finding 3 j. fathoms water, we stpered N. E. by E. for Cape Solander ; 
and the'aam|^.evening Tom -Thumb was secured along-side the 
Reliance Jn Port Jackson, 

• ^'1 • , 

In this little expedition, I had no otljer means of ascertaining the 
situations of places than by pocket-compass bearings and computed 
tiistanoes ; which was done as follows ; 


South lat. 


Cliffy south extreme of Cape Solander, lies in 34, ^,5 
Frona thence to Port Hacking, a low curving 1 


Bastion. 

o 

1£1 


le 




» Situation ofTort Hacking 
From Port Hackhigtti Watta-Mowlde; low cliffs, 
but rising gradually to the head of the cove; 
S.S.w'.Similet . - ‘ - - • 

Situation of Watta-Mowlee 
Thence to thel&hd of steep cliffs, nearly straight ; 

S. S. W. 4-§- mles . - 

To the end of coal cliffs, and commencement of 
Hat-Hill beach ; mostly a high shore, some- 
times cliffy, with small beaches at intervals ; 
S. by W. id miles, * 


Situation of Red Point 


34. 5>9 

151 6 

1 + 3 > 

-1,6 

34. 

J + 4.2 

1 

151 4.4 

-2,1 

+ 9,8 

”“ 2>4 

1 

+ ^>4 

+ 1,1 

34 29,5 

1 • 

151 1 

/ + 3.5 

- 4.3 

843 S»o 

150 56,7 



civ INTRODUCTipN. [Prior Discoveries. 

After this expeditiphjj^je duties of the ship, and a voyage to the 
Good Hope by the way of Cape Horn, suspended our pro- 
jects for some time. On the return of the Reliance to New South 
Wales, we found there the supra-cargo of the Sydney Cove, a ship 
from India commanded by Q. A. H^ilton, which, having started 
(AUas, PI. I.) a butt end, had been run on shore at'Furneaux's Islands and wrecked. , 
Mr. Clarke had left the Snip, wifh the chief mate ^d others, in the 
long boat, designing for Port Jackson, in order to procure means 
for transporting the officers people, and such part of the cargo 
as had been saved, to the same place ; but being overtaken by a 

heavy south-east gaf^i their boat had been thrown on shore, near 

% 

Cape Howe, three-hundred miles from the colony, and stove to 
pieces.' ^ ^ 

There wa& no ^other prospect of safety for Mr. Clarke and his 
companions, than to reach Port Jac^^on on foot; and they com- 
menced their inarch along the sea shore, scantily furnished with 
ammimition, and with less provisions. Various tribes of natives were 
passed, some of whom were friendly ; but the h^tility of others, 
and excessive fatigue, daily lessened the number of these unfortunate 
people ; and when the provisions and ammunition failed, the dimi- 
nution became dreadfully rapid. Their last loss was of the chief mate 
and carpenter, who were killed by Dilba, and other savages near 
Hat Hill ;* and Mr. Clarke, with a sailor and one lascar, alone re- 
mained when tli^y reached Watta-Mowlee. They were so exhaiisted, 
as to have scarcely strength enough to mak^ themselves observed 
by a boat which avas hshmg off the cove ; but were at Jength con- 
veyed into her, and Brough to Port Jackson. 

Mr. Qarke gave the first information the coai clifts. near Hat 
Hill ; and from him it%as ascertained, that, besides the known bays, 
many small streams and inlets had interrupted his march djong the 
shoVe, from Cape Howe to "Watta-Mowlee ; but that there were 

* This DUIni was on^ o£ the two Botany-Say natives^ who had been most strenuoui 
for Tom 'rhumb to go tip into the lagod^ which lies under the hilU 



East Coast, SfV.D:s Land.'] INmODUCTION. ct 


none which he had not been able to pass, e^er at the sea side, or by 
going a few miles round, into the country. A journal of his route 
was published in the Calcutta newspapers, some time in 1798. 

The colonial schooner Francis had made one voyage to Fumeaux's 
Islands, and brought from thence captain Hamilton, and part of his 
people and cargo. The same vessel was about to proceed thither 
a second time, and I was anxious to’^ embrace that opportunity of 
explbring those extensive and little kno^ lands; but the great repairs 
required by the Reliance would not allow of my absence. My friend 
Bass, less confined by his duty, made several excursions, principally 
into the interior parts behind Port Jackson ; with a view to pass over 
the back mountains, and ascertain the nature of the country beyond 
them. His success was no: commensurate to the perseverance and 
labour employed : the mountains were impassable ; but the course 
of the river Grose, laid down in Plate VIII., resulted from one of these 
excursions. 


CtAlU. 

iz»r. 


In September, S' small colonial ’vessel having been carried off by Shortlakb, 
convicts, lieutenant John* Shortland, first of the Reliance,* went 


after them to the northward, in an armed boat. The expedition was 
fruitless, as to the proposed object ; but in returning along the shore 
from Port Stephens, Mr. Shortland discovered a port in latitude 33“, 
capable of receiving small ships; and what materially added to 
the importance of the discovery, was a .stratum of doal, found to 
run through the south head of the port, and also pervaded a cliffy 
island in the eptrane'e. These coals were not only dccessible to ship- 
ping, but of a superior quality to those in jhe cliffs near Hat Hill. 
The port was named after His Excellency governor Hunter ; and 
a settlement, called Mw Castle, has lately been there established. 
The entrance is narrow, and the deepest water ( about three fathoms) 


(Atlas, 

FLVIIL) 


♦ Aftenmirds captain of the Jun(m, He was mortally wounded, whilst bravely defend- 
ing his Majesty’s frigate against a Vastly superior force ; and died at Guadaloupe. 

VOL. 11 . P 



cvi INTRODUCTION. [/Vibr Di$cw>erie$. 

shohtiand. close to the north-west side of the Coal Island ; but no vessel of 
more than three hundred tons should attempt it, 

r 

In December, Mr. George Bass obtained leave to make an expe- 
1797 . dition to the southward ; and he was furnished with a fine whale 
boat and six weeks provisions by the governor, and a crew of six 
seamen from the ships. He sailed Dec. 5., in the evening ; but foul 
and strong winds forced liim into Por^ Hacking and Watta-Mowlee. 
On the 5th, in latitude 34® 38', he was obliged to stop in a small 
bight of the coast, a little south of Alowrie. The points of land 
there are basaltic ; and on looking round amongst the burnt rocks 
scattered over a hollowed circular space behind the shore, Mr. Bass 
found a hole of tw'enty-five or thirty feet in diameter ; into which 
the sea washed up by a subterraneous passage. 

Dec. 6., he passed a long sloping projection which I have called 
Poutt Bass, lying about three leagues south of Alowrie. Beyond 
this point, the coast forms a sandy bay of four or five leagues in 
length, containing two small inlets ; and the southernmost being 
accessible to the boat, Mr. Bass went in and stopped three days. 
This little place was found to deserve no better name than Shoals 
Haven. The entrance is mostly choaked uji by sand, and the inner 
part with banks of sand and mud ; there is, however, a small channel 
sufficiently deep for boats. The latitude was made to be ,34° 5a' 
.south ; the sloping Point Bass, to the northward, bore N. 12“ E., and 
a steep head at the southern extremity of the bay, S, 35° E. The 
tide was found to rise seven or eight feet, and the time of higlv 
water to be about eight hours and a half after the moon passed over 
the meridian. 

The great chain of high land, called the Blue Mountains, by which 
the colony at Port Jackson is prevented from extending itself to the 
. west, appeared to Mr, Bass to 4 :erminate here, near the sea coast. 

The base of this southern extremity of the chain, he judged to 
extend twenty-five or thirty miles, in a south-western direttion from 



East Coast, 4* V. D. 's Land.] INTRODUCTION. < 

Point Bass ; after which it turns north-westward. In the direction bass. 
of west from Shoals Haven, and in all the space to the south of 
that line, was an extensive, flat country, where a party desinous of 
penetrating into the interior might reasonably diope to avoid those 
impediments which, at the back of Port Jackson, have constantly 
proved insurmountable. 

In an excursion from the boat towards the southern end of the 
mountains, Mr. Bass fell in with a consi<ierable stream, which he 
traced down to the shore, about three miles north of Slioqls' Haven : 
this is the first inlet of the long bay, which had been observed from 
the sea, with a bar running across the entrance. The soil on the 
southern bank of this stream he compared, for richness, to the banks 
of the Hawkesbury ; and a\ tributes this unusual fertility to the same 
cause: repeated inundations. In fact, the stream has .since been 
found to descend from the mountains at twelve or fifteen miles from 
the coast, and to run along their southern extremity to the sea ; so 
that it performs the same office here that the Hawkesbury does 
further north — that of being a channel for the waters which descend 
from the high back land ; but as, in the heavy rains, it is also une- 
qual to the task, the banks are overflowed, and the low country to 
the south and west is inundated and fertilized. There are, however, 
at the back of Shoals Haven, many thousand acres of open ground, 
whose soil is a rich vegetable mould, and now beyond the reach of 
the floods. 

Dec. lo. The boat left Shoals Haven and entered Jervis Bay, a 
large open place of very unpromising appearance. On the north side 
of the entrance, between Point Perpendicular, and Long Nose, there is 
a small cove, where a ship's boat might lie at half tide ; and with 
a hose fill water from the back of the beach, at two pits which 
appeared to be always full. The best anchorage for ships seem^ 
to be on the east side of the bay, between Long Nose and the 
northern beach, though ^hey would not, even there, be entirely 
land-locked. Bowen’s Island lies a quarter of a mile from the south 



INTRODUCTION. 


cviii 


[Prior IH$coverie$. 


Bass. Side of the entrance, but the passage between does not admit any 
thing larger than boats. There is a small beach at the back of the 
island, off which ships might anchor in 8 fathoms sandy bottom, and 
be sheltered as far round as south-east ; but with the wind nearer to 
east they would be exposed. 

The east shore of Jervis Bay runs, for twelve or fifteen miles, so 
near to north from the entrance, that it is not, at the head, more than 
four hundred yards across to the shore of the long outer bay. The 
piece of land, which is thus made a narrow peninsula, is rather high, 
with a face of steep cliff's toward the sea. The rocks on the inner 
side bear strong marks of volcanic fire ; and being disposed in parallel 
layers, their inclination to the west is very evident ; quantities of 
pumice stone were scattered along the shores. 

The country round the bay is mostly barren. On the eastern side 
it is rocky, with heath and brush-wood; the west is low, swampy, 
and sandy, with some partial exceptions ; but on the south side 
there are grassy spaces amongst the brush- wood which might afford 
pasturage for cattle. 

Jervis Bay was quitted Dec. 13., and at noon the Pigeon House 
bore W. by N. In the evening Mr. Bass stopped in a cove, wliich 
Point Upright shelters from northern winds ; and lie employed the 
next day in looking round the country. The vallies and slopes of the 
hills were found to be generally fertile ; but there being nothing of 
particular interest in this place, it was quitted on the 15th. Some small 
islands lying close under the shore (in Bateman Bay), bore west at 
noon ; and the night was passed at anchor under a point, in latitude 
36“ 00', where, the wind being foul on the 16th, Mr. Bass laid the 
boat on shore, and proceeded to examine the surrounding country. 

At eight or nine miles from the coast is a ridge of hummocky 
hijls, extending to the southward ; but the space between these hills 
and the sea is low, and in great part occupied by salt swamps. JThe 
sea was found to have an entrance at the back of the point, and to 
form a considerable lagoon, which communicated with the swamps 



Ea»t Co(ut, 8f V. D. s Land.] INTRODUCTION. e 

by means of several branching arms. The soil, as maybe supposed, bass. 
was generally bad, the sloping sides of some of the hills being alone 
capable of any utility. In a round of twelve or fourteen miles Mr. 

Bass could not find’ a drop of fresh water, or see a native. There 
were, however, many huts, and he traced the paths from them 
down to holes dug in the lowest grounds ; but these were then all 
dried up, and the country in general seemed to be suffering from 
drought. 

Dec. 17. The wind having veered to N. N. W., the boat was 
launched, and proceeded to the southward. Mount Dromedary was 
passed at eleven ; and an island of about two miles in circuit was 
seen lying off it, a few miles to the eastward : the latitude at noon 
was 36* 23'. At four, the ^air breeze died away, and a strong wind, 
which burst forth from the south, obliged Mr. Bass to run for 
a gap in the land, which had just before been noticed. Here, on a 
little beach at the mouth of an inlet, across which the sea was break- 
ing, the boat was hauled up for the night. Next morning, the inlet 
being free of breakers, he entered the prettiest little model of a har- 
bour he had ever seen. Unfortunately it is but a model ; for although 
the shelter within be complete for smaU craft, yet the depth over the 
bar is too small, even for boats, except at high water, when there is 
eight or nine feet. This little place was named Barmouth Creeks and 
lies, according to Mr. Bass’ computation, in 36® 47' south. The 
country round, so far as was examined, is rocky and barren near the 
sea; and towards the head of the creek, it is low and penetrated by 
the salt swamps. 

Dec. 19. At day light Mr. Bass continued his course to the south- (Atlas, 
ward, with a fair breeze. At seven he discovered Two-fold Bay ; 
but unwilling to lose a fair wind, reserved the examination of it for 
his return. At five in the evening the wiitd came at S. S. W. ; and 
he anchored under the lee of a point, but could not land. A sea 
breeze from E. N. E. next day, enabled him to continue onward ; and 
at eleven, he bore away west, round Cape Howe, whose latitude was 



ex 


INTRODUCTION. 


[Prior Discoveries. 


Ba 8». observed to be 37® 30'. In the evening he landed at the entrance of 
a lagoon, one mile north of the Ram Head, in order to take in as 
much fresh water as possible ; for it was to be feared that a want of 
this necessary article iflight oblige him to discontinue his pursuit, at 
a time when, from the coast being unexplored, it would become 
more than ever interesting. 

Dec. 21. A gale set in at W. S. W., and continued for nine days 
without intermission. This time was employed in examining the 
country, which, though hilly in external appearance, was found to 
be mostly low, sandy, and wet. The hills have a slight covering of 
green upon them, but consist of little else than sand ; and from what 
could be seen of the back country, the soil there is scarcely better. 
The vallies are overgrown with long grass, ferns, brush-wood, and 
climbing plants, so as to be almost impenetrable ; yet even there the 
soil is good for nothing. 

At every landing place, from Jervis Bay to Barmouth Creek, the 
fresh water had been observed to diminish both in quantity and qua- 
lity ; and upon this coast of sand the difficulty of procuring it was 
expected to be very great. It was, on the contrary, plentiful ; there 
being many little runs which drained out from the sand hills, and 
either trickled over the rocky spots at their feet, or sank through the 
beaches into the sea. 

The western gale being at length succeeded by a breeze at E. N. E., 
Mr. Bass left the Ram Head early on the 31st. His course was 
W. by S., close to a low, sandy coast ; the beach being interrupted by 
small, rocky points, not oftener than once in ten or fifteen miles. 
The back land consisted of short ridges of irregular hills, lying at 
no great distance from the sea. At noon, the latitude was 37® 42'; 
and the distance run from the Ram Head, by computation, was thirty 
or thirty-five miles. 

The furthest land seen by captain Cook, is marked at fifteen 
leagues from the Ram Head, and called Point Hicks; but at dusk 
Mr. Bass had run much more than that distance close along the 



Ea St Coast, & V. D.s Land:\ INTRODUCTION, 

shore, and could perceive no point or projection which would be dis- 
tinguishable from a ship: the coast continued to be straight, low, 
and sandy, similar to what had been pas'^ed in the morning. There 
arose many large smokes from behinvl the beach ; probably from the 
sides of lagoons, with which, there was reason to think, the back 
country abounded. 

The breeze continuing to be fresh and favourable, Mr. Bass ven- 
tured to steer onward in the night, and kept the shore close a-bord. 
At two in the morning, the increased hollowness of the waves made 
him suspect the water was becoming shallow ; and he hauled oft' for 
an hour, until there was sufficient daylight to distinguish the land. 
It was still low, level, and sandy, and trended S. W. by W., nearly 
as the boat was steering. At* seven o’clock, hfgh land appeared at 
a considerable distance in the south-west ; and the beach then trended 
in the same dire(;^ion. It, however, c hanged soon afterward, to run 
nearly west ; and Mr. Bass quitted it to keep on his course for the 
high land.* The latitude at noon was 38“ 41' ; and the difference 
ma^e from the noon before, upon the average course of S. W. by W., 
makes* the distance run 107 miles; which, added to the preceding 
thirty or thirty-five, gives the length of the beach from the Ram 
Head, to be about 140 miles.* 

The high land extended from the beailng of S. W. by S. to 
W. N. W., and was distant in the latter direction two or three leagues. 
North of it there was a deep bight; and further eastward, two or 
three places in the Long Beach which had the ajipearance of inlets. 
To the south there were several rocky islets ; and great numbers of 
petrels, and other sea-birds, were flying about the boat. 

* But the latitude observed appears to be 8' or ICy too little ; and if so, the length of 
the beach would be something more than 150 miles, it is no matter of surprise if obser- 
vations taken from an open boat, in a high sea, should differ ten miles from the truth ; 
butal judge that Mr. Bass*’qiiadrant must have received some injury during the night of 
the 31st, for a similar trror appears to pervade all the future observations, even those taken 
under favourable circumstances. 


cxi 


Bais. 

1797. 


1798. 



INTRODUCTION. 


[Prior Discoveries. 


tx\\ 

Bam. From the latitude of the high land, Mr. Bass considered it to be 

1798. seen by captain Fumeaux (or supposed to have been seen), in 

39®; and consequently, that he had traced the .unknown space be- 
tween Point Hicks ar\d Furneaux’s Land. His ci)urse was now steered 
to pass round this land ; but on coming abreast of the rocky islets, 
a hummqck appeared above the horizon in the S. E. by S., and pre- 
sently, a larger one at S. i W. ; and being unable to fetch the first, 
he steered for the latter, which proved to be an island ; and at six in 
the evening, he anchored under its lee. Vast numbers of gulls and 
other birds were roosting upon it, and on the rocks were many 
seals ; but the surf would not admit of landing. This island was 
judged to be thirty miles, S. by W., from the situation at noon. 

Jan. 2. The wind was strong at E. N. E. ; and Mr. Bass being 
apprehensive that the boat could not fetch the high main land, 
determined to steer .southward for the islands, in the hope of pro- 
curing some rice from the wreck of the ship Sydney Cove, to eke 
out his provisions. The wind, however, became unfavourable to 
him, veering to E. S. E. ; so that with the sea which drove the boat 
to leeward, the course to noon was scarcely so good as S. S. W. 
The latitude observed was then 39° 51'; and no land being in sight, 
the prospect of reaching Furneaux’s Islands became very faint. At 
four o’clock, an accident caused it to be totally given up: water was 
observed to rush in fast through the boat’s side, and made it abso- 
lutely necessary to go upon the other tack. The latitude to which 
Mr. Bass supposed himself arrived, was something to the south of 
40®; and the weather was clear enough for land of moderate height 
to have been seen five leagues further, had there been any within 
that distance. 

The boat was then kept north-eastward, towards Fumeaux’s 
Land. At nine in the evening, the wind blew hard at S. E. by E., 
accompanied by a hollow, irregular sea, which put our enterprising 
discoverer and his boat’s crew into the greatest danger ; but the 
good qualities of his little bark, with careful steerage, carried him 



East Coast, Sf V. D.'s Land.-\ INTRODUCTION. 

through this perilous night. On the 3rd, jit six o'clock, the land 
was seen; and in the afternoon, whilst standing in to look for a 
place of shelter, a smoke and -several people were observed upon a 
small island not far from the main coast. On rowing up, they 
proved to be, not natives, to Mr. Bass’ great surprise, but Europeans. 
They were convicts who, with others, had run away with a boat 
from Port Jackson, in the intention of plundering the wreck of the 
Sydney Cove; and not being able to find it, their companions, 
thinking their number too great, had treacherously left them upon 
this island, whilst asleep. These people were seven in number; and 
during the five weeks they had been on this desert spot, had sub- 
sisted on petrels, to which a seal was occasionally added. Mr. Bass 
promised to call at the island, on his return ; and in the mean time, 
proceeded to the west side ot'the high main land, where he anchored, 
but could not get on shore. 

Jan. 4. The wind being at north-cast, he continued his course 
onward, steering W. N. W. round an open bay ; and afterwards 
N. W. by W., as the coast generally trended. The shore consisted 
of long, shallow bights, in which the land was low and sandy ; but 
the intermediate rocky points were generally steep, with a ridge of 
hills extending from them, into the interior, as far as could be dis- 
tinguished. In the evening an inlet was discovered, with many 
shoals at the entrance ; and the deep channel being not found till a 
strong tide made it unattainable, Mr. Bass waited for high water ; he 
then entered a spacious harbour which, from its relative position to the 
hitherto known parts of the coast, was named Western Port. It 
lies, according to the boat’s run, about sixty miles N. W. by W. ~ W. 
from Furneaux’s Land ; and its latitude is somewhere about 38° 25' 
south.* The time of high water is near half an hour after the moon’s 
passage over the meridian, and the rise of tide from ten to fourteen 
feek 

The examination of thi^ new and important discovery, the repairs 

• The true latitude of the east entrance into Westejn Port, is aboi^t 38® 33' south. 

VOL. I. Q 


txiii 


Bass. 

1798. 



CXIV 


INTRODUCTION. 


[Prior Ditcoveriet. 


Bass, of the boat, and the continuance of strong winds, kept Mr. Bass 
thirteen days in Western Port. His sketch of it has since been 
superseded by the more regular examination of ensign Barralier, 
copied into the chart, where its form, situation, and extept will be 
best seen. The land upon its borders is, generally, low and level; 
but the hills rise as they recede into the country, and afford an 
agreeable prospect from the port. Wherever Mr. Bass landed, he 
found the soil to be a light, brown mould, which becomes peaty in 
the lowest grounds. Grass and iferns grow luxuriantly, and yet the 
country is but thinly timbered. Patches of brush wood are frequent, 
particularly on the eastern shore, where they are some miles in 
extent; and there the soil is a rich, vegetable mould. The island 
(since called Philltp Island) which shelters the port, is mostly 
barren, but is covered with shrubs and some diminutive trees. 

Mr. Bass had great diflRculty in procuring good water, arising, as 
he judged, from unusual dryness in the season; and the head of the 
winding creek on the east side of the port, was the sole place where 
it had not a brackish taste. The mud banks at the entrance of the 
creek may be passed at half tide by the largest boats ; and within it, 
there is at all times a sufficient depth of water. 

No more than four natives were seen, and their shyness prevented 
communication ; the borders of the port, however, bore marks of 
having been much frequented, but the want of water seemed to have 
occasioned a migration to the higher lands. Kanguroos did not appear 
to be numerous ; but black swans went by hundreds in a’ flight, and 
ducks, a small, but excellent kind, by thousands; and the usual wild 
fowl were in abundance. 

The seventh week of absence from Port Jackson had expired, by 
the time Mr. Bass was ready to sail from Western Port; and the 
reduced state of his provisions forced him, very reluctantly, to turn 
the boat’s head homeward. 

Jan. i8. At daylight, he sailed with a. fresh wind at west, which 
increased to a gale in the afternoon, with a heavy swell from the 



East Coast, 4 * V. D. s Land.-] INTRODUCTION. 

south-west; and he sought shelter behind a cape since named Cape 
Liptrap. Next morning, he ran over to the islands on the west side 
of Fumeaux’s Land 5 but was obliged to return to his former place 
of shelter, where a succession of gales kept him until the 26‘th. 
A quantity of petrels had been taken on the islands, and this week 
of detention was mostly employed in salting them for the homeward 
bound voyage. 

At length, Mr. Bass was able to execute the project he had formed 
for the seven convicts. It was imjSossible to take them all into the 
boat; therefore to five, whom he set upon the main land, he gave a 
musket, half his ammunition, some hooks and lines, a light cooking 
kettle, and directions how to proceed in their course toward Port 
Jackson. The remaining two, one of whom WSs old and the other 
diseased, he took into the boat with the consent of the crew, who 
readily agreed to divide the daily bannock into nine with them. He 
then bore away, with a fresh wind at west, round Furneaux’s Land.* 

From Jan. 26 to Feb. 1, Mr. Bass was detained* by eastern gales 
from proceeding on his return. The boat lay in Sealers Cove, whilst 
he occupied the time in 'examining Wilson’s Promontory. The 
height of this vast cape, though not such as would be considered 
extraordinary by seamen, is yet strikingly so from being contrasted 
with the low, sandy land behind it ; and the firmness and durability ^ 
of its structure make it worthy of being, what there was reason to 
believe it, the boundary point of a large strait, and a corner stone 
to the new- continent. It is a lofty mass of hard granite, of about 
twenty miles long, by from six to fourteen in breadth. The soil 
upon it is shallow and barren ; though the brush wood, dwarf gum 
trees, and some smaller vegetation, which mostly cover the rocks, 
give it a deceitful appearance to the eye of a distant observer. 

• I have continued to make use of the term Fumeaux’s Land conformably to Mr. BSss’ 
joursal j but the position of this land is so different from that supposed to have been seen 
by captain Furneaux, that it cannot be the same, as Mr. l^s was afterwards convinced. 
At our recommendation governor Hunter called it Wilson’s ProuomtokT} in compliment 
to my friend Thomas Wilson, Esq. of London. 


exv 

Bass. 

1798. 



INTRODUCTION. 


{Prior Dit/^overies. 


cxvi 

Bass. Looking from the top of the promontory to the northward, there 
is seen a single ridge of mountains, which comes down, out of the 
interior country, in a southern direction for the promontory ; but 
sloping off gradually to a termination, it leaves a space of twelve or 
sixteen miles of low, sandy land between them. This low land is 
nearly intersected by a considerable lagoon on the west, and a large 
shoal bay, named Comer Inlet, on the east side ; and it seemed pro- 
table, that this insulated mass of granite has been entirely surrounded 
by the sea at no very distant period of time. 

There were no inhabitants on Wilson’s Promontory ; but, upon 
the sandy neck, some were seen near the borders of the inlets. The 
few birds were thought to have a sweeter note than those of Port 
Jackson. 

Four small, barren islands lie seven or eight miles to the north- 
east, from Sealers Cove. The northernmost of them was visited, 
and found to be about one mile and a half in circuit, ascending 
gradually from the shore, to a hill of moderate elevation in the 
centre. There was neither tree nor shrub upon it ; but the surface 
was mostly covered with tufts of coarse grass, amongst which the 
seals had every where made paths and the petrels their burrows. 
Mr. Bass was of opinion, that upon these islands, and those lying 
scattered round the promontory, which are all more or less fre- 
quented by seals, a commercial speculation on a small scale might 
be made with advantage. The place of shelter for the vessel would 
be Sealers Cove, on the main land ; which, though small, and 
apparently exposed to east winds, would be found convenient and 
tolerably secure : fresh water is there abundant, and a sufficiency Of 
wood at hand to boil down any quantity of blubber likely to be pro- 
cured 

■yhe observed latitude of the cove was 38° 50' ;* and the rise of 
tide found to be ten or eleven feet, ten hours and a quarter c^ter^xhe 

* This appears to be from m to 15' too little; an error which probably arose from the 
•iinif cause as othcls before noticed. 



East eoast, 4* V. D\s%and.-] INTRODUCTION. 

moon passed over the meridian. The floo^, after sweeping south- 
westward along the great eastern beach, strikes off for the Seal 
Islands and the promontory, and then runs westward, past it, at the 

rate of two or three miles an hour : the ebb tide sets to the eastward. 

» 

“ Whenever it shall be decided,” says Mr. Bass in his journal, 
“ that the opening between this and Van Diemen's Land is a strait, 
“ this rapidity of tide, and the long south-west swell that seems to 
“ he continually rolling in upon the coast to the westward, will then 
“ be accounted for.” 

Feb. 2, Mr. Bass sailed to Corner Inlet; and next- day fell in 
with the five convicts, whom he put across to the long beach,* 
but was himself unable to proceed until the 9th, in consequence of 
foul winds. Corner Inlet is little else than a large flat, the greater 
part of it being dry at lox* water. There is a long shoal on the 
outside of the entrance, which is to be avoided by keeping close to 
the shore of the promontory ; but when the tide is out the depth, ex- 
cept in holes, no where exceeds 2^ fathoms. A vessel drawing twelve 
or thirteen feet may lie safely under the high land, from which there 
are some large runs of most excellent water. The tide rises a foot 
less here than in Sealers Cove, and flows an hour later ; arising, 
probably, from the flood leaving it in an eddy, by setting past, and __ 
not into the inlet. 

Feb. 9, Corner Inlet was quitted with a strong south-west wind, 
and Mr. Bass steered E. by N. a'ong the shore. At the distance of 
five miles, he passed the mouth of a shallow opening in the low 
sandy beach, from which a half-moon shoal stretches three miles to 
the south-eastward. Four or five miles further, a lesser opening of 
the same kind was passed ; and by noon, when the latitude was 
38“ 34,' (probably 38° 46'), he had arrived at the point of the long 
beach, which in going out, had been quitted to steer for the promon- 
tory. His general course from thence was N. E. by E. along the shore, 
until nine o’clock, when judging the coast must begin to trend more 

* Nothing more had been heard of these five men, so late as 1803. 


CXvii 


Bass. 



czviii 


INTRODUCTION. 


[Prior Difcotieriet. 

Bass, eastwardly, he again steered E. b. N. ; the wind blowing a fresh gale 
at W. S. W., with a following sea. At daylight, Feb. i o, the beach 
was distant two miles, and trending parallel to the boat's course. 

The western gale died away in the morning, and was succeeded 
by one from the eastward. The boat was in no condition to struggle 
against a foul wind ; and Mr. Bass, being unwilling to return to 
Comer Inlet, ventured through a heavy surf and took refuge upon 
the beach ; having first observed the latitude to be 37“ 47' south. 

The country at the back of the beach consisted of dried-up swamps 
and barren sand hills. Some natives came down with very little 
hesita^n, and conducted themselves amicably ; they appeared never 
to have seen or heard of white people before. 

Feb. 1 1 , the foul wind had ceased to blow, and the clouds threat- 
ened another gale from the south-west. So soon as there was suf- 
ficient daylight, the boat was launched, and at four the same 
afternoon anchored under the Ram Head. Mr. Bass was kept 
there till the 14th in the evening; when a strong breeze sprung 
up suddeniy at soutli-west, and he sailed immediately, passing 
Cape Howe at ten o'clock. By noon of the 15th, he had reached 
Two-fold Bay, where the latitude was observed to be 36° 53' south;* 
and having ascertained that Snug Cove, on its north-west side, afforded 
shelter for shipping, he steered northward, and passed Mount Dro- 
medary soon after midnight. At noon, Feb. 16, Mr. Bass landed 
upon a small island lying under the shore to the south-east of the 
Pigeon House, to examine a pole which he had before observed, 
and supposed might have been set up as a signal by shipwrecked 
people ; but it proved to be nothing more than the dead stump of 
a tree, much taller and more straight than the others. He Sailed 
next morning ; but the wind hung so much i» the north and east 

• Tlic true latitude of the mouth of Two-fold Bay is 37“ 5', shewing an error of 12“ to 
the north, nearly similar to whait Ims been qiecified io the observadons near WUsoa’a 
Promontory. ,, 



East CoMt, Sf V. D:$ Land.'l INTRODUCTION. 


exix 


quarters that he was forced successively , into Jervis Bay, Shoals B^ss. 
Haven, and Port Hacking; and it was not until the 24th' at night, 
that our adventurous discoverer terminated his dangerous and fati- 
guing voyage, by entering within the heads of Port Jackson. 

It should be remembered, that Mr. Bass sailed with only six 
weeks provisions ; but with the assistance of occasional supplies of 
petrels, fish, seal's flesh, and a few geese and black swans, and by 
abstinence, he had been enabled to prolong his voyage beyond 
eleven weeks. His ardour and perseverance were crowned, in despite 
of the foul winds which so much opposed him, with a degree of suc- 
cess not to have been anticipated from such’ feeble means. In three 
hundred miles of coast, from Port Jackson to the Ram Head, he 
added a number of particulars which had escaped captain Cook ; 
and will always escape aiiy navigator in a first discovery, unless he 
have the time and means of joining a close examination by boats, to 
what may be seen from the ship. 

Our previous knowledge of the coast scarcely extended beyond 
the Ram Head ; and there began the harvest in which Mr. Bass was 
ambitious to place the first reaping hook. The new coast was traced 
three hundred miles ; and instead of trending southward to join itself 
to Van Diemen’s Land, as captain Fumeaux had supposed, he found 
it, beyond a certain point, to take a direction nearly oppo.site, and to 
assume the appearance of being exposed to the buffetings of an open 
sea. Mr. Bass, himself, entertained no doubt of the existence of a 
wide strait, separating Van Diemen’s Land from New South Wales; 
and he yielded with the greatest reluctance to the necessity of re- 
turning, before it was so fully ascertained as to admit of no doubt in 
the minds of others. But he had the satisfaction of placing at the 
end of his new coast, an extensive and useful harbour, surrounded 
with a country superior to any other known in the southern parts of 
New South Wales. 

A voyage expressly undertaken for discovery in an open boat, and 
in which six hundred miles of coast, mostly in a boisterous climate. 



X INTRODUCTION. [Prior Discoveries. 

Bass, was explored, has not, perhaps, its equal in the annals of maritime 
1798. Jjjgtory. The public will award to its high spirited and able con- 
ductor, alas ! now no more, an honourable place 4 n the list of those 
whose ardour stands tmost conspicuous for the promotion of useful 
knowledge. 


Flinders. 

1798. 


(Atlas, 
Plate Vlll.) 


During the time that Mr. Bass was absent on his expedition in 
the whale boat, the Francis schooner was again sent with captain 
Hamilton to the wreck of his ship the Sydney Cove ; to bring up 
what remained of the cargo at Preservation Island, and the few 
people who were left in charge. On this occasion I was happy 
enough to obtain governor Hunter’s permission to embafk in the 
schooner ; in order to make such observations serviceable to geo- 
graphy and navigation, as circumstances might afford ; and Mr. 
Reed, the master, was directed to forward these views as far as was 
consistent with the main objects of his voyage. 

Feb. 1 , we sailed out of Port Jackson with a fair wind ; and on 
the following noon, the observed latitude w'as 35° 4,2', being 14' 
south of account. I prevailed on Mr. Reed to stand in for the land, 
which was then visible through the haze ; and at sunset, we reached 
into Bateman Bay.* When the two rocky islets in the middle of 
the bay bore S. by W. i W., a short mile, we had 8 fathoms water, 
and 6 fathoms a mile further in. The north head is steep with a 
rock lying off it ; but Bateman Bay falls back too little from the line 
of the coast to afford shelter against winds from the eastward. The 
margin of the bay is mostly a beach, behind which lie sandy, rocky 
hills of moderate elevation. 

In the morning of the 3rd, we steered S. by W. along the shore ; 
and saw, in latitude about 35® 58', and eight or nine miles from the 


^ The bearings in the following account arc corrected, as usual, for the variation ; but I 
am sorry to say that the steering compasses of the schooner proved to be bad, and there 
was no azimuth compass on board. * 



CXXl 


East Coast, ^ V.D. ’« Land:\ INTRODUCTION. 

south point of Bateman Bay, a small opening like a river running Fundee*. 
south-westward. It was here that Mr. Bass found a lagoon, with 
extensive salt swamps behind it, and observed the latitude 36° 00'. At 
noon, the east point of the opening bore N. ^ .W. seven miles, and 
the top of Mount Dromedary was visible above the haze ; but no 
observation could be taken for the latitude. 

Soon after noon, land was in sight to the S. S. E., supposed to be 
the Point Dromedary of captain Cook’s chart; but, to my surprise, it 
proved to be an island not laid down, though lying near two leagues 
from the coast. The whole length of this island is about one mile 
and a quarter, north and south ; the two ends are a little elevated, 
and produce small trees ; but the sea appeared to break occasionally 
over the middle part. It is probably frequented by seals, since many 
were seen in the water whiyjt passing at the distance of two miles. 

This little island, I was afterwards informed, had been seen in the 
ship Surprise, and honoured with the name of Montague. 

When captain Cook passed this part of the coast his distance from 
it was. five leagues, and too great for its form to be accurately dis- 
tinguished. There is little doubt that Montague Island was then 
seen, and mistaken for a point running out from under Mount Dro- 
medary ; for its distance from the mount, and bearing of about 
N. 75* E., will place it in 36“ 17', or within one minute of the lati- 
tude assigned to the point in captain Cook s chart. 

At six in the evening. Mount Dromedary was set at N. 40“ W. five 
leagues. We steered S. S. W. until two in the morning, when the 
land was so near as made it necessary to alter the course ; and at 
daybreak of the 4th, the shore was not more than three miles dis- 
tant ; it was moderately high and rocky, and at the back were many 
hummocky hills. Having been much upon deck in the night, I then 
retired to rest ; and in the mean time, the schooner passed Mr. Bafs’s 
Two-fold Bay without its being noticed. At nine we came abreast 
of a smooth, sloping point which, from its appearance, and being 
unnoticed in captain Cook's chart, I named Grej:n Cape. The 

R 


VOL. I. 



cxxii 


INTRODUCTION. 


[Prior Discoveriei. 

Elikdbhs. shore, for about seven miles to the northward, lies N. i6* W., and is 
1798. roclty aijd nearly straight, and well covered with wood : the Cape 
itself is grassy. On the south side, the coast . trends west, three 
or four miles, into ,a sandj bight, and then southward to Cape 
Howe. 

The latitude at noon was 37" 25', giving a current of twenty miles 
to the south, in two days ; Green Cape bore N. by E. four leagues, 
and Cape Howe S. by W. five or six miles. Captain Cook lays 
down the last in 37° 26', in his chart ; but the above observation 
places it in 37^ 30^', which I afterwards found to agree with an ob- 
servation of Mr. Bass, taken on the west side of the cape. The 
shore abreast of the schooner was between one and two miles dis- 
tant ; it was mostly beach, lying at the feet of sandy hillocks which 
extend from behind Green Cape to the pitch of Cape Howe. There 
were several fires upon the shore ; and near one ofithem, upon an 
eminence, stood seven natives, silently contemplating the schooner 
as she passed. 

On coming abreast of Cape Howe, the wind chopped round to the 
south-west, and the dark clouds which settled over the land con- 
cealed it from our view ; we observed, however, that it trended to 
the west, but sought in vain for the small island mentioned by cap- 
tain Cook as lying close off the Cape.* 

Our latitude was 38* 30' next day, or 38' south of account, although 
the wind had been, and was .still from that direction. Mr. Reed then 
steered W. by N., to get in again with the coast; and on the fol- 
lowing noon, we were in 38° 16' and, by account, 22' of longitude to 
the west of Point Hicks.* The schooner was kept more northward 
in the afternoon; at four o'clock a moderately high, sloping hill 
was visible in the N. by W., and at seven a small rocky point on the 
beach bore N. 50® W. three or four leagues. The shore extended 
E. N. E. and W. S. W., and was low and sandy in front; but) at 

• Hawkesworth, Vol. III. p. 80. Mr. Bass sailed dost round the cape in his whale boat, 
but did not see any. island lying there. 



Ecut Coast, 4- V. D.s Land:] INTRODUCTION. 

some miles distance inland, there was a range of hills with wood 
upon them, though scarcely sufficient to hide their sandy surface. 

At five in the morning of the 7th, the rocky point bore N. E. ^ N. 
six or seven miles, and the furthest visible part, of the beach W. \ S. 
The southern wind had died away in the night ; and a breeze spring- 
ing up at N. E. by E., we steered before it along the same low, 
sandy shore as seen in the evening. The hills which arose at three 
or four leagues behind the beach, appeared to retire further back as 
we advanced westward; they would, how’cver, be visible to a ship 
in fine weather, long before the front land could be seen. 

The observed latitude at noon was 38® 17' south, and by two sets 
of distances of the sun east of the moon, reduced up from the 
morning, the longitude was 147* 37' east.* Tlie beach was six or 
seven miles distant, but aft r obtaining the noon’s observation, we 
closed more in ;..and at two or three miles off, found a sandy bottom 
with 1 1 fathoms of line. Our course along the shore from two to 
four o’clock, was S. W. |- S., with a current in our favour. Tlic 
beach then trended more to the v/est ; but the breeze having veered 
to E. by N. and become strong, with much sea, it was considered too 
dangerous to follow it any longer. At five, the western and most 
considerable of two shallow-looking openings bore north-west, seven 
or eight miles ; and at sunset, some high and remarkable land w^is 
perceived bearing S. W. by W., which proved to be the same dis- 
covered by Mr. Bass, and now bearing the name of fVdson’s Pro-’ 
monlory. It appeared, from a partial view given by a break in the 
clouds, as if cut in two, and the parts had been removed to some 
distance from each other : the gap was probably Sealers Cove. 

The state of the weather, and the land to leeward, made it neces- 
sary to haul up south-eastward, close upon a wind. At day-break 

* It was 147° 10' ; but as I afterwards found that observations of the sun to the east 
gav^ 27' less, by this small five inch sextant, and those to the west 2?' greater than the 
mean of both, that correction is \^xe applied ; but not any which might be required from 
errors in the solar or lunar tables. 


cxxiii 

Flindbii. 

179B. 



CXXIV • 


INTRODUCTION. 


[Prior DiscoverwM. 

Flinders, of the 8th, neither Wilson’s Promontory nor any other land to the 
northward could be seen ; but between the bearings of N. 84" and 
S. E., six or eight miles distant, there was l^nd rather high and 
irregular, with a cliffy shore ; and a separate cluster of rocky islets 
bore south to S. 16° W., from three to five miles. We passed close 
to these last, at six o’clock', and perceived that the tide, which before 
had set to leeward, was then turned to the east : the moon had just 
before passed the meridian. 

This small cluster consists of a steep island, near one mile in 

length, of two smaller round islets, and two or three rocks ; one of 

which obtained the name of Judgment Rock, from its resemblance to 

an elevated seat. The higher and more considerable land to the 

eastward was seen, as we advanced, to divide itself also into several 

parts. This group is principally composed of three islands ; and 

between the largest on the east and two others on the west, there 

appeared to be a deep channel. The other parts are rocks, which 

lie scattered mostly off the north-western island. These two clusters 

were called Kent's Groups, in honour of my friend captain William 

% 

Kent, then commander of the»Supply. 

Our latitude at noon was 39® 38' ; the steep island of the small 
group bore N. 50" W., and the passage through the larger islands 
N. 12° E., six or eigtit miles. This observation places the centre of 
the passage and of the large group, in about 39° 29' south ; and from 
the lunar observations of the preceding day, brought on by log, (for 
unfortunately I had no time keeper, ) it should lie in longitude 
147“ 23' east. It is, however, to be observed, that a fortuitous com- 
pensation of errors can alone render a^dead reckoning correct in the 
way of such tides as we had experienced during the last twenty-four 
hours.* 

By keeping the wind to the southward, we came up with a pyra- 
midal-shaped rock through which there is a chasm : it bore W, 8f’ S. 

* The longitude of the large group, as given by my" time keepers in a future voyage, 
is 147® 17'. 



East Coast, Sf V. D. s Land.] INTRODUCTION. 

one mile, at four o'clock, when the eastern island of Kent’s large 
group was set at N, 17° E., five or six leagues. At six, the pyramid 
bore N. 38“ W. five miles, and high land came in sight to the east- 
ward : one piece extended from N. 73° to S. 87,° E., apparently about 
five leagues distant, and the bluff, southern end of another range of 
hills bore S. 51® E., something further. Captain Hamilton supposed 
these to be parts of the land he had seen to the north-west of Pre- 
servation Island, where the wreck of his ship was lying ; but whether 
they might belong to Furneaux’s Islands or to the main, was unknown 
to him. He had always gone to, and returned from his island by 
the east side of this land ; and the wind having veered northward, 
the schooner was kept as much to the nortli-east as possible, in order 
to pursue the same track. 

We came up with a lo point or island at eleven at night, when 
the wind died away. At six in the morning of Feb. 9., the northern 
land extended from N. 49* E. three leagues, to S. 47® E. four or five 
miles ; the southern land bore S. 24° to 2* E. five or six leagues, and 
seemed to form a hilly, separate ‘island ; although, as low land was 
seen between them, the two may probably be connected : tlierc was 
also a cliffy island bearing north, seven or eight miles. On a breeze 
springing up from south-west, our course was steered to pass close 
round the northern land ; but finding much rippling water between 
it and two islands called the Sisters by caj^tain Furneaux, we passed 
round them also, and then hauled to the southward along the eastern 
shore. 

This northern land, or island as it proved to be, has some ridges 
of sandy-looking hills exter^ing north and south between the two 
shores ; and they are sufficiently high to be visible ten leagues from 
a ship’s deck in clear weather. On the west side of the north point, 
the hills come nearly down to the water , but on the east side, there is 
two or three miles of flat land between their feet and the shore. The 
small trees and brush M^ood which partly covered the hills, seemed 
to shoot out from sand and rock ; and if the vallies and low land 


exxv 

Flinders. 

1798. 



cxxvl 


INTRODUCTION. 


[Pnor Discweries. 

Flimder*. within be not better than what appeared from the sea, tlie northern 
1799 - p2j.j qP great island is sterile indeed. The Sisters are not so 
high as some of the hills on the great island, and are less sandy : 
the small, cliffy islancj, which lies eight or nine miles, nearly west, 
from the inner Sister, had no appearance of sand. 

Whilst passing round the north end of Furneaux's Islands, I 
experienced how little dependence was to be put in compass bearings, 
in such, at least, as were taken with my best instrument, the steer- 
ing compass of the schooner. The south extreme of the inner 
Sister shut on with the north-west point of the great island at E. | S., 
magnetic bearing ; but after passing round, they shut, on the other 
side, at W. byN.i N. ; so that, to produce an agreement, it was 
necessary to 'allow half a point more east variation on ‘the first, 
when the schooner’s head was N. by W., than on the last, when it 
was S. S. E. In a second instance, the north end of the outer Sister 
opened from the one at N. E. N. ; but they came on again at 
S. W, 2 W., maklng’a difference of a whole point, when' the head 
was N. by W. and E. S. E. These bearings were probably not 
correct within tw'o or three degrees ; but they showed that a change 
in the course steered produced an alteration in the compass. 

The observed latitude at noon was 39” 50^', the centre of the outer 
Sister bore N. 34,* W., nearly five leagues, and our distance from the 
sandy, eastern shore of the great island was about six miles. At 
two o’clock, we came up with an island of three miles in length, 
and nearly the same space distant from a sandy projection of the 
great island. The passage between them is much contracted by 
shoal spits of sand which run out from each side ; and it seemed 
doubtful, whether the water were dee]^ enough in any part of the 
channel to admit a >ship. The form of the land here is somewhat 
remarkable : upon the low projection of the great island there are 
three pyramidal hills, which obtained the name of the Patriarch^^ 
and stand apart from the more western high land ; and upon the 
south-west end of the island opposite there is also a pyramid, wltich. 





East Coast, 4* V. D\s Land:] INTRODUCTION. 

with other hills near it, presents some resemblance to the Lion’s 
Head and Rump at the Cape of Good Hope. This island and two 
rocky islets lying off its south-east end were afterwards called the 
Babel Isles.’ The largest is covered with tufted grass and brush 
wood; and the whole appeared to be much frequented by shags, 
sooty petrels, and other sea birds. 

We had scarcely passed the Babel Isles, when the wind, which 
had been at W. by S., chopped round to the southward, with squally 
weather, and drove the schooner off to the north-east. In the night 
it became less unfavourable; and at noon of the loth, our latitude 
was 40® the isles bore N. 78“ W., three or four leagues, and 
the high land of Cape Barreji S. 13'" to 34® W. Having^ a fair wind 
in the afternoon, we passed along the outskirts of the Bay of Shoals, 
wdtliout perceiving any bre ikers ; but in the space between the 
great island and the land of Cape Barren there were many rocks, 
.-jid a low island of three or four miles long, wilh-ahill in the middle, 
lay at the entrance of the opening. 

The^ high part of Cape-Barren Island, but particularly the peak, 
may be seen eleven, and perhaps more leagues from a ship’s deck. 
The extremity of the cape is a low point, which runs out two miles 
east from the high land ; and off this point lies a flat, rocky islet 
and a peaked rock The shore is sandy on each side of the Cape 
point: it trends N. 40" W., for about five miles, on one side, and 
S. 4y“ W., past two sandy bights on the other, to a rocky projection 
on which are two whitish cones, shaped like rhinoceros’ horns. 

We steered south-westward, in the evening, round the Cape point, 
and were sufficiently close to bellowing of the seals upon 

the islet. Arrived off Cone Point, the schooner was hauled off shore ; 
and the wind becoming strong and unfavourable irf the night, it was 
not until the evening of the 12th, that wc got to anchor in Hamilton’ s 
Road, at the east end of Preservation Island. This road is sheltered 
from all winds, except betjveen south and S. S. E. ; and these do not 


Fcindkrs. 

1719S. 



ixxviii INTRODUCTION. [iVtor Diicoteriet. 

Flindbrs* throw in much sea : the, bottom is good-holding sand, in from 4 to 3 
fathoms, at a quarter of a mile from the beach. 

The ship Sydney Cove had been run on shorq between Preserva- 
tion and Rum Islands, and. part of her hull was still lying there; 
but the sea thrown in by western gales had, in great measure, broken 
her up, and scattered the beams, timbers, and parts of the cargo, 
upon all the neighbouring shores. 

My purpose of making an expedition amongst the islands was 
delayed by the schooner’s boat being out of repair; but in the mean 
time, a base line was measured round the sandy north-east end of 
Preservation Island, and angles taken from all the conspicuous 
points. 

Feb. 16. The boat was fitted, and I made an excursion of five 
days, through the channel which separates the land of Crjie barren 
from the more southern islands. It is c .led ^lRmstro .g’. Chan- 
nel, from the master of the Supply Avho had gone to afford assist- 
ance in saving the cargo of the Sydney Cove, and was the first to 
pass through it on his return towards Port Jackson ; but he, never 
arrived there, having, in all probability, perished at sea with his 
sloop and crew. The stations whence angles were taken for a 
survey of the channel and surrounding lands, were — 1st. Point 
Womat, a rocky projection of Cape-Barren Island, where a number 
of the new animals, called womat, were seen, and some killed, and. 
Battery Island; so named from four rocks upon it, resembling 
mounted guns ; sooty petrels, and large hair seals were found there. 
3rd. The sandy north-east point of Clarke’s Island ; which, with the 
opposite Sloping Point, forms the narrowest part of the channel. 
Its width was found to be three-quarters of a mile, but is somewhat 
contracted by rocks lying on the south side. These rocks were 
also frequented by hair seals, and some of them (the old males) 
were of an enormous size, and of extraordinary power. I leveled 
my gun at one, which was sitting on the top of a rock with his nose 



East Coast, 4* V. D. 's Land.'\ INTRODUCTION. 

extended up towards the sun, and struck him with three musket 
balls. He rolled over, and plunged into the water; but in less than 
half an hour had tajcen his former station and attitude. On firing 
again, a stream of blood spouted forth fr9m his breast to some yards 
distance, and he fell back, senseless. On examination, the six balls 
were found lodged in his breast ; and one, which occasioned his 
death, had pierced the heart: his weight was equal to that of a 
common ox. 

The 4th station was on Sloping Point, where an aculeated ant-eater 
was caught, and some quartz crystals were picked up from the 
shore. 5th, At the east side of Kent's Bay, under the peak of Cape 
Barren. This peak I wished to ascend, in order to obtain a view of 
fhv. surrounding lands, particularly of an extensive piece to ihesouth- 
warr; w!iich, front t!>esm'>k^s continually seen there, was supposed 
to be I' r :t o^' in Oiemen's Land ; but the almost impenetrable 
brush wood^ wiih whicli the sides of the peak and surrounding hills 
were covered, defeated my purpose. 

The,6th station was at Passage' Point. The 7th, on Cone Point, 
where the number of seals exceeded every thing we had, any of us, 
before witnessed ; and they were sm iller. and of a different species 
from those which frequented Arm; rrong’s Channel. Instead of the 
bull-dog nose, and thinly-set, sandy hair, these had sharp-pointed 
nWs, and the general colour of the hair ai-oroached to a black ; but 
the tips were of a silver grey, ami undtuneath was » hue, whitish, 
thick fur. The commotion excited b> our preseUvC, in this assem- 
blage of several thousanri timid a’iim.ds, was very interesting to me, 
who knew little of their manners. The young cubs huddled toge- 
ther in the holes of the rocks, and moaned piteously ; those more 
advanced scampered and rolled down to the water, with their mothers; 
whilst some of the old males stood up in defence of their families, 
until the terror of the sailors bludgeons became too strong to be re- 
sisted. Those who have ^een a farm yard, well stocked with pigs, 
calves, sheep, oxai, and with two or three litters of, puppies, with 

S 


cxxix 


Flinders. 

1798. 


VOL. I. 



cxxx INTRODUCTION. [Prior Di$coveriot. 

Fundbhs. their mothers, in it, and have heard them all in tumult together, 

I7»8, » > . , , 

may form a good idea of the confused noise of the seals at Cone 
Point. The sailors killed as many of these harmless, and not un- 
amiable creatures, as they were able to skin during the time nece^s- 
sary for me to take the requisite angles ; and we then left the poor 
affrighted multitude to recover from the effect of our inauspicious 
visit. 

My 8th station was taken, in returning to the schooner, upon 
the south end of the eastern Passage Isle; 9th, the south-west 
§nd of the western Passage Isle ; and loth, the south-east point of 
Clarke’s Island. The 11th and last station was at Looh-out Head, the 
bearings from which included some parts of the southern land, be- 
tween the extremes of S. ao° 20' E. and S. 59“ 35' W. At these dif- 
ferent stations, the needle of the theodolite was sometimes found to 
vary one or two degrees from itself, as it had done at Preservation 
Island ; an effect which I attribute to the attraction of the rocks, 
having since experienced the same, and even greater, dilferences in 
most places where the rocks, as here, are granitic. 

In the wider parts of Armstrong’s Channel there are many shoals 
of sand on each side, but a passage of sufficient width and depth 
is swept out by th# tides, for ships to go through in safety,,j^^he 
bottom is either rocky or sandy : rocky in the deep and nailfow- 
parts, whbre the tides run three or four miles in an hour ; and 
sandy in the bights and shoaler places. The sand of the beaches 
is mostly granitic, but it sometimes consists of blacjk metallic par- 
ticles, such as are found in the stone of the islands. 

It was not until Feb. 25 that the remains of the Sydney-Cove’s 
cargo were all on board, and that a favourable change in the wind 
permitted us to sail for Port Jackson. - These four djfli^ of deten- 
tion enabled me to continue the survey along the south side of 
Preservation Island, and as far as the Bay of Rocks upon that of 
Cape Barren. A meridian altitude from the south horizon, observed 
under more favourablfe circumstances than two others before taken. 



East Coast, 8 ; V. D.s Land] INTRODUCTION. 

gave 40" 28' for the latitude of Hamilton’s Rcjad. The longitude i'? 
10) 20" west of Cape Barren ; and therefore should be 148“ 6' east 
of Greenwich. It; is high water in the road, according to Mr. 
Hamilton’s report, half an hour before the moon passes over the meri- 
dian ; but from what I observed, without jpaying particular attentio.n 
to it, the tide did not appear to flow so late by an hour : the medium 
rise was about seven feet, as at Port Jackson. 

Well tasted fresh water is collected, at certain seasons, in small 
pools near the east end of Preservation Island ; but that which drains 
from the rocks was first* used by the Sydney-Cove’s erew, until 
several of them died. Small runs or pools of water are to be found 
almost every where under the high parts of Cape-Barren Island, 
and it is probable there may be some upon Clarke’s Island ; but at 
the Passage Isles we found it difficult to obtain wherewithal to satisfy 
our thirst. 

The stone of which the southern, and probably the whole of 
Furneaux's Islands are composed, is mostly a whitish granite, but 
sometimes inclining to red ; and is full of small, black specks. 
Quartz seems to have a more than usual share in its composition, and 
we occasionally found crystals of that substance upon the shores. 
The black specks were thought to be grains df tin, and to have 
communicated a deleterious quality to the water used by the ship- 
wrecked people. The exceptions to the general prevalence of 
granite were few: they consisted of some black, and some grey 
slate, in thin strata, placed nearly perpendicular to the horizon; but 
even here, the granite had pervaded the fissures of the strata ; and, 
in two instances, ^ substance which, from its appearance, I supposed 
to be a toad stone, had insinuated itself 

Some of tMb trees on Preservation Island had partly undergone a 
peculiar transformation. The largest of them were not thicker then 
a ijian’s "leg, and the whole were decayed ; but whilst the upper 
branches continued to be of wood, the roots at the surface, and the 
trunks up to a certain height, were of a stony substaijce resembling 


c.xxxi 


Flindehs. 

\79S. 



CXXXll 


INTRODUCTION. 


\Prior Discoveriet. 


Fj-inubrs. chalk. On breaking these chalky trunks, which was easily done, 
rings of the brown wood sometimes appeared in them, as if imper- 
fectiy converted; but in the greater number,, nothing more than 
circular traces remained. The situation in which these trees were 

I 

principally found, is a sandy valley near the middle of the island, 
which was likewise remarkable for the quantity of bones of birds 
and small quadrupeds, with which it was strewed. The petrefactions 
were afterwards more particularly examined by Mr. Bass, who 
adopted the opinion that they had been caused by water. 

Upon Cape-Barren Island' the hills risp to a considerable height, 
that of the peak, which does not much exceed some others, being 
near twelve hundred feet; but on the smaller islands there is no 
elevation of importance. The upper parts of all are generally 
crowned with huge lumps of granite ; and upon many of these, 
particularly on Rum Island, is a smaller, unconnected, round lump, 
which rests in a hollow at the top, as a cup in its saucer; and I 
observed with a glass, that there was a stone of this ‘kind at the 
summit of the peak of Cape Barren. The lov'er parts of the islands 
are commonly sandy; and, in several places under the hills, swamps 
and pools are formed. The water in these is generally tinged red ; 
and in one, situate )|j|ptween Passage and Cone Points, it had so much 
the appearance of blood, that I went to taste it ; but, except being a 
little brackish, found nothing remarkable. Whether the water 
become thus tinged, in its course down the hills, by earthy or 
metallic substances, or acquire its colour from the roots and leaves 
of vegetables, I am unable to decide ; but think the former most 
probable. 

All the islands are over-run with brush wood ; amongst which, in 
the more sheltered and less barren parts, are mixed a, few stunted 
trees, which seem to shed their bark annually, and to be of the 
heavy kind called gum tree at Port Jackson. The brush wood 
overspreads even the rocks where it can get the least hold; A i» 
commonly impenetrable, and on the south and west sides of thci 



cxxxiii 


East Coast, SfV.D.'s Land:] INTRODUCTION. 

islands assumes a depressed, creeping form, strongly indicative of 
the strength and generality of the winds from those quarters. 
Many of the sandy parts are covered with the hassocks of wiry 
grass, which constitute the favourite retreat of jhe sooty petrel; and 
at the back of the shores, there is frequently some extent of ground 
where the creeping, salt plants grow, and- to which the pinguins 
principally resort. To this general account of the scanty vegetable 
productions of Furneaux's Islands, may be added several low shrubs, 
and a grass which grows on the moist grounds near the borders of 
the pools qiid fresh swamps, and wliich, though coarse, might serye 
as food for cattle. • 

Of the animal productions of the islands, the list is somewhat 
more extensive. Those for which they are indebted to the sea, are 
seals of two kinds, sooty petrels, and pinguins. The hair seal 
appears to frequent the sheltered beaches, points, and rocks; whilst 
the rocks and rocky points exposed to the bud'ettings of the waves 
are preferred by J:he handsomer and superior species, which never 
condescends to the effeminacy of a beach. A point or island will 
not be greatly resorted to'by these animals, unless it slope gradually 
to the water, and the shore be, as we term it, steep to. This is the 
case with the islet lying o & Cape Barren, and wi<|i Cone Point; with 
parts of the Passage Isles, and the south end of Clarke's Island ; and 
at these places only, did I see fur seals in any number. 

The sooty petrel, better known at sea under the name of sheer- 
water, frequents the tufted, gras.sy parts of all the islands in astonish- 
ing numbers. It is known that these birds make burrows in the 
ground, like rabbits ; thaj they lay one or. two enormous eggs in 
these holes, and bring up their young there. In the evening, they 
come in frour sea, having their stomachs filled with a gelatinous sub- 
stance gathered .from the waves; and thi.s they eject into the thro|its 
of their offspring, or retain for their own nourishment, acco. ding to 
circumstances. A little after sunset, the air at Preservation Island 
used to be darkened with their numbers ; and it was genefally an 


Flikdrhs. 

171 ^ 8 . 



CXXXiT 


INTRODUCTION. 


{Prior Diacoveries, 


Flikdbm. hour before their squabblings ceased, and every one had found its 
own retreat. The people of the Sydney Cove had a strong example 
of perseverance in these birds. The tents were pitched close to a 
piece of ground full ofthieir burrows, many of which were necessa- 
rily filled up from walking constantly over them; yet, notwithstand- 
ing this interruption, and the thousands of birds destroyed, for they 
constituted a great part of their food during more than six months, 
the returning flights continued to be as numerous as before ; and 
there was scarcely a burrow less, except in the spaces actually 
covered by the tents. These birds are about the size of a pigeon, and 
when skinned and dried in smoke we thought them passable food. 
Any quantity could be procured, by sending people on shore in the 
evening. The sole process was to thrust in the arm up to the shoulder, 
and seize them briskly ; but there was some danger of grasping a 
snake at the bottom of the burrow, instead of a petrel. 

The pinguin of these islands is of the kind denominated little ; the 
back and upper parts are of a lead-coloured blue ; the fore and under 
parts, white. They were generall-y found sitting on the rocks, in 
the day time, or in caverns near the watei* side. They burrow in 
the same manner as the sooty petrel ; but, except in the time of rear- 
ing their young, domot seem, like it, to return to their holes every 
, night. The places preferred for breeding are those at the back of 
the shore, where the sand is overspread with salt plants ; and they 
weie never found intermixed^ith the petrels, nor far from the salt 
water. Their flesh is .so strong and fishy, that had not the skins 
, served to make caps, rather handsome, and impenetrable to rain, the 
pinguins would have escaped molestation. » 

No other quadrupeds than the kanguroo, womat, and duck-billed 
aculeated ant-eater were found upon the islands. The kanguroo is 
of a reddish br<yvvn, and resembles the smaller species which fre- 
quents the brush woods at Port Jackson : when full grown, it weigjhs 
from forty to fifty pounds. There were no traces of it upon the 
Passage Isles ; but, upon Cape-Barren and Clarke’s Islaids, the - 



cxxxv 


!FlINDB£I* 

1798. 


Barren ; Preservation and the Passage Isles do not possess it. Thia^ 
little bear-like quadruped is known in New South Wales, and called 
by the natives womat, wombat, or wow according to the different 
► dialect's,’ or perhaps to the different rendering of the wood rangers 
who brought the information. It burrows like the badger, and on 
the Continent does not quit its retreat till dark ; but it feeds at all 
*times on the uninhabited islands, and was commonly seen foraging 
amongst the sea refuse on the shore, though the coarse grass seemed 
to be its usual nourishment. It is easily caught when at a distance 
from its burrow ; its flesh resembles lean mutton in taste, and to us 
was acceptable food. Another species of this animal has been dis- 
covered in New South Wales, which lives in the tops of the trees 
and, in manners, bears much resemblance to the sloth. 

The aculeated ant-eater was not found on an}%other of the islands 
than that of Cape Barren : it is exceedingly fat, the flesh has a some- 
what aromatic taste, and was thought delicious. 

Of the birds which frequent Furneaiyc’s Islands, the most valum^le 
are the goose and black swan ; but this last is rarely seen here, even 
in the fresh- water pools, and except to breed, seems never to go on 
shore. The goose approa^ies nearest to the description of the species 
called hemacle ; it feeds upon grass, and seldom takes to the water. , 
I found this bird in considerable numbers on the smaller isles, but 
principally upon Preservation Island; its usual weight was from 
seven to ten pounds, and it formed our best repasts, but had become 
shy. ^Qannets, shags, gulls, and iced-bills were occasionally seen ; 
as also hawks, paroquets, and a few smaller birds. Fish were 


Ea$t Coast, Sf V. D:s Land.'\ INTRODUCTION. 

kanguroo was tolerably abundant, though difficult to be procured, 
owing to the thickness of its retreats. There were also numbers on 
Preservation Island, when the Sydney Cove was first run ori shore ; 
but having been much harassed and destroyed, a few only were 
shot during the time of our stay. 

Clarke’s Island afforded the first specimen of the new animal, 
called womat ; but I found it more numerous upon that of Cape 



*avi introduction. [Prwr Di$ccivm$s. 

FiiNDBti. not plentiful, but some were taken with hook and liile from the 
rockll. ■; 

Speckled 3^11ow snakes, of three or four f^et in length, were 
found upon Preservation Island, and exist, no ^oubt, upon the larger 
isles. They sometimes ^et into the burrows of, the sooty petrel, and 
probably destroy the ^oung. I saw one dragged out by a sailor 
who expected to have taken a bird ; but, being quick in his move- 
ments, he was not bitten. - These snakes posi^ss the venomous 
fangs ; but no person experienced the degree of virulence in their 
poison. ^ . 

The schooner was ready to sail oh Feb. 25 ; and the wind from jhe 
westward being fresh arid faycArable, we left Hamilton’s Roa^q 
return to Port Jackson. It was still a matter of doubt whetherftI|jB 
land to the south of the islands were, or were not, a part of Van 
Diemen’s Land ; and I therefore requested of hft*. Reed to make a 
stretch that way. At noon our latitude was 40° 44.3^', and the peak 
of Cape Barren bore N. 13* Ef. ; an island which had been visited 
by the Sydney-Cove’s people, and was represented to be a breeding 
place for swans, bore from N. W. to west, five or six miles, and 
there were some smaller isll^ behind it. The land lying two or 
three miles more to the south is sandy and low in front, hut ascends 
gently rising hills as it retreats into the country. Its general 
appearance was very different from that of Furneaux’s Islands, the 
lo^'^llia' hills being covered with green grass, interspersed with clumps 
of wood, and the back land well clothed with timber trees; 

We stretched on until the land was seen beyond 40*50'; and then 
veered to the northward. In this latitude, captain Fumeaux says, 
“ the land trenches away to the westward and as he traced the 
coast from the south end of the country to this part, tllftre could no 
longer be a douBP that it was joined to the land discovered by Tasman 
in 1642. The smokes which had constantly been seen rising from 
it shewed that there were inhabitants ; and this, combined with the 
• Cook's Second Voyage^ Vol. I. page 1 14, 



cxxxvii 


East Coast, 4 * V. D.'s Land.'] INTRODUCTION. 

circumstance of there being none upon the islands, seemed to argue 
a junction of Van Diemen's Land with New South Wales; for it was 
difficult to suppose^ that men should have reached the more distant 
land, and not have attained the islands intermediately situated ; nor 
was it admissible that, having reached them, they had perished for 
want of food. On the other hand, the great strehgth of the tides 
setting westward, past the islands, could only be caused by some ex- 
ceedingly deep inlet, or by a passage through to the southern Indian 
Ocean., These contradictory circumstances were very embarrassing ; 
and the schooner not being placed at ray disposal, I was obliged, to 
^\my great regret, to leave this important geographical question 
UB^ecidcd. 

At the time we veered to the northward, the const of Van Diemen's 

If* ’ . 

Land was about three mile^ distant, and the furthest extreme, a low 
point, bore S. 15^E. two or three leagues. On rcpassing Cape- 
Barren Point at four o’clock, I obta!)ied two sets of distances of the 
sun west of the moon, to pair with others of the sun on the east side, 
takei\on the loth, also within sight of the Cape. The mean result, 
freed from the errors of the table^ffave its longitude 148® 20' E; 
being 14' more than is as.signed tolr^y captain Furneaux, but 5^' 
less than vhat appears to be its* real situation. 

Nothing worthy of notice occurred in our ])assage back to Por;t 
Jackson : we made Hat Hill on March 7, and on the 9th, anchored 
in Sydney Cove. 

Mr. Bass had been returned a fortnight from his expedition in the 
whale boat ; and he communicated all his notes and observations to 
be added to my chart. There seemed to vrant no other proof of the 
existence of a passage between New South Wales and Van Diemen’s 
Land, than that of sailing positively through it ; but however anxious 
I was to obtain this proof, the gratification of my dell- e was required 
to J)e suspended by a voyage to Norfolk Island in the Reliance. 


Flinders, 

1798. 


VOL. 1. 


T 



cxxxviii 


Flinders 
and Bass. 
1798. 


(Atlas, 
PI. VIII.) 


INTRODUCTION. [Prior Discoveries, 


In September following, His Excellency, governor Hunter, had 
the goodness to give me the Norfolk, a colonial .sloop of twenty-five 
tons, with authority, to penetrate behind Furneaux’s Islands ; and 
should a strait be found, to pass through it and return by the south 
end of Van Diemen's Land ; making such examinations and surveys 
on the way as circumstances might permit. Twelve weeks were 
allowed for the performance of this service, and provisions for that 
time were put on board ; the rest of the equipment was completed 
by the friendly care of captain Waterhouse of the Reliance. 

I had the happiness to associate my friend Bass in this new expe- 
dition, and to form an excellent crew of eight volunteers from, the 
king's ships ; but a time keeper, that essential instrument to accu- 
racy in nautical surveys, it was still impossible to obtain. 

My report of the seals at Furneaux’s Islands K^d induced Messrs. 
Bishop and Simpson, the commander and supracargo of the snow 
Nautilus, to prepare their vessel for a sealing speculation to that 
quarter; and on Oct. 7, we sailed* out of Port Jackson together.* 

The wind being fair, we passed Hat Hill at four in the afternoon, 
and next morning, made Motint Dromedary. I took this opportu- 
nity of passing between Montague Ikle and the main ; but the depth 
of water being uncertain, the Nautilus was desired by signal not to 
follow. There was no bottom with 13, and afterwards with «o 
fatkoms, at a mile distance from the island ; and the passage seemed 
perfectly free from danger, and is five or six miles wide. Mount 
Dromedary, from which the island lies E. by N. N., is the highest 
land upon this part of the coast ; its elevation being, I think, not less 
than 3000 feet. The top is about three miles long, and the south 
end is somewhat the most elevated part ; it is covered with wood, 

* Mr. Bass’ Journal of observations upon the lands, &c. discovered or seen in this 
voyage, has been published by colonel Collins, in his Account of the English Coloi/tj in 
New South Wales^ Vol. II. page ld3 ^t seq.; his observations will, therefore, be gene* 
rally omitted in this account. 



East Coast, 8 f V. D. s Land.} INTRODUCTION. 

even there, but still more so down the sides ; the shore under it is 
mostly a white, sandy beach. 

At noon the centye of the mountain bore N. N. W. four leagues ; 
but the haziness of the weather prevented ^n observation being 
taken for the latitude, as it had before done when passing in the 
Francis.* We then hauled further off the coast, with the Nautilus 
in company, and being near the latitude of Cape Howe, at ten 
o’clock, lay to until daylight, for the purpose of obtaining a good 
departure ; but on the 9th, the wind had veered to south-west, and 
the weather having a bad appearance, we bore up for Two-fold Bay. 
The course after passing Green Cape, was N. 16* W. seven miles 
to Haycock Point, and N. 44,° W. three or four miles from thence to 
the south point of entrance to the bay ; the shore being all along 
bold, and for the most part rocky. From the south point, which 
may be known by its reddish appearance and having a steep rock 
lying ofFit,we steered for Snug Cove, on the north-west side of the bay; 
and there anchored in 3j fathoms, sandy bottom, at something more 
than a cable’s length from the small beach, and the same distance from 
the two points which bound the cove. In this situation, the outer red 
point was hidden by Snug-cove Head and further out, in 5 fathoms, 
where the Nautilus anchored, the head and point were in a line. 

In order to make some profit of this foul wind, Mr. Bass landed 
early next morning to examine the country, whilst I went with 
Mr. Simpson to commence a sui vey of Two-fold Bay. In the way 
from Snug Cove, through the wood, to the long northern beach, where 
I proposed to measure a base line, our attention was suddenly called 
by the screams of three women, who took up their children and ran 
off in great consternation. Soon afterward a man made his appear- 
ance. He w’as of a middle age, unarmed, except with a whaddie^or 
wooden scimitar, and came up to us seemingly with careless coiafi- 
deijce. We made much of him, and gave him some biscuit ; aijd he 

• The highest part of Mount Bromedary appears to lie in 36° 19' south, and longitude 
150 ^ 1 1' east ; or about 2' south and 11' east of its position in captain Cook’s chart. 


cxxxix 


Flindeus 
and JUsd. 
I79b. 


(Atlas, 
Plate VI.) 



cxl 


INTRODUCTION. 


[Prior Discoveries. 


Flinders 
and JUss. 
1798. 


in return presented us with a piece of gristly fat, probably of whale. 
This I tasted ; but watching an opportunity to spit it out when he 
should not be looking, I perceived him doing precisely the same thing 
witl^our biscuit, whose taste was probably no more agreeable to 
him, than his whale was to ‘me. Walking onward with us to the 
long beach, our new acquaintance picked up from the grass a long 
wooden spear, pointed with bone ; but this he hid a little further on, 
making signs that he should take it on his return. The commence- 
ment of our trigonometrical operations was seen by him with indif- 
ference, if not contempt ; and he quitted us, apparently satisfied that, 
from people who could thus occupy themselves seriously, there was 
nothing to be apprehended. 

We measured 1 16 chains along the north beach, and having taken 
the necessary angles, returned to Snug Cove for the purpose of 
observing the latitude ; but the thick squalls, which were continually 
passing over from the south-west, prevented a sight of the sun. The 
survey was continued in the afternoon ; and on the following 
morning, Oct. 11, the wind being still unfavourable, the west side of 
the bay was nearly completed. 

I was preparing the artificial horizon for observing the latitude, 
when a party of seven or eight natives broke out in exclamation 
upon the bank above us, holding up their open hands to shew they 
were unarmed. We were three in number, and, besides a pocket 
pistol, had two muskets. These they made no objection to our 
bringing, and we sat down in the midst of the party. It consisted 
entirely of young men, who were better made, and cleaner in their 
persons than the natives of Port Jackson usually are ; and their 
countenances bespoke both good will and curiosity, though mixed 
with some degree of apprehension. Their curiosity was mostly 
directed to our persons and dress, and constoiitly drew off their at- 
tention from our little presents, which seemed to give but a momen- 
tary pleasure. The approach of the sun to the meridian calling 
me down to the beach, our visitors returned into the woods. 



East Coast, Sf V. D.'s Land.-\ INTRODUCTION. cxl 

seemingly well satisfied with what they had seen. We could per- FLIwr^LKS 
ceive no arms of any kind amongst them ; but I knew these people 
too well not to bcjassured that their spears were lying readj^ and 
that it was prudent to keep a good look out upon the woods, to 
prevent surprise wliilst taking the observation. 

Oct. 12. We sailed in the afternoon, with a breeze from the east- 
ward ; but a return of the wind to south-west, with tlireatening 
weather, induced me to bear up again in the evening ; and we 
anchored on the south side of the bay. This part is not so well 
sheltered as Snug Cove, for the Nautilus was not quite land-locked 
in 3 fathoms water. The weather became very bad in the night ; 
and being no better on the 13th, the two vessels were completed 
with wood, and the country further explored; a few more bearings 
were also added to our m terials for laying down a jdan of the bay, 
and thus terminated our examination. 

The latitude of Snug Cove on tlie north-west side of Two-fold 
Bay, and by much the best anchorage in it, is 37*' 4' south. The 
longitude, from two sets of distances of the sun west of the moon, 
deducting for the errors of the tables, Avas 150'’' 3' east of 
Greenwich. The variation of the azimuth compass observed on the 
beach, was 9° 29', and of the surveying theodolite it" east. My 
haste to complete the survey did not allow of much attention being 
paid to the tides ; but it Avas high water about nine hours after the 
moon passed over the meridian, and the general rise from six to 
eight feet. 

TAVo-fold Bay is not, of itself, worthy of particular interest ; but 
as nothing larger than boats can find shelter in any other i)art of 
this coast, from Jervis Bay, in latitude 35® 6', round to Corner Inlet, 
or to Furneaux’s Isles in 40^“, it thereby becomes of importance to 
whalers, and to othei^ ships passing along the coa.st. 

^Besides its latitude. Two-fold Bay may be known by Mount 
Dromedary, which wili be seen, in moderately fine weather, at 
the distance of fifteen or sixteen leagues to the northward ; and also 



cxlii INTRODUCTION, {Prior Discoveries, 

FtiNDERs by the land behind the. bay lying more in hummocks than else- 
where. One of these hummocks is round, and much higher than 
the ^sl ; and when it bears S. 6o° W. ( S. W. ^ W. nearjy , by 
compass, ) a course for it wijl bring a ship to the middle of the bay. 
On approaching near, she should look for two rocks, rather pointed, 
of which one lies off the outer north, and the other off the outer 
south point. Snug Cove is difficult to be distinguished by a stran- 
ger; but on coming near the rocky head, at the south-west end 
of the long northern beach, it will be seen on the south side of 
that head ; and the anchor must be then ready to be let go. If the 
wind be from the southward, it should be dropped a little before 
the head shuts on with the south point of the bay, in 5 or 6 fathoms 
water ; and in veering away, the lead should be kept out astern of 
the vessel. There is room for two or three small ships in Snug 
Cove, but not for more. 

Wood, in abundance, can be procured on every side qf the bay ; 
but there are only two places where fresh water was found, and that 
not very good. One of these was a swampy pond upon the low 
neck behind Snug Cove, where casks might be filled without much 
difficulty; the other is near the inferior anchorage on the south side 
of the bay ; and both are indicated in the particular plan. 

The ponds and lagoons, which are to be found at the back of 
most of the beaches, are frequented by ducks, teal, herons, red-bills, 
and some small flights of the curlew and plover. The bay seemed 
to be well stocked with fish ; and our success with hook and line 
made us regret having no seine, for the hauling of which many of 
the beaches are particulaHy well adapted. It is not improbable that 
Two-fold Bay, like some of the open bays on the east coast of Africa, 
may be frequented by whales at certain seasons : of this I ha>£e no 
decisive proof ; but the reef of rocks, called Whale Spit, received its 
name from the remains of one found there. The natives had.tabjn 
their share; and the dogs, crows, and gulls were carrying away 
the rest. 



cxliii 


East Coast, Sf V. D.'s Land.'] INTRODUCTION. 

Oct. 14. In the morning, we left Two-fold Bay with a breeze at 
north-east; and at sun-set, having run eleven leagues from the 
south point, our departure was taken from Cape Howe. I then 
steered*S. W. by S., judging it to be the course best calculates! to 
bring us within sight of the land supposed, by captain Furneaux, to 
lie in 39® south. On the 15th, at noon, our latitude was 38° 34'; 
the weather was fine, but no land visible to the southward. In the 
opposite direction there was a range of hills whose centre bore 
N. by W. i W. ; at sunset it was seen as far as N. 37® W., from 
the sloop’s deck, and from the mast head of the Nautilus, the 
land was distinguished, or thouglit to be so, as far as N. 60® W. 
These bearings, but particularly the last, seemed to shew a strong 
current to the westward, for neither Mr. Bass nor myself could 
believe, that the hills at the back of the Long Beach were sufficiently 
elevated to be seen beyond fifteen leagues; I therefore took four 
sets of distances, of stars east and west of the moon, which placed 
us, an hour and a half after sunset, in longitude 149° 13' cast, 
agreeing nearly with the dead reckoning. The land, if it really were 
such, was consequently t'v^enty-five or more leagues off’; and if tJie 
bearing of N. 60° "W. were not a mistake, it must Iiave been thirty 
leagues distant in that direction. This supposed land was visible all 
the afternoon; but it might possibly have been the dense clouds 
hanging over the hills at the back of the I.ong Beach, and not the 
land itself. 

Our course to the south-westward was continued all night; but 
the wind having veered to W. S. \V. at daybreak of the 16th, the 
sloop was then put on the northern tack. . No land was visible in 
any direction ; nor was there any at noon, when the observed lati- 
tude was 38® 43'. The wind veered round by the south until it 
fixed ilself at east ; and when the day broke, on the 17th, the signal 
was made to the Nautilus, and we bore away S. W. by W. until 
noon. The latitude was then 39® 1 1' south, and we judged ourselves 
to be nearly in the meridian of the Sisters ; the weather was tolerably 


Flinders 

and Bass, 
1798. 



cxliv 


INTRODUCTION. 


[Prior Discoveries, 

Flindbr* fine, and had been so all the momine, yet no land was any where to 

and Bass. « ^ i i i • 

jr^s. be seen ; and I therefore concluded, that none could he in or near 
the meridian of these islands, and be in the latitude of 39®. 

The course steered at noon was west ; but in half an ^our it 
was altered for high irregular land which came in sight to the 
south-westward, and proved to be the largest of the two clusters 
which I had discovered when in the Francis, and named Kent’s Groups. 
We sounded in 30 fathoms, but lost the lead, the sole deep-sea line 
with which we had been furnished, proving to be totally rotten. 
After running twenty miles, assisted by a flood tide, we came up 
with the group at four o’clock, and steered though the channel by 
which the principal islands are separated. It is about three miles 
long, and a full mile in width ; is free from danger, and so deep, 
that our hand line could not reach the bottom. There are two sandy 
coves on the east, and one on the west side of the channel, where 
small vessels might find shelter, if there were any inducement to 
visit these steep, barren, granitic masses of rock. Above the cliffs 
we could occasionally perceive a brown-looking vegetation of brush 
wood, and here and there a few starved ^um trees ; but there was 
neither bird nor quadruped to enliven the dreary scene.* The 
principal island of the small, western group, opened at S. 68" W.* 
on clearing the channel ; and we then hauled the wifid to the south- 
ward, for Furneaux’s Islands, that the Nautilus might no longer be 
detained from her sealing business. 

The wind blew fresh from the 
weather. At daylight, Oct. 18, a large piece of hilly land bore 
N. 48® to 64“ Rf, four leagues ; and soon afterward. Mount Chappell^ 
a smooth round hill which had been seen from Preserv^ion Island, 

* Kent’s large group is not, however, so barren and deserted as appearances bespoke. 
It lias since been ascertained that, in the central parts of the larger islands, there are 
vallies in which trees of a fair growth make part of a tolerably vigorous vegetation, cind 
where kangaroos of a small kind were rather numerous ; some seals, also, were found 
upon the rocks, and fresh water was not difficult to be prociu’cd in certain seasons. 




East Coast, SfV.D.'sLand.^ INTRODUCTION. cxir 

was set at S. 78° E., distant seven or eight leagues, and was as con- Flinder* 
spicuous on this side as when seen from the eastward. Our latitude *”1798“' 
at noo^ was 4,0® aat, and Mount Chappell bore N.'yi® E. seven or 
eight miles, which would place it I'to th^ north of its position before 
determined. Between us and the mount were two small, low islands, 
and to the northward, the hilly land first seen was visible under the 
sun. 

Finding *he wind hang obstinately in the eastern quarter, we had 
tacked to*the north in order to keep under the lee of the islands. 

This course brought us, in the evening, within two miles of the hilly 
northern land, the same which had been discovered in the Francis, 
and of whose connection with the great island of Furneaux I was 
doubtful ; nor could it yet be determined. The shores of the south- 
western part are rocky; ana the land rises, by a steep ascent, to hills 
of an elevation equal to that of Mount Chappell. These hills are 
slightly covered with grass and small brush wood, but the general 
appearance was that of great sterility. 

About four miles to thg south of this land we had passed a rocky 
islet, and observed a circular reef which seemed to connect the two 
together. The stormy appearance of the night induced me to stretch 
in, under this reef ; and finding there was shelter from the east winds, 
we came to an anchor in 5 fathoms, coarse sand ; the Nautilus followed; 
but not liking the place, captain Bishop preferred keeping the sea. 

On sounding round the sloop,J^ found the bottom every where foul, 
and that there were no means of escape in case of a shift of wind ; 
therefore, after killing a few seals upon the granitic rocks, we 
weighed th^ anchor, ran two leagues to the southward, and then 
hauled the wind under storm sails for the night. 

Oct. 19, the wind was at north-east ; and we bore away to pass 
between Mount Chappell and the low islands lying to the west- 
ward. The passage is about two miles wide, and the water much 
discoloured ; but 10 fathoms of line did not reach the bottom, A 
similar appearance in the water had been observed several leagues 

U 


VOL I. 



cxivi INTRODUCTION. [Prior Dwcoveriei. 

Ft-mnEnB to the Westward of the Ipw islands, where there was 23 to 25 fathoms* 
1798. on a bottom o^litid and broken shells. 

This small ^l^up, to which the name of Ch4!ppell Isles is^ affixed 
in the chart, consistS'of three, or perhaps four islands, for the mount 
seemed to stand detached from the land on the east side of the pas- 
sage. The basis of the whole is probably of granite, and they seemed 
nothing superior in fertility to the worst of Furneaux’s Islands; but 
in a distant view, a slight covering of small herbage upon their 
sloping, even surfaces, gave them a prepossessing appearance. 
Mount Chappell is five or six hundred feet above the water ; and 
the elevation of the other islands being inconsiderable, it was a very 
conspicuous object until, by the clearing away of the haze, the high 
mountains of the great island behind it became visible : their white, 
towering peaks, bathed in the late showers, reflected the gleaming 
sunshine with great splendour, and presented a spectacle sO magni- 
ficent, that the circular, gently sloping Mount Chappell no longer 
attracted attention. 

We joined the Nautilus off the south side of the islands, and after 
passing several rocks in our course eastward, anchored at the east 
end of Preservation Island about noon. Mr. Hamilton had left his 
house standing, with some fowls and pigeons in it^^^when we had 
quitted the island nine months before. The. house reilteinedin nearly 
the same state, but its tenants were not to be found, having pro- 
bably fallen a prey to the hawks. 

Oct. 20, the wind was at north-west, and blew a gale, accompa- 
nied with rain,, which continued for several days. This weather very 
much impeded our progress with the Nautilus in Armstrong’s 
Channel, but captain Bishop at length moored in Kent’s Bay, the 
most secure place to be found within reach of the sealing points. 
The greater part of, Kent’s Bay is occupied by shoals ; but along the 
shore of Sloping Point there is a deep channel running northward, 
which leads into the western head of the .bay ; and there, behind a 
reef of dry rocks, several ships may lie in 4 or 5 fathoms, shel- 



cxivii 


Boat Coagt, ^ V. D.'$ Land.^ INTRODUCTION. 

tered from all winds. The Nautilus’s tentsi were pitched upon the 
borders of a run of fresh water, about one mile nq^of the anchor- 
age ; qjid a garden, twhich captain Bishop made the^produced some 
tolerable vegetables. 

We had no prospect of advancing along the north coast of Van 
Diemen’s Land whilst the strong western winds continued to blow ; 
and therefore, whilst Mr. Bass explored some of the islands, I occu- 
pied myself in sounding different parts of Armstrong’s Channel, and 
in making some other additions to my former survey. At length, 
on Oct. 31., the gale moderated to a light breeze, and we stretched 
over, with the flood tide, towards the Swan Isles. At noon, our 
situation was as under. 

Latitude observed, - - - 40 39 S. 

Peak of Cape Barren, - - N. i6 E. 

Van Diemen’s Land, eastern extr. about S. by E. 

Largest Swan Isle, the centre, - - S. 53 W. 

Soon after three o’clock, we anchored in a small sandy bay, at the 
south-east end of ihe largest Swan Isle, in 4 fathoms ; being well 
sheltered from north and western winds, but entirely open to any 
that might arise from the opposite quarters. The furthest ex- 
treme of thejggjposite coast then bore S, 36° E. three leagues ; but 
the nearest p^, in the direction of S. by W., was little more than 
three miles distant. 

I landed with Mr. Bass ; and leaving him to pursue his researches, 
went round to the north side of the island, to take angles. From a 
small, elevated projection there, ^ 

The peak of Cape Barren was set at N. 28*40 E. 

Mount Chappell, - - - N. 21 20 W. ; 

from which, and several intermediate bearings, this station became 
firmly connected with the survey of Fumeaux’s Islands. Mr. Bass 
thought the stone to contain a rather large quantity of iron, and the 
bearings seemed to confirm it, for they did not agree in any common 
intersection with the allowance of 9° east, which I considered to be 


Flinders 
and Bass. 
1798. 



cxlviii 

Flinders 
and Bass. 
1793 . 


INTRODUCTION. 


XPridr Digcoveriei, 


k. 


the true variation ; buf with 6° 3®^ they not only coincided, but 
placed this station in latitude 40" 43' south, the same as deduced 
from three meridional observations taken within sight of the 
island. 

One mile from the north-west end, lies a low, rocky islet, and 
several rocks both above and under water. All these are compre- 
hendpd under the genera! name of the Swan Isles ; a name which, 
on examination, they appeared very little to deserve, for we did 
not see a single bird of that species, or any of their nests ; but there 
were several of the bernacle geese, and two of them were shot by 
Mr. Bass. 


The length of the largest Swan Isle is two and a quarter miles/* 
by a medium breadth of one mile. The stony parts are over-run 
with thick brush wood, and the sandy are mostly covered with has- 
socks of wiry grass, to which the sooty petrels resort. In external 
appearance, this island bears a resemblance to that of Pi;eservatioii ; 
but its sterility is greater, and it is destitute of the kanguroo. We 
did not see any fresh water in the vallies^ shores, nor 
any marks of the island having been ever visited by the natives of 
the opposite coast. 

Nov. 1. Having an unfavouraBle wind, I waited the flood tide, and 
then proceeded westward, along that part of Van Diemen’s Land 
to which the name of Cape Portland was given, in honour of His 
Grace the then secretary of state for the colonies. From the eastern 
extremity, the coast trends about N. 6s® W. six leagues, and termi- 
^nates in a point, off which lie some small rocky islets. The shore 
consists of long, sandy beaches, separated by low and stony points, 
which project very Ktfle beyond the coastline. The country for two 
or three miles behind the shore is low and sandy; but it then ascends 
in gradations of gently rising hills, and being covered with verdure, 
interspersed with clumps of wood and single trees of a fair growth, 
it had a very pleasing appearance. At tlje back of these bills, the 
bare and rugged tops of a* ridge of distant mountains appeared 



cxlix 


East Coast, V. D.'s I-anrf.] INTRODUCTION. 

here and there, and formed a striking contrast with the verdure of 
the front scene. 

>* 

Our soundings alpng the south side of the largesi.Swan Isle were 
generally 8 fathoms, on a sandy bottom ; nor, was there much de- 
crease until noon, when the low shore of Cape Portland was at 
something less, and the outer rocky islets something more than a 
mile distant, and we came rather suddenly into 3 fathoms. The 
latitude observed was 40* 43 ^ south, and the island last quitted bore 
N. 85“ to S. 84® E., distant six miles. 

There being little wind at this time, the sloop, in passing round the 
rocky islets of Cape Portland, was carried by the tide over a ledge 
♦ where there was scarcely a fathoms ; and was then driven westward 
on a curved line of rippling water, which extended northward from 
the islets as far as the eye could reach. We passed over the rippling 
in 9 fathoms ; and the wind being entirely gone, were then carried to 
the south-west. 

Soon after four o’clock, the ebb appeared to be making ; and the 
anchor was d rooped in 1 1 fathoms, sandy bottom, about one mile 
west of Cape Portlihd.*^ The shore on this side of the cape trends 
south, in rocky heads and beaches, and afterwards curves westward, 
forming an extensive bay, which terminates in a point. To this the 
name of Point Waterhouse was given, in honour of the commander 
.of the Reli^ce; and an island, whose top is level and moderately 
high, lying off the point, was named Isle Waterhouse. 

The bottom of the large bay is sandy, and the hills of Cape Port- 
land there retiring further back, permitted a view of the inland 
mountains, of which there was a high and. extensive ridge. Moui# 
tains like these are usually the parents of rivers ; and the direction 
of the ebb tide, which came from between S. W. by S. and S. W. by 
W. at the rate of two-and-half miles an hour, gave hopes of finding 
some considerable inlet in the bay, and increased our anxiety for a 
fair breeze. 


Flinders 
and Bass. 
1798. 



INTRODUCTION. 


d 


[Prior Di$eovm«$. 


FtiwBsis A set of distances of the sun east of the moon, a meridian altitude 
“J of the planet Mars, and *a western amplitude of the sun were taken at 
this anchorage, the results of which, with the Ijearings of the land, 
were as under : 

Latitude observed, - - - 40 44 S. 

Longitude from lunar distances corrected, - 147 5 ® E. 

Variation of the compass (the sloop's head being S. W.) 13 30 E. 

C. Barren peak, over the outer islets of C. Portland, N. 47 

Mount Chappell, . - - North. 

Isle Waterhouse, centre, dist. 5 or 6 leagues, S. 71 W. 

Point Waterhouse, - - - - S. 61 W. 

Ridge of inland mountains, - - South to S. 42 W. 

Highest part of ditto, a round top, - - S. 19 W. 

The Hood tide ceased to run at three quarters past three in the 
morning, or about nine hours after the moon passed over the meridian. 

Nov. 2. A light breeze having sprung up from the eastward we 
steered for the bottom of the bay, and at noon the nearest part of the 
beach was distant only two miles. ' 

Observed latitude, - - - 40 49^ S. 

G. Portland, with the outer isldts behind, - N, 27 E. 

Isle Waterhouse, extremes, - N. 78* to 89 W. 

Point Waterhouse, - - - S. 88i W. 

We stood on another mile, and then bore away westvyard, follow- 
ing the round of the shore, but no inlet could be perceived. At three 
o’clock, we had passed Point Waterhouse, and seeing a fair channel 
of about two miles wide between it and the island, steered through, 
%. W. by W. 

Isle Waterhouse is#bar four miles in length. Its southern shore 
consists of beaches and rocky points ; but it rises abruptly to a mo^ 
dei:;jite elevation. The level top is mostly covered with wood ; aind 
although its appearance did not bespeak fertility, it was superior, to 
any we had seen of Fumeaux's Islands. The land at the back of 



cli 


Ea^ Coast, 4 * V. D\s Land.] INTROIJUCTION. 

Point Waterhouse is higher than that of the island, and is composed Flinmm 
of grassy, woody hills, rising over each other by gentle ascents, “fygs.”' 
Upon the point theife is a sandy hillock, and a reef of rocks extends 
out from it a quarter of a mile. We had 8 fathoms, whilst rounding 
this reef ; and in steering through the passage, the soundings were 
7> 5> 4> 5* ^ fathoms; the sandy bottom being visible under 

the sloop. At the further end of the channel, a rocky islet and a 
small reef were passed, leaving them on the starbord hand. The 
islet was almost covered with sea birds and hair seals ; from which 
circumstance we judged, that the natives of Van Diemen's Land 
were not able to get across here, any more than to the Swan Isles ; 
and that, consequently, they had no canoes upon this part of the coast. 

From Point Waterhouse, the shore trends S. 6^ W,, five or six 
miles, and is mostly rocky. It then takes a direction of S. S. W., in 
a long sandy beach, and afterwards curves westward to a projecting 
point, near which we had no ground with 13 fathoms a little before 
sunset. Another island had been for some time visible, and was then 
distant six miles : It was called • 

Ninth Island, 2ir\di 'hbre - - N. 32 W. 

Isle Waterhouse, about the' centre, - N. 50 E. 

South side of the passage, -- - N. 62 E. 

Projecting point, dist. one-third of a mile. South. 

The projecting point is over-topped with hillocks of almost bare 
sand, as is a second, which lies W. 6® S., two or three miles from, 
and much resembles, the firk: these two projections received the 
joint name of Double Sandy Point. The back country was manifestly 
worse than any before seen on this coasj. The pleasant lookid(P 
hills of Point Waterhouse no longer appuoached the shore; but 
retiring far inland, left a low space between the back hills and the 
sea, which had every appearance of being sandy and barren. 

In passing the western part of Double Sandy Point, we had 5, and 
tlien 4 fathoms ; and saw a reef extending from it some distance to the 
westward. It was then ‘nearly dark, and we hauled off upon a wind. 



clii 


INTR 0 D\JCTI 0 N. 


[Prior Discoverieo. 


for the night; the furthest visible extreme, a remarkable stony 
^179^ head, bearing S. 70* W. about eight miles. 

The wind blew a moderate breeze all night,j, at north-east. At 
five in the morning, ^ov. 3, the Ninth Island was distant two miles, 
and bore E. a*N., in a line with Point Waterhouse. The top of the 
island appeared green and level ; but I did not see any seals upon 
the rocks. Resuming our former course along shore, we passed 
close to Stony Head at ten o'clock, when two sets of distances of 
the sun east of the moon, gave its corrected longitude 147° 10' east. 
The wind having then veered more to the north, we hauled further 
off, and passed a rocky islet (the tenth), upon which a few over- 
grown hair seals were sunning themselves. At noon, our situation 


was as follows. 

Latitude observed, - - 40 55^ S. 

Tenth I., distant four miles, - S. 87 E. 
Stony Head, dist. six or seven miles, S. 6a E. 

A low head, distant ten miles, - S. 35 w! 

Western extreme of the land, - S. 53 W. 


Stony Head is the extremity of a ridge* df hills which branches 
out from the inland mountains, and stretches across the low, sandy 
land in front, to the sea. On each side of the ridge there were 
several smokes, which induced me to suppose the flat lands might 
contain lakes of fresh water. The low head, bearing S. 35® W. 
seemed to be the termination of another branch from the inland 
mountains ; round it there was some appearance of an opening, and 
at two o’clock, this excited so much hope that I ventured to bear away 
^fcfore the wind. We advanced rapidly with the flood, and at four, 
had passed Low Head' and were steering S. E. by S., up an inlet of 
more than a niile wide. Some shoals, not quite covered, we left on the 
sta^bord hand ; keeping a straight course for the entrance of a basin 
or bay, at which the inlet seemed to terminate. This course took 
us over some strong ripplings of tide, on none of wjiich, however, 
there was less than 5 fathoms ; and so soon as they were passed, 



cliii 


Eagt Coast, 8f V. D.’s Lanrf.] INTRODIJCTION. 

13 fathoms did not reach the bottom. After advancing three miles, Flikdeks. 
we approached a low, green island, lying nearly in mid-channel ; ““fj 
and being vmcertain which was the deepest side, I took the most 
direct, which lay to the west. From 8 fathoms, the next cast of the 
lead was and immediately the sloop was aground. Fortunately, 
the bottom was soft, and the strong flood dragged her over the 
bank without injury. The water deepened again as quick; and 
when the channel on the east side of Green Island was open, there 
was no bottom at 13 fathoms. 

We could not but remark the contrast between the shores of this 
inlet, covered with grass and wood down to the water’s edge, and 
the rocky sterile banks observed in sailing up Port Jackson : it spoke 
favourably for the country, and added to the satisfaction we felt in 
having made the discovery. There was, however, little time for 
meditation : the tide drove the sloop rapidly onward to the basin ; 
and the evening coming on, I pushed between some dry rocks and a 
point on the western side, and anchored in 2 fathoms, on a bottom 
of sand and mud. 

There appeared to bb ’three arms, or rivers, discharging them- 
selves into this extensive basin. That which came from the west- 
ward, had its embouchure close to the sloop ; and Mr. Bass went off 
in the boat to look up it. His attention was, however, soon called 
to another pursuit: a number of black swans were swimming before 
him, and judging from former experience in Western Port, that 
several of them were unable to fly, he gave chase with the boat. 

On his return at dusk, he rejoiced us with the sight of four, and 
with a promise that we should not be in want of fresh provisions irf 
this. port. 

Nov. 4. J landed Mr. Bass with two men, to examine the country, 
and then commenced a survey of the port by an examination of the 
Western Arm. It is narrow, and has not more in the entrance than 
3 lathoms, although, about one mile up, there be 7 near the star- 
bord shore. This arm is not accessible to ships beyond three miles; 

VOL. I. X 



cliv INTRODUCTION. [Prior Discoteries, 

FtiNDEKs and even in that distance there is much more shoal than deep 

and Ka5s. ^ * 

179$. water. 

The rocks lying at the entrance of the basin a,’’e covered at the top 
of the flood, but at other times are much frequented by shags. After 
observing the latitude and taking bearings there, I went down to 
Green Island ; and the tide being then out, perceived the shoals in 
Sea Reach to be so numerous and extensive, that it was surprising how 
the sloop could have reached thus far without striking upon some of 
them. In the channel to the east of Green Island I found from 7 to 
85 fathoms, and both the sides of it steep to ; a rock lies in the middle 
of the passage, but at twenty yards from it there was 3 fathoms all 
round. Green Island is covered with long, coarse grass and bushes, 
with a few small trees intermixed. The large, noisy gulls frequent it 
for the purpose of breeding, as do the swans, several of whose deserted 
nests were found with the broken egg-shells in them. These were 
. corroborating proofs, that the natives of this part of Van Diemen's 
Land have not the means of transporting themselves across the 
water; for Green Island is scarcely two cables length from the 
shore. * ' 

In returning to the sloop, I took off Mr. Bass and his party^ 
together with a kanguroo weighing between eighty and ninety 
pounds, which he had shot out of a considerable flock. Our fresh 
provisions were still further increased by an addition of six swans, 
caught this evening with the boat. 

Nov. 5 was employed in the survey of the Western Arm, and 
searching, but in vain, for the means of conveniently replenishing 
our water casks. Next morning we steered across the basin, and 
sought to anchor under an island which, from its situation at the 
entrance, of the eastern arm, was called Middle Island; but there 
not being a sufficient depth of water behind it, the course was 
continued up the eastern arm, in 10 or more fathoms water, for two 
or three miles ; when we anchored upon a five-fathom bank, near a 
small cove on the northern shore. On lading, a little stream was 



East Coast, 4 * V. D.s Land.'] INTRODUCTION. 


civ 


found descending from the hills into the sputh-east corner of the Funderb 
cove, and in the middle was a gully with several deep holes in it 
full of excellent water: this last, though not accessible till half flood, 
was the most convenient for our purpose. 

There were many recent traces of natives on the shore ; and after 
returning to the sloop, we saw, on the opposite side of the arm, a 
man who employed or amused himself by setting fire to the grass 
in different places. He did not stay to receive us, and we rowed 
down to Middle Island where a smoke was rising. The natives 
shunned us there also ; for soon after landing, I saw three of them 
walk up from the shoal which joins Middle Island to the opposite 
low, sandy point. The party appeared to consist of a man, a woman, 
and a boy ; and the two first had something wrapped round them 
which resembled cloaks of .'kins. 

The gently-sloping hills of Middle Island afford about forty acres 
of pasture .land, well covered with grass, and thinly wooded. No 
fresh water was seen, but it might probably be obtained by digging. 
This^sland is little frequented by aquatic birds, from the circum- 
stance of its being accessible, at low water, to the inhabitants of the 
main. 

Nov. 7. Mr. Bass and myself landed on the south shore upon our 
respective pursuits. The sandy point at the back of Middle Island 
was particularly favourable to the survey ; and a base of sixty-six 
chains measured round it, with the concomitant angles, enabled me 
to connect the eastern arm with the basin. The sloop had been 
completed with water in the morning, and was ready to proceed in 
continuation of the voyage ; but the width of the arm, the depth of 
water in it, and strength of the tides, were too strong indications 
of a river of extensive course for me to be able to quit it without 
some further examination. 

^ rainy gale from the eastward did not allow of moving until (AtW, 
Nov. 9th ; we then got under way with the flood tide, and beat up ’ 

the first, or Long Reach, against a south-east wind, i^breast of Point 



Ivi INTRODUCTION. {Prior Diseovories, 

(®®® chart),, where the river turned sharp round to the 

1798. south-west, I went away in the boat to examine the upper end of 
Long Reach ; but the haste required in following after the sloop, 
which the tide assisted in djriving fast upward, allowed me to do it 
but very cursorily. In Crooked Reach, I stopped at two places, and 
measured a short base near Glen Bight. The sloop was then lost to 
view, although the wind had died away; and on reaching Brush 
Island, it was not easy to know which way she had taken. Round-head 
Bay having as much the appearance of being a continuation of the 
river, as had Whirlpool Reach. This reach stretches south-eastward, 
and its width is much less than in any of the lower parts of the river, 
being no more than a short quarter of a mile ; but, as might be ex- 
pected, the depth in it, from lo to as fathoms, is greater, and its 
borders are steep and rocky. At the end of Wharlpool Reach, the 
banks of the river opened out so considerably that, from our little 
boat, it appeared like a sea, the land at the further end being scarcely 
distinguishable. Fortunately, we got sight of the sloop in Anchor 
Bight before it was dark, and carried witli us another black swan. 

Nov. lo, being under the necessity of going down to Brush Island, 
to bring the survey up from thence to the position of the sloop, we 
did not get under way till near noon. The wind was from the west- 
ward, and I went forward in the boat to Egg Island, so named from 
the number of eggs, mostly of the gull and red bill, which were 
there found. It is small and stony ; but covered with grass, and had 
not been visited by the natives. My next station was on the oppo- 
site side of the river, upon a low sandy point which is length- 
ened by a dry shoal. These project out from the general line of 
the southern shore^and contract the river to less than half ^mile ; 
whereas its width above and below, is one mile and a half. On 
the east, or lee side of this point and shoal was a flock of swans, in 
number not less than from three to five hundred ; and their cast qqills 
were so intermixed with the sand, as to forpi a component part of the 
beach. This countless number of quills gave me an insight into the 



clvi 


j&M/ Coast, 4 * V. iy.s Land.-] INTRODUCTION. 

cause why so many of the swans, though, not young birds, were Fj-indehs 
unable to fly : they moult their wing feathers, probably at stated **1798? 
periods, though not,iI should think, every year. This sandy projection 
was named Swan Point. 

On steering southward from thence, I found that the bight in 
which this great number of birds had assembled, was full of shoals 
producing the long aquatic grass which forms the principal part, if 
it be not their sole food. We sailed through the flock, and might 
have procured a good number, had not the progress of the sloop 
obliged us to hasten onward to Shoal Point : one incautious bird was 
caught by his long neck as we sailed past him. 

The change in the direction of the river, from south-east to south, 
made the extension of a new base necessary. From the end of 
Shoal Point, I rap thirty-fwo chains westward, across a small stream 
oi fresh water ; and having taken the necessary angles, returned to 
the sloop, which had then anchored at half a mile from the point, 
in 4 fathoms. The shoal was dry in the evening, within two cables 
length of the vessel, and rendered the fresh stream inaccessible to a 
boat. 

The time of our absence from Port Jackson being restricted to the 
beginning of January, I did not think it advisable to take the sloop any 
further up the river; but determined, after devoting one day more 
to an excursion in the boat, to return and proceed along the north 
coast of Van Diemen’s Land, in prosecution of the main object of 
the voyage. 

Nov. 11, Mr. Bass landed near Shoal Point, to go as far back into 
the country as the limited time would permit. I steered from thence 
over tq a red bank on the east side of the river^ measured a base of 
seventy nine chains, and took angles from a variety of stations. At 
the Crescent Shore, the river was contracted to a quarter of a mile in 
wdth, the water was half fresh, and the depth across as follows : 

1^, 3, 8, 8j, 1 a j, 11, 6,4 fathoms at half flood. 



viii 


INTRODUCTION. 


[Prior Di8Cover%e$, 


'LINDBH8 

me! Bass. 
1798. 


The direction of the river, from where the sloop was lying to this 
part, is nearly S. S. W. ; but it then winds round the Crescent Shore, 
and runs E. S. E. My uppermost station was upon a hill near the 
water side, at the commepcement of this new reach ; and from 
thence the river appeared, at the distance of a mile and a half, to re- 
open out its banks, and to turn more southward. In an eastern 
direction, across the wide part, there were three ridges of hills, 
and beyond them some blue peaks and caps of distant mountains, 
which I judged to be the same we had seen from Cape Portland ; and 
amongst which the source, or some of the sources of this river most 
probably arose. The distance of these mountains concurred with 
the strength of the tides and the depth of water to indicate, that, 
at the Crescent Shore, the larger half of the river still remained to 
be explored.* 

The morning of Nov. la was foggy and calm. .We rowed the 
sloop down with the assistance of the ebb tide, to Round-head Bay, 
and anchored in 3^ fathoms. At high water, the anchor was again 
weighed ; and at dusk, having had a breeze, we reached the.fiv§- 
fathora bank in Long Reach, near Watering Cove. From the upper 
end of Whirlpool Reach to Point Rapid, I went a-hcad in the boat 
and examined all the creeks and gullies on the western shore, for 
watering places. There were drains of fresh water down some of 
these, but in none, not even in Glen Bight, was there any accessible 
to boats. 

Nov. 13, we beat down with the ebb tide to Middle Island, and 
then steered across the basin for the Middle Arm, which was yet 
totally unexplored ; but after many ineffectual attempts to find a 
passage over the shoals, we. came to, in 5 fathoms, near the Shag 
Rocks, and I went to examine the arm with the boat. From 

* The chart will shew from later examinations, how far the river is navigable, and 
whence its different sources are derived. 



East Coast, 8 f V.D. 's Land.-] INTRODUCTION. clix 

i 

Inspection Head I discovered a narrow channel leading into it, where Flinders 
there was more than sufficient depth for ships; but this arm is “"irss!* 
altogether of little cpnsequence. 

In the everting, it^bllt^. a gale of wind from the north-westward, 
with hail and ^ain and the same weather continuing next day, I 
employed the time^in examining Sea Reach. On the 15th, some- 
W'hat finer weather enabled us to get down to Outer Cove, a place 
opposite to Green Island, where there is room for a larger vessel than 
the Norfolk to ride at single aqphor, in 8 fathoms. The head of the 
cove is shoal, and the stream that falls into it is salt to a greater dis- . 
tance than a boat can go; nor could any accessible fresh water be 
found in the neighbourhood. Middle Rock, so named from its ^situ- 
ation in the deep channel between the cove and Green Island, is 
hiddep at half flood. Fine muscles were gathered from it, many of 
them containing small, discoloured pearls, such as are found in those 
of Adventure "Bay. 

From thfs time to the 20th, the western winds continued to blow 
strong ; and finding, after an ineffectual attempt, that it was impos- 
sible *to make any progfess in the voyage, we remained in port, 
taking astronomical observations, completing the survey, and ex- 
amining the country, until a favourable change should take place. 

At the back of the longest beach near Low Head, and on the same 
side, .1 found a deep pool of tolerably good water, at which our casks 
were again replenished ; and when the boat was not employed in 
this, or other services, the people were sent swan hunting, and never 
without success. 

Nov. 20. The wind having become moderate at north-west, we 
beat out of the port with the ebb tide ; and at one p. m., took a de- 
parture from Low Head. The breeze had then veered to E. N. E. ; 
and when we had run nine leagues, a head on the west side of the 
port bore S. 53* E., and the furthest visible part of the coast was at 
w€st : being then dusk, the wind was hauled offsljore. 

We had rainy weather in the night, and the wind shifted back to 



clx INTRODUCTION. {Prior Discoveries.. 

f ‘ 

FtiMDEKs W. N. W., and blew a fresh gale. This §ood raised a high se», and 
reduced us to a close-reefed main sail antt^ib ; nor wem we without' 
apprehensions of t|;ie shore for the followir^night^ so much did the 
sloop drive to leewaj^d. On the asnd jjiK^^the gale was more 
moderate, the wind at W. by S,, and the w^thieir j^rnlitted an obser- 
vation to be taken for the latitude; it Was 40® and we had, land 
beariri^ E. N. E. about three leagues ^stant. So soon as I had satis- 
fied myself that this could be no other than the hilly land lying five, 
leagues to the northward of the Chappell Isles, we bore’.away before 
the sea ; and by carrying all sail, secured an anchorage in Hamilten's 
Road before dark. 

It jfWas not safe to move on the a3rd, and there being a lunar 
eclipse announced in the ephemeris fo take place in the following 
night, I landed to observe it with the telescope of the sextant.,* XHh 
times at which the beginning and end happened by the watch, being' 
corrected from altitudes of the stars Rigel and Sirius observed iri ah 
artificial horizon, gave 148“ 37^' for the uncorrected longitude of 
Breservation Island ; which is 37' more than was deduced from 
the lunar distances in the Erancis. The penumbra attending the 
cartel’s shadow is usually supposed to render this observation uncer- 
tain to two or three minutes of time, or more than half a .degree of 
longitude. 

Nov. 34. The gale had subsided to a moderate breeze, and we 
tried to beat back to the westward ; but finding too much sea, bore 
away into Armstrong’s Channel to speak the commander of the 
Nautilus ; that, through him, governor Hunter might be informed 
of our discoveries thus far, and of the delays experienced from the 
western winds. I was happy to find captain Bishop proceeding suc- 
cessfully in his sealing business, though slower than he might have 
done, had the anchorage been nearer to the eastern points.* 

* Nine thousand skins of the first quality, with several tons of oil, were procured by^he 
Nautilus, and FurneaiA’s Islands have since been frequented by small vessels from Port 
• Jacksgn upon the smt enand. Unfortunately, this species of fishery is sopn exhausted in 



clxi 


n<ut Coa»t, 4 - V. D:$ Land.-l INTRODUCTION. 


40 34.i S. 
N. E. 

N. 78 E. 

S. 7E. 


In the evening it fell calm, and the tide being favourable, we 
rowed bac^^or Hamilton’s Road ; but a fair breeze springing i/p 
when abreaS^of it, iastdad of anchoring we made all sail to the west- 
south-west for Van Diemen's Land. 

On the 25th* at 3 ay-light, the Ninth Island bore south, five miles ; 
the wind had then shifted to N. by W., and blew strong, with rainy 
wegther ; and at* eight o’clock, it was at N. W. by W., an^ obliged 
.us td tack off shore. This gale cleared away on the 26th, and at 
nbqn our situation was in 

■ Latitude _ _ « 

Mount Chappell bore 
Peak of Cape Barren, 

Land taken for Isle 'Waterhouse, 

♦ 

We were then steering south-westward again with a fair breeze ; but 
liad scarcely passed Stony Head, next morning, when another gale 
sprung up from the north-west. It was a happy circumstance that 
we were able to reach our new discovered port, and take refuge at 
the former secure anchorage nearthe Shag Rocks ; for this gale w^ 
more* violent and of longer continuance than any of the preceding. 
This longjsuccession of adverse winds caused us almost to despair of 
accomplishing the principal object of the voyage ; for of the twelve 
weeks, to which absence from Port Packson was limited, nearly 
eight were already expired. * 

Dec. 2. The gale moderated, and we made an attempt to continue 
the voyage, but were driven back. On the 3rd, the attempt was 
repeated; and the wind being light, we anchored at the entrance of 
the port, 1» prevent losing by the flood what had been gained by the 
ebb tide. In the evening a fair wind sprung up ; and at length, to 
our great satisfaction, we were enabled to proceed in the discovery 
of the strait. 

The harbour, which we entered with so much pleasure on Nov. 3, 

any one place ; or it would have been the means of raising up an Iheful body of sealben, 
and thus proved of advantage, both to the colony and to the mother eountiy. 

VOL. I. Y 


Flinders 
and Bass. 
1798. 



elxii 


INTRODUCTION. 


[Prior Di$cweriet. 


Flikdsrs 
and Bas3. 
1798. 


and finally quitted with still more on Dec. 3, was named Port Dal- 
ftYMPLE, by His Excellency governor Hunter, as a made of respect 
to Alexander Dalrymple, Esq., the late hydrographeP*) the Admi- 
ralty. The following is a summary of the observations taken there, 
for fixing the position of*Low Head, on the east side of the en- 
trance : 

l^atit^de from six meridian altitudes, of which three 
were taken in port, and three at sea within sight 
of Low Head - - - - 41 3 30 S. 

Longitude from two sets of distances of the sun east, 
and two west of the moon, with Troughton’s nine 
inch sextant No. 251, corrected for the errors of 
the lunar and solar tables - - 14,6 43 45 E. 

From two d*. d®. with a five-inch sextant of Adams 146 ^52 46 

Mean from sun and moon 146 48 15 E. 

From one set of a star east, and one west of the moon, 

with No. 251 - - - _ 146 52 34 

From two ditto, ditto, with the five-inch - 146 56 50 

Mean from stars and moon 146 -54 42 

Mean of all i|,6 51 28 E.* 

Variation of the theodolite, observed *on the shore 
of Outer Cove - - - - 7 28 east 

D®. of the azimuth compass, observed in the same 

place, - - - - .8 30 

D®. of the same, taken at anchor off the port, tlyi 

sloop's head being N. by E. ( magnetic ) , - 7 44 

The time of high water in Port Dalrymple, is one quarter of an 


• The longitude of Low- Head, deduced from the Investigator’s time keepers, combined 
with my surveys incite Francis and Norfolk, is 146® 47|' ea^t; as the observations with 
the large se&tant. No. 251, taken alone, would give it very nearly. 



cixiii 


East Coast, 8f V. D 's Land.] INTRODUCTION. 

hour before the moon passes over the meridiaij; and the rise of tide is Flindehs 
from six to jjght, or it is said to ten, feet. The ebb sets out seven 
hours; andlBth ebb* and flood run with much rapidity in the narrow 
parts, but the* particular rate was not ascertained. 

Port Dalrymple and the River Tamar* occupy the bottom of a 
valley betwixt two irregular chains of hills, which shoot off' north- 
westward, from the great body of inland mountains. In some places, 
these hills stand wide apart, and the river then opens its banks to a 
considerable extent; in others, they nearly meet, and contract its 
bed to narrow limits. The Tamar has, indeed, more the appearance 
of a chain of lakes, than of a regularly-formed river; and such it 
probably was, until, by long undermining, assisted perhaps by some 
unusual weight of water, a communicating channel was formed, and 
a passage forced out to sea. From the shoals in Sea Reach, and 
more particularly from those at Green Island which turn the whole 
force of the tides, one is led to suppose, that the period when the 
passage to sea was forced has not been very remote. 

Of the two chains of hills which bound the valley, the eastern one 

• % 

terminates at Low. Head ; the other comes down to the sea, five or 
six miles from it, on the west side of the port. The ends of these 
chains, when seen from directly off the entrance, appear as tw^o 
clusters of hills having some resemblance to each other ; and in fine 
weather, the distant blue heads of the hack mountains will be seen 
oyer the tops of both clusters. These appearances, joined to the 

• So named^by the late lieut. colonel Paterson, who was sent from Port Jackson to 
settle a new colony there, in 1804. The sources of the river were then explored, and the 
new names applied wbich are given in the chart. The first town established was York-^ 
toum at the head of the Western Arm, but this proving inconvenient as a sea port, it was 
proposed to be reuu^ed lower down, near Green Island. Launceston^ which is intended 
to be the capital of the new colony, is fixed at the junction of the North and South Esksy 
up to which the Tamar is navigable for vessels of 150 tons. The tide reaches nine or ten 
ndfcs up the North Esk, and the produce of the farms within that distance may be sent 
down the river by boats ; but tl^p South Esk descends from the idcmntams by a cataract, 
directly into the Tamar, and, consequently, is not accessible to navigation of any kind. 



clxiv 


INTRODUCTION. 


[Prior IHscoveriis. 


Flinders latitude and longitude, ^re the best distant marks for finding Port 
Dalrymple. If a ship come along shore from the eastw^d, the Ninth 
Island, and afterward Stony Head with the Tenth Islet ^ng three or 
four miles to the north-west, will announce the vicinity of the port ; 
and Low Head will be perceived in the bight to the S. S. W., but it 
is not a conspicuous object. ^ 

Three or four leagues to the westward of the port, the back land 
is uncommonly high, and the top of the ridge is intersected into 
uncouth shapes. From the brilliancy of some of these mountains, 
on the appearance of the sun after rain, I judged them to be of 
granite, like those of Fumeaux’s Islands. These mountains, with 
the direction of the coast and what has been said of the clusters of 
hills, may serve as marks for Port Dalrymple to ships coming along 
shore from the westward. 

Reefs and banks extend out to a considerable distance on the west 
side of the entrance ; so that strangers should avoid that side, and 
endeavour to come in with Low Head. The greater part of these 
shoals, as also of those in Sea Reach, are covered at half tide; 
therefore the first of the flood, or even a little before, is the best 
time to enter Port Dalrymple, as almost the whole of the dangers 
are then visible. A signal post, with pilots, was fixed at Low Head 
on the settlement of the new colony in 1804, and beacons have since 
been placed on the most dangerous rocks and shoals ; it has there- 
fore become unnecessary to give particular instructions for sailing 
up the port, especially as they may be found in my Observations on 
the coasts of Van Diemen’s Land, a little memoir published by 
Mr. Arrowsmith, in 1801.* ’1/ 

We found Port Dalrymple to be an excellefit;pi|fee for refresh- 

* In Mr. Horsburgh’s Sailing Directims^ Part II., are gIyeD,^4Apon my friend 
captain Kent’s authority, notices of the beacons laid down, and directions respecting them ; 
to which I add, from tlie information of lieut. Oxley, that a rock, on which H. M. '^bip 
Porpoise struck, lies W. \ N. by compass, one cable’s lengtji from Point Roundabout. There 
is no more than fopr feet upon it at low water, but it may be safely passed on cither side. 



clxv 


East Coast, 8f V. D.'s Land.-] INTRODUCTION. 


ment. Out of the jflocks of black swans, from one-fifth to one- 
tenth of thgpi were unable to fly; and since the same thing has 
been found^ obtai^i in the months of January and May, as well as 
in October, it is probably so at all times of the year. These birds arc 
endowed with a considerable portion of 'sagacity : they cannot dive, 
but have a method of immersing themselves so deep in the water, 
as to render their bodies nearly invisibi^ and thus frequently to avoid 
detection. In chase, their plan was to gain the wind upon our little 
boat ; and they usually succeeded when the breeze was strong, and 
sometimes escaped from our shot also. 

Kanguroos appeared to be rather numerous in this part of Van 
Diemen’s Land ; but as they were shy, and we had little time or 
necessity to go after them, one only was procured ; it was of the 
large, forest kind, and the flesh was thought superior to that of 
the same animal at Poi t Jackson. 

Ducks and teal went by flocks in Port Dalrymple; but they were 
shy, and we took no trouble after them. The white-bellied shag, 
and the black and pied red bills were common in the lower parts of 
the ix>rt, and some pelichns were seen upon the shoals. The large 
black shag, usually found in rivers, was seen in different parts of 
the Tamar ; and upon another occasion, we found these birds to be 
tolerable food. 

Neither our wants nor leisure were sufficient to induce any 
attempt to catch fish. Muscles were abundant upon those rocks 
which are overflowed by the tide ; and the natives appeared to get 
oysters by*diving, the shells having been found near their fire places. 

The country round Port Dalrymple has, in general, a jfieasing 
and fertile ajfpearance; nor did examination prove it to be deceitful. 
But this subject, and what concerns the natives, came more particu- 
larly within the department of Mr. Bass; and his observations upon 
them having been published, I proceed to the continuation of the 
iToyage. 

Dec. 3 , in the evening, the Norfolk was lying at anchor off the 


Flinders 
and Bass. 
1798. 



ckvi INTRODUCTION. {Prior Discoveries. 

I'l-jNDERs entrance of the port, when a breeze sprung up from the north-east- 
ward, and enabled us to proceed along the coast. At dusk. Low 
Head bore S. 77° E. six miles, and we then hauled off for the night. 
The shore oh the wpst side of Port Dalrymple falls back to the 

c 

southward and forms a bight under the high land, where it is pos- 
sible there may be some small opening ; for the haziness of the 
weather did not allow the coast line to be distinctly traced. Upon the 
back mountains are many variously-shaped tops, of which the east- 
ternmost bore S. and a flat one towards the other end of the 

ridge, S. 38° W. The furthest land which could be seen was a 
round hill, making like an island, and bore very nearly west from 
the mast head. 

Dec. 4. We resumed our course westward, but the wind being at 
N. N.E.,did not dare to approach very near the shore. At noon, 
the observed latitude was 40® 58', and the hills on the west side of 
Port Dalrymple bore S. 65* E. five or six leagues. From thence to 
S. 38* W., where another chain of hills came down to the sea, the 
country is well wooded, and lies in hills and vallies. The Round Hill 
bore S. 65° W. five or six leagues, and in the evening, when three 
leagues distant, the low land connecting it with the main was visible. 

During the night, and next day, Dec. 5, the winds were light and 
variable, so that we made little progress. At noon, the furthest 
land seen to the westward appeared like a small flat-topped island, 
but being found to be connected with the main land, received the 
descriptive name of Circular Head; a nearer projection, of a jagged 
appearance, was called Rocky Cape, and a steep cliffy head still nearer, 
Table Cape, from its flat top. Our situation wasithen as under ; 

Latitude observed, - - - ^40® 56' S. 

Round Hill, distant three leagues, - S.*^ ss E. 

Table Cape, northt€Xtreme, - - N. 88 W. 

Rocky Cape, highest knob, - - N. 77 W. 

Circular Head - - - N. 71 W. 

A flat-topped peak, inland, - - S. 14 W, 



clxvii 


Ecut Coast, 4 - r. D:s Land.-] INTRODUCTION. 

The sandy shore abreast was seven or eight miles distant, and be- 
hind it the land was low, but tolerably well covered with wood. 
The sole remarkabhj object inland, was the flat-topped peak, which 
had very much the appearance of an extinguished volcano. From 
after bearings, it was found to lie S. i° E. eleven leagues from 
Table Cape ; and in that direction its top assumes the form of a 
pointed cone. 

In the morning of Dec. 6 , our situation was N. 8° E. four miles 
from the cliffy, north-east end of Table Cape, and the Round Hill 
bore S. 41° E. Having a favourable breeze, we passed, at eight o’clock, 
within half a mile of the reef which surrounds Rocky Cape, and 
steered onward for Circular Head, which as yet was the furthest 
visible land. 

Table Cape, Rocky Cape, and Circular Head lie nearly in a line 
of N. 62° W., and are about ten miles apart from each other. Be- 
tween these, che coast forms two shallow bights ; the shore of the 
first is mostly rocky, and an islet lies in the middle ; the western 
bight is sandy, and promises better anchorage, particularly near 
Circular Head, where a vessel may be sheltered against all winds 
from the western half of the compass. The land at the back of the 
shore, from Table Cape westward, is of a different description to 
that before passed : instead of having an extensive view over a 
variegated, and well wooded country, Jie .sight was there confined 
by a ritlge of stony hills, of which Rocky Cape is no more than a 
projecting part. 

Circular Head is a cliffy, round lump, in form much resembling a 
Christmas cake ; and, is joined to the main by a low, sandy isthmus. 
The land at the back is somewhat lower than the head, and is formed 
into very gentle slopes. A slight covering of withered grass gave it 
a smooth appearance ; and some green bushes scattered over it much 
resembled, at a distance, a herd of seals basking upon a rock. 

^We passed Circular Head at ten, and three hummocks of land then 
came in sight to the north-westward, the southernmost and highest 


Flinders 
and Bass. 
1798. 



clxviii INTRODUCTION. [Prior Diseoverie$. 

and^BAsT Something of a sjigar-loaf form. Between these hills and the 

1798 - smooth land to the west of Circular Head, there was a large bight, 
in which some patches of land were indistinctly visible through the 
haze ; but as the wind was then blowing directly into the bight, the 
fear of getting embayed prevented its examination. Our position at 
noon was as follows : 

o I 

Latitude observed, - - - 40 39!^ S. 

Circular Head, distant seven miles, - S. 17 E. 

West extreme of the smooth land behind it, S. 6 W. 
Sugar-loaf hummock, - - - N. 55 W, 

Northernmost hummock, - - N, 4a W. 

From the time of leaving Port Dalrymple no tide had been 
observed, until this morning. It ran with us, and continued until 
three o’clock; at which time low land was seen beyond the 
three hummocks. This trending of the coast so far to the north 
made me apprehend, that it might be found to join the land 
near Western Port, and thus disappoint our hopes of discovering 
an open passage to the westward ; the water was also discoloured, 
as if we were approaching the head of a bay, rather than the issue of 
a strait; and on sounding, we had 17, and afterwards 15 fathoms on 
a sandy bottom. 

The wind having become light and the tide turned to the east- 
ward, our situation at dusk was little altered from what it had been 
at three o’clock ; but from the clearing away of the haze, tlie lands 
in the great bight had become more distinguishable, and the follow- 
ing bearings were taken : 

Table Cape, distant 11 oria leagues, - - S. 43^ E. 

Circular Head, - - - S. 26 E. 

Sugar-loaf hummock, - - *N. 75 W. 

Extreme of the threej-h^mmock land, - N. 48 W. 

Low point in the great bight, with a cliffy 

head at a further distance behind it, - S. 70 W. 

The cliffs visible behind the low point had every appearance of being 



clxix 


East Coast, 4 * V. D. s Land.} INTRODUCTION. 

the north head of an opening, but of wliat Icjnd, our distance was too 
great to determine.* 

During the nighband next day, Dec. 7, the wind was variable, witli 
alternate calms. The latitude at noon was 401" 28', and the sugar- 
loaf hill bore W. by S. ten miles. On the 8th a breeze sprung up 
from the south-westward, and threatened a gale from that boisterous 
quarter. We were in 40* 23' at noon, and trying to work up to the 
land of the three hummocks, to prevent losing ground ; and at six 
in the evening, got to an anchor in a quarter less 4 fathoms, in a 
small sandy bight under the northern hummock, being sheltered 
from N. 2° E., round by the west to S. 30° E. Circular Head was 
still visible, bearing S. 35® E. ; and the difference of longitude 
made from Port Dairy mple was calculated at subject to future 
revision. 

Mr. Bass and myself landed immediately to examine the country 
and the coast, and to see what food could be procured ; for the long 
detention by foul winds had obliged me to make a reduction in 
the provisions, lest the object o*f our voyage and return to Port 
Jackson should not be accomplfthed in the twelve weeks for which we 
were victualled. At dusk, we returned on board, having had little 
success as to any of the objects proposed ; but with the knowledge 
of a fact, from which an interesting deduction was drawn : the tide 
had been running from the eastward nil the afternoon, and contrary 
to expectation, we found it to be near low water by the shore ; the 
flood, therefore, came from the west, and not from the eastward, as 
at Furneaux’s Isles. This we considered to be a strong proof, not 
only of the real existence of a passage betwixt this land and New 
South Wales, but also that the entrance into the Southern Indian 
Ocean could noti)e far distant. 

• In 1804, Mr. Charles Bobbins, acting lieutenant of His Majesty’s ship Buffalo, 
sent from Port Jackson to examine this great bight ; and from his sketch it is, 
that the unshaded coast and soundings written at right angles are laid down in the 
chart. 


Flinders 
and Ba5s, 
1798. 


VOL. I. 


z 



INTRODUCTION. 


{Prior Discoveries. 


clxx 

Fmn'dbbs The little time there w^s for examining the coast, confined my ob- 
1798. servations to what were necessary for giving it the formation it has in 
the chart. The country is hilly, and Mr. Bass found it impenetrable 
from the closeness of, the tall brush wood, although it had been par- 
tially burnt not long before. There was very little soil spread over 
the rock and sand, and the general aspect was that of sterility. 
Several deserted fire places, strewed round with the shells of the sea 
ear, were found upon the 'shore. 

The south-west wind died away in the night ; and at six next 
morning, Dec. 9, we got under way with a light air at south-east. 
After rounding the north-east point of the three-hummock land, our 
course westward was pursued along its north side. 

A large flock of gannets was observed at daylight, to issue out of 
the great bight to the southward ; and they were followed by such a 
number of the sooty petrels as we had never seen equalled. There 
was a stream of from fifty to eighty yards in depth, and of three hun- 
dred yards, or more, in breadth ; the birds were not scattered, but 
flying as compactly as a free movement of their wings seemed to 
allow ; and during a full hour and a half, this stream of petrels con- 
tinued to pass without interruption, at a rate little inferior to the 
swiftness of the pigeon. On the lowest computation, I think the 
number could not have been less than a hundred millions ; and we 
were thence led to believe, that there must be, in the large bight, 
one or more uninhabited islands of considerable size.* 

From the north-east point of the three-hummock land, the shore 
trended W. i* N. three miles ; then S. 39® W. four miles, to aTOcky 
point, forming the south-west extremity of what was then ascer- 
tained to be Three-hummock Island. The channel which separates 

♦ Taking the stream to have been fifty yards deep by three hundred in width, and that 
it moved at the rate of thirty miles an hour, and allowing nine cubic yards of space to 
each bird, the number would amount to 151,500,000. The burrows required to lodo’e 
this quantity of birds would be 75,750,000 ; and allowing a square yard to each burrow, 
they would cover something more than 18{ geographic square miles of ground. 



clxxi 


Edit CoMt, 8 f V. D. s Land.] INTRODUCTION. 

it from the land to the west, is, at least, two miles in width, and is 
deep ; so that it was difficult to conjecture how the Indians were able 
to get over to the island. It was almost certain that they had no 
canoes at Port Dalrymple, nor any means of reaching, islands lying 
not more than two cables length from the shore ; and it therefore 
seemed improbable that they should possess canoes here. The small 
size of Three-hummock Island rendered the idea of fixed inhabitants 
inadmissible ; and whichever way it was considered, the presence of 
men there was a problem difficult to be resolved.* 

The coast on the west side of the channel lies nearly south, and rises 
in height as it advances towards the cliffy head, set on the 6th p. m. 
The north end of this land is a sloping, rocky point ; and the first pro- 
jection which opened round it, was at S. 32* W., five or six miles. Be- 
yond this there was nothing like main land to be seen ; indeed, this 
western land itself had very little the appearance of being such, either 
in its form, or in its poor, starved vegetation. So soon as we had 
passed the north sloping point, a long swell was perceived to come 
from the south-west, such as we had not been accustomed to for some 
time. It broke heavily u’pon a small reef, lying a mile and a half from 
the point, and upon all the western shores ; but, although it was likely 
to prove troublesome, and perhaps dangerous, Mr. Bass and myself 
hailed it with joy and mutual congratulation, as announcing the com- 
pletion of our long-wished-for discovery of a passage into the South- 
ern Indian Ocean. 

We had a fine breeze at east ; and our course was directed for a 
smallj’Tocky island which lies W. ^ N. 6 miles from the north point 
of the barren land. This island appeared-to be almost white with 
birds ; and so much excited our curiosity and hope of procuring a 

♦ Future Visitants to these islands have sen'll the Indian - passing over in bodies, by 
swimming, similar to those whom Dauipier saw' on the nortli-west coast of New Hol- 
Whd. Why the natives of Port Dalrymple should not have had recourse to the same 
expedient, where the distance to be traversed is so much less, seems incomprehensible. 


Flinders 
and Bass. 
1798. 



clxxii 


INTRODUCTION. 


[Prior Discoveries. 


Flinders supplv of food, that Mr. Bass Went on shore in the boat whilst 

and Hass. . . , . , , i . i .. ..1 

1798. I stood ofF and on, waiting his return. No land could be seen to tne 
northward, and the furthest clearly distinguishable in the opposite 
direction was a steep island at the distance of four leagues. The 
observations taken at noon were, 

o / 

Latitude, - - 40 23^ S. 

The bird island, distant two miles, - S. 16 to 64 E. 

Three-hummock Island, the sugar loaf, S. 64 E. 

Steep-head Island - - - S. 9 E. 

Mr. Bass returned at half past two, with a boat load of seals and 
albatrosses. He had been obliged to fight his way up the cliffs of 
the island with the seals, and when arrived at the top, to make a 
road with Jiis clubs amongst the albatrosses. These birds were sit- 
ting upon their nests, and almost covered the surface of the ground, 
nor did they ariy otherwise derange themselves for the new visitors, 
than to peck at their legs as they passed by. This species of albatross 
is white on the neck and breast, partly brown on the back and wings, 
and its size is less than many others met with at sea, particularly in 
the high southern latitudes. The seals were of the usual size, and 
bore a reddish fur, much inferior in quality to that of the seals at 
Furneaux’s Islands. 

Albatross Island, for so it was named, is near two miles in length, 
and sufficiently high to be seen five or six leagues from a ship’s 
deck : its shores are mostly steep cliffs. The latitude is 40° 95', and 
longitude made by the running survey, 2° 7' west of Port Dalrymple ; 
but it afterwards appeared from the Investigator’s time keepers, to 
lie in 144° 41' east of Greenwich. 

The tide (apparently the ebb) had set so strong to the south- 
westward, that notwithstanding our efforts to keep up with the 
island, it was distant five miles when Mr. Bass returned and the boat 
was hoisted in. A black lump of rock was then seen three or four 
leagues to the south-westward, and the following bearings were 
taken just before making sail. 



clzxiii 


East Coast, Sf V. D. 's Land.^ INTRODUCTIOT^. 

Albatross Island, - - • N, 75 to 86 E. 

Steep-head Island, - - S. 31 E. 

Black, pyramidal rock. - - S. 59 W. 

We kept close to the wind at north-east, in order to fetch Steep- 
head Island ; but were carried so far to leeward by the tide, tliat 
soon after four o’clock our situation was as follows : 


Albatross Island, - - - N. 18 E. 

Sugar-loaf hummock, - - N. 71 E. 

Western part of the barren land, - N. 61 E. 

Steep-head Island, centre, - S. 71 E. 

Black, pyramidal rock, - - N. 77 W. 

High black rock, dist. s miles, having breakers 

to the south-westward, - - S. 18 E. 


Besides these islands a id rocks, we passed another cliffy island four 
or five miles to the south of Steep-head, and to which I gave the 
name of. Trefoil Island, its form appearing to be nearly that of a 
clover leaf ; there were, also, several others of less importance, 
mostly lying near the Jjarren land. The steep south end of this 
land was set over the north end of Trefoil at N. 65° E. ; and being 
almost assured of its separation from Van Diemen’s Land, I added 
it, under the jiame of Barren Island, to the rest of this cluster ; and 
in honour of His Excellency, the governor of New South Wales, I 
gave to ’the whole the title of Hun i ku’s Isi,es. 

The north-west cape of Van Diemen’s Land, or island, as it might 
now be termed, is a steep, black head, which, from its appearance, 
I call Cape Grim. It lies nearly due 'south, four miles, from the 
centre of Trefoil, in latitude 40® 44,'; the ‘longitude will be 144® 43' 
east, according to the position of Albatross Island made in the Inves- 
tigator. There are two rocks close to Cap>e Grim, of the same 
description with itself. On the north side of the cape, the shore, is a 
low, sandy beach, and trends north-eastward, three or four miles ; 
but whether there be a sufficient depth for ships to pass between it 
and Barren Island, has not, I believe, been yet ascertained. To the 




Flinders 
and Bass. 
179ft. 



clxxiv 


INTRODUCTION. 


[/V»or Discoveries. 

FtiKDBHs south of the cape, the bJack cliffs extend seven or eight miles, when 
**1798.” the shore falls back, eastward, to a sandy bay, of which little could 
be perceived. ' 

Our situation at dusk, was three miles from the cliffs, with Cape 
Grim bearing N. i8* E. The furthest land, beyond the sandy bay, 
bore S. 4* E. four or five leagues, and proved to be near the western- 
most point of Van Diemen’s Land. The wind being strong at 
E. N. E. and the night dark and tempestuous, we kept as much under 
the land as possible; but found ourselves iir^e morning, Dec. 10, to 
be driven far to the south-westward. At eight o'clock, the wind 
having moderated, we made sail, S. E. ^ E. ; and at noon, were in 
the following situation. ^ , 

Latitude observed, - - - 41 i.Si S. 

Sandy west Pt. of V. D. Land, dist. 10 m. N. 10 W. 
Furthest extreme, a low point, - S. 2a E. 

An inland mount, - - S. 53 f. 

The nearest part of the coast was between two and three miles dis- 
tant, and consisted of sandy beaches, separated by points which had 
many straggling rocks lying off them. At the back of the shore, 
the land was low for two. or three miles, and then rose gently to a 
ridge of barren, low hills. The inland mount, set at S. 53° E., 
appeared to be the north end of a second chain, much higher, and 
better wooded, than the front ridge : it lies eight miles back from 
the shore, and is named Mount Norfolk, after my little vessel. 

After obtaining the noon's observation and bearings, we steered 
southward along the shore; and at six o'clock, had passed five 
leagues of the same kind of coast as before described ; but the wind 
then flew round to W. N. W., and made it necessary to haul further 
off At6‘>..3o', ^ 

Mount Norfolk bore - - - N. 36 E. 

Low, rocky projection, distant four miles, - N. 35 E, 
Distant mount, at the southern end of the back ridge, 

and the furthest land in sight, - - S.' 42 E. 



East Coast, Sf V. D.’s Zanrf.] INTRODUCTION. 


clxxv 


Dec. 11. Before five o’clock, we came in with the land a few Flindehs 
miles from where it had been quitted in the evening. , 

Mount Norfolk then bore - - N. 27 E. 

Low, rocky projection, di.st. three leagues, N. 12 W. 

Two conic rocks, at the southern ’extreme, S. 42 E. 

The wind was moderate at north-west, and we bore away along the 
shore, which was distant four miles, and much similar to that of the 
preceding day; but it had no scattered rocks lying in front. Behind 
some low cliffs, passe^ at seven o’clock, was perceived a small 
opening like a river, whose course seemed to run northward, be- 
tween the front and back ridges of hills : a smoke, which arose from 
the inner side of the opening, was the first seen upon this west 
coast. I steered a short time for the entrance ; but seeing rocks in 
it, and the wind coming more on shore, hauled off south, to increase 
our distance. 

Two miles from the opening are the conic, and several low rocks, 
which weTe passed at the distance of one mile and a half. At ten, 
we kept two points more away, 'having gained an offing of seven 


miles ; and at noon had*,* , , 

Latitude observed, - - - 42 2^ S. 

Furthest extreme of the coast, - - S. S. E. 

Mount at the southern end of the back ridge, N. 42 E. 

A peaked hill, four miles E. S. E. from it, - N. 60 E. 


The two last appear to have been the smaller mountains seen by Tas- 
man to the north-east, on his discovering this land Nov. 24, 1642 ; and 
I have therefore named the first Mount Heemskerk, and the latter 
Mount Zeehaan, after his two ships. The back ridge of woody hills 
does not terminate here; but it retreats further inland, and as far as 
could be perceived through the haze, rises in height to the south- 
ward. The extreme of the coast, which bore S. S. E., forms the 
southern point of a sandy, and rather deep bight, where I thought it 
jfrobable there might be some small opening ; but as the wind blew 



clxxvi INTRODUCTION. iPrior Discoveries. 

Flinders strong directly into it, t^ere was too much danger in bearing away 

and Bass, r - * 

for Its examination. 

At three o'clock, we passed the southern point of the bight, 
at the distance of four miles ; and the coast then again trended 
S. S. E., waving in rocky bights and projections. The land here 
rises by a gentle ascent for two or three miles from the shore ; its 
appearance was smooth and uniform ; but it was destitute of wood, 
and almost of other vegetation : the back mountains were obscured 
by the haze. .|||||| 

The heavy south-west swell, which had met us at the entrance of 
the Indian Ocean, still continued to roll in, and set dead upon this 
coast ; and the wind blew fresh at W. N. W. Under these circum- 
stances, we looked out for some little beach, where, in case of 
necessity, the sloop might be run on shore with a prospect of safety 
to our lives ; for should the wind come three or four points further 
forward, there was no probability of clearing the land on either tack. 
No such beach could, however, be discovered; and we therefore 
carried all possible sail to get past this dreary coast. A remarkable 

I 

pyramid came in sight in the evening ; it eight o’clock it was 
distant five miles to the east, and seen to be a rock on the north side 
of a point, which projects two or three miles from the coast line. 
This point, named Point Hibbs after the colonial master of the Nor- 
folk, is higher than the neck by which it is joined to the back land; 
and from thence, it appears to have been taken for an island by 
Tasman ; for I consider Point Hibbs and the pyramid to be the two 
islands laid down by him, in 42" 35': their latitude, by our run from 
noon, is 42® 39'. 

We hauled off, upon a v/ind, at eight o’clock ; and at four next 
morning, Dec. 1 2, came in again with the same land. At five, when 
our. course was resumed along shore. Point Hibbs was distant two 
or three miles, and the pyramid, which bore N. 31* E. over its extre- 
mity, then appeared like the crown of a hat. The coast to tfife 



East Coast, Sf V. D.'s Land.-] INTRODUCTION. 


clxxvii 


southward is more irregular in its trending(»is of somewhat greater Pi-iNriER? 
elevation, and not so destitute of wood as on the north side of the *"'1798?' 
point. At the distance of three leagues we passed a cliffy head, 
with high rocks lying a mile from it ; and two leagues further, there 
were some patches of breakers two miles off the shore ; the general 
trending was between S. by E. and S. S. E. 

At ten o’clock, a projection which merited the name of Rocky Point 
bore S. 74,” E., five miles ; and here the direction of the coast was 
changed to east, for W seven miles, when it formed a bight by 
again trending south-eastward. The shore round the bight is high, 
and at the back were several bare peaks which, from their whiteness, 
might have been thought to be covered with snow ; but their greatest 
elevation of perhaps 1200 feet, combined with the height of the 
thermometer at 62*, did not admit the supposition. These peaks 
arc probably what Tasman named De Witt’s Isles, from his distance 
having been too far off to distinguish the connecting land , and I 
therefore called the highest of them, lying in 43° 9^' south. Mount 
Be mtt. 

This morning, two s'ets of distances of the sun west of the moon 
were observed, and our situation at noon was as follows : 

o / 

Latitude, - - - - 43 7 S. 

I.ongitude from the lunar observations, - 145 16 E, 

Rocky. Point, distant six or seven n-ies, - N. 3 W. 

Mount De Witt, - - - - S. 77 E. 

Highest of two smaller hills, at the S. extreme, S. 59 E. 

It afterwards appeared, that these smaller hills stood upon the ex- 
tremity of a point ; and in honour of the noble admiral with whose 
victory we had become acquainted, it was named Point St. Vincent. 

The western breeze died away in the evening, and the sloop was 
drifted in by the swell, and perhaps by a tide, towards an open- 
ing round Point St. Vincent. This opening is indicated in the small 
Chart which accompanies the voyage of M. Marion, but does not 
appear to have been seen by any other navigator. Our bearings of the 

voL I. A a 



clxxriii introduction. [Prior Dtscoveries. 


Flinders 
A nd Bass. 
1798 


land, at sunset, deduced from the sun^s amplitude and sextant angles. 


were as follow : 

Mount De Witt, - - - N. i 8 E. 

Point St. Vincent, distant five miles, - N. 57 

Steep head on the east side of the opening, dist. 8 m. N. 86 E. 
Pyramidal rock, lying off a cliffy head, - S. 46 E. 


At a further distance, and in the same bearing with the pyramidal 
rock, was a steep, jagged point, which proved to be the south-west 
cape of Van Diemen’s Land. Our latitude at this time was 43° 18^', 
the passage of the moon having allowed me to get an observation at 
four o’clock ; from whence to eight, our position had changed only 


onc-and-half mile to the east. 


It remained nearly calm all night; and on the isth, at daybreak, 
I was much surprised to find our situation near ten miles to the 
southward, instead of being in the same place. This circumstance, 
and a breeze which arose at north, precluded me from examining 
the opening as I had' intended; for a width of three or four miles 
at the entrance, and the form of the mountains behind, made it 
probable that a considerable river discharged itself there; and 
the offset during tlic night strengthened the supposition. At six 
o’clock. 


Mount Dc Witt bore - - North. 


Point St. Vincent, - - - N. 7° E. 

Steep head on the east side of the opening, N. 27 E. 

Pyramidal rock, off the cliffy head, - N. 33 E. 

South-west Cape, the extreme, - S. 82 E. 

We were then steering for the South-west Cape, and at nine I set 
Mount De Witt over it at N. 22° W., our distance from the cape being 
then about three miles. 

l^even islands and rocks were counted to the eastward, lying at 
different distances from the coast; and the wind having veered 
to west, permitted us to pass within them. At noon, the shore tb 
the north bein^ too near for the sun’s altitude to be observed, its 



clxxix 


East Coast, S( V. D 's Land.-] INTRODUCTION. 

supplement was taken to the south, and g»ve the latitude 43° 27^'. 
A steep head which lies N. 79“ E. four or five miles from the South- 
west Cape, then bJre S. 74* W., three miles;* whence the latitude 
of the Cape should be 43° 29', which is 10 less than given by captain 
Furneaux, and 8' by captain Cook. This difference naturally excited 
some suspicion of an error in the observation, and I measured the 
supplement in the same manner on the following noon, when it gave 
2' 40" less than the latitude determined by D’Entrecasteaux in Storm 
Bay. The South-westX'^pe is therefore placed 2' 40" further south 
than my observation gave it; that is, in latitude 43“ 32'.-f The 
longitude of the Cape, from the observations taken off Rocky Point 
and brought forward by the survey, would be 145*’ 47'; but its 
situation in 146® 7', by captain Cook, appears to be preferable: 
D’Entrecasteaux places it in 146° o'. 

The nearest land, at noon, was a steep head bearing N. 66° E,, 
one mile and a half; and between this, and the head which bore 
S. 74° W., the shore forms a sandy bay four miles deep, where it is 
probable there may be good aYichorage, if two clumps of rock, 
W'hich lie in the entran’ce, will admit of a passage in. After taking 


* Th’s head opened round the Cape at E. 14° N., ni«ignetic, the sloop’s head being 
E. by N.; and shut at W. S.^ when the head was north. In tlie fiist case I allow 
east variation, and in the last, S'"; which makes th in agree as nearly as can be expected 
from bearings taken under sail. 

f Captain Furneau.x says (in Coo^s second Voyage^ Vol. T, page 109), that on March 
9, 1773, at noon, the South-west Cape bore norths four leagues; and by referring to 
the Astrmiormcal Ohservations, p. 193, I find that his latitude was 43® 45 t, which 
would place the Cape in 43** 337 ; nevertheless the captain says it is in 43° 39', and it is 
so laid down in his chart. The observation by which captain Cook appears to have fixed 
the South-west Cape, is that of Jan. 24, 1777 , at »oon ; when he says, our latitude was 
« 430 4y/ south” {Third Foi/age, Vol. I. p. 93). But the Astronomical Ohservatious 
of that voyage shew (p. 101), that the observed latitude cn board the Resolution was 
43° 42-}'; which would make the Cape in 43® 32}' south. I consulted captain Kings 
journal at the Admiralty, but found no observed latitude marked by him on that day. 


Flinders 
and Bass, 
1793 . 



clxxx 


INTRODUCTION. 


[Prior Discoverm. 


Flindbbs bearings of Maatsuyker’s Isles and the different headlands, we bore 

and Bass. ® # i • v u i.i u 

J798. away eastward, and passed another deep, sandy bight, probably the 
same in which Mr. Cox anchored in 1789. At two o’clock, the 
South-west C^pe, distant 15 or 16 miles, bore W. 2" S. 

I 

A steep head at the furthest extreme, which 

proved to be the South Cape, - - S. 72 E.* 

At this time we were one mile within, or north of the largest of the 
islands ; and saw with some surprise, for it is three miles from the 
main, that its gras.sy vegetation had been burnt. From hence we 
steered for the easternmost isle, lying off a wide open bight in the 
coast, and afterwards hauled up for the South Cape. The wind died 
away at six o’clock, when the Cape was one mile distant ; but thick 
clouds were gathering in the south and west, and strong gusts with 
heavy rain presently succeeded. Fortunately, the squalls came from 
the westward, so that we were enabled to get further from those 
stupendous cliffs ; had they come from the south, the consequences 
might have been fatal to the Norfolk. 

The first steep head, to the eastward of the South Cape, opened 

• Tlie magnetic bearing of tlie South-west Cape was W. 5® S., and that of the South 
Cape E. 15® S. The true variation I believe to have been 8®E. ; but as the sloop's head 
was at east, no more than 3® are allowed, from a system which will be hereafter explained. 
It seemed necessary to say this, because the formation of the south end of Van Diemen's 
Land in my chart, differs from that given by captain Cook, and from those of most 
others. 

In Bayly's Astronomical Observattons, page 192, it appears that six sets of variations 
were observed on board the Resolution, Mar. 24, I???, o# the South Cape ; the mean 
result of which was 4® 43' cast. Next morning six other sets were taken near the same 
place, and the mean variation came out 10* 8' east. In captain King s journal, I found 
the same observations entered, and that the ship’s Jiead was E. by N. i N. in the first 
case, andN. W. by W. in the second. This, with the example in the Francis, page 
cxxvi, and that in the Norfolk on the preceding page, may serve to show, for the 
present, that corrections are required to the variation, according to the direction of the 
vessel’s head. 



clxxxi 


East Coast, 8 ( V. D .s Land.] INTRODUCTION. 

round it at E, 7*N., (allowing 4“ east ^riation,) and a second from 
the first, at E. 16* N., their distances asunder being each about five 
miles. It is the middlemost of these three heads which is called 
South Cape by captain Cook, as appears from the relative situations 
of his Peaked Hill and of Swilly rock ; but he had not the opportu- 
nity of seeing the heads opening one from the other, as we had in 
the Norfolk. I make the latitude of the Cape (adding the 2' 40") to 
be 43“ 37', nearly as captain Furneaux did ; and as captain Cook 
would have done, had his latitude at noon been taken 43“ 42^^, 
according to the Astronomical Obsen>ations , instead of 42° 47', as in 
the voyage. 

Pedra Blanca, or Swilly rock, became visible at half past seven, 
when the squalls had mostly blown over ; and the following bearings 
where then taken : 

South Cape, distant five miles, - - W. by N. 

East extreme ofthe next steep head, dist. 2y miles, N. 14* E. 

Pedra Blanca, - - - - S. 33 E. 

Distant land through, the haze, - - N. 60 E. 

At nine o’clock we hauled up for D ’Entrecasteaux's Channel, of 
which I had the sketch of Mr. Hayes, and stood off and on, in the 
entrance, during the night ; the wind blowing hard at west, with 
dark rainy weather. 

Dec. 14, at four in the morning, our situation was far to leeward ; 
and having no prospect of fciching into the channel, we bore away 
for Boreel’s Isles, which were seen bearing N. 65° E. two leagues. 
Three of these produce some vegetation, and that of the largest had 
been partially burnt not long before. The twt) easternmost, called the 
Friars by captain Furneaux, .are bare pyramidal rocks, and, except 
where they had been made white by the gannets, are of a black, 
weather-beaten colour ; a patch of breakers lies one mile to the 
north-east from them. 

Fluted Cape opened round Tasman’s Head at N. 18® E. We passed 
these steep projections at a mile distance ; and not being able to 


Flinders 
and li\ss. 
1798. 



clxxxii 


INTRODUCTION. 


[JVtor DiscoverieB. 


Flinbers 
and Bass. 
1798. 


fetch into Adventure Bty, did the same by Cape Frederick Henry.* 
At noon, this cape bore S. 13* W. eight miles, and Fluted Cape Hvas 
behind it in the same bearing. I projx)sed to 'enter the Derwent 
River ; but on making a stretch toward Betsey’s Island,-f it appeared 
that the Henshaw’s Bay of Hayes, instead of being a shallow bight, 
was a deep opening ; and as the north-west wind blew out of tt^e 
Derwent, we stretched on, seven miles above the island, and came 
to an anchor in 10 fathoms, sandy 'ground. "I'his opehing is the 
North Bay of D’Entrecasteaux ; but I was totally ignorant, at that 
time, of its having ever been entered. 

Dec. 15, the wind being at north-west, we passed a sloping 
island ( Isle St. Aignan of D’Extrecasteaux ) , and steered rforth-east- 
ward, to explore the inlet. After running tliree-and-half miles, 
with soundings from 13 no bottom, to 5 fathoms, we anchored under 
a small island, wftch lies S. 75° W., one mile and a half, from Point 
Renard, the uppermost station of the French boats. Thi? small spot 
received the descriptive name of Isle of Caves, and lies in the passage 
from North Bay to a large extent of water which appeared to the 
eastward, and which the French boats did not explore. 

From the Isle of Caves we ran six miles, E. S. E. up the new 
bay, for Smooth Island. The width of the entrance, from Point 
Renard to Green Heed, is two miles, the soundings are from 6 to 
16 fathoms, and there are no dangers. Smooth Island, behind which 
we anchored in 4 fathoms, and where I again landed to take bearings, 
is three quarters of a mile long, and covered with grass and a few 
small trees. It had been visited by the natives, as had the Isle of 

• This name, given by captain Furneaux, is altered in D’Entrecasteaux’s voyage to that 
of Cape Tt ohruind. The captain was undoubtedly mistaken in his ideas concerning 
Frederik Hendrik’s Bay ; but this does not appear to be a sufficient reason for chang- 
ing the established name of this cape, unless Tasman had applied it to some other 
land, uhich is not the case* 

t Tlrs IS, the Isle WUlaumeZy of D’Entrecasteaux ; but it was known to me from the 
aketch of captain Hayes, and is stiU to the colonists, under the name of Betsey's Island. 



Ecust Coast, 4 * V. D:s Land.] INTRODUCTION. 


clxxxiii 


Caves ; but from the eggs of gulls found upon both, I judge they do Flinders 

^ • and JUs9. 

not go often. ]79g. 

Dec. i 6 , we anchored two miles to the south-east of Smooth 
Island, in 6 fathoms, near a point of the main where a round hill 
afforded me a good view of this extensive bay. The country tliere 
is stony and barren, though covered with wood and much frequented 
by kanguroos. In the evening, the appearance of a soutliern gale 
induced me .to shift our berth to the north side of the point ; between 
which, and an islet lying half a mile from it, the depth was 5 to 7 
fathoms. 

On the 17th, we landed upon the islet, and killed some out of the 
many gulls by which it is frequented. A small arm of the bay ex- 
tending north-eastward, where we hoped to obtain fresh water, was 
the object of our examination in the afternoon. There was a little 
stream falling in at the head, but rocks prevent^ it from being 
accessible to boats, or to a raft ; and a walk of perhaps a mile to the 
eastward, afforded nothing but the sight of a stony country, and of a 
few miserable huts. Our greyhound started a kanguroo, but it was 
lost in the wood ; and threre were no birds to shoot. 

Dec. 18, the wind still blowing fresh from the westward, we 
worked up to Smooth Island ; and then stretched over to the south 
side of the bay. The soundings were generally 9 fathoms, on mud 
and sand, to within a mile of the shore : .ind at half a mile, where 
the anchor was dropped, the depth was 4 fathoms. 

We landed at a steep, but not high point near the sloop, where I 
took some bearings, and observed the meridian altitude of the moon 
in an artificial horizon, which gave the latitude 4,3° 1^'; Mr. Bass, in 
the mean time, walked a little distance inland, but saw nothing of 
particular interest. Some further bearings were taken next morning, 
from a head lying to^he west ; after which the anchor was weighed, 
and we steered northward along the west side of the bay, with 
soundings from 8 to 4 fathoms. In the evening, we had worked 



clxxxiv INTRODUCTION. [Bwr Discoverie$, 

FuNnEHs back into North "Bay, and come to an anchor under the north-east 
^ end of Sloping Island. 

The great eastern bay now quitted had never been entered till 
this time ; and as it is proved not to be Frederik Hendrik’s, I have . 
named it Norfolk Bay. It is about eight miles long, north and 
south, and three to five miles broad from east to west. The largest 
fleet may find shelter here, with anchorage on a good bottom of 
4 to 9 fathoms deep. We saw but one small stream of fresh water, 
and that was of difficult access ; but it is scarcely probable that, 
amongst the many coves all around the bay, water convenTent for 
ships should not be found. The country near the shore is rocky ; but 
as the kanguroo seemed to be abundant, there are probably many 
grassy plains further inland. Wood abounds every where, except 
at Green Head, which is mostly covered with grass. Of the four 
islands in the bay. Smooth and Gull Islands were found superior in 
fertility to the main land : the first contains about forty acres of 
tolerable pasturage. 

In North Bay, the upper part seemed to be circumscribed by a 
sandy beach, and to offer nothing of particular interest ; we |hdre-» 
fore steered downward, on Dec. so, for the Derwent Rivi||||^ but rainy 
squalls coming on from the south, ran for a small beach on the 
western shore, and anchored off it in si fathoms. A narrow inlet 
there, from which the tide issued with some strength, excited the 
hope of finding a short cut into the Derwent ; but it proved, on e.x- 
amination, to terminate in a shoal lagoon. The country on its bor- 
ders affords good pasturage, with some spots fit for cultivation ; 
there is, also, fresh water on the north side, but only for domestic 
purposes. The lagoon is frequented by ducks, black shags# pelicans, 
and gannets. 

Dec. ai, we proceeded round for the Derwent. On clearing 
North Bay, I went off in the boat to Betsey’s Island, leaving Mr. 
Bass to conduct the sloop. This island is high, and accessible only 



clxxxv 


East Coast, 4- V. D'.s Land.'\ INTRODUCTION. 

towards its north end ; its length is one mile, and mean breadth Flindeks 
about half that quantity ; the soil is fertile, and nourishes a luxuriant 1799. 
vegetation of grass ind wood ; and though the natives visit it occa- 
sionally, none of their traces were recent; On rejoining the sloop, I 
found she had passed between the island and two flat rocks near the 
.main, with from 5 to 9 fathoms water ; in which depths the gigantic 
sea-weed grows up to the surface. At eight o'clock we ancliored 
in 9 fathoms, off Cape Direction, at the entrance of the river. 

Dec.^aa, a base was measured and bearings taken for a survey of 
the entrance, which proved to be near three miles wide. On the 
^ a3rd, the wind being fair, we ran upwards between shores which 
were sometimes steep, but generally of a gradual ascent, and well 
clothed with grass and wood. At nine miles from the entrance lies 
Sullivan Cove, on the wert side, where a settlement has since been esta- 
blished by colonel Collins ;* and here the width of the river is sud- 
denly contrjicted, from one mile and a half to less than three-quarters 
of a mile, but the depth is not diminished. Four miles higher up 
we found Risdon Cove, and anchored there in ^ fathoms, with the 
Ihtention of filling our empty water casks at the Risdon River of yir. 

Hayes ; biij^tnding it to be a little creek which evenipjr boat could 
not enter, I determined to seek a more convenient watering place 
higher up the Derwent. 

Dec. 34,. the wind being adverse to proceeding upward, an exten- 
sive set of angles was .taken from the top of Mount Direction ; and 
next day, I carried the survey up the river, whilst Mr. Bass ascended 
the great Mount Table, on the western side. At the northern foot of 
this mount lie King George’s Plains, a name “given by Mr. Hayes to 
about thrfee hundred acres of pasture land ; and in the front of 
the plains is his Prir^e of Wales’ Bay, a small shallow cove. Such 
names as these led us, at first, into some errors with respect to the 

•The first settlement was made in Risdon Cove, in 1803, by captain John Bowen 
of the navy, who was sept from I^rt Jackson for that purpose, by his Bxcellency governor 
King t but on the arrival of cdonel Collins in 1804, it was removed to Sullivan Cove. 

VOL. I. B b 



clxxxvi INTRODUCTION. [Prior Piseoveries. 

Flinpers importance of the placec sought ; but after the above examples, we 

and Bass. , , , 

iros. were no longer deceived by them 

In the afternoon of the S5th, we got the sloop, with much diffi- 
culty, five or six miles further up the river, to an inlet which I called 
Herdsman’s Cove, from the pastoral appearance of the surrounding 
country. Two streams fall into it ; and up the principal one, in the 
north-east comer, I went two miles with the boat. The water was 
there found to be fresh, and the depth sufficient to allow of its being 
reached by the sloop ; but the banks being steep and channel narrow, 
I was deterred from watering in this place, by the fear of detention 
from foul winds. 

The width of the Derwent abreast of Herdsman’s Cove is half a 
mile ; but except a very narrow channel close to the eastern shore, 
it is too shallow even for boats. The intention of proceeding fur- 
ther with the sloop was therefore abandoned ; but so soon as the 
rainy, blowing weather permitted, which was not until the 28th, I 
accompanied Mr. Bass in a boat excursion up the river. Three miles 
above Herdsman's Cove the banks open out to a mile in width ; the 
river, from running north-westward, turns to the south-west ^ and 
the deep channel makes a short cut across to the convex bank, 
leaving the mud to collect in the opposite elbow. A great deal of 
long, aquatic grass growing upon these mud flats, seemed to have 
attracted the black swans, for the number collected there was not 
estimated at less than five hundred. 

The width of the Derwent is contracted in the south-west reach 
to little more than a quarter of a mile, and we had not rowed far 
up it before the water became perfectly fresh. The land on both 
sides rises to hills of moderate elevation, and the rather steep 
acclivities being well clothed with verdure, thj|y had an agreeable 
appearance. Our attention was suddenly called from contemplating 
the country, by the sound of a human voice coming from the hills. 
There were three people ; and as they would not comply with oiir 
signs to come down, we landed and went up to them, taking with 



clxxxvii 


East Coast, ^ V. D\s Land.} INTRODUCTION. 

us a black swan. Two women ran off, but a man, who had two 
or three spears in his hand, staid to receive us, and accepted the swan 
with rapture. He seemed entirely ignorant of muskets, nor did any 
thing excite his attention or desire except the swan and the red ker- 
chiefs about our necks ; he knew. However, that we came from the 
sloop, and where it was lying. A little knowledge of the Port- 
Jackson, and of the South-Sea-Island languages was of no use in 
making ourselves understood by this man ; but the quickness with 
which Jie comprehended our signs spoke in favour of his intelligence. 
His appearance much resembled that of the inhabitants of New 
South Wales ; he had also marks raised upon the skin, and his face 
was blackened and hair ruddled as is sometimes practised by them. 
The hair was either close cropped, or naturally short; but it had 
not the appearance of being woolly. He acceded to our proposition 
of going to his hut ; but finding from his devious route and frequent 
stoppages,. that he sought to tire our patience, we left him delighted 
with the certain possession of his swan, and returned to the boat. 
This was the sole opportunity we’ had of communicating with any of 
the natives of Van Diemen’s Land. 

At one o'clock, when advanced five miles above,;^he elbow, the 
ebb tide made ; and the wind being unfavourable. We landed to dine. 
The general course of the river had been nearly south-west ; but it 
there turned west-by-north. The width, found by extending a base 
line, was two hundred and thirty yards, and the depth, as it had gener- 
ally been in the channel from Herdsman’s Cove, was 3 fathoms ; but 
in some parts there may not be more than a, at low water. 

We arrived on board the sloop in the evening, with fourteen swans, 
in time to get a short distance down the river, before the ebb tide 
had done running ; ^and no place more convenient than Risdon Gove 
having offered itself, we anchored there next day, and proceeded to 
complete our water, and refit the sloop for returning to Port Jackson. 
The late rains had so much increased the stream at the head of the 
cove, that our labour was much abridged ; and ^ in the evening 
of Dec. 30, every thing was completed. 


Flinders 
and Bas3. 
1798. 



elxxxviii 


INTRODUCTION. 


Fcindeus 
and Bass. 
1798. 


[Prior Discoverieg. 

This cove is the highest part of the Derwent to which a ship can 
advance. There is no danger in proceeding thus far, except off 
Shoal Point, about two miles below, on the wekem shore; and on 
the opposite side, near the echoing cliffs, there are 12 to 17 fathoms. 
Above Risdon Cove the mud flats commence, and will stop any 
vessel which draws more than ten or twelve feet ; although there 
be, in some places higher up, from 5 to 8 fathoms. Mount Direction, 
on the north side of Risdon Cove, forms two round heads which are 
distinguishable from the entrance of the river, bearing N. 16“ W. 
from Cape Direction. The latitude observed under the mount, from 
the moon’s meridian altitude, was 42“ 48' 12" south; variation of the 
azimuth compass on the south side of the cove, 8“ 28', and of the sur- 
veying theodolite 9° 15' east ; but I found it alter one or two degrees 
in different places, both in Norfolk Bay and in the Derwent, owing 
to partial attractions in the land.* 

In Risdon Cove the tide rises between four and five fe^t, which is 
more, by at least a foot, than it appeared to be at the entrance of 
the river. The time of high water is about eight hours after the moon's 
passage over the meridian, or one hour later than in Adventure 
Bay.-f In the narrow parts, above Sullivan Cove, the tides run with 
tolerable regularity, and with some degree of strength ; but towards 
the entrance of the river, the water at the surface sometimes ran 
down twelve hours together, and at other times as much upwards, 
whilst the rise and fall by the shore were at the usual periods. 
These anomalies were probably occasioned by the wind, and seemed 
not to extend far below the surface ; for I found a counter current 
at the bottom. 

The banks of the Derwent are not remarkably high, but the 
country in general may be termed mountainous. Mount Table, at 
the back of Sullivan Cove, is supposed to be three-quarters of a mile 
in height ; nor do I think, from having seen it beyond the distance 

* Upon t\ic top of Mount Table, the compass has since been found to vary as much 
as 20% from one part of the mountain to another, 
t See Bligh’s l’'oyage to the South Seats; page 58 * 



clxxxix 


East Coast, Sf V. D.'s Land.^ INTRODUCTION. 

of thirty miles from the sloop’s deck, that it ^an be much less. The Flinders 
publication of Mr. Bass’ remarks upon the soil and productions of 
this part of Van Dtemen’s Land dispenses me from entering upon 
those subjects ; it is sufficient to say, that the Keports of them were 
so favourable as to induce the establishment of a colony on the banks 
of the Derwent, four years afterward ; and that the discoveries which 
have since been made are marked in the chart. 

The last day of December and the first of January were occupied 1799. 
in beating down to the entrance of the river. 

Jan. 2. The wind blew strong from the south-east, with heavy 
rain ; and finding no advantage could be made by beating in Storm 
Bay, we ran into D’Entrecasteaux’s Channel, passed the large North- 
west Port, and anchored in Pruen Cove, in 4 fathoms. We landed, 
so soon as the rain cleared away, and found a small creek in which 
the water was fresh at a few hundred yards above where it falls into 
the cove. A tree had been felled on the bank, probably in 1793 or 4 
by Mr. Hayes, who called this stream Amelia’s River; but it would 
be very difficult to fill casks here’, except when long continued rains 
should bring the fresh’ water to the entrance of the creek. The 
valley through which it comes from the westward, seemed to be of 
a rich, though damp soil. 

On Jan. 3, having a breeze at north-west, we got under way at 
daylight ; and after repassing the northern entrance of D’Entrecas- 
teaux’s Channel, steered across Storm Bay. At two o’clock, I had 
the following bearings : 


Tasman’s Head, 

S. 

37 

W. 

Cape Frederick Henry, - • 

S. 

71 

W. 

Quoin Island, distant six miles. 

N. 

28 

w. 

Low point, distant miles. 

N. 

6 

E. 

Cape Raoul,* distant 3 miles. 

S. 

71 

E. 


* This is the cape which, from its appearance, I had called by the descriptive name of 
Cape JBasaltes; not knowing that D’Entrecasteaux, or any other navigator, had pre- 
viously affixed an appellation.. I give it up the more readily, because it is said these 
columns are not strictly basaltes. 



cxc 


INTRODUCTION. 


Flinders 
and Bass. 
1799. 


{Prior Discoveriet. 

Cape Pillar opened roupd Cape Raoul at E. 5° N., and the distance 
run from one to the other was nine miles. These two high, 
columnar capes are the ejtfreme points of the land which captain 
Fumeaux took to Maria’s Island. Between them, the shore falls 
back about four miles, and forms a small bay at the head, where 
there appeared to be shelter against all winds except those from 
the southward ; and perhaps from those also, for the water seemed 
to reach behind the inner western point. At five o’clock, we passed 
Tasman’s small, cliffy Island and Cape Pillar, and Maria’s Island 
came in sight at N. 6 ° E. We then hauled up to keep cloSe in 
with the shore to the northward; but the wind came in such violent 
puffs down those steep cliffs, that the necessity of steering further 
off frustrated my intention : the outer Hippolite Rock bore N. ,56* W. 
three miles, at dusk. 

Jan. 4. At daylight, Maria's Island appeared to b^, divided into 
two, Schouten’s Island was visible, and the principal bearings taken 
were as follow : , 

Tasman’s small Island, • - - S. 24 W. 

A deep bight in the coast, - • - S. 56 W. 

South head of Frederik Hendrik’s Bay, - S. 72 W. 
Maria’s Island, south part, - N. 64° to 43 W. 

■ ' north part, - N. 39 to 19 W. 

Schouten's Island, - - North to N. 5. E. 

The wind shifted to north at ten o’clock, and we tacked towards 
Maria's Island. At noon, the north-east extreme, a cock's-comb-like 
head, was distant four or five miles ; but the islet lying off it, in Mr. 
Cox’s chart, was not visible, nor yet the isthmus which, connects 
the two parts of the island. , , 

Observed latitude, - - - 42 41* S. 

, South head of Frederik Hendrik’s Bay, S. 40 W. 

Maria’s Island, south part, - Clouded. 

- ■' norfjj part, S. 82“ to N. 64 W. 

Schouten’s Island, dist. 4 leagues, N. j W. to 8»E. 



East Coasts Sf V. D:$ Land] INTRODUCTION. 


cxci 


We had squally weather in the afternoon .,with the wind at north- 
west ; and being unable to get near Maria's Island before the even- 
ing, bore away northward, having thenm fresh breeze at W. S. W. 
Schouten's Island was passed within two miles at ten o'clock, and at 
eleven, a piece of land called Vanderlin's Island by Tasman, but 
which has since been found to be the southern extremity of a penin- 
sula. We then steered north, to keep in with the coast; but the 
wind drawing forward in the morning of the 5th, the sloop was 
drifted off, by noon, to four or five leagues. The land then abreast 
rose in ranges of irregular, well-wooded hills ; and behind them 
were two peaTcs and a flat-topped piece of land, seemingly not many 
leagues*from the shore. The southernmost of the two peaks is the 
most elevated, ^nd appears to be the high round mountain seen by 
Tasman on Dec 4 and 5, 1642; I have, therefore, called it Tasman's 
Peak. It is the northernmost part seen by him on this side of Van 
Diemen's Land, as Mount Heemskerk was on the west coast; the 
flat-topped mountain is that which colonel Paterson afterwards 
named Benlomem To the southward, the land was visible at a great 
distance ; and if Schouten’s Island and the cape of the peninsula near 
it can possibly be seen so far as twenty leagues from the deck, it 
must have been them. My observation and bearings at this time 
were as follow : ^ ^ 

Latitude obsefliifed. 

South extreme of the coast, 

Ahother piece of land, like an island, 

Tasman’s Peak, - - - 

Northern extremity of the land, • - 


41 ®7t S. 
S. 18 W. 

S. 23 w. 

S. 63 w. 

N. 32 W. 


It was to me a subject of regret, that the wind did not allow of 
keeping close in with this east coast, since captain Fumeaux's 
examination was made at too great a distance to be exact ; but .my 
limited time of absence being expired, and provisions nearly Out, 
nothing more could be attempted than^^bat might be done in the 
way to Port Jackson. 


Flinders 
and Bass. 
1799. 



INTRODUCTION. 


cxcii 


{Prior JPiscov^ries. , 


Funders 
and Bass. 
1799. 


(Atlas, 
Plate VI.) 


Jan. 6, in latitude 40*^45^' no land was in sight ; but oh the 7th, 
when in 40* 24^', the high land of Cape Barren was visible through 
a thick haze, bearing S. 76®#W. five or six miles. The wind being 
then nearly at east, , we steered to pass between Cape Barren and the 
great northern island, intending to explore the west side of the latter 
in our way. At five o’clock breakers were seen two miles tq the 
north, though no bottom could be found at 17 fathoms ; at six, 
however, we fell suddenly into 3 fathoms ; but hoping tp find a 
sufficient depth for the sloop round the island which lies in the open- 
ing, stood on till the soundings diminished to nine feet, and breakers 
were seen all round a-head, from beam to beam. It ^tas then neaf 
sun-set, and the breeze right aft ; but whilst I was considering what 
could be done for our safety, the wind shifted suddenly, as if by an 
act of Providence, to the opposite quarter, and enat)led us to steer 
back, out of this dangerous place, with all sail. At nine o’clock the 
wind returned to the south-eastward, having just lasted long enough 
to take us out of danger ; at eleven we had 20 fathoms ; and in two 
hours more steered N. by W., for the Babel Isles, with afresh and 
fair wind. 


Jan 8, at six o’clock, Mr. Bass went on shore to the small, south- 
eastern islet ; whence he brought a boat load of seals and gannets. 
Besides t|^ese, the islet is inhabited by geese, shags, pinguins, gulls, and 
sooty petrels ; each occupying its separate disjjipct, and using its own 
language. It was the confusion of noises amongst these various animals 
which ^duced me to give the name of Babel Isles to this small cluster. 

After taking on board our seals and gannets, we steered north- 
westward ; and at one o’clock took a departure from the Sisters. I 
wished to make another effort to find the supposed Fumeaux’s 
Land, represented to lie north of these islands and in latitude 39® ; 
but the wind being strong from the south-eastward, the course 
steered was N. by E. At eight o’clock we had passed the 39th de- 
gree ; and no land beiM^visUjjJ^j the course was then altered to 
north-east, for Cape Ho^? * 



cxciii 


Jlast Coast, ^ r. D:s Land.} INTRODUCTION. 

Jan. g, the wind blew strong at S. S. E., with thick, hazy weather. 
At eight in the morning, high land was distinguished two points on 
the weather bow, and sand hills from thbnce to abaft the lee beam, 
dot more than six or seven miles distant. We* immediately hauled 
the wind to the eastward, and carried every sail the sloop could bear 
in such a sea as was then running. The land to windward was 
judged to be near the Ram Head ; although our reckoning was 
20' short«in latitude, and we supposed ourselves to the eastward. 

To make certain of clearing Cape Howe, the eastern course was 
prolonged until day-light of the 10th ; we then bore away, and at 
noon were in latitude 37® 5'. On the 11th, the observation gave 34," 
30' ; ai^the gale still continuing, we anchored within the heads of 
Port Jackson at^ ten o’clock the same evening, having exceeded, 
by no more than eleven days, the time which had been fixed for our 
return. 

To the strait which had been the great object of research, and 
whose di^overy was now completed, governor Hunter gave, at my 

recommendation, the name of Bass’ Strait. This was no more than 

« • 

a just tribute to my worthy friend and companion, for the extreme 
dangers and fatigues he had undergone in first entering it in the whale 
boat, and to the correct judgment he had formed from various indi- 
cations, of the existence of a wide opening between Van lumen’s 
Land and J^ew South^^ales. 

The success of this expedition favoured my views of further dis- 
covery ; and the Reliance not being immediately wanted for service. 
His Excellency accepted a proposition to explore Glass-house and 
Hert>ey’s Bays, two large openings to the northward, of which the 
entrances c 9 ily were known. I had some hope of finding a consi- 
derable river disci \arging elf at one of these openings, and pf 
being able by its means to penetrate further into the interior of the 
country than had hitherto been effected. 

The sloop Norfolk was again allotted to me, with nearly the same 
VOL. I. C c 


Flinders. 

1799. 


Flindjers. 

1799. 



cxciv 


INTRODUCTION. 


[Prior Discoveries. 


Flinders. 

1799. 


(Atlas, 
Plate VI 11.) 


(Atlas, 
Plate IX.) 


volunteer crew as before ; and I was accompanied by Mr. S. W . 
Flinders, a midshipman of the Reliance, and by Bongaree, a native, 
whose good disposition and manly conduct had attracted my esteem. 
Of the assistance of .my able friend Bass I was, however, deprived-, 
he having quitted the station soon after our Iasi voyage, to return 
to England. The time of my absence was limited by the governor 
to six weeks, ?ome arrivals being then expected which might call 
the Reliance into active service. 

We sailed out of Port Jackson on July 8 ; and next morning 
came in with a part of the coast, north of Port Stephens, which cap- 
tain Cook had passed in the night.* Off a projection which I called 
Sugar-loaf Point, in latitude 32° 29', lie two rocks to the souRi-east- 
ward, at the distances of two and four miles. We passed between 
these rocks and the point, and kept close in with the shore as far 
to the north as the hills called Three Brothers by captain Cook, of 
which the northernmost and highest lies in latitude 31® 43' south. 

July 10, the observed latitude of 31* 38' shewed a set of 33' to the 
south ; whereas it had the day before been 8' the contrary way. 
Our di.stance from the shore had then become six leagues, owing to a 
foul wind ; but we got in with it again in the evening, and steered 
northward with a fair breeze. On the 11th we sailed amongst the 
Solitary Isles, of which five were added to the number before seen ; 
and the space from thence to twelve leagupB northward having 
been passed by captain Cook in the night, I continued to keep close 
in with the coast. 

In latitude 29° 43', we discovered a small opening like a river, 
with an islet lying in the entrance ; and at sunset, entered a larger, 
to which I gave the name of Shoal Bay, an appellation which 

* The journal of this expedition^ delivered to governor Hunter on ray return, having 
been published in great part by colonel Collins, the account here given will be brief, 
and almost wholly confined to nautical subjects. The reader who desires more inforraa* 
tion upon the lands visited, and upon their productions and inhabitants, is referred to the 
Avemmt of the English Colony in New South Wales^ Vol II. page 225 to 263. 



East Coast, S( V.D. ’s Lam^ INTRODUCTION. 

it but too well merited. On the south side, of the entrance, which 
is the deepest, there is ten feet at low water ;^nd within side, the 
depth is from 2 to 4* fathoms in a channel near the south shore ; the 
rest of the bay is mostly occupied by shoals, oyer which boats can 
scarcely pass when the tide is out. High water appeared to take 
place about seven hours after the moon’s passage; at which time, a ship 
drawing not more than fourteen feet might venture in, if severely 
pressed. Shoal Bay is difficult to be found, except by its latitude, which 
is 29“ 26^' ; but there is on the low land about four leagues to the 
southward, a small hill somewhat peaked, which may serve as a mark 
to vessels coming from that direction. 

July 12. The morning was employed in examining the bay, and 
in looking round the country. The sloop had sprung a bad leak, and 
I wished to have laid her on shore ; but not,|^ finding a convenient 
place, nor any thing of particular interest to detain me longer, we 
sailed at one o’clock, when the tide began to rise. Cape Byron, in 
latitude 28* 38', and the coast for twelve miles to the north and 
south, were passed on the 13th ;*but no particular addition or cor- 
rection could be made tx) captain Cook’s chart. At Moreton Bay, 
further on, that navigator had left it in doubt whether there were any 
opening ; and therefore we closed in again with the land at Point 
Ix)ok-out, on the 14th. At noon, the point bore S. 42° E., three or 
four miles, and a small flat islet E. 3^* N three miles ; the opening 
in Moreton Bay- was then evident, and bore W. N. W. It is small, 
and formed by two sandy points, beyond which a large extent of 
water was visible. Our latitude at this time, was 27'' 24', giving that 
of Point Look-out to be 27° 27' south. Captain Cook says it is “ in 
“ latitude 27“ 6 ' a difference which probably arose from his having 
allowed for a strong northern current during the run of four or five 
hours from the preceding noon, whereas, in reality, none existed ; 
for his course and distance by log, from the noon's observation, 
would give the point in its true latitude. 

* HawhestvortJC s Voyages^ Vol III. page 119. 


cxcv 

Flinders. 

1799. 



cxcvi 


INTRODUCTION. 


[/Vjot Discoveries, 


Fli: DKRS. stood on to within two milovS of the opening in Moreton Bay ; 

but seeing it blocked up by many shoals of sand, and the depth hav- 
ing diminished from 12 to 4 fathoms, the course "W’as altered for Cape 
Moreton, which was visible seven or eight leagues to the northward. 
At eight in the evening, the anchor was dropped in 7 fathoms at the 
entrance of- Glass-house Bay, Cape Moreton bearing E. S. E, two or 
three miles. 

But little progress \^as made up the bay on the 15th., owing to 
the many shoals in it, and to a foul wind. At noon, the latitude of 
Cape Moreton was ascertained to be 27° o^' south, and the longitude 
from distances of stars east and west of the moon, corrected by the 
observations at Greeenwich, was 153“ 25' east; being 4-^' south, 
and 7' west of its position by captain Cook. In the evening, when 
the lunar distances were observed, the sloop was at anchor in 1 1 
fathoms on the west side of the entrance, within two miles of a low 
projection which an unfortunate occurrence afterwards caused to be 
named Point Skirmish. 

On the 16th, whilst beating up amongst the shoals, an opening 
was perceived round the point ; and being tnuch in want of j place 
to lay the sloop on shore, on account of the leak, I tried to enter it ; 
but not finding it accessible from the south, was obliged to make the 
examination with the boat, whilst the sloop lay at anchor five miles 
off. There was a party of natives on the point, and our communication 
was at first friendly ; but after receiving presents they made an at- 
tack, and one of them was wounded by our fire. Proceeding up the 
opening, I found it to be more than a mile in width ; and from the 
quantities of pumice stone on the borders, it was named Pumice-stone 
River. It led towards the remarkable peaks called the Glass Houses, 
which were now suspected to be volcanic, and excited my curiosity. 

On board the sloop, the leak had, in the mean time, been found 
to krise from a plank having started from the timbers, at three or 
four streaks above the keel; and the open space being filled up 
with oakum from the inside, very little water came in ; I therefore 



East Coast, Sf V. D. 's Land.-\ INTRODUCTION. 

left the river and the Glass Houses for a future examination, and 

I 

proceeded up the bay with the afternoon's flood. On the i8th at noon, 

4 

we had passed two low islands surrounded with shoals, and were at 

anchor in 6 fathoms, abreast of a third. The south point of the open- 

0 

ing from Moreton Bay then bore N. 77“ ‘E., ten miles; and the ob- 
served latitude being 27° 27^', confirmed the observation taken 
without side on the 14th. Next day, we beat up against a southern 
wind to a sixth island ; but the shoals then became more numerous, 
and the channels between them so narrow, that it was very difficult 
to proceed further. 

The latitude observed upon the sixth island was 27" 35', being 
thirty-four miles south of Cape Moreton at the entrance of the 
bay. Above this island, the east and west shores, from being 
nine or ten miles apart, approach each other within two miles, and 
the space between them iakes the form of a river ; but the entrance 
was too full of shoals to leave a hope of penetrating by it far into 
the interior, or that it could be of importance to navigation. Under 
this discouragement and that of a foul wind, all further research at 
the -head of Glass-housc.*Bay was given up; and I returned on board 
to seek in Pumice-stone River for a place to stop the leak, and the 
means of visiting the Glass Houses. On the 22d, we got into the 
river after many difficulties, arising principally from shoals in the 
entrance, which could only be passed -n. high w^ater. The place 
chosen for laying the sloop on shore was on the east side, five 
miles above Point Skirmish, at a small beach, close to which the 
depth was 7 fathoms. 

July 25. The leaky plank being secured, and the sloop restowed 
and completed with water, we proceeded two miles further up the 
river, amongst mangrove islets and muddy flats. Next morning I 
landed on the west side, as far above the sloop as the boat could 
advance ; and with my friend Bongaree and two sailors, steefed 
north-westward for the Glass-house peaks. After nine miles of 
laborious walking, mostly through swamps or over a rocky country. 


cxcvii 

Flinders. 

17S/9. 



cxcviii INTRODUCTION. {Prior Diacwme*. 

Flinders. WC reached the top of a stony mount, from whence the highest 
peak was four miles distant to the north-west. Three or four 
leagues beyond it was a ridge of mountain, .from which various 
small streams descend into Pumice-stone River ; the principal plaCe 
of their junction seeming 'to be at a considerable extent of water 
which bore N. 80° E., and was about six miles above the sloop. 
Early on the 27th, we reached the foot of the nearest Crlass House, 
a flat-topped peak, one mile and a half north of the stony mount. It 
was impossible to ascend this almost perpendicular rock ; and find- 
no marks of volcanic eruption, we returned to the boat, and to the 
sloop the same evening. 

July 28, we proceeded down the river; but owing to krong 
winds and squalls from the south-east, did not clear it before the 
31st. Some communications with the natives had been obtained 
whilst the sloop was lying on shore ; and this detention afforded 
opportunities of repeating them. I am happy to say they were all 
friendly, which is attributable to their opinion of us having under- 
gone a salutary change from the. effect of our fire* arms at Point 
Skirmish. 

These people were evidently of the same race as those at Port 
Jackson, though speaking a language which Bongkree could not 
understand. They fish almost wholly with cast and setting nets, live 
more in society than the natives to the southward, and are much 
better lodged. Their spears are of solid wood, and used without 
the throwing stick. Two or three bark canoes were seen ; but from 
the number of black swans in the river, of which eighteen were 
caught in our little boat, it should seem that these people are not 
dextrous in the management either of the canoe or spear. 

The entrance of Glass-house Bay, from Point Skirmish to the 
inner part of Cape Moreton, is eight miles wide ; but it contains so 
many shoals that a^ ship would have much difficulty in finding a 
passage. These shoals are of sand, and in the channels between 
them are various depths from 5 to 13 fathoms upon similar ground ; 



OXCIX 


East Coast, V. D.'s Land.] INTRODUCTION. 

but towards the head of the bay, both on the shoals and in the deeper Flinders 
parts, the botto*n is almost universally of mud. The land on the 
borders of Pumice-stone River is low ; and is either sandy or rocky, 
with a slight superficies of vegetable soil ; yet 'not ill clothed with 
grass and wood. On the west side of Glass-house Bay, the appear- 
ance of the land was much similar, but with a diminution of sand in 
the upper part. The long slip on the east side, which I have called 
Moreton Island, as supposing it would have received that name from 
captain Cook, had he known of its insularity, is little else than a ridge 
of rocky hills, with a sandy surface ; but the peninsula further south 
had some appearance of fertility. I judged favourably of the country 
on the borders of what seemed to be a river falling into the head of 
the bay, both from its thick covering of wood, and from the good 
soil of the sixth island, w hich lies at the entrance. The other islands 
in the bay are very low, and so surrounded with forests of large 
mangrove, that It must be difficult to land upon them. It was high 
water in Pumice-stone River, nine hours and a half after the moon’s 
passage over the meridian ; and tVie rise of tide was from three to 
six feet, the night tide being much the highest. 

July 31, we ^iled out of Pumice-stone River ; and by keeping 
near the shore of Point Skirmish had generally 6 fathoms ; but two 
narrow shoals were passed upon which the depth was only twelve 
feet. At noon, when the east extreme of the point bore S. 40® W. 
one mile and a half, the observed latitude was 27" 4', and depth 10 
fathoms ; but before one o’clock, it suddenly diminished to 3 ; and dur- 
ing five miles run to the N. N. E., varied from that to 6 fathoms. It 
then deepened to 9, and the outer edge of the shoals, a well-defined 
line of discoloured water, was seen stretching S. 60“ E. for Cape 
Moreton. At five o'clock, the top of the highest Glass House, 
appearing like a small peak upon the mi)untainous ridge behind, bore 
S. 6a® W., and Cape Moreton S, 11® E. twenty-two miles. The cape 
was then disappearing from the deck ; whence its elevation should be 
between three and four hundred feet above the sea; 



INTRODUCTION. 


cc 


[Prior DvmoverioB. 


Fliwdbhs. August 8 at noon, 'the eastern extremity of Sandy Cape bore 
(Ati. PI. X.) N. 51“ W., six miles, and its latitude was found to be 34“ 4a', being 
three minutes north of its situation by captain Cook. In running 
northward, within two or three miles of the edge of Break-sea Spit, 
we had 12 fathoms ; and at five o'clock, passed over the end of the 
spit in gf; Sandy Cape then bearing S. 9* E. six leagues. The 
water deepened almost immediately to more than 17 fathoms; and 
in keeping close to a south-east wind, up Hervey's Bay, the depth 
was from 20 to 14, during the night. 

On the 3rd, the wind veered to S. S. W. ; and at noon the anchor 
was dropped in 17 fathoms, with the extreme of Sandy Cape bearing 
N. 66° E. seven or eight miles. The observed latitude was 24“ 45^', 
and a tide of one mile per hour came from the southward. A fair 
wind sprung up in the afternoon, and we ran five leagues by log in 
a S. by W. direction, anchoring at dusk in n fathoms, sandy bottom. 

Aug. 4 was employed in beating up along the eastern shore, 
against a south-west wind. At three leagues above the anchorage, 
our progress was stopped by a mass of shoals which seemed to pre- 
clude all further access towards the head of the bay on that side. In 
the night, we stretched north-westward, to get roun(^them ; and in 
the evening of the 5th, anchored in 5 fathoms, three or four miles 
frorr» the western shore. 

Aug. 6. The wind being off the land, we followed the line of the 
coast upwards, as close as the shoals would allow; and before noon 
entered an opening formed by the western shore on one side, and an 
islai|d of moderate height, three or four miles long, on the other. 
The opening was not more than two miles wide, and was still further 
contracted by a low islet in the middle, surrounded with shallow 
banks. There was a large expanse of water above ; but we had 
not; advanced two miles before shoal water obliged us to tack ; and 
after having tried for a channel in every^^irection, without success, 

1 anchored in 3 fathoms, half a mile north-west from the low islet, 
and landed. ^ 



East Coast, ^ V. D. s Land.-] INTRODUCTION. 

This rocky, sandy spot lies in latitude 17'. It is much fre- 
quented by aquatic birds, particularly by that species whence it 
obtained the name of Curlew Islet; and since a small shield and 
three wooden spears were found there, it must ulso be visited occa- 
sionally by men. The larger island, lying to the east, is richly 
covered with grass and wood. Its position is nearly in the middle 
of the entrance to what may be called the upper bay ; and as no 
deep channel past the island could be found on the west, I deter- 
mined to try on the east side ; having much difficulty in believing, 
that a piece of water six or seven miles in extent every way, should 
not have a channel into it sufficiently deep for the Norfolk. 

The anchor was weighed soon after four o’clock, and several 
attempts made to get round the larger island ; but being constantly 
repulsed by shoals, I w is at length forced to relinquish the hope of 
penetrating further up Hervey’s Bay. We then steered north-west- 
ward, to complete the examination of the west side down to the coast 
seen by captain Cook. 

Aug. 7. At daylight, a sloping hummock, in latitude 24“ 50', 
bore W. 16^ N., our distance off the shore under it being one mile 
and a half, and the depth 7 fathoms. At nine, the water shoaled 
suddenly, and obliged us to haul off north-eastward. The coast 
was then seen extending to the W. N. W., and having been laid 
down by captain Cook, the north-eastern course was continued for 
Break-sea Spit, and the examination of Hervey’s Bay concluded. 

This inlet is about fifteen leagues across, from the sloping hum- 
mock to the eastern extremity of Sandy Cape, and nearly as much 
in depth. The east side is formed by a great sandy peninsula, of 
which the cape is the northern extremity ; but about half way up, 
there are several white cliffs, and others in the upper bay, which had 
the appearance of chalk. The shores at the liead and on the west 
side are more rocky than sandy. The back land is low for some 
miles, and not ill covered with grass and wood; it then rises, td^ills 
of cdhsiderable elevation, amongst which Double Mountli^S most 

VOL. I. D d 


cci 

FLIN13ERg 

1798. 



ccii INTRODUCTION. [Prior Disco/verm. 

FiiNDEBs. remarkable. The smokes in different places bespoke the country to 
1799. 

be inhabited in the scanty numbers usual on other parts of the east 
. coast; but none of the people were seen. 

Aug. 7, at ten in* the evening, we passed the end of Break-sea 
Spit in 13 fathoms, and hauled up south-east; but the winds were 
so unfavourable, that on the 14th our latitude was no more than 
29“ 19'. I kept the land barely within sight, in order to obtain the 
greatest advantage from the southwardly current ; for, contrary to 
captain Cook’s observation, it was found to be strongest at the dis- 
tance of six, and from thence to twenty leagues. Close in with the 
shore, more especially in the bights which fall within the general 
line of the coast, an eddy had been found setting to the northward. 

Light northern winds favoured us for two days ; but returning 
to the south-west, and sometimes blowing strong, it was the 20th in 
the evening before the sloop was secured in Port Jackson, although 
the current had set us 910 miles on the way. 

I must acknowledge myself to have been disappointed in not being 
able to penetrate into the interior of New Stiuth Wales, by either of 
the openings examined in this expedition ; but, however mortifying 
the conviction might be, it was then an ascertained fact, that no river 
of importance intersected the East Coast between the 24th and 39th 
degrees of south latitude. 

Conclusive The account of the discoveries which resulted from the establish- 

1 ^ 1X1 

ment of the colony in New South Wales, closes with this expedition ; 
and it remains only to point out what was wanted to be .done in these 
parts of Terra Australis.' 

(AUas,Pi.L) In Van Diemen’s Land, the opening round Point St. Vincent and 
the space between Maria’s Island and Cape Portland required to be 
further explored. The north side also, from the want of a time 
keeper in the Norfolk, required to have the longitude of its points 
better ascertained ; and that the bight between Circular Head and 
Cape Grim shopld be examined. In Bass’ Strait, some of the islands 



EasiCocut,8(V.D:8Land:\ INTRODUCTION. 

were known, but the middle of the strait and its western entrance 
were in want of much investigation, before it could be deemed a safe 
passage for ships; and the greater part of the coast on the north 
side, remained as laid down by Mr. Bass, with all the uncertainty 
attending the navigation of an open boat. 

On the east coast of New South Wales, from Bass’ Strait to Bus 
tard Bay in latitude 24°, the shore might be said to be well explored 
but from thence northward to Cape York, there were several por- 
tions which had either been passed by captain Cook in the night, oi 
at such a distance in the day time, as to render their formatior 
doubtful : The coast from 15® 30' to 14® 30' was totally unknown. 

The following openings or bights had been seen and named b} 
captain Cook, but were yet unexamined: Keppel and Shoal-watet 
Bays; Broad Sound; Ri pulse, Edgecumhe, Cleveland, Halifax, Rock- 
ingham, and Weary Bays. To the northward of these were Wey- 
mouth, Temple, Shelburne, and Newcastle Bays; and perhaps manj 
others which distance did not permit our great navigator to notice 
There was also a numerous list of islands, of which a few only hac 
been examined ; and several were merely indicated from a distam 
view. 

From 16*, northward to Cape York, an extensive ghain of reefs 
had been found to lie at a considerable distance from the coast, 
without side of the islands ; and two vessels from Port Jackson had 
met with others further south, extending nearly from 21° to 23®. It 
was of importance to ascertain the limits of these vast bodies of 
coral, were it only on account of the ships employed in the whale 
fishery ; but in the view to future settlem'ents within the tropick, it 
was necessary to be known whether these reefs might form such a 
barrier to the coast, as to render it inaccessible from the eastward : 
if not, then the open parts were to be ascertained. • 

Of the persons, manners, and xiustoms of the inhabitants, little 
new information could be expected. The skirts of th^r cc| 0 aiitry 
had been examined in the southern parts, and extensive r^ldections 


cciii 


Conclusive 

Remarks. 



cciv 


INTRODUCTION. 


[Prior Discoveries. 


CoBoiwive in natural history made ‘there ; but to the north of Endeavour River, 
the country had been seen only at a distance. The vast interior of 
this new continent was wrapped in total obscurity ; and excited, per- 
haps on that very account, full as much curiosity as did the forms of 
the shores. This part of the subject, however, will scarcely be 
thought to belong to a naval expedition ; except in so much as 
rivers and other inlets might conduce to obtaining the desired 

information. 

* 

On a general review of the various objects in Terra Australis, to 
which investigation might be usefully directed at the commencement 
of the nineteenth century, and in which natural history, geography, 
navigation, and commerce were so much interested, the question. 
Why it should have been thought necessary to send out another 
expedition ? will no longer be asked. But rather it will be allowed 
that, instead of one, there was ample room for two or three ships ; 
each to be employed for years, and to be conducted with a zeal 
and perSeverence not inferior to the examples given by the best 
navigators. 

On the arrival of His Majesty’s ship Reliance in England, at the 
latter end of 1800, the charts of the new discoveries were published, 
and a plan was proposed to the Right Hon. Sir Joseph Ranks 
for completing the investigation of the coasts of Terra Australis. 
The plan was approved by that distinguished patron of science and 
useful enterprise ; it was laid before Earl Spencer, then first Lord 
Commissioner of the Admiralty ; and finally received the sanction of 
His Majesty, who was graciously pleased to direct that the voyage 
should be undertaken ; and I had the honour of being appointed to 
the command. 



A 

VOYAGE 


TO 


TERRA AUSTRALIS. 



V€*^AGE 

TO 

TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


BOOK I. 

TRANSACTIONS FROM 'iIIE BEGINNING OF THE VOYAGE TO THE 
DEPARTURE FROM PORT JACKSON. 


CHAPTER I. 

Ap^intment. to the Investigator. Outfit of the ship. Instruments, hooks, 
and charts supplied, ivith articles for presents and barter. Liberal con- 
duct of the Hofi. East- India Company. Pa'^sage round to Spithead. The 
Roar sand. Instructions for the execution of the voyage. French passport, 
and orders in consequence. Officers and company of the Investigator, 
and men of science who emparked. Account of the time keepers. 

On the 19th of January 1801, a commission was signed at the 
Admiralty appointing me lieutenant of His Majesty's sloop Inves- 
tigator, to which the name of the ship, heretofore known as the 
Xenophon, was changed hy this commission ; and captain John 
Henry Martin havinjg received orders to consider himself to be super- 
seded, I took the command at Sheerness on the a5th of thd same 
month. 


1801 . 

January, 



A VOYAGE TO [/« England. 

The Investigator tras a north-country-built ship, of three-hun- 
dred and thirty-four tons ; aiMn fQn^li^|||^sdhibled the descrip- 
tion of vessel recommend«S|fcii®i Clft as best calculated for 
voyages of discovery. Sha had be|P|piirchased some years befoiie 
into His Majesty’s service; and having been newly coppered and 
repaired, was considered to be the best vessel which could, at that 
time, be spared for the projected voyage to Terra Australis. 

The ship was in a state of re-equipment; but, on obtaining 
permission from the Navy Board to fit her out in such manner as I 
should judge necessary, without reference to the supplies nsually 
allotted to vessels of the same class, all the stores were returned, 
and others of the best quality demanded, upon a more extensive 
scale. Such of the officers and crew as were aged, or did not volun- 
teer for this particular service, were discharged ; and able .young 
men were received in lieu from His Majesty’s ship Zealand, on 
board of which the flag of vice-admiral Graeme was flying at the 
Nore. Upoif one occasion, where eleven volunteers were to be 
received from the Zealand, a strong instance was given of the spirit 
of enterprise prevalent amongst British seamen. About three hun- 
dred disposable men were called up, and placed on one side of the 
deck ; and after the nature of the voyage, with the number of men 
wanted, had been explained to them, those who volunteered were 
desired to go over to the opposite side. The candidates were not 
less than two-hundred and fifty, most of whom sought with eager- 
ness to be received ; and the eleven who were chosen, proved, with 
one single exception, to be worthy of thfe preference they obtained. 

In making the various alterations required in the ship, and in 
performing the duties incident to an equipment of this mature, I re- 
ceived the most ready concurrence and assj^ance from Is^c Coffin, 
Esq., ( now vice-admiral Sir Isaac Coffin, Bart. ) the resi<^t naval com- 
missioner at Sheerness. At his suggestion I had thfe ship coppered 
two streaks higher than before,' and took on board a spare rudder, 
whidi, after being fitted, was* stowed away in pieces, ready against 



Sheeme$9.] TERMk AUSTRALIS. « 

those accidents to which ships employed in examining new, or little;^ 
hnowti coasts, To. Mr. Whidbey, the 

master attendant, wHo MCTsei^MP^liPbxpedition pf (»ptain Van- 
a^ver, f.was also much for his. valuable advice and assist- 

ance in the selection of the proper stores. Both these officers con- 
stantly took pleasure in promoting whatever could be useful to’ the 
voyage, or add to our comfort and convenience ; and in some cases, 
our wants, and even wishes, were anticipated. 

February i6, 1 was promoted to the rank of commander. On Febnuiiy. 
the i 4 jth of the following month, the guns, twelve six-pounders, with March, 
their ammunition and a chest of fire works were received ; and the 
provisions artd stores being all on board on the a7th, and the ship 
ready for sea, we dropped out to the Nore. I was anxious to arrive 
upon the coasts of Terra Australis in time to have the whole of the 
southern summer before me; but various circumstances retarded 
our departure, and amongst others, a passport from the French 
government, to prevent molestation to the voyage, had not arrived. I 
took advantage of this d^ay to remedy an inconvenience, under which 
we were otherwise likely to suffer. The quantity of provisions neces- 
sary to be carried out did not leave room in the holds for more water 
than fifty tons ; but by removing ten of the long guns, and sub- 
stituting a few light carronades which could be carried on the upper 
deck, ten ’tons more of water might be received, without reducing 
our efficient strength; for the ship was too deep to admit of the 
guns below being used in bad weather, whereas the carronades 
would be always serviceable. My application to have this exchange May. 
made, was complied with ; and on May so* it was effected. 

On the 2 and, a set of astronomical and surveying instruments, 
for the i^ip of myself a|||^fficers, was sent down by direction of the 
N*ivy Board; fts also yarious articles for presei^ts to, and barter w^h, 
die native inhdlMta^ of the countries to be visited, and many for 
our own use and c<myonience. Amongst the datter were roost^of 
the, books of voyages to,.the South Seas, which, with our own indi- 
voL. I. E e 



A VOYAGE TO [/» B^gbrni. 

vidual collections, and die Encyclopedia Eritannica, presented by the 
Right Hon. Sir Joseph in my cabin for the 

pse of all^he officers. Ei4^||pfl which related 

to Terra Australis and the. nd^hb^B islaiidss was copied for us 
under the direction of the late hydrographer, Alexander Dalrymple, 
Esq.; who also enriched our stock of information by communicating 
all such parts of his works as were appropriate to the voyage. 

The expense to officers of an outfit for several years, was 
much alleviated by the liberality of the Hon. East-India Company. 
The sum of £600. was ordered by the Court of Directors, to be paid 
as an allowance to tlie men of science, to the officers of the ship, 
and myself, for our tables ; and the same sum to be ^ven at the 
conclusion of the voyage. This allowance the directors were pleased 
to make, from the voyage being within the limits of the Company’s 
charter, from the expectation of our examinations and discoveries 
proving advantageous to their commerce and the eastern^ navigation, 
and partly, as they said, for my former services. 

On the 26th, I received orders to prqceed round to Spithead; 
but the winds being generally from the westward, we did not arrive 
there before the and of June. A circumstance occurred during the 
passage, which, amongst many others, shewed the necessity there 
was for a regulation since adopted, to furnish His Majesty’s ships 
with correct charts. No master had been appointed to the Investi- 
gator; nor was any officer on board intimately acquainted with the 
havigation of the Channel ; and having been most of my life 
engaged ir^foreign voyages, 1 was under the necessity, after leaving 
the pilot in the Downs,'to trust almost wholly to my chart, which 
was that of Mr. J. H. Moore. In working up under Dungeness, on 
the evening of May e8, we made a trip in shore, towards the town 
of . Hythe, as I kipposed from the chart.’ A little after six, the 
officer of the watch had reported qur distance firom the land to bo- 
near two leagues ; and there being from 10 t3S|;i4 fathoms marked 
within two or three miles of it, and no mention of any shoal lying 



TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


m the way, I intended to stand on half in hour longer; but 
ten idinutes, felt <h£diig up(^ a bank. The sails were 

^mediately thrown* al^^^l^d^^iP'^her being fine and water 
smooth, the ship was got off f|||3»ut having received any apparent 
injury. 

This sand is laid down in the Admiralty charts, under the 
name of the and extends from Dungeness towards Folkstone, 
at the distance of from two and a half, to four miles from the land. 
The leadsman, having found no bo^om with 15 fathoms at ten 
minutes before six, had very culpably quitted the chains when his 
watch was out, without taking another cast of'the lead; and the ship, 
in going af the rate of two knots and three-quarters, was upon the 
bank at twenty minutes after six ; so that it appears to be steep on 
the east side. 

The bearings given by the azimuth compass, whilst the ship 


was agroupd, were as under : 

Dungeness light house, - - - S. W. 

Lid^hurch, - ^ - - W. by S. ’ S. 

Town of Dim, but taken to be Hythe, - N. W. by N. 
Cheriton church, then supposed to be Folkstone, E. N. E. 

Cliffy eastern extreme of the land, near Dover, E. j N. 


The distance from the town of Hythe (Dim,) was guessed to be 
not less than two-and-half, nor more than four miles. 

In consequence of this accident, we went into Portsmouth June. 
Harbour and into dock on June 10; and it being ascertained that the 
ship had received no injury, we returned to Spithead next day, and 
moored as before, waiting for orders. On the 18th, commissioner 
Sir Charles Saxton paid the ship’s company their wages up to- the 
end of May, with an advance of two months ; and the officers were 
penuitted to draw bills for three months pay in advance. 

; ^ On July 17, . I, receiv^lhe following instructions for the exe- 
cutibn'of the voyage. 



A VOYAGE TO 

• By the Commissioners for executkig the 
oiSce of Lord Admiral of the United 
^f Gr^ Britain and Ireland, &c. 

'^^HEREAs the sloop you coDiftaod has been fitted and stored for 
a vojage to remote parts ; And whereas it is our intention that you 
should proceed in her to tlie coast of New Holland for tlie purpose of 
malting a complete examination and survey of the SQid coast, on the 
eastern side of which His Majesty's colony of New South Wales is 
situated ; You are hereby required and directed to put to sea the first 
favourable opportunity of wind and weather, and proceed with as 
little delay as possible in execution of the service above-mentioned, 
repairing in the first place to A^adeira and the Cope of Good Hope in 
order to take on board such supplies of water and live stock as you 
may be in want of. 

Having so done you are to make the best of your way to the coast 
of New Holland, running down the said coast from 130 degrees of 
Jsast longitude to Sass’6 Strait ; (putting if you shall ‘find it neces- 
saiy, into King George the third's Harbour for refreshments and 
vmter previous to your commencing the sur./ey ;)and onyour arrival on 
the coast, use your beat endeavours to discover such harbours as may 
be in those parts ; and in case you should discover any creek or 
opening likely to lead to an inland sea or strait, you are at liberty 
either to examine it, or not, as you shall judge it most expedient, 
until a more favourable opportunity shall enable you so te do. 

When it shall appear to you necessary, you are to repair to Sydney 
Cove for the purpose of refreshing your people, refitting the sloop 
under your command, qpd consulting with the governor of New 
South Wales upon the best means of ^carrying on the survey of the 
coast ; and having received from him such information as he may .he 
ahleto Communicate, and taken under your command the La^y Nelson 
tender, which you may expect to find at Sydney Cove« you are to re- 
commence your survey, by first diligently examining the coast from 
Bass’s Strait to King George the third’s Harbour ; which jrou may 
do either by proceeding' along shore to the westward, or, in casO 
you should think it more expedient, by proceeding first to King 



TERRA AUSTRALIS. 

Oeojrge*s canjin^ on your surrey from thence to the 

eastvtardf . 

You are to iepair ^om time to time, when the season will no 
longer admit of your carrying on the survey, to Sydney Uove ; from 
whence your are tq return^ in the execution of these instructions, so 
soon as circumstances will enable you so to do. 

You are to be very diligent in your exam^ation of the said coast, 
and to take particular care to insert in your journal eveiy circum* 
stance that may be useful to a full and complete knowledge thereof, 
noting the winds and weather which usually prevail there at different 
seasons of the year, the productions and comparative fertility of the 
soil, and the manners and customs of the inhabitants of such parts as 
you may be able to explore ; fixing in all cases, when in your power, 
the Jtrue positions both in latitude and longitude of remai'kable head 
lands, bays, and has hours, by astronomical observations, and noting 
the variation of the needle, and the right direction and course of the 
tides and currents, as well as the perpendicular height of the tides; 
and in case, during your survey, any river should be discovered, you 
are cither to proceed yoursolf in the tender, or to direct her com- 
mander to enter it, knd proceed as far up as circumstances will permit ; 
carefully laying down the course and the banks thereof, and noting 
the soundings, going on shore as often as it shall appear probable that 
any considerable Variation has taken place either in the productions 
of the soil or the customs of the inhabitants ; examining the country 
as 'far inland as shall be thought prudent to venture with the small 
number of persons who can be spared from tlie charge of the vessel, 
wherever there appears to be a probability of discovering any thing 
useful to the commerce or manufactures of the United Kingdom. 

When you sball have completely examined the whole of the 
coast from Bass’s Strait to King George the third’s I]arbour,you are, 
at such times as may be most suitable for Uie purpose, ^hich may be 
seen on a f^erence to Mr. Dalrymple’s memoir, an extract of which 
« accompanies this,) to proceed to and explore the north’-west codat of 

Holland^ where, from the extreme height of the Ude* observed 
by Dapapier, it is probable that valuable harbours may be discovered. 



A VOYAGE TO 


[/» England, . 


Haying pcrfoi^med thia service, y<w are carefully to lixamine 
the Gulf of Carpentaria, and the parts to thas^restward thereof, be- 
tween the ISOth and lS9th degrees of east longitude; taking care to 
seize the earliest, opportunity tp*dd*'«o, when the seasons and preva- 
lent winds may be favourable for visiting those seas. 

When you shall have explored the Gulf of Carpentaria and the 
' parts to the westward thereof, you are to proceed to a careful investi- 
gation and accurate survey of Torres' Strait, and when that shall 
have been completed, you are to examine and survey the whole of 
the remainder of the north, the west, and the north-west coasts of New 
Holland, and especially those parts of the coast most likely to be 
fallen in with by East-India ships in their outward-bound passages. 
And you are to examine as particularly as circumstances will 
allow, die. bank which extends itself /rom the Trial Rocks towards 
Timor, in the hope that by ascertaining the depth and nature of the 
soundings thereon, great advantage may arise to the East-lndia Com- 
pany's ships, in case that passage should hereafter be frequented by 
them. 

So soon as you sl^all have completed the whole of these surveys 
and examinations as above directed, you^ are to proceed to, and 
examine very carefully the east coast of New Holland, seen by cap- 
tain Cook, from Cape Flattery to the Bay of Inlets ; and in order to 
refresh your people, and give the advantage of variety to the painters, 
you are at liberty to touch at the Fyees, or some other of the islands 
in the South Seas. 

During the course of the survey, you are to use the tender under 
your command as much as possible ; moving the Investigator on- 
ward from one harbour to another as they shall be discovered, in 
order that the naturalists may have time to range about and collect 
the produce of the earth, and the painters allowed time to finish as 
many of their works as they possibly can on the spot where they may 
have been begun : And when you shall have completed the whole of the 
surveys and examinations as above-mentioned, you are to lose no time 
in returning with the slo(^ under your command, to England for 
farther orders, touching on your Way, if oeOtoMuy^ at Hie Cape of 



PorUmmth.'] 


TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


]l 


Good Hope^ and repairing with aa little* delay as possible to Spit* 
head, and transbiitto our secretaiy an account of your arrival. 

During your continuance, on the service above-mentioned, you 
are, by all proper opportunities, to send to our secretary for our in- 
formation, accounts of your proceedings and copies of the surveys and 
drawings which you shall have made, and such papers as the Naturalist 

-Y * * 

and the Painters employed on board may think proper to send home ; 
and upon your arrival in England you are immediately to repair to 
this office in order to lay before us a full account of your proceed- 
ings in the whole course of your voyage ; taking care before you 
leave the sloop to demand from the officers and petty officers the log 
books and journals which they may have kept and such drawings and 
charts as they may have taken, and to seal them up for our inspection. 

And whereas you have been furnished with a plant cabin |[or 
the purpose of dep'fsitiug therein such plants, trees, shrubs, &c., as 
may be collected during the survey above- mentioned,,you are, when 
you arrive at Sydney Cove, to cause the said plant cabin to be fitted up 
by the carpenter on the quarter deck of the sloop you command, 
according to the intention of its constrqptiou ; and you are to cause 
boxes for containing earth to be made and jilaccd therein, in the same 
manner as was done in the plant cabin carried out by the Porpoise 
store ship, which plant cabin you will find at Sydney Cove. 

You are to place the said plant cabin, with the boxes of earth 
contained ib it, under the charge and care of the naturalist and gar- 
dener, and to cause to be planted therein during the survey, such 
plantsji trees, shrubs, &c., as they may think suitable for the Royal 
Gardms at Ktw ; and you are, as often as you return to Sydney Cove, 
to. cause the said plants to be deposited in the governor’s garden and 

his charge, there to remain until you sail for Europe : And so 
soon W you shall be preparing to return home, you are to cause the 
smtdl plant cabin to be removed from the sloop’s quarter deck, and 
the one Brought out by the Porpoi.‘>e (which is something larger), to 
be plitced there in its stead. In this last mentioned cabin the naturalist 
tmid gardener are to place the plants, trees, shrubs, &c., which may 
have ItCKUl coRected during the survey, in order to their being brought 



A VOYAOE TO [/« Bagitxhd. 


home for His Majrtfty ; yon are> so soon as. the sloop shell arrive 
at any port in England, to^ive nofice of her arrival to His Majesfy's 
botanic gardener at KeV, and to transiMt to bkn a list and state of the 
said plants Ac.,, which. th^ gfidenor employed under your orders is 
to furnish' you with for tlFht purpose. 


Given under our 


hands the o^ J^ne, ISOl. 


(Signed), . St. Vincent. 

To T. Tbouiuudce. 

Matthew Flinders, Esq. J. Mabsvam. 

< Commander of His Majesty's sloop 
Investigator, at Spithead. 


By command of their Lordships, 

(Signed,) Evan Netean. 


„Tl»e instructions were accompanied with the extract of a memoir 
from Mr. Dalrymple, respecting the winds and weather to be ex- 
pected, principally upon the south coast of Terra Australis. Also 
with the following Passport from the French government. 

Le Premier Consul de la Republique FRAN9AISE, 
sur le compte quilui a etc rendu de la demande faite par le Lord 
Hawkesbury au Citoyen Otjo, commissaire du gouvemement 
Franfais LondreSy d’un Passeport po«r la corvette Investigator, 
dont le signalement est ci-apres, expedk'e par ^gouvemement 
Anglais, sous le commandement du capitaine Mattl^jew Flinders, 
pour un voyage de decouvertes dans la Mer Pficijupe, ayant de- 
cide que ce passeport seroit accorde, et qi^ cette expedition, dont 
Vohjet est d'etendre les connoissances huinai^es,,^’^asswrer 
davantage les prog^s de la science nautique et ^de^lUtget^a- 
phie, tmtveroit de la part du gouverftement Prangaie la samte 
etlafrotection Mcetsedres. 

Le Ministre de la Marine et de# Colonies ordenne 
tn consequence d tons les commandants deibdtmants de guerre de 



TERRA AUSTl^IS. 


13 


la RlpuhUque, d ses agens dans tmtes les colonies Franfatses, aux 
commandants des bdtiments porteurs de lettres de marque, et d tous 
autres qu’il appartiendra, de laisser passer librement et sans em~ 
pichement, ladite corvette Investigator, 5^4 qffkiers, equipage, et 
effets, pendant la dureede leur voyage ; de leur permettre d’ahor- 
der dans les differe^ts ports de la Republique, tant in Europe que 
dans les autres parties du monde, soit qu’ils soient forces par le 
. mauvais terns d’y chercher un r^uge, soit qu’ils viennent y recla- 
mer les secours et les moyens de reparation^ necessaires pour con~ 
tinuer leur voyage. It est bien entendu, cependant, qu’ils ne 
trouveroni ainsi protection et assistance, que dans le cas ou Us ne 
se seront pas volontairement detourne's de la route qu’ils doivent 
suivre, qu’ils n’auront commis, ou qu’ils n’ annonceront I’inten- 
tion de commettre aucune hostility contre la Republique Franfoise 
et ses allies, qu’ils n’auront procure, ou cherche d procurer aucun 
secours d ses enriemis, et qu’ils ne .s’occuperont^ d’ aucune espcce de 
commerce, ni de contrebande. 

Fait d Paris le quatre^Prairial an neuf di^ la Republique Franfaise. 

Le Ministre de la Marine et des Colonies 
( Signed ) Forfait. 

Par le Ministre de la Marine et des Colonies 

(Signed) Cn*'. M. Juriein. 

Signalement de la corvette. 

La corvette I’Investigator est du port de 334, tonneaux. 
Son equipage est compose de 83 hommes, outre cinq hommes de 
lettres. . 

Son artillerie estde 6 carronades de \o.. 

a ditto fife i8« 
a canons de 6 . 
a pierriers. 

Ff . 


VOL. I. 



14 


A VOYAGE TO 


[/n EfoglanA, 


1801 . 

July. 


Le smssigne, commissaire du gouvemement Frangais d 
Londres, certijie le signalement ci-dessus conforme d la note qui 
lui a ete communiquee par le ministre de Sa Majeste Britanmque. 

Londres le 4 Messidor an g. 

( Signed) Otto. 

In consequence of this passport, I received directions from the 
Admiralty “ to act in all respects towards French ships as if the two 
“ countries were not at war; and," it was added, ‘‘ with respect to 
“ the ships and vessels of other powers with which this country is 
“ at war, you are to avoid, if possible, having any communication 
“ with them ; and not to take letters or packets other t!ian such as 
“ you may receive from this office, or the office of His Majesty’s 
“ secretary of state." 

From His Grace the duke of Portland, I carried an order to 
the governor of New South Wales to place the brig Lady Nelson 
under my command, on arriving at Port Jackson ; and also one from 
the Admiralty, directing the governor, in his quality of senior naval 
officer, not to take the Investigator from thi* purposes of the voyage; 
but to assist me with all the means in his power to put them into 
execution. 

So soon as my sailing orders were received, demands were 
sent on shore for provisions to replace what had been consumed at 
Spithead ; and they came on board next morning, when the ship 
was unmoored. We were able to stow a proportion of provisions 
for twelve months, bread excepted, of which only seven months 
cduld be taken, including a part in flour. Of salt meat I took for 
eighteen months, knowing that little reliance cduld be had upon the 
colony in New South Wales for that article ; and further to guard 
against any detriment to the voyage from a want of provisions, I 
left an application to the Admiralty for a general supply, for twelve 
months ; to be sent after me, and lodged in the store houses at Port 
Jackson for our sole use. 



TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


15 


Portsmouth.'] 

Of the various extra provisions usually furnished as preserva- 
tives of health to the crews of His Majesty’s ships going upon similar 
service, our supply was abundant; and the surgeon was as liberally 
furnished with antiscorbutic medicines. » 

The complement of the Xenophon had been seventy-five men; 
but on the name and destination of the ship being changed, the fol- 
lowing establishment was ordered. The names of the officers are 
added to the list, and also of the men of science who took part in the 
expedition. 


Astronomer, - 1 

Naturalist, - - 1 

Natural-history painter, - 1 

Landscape painter, - 1 

Their servants, 4 

Gardener, - - 1 

Miner, - - 1 ' 

• 

Supernumeraries 1 0 

Commander, - 1 

Lieutenants, - 2^ 

Master, - - I 

Surgeon, - - 1 

Surgeon's assistant, - 1 

Master's mates and midship- 
men, - - 6 


Boatswain, - 1 

Gunner, - - 1 

Carpenter, - 1 

Clerk, - - 1 


John Crosley. 
Robert Brown, 
Ferdinand Bauer. 
William Westall. 

Peter Good. 

John Allen. 


Matthew binders. 
Robert Fowler. 
Samuel W. Flinders. 
John Thistle. 

Hugh Bell. 

Robert Purdie. 
Thomas Evans. 
William 1 aylor. 

John Franklin. 
Thomas Bell. 
Nathaniel Bell. 
Kennet Sinclair. 
Sherrard P. Lound. 
James Wolsey. 
Charles Douglas. 
Robert Colpits. 
Russel Mart. 

John Oliver 


Complement brought over, 1 6 


Cook and mate, - 2 

Sail raker and mate, - 2 

is rinourcr, - 1 

Master at anm^, - 1 

Boats wairj's mates, 2 

Gunner's mate, 1 

Carpenter’s mates, 2 

D*. crew, - 2 

Quarter masters, - 4 

Able and ordinary seamen and 
landsmen, 35 

Marines. 

Serjeant, - 1 

Corporal, - 1 

Drummer, L 

Privates, 12 


Complement 83 
Deficiency. 


Sailmaker, 1 

Master at arms, 1 

Quartermasters, - 2 

Cook’s mate, - 1 

Carpenter's crew, - • 1 

Seaman, - 1 


Part of complement 16 


Deficient of complement 7 


1801 . 

July. 



A VOYAGE TO [/« England. 

The deficiency of seven, and the two young gentlemen more 
than allowed, left the whole number of persons on board to be eighty 
eight, at the time of sailing. 

Mr. Crosley, tfie astrdnomer, brought with him an assortment 
of instruments from the Board of Longitude; part for use at sea, 
and the larger instruments for making observations on shore, at such 
ports and bays as we might anchor in during tlie voyage. His 
time keepers were the numbers 543 and 520, and watch 465 of 
Earnshaw ; and the numbers 176 and 5 ^ of Arnold. Amongst the 
instruments supplied to me by the Navy Board, which were uncon- 
nected with the above and mostly intended for surveying, was 
Arnold's watch number 1736, sent for the purpose of being taken up 
rivers in the tender, or in boats. Its error from mean Greenwich 
time, at noon July 17, was 2' 38", 71 slow, and its rate of losing per 
day 4", 41. This error and rate were given me by Mr. Bayly, 
mathematical master of the naval academy at Portsmouth, who had 
the kindness to take charge of the \yatch during our stay at Spithead. 



Towards Madeira.] TERRA AUSTRALIA 


1801 . 

July. 


17 


CHAPTER H. 

Xkparture from Spithead. Variation of the compass. The Dezerlas. 

Arrival at Madeira. Remarks on Funchal. Political state of the 
island. Latitude and longitude. Departure from Madeira. The 
island St. Antonio. Foul tvinds ; and remarks upon them. The ship 
leaky. Search made for Isle Sable. Trinidad. Saxemherg sought 
for. Variation of the compass. State of the ship’s company, on 
arriving at the Cape of Good Hope. Refitment at Simon’s Bay. 
Observatory set up. The astronomer quits the expedition. Rates of 
the time keepers. Some remarks on Simon’s Bay. 

o N July i8 we sailed from Spithead ; and in the afternobn of the Saturday is. 
30 th, having a light breeze froip the eastward, with fine weather, Monday, 20. 
our departtlre was taken from the Start, bearing N. i8» W. five or six 
leagues. On the following day we fell in with vice-admiral Sir Tuesday, 21. 
Andrew Mitchell, with a detachment of four three-decked ships 
from the grand.fleet cruizing before Brest It was gratifying to learn 
from the admiral, that although he had not dropped an anchor for 
seventeen weeks, there was not a scorbutic man on board ; nor any 
in the sick list, except from slight hurts. 

The variation of the compass off St. Alban's Head, had been 
observed by Mr. Thistle, the master, to be 28® 43' wt?st, from ampli- 
tude ; oft' the Start it was 29° 34' from a western azimuth, and 
30' from amplitude ; but on the following afternoon, where the 
variation should have been nearly the same, azimuths gave 24" 12' 
and an amplitude 23° 43' west ; the mean 5* 35' less than oft' the 
Start. The same compass was always used, and the ship's head 
was at west (magnetic), or within one point of it, in all the cases; 
but in the first observations the compass was placed on the binnacle. 



IS A VOYAGE TO [From England. 

1801. and in the last, was upon the booms. In order to ascertain clearly 
what effect this change of place did really produce, I took observa- 
Mooday 27. tions a fcw days afterward *with every compass on board, and Mr. 

Thistle did the same upon the booms, ten or twelve feet before the 
main mast, where the compasses were as far removed from any 
quantity of iron, as they could be placed in any part of the ship. 
The head was south-we.st by the steering compass, our latitude 
was 38° 1' north, longitude 14* 18' west, and the results were as 
under. 

Variation from an azimuth compass by Wal- 
ker, marked No 1 : mean of both sides 
of the vane, _ _ _ 

From a ditto marked No. 2, 

ditto marked No. 3, - 

Walker’s meridional compas»> 

Ditto used as a common azimuth. 

Compass made by Adams, 

Means,' 25 3 20 57W. 

Thus a change of place from the binnacle to a little before the centre 
of the ship, produced an alteration of 4° 37' in the mean variation, the 
same way as, but a less quantity than Mr. Thistle had found it off 
the Start, when the ship's head was west. The true variation I judge 
to have been 23®, and that the observations on the booms showed 
2° too little, and those on the binnacle 2i* too much. The error in 
excess, upon the binnacle, appeared to continue so long as the ship 
was in the northern hemisphere and the head to the westward ; but 
it diminished gradually as we approached the equator, and the ob- 
servations on the binnacle and booms then nearly coincided. This 
example is sufficient to show the impropriety of allowing a variation 
upon the ship’s course, from observations taken elsewhere than at 
the binnacle. 


Binnacle. Booms. 

® / o / 

25 47 22 17 w. 

25 35 19 15 

24 41 21 27 

25 46 

25 51 20 35 

25 44 21 g 



Totoards MadeiraJ\ TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


19 


We continued our course for Madeiri, witjj fair winds. Our 
latitude on the 30th, was 30* 5' north, longitude 15“ 31' west; and 
in the afternoon Porto Santo was seen, bearing west-north-west; 
the wind then became light and variablq, and soon afterwards died 
away. The variation observed on the binnacle by the master, when 
the head was south- west-by-south, was 22® 45', but on the booms 
19* 51'; the true variation being as I believe, 20® 51' west. 

It was calm on the 31st, and I had a boat lowered dowmand 
went round the ship with the carpenter, to inspect the seams near 
the water line ; for we had the mortification to find the ship begin- 
ning to leak so soon as the channel was cleared, and in the three 
last days she had admitted three inches of water per hour. The 
seams appeared sufficiently bad, especially under the counter and at 
the butt ends, for the le^k to be attributable to them ; and as less 
water came in when the ship was upright than when heeling to a 
beam wind, I hoped the cause need not be sought lower down. Be- 
fore hoisting up the boat, a small hawke’s-bill turtle was picked up ; 
and between this time and thaf of anchoring in Funchal Road, 
several others were seen, and a second, weighing about thirty pounds, 
was caught. 

Aug. 1, at noon, Porto Santo boreN. ii°W., and the rocky 
islands called Dezertas, from N. 65® to S. 85® W. distant three leagues. 
The south end of these islands lies, by our observations, in latitude 
32® 24' 20" north, which differs less than one mile from its position 
in Mr. Johnston’s chart of the Madeiras. There being little wind 
next morning, I went off in one of the cutters, accompanied by Mes- 
sieurs Brown and Bauer, the naturali.st and natural-history painter, 
to the southernmost island, called Biijio, which was not far distant. 
On the way, I shot several birds of the puffin kind, one of which 
had a fathom of small brass wire attached to its wing. The distai}ce 
of the land proved to be more considerable than was expected ; and 
there bei^ a current setting southward we did not reach the 


1801. 

July. 

Thursday 30. 


Friday 31 . 


August. 
Saturday 1. 


Sunday 2. 



90 

. 1801 . 
August* 
Bmduy 2. 


Monday 3. 


A VOYAGE TO Madeira. 

shore until near tl^ee iri the afternoon, when it was necessary tolhink 
of returning. 

A small ledge of rocks, which projected a little from under 
the cliffs at the south-west part of Bujio, afforded a landing place ; 
but it was impossible to ascend the top of the island. We saw no 
other animated beings than a few birds something like gr^en linnets, 
but which were said, at Madeira, to have been canary birds ; and 
the other ])roductions were scarcely sufficient to afford amusement 
even to a naturalist. The cliflfe over head showed marl^s of irregular 
stratification, and in some of the lines there was a red tinge, appar- 
ently of iron. The base underneath was black and honey-combed, 
as if it had been in the fire, resembling in this respect the common 
stone at Funchal. 

#e left Bujio well satisfied that, so far as we could judge of 
the islands, the name Dezertas, or Desert Islands, was well, chosen.; 
and soon after dusk, reached the ship. There was then^ a good' 
breeze from the north-eastward, with which we steered for Madeira, 
tacking occasionally during the night, tQ*take advantage of the dif- 
ferent flaws of wind. At the following noon, the ship was under. 
Brazen Head, which forms the east side of Funchal Iload ; and being 
there becalmed, we towed in with the boats, and came to an anchor 
at four o'clock, in sa fathoms, steadying ^ith a kedge to the north- 
west. In this situation, which seems to be as good as any ^ In file 
road, the bearings by compass were as follow : 

Brazen Head, - - - S. 71* E. 

Punta de Cruz, on the west side, - N. 85 W. 

Loo Fort, distant one-third of a mile, N. la W. 

The north-east winds usually prevail at Madeira in the summer 
season, and sometimes blow very strong. To reach Funchal Road, 
ships are accustomed to sail between the east end of Madeira and the 
Dezertas, before the wind. They are notary desirous of passing 
close to Brazen Head, where they would be becalmed, but Jceep off a 



TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


Eumhal Road."] 


21 


mile or two, in the skirt of the north-east w?nd, mjtil they are off the isoi. * 
town, or even off’ Punta de Cruz, wliere they generally find a 
breeze from the soUth-west, which takes them to the anchorage. 

This south-west wind is the sea breeze ®f Funchal ; and during the 
time we lay in the road, it usually set in at eight or nine o’clock in 
the morning, add prevailed as far as three or four miles in the offing, 
tillsunSet. A^variable breeze comes off the land in the night; at 
which time it is recommended to ships to pass close to Bfazen Head 
and tow into, the road. ’ 

Wfi found his Majesty’s ship Argo lying here ; and I waited 
upon captairf James Bowen, immadlately that the ship was secured. 
Lieutenant Flinders was sent, at the same time, to present my re- 
spects to the Portuguese governor, and to ask his Excellency’s 
permissi^ to purchase ihe necessaries of which we stood in need ; 
as also for the scientific gentlemen to make such an examination of 
the natural productions of tfie island, as oxir short stay would allow. 

The first request was granted by the governor in polite terjns, and 
accompanied with offe^ of assistance; but an answer to the second 
w^as deferred until he*should see me. 

This evening^ the - ship was heeled three streaks, when it was 
found that she admitted more than three inches of water per hour ; 
whereas, when upright, ft: scarcely amounted to one inch. Next 
mofning,- therefore, the carpenters began caulking two seams above Tuesday 4» 
the copper, all round, whilst the seamen were employed in shifting 
tfte top masts and examining the rigging. 

. By the assistance of* Joseph Pringle, Esq., the British consul, 

I procured boats from the shore to be sent for our, empty water 
casks ; and an ox was killed for our use, and wine prepared for 
embarkation. His Excellency, the governor, had appointe4 noon of 
this day to receive my visit ; and I waited upon him in form, accom- 
panied by the consul, who interpreted between us. The governor 
repeated his offers of assistance ; and on being made to understand the 
nature of the excursions which our gentlemen desired to make into 
vot. I. G g 



22 


180 U 
August. 
Tuesday 4. 


Thursday 6‘. 


A VOYAGE TO [At Madeira. 

the country, he granted liis permission with the utmost readiness. 
After I had answered some questions relative to the settlement of 
political affairs in the north of Europe, we took 6ur leave ; and were 
attended out by the officers *in waiting, and saluted by the guard. 

On the 6th in J^e evening, our supply of provisions was 
received, and the caulking of the ship completed.* The scientific 
gentlemen returned from an expedition towards the Pic 6 Ruivo ; 
which is the highest of a ridge of mountains occupying the central 
parts of the island, and is said to be 5067 feet, or nearly an English 
mile, above the level of the sea. The ascent was found to be very 
difficult; and this, with the heat of the weather and limitation of 
their time to this evening, disabled them from reaching the summit. 
It was late when they arrived at the shore ; and in embarking abreast 
of the tow'ii, they had the misfortune to be swamped, and tp lose the 
greater part of their collections and sketches, although the boat was 
managed by Portuguese watermen, accustomed to the place. 

The best landing is behind the Loo Rock ; but the stony beach 
in fronl of the town is usually safe in the summer time. It was so 
on our first arrival, until the strong eastern wiifds in thC offing raised 
so much sv ell as to make it dangerous, even fo/ people experienced 
in the management of a boat in the surf. 

The town of Funchal is placed at the foot of a mountain, which 
projects from the great central ridge ; and the houses being mostly 
white, they form a strong, but agreeable contrast with the back land. 
At different elevations up the side of the mountain, are scattered the 
country houses of the richer inhabitants, placed amongst groqps of 
trees and surrounded with vines. These, with a convent dedicated 
to Our Lady of the Mountain, which, like the houses, is white, but 
partly hidden by foliage, give to the whole a picturesque and pleasing 
appearance from the ships in the road. The town is larger, and 
there was more trade and activity in it than I was prepared to expect 
in a small colony, where the students of the college and ecclesiastics 
of diflerent orders form no inconsiderable part of the superior class 



Funchal Road."] 


TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


2 


of inhabitants. Several British merchants reside at Madeira ; their isoi. 
houses of business are at Funchal, but their favourite rcsideiu cs arc TJmi»dLy c 
upon the side of the’mountain. I accompanied captain Bowen to one 
of these, the hospitable seat of Mr. Murdoch, ‘and thought it one of 
the prettiest places I had seen. The house of Mr. Pringle, tlic 
consul, was my home when on shore; indeed the politeness of our 
countrymen prevented me from experiencing the accommodation 
afforded to strangers at a house in the town, dignified with the name 
of hotel. Some of our gentlemen complained of its being miserable 
enough, even without the swarms of fleas and otlier vermin by which 
they were molested. 

His Majesty's ships Argo, Carysfort, Falcon, and transports, 
under the command of captain James Bowen, had arrived in Funchal 
Road about nine days bf'ore us ; having on board the 85th regiment 
under colonel Clinton. After making their dispositions, the two 
commandqrs sent to inform the Portugues-; governor, that His Bri- 
tannic Majesty, considering the probability of an attack from the 
French upon the islan< 3 |^, had sent troops to assist in its defence ; and 
they demanded permission for the forces to land. A council was 
called by the governor ; and it being agreed that even were they 
inclined yet no effectual resistance could be made, the permission 
was given, and a place assigned for the encampment of the troops 
to the west of the town. A part of the 8,/;th was afterwards quar- 
tered in the Loo Fort and in tliat of St. Diego, which command both 
the town and the road ; and the men were employed in putting 
these fortifications into a state of defence. 

These arrangements caused no change in the administration of 
the government, nor in the trade of the island ; but the governor 
was said to be not satisfied that his conduct would be approved. On 
the day of our arrival, he received intelligence of peace being con- 
cluded between Portugal and Spain, but that the war with France was 
continued ; and 'before we sailed. His Majesty's sloop Voltigeur 
brought despatches from the Court- of Lisbon, which directed the 
governor to receive the British troops ; and it was supposed tJiat 



24 A VOYAGE TO [At Madeira. 

!8oi. every thing connected w\th the defence of the island would be com- 
Tii^S'ay 6. niittcd to them. This was the state of things when I took leave of 
captain Bowen and of colonel Clinton. 

Water, wine, stud freSh beef, were the supplies procured at 
Madeira. Wine for the ship’s company was charged at the enormous 
price of ^v. ^d. per gallon, and the beef at lod. per pound ; I there- 
fore took only small quantities of each. For good Madeira, we paid as 
much as .£’42. the pipe. Fruit and onions were in abundance, and 
probably were not of less advantage to the health of the people than 
the more expensive articles. 

The latitude observed in Funchal Road was 32* 37' 44" north. 
The longitude, as given in the Requisite Tables, is 17'’ & 15" west ; 
but in the Connoissance des Temps for i 7 . 0 ®> 't is laid down by a 
member of the Academy of Sciences, probably the Chevalier de Borda, 
at 16" 56' from Greenwich. Arnold’s watch No. 1736, in my care, 
gave 16' 22' 42", and the greatest longitude shown by any of the six 
time keepers was 16® 54' 26". This was given by Earnshaw’s watch 
No. 465, which had kept an uniform rate during fifteen months pre- 
viously to its being brought on board. We made use of this watch 
to reduce some lunar observations taken a few days before arriving, 
and others after sailing, to the place of anchorage ; and the result 
was as follows : 

Ten sets of distances, east and west of the moon, 

taken by Mr. Crosley in Funchal Bay and after- eta 
wards, with a Troughton’s sextant, - 16 59 21 W. 

Eight sets,* east and west, taken by me with a 
Troughton’s circle dnd two sextants, before and 
afterwards, _ _ _ _ iff 51 28 

West longitude of Funchal by lunar observations, it> 55 24 

* Four of these are uncorrected for t!ic erros of the lunar and .^^olar tables, 'fliey 
wrre tukt n Aug. 29, on which no observation of the moon was made at Greenwich ; 
and t\\e errors ohserved on the 2ji\\ and SOth were so irregular, that no proportion can be 
made between them with any prospeefof accuracy. Were the errors of the SOih applied, 
the longitude of Funchal would be 4' less. 



Funchal Road.l TERRA AUSTRALIS. 25 

We were therefore induced to prefer the , in the Connoissance isoi. 

des Temps, as being nearer the true longitude of Funchal from Timt^ye. 
Greenwich, than th6 17* 6' 1,5" of the Requisite Tables. 

Every person had returned on board on Friday morning; and Friday 7. 
a young man, a native of Ireland, who had been sent here sick in a 
French cartel, applying to go the voytge, I ordered him to be 
entered, on the surgeon reporting him to be a fit man for His 
Majesty’s service. 

On quitting Funchal Road, we were taken aback, at two 
o’clock, by the cast-north-cast wind, about two miles off Brazen 
Head. It blew so strong as to make it necessary to clew down all 
the sails; ai d until next morning, nothing above close-reefed top Saturdays, 
sails could be carried with safety. At noon, the log gave 162 miles 
from Funchal ; but the cloudy weather did not admit of taking 
observations. 

At daybreak of the qth the island Palma was in sight, bearing Sunday ». 
S. 72* E. ten or twelve leagues. Albacores and bonitas now began 
to make their appearance, and the officers and men were furnished 
with hooks and lines, and our harpoons and fiz-gigs were prepared. 

This day I ordered lime juice and sugar to be mixed with the grog; 
and they continued to be given daily to every person on board, until 
within a short time of our arrival at the Cape of Good Hope. 

We carried fair, and generally i’lesh winds, until the 15th in .Saturday is. 
the morning, when St. Antonio, the uorth-westernmost of the Cape- 
Verde Islands was in sight. At eight o’clock, the extremes bore 
N. 6(^'E and S. 13“ W., and the nearest part was distant four miles; 
in which situation no bottom could be found at 75 fathoms. A boat 
was observed near the shore, and our colours were hoisted ; but no 
notice appeared to be taken of the ship. 

The north-west side of St. Antonio is four or five leagues in 
length ; and rises abruptly from the sea, to hills which are high 
etiough to be seen fifteen, or more leagues from a ship’s deck. 

These barren hills are intersected by gullies, which bore marks of 



26 A VOYAGE TO {From Madeira. 

1801. much water having passed down them. By the side of one of these 
SaUm^y^i.5. gulhes, which was near the place where we lost sight of the boat, 
there was a path leading up into the interior of the island. The 
south-west and south points'are low ; they lie N. 14,° W. and S. 14* E. 
and are five or six miles asunder. Between them, the land hollows 
back so as to form somewhat of a bay, which, if it afford good 
anchorage, as it is said to do, would shelter a ship from all winds 
betw'cen north and east-south-east. We did not observe any beach 
at the head of the bay, perhaps from having passed at too great a 
distance. 

No observations could be taken for fixing the situation of this 
island; but in 1795, Mr. Croslcy and myself made the high land 
near the south-west point to lie in 17° 00' north, and by uncorrected 
lunar observations, in 25“ ja' west; which agrees well with the 
position of the north-west point, as given by captain Vancouver.* 
The variation from azimuth on the evening of the 14th, before 
making the land, was 13° 51' west, and 13“ 3' this evening, when 
four leagues to the west of it; the compass being placed on the 
binnacle, and the ship’s head south-south-west (magnetic) in both 
cases. The true variation here, at this time, I judge to have been 
12® 24' west. Captain Vancouver observed 12° 32', in 1791; but it 
does not ap])ear how the ship's head was directed. 

Some distant land opened from the south point of St, Antonio, 
at S. 75" E. ; which I took to be a part of the island St. Lucia. 

During the three days before making St. Antonio, the wind 
varied from the regular north-east trade, to east-north-east, and as 
far as south-east-by-east ; and about the time of seeing the land, it 
dwindled to a calm. For three days afterwards it was light, and 
variable between north and south-east; after which it sometimes 
blew from the north-west and south-west, and sometimes from the 
• eastw'ard. These variable winds, with every kind of weather, but 
Sunday 23. most frequently with rain, continued until the 23rd, in latitude li* 


• Voyage round the World, Vol. I. p«ge 10, 



TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


2T 


Towards the Cape.'] 

north and longitude 23® west; when a steady breeze set in from the isoi. 
south-westward, and the weather became more settled and pleasant. 

The clouds were sufficiently dense to keep off the intense heat of the 
vertical sun, but did not often prevent us from obtaining daily 
observations for the latitude and longitude. At the same time with 
the south-west wijid came a swell from the southward, which jnade 
the ship plunge considerably; and so far opened her leaks, that she 
again made two inches of water in the hour. 

On the 27th, in latitude 6“ north and longitude 17^® wes^ a Thursdavjr. 
noddy was caught, and next day a swallow was found dead in my Friday as. 
sleeping cabin. This poor little bird had been our companion for 
three or four days before, and had become a favourite. It was 
generally seen darting past the lee scuttles and ports, apparently 
after the flies which were cairicd out by the streams of air; some- 
times it alighted upon the boats which hung on the ship’s quarters, 
and more than once rested itself in the cabin where, at length, it was 
• found dead. 

The south-western winds continued to blow without intermis- 
sion, and drove us, much against my inclination, far to tlic eastward, 
towards the coast of Africa. One or two attempts wx*rc made to 
go upon the w’estern tack; but this could not be done with any 
advantage until tlic 2nd of September, wh<*n we were in latitude SeptendnT. 
3® 50' north, and longitude ill” west. The wind had veered gra- " 

dually round, from south-west to south, as we ajjproachcd the African 
coast, to the direction of whicli it kept at nearly a right angle. . I 
had not fully adverted to the probability, that the winds blowing upon 
this coast would prevail to a greater extent at this season than at 
any other time of the year; otherwise, as I wished to avoid Africa, 

I should have passed some degrees to the westward of the Cape- 
Verde Islands, and probably have carried the north-east trade to tjie 
12th, or perhaps to the 10th degree of north latitude; and in 8“, or 
at furthest in 6 ^, the south-east trade might have been expected. 

Captain Cook, in his second voyage, experienced the same 



28 A VOYAGE TO {FromMadtkk. 

1801. south-western winds, and was carried so far eastward, that he 
We^*^! crossed the equator in longitude 8 * west. Monsieur de la P^rouse 
also experienced them, and both were here at the same season with 
ourselves ; that is, in the months of August and September, when 
the African continent had received its greatest degree of heat.. 

Although I preferred to avoid Africa, it is by no means cer- 
tain that a good passage to the Cape of Good Hope may not be Jii^de, 
especially at this season, by steering round the Bight of Benin with 
the south-west and south winds. It is probable, that on approach- 
ing the meridian of Greenwich the wind would be found to return 
to the south-west, and perhaps more westward, and enable a. ship to 
reach the loth degree of south latitude before meeting the south- 
east trade ; in which case, the circuit to be made before attaining 
the western winds beyond the southern tropic, would be much short- 
ened. The East-India-Company’s ships bound to St. Helena, do, I 
believe, now generally follow that route. 

The leakiness of the ship increased with the contitmance df 
the south-west winds; and at the* end of a week, amounted to five 
inches of water an hour. It seemed, however, that the leaks were 
mostly above the water's edge, for on tacking to the westward they 
were diminished to two inches. This working of the oakum out of 
the seams indicated a degree of weakness which, in a ship destined 
to encounter every hazard, could not be contemplated without unea- 
siness. The very large ports, formerly cut in the sides to receive 
thirty-two-pound carronades, joined to what I had been able to 
collect from the dock yard officers, had given me an unfavour- 
able opinion of her strength ; and this was now but too much con- 
firmed. Should it be asked, why representations were not made, and 
a stronger vessel procured ? I answer, that the exigencies of the navy 
were such at thJit time, that I was given to understand no better 
ship could be spared from the service ; and my anxiety to complete 
the investigation of the coasts of Terra Australis did not admit of 
refusing the one offered. 



TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


29 


Towards the Cape.] 

The wind was at south when we tackdd to the westward ; but isoi. 
it shortly veered to south-by-east, and as far as south-east-by-south, ■^urs^yT. 
which enabled me to look up for the small Isle Sable, or St. Paul, said 
to lie in o“ 25' south, and about i8i* west. , I was desirous of ascertain- 
ing the true position of this, and of some other small islands, laid 
down in the neighbourhood of the equator. They are placed so 
much, in the tracks, both of outward and homeward bound ships, 
that it was not improbable some one of the vessels missed at dif- 
ferent times, might have suffered shipwreck upon them ; and the 
hope that we might be the happy means of restoring to their country 
and friends some unfortunate fellow creatures, perhaps countrymen, 
was an additional incitement to look after them. 

On the 7th, our latitude was 0° 43' north, and we expected to Monday 7 . 
cross the equator some time in the following night. It was a part of 
my plan fgr preserving the health of the people, to promote active 
amusements amongst them, so long as it did not interfere with the 
duties of the ship; and therefore the ancient ceremonies used on 
this occasion, were allowed to be ‘performed this evening ; and the 
ship being previously put under snug sail, the seamen were furnished 
with the means, and the permission, to conclude the day with merri- 
ment, At noon next day, the latitude was o" 17' south, and longi- Tuesdays, 
tude 17® 7' west; so that the line had been crossed in nearly 17*, about 
seven in the morning. 

From the longitude of 11®, we had been constantly attended 
by that species of the pelican called man-of-war bird by our seamen, 
and fregate by the French; but not one of them was *10 be seen at 
this time, although we were drawing nc?ar to the supposed situation 
of St. Paul. At four in the afternoon, our latitude was judged to be 
0“ 29' south ; and the course then steered was west, by compass, for 
a current of ten miles to the north had fully counteracted the west- 
ern variation on the two preceding days. On the^th, the latitude Wednet.ji. 
was o® 43' south, and longitude 18° 35'. We ran northward four 
hours, finding the current had not prevailed as before ; and then 
VOL I. H h 



so 


VOYAGE TO 


[Ihom Madetta 

1801. steer^ M the parallel ‘of the island. Next day at noon, our situ- 
Thursday 10. atioii was in 0° 2s' south and so 5 west; and seeing no land, nor 
any signs ofbeing in its neighbourhood, I gave up the search after the 
island, and hauled south-WQstward on our way to the Cape of Good 
Hope. 

In the morning, I had observed the variation with Walker’s 
meridional compass, when the ship's head was W. by N. ( magnetic ) ; 
upon the binnacle it gave 14° 30', and on the booms 13° o' west. 
Thus the difference, arising from a change of place in the compass, 
appeared to diminish sensibly as we approached the magnetic equator. 
The true variation I judge to have been 13“ 11' west. 

During the two nights of our search for St. Paul’s, the quan- 
tity of sail was so reduced that not more than ten or twelve leagues 
should be passed between dusk and daylight ; by which means the 
view astern, in the morning, nearly reached to the horizon of the pre- 
ceding evening, and any thing, a little elevated above the surface of 
the water, could scarcely escape being seen from the mast head, 
more especially as we were fortunate in having distinct views to- 
wards each setting and rising sun. The Idok-out, also, was parti- 
cularly attended to ; for at this time was commenced the system 
which, in all similar cases, I intended to pursue throughout the 
voyage. A part of this plan was an order to the three warrant 
officers to take charge of the look-out betwixt dark and daylight, 
and to be answerable for the vigilance with which it should be exe- 
cuted, both in their own persons, and in those who were placed upon 
the same duty under them. The leisure usually enjoyed by this 
class of officers, particularly by the gunner and carpenter, I conceived 
to admit of this abridgment, without injury to their ordinary sea 
duties. 

I had twice before crossed the equator, at the respective distances 
of twenty-six and seventy-three miles to the west of where our search 
for the Isle of St. Paul ceased ; and Mr. Thistle, the master, had 
crossed the parallel of 95' south, in longitude aa° la', a few months 



Towards the C«pe.'\ 


TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


81 


before ; indeed if the Isle had existed between the longitudes of September 
so" and 35°, it must have been repeatedly seen. I therefore 
think it may be asserted, that there is no land between 17® and 25° 
west, either in, or about the latitude oT 25' south. The track of 
Mons. de la P6rouse cuts that parallel in longitude 16* ; and he saw 
no other marks of the vicinity of land than the man-of-war birds 
which had followed him for several days. If the presence of thtese 
birds be any indication of land, I should suppose that there was some 
lying between the 1 ith and 16th degrees of west longitude ; and if 
such an island as St. Paul exist, it will probably be found within 
those limits. 

Having lost all hope of finding this island, I could have wished 
to recross the equator and run in the latitude of 55' north ; in which 
parallel the isle Pennedo de St. Pedro, sometimes also called St. Paul, 
is said to be situate. In Arrowsmith’s general chart, it is marked in 
34® west longitude, whilst another authority places it to the west of 
37®,* but I considered that the search might carry me as far as 39", 
and perhaps further ; and my orders being silent with respect to 
these islands, I did liot think myself authorized to thus occupy so 
much time ; and we therefore hauled to the south-westward on the 
afternoon of the 10th, as before mentioned. On the following day, Friday ij. 
a gannet was seen, which seemed to imply that our situation of 1^" 
south, and 21^° w'est, was not far removed from some island or rock ; 
for I do not recollect to have seen this bird at a greater distance 
from land than thirty leagues. 

The trade wind varied from south-south-east to east-south-east, 
and commonly blew fresh, with frequent squalls. The swell from the 
southward, with which these winds were for some days accompanied, 
caused the ship to work so much, that she soon let in as great a quan^ 
tity of water on this tack, as she before had done on the other ; I 

* V oyage of La Pirowe, page 60 of the London translation. I am lately informed, 
that Pennedo de St. Pedro lies in latitude 0° 55', north, and longitude 27® 0 <west; that 
it makes like four sail of ships, and is covered with birds, but affords mo water. 



82 A VOYAGE TO [From Madeira. 

therefore judged it advisable to alter the plan of keeping within 
seven points of the wind, and to go with it upon the beam ; and also 
to put in practice every means of lightening the upper works, for they 
seemed to be very inadequate to support the weight with which they 
Jiad been unavoidably loaded. Two eighteen-pound carronades, 
stern chacers, were taken off the upper deck and struck into the hold ; 
the’‘sparc rudder, and a variety of other things which a want oY 
room had obliged us to stow in the main and mizen channels, were 
taken within board ; and every exterior weight concentrated as much 
as possible. After this was done, the tremulous motion caused by 
every blow of the sea, exciting a sensation as if the timbers of the 
ship were elastic, was considerably diminished ; and the quantity of 
water admitted by the leaks was also somewhat reduced. 

On the 13th, in latitude 4“ 44' south and longitude 23* 17' west, 
a swallow, a gannet, and two sheerwaters were seen ; and from six 
to eight in the evening, the officer of the watch and myself thought 
the water to be much smoother than before, or than it was after- 
ward. Had it been in an unknown sea, I should have been per- 
suaded that some island, or shoal, lay at no great distance to the 
south-eastward of our situation at that time. 

The trade wind continued, with some little variety in its di- 
Sunday 20 . rection, to blow fresh until the 20th, when it became light, and some- 
times calm. We were then approaching the small island- Trinidad. 
Many gannets were seen at twenty-four leagues off, but none at a 
Wcdnfis. 23. greater distance. On the 23rd, the island was in sight ; and at noon, 
when our latitude was 20* 1' south, and longitude 29® 13' west, a 
peaked hummock near the* eastern extremity bore S. 25° W.,- nine 
or ten leagues. The western extremity bore S. 29“ W., and at first 
appeared to be a bluff head ; but it afterwards assumed the form of a 
conical rock, and was, in all probability, the Nine Pin of captain 
. D' Auvergne’s chart. One of' the rocks called Martin Vas, was 
visible from the main top, and angled 49* 43' to the left of the 
peaked hummock ; its bearing was consequently very near S. 23* E. 

Mons. de la P6rouse, who sent a boat on shore to Trinidad, lays 


1801. 

September. 
Friday il. 


Sunday 13. 



TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


Yowarda the Cape.'] 


8S 


dawn the latitude of the south-east point at 20*31' south, and longi- laot. 
tude from lunar observations, a8* 37' west of Greenwich.- The lati- 
tude appeared to agree with our observations ; but in the longitude 
there is some diflference. According* to Earnshaw's two time 
keepers. No. 465 and 543, which kept better rates than the remain- 
ing four, the longitude of the Nine Pin is 29® 25^' west; which 
being reduced to the south-east point, will place it in 29° 23', or 
46' west of the French navigator.* The longitude in captain 
D'Auvergne’s plan of Trinidad, constructed 1782, is 29® 55, or 32' 
still further west. From two sets of distances of the star Altair to 
the west, and two of Aldebaran east of the moon, I made the longi- 
tude of the south-east point to be 29" 19' west; the difference from 
the time keepers, which I consider to have given the best longitude, 
being no more than 4'. 

Azimuths taken upon the binnacle in the morning, with three com- 
passes, and the ship's head at S. W. by S., gave variation 3" 54' ; and 
in the evening, at S. W., 3° 50' ; but next morning, when Trinidad Thur*. 24. 
was just disappearing from the deck in the N. 60° E., other azimuths 
then showed the variation to be 1° 35' west, the ship’s head being 
S.‘S. W. ; it therefore appears, that there is a difference off the north, 
and off the south-west sides of the island. From the first obser- 
vations I deduce the true variation to bf* 4" 1 4' west, and from the 
last 1" 50' west. Captain D'Auvergnc marks the variation o® 45' 
west, in 1 782 ; but under what circumstances it w'as ascertained, 
does not appear. 

' The trade wind having again arisen from east-south-east, we 
were enabled to make between eighty and ninety miles a day. It 
afterwards veered gradually round, by the north-east and north, to 


• Tlie error of No. 4G5 was found, at the Cape of Good Hope, to be 10' 67", 2 to the 
east, and of No. 543, to be SS* 2l'',5 east, contracted in 96 days upon their Englbh rates. 
To obtain the above longitude, a proportional part of these errors according to die number 
of days, has been applied to the keepers •, and the difference between them is then no 
more than 2". 



34 


[From Madeira. 


A VOYAGE TO 

1801. the westward, and blew fresh; so that on the 29th, our latitude was 
31 " 2 ' and longitude 26" o' west. This was 1/ to the south, and 
about 6* west of the situation usually assigned to Saxemherg ; an 
island which has been frequently sought by the East-India, and other 
ships, in the place which it still occupies in the charts; and not find- 
ing it there, they have run a few degrees to the eastward, in the same 
parallel, but always without success. The opportunity which pre- 
sented itself of now adding 6® of longitude to the examined space, 
and on the opposite side, I should have thought myself culpable in 
neglecting ; and therefore, having placed the ship in the supposed 
parallel of the island, we steered due east for it ; adopting the same 
regulations for the look-out at night, as when searching for St. 
Paul’s. 

We had seen an unusual number of pintado and sooty petrels on 
the preceding afternoon, as also of a brown bird, apparently one of 
the sea-swallow tribe, having a white belly and the form, and size of 
a woodcock ; and this evening it was reported to me from the mast 
head, and confirmed by others on deck, that.a turtle was seen lying 
upon the water. These indications of land gave me some hope that 
Wednes. 30, the long lost Saxemberg might be brought to light. On the follow- 
ing noon, the observed latitude was 30® 41' and longitude 22" 46'; 

October nothing further had transpired to betoken the vicinity of land. 

Thursday 1. Ncxt day, our observations gave 30° 34' south, and 20“ 28' west; and 
I then steered east-south-east, a course which should have taken us 
almost directly over the supposed situation of Saxemberg, if the same 
current of 11' north had prevailed, as on the preceding day. But 
this not proving to be the case, our track lay a few miles to the 
south ; though sufficiently near for us to be satisfied of the non- 
existence of the islatnd in the place assigned to it, if that could any 
longer admit of a doubt.* 

* At the Cape of Good Hope, in 1810, His Excellency the Earl of Caledon £ivoin«d 
me with the following extract from the log book of the sloop Colombas,— Long, oHuter j 
returning to the Cape from the coast of Brazil. 



Towards the Cape.] TERRA AUSTRALIS. 35 

The fresh western winds continued' with short intervals of isoi. 
calm, as far as the latitude 33“ 33', and longitude 13" o' west; when sun^^4. 
they died away, and a breeze sprung up from the eastward. With 
this wind we could do little more than look up for the isles of 
Tristan d'Acunha, whose bearing was then S. 16* E., and distance 
seventy-seven leagues. From the description given by sir Erasmus 
Gower* of the anchorage, and the convenience with which water 
may be obtained, and his account of the animals yvhich resort there, 

I should not have considered it to be lost time, had the wind made 
it advisable to put in at Tristan d’Acunha, for a few days ; but it 
veered round to the north-west, on the 6th, and we resumed our Tuesdays, 
former course to the Cape of Good Hope. 

In the morning of the 14th, the variation by mean of amplitude Wednes. 14 . 
and azimuth, was 25* jo* west; the ship’s head being E. by S., and 
our latitude 35® 4' south, and longitude 13® 50' east. It is worthy of 
being mentioned, that in the year i797> and near the same place, I 
observed the variation to be 19® 40' west, on board His Majesty’s 
ship Reliance ; and as the compfiss was upon the binnacle in both 
cases, the sole cause to' which I can attribute this great difference is, 
that the ship’s head was west, instead of E. by S. The true variation 
could not be far from the mean of the two observations, since it was 
26® at the Cape of Good Hope. In the English Channel, the com- 


^ September 22, 1809, at five p, m., saw the island of Saxonburg, bearing E. S. E., 
first about 4f leagues di.stant ; clear Vicather. Steered for the said island, and found it 
to be in the latitude of 30® 18' south, longitude 28® 20' west, or thereabout. 

The island of Saxonburg is about four leagues in length, N. W. and S, E., and about 
miles in breadth. The N. W, end is a high*blu# of about 70 feet, perpendicular 
form, and runs along to the south-east about 8 miles. You will see trees at about a 
5^ mile and a half distance, and a sandy beach.*’ 

The situation of Saxemberg in the common tables and charts, was 30® 45' south and 
19® 4(J west, almost 9® of longitude too little; and therefore it is not surprising tbatehips 
have missed it. At the time so many birds were seen, on the 28th, the Investigator was 
ncft more than eighty miles from the position of the island, as above given from Mr. Long. 
• Lord Maeartney*$ Embassy to China^ by .sir G. Staunton, Vol. I. p, 198 — 201. 



36 


[^Prom Mfadeira. 


A VOYAGE TO 

1801. pass on the binnacle hall shown nearly 4® too much west variation, 
Wwin^ 14. when the ship’s head was at west ; but here, it gives at least »* too 
much, with the head in an opposite direction ! This difference in the 
two hemispheres merits particular notice ; it is part of a series of 
apparent anomalies in the compass which have hitherto remained 
unaccounted for; but which seem reducible to one general cause,' as I 
have attempted to show in the Appendix No. IL to the second volume, 
Friday 1C. At daybreak of the 16th, we expected to see the high land of 

the Cape ; but the weather being hazy, it could not be distinguished 
until eight o’clock, when it bore north-east, eight leagues ; being 
three leagues more than Earnshaw’s pocket time keeper, in which we 
had most confidence, led us to expect, dead four miles less than was 
given by my uncorrected lunar observations of the 14th p. m., 
brought forward by the time keeper. 

At this time we had not a single person in the sick list, both 
officers and men being fully in as good health, as when we sailed 
from Spithead. I had begun very early to put in execution the 
beneficial plan, first practised and made known by the great captain 
Cook. It was in the standing orders of the ship, that on every fine 
day the deck below and the cockpits should be cleared, washed, 
aired with stoves, and sprinkled with vinegar. On wet and dull 
days they were cleaned and aired, without washing. Care was taken 
to prevent the people from sleeping upon deck, or lying down in 
their wet clothes ; and once in every fortnight or three weeks, as 
circumstances permitted, their beds, and the contents of their chests 
and bags, were opened out and exposed to the sun ahd air. On^the 
Sunday and Thursday mornings, the ship’s pompany was mustered, 
and evcjry man appeared clean shaved and dressed ; and >vheh the 
evenings were fine, the drum and fife announced ti^ fore castle to 
be the scene of dancing ; npr did I discourage other playful amuse- 
ments which might occasionally be more to the taste of the sailors, 
and were not unseasonable. 

Within the tropics,, lime juice and sugat were made to suffice 



TERRA australis. 


87 


TowarSi Ae CajM.] 

as antiscorbutics ; on reaching a higher latitude, sour krout and 
vinegar were substituted ; the essence of malt was reserved for the 
passage to New Holland, and for future occasions. On consulting 
with the surgeon, I had thought it expedient to make some slight 
changes in the issuing of the provisions. Oatmeal was boiled for 
breakfast four days in the week, instead of three ; and when rice 
was issued, after the expenditure of the clieese, it was boiled on the 
other three days. Pease soup was prepared for dinner four days in 
the week, as usual; and at other times, two ounces of portable 
broth, in cakes, to each man, with such additions of onions, pepper, 
&c. as the different messes possessed, made a comfortable addi- 
tion to their salt meat. And neither in this passage, nor, I may 
add, in any subsequent part of the voyage, were the officers or 
jjeople restricted to any allowanpe of fresh water. They drank 
freely at the scuttled cask, and took away, under the inspection of 
the officer qf the watch, all that was requisite for culinary purposes; 
and very frequently two casks of water in the week were given for 
washing their clothes. . 

With these regulations, joined to a due enforcement of dis- 
dpline, I had the satisfaction to see my people orderly and full of 
zeal for the service in which we were engaged ; and in such a state 
of health, that no delay at the Cape was required beyond the neces- 
sary refitment of the ship, and I still hoped to save a good part of 
the summer season upon the south coast of Terra Australis. 

The usual time for His Majesty’s ships to leave False Bay and 
go round to Table Bay, I found to be the latter end of September; 
but being then unacquainted with the precise time, ajid knowing of 
the loss of the Sceptre in Table Bay, on November 5, from a heavy 
gale at north-west, I determined to go into False Bay ; unless we 
should get previous information that it had been quitted by the 
squadron. At noon, the extremes of the land bore N. by W. ^ W. 
and E. i N. The Cape Point bore north, three leagues ; and our 
observed latitude being 34" 3*', showed the Requisite Tables to be 
VOL. I. I i 


1801 . 

October. 
Friday 16 . 



38 A VOYAGE TO [Cape of Good 

isoi. erroneous in the position of this point; but that 34,* sg', as assigned 

October. . .S jt 

Friday J6. toit by Captain King, was correct,* 

At one o’clock we hauled round the rocks which lie off the 
Cape Point, and steered int6 False Bay. Near these rocks were two 
whales ; and one or more of what seamen call thrashers were en- 
gaged in a furious combat with them, at a less distance than half a 
mile from the ship. The sinewy strength of the thrasher must be 
very great ; for besides raising his tail high out of the water to beat 
the adversary, he occasionally threw the whole of his vast body 
several feet above the surface, apparently to fall upon him with 
greater force. Their struggles covered the sea with foam for many 
fathoms round. 

At three o'clock we got sight of the squadron lying in Simon's 
Bay, It consisted of His Majesty’s ships Lancaster, JujMter, Dio- 
mede, Imperieuse, Hindoostan, Rattlesnake, and Euphrosyne, under 
the command of vice-admiral sir Roger Curtis, Bart. The master of 
the Lancaster came on board to pilot the ship to a proper berth, and 
I went on shore to wait upon the vice-adnjiral. On showing my 
orders, and presenting an account of the supplies and the work re- 
quisite to put the Investigator in the same state as on leaving Eng- 
land, I found that the naval magazines could furnish only some 
part, and that many articles, especially biscuit, were' not to be ob- 
tained ; but with great consideration for the service on which I was 
sent out, the commander in chief ordered every request to be granted 
either in the articles specified, or by substitution ; and a thorough 
caulking, both within and without side of the ship, being the work 
most essential to be done, a gang of caulkers, collected from the 
Saturday 17. squadron, was sent on board on the following morning. 

The water which is conducted in pipes to the wharf, for the 
convenience of shipping, was said not to keep well at sea ; and the 
master of the Lancaster, from whom this information was obtained, 
recommended, as much superior, that which drains through the 

• See CoQk*s third^FoyagCy Vol. HI* page 484. 



TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


JPixise Ray.] 


39 


sand, from the hills on the north side of Simon’s Bay. I went, ac- isoi- 
cordingly, to make an examination ; and found that by sinking a Saturday 17. 
cask in the sand, with the head out and the upper hoops taken off, 
the water drained through the spaces betWeen the staves, sufficiently 
fast for our purpose. This plan was therefore adopted ; and the 
watering of the ship immediately commenced. 

Having seen this, and some other duties set forward under the 
proper officers, I accompanied Mr. Crosley, the astronomer, in 
search of a place where the observatory and tents could be conve- 
niently set up. The situation chosen was near a small rill on the 
south side of the bay, about three-hundred yards from the maga- 
zine ; and the permission of the military commandant being obtained, 
two tents, the observatory, and astronomical instruments were 
landed in the afternoon, with a guard of maruies. The whole was 
placed under the charge of Mr. Flinders, the second lieutenant, 
who was also to act as an assistant in making and calculating the 
observations, for which he was qualified. The situaticai of the tents 
was tolerably well shgltered from the south-eastern gales, which 
begin to prevail at this season of the year ; but thp«quantity of sand 
put in motion by every breeze, was a great moJestation, and proved 
injurious to the instruments. Besides this inconvenience, there was 
another attached to the situation which had not been foreseen. The 
road from Simon’s Town to a place called the Company’s garden, 
led close past the observatory ; and this was the sole ride or walk 
in the neighbourhood, which the inhabitants and the gentlemen be- 
longing to the ships in the bay could enjoy. From those of the first 
rMik, who took their morning's , ride, to tfie sailor who staggered past 
on a Sunday, and even the slave with his bundle of fire wood, all 
stopped at the observatory to see what was going on. Ramsden’s 
universal theodolite, set up for the purpose of observing transite, 
excited its share of attention from the curious. Some wanted inform- 
ation, some amusement, and all would have liked to see how tiie^ua 
appeared through the telescope, 



40 A VOYAGE TO [Cape of Chod Hope. 

1801. By the end of October, our provisions and stores were recdved ; 

the sails had<)een examined and repaired on board the Lancaster, and 
were rebent ; and the caulkers having completed their work, the 
ship was fresh painted. Being anxious to commenceT:hfe investiga- 
tion of the coasts of Terra Australis, the stripping of the masts and 
reparation of the rigging were deferred to King George’s Sound, 
and no more was done at the ship than necessity required ; for I 
preferred passing the time necessary to a complete re-equipment 
in a port where astronomical observations and surveys could be at 
the same time usefully carried on, and the naturalists employ them- 
selves in a field almost unexplored, rather than in a bay already 
well known, and where the surrounding country had been so often 
traversed. 

Mr. Crosley had been frequently unwell during the passage 
from Madeira ; and after trying the effect of a few days on shore, 
he decided to remain at the Cape of Good Hope, and relinquish 
the expedition. The instruments supplied by the Board of Lon- 
gitude he agreed to leave in niy care ; after having consulted 
with the commander in chief upon the subject, and received his ap- 
probation. The loss df the astronomer was severely felt by me, both 
from being deprived in the surveys of his more accurate observa- • 
tions, and from being called upon to supply his place so far as was 
in my power. The duties of commander joined to the occupation of 
surveyor, Jeft little time for other employment ; but through an in- 
crease of effort, and with the as^stiince of my officers, I hoped to 
carry on the surveys and fulfil the most essential parts of the instruc- 
tions from the Board of Longitude, at the same time. Of these in- 
structions, Mr. Crosley permitted me to take a copy. 

The rates of going with mean solar titoe of the four time keepers 
committed to my charge, were deduced by Mr. Crosley from three 
November observation of equal altitudes, with a sextant and quick-silver 
Sunday 1. horiaon, between the aist and syth of October. These rates, which 
he left with me, I extended to- November i, by equal altitudes taken 



TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


41 


Faist Bay.l 

on that day ; and their, respective errors were deduced by allowing 'soi* 

l^JovcDihcr 

1** 13' 4o"^7 to be the longitude in time of Simon's Bay.* Sunday 1, 

Eamshaw’s No. 543, slower than 
mean Greenwich time, at noon 

there Nov. 1, - - o 14, 35,33 and losing 5,33 

No. 520, - - 34 - - 15.84 

Arnold’s No. 176, _ . 59,29 - - 8,96 

No. 82, - - ' ■ ■ - - - 

No. 1736, watch, faster 21 20,03 - - 17,27 

The watch was intended to be taken up rivers, and to such 
places as the ship did not go ; and in order to gain some knowledge 
of its probable performance, I wore it five days in the pocket. Its 
rate of losing during that time, was from 11 ",59 to 8",79 per day; 
so that upon the average, it lost 7'’ less in the pocket than when in 
a fixed situation ; for the above rate of 17”, 2 7 was what it kept in 
the box, during the last three days. Arnold’s No. 8^ , altered its 
rate on the last day, from 2"98 to 'i'i8",(>8, without j^iyu, apparent 
cause ; no rate could therefore bfe fixed for it, wi^^y probability 
of its being kept. Of’ the excellent watch No. ^5 pf Earnshaw, 
being Mr. Crosley’s private property, we werp.deprived at the same 
time with the astronomer; he also took with him the reflecting 
circle, No. 74 of Troughton, both of which I considered to be an 
addition to our loss. 

So soon as the corresponding altitudes of Sunday afternoon 
were obtained, 1 took on board: the time keepers and instruments, 
with the tents and observatory, , The ship was then ready for sea ; 
but the wind blew a gale frcmi^^ths south-eastward, which continued 
until Tuesday. It then fell cidm, and we unmoored ; but before get- Tuesdays, 
ting under way, the same wind again set in, and oblige us to drop 
a second anchor. 

•In 1763, Mr. Mason determined the longitude of his obsemtory in Cape Town, 
from the transit of Venus, to be 18° 23' f* east ; and the difiisrenOe of longitude ftom 
thence to Simon's ^ the Dutch survey, ia 2' OO* cut. 



42 A VOYAGE TO [Cape ef Oaod Hopei 

Nolfe^ber Tl^rpvigh the kind attention of sir Roger Curtis, the commander 

Tuesday s! in chief, the ,state of the ship and our provisions and stores were as 
complete as when leaving Spithead. The ship's company had been 
regularly served with fresh meat every day, beef and mutton alter- 
nately ; vegetables were not to be purchased, but we several times 
received small quantities, with oranges and lemons, from the naval 
hospital in Cape Town ; and a proportion of these for a week, with 
a few days fresh meat, were carried to sea. Two of my ship’s com- 
pany, whose dispositions required more severity in reducing to good 
order than I wished to exercise in a service of this nature, were ex- 
changed by the vice-admiral ; as also two others, who from want of 
sufficient strength, were not proper for so long a voyage. In lieu 
of these, I received four men of good character from the flag ship, 
who made pressing application to go upon a voyage of discovery. 
Mr. Nathaniel Bell, one of the young gentlemen of the quarterdeck, 
haying expressed a wish to return to England, he was discharged; and 
Mr. Denis Lacey, midshipman of the Lancaster, received in his place. 

Simon's Bay is known to be ' a large and well-sheltdred cove, 
in the north-western part of the sound, called False Bay. Since the 
loss of the Sceptre in Table Bay, it has been more frequented than 
formerly ; and I found it to be a prevailing sentiment, that were it 
not for the advantages of Cape Town, Simon’s Bay would, in every 
respect, be preferable for the royal dockyard, and the equipment of 
His Majesty’s ships. It was remarked to me by an officer of discern- 
ment, captain of the flag ship, that instances of vessels being driven 
from their anchors by winds blol^mg into Simon’s Bay, were exceed- 
ingly rare. He had observ^d^lhat. ^e 'strain upon the cables with 
these winds, was much less thai^ vrith those of equal strength blow- 
ing olf the land ; and he accounted for it from the water thrown 
into the bay by sea winds, rebounding from the shore and forming 
what is called an under-tow, which tended to keep a ship up to her 
anchors. This takes place in Simon’s Bay, with the south-east winds, 
but not in Table Bay with those from the north-west, which blow 



meB(ty:\ TERRA AUSTRAUS. 43 

into it ; owing, in part, to the distance at which ships there ride from 

the land, and apparently, also, from the under-tow passing out on Tuesdays. 

the eastern side of the bay, clear of the anchoring ground. 

The Cape of Good Hope cannot’ now be supposed to fur- 
nish much of novelty in the department of natural history, espe- 
cially to transient visitors ; but it still continues to afford much 
amusement and instruction to English botanists. It did so to our 
gentlemen, who were almost constantly on shore upon the search ; 
and their collections, intended for examination on the next passage, 
were tolerably ample. They w'ere sufficiently orthodox to walk 
many miles for the purpose of botanising upon the celebrated Table 
Mountain ; for what disciple of Linnaeus could otherwise conscien- 
tiously quit the Cape of Good Hope.'* In taking so early a departure, 
though it were to procc/d to the almost untrodden, and not less 
ample field of botany. New Holland, I had to engage with the 
counter wishes of my scientific associates ; so much were they de- 
lighted to find the richest treasures of the English green house, pro- 
fusely scattered over the sides and summits of these barren hills. 



44 


A VOYAGE TO 




CHAPTER III. 

Departure from False Bay. Remarks on the passage to Terra Australis. 
Gravity of sea-water tried. Cape JLecuwin, and the coast from thence 
to King George’s Sound. Arrival in the Sound. Examination of the 
harbours. Excursion inland. Country, soil, and productions. Native 
inhabitants: Langtiage and anatomical measurement. Astronomical 
and nautical observations. 

November, daybreak of November 4, a liffht breeze from the eastward 

Wednea. 4. . . ^ o 

enabled me to quit Simon's Bay, after a stoppage of eighteen days. 
The high land of Great Smit's Winkel afterwards becalmed the 
sails ; and we were no further advanced, at noon, than to have 
the Cape Point bearing south-west, at the distance of :wo or 
three leagues. On receiving the breeze,’ which came from the 
south-south-west, we stretched towards Cape Agufhas, veering ship 
Thursday 6. at eleven at night, on coming into 50 fathoms. This wind died away 
in the morning, and remained calm till noon ; the Cape Point then 
bore N. W. | N., Cape False N. | E., and our latitude was 34" 36'. 
Near this situation, the bottom is a^yeenish mud, at the depth of 
78 fathoms. 

The report of guns ; 1 ^ the squadron in Simon's Bay, 
to commemorate the esqapof^^j^l^wder treason, was distinctly 
heard at one o'clock, when, -^'^^ occupied in making saU to a fine 
breeze which had sprung up fiom the aouth-wertward. At six in 
the evening, it blew fresh wth cloudy wea^w; the.iextremes of the 
latid bore from N. so* W. to 58* E., and We took our departure for 
New Holland. 

lieutenant Flinders ob^rved azimuths this evening from the 



Towards New BoUand.'] TJERRA AUSTRALIS. 


A5 


binnacle with two compasses; the ship’s head was south (magnetic), isoi. 
and the variation found to be 36° 1 3' west ; and in default of observa- 
tions on shore, I consider this to have been the true variation at the 
Cape of Good Hope in 1801. 

During our run across the Agulhas Bank, I did not find any 
cuirent setting to the westward ; but in the five days taken to reach 
the latitude 36® 30' and longitude 33° 38', the sliip was set 59' to the Tuesday 10. 
north of the reckoning. The swell which followed after the ship 
probably counteracted the effect of the usual westwardly current; 
and indeed it must have done something more, if our log were cor- 
rect, since the longitude by time keepers was then 30' a-head of 
account, 

I considered the parallel of 37® south, at this season of the 
year, to be sufficiently distant from the verge of the south-east trade 
to insure a continuance of western winds ; and to be far enough to 
the north, to avoid the gales incident to high latitudes. Having 
made this passage three times before, I was satisfied of the impro- 
priety of running in a high southe'rn latitude, particularly when the 
siin is in the otl|er hemisphere, and there is nothing else in view 
than to make a good passage ; not only from the vinds there being 
often stronger than desired, but because they will not blow so 
steadily from the westward. In the latitude of 43*, I have experienced 
heavy gal^ from the north, and from the south, and even from the 
eastward, in the months of June and July; ^allowances for lee way 
were also frequent in that pa$^|age, and light vinnds or cahns not 
unccmunon. The ^allel of seems to be a proper one, 
when the sun is in his highe^ sibAth declination, ^d fr<Mn that time 
until the middle of February ; l>ut in the opposite months of the year, 

I should prefer to run down my easting two or three degrees even 
"to the northwil'd of what was now chosen for the Invet#gator. 

It may not be improper to anticipate upon the vi^yage so far 
as to state what was the result of keeping in the parallel of 37", in 
the month of November. From the Cape of Good Hope to the 
VOL. I. K k 



46 


A VOYAGE TO 


{fVviK Ike Cape. 

i8oi< island Amsterdam, the winds were never so strong as to reduce the 

Norember. jjjvestigator to close-reefed top sails ; and on the other hand, die 
cedms amounted to no more than seven hours irt nineteen days. The 
average distance on the Icfg board upon direct courses, for we had 
no foul winds, was a hundred and forty miles per day; and the 
Investigator was not a frigate, but a collier-built ship, and deeply 
laden. In the following twelve days run, from Amsterdam to the 
south-west cape of New Holland, the same winds attended us ; and 
a hundred and fifty eight miles per day was the average distance, 
without lee way or calm. 

Thun. 12. On the 19th, I took the opportunity of light winds to send 

down a bucket, fitted with valves to bring up water from a depth ; 
but having no thermometer of a proper size to go into the bucket, I 
could only immerse one after the water was brought up. In this 
imperfect way, the temperature at 150 fathoms depth was found to 
be 63°,!, differing very little from that of the water at the surface, 
which was 63* ,8. In the air, the thermometer stood at 63* ,6. The 
specific gravity of the water brought up was afterwards tried at 
King George's Sound, and proved, at the temperatare of 69", to be 
1 ,026, taking that of the crystal-glass bulb, with which the experi- 
ment was made, at 3,150; and the specific gravity of the surface 
water, taken up at the same time, was exactly the same. The lati- 
• tude of out* Skinition was 36* 36' south, and Icmgitude 38® 23' east. 
The mean 'indiiwti<«|;|^ ithe dippittg^ needle, placed upon the cabin 
table, Waa.^^'§*:1(^ti^V«outh end; and the variation, by mean of 
azimuths the priteoeding evening amplitude this morning, 
takeii on tibe binflacle when the'^elup's head was S. E..by EL, magn 
netic, was 31* 4,7'; but die true vaariddon, or such as, would bave 
been bead «.t noTtb, or south, I consider to have 

been 99* SMS' . ^^1^. 

Tbfddj^bd^ the passage <to the idUoid Amsterdam, we were 
accompaii^ by s^e, or all of the oceamc birds usually found in 
these latitudes; but not in the numbers I had been accustomed to 



Towards l^vHoUand.^ TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


47 


see them further south. The spouting of a whale was occasionally isoi. 
perceived, and became more frequent on approaching the island ; the *^®’^®“***^ 
number of small blife petrels was also increased, and a few Cape 
hens then made their appearance. 

At five in the evening of the 84th, the mean variation from Tuesday 24. 
three compasses on the binnacle, was observed to be 83* 7' west, 
with the ship's head E. S. E., or 80° 4' true. Our latitude was then 
38* so' south, longitude 76" 26' east; and at eleven at night, having 
nearly reached the longitude of Amsterdam, whose situation I 
wished to compare with the time keepers, we hove to, in a parallel 
between it and the island St. Paul. At five next morning, we steered Wednes. 25. 
southward to make Amsterdam ; but having reached its latitude, and 
no land being visible, our eastwardly course was resumed. The 
weather was thick, so thrt objects could not be distinguished beyond 
five or six miles ; and at noon the ship was found to have been set 
23' of longitude to the east of what the log gave. From these joint 
causes it must have been that Amsterdam was not perceived, if its 
situation of 38“ 43' south and 77° 4 °* east, as made in His Majesty’s 
ship Providence, in 1798, were rightly ascertained. h 

In passages like this, when fortunately made, it is seldom that 
any circumstance occurs, of sufficient interest to be related. Our 
employments were to clean, dry, and air the ship below ; and the 
seamen's clothes and bedding, with the sails, upon deck. These, 
with the exercise of the great guns and snu^ arms, were our prim- 
dpal employments in fine weather ; and wh^?iiil^(9^e, we were 
wet and uncomfortable, and could do little. It was^a gl^t satisfao 
tion that frequent pumjang of the ship* was not now required, the 
greatest quantity of water admitted during this passage being less 
than two inches an hour. The antiseptics issued were jkhit krout 
and vinegar, to the extent of the applications for them ; mid at half 
an hour before noon every day, a pint of strong wortj by pour* 
in^ boiling water upon the essence of malt, was given to each man. 



48 


A VOYAGE TO 


1801 . 

November. 


December. 
Simday 6. 


(Atlas, 
Plate II.) 


[South Coast. 

It was drunk upon deck; and with half a biscuit, made a luncheon 
for both officers and people. The allowance of grog was never 
issued until half an hour after the dinner time.* 

On the 6th of December, our latitude was 35* lo^ and longi- 
tude 114* 19'; which placed us about S..W. jS. twenty-two leagues 
from the westernmost isles lying off the south-west cape of New 
Holland, according to their position by the French rear-admiral 
D'Entrecasteaux ; a traced copy of whose general chart of this coast 
had been furnished to me from the hydrographical office at the 
Admiralty. There were no names applied in this copy ; but in the 
charts of the French voyage, lately published, these isles are called 

A 

I/es St. Almam. 

Notwithstanding the nearness of the land, there were no signs 
of such proximity : no discolouring in the water, no sea weed, no 
, new birds, and but few of the species before seen. The current had, 
indeed, somewhat changed; for whilst, during the three preceding 
days, it had setN. la* W. twenty-seven miles per day, on an average, 
it was found this day to have run N. 47° E. twenty-two miles. tmI 
change however could scarcely be thought a sign of land, since 
equal, or greater differences had occurred during the passage, and 
might arise, in part, from errors in the log. 

At two ui the afternoon, the wind being north-westward, 
we hauled up to make the south-western point of Leeuwin's Land, 
and bent the taWeej- '^t seven, land was seen right a-head, bearing 
N. 14'*£., at thi^ ^<^||iosed distance of ten leagues; and on sounding, 
there was'fi^ fathoms, coral sand. We stood for it until eleven at 
night, and then veered- to the south-west, in 65 fathoms, same 
bottom. ,>j 

The examination of Nuyts’ and of Leeuwin’s Lands was not 
prescribed in' my instructions to be made at this time ; but the diffe- 
rence of sailii^ along the coast at a distence, or in keeping near it 
and making a running survey, was likely to be so little, that I jutTged 



Cape Leeumn."] TERRA AUSTRALIS. 49 

it advisable to do all that circumstances would allow whilst the isoi. 
opportunity offered ; and I had the pleasure to find this slight devi- 
ation approved at thfe Admiralty. 

At two in the morning, we had 8o fathoms, and veered towards Monday r 
the land. It was seen from the mast head at five ; and the highest 
part, the same which had been set in the evening, bore N. 13“ W. 

This is the largest of the before-mentioned Isles of St. Alouarn ; 
but at half past seven, we saw hills extending from behind, and, to 
all appearance, joining it to the main land. This supposed isle is, 
therefore, what I denominate Cape Leeuwin, as being the south- 
western, and most projecting part of Leeuwin’s Land. The highest 
hill lies nearly in latitude 34,“ 19' south, and longitude J15* 6' east ; 
it is a sloping piece of land of about six hundred feet in elevation, 
and appeared to be rocky, with a slight covering of trees and shrubs ; 
but this cape will be best known from Mr. Westall’s sketch. A piece 
of lower land was seen to the north-west, probably a continuation view i.) 
of the coast, and there are some rocky islets scattered on the south 
lide of the cape. The largest of these islets, lying about four miles 
off, was passed before eight o'clock, at the distance of seven or eight 
miles, and seen to be surrounded with high and extensive breakers. 

On the east side of Cape Leeuwin, the land falls back north- 
eastward three or four leagues, and afterwards curves to the south- 
east, forming a large bight which appeared to be wholly exposed to 
the southern winds. The coast line, round the upper part of this 
bight, was not distinguishable ; but the hills at ^eback showed more 
of bare sand, than of vegetable covering. At ten o'clock, a low, 
black projection, forming the eastern ’point of the bight, bore east 
three miles ; and the depth was 15 fathoms upon a coarse sandy 
bottom. We then veered round to the south-eastward, following 
the direction of the coast, with the wind at west-south-west and 
weather somewhat squally ; and at noon, our situation and principal 
bearings were as follow ; 



60 


A VOYAGE TO 

I 

1801, , Latitude observed, 

Longitude by time keepers, 

C. Leeuwin, furthest visible part. 

The low, black, point, • 

Furthest extreme of the coast a-head. 


[jSSattdi Qmi. 
34 3 * 7 ^. 

115 30 

N. 55 W. 

N. 4W. 

S. 53 E. 


The shore abreast was seven or eight miles distant ; and be- 
hind it ran a continuation of the same ridge of sandy hillocks which 
surrounds the bight, and it extended to the southern extreme. Over 
this ridge were perceived, here and there, the tops of some higher, 
and less sandy hills, standing a few miles inland ; but the general 
aspect of the country was that of great sterility ; nor was there, as 
yet, any applarance of its being inhabited. 

Soon after four we passed the ^loon’s extreme at the distance 


of four miles. It is a steep, rocky cape, named in the French chart. 
Point D'Entrecasteaux ; and is cme of the most remarkable projec- 
tions of this coast. I make its latitude, from the bearings, to be 
34,® 5a' south, and longitude by time keepers 116* 1' east. A 
low rock lies two or three miles to the east-south-east, from thJ 
point, and a patch of breakers nearly the sairie distance to the south ; 
and soon after passing the point, two other rocks, white and rather 
high,. were seen lying from it five leagues to the south-east. At a 
quarter past seven, when the night closed in. 

The two white rocks bore - - N. ao* E. 

Furthest.exaaliiieof the land, like a steep head, N. 71 E. 

The wind was then at south-west, and we stretched onward 
Tuesday 8. until onc in die morning, before tacking to the north-west for the 
land. At day light, the ship was found to have been carried to the 
eastward, and neither Point D'Entrecasteaux nor the two white 


rocks were in sight ; but in the N. 19= E., about eight miles, was a 
head not far from the extreme set in the evening. It afterwards 
proved to be a smooth, steep rock, lying one mile from the main ; 
and is the land first made upon this coast by captain Vancouver, 



CapeLeeumn^) TERRA AUsIPRALlS. 51 

who called it Cape Chatham. Its latitude is very nearly 35* 3' south, 
longitude 116" 29' east, and it was sketched by Mr. Westall. Tuesday 8. 

Whilst stretching in for the shore, with the ship’s head north- 
west-by-north (magnetic), I took azimuths with two compasses on views.) 
the binnacle; after which they were immediately placed upon a stand 
near the taffrel, and other azimuths taken. The variation resulting 
from the observations on the binnacle was 5* 59' west, and from those 
near the taffrel 8® 24' west ; affording another instance of the effect 
produced by changing the place of the compass. In 1803, and at 
twenty leagues to the west of Cape Leeuwin, we had 10* 4' variation 
on the binnacle, with the head south-east; from which, and the above 
5* 59' f the true variation off" the cape, or such as would be obtained 
with the ship's head at north or south, should be 7° 48' west.* 

At seven o’clock, we got sight of the two white rocks, which 
enabled me to take up the survey of the preceding evening; and we 
then bore away along the coast at the distance of four or five miles, 
with a pleasant breeze and fine weather. 

Some parts of the shore between Point D’Entrecasteaux and 
Cape Chatham were not distinctly seen. That which is nearest to 
the cape, lies in the line of N. 38° W. from its outer part, and pre- 
sents an intermixture of steep cliffs and small sandy beaches, with 
a back land moderately high, and better covered with wood than 
that before described. On the east side of Cape Chatham, the shore 
falls back to the northward, and makes a bight in which is a small 
reef of rocks. It then projects in a cliffy head, which lies S. 75® E. 
seven miles from the cape, and is called Point Nuyts in the French 
chart ; upon the supposition, probably,’ that this was the first land 
seen by Nuyts, in 1627. Beyond this point, the coast trends very 
nearly east ; but forms several projections, some of which are steep 

♦ The mode by which these, and other obsenrations made with the compass on the 
binnacle, are reduced to what is conceived to be the true variation^ is explained in^he 
Appendix No, II, to the second volume. 



^ A VOYAGE TO * [<&^Coart. 

i«oi. and others low ; and between them are sandy bights where small 
^^^^8 vessels might obtain shelter from all northern winds. The hills 
lying at the back of the shore seemed to • be barren, though 
trees grew thickly, on their eastern sides ; they are not high, 
but it was rare to perceive any thing of the interior country above 
them. 

At noon, the nearest parts of the coast were a steep, and a 
more eastern low point, both distant about four miles ; and from the 
bight between them was rising the first smoke seen upon this coast. 
Our situation at this time, and the principal bearings taken, were as 
under ; 

® // 

Latitude, observed to the north and south, ' S 5 7 5 - 

Longitude by time keepers, - - ii6 50. 

Point Nuyts, with Cape Chatham behind, N. 75 W. 

Steep point, near the smoke, - N. 15 W. 

Furthest visible extreme a-head, - N. 84, E. 

Soon after two o’clock, we passed at the distance of five miles 
from a steep point which has a broad rock lying near it. This 
point, being unnamed and somewhat remarkable, I call Point Hil- 
lier\ it lies in 35* 4' south, and 1 17" 9' east. The coast extends from 
thence nearly east-by-south, without any considerable projection, 
except at the furthest extreme then visible ; and on coming up with 
it, at half past five, it proved to be the Cape Howe of Vancouver* 
There is another Cape How^e upon this same coast, named by cap- 
tain Cook , which makes it necessary to distinguish this by a descrip- 
tive adjunct, and I shall therefore call it West Cape Howe. The 
situation of this projecting cliffy cape is in 35* 8^' south and 117® 40' 
east. Beyond it the land trends north-by-east, four miles, into a 
sandy bight, in ^hich there is a small islet ; and further along the 
shore, which then stretches eastward and again becomes cliffy, 
there are two others. When the cape bore N. lo* W. four miles, 
the highest of the Eclipse Isles was in sight, bearing E. 4* N. ; 
but “ the small detached isjet,” which captain Vancouver says 



53 


King Oeorge'B Sbitnd.] TERRA AUSTI^ALIS. 

(Vol. I. p. 3a) “ lies from Cape Howe S. 68* E., three leagues," isoi. 
could not be seen ; though it should have lain nearly in our track.* 

The wind blew* fresh at this time, and a current of more than 
one mile an hour ran with us, so that, by carrying all sail, I hoped 
to get sight of King George’s Sound before dark. At seven, we 
pa.ssed close on the south side of the Eclipse Isles; but Bald Head at (Alias, 
the entrance of the sound had so different an appearance from what View 3.) 

I had been led to expect, being a slope in this point of view, that 
the steep east end of Break-sea Island was at first taken for it. The 
error was fortunately perceived in time ; and at eight o’clock we 
hauled up round the head, with the wind at west, and made a stretch 
into the sound. It was then dark ; but the night being fine, I did 
not hesitate to work up by the guidance of captain Vancouver’s 
chart ; and having reached nearly into a line between Seal Island and 
the first beach round Bald Head, we anchored at eleven o’clock, in 
8 fathoms, sandy bottom. 

King George’s Sound had been chosen as the proper place in Wednes. 9. 
which to prepare ourselves for the examination of the south coast 
of Terra Australis, and I sought to make the be.st use of the advan- 
tages it might furnish. The first essential requisite was a place 
of secure shelter, where the masts could be stripped, the rigging 
and sails put into order, and communication had with the shore, 
without interruption from the elements; but this, from captain Van- 
couver’s chart and description, I did not expect the outer sound to 
afford. The facility of quitting Princes.s-Royal Harbour, with such 
a wiiKl as would be favourable for prosecuting the investigation of 
the coa.st, induced me so far to prefer 'it «o Oyster Harbour as to 
make it the first object of examination ; and in the morning, after 

♦ This islet, seen by captain Vancoviver in tlie evening, must have been the highest of 
the Eclipse Isles; but from the apparent difference of its situtition, was thought not t^ be 
the same on the following morning. The cliange in tlic variation of the compass, which . 
had* taken place on altering the direction of the ship’s head, seems to have been the cause 
of this apparent difference. 

L 1 


VOL. /. 



M 


A VOYAGE TO 


[(SitwiA Coait. 


1801 . 

December. 
Wednes. 9. 


(Atlas, 
Plate XVn. 
View 4.) 


we had sounded round the ship and found her so placed as to require 
no immediate movement, I went in a boat for the purpose, accom- 
panied by the master and landscape painter; tHe naturalist, and some 
other gentlemen landing al the same time, to botanise in the vicinity 
of Bald Head. 

Seal Island, where we stopped in passing, is a mass of granite, 
which is accessible only at its western end, as represented in Mr. 
Westall's sketch. After killing a few seals upon the shore, we 
ascended the hill to search for the bottle and parchment left by 
captain Vancouver in 1791 ;* but could find no vestiges either of it 
or of the staff or pile of stones ; and since there was no appearance 
of the natives having crossed over from the main, I was led to sus- 
pect that a second ship had been here before us. 

At Point Possession, on the south side of the entrance to 
Princess-Royal Harbour, we had a good view of that extensive piece 
of water. Wood seemed not to be abundant near the shores; and 
therefore a projection two or three miles to the south-west, which 
was covered with trees, first attracted my notice. The depth of 
water in going to it was, however, too little for the ship ; nor was 
there any fresh stream in the neighbourhood. Some person, but 
not captain Vancouver, had nevertheless been cutting wood there; 
for several trees had been felled with axe and saw. Not far from 
thence stood a number of bark sheds, like the huts of the natives 
who live in the forests behind Port Jackson, and forming what might 
be called a small village ; but it had been long deserted. Going 
across from the woody jwint to the north side of the harbour, we 
there found 3 fathoms withm less than half a mile of the shore ; and 
an increasing depth from thence out to the entrance. The sound- 
ings in the entrance were from 5 to 7 fathoms ; but the channel was 
too narrow to admit of getting in without a leading wind and much 
caution. 

On Thursday morning, the master was sent to examine* the 

* See his Voyage, Voh I. page 40. 


’rhursd. 10. , 



65 


King George^s SoundJ] TERRA AUSTI^ALIS. 

north side of the harbour for water and wood, and we got the ship 
under way to beat up to the entrance; the wind blowing still from 
the westward. At eleven o'clock, the anchor was dropped in 6 
fathoms, half a mile from Point Possession ; and as I was doubtful 
of the master's success, I went in a boat, accompanied by lieutenant 
Flinders, to examine Oyster Harbour. We carried 7 and 6 fathoms 
from the ship towards the entrance, until Michaelmas and Break-sea 
Islands were closing on with each other; after vyhich the depth 
diminished to 5, 4, 3, and 2^ fathoms. On hauling westward, we 
got into six feet; but steering the other way, it deepened to seven- 
teen, the east side of the opening being then in a line with the middle 
of some high, flat-topped land, at the back of the harbour. Keeping 
in that direction, we carried 3, 4, and 5 fathoms ; and had 6 in the 
narrowest part of the entr.mce. Within side, the deep water turned 
on the starbord hand, but in many parts, there was not more than 
3 fathoms. ^ 

As I proposed to make a new survey of King George's Sound, 
we landed to take a ^et of angles upon the small central island; 
the same which captain Vancouver describes ( Vol. I. page 35), as 
covered with luxuriant grass and other vegetables ; and where he 
planted vine cuttings, water cresses, and the seeds of various fruits. 
There were no remains of these valuable gifts, although nothing 
indicated the island to have been visited since his time ; and, to our 
disappointment, the vegetation upon it now consisted of tufts of 
wiry grass and a few stunted shrubs, supported by a thin layer of 
sandy soil, which was every where perforated with rat holes. 

From the island, we rowed in various directions, sounding the 
harbour ; but the boat could seldom approach the shore within a 
cable's length, or the eighth part of a mile. On the south-west side 
there were two small streams, in one of which the water was fresh, 
though high coloured. Returning to the entrance, we landed on 
thd east side, and found a spot of ground six or eight feet square, 
dug up and trimmed like a garden ; and upon it was lying a piece 


1801 . 
Dece’uber. 
ThumeU) 10. 



66 


[South Coa$t. 


A /voyage to 

1801. of sheet copper, bearing this inscription; “ August 27, 1800. Chr. 
Thuw^^io. “ Dixson — ship Elligood which solved the difficulty of the felled 
trees, and the disappearance of captain Vancouver’s bottle. On 
digging in this place, I found that fresh water of a high colour, but 
well tasted, might be obtained ; wood was abundant, and the depth 
of the entrance admitted of the ship being made fast to the sliore ; 
so that this was a situation adapted to our purpose of refitment, 
provided the ship could be got over the bar. This point I was 
desirous to ascertain in my way on board, but the strength of the 
wind prevented it. 

Tlie report of the master from Princess-Royal Harbour was, 
that water could be obtained at the north side by digging near the 
shore, at the foot of the highest hill; but that there was no wood at 
Friday u. a convenient distance. I therefore sent him, next morning, to land 
the naturalists at the entrance of Oyster Harbour, and then to sound 
the bar; and not being satisfied with his report, that there was not 
so much as fourteen feet, which the ship drew, when captain Van- 
couver had marked seventeen, I Vent to the nearest head, with a 
theodolite and signal flags, to direct his movements. No more, 
iiowever, than thirteen feet could now be found upon the shallowest 
part of the bar; and,^con.sequently, the idea of refitting in Oyster 
Harbour was abandoned. The boat which brought off Mr. Brown 
and his party in the evening, collected a good quantity of oysters, 
and of the large fan muscles, from the shoals. 

The wind continuing foul for going into Princess-Royal Har- 
.saturday 12. bour, a wooding party was sent next morning, to a bight round the 
north side of the entrance ; where the wood was found to split 
better than at some other places. Another party went to the same 
place with the launch, to haul the seine ; but the wind coming round 
to the eastward, the boat was recalled, and a kedge anchor and 
hawser put into it. We then weighed, and ran into the harbour 
under the top sails ; and at eleven, anchored in seventeen feet upon 
muddy ground, at one-third .of a mile from the shore under the 



51 


King &€orge'« Sound.} TERRA AUSTRkLIS. 

highest hill. When the ship was moored, Michaelmas Island was isoi. 
on with the north, and Break-sea Island with the south point of the 
entrance, and the hFghest hill bore N. E. by N. by compass. The 
least depth of water we had in passing the entrance, was 4 fathoms ; 
but to those who may wish to go in, the plan in Plate II, of the Atlas, 
and a good look-out from the mast head, will be of more service 
than any written directions. 

So soon as the ship was secured, I landed with the naturalists; 
and after fixing upon a place for our tents, ascended the highest 
hill to take angles. Amongst other objects, I perceived in the bear- 
ing of N. 87“ 30' W., two distant pieces of water, at the back of the 
bight near West Cape Howe ; but whether they were lakes, or an 
inlet of the sea, could iiot be distinguished. Our tents, under the 
guard of a party of ma-hies, were set up tliis evening; and in the 
morning, the observatory and instruments were sent on shore, under Sunday is. 
the care of lieutenant Flinders, who had undertaken to assist me in 
performing the office of astronomer. 

Marks of the country being inhabited were found every where, 
but as yet there was nothing to indicate the presence of the natives 
in our neighbourhood ; I therefore allowed a jiart of the ship's com- 
pany to divert themselves on shore this afternoon ; and the same 
was done every Sunday during our stay in this harbour. On Monday, Monday 14. 
the topmasts were struck, and our vaiious duties commenced ; the 
naturalists ranged the country in all directions, being landed at such 
places as they desired ; whilst my own time was divided betwixt the 
observatory and the survey of the sound. 

Some smokes being perceived at 'the head of the harbour, Mr. 

Brown and other gentlemen directed their excursion that way, and 
met with several of the natives, who were shy but not afraid. One 
man with whom they had communication, was admired for his manly 
behaviour, and they gave him a bird which had been shot, and a 
pocket-handkerchief ; but like the generality of people hitherto seen 
in this country, these men did not seem to be desirous of commu- 



pS A \^3YAGE TO [Smta Chasf. 

jsoi. nication with strangers ; and they very early made signs to our gen- 
to return from whence they came. Next morning, however, 
we were agreeably surprised by the appearancd of two Indians, and 
afterwards of others, upori the side of the hill behind our tents. 
They approached with much caution, one coming first with poised 
spear, and making majiy gestures, accompanied with much vocife- 
rous parleying, in which he sometimes seemed to threaten us if 
we did not be gone, and at others to admit of our stay. On Mr. 
Purdic, the assistant-surgeon, going up to him unarmed, a commu- 
nication was brought about, and they received some articles of iron 
and toys, giving in exchange some of their implements ; and after 
a short stay, left us, apparently on very good terms. 

Thursdayi?. On the 17th, one of our former visitors brought two strangers 
with him ; and after this time, they and others came almost every 
day, and frequently stopped a whole morning at the tents. We 
always made them presents of such things as seemed to be most 
agreeable, but they very rarely brought us any thing in return ; nor 
was it uncommon to find small mirrors, and other things left about 
the shore ; so that at length our presents were discontinued. 

Wednes. 23 . I formed a party on the asrd, consisting of the officers of the 
ship, the scientific gentlemen, and others, amounting to thirteen, well 
armed and provided for two days, in order to visit the lakes behind 
West Cape Howe. We walked along the shore to the north-western 
extremity of Princess-Royal Harbour, where several small runs of 
fresh water were found to drain in, from peaty swamps. Striking 
from thence into the country in a western direction, we had not 
advanced far when a native was seen running before us ; and soon 
afterward an old man, who had been several times at the tents, came 
up, unarmed as usual. He was very anxious that we should not 
go further; and acted with a good deal of resolution in first stopping 
one, and then another of those who were foremost. He was not 
abl.e to prevail ; but we accommodated him so far, as to make 'a 
circuit round the wood, where it seemed probable his family and 



TERRA AUSHRALIS. 


69 


King George's /SSoumi.] 


female friends were placed. The old man followed us, hallooing isoi. 
frequently to give information of our movements ; and when a 
paroquet was shot, he expressed neither fear nor surprise, but re- 
ceived the bird with gladness ; and attended with some curiosity to 
the reloading of the gun. 

Our course for the lakes led us through swamps and thick brush- 
woods, irf which our new acquaintance followed for some time ; but 
at length, growing tired of people who persevered in keeping a bad 
road in opposition to his recommendation of a better, which, indeed, 
had nothing t'bjectionable in it, but that it led directly contrary to 
where our object lay, he fell behind and left us. We afterwards 
took to the skirts of the sea-coast hills, and made better progress ; 
but were obliged to lecross the swamps and force our way through 
a thick brush, before reac’ung the eastern lake. 

This jiiece of water was found to be one mile and a half, east 
and west, and one mile in breadth ; and appeared to receive the 
drainings from the numerous swamps round about. In coasting 
round the Jiorth sidc^ to reach the south-western lake, we were 
stopped by a serpentine stream, upon which were two black swans; 
but they took to flight before we could get near to shoot them. 

After following the windings of this rivulet, some distance to the 
north-west, without being able to pass over, we struck inland 
towards the skirt of some rising hills ; and crossed the stream early 
enough to walk a mile to the south-west before sunset ; when the 
convenience of dry ground, with wood and water at hand, induced 
us to halt for the night. 

On Thursday morning, we reacnea the south-western lake, Thursday24. 
and found it to be larger than the first. Its water was brackish, 
which bespoke a communication with the sea ; and as there was no 
certainty that this communication might not be too deep to be pas^d, 
it was thought prudent to give up the intention of proceeding to the 
sea side; and our steps were retraced across the rivulet and round 
the northern lake. We then struck* southward, and ascended the 



15 r ^ wnenoe i fi«^ «fi . 

Ti^kSSIearCipe Howland the form irf> 
hat no ^l^^ippnanMa^^ was visible between thekt.^ 

dttv^iWrse ho^hfewdn^ 'itiras’'^ur«iied along the sandy ridge alt 
the'oliflfs, where the want of water was as great, as the 
sfiS^M^ttn^anoe hkd been in the loW land going out. Towapfds smj^ 
set| Wllm' JPriflceSs-Rcw^^ Harbour was still some miles dfetant, riie 
na^A4ll‘^}iwiQry’ bainter became unable to proceed fuit’her, being 
overcotQ^ the labour df the Walk> with the fexofessive neat> and 
witli‘ '¥o have detained the \^hole ^rty in a state of suffer- 

ance, w^uld have bettl imprudent ; and Mr. Brown and two others 
having volunteered to stay, we left them the scanty remains of our 
pt&vfpUm, and pushed forward to the tents, which we reached at 
eight o'clo^! At midnight We had the pleasure to see our friends 
ijrrive, and the l^b^fadon' made for sending to their assistance, at 
iaybriea'k, become unnecessary. 

The country through which we passed in this excursion, has 
but little to rt^ommend it. The stony hills pf the sea coast -were, 
ndeed, g^neiyiUy Covered with shrubs ; but there was rarely any 
leuth ^ oOtL and no wood. The land slopes down gra- 

; and at the bottom, water drains out, and 
bnns a extending from Princess-Royal Harbour 

O the lakas. latere ^he country is covered with grass and brush- 
^ood(.^and*'m a little elevated there are forest trees; 

lav^ttneh^Jthb'jbu ia ^ha^low, and. unfit for cultivation. 

the and the watering of the ship Were 

the .sails repaired and bent, and 
friends]; |he natives, continued to visit' 
a|i^ S^eral others being at;, the tents tl^ 

marines on shore, to be exercised 
*. 1^' coats and white crossed belts were 

resemblance to thrir own manpef of 
4di4^|he drum, but particular^ the fife, 

''•t '' ^ * t* 4 * a 





astotiiiAttnent ; but wbQii<ith^ aaw idMiie beautiful isoi. 

andri^e^ipaeii, T|vith their bright musk^tSj drawn up in a lipe, they\SS*S3i 
r«bsi;di^y at^eamed^ with delight ; nor were their w^d gestures 
epd vpdferation to be silenced, but by cdmmencing the exercise, to 
wtii^ they paid the most earnest and silent attention. Several of 
them naoved their hands, involuntarily, according to the motions ; 
and the old man placed himself at the end of the rank, with a short 
staff in his hand, which he shouldered, presented, grounded, as did 
the marines their muskets, without, I believe, knowing what he did. 

Before firing, the Indians were made acquainted with what was 
going to take place; so that the vollies did not excite much 
terror. 

The tents and observatory were already struck ; and every 
thing being sent on board, we took leave of the natives, and em- 
barked v/ith the intention of running into the Sound this evening ; 
but a change in the wind, to south-by-east, prevented it. This wind 
veered to east and north-east, and for a short time blew strong ; so 1802. 
that it was the 3rd of January in ’the afternoon, before we steered sun^^j. 
out of Princess-Royal Harbour. It was not my intention to pro- 
ceed immediately to sea ; and I therefore took the opportunity of 
Standing backward and forward in the sound, with the dredge and 
trawl over board ; and a variety of small fish were brought up. 

These weye of little use, as food ; but with the shells, sea weeds, and 
corals, they furnished amusement and occupation to the naturalist 
and draughtsman, and a pretty kind of hippocampus, which was 
not scarce, was generally admired. 

In the evening, the anchor was dropped in 7 fathoms, abreast 
of the secoiul sandy beach near a flat rock on the south side of the 
acipnd, almost in the same spot where captain Vancouver had an- 
chored in i79t. I think the Sound does not afford a more secure 
place, the sole points of exposition being between Bald Head and . 
BreaA&*saa Island, making an angle of no more than 10* ; and as both 
WDOit ’watcir are procurable here, though n«tlmr very good, 
voL.t.'/ Mm 



1802. 

January. 

Sundays. 

Monday 4. 


Tuesday 5. 


VOYAGE TO [South Coast. 

a ship proposing to stay only a few days is under no necessity of 
having recourse to the harbours. 

On the 4th, a fresh gale blew from thte westward, and pre- 
vented me from moving' the ship. A bottle, containing a parch- 
ment to inform future visitors of our arrival and intention to sail 
on the morrow, was left upon the top of Seal Island ; and the wind 
having moderated next day, and the weather become finer, though 
still squally, we then made sail out of King George’s Sound, to 
prosecute the further examination of the coast. 

The refreshments we had procured, were fish and oysters. 
The seine was frequently hauled upon the different beaches ; but 
although it was done in the evening, round fires which had been 
previously kindled, little success was obtained in this way. With 
hook and line we were more fortunate, both along-side and from 
boats stationed off the rocky points ; and the whole ship's company 
had generally a fresh meal once in three or four days. Of oysters, as 
many were taken from the shoals in both harbours, as we chose to 
spare time for gathering. Our fire wood was procured from the 
north point of entrance to Princess-Royal Harbour, at the inner end< 
of the long middle beach ; but the trees best calculated for sawing 
into planks were obtained at the easternmost of the two woody pro- 
jections on the south side of the harbour. A good number of planks 
and logs were taken on board, for making garden boxes, to contain 
the most curious plants collected by the naturalist, and for a variety 
of other purposes. The fresh water, procured by digging near the 
tents, was a little discoloured, but good ; and it was sufficiently 
abundant for every purpose: its specific gravity was 1,003 at the 
temperature of 6q°. 

Captain Vancouver has described the country in the neighbour- 
hood of King George's Sound, and therefore a few observations 
upon it will suffice. -The basis stone is granite, which frequently 
shows itself at the surface, in the form of smooth, bare rock ; -but 
upon the sea-coast hills, an4 the shores on the south sides of the 



King George's Sound."] TERRA AUSTRAiilS. .iSS 

Sound and Princcss-Royal Harbour, the granite is generally covered 
with a crust of calcareous stone ; as it is, also, upon Michaelmas 
Island. Captain Vancouver mentions (Vol. I. p. 49) having found 
upon the top of Bald Head, branches of coral protruding through 
the sand, exactly like those seen in the coral beds beneath the sur- 
face of the sea ; a circumstance which should seem to bespeak this 
country to have emerged from the ocean at no very distant period 
of time. This curious fact I was desirous to verify ; and his de- 
scription was proved to be correct. I found, also, two broken 
columns of stone three or four feet high, formed like stumps of 
trees and of a thickness superior to the body of a man ; but whether 
they were of coral, or of wood now petrified or whether they 
might not have been calcareous rocks, worn into that particular form 
by the weather, I cannot dk:termine. Their elevation above the pre- 
sent level of the sea could not hay|j been less than four hundred 
feet. \ 

But little calcareous matter was found elsewhere than on the 
southern shores. In pyster Harbour, a rather strongly impreg- 
nated iron stone prevails, but mixed with quartz and granite ; and 
in some parts of both harbours, a brown argillaceous earth was not 
uncommon. 

The soil of the hills is very barren, though, except near the 
sea coast, generally covered with wood ; and that of the plains at 
the head of Princess-Royal Harbour, has been described as shallow, 
and incapable of cultivation. In the neighbourhood of Oyster Har- 
bour the land was said to be better, especially near the rivulet which 
falls into the northern corner ; and on the borders of a small lake, 
at the back of .the long beach between the two harbours, the country 
was represented to be pleasing to the eye, and tolerably fertile. 

The timber trees of the woods consist principally of dilFerent 
species of that extensive class called gum-tiee by the colonists at 
Port Jackson, by botanists eucalyptus. They do not grow very large 
here, and the wood is heavy and seldom fit for other than common 



64 


A VCJYAGE to 


1802. 

January. 


[SotUh Coast. 

purposes.' Amongst the plants collected by Mr. Brown and his 
associates, was a small one of a novel kind, which we commonly 
called the pitcher plant. Around the root leaves are several little 
vases lined with spiny hairs, and these were generally found to con- 
tain a sweetish water, and also a number of dead ants. It cannot be 
asserted that the ants were attracted by the water, and prevented by 
the spiny hairs from making their escape ; but it seemed not impro- 
bable, that this was a contrivance of nature to obtain the means 
necessary either to the nourishment or preservation of the plant. 

Amongst the animal productions, the kanguroo and cassowary 
hold the first ranks. The kanguroo appeared to be numerous, and 
of more than one species ; but none were caught. Three of them 
seen by me bore a resemblance to the large kind which inhabits the 
forests at Port Jackson ; and the cassowary showed nothing distin- 
guishable at a distance from the same animal at that place: both 
were shy ; as were the ducks, swans, and all the birds. 

Near Point Possession were found two ne.sts of extraordinary 
magnitude. They were built upon the ground, from which they 
rose above two feet; and were of vast circumference and great 
interior capacity, the branches of trees and other matter, of which 
eacli nest was composed, being enough to fill a small cart. Captain 
Cook (see Hawkesworth, Vol. III. p. 195) found one of these enor- 
mous nests upon Eagle Island, on the East Coast; and if the magni- 
tude of the constructor be proportionate to the size of the nest. 
Terra Australis must be inhabited by a species of bird, little inferior 
to the condor of the Andes. ^ 

Amongst the reptiles was a variety of lizards ; one of which, 
of the larger size, was met with by Dampier on the West Coast, and 
is described by him “ as a sort of guano, but differing from others 
“ jn three remarkable particulars : for these had a larger and uglier 
“ head, and had no tail : And at the rump, instead of the tail there^ 

“• they had a stump of a tail, which appeared like another head ; but 
“ not really such, being without mouth or eyes : Yet this creature 



TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


66 


King Oeorge'a (Sounrf.] 


" seemed, by this means, to have a head at each end ; and, which 
“ may be reckoned a fourth difference, the le^s, also, seemed all 
“ four of them to be lore legs, being all alike in shape and length, and 
“ seeming by the joints and bendings to be made as if they were to 
“ go indifferently either head or tail foremost. They were speckled 
“ black and yellow like toads, and had scales or knobs on their 
“ backs like those of crocodiles. They are very slow in motion ; 
“ and when a man comes nigh them they will stand and hiss, not 
“ endeavouring to get away. Their livers are also spotted black 
“ and yellow ; and the body when opened hath a very unsavoury 
“ smell. The guano’s I have observed to be very good meat ; and 
“ I have often eaten of them with pleasure; but though I have eaten 
of snakes, crocodiles, and alligators, and many creatures that look 
“ frightfully enough, and there are but few I should have been 
‘‘ afraid to eat of, if pressed by hunger, yet I think my stomach 
“ would scarce have served to venture upon these New Holland 
“ guano’s, both the looks and the smell of them being so offensive.” 
The animal is certainly of a singular form ; but it is scarcely neces- 
sary to say, that the merit of Dampier's description does not consist 
in being strictly accurate. 

The fish caught with hook and line were principally small 
mullet, and an excellent* kind of snapper, nearly the same as that 
called wdlamai, by the natives of Port Jackson ; but these were 
larger, weighing sometimes as much as twenty pounds. 

Our frequent and amicable communication with the natives of 
this country has been mentioned. The women were, hoAvtiver, kept 
out of sight with seeming jealousy ; and the men appeared to suspect 
the same conduct in us, after they had satisfied themselves that the 
most beardless of those they saw at the tents were of the same sex 
with the rest. The belief that there must be women in the ship, 
induced two of them to comply with our persuasion of getting into 
the boat, one morning, to go on board ; but their courage failing, 


ISO?. 

Jauuary. 



66 

1802, 

Januaiy. 


A VOYAGE TO [South Coast 

they desired to be relaiided ; and made signs that the ship must go 
on shore to them. 

It was with some surprise that I saw the natives of the east 
coast of New South Wales so nearly pourtrayed in those of the 
south-western extremity of New Holland. These do not, indeed, 
extract one of the upper front teeth at the age of puberty, as is 
generally practised at Port Jackson, nor do they make use of the 
u'omcrah, or throwing stick ; but their colour, the texture of the hair, 
and personal apjiearance are the same ; their songs run in the same 
cadence ; the manner of painting themselves is similar ; their belts 
and fillets of hair are made in the same way, and worn in the same 
manner. The short, skin cloak, which is of kanguroo, and worn over 
the shoulders, leaving the rest of the body naked, is more in the 
manner of the wood natives living at the back of Port Jackson, than 
of those who inhabit the sea coast >and every thing we saw con- 
firmed the supposition of captain Vancouver, that they live more by 
hunting than fishing. None of the small islands had been visited, 
no canoes were seen, nor was any tree found in the woods from 
which the bark Iiad been taken for making one. They were fearful 
of trusting themselves upon the water; and we could never succeed 
in making them understand the use of the fish hook, although they 
were intelligent in comprehending our sigivs upon other subjects. 

The manners of these people are quick and vehement, and 
their conversation vociferous, like that of most uncivilised people. 
They seemed to have no idea of any superiority we possessed over 
them ; oij^the contrary, they left us, after the first interview, with 
some appearance of contempt for our pusillanimity; which was. pro- 
bably inferred from the desire we showed to be friendly with them. 
This opinion, however, seemed to be corrected in their future ^visits. 

Nothwithstanding the similarity of person and manner to the 
inhabitants of Port Jackson, the language of these people is very 
difierent. We found their pronunciation difficult to be imitated; 



TERkA AUSTRALIS. 


67 


King George's Sound!} 

more so, indeed, than our language was to them. Several English ism. 
words they pronounced perfectly ; whilst of such where an/ or an 
s entered, they could make but little : Finger, was pronounced 
hing-gah, ship, yip.; and of King George,’ they made Ken Jug-ger. In 
the difficulty of pronouncing the f and s, they resemble the Port- 
Jackson natives ; and the word used by them in calling to a distance, 
cau-wah ! ^come here,) is nearly similar to cow~ee ! The word also 
to express eye, is nearly the same. But in the following table, which 
contains all the words that, with any certainty, I was able to collect, 
the most essential differences will be found, both from the Port- 
Jackson language, and from that of the south end of Van Diemen's 
Land; and the words collected by Captain Cook at Endeavour 
River bear no resemblance to any of them. 



K.Gworge’s Sound, 

Port Jackson * 

- 

Van Diemen's Land.t 

Head 

Kaat 

Ca-ber-ra 


Hair 

Kaat-jou 

De-waf-ra 

Pclilogueni 

Nose 

Mo-il 

No-gto 

Mug'ui (Miiidgc, Cook) 

Cheek, or beard 

Ny-a-nUk 

Yar-rin 

Caijg'iiijjo 

Teeth 

Yca-al 

Da-ra 

Pegiii or Canan(Kaniy, C.) 

Ear 

Dii-ong 

Go-ray 

Vaigni (Koygee^ Cook) 

Lips 

Ur-luk 

Wil-ling 

Mogude lia 

Tliroat 

Wiirt 

Cad-le-an 


Nipple 

By)ep 

Na-buiig 


Belly 

Ko-bul 

Ba;-roiig 

^ Lomangui 

Posteriors 

Wa-la-kah 

Booag 

None 

Thigh 

Dtou-al 



Knee 

Wo-nat 

Go- rook , 

Ronga 

Leg 

Maat 

Dar-ra 

Lerai 

Foot 

Jaan 

Ma-no-e 

Pere 

The sun 

Djaat 

Co-ing 

Panuberc 


* From Collins’ Jccount of the English colony in Nw South Wales, Vol. I. p. 610-61 1 . 
f Voyage de D' Ent recast eauxy par M. de Ilossel. Tome 1« p. 552 seq. These words 
are written after the French pronunciation of the letters. 



A VOVAGE TO 


[SotfA^ Coatt. 


«8 


18 <M. 

January. 


The following anatomical admeasurement of one of the best 
proportioned of our visitors, was furnished by the surgeon, Mr. 
Hugh Bell ! 


Full height - - 5 7 6 

Circumference of the head 1 11 0 

From the transverse nasal 
suture, to the posterior 
ridge of the occiput -13 0 

From the small rim of each 

ear across the forehead 10 0 

From the nasal suture ,jj>iyer 
the nose, to the tip of 
the chin, - - .052 

From ditto, to the tip of the 
nose, - - -010 

From the tip of the nose to 

theedgeof the upper lip 0 10 

From the edge of the un- 
der lip, to the tip of the 
chin - - - 0 1 5 

Extent of the mouth - 0 2 1 

nostrils - 0 1 6 

lower jaw from 

each angle - - 0 8 6 

Length of the arm - 116 

— fore arm - 1 0 0 

middle meta- 
carpal bone - - 0 4 0 

middle finger *0*4 3 

femur, from 


the great trochanter to its 
lower end - 15 6 

Length of the tibia 14 6 

foot 0 10 0 

Length from the protuber- 
ance of the inner ancle, to 
the tip of the heel, - 0 3 9 
Ditto, to the end of the 

great toe - - 0 8 6 


Circumference of the neck 10 6 

— . chest 2 8 9 

pelvis 2 4 9 

■ arm 0 10 6 

elbow 

joint - - - 0 9 6 

; forearm 0 9 9 

wrist 0 6 0 

thigh 1 7 6 

Circumference just above 

the knee joint - - 1 1 0 

ofthekneeioint 1 1 0 

le^, 

immediately below the 

knee joint - - 0 11 0 

— ' ■ ■ leg 10 0 

the small 0 7 6 

foot 0 10 6 


Our operations at the observatory were not favoured by the 
weather ; but a sufficient number of observations was obtained for 
aU the purposes of navigation : 



TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


69 


K. George's Sbtinrf.] 

The Latitude of the tents in Princess-Royal 
Harbour, from three meridian zenith dis- 
tances of the* sun, observed with Ramsden's 

Of 

universal theodolite, was - * - 35 s 5 south. 

Longitude from thirty-one sets of distances of 
the sun east and west of the moon, of which 
the particulars are given in Table I. of the 
Appendix to this volume, - 117 53 lo east. 

These being reduced by the survey to Bald* Head, at the entrance 
of the sound, will place it in 

^ ^ o / // 

Latitude - 35 6 15 south. 

Longitude - 118 o 45 east.* 

The mean rates of the time keepers, deduced from equal alti- 
tudes taken on and bet\ cen Dec. 15 and Jan. 1, and their errors 
from mean time at Greenwich, at noon there on the last day of ob- 
servation, were as under ^ „ 

Earnshaw’s No. 543, slow o 21 46,69 and losing 6,46 per day. 

No. 529, o 51 *,8i 16,72 

Arnold’s No. 176, 1 o 45,46 9.26 

No. 82 went too irregularly to be worth taking. 

The longitude of the tents given by the time keepers on the 
first day of observation, with the Cape rates, was as follows: 

Earnshaw’s No. 543, 118° 14' 49" east. 

520, 117 59 22 

Arnold’s 176, 118 1 14 

The two first, which generally throughout the voyage shewed them- 
selves to be the best time keepers, were o’n a mean 13' 56" to the 
east of the lunar observations ; but by using rates accelerating in 

* The situation of Bald Head, in captain Vancouver’s chart, i ; 35" 0 ' 4(y' south, and 
118 ® 16 ' 3(y' cast from lunar observations which were not corrected for tlie errors of the 
astronomical tables. The situation assigned to Bald Head in the voyage of^the French 
admiihl D’Entrecasteaux, is 35® 10' south, and 118 ® 2' 40 " east; but since the admiral 
passed it at six in the evening, and in blowing weather, an error of a few minutes may 
have entered into both latitude and longitude. 

VOL. I. . N n 


1802 . 

January. 



70 


A VOYAGE TO 


[^South Coast. 


1802 . 

January. 


arithmetic progression from those of the Cape of Good Hope to the 
new ones of King George's Sound, the mean of Earnshaw's two time 
keepers will then differ only 8' 19" to the east in forty-four days. In 
fixing the position of places from Cape Leeuwin to the Sound, these 
accelerating rates have been used ; and the longitude has been fur- 
ther corrected by allowing an equal proportion of the error, 8' 19", 
according to the number of days after Nov. 1, when the last obser- 
vations were made at the Cape of Good Hope. In the Appendix, 
the nature of these corrections is more particularly explained. 

The height of the thermometer at the tents, as observed at 
noon, varied between 80° and 64,“. On board the ship, it never 
exceeded 70-', nor was below 60“. The range of the barometer 
was from 29,42 inches in a gale of wind from the westward, to 
30,28 inches in a moderate breeze from south-west. ^ , 

Mean Dip of the S. end of the needle, taken on shore, 64 1 

On board, upon the cabin table, - 64 52 

The increase being probably occasioned by the iron ballast in the 
bread room underneath.. 

The I'anatUm given by three compasses at the 
observatory was G° 22^' west, by Walker’s 
meridional compass 5“ 25', and by the surveying 
theodolite 8“ 17'; but upon the eastern part of 
the flat granite rock, on the south side of the . 
sound, two theodolites gave only 4° 1' west. On 
board the ship, at anchor off Point Possession, 
the variation from the three compasses on the 
binnacle, when 'the head was south-eastward, 
was 9" 28' ; or, corrected to the meridian, 7'’ 12' 
west. It seems not easy to say what ought to 
be considered as the true variation ; but the 
mean of the observations at the tents being 
6* 42', and on board the ship 7“ I2', I conceive it 
will not be far wrong if taken at - - q/ wrest. 



TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


71 


King George's Sound.l 

This is what I allowed in tracing a base line upon the beach between 
the two harbours ; and the back bearings from different stations did 
not vary more than- a degree from it, except at the west end of 
Michaelmas Island, where the variation, hi one spot, wdiS greaterhy 3°. 

The above different variations show that the needle was 
affected by the rocks ; and there will be frequent occasion, in the 
course of the voyage, to point out similar anomalies in the observa- 
tions' on land ; for they were found to take place upon almost all 
those parts of Terra Australis, where the basis stone is of granite, as 
here ; and also in those where green-stone, porphyry, basaltes, or 
iron-stone prevail ; whereas in the lime, or grit-stone countries, the 
needle did not appear to suffer any derangement. In the Appendix 
No. II. to the second volume, where the changes on ship board, which 
arose from altering the 'irection of the head, are exjilained, this sub- 
ject of the differences on shore is mentioned ; for they also were not 
without a certain degree of regularity. 

No set of Tide was perceived on board, cither whilst the ship 
was in the Sound, or in Princess-Royal Harbour; nevertheless it was 
sometimes found to run with considerable strength in the narrow 
entrances of both harbours. According to lieutenant Flinders' ob- 
servations on shore, during sixteen days, there was only one high 
water in twenty-four hours ; which always took place bctwx'en six 
and twelve at night : for after, by gradually becoming later, it had 
been high water at twelve, live next night it took place soon after 
six o’clock ; and then happened later by three quarters of an hour 
each night, as before. The greatest rise observed was three feet two 
inches, and the least two feet eight indhe.s. The accumulation was 
made in this manner : After low water, it rose for several hours ; 
then ceased, and became stationary, or perhaps fell back a little. In a 
few hours, it began to rise again ; and in about twelve from the first 
commencement, was high water. It was observed by captain Cook 
upon the east coast of tlis country,* and since by many others, 

♦ See Hawkesworth’s Voyages, Vol. III. p. 224. 


1802. 

January* 



72 


A VOYAGE TO 


\_Soutk Coast. 


1802. 

Jauuaiy. 


including myself, that the night tide rose considerably higher than 
that of the day ; which is conformable to our observations in King 
George’s Sound ; but with this difference, that in the day we had 
scarcely any tide at all. 

The ba.sc line for my survey of the Sound was of 2,46 geogra- 
phic miles, measured round the curve of the long beach between 
the two harbours. The other stations whence bearings were taken 
with the theodolite, were,-— in the Sound, four ; at the entrance of, 
and within Princess-Royal Harbour, three ; and in Oyster Harbour, 
four; at each of which, a point with a circle is marked in the plan. 
The soundings were either taken in the ship, with simultaneous cross 
bearings, or in boats, generally accompanied with notices of known 
objects in a line, or the angles between them taken with a sextant. 

There are many small, but no very essential differences be- 
tween my plan and that of captain Vancouver. The most important 
to navigation, is that in the soundings going into Oyster Harbour : 
I could find only thirteen feet over the bar, whereas he marked 
seventeen ; a difference, however,' which may not improbably have 
taken place between 1791 and 1801. 



From K. Oe<yrge'» Sonnrf.] TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


73 


CHAPTER IV 

Departure from King George’s Sound. Coast from thence to the Archi- 
pelago of the Recherche. Discovery of Lucky Bay and Thistle’s Cove. 
The surrounding country, and islands of the Archipelago. Astrono- 
mical and nautical ohseniations . Goose-Isla?id Bay. A .salt lake. 
Nautical observations. Coast from the Archipelago to the end of Nuyt.s’ 
Land. Arrival in a hay of the unknown coast. Remarks on the pre- 
ceding examination. 

In running along that part of the South Coast wliich lies to the 
west of King George’s Sound, I had endea>"oured to keep so close in 
with the land that the breaking water on the shore should be visible 
from the ship’s deck by which means our supposed distance would 
be little subject to error, and no river or opening could escape being 
seen. This close proximity could not, however, be obtained in every 
part, especially where the coast retreated far back ; but it was always 
attempted where practicable and unattended w ith much danger or 
loss of time; and when it could not be done, I was commonly at the 
mast head with a glass. All the bearings w ere laid down so .soon 
as taken, whilst the land was in sight ; and before retiring to rest, 

I made it a practice to finish up the rough chart for the day, as also 
my journals of astronomical observations, of bearings, and of remarks. 
When we hauled off from the coast at night, every precaution was 
taken to come in with the same point in the morning, as soon after 
daylight as practicable ; and when the situation of the ship, rela- 
tively to the land of the receding evening was ascertained, our 
rodte along the coast waf®feumed. This plan, to see and lay down 
every thing myself, required constant attention and much labour. 


1 8 f«. 
January 



74 


A VOYAGE TO 


[iSSouf^ Coast. 


iSo2. but was absolutely necessary to obtaining that accuracy of which 1 
was desirous ; and now, on recommencing the survey from King 
George’s Sound to the eastward, I persevered -'in the same system; 
and it was adhered to, although not particularly mentioned, in all 
the succeeding part of the voyage. 

Tuesday 5. On the 5th of January, in the morning, we got under way 

riati!'ii’) Sound, having a fresh wind from the westward and squally 

weather. I steered between Michaelmas Island and the main, in 
order to explore better that part of the Sound, and ascertain the ex- 
tent of a shoal running off from the north-west end of the island. 
It was found to run out not further than half a mile, at which distance 
we passed in 5 fathoms water ; and at noon, when the east end 
of Break-sea Island bore S. 30* W., we had 33 fathoms. 

Mount Gardner is a high, conic-shaped hill, apparently of 
granite, very well delineated in captain Vancouver’s atlas. It 
stands upon a projecting cape, round which the shore falls back to 
the northward, forming a sandy bight where there appeared to be 
shelter from western winds ; indeed, as the coast line was not dis- 
tinctly seen round the south-west corner ©f ’ the bight, it is possible 
there may be some small inlet in that part. 

The south end of an island, called He Pelee (Bald Island) by 
D’Entrecasteaux, opened round the cape of Mount Gardner at 
N. 6g° E. The French navigator having passed without side of this 
island, 1 steered within, through a passage of a short mile wide ; 
and had 17 fathoms for the shoalest water, on a sandy bottom. Bald 
Island is of moderate elevation, and barren, as its name implies; it 
is about two-and-half mileS in length, and the south end lies in 
3^° 55' south, and ii8° 29' east. It lies off a rocky projection of 
the main land, at which terminates a ridge of mountain extending 
three leagues along the shore from the bight behind Mount Gardner, 
There are a number of- small peaks upon the top of this ridge, which 
induced me to give it the name Mount J^j^peak. 

After clearing the passage of Bald Island, I found the shore 



From K. George's Sotind.'] TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


75 


to trend north-eastward, and to be low and sandy; but’ at the dis- 
tance of eight leagues inland, there was a chain of rugged moun- TuMda^L 
tains, of which the feastern and highest jieak, called Mount Rugged, 
lies N. 1 1-^® W. from the passage. At six, we came up with a steep 
rock, one mile from the main, and then hauled to the wind, off shore, 
for the night. This lump, wliich apj>eared to be of granite, I called 
Htud-off Rock; it lies in 31® 43' south, and 118“ 39' east, and two 
leagues to the south-west of a cliffy point which bears the name of 
Ca])c Riclic in the French chart. 

At one in the morning, being seven or eight leagues from the Wt dms. «. 
coast and in 45 fathoms, we tacked ship towards the land, having a 
fresh breeze at west-south-west, with hne weather. Haul-off' Rock 
bore N. 77° W., three or four miles, at six, and we then bore away 
along tile coast. Beyond Cajie Riche the shore forms a sandy bight, 
in which is a small island ; and on the north side of another cliffy 
projection, four leagues further, there is a .similar falling back of the 
coast, where it is probable there is also good shelter for boats, if 
not a small inlet. At noon, a prqiecting head two miles long, which, 
from the lumps of rock at the top, I called Cugc Knob, was three 
miles distant ; and our c)bservations and bearings of the land were 
then as muler : 

Latitude, ob.served to the north and south, 34 35 26* 

Longitude by time keepers, - - 119 15 

The cliffy jirojection past Cape Riche, 

with Mount Ifugged behind it, - N. 75 W. 

Two rocks, distant 7 or 8 miles, - N 56' W. 

Cape Knob, eastern extremity, N. 11 E. 

A cliffy projection further eastward, - N. 46 E. 

One of the Doubtful Isles, - - N. .74 E. 

The coast is sandy on both sides of Cape Knob, but especially on the 
west side, where the hillocks at the back of* the shore are little else 
thdn bare sand. 

At four o’clock we had passed the Point Hood of Vancouver; 
and seeing a channel of nearly a mile in width, between it and the 



76 


A VOYAGE TO 


[South -Cooit. 


i8oa. two outer df his Doubtful Islands, steered through it with soundings 
Wedne^fi. froni SO to *4 fathoms. I then hauled up south-westward, along 
the inner island and point, and sent away the master to sound 
between them ; it being my* intention to anchor, if a sufficient depth 
should be found for the ship to escape in case the wind came to blow' 
from the eastward : it was then light at south-east-by-south. Mr. 
Thistle found the opening to be very narrow, and no more than 2 
fathoms in the shoalest part; we therefore stood out, repassing 
within a small black islet, upon w'hich were some seals. At eight, 
tacked to the southward, and weathered the Doubtful Islands. 

On the north side of the isles and of Point Hood, the shore 
falls back five or six miles to the west-south-west before it curves 
northward, and affords good shelter against all winds which do not 
blow strong from between north-east and east. At the time we 
stood out of the bay, the ship was three miles within the outermost 
islands, and not more than a cable’s length from the shore of Point 
Hood, and we had 7^ fathoms, sandy bottom. The point and islands 
are steep and rocky, but the wesforn shores of this great bay are 
mostly sandy beaches. On the north-western and north sides, there 
are some masses of tolerably high land which appeared to be granitic; 
and for distinction in the survey, they are called West, Middle, and 
pMst Mount Barren. 

The wind was variable between east and north-by-eas.t, during 
Timrsday 7- the night. At day break, the three mounts were in sight, and the 
north end of the Doubtful Isles bore N. 74® W. three leagues. As 
the wind veered round to the west and southward, we steered more 
in for the north side of Ddubtful-Island Bay ; and at noon, our 
situation and the bearings of the land were these : o / // ’ 

Latitude, observed to the north and south, - 34 16 40 

Ix)ngitude by time keepers, - - 11947 

. 'Doubtful Isles, south extreme, dist. 11 miles, S. 55 W. 

West Mount Barren, - -1 - N. 77^ W. • 

Middle d“. - - _ N. 25 W. - 

East d®., the furthest visible land, - N. 28 E. 



From K. George's Soj/nd.] TERRiV AUSTR A LIS. 


77 


Our course was directed to the northward, with the wind 
at south-east-by-south ; but seeing the appearance of an opening in 
the north-west corner of the bay, with smokes rising there, we 
steered north-west for it. In an hour tl\e low land was seen from 
the mast head to extend across the sup|X)sod opening, and we then 
hauled up east- by-north, to the wind, at tlie distance of five or six 
miles from the high, rocky shore between the Middle and East 
Mount Barren. At seven in the evening, the eastern mount bore 
N. 44“ W., three leagues, and the coast, which from thence becomes 
sandy, was seen as far as N. 76* E. A small reef, one of two before 
laid down both by Vancouver and D’Entrecasteaux, was then ob- 
served three or four miles to seaward. It was important to get 
sight of this reef before dark, for we should otherwise have been at 
great uncertainty <luring '^le night, more especially as the surf upon 
it broke only at times. 

The wind being at south-by-east, we tacked and stood west- 
ward, nearly in our afternoon’s track, until midnight ; and the breeze 
having then veered to south-west,’ we were able to stretch off south- 
south-east, to windward of the breakers. At half past five in the 
morning. East Mount Barren was four leagues distant to the north- 
ward, and our course was resumed along the shore. The breakers 
were passed at the distance of two miles, and the mount was set 
over them, bearing N. 38° W. at seven o clock. The second small 
reef lies nearly east-north-cast from the first ; and was left three 
miles to the northward. 

On the preceding evening, a small rocky island had been seen 
indistinctly from the mast head, and it 'now again came in sight to 
the eastward. The French ships had passed without side of this 
island, and I therefore steered to go between it and the main land ; 
but breaking water was seen to extend so far to the north, that 
the uncertainty of finding a passage made the attempt too dangerous 
with the wind right aft. accordingly hauled up to windward. of 
the island ; and had 38 fathoms between it and a small reef lying 
VOL. I. O o 


1802 . 
January. 
Thursday 7. 


Friday 8. 



78 


A VOYAGE TO 


[SouiA Coast. 


1802. 
January^ 
I-Viday H, 


S. / S" W., between two and three miles from it. The island is low, 
smooth, and sterile, and is frequented by seals ; its latitude is 34° 6 * 
and longitude 120® 28', and it lies eight or nine miles from the main land . 

At noon, the rocky 'island was near ten miles astern, and a 
cluster of four small islets appeared in the offing at the distance of 
four leagues. The nearest part of tlie main land, seven or eight 
miles distant, was low and sandy, as it had been all the way from 
East Mount Barren, and continued to be to the furthest extreme 
visible from the mast head ; there were, however, a few scattered 
sandy hillocks on the shore, but nothing could be seen of the back 
country. Our situation, and the bearings taken at this time were as 
under: „ , „ 

Latitude, observed to the north and south, 34 1 48 


Longitude by time keepers, - - 120 38 

East Mount Barren, - - - N. 80j W. 

The small island astern, - - S. 65 "W. 

Four islets in the offing, - - S. 77 E. 

Mast-head extreme of the coast, - N. 59 E. 


We passed at nearly an equal distance between the four rocky 
islets and the main land, that is to say, at six or eight miles from 
each ; and at five o’clock were abreast of a projecting part of the 
coast, where the sandy hills seemed to form white cliffs. This is 
called Cap des Basses (Shoal Cape) in the French chart; and we 
saw, in fact, an islet under the land, surrounded with much broken 
water, and the soundings decreased from 35 to 25 fathoms soon 
after passing it at the distance of five or six miles. There was 
an appearance of small • inlets on each side of Shoal Cape, but as 
admiral D’Entrecasteaux passed within three miles and does not 
mark any, it was probably a deception, caused by the land being 
very low between the sand hills. 

Before sunset, the westernmost isle of D’Entrecasteaux’s 
Archipel de la Recherche was in sight to^e eastward, and at half past 
seven, our distance from it was about six miles. The French 



Recherche's Archipelago.} TERRA AUSTRALIS: 

admiral had mostly skirted round the archipelago, a sufficient 
reason for me to attempt passing through the middle, if the wea- 
ther did not make the experiment too dangerous. It was fine at 
this time, and the breeze moderate at ‘ south-south- west ; and I 
therefore took measures to be in with the western group as early 
on the following morning as possible, to have the whole day for 
getting through. 

At a quarter past five, we bore away for the south end of the 
westernmost island, passed it within a mile and a half at seven, and 
steered eastward for the clusters rising a-head and on both bows. 
At noon, the number of rocks above water, the patches of breakers, 
and the islands with which we vere surrounded, made it necessary 
to heave to, in order to take the angles of so many objects with 
some degree of accuracy. The situation of the ship, and the three 
most material bearings were these : 

Latitude, observed to the north and south, - 35 o 25 

Longitude, reduced up from eight o’clock, - * 121 49 45 

Observatory I. ( of D’Entrecasteaux ) dist. 6 miles, N. 37 W. 
High peak on Cape Le Grand, - - N. 84,- E. 

Small, high, peaked island, distant 7 or 8 miles, S. 57 E. 

This last peak had been visible from daybreak, and appears to be 
the top of the imperfectly formed He ck Remarque of D’Entrecas- 
teaux’s chart ; and from it, I measured with a sextant the angles of 
most of the other objects. Tiie long reef of rocks, called La 
Chaussee (The Causeway), was four or five miles distant to the 
southward ; and a sunken rock, upon which the sea broke at times, 
was three miles off to the north-cast, 'rite islands were more par- 
ticularly numerous to the east-south-east, where our course lay ; but 
as they were generally high, with bold rocky shores, and we had 
hitherto found deep water, I bore away for them so .soon as all the 
bearings were obtained. 

' The chart alone can ^ve any adequate idea of this labyrinth 
of islands and rocks, or of our track amongst them until half past 


70 


1802. 
January, 
j^iday 8. 


Saturday 9. 



80 


A VOYAGE TO 


[Sou^ Coast. 


1802. five in the evcnint^. We were then abreast of the T/rdu Mondrain, 
Sa^ay 9 . the view from the mast head was almost as crowded as before; 

but with this difference, that the islands were .^maPer, and the low 
rocks and patches of breakers more numeroirs, no probabi- 
lity of reaching a space of clear wa^^er in which t() off and on 

during the night, and no prospect of shelter under anv of the islands, 

I foiuid myself under the necessity of adopting a hazotrdous measure; 
and with the concurre?icc of the master’s opinion, we steered directly 
before the wind for the main coast, where the appearance of some 
beaches, behind other islands, gave a hope of finding anchorage. At 
seven in the evening we entered a small sandy bay ; and finding it 
sheltered every where except to the south-westward, in which 
direction there were many islands and rocks in the offing to break 
off the sea, the anchor was dropped in 7 fatlioins, sandy bottom. 
The master sounded round the ship, but nothing was found to injure 
the cables ; and except the water being shallow in the north-west 
corner of the bay, there was no danger to be apprehended, unless 
from strong south-west winds. The critical circumstance under 
W'hich this place was discovered, induced me to give it the name of 
Lucky Bay. 

Sunday JO. I had intended to pursue our route through the archipelago in 

the morning; but the scientific gentlemen having expressed a desire 
for the ship to remain two or three days, to give them an opportunity 
of examining the productions of the country, it was complied with ; 
and they landed soon after daylight. I went on shore also, to make 
observations upon the I'ates of the time keepers ; and afterwards 
ascended a hill at the back of the bay, to take angles with a theodo- 
lite. A party of the gentlemen were upon the top, eating a fruit 
not much unlike green walnuts in external appearance, and invited 
me to partake ; but having breakfasted, and not much liking their 
flavour, I did but taste them. Mr. Thistle and some others who had 
eaten liberally, w'cre taken sick, and rritnained unwell all the day 
afterward. The plant which produced these nuts was a species of 



Recherche’s Archipelago."] TERRA AUSTRALIS. 

zamia ( Zamia spiralis of Brown's Prodr. flor. Nov. Holl. I, ) ; a 
class of plants nearly allied to the third kind of palm found by cap- 
tain Cook on the East Coast, the fruit of which produced the same 
deleterious effects on board the Endeavour.* 

The weather, unfortunately for my bearings, was so hazy, 
that unless objects were eminently conspicuous, they could not be 
distinguished beyond four or five leagues. My list, however, con- 
tained forty-five islands and clusters of rocks, independently of many 
patches of breakers where nothing above water appeared ; yet 
most of those in the western part of the archipelago were in- 
visible, either from their distance, or from being hidden by other 
lands. 

In turning from the view of these complicated dangers to that 
of the interior country, the prospect was but little improved. Sand 
and stone, with the slightest covering of vegetation, every where 
presented themselves on the lower lands ; and the many shining 
parts on the sides of the hills, showed them to be still more bare. 
The vegetation, indeed, consisted’ of an abundant variety of shrubs 
and small plants, and ’yielded a delightful harvest to the botanists ; 
but to the herdsman and cultivator it promised nothing : not a blade 
of grass, nor a square yard of soil from which the seed delivered to 
it could be expected back, was perceivable by the eye in its course 
over these arid ])lains. 

Upon a rock on the side of the hill I found a large nest, very 
similar to those seen in King George’s Sound. There were in it 
several masses resembling those which contain the hair and bones 
of mice, and arc disgorged by the owls'ii^ England after the flesh is 
digested. These masses were larger, and consisted of the hair of 
seals and of land animals, of the scaly feathers of pinguins, and the 
bones of birds and small quadrupeds Possibl} the constructor of 
the nest might be an enormous owl ; and if .so, the cause of the bird 
being never seen, whilst the nests were not scarce, would be from 


81 


1802 . 
January. 
Sunday 10. 


* Hawkeswortb, Vol. IH. p. 220, 221. 



82 


A VOYAGE TO 


Coatt, 


1801. it.s not going out until dark; but from the very open and exposed 
s^(b^o. situations in which the nests were found, I should rather judge it to 
be of the eagle kind ; and that its powers are.- such as to render it 
heedless of any attempts from the natives upon its young. 

Monday II. On the following morning, I sent the master to examine a 

small bay or cove, lying two miles to the westward of Lucky Bay. 
He found it to be capable of receiving one ship, which might be 
jilaced in perfect security in the western corner, with anchors out on 
the oft bow and quarter, and hawsers on the other side fast to the 
shore. She would thus lie in from 3 to 5 fathoms, almost near enough 
to la}'^ a stage to the beach. There was wood for fuel ; and at less 
than a hundred yards from the shore, a lake of fresh water, one 
mile in circumference, from which a small stream runs into the cove; 
but another stream, descending from the hills nearer into the western 
corner, would better suit the purposes of a ship. This account was 
from the master, after whom this little, but u.seful discovery was 
named Thistle's Cove. It seems to be much superior to Lucky Bay, 
where neither wood nor water can be procured without much 
time and trouble, nor is the shelter so complete. 

Tuesday 12. Next day, Mr. Thistle was sent to examine the coast and 

islands to the eastward, when he found the archipelago to be full as 
dangerous in that direction, as to the west. He landed upon an 
island three leagues distant, and brought me from thence a list of 
other islands and rocks further on, whose bearings had been taken. 
Several seals were procured on this and the preceding day, and some 
fish were caught along-side the ship ; but our success was much 
impeded by three monstrous sharks, in whose presence no other fish 
dared to appear. After some attempts we succeeded in taking one of 
them ; but to get it on board required as much prejiaration as for hoist- 
ing in thelaunch. The length of it, however, was no more than twelve 
feet ‘three inches, but the circumference of the body was eight feet. 
Amongst the vast quantity of substances contained in the stomach, 
was a tolerably large seal, bitten in two, and swallowed with half of the 



Recherche' s Archipelago.'^ TERRA AUSTRALIS. 83 

spear sticking in it with which it had probably been killed by the ]8(ya. 
natives. The stench of this ravenous monster was great, even be- 
fore it was dead ; and when the stomach was opened, it became in- 
tolerable. 

On the 13th, the wind blew fresh from the eastvVard ; and as Weducs. is. 
we could not sail with the ship, lieutenant Fowler and Mr. Thistle 
went over to Mondrain Island, the largest we had yet seen in the 
archipelago. An observation of the latitude and a set of angles 
were there taken, and they brought back some seals of a reddish 
fur, and a few small kanguroos of a species different from any I 
had before seen. The island was covered with brush wood; but 
some of the party, either from accident or design, set it on fire ; and 
the wind being fresh, there was a general blaze in the evening, all 
over the island. 

Very little other stone was seen about Lucky Bay than gra- 
nite ; and all the surrounding hills, as well as the islands visited, 
were composed of varieties of the same substance ; and some speci- 
mens from Mondrain ^Island contained garnets. In many places the 
surface of the rocks was scaling off in layers, and in the steep 
parts great lumps had fallen off, and some caverns were formed in 
the cliffs. This propensity to decomposition was more remarkable 
in the high peak of Cape Le Grand, about five miles to the west- 
ward, to which Mr. Brown made an excursion. He found a per- 
foration at the top forming an arch of great width and height, and 
above it, at the very summit of the peak, were loose pieces of 
granite of considerable size. 

There did not appear to be any Indians at this time in the 
neighbourhood of Lucky Bay ; but from their fire places, it was 
judged that they had not quitted it long since. Geese and ducks 
were found here, and not being very shy, some of them were kiljed 
by the shore parties. The goose was also found upon the islands ; 
and is the same bird spokqn of in the Introduction, page cxxxv, as 



84 


A VOYAGE TO Coast, 

resembling the bemacle goose, and frequenting Furnea.ix’s Islands 

January, # 

The latitude, observed upon a point of the main 
land on the east side of Lucky Bay, from one 
supplement of the sun’s altitude, was 33*59' 45"; 
but as the supplement of the preceding day 
gave 39" less than the mean of both observa- 
tions, I consider the true latitude to be more 
nearly - - - - 34, o 20 S. 

The longitude from sixteen sets of distances of 
the sun east and west of the moon, of which 
the individual results are given in Table II. of 
the Appendix to this volume, was 122° 15' 

4 «" ; but from the two best time keepers, in 
which, from the short period since leaving 
King George’s Sound, I put most confidence, 
it will be more correctly - - -1221414E. 

Dip of the south end of the needle, taken 
on shore upon the granite rock, - 66 4 o 

But I am inclined to think it was attracted by the granite ; and 
that, had the needle been considerably elevated, it would not have 
shown more dip than at King George’s Sound, where it was 64° 

The variation deduced from observations taken 
on shore, morning ^nd evening, with three 
compasses placed on the same rock, was 
2° 35' west ; with Walker’s meridional com- 
pass, 4® 55'; and 'with the surveying theodolite 
0° 30' west.-f An amplitude taken on board 

• This goose is described by M. Labillardi^re, page 258 of the London translation, as 
. a new Species of swan. 

t It is remarkable, that the diflFerence between these three kinds of instruments is 
directly the reverse here of what it was in King Getrge’s Sound. 



85 


Rfcherche's Archipelago.'] TERRA AUSTRALIS. 

the ship, with the head east-south-east, gave 1802. 

T ^5'> which, reduced to what it should be 
with the head in the meridian, is 4* 96' west. 

The mean, and what I consider to be nearest 
the true variation in this neighbourhood, 
will be - - - _ 3’ 6/ west 

This is what I allowed upon the bearings taken with the theodolite 
upon the top of the hill behind the bay, and it appeared to be the 
same upon two small islands, one to the east and the other west, 
where Mr. Thistle took angles ; but at Mondrain Island there seemed 
to be considerable differences. 

Before entering the archijielago, the variation was observed to 
be 9*21' west, with the ship's head east-.south-east ; but at three 
leagues to the east of Termination Island, in the following year, and 
with the head at east-north-east, it was no more than 3“ 50 west. 

From the first, I should deduce the true variation on the west side 
of the archipelago to be 6“ 28', and off Termination Island, from the 
second, to be 0° 57' west ; both of which coincide with the other 
observations in showing the islands of the archipelago to possess a 
considerable degree of magnetic attraction. 

The rise of tide in Lucky Bay was so trifling, that under the 
circumstances of our stay no attention was paid to it. 

In the morning of the 14th, the wind being then light from Thursday 14. 
the northward, we got under way and steered for Mondrain Island. 

In our route eastward from thence, several low rocks and patches of 
breakers were left on each side, besides small islands whose bear- 
ings had been taken from the hill behirfd Lucky Bay ; the depth of 
water, however, was between 20 and 30 fathoms. The wind was 
then moderate from the south-westward, but the weather so hazy 
that there was much difficulty, and some uncertainty, in recognizing 
the different islands. 

• At half past ten we steered more towards the main land, 
that no opening in it might escape unseen ; and at noon , hove to 
VOL. I. P P 



86 


A VOYAGE TO 


[«SI()m<A Coatt. 


!8o«. for the purpose of takings bearings. The latitude observed to the 
Thur^^i4. *iorth was 34° 2', and longitude 122° 36'. A chain of islands and 
breakers lay about two miles to the northward ; and amongst the 
cluster to the east were two islands with peaks upon them, which, 
from their similarity, were named the Twins : the southernmost 
and nearest bore E. 7° N., tlirec leagues. The nearest part of the 
main land was a projection with hills upon it which had been set 
from Lucky Bay, whence it is nearly five leagues distant ; the 
intermediate space being a large bight with a low, sandy coast at 
the back, and containing many small islands and breakers. To the 
eastward of the hilly projection, the coast seemed again to be sandy ; 
but although our distance from it was not more than six or seven 
miles, it was scarcely visible through the haze. 

After the bearings were obtained, we bore away along the 
south side of the chain of islands and rocks ; and at half past 
one steered north-easf to look for a place of shelter, either amongst 
the cluster near the Twins, or in the opposite main land. The 
water shoaled amongst the small islands, from 30 to 10 fathoms, 
and suddenly to 3, when the bottom was distinctly seen under the 
ship. The next cast was 7 fathoms, and we steered on eastward 
for two islets three-quarters of a mile asunder, between which the 
master was sent to sound. On his making the signal we followed 
through, having 20 fathoms, and afterwards hauled the wind t(} the 
south-east, seeing no hope of shelter either amongst the islands or 
near the main land. The coast slretclied eastward with little 
sinuosity, and was sandy, but not so low as before. 

At six o’clock we had some larger, flat islands to windward, 
and in the east-south-east was one much higher and of greater ex- 
tent, which proved to be the /. du Milieu ( Middle Island ) of D’En- 
trecasteaux. Betwixt this island and his Cap Aride on the main, 
there were many small isles and apparently passages ; and we there- 
fore bore away in the hope of finding anchorage against -the 
approaching night. Many patches of breakers were passed; and 



87 


Recherche's Archipelago.'] TERRA AUSTRALIS. 

seeing a small bay in the north side of Middle Island, we stood 1802. 
in for it under shortened sail, and came to an anchor in 7 fathoms, 'rhuw^Ti. 
sandy bottom, off' the first of three small beaches. The island 
sheltered us from east-north-east, round by the south to west-by- 
north ; and to the northward there was, besides the main land, a 
number of reefs and small isles, of which the nearest and largest 
was a quarter of a mile distant, as Middle Island was on the other 
side. The master was immediately sent to examine the passage 
through to the eastward , that we might know whether there were 
a possibility of escape in case the anchor should not hold ; for the 
wind blew fresh at west-south-we.st, and threw some swell into the 
bay ; he found 3 fathoms in the shallow part of the opening. 

The botanists landed in the morning ujx^n Middle Island ; for Friday is, 

I had determined to stop .• day or two, as well for their accommoda- 
tion as to improve my chart of the archipelago. I went to the 
northern island, which is one mile long and near half a mile in 
breadth, and found it to be covered with tufts of wiry grass inter- 
mixed with a few shrubs. Some of the little, blue pinguins, like 
those of Bass' Strait, harboured under the bushes ; and amongst the 
grass and upon the shores were a number of the bcrnaelc gce.se, of 
which wc killed nine, mostly with sticks; and si.vteen more were 
procured in the course of the day. 

After taking bearings from the upjxTmost of the small eleva- 
tions of Goose Island, as it was now named, 1 ascended the high 
north-western hill of Middle Island, which afforded a more extensive 
view. The furthest visible part of the main land was a projecting 
cape, w'ith a broad-topped hill upon it beai'ing N. 58° E., six or 
seven leagues. This projection not having been seen by D’Entre- 
casteaux, was named after the late admiral sir Thomas Pasley, under 
whom I had the honour of entering the naval service. The shore 
betwixt Cape Pasley and Cape Arid is low and sandy, and falls back 
in k large bight, nearly similar to what is formed on the west sidepf 
Cape Arid. Behind that cape was -a high bank of sand, which 



86 


A VOYAGE TO' [-Soutt Cooit. 

1802. stretched from one bight nearly to the other, and had the appear- 
Fri^Ts. ‘ince of having been the sea shore not very long since. 

(Atlas, The mount upon which I stood is the highest part of a ridge 

View 5*) of almost bare granite, extending along, or rather forming the west 
side of Middle Island. The other parts of the island are low, and 
thickly covered with brush wood and some trees, where a small 
species of kanguroo seemed to be numerous, though none were 
caught. In the north-eastern part was a small lake of a rose colour, 
the water of which, as I was informed by Mr. Thistle who visited it, 
was so saturated with salt, that sufficient quantities were crystallised 
near the shores to load a ship. The specimen he br 6 ught on board 
was of a good quality, and required no other process than drying to 
be fit for use. This lake is at the back of the easternmost of three 
small beaches on the north side of the island, and it might be con- 
cluded, that the salt was formed by the evaporation of the water 
oozing through the bank which separates it from the sea ; but as, 
in the small drainings from the hills, the water was too salt to be 
drinkable, this may admit of a doubt. 

Saturday 16. On Saturday morning, a part of the people were employed 

cutting a boat load of fire wood, and the master was again sent to 
sound the passage out to the eastward, and amongst the rocks lying 
beyond it. The shallowest depth he found was 3 fathoms, after 
which the water deepened to 7 and 10, past the north-east point and 
out to sea. He landed upon some of the rocky islets, and brought 
from thence twenty-seven more geese, some of them alive. The 
botanical gentlemen employed the day in going round Middle Island, 
but they found very little to reward their labour. A piece of fir 
plank, with nails in it, which seemed to have been part of a .ship’s 
deck, was picked up on the shore; but no trace of the island having 
been visited, either by Europeans or the natives of the main land, 
was any where seen. 

• This view was taken in the following year, at five leagues distance from Middle 
Island, but it shows the form of the mooiit, and of the granitic ridge. 



Recherche's Archipelago.'] TERRA AUSTRALIS. 89 

The basis stone of this, as it appears to be of all the islands as 1802. 
well as of the coast of the archipelago, is granitic ; but at the south saturd^s. 
side of Middle Island there is a thick crust of calcareous rock over 
it, as there is at the south end of Goose’ Island. It was also on the 
south side of King George's Sound, that the calcareous rock covered 
the granite ; a coincidence which may perhaps afford some light to 
the geologist. 

The latitude of Goose-Island Bay, for so this anchorage was 
named, is 34° 5' 23" south, and longitude by the two best time keepers 
corrected 123“ 9' 30", 5 east; the observations being made on the 
middlemost oTthe three southern beaches. 

The variation from azimuth, observed on the binnacle when 
the ship’s head was west-south- west, was o® 54' west, and in the fol- 
lowing year similar observations taken at anchor one mile to the 
eastward, with the head east, gave 6* 10' west; whence I deduce 
the variation which would have been obtained with the head at north 
or south, to be 3° 25' west. From the bearings on shore, compared 
with the latitudes and longitudes,’ it appeared to be 5^° on the centre 
of Goose Island ; and 4" upon the granitic mount of Middle Island. 

No run of ink was observed, notwithstanding the narrowness 
of the channel where the ship lay. 

Goose-Island Bay may be useful as a place of refreshment, but 
the geese, were not found to be so numerous at a different season of 
the year ; a few hair seals may be procured, probably at all times. 

The wood is a species of eucalyptus, neither abundant nor large ; but 
two or three ships may be supplied with fuel. Fresh water was not 
to be obtained upon either of the islands ^ but upoii the opposite Cape 
Arid, five miles to the north, I judged there might be small streams 
running down from the hills. The lake of salt will be the greatest 
inducement for vessels to stop in this bay ; they must not, however, 
come to it in the winter season, as there will be occasion to show 
hereafter. 

On the 17th in the morning, the anchor was weighed and we Sund.iy 17 



90 


A VOYAGE TO 


Coa$t. 


1802. Steered out eastward. The shallowest water was seventeen feet, 
Sund^Tr. between the south-east point of Goose Island and the opposite west 
point of the middle beach ; after which it deepened ; and abreast of 
the middle rock there wa’s 7 fathoms. Having cleared the islets 
lying off the north-east point of Middle Island, we steered for Cape 
Pasley, leaving the South-east Isles of the archipelago far distant on 
the starbord hand. A low islet and some rocks lie three miles to 
the south of the Cape, and the soundings we had in passing between 
them were 38 and 34 fathoms. 

The wind at this time was moderate at south-west, with fine 
weather. Middle Island and Cape Arid were still visible at noon, 
and the Eastern Group, which, according to D’Entrecasteaux, termi- 
nated the archipelago, was coming in sight. Our situation and most 


material bearings were then as under : « / // 

Latitude, observed to the north and south, 33 54 55 

Longitude by time keepers, - - 123 35 

Middle Island, top of the mount, - S. 65 W. 

Cape Pasley, the hill, dist. 6 miles, - S. 84 W. 


Furthest extreme, a low point, dist. 3 leagues, N. 38 E. 

A.ragged mount in the interior of the country, N. 31 W. 

Eastern Group, the northern hill upon the 
highest and southernmost isle, dist. 8 
leagues, - - - N.80 E. 

At half past one, we, passed within three miles of the point 
which had been the furthest extreme at noon ; it is low and sandy, 
and a ledge of rocks extends from it to the north-east. I named it 
Point Malcolm, in honour.of Captain Pultney Malcolm of the navy. 
The depth diminished from so to 10 fathoms, in passing near a 
sunken rock two miles to the south-east of the point, and upon 
which the sm breaks only at times. The coast from thence trended 
rapidly to the northward ; and in following its direction at from three 
to five miles distance, we left eight islands of the Eastern Group on 
the starbord, and two on the larbord hand. These, with the excep- 



01 


Rech^che^s Archipelago.'] TERRA AUSTRALIS. 

tion of the southernmost, which has a hill at each end and some vege- 
tation, are little better than low sterile rocks. 

At seven in the 'evening, the water being smooth, we anchored 
in 8 fathoms, sandy bottom, three or four miles from the shore ; 
where our calculated situation, and the bearings of the land were as 
follow : 

Latitude, - - - 33* 17' S. 

Longitude, - - - 124 6 E. 

Northern extreme of the coast, N. 27 E. 

St)uthern extreme, - - S. 36 W. 

A mount in the interior country, S. 68 W. 

From Cape Pasley to the northern extreme above set, the 
coast is sandy and low, presenting, with trifling exceptions, a con- 
tinued beach. On the noi ih side of Point Malcolm it stretches north, 
and then eastward, forming a bight five miles within the land ; after 
which the general trending is north-north-east, with very little 
sinuosity. Four or five miles behind the shore, and running j)arallel 
with it, is a bank of moderately high and level land ; over which 
the tops of some barren-looking mountains were occasionally seen. 
The most remarkable of these is Mount Ragged, lying N. 8° W. 
nine or ten leagues from Cape Pasley. 

We had now altogether lost sight of the Archipelago of the 
Recherche, The chart which 1 have constructed of this extensive 
mass of dangers is much more full, and in many parts should be 
more accurate than that of D'Entrecasteaux ; but I dare by no means 
assert, that the very great number of islands, rocks, and reefs therein 
contained, are the whole that exist; nor 'that every individual one is 
correctly placed, although the greatest care was taken to obtain 
correctness. All the islands seem to be more or less frequented by 
seals ; but I think not in numbers suflicient to make •speculation 
from Europe advisable on their account; certainly not for the Chi'na 
market, the seals being mostly of the hair kind, and the fur of such 
others as were seen was red and coarse. There is, besides, a risk 


1809 . 
January, 
Sunday 17* 


(A this, 
Plate III.) 



02 


A VOYAGE TO 


[iSiDKtft Goota. 


1808. of being caught in the archipelago with strong south, or western 
SundayTr. wi^ds, in which case destruction would be almost inevitable, for I 
know of no place where a ship might take refuge in a gale. The 
shelter in Thistle’s Cove is‘, indeed, complete, when a vessel is once 
placed ; but the cove is too small to be entered except under favour- 
able circumstances, and the shelter in the western corner could not 
be attained with winds blowing strong out of it. The archipelago 
should not, therefore, be entered without the assurance of carrying 
fine weather to the proposed anchorage. 

During the night of the 17th, there was no current or set of 
tide past the ship. Every thing was kept prepared for getting under 
way at a moment's notice ; but the wind blew gently off the land, 
and the people of the watch occupied themselves successfully in 
Monday 18. catching dog fish. At day break we made all sail to the north- 
eastward, along the same low and, if possible, still more sandy coast. 
The wind was light, and at nine it fell calm. This was succeeded 
by a sea breeze at east-south-east, and we trimmed close to it, keep- 
ing on our former course until four in the afternoon ; when the land 
being one mile and a half distant, we tacked in 12 fathoms, and 
stretched to the southward. 

The shore curved round here, and took a more eastern direc- 
tion; and the bank of level land, which continued to run along 
behind it, approached very near to the water side. Three leagues 
further on, it formed cliffs upon the coast ; and a projecting part of 
them, which I called Point Culver, bore N. 77® E. four leagues: 
this was the furthest land in sight. 

This afternoon we parsed a number of pale red medusas, such 
as I had usually seen on the East Coast at the entrances of rivers, 
and which, on being touched, produce a sensation like the stinging 
of a nettle. ^fThere was also a red scum on the water, and some of it 
was taken up to be examined by Mr. Brown in a microscope. It 
consisted of minute particles not more than half a line in length, .and 
each appeared to be composed of several cohering fibres which were 



Bettpeek Ae Archipelagos.'] TERRA AUSTRALIS. 

jointed; the joints being of an uniform thickness, and nearly as jsos. 
broad as long. These fibres were generally of unequal length, and 
the extremities of the compound particle thence appeared somewhat 
tom. The particles exhibited no motiori when in salt water; and 
the sole effect produced by immersing them in spirit of wine was the 
separation of each into its component fibres. 

Until daybreak next morning the wind was unfavourable; Tuesday 19. 
but it then veered round to the south, and enabled us to pass Point 
Culver. Our situation at noon, and the bearings taken were these : 

Latitude, observed to the north and south, 32° 52' 51" 

Longitude by time keepers, - - 124 58 

Point Culver, distant five leagues, - S. 78 W. 

Small rock under the cliffs, dist. 5 miles. North. 

Furthest extreme of the coast, cliffs, N. 39 E. 

Our course along the shore was so favoured by the wind, that 
at seven in the evening we had passed another projecting part of the 
cliffs, named Point Dover, distant from Point Culver fifty miles ; 
and the extreme in sight a-head was twenty miles further, and still 
cliffy. The nearest part was two or three leagues distant ; and the 
wind being still at south, we hauled up to it, and at nine o’clock 
stood back to the westward. 

The elevation of these cliffs appeared to be about five-hundred 
feet, and nothing of the back country was seen above them. In the 
upper part they are brown, in the lower part nearly white, and the 
two strata, as also the small layers of which each is composed, are 
nearly horizontal. They were judged to be calcareous, as was the 
white, grey, and brown sand which the* lead brought up when the 
bottom was not of coral. 

A surveyor finds almost no object here whose bearing 
can be set a second time. Each small projection presents the 
appearance of a steep cape, as it opens out in sailing along; but 
before the ship arrives abreast of it, it is lost in the general uni- 
formity of the coast, and the Iatitude,‘longitude, and distance of th,e 
voi^ I. Q q 



A VOYAGE TO 


d4 


[SouA CoMtr 


1808. neare8t cliflsj are all the documents that remain for the cdnstructicmi 
of a chart. Point Culver and Point Dover are exceptions to this 
general uniformity; but it requires a ship to be 'near the land before 
even these are distinguishable. The latter point was somewhat 
whiter than the cliffs on each side, which probably arose from the 
front having lately fallen off into the water. 

In the night of the i^thj the wind shifted round to the east- 
ward, and continued there for three days ; and during this time we 
beat to windward without making much progress. Several observa- 
tions were taken here for the variation of the compass ; with the 
ship’s head east-by-north, azimuths gave 7“ 15' west, and at south, 
4* 26'; five leagues further eastward they gave 6" 13' with the 
head north-east, and eight leagues further, an amplitude 4° 18' at 
south-by-east. These being corrected, would be 4“ 13', 4® 26', 4* 2', 
and 3® 42' west ; so that the variation had now reassumed a tolerably 
regular course of diminution. The mean of the whole is 4“ 6' west 
variation in the longitude of 125“ 51' east. 

Briday 22 . At the end of three days beating, our latitude in the evening 

of the 22nd was 32* 22', and longitude 126° 23'; the depth in that 
situation was 7 fathoms, at two miles from the land, and the furthest 
extremes visible through the haze, bore west-half-north and east, 
the latter being distant four or five miles. The bank which before 
formed the cliffs, had retired to a little distance from the. coast, and 
left a front screed of low, sandy shore. Several smokes arose from 
behind the bank, and were the first seen after quitting the archipelago. 

The barometer had kept up nearly to 30 inches during the 
east and south-east winds; but it now fell to 29,65 ; and we stretched 
off for the night in the expectation of a change of wind, and pro- 
bably of blowing weather. At ten, the sails were taken aback by a 
Saturday 23 . breeze frort^the westward; but at daylight it had veered to south- 
by-west, and the mercliry was rising. We then bore away for the 
land ; and having reached in with the low, sandy point, which*had 
bpme east in the evening, steered along the coast at three or four 



95 


tki Archipelaffos.] TERRA AUSTRALIS. 

tulles distance, in from 7 to ii fathoms water. The latitude at noon isos, 
from very indilFerent observations, was 32* 22^', and longitude 1 27° 2'; Saturday 23. 
the qoast, four miles distant to the northward, was low and sandy, but 
rose quickly to the level bank, upon which there were some shrubs 
and small trees. Nothing of the interior country could be seen 
above the bank ; but this might possibly have been owing to the 
haze, which was so thick that no extremes of the land could be de- 
fined. The wind was fresh at south-south-west, and by seven in 
the evening our longitude was augmented 55' ; the land was then dis- 
tant six or seven miles, trending east-north-eastward ; and we hauled 
to the wind which had increased in strength though the barometer was 
fast rising. 

Having stood to the south-east till midnight, we then tacked 
to the westward ; and at five next morning bore away north for the Sunday 24. 
land, the wind being then at south-by-east, and llie barometer 
announcing by its elevation a return of foul winds. At six we 
steered eastward, along the same kind of shore as seen on the preced- 
ing day; but the wind coming more’ unfavourable, and depth diminish- 
ing to 5 fathoms soon after eight o'clock, made it necessary to stretch 
off to sea. The coast, in latitude 32" 1' and longitude 128" 12', was 
three miles distant to the north. A league further on it took a more 
northern direction, but without much changing its aspect ; it con- 
tinued to be the same sandy beach, with a bank behind it of level 
land topped with small trees and shrubs as before described. 

The rest of the day and the whole of the 25th were taken up in Monday 25. 
beating fruitlessly against an eastern wind. Azimuths observed when 
the ship’s head was east-by-north, gave variation 6’“ 4' ; and ten miles 
to the south a little eastward, they gave 3“ 8' west, at south-by-east; 
corrected 3® e' and 2" 32', and the mean 2' 47' for the true variation, 
showing a decrease since the last, of i 19* 2“ 11' of longitude. 

At ten in the evening, our situation was less advanced tlian 
on the morning of the 24th, when we tacked olF shore ; but the 
mercury was again descending, and during the night the wind 
veere^to north-east, to north, and at eight in the morning .to west- Tuesday 2c. 



96 


A VOYAGE TO 


1802 . 
Januaiy. 
Tueadajr 26 . 


(Atlas, 
Plate XVII. 
View 6.) 


Wednes. 27. 


by-north, when we steered in f«r the land. At ten, the shore, was 
eight or nine miles distant, and our course was north-east, nearly as 
it trended. The latitude at noon, from observations to the north and 
south, was 31° 51' 34", and* fongitude by time keepers 128° 41' ; the 
beach was distant three or four miles in the north-north-west, and 
the bank behind it lay two or three miles inland and was somewhat 
higher, but had less wood upon it than further westward. The wind 
W'as fresh at south-west, and the mercury was rising; but the 
haziness of the weather was such, that no extremes of the land could 
be set. 

Our course from noon was nearly east, at the distance of five 
or six miles from the shore ; and we ran at the rate of between 
seven and eight knots, under double-reefed top sails and fore 
sail. Abreast of our situation at half past two, the level bank again 
closed in upon the shore, and formed cliffs very similar to those along 
which we had before run thirty leagues. Their elevation appeared 
to be from four to six hundred feet, the upper third part was brown, 
and the lower two-thirds white ; but as we advanced, the upper 
brown stratum was observed to augment in proportional quantity. 
We could not distinguish, as before, the smaller layers in the two 
strata ; and from the number of excavations in the white part, appai*- 
ently from pieces having fallen down (see Mr. Westall's sketch), I 
was led to think the lower portion of these cliffs to be. grit stone, 
rather than calcareous rock. The bank was not covered with 
shrubs, as before it came to the w^ter side, but was nearly destitute 
of vegetation, and almost as level as the horizon of the sea. 

At dusk we hauled* up south-east-by south to the wind, at one 
in the morning tacked to the westward, and at four bore away 
north for the land. Having reached within six miles of the cliffs, 
we steered eastward again, with a fair breeze ; and at noon were in 
latitude 31* 40' 52" and longitude 130° 59' ; the cliffs were then 
distant seven miles to the northward^ and at N. g° E. was their*ter- 
mination. 

The length of these cliffs, from their second commencen||nt, is 



Between the Archipelagos.'] TERRA AUSTRALIS. fc 

thirty-three leagues;. and that of the level bank, from near Cape 1809. 
Pasley where it was first seen from the sea, is no less than one 
hundred and forty-five leagues. The height of this extraordinary bank 
is nearly the same throughout, being ho where less, by estimation, 
than four hundred, nor any where more than six hundred feet. 

In the first twenty leagues the ragged tops of some inland moun- 
tains were visible over it ; but during the remainder of its long course 
the bank was the limit of our view. 

This equality of elevation for so great an extent, and the 
evidently calcareous nature of the bank, at least in the upper two 
hundred feet, would bespeak it to have been the exterior line of a 
vast coral reef, which is always more elevated than the interior parts, 
and commonly level with high water mark. From the gradual sub- 
siding of the sea, or peiliaps by a sudden convulsion of nature, this 
bank may have attained its present height above the surface ; and 
however extraordinary such a change may appear, yet, when it is 
recollected that branches of coral still exist upon Bald Head, at the 
elevation of four hundred or more feet, this supposition assumes a 
great degree of probability ; and it would further seem, that the 
subsiding of the waters has not been at a period very remote, since 
these frail branches have yet neither been all beaten down nor 
mouldered away by the wind and weath^'r. 

If this supposition be well founded, it may, with the fact of 
no hill or other object having been perceived above the bank in the 
greater part of its course, assist in forming some conjecture of 
what may be within it ; which cannot, as 1 judge in such case, 
be other than flat, sandy plains, or water. The bank may even 
be a narrow barrier between an interior, and the exterior sea, and 
much do I regret the not having formed an idea of this probability 
at the time ; for notwithstanding the great difficulty and risk, I should 
certainly have attempted a landing upon some part of the coast, to 
ascertain a fact of so much importance. 



08 


A VOYAGE TO 


[S&uth Coast. 

1803 . At the termination of the bank and of the second range of 

Wedue^7. cliffs, the coast became sandy, and trended north-eastward about 
three leagues ; after which it turned south-east-by-east, and formed 
the head of the Great Australia^ Bight, whose latitude I make to be 31® 
9,q' south, and longitude 13^° east. In the chart of admiral 
D'Entrecasteaux, the head of the Great Bight is placed in 31" $ 6 ' and 
131" 27' ; butT think there is an error at least in the latitude, for the 
admiral says, “ at day break I steered to get in with the land ; and 
“ the wind having returned to south-east, we hauled our starbord 
“ tacks on board, being then four or five leagues from the coast. 

** At elex’en o’clock, the land was seen a-head, and we veered ship in 
“ 32 fathoms, fine sand.”* The latitude observed at noon, as appears 
by the route table, was 31“ 38' 58" ; and if we suppose the ship, 
lying up south-south-west, to have made 3' of southing in the hour, 
as marked in the chart, slie must have been in 31" 37' at eleven 
o'clock ; which is witliin one mile of the latitude assigned to the 
head of the bight, where the shore curves to the south-east-by-east. 
This does not accord with the land being only then s^en a-head, 
since the weather appears to have admitted the sight of it at the 
.distance of four or five leagues. If we suppose the admiral, when he 
veered, to have been eight, instead of one mile from the head of the 
Great Bight, and the account strongly favours the supposition, it 
will then agree w'ith my latitude. I had only 27 fathoms in crossing 
the head ; and although it is possible there may be 30 closer in, 
yet in such a place as this the probability is, that the ship having 
the greatest depth of water was the furthest from the land. 

After steering east-north-east, east, and east-south-east, and hav- 
ing seen the beach all round the head of the Great Bight, IJve hauled 
up parallel to the new direction of the coast, at the distance of six 

* de D' Entrecasteaux, par M. de Rossel, Tome I, page 220. The 32 fa- 

thoms are, 1 believe, of five French feet each, making very nearly 30 fathoms English 
measure. 



99 


Between the Archipelagos."} TERRA AUSTRALIS. 

miles ; and at five o’clock were abreast of the furthest part seen by 
the Fren";h admiral when he quitted the examination. The coast is 
a sandy beach in fro’nt; but the land rises gradually from thence, 
and at three or four miles back is of m'oderate elevation, but still 
sandy and barren. According to the chart of Nuyts, an extensive 
reef lay a little beyond this part. It was not seen by D’Entrecas- 
teaux, but we were anxiously looking out for it when, at six o'clock, 
breakers were seen from the mast head bearing S. 43^ E. some dis- 
tance open from the land. We kept on our course for them, with 
the wind at south-south-west, until eight o’clock, and then tacked 
to the westward in 27 fathoms ; and the ship’s way being stopped 
by a head swell, we did notveei towards the land until three in the 
morning, at w'hich time it fell calm. 

On a light breeze springing up from the northward wc steered 
in for the coa.st ; and at noon were in the folio w'ing situation. 
Latitude, obsci ved to the north, - - 3?“ 2^' 

Longitude by timekeepers, - - 131 51 

Breakers, distant 2 or 3 miles, * - N. 22 to 42 E. 

A sandy projection of the coast, south part, - N. 37 E. 
Extremes of the land from the deckj N. 15 W. to 89 E. 

The breakers lie five or six miles from the land, and did not appear to 
have any connection with it, nor with two other sets of small reefs 
which came in sight to the east and east-south-east, soon afterward. 
At two o’clock, our situation was betwixt these last reefs. The south- 
ernmost patches are two or three miles in length, and there are 
large rocks upon them, standing above water ; tlic northern patches 
extend eight miles along the coast, ffom which they are distant 
three miles, and on the eastern parts there are also some rocks 
above water ; but there were none upon the western reef first seen. 
It may be doubted whether the western reef were known to Nuyts, 
but there can be no doubt concerning these last ; and I call’the 
whole Nuyts’ Reefs. 


1802. 
J.'inujiiy. 
Wednes. 27. 


(Atlas, 
Plate IV.) 


Thursday28. 



A VOYAGE 




foo 

1802. The aspect of the shore to the northward waS' nearly the same 

ThS^’s. preceding afternoon, but behind the second reef^ it 

began to assume a more rocky appearance. A high cliffy cape is 
formed a little furtlier eastward, answering to the broad projection 
marked A in the copy I have given of the Dutch chart; it has a 
' pyramidal rock near it, and the coast there takes a direction some- 
what on the north side of east. This remarkable projection, being 
within a few leagues of the furthest part of the main coast discovered 
by the Dutch, I have called Cape Nuyts : its latitude is 32° 2' south, 
and longitude 132“ 18' east. 

After clearing Nuyts’ Reefs we steered east-north-east, past 
the cape, to look for anchorage in two bights ; but there were rocks 
in both, and they were open to the southward. Beyond them was 
a low, cliffy point, lying E. 3° N. seven or eight miles from Cape 
Nuyts ; and seeing a bay behind it which promised shelter from 
south-west and south winds, we hauled round the point at half past 
five. The water shoaled gradually from n to 3 fathoms, on which 
I hove the sails aback and sent the master a-head to sound ; and 
as he did not make the signal for deeper water, and we v^ere already 
in tolerable shelter, the anchor was dropped in 3^ fathoms, sandy 
bottom. We had then the following bearings : 

Low cliffy point, distant 2 or 3 miles, - S. 35 E. 

Head of the bay, distant mile, - S. .58 W. 

Cliffs, appearing like an island, dist. 4 leagues, N. 77 E. 

Furthest land visible from the mast head, - E. S. E. 
Between the first and the last of these bearings we were exposed to 
the sea, but sheltered at all other points of the compass. 

Being arrived at the extremity of that part of the south coast 
of Terra Australis which had been previously explored, it may be 
useful, before entering on the unknown part, to compare ray 
examination of it with" what was contained in former charts. It will 
thence appear, that the employment of fifteen days in running along 



Between^ Archipelagos."] TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


101 


the coast, more than would probably have been required had I kept 
at a distance, was not without some advantage to geography and 
navigation. 

At Cape Leeuwin, the largest He 'St. Alnuam of D'Entrecas- 
teaux was seen to be joined to the main, and to form the south- 
western extremity of Leeuwin 's Land, and of Terra Australis. The 
coast from thence to King George's Sound was more accurately 
investigated than the Frejich admiral had an opportunity of doing, 
and his omission of soundings supplied. Captain Vancouver's chart 
is superior to tliat of the French, from Cape Chatham to tlie Sound; 
but that officer's distance from some parts prevented him from see- 
ing them correctly. In the Sound, no particular advantage will be 
derived from the new survey, the plan given by Vancouver being 
sufficiently correct for lu utical purposes, with the exception of the 
bar to Oyster Harbour, over which he had marked seventeen feet, 
but where thirteen now appeared to be the greatest depth. From 
King George’s Sound to Point Hood, the coast had been very indis- 
tinctly, and sometimes, not at all seen by Vancouver; but I found it, 
speaking generally, to be laid down by D'Entrecasteaux with accuracy, 
though the bights in the land are marked somewhat loo deep, from 
his distance not allowing the low beaches to be always distinguished. 
These trifling inaccuracies were remedied, the passages between 
Bald and Doubtful Islands and the main land opposite to them 
ascertained to be safe, and the omission of soundings along the coast 
remedied. 

In Doubtful-Island Bay the French chart does not give the 
north-western part sufficiently deep ; but the coast from thence to 
the Archipelago of the Recherche, as also the reefs and rocks, were 
well distinguished, better perhaps than by me; but the usual want 
of soundings, with the exception of some distant ones by Vancouver, 
still continued. D'Entrecasteaux’s chart appeared to be excellent 
in the western part of the archipelago, and good in the positions of 
the islands on the outskirts ; so that 1 have, in some cases, borrowed 

Rr 


ISOS. 

Jaauaiy. 


(Atlas, 
Plate II.) 


VOL, I. 



m 

1802: 

January. 


(Atlas, 
Plate JII.> 


A VOYAGE TO [-SiotriA Ceagt: 

from it. With respect to the inner islands and the main coast, it 
was necessarily defective, from the French ships having sailed round 
the archipelago, and not through the middle of it as I did in the 
Investigator. Here, my survey, though far from complete in the 
details, will aflfbrd much new information ; and useful also, since it has 
brought to light a well sheltered cove affording wood and water, 
and two other tolerable anchorages at which some refreshments may 
be procured, and at one, quantities of salt in the summer season. 

From the archipelago eastward, the examination of the coast 
was prosecuted by D’Entrecasteaux with much care, and with some 
trifling exceptions, very closely ; but as far as the 1 27th degree of 
longitude from Greenwich, no soundings were given. These have 
been supplied, and a more minute description given of the coast. At 
the 1 spth degree, the French ships seem to have been closer in with 
the land than was the Investigator; and it would appear by the 
track that they were also closer at the 130th, and at the head of the 
Great Bight, but these last are not corroborated by the soundings. 
From thence to the bay in which we anchored on the 28th, the 
Dutch chart of 1627 was the sole authority; and making allowances 
for the state of navigation at that time, it is as correct in form as 
could reasonably have been expected. 

The latitudes and longitudes of the points and islands along 
the coast have been either verified or corrected, for there are com- 
monly some differences between my longitudes and those of Van- 
couver and D’Entrecasteaux. The observations by which certain 
places, taken as fixed points, are settled in longitude, are mentioned 
at those places, as also are’ the corrections applied to the time keepers 
for laying down the intermediate parts ; and both are more particu- 
larly specified in the Appendix to this volume. 

Monsieur Beautemps Beauprtf, geographical engineer on board 
La Recherche, was the constructor of the French charts ; and they 
must be allowed to do him great credit. Perhaps no chart o’f a 
coast so little known as this Nvas, will bear a comparison with its 



BettcBen the Archipelagos."] TERRA AUSTRALIS. 103 

original better than those of M. Beauprfe, That the Plates II. and I 802 . 
III. in the accompanying Atlas, are offered as being more full and 
somewhat more correct, does neither arise from a wish to depreciate 
those of my predecessor in the investigation, nor from an assumption 
of superior merit; there is, indeed, very little due to any superiority 
they may be found to possess ; but there would be room for reproach 
if, after having followed with an outline of his chart in my hand, 
improvements should not have been made in all, or some of those 
parts where circumstances had not before admitted a close exami- 
nation. 



104 


A VOYAGE TO 


[iSbufl^ Cottif. 


180'3. 
January. 
Tlmrs. 2H, 

(Atlas, 
Plate IV.} 


Friday 29. 


CHAPTER V. 

Fozvkr’s Bay. Departure from thence. Arrival at the Isles of St. 
Francis. Correspondence between the winds and the marine barometer. 
Fxamination of the other parts of Nuyts' Archipelago, and of the main 
coast. The Isles of St. Peter. Return to St. Francis. General 
remarks on Nuyts’ Archipelago. Identification of the islands in the 
Dutch chart. 

The bay in which we anchored on the evening of January s8, at 
the extremity of the before know'n south coast of Terra Australis, 
was named Fowler’s Bay, after my first lieutenant ; and the low, 
cliffy point which shelters it from southern winds and, not impro- 
bably, is the furthest point (marked B) in the Dutch chart, was 
called Point Fowler. The botanical gentlemen landed early on the 
following morning to examine the productions of the country, and I 
went on shore to take observations and bearings, and to search for 
fresh water. 

The cliffs and rocks of Point Fowler are calcareous, and con- 
nected with the main land by a low, sandy isthmus of half a mile 
broad. Many traces of inhabitants were found, and amongst others, 
some decayed spears; but no huts were seen, nor any thing to indi- 
cate that men had been here' lately. Upon the beach were the foot 
marks of dogs, and some of the emu or cassowary. I found in a 
hole of the low cliffs one of those large nests which have before 
been mentioned, but it contained nothing, and had been long aban- 
doned. 

No fresh water was discovered round the shores of the bay, 
nor was there any wood large enough for fuel, nearer than tiy^ brow 



105 


Betweeti^ Archipelagos . TERRA AUSTRALIS. 

of a hill two or three miles off. Two teal were shot on the beach, 
whence it seemed probable that some lake or pond of fresh water 
was not far distant; a sea pie and a gull were also shot, and a few 
small fish caught along-side. These constituted every thing like re- 
freshment obtained here, and the botanists found the scantiness of 
plants equal to that of the other productions ; so that there was no 
inducement to remain longer. 

Fowler's Bay, however, may be useful to a ship in want of a 
place of shelter. It is open onl}’ to the three points of the compass 
between south-east-by-south and east-south-east ; and it was evident 
from plants growing close to the water side, that a swell capable 
of injuring a vessel at anchor was seldom, if ever thrown into it. 
The latitude of the east extremity of Point 

Fowler is - - _ _ ga® i' south 

Longitude of the point, deduced from twenty- 
two sets of distances (see Table* 111 of the 
Appendix to this volume ) is 1 32“ 30' ; but 
that given by time keepers with accelerated 
rates and supplemental correction, as ex- 
plained at the end of Chap. VI, and in the 
Appendix, is preferred, and is - - 132 27 cast 

The variation observed upon the bhinaclc, with 
the ship’s head east-south-east, was 3" ii 'west 
by the surveying compass ; and in the offing, 
with the head north-north -cast, it was 1° 41' 
west. These, corrected, will be 0° and 
0*30'; and therefore the variation allowed 
upon the bearings on shore was - o 25 west. 

The wind was at south-east-by-.^outh at one iji the afternoon, 
when the anchor was weighed to beat out of the bay. At half past 
five we were three miles from a cliffy liead whicli had been taken for 
an island at the anchorage, and set at N. 77* E. The shore form.s a 
small bight on the east side of this head, and then stretches south- 


1802. 

January. 
Friday 29* 



106 


A VOYAGE TO 


[«SbtiA CoMt. 

Janm^ south-eastward in a sandy beach, with a ridge of barren land be- 

Friday 29 . hind. At sunset we passed to windward of Point Fowler, and stood 
off to sea for the night. 

Saturday 30 . Cape Nuyts borc north, two or three leagues, soon after day- 
light, and the wind was then at east ; but as the day advanced it 
veered to the south-east, and permitted us to make a stretch toward 
the furthest land. At five in the evening we tacked near some low, 
whitish cliffs, which had been seen from the mast head when in 
Fowler's Bay ; tliey were two or three miles off, and the furthest land 
visible from the deck bore S. 63° E., at no great distance. The coast 
here is broken into sandy beaches and small, cliffy points, and 
the same ridge of barren land runs behind it, but the elevation is not 
great. 

Sunday 31 . At three in the afternoon of the 31st, we reached in again with 

the coast, about four leagues beyond our situation on the preceding 
day. The depth at two miles off shore, was 7 fathoms on a coral 
bottom ; the northern extreme bore N. 58“ W., and a low point on 
the other side, named Point Bell, S. 45“ E. Seven miles. To seaward, 
a flat rock bore W. 3“S., one mile and a half; it is the largest 
of four which were called Sinclair’s Rocks, and lie scattered at the 
distance of two or three miles off the coast. We stood off, at this 
time ; but so little could be gained upon the south-east winds, that 

February. 

Monday 1. when we came in next morning, it was almost exactly in. the same 
spot, and Point Bell was not passed until late in the afternoon ; the 
weather, also, was adverse to the examination, being so hazy that 
the highest land could not be seen beyond three or four leagues; 

At half past six in the evening, when we tacked to stand off 
for the night. Point Bell bore N. 68® W. four miles. It lies in 32* 
16^' south, and 133** 5' east ; and there is a brofd, flat rock, sur- 
rounded with breakers, one mile to the westward. The main coast 
beyond the point forms’ some bights, and is divided betwixt sand and 
rock, as before described: its general trending is nearly east.' A 
small island, somewhat elevated, lies six miles to the south-east of 



TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


Nayta' Archipelago.'] 


lor 


Point Bell, and has a ledge of rocks and islets extending from it a 
league to the north-eastward, and a separate islet one or two miles to Monday i. 
the east : these obtained the name of Purdie’s Isles. After we had 
tacked in g fathoms, a wave was perceived to break upon a sunken 
rock, within less than half a mile of the ship ; and I think it would be 
dangerous to pass between Point Bell and Purdie’s Isles. 

At noon of the and, no land was in sight. The weather was Tuesday 2. 
still hazy, and the wind at south-east ; but in the afternoon it favoured 
us two points, and we got sight of a higher and larger island than 
* any before seen on this part of the coast. At half past four, being 
then near a smaller isle and several rocks, we tacked towards the 
large island which was six or seven miles to the southward ; and 
soon after eight in the evening, got to an anchor in a little sandy 
bay on its north side. 1 he depth was 6 fathoms in passing the north- 
west point of the bay, but 10 within side, on a fine sandy bottom, 
where the anchor was dropped. At daybght, wc found ourselves Wedncs.s. 
half a mile from the shore, and the extremes bearing from N. 32^^ W., 
round by the west ^nd south, to S. 77° E. ; and at the distance of 
two miles, we were sheltered by four small islands, extending from 
N. 41° to 88" E. The master was sent to sound in the bay ; but the 
bottom was every where good, and nothing found to injure the 
cables. The scientific gentlemen landed upon their respective pur- 
suits; and I followed them to take angles for my survey, and see 
what could be procured for the ship’s company. 

The island is nearly three miles long, north-west and south- 
easf, and is moderately high and cliffy at the ends ; the middle part 
is a sandy isthmus, not more than half a mile broad, but the 
breadth of the higher ends is from one-and-half to two miles. This 
island is the central one of a group ; for besides the four small 
isles to the north-east, there are two close to the west end, 
and two others, something larger, lying off to the southward. I 
call* these the Isles of St. Francis ; in the persuasion that the 
central one is that named St. Francis by Nuyts. Independently of 



106 


A VOYAGE TO 


[iSSo«it& Court. 


1802. the eight isles and a rock, surrounding this Isle St. Francis, I set 
w^ine^. from the north-east point, three other islands. The first, named 
Lacy’s Isle, bore N. 28“ E., seven miles ; and two miles from it to 
the north-west, there is an islet and a separate rock above water, 
surrounded with breakers, the same near which we had tacked at 
half past four on the preceding evening. The second was called 
Evans' Me, and bore N. 49" E. eleven miles ; and the third, to which 
the name of Franklin was given, bore N. 81" E. sixteen miles. All 
these are much inferior in magnitude to the central island of St. 
Francis. 

For several days before anchoring here, we had observed 
large flocks of sooty petrels ; and I found the surface of the island, 
where it was sandy and produced small shrubs, to be full of their 
burrows. Pinguins, similar to those of Furneaux’s Islands, had 
their burrows nearer to the water side. A small species of kanguroo, 
was also found, and at some preceding season the island had been fre- 
quented by geese ; but at this time, the vegetation being almost burnt 
up, they seemed to have quitted it from want of food. The heat 
was, indeed, such as to make walking a great fatigue; and this was 
augmented by frequently sinking into the bird holes, and falling 
upon the sand. The thermometer stood at 98“ in the shade, whilst 
it was at 78® on board the ship. 

Where the surface is not of sand it consists of calcareous rock, 
mostly in loose ^ pieces ; but the stone which forms the basis of the 
island is heavy and of a close grain, and was judged to be porphyry. 
In the crevices of a low calcareous cliff', at the south-east side of the 
bay, I found some thin cakes of good salt, incrusted upon a stone 
containing lamina! of quartz. 

A party was sent on shore at dusk, to collwt petrels, and in 
less than two hours returned with sufficient to give four birds to 
Thurediiy 4 every man in the ship. ' Early in the morning, the boats were again 
sent upon the same errand, and to haul the seine ; but the birds were 
gone off to sea for the day, 'and no fish were caught. A small 



Nuyti Archipelago.'] TERRA AUSTRALIS. 

kanguroo was brought off, as also a yellow snake, whicli was the 
second killed on this island. The great heat deterred the naturalists 
from going on shore* this morning, for the very little variety in the 
vegetable productions presented no inducement to a repetition of their 
fatigue. I landed to see what further could be discovered of the 
neighbouring islands ; and we then prepared to get under way so 
soon as the breeze set in from the south-eastward, which it usually 
did about noon, after a few hours of calm or of light airs. 

The small bay in tlie Isle St. Francis, which I call Petrel 
Bay, affords excellent shelter for two or three ships; but no fresh 
water, not even to rince our mouths, could be found at this time; 
and a few scattered bushes were the nearest a]>|)roacli to wood upon 
the island. Petrels, pinguins, and a few hair seals may be procured, 
and probably some gee. 3 in the wet seasoji. 

I had hitherto observed upon this coast, tliat the south-east 
and east winds produced the same effect I'.pon the barometer as at 
the Cape of Good Hope, in keeping the mercury high, commonly at 

or above 30 inches; and the more* fresh was the wind, the higher it 

% 

stood; but within the last few days, the barometer was much lower 
with the same winds, and at this time w'as at 29,74. The den.se haze 
which prevailed might possibly have caii.sed the change, but I sus- 
pected another reason for it. Winds coming off the land, I liad 
remarked, had a tendency to depress tli^ mercury, and sea winds to 
make it rise, thougli no change took place in tlie w'eather ; and it 
therefore seemed probable, as the trending of the coast beyond 
these islands was unknown, that rhe .soutli-east and east winds came 
off' the land, and not from the sea, as • b.efore ; in which case, the 
unknown coast would be found trending to the .southward, a conjec- 
ture which, it will ^je seen, was verified. That there was no entrance 
to a strait, nor any large inlet near tiv' x- islands, was almost demon- 
strated by the insignificance of the tides; for neither in Fowler's 
Bay, nor at this Isle St. Francis, could any set be perceived; nor was 
there any rise by the shore worthy of notice. 

V OL. I. S s 


109 


1802. 
February. 
Thurs. 4. 



no 


A VOYAGE TO 


[^SouA Coast. 


1802. 
February. 
Thurs. 4. 


Friday 5. 


At half past one we left Petrel Bay; and having passed 
between the small isles to the north-east, steered for Evans' Island, 
and toward the Isles of St. Peter, which were eJcpected to lie beyond 
it. At five o’clock, we passed between Evans’ Island and some 
rocks above water, with breakers round them, lying three miles to 
the eastward. An island, equally high with that of St. Francis, was 
then seen to the north, and low land extended from it to N. 45* E., 
which had some appearance of being part of the main. We steered 
for these lands ; and seeing an opening between them at sunset, I 
attempted it in the hope of getting anchorage for the night; but the 
water shoaled suddenly, from 4 fathoms to sixteen feet upon rocks, 
and obliged me to veer on the instant. We then stood back to the 
southward, till eight o’clock, and nothing being perceived in the 
way of the ship's drift, hove to for the night. 

The wind was north-east in the morning; and at half past 
four o’clock we filled the sails and steered eastward until eight, 
when the central island of St. Francis bore . 71® W . , and Franklin’s 
Isles, for there are two, besides rocks, were distant four leagues, the 
small opening between them bearing N. 28° W. To the south-east- 
ward of the.se islands, at the distance of eleven miles, is a low pro- 
jection of the main land, to which the name of Point Brown was 
given, in compliment to the naturalist ; and four leagues further, in 
the same line, was a cliffy head, called Cape Bauer after the painter 
of natural history. Between these projections there was a wide 
space where no land was visible, and for which we accordingly 
steered on the wind veering more to the northward. The atmos- 
phere was still hazy, mort; especially about the horizon, and no 
observations worthy of confidence could be taken for either latitude 
or longitude. At noon, ^ 

Franklin’s Isles bore - N. 484-" to 56^* W. 

* Point Brown, distant four miles, - N. 34 W. 

Cape Bauer, south extremity, dist. 3 leagues, S. 50 E. 

No land was yet visible a-head ; and there being much refuse from 



Nuyts' Archipelago:\ TERRA AUSTRALIS. 

the shore, as well as sea weed floating about, some hopes of finding 
a river were entertained. At half , past two, however, low, sandy 
land was seen from the mast head, nearly all round, the depth had 
diminished from 19 to 7 fathoms, and ‘ the water was much dis- 
coloured in streaks, at less than a mile from the ship. Smokes 
were rising in three different places ; but as the wind was unfavour- 
able, and there was no prospect of any opening sufficiently large to 
admit the Investigator, I gave up the further examination of this 
place, and called it Streaky Bay. 

There remained nearly forty miles of space, between Point 
Bell and Point Brown, in which the main coast had not been seen. 
This it was necessary to explore; but the wind being then at north- 
north-east, I steered to the southward, to gain some further know- 
ledge of the coast in that direction, before dark. 

West of Cape Bauer, and distant four miles, there is a low island, 
extensively surrounded with rocks and breakers, which 1 called 
Olive’s Island. We passed, between it and the cape, and observed 
the cliffs of the latter to be stratified, and apparently calcareous. 
Another cliffy, and somewhat higher projection opened from it at 
S. i® W., distant seven miles, the intermediate low land forming a 
bight four or five miles deep, which is mostly skirted by a sandy 
beach. This projection I named Point Wc stall, in compliment to 
the landscape painter; and at six in the evening, when it bore north- 
east-by-east two or three miles, we veered round to the northward. 
Beyond Point Westall the coast takes a more eastern direction, the 
first land which opened out from it being at S. 43" E. ; this was a 
third cliffy projection, terminating anotKer sandy bight in the coast. 
No hill, nor any thing behind the shore could be perceived, but it 
does not certainly.follow that there are no hills in the back country, 
for the haze was too thick to admit ol the sight extending beyond 
four or five leagues. 

• Th^ wind having veered to east-north-east, we kept to the 
northward all night, under easy sail; and at daylight, the lands 
around us were in the following bearings: 


111 


1802. 
February. 
Fiiday 5. 


Saturday 6 , 



112 


A VOYAGE TO 


[South Coast. 


1S02. 
February. 
Saturday 6. 


I. St. Francis, the largest, southern cliffs, - N. 8 o W. 
Lacy’s Isle, centre, - - - N. 57 

Evans’ Isle, centre, - - - N. 43 W. 

Franklin’s Isles, extremes, - N. 29’ to 10 W. 

Point Brown, south extremity, - N. 65 E. 

Cape Bauer, north extremity, - - S. 78 E. 

Olive’s Island, centre, - - S. 67 E. 

Ciifly head beyond Point Westall, - S. 45 E. 

All sail was made to fetch betw'een Franklin’s Isles and Point Brown, 


in order to follow the course of the main land as close as possible ; 


but finding, after several tacks, the impossibility of weathering the 
isles, we bore away; and at noon hauled up north-north-cast, round 
them. The wind was light at cast, and the weather fine over head; 
but there was so dense a haze below, that the true horizon could 


not be distinguished from several false ones, and we had six or seven 
different latitudes from as many observers : those taken by me to 
the north and .south, differed 19 minutes. This dense haze, from 


its great refractive power, altered the appearance of objects in a 
surprising manner : a sandy beach seemed to f)e a chalky cliff, and 
the lowest islands to have steep shores. The thermometer stood. 


at this time, at 83°, and the barometer at 2 (), 6 o inches. 

On the north side of Point Brown the shore formed a large 
open bay, into which we hauled up as much as the wind would permit, 
passing near to a reef of rocks and breakers, two miles to the north- 
north-cast of Franklin’s Isles. At half jia.st two, the water had 
.shoaled to 5 fathoms; and not being able to distinguish any inlet, 
we then bore away we.stward along the land. The number of 
smokes rising from the shore^s of this wide, open place, induced me 
to give it the name of Smoky Bay. *- 

At four o’clock wc passed the small opening which had been 
unsuccessi'ully attempted in the evening of the 4th, and hauled up 
northward under the lee of the island forming its western .side. The 
main land then came in sight a-head ; but between it and the islands 
was a space five or six miles wdde, which had the appearance of 



TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


Nvt/ts' Archipelago.'] 


lit? 


being the entrance to a river. No land was visible to the north-east; 1802. 
and besides quantities of grass and branches of trees or bushes float- si^unia^s, 
ing in the water, there was a number of long, gauze-Avinged insects 
topping about the surface, such as frcqlient fresh-water lakes and 
swamps. In order to form a judgment of how much fresh, was 
mixed with the salt water, or whether any, I had some taken up for 
the purpose of ascertaining its specific gravity ; but before the 
experiment could be made, the dej)th diminished to 3 fathoms, and 
low land was distinguished nearly all round. We then veered ship; 
and at seven o’clock came to an anchor in 6 fathoms, off a small 
beach on the north side of the western and smallest island, being 
sheltered at all points except between S. 38" and N. 80“ W. 

The specific gravity of tiie water taken up proved to be 1,03^,, 
or ,008 greater than the water of the Soutliern Indian Oct'an, west- 
ward of the Island Am.sterdam ; although the temperature in which 
it was w'eighed, was higher by 14’'. ’rhi - circiimstance, w'ith the 
shallowness of the inlet and the land having been seen to close round 
so nearly, made nu give up the intention of attonpting to proceed 
any higher un, iiicc no river of importance was to be expected. 

Great fiocks of .sooty j)etrels were observed coming iti from 
sea to the island, and at the first dawn next morning, a boat was suwhy r. 
sent to cc-ilect a quanti'y of them, and to kill seals; but the birds 
wciX' 'dreadt nii-ving oft, and no more than four .seals, of the hair 
kind, were proenved. The botanists preferred going on .shore to 
the more ea.sUTn land, wdiich, though loW’, was much more exten- 
.sive th.-m tlic i.'ftnd nearer to the ship; and in fact, it was not 
yet ascertained w hether it W'ere not a '[jart of the main. I w'ent to 
the higher island with a theodolite to take bearings; and as the 
survey had sliqiwn that no dependenct; was to be jftaced in any 
observations taken on board the sluj) during tJie last five days, 1 
took with me the necessary instruments for -determining the latitude 
and longitude. 

CJranite was found to comjroge the rocks of the shore, and 
seemed to be the basis of the island ; but it W'as covered with a crust 



114 


A VOYAGE TO 


Coast. 


1802. of calcareous stone, in some places fifty feet thick. The soil at the 
Smjday'r! top was little better than sand, but was overspread with shrubs, 
mostly of one kind, a whitish velvety plant — {artriplex reniformis of 
Brown),* nearly similar to* what is called at Port Jackson, Botany- 
Bay greens. Amongst these, the petrels had everywhere undermined ; 
and from the excessive heat of the sun, the reflexion from the sand, 
and frequently stepping *up to the mid-leg in the burrows, my 
strength was scarcely equal to reaching the highest hill near the 
middle of the island. I had no thermometer, but judged the temper- 
ature could scarcely be less than 120°; and there was not a breath 
of air stirring. My fatigue was, however, rewarded by an extensive 
set of bearings, and I overlooked the lower and larger island to the 
eastward, and saw the water behind it communicating with Smoky 
Bay. That low land and the island upon which I stood, being the 
north-easternmost of this archipelago, must I conceive, be the Isles 
of St. Peter in Nuyts’ chart ; notwithstanding their relatively small 
distance from those of St. Francis. The bay to the northward, be- 
tween these islands and the main land, I named Denial Bay, as well 
in allusion to St. Peter as to the deceptive hope we had formed, of 
penetrating by it some distance into the interior country. The bear- 
ings most essential to the survey, taken from this station, were these, 
Point Brown, sandy hillocks on it, S. 52“ o' E. 

Franklin's Isles, the extremes, - S. 49° 15' to 33 45 E. 
Evans’ Isle, centre, - - S. 23 oW. 

Isles of St. Francis, southernmost, 

the centre, - - S. 34 o W. 

, the largest, extremes, S. 38 o to 46 20 W. 

Lacy's Isle, centre, * - - S. 51 o W. 

Purdie’s Isles, the easternmost, N. 83 15 W. 

Bound’s Isle, centre, - - N. 76 30 W, 

Point Bell, the hill on it, - - N. 73 o W. 

* Point Peter, across Denial Bay, - N. 12 45 W. 

On returning to the shore to complete my observations, a 

* Prod, flor’ Nov. Holl. p. 406 . 



Nuyts' Archipelago:] TERRA AUSTRALIS. 

flock of teal presented themselves, and four were shot. There were 
also pied shags, and gulls of three species ; and in the island were 
seen many crows, a green paroquet, and two smaller birds. A black 
snake, of the common size, was killed, but its form did not bes|>eak 
it to be venemous. After observing the sun’s altitude at noon, I re- 
turned on board with the intention of getting the ship under way, to 
examine more closely a bight in the coast near Point Bell ; and then 
of returning to Petrel Bay in the Isle St. Francis, in order to 
obtain better observations for a base to my chart of this archipelago. 
At two o’clock, Mr. Brown and his party returned from the eastern 
island, bringing four kanguroos, of a different species to any be_ 
fore seen. Their size was not superior to that of a hare, and they 
were miserably thin, and infested with insects. No other than cal- 
careous rock was seen upon the eastern island. It seemed to afford 
neither wood nor water, nor were there any macks of its having 
been visited by the natives of the continent ; in which respects it re- 
sembled the western island, as it also did in its vegetation, and in 
being frequented by the sooty petrel. Mr. Brown’s pocket thermo- 
meter stood at 125® when placed on the .sand, and 98“ in the shade ; 
whilst on board the ship the height was only 83°. 

The sun was too high at noon for its altitude to be taken from 
an artificial horizon, with a .sextant ; but by lying down upon the 
beach, I obtained it from the sea horizon, tolerably free from the 
refractive errors caused by the l»aze. The latitude oi the north side of 
the western Isle of St. Peter, thus observed, was 32“ 2 i f ' south, and 
the longitude by time keepers, corrected as usual, 133” 29' cast. There 
was no set of tide past the ship; but fropi eight o’clock to noon, 
the water had risen about a foot by the shore. 

The anchor was weighed on the return of the botanists, and 
we steered westward past the small island named hound’s, and as 
far as Purdie’s Isles ; when, having seen tlie whole line of die 
coast behind them, we hauled to the southward at six o’clock, for 
Petrel Bay ; and atone in the morning came to, in 13 fathoms, near 
our former anchorage. 


115 

1802. 
February. 
Sunday 7. 


Monday 8. 



116 


A VOYAGE TO 


[^SotUk Codtt. 


1802. 

February^ 


It was here confirmed by satisfactory observations on shore, 
that our former latitudes and longitudes taken on board the ship were 
erroneous ; and the consequent necessity of reconstructing my chart 
of these islands, induced me to remain at anchor the rest of the day. 
A boat was sent to fish with hook and line, and had some success ; 
and at dusk a sufficient number of sooty petrels were taken from 
the burrows to give nine to every man ; making, with those before 
caught, more than twelve hundred birds. These were inferior to 
the teal shot at ' the western Isle of St. Peter, and by most persons 
would be thought not eatable, on account of their fishy taste ; but 
they made a very acceptable supply to men who had been many 
months confined to an allowance of salt meat. 

The latitude of our anchorage in Petrel Bay proved to be 
south, and corrected longitude, by time keepers, 133® 15^' 
east. The variation of the compass on the binnacle, with the ship’s 
head south-eastwardly, but the exact point not noted, was 2“ 23' 
west. Other azimuths, taken five leagues to the north-westward, 
with the head south-half-west, gave o" 19' east ; and six leagues to the 
eastward, the licad being north-half-west, we had 0“ 16' east. All 
these observations, being corrected, and supposing the ship’s head 
in the first case to have been south-east-half-east, as is jirobable, 
would agree in showing that the true and magnetic meridians exactly 
coincided at the Isles of St. Francis in 1802. 

Being about to quit this archipelago, it may be expected that I 
should make some general remarks upon it. The basis stone of the 
islands where we landed, and that of the others, as also of the pro- 
jecting parts of the znain, 'appeared to be similar, was either por- 
phyry or granite ; but this was generally covered with a stratum, 
more or less thick, of calcareous rock. The arid sterility of the two 
largest islands has been already mentioned ; and yet they appeared 
superior tp any of the smaller isles, where there was no proba- 
bility that the small kangaroos could exist in the dry season. • The 
surface of the continent seemed to be almost, equally destitute of 



TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


117 


Nuffts' Archipelago.'] 


vegetable soil to cover the sand and rock ; and from the hot winds 
off the land, which we felt in Streaky and Smoky Bays, it would seem 
^ that, this aridity prevails to a considerable distance in the interior. 
There are, however, some grounds to believe, that a lake, or run of 
fresh water exists not far from Denial Bay ; the flock of teal seen upon 
the western Isle of St. Peter, and the number of winged, fresh-water 
insects skimming the surface of that bay, are the grounds to which I 
allude. \ 

My examination of this group of islands was ‘tolerably minute 
to be do ^e wholly in a ship ; but much still remained, which boats 
would best accomplish, to make the survey complete, especially in 
the bays of the main land. No more than a general examination was 
prescribed by my instructions at this time, and I therefore left the 
minute parts for a second visit, when the ship would be accompanied 
by the Lady Nelson tender. 

Upon the identity of the particular islands composing this 
group, as compared with the chart of Nuyts’ discovery, there may 
possibly be some diffi;rence of opinion, but there can be no doubt 
that the group, generally, is the same with that laid down by the 
Dutch navigator ; and I therefore distinguish it from others upon 
this coast by the title of Nuyts’ Archfpelago. Besides the nine 
Isles of St. Francis and two of St. Peter and several distinct rocks 
and patches of reef, it contains Sinclair’s four Rocks, Purdie’s Isles, 
Lound’s Isle, Lacy’s and Evan.s' Islands, Franklin’s Isles, and Olive’s 
Island ; all of which are named after young officers of the Investi- 
gator. The state of navigation in 16*7, does not permit the expec- 
tation of any exact coincidence between * tlie islands laid down by 
the Dutch and those in my chart ; if a few leading features of re- 
semblance be found, this is all that can be fairly required ; and these 
I shall endeavour to trace. 

The cape marked A ( see the copy of the Dutch ;fchart from 
Thevenot'), the Point B, and the western reefs, I conceive to be 
clearly identified in Cape Nuyts, Point Fowler, and Nuyts' Reefs, 
VOL. I. T t 


1803 . 

February. 



118 


A VOYAGE TO 


1809 . 

February. 


l^Souih 'Goait. 


although there be a difference of near half a degree in latitude. 
The next leading mark is the line of islands 'marked i, a, to 5, 
extending south-south-east from the furthest extremity of the 
mainland. I found no islands corresponding to" the first three of 
these ; but the main coast there trends south-east, and there are 
cliffy projections upon it which might appear Jike islands to a ship 
so far distant as not to raise the intermediate beaches. I conceive 
then, that the island marked 3, is the projecting point which 
I have named Point Bell ; and that 1 and 2 are the two cliffy pro- 
jections further northward. The island marked 4 will be the largest 
of Purdie’s Isles ; and in looking on, nearly in the same line, we find 
5 in Lacy’s Island. The island 6, or St. Francis, should lie to the 
west-south-west, or perha])s .south-west, for since the line of the five 
islands is two points too much to the right, this bearing may be the 
same. To the south-west-by-south the large Isle St. Francis is found, 
in the centre of eight smaller isles which Nuyts has not distinguished. 
The islands 8, 9, and 10, are to be sought to the east-north-east of 
5, or Lacy's Island, or rather to the north-epst, two points to the 
left ; and there wc find, though not very exactly, Evans’ Island 
and the two Isles of St. Peter. Lsland 7 should be to the north-west 
of 8, and in a direction between 4 and 9 ; and in that position is 
Lound’s small Isle. 

This explanation, I am aware, may be disputed, because it 
leaves Franklin’s Isles unjioticcd ; and it may be objected, that had 
Lound’s Isle been seen, the main land nortli of it would have been 
seen also. That Nuyts passed to the south w'ard of all the islands 
laid down in his chart seeiVis improbable, since he distinguished only 
one of the Isles of St. Francis ; but if this be supposed, then 
7 and 8 might be Evans’ and Franklin’s Isles, and 9 and 10 would 
be Point Brown and Cape Bauer, which lie to the south-east, 
instead of north-east ; and in this case the islands which I suppose 
to.be St. Peter’s, and that of Lound, will not have been seen. The 
question is, in fact, of no impoftance, other than what arises from a 



Nuyt^ Archipelago,'] TERRA AUSTRALIS. 

desire to do justice to the Dutch navigator ; and on this head, I trust 
there can be no accusation. My opinion coincides with the first 
explanation ; and unless an island exist to the south-west of St. 
Francis, and I am tolerably certain that none lies within five leagues, 
a correspondence more free from objections cannot easily be 
pointed out. 


119 

1802. 

February, 



Iso 


A VOYAGE TO 


Coa»t. 


CHAPTER VI. 

Prosecution of the discovery of the unknown coast\ Anxious Bay. An- 
chorage at Waldegrave's and at Flinders’ Islands. The Investigator^ s 
Group. Coffin’s Bay. Whidhey’s Isles. Differences in the magnetic 
needle. Cape Wiles. Anchorage at Thistle’s Island. Thorny Passage. 
Fatal Accident. Anchorage in Memory Cove. Cape Catastrophe, and 
the surrounding country. Anchorage in Port Lincoln, and rffitment 
of the ship. Remarks on the country and inhabitants. Astronomical 
and nautical observations. 

Feb^iy break in the morning of Feb. g, when the anchor was 

Tuesdays, weighed from Petrel Bay to prosecute the examination of the 
unknown coast, we were unexpectedly favoured with a refreshing 
breeze from the westward ; and our course was directed for Cape 
Bauer. At noon, the latitude from mean of observations to the 
north and south, which differed only i', was 32* 43' 17"; but although 
our distance from the land could not be more than three leagues, 
no part of it was distinguishable; the haze was very thick, 
but it was of a different nature, and had none of that .extraordi- 
nary refractive power which the atmosphere possessed during the 
prevalence of the eastern winds. At one o’clock, Olive’s Island was 
indistinctly perceived ; and at two we came in vvith Point Westall, 
and then steered south-south-eastward along the coast at the dis- 
tance of four or five miles. At six, a bold cliffy head, which I 
named Cape Radstock, in honour of admiral Lord Radstock, bore 
N. 75 “ E ., six or seven miles ; and the land seemed there to take 
another direction, for nothing beyond it could be perceived. The 
wind was at west-south- west ; and we kept on the starbord tack 
till eight o’clock, and then stood off for the night. 



121 


From NuyU' Archipelago'^ TERR 4 AUSTRALIS. 

At five in the morning we steered for the land; and soon 
afterward Cape Radstock was in sight, bearing N. 57“ E., five 
leagues. The latitude of this cape is 33“ is' south, and longitude 
134° ^5! Other cliffy heads came in sight as we advanced 

eastward ; and at seven, the appearance of an opening induced me 
to steer close in ; but it proved to be a bight full of rocks, with low 
land behind. The line of the projecting parts of the coak is nearly 
east from Cape Radstock, for four leagues ; and at the end of them 
is a cliffy point which received the name of Point Weyland. Round 
this point, an opening was seen of so promising an appearance that 
I bore away north and north-east, for it, although land was in sight 
as far as east-south-east. Before noon, the greater part of the open 
space was found to be occupied by low land ; and no more of the 
opening remained than a small inlet through the beach, leading, 
apparently, into a lagoon, the water of which was distinguished from 
the mast head. This inlet was fit only to receive boats ; and there- 
fore we hauled the wind to the southward, when the sandy shore 
near it was distant two-and 4 ialf-miles on one side, and Point Wey- 
land one mile and a lialf on the other. The latitude of this point is 
33 ° 14' south, and longitude 134,* 32' east. As the day advanced 
the wind veered to south-west, and there being a swell from the 
same quarter, we could do no more than make a south-east-by-south 
course, parallel with the shore. At three o'clock, the main land 
was seen to extend out beyond what the ship could fetch ; there 
were besides, two islands lying still further out, and a third was 
perceived in the offing, almqst directly to windward. The two first 
received the name of Waldegrave’s Jshs, and the latter with some 
rocks neay it were called Top^gallajit Isles. Our distance from the 
sandy shore was then barely a league ; and coming into 7 fathoms 
water soon afterward, we tacked, hoping to weather Cape Radstock; 
but finding this to be impossible, were constrained to pass the raght 
in working to windward in the bay. The weather was squally with 
rain, but our situation made it necessary to carry all possible sal; 


1802 . 
February. 
Wednes. 10* 



180 S. 
Febnu^. 
ThuM. li, 


A VOYAGE TO [-Sb«* Coaa. 

and we had the satisfaction, at daylight, to find the ship had gained 
considerably. It then blew a strong breeze at south-west-by-south, 
and we stretched in under Waldegrave's Isles; and finding the 
water become smooth, the 'anchor was let go in 7 fathoms, on a 
bottom of calcareous sand, at half a mile from the north-east end of 
the inner and largest island. We were here sheltered from the 
present wind, but exposed from west-by-south to north-north-west ; 
the master was therefore immediately sent to sound the opening of 
one mile wide between the island and the main, by which alone we 
could hope to escape, should the wind shift to the north-westward 
and blow strong ; but the opening proved to be full of rocks and 
breakers. 

The press of sail carried in the night had so much stretched 
the rigging, that it required to be set up, fore and aft. Whilst 
this was doing on board, the naturalists landed upon the island ; 
where I also went to take bearings with a theodolite, and observa- 
tions for the latitude and longitude. The island is about two miles 
long, and connected by rocks with the small, outer isle ; and they^, 
extend four or five miles from a projecting part of the main, in 
a west direction. These islands form the southern boundary, as 
Cape Radstock does the north point of a great open bay, which, 
from the night we passed in it, obtained the name of Anxious Bay. 

I found the island to bear a great resemblance to the western 
Isle of St. Peter, in its cliffy shores, granitic basis, and super-stratum 
of calcareous stone ; in its vegetable productions, and in. its surface 
being much excavated by the burrows of the sooty petrel. It had 
also been frequented by geeSe at some preceding season of the year, 
and there were marks of its having been a breeding plac^, for them ; 
but at this time, the vegetation was too much dried up to afford any 
subsistence. Crows of a shining, black colour were numerous; and 
in two which I shot, the bill was surrounded at the base with small 
feathers, extending one-fourth of the length towards the extremity. 
There were no appearances of .the island having been before visited 



123 


fVom Nuyts' Archipelago.'] TERRA AUSTRALIS. 

either by Europeans or Indians, and a single rat was the sole quad- isos, 
ruped seen ; but a few hair seals were killed upon the shore. Mr. ThuredaTii. 
Brown rerifarked, that this was the first island where not a single 
novelty in natural history had presented itself to his observation. 

From the highest part of the island I saw two patches of 
breakers, lying near three miles out from the western island ; and 
beyond the Top-gallant Isles in the offing, there was a piece of land 
of more considerable extent, which the haze did not allow of being 
well defined. No part of the main coast was visible from hence, 
beyond the projection close to Waldegrave's Isles; but on changing 
my station to the southward, land opened from it at the distance 
of three or four leagues. The principal bearings taken were as 
follow : 

Point Weyland, distant 7 or 8 leagues, - N. 24° 10' W. 

Top-gallant Isles, centre of the largest, - S. 52 20 W. 

Southmost rock, like a ship under sail, - S. 48 5 W. 

Further land, the east side, - S. 57° 40' to 69 10 W. 

Southern extreme qf the coast, - S. 49 40 E. 

A squall passed over as the sun came to the meridian, and 
deprived me of an' observation for the latitude ; but the centre of 
Waldegrave’s largest Isle was afterwards found to be in 33® 35|-' 
south, and the longitude by my observations on shore for the time 
keepers, was 134° 44' east. 

There were' strong squalls during the night, with rain, but 
the wind being off the land, the ship rode easy with a whole 
cable. At daylight, the weather was more moderate, and we Friday 12. 
stretched out for the distant piece of ‘land in the offing. At 
noon, it was seven miles to windward, and seen to be an island 
of about five miles in length ; and being near enough at dusk to 
observe that it afforded shelter, and that there were no apparent 
dangers, we continued to beat up, and got to anchor at half past 
nine*, 4 n 7 fsrthoms, fine sand; the nearest beach being distant half- a 
mile, and the island extending from S’. 85® E. to 67® W. 



124 


A VOYAGE TG 


{iSbtttA Coast. 


1808. In the morning, we were surprised to see breaking water 

about one mile from the ship, arid as much from the shore. It was 
not far from the place where the last tack had been made in the 
evening, and the master found no more than six feet water close to it; 
so that we were fortunate in having escaped. The botanical gentle- 
men landed early ; and I followed them to make the usual observa- 
tions for the survey. 

. From my first station, at the north-east end of the island, the 

largest of the Top-gallant Isles bore S. 67°E., four or five miles. 
It is of little extent, but high and cliffy ; and there are three rocks 
on its south side resembling ships under sail, from which circum- 
stance this small cluster obtained its present name. To the south- 
west, I distinguished several small islands, of which the northern- 
most and largest is remarkable from two high and sharp-pointed 
peaks upon it, lying in latitude 33* 57' and longitude 134,* 13'. This 
cluster, as it appeared to be, received the name of Pearson’s Isles; but 
it is possible that what seemed at a distance to be divided into several, 
may form two or three larger islands, or even be one connected land. 
Another island, about one mile long and of moderate height, was 
discovered bearing S. 78“ W., about four leagues. It was surrounded 
with high breakers, as was a smaller isle near it; and the two were 
called Ward’s Isles. These three small clusters, with Waldegrave's 
Isles, and this larger island, which was named Flinders’^ after the 
second lieutenant, form a group distinct from Nuyts’ Archipelago ; 
and I gave it the name of the Investigator's Group. 

The form of Flinders' Island is nearly a square, of which each 
side is from three to five miles in length. Bights are formed in the 
four sides ; but that to the north seems alone to afford good anchor- 
age. In its composition this island is nearly the same as that of 
Waldegrave's largest isle ; but between the granitic basis and the 
• calcareous top, there is a stratum of sand stone, in some places twenty 
feet thick. The vegetation differed from that of other islands before 
visited, in that the lower lands were covered with large bushes; and 



TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


. InvesHgcOot^n Chtoup.'\ 


125 


there was very little, either of the white, velvety shrub 
or of the tufted, wiry grass. A small species of kanguroo, 
than a cat, was rather numerous. I shot five of them, and some 
others were killed by the botanists and their attendants, and found 
to be in tolerably good condition. We were now beginning to want 
a supply of water, and the northern part of the island was sought 
over carefully for it ; but the nearest approach to success was in 
finding dried-up swamps, in which tlic growing plants were tinged 
red, as if the water had been brackish. No other trees than a few 
small casuarinas at a distance from the anchorage, were seen upon the 
island; but wood for fuel might with some difficulty be picked out 
from the larger bushes growing near the shore. The beaches were 
frequented by seals of the hair kind. A family of them consisting 
of a male, four or five females, and as many cubs, was lying asleep 
at every two or three hundred yards. Their security was such, that 
I approached several of these families very closely ; and retired 
without disturbing their domestic tranquillity, or being perceived by 
them. 

The latitude of the north-east sandy cove in Flinders' Island was 
found to be 33* 41' south, and lofigitude 134° 27j' east. The variation 
on board, observed by Mr. Thistle on the binnacle with the ship's 
head south-by-east, was 0° 6' east; which, corrected, gives 0° 44' 
for the variation to be allowed on the bearings taken on shore, or 
on board the ship with the head at north or south. The izi/e appear- 
ed to be as inconsiderable here as in Nuyts' Archi|)elago. With the 
present southern winds the temperature at this island was very 
agreeable ; the thermometer stood betw.een 6 ^ and 68», and the 
barometer at 30,08 inches, and it was rising. 

In the morning of the 14th, the wind was at south-south-east. Sunday 14. 
We weighed the anchor at daylight, and beat to windward the 
whole day ; but without gaining any thing to the southward. A little 
before midjjdght, the wind having veered mqrp to the east, we passed 
the Top-gallant Isles, and at noon next day Were in the following Monday is. 
situation : 

U u 


(atriplex), 

^ f ' Februaiy; 
not bigger Saturday tS. 


VOL. I. . 



126 


A VOYAGE TO 


[iSbu^A Coa$t. 


ISM, 
Februaiy. 
Monday 15 


Tuesday 16. 


Latitude observed, - - - 33' 59!' 

Longitude from bearings, - - 134, 38 

Top-gallant Isles, centre of the largest, - N. 12 W. 

Pearson’s Isles, the two northern peaks, - N. 83 W. 

No part of the main land was visible ; but the wind having veered 
back to the southward, in the nature of a sea breeze, we were then 
standing eastward ; and in two hours several smokes were seen, 
and soon afterward the land. At six o’fclock, a -very projecting 
point of calcareous cliffs, distant five miles, was the southernmost 
visible extreme. It was named Point Drummond, in compliment to 
captain Adam Drummond of the navy ; and lies in 34,“ 10' south, and 
135° 13' cast. 

The coast from Waldegrave’s Isles to Point Drummond runs 
waving in a south-eastern direction, and forms bights and broad, 
cliffy heads. It appeared to be of moderate elevation, and barren ; 
but the further parts of it could not be well distinguished, on account 
of the haze. 

We tacked from the shore at six o’clock, when the following 
bearings were taken ; 

Point Drummond, 

A broad cliffy projection, the north end, 

—■ south end, distant 4, or 5 miles. 


S. 

N. 

N. 

N. 


14" E. 
11 W. 
26 E. 
41 W. 


A rocky islet, distant three leagues. 

This islet lies four miles from the main land, and nothing was seen 
to prevent a ship passing between them. 


Soon after we had tacked, the wind veered gradually round 
from the south to cast ; and having steered southward under easy 
sail till midnight, we then hove to. A heavy dew fell, which had 
not before been observed upon this part of the coast. 

At daylight. Point Drummond was seven miles distant to 
the north-by-east. The shore, after falling back four or five miles 
from it, trended southward ; but there was other land further* out, 
and we steered for the opening between them, passing a rocky 
islet five miles from Point Drummond and nearly as mucli from 



From Inveitigatofs Groups TERRA AUSTRALIS. 12T 

the eastern shore. At eight o’clock we found ourselves in a i^os. 

^ , Fcbruai'v^. 

bay, whose width, from the outer western point of entrance, Tuesday i6*. 
named Point Sir Isaac, to the shore on the east side, was near 
three leagues. It extended also far in to* the south-south-east ; but 
the depth diminished, in less than half an hour, to 4 fathoms, al- 
though the head of the bay was still six or seven miles distant. We 
were then two miles from the eastern shore, with Point Sir Isaac 
bearing N, 67* W. ; and hoping to find deeper water in that direc- 
tion, hauled to the westward ; but coming into 3 fathoms, were 
obliged to tack, and the wind veering round from the sea, we worked 
to windward in the entrance of the bay. 

The situation of Point Sir Isaac is 34® 27' south, and from ob- 
servations of the moon with stars on each side, in 135* 13' east ; but 
by the time keepers corrected, which I prefer, the longitude is 
135“ 10' east. The basis of the point seemed to be granitic, with an 
upper stratum of calcareous rock, much similar to the neighbouring 
isles of the Investigator’s Group, Its elevation is inconsiderable, and 
the surface is sandy, and barren, as is all the land near it on the 
same side. The large piece of water which it shelters from western 
.winds, I named Coffin’s Bay, in compliment to the present vice- 
admiral sir Isaac Coffin, Bart, ; who, when resident commissioner at 
Sheerness, had taken so zealous a part in the outfit of the Investigator, 

Coffin’s Bay extends four or five leagues to the south-eastward from 
Point Sir Isaac ; but I do not think that any stream, more consider- 
able than perhaps a small rill from the back land, falls into it, since 
sandy cliffs and beach were seen nearly all round. On the east side 
of the entrance, the shore rises quickly from the beach to hills of 
considerable height, well covered with wood. The highest of these 
hills I call Mount Greenly : its elevation is between six and eight 
hundred feet, and it stands very near the water side. 

' Many smokes were seen round Coffin’s Bay, and also fwo 
parties of natives, one on each side ; these shores were therefore 
better inhabited than the more western parts of the South Coast ; 



128 


A VOYAGE TO 


[SoutA CoMt. 


1809. indeed it has usually been found in this country, that the borders of 
shallow bays and lagoons, and at the entrances of rivers, are by far 
the most numerously peopled. These natives were black and naked, 
differing in nothing that we could perceive from those of King 
George's Sound before described. " 

In the evening, the wind veered to the southward ; and at 
sunset we passed Point Sir Isaac at the distance of half a mile. Our 
course was then directed to the south-west, towards two high pieces 
of land, which appeared in the offing, and obtained the name of 
Greenly' s Isles. The ship was hove to at midnight ; but on seeing the 
Wednes. 17 . islands to leeward at two in the morning, we filled ; and at three, 
tacked towards the main land. At daylight, a rocky point which 
lies ten or eleven miles to the south-south- west of Point Sir Isaac, 
and is called Point IFhidbey, was distant two miles ; and the peak 
upon the southernmost of Greenly's Isles bore S. 66° W., four or 
five leagues. At S. i8“ E. , seven or eight miles from Point Whidbey, 
lies an island one mile in length, the middlemost and largest of seven, 
which I named Whidbey’s Isles, after my worthy friend the former 
master-attendant at Sheerness. The basis of these isles appeared to 
be granitic, but the more elevated are covered with a thick crust of 
calcareous rock ; and in the middlemost, this upper stratum is per- 
forated, admitting the light through the island. 

The two easternmost of Whidbey’s Isles are close to a low pro- 
jection of the main land, which was named Point Avoid. It lies eleven 
or twelve miles to the east-south-east of Point Whidbey ; and the 
shore between them forms so deep a bight, that the peninsula between 
it and Coffin's Bay seems to be there not more than two or three miles 
broad. At the head of this bight is a low, rocky island, and there are 
rocks and breakers on each side of the entrance ; on which account, 
and from its being exposed to the dangerous southern winds, I named 
• it Avoid Bay. 

Having the wind at south-east-by-south, we beat up all the 
morning off the entrance of this bay, taking bearings of the different 



From Investigator's Oroiip.'] TERRA AUSTRALIS. 129 

islands and points, and of Mount Greenly which was visible over the i8<«- 
peninsula, to fix their relative positions. At noon, our Wednei. 17. 

Latitude, observed to the N. and S., was - 34,® 43' 32" 

Longitude by time keepers, _ . _ 1 35 3 35 

Greenly’s Isles, the peak, bofe - - N. 74 W. 

Whidbey’s Isles, three westernmost, - S. 36® to 60 W. 

middlemost, north end dist. a miles, N. 8 1 E. 

two near Point Avoid, - - N. 81 E. 

Mount Greenly, over the peninsula, - Not distinct. 

Point Whidbey, distant 7 miles, - - N. 2 E. 

At dusk in the evening, having weathered Whidbey's Isles, 
we tacked near Point Avoid and stretched off to sea ; but on coming 
in with the land at daylight of the 18th, it appeared that nothing was Thursdayis. 
gained, our situation being then in the same bight to the eastward of 
the point. 

The shore of the bight is sandy and low, and trends from 
Point Avoid about five miles to the east ; after which it takes a 
more southern direction and becomes higher, and the projecting 
parts of the waving coast line are cliffy. Behind the shore the land 
rises to a moderate height, is destitute of vegetation, and of a yellow 
colour, but whether from the surface being of bare rock, or of sand, 
could not be distinguished. 

In stretching oft'again,with the wind at east-south-east, we passed 
near to a small circular reef, lying nine miles from Point Avoid, 
and six from the nearest shore. Azimuths taken at this time with 
three compasses on the binnacle, and the ship’s head at south (mag- 
netic), gave the mean variation 1® 12' 'east ; but with the surveying 
compass ajone it was 1° 39' east, which is what I allowed in the survey. 

On the preceding day, the two guns upon the quarter deck, nearest 
to the binnacle, had been struck down into the after hold ; from a 
persuasion that the differences so often found in the variations and 
bearings when on different tacks, must arise from some iron placed 
too near the compasses. Strict search had been repeatedly niade 



130 


A VOYAGE TO 


[South Coast 

1802. for sail needles, marlinespikes, or other implements ofiron which might 
Thuradayis. have been left in or about the binnacle, but I could fix on nothing 
unless it were the guns ; for it is to be observed, 'that notwithstanding 
the constancy of the differences, the idea of any regularly acting 
cause to derange the needle had not yet fixed itself in my mind. 
The perfection to which naval science had arrived did not allow me to 
suppose, that if a constant and unavoidable attraction existed in ships, 
it would not have been found out, and its laws ascertained ; yet no 
longer than three days before, differences had been observed, sufficient 
one would think to have convinced any man that they were produced 
by some regular cause. Off Point Drummond, about fifteen leagues 
to the north of where the variation i* 39' east was observed with the 
ship's head at south, both azimuths and an amplitude had been taken 
with the same compass. The first gave 1“ 33' west, the head being 
south-east-by-east ; and after we had tacked, and the head was 
south-west-by-west, the amplitude gave 3° 56' east ! I did not yet see, 
that as the ship’s head was as much on the east side of the magnetic 
meridian in one case, as it was to the west in the other, so was the 
variation as much too far west then, as it was too far east afterward. 
Differences like this, of 5^ °, which had frequently occurred, seemed 
to make accuracy in my survey unattainable, from not knowing what 
variation to allow on the several bearings. The guns were removed 
in the hope to do away the differences, but they still continued to 
exist, nearly in the same proportion as before ; and, almost in despair, 
1 at length set about a close examination of all the circumstances 
connected with them, in order to ascertain the cause, and if possible 
to apply a remedy*; but it^ was long, and not without an accumula- 
tion of facts, before I could arrive at the conclusions deduced and 
explained in the Appendix No. II. to the second volume. 

We tacked towards the land soon after noon; and being 
within five miles of it at three o’clock, stood off again. The fur- 
thest extreme of the main land was a sloping low point, distant 
about three leagues ; but two or three miles beyond it, to the south. 



131 


From Investigator's Oroup."] TERRA AUSTRALIS. 

was a small island to which I gave the name of Liguanea. Some of 1802. 
Whidbey's Isles were still to be distinguished, and the bearings xhurefis, 
taken just before tacking were as under : 

Inner island near Point Avoid, ‘ - N. 31“ W. 

Nearest part of the cliffs, - E. N. E. 

The sloping low point, - - S. 71 E. 

Liguanea Island, highest part, - S. 57 E. 

At seven in the evening, we came in with the land a little further to 
*vindward, and tacked at a mile and a half from a patch of breakers 
which lie N. 72® W. three or four miles from the sloping low point. 

This point was still the furthest part of the main land visible, the 
coast seeming from thence to take a more eastern direction. 

In the afternoon of the 19th, when the wind had returned to Friday 19. 
the south, we passed to windward of Liguanea Island, and saw it 
surrounded with many breakers on its south and west sides. The 
sloping low point was also visible; and three miles further eastward 
there was a steep head, with two high rocks and one lower near it, of (Atlas, 
which Mr. Westall rnade a sketch. This projection I named Cape view 7.^/ 
Wiles, after a worthy friend at Liguanea, in Jamaica; it lies in latitude 
34® 57' south, and longitude 135° 38^' cast. Before dark, we got 
sight of a hill situate upon a projecting cape, thirteen miles to the 
east-south-east of Cape Wiles, and observed the intermediate coast 
to form a . large bight or bay, which I j>roposed to examine in the 
morning ; and for that purpose wc stood off and on during the night, 
with the wind from the southward. 

At daylight of the 20th, the hill on the east side of the bight Saturday 20 . 
bore N. 6’8° E. five or six miles, and an Island, named Is/e JVilliams, 
w'as seen tp lie two miles from it to the south-east. We steered 
north-west soon afterward, up the bight ; but in an hour were able 
to see the land all round, and that this place, which I called Slea- 
ford Bay, was dangerous with the wind at south-east, as it was then 
blowing. We therefore braced up, to work out; and at noon, our 
situation, with that of the surrounding lands, was as follows : 



132 


A VOYAGE TO 


[Siouth Coati, 


1808. Latitude, observed to the north and south, a' 33" 


sitti^ylb. Longitude by time keepers, - 135 44 

Liguanea Isle, the centre nearly, - N. 67 W. 
Cape Wiles, centre of the cliffs, - N. 38 W, 
Hill on the east side of Sleaford Bay, N. 77 E. 
Isle Williams, - _ . - E. a N. 


In the afternoon the wind favoured us by veering to south-by- 
west, and the passage between the projection of the hill and Isle 
(Atlas Williams seeming to be clear, we steered through it with good 
soundings, the least being 12 fathoms upon rippling water. Three 
miles further the main land formed a point, and took the uncommon 
direction of N. 15* W. ; but to the eastward there was a large piece of 
land, whether island or main we could not tell, and several small 
islands lay between. The opening was four miles wide; and we steered 
into it, passing through ripplings of tide with irregular sound- 
ings. No land could be seen to the north-east, but the night was 
coming on ; and as the eastern land sheltered us from the present 
wind, we ran within half a mile of the shore and anchored in 3^ 
fathoms. The master was sent to sound about the ship; and find- 
ing we had not a sufficient depth for swinging toward the shore, 
the anchor was tripped and let go further out, in 7 fathoms, on a 
sandy bottom. No part of the eastern land was visible beyond the 
bearing of N. 76* E., distant one mile and a half ; and the furthest 
extreme of what we could be certain was- main land, bore 
N. 17" W. 

A tide from the north-eastward, apparently the ebb, ran more 
than one mile an hour ; -which was the more remarkable from no 
set of tide, worthy to be noticed, having hitherto been observed 
upon this coast. No land could be seen in the direction from whence 
it came ; and these circumstances, with the trending of the coast to 
the north, did not fail to excite many conjectures. Large rivers, 
deep inlets, inland seas, and passages into the Gulph of Carpentaria, 
were terms frequently used in our conversations of this evening; 



TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


133 


Cape CataMrophe.'] 

and the prospect of making an interesting discovery, seemed to have 
infused new life and vigour into every man in the ship. 

Early in the ihorning, I went on shore to the eastern land, 
anxious to ascertain its connexion with, ot separation from the main. 
There were seals upon the beach, and further on, numberless traces 
of the kanguroo. Signs of extinguished fire existed every where ; 
but they bespoke a conflagration of the woods, of remote date, 
rather than the habitual presence of men, and might have arisen 
from lightning, or from the friction of two trees in a strong wind. 
Upon the whole, I satisfied myself of the insularity of this land ; and 
gave to it, shortly after, the name of Thistle’s Island, from the 
master who accompanied me. In our way up the hills, to take a 
commanding station for the survey, a speckled, yellow snake lay 
asleep before us. By pressing the butt end of a musket upon his 
neck, I kept him down whilst Mr. Thistle, with a sail needle and 
twine, sewed up his mouth ; and he was taken on board alive, for 
the naturalist to examine ; but two others of the same species had 
already been killed, and one of them was seven feet nine inches in 
length. We were proceeding onward with our prize, when a white 
eagle, with fierce aspect and outspread wing, was seen bounding 
towards us; but stopping short, at twenty yards off, he flew up into 
a tree. Another bird of the same kind discovered himself by making 
a motion to pounce down upon us as we passed underneath ; and it 
seemed evident that they took us for kanguroos, having probably 
never before seen an upright animal in the island, of any other 
species. These birds sit watching in the trees, and should a kan- 
guroo come out to feed in the day time, it is seized and torn to pieces 
by these voracious creatures. This accounted for why so few kan- 
guroos were seen, when traces of them were met with at every step ; 
and for their keeping so much under thick bushes that it was im- 
possible to shoot them. Their size was superior to any of those 
found upon the more western islands, but much inferior to the 
forest kanguroo of the continent. 

VOL. I. X X 


1802 . 

February. 

Sunday 21. 



184 


A VOYAGE TO 


1809 . 
February. 
Sunday 21 


\^South Coa$t. 

From a clear spot upon the north-western head of the island, 
I traced the main coast to a cape bearing N. iS** W., where it was 
lost, but re-appeared at a further distance, and e’xtended to N. W . 
More to the right were three small islands, which I named Sibsey, 
Stickney, and Spilsby Islands, but no other land in a north-east, and 
none in an eastern direction. On the opposite side, six leagues out 
at sea, there was a small cluster of low islands, and some rocks and 
breakers at a less distance: these were called Neptune’s Isles, for 
they seemed to be inaccessible to men. In the opening between 
- Thistle’s Island and the main are several small isles ; and the two 
southernmost so much contract the entrance of the passage, that one 
mile and a half of its breadth, between the main land and western 
isle, was alone safe for ships: I gave to this the name of Thorny 
Passage. The bearings taken at this station, of most importance to 
the survey, were these : 

Hill on the east side of Sleaford Bay, - S. 70° 50' W. 

Point where the coast turns northward, S. 73 30 W. 

Hill of a conic form, on the ftiain land, N. 35 50 W. 

Sibsey I., centre, over a nearer low rock, N. 13 o E. 

Stickney Island, centre, - - N. 26’ o E. 

Spilsby Island, centre, - - N. 33 o E. 

Thistle’s I., west side, furthest visible part, S. 35 30 E. 

Neptune’s Isles, the furthest, centre, - S. 5 30 E. 

two nearer, the extremes, S. j° E to 4 o W. 

Thistle's Island is about twelve miles long, and from one to 
two or three in breadth, and in the middle part is high enough to be 
seen ten or twelve leagues ‘from a ship’s deck. The stone of the 
north-east end was found to be calcareous ; but at thq top of the 
north-west head, not less than two hundred feet high, there were 
many small pieces of granite, rounded to all appearance by attrition 
in the water. Some of the cliffs on the western side are white, as if 
composed of chalk, and the soil in general seemed to be sandy;, yet 
the island was pretty well covered with wood, principally eucalyptus 



Cape Catastrophe.-^ TERRA AUSTRALIS. 185 

and casuarim. No water could be found ; and as the ship’s hold was isos, 
becoming very empty, I returned on board, after observing the s^dTy^i. 
latitude, with the intention of running over to the main in search of 
it. But on comparing the longitude observed by lieutenant Flinders 
with that resulting from my bearings, a difference was found which 
made it necessary to repeat the observation on shore ; and as this 
would prolong the time too near dusk for moving the ship, Mr. 

Thistle was sent over with a cutter to the main land, in search of an 
anchoring place where water might be procured. 

The latitude of a small beach on the north end of Thistle’s 
Island, was found to be 34“ 56'; and longitude by the time keepers 
corrected, 136° 3^ , agreeing with thirty sets of lunar observations 
reduced to a place connected with this by land beariiigs. The 
strongest tides set past the ship at the rate of two miles an hour, 
from the north-north-east and south-south- west ; the latter, which 
appeared to be the flood, ceasing to run at the time of the moon’s 
passage over the meridian. It rose seven feet and a half by the lead 
line, in the night of the 20th; and there were two tides in the twenty- 
four hours. 

At dusk in the evening, tlie cutter was seen under sail, returning 
from the main land ; but not arriving in half an hour, and the sight of 
it having been lost rather suddenly, a light was shown and lieutenant 
Fowler went in a boat, with a lanthorn, to see what might have 
happened. Two hours passed without receiving any tidings. A 
gun was then fired, and Mr. Fowler returned soon afterward, but 
alone. Near the situation where the cutter had been last seen, he 
met with so strong a rippling of tide that he himself narrowly 
escaped being upset; and there was reason to fear that it had actually 
happened to Mr. Thistle. Had there been daylight, it is probable 
that some or all of the people might have been picked up; but it 
was too dark to see anything, and no answer could be heard to the 
hallooing, or to the firing of muskets. The tide was setting to the 
southward and ran an hour and a half after the missing boat had 



186 


A VOYAGE TO 


[iSSot((A Coatt. 


180S. been last seen, so that it would be carried to seaward in the first in- 
Sun<^ 7 i. stance ; and no more than two out of the eight people being at all 
expert in swimming, it was much to be feared that most of them 
would be lost.* 

Monday 28. At daybreak I got the ship under way, and steered across 
Thorny Passage, over to the main land, in the direction where the 
cutter had been seen ; keeping an officer at the mast head, with a 
glass, to look out for her. There were many strong ripplings, and 
some uncommonly smooth places where a boat, which was sent to 
sound, had la fathoms. We passed to the northward of all these ; 
and seeing a small cove with a sandy beach, steered in and anchored 
in 10 fathoms, sandy bottom; the main land extending from north- 
half- west, round by the west and south to east-south-east, and the 
open space being partly sheltered by the northern islands of the 
passage 

A boat was despatched in search of the lost cutter, and pre- 
sently returned towing in the wreck, bottom upward ; it was stove 

I 

* This evening, Mr. Fowler told me a circumstance which I thought extraordinary ; 
and it afterwards proved to be more so. Whilst wc were lying at Spithead, Mr. Thistle 
was one day waiting on .shore, and having nothing else to do he went to a certain old 
man, named Pine, to have his fortune told. The cunning man informed him that he 
was going out a long voyage, and that the ship, on arriving at her destination, would be 
joined by another vessel. That such was intended, he might have learned privately ; but 
he added, that Mr. Thistle would be lost before the other vessel joined. As to the man- 
ner of his loss the magician refused to give any information. My boat’s crew, hearing what 
Mr, Thistle said, went also to consult Hie wise man ; and after the prefatory information 
of a long voyage, were told tliat they ,would be shipwrecked, but not in the ship they were 
going out in ; whether they wouli escape and return to England, he was not permitted 
to reveal, * 

This tale Mr, Thistle had often told at the mess table ; and 1 remarked with some pain 
in a future part of the voyage, that every time my boat’s crew went to embark with me 
in the Lady Nelson, there was some degree of apprehension amongst them that the time 
of the predicted shipwreck was arrived, 1 make no comment upon this story, byt re- 
commend a commander, if possible, to prevent any of his crew from consulting fortune 
tellers* 



Cape Cata$trophe.'\ TERRA AUSTRALIS. 18T 

in every part, having to all appearance been dashed against the is®*- 
rocks. One of the oars was afterwards found, but nothing could Mondi^M. 
be seen of our unfortunate shipmates. The boat was again sent 
away in search ; and a midshipman was* stationed upon a head land, 
without-side of the cove, to observe every thing which might drift 
past with the tide. Mr. Brown and a party landed to walk along the 
shore to the northward, whilst I proceeded to the southern extre- 
mity of the main land, which was now named Cape Catastrophe. 

On landing at the head of the cove, I found several foot marks of 
our people, made on the preceding afternoon when looking for 
water; and in my way up the valley I prosecuted the same research, 
but ineffectually, although there were many huts and other signs 
that natives had resided there lately. 

From the heights near the extremity of Cape Catastrophe, I 
examined with a glass the islands lying off, and all the neighbouring 
shores for any appearance of our people, but in vain ; I therefore 
took a set of angles for the survey, and returned on board ; and on 
comparing notes Vijith the different parties, it appeared that no 
further information had been obtained of our unfortunate com- 
panions. 

Next morning I went in a boat ten miles along the shore to Tuesday 23. 
the northward, in the double view of continuing the search, and 
carrying ©n the survey. All the little sinuosities of the coast were 
followed, and in one place I picked up a small keg, which had be- 
longed to Mr. Thistle, and also some broken pieces of the boat ; but 
these were all that could be discovered. After taking angles at 
three stations on the main land, I crossed over to the northernmost 
and largest of the six small islands lying within Thorny Pas- 
sage. It is a mile and a half long, with a small islet off the north, 
and another off its south end. These I called Taylor’s Isles, in 
memory of the young gentleman who wa^ in the cutter with 'Mr. 

Thistle. They lie near two miles from the main, and the depth be- 
tween is from 7 to 10 fathoms, on ^ sandy bottom. A ship might 



138 


A VO'YAGE TO [South Coast. 

1S02. anchor artd be sheltered here, off a small beach at the north end of 
I'utsday «3. the largest island ; but I did not find any fresh water, either there 
on the opposite parts of the main land. 

On returning to the ship, I learned from some of the gcntle- 
. iHen who had been at the top of the highest hills at the back of the 
cove, that they had seen an inlet, going in w'cstward, a little beyond 
M iiines. 24 . where my excursion had terminated. Next day, I went up with 
instruments; and having climbed upon a high lump of granite, saw 
the water extending 40® behind the coast, and forming, apparently, 
an extensive port. The annexed view, taken from near the same spot 
by Mr. Wcstall, shows what was visible of tliis fine piece of w^ater, 
and the appearance of the neighbouring land. In addition to this 
interesting discover}^ I obtained bearings of Cape Wiles, of tlie fur- 
thest extremity of Thistle's Island, and of a group of four islands 
and two rocks, five leagues beyond it to the east-south-east. The 
largest of these was named IVedge Island, from its shape, and the 
group Gamdier’s Isles, in honour of the worthy admiral (now 
lord Gambler), who had a seat at the Admir?lty board when the 
Investigator was ordered to be fitted. 

This naoming lieutenant Fowler had been sent to search the 
southern islands in Thorny Passage for any remains of our jicople; 
but he was not able to land, nor in rowing round tliem, to see any 
indication of the objects of his pursuit. The recovery of their bodies 
was now the furtliest to which our hopes extended ; but tlie number 
sharks seen in the cove an^at the last anchorage, rendered even 
this prospect of melancholy satisfaction extremely doubtful ; and our 
want of water becoming ey«ry day more pressing, we prepared to 
depart for the examination of the new opening to the northward. I 
caused an inscription to be engraven upon a sheet of copper, and set 
up on a stout post at the head of the cove, which I named Memory 
Cove ; and further to commemorate our loss, I gave to each of the 
six-islands nearest to Cape Catastrophe, the name of one of the sea- 
men : Thistle’s and Taylor's Islands have been already mentioned. 





Cape Catastrophe.] TERRA AUSTRALIS. 

Mr. Westall’s view from the ship in Memory Cove, represents 
Thistle's Island and three of the small isles in front of it. 

The reader will pardon me the observation, that Mr. Thistle 
was truly a valuable man, as a seaman, an officer, and a good mem- 
ber of society. I had known him, and we had mostly served to- 
gether, from the year 1 794, He had been with Mr. Bass in his 
perilous expedition in the whale boat, and with me in the voyage 
round Van Diemen's Land, and in the succeeding expedition, 
to Glass-house and Hervey's Bays. From his merit and prudent 
conduct, he was promoted from before the mast to be a midshipman, 
and afterwards a master in his Majesty's service. His zeal for 
discovery had induced him to join the Investigator when at Spithead 
and ready to sail, although he had returned to England only three 
weeks before, after an absence of six years. Besides performing as- 
siduously the duties of his situation, Mr. Thistle had made himself well 
acquainted with the practice of nautical astronomy, and began to be 
very useful’in the surveying department. His loss was severely felt 
by me; and he was lamented by ‘all on board, more especiall}' by 

t 

his messmates, who knew more intimately the goodness and stability 
of his disposition. 

Mr. William Taylor, the mid.shipman of the boat, was a young 
officer who promised fair to become an ornament to the service, as 
he was to society by the amiability of hi manners and temper. The 
six seamen had all volunteered for the voyage. They were active 
and useful young men ; and in a small and incomplete ship’s com- 
pany, which had so many duties to perform, this diminution of our 
force was heavily felt. ’ . 

The latitude of our anchorage in Memory Cove was 34“ 58' 
south, and longitude 135° 56’j east. The variation observed on the 
binnacle by lieutenant Flinders, when the ship’s head was S. by W., 
was 2° 38' east, or corrected for one point of western deviation from 
the magnetic meridian, 2* o' east. In the bearings taken on the 
eastern side of the high land behind the cove, the variation appeared 


139 


1809 . 

February. 

Wedned.^4. 

(Atlas, 
Plate XVII 
View 9.) 



140 

1802. 
Februury. 
Wednea. 24. 


Thurs. 25. 


A VOYAGE TO iSouth Coast. 

to be 3° fio', but upon the summit it was i® 40', being less than on 
board the ship. 

The soil of the land round Memory Cove, and of Cape Cata- 
strophe in general, is barren ; though the vallies and eastern sides of 
the hills are covered with brush wood, and in the least barren parts 
there are small trees of the genus eucalyptus. The basis stone is 
granite, mostly covered with calcareous rock, sometimes lying in 
loose pieces ; but the highest tops of the hills are huge blocks of 
granite. Four kanguroos, not larger than those of Thistle’s Island, 
were seen amongst the brushwood ; and traces of natives were found 
so recent, that although none of the inhabitants were seen, they 
must have been there not longer than a day before. Water does 
consequently, exist somewhere in the neighbourhood, but all our 
researches could not discover it. 

Before quitting Memory Cove a boat was sent to haul a seine 
upon the beach, which was done with such success, that every man 
had two meals of fish and some to spare for salting. In the morn- 
ing, we sailed for the new discovered inlet, and at two o’clock passed 
round the projection which liad been set at N. i8® W. from Thistle’s 
Island. It formed the south side of the entrance to the new opening, 
and is named Cape Donington. Our soundings in passing it were 
from 7 to 9 fathoms, and in steering south-westward we left an 
island four miles long, named Boston Island, on the starbord hand, 
and passed two islets on the other side, called Bicker Isles ,yN\\\c\\ lie 
off Surjieet Point. On the depth of water diminishing to 5 fathoms we 
tacked, and presently came to an anchor on the west side of this 
point, in 4^ fathoms, soft, grey sand. We were then three miles 
within the entrance, and the nearest shore was a beach half a mile 
distant, lying under the hill which had been seen from Thistle’s 
Island. This is a ridge of moderately high land about two miles 
long, but when seen to the north or south it assumes a conical form. 
I named it Stamford Hill ; and there being a good deal of wood 
scattered over it, a hope was given of procuring water by digging at 



Port Lincoln^ 


TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


141 


the foot. A boat was sent to make the experiment this evenihc^, at isoe. 
the back of the beach ; but the water wliicli flowed into the pit was 
quite salt ; and notwithstandincj the many natives huts about, no 
fresh water could be found. 

Boston Island at the entrance of the port beinsj also woody and 
of some elevation, the boat was sent next morning to search there Friday jo- 
for water; and in the mean time I landed with the botanists, and 
ascended Stamford Hill to ascertain the nature of this inlet and take 
angl es. The port was seen to terminate seven or eight miles to the 
west-south-west ; but there was a piece of water beyond it, ap- 
parently a lake or mere, from which we might hope to obt ain a 
supply, if no more convenient watering )>lace should be found. 

Betwixt Cape Bonington at the entrance, and Surfleet Point, was a 
large cove with a sandv beach at the head, capable of sheltering a fleet 
of ships, if the deptit should be sufficient, as it appeared to be, to 
receive them ; this was named Sl)a/Jing Cor’e. Wood was not 
wanting there, but no stream of water couid be distinguished. On 
the north .side of the port, higher up, was a projecting piece of land, 
with an island lying o’ff it nearly one mile in length. This island, 
which was named Granlluun Island, contracts the width of that part 
to one mile and three quarters ; whereas above and below it the 
width is iVom two to three miles. 

The eastern entrance to the port, between Bo.ston Island and 
Cape Bonington, is one mile and a half wide; the we.stern entrance, 
betwixt the island and what was called Kiiion Point, is larger, and 
appeared to be as deep as the first, in which we had from 7 to y 
fathoms. From Kirton Point, northward, the shore curves hack to 
the west, and makes a semicircular sweep round the island, harming 
an outer bay w'hich was named Boston Bay. It is terminated by 
Point Boston, a low point one mile and a half from the north end of 
the i>land ; but whether the water between them be deep, \yas 
not ascertained. From Point Boston the shore takes another sweep 
to the west and northward ; and comes out again three or four 
VOL. 1. Y y 



142 


A VOYAGE TO 


[jS'out/* Coa$t. 


1802. leagi/es to the north-east, at a low, but somewhat cliffy projection, 
to which I gave the name of Point Bolingbroke. The large bight 
within, received the appellation of Louth Bay / and two low islands 
in it, of which the largest is more than a mile in length, were 
called Louth Isles. At Point Bolingbroke the land appeared to trend 
north or westward ; and could no further be perceived from Stam- 
ford Hill. 

Three small isles had been seen from I'histle’s Island and 
their bearings set ; and the discovery of them was now augmented 
by several others, forming a cluster to the eastward of Point Boling- 
broke. This was called SfR Joseph Banks’ Group, in compliment 
to ihe Right Honourable president of the Royal Society, to whose 
exertion and favour the voyage was so much indebted. 

Of the numerous bearings taken with a theodolite from the 
top of Stamford Hill, those which follow were the most important 
to the connexion of the survey. 

Extremeof the land toward C. Catastrophe, - S. 1*7* 56' E. 

Thistle's I., highest part and N. E. extr., S. 40° and 42 50 E. 

Sir J. Banks’ Group, Stickney I., centre, ' - N. 70 30 E. 

Sibsey Island, centre, - N. 57 10 E. 

Kirkby Island, centre, - N. 45 20 E. 

Caj>e Donington, north-west extremity, - N. 37 50 E. 

Point Bolingbroke, south end, - N. 29 12 E. 

Boston Island, highest hill near the centre, N. 5 10 W. 

—————— the extremes, - N. 15“ 54' E. to 13 46 W. 

A lake behind the head of the port, N. end, - S. 74 40 W. 

The port which formed the most interesting part of these dis- 
coveries I named Port Lincoln, in honour of my native province ; and 
having gained a general knowledge of it and finished the bearings, 
we descended the hill and got oii board at ten o’clock. The boat 
had returned from Bpston Island, unsuccessful in her search for 
water ; and we therefore proceeded upward, steering different 
courses to find the greatest depth. Soon after one o’clock we 



Port Lincoln.'] TERRA AUSTRALIS. 143 

anchored in 4 fathoms, soft bottom, one mile from the beadh at I802. 
the furthest head of the port, and something less from the southern Friday 
shore. 

Fresh water being at this time the most pressing of our wants, 

I set off the same afternoon, with a party, to examine the lake or 
mere discovered from Stamford Hill. The way to it was over low 
land covered with loose pieces of calcareous rock ; tlie soil was 
moist in some places, and, though generally barren, was overspread 
with grass and shrubs, interspersed with a few clumps of small 
trees. After walking two miles we reached the lake, but to our 
mortification, the water was brackish, and not drinkable : the dis- 
tance, besides, from Port Lincoln was too great to roll casks over a 
stony road. This piece of water was named Slciiford Merc, h is one 
mile broad, and appeared to be three or four iii length. Tiie shore 
was a whitish, hardened ciay, covered at this time with a thin crust, 
in which salt was a component part. The sun being too near the 
horizon to admit of going round the mere, our way was bent towanls 
the ship; and finding a moi.st place within a hundred yards of the head 
of the port, I caused a liolc to be dug there. A stratum of wliitish 
clay was found at three feet below tlie surface, and on penetrating 
this, water drained in, which was perfectly sweet, thougli di.scolonred; 
and we had the satisfactiim to return on beard with the certainty of 
being able to procure water, although i. would probaldy require 
some time to fill all our empty c.a.sks. 

Early in the morning a party of men was sent with sj)ades to .Sutunlay 27. 
dig pits ; and the time keepers and astronomical instruments, with 
two tents, followed under the charge of Mr. Flinders. 1 went to 
attend the digging, leaving orders w'ith Mr. Fowler to moor the ship 
and send on shore empty casks. The water flowed in i)rctty freely, 
and though of a whitish colour, and at first .somewhat thick, it was 
well tasted. Before the evening, the observations for the rates.of 
the time keepers were commenced ; and the gunner was installed in 
the command of a watering party, and furnished with axes to cilt 



144 


1802 . 

February. 


A VOYAGE TO ISouth Coast. 

wood’ at such times as the pits might require to be left for replen- 
ishing. 

The necessary duties being all set forward under the superin- 
tcndancc of proper officers} I employed the following days in survey- 
ing and sounding. The direction of the port was too remote from the 
meridian to obtain a base line from differences of latitude, which, 
when observed in an artificial horizon, and at stations wide apart, I 
consider to be the best; nor was there any convenient beach or open 
place where a base line could be measured. It was therefore 
attempted in the following manner: Having left orders on board the 
ship to fire three guns at given times, I went to the south-east end 
of Boston Island, with a pendulum made to swing half seconds. It W'as 
a mu.sket ball slung with twine, and measured 9,8 inches, from the 
fixed end of the twine to the centre of the ball. From the instant 
that the flash of the first gun was perceived, to the time of hearing 
the report, 1 counted eighty-five vibrations of the pendulum, and 
the same with two succeeding guns ; whence tlie length of the base 
was deduced to be 8,01 geographic miles.* A principal station in 
the survH'Y of Port Lincohi was a hill on the north side, called North- 
side Hill, which afforded a view extending to Sleaford Mere and 
Bay, and as far as Cape Wiles on one side, and to the hills at the 


* This lenp^th was founded on the suppo.sition, that sound travels at tlie rate of J14i^ 
feet in a second of tirnc^ and that feet make a f^eograpliic mile. A base of 15' 24 ' 

of latitude was afterwards obtained from observations in an artificial hbri/on, and of 
2 :/ 17" of longitude from the time keepers with new rates^ both correct, as 1 believe, to 
a few seconds. From this long base and theodolite bearings, the first base appeared to be 
somewhat too sh(>rt; for they gave, it' 8,22 instead of 8,01 miles. The length of the pen- 
dulum in tlie first measurement was sucli as to swing half seconds in England ; and I 
had not tliouglit it, in this ease, w’orth attention, that by tbe laws of gravity and the oblate 
spheroid, the pendulum would not swing so (jiii; k in the latitude of 35*’, I must leave it 
to better mathematicians to determine from tlie dufa and the true length of a geographic 
mile* in this latitude, whetlier the base ought to liavc been 8, *22 as given by the observa- 
tions and bearings: it was proved to be sufficiently near for all the j)urposes of a common 
nautical survey. 



Port Lincoln.'] TERRA AUSTRALIS. 

beak of Coffin’s Bay on the other. A great part of the bearings 
taken from hence, crossed those from Stamford Hill very advan- 
tageously. 

Amongst the various excursions made by the scientific gentle- 
men, one was directed to Sleaford Mere, of which they made the 
circuit. The two southern branches were found to terminate within 
a hundred yards of the head of Sleaford Bay, with which the mere 
had been suspected to have a communication from its water being 
not quite fresh ; but they are separated by a stony bank too high for 
the surf ever to pass over it. At the head of the bay a boat’s sail 
and yard were seen floating, and no doubt had belonged to our 
unfortunate cutter : after being set out to sea by the tide, it had 
boon driven up there by the late .south-east winds. 

The refitment of the .shij> being nearly comjfleled 021 the 3rd 
of March, lieutenant Fowler was .sei^t round to Memory Cove in a 
boat, to make a final search along the .shoi*es and round the isUuids 
in Thorny I^assage, for the bodies of our late shipmates, which tlie 
sea might have throv\'n up. On the 4th, the last turn of water was 
received, and completed our stock up to sixty tons ; and the 
removal of our establishment from the shoi’e waited only for the 
observation of a solar eclipse, aiinoimccd in the iiautical epheineris 
for this day. Tlie morning was cloudy, with rain; but towards 
noon the weather cleared uj), and I hao the sutisfactio/i to observe 
the eclipse with a refracting tclescojre of forty-six inches focus, and 
a power of about two hundred. The beginning took place at 
!*• 12' 37'', 8 of apjKirent time, and tlie end at 3*’ 36'' ii",8. So soon 
as the observation was concluded, the tcfits and astronomical instru- 
ments were, carried (Mi board, the launch was hoisted in, and every 
thing prepared for going down the port on the following morning. 

Many .straggling bark huts, .'-imilar to those on other parts 
of the coast, w'ere seen upon the shores of- Port Lincoln, and the 
patlis near our tents had been long and d(.;e]ily trodden ; but 
neither in my ex(Jursions nor in thos.e of tlie botanists had any of 


14o 


1S02. 

February. 


IMan li. 
AVediics, 5. 


Fhurs. A. 



146 


A VOYAGE TO 


1802. 
March. 
Thursday 4. 


[South Coast. 


the natives been discovered. This morning, however, three or four 
were heard calling to a boat, as was supposed, which had just 
landed ; but they presently walked away, or’ perhaps retired into 
the wood to observe our movements. No attempt was made to follow 
them, for I had always found the natives of this country to avoid 
those who seemed anxious for communication ; whereas, when left 
entirely alone, they would usually come down after having watched 
us for a few days. Nor does this conduct seem to be unnatural ; 
for what, in such case, would be the conduct of any people, ourselves 
for instance, were we living in a state of nature, frequently at war 
with our neighbours, and ignorant of the existence of any other 
nation.^ On the arrival of strangers, so different in complexion and 
appearance to ourselves, having power to transport themselves over, 
and even living upon an element which to us was impassable; the 
first sensation would ])robably be terror, and the first movement 
flight. We should watoli these extraordinary people from our 
retreats in the woods and rocks, and if we found ourselves sought 
and pursued hy them, should conclude their designs to be inimical ; 
but if, on the contrary, we saw them quietly einj)loyed in occupations 
which had no reference to us, curiosity would get the better of fear; 
and after observing them more closely, we should ourselves seek a 
communication. Such seemed to have been the conduct of these 
Australians; and I am persuaded that their appearance on the morn- 
ing when the tents were struck, was a prelude to their coming down; 
and that had we remained a few days longer, a frieTidly communication 
would have ensued. The way was, however, prepared for the next 
ship which may enter this- port, as it W'as to us in King George’s 
Sound by captain Vancouver and the ship Elligood; to w'hosc pre- 
vious visits and peaceable conduct w'e w'cre most probably indebted 
for our early intercourse with the inhabitants of that place. So far 
asa.ould be perceived with a glass, the natives of this port were the 
same in j)ersonal appearance as those of King George’s Sound, and 
Fort Jackson. In the hope of conciliating their good will to sue- 



Pori Idncoln.'] 


TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


ceeding visitors, some hatchets and various other articles were left 
in their paths, or fastened to stumps of the trees wliicli had been cut 
down near our watering pits. 

In exj)ressing an opinion that thes6 people have no means of 
passing the water, it must be understood to be a deduction from our 
having met with no canoe, or the remains of any about the port; 
nor with any tree in the woods from which a sufficient size of bark 
had been ta}cen to make one. Upon Boston Island, however, there 
were abundant marks of fire ; but they had the appearance, as at 
Thistle’s Island, of having been caused by some conflagration of the 
woods several years before, rather than of being the small fire 
places of the natives. 

There are kanguroos on the main land but none were caught ; 
our efforts, both in huntmg and fishing, were indeed very confined, 
and almost wholly unsuccessful. What has been said of the neck 
of land between the head of the port artd Sleaford Mere may be 
taken as a description of the country in general ; it is rocky and 
barren ; but has a sufficient covering of grass, bushes, and small 
trees not to look desolate. The basis stone is granitic, witli a super- 
stratum of calcareous rock, generally in loose pieces ; but in some 
jiarts, as at Boston Island, the granite is found at the surface or 
immediately under the soil. Behind the beach, near our watering 
pits, the calcareous stone was so impc.tectly formed, that small 
shells and bits of coral might be picked out of it. Tliis fact, with 
the saltness of Sleaford Mere and of a small lake on the south side 
of the port, accords with the coral found upon Bald Head and various 
other indications before mentioned, to show that tJiis part, at least, 
of Terra Australis cannot have emerged very many centuries from 
the sea; the salt imbibed by the rocks having not yet been all 
washed away by the rains. In the mountains berhind Port Jackson, 
on the East Coast, at a vastly superior elevation, salt is formed *in 
some, places by the exhalation of the water which drips from the 
grit-stone cliffs. 


I f 

Mai ell. 



148 


A VOYAGE TO 


[South Coatt. 


180 S. 

March. 


' Port Lincoln is certainly a fine harbour ; and it is much to be 
regretted that it possesses no constant run of fresh water, unless it 
should be in Spalding Cove, which we did not examine. Our pits 
at the head of the port will however, supply ships at all times ; and 
though discoloured by whitish clay, the water has no pernicious 
quality, nor is it ill tasted. This and wood, which was easily pro- 
cured, were all that we found of use to ships ; and for the estab- 
lishment of a colony, which the excellence of the port might seem 
to invite, the little fertility of the soil offers no inducement. The 
wood consists principally of the eucalyptus and casuarina. 

Of the climate we had no reason to speak but in praise ; 
nor were we incommoded by noxious insects. The range of the 
thermometer on board the ship was from 66 “ to 78*, and that of the 
barometer from 29.94 inches. The weather was generally 

clouded, the winds light, coming from the eastward in the mornings, 
and southward after noon» On shore, the average height of the 
thermomeier at noon was 76“. ' 

The latitude of our tents at the heat of Port Lin- 
coln, from the mean of four meridian* obser- 
vations of the sun taken from an artificial 
horizon, was - - - - 34“ 48' 25" S. 

The longitude, from thirty sets of distances of 
the sun and stars from the moon ( see Table 
IV. of the Appendix to this volume), was 135 44 51 E. 
These observations, being reduced to Cape Donington at the en- 
trance of the port, will place it in 

Latitude* - 34° 44' south. 

Longitude 135 56'^ east. 

No corresponding observation of the solar eclipse appears to 
have been made under any known meridian, and from the nature of 
cirr.um.stances, the error of the moon’s place could not be observed 
at Greenwich; the distances would therefore seem most worthy of 
confidence, and are adopted ; but the longitude deduced from the 



TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


149 


Port Ldncoln.'] 

eclipse, as recalculated by Mr. Crosley from Delamhre’s solar tables 
of 1806, and the new lunar tables of BurckJiardt of 18 12, differs but 
very little from them : it is 135“ 46' 8" east. 

The rates of the time keepers, deduced from equal altitudes on, 
and between Feb. 27 and March 4, and their errors from mean 
Greenwich time, at noon there on the last day of observation, were 
found to be as under : 

Earnshaw's No. 543 slow o'* 30' 30", 54 and losing 8", 43 per day 
520 - 1 9 7, 72 - - 18, 82 

Arnold’s No. 176 altered its rate prodigiously on March 1st, and on 
the 2nd it stopped. His watch, No. 1736, varied in its rate from 
7",8i to i".90, so that it continued to be used only as an assistant. 

The longitude given by the time keepers with the King- 
George’s-Sound rates, on Feb. 27, the first day of observation at the 
tents, was by 

No. 543, 136“ 15' 9".o east. 

520, 135 58 53.55 

176, 136 • 1 23,95. 

But by allowing a rate accelerating in arithmetic progression, from 
those at King George’s Sound to what were obtained at this place, the 
mean longitude by the two first time keepers would be 135“ 52' 16", 
or 7' 25" to the east of the lunar observations ; which quantity, if the 
positions of the Sound and of Port Linco 11 be correct, is the accumu- 
lation of their irregularity during fifty-seven days. In laying down 
the coasts and islands from the Sound up to Cape Wiles, the longitudes 
are taken from the time keepers according to the accelerated rates, 
corrected by an equal proportion of the crrpr 7' 25" in fifty-seven days. 
From Cape Wiles to the head of Port Lincoln the survey is made from 
theodolite bearings and observed latitudes, without the aid of the time 
keepers. 

The Dip of the south end of the needle, taken at 
the tents, was nearly the same as in K. George’s 
Sound, being - - 64* 27' 

Variation of the theodolite at the same place, 1 3^ E. 

Z z 


1802. 

Marck. 


VOL. I. 



150 


A VOYAGE TO 


1802. 

March. 


Friday 5. 


Saturday <5. 


[South CoMt 

And t'he bearings from different stations in the port were conform- 
able to this variation, except at Cape Donington, where, at a station 
on the north-western part, it appeared to be as much as 4^* east. 

The observations for the variation on board the ship, at an- 
chor in the lower part of the port, gave 2® 23' west, when the ship’s 
head was eastward, and o" 53' east, at south-south-east. According 
to the first, which were taken by lieutenant Flinders whilst the ship 
lay under Stamford Hill, the true variation should be 0“ 51' east; 
but by the second, observed by myself near Cape Donington, 2* 7' 
east, or nearly the same as was found in Memory Cove. Were the 
mean taken, it would be 1“ 29', or 10' less than at the head of the 
port. 

From Mr. Flinders’ remarks upon the Tide, it appeared that 
the rise did not exceed three-and-half feet; and that, like Princess- 
Royal Harbour, there was only one high water in twenty-four hours, 
which took place at night, about eleven hours after the moon’s pas- 
sage over the meridian, or one hour before it came to the lower 
meridian ; yet at Thorny Passage, which is but.a few leagues distant, 
there were two sets of tide in the day. This difference, in so short 
a space, appears extraordinary ; but it may perhaps be accounted for 
by the direction of the entrance to the_ port, which is open to the 
north-east, from whence the ebb comes. 

On the 5th of March in the morning, we ran down the har- 
bour, and anchored under Cape Donington at the entrance of Spal- 
ding Cove, in 7 fathoms, soft mud ; the north-western extremity of 
the point bearing N. 16° E., one mile, and partly hiding Point Boling- 
broke. In the evening, lieutenant Fowler returned from his search. 
He had rowed and walked along the shore as far as Memory Cove, 
revisited Thistle’s Island, and examined the shores of the isles in 
Thorny Passage ; but could find neither any traces of our lost 
people nor fragments of the wreck. He had killed two or three 
kanguroos upon Thistle’s Island. 

On the following morning, I landed at Cape Donington to take 



Port Lincoln.'] 


TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


151 


some further bearings, and Mr. Evans, the acting master, was sent 
to sound across the entrance of Spalding Cove, and between Bicker 
Isles and Surfleet Point, where a small ship-passage was found. The 
boat was afterwards hoisted up ; and our operations in Port Lincoln 
being completed, we prepared to follow the unknown coast to the 
northward, or as it might be found to trend. 


1802. 
March. 
Saturday S. 



152 


A VOYAGE TO 


[iS^ Cout. 


imz. 
March. 
Saturday 6. 


Sunday T. 


CHAPTER VII. 

Departure from Port Lincoln. Sir Joseph Banks’ Group. Examination 
of the coast, northward. The .ship found to be in a gulph. Anchorage 
near the head of the gulph. Boat expedition. Excursion to Mount 
Brown. Nautical observations . Departure from the head, and ex- 
amination of the east side <f the gulph. Extensive shoal. Point Pearce. 
Hardwicke Bay. Ver}f£at}o7i of the time keepers. General remarks 
on the gulph. Cape Spencer, and the Althorpe Isles. New land dis- 
covered: Anchorage there. General remarks on Kanguroo Island. 
Nautical observations. 

At ten in the morning of March 6, we sailed out of Port Lincoln, 
and skirted along the east side of Boston Island and the entrance of 
Louth Bay. In the afternoon we passed within two miles of Point 
Bolingbroke; and at six in the evening came to ananchorin lofathoms, 
off the north side of Kirkby Island, which is the nearest to the point of 
any of Sir Joseph Banks’ Group, and had been seen from Stamford 
Hill. A boat was lowered down to sound about the ship, and I went on 
shore to take bearings of the different islands ; but they proved to be 
so numerous, that the whole could not be completed before dark. 

I landed again in the morning with the botanical gentlemen, 
taking Arnold's watcli and .the necessary instruments for ascertaining 
the latitude and longitude. Twelve other isles of the, group were 
counted, and three rocks above water ; and it is possible that some 
others may exist to the eastward, beyond the boundary of my horizon, 
for it was not extensive. The largest island seen is four or five miles 
long, and is low and sandy, except at the north-east and south ends ; it 
was called Reevesby Island, and names were applied in tlie chart to 



TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


153 


Spincer't Oulph.l 

each of the other isles composing this group. The main c6ast ex- 
tended northward from Point Bolingbroke, but the furthest part 
visible from the top of Kirkby Island was not more than four or five 
leagues distant; its bearing and those of the objects most important 
to the connection of the survey were these ; 

Main coast, furthest extreme, - - N. 13“ 40' E. 

Point Bolingbroke, - - - - N. 86 50 W. 

Stamford Hill, station on the north end, - S. 45 17 W. 

Thistle’s Island, centre of the high land, - “ S. 5 37 W. 

Sibsey Island, extremes, - - S. i6®27'to 13 2 W. 

Stickney Island, - - - - S. 18 30 to 22 4,0 E. 

Spilsby Island, - - - ^ S, 39 30 to 48 25 E. 

Granite forms the basis of Kirkby Island, as it does of the 
neighbouring parts of the continent before examined ; and it is in the 
same manner covered with a stratum of calcareous rock. The island 
was destitute of wood, and almost of shrubs ; and although there 
were marks of its having been frequented by geese, none of the birds 
were seen, nor any^ other specie^ of animal except a few hair seals 
upon the shore. This description, unfavourable as it is, seemed appli- 
cable to all the group, with the exception of Reevesby and Spilsby 
Islands, which are higher and of greater extent, and probably some- 
what more productive. 

The latitude of the north side of Kirkby Island, observed from 
an artificial horizon, was 34® 33' 1" south, and longitude by time 
keepers, 136® 10' 8'' east. The variation from azimuths taken on 
board the ship at anchor, with the head south-by-west ( magnetic as 
usual), was 2“ 40' east ; which corrected to the meridian, would be 
2* 2' east, ,the same nearly as was observed in Memory Cove, and at 
the entrance of Port Lincoln ; but an amplitude taken on shore with 
the surveying theodolite, gave 3° 57' east. This seemed extraor- 
dinary when, except at Point Donington,no local attraction of im- 
portance had been found in the shores of Port Lincoln, where the stone 
is the same. It was however corroborated by the bearings ; for that of 


1802. 
March. 
Sunday 7* 



154 


A VOYAGE TO 


Coaat. 


1808. Stamford Hill, with 3" 57' allowed, differed only a' from the back 
Sunday 7. bearing with the allowance of 1° 39' ; which is a nearer coincidence 
than I have generally been able to obtain. 

At two in the afternoon the anchor was weighed, and leaving 
most of Sir Joseph Banks' Grewp to the right, we steered northward, 
following the direction of the main land. The coast is very low and 
commonly sandy, from Boston Bay to the furthest extreme seen from 
Kirkby Island ; but a ridge of hills, commencing at North-side Hill in 
Port Lincoln, runs a few miles behind it. In latitude 34*20' this ridge 
approaches the water side, and in its course northward keeps nearly 
parallel, at the distance of two or three miles. ^ It is moderately ele- 
vated, level, destitute of vegetation, and appeared to be granitic. At 
half past six, when we hauled off for the night, the shore was five 
or six miles distant ; the furthest part bore N. N. E. ^ E., and a bluff 
inland mountain was set at N. 71“ W., over the top of the fi-ont 
ridge. 

The wind was moderate from the south-eastward ; and at 
Monday 8. seven on the following morning, when the bluffinland mountain was 
bearing W. a" N., we resumed our north-eastern course along the 
shore ; which was distant seven miles, and had not changed its 
appearance. Towards noon the water shoaled to 6 fathoms, at three 
miles from a sandy beach ; a lagoon was visible from the mast head, 
over the beach, and a small inlet, apparently connected wjth it, was 
perceived soon afterward. A few miles short of this, the ridge of hills 
turns suddenly from the shore, and sweeps round at the back of the 
lagoon, into which the waters running off the ridge appeared to be re- 
ceived. The corner hill, wbt?re the direction of the ridge is changed, 
was called Eilmv Hill ; and since losing sight of the bluffinland mount, 
it was the first distinguishable mark which had presented itself for 
the survey : it lies in latitude 33’ 43', and longitude 136* 42'. The 
coast there trends nearly east-by-north, and obliged us to haul close 
to the wind, in soundings of 7 to 9 fathoms. 

We had then advanced more than twenty-five leagues to the 



TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


155 


Spencer's Oiilph.'\ 

• 

north-north-east, from Cape Catastrophe; but although nothing had ifio2. 
been seen to destroy the hopes formed from the tides and direction of Momky 8. 
the coast near that cape, they were yet considerably damped by the 
want of boldness in the shores, and the shallowness of the water ; 
neither of which seemed to belong to a channel capable of leading 
us into the Gulph of Carpentaria, nor yet to any very great distance 
inland. 

At two o’clock the shore again took a northern direction, but 
it was still very low in front, and the depth did not materially 
increase. Land was presently distinguished on the starbord bow 
and beam; and before four, an elevated part, called Barn Hill from 
the form of its top, bore E. 4° N. We continued to follow the line 
of the western shore, steering north-north-east, and north ; and the 
wind being at south, v. e hauled north-w^estw'ard at six o’clock, 
intending to anchor under the shelter of the land. From 7 fathoms, 
the depth diminished to 5, and quickly io seventeen feet : upon 
which we veered round, ran back_ into 5 fathoms, and came to an 
anchor three or four miles off the shore, on a .sandy bottom. The 
wind blew fresh, with rainy squalls; but a wdiole cable being veered 
out, we rode smoothly all night. 'The furtliest land visible to the 
northward, consisted of detached hummocks, of which the higliest 
was called Mount Tonng, in honour of th<‘ admiral. Abreast of the 
ship the land ro.se gradually from the beach to the ridge of hills 
which still continued to run behind it ; but at this place some back 
hills were visible over the ridge; and the liighest of several hum- 
mocks upon the top, which served as ^ mark in the survey, was 
named Middle Mount. Observations for the time keepers were 
taken in the’morning before getting under way, and the situation of Tuesday 9. 


the anchorage was found to be in 

Longitude, _ _ - ■ '37°27j' 

Mount Young bore, - - N. 1 1 E. 

Middle Mount, - - - N. b'l'i W. 

Low western shore, extreme, - S. 21 W 

High eastern land, about the middle, N. 71 E. 



A VOYAGE TO 


XSou^ Coast. 


m 

1803 . Having obtained the observations, we steered for the outermost 

Ti^^ 9. of the northern hummocks, with soundings gradually increasing to 
12 fathoms; but shoaling on a sudden to 7, upon coral, we hauled 
to the wind and tacked instantly ; finding, however, that the depth 
did not further decrease, I let the ship go entirely round, and con- 
tinued the former north-eastern course, with soundings from 7 to 9 
fathoms. 

At noon, the furthest hummock seen from the anchorage was 
distant four or five miles ; it stands on a projection of low sandy 
land, and beyond it was another similar projection to which I gave 
the name of Point Lowly. This was the furthest visible part of the 
western shore ; but the eastern land there approached within seven 
or eight miles, and extended northward, past it, in a chain of rugged 
mountains, at the further end of which was a remarkable peak. 
Our situation and bearings at this time were as follow : 


Latitude, observed to the north and south, - 33°. 5' 14" 
Longitude by time keepers, - - i 37 

Middle Mount, - - - S. 75 W. 

Mount Young, - - - S. 87 W. 

Point Lowly, the extreme, - - N. 43 E. 

High peak on the eastern land, - N. 25 E. 


Our prospect of a channel or strait, cutting off some consider- 
able portion of Terra Australis, was lost, for it now appeared that 
the ship was entered into a gulph; but the width of the opening 
round Point Lowly left us a consolatory hope that it would termi- 
nate fti a river of some importance. In steering for the point we came 
into 4 fathoms, but on hilling to the eastward found 8, although 
a dry sand bank was seen in that direction. The depth afterwards 
diminished to 6, on which the course for Point Lowly was resumed; 
and we passed it at the distance of a mile and a half, in 9 fathoms 
water. Here the gulph was found to take a river-like form, but the 
eastern half of it was occupied by a dry, sandy spit and shoal water. 
We continued to steer upwards, before the wind ; but as the width 





Spencer's Gulph ^ 


TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


167 


contracted rapidly, and there was much shoal water, it was \jnder ifioa. 
very easy sail, and with an anchor ready to be let go. At four o’clock, 
in attempting to steer close over to the western side, we came sud- 
denly into 2j fathoms ; the ship was instantly veered to the east- 
ward, and on the water deepening to 7, we let go the anchor and 
veered out a whole cable ; for the wind blew a fresh gale right up 
the gulph, and between S. 4® W, and 30® E. there was no shelter from 
the land. At sunset, a second anchor was dropped under foot. 

We had reached near five leagues above Point Lowly, at the 
entrance of the narrow part of the gulph ; but the shores were low on 
both sides, and abreast of the ship not so much as four miles asunder. 

At the back of the eastern shore was the ridge of mountains before 
mentioned, of which Mr. Westall made the sketch given in the (piatexvii. 
Atlas; and the highest peak toward their northern extremity, after- 
wards called Mount linnvn, bore N-32°E. On the western side, 
upwards, there was moderately high, fiat-topped land, whose eastern 
bluff bore N*. 36^ W., about three leagues, and there the head of tlie 
gulph had the appearance of terminating ; but as the tide ran one 
mile an hour past the ship, we still flattered ourselves with the 
prospect of a longer course, and that it would end in a fresh-water 
river. 

Early on the following morning, Messrs. Brown, Bauer, and tvedixp. 10. 
Westall, with attendants, set off upon aa excursion to the eastern 
mountains,' intending, if possible, to a.scend to the top of Mount 
Brown ; and I went away in a cutter, accompanied by the surgeon, 
to explore the head of the gulph, taking with me Arnold’s pocket 
time keeper. After crossing the middle shoal upon which we' had 
2^ fathoms in the ship, the water deepened to 10, but afterwards 
diminished to 2, on approaching the mangroves of the western side. 

Keeping then upwards, I had from 7 to 10 fathoms in the mid-chan- 
nel ; but found shoal water extending a mile,.and sometimes more, 
from the shore, and no possibility of landing until we came near the 
broad, flat-topped hill. From the eastern bluff of this hill, Mount 
VOL. I. 3 A 



15^ 


A VOYAGE TO 


[South Coast. 


1802. Browh bore N. 6 s* so' E., and Mount Arden, a peak nearly at the fur- 
thest extremity of the ridge, N. 18“ 40' E. ; and the inlet was seen to run 
in a serpentine form to the northward, between low banks covered 
with mangroves. After taking the bearings, we returned to the boat 
and pursued our course upward along the western shore, having from 
4to 7 fathoms past the bluff ; but the inlet was there less than two miles 
wide, and a league further on it was contracted to one mile ; half of 
which, besides, was occupied by mud flats. These banks were fre- 
quented by ducks and other water fowl; and some time being occu- 
pied in chasing them, our distance above the ship was not so much as 
five leagues in straight aline, when the setting sun reminded us of look- 
ing out for a place of rest. A landing was effected with some diffi- 
culty amongst the mangroves on the eastern shore ; and from a 
small eminence of red earth, I set the ship's mast heads atS. 14° E., 
and Mount Brown N. 85° E. 

Thursday 11. Next moming we continued the examination upwards, carry- 

ing 4, 3, and 2 fathoms in mid-channel ; but at ten o’clock our oars 
touched the mud on each side, and it was not possible to proceed 
further. I then landed and took observations In an artificial horizon 
for the time keeper, which gave 4' 34" of longitude to the west of 
the ship, or only two seconds more than was deduced from the 
bearings. Mount Brown bore S. 72® E., Mount Arden N. 26“ E., 
and my last station on the eminence of red earth S. 6“ E. The inlet 
wholly terminated at one mile and a half to the N. 16® W. 

It seemed remarkable, and was very mortifying, to find the 
water at the head of the gulph as salt nearly as at the ship ; never- 
theless it was evident, that .much fresh water was thrown into it in 
wet seasons, especially from the eastern mountains. The summits 
of the ridge lie from three to four leagues back from the water side, 
but the greater part of that space seemed to be low, marshy land. 
To the northward no hill was visible, and to the westward but one 
small elevation of flat-topped land ; all else in those directions was 
mangroves and salt swamps, and they seemed to be very extensive. 



TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


Spencer's Oulph.'] 


159 


Two miles below the place where the observations for the*time 1802. 
keeper were taken, was a small cliff of reddish clay on the western TturTii 
shore; and being near it on our return, when the sun was approach- 
ing the meridian, I landed to observe the latitude. It was 3a® 27' 56" 
south ; so that the termination of the gulph may be called in 32“ 24^' 

W'ithout making a greater error than half a mile. Mount Brown 
bore from thence S. 8oj“E,, and its latitude will therefore be 32° 30^' 
south ; the longitude deduced from bearings and the time keepers 
on board, is 138“ o^' east. 

Our return to the ship was a good deal retarded by going after 
the black swans and ducks amongst the flats. The swans were all 
able to fly, and would not allow themselves to be approached ; but 
some ducks of two or three different species were shot, and also several 
sea pies or red bills. Another set of bearings was taken on the 
we tern shore, and at ten in the evening we reached the ship, where 
Mr. Brown and his party had not been long arrived. The 
ascent to Mount Brown had proved to be very difficult, besides 
having to walk fifteen miles on a winding course, before reaching 
the foot; by perseverance, however, they gained the top at five on 
the first evening, but were reduced to passing the night without 
water; nor was any found until they had descended some di.stance 
on the following day. The view fr.)m the top of Mount Brown 
was very extensive, its elevation being ne t less than three thousand 
feet; but neither rivers nor lakes could be perceived, nor any thing 
of the sea to the south-eastward. In almost every direction the eye 
traversed over an uninterruptedly flat, woody country ; the sole ex- 
ceptions being the ridge of mountains extending north and south, and 
the water of the gulph to the south-westward. 

Mr. Brown found the stone of this ridge of craggy mountains 
to be argillaceous, similar to that of the flat-topped land where I 
had taken bearings on the west side of the inlet. It is reddish, 
smooth, close-grained, and rather heavy. Bushes and some small 
trees grow in the hollows of the rising hills ; and between their 



160 A VOYAGE TO {South Coast. 

feet and the mangrove swamps near the water, there was some 
tolerably good, though shallow soil.N. 

We had seen fires upon the eastern shore opposite to Point 
Lowly, on first entering the head of the gulph, and wherever I had 
landed there were traces of natives ; Mr. Brown found them even to 
a considerable height up the side of the mountain; and it should 
therefore seem that the country here is as well inhabited as most 
parts of Terra Australis, but we had not the good fortune to meet 
with any of the people. 

The observations taken by lieutenant Flinders fixed the posi- 
tion of the ship in latitude 32° 44' 41" south, and longitude by the 
time keepers 137* 49' 56" east. Twelve sets of distances of the sun 
and moon gave 137' 50' 9" ; but these being all on one side, the time 
keepers are preferred. Azimuths observed from the binnacle, when 
the ship’s head was between S. by E. and S. S. E., gave o® 4a' east, 
or 1* 37' east, nearly, for the true variation ; and there was no par- 
ticular attraction upon the theodolite at any of my statiwis on shore. 

We had two flood tides in. the day setting past the ship, and 
they ran at the strongest one mile and a half per hour; the rise 
appeared to be from six to eight feet, and high water to take place 
at two hours and a half after the moon passed the meridian. Except 
in the time of high water, which is considerably later than at Thorny 
Passage the tides at the head have a near affinity to those at the 
entrance of the gulph ; whence the great differences at Port Lincoln, 
intermediately situate, become so much the more extraordinary. 

Saturday 13 , Nothing of particular interest having presented itself to detain 

us at the head of the gulph, we got under way in the morning of 
the 13th; having a light breeze from the north-westward. The 
western shore had been followed in going up, and for that reason I 
proposed to keep close to the east side in returning ; but before eight 
o’clock, the water shoaled suddenly from 4 to a fathoms, and the 
• ship hung upon a mud bank covered with grass, two or three miles 

from the shore. A kedge anchor was carried out astern ; and in half 



Spencer^s Oulph 3 


TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


161 


an hour, we again made sail downward, in soundings from 5 to 10 
fathoms, near the edge of the shoal. SaWay is. 

At noon, latitude observed to the N. and S., - 32* 57' 6" 

Mount Brown bore - - - * - - N. 9 30 E. 

Pt. Lowly, south extreme dist. 7 miles, - S. 79 o W. 

The depth was then 7 fathoms ; but there were banks a-head, 
extending to a great distance from the eastern shore, and in steering 
westward to pass round them, we had 3^ fathoms for the least water. 

It afterwards deepened to 7, and we again steered southward, but were 
not able to get near the land ; on the contrary, the shallow water 
forced us further off as we proceeded. The wind was at west-south- 
west in the evening ; and this not permitting us to lie along the edge 
of the bank, we came to an anchor in 7 fathoms, soft bottom ; being 
then above four league.® from the eastern low shore, although there 
was only 3|- fathoms at less than a mile nearer in. 

Mount Brown bore - - N. 21° E. 

Barn Hill, - - - S. 43 E. 

Mount Young, -• - N. 66 W. 

In the morning* we followed the line of the great eastern shoal, Sunday h, 
and its direction permitted us to approach nearer to the land, with 
soundings between 8 and 4 fathoms. A little before noon, after 
running half an hour in less than 4 fathoms and getting within 
about .six miles of the land, we were <.hliged to tack and stretcli 
off, the wind having veered to south-west. Our situation twenty 
minutes afterward, was in 

Latitude, observed to the north and south, - 33“ 23' 49" 

Longitude by time keepers, - . - 137 47 

Mount Young bore - - - N. 38 W. 

Middle Mount, west side of the gulph, N. 66 W. 

Bam Hill, on the east side, - - S. 60 E. 

We beat to windward all the afternoon, and at sunset anchored in 
3| fathoms, near the edge of the great bank and seven or eight 
miles from the land. The shore was low and sandy, but there was 
a ridge of hills behind it nearly sipiilur to that on the west side of 



162 


A VOYAGE TO 


[/STotif/i CocM, 


ISO*, the gulph. Bam Hill lies at the back of this ridge and about twelve 
Sunday 14. miles from the water ; and towards the southern end of the ridge was 
another hill, also some distance inland, of which I shall have occa- 
sion to speak hereafter. A middle mount on the west side of the 
gulph, higher and further back than the one before set, was in sight 
from this anchorage ; and the bearings taken were these : 

Middle back mount, - - N. 6i“ W. 

Bam Hill on the east side, - S. 74, E. 

A more southern hill, - - S. 38 E. 

Mount Brown was no longer visible ; but it had been seen this 
afternoon at the distance of fifty-eight miles, and was sufficiently 
above the horizon to have been distinguished some miles further 
from a ship's deck in a perfectly clear day. 

Monday 15. On the moming of the 15th, the wind had shifted to south- 

east; and the great bank then trending south-westward, we fol- 
lowed it with variable soundings between 3 and 10 fathoms. At ten 
o’clock the water had deepened to 15; and being the'n nearer to 
the west than to the east side of 'the gulph, and the wind having 
come more a-head, we tacked to the east-south-east; but in fifty 
minutes were obliged to steer westward again, having fallen into 
3 fathoms on the edge of the bank. This is the narrowest part of 
the Guljih below Point Lowly, the two shores being scarcely more 
than twenty miles asunder ; and of this space, the great eastern 
bank, if the part where we last had 3 fathoms be connected with it, 
occupies about eleven, and the shallow water of the west side one or 
two miles. The soundings we had in stretching westward across the 
deep channel, were, from .the shoal 3, 5, 7, 10, 12, 12, 12, 10, 9, 
8, 7, b, 7, 6, 5 fath.iins, at nearly equal distances asunder, and the last 
at six miles from the western land. 

After sounding across the channel, we stood back, lying up 
south-east, and reached vvithin five miles of the eastern shore, where 
the anchor was dropped in 4,]- fathoms ; Barn Hill bearing N. 6^®. E., 
and a cliffy projection, named Point Riley after the gentleman of that 



TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


Spencer's Gulph."] 


10 ):{ 


name in the Admiralty, S. 14,® W., two or three leagues, This^ point 
was the furthest visible part of the eastern shore ; and so low and AJoudly 15. 
uniform had the coast been from the head of the gulph, that this was 
the first mark I had found upon it for the survey. The great eastern 
bank, which we had already followed about sixty miles, seemed to 
terminate at Point Riley; and from thence southward, the gulph 
greatly enlarges its breadth. The situation of the point is about 
S 3 * 53' south and 137“ 30' E. 

We got under way at six in the morning, and the wind being Tu»aday n;. 
fropi the south-eastward made a good stretch along the coast until 
noon. A patch of breakers then lay five miles to the south-east ; 
but the land was ten miles distant, and .some white sandy cliffs, four 
or five leagues from Point Riley, bore S. 52° E. The intermediate 
coast, as also that which extends several leagues to the north of the 
point, is low and sandy ; but at a few miles back it rises to a level 
land of moderate elevation, and is not ill clothed with .small trees. 

In the afternoon we had to beat against a southern wind ; and the 
coast in that part being too open for anchorage, this was continued 
all night and the next morning ; but with so little profit, that the Wednes. 17. 
same land was still in sight at noon, and our situation found to be as 
follows : 

Latitude, observed to the north and south, - 34,® 15' 24" 

Longitude by time keepers, - - 137 34^ 

North extreme near the sandy cliffs, dist. 6 miles, N. 19 E. 

Low red cliffs, south end dist. 6 or 7 miles, - S. 54 E. 

At six in the evening, the reddish cliffs were brought to bear 
N. 44“ E., and a long point, or an islatxi lying off a point, bore 
S. 43 « W. two leagues. Our distance from a cliffy islet, close under " 
the shore, was two or three miles, but the breakers from it were only 
half a mile off, and the depth was 4 fathoms. 

On the 18th in the morning, we fetched to windward of the Thursday! 8. 
island-like point, to which I gave the name of Point Pearce, in com- 
pliment to Mr. Pearce of the Admiralty. Its latitude is 34° 28^' 



164 A VOYAGE TO [-Sw/* Coast. 

1803 . south', and longitude 137* 21' east. On the south side of this point 
or island, for I could not fully ascertain its connexion, the shore falls 
back seven or eight miles to the east ; and then trends southward. 
It is low and very sapdy ; but rises gradually to a level country, of the 
same description as that near Point Riley. At sunset, the land was 
seen as far as south-west-by-south ; and the wind favouring us a 
little, we made a stretch for it. A fire upon the shore served as a 
mark to steer by ; and on approaching it at ten o'clock, the anchor 
was let go in 6 fathoms, upon a bottom of coarse sand and small 
stones ; the weather being fine, and wind moderate off the land. 

The howling of dogs was heard during the night; and at 
Friday 19. daylight the shore was found to be distant two or three miles, and 
was woody,, rising land, but not of much elevation. A remarkable 
point, which I named Corny Pointy bearing S. yg” W. three miles, 
was the furthest land visible to the westward ; its latitude, from 
meridian observations of Jupiter and the moon, is 34,* 52' south, and 
longitude from the time keepers 137* east. Between this point 
and Point Pearce, twenty-eight. miles to the north-north-east, is a 
large bay, well sheltered from all southern winds, and none others 
seem to blow with much strength herel The land trends eastward 
about seven leagues, from Corny Point to the head of the bay ; but 
what the depth of water may be there, or whether any fresh stream 
fall into it, I am not able to state ; the land, however, was better 
wooded, and had a more fertile appearance than any before seen in 
the neighbourhood. I called this Hardwicke Bay, in honour of the 
noble earl of that title. 

Several observations 4 br the variation of the compass had been 
taken whilst beating in the neighbourhood of Point Pearce. On its 
north side, eight miles from the shore, an amplitude with the sliip's 
head S. W. by S. gave 4“ 38' east ; at E. by N., when fourteen miles 
olF, another gave i°.i3' east; but azimuths three or four miles 
nearer in, o* 10' westi and at S. E., when six miles off’, 0° west. 
On the south side of Point Pearce, the head being S. S. W., and the 






Spencer's Gulph.'\ 


TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


laj 

land distant thirteen miles, an amplitude gave 3“ 15' east. 'These iso?, 
different observations, which were all taken with the surveying 
compass, being corrected upon the principles and by the proportion 
explained in the Appendix No. II. to tlie second volume, will be 
respectively, a° 51', 4* 21' furthest from the land, 2" 58', 1° 41' 
nearest the land, and a* 1' east. The mean is 2“ 4b' east ; which 
may be taken for the true variation at three or four leagues oft' 

Point Pearce in 1802 ; but close in with the shore, I suspect it was 
less by 1®, or perhaps 2“. 

Having remained at anchor until the sun was high enough 
to admit of observations for the time keepers, we got under way 
at half past seven o’clock ; and the coast round Corny Point being 
found to trend S. 27° W., nearly in the wind’s eye, I stretched Vi^tst- 
ward across the gulph towards Thistle’s Island, in order to compare 
the time keepers with the longitudes of places before settled. Our 
latitude at noon, observed on both sides, was 34° 50' 10"; Spilsby 
Island, the south-easternmost of Sir Joseph Banks’ Group, was seen 
bearing N. 36'* W., ai>d the eastern bluff'of Wedge Island, the central 
and largest of Gambier’s Isles, bore S. W. Garnbier’s Isles, 
four in number besides two peaked rocks, had been first seen from 
the high land behind Memory Cove. They lie nearly in the ceiUre 
of the entrance to the gulph ; and the latitude of Wedge Island is 
35® 1 1' south, and longitude 136° 29' east. Soon after four in the 
afternoon, I had the following bearings : 

Wedge Island, highest part, - - S. 21^'’ E. 

Thistle’s Island, highest part, - - S. 29 W. 

C. Catastrophe, former station on the S. E. point, S. 53 j W. 

Stamford* Hill, former station at the top, - N. 86 W. 

Sibsey Island, centre, - - - N- 33 W. 

Stickney Island, - - - - N. 11 W. 

Spilsby Island, - - - N. 174- E. 

The longitude deduced from these bearings was 30' 22" east,'from 
the head of Port Lincoln, and that resulting from observations for 

3 B 


VOL. I. 



166 


A VOYAGE TO 


[Soulh'^CoMt. 


1802. the time keepers taken in the same place, was 30' 53" ; showing a 
difference of no more than o' 31" to the east, since quitting the port. 
This quantity in a sea observation is so small and uncertain, that I 
considered the time keepers to have gone correctly from March 4, 
when the last observations in Port Lincoln had been made, up to this 
time ; and that the lunar observations taken in the interval might 
be reduced back to the head of the port by their means, and used to 
fix its longitude witliout any further correction. 

Besides the bearings above given, there was a rocky islet four 
miles distant in the S. 78® W. ; part of a ledge of low rocks which 
extended towards the north end of Thistle's Island, and may possi- 
bly be connected with the rock set from thence. This ledge is 
marked dangerous, in the particular chart. 

Having satisfactorily ascertained the going of the time keepers, 
we tacked and stretched back for the coast on the east side of the 
gulph ; but did not get sight of it before dark. At six on the follow- 


Saturday 20. ing momiiig, 

Corny Point, dist. 5 or 6 leagues, bore • - N. 63^° E. 
A cliffy head, distant 10 miles, - _ S. 8.5 E. 

Furthest extreme, a cliffy point, - S. 21 E. 

Wedge Island, eastern bluff, - - S. 4.9 W. 

Thistle’s Island, highest part, - - West. 


An am])litude taken when the ship’s head was south-by-east, gave 
variation 1* 25' cast, and azimuths at south-south-east, j® 10': the 
mean, reduced to the meridian, is 2® 13' east, or a few minutes more 
than had been found on the .west side of the gulph, and haif a degree 
less than off Point Pearce. 

The tide appeared to set us along the shore to the* southward, 
although, from what was observed at Thistle’s Island, it should have 
been the time of flood. With its assistance, and the wind having 
become less unfavourable, we were enabled to make a course for 
^ the nirthest land. This proved to be a cape, composed of three 
cliffy points, near the northern part of which lay a cluster of black 





Spmcer's Gulph:] TERRA AUSTRALIS. 167 

rocks. The southemmost cliff bore at noon E. S. six or, seven iso?, 
miles, and beyond it there was no main coast visible ; but three Saturdays, 
small islands, with several rocks and a reef, were seen to lie as far 
as five miles to the southward, out from the cape. 

Although the continuation of the main, coast was not to be 
distinguished beyond the cape, yet there was land in sight at the 
distance of seven or eight leagues, from about south to S. 184-° W. 

Whether this land were an island, or a part of the continent, and the 
wide opening to the eastward a strait, or a new inlet, was uncertain; 
but in either case, the investigation of the gulph was terminated; 
and in honour of the respectable nobleman who presided at the 
Board of Admiralty when the voyage was planned and ship put into 
commission, I named it Spencer's Gulph. The cliffy-pointed cape 
which forms the east ''ide of the entrance, and lies in 35® 18' south 
and 136° 55' east, was named Cape Spencer; and the three isles 
lying off it, with their rocks, Althorpe Is/^s. 

A line drawn from the nearest part of C.ijic Catastrophe to 
Cape Spencer will be forty-eight’ miles long, and so much is the 
entrance of the gulph in width. Gambler's Isles lie not far from 
the middle of the line; and if we measure upward from them, the 
gulph will be found, without regard to the small windings, to extend 
one hundred and eighty-five miles into the interior of the country. 

For the general exactness of its form in the chart, I can answer with 
tolerable confidence; having seen all that is laid down, and, as usual, 
taken every angle which enters into the construction. Throughout 
the whole extent of the shores the water line was almost every 
where distinguished ; the only exceptions being, small portions at 
the head of.Hardwicke and Louth Bays, of a bight near Point Ix)wly, 
and of the low land at the back of the great Eastern Shoal. 

At noon, when oflf Cape Spencer, the Aind became variable 
and light, with very hazy, cloudy weather; and the mercury in my 
marine barometer had fallen two tenths of an inch. At six in the 
evening a breeze sprung up at west-taorth-west ; and as I expected a 



168 


A VOYAGE TO 


[^SoHth Coast. 


1802. g^aJe 'v^ould come on, and that as usual it would veer to the south- 
Saturday 20. west, we ceased to follow the coast beyond Cape Spencer, and 
steered for the land seen in the southern quarter. The Althorpe 
Isles were passed at eight o'clock, at the distance of eight or nine 
miles ; and the wind being fresh at west, we made short trips during 
the night between the two lands, not knowing what might be in the 
Sunday 21. sjiace to Iceward. At daylight the ship was nearly in mid-channel, 
between the southern land and Cape Spencer, and nothing was seen 
to the eastward. It then blew a fresh gale at south-west, with much 
sea running; we stretched south-east under close-reefed top sails, to 
get under the lee of the southern land ; an<J*at eight o’clock, when 
the largest Althorpe Isle bore N. 32® W., it was distant six or seven 
miles to the south, and extended from S. W. to 79° E., as far as 
the eye could reach. It was rather high, and cliffy; but there was 
nothing by which to judge of its connection with the main. 

At ten o'clock we were close under the land ; and finding the 
water tolerably smooth, had shortened sail with the intention of an- 
choring near a small, sandy beach ; but the situation proving to be 
too much exposed, we steered ea.stward along the shore under two 
close- reefed top sails and fore sail, the wind blowing strong in squalls 
from the south-west. The furthest land seen a-head at noon, was a 
projecting point, lower than the other cliff's ; it bore E. 7“ S., four 
leagues, and lies in 35° 33' south, and 137° 41' east. It .was named 
Point Marsden, in compliment to the second secretary of the Admi- 
ralty ; and beyond it the coast was found to trend soulhwai d into a 
large bay containing three coves, any one of which promised good 
shelter from the gale. This was called Nepean Bay, in compli- 
ment to the fir.st secretary (now sir Evan Nepean, Bar.t.), and we 
hauled up for it ; but the strength of the wind was such, that a head 
land forming the east side of the bay was fetched with difficulty. 

six in the evening we came to anchor in 9 fathoms, sandy bot- 
tom, within a mile of the shore ; the east extreme bearing S. 76* E., 
and the land near Point Marsden, on the west side of Nepean Bay, 





TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


160 


Kanguroo Island.'] 

N. 6i“ W., six leagues. A piece of high land, seemingly , uncon- i8f«. 

nected, bore from N. 45® to 78“ E. ; but no land could be distin- SunXiysi. 
guished to the northward. 

Neither smokes, nor other marks* of inhabitants had as yet 
been perceived upon the southern land, although we had passed along 
seventy miles of its coast. It was too late to go on shore this evening ; 
but every glass in the ship was pointed there, to see what could be 
discovered. Several black lumps, like rocks, were pretended to 
have been seen in motion by some of the young gentlemen, which 
caused the force of their imaginations to be much admired; next 
morning, however, oii going toward . the shore, a number of dark- Monday 22. 
brown kanguroos were seen feeding upon a grass plat by the side 
of the wood ; and our landing gave them no disturbance. I had 
with me a double-barrelled gun, fitted with a bayonet, and the gen- 
tlemen my companions had muskets. It would be difficult to guess 
how many kanguroos were seen ; but I killed ten, and the rest of 
of the party made up the number to thirty-one, taken on board in 
the course of the day ; the least of them weighing sixty-nine, and 
the largest one hundred and twenty-five pounds. These kanguroos 
had much resemblance to the large species found in the forest lands 
of New South Wales ; except that their colour was darker, and they 
were not wholly destitute of fat. 

After this butchery, for the poor animals suffered themselves 
to be shot in the eyes with small shot, and in some cases to be 
knocked on the head with sticks, I scrambled with dilHculty through 
the brush wood, and over fallen trees, to reach the higher land with 
the surveying instruments ; but the thickness and hcigiit of the 
wood prevented any thii;^ else from being distinguished. There 
was little doubt, however, that this extensive piece of land was sepa- 
rated from the continent'; for the extraordinary tameness of the 
kanguroos and the presence of seals uj)on the shore, concurred with 
the absence of all traces of men to show that it was not inhabited. 

The whole ship’s company was employed this afternoon, in 



170 ' 


A VOYAGE TO 


[jSinifA Coast, 


1802 , 
M o ch, 
Monday 


Tuesday 523 


(Atlas, 
Plate XVII. 
View i2.) 


skinning and cleaning the kanguroos ; and a delightful regale they 
afforded, after four months privation from almost any fresh provi- 
sions. Half a hundred weight of heads, fore quarters, and tails were 
stewed down into soup for .dinner on this and the succeeding days; 
and as much steaks given, moreover, to both officers and men, 
as they could consume by day and by night. In gratitude for 
so seasonable a supply, I named this southern land Kanguroo 
Island. 

Next day was employed in shifting the top masts, on ac- 
count of some rents found in the heels. The scientific gentlemen 
landed again to examine the natural productions of the island, and in 
the evening eleven more kanguroos were brought on board ; but 
most of these were smaller, and seemed to be of a different species 
to those of the preceding day. Some of the party saw several large 
running birds, which, according to their description, seemed to have 
been the emu or cassowary. 

Not being able to obtain a distinct view from any elevated situ- 
ation, I took a set of angles from a small projection near the ship, 
named Kat/gi/roo Head; but nothing could be seen to the north ; and 
the sole bearing of importance, more than had been taken on board, 
was that of a high hill at the extremity of the apparently uncon- 
nected land to the eastward : it bore N. 39° 10' E., and was named 
Mount Lofty. The nearest part of that land was a low point, bear- 
ing N. 60° E. nine or ten miles ; but the land immediately at the 
back was high, and its northern and southern extremes were cliffy. 

I named it Cape Jervis, and it was afterwards sketched by Mr. 
Westall. 

All the cliffs of Kanguroo Island seen to the west of the anchor- 
age, had the appearance of being calcareous, and the loose stones scat- 
tered over the surface of Kanguroo Head and the vicinity were of 
that substance ; but the basis in this part seemed to be a brown slate, 
lying in strata nearly horizontal, and lamina of quartz were some- 
times seen in the interstices. Ip some places the slate was splijt into 



Kangvroo Island.'] TERRA AUSTRALIS. 

pieces of a foot lonp:, or more, like iron bars, and had a shining, ore- 
like appearance ; and the strata were tlien further from the horizontal 
line than I observed them to be elsewhere. 

A thick W'ood covered almost all th'at part of the island visible 
from the ship ; but the trees in a vegetating state were not equal in 
size to the generality of those lying on the ground, nor to the dead 
trees standing upright. Those on the ground w'ere so abundant, 
that in ascending the higher land, a considerable part of the walk 
was made upon them. They lay in all directions, and were nearly 
of the same size and in the same progress towards decay ; from 
whence it would seem that they had not fallen from age, nor yet 
been thrown down in a gale of wind. Some general conflagration, 
and there were marks apparently of fire on many of them, is per- 
haps the sole cause which can be reasonably assigned ; hut whence 
came the woods on fire ? That tliere were no inhabi'aivs upon tlie 
island, and that the natives of the continent dd n.A vi.it it, was 
demonstrated, if not by the want of all signs of such visit, yet by tlie 
tameness of the kanpjuroo, an animal which, on the continent, resem- 
bles the w'ild deer in timidity. Perhaps lightning might have been 
the cause, or possibly the friction of two dead trees in a strong wind ; 
but it Avould be somewhat extraordinary that the same thing should 
have happened at Thistle’s Island, Boston Island, and at tliis place, 
and apparently about the same time. Can this part of Terra Aus- 
tralis have been visited befor^^, unknown to the w'orld Tlie French 
navigator, ha Perottse, was ordered to explore it, but there seems 
little probability that he ever passed Torres’ Strait. 

Some judgment may be formed of* the epoch when these con- 
flagrations* happened, from the magnitude of the growing trees ; for 
they must have sprung up since that period. They were a .<^pec‘:es 
of eucalyptus, and being less than the fallen trees, had most probably 
not arrived at maturity ; but the wood is har’d and solid, and it may 
thence be supposed to grow slowly. With these considerations, I 
should be inclined to fix the period at not less than ten, nor more 


171 

1S03. 

March. 



172 


A VOYAGE TO 


[^South Coaat. 


tlian twenty years before our arrival. This brings us back to La 
Perouse. He was in Botany Bay in the beginning of 1788 ; and if 
he did pass through Torres’ Strait, and come round to this coast, as 
was his intention, it would probably be about the middle or latter 
end of that year, or between thirteen and fourteen years before the 
Investigator. My opinion is not favourable to this conjecture ; but 
1 have furnished all the data to enable the reader to form his own 
judgment upon the cause which might have prostrated the woods of 
these islands. 

The soil of that part of Kanguroo Island examined by us, was 
judged to be much superior to any before seen, either upon the south 
coast of the continent, or upon the islands near it ; with the excep- 
tion of some portions behind the harbours of King George's Sound. 
The depth of the soil was not particularly ascertained ; but from the 
thickness of the wood it cannot be very shallow. Some sand is 
mixed with the vegetable earth, but not in any great proportion; 
and I thought the soil superior to some of the land cultivated at Port 
Jackson, and to much of that in oiir stony countjes in England. 

Never perhaps had the dominion possessed here by the kan- 
guroo been invaded before this time. The seal shared with it upon 
the shores, but they seemed to dwell amicably together. It not unfre- 
quently happened, that the report of a gun fired at a kanguroo near the 
beach, brought out two or three bellowing seals from under bushes 
considerably further from the water side. The seal, indeed, seemed 
to be much the most discerning animal of the two ; for its actions 
bespoke a knowledge of our not being kanguroos, whereas the kan- 
guroo not unfrequcntly appeared to consider us to be seals. 

The latitude of the landing place near Kanguroo Head from an 
observation in the artificial horizon, was 35° 43' o" south; and the lon- 
gitude of our anchorage by time keepers, 137® 58' 31" east. This last, 
being deduced from observations only four days after the proof had 
of the time keepers having gone correctly since leaving Port Lincoln, 
should be as accurate, or very nfearly so, as the longitude of that port. 



TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


178 


Kanguroo Island.'] 


The variation observed from two compasses on board, with the 
head south-westward, was 6° 31' east ; but when the ship swung to 
a tide coming from east-north-east ; the cliange in the bearings of 
different objects showed the variation to bq about 4° less. The true 
variation I deduce to be 4° 1^' east ; which is an increase upon what 
was observed on the west side of Cape Spencer, of 2” ; although the 
distance be no more than twenty-four leagues, and the previous in- 
crease from Cape Catastrophe had been almost nothing. It seems 
probable that the existence of magnetic bodies in the land to the 
north-westward, and perhaps also in Kanguroo Island and Cape 
Jervis, was the cause of this change in the direction of the needle. 

From appearances on the shore, I judged the rise of tide to 
be about six feet. The flood came from the east-north-east, twice in 
the day, and by the swinging of the ship, ceased at two hours and a 
half after the moon's passage ; but the time of high water was after- 
w'ards found to be later by one hour and a half. 


5C 


1802. 

March. 


VOL. T. 



m 


A VOYAGE TO 


[South Cocut. 


1902. 
March. 
Wedues. 24. 


Thurs. 25. 


CHAPTER VIII. 

Departure from Kanguroo Island. Examination of thx main coast, from 
Cape Spencer eastward. The Investigator’s Strait. A new gulph 
discovered. Anchorage at, and examination of the head. Remarks on 
the surrounding land. Return down the Gulph. Tivubndge Shoal, 
Torke’s Peninsula. Return to Kanguroo Island. Boat expedition to 
Pelican Lagoon. Astronomical observations. Kanguroo Island quitted. 
Backstairs Passage. The coast from Cape Jervis, eastward. Meeting, 
and communication with Le Gdographe. Remarks upon the French 
discoveries on the South Coast. 

24 in the moming, we got under way from Kanguroo 
Island, in order to take up the examination of the main coast at Cape 
Spencer, where it had been quitted in the evening of the 20th, when 
the late gale commenced. The wind had continued to blow fresh 
from the southward ; but had now moderated, and was at south- 
west. We steered north-westward from ten o'clock till six in the 
evening ; and then had sight of land extending from N. 62° W. to 
a low part terminating at N. 17® E. distant three leagues. A hum- 
mock upon this low part was named Troubridge Hill, and at first it 
makes like an island. Nothing was visible to the eastward of the low 
land ; whence I judged there to be another inlet or a strait between 
it and Cape Jervis. Soon .after dusk the wind veered to south-by- 
east, on which we steered south-westward, and continued the same 
course until four in the morning; when the largest Althorpe Isle 
being seen to the north-west, the ship was hove to, with her head 
eastward ; and at daylight, before making sail, the following bear- 
ings were taken of the lands to the northward, but no part of. Kan- 
guroo Island was visible. 



Investigator's Strait.l 


TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


175 


Wedge I. (of Gambier’s Isles), highest part, - N. 64^“ W. i8q 2. 
Althorpe Isle, largest, distant 6 miles, - N. 83® to 7b W. Thurrss 

Cape Spencer, south point, - - N. 44, W. 

Furthest extreme of the northern land^ - N. 44 E. 

The wind fixed itself at south-east, and it took us two days to 
work back against it as far as Troubridgc Hill. The shore is Saturday 27. 
generally low and sandy ; but with the exception of one very low 
point, it may be approached within two miles. Many tacks were 
made in these two days, from the northern land across to Kanguroo 
Island, and gave opportunities of sounding the intermediate strait. 

From 45 fathoms, in the middle of the western entrance, the depth 
diminishes quickly to 25, then more slowly to 20 ; after which it 
is irregular between 12 and 20 fathoms, as far as the mouth of 
the second inlet. Of the two sides, that of Kanguroo Island 
is much the deepest; but there is no danger in any part to pre- 
vent a ship passing through the strait with perfect confidence ; and 
the average width is twenty-three miles. It was named Investi- 
gator’s Strait, after the ship. The bottom is mostly broken shells, 
mixed with sand, g-ravel, or coral, and appeared to hold well. 

Froiti two amplitudes taken to the north-north-west of Point 
Marsden, and near the middle of the strait, the variation was 1° 49' 
east ; the ship’s head being south-south-east in one case, and north- 
east-by-north in the other. The true variation deduced from these, 
is 3“ 20' ea-st; which is 1“ 7' greater than at Cape Spencer, and 0*53' 
less than at the anchorage near Kanguroo Head. 

At noon of the 27th, the eastern wind died away ; and we 
dropped a kedge anchor in 15 fathoms, about two miles from Point 
Marsden, where the following observations and bearings were taken. 

Latitude, observed to the north, - 35® 31' 38" 

Longitude by time keepers, - - 137 42 

Kanguroo I., furthest western extreme, - S. 82 W. 

Point Marsden, west side, - S. 26 W. 

innermost head up Nepean Bay, S. 27 E. 

■ furthest eastern extreme, ~ S. 57^ E. 

Cape Jervis, south extreme, - S. 73 E. 



176 


A VOYAGE TO 


[Sou^A Coiut. 


1802. No set of tide was observable until three o'clock, when it made 
Sat^ay 27 . g^^^ly to the north-east, towards the new inlet ; and a breeze 
springing up at south-east soon afterward, we pursued the same 
course, and were well within the entrance at eight o’clock. Fires 
were seen a-head ; but the soundings being regular, and increasing, 
we kept on until midnight ; when the land was seen also, and we 
Sunday 28. Stood back for two hours. At daylight I recognised Mount Lofty, 
upon the highest part of the ridge of mountains which, from Cape 
Jervis, extends northward behind the eastern shore of the inlet. 
The nearest part of the coast was distant three leagues, mostly low, 
and composed of sand and rock, with a few small trees scattered 
over it ; but at a few miles inland, where the back mountains rise, 
the country was well clothed with forest timber, and had a fertile 
^pcarance. The fires bespoke this to be a part of the continent. 

Light airs and calms prevailed during the morning, and the 
ship had very little way until noon, when a breeze sprung up at 
south-west. Our situation was then in 

Latitude, observed to the nortli and south, - 35° 4' 13" 

Longitude by time keepers, - - 138 23 

Mount Lofty bore - - - N. 71 E. 

Southern extreme toward Cape Jervis, - S. 17 W. 
Northern extreme, trees above the water, N. 32 E. 

The situation of Mount Lofty was found from hence and from some 
other cross bearings, to be 34® 59' south and 138° 42' east. No 
land was visible so far to the north as where the trees appeared 
above the horizon, which showed the coast to be very low, and our 
soundings were fast decreasing. From noon to six o’clock we ran 
thirty miles to the northward, skirting a sandy shore at the distance 
of five, and thence to eight miles ; the depth was then 5 fathoms, 
and we dropped the anchor upon a bottom of sand, mixed with 
pieces of dead coral. ■ 

Monday 29. In the moming, land was seen to the westward, and also a 
hummocky mountain, capped jwith clouds, apparently near the head 



TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


177 


Chilph of St. Vincent.} 

of the inlet. Azimuths with the surveying compass, taken when i«o2. 
the ship’s head was south-eastward,- gave 2“ 27' east variation ; but Mon^y^3j>. 
an amplitude taken at the same anchorage on the preceding evening 
when the head was south-by-west, showed 5* 22' east. These cor- 
rected to the meridian, will be severally 4,“ 4,3' and 4° 44' east ; or 
half a degree more than was observed near Kanguroo Head. The 
observations at this anchorage and the bearings taken were as 
follow : 

Latitude observed from the moon, - 34 ° 3^' S. 

Longitude by time keepers, - - 138 18 E. 

Mount Lofty, - - - S. 41^ E. 

Nearest shore, distant 7 miles, - N. E. to N. 

Hummock mount, highest top, - N. 12^ W. 

Western land, furthest extremes, N 51* to S. 65 W. , 

There being almost no wind in the morning, w-e remained at 
anchor until nine o’clock, to set up afresh the rigging of the new 
top masts;, and I took a boat to sound upon a rippling near the ship, 
but found the same depth of 5 fathoms. Very little progress was 
made until noon ; .at which time shoal water obliged us to steer 
westward. At three, the soundings had increased from 3^ to 10 
fathoms, which was the deepest water to be found ; for it became 
shallower on approaching the western shore. After steering various 
northwardly courses, we anchored at sunset in 5 fathoms, sand, 
shells, and broken coral ; the shores then appeared to close round, 
at the distance of seven or eight miles ; and the absence of tide gave 
no prospect of finding any river at the head of the inlet. 

According to lieutenant Flinders’ observations, the situation of Tuesday so. 


the anchorage was in 

Latitude, _ _ - 34° 16' 36" 

Longitude by time keepers, - - 138 6 

Mount Lofty, dist. 17 leagues, bore, - S. 35 E. 

Hummock Mount, highest part, - N. 5 E. 

A low sandy point, dist. 3 or 4 miles, N. 69 E. 

A low point covered with mangroves, N. 53 W. 



178 


A VOYAGE TO 


Coe»t. 


1802 . 
March. 
Tucbiiay 3 J. 


The variation from an amplitude, observed when the ship's 
head was south-eastward, was a'’ 50' east ; but the compass being 
upon a stand out of its usual place, I cannot deduce the true variation, 
but took it to *be 4° 40' «east, nearly as found at the preceding 
anchorage. 

Early in the morning, I went in a boat, accompanied by the 
naturalist, to examine more closely the head of the gulph. We 
carried from 4 to 3 fathoms water four miles above the ship, when 
it shoaled to fifteen and, eight feet, which brought us to mud flats, 
nearly dry; but by means of a small channel amongst them we got 
within half a mile of the shore, and walked to it upon a bank of mud 
and sand. 

It was then ten o’clock, and the tide was out; so that I judged 
the time of high water to be about seven hours after the moon's passage, 
or three hours later than at Kanguroo Island ; and the ordinary rise 
appeared to be six or eight feet. An observation of the sun’s 
meridian altitude from the artificial horizon, showed -the landing 
place to be in latitude 34° 8' 53", pnd the uppermost water might be 
30" less ; whence the extent of this inlet, froiVi' Cape Jervis on the 
east side of the entrance, is 1" 30' of latitude. 

Microscopic shells of various kinds, not larger than grains of 
wheat, were heaped up in ridges at high-water mark ; further back 
the shore Was sandy, but soon rose, in an undulating man- 
ner, to hills covered with grass; and the several clumps of trees 
scattered over th^m gave the land a pleasing appearance from the 
water side. We set off' in the afternoon for the Hummock 
Mount, which stands upon ^ northern prolongation of the hills on 
the west side of the inlet, and about eight miles from the water; but 
finding it could not be reached in time to admit of re‘turning on 
board the same evening, I ascended a nearer part of the range, to 
inspect the head of the inlet. It was almost wholly occupied by 
flats, which seemed to be- sandy in the eastern part and muddy to 
the westward. These flats abounded with rays ; and had we been 



179 


Gulph of St. Vincent.'] TERRA AUSTRALIS. 

provided with a harpoon, a boat load might have been caughf. One 
black swan and several shags and , gulls were seen. 

I found the grass upon these pleasant-looking hills to be thinly 
set, the trees small, and the land poor in vegetable soil. The moun- 
tainous ridge on the east side of the inlet passes within a few miles 
of Hummock Mount, and appeared to be more sandy ; but the wood 
upon it was abundant, and of a larger growth. Between the two 
ranges is a broad valley, swampy at the bottom ; and into it the 
water runs down from both sides in rainy weather, and is discharged 
into the gulph, which may be considered as the lower and wider part 
of the valley. 

This eastern ridge is the same which rises at Cape Jervis ; 
from whence it extends northward towards Barn Hill and the ridge 
of mountains on the east side of Spencer's Gulph. If it join that ri*dge, 
as I strongly suspect, its length, taking it only from Cape Jervis to 
Mount Arden, will be more than seventy leagues in a straight line. 

There are some considerable elevations on the southern part ; Mount 

*■ 

Lofty is one of them, and its height appeared nearly equal to that of 
Mount Brown to the’ north, or about three thousand feet. Another 
lies six or seven miles to the north-by-east of the Hummock Mount, 
near the head of this inlet ; and seems to have been the hill set from 
Spencer's Gulph, at the anchorage of March 14, in the evening, 
when it was distant ten or eleven leagues and appeared above the 
lower range in front of Barn Hill. 

From my station on the western hills of the new inlet, across 
to Spencer's Gulph, the distance was not more than thirty miles ; 
but as I did not ascend the highest part of the range, the water to 
the westward could not be seen. Had the Hummock Mount been 
within my reach, its elevation of near fifteen hundred feet would 
probably have afforded an extensive view, both across the penin- 
sula, and of the country to the northward. . 

In honour of the noble admiral who presided at the Board of 
Admiralty when I sailed from England, and had continued to the 


ISfKJ. 
March. 
Tucbday 30. 



180 


A VOYAGE TO 


{^South Coast. 


ISOS. 
March. 
Tuesday 30, 


Wednes. 31 . 


April. 
Thurs. 1. 


voyag/e that countenance and protection of which Earl Spencer had 
set the example, I named this new inlet, the Gulph of St. Vincent. 
To the peninsula which separates it from Spencer's Gulph, I have 
affixed the name of Yonicti’s Peninsula, in honour of the Right 
Honourable Charles Philip Yorke, who followed the steps of his 
above mentioned predecessors at the Admiralty. 

On the 31st at daylight we got under way to proceed down 
the gulph, and having followed the eastern shore in going up, I 
wished to trace the coast of the peninsula in returning ; but the wind 
being nearly at south, it could only be done partially. At two in 
the afternoon, we tacked in 3 fathoms from the eastern shoals, and 
at sunset, in the same depth one mile from the western side ; our 
distance from the head of the gulph being then about ten leagues, 
and the furthest land of the peninsula bearing S. 3° E. The western 
hills come down nearly to the water side here, and have the same 
pleasant appearance as at the head of the gulph, being grassy, 
with clumps of wood scattered over them ; the coast line is some- 
what cliffy, and not so low as the-eastern shore. 

During the night the wind veered round 'to east, and at 
three in the morning to north-east ; and a fire being seen on the 
eastern shore, the fore top sail was laid to the mast. At daybreak 
we made sail west, for the land of the peninsula ; and at half past 
nine it was less than five miles distant, being very low and sandy. 
The northern extreme then in sight appeared to be the same land 
set in the evening at S. 3® E. ; the other extreme was not far from 
Troubridge Hill, on the west side of the entrance to the gulph ; and 
near it was an extensive basik, part of it dry, which I called Trou~ 
bridge Shoal. The bearings taken at this time were. 

Northern extreme of the west shore, - N. 2° E. 

Southern extreme, distant 7 miles, - - S. 42 W. 

Troubridge Shoal, dry part, - S. i3°W.to 9 E. 

Cape Jervis, S. extreme of high land, S. 18 E.. 

Mount Lofty, - . - - N. 8,5 E. 



Onlph of St. Vincent.] TERRA AUSTRALIS. 181 

We now hauled the wind to the south-east, and weathered the 

April. 

dry part of Troubridge Shoal ; but passed amongst several patches Thursday i. 
of discoloured water in soundings from 4 to 3- fathoms. At noon, 
when our latitude observed on both sides ’was 35° 9' 38" and longi- 
tude by time keepers 138® 4,^', the shoal was distant three leagues 
to the west-north- west; Cape Jervis bore S< 12°, and Mount Lofty 
N. 72“ E. 

Our examination of thegulph of St. Vincent was now finished ; 
and the country round it had appeared to be generally superior to 
that on the borders of Spencer’s Gulph. Yorke’s Peninsula between 
them, is singular in its form, bearing some resemblance to a very 
ill-shaped leg and foot. The length of the southern part, from Cape 
Spencer to the sandy point near Troubridge Shoal, is about fo/ty- 
five miles; and from thence northward, to where the peninsula 
joins the main land, about sixty miles. Its least breadth is from the 
head of Hardwicke Bay to the Investigator's Strait, where it appears 
to be not more than three leagues. 

Having now ii^ade myself acquainted with the shores of the 
continent up to Cape Jervis, it remained to pursue the discovery 
further eastward ; but I wished to ascertain previously, wliether 
any error had crept into the time keepers rates since leaving Kan- 
guroo Island, and also to procure there a few more fresh meals for 
my ship’s company. Our course was m consequence directed for 
the island, whicli was visible trom aloft ; but the winds being very 
feeble, we did not pass Kanguroo Head until eleven at night. I pur- 
posed to have run up into the eastern cove of Nepean Bay ; but 
finding the water to shoal from 12 to 7* fathoms, did not think it 
safe to go farther in the dark ; and therefore dropped the anchor 
about three-quarters of a mile from the shore, and two miles to the 
south-west-by-west of our former anchorage. 

Early on the followitig morning a ^party was sent to shoot Friday 2, 
kangaroos, another to cut wood, and the naturalists went to pursue 
their researches. The observations taken by lieutenant Flinders, 

VOL. 1. 3D 



182 


A VOYAGE TO 


Coast. 


180*. compared with those of March e^th, showed the time keepers to have 

Friday «. erred a' lo" of longitude to the west, in the nine days we had been 
absent ; and they had not, consequently, lost quite so much upon a 
medium as the Port-Lincoln rates supposed. This small error, 
which principally affected the Gulph of St. Vincent, has been cor- 
rected in the longitudes there specified and in the chart, by an equal 
proportion. 

The kanguroos were found to be less numerous than at the 
first anchoring place, and they had become shy; so that very 
few were killed. Those few being brought off, with a boat load of 

Saturdays, wood, we got under way at daylight next morning, to prosecute the 
examination of the coast beyond Cape Jervis ; but the time keepers 
had stopped, from having been neglected to be wound up on the 
preceding day. We therefore came to an anchor again ; and as 
some time would be required to fix new rates, the ship was moored 
so soon as the flood tide made. I landed immediately, to commence 
the necessary observations, and a party was established on shore, 
abreast of the ship, to cut moi*e wood for the holds. Lieutenant 
Fowler was sent in the launch to the eastward, with a shooting 
party and such of the scientific gentlemen as chose to accompany 
him ; and there being skins wanted for the service of the rigging, 
he was .directed to kill some seals. 

Sunday 4. On the 4th, I was accompanied by the naturalist in a boat ex- 

pedition to the head of the large eastern cove of Nepean Bay ; in- 
tending if possible to ascend a sandy eminence behind it, from which 
alone there was any hope of obtaining a view into the interior of the 
island, all the other hills being thickly covered with wood. On ap- 
proaching the south-west comer of the cov^ a small opening was 
found leading into a considerable piece of water ; and by one of its 
branches we reached within little more than a mile of the desired 
sandy eminence. After ^ I had observed the latitude 35® 50' a" 
from an artificial horizon, we got through the wood without much 
difficulty ; and at one o'clock reached the top of the eminence. 



Kanguroo hlafd.'\ TERRA AUSTRALIS. IS8 

to which was given the name of Prospect Hill. Instead of a 
view into the interior of the island, I was surprised to find the* sea at Sun'aay 4. 
not more than one and a half, or two miles to the southward. Two 
points of the coast towards the east end of the island, bore S. 77* E,, 
and the furthest part on the other side, a low point with breakers 
round it, bore S. 33“ W., at the supposed distance of four or five 
leagues. Between these extremes a large bight in the south coast 
was formed ; but it is entirely exposed to southern winds, and the 
shores are mostly cliffy. Mount Lofty on the east side of the Gulph 
of St. Vincent, was visible from Prospect Hill at the distance of sixty- 
nine miles ; and bore N. 40“ 40' E. 

The entrance of the piece of water at the head of Nepean Bay, 
is less than half a mile in width, and mostly shallow ; but there is 
a channel sufficiently deep for all boats near the western shore. 

After turning two low islets near the east point, the water opens out, 
becomes deeper, and divides into two branches, each of two or three 
miles long.* Boats can go to the head of the southern branch only 
at high water ; the east branch appeared to be accessible at all times ; 
but as a lead and Ihib were neglected to be put into the boat, I had 
no opportunity of sounding. There are four small islands in the 
eastern branch ; one of them is moderately high and woody, the 
others are grassy and lower ; and upon two of these we found 
many young pelicans, unable to fly. Flocks of the old birds were sit- 
ting upon the beaches of the lagoon, and it appeared that the islands 
were their breeding places ; not only so, but from the number of 
skeletons and bones there scattered, it should seem that they had 
for ages been selected for the closing scene of their existence. 

Certainly none more li^cely to be free fro*m disturbance of every kind 
could have* been chosen, than these islets in a hidden lagoon of an 
uninhabited island, situate upon an unknown coast near the antipodes 
of Europe ; nor can any thing be more cpnsonant to the feelings, if 
pelicans have any, than quietly to resign their breath , w hilst surrounded 
by their progeny, and in the same spot where they first drew.it. 



A VOYAiQ^^^ 


:; 4 :% -V 

^-to.retu^\.<^ '-TOii 

the entraiiofe of the was Wgh 


|q^ moftting of o'clock; but oi» 

'‘wth the swinging- of 2 d^^^^;appeared jjJiat the tide ha^'^ 
running ^ houii ji^ thc/westward. The 

li^oon sa^i&d^ 1)0 from f^r t<> eight feet. 

; ''•r';'¥V;^^^?^'-kangui^^ ,h^y^»ep' ‘obtah^ my al 



.^cuney^l skins.; 
seal kiqtui^Qsj^,' 

' laid * After all the 
kanguroQS 
place, near Kan 
That of the is: 
thim vmre some 



attrjbcfive; and w 


fix«d 


eajBt3|ipiedt«f: 


.at^curs flawing attack«d.adi 
ihite in the, leg, ai^ ann 
l^u^e injdie ish^, hijlppeared 
ous .at Ottr,.fi]^landing 

t '^'d 

1^ be particularly 
'thirty emus oi 
happened that 
y. They were 
razplali beaches to the 
ited m the annexec 
^^ippzed from the rocks, 
^ie4|f^ployed in digging 
^ I am sorry tc 





imiiA AUSTRALtS. )85 


steiyi was the «dle place found by us where the hope of ja^ i«a. 

curing fresh water could be entertained. ‘ - 

Having received an board a good stock of wood, the launbh 
was hoisted in, and every thing prepared for going to sea. Next 
morning, so soon as the siln was sufficiently elevated to be observed Tuesday «. 
in the artificial horizon, I landed to take the last set of observati<His 
for the time keepers ; after which the anchor was weighed, and we 
steered out, of Nepean Bay vrith a light breeze from the south-west 
Towards noon it fell calm, and finding by the land that the ship was 
set westward, an anchor was dropped nearly in our first place off 
Kanguroo Head : and Mr. Westall took the sketch given in the (Atlas, 
AUas. . . View 11.) 


The rates of the time keepers were obtained, for the sake of 
^pedition, from single altitudes of the sun's upper and lower lifnbs, 
taken from a quicksilver horizon with a sextant fixed on a stand; 
the time being noted from Arnold's watch, compared with Eam- 
shaw's time* keepers before going on shore and immediately after 
returning. From the altitudes of the 3rd, 4th, and 6th, in the morn- 
ing, the rates of the ’two time keepers and their errors from mean 
Greenwich time, reduced to noon there on the last day, were as 
under ; 

Earnshaw's No. 543, fast o** o' 18", 03 and losing 8", 46 per day. 

'No.5so,s1owo 45 29,56 - - - 18,07 

In deducing these eirors, the longitude given by the time 
keepers on our first arrival from Spencer's Gulph, which I consider 
to be equally good with that of Port Lincoln, was used, with a cor- 
rection of — 1' 20" for the change of place. The medium of the Port- 
Lincoln rates was something greater than that now found ; which 
corresponded with the time keepers having given the longitude of 
Kanguroo Head less on the second than on the first arrival. This 
was some proof that the letting down had not affe(ted the rk^ and 
tended to give me confidence in their accuracy. 



186 


A VOYAGE TO 


[South Coast. 


1802. The variation observed on shore, with the theodolite, was 5* 48' east. 

Tu^i^ e. D®. with azimuth compass. No. I. - - - 358 

For this difference between the instruments, I find it difficult to 
account satisfactorily ; but* it is the same way, and nearly similar in 
quantity' to what was observed in Lucky Bay. The true variation 
on board the ship, deduced from azimuths taken at anchor two miles 
to the north-east, and using the compasses No. 1 and 2, was as before 
mentioned, 4* 13', nearly the mean of the above ; but the bearings 
taken with the theodolite at Kanguroo Head and Prospect Hill 
showed only 2^* east, as compared with the bearings on board the 
ship. There can be little doubt of the existence of magnetic sub- 
stances in the lands about here, more particularly, as I think, in 
Yorke's Peninsula ; and there will presently be occasion to notice 
more instances of their effect. 

The approach of the winter season, and an apprehension that 
the discovery of the remaining unknown part of the South Coast 
might not be completed before a want of provisions would make it 
necessary to run for Port Jackson^ prevented me from stopping a day 
longer at Kanguroo Island than was necessary t6 obtaining rates for 
the time keepers ; and consequently, from examining the south and 
west parts of that island. The direction of the main coast and the inlets 
it might form, were the most important points to be now ascertained ; 
and the details of particular parts, which it would interfere too much 
with those objects to examine, were best referred to the second visit, 
directed by my instructions to be made to this coast. When, there* 
fore, the rising of a breeze made it advisable to get under way from 
Kanguroo Head, which was not until two in the afternoon, we pro- 
ceeded for the eastern outlet of the Investigator's Strait; in order to 
prosecute the discovery beyond Cape Jervis. 

The wind was at south-east ; and the tide being against us, 
but little progress was made until the evening, when it became favour- 
able. Our soundings wefe irregular, and some rocky islets being 



TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


18 T 


Kanguroo hland^ 

seen without side of the opening, I stood in at nine o’clock, to look i8o«. 
for anchorage at the east end of Kanguroo Island; and finding no xuM^y 6. 
shelter there, we ran a little to leeward into a small bay which I had 
observed before dark, and anchored at half past ten, in fathoms, 
on ^ bottom of hard. sand. At daylight, the following bearings were Wednesd. 7. 
taken. 

East point of the little bay, dist. 1 j mile, - East. 

West point, distant three miles, - N. 38® W. 

Cape Jervis, inner low point, - N. 3 W. 

Eastern extreme of the coast, - - N. 65 E. 

The bay is perfectly sheltered from all southern winds ; and as there 
were several spots clear of wood near the beach, it is probable that 
the kanguroos, and perhaps cassowaries, might be numerous. ,We 
did not stop to land, but got under way so soon as the bearings 
were taken, to beat out of the strait against the south-east wind ; so 
little was gained, however, after working all the day, that at eight 
in the evening the ship was still off the east end of Kanguroo Island. 

This part of tfie Investigator's Strait is not more, in the nar- 
rowest part, than seven miles across. It forms a private entrance, 
as it were, to the two gulphs ; and I named it Backstairs Passage. 

The small bay where w'e had anchored, is called the Ante-chamber; 
and the cape which forms the eastern head of the bay and of Kan- 
guroo Island, and lies in 35* 48' south and 138® 13' east, received 
the appellation of Cape Willoughby. Without side of the passage, 
and almost equidistant from both shores, there are three small, rocky 
islets near together, called the Pages, whose situation is in latitude 
35® south, and longitude 138® 21' ’east; these are the sole 
dangers in Back-stairs Passage, and two of them are conspicuous. 

Our soundings in beating through, were from 8 to 23 fathoms; and 
in a strong rippling of tide like breakers, there was from 10 to i«, 
upon a bottom of stones and shells. 

" At eight in the evening we tacked from Cape Willoughby ; 
and having passed to windward of the Pages, stretched on east and 



188 


A VOYAGE TO 


ISOS. 

A|»iL 

Thui^aj 


[/SottA Coeut. 

north-eastward until four in the morning. Land was then seen 
. under the lee, and a tack madej>fF shore, till daylight, when we stood 
in with the wind at east -south-east. At nine, the land was distant 
five miles, and of a very different aspect to that of Cape Jervis. As 
far as six leagues from the cliffy southern extremity of the cape, 
the land is high, rocky, and much cut by gullies or ravines ; a short, 
scrubby brush- wood covers the seaward side, and the stone appeared 
to be slaty, like the opposite cliffs of Kanguroo Island. But here 
the hills fall back from the sea, and the shore becomes very low with 
some hummocks of sand upon it ; and the same description of coast 
prevailed as far as could be seen to the eastward. 

Our situation at nine o’clock, when we tacked to the south, 
was, as follows ; 


Longitude by time keepers. 

- 


47t 

Cape Jervis, two southern parts, bore 

- S. 

84 

W. 

A round hummock. 

- N. 

8^ 

W. 

A rocky islet, under the land. 

- N. 

6a 

w. 

Furthest visible part of the sandy coast. 

.. s. 

87 

E. 


Before two in the afternoon we stretched eastward again ; and 
at four, a white rock was reported from aloft to be seen a-;head. On 
approaching nearer, it proved to be a ship standing towards us ; and 
we cleared for action, in case of being attacked. The stranger was 
a heavy-looking ship, without any top-gallant masts up ; and our 
colours being hoisted, she showed a French ensign, and afterwards 
an English jack forward, as we did a white flag. At half past five, 
the land being then five miles distant to the north-eastward, I hove 
to ; and learned, as the stranger passed to leeward with a free wind, 
that it was the French national ship Le Geographe, under the cpm- 
mand of captain Nicolas Baudin. We veered round as Le G6o- 
graphe was passing, so as to keep our broadside to her, lest the flag 
of truce should be a deception ; and having come to the wind on the 
other tack, a boat was hoisted out, and I went on board the French 
ship, which had also hove to. ’• 



TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


189 


Encounter Bay."] 

As I did not understand French, Mr. Brown, the naturalist, 
went with me in the boat. We were received by an officer who Thvuwday s. 
pointed out the commander, and by him were conducted into the 
cabin. I requested captain Baudin to show me his passport from 
the Admiralty ; and when it was found and I had perused it, offered 
mine from the French marine minister, but he put it back without 
inspection. He then informed me that he had spent some time in 
examining the south and east parts of Van Diemen’s Land, where 
his geographical engineer, with the largest boat and a boat’s crew, 
had been left, and probably lost. In Bass’ Strait captain Baudin had 
encountered a heavy gale, the same we had experienced in a less 
degree on March s i , in the Investigator’s Strait. He was then separ- 
ated from his consort, Le Naturaliste ; but having since had fair wipds 
and fine weather, he had explored the South Coast from Western 
Port to the place of our meeting, without finding any river, inlet, 
or other shelter w'hich afforded anchorage. I inquired concerning a 
large island, said to lie in the western entrance of Bass’ Strait ; but 
he had not seen it, and seemed to doubt much of its existence. 

Captain Baudin was communicative of his discoveries about 
Van Diemen’s Land ; as also of his criticisms upon an English chart of 
Bass’ Strait, published in i8oo. He found great fault with the north 
side of the strait, but commended the form given to the south side 
and to the islands near it. On my pointing out a note upon the chart, 
explaining that the north side of the strait was seen only in an open 
boat by Mr. Bass, who had no good means of fixing either latitude or 
longitude, he appeared surprised, not having before paid attention to 
it. I told him that some other, and mope particular charts of the 
Strait and its neighbourhood had been since published ; and that if 
he would keep company until next morning, I would bring him a 
copy, with a small memoir belonging to them. This was agreed to, 
and 1 returned with Mr. Brown to the Investigator. 

It somewhat surprised me, that captain Baudin made no enquiries- 
concerning my business upon this unknown coast, but as he seemed 
VOL. I. 3 E 



190 


A VOYAGE TO 


Ckxut. 


1808. more-desirous of communicating information, I was happy to receive 
FriS^ 9 . it ; next morning, however, he had become inquisitive, some of his 
officers having learned from my boat’s crew that our object was 
also discovery. I then told him, generally, what our operations had 
been, particularly in the two gulphs, and the latitude to which I had 
ascended in the largest ; explained the situation of Port Lincoln, 
where fresh water might be procured ; showed him Cape Jervis, 
which was still in sight ; and as a proof of the refreshments to be ob- 
tained at the large island opposite to it, pointed out the kanguroo- 
skin caps worn by my boat’s crew ; and told him the name I had 
affixed to the island in consequence. At parting, the captain requested 
me to take care of his boat and people, in case of meeting with them ; 
an<J to say to Le Naturaliste, that he should go to Port Jackson so 
soon as the bad weather set in. On my asking the name of the captain 
of Le Naturaliste, he bethought himself to ask mine ; and finding it 
to be the same as the author of the chart which he had been criticis- 
ing, expressed not a little surprise ; but had the politeness to con- 
gratulate himself on meeting me. 

The situation of the Investigator, when I hove to for the pur- 
pose of speaking captain Baudin, was 35* 40' south, and 138* 58^ 
east. No person was present at our conversations except Mr. Brown ; 
and they were mostly carried on in English, which the captain spoke 
so as to be understood. He gave me, besides what is related above, 
some information of his losses in men, separations from his consort, 
and of the improper season at which he was directed to explore this 
coast; as also a memorandum of some rocks he had met with, lying 
two leagues from the shore, in latitude 37° 1’, and he spoke of them 
as being very dangerous. 

I have been the more particular in detailing all that passed at 
this interview, from a circumstance which it seems proper to explain 
and discuss in this place. 

At the above situation of 35° 40' south, and 138® 58' east, the 
discoveries made by captain Baudin upon the South Coast have their 



TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


181 


Encounter Bay.^ 

termination to the west ; as mine in the Investigator have to the isos, 
eastward. Yet Mons. Peron, naturalist in the French expedition, 
has laid a claim for his nation to the discovery of all the parts be- 
tween Western Port in Bass’ Strait, and Nuyts’ Archipelc^o ; and this 
part of New South Wales is called Terre Napoleon. My Kanguroo 
Island, a name which they openly adopted in the expedition, has 
been converted at Paris into VIsle Deeres ; Spencer's Gulph is named 
Golfe Bonaparte ; the Gulph of St. Vincent, Golfe JosSphine ; and so 
on, along the whole coast to Cape Nuyts, not even the smallest 
island being left without some similar stamp of French discovery.* 

• The most remarkable passages on the subject are the following, under the title of 

Terre Napolton. 

De ce grand espacc (the south coast of Terra Australis), la partle seule qui du 
Cap Leuwen s’^tend aux lies St. Pierre et St, Francois, itoit connue lors dc notre d^- 
part d’Europe. D^couverte par les Hollandois en 1627> elle avoit dans ces der- 
niers temps, visitc^c par Vancouvbr et surtout par Dbntrbcastbaux ; mals ce der- 
nier navigateur n’ayant pu lui-m^me s’avancer au-dela dcs lies St. Pierre et St, Franqois, 
qui forment lalimite orientalc de la terre de Nuyts, et les Anglois n’ayant pas port6 
vers le Sud leurs recherches plus loin que le port Western, il en rdsultoit que toute la 
portion comprise entre ed dernier point et la terre de Nuyts dtoit encore inconnue au 
moment oA nous arrivions sur ces rivages," p. 816. That is on March 30, 1802. 

M. Peron should have said, not that the south coast from Western Port to Nuyts’ Land 
was then unknown ; but that it was unknown to them ; for captain Grant of the Lady 
Nelson had discovered the eastern part, from Western Port to the longitude ’l40J®, in the 
year 1800, before the French ships sailed from Europe ; and on the west I had explored 
the coast and islands from Nuyts’ Land to Cape Jervis in ISS*^ 10', and was, on the day 
specified, at the head of the Gulph of St, Vincent, 

Dans ce moment, le capitaine Anglois nous h^la, en nous demandant si nous n’^ons 
phB Tun desdeux vaisseaux partis de France pour faire des d4couvertes dans I’hdmisphAre 
Austral. Sur notre r^ponse affirmative, il fit aussito^mettre une embarcadon a la mer, 
etpeu d’instans apres nous le reqfimes k bord. Nous apprlmes que c'^k le capitaine 
Flinders, ctdui-lA m^me qui avoit ddja fait la circonnavigadon de la terre de Didmen; 
que son navire se nommoit the Investigator ; que, parti d’Europe depuis huit mois dans 
le deasein de completer la reconnoissance de la Nouvelie Hollande et des aichipels du 
grand Oedan Equatorial, il se trouvoit, depuis environs trols mois, k la terre de Nuyts ; 

« que, contrariE par les vents, il n'avoitpu pEnEtrer, comme il en avoit eu le projet, der- 



192 


A VOYAGE TO 


[South Cocut. 

1808. It is said by M. Peron, and upon my authority too, that the Inves- 
Friday 9 . tigatof had not been able to penettate behind the Isles of St. Peter 
and St. Francis; and though he doth. not say directly, that no part 
of the before unknown coast was discovered by me, .yet the whole 
tenor of his Chap. XV induces the reader to believe that I had done 
nothing which could interfere with the prior claim of the French. 

Yet M. Peron was present afterwards at Port Jackson, when I 
showed one of my charts of this coast to captain Baudin, and pointed 
out the limits of his discovery ; and so far from any prior title being 
set up at that time to Kanguroo Island and the parts westward, the 
officers of the G^ographe always spoke of thenk as belonging to the 
Investigator. The first lieutenant, Mons. Freycinet, even made use 
of the following odd expression, addressing himself to me in the 
house of governor King, and in the presence of one of his compa- 


rlire les lies St. Pierre ct St. Francois ; que, lors de son depart d'Angleterrc,” &c. 
p. 324v 325* 

En nous fournissant tous ces details, M. Flinders se montra d^une grande reserve 
sur scs operations particulieres. Nous* apprlnics toutefois par quelques-uns de ses 
matelots^ qu’il avoit eu beaucoup k soufirir de ces m^mes venis de la partie da Sud qui 
nous avoient si favorables^ et ce fut alors sur-tout que nous pumes appr^cier davan- 
tage toute la sagesse de nos propres instructions. Aprfes avoir converse plus d'une heure 
avcc nous/* (no person except Mr. Brown was present at my conversation with cap- 
tain Baudin, as I have already said), le capitaine Flinders repartit pour son bord, 
promettant de revenir le lendemain matin nous apporter une carte particuli^re de la 
riviere Dahymple^ qu’il venait de publier en Angleterre. II revint en cffet, le 9 avril, 
nous la remettre, et bient6t apr^s nous le quitt&mes pour reprendre la suite de nos tra- 
vaux g^ographiques." p. 325. 

L’lle principale de ce dernier groupc’^ (their Archipel Berthier) se dessine sous la 
forme d'un immense liama 5 on.^*«(niistle’s Island seems to be here meant.) Ind4- 
pendamment de toutes ces lies, il en existe encore plus de vingt autres diss^min^es 
aux environs de la pointe occidentale du golfe et en dehors de son entree : chacune 
d*elles fut d^gn6e par un de ces noms honorables dont notre patrie s’enorgueillit k 
juste tjtre.’’ p. 327* 

Voyage de Dicouverte fux Terres Australes^ r^ig^ par M. F. PeiDo, 
Naturaliste de Texp^ition^ Paris^ 1807* 



Encounter Bay TERRA AUSTRALIS. 193 

nions, I think Mens. Bonnefoy, “ Captain, if we had not been kept 
“ so long picking up shells and catching butterflies at Van Diemen's Friday ». 

“ Land, -you would not have discovered the South Coast before us.” 

The English officers and respectable inhabitants then at Port 
Jackson, can say if the prior discovery of these parts were not gene- 
rally acknowledged ; nay, I appeal to the French officers themselves, 
generally and individually, if such were not the case. How then 
came M, Peron to advance what was so contrary to truth ^ Was he 
a man destitute of all principle ? My answer is, that I believe his 
candour to have been equal to his acknowledged abilities ; and that 
what he wrote was from over-ruling authority, and smote him to 
the heart : he did not live to finish the second volume. 

The motive for this aggression I do not pretend to explain. It 
may have originated in the desire to rival the British nation id the 
honour of completing the discovery of the globe ; or be intended as 
the fore runner of a claim to the possession of the countries so said 
to have been first discovered by French navigators. Whatever may 
have been the object in view, the question, so far as I am concerned, 
must be left to the judgment of the world ; and if succeeding French 
writers can see and admit the claims of other navigators, as clearly 
and readily as a late most able man of that nation* has pointed out 
their own in some other instances, I shall not fear to leave it even 
to their decision. 


* M. De Fucuribu. 



194 


A VOYAGE TO 


Cocut. 


CHAPTER IX. 

Examination of the coast resumed. Encounter Bay. The cafes Ber- 
nouilli and Jaffa. Boudin's Rocks. Differences in the hearings on 
tacking. Cape Buffon, the eastern limit of the French discovery. ^The 
capes Northumberland and Bridgewater of captain Grant. Danger 
from a south-west gale. King’s Island, in Bass' Strait : anchorage 
there. Some account of the island. Nautical observations. New 
T eaf^s Isles. Cape Otway, and the north-west entrance to Bass’ Strait. 
Anchorage in, and examination of Port Phillip. The country and 
inhabitants. Nautical observations. 

1802 . I returned with Mr. Brown on board the Investigator ^t half past 
Frid^ 9. ^ morning, and we then separated from Le G^ographe ; 

' captain Baudin's course being directed to the north-west, and ours 
to the southward. W e had lost ground during the night, and the wind 
was very feeble at east, so that the French ship was in sight at noon. 


and our situation was as follows : 

Latitude observed, - - - * 35® 44,' 

Longitude by time keepers, - - 13853 

Cape Jervis bore - - - N. 8a jW. 

Hummock at the east end of the high land, N. 4^ E. 
Nearest sandy hillock, dist. 3 or 4 leagues, N. 65 E. 


At the place where wte tacked from the shore on the morning * 
of the 8th, the high land of Cape Jervis had retreated* from the 
water side, the coast was become low and sandy, and its trending 
was north-east; but after running four or five leagues in that 
direction, it curved round to the south-eastward, and thus formed a 
large bight or bay. The head of this bay was probably seen by 



TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


Encounter Eay.'\ 


1 ri ► 


captain Baudin in the afternoon; and in consequence of our meeting isoz. 
here, I distinguish it by the name of Encounter Bay. The sue- Friday ’9. 
ceeding part of the coast having been first discovered by the French 
navigator, I shall make use of the names in describing it which he, 
or his countrymen have thought proper to apply ; that is, so far as 
the volume published enables me to make them out; but this volume 
being unaccompanied with charts, and containing few latitudes and 
longitudes by which the capes and bays can be identified, I must be 
excused should any errors be committed in the nomenclature. 

There was no wind, from noon to two o'clock ; and it appeared 
by the lead that the ship was drifted to the west-north-west, pro- 
bably by a flood tide. On a breeze springing up from the south- 
ward, we stretched in for the shore ; and at six in the evening it was 
four miles distant, being sandy and generally very low ; but there 
were several hillocks upon it high enough to be seen four or five 
leagues from a ship’s deck, and one of them, more bluff than the 
rest, and nearly destitute of vegetation, bore N. 17° E. Next day at Saturday lO. 
noon our situation was within tlTree miles of the land, but very 
little advanced beyond that of the preceding day; our latitude being 
35 * 49 J^ bluff hummock in sight bearing N. 22° W. 

A tide or current setting along the shore appeared to retard 
us considerably, for at sunset we were not so much as two miles 
from the npon’s place ; the hummock then bore N, 25® W., and the 
furthest part of the coast sourh-east-by-east from the mast head. 

An amplitude taken in the morning, with the ship’s head west- 
by-south, gave 5“ 11' east variation ; and in the afternoon, when the 
land was only three miles distant and th*d head south-east, azimuths 
with the same compass gave 0° 50' west. These, corrected to the 
meridian in the mode I have adopted, will be severally 1® 57' and 
!• 30' east; and the mean i* 44'. The variation had therefore 
decreased considerably since leaving Kanguroo Island, contrary to the 
natural order ; which proves that the* quick increase on passing 
Yorke’s Peninsula, was owing to some peculiar attraction, either in 



196 


A VOYAGE TO 


]Qcn. 

April. 

Satui^y 10. 


Sunday 11. 

(Atlas* 
Plate V.) 


Monday 1^. 


[Sw^Coa^: 

tliat or -the neighbouring lands. Whilst beating through the Back- 
stairs Passage, I had observed art’ amplitude when the ship’s head 
war south-south-west, which gave the extraordinSty variation of 
8° 4,1' east, or reduced to the meridian, 1*27' east; although we 
were then not so much as four miles from the anchorage where it . 
had been found 4* 13' east. Another amplitude was observed at 
eight leagues to the east of Cape Willoughby, when the head was 
north-east-half-east, and gave 2* 5' east variation, or reduced, 4“ 36' 
This last is correspondent with what was observed near Kanguroo 
Head and in the Gulph of St. Vincent ; but the variation of 1* 27' 
in the passage is totally irregular, and must I think be ascribed 
to an attraction either in Cape Jervis to the north-east, or in the east 
end of Kanguroo Island to the south-east, or to both. When the 
great variation of 4* 36' was obtained, both these lands were to the 
west ; and when afterwards the 1“ 5/ and 1* 30' were observed, the 
nearest land was again to the eastward of the ship ; and nearest in 
the last case. 

The winds continued to be light and unfavourable; but by 
taking advantage of the changes in 'direction, and keeping further 
from the land, out of the tide or current, we had gained eight leagues 
by noon of the 11th. About twenty miles of coast beyond what had 
been set as the furthest extreme on the preceding day^^'was thm in 
sight ; and our situation and bearings were as follow : 

Latitude by corrected log, - - 36*11' , 

Longitude by time keepers, - - 139 

Northern extreme, from the mast head, N. 10 E. 

Nearest part, distant'7 or 8 miles, - N. 59 E. , 

A broad patcii of white sand, - N. 78 JE. 

Southern extreme, from the mast head, S. 661 E.“ 

At one o’clock we bore away along the coast, jwith a %ht 
breeze from the north-eastward; and having run five leagues,, 
tacked to seaward soon after dark. Next morning, we again 'fol- 
lowed the coast at the distance- of from five to three miles; and at 



TiHoardtC.NK-aiumberland.'] TERRA AUSTRALIS. 197 

noon a somewhat projecting part, which appears to be the Cap^ Ber- isoe, 
nomlli of the French navigators, was three or four miles distant to n. 

the east. Its latitude is 36“ 33' and longitude 139" 51'; and about 
six miles to the south-south-east, there are two low, black rocks 
Ij^ing close under the shore. 

From Encounter Bay to this slight projection, the coast i^i little 
else than a bank of sand, with a few hummocks on the top, partially 
covered with small vegetation ; nor could any thing in the interior 
country be distinguished above the bank. The shore runs waving 
between east-south-east and south-south-east ; but to form what is 
called Cape Bemouilli, it trends south, and then curves back south- 
eastward into a bight. The land then becomes better clothed with 
bushes and small trees ; and it also differs from the more northern 
part in that some little risings of back land were visible. 

Our soundings were more shallow along this part of the coast 
than before. The depth in passing Cape Bemouilli was from 8 to 
la fathoms ; ’and on tacking out of the southern bight, at half past 
five in the evening, it, was no more* than 6 , at three miles from the 
shore. We then saw land extending as far out as S. 39° W., which 
was the south head of the bight, and appears to be the Cape Jaffa of 
the French; but I do not find that they have given any name to the 
bight or bay, akhough much more deserving than some other sinu- 
osities in the coast on which that honour is conferred. 

This evening the variation from azimuths was 1* 35' east, 
taken when the ship’s head was S. S. E. ^ E. ; which being corrected 
upon the same principle as before, is 3” east, and showed the varia- 
tion to be now increasing, according to the regular order. 

During the night, we worked up successfully against a south- 
south-east wind, for at six in the morning the low, outer extreme of Tuesday is. 
Cape Jaffa bore N. 15° E., six or seven miles. The shore is sandy, 
but rises from the beach to a moderate elevation, and is then well 
clothed with small wood. About three leagues to the south of the 
cape is a cluster of low rocks, apparently the same of which captain 

' VOL. I. 3 ^ 



198 


A VOYAGE TO 


{}SSmi< 4 CoofC 


1808. Baudin had given me information ; they do not, however, lie exactly 
Tawd^ 13. situation expressed in his memorandum, and are not more 

than two miles from the land. We called them Boudin's Rocks; and 
since no name is applied to them in M. Peron’s account of their 
voyage, the appellation is continued. 

Four miles beyond the rocks, is a point of moderate elevation ; 
sandy, but mostly overspread vdth bushes. This is their Cape Lannes; 
and on its north side is a small bay, called the Baye de Rivoli, with a 
sandy shore, and open to west winds. The bearings of these places, 
and our situation at noon, half an hour after tacking from Baudin’s 
Rocks, were as under ; 


Latitude, observed to the north. 


37“ 

7'i 

Longitude by time keepers. 

139 

41 

Cape Jaflfa, extreme. 

N. 

2 

E. 

Baudin's Rocks, distant 3 miles. 

N. 

70 

E. 

Rivoli Bay, about the middle,* 

S. 

73 

E. 

Cape Lannes, distant 4 or 5 miles. 

S. 

4^ 

E. 

Furthest extreme of the coast, 

s. 

38 

E. 


Wedncs. 14. For the last two days there had been a little current in our 
favour, and notwithstanding that the winds had been mostly adverse, 
we made some progress along the coast; but on opening out the 
land beyond Cape Lannes, the current took a northern direction, and 
at noon of this day we were no further advanced than to have that 
cape bearing N. 86“ E. at the distance of nine or ten miles. The 
furthest part of the coast then visible was a peaked sandy hummock, 
bearing S. 68|^“ E. In the night, the wind came more off the land, 
and permitted us to make an advantageous tack to the southward ; 

Thun. 15. and at noon next day, whfen we had reached in again with the coast, 
our situation was in 

Latitude observed, - - 37“ 3 $^' 

Longitude by time keepers, - 139 50 

Cape Lannes, Weik extreme, bore - N. 13 W. 

The peaked sandy hummock, dist. 5 miles, N. 32 E; 
Furthest extreme, , ; ~ . S. 59 E. 



^btoar*CmrlftttOT6«r&mrf.] TERRA AUSTRALIS. 199 

t 

In the evening we got sight of a projecting, and somewhat elevated isoz. 
part, which lies ten leagues to the south-eastward of Cape Lannes, Th^^is, 
and appears to be the Cape Buffon of the French navigators. The 
intermediate coast is similar to that between Encounter Bay and 
Cape Bemouilli ; with the sole difference that the hummocks upon 
the sandy bank are somewhat higher: nothing inland appeared above 
them. 

The wind was again favourable in the night for making a long 
stretch to the southward; and it was prolonged to the next day at Friday is. 
noon, when our distance from the coast was judged to be ten leagues ; 
but no part of it was in sight, and we had then got out of soimdings, 
there being no bottom at aoo fathoms. The latitude was 37“ 57' 
south, and longitude from six sets of distances of stars east and west 
of the moon, 139® 39', but by the time keepers corrected, 139* 45' 
east. Not more than seven or eight leagues from this situation, 
there should lie an island according to the account given by captain 
Turnbull of the Britannia south whaler, who saw it in his passage 
out to Port Jackson. .Having thick ’weather at the time, he was not 
able to ascertain its latitude or longitude, otherwise than by the log; 
and as it was not in sight from our mast head, its position must be 
considered as very uncertain. 

The variations observed this day, with the same compass 
always on tljie binnacle, were as under ; 

By morning’s amplitude, ship’s head S. E. by S. - a® 39' east, 
morning’s azimuth, - S. S. E. - a a 

evening’s azimuth, - N. E. - a a 
The mean, reduced to the meridian, will Se 4*5' east. Nine leagues 
to the north, and half the distance nearer to the land, an amplitude 
had been taken with the ship’s head in the meridian, which gave 
4® 8' east. / 

On the three preceding days marfj^acks had been made 
from the shore, and I had frequently taken bearings just before the 
helm was put down ; and so soon as the ship was round and th^ 



too twvijoirtd {AMiesiML 

Ap^' itttldy, they vm& again tdten, DiflRa?ences dways'tnok 

iirUbiy la. placet Ahd withcAit any exoCpdiin Ihe iMbarings reqmred a greater 
alioiehitoe of variation to the x^glttaflet' tacking, when the head was 
vmtward^ than before, when etotward ; agreeing wifo the differences 
80 frequently found kt idle azimuths and amplitudes, whidi had always 
beoi to show a greater east or less West variation when the head was 
on the west side of the meridian. The least average difference in any 
one of five sets of bearings wa»4|?, the greatest 7 *, and the mean 
Mid according to the system adopted in correcting the variations, ex- 
plained in the Appendix No.^II. to (he second volume, the mean dif- 
ference arising from the five changes in the direction of the ship’s 
head, should be 5* * 

The eastern wind died away at hOon of the lUJth, and the ship 
scarcely had steerage way until after midnight; a breeze then sprung 
up from the north-westward, and we steered north-east to make the 
SaturdBjir. land near Cape Buffon. At half past seven the cape bore N. 1" W. 
seven miles, and was asoertairied to be m nearly 37* gfi' south, and 
140* 10' east. There is a bight'in the coast op its north side, where 
the land was not distinctly seen all round, owing probably to its 
being a low beach. At nine o’clock we bore away southward, keep- 
ing at the distance of two or three miles from (lie shore. It was the 
same kind of hummock-topped bank as before described; but a ridge 
of moderately high hills, termUtated to th« southward by a bluff, was 
visible over it, three or four leagues inland ; and there was a reef of 
rocks lying in front of the shore. At noon, two larger rocks were 
seen at the southern end of the reef, and are those called by the 
French,^the Carpenters. Tliey lie one or two fofies from a sandy 
projection named by them Bothers ; but Here a prior title to 
discovery interferes. 

On arriving atl^rt Jackson, I learned, and a»did captain Bau- 
din, that tWs coast Imd before visitod. Lieutenant (nowcaptain ) 
James Grant, commander of brig Lady NelswijSaw the 

^\e projection, which he naiil#^ Bahh, on Dec. 3, i8oo ; and 





^ TERRA AUSTRALIS. C 201 

i-JoUoWjQ^.fbe <x>a8t from theiM:e»,v^ough The same isoa. 

j)rindple upon which I had adopted the names apidted by theFmich;s»to5S*ir. 
navigators to the. parts discovered by them^ wilLnow guide me in 
ma)k^ use of the appeUatioos bestnwed'by captdn^Gtfant; 

, , . ,’I3ie termmatioii to the west, of that part of the South Coast 

discovered by taiptain Baudin in Le Gdographe, has hem pointed out ; 
and it seems proper to Specify its commenOement to the east, that the 
extent of his Terre Napoleon may Ibe jMoperly. defined. The begin- 
nmg of the land which,, of aU Europeans was first seen by him, so 
«far as is known, cannot l^piaced further to the 5outh<ieast than Cape 
Bfcufibn ; for die land is laid down to the northward cMf it m captain 
Grant’s chart, though indistinctly. The Terre Napoldon is therefore 
comprised between the latitudes 37** 36' and 35* 40' south, and the 
longitudes 4^*: to* sajd 3*58* 5^^ of Greenwich; making with 
the windings, 4iiboUt:Rfty leagues, of coast, in which, as captain 
Baudin truly observed,.' thepre , is t nether river, inlet, nor place of 
shelter ; nbr does even the worst parts of thiuyts' Land exceed it in 
sterility. • 

At noon of 47th we were in 

Latitude observed, - - » - 37*47 t 

Longitude by tune keepers, - - - 140 16- 

Cape Bu&n bore - - - - - N. ati W. 

Reef of rocks, (nearest part dist..e 4 - raises) N.^i'toS. 42 E. 

Hills belund the coast, - - - N. 38 to N. 79 E. 

Sandy hummock on fTestj;- Cape Banks S. 44 £. 

* See A Ve^age in the Ladg Nebon to New S<i^h fValee, byJamea Grant. London, 

1B03. This T^jrage em published four years previously tp M. Peron's book ; Imt no 
more attenti&n was p^ at Paris to captain Grant's rights than to mine ; his discoveries, 
though known to M. Peton and the French expedition in 1802, being equally claimed 
Sad auned by them. 

t llie adidiUoBof Westwmade l9liieaame, to dl^n^Ish it from Cape Banks on the 
by captaia Copk* ‘ It is to be regretted, that navigators oftea apply 
names in so careless a manner as. to introduce ponfusion intq geography. 



208 


A VOYAOE TO 


[SM Cow). 


ia», jn iJie iftemoon the wind veered to the southward, and we 

April. • 

SattuSyir. tacked frorti the shore, not being able to weather the Carpenters at 
the south end of the reef. A long swell rolled in at this time, and 
seemed to announce a gale* from the southward, yet the wind died 

Sunday 18. away in the night ; and at daybreak a light breeze sprung up atnorth- 
west, and enabled us to close in with the land. We passed the Car- 
penters at the distance of four miles ; but at two in the afternoon 
the wind again died away. A cliffy point which proved to be 
the Cape ’Northumberland of captain Grant, was then in sight, as 
also were two inland mountains lying to the north-east; the nearest is 
his Mount Schanck, of a flat, table-like form, the further one. Mount 
Gambier, is peaked. The following bearings were taken whilst ly- 
ing becalmed. 

West C. Banks, sandy hummock, dist. s leagues, N. a* W. 

Mount Schanck, - - - - N. 70 E. 

Cape Northumberland, dist. 3 or 4, leagues, - S. 82 E. 

The long swell from the southward still prevailed, and the 
barometer was fast falling ; but at seven in the evening a breeze 
sprung up once more from the north-west ; and after stretching a 
little off from the shore, we laid to for the greater part of the night. 

Monday 19. At daylight the wind was at north-north-west, and blew fresh, with 
squally weather. We reached in for the land ; and at eight, 

C. Northumberland, dist. 6 or 7 miles, bore N. 32“ W. 

Mount Schanck, - - - N. 1 W. 

Furthest extreme, obscured by haze, - S. 66 E. 

Close to Cape Northumberland are two pointed rocks, resem- 
bling the back fins of sharl^s; and on its eastern side were heavy 
breakers, extending more than a mile from the shore. The situation 
of the cape, as near as it could be ascertained, is in 38* 2' south, and 
140’ 37 t east. 

Beyond Cape Northumberland the coast was found to trend 
east-by-north, but curved ‘afterwards to east-by-south ; it was 
M^er than we had lately seen, ^d not so barren ; nevertheless, the 



Of a Bridgewater.'] TERRA. AUSTRALIS. aOl 

shrubs and small trees did not more than half cover the sandy surface. 

We pursued the round of the coast at the distance of four or five Monc^io. 
miles, having three reefs in the top sails on account of the squally 
weather. At ten o’clock, in a clear interval, land was seen bearing 
S. 51° E. ; and a thick squall with rain coming on, in which the 
wind shifted suddenly from nprth-north-west to south-west, we were 
forced to haul close up, and let out the third reefs in order to wea- 
ther the coast. A constant succession of rainy squalls prevented us 
from knowing how the land lay for some time, nor could an obser- 
vation for the latitude be obtained ; but at half past noon our anxiety 
was relieved by distinguishing the furthest extreme, a bold, cliffy 
cape, bearing S. 72^* E., broad on the lee bow. 

This high projection was the Cape Bridgewater of captain 
Grant. A hill upon it slopes to the edge of the cliffs by which the 
cape is begirt toward the sea ; and on the land side it descends so 
low, that the connection of the hill with the main could not be clearly 
discerned. • To the northward, and nearly in a line with the first, 
are two other hills almost equal to it in elevation. As we passed Cape 
Bridgewater, a second cliffy head opened at S. 75^° E. and a further 
round the last, at N. 83" E. These are the Capes Nelson and Sir IF. 

Grant, though differing considerably in relative position from what 
they are laid down in captain Grant’s chart. 

At two o’clock, the weather having become somewhat finer, 

I ventured to bear away along the coast ; and presently a small 
island with two hummocks on it, and a rock nearer to the shore were 
visible : these are Lawrence’s Isles. The bearings of the land at four were, 

C. Bridgewater, top of the hill, diot. 4 leagues, N. 44* W. 

Cape Nelson, the south-west extreme, - N. ai W. ^ 

Cape Sir W. Grant, east part of the cliffs, - N. 12 E. 

Lawrence’s double Isle, dist. 3 leagues, - - N. 35 E. 

Before six we hauled the wind off shore ; having set the double isle at 
N. 43" W., six or seven miles, and seen the land indistinctly as far as 
east-north-ea^t. 



104 


A VOYAGE TO 


OmML 


Duriiig the night there were squalls of wind with hail and 
Tuesday 80. rain, but tolerably moderate weather in the intervals. At daylight, 
we bore away for the land ; and at half past seven, the 

' Hill on Cape Bridgewater bore - ' N. 66" W. 

Lawrence's double isle, - - N. 53 W. 

A cliffy, flat-topped isle, west extreme, N. 16 E. 

This last is Lady Julia Percy's Isle; and when it bore N. 64," E, five 
miles, we steered eastward along the coast. At some distance 
inland, to the northward of Lady Percy’s Isle, a round hill was dis- 
tinguished ; but the shore was scarcely perceptible through the squalls 
and haze : what little of it could be seen, appeared to be sandy and 
of moderate elevation. 

At eleven, the land was perceived to the eastward, and we hauled 
up east-south-east. Our latitude at noon, from an indifferent double 
altitude, was 38* 33^^' and it is upon this uncertain observation, that 
the correctness of the neighbouring lands in the chart principally 
depend ; I do not, therefore, specify here either the latitudes or lon- 
gitudes. The coast was seen to leeward at times, and appeared to 
be moderately high ; we ran along it at the distance of five, and 
from that to eight miles, clewing down the treble-reefed top sails 
occasionally, and setting them after the squalls were passed. At 
two o’clock, the land appeared to be trending south-east, which 
obliged us to haul up to the wind and take in close reefs ; and the 
gale increasing, the fore and mizen top sails were handed. 

It was seldom that the weather would allow of any thing 
being distinguished beyond two miles; and when the night came on, 
we were quite uncertain of the trending of the coast. At eight 
o’clock, by favour of moon light and a short cessation of rain, land 
was perceived on the lee beam ; it seemed to be a head of consider- 
able elevation, and was judged to be from three to six miles off*. 
The fore and mizen top saHs and reefed main sail were immediately 
set, notwithstanding the danger«to the masts ; and there being much 
sea running, the ship was kept qne point from the wind, to make her 



TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


iSoM* SiJra*?.] 


*or> 


go through the water. We had no chance of clearing the land on i8(w. 
the other tack ; and therefore our sole hope was, that the coast 
might not trend any further to the southward. 

At two in the morning, the strength' of the gale obliged us to Wednes. 8i. 
take in the fore and mizen top sails and main sail; and we had 
soundings in 45 fathoms, small stones. Our anxiety was great until 
daylight, when it was dissipated by not finding any land near us ; 
and in the course of the morning the wind moderated, the barometer 
began to ascend, and the weather became even fine. Our latitude at 
noon was 39® lOj' and longitude 144* sa' ; the last being aa' more than pM^vi.) 
given by the log. ■ High land was then visible astern, extending 
from about N. 50* to 17* W., at the supposed distance of twelve or 
fifteen leagues. 

We were now entered into Bass’ Strait ; and the subsiding of 
the sea made me suspect that the large island, concerning which I 
had made inquiry of captain Baudin, was to windward. The south 
part of this hsland was discovered by Mr. Reid, in a sealing expedi- 
tion from Port Jackson ; and before quitting New South Wales in 
1799, I had received an account of its lying to the north-west of 
Hunter’s Isles. It afterwards appeared, that 4 he northern part was 
seen in January 1801, by Mr. John Black, commander of the brig 
Harbinger, who gave to it the name of King’s Island.* Of this I 
was ignorant at the time ; but since it was so very dangerous to 
explore the main coast with the present south-west wind, I was 
desirous of ascertaining the f>osition of this island before going to 
Port Jackson, more especially as it had escaped the observation of 
captain Baudin. 

Our soundings in the afternoon, and until four in the morning Thun. « 2 . 
when we tacked to the westward, were from 35 to 28 fathoms, sand 
and shells. At eight o’clock, land was seen to the south-west; and 
at noon our 

• Grant's Fbyage to New Wales, page 8«. 

VOL. I. ► 3 ^ . 



206 


A VOYAGE TO 


[South Cooft. 


laps, 
^ril. 
Thun. Sf . 


Friday 23. 


Latitude observed was - - 39*3':?' 

Longitude by time keepers, - - 144 16 

King’s Island, south extreme, bore - S. 18 W. 

■■ ■■■ a middle hummock, - S, 37 W. 

■ '■ northern extreme, - S. 74, W. 

High main land from the mast head, - N. 23 W. 


We tacked to the south-south-east at three o’clock, working 
up for King's Island, which was distant about five or six leagues, 
directly to windward. In the night we lay up south, parallel with 
the east side of the island ; but the soundings having diminished to 
16 fathoms, I feared we might be approaching a reef of rocks lying 
off the south-east end, of which Mr. Reid had spoken. We there- 
fore tacked to the northward at eleven o'clock; and after beating 
until three in the following afternoon, got to an anchor in 9 fathoms, 
fine sand, under the north-east end of King’s Island ; the nearest 
part of the shore being distant a short half mile, and the extremes- 
bearing S. 37® E. and N. 69° W. 

A boat was immediately hoisted out, and I landed with the 
botanical gentlemen. On stepping out of tl^h^ioat, I shot one of 
those little bear-like quadrupeds, called Womat; and another was 
afterwards killed. A seal, of a species different to any yet seen by 
ns, was also procured ; its phippers behind were double, when com- 
pared to the common kinds of seal, and those forward were smaller, 
and placed nearer to the head ; the hair was much shorter, and of a 
blueish, grey colour ; the nose flat and broad ; and the fat upon the 
animal was at least treble the usual quantity. I never saw the sea 
elephant, and possibly this might have been a young female ; but 
there was no appearance "of any trunk. A top-mast studding-sail 
boom, not much injured, was lying near the landing plate; and as I 
afterwards learned that the wreck of a vessel had been found upon 
the west side of the island, this boom had probably drifted from 
thence. 



TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


207 


Ba»i J 

The north-east part of King^s Island extends south-east-by- I802. 
east, three or four leagues. The shore is mostly of sand, and 
behind the beach it was washed or blown up in great ridges, but 
partly overspread with a kind of dog grass which kept the sand 
together. In general, the land is low ; but some little eminences 
appeared at a distance, and at the north end of the island there is a 
short range of hills, moderately high and covered with wood. Granite 
seemed to be the basis of the shore where we landed. Behind the 
front ridges of sand was a brush wood, so thick as to be almost 
impenetrable; but whilst I was occupied in taking bearings, the 
botanists found some openings in the brush, and picked up so many 
plants as to make them desirous of a further examination. We 
returned on board at dusk, with our womats, the seal, and a kan- 
guroo ; the last being of a middle size between the small species of 
the lesser islands, -and the large kind found at Kanguroo Island and 
on the continent. It appeared indeed, all along the South Coast, that 
the size of the kanguroo bore some proportion to the extent of land 
which it inhabited. 

In the momii[j^the wind blew fresh from the southward. A Saturday 24. 
boat was sent on shoreVith Mr. Brown and his party ; and at eleven 
o'clock, when they returned, we got under way. 

A small lake of fresh water was found at a little distance 
behind the sandy ridges in front of the shore. This was surrounded 
by a good vegetable soil ; and the number of plants collected near it 
was greater than had before been found upon any one island. The 
small lake is too far from the sea side for a ship to obtain water from 
it conveniently ; but two little streams which drained from the sand 
hills, made it probable that fresh water'might have been obtained 
any where’ at this tinre by digging. The water of these rills was 
tinged red, similar to that obtained at King George's Sound, and to 
the pools I had before seen at Fumeaux's Islands ; and as the stone 
in tl}ese places is granite, and water so discoloured was not found 



a» A VOYAGE TO [AwA Coate. 

180B. any where else, it seems very probable that the discolouring arises 
6atu^24. from the granite and granitic sand. 

Two more womats were killed this morning; and a skull was 
I»cked up, which was thought to be of a small dog ; but more pro- 
bably was that of an opossum. 

From the observations taken whilst beating up to the anchor- 
age, the top of the highest hill at the north end of King’s Island will 
be in latitude 39* $ 6 ^' south, and longitude 143* 54' east. The varia- 
tion of the compass, taken on the binnacle with the ship’s head at 
south, was 7* 59' east; but ten leagues to the eastward it was 1 1° 5s', 
with the head west-south- west, or reduced to the meridian, 8° 43' 
east. The tides set one mile and a halFah hour past the ship, north- 
west-by-west and south-east-by.'^ast, nearly as the coast lies; that 
fronrthe eastward running nearly eight hours, and turning about two 
hours after the moon had passed the meridian ; but which tide was th^ 
flood, or what the rise, we did not remain long enough to determine. 

The time was fast approaching when it would be necessary to 
proceed to Port Jackson ; both on account of the ^winter season, and 
from the want of some kinds of provisions. this took place, 

I wished to finish as much of the South Coas^as possiliie, and would 
have recommenced at Cape Bridgewater had the wind been favour- 
able ; but it still blew fresh from the southward, and all that part 
remained a lee shore. I determined, however, to run over to the 
high land we had seen on the north side of Bass' Strait; ahd to trace 
as much of the coast from thence eastward, as the state of the 
weather and our remaining provisions could possibly allow. 

In steering north-north-west from King’s Island, two small isles 
were seen lying off the north-west side; the first opening from the 
northern extreme at S. 50®, and the second being clear of it at S.36' W. 
These are the same which Mr. Black named New Year's Isles ; 
and his Harbinger's Reefs were seen to extend, in patches, nearly 
two leagues from the north end of King’s Island ; but there is, as I 



Bass’ SKlrai^] 


TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


209 


afterwards learned, one or more passages between the reefs, amd 
another between them and the island.* ’ Saturday 84. 

At three in the afternoon the northern land was in sight, and 
the highest hills of King's Island were sinking below the horizon, as 
seen from the deck. Their distance was twenty-five miles; and 
consequently the elevation of them is between four and five hundred 
feet above the level of the sea. At five o’clock, a bluff head, the 
most projecting part of the northern land, was distant three or four 
leagues ; it was Captain Grant’s 

Cape Otway, and bore - N. 54° W, 

The extremes of the land, - N. 58* W. to 23“ E. 

We then hauled to the wind, and stood off and on ; at day- 
light bore away for the land with a moderate breeze from the south- Sunday *6. 
ward; and at eight o’clock, when Cape Otway bore N. 69®W. ten 
miles, we steered north-eastward along the shore. On the west side 
of Cape Otway the coast falls back somewhat to the north, and pro- 
jects again at the distance of ten or eleven miles ; where it is not, as 
I think, more than three leagues to the east of the headland seen 
under the lee at in the evening of the 20th. From Cape 

Otway, eastward, the shore trends east-north-east about three leagues, 
to a projection called Cape Patton, and according to Captain Grant, 
a bay is formed between them ; but at three leagues off, nothing 
worthy of being called a bay could be perceived. Beyond Cape 
Patton the’ coast took a more northern direction, to a point with a 
flat-topped hill upon it, and further than this it was not visible. 

^ The whole of this land is high, the elevation of the uppermost 
parts being not less than two thousand feet. The rising hills were j 

covered with wood of a deep green foliage, and without any vacant 

• 

• The New Year's Isles fijrm a small roadsted, in which the brig Harrington from Port 
Jackson, commanded by Mr. W. Campbell, had rode out the south-west gale; and was 
lying there at this tiftie, engaged in a sealing speruUtiin. Bass’ Strait had not been 
discovered much above two years, and it was already tutned to purposes of various utility; 
a strong proof of enterprising spirit in the colonists of New South Wales. 



A VOYAGE TO 


[iSoulfc Caent. 


m , 


180S. 
AprU. 
Sunday 25. 


Monday 26. 


spaces of rock or sand ; so that I judged this part of the coast to 
exceed in fertility all that had yet fallen under observation. - 
» Cape Otway lies very nearly in latitude 38® 51' south, and 
longitude 143° ag' east. ‘The width of the north-west entrance to 
Bass’ Strait, between this cape on the noi th and King's Island to the 
south, is therefore sixteen leagues ; and with the trifling exception 
of the Harbinger’s Reefs, which occupy not quite two leagues of the 
southern part, the passage is free from danger. In such parts of it 
as we got soundings, the depth was between 38 and 50 fathoms. 

At noon, the wind had veered to the south-east, which being 
directly ‘upon the shore, I did not think it prudent to follow the 
land too closely ; and we therefore kept up nearly to the wind. In 
the course of the afternoon, land came in sight to the eastward ; and 
the bearings taken at sunset were these : 

Furthest extreme towards C. Otway, S. 73* W. 

Furthest connected part to the northward, N. 18 W. 

Two small distant peaks, - - N. 4 W. 

Bluff head, like the N. eqd of an island^ N. 63 E. 

Extreme of the eastern land, - ' N. 83 E. 

Between the first and last of these bearings there was a deep bight 
formed^ at the head of which no other land than the two small peaks 
could be. perceived. 

In the morning we kept close to an east-south-east wind, 
steering for the land to the north-eastward; and at nine o'clock 
captain Grant’s Cape Schanck, the extreme of the preceding even- 
ing, was five leagues distant to the N. 88" E., and a rocky point 
towards the head of the bight, bore N. la® E. On m ini ng within 
five miles of the shore at eleven o’clock, we found it to be low, and 
mostly sandy ; and that the bluff head which had been taken for 
the north-end of an island, was part of a ridge of hills rising at 
Cape Schanck. We then bore away westward, in order to trace the 
land round the head of the deep bight; and at noon, the situatkm of 
the ship and principal bearings'^ were as under : 



Bam’ 


TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


211 


Latitude observed, - - g8“ as' 1802. 

Longitude by time keepers, - 144 3 ly 

CapeSchanck, - - - S. 68* E. 

The rocky point, distant 6 or 7 miles, N. 48 E. 

Highest of two inland peaks, - N. 15 W. 

A square-topped hill near the shore, N. a8 W. 

Extr, of the high land towards C. Otway, S. 56 W. 

On the west side of the rocky point there was a small open- 
ing, with breaking water across it ; however, on advancing a little 
more westward the opening assumed a more interesting aspect, and 
I bore away to have a nearer view. A large extent of water pre- 
sently became visible within side ; and although the entrance seemed 
to be very narrow, and there were in it strong ripplings like 
breakers, I was induced to steer in at half past one ; the ship being 
close upon a wind and every man ready for tacking at a moment's 
warning. The soundings were irregular between 6* and 12 fathoms, 
until we got -four miles within the entrance, when they shoaled quick 
to af. We then tacked ; and having a strong tide in our favour, 
worked to the eastward between the shoal and the rocky point, 
with 1 2 fathoms for the deepest water. In making the last stretch 
from the shoal, the depth diminished from 10 fathoms quickly to 
3 ; and before the ship could come round, the flood tide set her 
upon a mud bank, and she stuck fast. A boat was lowered down 
to sound ; knd finding the deep water lie to the north-west, a kedge 
anchor was carried out; and having got the ship’s head in that 
direction, the sails were filled and she drew off into 6 and 10 

fathoms ; and it being then dark, we came to an anchor. 

* 

The extensive harbour we had thus unexpectedly found I 
supposed niust be Western Port, although the narrowness of the 
entrance did by no means correspond with the width given to it byi 
Mr. Base. It was the information of captain Baudin, who had ■ 
coasted along from thence with fine weather, and had found no 
inlet of any kind, whidi induced this supposition ; and the very 



$12 


A VOYAGE TO 


Cotuk 


1808. great extent of the place, agreeing with that of Western Port, was 
in confirmation of it. This, however, was not Western Port, as we 
Tuesday Z7. found next moming ; and 1 congratulated myself on having made 
a new and useful discovery ; but here again I was in error. This 
place, as I afterwards learned at Port Jackson, had been discovered 
ten weeks before by lieutenant John Murray, who had succeeded 
captain Grant in the command of the Lady Nelson. He had given 
it the name of Port Phillip, and to the rocky point on the east side 


of the entrance, that of Point Nepean. 

Our situation was found in the moming to be near two miles 
from the south shore, and the extreme towards Point Nepean bore 
N. 83* W,, two leagues. About three miles to the north-by-west 
were some dry rocks, with bushes on them, surrounded with mud 
flats; and they appeared to form a part of the same shoal from 
which we had three times tacked in and 3 fathoms. The mud 
bank where the ship had grounded, is distinct from the middle 
shoal ; but I am not certain that it is so from the south ‘shore, from 


which it is one mile distant. The. Bluff Mount (named Arthurs Seat 
by Mr. Murray, from a supposed resemblance' to the hill of that 
name near Edinburgh,) bore S. 76* E.; but from thence the shore 
trended nothward so far, that the land at the head of the port could 
not be seen, even frpm aloft. Before proceeding any higher with 
the ship, I wished to gain some knowledge of the form and extent 
of this great piece of water ; and Arthur’s Seat being more than a 
thousand feet high and near the water side, presented a favourable 
station for that purpose. 


After breakfast I went away in a boat, accompained by Mr. 
Brown and some other gentlemen, for the Seat. It was seven or 
eight miles from the ship ; and in steering nearly a straight course 
for it, we passed over, the northern skirt of the shoal where the ship 
had touched ; but afterwards had from 7 to 3 fathoms nearly to the 
shore. Having observed the latitude there from an artificial horizon, 
1 ascended the hill ; and to my surprise found the port so extensive, 



TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


Pori Pk{IUp.'\ 


213 


that even at this elevation its boundary to the northward could not isos, 
be distinguished. The western shore extended from the entrance xu<»day sr. 
ten or eleven miles in a northern direction, to the extremity of what, 
from its appearance, I called Indented Head; beyond it was a wide 
branch of the port leading to the westward, and I suspected might 
have a.' communication with the sea ; for it was almost incredible, 
that such a vast piece of water should not have a larger outlet than 
that through which we had come. 

I took an extensive set of bearings from the clearest place to 
be found on the north-western, bluff part of the hill ; and we after- 
wards walked a little way back upon the ridge. From thence 
another considerable piece of water was seen, at the distance of three 
or four leagues ; it seemed to be mostly shallow ; but as it appeared 
to have a communication with the sea to the south, I had no doubt 
of its being Mr. Bass' Western Port. 

Arthur’s Seat and the hills and vallies in its neighbourhood, 
were generally well covered with wood ; and the soil was superior 
to any u^n the borders of the salt water, which I have had an 
opportunity of examining in Terra Australis. There were many 
marks of natives, such as deserted fire places and heaps of oyster 
shells; and upon the peninsula which forms the south side of the 
port, a smoke was rising, but we did not see any of the people. 
Quantities of fine oysters were lying upon the beaches, between high 
and low water marks, and appeared to have been washed up by the 
surf ; a circumstance which I do not recollect to have observed in any 
other part of this country. 

We returned on board at dusk in the; evening; and at daylight wednes. 28. 
the anchor was weighed with the intention of coasting round the 
port with the ship. The wind was at north-east, but the flood tide 
was in our favour ; and having made a stretch toward the middle 
shoals, we tacked and ran east- south-east- along their south side, 
until R^st eight; when the flood having deased, we came to in 7 
fathoms. At slack, water in the afteinoon we again steered east- 
. V 01 -. I. 3 K 



214 


A VOYAGE TO 


[SovA Coast. 


i8o». ward, but were soon obliged to anchor from want of wind ; and I 
found that this slow mode of proceeding was not at all suited to the 
little time for which we had provisions remaining, besides that there 
was much probability of getting frequently aground; the plan of 
examining the port with the ship was therefore abandoned. 

Having left orders with Mr. Fowler, the first lieutenant, to 

Thun. S9. take the ship back to the entrance, I went in a boat early next morn- 
ing with provisions for three days ; in order to explore as much of 
the port as could be done in that time. Round the east end of the 
middle shoals I carried 6 and 7 fathoms ; and keeping north-east- 
ward, had 8 and 9 fathoms at a mile or more from the shore, and 
4 close past the second rocky point above Arthur’s Seat. The wind 
being at north-west, I was obliged to land behind some rocks more 
than two miles short of the third point, but walked to it with my 
surveying instruments. This was nine miles from the Seat, and the 
furthest part of the shore seen from thence ; further on, the shore 
falls back more eastward, in long sandy beaches, and afterwards 
curves to the north-west; but it was lost to sight long before joining 
the land on the west side of the port. After taking angles and 
observing for the latitude and longitude, I rowed to windward for 
Indented Head, five leagues off. At the end of the first mile and a 
half the depth was 1 1 fathoms, but afterwards no bottom at la, until 
within two miles of the western shore, where it was 9 fathoms. 
We landed at nine o’clock at night, near the uppermost part which 
had yet been seen. 

iwdaj so. In the morning, a fire was perceived two-hundred yards from 
the tent; and the Indians ‘appeared to have decamped from thence 
on our landing. Whilst I was taking angles from a low point at the 
north-easternmost part of Indented Head, a party the inhabitants 
showed themselves about a mile from us ; and on landing there we 
found a hut with a fife in it, but the people had disappeared, and 
carried off their effects. 1 left some strips erf cloth, of their favourite 
red colour, hanging about the hut; -and pvooBededmestward along 



TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


2l6 


Port PhiUip.'\ 


the shore, to examine the arm of the port running in that dirfeo- 
tion. 

Three natives having made their appearance abreast of the 
boat, we again landed. They came to us without hesitation, received 
a shag and some trifling presents with pleasure, and parted with 
such of their arms as we wished to possess, without reluctance. 
They afterwards followed us along the shore; and when I shot 
another bird, which hovered over the boat, and held it up to them, 
they ran down to the water side and received it without expressing 
either surprise or distrust. Their knowledge of the effect of fire 
arms I then attributed to their having seen me shoot birds when un- 
conscious of being observed ; but it had probably been learned from 
Mr. Murray. 

At noon, I landed to take an observation of the sun, which 
gave 38“ 7' 6" for the latitude ; my position being nearly at the 
northern extremity of Indented Head. Some bearings were taken 
from the br6w of a hill a little way back ; and after a dinner of 
which the natives partook, we left them on friendly terms, to 
proceed westward in our examination The water became very 
shallow abreast of a sandy point, whence the shore trends nearly 
south-west; and there being no appearance of an opening to 
the sea this way, I steered across the western arm, as well to 
ascertain its depth as with the intention of ascending the hills lying 
behind the northern shore. Two of the peaks upon these hills 
had been set from the ship’s deck at sunset of the S5th, at the dis- 
tance of thirty-seven miles ; and as their elevation must consequently 
be a thousand feet, or more, I expected to obtain from thence such a 
view of the upper parts of the port, as would render the coasting 
roimd it unnecessary. 

The width of the western arm was found to be six miles; and 
the soundings across augmented regularly to 6 fathoms in mid-chan- 
nel, and then decreased in the same wa/; but there was less than 
3 fathoms at two miles from the northern shore. That side is 


1808 . 
April. 
Friday 30 * 



A VOYAGE TO 


[SemA CcomL 


laps. 

April 

l^ldday 30. 


May. 

Saturday 1, 


indeed very low and marshy, with mud banks lying along it ; and 
we had difficulty in finding a dry place to pitch the tent, and still 
more to procure wood wherewith to cook the ducks I had shot upon 
the banks. 

At day dawn I set off with three of the boat’s crew, for the 
highest part of the back hills called Station Peak. Our way was 
over a low plain, where the water appeared frequently to lodge ; it 
was covered with small-bladed grass, but almost destitute of wood, 
and the soil was clayey and shallow. One or two miles before 
arriving at the feet of the hills, we entered a wood where an emu 
and a kanguroo were seen at a distance ; and the top of the peak 
was reached at ten o’clock. My position was then ai' of latitude 
from Point Nepean, in the direction of N. a8® 30' W., and 1 saw the 
water of the port as far as N. 75® E., at the distance of seven or eight 
leagues; so that the whole extent of the port, north and south, 
is at least thirty miles. The extremity of the western arm bore 
S. 15*45' W., which makes the extent, east pnd west, ta be thirty-six 
miles ; but there was no commnnication with the sea on that side, nor 
did the western arm appear to be navigable beyond seven miles 
above where I had crossed it.^ Towards the interior there was a 
mountain bearing N. 11* E., eleven leagues distant; and so far the 
country was low, grassy, and very slightly covered with wood, pre- 
senting great facility to a traveller desirous of penetrating inland^ . 

I left the ship’s name on a scroll of paper, deposited in a small 
pile of stones upon the top of the peak ; and at three in the after- 
noon reached fhe tent; much fatigued, having walked more than 
twenty miles without finding a drop of water. Mr. Lacy, the mid- 
shipman of the boat, had observed the latitude at the tent from an 
artificial horizon to be 38° 2' 22"; and Station Peak bore from thence 
N.47*W. 

In the evening we rowed back to Indented Head, and landed 
there soon after dark. Fires had been seen moving along the shore, 
but the people seemed to have fled ; though we found two newly 



PwtPhmp.'\ TERRA AUSTRALIS. 21T 

erected huts with fires in them, and utensils which must have isw. 
belonged to some of the people before seen, since there was boiled i 
pee in one of the baskets. We took up our quarters here for the 
night, keeping a good watch ; but nothing was seen of the Indians 
till we pushed off from the shore in the morning, when seven Sundays, 
showed themselves upon a hill behind the huts. They ran down to 
examine their habitations, and finding every thing as they had left 
it, a little water excepted of which we were in want, they seemed 
satisfied and for a short time three of them followed the boat. 

Along the north-east and east sides of Indented Head, I found 
the water to be shoal for nearly a mile off ; but on approaching the 
entrance of what Mr. Murray called Swan Harbour, but which I 
have taken the liberty of converting into Swan Pond, it became 
somewhat deeper. Seeing swans there, I rowed into it after* them, 
but found the place full of mud banks, and seldom more than three or 
four feet in depth. Three of the birds were caught; and at the south 
side of the’ entrance, >* upon the sandy peninsula, or island as it is 
when the tide is in, I shot some delicate teal, and found fresh water 
in small ponds. 

The ship was lying about three miles within the mouth of the 
port, near to the south shore ; and after I had taken bearings at two 
stations on the sandy peninsula, we steered a straight course for her, 
sounding all thp way. It appeared that there was a passage up the 
port of a mile wide, between the middle banks and the western 
shore, with a depth in it from 3 to 4^ fathoms. On the western ex- 
tremity of the banks I had fathoms, and afterwards 5, 7, 4, 7, 8, 

9, 9 to the ship. \ 

Lieutenant Fowler had had a good deal of difficulty in getting 
back to the entrance of the port; owing in part to the western 
Winds, and partly from the shoals, which do not seem to lie in any 
regular order. He had touched upon one of these, where there 
wa& ten feet on one side of the ship, and on the other, 5 fathoms. 

This seems to have been a more eastern part of the same shoal upon 



218 A VOYAOE TO [SduA Coart, 

ISOS, which we had before grounded; but no danger is to be feared from 
Sunday % these banks to a flat-floored ship. 

^ I find it very difficult to speak in general terms of Port Phillip. 
On the one hand it is capable of receiving and sheltering a larger 
fleet of ships than ever yet went to sea ; whilst on the other, the 
entrance, in its whole width, is scarcely two miles, and nearly half 
of it is occupied by the rocks lying off Point Nepean, and by shoals 
on the opposite side. The depth in the remaining part varies from 
6 to 1 ft fathoms ; and this irregularity causes the strong tides, espe- 
dally when running against the wind, to make breakers, in which 
small vessels should be careful of engaging themselves ; and when 
a ship has passed the entrance, the middle shoals are a great obstacle 
to a free passage up the port. These shoals are met with at four 
miles directly from the entrance, and extend about ten miles to the 
east-south* east, parallel with the south shore; they do not seem, 
however, to be one connected mass, for I believe there are two or 
three deep openings in them, though we had not time to make an 
examination. 

No runs of fresh water were seen in my excursions ; but Mr. 
Charles Grimes, surveyor-general of New South Wales, afterwards 
found several, and in particular, a small river falling into the northern 
head of the port. Mr. Grimes was sent by governor King, in 1803 , 
to walk round, and survey the harbour ; and from his plan I have 
completed my chart of Port Phillip. The parts of the coast left 
unshaded are borrowed from him, and the soundings written at 
right angles are those of his companion, lieutenant Robbins. 

The country surrounding Port Phillip has a pleasing, and in 
many parts a fertile appearance; and the sides of some of the hills 
and several of the vallies, are fit for agricultural purposes. It is in 
great measure a grassy country, and capable of supporting much 
cattle, though better calculated for sheep. To this general descrip- 
tion there are probably several exceptions ; and the southern penin- 
sula, which is terminated by Point Nepean, forms one, the surface 



TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


Port PfiHUp^ 


219 


there being mostly sandy, and the vegetation in many places, little isos, 
better than brush- wobd. Indented Head, at the northern part of the 
western peninsula, had an appearance particularly agreeable ; the 
grass had been burned not long before, ’and had sprung up green 
and tender ; the wood was so thinly scattered that one might see to 
a considerable distance ; and the hills rose one over the other to a 
moderate elevation, but so gently, that a plough might every where 
be used. The vegetable soil is a little mixed with sand, but good, 
though probably not deep, as I judged by the small size of the trees. 

The most common kinds of wood are the casuarina and 
eucalyptus^ to which Mr. Grimes adds the banksia, mimosa, and some 
others ; but the timber is rarely sound, and is not large. 

Were a settlement to be made at Port Phillip, as doubtless 
there will be some time hereafter, the entrance could be easily 
defended ; and it would not be difficult to establish a friendly inter- 
course with the natives, for they are acquainted with the effect of fire 
arms, and desirous of ppssessing many of our conveniences. 1 thought 
them more muscular than the mep of King George’s Sound ; but, 
generally speaking; they differ in no essential particular from the 
other inhabitants of the South and East Coasts, except in language, 
which is dissimilar, if not altogether different to that of Port Jack- 
son, and seemingly of King George’s Sound also. I am not certain 
whether they^have canoes, but none were seen. 

In the woods are the kanguroo, the emu or cassowary, paro- 
quets, and a variety of small birds ; the mud banks are frequented 
by ducks and some black swans, and the shores by the usual sea 
fowl common in New South Wales. The range of the thermometer ' 
was between 61® and 67®; and the climate appeared to be as good 
and as agreeable as could well be desired in the month answering 
to November. In 1803, colonel Collins of the- marines was sent out 
from England to make a new settlement -in this country ; but he 
quitted Port Phillip for the south end of Van Diemen's Land, pro- 



A VOYAGE TO [Sov^ Voea. 

( 

1802. bably from not finding fresh water for a colony sufficiently near to 
the entrance. 

Point Nepean is in latitude 38® 18' south. The longitude from 
twelve sets of distances taken by lieutenant Flinders in the port, and 
six others by me ten days before arriving, the particulars of which 
are given in Table V. of the Appendix to this volume, is 144® ^0^' 
east ; but these observations being mostly on one side of the moon, 
the corrected longitude by time keepers, 144° 38' east, is preferred. 

No observations were taken in the port for the variation of the 
compass; but at seven leagues to the south-south-west of Point 
Nepean, azimuths gave 3“' 41' when the ship’s head was at N.E. by 
E. j; E., and an amplitude at N.N. E. ^ E., 6® 48' east. The mean 
of these, corrected to the meridian, will be f 30', or half a degree 
less than at King’s Island ; I therefore take the variation in Port 
Phillip to have been generally, 7*, though at some stations it seemed 
to have been no more than 6® 30' east. 

The rise of tide is inconsiderable in the upper parts of the 
port ; near the entrance it is from, three to six feet. By the swing- 
ing of the ship, which however varied at different anchorages, 
it appeared to be high water two hours and a half after the moon’s 
passage ; but at Point Nepean, the time of high water by the shore 
is said by Mr. Grimes to be only one hour after the moon. At Western 
Port, Mr. Bass found high water to take place half an hour after 
the moon's passage, ^d the tide to rise from ten to fourteen feet. 
This great increase, in a place so near, seems extraordinary ; but 
' may perhaps be accounted for by the meeting of the tides from two 
entrances, whilst Port Phillip has only one, and that very narrow, 



Bom’ 


TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


221 


CHAPTER X. 

Departure from Port Phillip. Cape Schanck. Wilson’s Promontory, and 
its isles. Kent’s Groups, and Furneaux’s Isles. Hills behind the Long 
Beach. Arrival at Port Jackson. Health of the ship’s company. 
Refitment and supply of the ship. Price of provisions. Volunteers 
entered. Arrangement for the succeeding part of the v(^age. French 
ships. Astronomical and nautical observations. 

On the sd of May at daylight, the anchor was weighed to go out 
of Port Phillip with the last half of the ebb ; and the wind being 
from the westward, we backed, filled, and tacked occasionally, 
dropping out with the tide. When the entrance was cleared, and 
five miles distant, Mr. Westall took a view of it, which will be an 
useful assistance in finding this extensive, but obscure port ; and at 
eleven o’clock, when we bore away eastward to pass Cape Schanck, 
he sketched that cape and the ridge of hills terminating at Arthur's 
Seat. Cape Schanck is a cliff}' head, with three rocks lying off, the 
outermost of which appears at a distance like a ship under sail : the 
latitude is 38® 29' or 30' south, and longitude 144° 53' east. It will 
always be desirable for vessels to get sight of this cape, before they 
run far into the great bight for Port Phillip ; and if the wind blow 
strong from the southward, it will be unsafe to run without having 
seen it. 

Cape Schanck is also an excellent mark for ships desiring to 
go into Western Port, of which it forms the west side of the prin- 
cipal entrance ; but as there are many breakers and shoals on that 
side, which extend almost to raid-channel-, it will be necessary to 
give the cape a wide berth, by keeping o'fex to Phillip Island on the 
starbord hand. 

S I 


1802. 

May. 

Monday 3, 


(Atlas, 
Plate XVI r. 
View 13.) 


(View H.) 


VOL. I. 



222 


A VOYAGE TO 


Coa$l. 


1808. At noon, Cape Scharick bore N. 36* W. five or six miles ; the 

Mo^y 8. breeze was fresh from the westward, with cloudy weather, and we 
steered for Point Grant, at the east side of the entrance into Western 
Port. There is a square-topped rock surrounded with a reef lying 
off the point ; but the Lady Nelson has passed between them, with 
3 fathoms water. On reaching within a mile of this reef, at one 
o’clock, I set 

C. Schanck, distant 9 or 10 miles, at - N. 85“ W. 

A cliffy head up the entrance, distant 5 miles, N. 16 W. 

Square-topped rock, - - - - • N. 85 E. 

Cape Wollamai, - - - - - S. 8o^E. 

We then steered eastward along the south side of Phillip Island, 
and passed a needle-like rock, lying under the shore. Cape Wolla- 
mai ’is the east end of the island, and forms one side of the small, 
eastern entrance to the port ; and at three o’clock, when it bore N. 
14“ E, five or six miles, its longitude was ascertained by means of 
the time keepers to be 145® 25' east: the latitude deduced from 
bearings, is 38® 33' south. Wollamai is the native name for a fish at 
Port Jackson, called sometimes by the settlers, light-horseman, from 
the bones of the head having some resemblance to a helmet ; and 
the form of this cape bearing a likeness to the head of the fish, 
induced Mr. Bass to give it the name of Wollamai. 

We ran south-eastward along the shore, at the rate of six or 
seven knots, until sunset ; when a steep head, supposed to be the 
Cape liptrap of Captain Grant, was seen through the haze, and our 
bearings of the land were. 

Cape Wollamai, distant six leagues, - N. 49° W. 

' A low projection, distant seven miles, - N. ai E. 

Cape Liptrap, - - . - - S. 50 E. 

We soon afterwards hauled to the wind off shore, under treble- 
reefed top sails ; and the gale increasing, with much swell from the 
south-westward, the closd reefs were taken in. At midnight, tacked 
Tuesday 4. to the northward, and stood pff and on till day break ; the wind 



Bats* Strait.'] 


TERRA AUSTRALIS 


m 


being strong at west, and weather squally with rain. We then bore i8o«, 
awiy for the land, which was seen to leeward ; and at seven, the 4. 

bearings of the principal parts were as under : 

Land indistinct, apparently C. Liptrap, - N. 5" W. 

Wilson’s Promontory, south extreme, - S. 85 E. 

A peaked I. (Rodondo of captain Grant), - S. 71 E. 

Besides Rodondo, which lies about six miles to the south-by- 
east of the promontory, I distinguished five or six less conspicuous 
isles, lying along the south and west sides of this remarkable head 
land : these are called Glennie's Isles. To the N. 88* E. from 
Rodondo, and distant about two leagues, was a small island which 
appears to have been one of Mon cur’s Isles ; and in steering south- 
eastward, we got sight of the Devil's Tower, and of the high island 
and rocks named Sir Roger Curtis’ Isles. These names were given 
by captain Grant in 1800; but he was not the discoverer of the 
places to which they are applied. They are all laid down upon my 
chart of 1799, on the authority of Mr. Bass; and when it is con- 
sidered that this enterprising man -saw them from an open boat, in 
very bad weather, their relative positions to Wilson's Promontory 
will be thought surprisingly near the truth. Unfortunately the 
situation of the promontory itself, owing io some injury done to his 
quadrant, is considerably in error ; being twelve or fourteen miles 
y^rong in latitude. A reef is mentioned by captain Grant, as lying 
to the southward between Rodondo and Moncur’s Isles; and a rock, 
level with the water, was seen in the same situation by the ships 
Cato and Castle of Good Hope, from which last it received the 
appropriate name of Crocodile Rock. This also was seen by Mr. 

Bass, and laid down in its relative situation ; but in the Investigator, 

I was not sufficiently near to get sight of this important danger. 

We continued to steer south-eastward, round all these islands, 
having a fresh gale at west-south-west with squally weather ; and 
at noon our situation was in 



A VOYAGE TO 


[SSmdft Co(ut. 

Latitude observed, - - 89 ** 35 

Lcm^tude by time keepers, - - ' - 146 30 

Rodondo bore - - - - N. 15 W. 

Sir R. Curtis' Island, thd peak, dist. 7 miles, - N. 46 E. 
(The Devil’s Tower iJeing nearly on with the north side.) 

Two pointed rocks, - - N. 57® and 62 E. 

Wilson's Promontory was no longer visible; but from the best 
bearings I had been able to obtain in such blowing weather, its 
south-eastern extremity lies in latitude 39° iij south, and longitude. 
146" 24' east. 

Not seeing any more islands to the southward from the mast head, 
we bore away east soon after noon, to make Kent’s Groups ; and before 
three o'clock they both came in sight, as did an island to the north- 
ward; which seems to have been one of the small cluster discovered 
by Mr. John Black, and named Hogan's Group. The longitude by 
time keepers at this time was 146® 58' east, and the following bear- 
ings were taken : 

Sir R. Curtis’ Island, the peak, - - N. 71* W. 

Hogan’s highest Island, from the mast head, N. 5 E. 

Kent’s large Group, south end of the eastern I. N. 70 E. 

Small Group, dist. 6 or 7 miles, hiding the 

north-west end of the large group, N. 52® to 45 E. 

In steering past the south sides of the two groups at the dis- 
tance of four to six miles, I was enabled to correct theii* positions ; 
and also that of the pyramid, which was set at S. 4^“ E. ten miles 
at four o’clock. When these lands had been laid down in the 
Francis and Norfolk in 1798, it was without the assistance of a time 
keeper, and therefore liable to considerable errors in longitude. 

At five in the evening, I thought myself fortunafe to get a 
sight of Furneaux’s great island through the haze ; and also of a 
small, craggy isle which h^id been before fixed relatively to the inner 
Sister. To obtain the positions of these places by our time keepers. 



Ba$if <Sltra^.3 


TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


m 


was to me an important object ; since they were connected with the iso** 
former survey of Furneaux’s Islands and the north-eastern part of 4, 
Van Diemen's Land. The bearings taken at five were, 

Fumeaux’s great I., hills on the wesl part, S. 48* E. 

Small craggy isle, - - • - S. 69 E. 

Kent's large Group, extremes, - - N. 7® to 47 W. 

Small Group, the largest isle, - - N. 77 W. 

A small rock, not seen before, - - N, 88 E. 

The hills uponFurneaux's great island, which I believe, but could 
not certainly ascertain to have been upon the westernmost point, 
will therefore lie very nearly S. 48® E., from the bluff south-west end 
of Kent’s large Group, instead of S. 38“ E., as before marked. This 
places the great island 10' of longitude further east from the group, 
than was given by my run in the Francis during the night of Fbb. 8, 

1798. 

We passed to the northward of the small new rock at the dis- 
tance of three miles, and I judged it to lie four, or four-and-half 
leagues from the eastern side of Kent's large Group. No kind of 
danger was observed between them, biit it was then nearly dark ; 
and the wind being fresh and favourable, and not having more than 
ten days provisions in the ship, I felt it necessary to leave this and 
some other parts of Bass’ Strah to a future examination ; and we 
steered onward, east-north-east for Port Jackson. 

At daylight of the 5th, the course was altered more north- Wedncsd.s. 
ward ; and at noon, land was seen from the mast head to the north- 
north-west, probably some of the hills at the back of the Long Beach, 
and distant not less than twenty leagues: our latitude was 38" 32' 
south, and longitude 149" 35' east. The wind had then moderated, 
and having shifted to north-west, we kept close up to make Cape 
Howe. At four, hove to and sounded, but no bottom could be had 
with 90 fathoms ; the land extended in .patches from west-north- 
west^ distant twenty-five or more leagues?, to near the Ram Head at 
north ; and consequently the hills 41 the back of the Long Beach 



10 - 


A VOYAGE TO 


ySd^ Cm»t. 


Friday 7* 
(Atlas, 


muft be considerable elevation, superior to any other land net(t 
the unuxj^^^ southern, or perhaps any part of New South Wales. 
<rbttn4ftf & ! On the wind shifting to the east side of north, next day, I 
l^ked to get in with the Iwd ; being desirous of running near to as 
much of the coast, and correcting its longitude in our way to Port 
Jackson^ as could be done without loss of time ; but at noon the 
wind veered back, and our north-eastern course was resumed. The 
land could not then be further distant than nine or ten leagues ; but 
no part of it was in sight, nor from the dulness of the weather, . 
could any observation be taken. 

After a squally night, the wind fixed at west-by-north ; and 
at daybreak of the 7th, the land was visible from west to north-west, 
and our course was parallel to it. At noon, the latitude was gS* 

Plate VIII.) longitudc 151“ 16' east; Mount Dromedary was hi 

sight bearing N. 85* W., and by the difference of longitude, was 
distant fifty-two miles : I estimate its highest southern part to lie m 
gfi* 19' south, and 150* 11' east. The wind returned to the north- 
west in the afternoon, and we loss sight of the land ; but becoming 
fairer afterwards , and the southern current not ha^^g much strength, 
Saturdays, by four next day the heads of Pm*t Jadcson were in sight. At dusk 
the flag-staff upon the South Head bore west-south-west, and our 
distance from the shore was seven or eight miles. 

I tried to beat up for the port in the night, being sufficiently 
well acquainted to have run up in the dark, had the wind permitted; 
but we were still to leeward in the morping, and Mr. Westall made 
a good sketch of the entrance. Atone o'clock we gained the heads, 
a pilot came on board, and soon after three the Investigator was 
anchored in Sydney Cove. 

There was not a single mdividual on board who was not upon 
deck working the ship into harbour ; and it may be averred, that the 
officers and crew were, generally speaking, in better health than on 
the day we sailed from ^nfhead, and nm in less good spirits. I have 
said nothing of tberegulatkms observed after we- made Cape Leeu- 


Sunday 9. 

(Atlas, 
PI. XVIII. 
View 1.) 





Port Jacksm.] ■ TERRA AUSTRALIS. 2:i7 

win ; they were little difierent from those adopted in the eominencc- ’ 
ment of the voyage, and of which a strict attention to cleani'iness, Suiuity 9 . 
and a free circulation of air in the messing and slec'ping jilaccs 
formed the most essential parts. Several of the inhabitants of Port 
Jackson expressed themselves never to have been so strongly re- 
minded of England, as by the fresh colour of many amongst the 
Investigator’s ship’s company. 

So soon as the anchor was dropped, I went on shore to wait upon 
his Excellency Philip Gidley King, Esq., governor of New South 
Wales, and senior naval officer upon the station ; to whom I com- 
municated a general account of our discoveries and examinations 
upon the South Coast, and delivered the orders from the Admiralty 
and Secretary of State. These orders directed the governor to place 
the brig Lady Nelson under my command, and not to em])lc)y the 
Investigator on other service than that which was the object of the 
voyage ; and His Excellency was pleased to as.sure me, that every 
assistance in -the power of the colony to render, .should be giv(‘n to 
forward a service so interesting to .his government, and to himself. 

The Lady Nelson was then lying in Sydney Cove ; but her com- 
mander, lieutenant Grant, had requested permission to return to 
England, and had sailed six months before. 

Besides the Lady Nelson, there w'crein the port His Majesty’s 
armed vessel Porpoise, the Speedy, south-whaler, attd the Margaret 
privateer ; also the French national ship Le Naiuraliste, commanded 
by captain Hamelin, to whom I communicated captain Baudin’s in- 
tention of coming to Port Jackson so soon as the bad weather sliould 
set in. Le Geographe’s boat had been picked up in Bass' Strait hy 
Mr. Campbell of the brig Harrington, and the officers and crew 
were at this time on board Le Naturalistc. 

The duties required to fit the ship for prosecuting the voyage 
with success being various and extensive, Cattle Point, on the cast side 
of Sydney Cove, was assigned to us by tho governor for carrying on 
some of our employments, whilst others were in progress on board the 



228 


A VOYAGE TO 


[JEagt Coast. 


1802. 

May. 


ship and In tlie dockyard. On the moniing after our arrival, we warped 
to a convenient situation near the point, and sent on shore the tents, 
the sail-makers and sails, and the cooper with all the empty casks. 
Next day the observatory was set up, and the time keepers and 
other astronomical instruments placed there under the care of lieu- 
tenant Flinders ; who, with Mr. Franklin his assistant, was to make 
the necessary observations and superintend the various duties carry- 
ing on at the same place; and a small detachment of marines was 
landed for the protection of the tents. 

I had found the barricade of the quarter deck* to stand so high, 
as to be not only an obstacle to beating to windward, but a great 
inconvenience to surveying the coast ; for when the wind was on the 
side next to the land, there were no means of taking bearings over 
it blit by standing on the top of the binnacle ; or otherwise by re- 
moving the compass to different places, which I had found could not 
be done without materially changing the variation. These incon- 
veniences being stated to the governor, his permission ‘was obtained 
to reduce it so low as that it might be overlooked in all cases ; and 
an order was given that four convict carpenters, and such other 
assistance from the dockyard should be furnished as was necessary. 

To supply the place of the cutter we had lost at the entrance 
of Spencer’s Gulph, I contracted for a boat to be built after the 
model of that in which Mr. Bass made his long and adventurous 
expedition to the strait. It was twenty-eight feet seven inches in 
length over all, rather flat floored, head and stern alike, a keel 
somewhat curved, and the cut-water and stern post nearly upright ; 
it was fitted to row eiglit oars when requisite, but intended for 
six in common cases. The timbers were cut from the largest 
kind of hanksia, which had been found more durable than mangrove ; 
and the planking was of cedar. This boat was constructed under the 
superin tendance of Mr. .Thomas Moore, master builder to the 
colony ; and proved, liktf her prototype, to be excellent in a sea, 
as well as fur rowing and sidling in smooth water. The cost at 



TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


229 


Port Jack8on.'\ 

Port Jackson was no more than ; but this was owing to some 
of the materials being supplied from the public magazines. 

Whilst these branches of our refitment were going on, a 
thorough examination was made and survey taken of all the ship’s 
stores ; as well for the purpose of sending away those unserviceable 
and replacing them with others so far as they could be obtained, as 
with a view to enable the warrant officers to pass their accounts and 
obtain their pay up to this time ; a precaution which the nature of our 
voyage rendered more peculiarly necessary. After the surveys were 
ended, the seamen were employed in stripping and re-rigging the 
masts, and preparing the hold to receive a fresh stock of provisions 
and water ; the naturalist and his assistants, as also the two painters, 
made excursions into the interior of the country ; and my time was 
mostly occupied in constructing the fair charts of our discoveries 
and examinations upon the South Coast, for the purpose of their 
being transmitted to the secretary of the Admiralty. 

On the 4th of June, the ship was dressed with colours, a 
royal salute fired, and I went with the principal officers of the Inves- 
tigator to pay my respects to His Excellency the governor and cap- 
tain-general, in honour of His Majesty’s birth day. On this occasion, 
a splendid dinner was given to the colony ; and the number ^of ladies 
and civil, military, and naval officers was not less than forty, who 
met to celebrate the birth of their beloved sovereign in this distant 
part of the earth. 

On the 6th, the Speedy, south-whaler, sailed for England, 
By Mr. Quested, the commander, I transmitted to the Admiralty an 
account of my proceedings upon the south coast of Terra Australis ; 
but the charts being unfinished, were obliged to be deferred to a 
future opportunity. To the Astronomer Royal I sent Arnold’s 
time keepers. No. 8a and 176, which had stopped ; together with 
a statement of the principal astronomical observations hitherto made, 
and an account of Earnshaw’s two time keepers. No. 543 and 520, 
which continued to perform well. 

VOL. I. 3 K 


1802. 

May. 


June. 



280 


A VOYAGE TO 


[East Coast. 


1802. Captain Baudin arrived in Le G6ographe on the aoth, and a 

boat was sent from the Investigator to assist in towing the ship up 
to the cove. It was grievous to see the miserable condition, to which 
both officers and crew were reduced by scurvy ; there being not more 
out of one hundred and seventy, according to the commander's 
account, than twelve men capable of doing their duty. The sick 
were received into the colonial ho.spital; and both French ships fur- 
nished with every thing in the power of the colony to supply. Be- 
fore their arrival, the necessity of augmenting the number of cattle 
in the country had prevented the governor from allowing us any 
fresh meat; but some oxen belonging to government were now killed 
for the distressed strangers ; and by returning an equal quantity of 
salt meat, which was exceedingly scarce at this time, I obtained a 
quarter of beef for my people. The distress of the French naviga- 
tors had indeed been great; but every means were used by the 
governor and the principal inhabitants of the colony, to make them 
forget both their sufferings and the war which existed between the 
two nations.* 

July. His Excellency, governor King, had done me the honour to 

visit the Investigator, and to accept of a dinner on board ; on which 

occasion he had been received with the marks of respect due to his 

rank of captain-general ; and shortly afterward, the captains Baudin 

and Hamelin, with monsieur Peron and some other French officers, 

as also colonel Paterson, the lieutenant governor, did me the same 

favour; when they were received under a salute of eleven guns. 

The intelligence of peace, which had just been received, contributed 

to enliven the party, and rendered our meeting more particularly 

agreeable. I showed to captain Baudin one of my charts of the 

South Coast, containing the part first explored by him, and distinctly 

marked as his discovery. He made no objection to the justice of 

, > 

• These liberal proceedings^ wjbich do so much honour to governor King and the 
colonists^ are handsomely acknowledged by M, Peron in his account of the French 
voyage. 



PortJackson.l TERRA AUSTRALIS. 

the limits therein pointed out ; but found his portion to be smaller iso?, 
than he had supposed, not having before been aware of the extent 
of the discoveries previously made by captain Grant. After examin- 
ing the chart, he said, apparently as a reason for not producing any 
of his own, that his charts were not constructed on board the ship ; 
but that he transmitted to Paris all his bearings and observations, 
with a regular series of views of the land, and from them the charts 
were to be made at *a future time. This mode appeared to me 
extraordinary, an,d not to be worthy of imitation ; conceiving that a 
rough chart, at least, should be made whilst the land is in sight, 
when any error in bearing or observation can be corrected ; a plan 
which was adopted in^the commencement, and followed throughout 
the course of my voyage. 

Amongst our emidoyments was that of fitting up a green 
house on the quarter deck, and sawing plank to make boxes for the 
reception of such plants as might be found by'the naturalist, and 
thought worthy of being transported to His Majesty’s botanic garden 
at Kew. This green* house had been received at Sheerness, and 
stowed away in pieces ; but I saw that when filled with boxes of 
earth, the upper works of the ship, naturally very weak, would be 
incapable of supporting the weight; and that in bad weather, we 
should be obliged to throw it over board for the safety of the ship. 

I therefore -propo-sed its reduction to two-thirds of the size; and 
Mr. Brown being of opinion it would then contain all the plants 
likely to be collected in any one absence from Port Jackson, it was 
reduced accordingly ; and the feet lowered down close to the deck. 

This arrangement required an alteration 'in the tiller, and a short 
one, with two arms, was fitted to the after part of the rudder head ; 
with which expedient, and leading the main braces forward, the 
grdtn house was not likely to cause much inconvenience to the 
working of the ship. The plants already collected on the South 
Coast had been landed on our arrival, in good order; and deposited 



232 


A VOYAGE TO 


\Ea8t Coast. 


1802. in the 'governor’s garden until such time as, the objects of the voyage 

being completed, we should be ready to sail for England. 

The ship liad never made more than three inches of water in 
an hour, after leaving the Cape of Good Hope; so that much caulk- 
ing was not required, either within or out board. What was found 
necessary, was fini.'>hed by the middle of July, at the same time 
with the barricading of the quarter deck ; and the masts being then 
new rigged, and holds nearly completed with -water and provisions, 
the sails were bent and the ship was painted. On the 2 ist, the last bag 
of bread and turn of water were received, the new whale boat was 
brought off', and we dropped down the harbour ; being then ready 
for going to sea next morning. 

. In consequence of the directions given by His Majesty's prin- 
cipal secretary of state for the colonies, the Lady Nelson, a brig of 
sixty tons, commanded by acting-lieutenant John Murray, was 
placed under my oi'ders, as a tender to the Investigator. This vessel 
was fitted with three sliding keels ; and built after the plan of that 
ingenious officer commissioner ( now vice-admiral ) Schanck. When 
the sliding keels were up, the Lady Nelson drew no more than six 
feet water ; and was therefore peculiarly adapted for going up rivers, 
or other shallow places which it might be dangerous, or impossible 
for the ship to enter. Mr. Murray’s crew was mostly composed Of 
convicts ; and having no officer in whom he could place entire con- 
fidence, I lent to him Mr. Denis Lacy, one of my young gentlemen 
acquainted with the management of a time keeper, to act as his 
chief mate. 

The price of fresh meat at Port Jackson was so exorbitant, 
that it was impossible to think of purchasing it on the public account. 
1 obtained one quarter of beef for the ship’s company, in exchange 
for salt meat, and the governor furnished us with some basket%of 
vegetables from his garden ; and in lieu of the daily pound of biscuit, 
each man received a pound and a quarter of soft bread, withotit any 



Port Jachson.'] 


TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


2i3 


expense to government. But with these exceptions, I was. obliged 
to leave the refreshment of the people to their own individual exer- 
tions ; a‘:sisting them with the payment due for savings, of bread 
since leav ng the Cape of Good Hope, and the different artificers 
with the money earned by their extra services in refitting the ship. 
Fish arc usually plentiful at Port Jackson in the summer, but not in 
the winter time ; and our duties were too numerous and indispens- 
able to admit of sending people a\vay with the seine, when there 
was little prospect of success ; a few were, however, occasionally 
bought along-side, from boats which fished along the coast. 

In purchasing a sea stock for the cabin, I paid ^^3. a head for 
sheep, weighing from thirty to forty pounds when dressed. Pigs 
were bought at gd. per pound, weighed alive, geese at lo.v. each, 
and fowls at 3s. ; and Indian corn for the stock cost ^s. a bushel. 

To complete the ship's provisions, I entered into a contract for 
30,000 pounds of biscuit, 8000 pounds of flour, and 1 56 bushels of 
kiln-dried wheat ; but in the mean time, the ship Coromandel brought 
out the greater part of the twelvemonths' provisions, for wl)ich I 
had applied on sailing from Spithead ; and the contractor was pre- 
vailed upon to annul that part of the agreement relating to flour and 
wheal. The biscuit cost 3.3.V. per hundred pounds; and considering 
that the colony was at short allowance, and that tJie French ships 
were to be supplied, it was a favourable price. From two American 
vessels which arrived, I purchased 1483 gallons of rum at 6s. 6d. 
per gallon ; which, with what remained of our former stock; was a 
proportion for twelve months. In other respects our provisions were 
completed from the quantity sent out from England; and the 
remaining part was lodged in the public stores, in charge of the 
commissary, until our return. 

In addition to the melancholy loss of eight officers and men, 
at the entrance of Spencer's Gulph, and the previous deficiency of 
four in the complement, I found it necessary to discharge the man 
who had been bitten by a seal at Kanguroo Island, as also a marine. 


IRO^. 

July. 



236 


A VOYAGE TO 


IMS. 

July. 


{East Coast, 

opinion,, as well as myself, that it would be unsafe to do this in the 
middle of the winter season ; and that to remain six months in port 
waiting for the fine weather would be a sad wa.ste of time ; I had, 
besides, left very little of importance to be examined upon the South 
Coast, a circumstance which the instructions had not contemplated. 
Upon all these considerations, it was decided to proceed to the north- ' 
ward, — examine Torres’ Strait and the east side of the Gulph of Car- 
pentaria before the north-west monsoon should set in, — proceed as I 
might be able during its continuance, — and afterwards explore the 
North and North-west Coasts ; returning to Port Jaclcson when, and 
by such route as might be found most advisable, and conducive to the 
general purposes of the voyage. 

It was probable that the north-west monsoon would not set in 
before the beginning of November ; I therefore intended to examine 
such parts of the east coast of New South Wales in my way to the 
northward , as had been passed by captain Cook in the night, and 
were not seen in my expedition witli the'Norfolk sloop iri 1799. The 
openings of Kcppcl and SJioal-w^ter Bays, and the still larger of 
Broad Sound, I was also anxious to explore ; in the hope of finding 
a river falling into some one of them, capable of admitting the Lady 
Nelson into the interior of the country. These desirable objects I 
expected to accomplish before the approach of the monsoon would 
call me into the Gulph of Carpentaria. 

The French ships were in no forwardness for sailing ; and 
it was understood that captain Baudin intended sending back Le 
Naturalistc to France, by the way of Bass' Strait, so soon as the 
season should be favefurabie. He had purchased a small vessel of 
between thirty and forty tons at Sydney, to serve him as a tender ; and 
he told me that we should probably meet in the Gulph of Carpentaria 
in December or January. I understood that he meant to return to 
the South Coast, and after completing its examination, to proceed 
northward, and enter the Gulph with the north-west monsoon ; but 
it appeared to me very probable, that the western winds on the South 



^art Jackson.'l TERRA AUSTRALIS. 

Coast would detain him too long to admit of reaching the Gulph of 
Carpentaria at the time specified, or at any time before the'south- 
east monsoon would set in against him. 

Before leaving Sydney Cove, 1 placed in the hands of governor 
King two copies of my chart of the south coast of Terra Australis, 
il^ix sheets ; with three other sheets of particular parts, on a large 
scale. One copy I requested him to send with my letters to the 
secretary of the Admiralty, by the first good opportunity that 
offered ; the other was to remain in liis hands until my return, or 
until he should hear of the loss of the Investigator, when it v.’as also 
to be sent to the Admiralty. 

During our stay of twelve weeks at Port Jackson, there were 
not many days favourable to our pursuits at the observatory, the 
weather being dull and rainy for the greater part of the time ; by 
watching all opportunities however, a sufficient number of obser- 
vations were obtained to show the rates of the time keepers, and to 
answer the purposes of geography and navigation 

The hatitnde of Cattle Point, from thirty meri- 
dian altitude’s in an artificial horizon, of 
which fourteen were taken by Mr. Crosley 
and seven by me in 1795, and ninc-by lieu- 
tenant Flinders at this time, is - - 33® 5 i'45",6S. 

JLmigitude from forty-four sets of distances 
of the sun and moon, of which the individual 
results are given in Table VI of the Appen- 
dix to this volume, - . _ 11 49 E.* 

< 

•In 1795 1796 I took sixty sets of distances upon Cattle Point, an equal 

number on each side, which gave tlie longitude 151 17' 1-' ; but these observations 
not having been calculated with great nicety, nor corrected for the errors of the lunar 
and solar tables, the result is not considered to be of equal authority with that given 
above. Tlie present admiral D* Espinosa, when an officer in the voyage of Malaspina, 
observed an eclip&e of the sun at Port JocksoA, and occultations of the first 
and second satellites of Jupiter, from wliich he deduces the longitude of the town of 
VOL. 1 . ^ 3 L * 


237 


1S02. 

July. 



288 


} 802 . 

July. 


A VOYAGE TO lEout Coast. 

• t 

This position of Cattle Point, being reduced to the entrance of 
Port Jackson, will be for the 

Flag staff on the south head, latitude 33* 51^' south, 

* longitude 151 16^ east. 

Ramsden's universal theodolite was set up at the observatory, 
and intended to be used as a transit instrument; but from the 
unfavourable state of the weather and my numerous occupations, it 
was not adjusted to the meridian ; and the rates of the time keepers 
were therefore deduced from equal altitudes, taken with a sextant 
and artificial horizon in the usual way. Their errors from mean 
Greenwich time, at noon there July 18, and the mean rates of going 
in the last fifteen days, which were selected as the best, were as 
under : 

Eartishaw’s No. 54,3, slow o'* 16' 39" ,72 and losing 8",63 per day. 

520, - 1 18 53,00 - - - 19,5s 

The longitude of Cattle Point, given by the time keepers with 
the Kanguroo-Island rates on May 10th, the first day of observation 
after our arrival, was by No. 543 - 151" 31’ 21" 

520 - 151 26 49 east. 

The mean is 17' 16" more than deduced from the lunar observations; 
and when rates are used equally accelerating from those at Kan- 
guroo Island, to what were found on first arriving at Port Jackson, 
the longitude by the time keepers would still be 14' 57",4 to the east ; 
so that they appear to have gone less regularly during this passage 
than before. In fixing the longitudes of places between the two 
stations, the time keepers with their accelerated rates have been 
used; and the error of 14/ 57", 4 has been corrected by quantities 
proportionate to the times of observation, between April 6 at Kan- 
guroo Island, and May 9 at Port Jackson. 

The mean dip of the south end of the needle at 

Cattle Point was , - - - 62® 52' 

Sydney to be 151® 12' 45" east of Greenwich; not differing more than a minute of lon- 
gitude from the above forty-four sets of corrected lunar observations. 



Port Jaekion!\ 


TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


239 


Variation of the compass, observed by lieutenant 
Flinders on Garden Island in the following 
year, - - - 8* 51' east. 

No remarks were made at this time upon the tide ; but it is 
known to be high water in Port Jackson about eight hours and a quar- 
ter after the moon’s passage over and under the meridian ; and the 
usual rise to be between four and six or seven feet. When high 
water takes place between three or four in the afternoon and one or 
two in the morning, it rises from six to eighteen inches higher than 
the preceding flo'od ; and the following ebb descends a few inches 
lower than that which preceded the high tide. 

The range of the thermometer on board the ship, was from 
51* to 69'’; and nearly the same on shore. The mercury in the 
barometer stood from 29,60 to 30,36 inches ; but it was remarkable 
that it stood lowest in the fine weather, when the wind came from 
the westward oft' the land, and was highest in the rainy, squally 
weather, with the wind from the sea. According to the information 
communicated by colonel W. Paterson, F. R. S., commander of the 
troops at Port Jackson, this relation between the mercury and the 
weather was general here in the winter season, when the eastern 
winds bring rain with them ; and I had frequent occasion to remark 
upon the South Coast, that sea winds raised the mercury in the 
barometer, whilst those from the land, even with fine weather, 
caused it to descend. 


1H02. 

July. 



240 


A VOYAGE TO 


[South Cooit 


CHAPTER XL 

Of the winds and currents on the south coast of Terra Australis, and in 
Bass’ Strait. Usual progress of the gales. Proper seasons for sailing 
eastward, and for going westward : best places of shelter in each case, 
with some histructions for the Strait. 

Before entering upon the second part of the voyage, it seems 
proper to give an account of the winds and currents which prevailed 
upon* the South Coast; and to add thereto such other general in- 
formation as may be useful in rendering the navigation more safe 
and expeditious, both along the coast and through Bass’ Strait. 

The rate and direction of the currents here described, are 
deduced from the daily positions of the ship by astronomical observ- 
ation, compared with those given by a log kept in the common way, 
but with somewhat more than common attention. In the observa- 
tions, however, there may be some errors, and a log cannot be 
depended upon nearer than to five miles in the distance, and half a 
point in the course for the twenty-four hours ; and consequently this 
account of the currents must be taken as subject to the sum, or to the 
difference of the errors in the observations and log; though it is 
probable they may have been diminished by taking the medium of 
several days, which has alWays been done where it was possible. 

Besides the difficulty there is in obtaining the exact rate and 
direction of a current, it is known that a continuance of the wind in 
any particular quarter may so far change its rate of moving, and 
even its direction, that at another time it may be found materially 
different in both. Of the probability of these changes the •com- 
mander of a ship must form his own judgment, from the winds he 



TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


241 


Winds and currents.] 

may have previously experienced ; and he will consider what is here 
said ujwn both winds and currents, as calculated and intended' to give 
him a general notion, and no more, of what may usually be expected 
upon the South Coast. 

Several days before making Cape Leeuwin, I experienced a 
current setting to the northward, at the rate of twenty-seven miles 
per day; but at the mean distance of forty leagues, west-south-west 
from the cape, the current ran north-cast, twenty-two miles ; and 
when the ship got in with the South Coast, I found it setting N. 70° E., 
at the average Vate of twenty-seven miles per day ; this was in the 
month of December. On approaching Cape Leeuwin in May, from 
the north-westward, the current for five days was ten miles to the 
east; but at forty leagues from the cape, it ran N. 35® E. fifteen 
miles ; and from the meridian of the cape to past King George’s 
Sound, the current set east, twenty-seven miles per day, nearly as it 
had before done in December. Captain Vancouver and admiral D’En- 
trecasteaux do not speak very explicitly as to the currents ; but it 
may be gathered from both, that*they also experienced a set to the 
eastward along this part of the South Coast. 

The winds seem to blow pretty generally from the westward 
at Cape Leeuwin. In the summer time, they vary from north- 
west in the night, to south-west in the latter j^art of the day, though 
not regularly; and in the winter season this variation does not seem 
to take place. A long swell of the sea, called ground swell to 
distinguish it from the lesser, v.iriable one of the surface, appears to 
come at all times from the soulh-westward, which indicates ^liat the 
strongest and most durable winds blow’ from that quarter; and this 
was partly confirmed by our experience, for whenever it blew hard, 
the wind was at, or near to south-west. 

It is from the superior strength and apparent prevalence of 
this wind, that the currents in the neighbourhood of Cape Leeuwin 
may be explained. The sea being driven in from the south-west, 
and meeting with the cape, will necessarily be divided by it, and 


(Atlas, 
Plate I.) 



242 


A VOYAGE TO [South Coast. 

form two currents, which will follow the directions of the land ; one 
branch will run northward, along the west coast of Terra Australis, 
and the other eastward along the South Coast: our present busi- 
ness is to follow the latter current. 

If a line be drawn from the south-western extremity of New 
Holland, to King’s Island in Bass’ Strait, it will show where the 
current may be expected to run strongest; though it will not be 
equally strong at those parts of the line which are distant from the 
land, as at those in its immediate vicinity. In drawing another line, 
from the north-eastern isles of the Archipelago of the Recherche to 
Cape Northumberland, we shall have what will commonly be the 
northern boundary of the current; for within this line the water 
does not seem to run in any constant direction, but is moved accord- 
ing as the wind may happen to blow. This was found by admiral 
D’Entrecasteaux ; and is conformable to my experience, as I shall 
now explain. 

It has been said, that the eastwardly current was found in May 
and December to run twenty-seven miles per day, from Cape Lceu- 
win past King George’s Sound. From thence to a little beyond the 
Archipelago of the Recherche, keeping in with the shore, I found it 
to set north-east thirteen miles ; and at a distance from the coast, it 
ran north-east-by-east sixteen miles per day, the wind being more 
from the south than from the northward in both cases. 

In coasting from the Archipelago, all round the Great Bight 
and as far south-eastward as to Cape Northumberland, I had no 
determinate current ; it generally followed the impulsicn given to it 
by the winds, and was inconsiderable. From the middle of January 
to the middle of April, the winds were most prevalent from south- 
south-east to east-north-east ; coming more from the land at night, 
at:d from the sea in the day time. They seldom had any strength ; 
\vhcreas the winds w hich occasionally blew from the westward were 
fresh, and sometimes became gales, veering in that. case, invariably- 
to the south-west. 



Winds and currenU..'] TERRA AUSTRALIS. 

On reaching Cape Northumberland I again found the east- 
wardly current ; and from thence into Bass’ Strait it ran N. 8b* E., at 
the rate of twelve miles a day, the wind blowing strong from, the 
south-westward in the latter part of the time. 

In a subsequent run across the Great Bight in May, from the 
Archipelago nearly direct for Bass’ Strait, the current set upon the 
average, N. 39° E. fourteen miles a day ; appearing to be much in- 
fluenced in its northern direction by the winds blowing strong 
from the southward. Mr. Dairy mple, in reasoning from the ana- 
logy of southern Africa, expected that the winds upon this coast 
would be found to blow from the northward, or off the shore, in the 
winter time, and this might possibly be the case if close in with the 
land ; but at a distance from it, as just observed, the winds were from 
the southward. 

S jch a?i accumulation of water forcing itself through Bass’ 
Strait, would naturally lead to the expectation of finding a strong 
current there, setting to the east; but on the contrary, the set in 
comim n cases was found to be rather in the opposite direction, the 
current appearing to be predominated by the tides, whose superior 
strength forced it below the surface. The flood comes from the 
easiw3!d ; and after making high water at Furneaux's Isles, passes 
on to Hunter’s and King’s Islands, where it meets another flood 
from the southward ; and the high water then made seems to be 
nearly at the time that it is low water at Furneaux's Isles. Another 
flood is then coming from the east, and so on ; whence a ship going 
eastward through the Strait, will have more tide meeting than setting 
after her, and be commonly astern of hdr reckoning. This applies 
more especially to the middle of the strait, and is what I there found 
with winds blowing across it ; but the bight on the north side, be- 
tween Cape Otway and Wilson’s Promontory, seems to bean excep- 
tion, and in fact, it lies out of the direct .set of the tides. In running 
from Port Phillip to the Promontory I vvas set S. 73“ E., thirty-five 



244 ' 


A VOYAGE TO 

t 

miles in the day ; but it then blew a gale from the west and south- 
westwaM. 

Although the eastwardl^ current be not commonly found at 
the surface in Bass’ Strait, it is not lost. Navigators find it running 
with considerable strength, when passing the strait two or three de- 
grees to the east of Furneaux's Islands ; and it was this current so 
found, which led admiral Hunter to the first opinion of the existence 
of an opening between New South Wales and Van Diemen’s Land. 

Every thing in Bass’ Strait bespeaks the strongest winds to 
come from the south-west; and there is reason to believe that dur- 
ing nine months of the year, it generally blows from some point in 
the western quarter. In January, February, and March, eastern 
winds with fine weather seem to be not uncommon ; but there is no 
dependence to be had on them at any other season. At the eastern 
side of the strait and of Van Diemen’s Land, it is not unusual to meet 
a north-east or north wind, though it seldom blows strong. The 
gales usually come from between south-west and south-east, and , 
most frequently from the latter direction ; which renders it hazardous 
to approach the coast between Cape Howe and Wilson’s Promontory. 

Thus, speaking generally of the south coast of Terra Australis, 
it may be considered that during the six or eight winter months, the 
winds blow almost constantly from some western point ; and that 
gales of wind at south-west are frequent. The progress of thegaics 
is usually this : the barometer falls to inches, or lower, and the 
wind rises from the north-westward with thick weather, and com- 
monly with rain; it veers gradually to the west, increasing in strength, 
and the weather begins to clear up so soon as it has got to the 
southward of that point ; at south-west the gale blows hardest, 
and the barometer rises; and by the time the wind gets to south 
or south-south-east, it becomes moderate, the weather is fine, 
and the barometer above .30 inches. Sometimes the wind may 
return back to west, or sbmething northward, with a fall iathe 



245 


Wind$ €md eurrenU.'] TERRA AUSTRALIS. 

* 

mercury, and diminish in strength, or die away ; but the gale is 
not over, although a cessation of a day or two may take plade. In 
some cases, the wind flies round suddenly from north-wes^^o 
south-west ; and the rainy, thick weaker then continues a longer 
time. 

Such is the usual course of the gales along the South Coast 
and in Bass’ Strait ; but on the east side of the strait the winds par- 
take of the nature of those on the East Coast, where the gale often 
blows hardest betw'een south and south-east, and is accompanied 
with thick weather, and frequently with heavy rain. 

In the four or five summer months, the south-east and east 
winds appear to be most prevalent all round the Great Bight ; but 
even there, the western winds sometimes blow at that time, and 
usually with considerable strength. Thus I had a strong south- 
west wind in the middle of February, near the Investigator’s Group, 
and a gale from the same quarter in March, at the entrance of 
Spencer’s Gulph ; which last was felt still more severely in Bass’ 
Strait by captain Baudin. At the -two extremities of the coast, that 
is, in the strait and near King George's Sound, the winds blow 
sometimes from the west and sometimes from the eastward, in the 
summer ; but the strongest winds are from the south-west. 

It will hence appear, that the summer is alone the proper time 
for a ship to come upon, and still more so for exploring the south 
coast of Terra Australis ; whether she proceed along it from west 
to east, as I did in the Investigator, or from east to west, as captain 
Baudin, seems to be almost a matter of indifference. From Cape 
Leeuwin to the end of the Archipelago 6f the Recherche, and from 
Cape Northumberland to Bass’ Strait, it is perhaps most advanta- 
geous to proceed eastward, on account of the current ; but in the in- 
termediate and more considerable part of the coast, a western route 
is certainly preferable. It has also this general ad'^antage, that the 
winds which are fair for running along the coast are those that 
blow moderately, and are accompanied with fine weather, most 
VOL, I. 3 ^ 



*^<5 A VOYAdE to [Siwtfc Coaut. 

proper for making a survey; whereas those favourable to the oppo- 
site route frequently blow strong, and render it dangerous to keep in 

the land. As to makii^ a survey of the South Coast in the 
winter season, which had been judged from theoretical analogy to 
be the most proper time, it appears to be not only a dangerous ex- 
periment, but also one from which very little accuracy of investiga- 
tion could be expected ; and with as much ardour as most men 
for such pursuits, I should very unwillingly undertake the task. 

These observations upon the danger of sailing along the South 
Coast in the winter season, are not meant to apply t6 the commander 
of a ship desirous of going eastward thrbugh Bass' Strait, and of 
seeing no more of the land than is necessary to assure his situation. 
The strait may be passed without more than very common danger, 
at any time of the year, provided that the navigator be certain of his 
latitude before approaching the longitude of 14,3!^ ; he should not, 
however, enter the strait in the night, unless he have previously 
seen the land, or be certain both of latitude and longitude. The 
parallel of gg', or 59“ 20', according as the wind may incline, is 
the best for taking a ship between King's Island and Cape Otway ; 
and a sight of either, or preferably of both, will point out his position 
on the chart. The sole danger to be apprehended here, is the Har- 
binger's Reefs, two patches lying nearly two leagues out from the 
north end of King's Island ; but are so far separated from it, and 
from each other, as to leave practicable passages between them, 
where the shoalest water found by the Cumberland schooner was 
9 fathoms. 

When the position of the ship at the entrance of the strait is 
ascertained, a course should be shaped for Curtis' Island, which will 
be visible ten or eleven leagues from the deck in fine weather; and 
as the distance is between forty and fifty leagues, and nothing lies 
in the way, a part of it maybe run in the night, with a good look-out 
J would afterwards pass oh the south side of Kent’s Groups, at not 
\ greater distance from the largest than two leagues ; and then steer 



Sailing directiont.'] TERRA AUSTRALIS. 

east-north-east by compass, if nearly before the wind, or on either 
side of that course as the wind may incline *, but taking care 'not to 
approach the northern Long Beach. 

In case of meeting with a contindance of foul winds, the ilWfet 
convenient places in the strait for anchorage, when going eastward, 
are these : 

ist. Under the north-west end of King’s Island, near the New 
Year’s Isles. Of this anchorage I know only, besides what is given 
in the chart, that the' brig Harrington there rode out a gale from 
south-west, the heavy sea being broken off by the New Year’s Isles ; 
and the shelter from eastern winds must certainly be much more 
complete. 

2nd. Port Phillip ; anchoring just within the entrance, on the 
soutli side. When a fair wind comes, a ship can get out of the port 
by means of the strong tides. 

3rd, Hunter’s Isles, between Three-hummock and Barren 
Islands ; taking care not to anchor too close to the weather shore, 
lest the wind change suddenly, 

4th. The bight' between Wilson’s Promontory and Cape Lip- 
trap, in case of necessity ; but I would not recommend this place, it 
being very dangerous should the wind shift to south west, 

5th, Kent's large Group for brigs and lesser vessels ; in one of 
the small sandy coves under the eastern island. 

6th. FUmeaux’s Isles, between Clarke’s and Preservation Islands. 
If the ship be not able to weather Clarke's Island, and pass out to the 
south-eastward ^hen the fair wind comes, she may run through 
Armstrong’s Channel, with a boat a-head and a good look-out. 

This is all that it seems necessary to say for the information of 
a commander desirous of going eastward through Bass' Strait ; and 
with the chart in the Atlas, (Plate VI. ), it is all that a man of mode- 
rate experience and judgment will desire. I have not mentioned the 
entr^ce to tbe strait between King’s island and Hunter’s Isles, 
thinking it not to be recommendable ; both on account of Reid’s Rocks, 


24 T 



948 


A VOYAGE TO 


[iSotttA Coeut 


which lie in the passage, and whose position is'not well ascertained, 
and also because I am not satisfied that Hunter's Isles are placed in 
tl^xhart at their true distance from King's Island ; the difference of 
Ic^ttude is from an apprdximation only ; but the error, if any, can- 
not exceed eight or ten miles, and is in excess. However, with 
daylight and a good look-out, the strait may be safely entered by 
this pass, at any time that a ship can carry sail upon a wind. I en- 
tered this way in the Investigator, during the night ; but what a ship 
on discovery may do is not to be given as an example to others, 
whose sole objects are expedition and safety. The .outlet by the 
pass called Banks' Strait, between Furneaux's Islands and Cape 
Portland, is perfectly safe ; but is out of the way for a ship bound to 
Port Jackson. 

It has been observed that the winds are commonly favourable 
for making a passage to the westward, through Bass' Strait and along 
the South Coast, in the months of January, February, and March. 
I have no personal experience of such a passage, further than through 
the strait, though it has lately been made several times ; but to those 
who may be desirous of doing the same, and are strangers to these 
parts, the following observations may be acceptable. 

The first remark is, that the three months when this passage 
is most easy to be made, are precisely those in which it is unsafe, if 
not impracticable to go through Torres' Strait ; and the second, that 
it will generally be of no avail for a ship to be in Bass' Strait before 
the middle of December, and if it be the middle of January it will be 
preferable. 

Ships coming from Port Jackson, or any where from the north- 
eastward, may take a departure from Cape Howe in 37* 30^' south 
and 1^*5' cast; but from thence, they should not steer a course 
more westward than south-south-west by compass, until in latitude 
89 * 80 '; on account of th^ danger to be apprehended from south- 
east winds upon the Long Beach. Having reached 39® 30' .they 
should steer a true west course, or wcsts-by-souffi by compass, leaving 



Jailing directions.^ 


TERRA AUSTRALIS. 


249 


the Sisters, the craggy islet, and a rock, on the larbord liand. The 
eastern island of Kent’s large Group, which lies in 39° south, 

147* 19^ east, and may be seen ten, or perhaps twelve leagues from the 
deck in fine weather, will come in sight a-head; and in pa^ng 
three or four miles on the south side, the small western group will 
be seen, and is to. be passed in the same way ; as are Curtis' peaked 
Isles, which will then be in sight. From Curtis’ Isles to the north 
end of King’s Island, the course is nearly true west, and distance 
about forty-two leagues, with nothing in the way; but it is better to 
steer five or six leagues to the north of King's Island, if the winds 
permit. Should they hang to the westward of north, the course 
may be safely directed for Three-hummock Island ; passing after- 
w'ards to the north or south of King's Island, as the winds may be 
most favourable. 

In the case of foul winds, which, if the weather be thick or 
rainy, may be expected to fix at south-west and blow strong, there 
are many places where a ship may anchor, to wait a change ; but 
the following appear to be the mpst convenient. 

1st. Hamilton’s Road, at the east end of Preservation Island. 

and. On the south side of the largest Swan Isle, for small 
vessels, or under Isle Waterhouse. 

3rd. Port Dalrymple. 

4th. Various places amongst Hunter’s Isles, 

5th; Sea-elephant Bay, on the east side of King’s Island, where 
there is fresh water ; or under the north-east end of that island, if 
the wind be from south-west. 

6th. Western Port, under Phillip Island ; anchoring so soon 
as the ship is sheltered. A fair wind for going onward through the 
strait, will take a ship out of this port. 

7th. Port Phillip. 

After clearing Bass’ Strait, I think it most advisable to keep (Atiaa, 
at not more than ten or twenty leagues off the coast, from Cape ‘ 

Otway to Kanguroo Islands as the wind may there be expected 



260 


A VOYAGE TO 


[South Cocut. 

more favourable, and the contrarj current less strong than in steer- 
ing a straight course toward Cape Lccuwin. ’ But should the wind 
rise from the north-westward, with thick weather and a descent 
more than usually rapid in* the marine barometer, a stretch off shore 
should immediately be made, to prepare for a south-west gale. A 
look-out must be kept for an island lying to the west-south-west of 
Cape Northumberland; it was seen by Mr. Turnbull, commander 
of the Britannia, south whaler, but the weather being thick, its 
situation was not well ascertained. According ‘to the best informa- 
tion I could procure, this island lies in 38^® south, and about 139^° or - 
cast longitude. 

From Kanguroo Island, a straight course may be made for tlic 
southernmost part of the Archipelago of the Recherche; but should 
the winds come from the westward and not blow a gale, or be light 
and unsteady,. I. would steer more northward, nearer to the land, in 
the hope of having them more favourable. From the Archipelago 
to Cape Leeuwin it seems best to keep at a distance from the land, 
unless under the necessity of stopping in that neighbourhood ; for the 
current runs strong near the shore, and with the advantage of an 
offing of twenty or thirty leagues, a ship may lie clear of the cape 
with a wind which might otherwise keep her beating for many days. 

Tliere appears to be no place of shelter against western gales, 
between Bass’ Strait and Kanguroo Island; but there are then, 
besides various anchorages under that island, the bays arrd coves at 
the entrance of Spencer’s Gulph; and further westward, Coffin’s 
Bay, Petrel Bay in the island St. Francis, and Fowler’s Bay near the 
head of the Great Bight.. Afterwards come Goose-Island Bay, 
Thistle’s Cove, and the lee of Observatory Island, all in the Archi- 
jjelago of the Recherche ; the cove cannot be entered i'n a gale, 
but W'hen once secured in the south-west corner, a ship will be 
safe; the other two places afford very indifferent shelter from 
strong winds, and are indeed fit only for a temporary anchorage 
in moderate weather. Doubtful-Island Bay and King George’s 



Saaing difecliont:\ TERRA AUSTRALIS. 251 

Sound afford complete shelter against western gales ; but some little 
time would be lost in getting out of them, ship waited until 
an eastern wind set in. Some account of all tnese places will be 
found in the preceding pages of this volume ; with the exception of 
Observatory Island, for which D'Entrecasteaux's voyage may be 
consulted. 




APPENDIX. 






[ 2oB ] 


APPENDIX. 

»A.ccount the ohssxvutions hy Tvhich the Longitudes of places on the south 
coast of Terra Australis have been settled. 

The lunar distances knd other observations taken in the Investigator’s 
voyage having been ordered by the Commissioners, of the Board of 
Longitude to be recalculated by a professed astronomer, with every 
degree of correctness which science has hitherto been able to point 
out as necessary, this delicate, but laborious task was assigned to 
Mr. Jolin Crosley, formerly assistant at the Royal Observatory at 
Greenwich ; a gentleman who formed part of the expedition as far 
as the Cape of Good Hope, but whose ill health had then made it 
necessary to relinquish the voyage and return to Kngland. The 
data and results of all the observations will probably be made public, 
by order of the Commissioners ; but in the mean time, for the satis- 
faction of the geographer, and more especially for that of the sea- 
man, whose life and property may be connected with the accuracy 
of the charts, the results of the lunar distances observed upon each 
coast are added in the form of an Appendix to the volume wherein 
that coast is described. It is by these results that the time keepers 
have been regulated ; and the longitudes used in the construction of 
the charts are taken from the time keepers. 

To appreciate the degree of confidence to which these results 
may be entitled, it is necessary to know under what circumstances 
the observations were taken ; also the method used in the calcula- 
tions, and the corrections which have been applied beyond what is 
usual in the common practice at sea : of these the following is a 
gene^ral statement. 



APPENDIX. 


[SoutA Coast. 

istl The instruments used in taking the distances, were a nine- 
inch sextant by Ramsden, and three sextants of eight inches radius 
by Troughton, the latter being made in 1801, expressly for the 
voyage. On board the ship, the sextant was necessarily held in the 
hand, and the distances were sometimes so taken on shore ; but in 
most of the latter cases, it was fixed on a stand admitting of the 
sextant being turned easily in any direction. The telescopes were 
of the largest magnifying powers which the motion of the ship, or 
state of the atmosphere could admit, and each longitude is the result 
of a set of observations, most generally consisting of. six independent 
sights. They were taken either by lieutenant Flinders or by myself; 
those by him being designated in the column of Observers by the 
letter F, the others by C. 

^nd. Preparatory to the reduction of the apparent to the true 
distance, the four following corrections have been applied. 

From the suji’s semi-diameter, as given in the nautical almanack, 
3" have been subtracted. In the almanacks of the years compre- 
hending our observations, the semi-diameter was stated from Mayer’s 
tables, which gave it 3" too great; owing to the imperfection of the 
telescope with which Mayer observed. 

The semi-diameters of the sun and moon being less in the 
vertical, than in the horizontal direction, on account of the differences 
in the refraction, they have been reduced proportionally to these 
differences and to the angles at the points of contact in measuring 
the distance. This correction is called contraction of the semi-diameter. 

Before using the moon’s horizontal parallax in the nautical 
almanack, where it is calculated for the equator, it has been dimin- 
ished by a number of seconds depending upon the latitude of the 
place, and upon this assumed position ; that the earth is* a regular 
spheroid, whose polar axis is to the equatorial axis, as 3S0 to 321. 
This, and the preceding correction are tmnecessary, unless where 
great exactness may be required. 



Inmar rjb$ervatums.'\ 


APPENDIX. 


257 


The refraction of the heavenly bodies given in the tables, being 
calculated for a mean height of 50“ of Fahrenheit's thermometer, and 
29,6 inches of the barometer, it has been corrected for the difference 
between these means and what was the? state of the atmosphere at 
the time of observation. 

3rd. In reducing the apparent to the true distance, Mr. Crosley 
has u.sed the method of Joseph Mendoza dc Rios, Esq., F. R. S., 
given with his Nautical Tables, second edition, 1809; and the tables 
from which the corrections were taken and the computations made, 
are those of the same valuable work. 

4,th. The reduced distance, found as above, has been corrected 
to the spheroidal figure of the earth, according to the theory ex- 
plained in the Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of 1 797 ; 
and for doing which, rules are given by Mr. Mendoza witli his 
Nautical Tables of i8oi.- This calculation is tedious, and the correc- 
tion, more especially in low latitudes, too small to be necessary in 
common cases. 

5th. In the nautical almanack the distances are given to every 
three hours, but the irregularities of the moon’s motion being such 
as to cause some inequality in the different parts of this interval, the 
distance at the hour preceding, and at the hour following the time 
of observation, was found by interpolation from the two nearest 
given on each side; and having the distances at Greenwich for each 
hour, the 'observed distance can never fall more than half an hour 
from one of them ; and the moon’s inequalities do not then produce 
any sensible error in the corresponding time, as obtained from com- 
mon proportion. The correction arising* from this process is seldom 
so important as to be necessary in sea observations. 

6th.* The longitude deduced from a comparison of the true 
distance at observation with the hourly distances at Greenwich, is 
contained in the following tables under .the head of Longitude from 
Nautical Almanack. But as it frequently*happened, that the observa- 
tion was not taken exactly in the place which it is intended to fix. 



APPENDIX. 


£58 


[South Coa$t. 


this longitude is reduced to that place by the application of tbe dif- 
ference shown by the time keepers to have existed between the two 
situations. In ascertaining this difference, the rates of going allowed 
to the time keepers are generally those found at the place which is 
to be fixed ; whether applied to observations taken before arriving, 
or after quitting that place. This, however, could ,be done only at 
those stations where rates had been observed ; at the intermediate 
points, where the result of lunar distances is given principally as an 
object of comparison with the time keepers, the fates allowed in the 
reduction are those found at the station previously quitted ; but then 
the difference of longitude is corrected by the quantity consequent 
on the following supposition: that the time keepers altered their 
rates from those at the previous, to those at the following station, in 
a ratio augmenting in arithmetic progression. The difference of longi- 
tude, thus corrected when necessary, is given under the head of 
Reduction by time keepers; and the longitudes reduced by it to the 
place intended to be fixed, are taken to be of equal authority with 
those resulting from observations ipade in the place itself. 

7th, But these longitudes, whether reduced to, or observed in, 
the place to be fixed, still require a correction which is of more im- 
portance than any of those before mentioned. The theories of the 
solar and lunar motions not having reached such a degree of perfec- 
tion as to accord perfectly with actual observation at Greenwich, the 
distances calculated from those theories and given in the tilmanack 
become subject to some error; and consequently so do the longitudes 
deduced from them. The quantities of error in the computed places 
of the sun and moon, have been ascertained at Greenwich as often as 
those luminaries could be observed ; and Mr. Pond, the astronomer 
royal, having permitted access for this purpose to the' table of 
errors kept in the Observatory, Mr. Crosley has calculated the cor- 
responding effects on the longitude, and proportioned them to the 
time when our observation? were taken. The combined effect of 
tl» two errors forms a correction, to the longitudes obtained from the 



Lunar obtervations.'] 


APPENDIX. 


259 


sun and moon ; but when the moon was observed with a star, then 
the moon's error alone gives the correction. But it has sometimes 
happened, that there were many days interval between the observa- 
tions of the moon at Greenwich, and that the errors preceding and 
following are so extremely irregular, that no accuracy could be ex- 
pected in reducing them by proportion ; in these unfortunate cases, 
that part of the error belonging to the moon has been taken absolute, 
such as it was found on the day nearest to the time of observation ; 
but the sun's error is always from proportion. These corrections, 
with the interval in the Greenwich observations of the moon, are 
given under their proper heads. 

8th. The longitudes thus computed, reduced to the intended 
point, and corrected, are placed under each other ; and the mean of 
the whole is taken to be the true longitude of that point, unless in 
certain cases where it is otherwise expressed. The mean is also 
given of the longitudes uncorrected for the errors of the sun and 
moon's places, that the reader may have an opportunity of com- 
paring them ; and some sea officers who boast of their having never 
been out more than 5', or at most 10', may deduce from the column 
of corrections in the different tables, that their lunar observations 
could not be entitled to so much confidence as they wish to suppose ; 
since, allowing every degree of perfection to themselves and their 
instruments, they would probably be 12', and might be more than 
30' wrong. 

In the nautical almanacks for 1814 and 1815, the distances are 
computed from the new tables of Burg f9r the moon, and of Delambre 
for the sun ; and it is to be hoped that the necessity of correcting 
for errors, in the distances at Greenwich will have ceased, or be at 
least greatly diminished. Should the computed places of the sun 
and moon be happily found to agree with actual observation, and 
supposing that our results may be ta^en as the average of what 
practised observers with good instruments will usually obtain when 



260 


APPENDIX. 


[SbufA Coast. 


circumstances are favourable, then lunar observations taken in 1814 
and afterwards, may be entitled to confidence within the following 
limits ; 

From one set of distances, consisting of six independent sights, 
the error in longitude may be 30' on either side ; but will probably 

t 

not exceed 12'. 

From six sets on one side of the moon, each set consisting as 
above, the error may be ^o ' ; but not probably more than 8'. 

Twelve sets of distances, of which six on each side of the moon, 
are not likely to err more than 10' from the truth; and may be 
expected to come within 5'. 

The error in sixty sets, taken during three or four lunations, 
and one. half on each side of the moon, will not, I think, be wrong 
more than 5' ; and will most probably give the longitude exact to 
i' or 2'. This degree of accuracy is far beyond what the hopes of 
the first proposers of the lunar method ever extended, and even 
beyond what astronomers accustomed only to fixed observatories 
will be disposed to credit at this time ; but in thinking it pmbable that 
sixty sets of lunar distances will come within 1' or 2' of the truth*' 
• when compared with correct tables, I conceive myself borne out by 
the following facts. 

In Port Lincoln, I observed an eclipse of the sun with a re- 
fracting telescope of forty-six inches focus, and a power of about 
two hundred. It was recalculated by Mr. Crosley from Delambre's 
and Burckhardt’s tables, the one made four and the other ten years 
afterwards. The longitude, deduced from the beginning differed 
only 31*^5 from that at thd end, and the mean of both only 1' 17" 
from thirty sets of lunar distances corrected for the errors of the 
tables. 

The Spanish admiral D’Espinosa observed emersions of the 
first and second satellites of Jupiter in 1793, at Jackson, and 
also an eclipse of the sun which he recalculated by the tables cf 



Ldinar observations.’} 


APPENDIX. 


261 


Burg. He deduces from thence tlie longitude of Sydney Cove to be 
151 4 >^’ f ^•id from^r/y-^oMr sets of lunar distances by lieutenant 

Flinders, it would be 151“ 11' 4,9" east. 

At Port Louis in the Isle Mauritius, the Abbe de la Caille 
observed an eclipse of the sun, the transit of mercury over the sun's 
disk, and various occultations of Jupiter’s satellites ; M. d’Aprfes also 
observed several occultations ; and this place should therefore be 
well determined. Jts longitude in the Requisite Tables is 57“ 29' 15" 
east ; and from twenly-seven sets of distances taken whilst a prisoner 
there, I made it, when corrected for the errors of the tables, 
57° 29' 57" east. 

In appreciating the degrees of accuracy to which a small or 
larger number of lunar distances may be expected to give the longi- 
tude, I suppose the observer to be moderately well practised, his 
sextant or circle, and tirhe keeper to be good, and his calculations to 
be carefully made; and it is also supposed, that the distances in the 
nautical almanack are perfectly correct. As, however, there may 
still be some errors, notwithstanding the science and the labour em- 
ployed to obviate them, it cannot be too much recommended to sea 
officers to preserve all the data of their observations ; more especially 
of such as may be used in fixing the longitudes of places but little, 
or imperfectly known. The observations may then be recalculated, 
if requisite ; the corrections found to be necessary may be applied ; 
and the observer may have the satisfaction of forwarding the pro- 
gress of geography and navigation, after having contributed to the 
safety of the ship, and benefit of the particular service in which he 
may happen to have been engaged. 



appendix. 


'[South Coast. 


TABLE I. (Reference from p. 69.) ■ 

Dngitude of the Observatory in Princess Royal Harbour, King George's Sound. 


nwich 

the 

ions. 

Place. 

Longit. L. 
from 

Naut. Aim. 

Reduction 
by two 
time keepers. 

E. Longitude . 
of the 

Observatory. 

Correction ^ 

[lorrect. Longit. 
of the 

Observatory. 

Wlience 

deduced. 

for errors 
of tables. 

interv. of 
(t ’s error. 

ow. 1 

c 

At sea. 

90 66 d 

+ 27 20 49 

118 16 49 . 

-29 45 

One 3ay, 

iW 47 4 

o E. d 

r 301 


91 6 16 

— 

118 27 4 

— 

— 

117 57 19 

— 




95 50.45 

+ 22 39 7 

118 29 52 

-29 0 

Two days. 

118 0 52 

Ditto. 

7 50| 


96 47 45 



118 26 52 

— 

— 

117 57 52 

— 

T 23 

. 

97 61 0 

+ 20 20 18 

118 11 18 

-28 30 

— 

117 42 48 

— 

ber. f 

Anchorage 

118 4 30 


118 4 30 

- 5 30 

One day. 

117 59 0 

O W. d 


in Princess 

118 4 30 


118 4 30 

— 

— 

117 59 0 

— 

7 24^ 

Royal Har- 

118 .7 30 


118 7 30 

— 

— 

118 2 0 

— 


bour. 

118 9 46 


118 9 46 

— 

— 

118 4 15 

— 



118 1 0 


118 1 0 

— 

— , 

117 55 30 

— 


^ At Observa- 

117 66 45 


1 17 56 45 

- 9 30 

One day. 

117 47 15 

Ditto. 


1 lory. 

117 59 15 


117 69 15 

— 

— 

117 49 45 

— 

;l 47^ — 

117 65 46 


1 17 55 45 

— 

— 

117 46 15 

1 — 

1 — 

117 54 SO 


1 17 54 30 

— 

— 

117 45 0 

— 



117 63 45 


117 53 45 

— 

— : 

117 44 15 

— 


^ Ditto. I 

118 2 45 


118 2 45 

- 13 0 

One day. 

117 49 45 

O K d 


— 

118 6 30 


118 6 30 

— 

— 

117 53 30 

— 



117 58 0 


117 58 0 

— 

— 

117 45 0 

— 


— 

117 56 45 


1 17 56 45 

— 

— 

1 17 43 45 

— 

3 f% OiTl J 

1 

117 55 0 


117 55 0 

— 

— 

117 42 0 

— 

i3 32^ 

— 

118 8 0 


118 8 0 

— 

— 

117 55 0 

— 


— 

118 4 30 


118 4 30 

— 

— 

117 51 30 

— 


— 

117 50 (1 


117 50 0 

— 

— 

117 37 0 

— 


— 

117 52 30 


117 52 30 

— 

— 

117 39 30 

— 


i. — 

117 51 0 


117 51 0 

— 

— 

117 38 0 

— 


On shore at 

122 80 41 

- 4 22 3^i 

1118, 8 7 

- 0 15 

One day. 

118 1 52 

o w.d 

Jan. 

Lucky Ray 

122 29 30 

— 

1 18 6 52 

— 

— 

118 0 37 

— 

>' / 

IT 

1 — 

122 33 1£ 

— 

118 10 37 

— 

— 

118 4 22 

— 

i i OO* 

\ 

t 

122 34 4£ 

— 

118 12 7 

— 

— 

118 5 52 

— 


- 

122 38 4,': 

— 

118 16 7 

— 

— 

118 9 52 

— 


1 - 

122 41 R 

) ‘ — 

118 18 37 

— 

— 

118 12 22 

— 


ffoflunar'distSs?”*'} Uncorrecled 11 8- 5 41,8 Corrected 117 53 9,9 andtaken! 


From observations east of the moon alone - 1 17° 48' 3, 7" 

w est of the moon alone - 117 67 57 


Mean 117 53 0,3 east. 


O I I I C I Observers. 


APPENDIX. 


tjunaT (jh8eT^}alions!\ 


table II. (Reference from p. 84.) 

t 

Longitude of the south pomt of Lucky Bay, Archipelaoo of the Recherche. 


f 


Appt. Greenwid 


Longitude E. 

Reduction 

East 

Lomirit. 

Correction 

Correct. Longit. 


time of the 

Place. 

from 

by two 


of 


foi'iTrors 
of (ables. 

Jnterv. of 
([ ’s error. 


of 


Whence 

observations. 


Naut. Aim. 

<« 

time keepers. 

Lucky Bay. 

Lucky Bay 

deduced 

1802 Jan. 

On the* 

122 30 45 


0 

122 

30 

// 

45 

* 

-6 15 

On» day 

122 

24 

// 

30 

0 W. ( 


South Pt. 

122 29 30 


122 

29 

30 

■■ ■ 

— 

122 

23 

15 

«... 

{>-at 17 5G<^ 


122 33 15 


122 

33 

15 


— 

122 

27 

0 



- — 

122 34 45 


122 

34 

45 


— 

122 

28 

30 

— 


. — 

122 38 45 


122 

38 

45 


— 

122 

32 

30 

— 



122 41 15 

oft! 

122 

41 

15 


— 

122 

35 

0 

— 


At sea. 

132 0 45 

- 9 30 55 

122 

29 

50 

- 8 45 

As on 27 th 

122 

21 

5 

0 E. c 


— 

131 51 -15 



122 

20 

20 

• 

there 

122 

11 

35 

— 

27 at 13 28^ 

— 

131 51 0 

— 

122 

20 

5 


being no 
other obs. 

122 

11 

20 

— 


— 

131 47 0 


122 

16 

5 



until 

122 

7 

20 

— 


— 

131 50 15 

■ - 

122 

19 

20 

_ 

Feb. 5. 

122 

10 

35 

— 


- — 

131 52 45 


122 

21 

50 



— 

122 

13 

5 

— 

r On shore 

132* 30 45 

-10 13 38 

122 

17 

7 

-8 30 

Ditto. 

122 

H 

37 

Ditto 

I 

at Fowler’s 

132 24 30 


122 

10 

52 




122 

2 

22 

— - 

28 at 14 42 < 

132 19 30 

- 

122 

5 

52 

j 


121 

57 

22 

— 

1 - 

132 19 15 

— 

122 

5 

37 

— 

— 

121 

57 

7 

' 


r.(Onc;itudc fnttn sixteen sets 1 , 

. }• Imcorrected 

of iutiRr distuiiccs, 


j 


122 2«27,J Corrected 122 15 42,1 


Longitude of the sou^ point from the two time keepers. 

On Jan. 0 at IS*" 51' of Greenwich time, and using the 
King-George’s-Sonnd rates, (he moan longitude was 122'’ 15' 48" 
Correction for variation in the rates found at Pt. Lincoln, — 0 24,1 

I 

Correction for supplemental error during 9 days, — 1 10,2 


Corrected longitude, taken preferably to that above, 122 14 13,7 east. 



appendix. 


[South Cocut. 


TABLE III. (Reference from p. 105.) 
Longitude of the Anchorage in Fowler's Bay. 


reen'wich 
j of the 
vations. 

! 

Place. 

Longitude E. 
from 

Naut. Aim, 

Reduction 
by two 
time keepers. 

Bast Longit. 

of the 
Ancliorag-e. 

Correction 

Corr. Longit. 

of the 
Anchorage. 

Whence 

deduced. 

for errors 
of tables. 

Intcrv. of 
, a *s error. 



o 

/ 

// 

o / 

// 

o 

/ 

1 

n 1 

/ 

// 

• 

• 

/ 

// 

0 W. d 

1 Jan. 

On shore 

122 

30 

45 

+ 10 13 

38 

132 

44 

231 

- 6 

15 

One day. 

132 

38 

8 

h i 

at Lucky 

122 

29 

30 



132 

43 

8 

— 


— 

132 

36 

53 

— 

17 66.> 

Bay. 

122 

33 

15 

— 


132 

46 

53 

— 


— 

132 

40 

38 

— 


— 

122 

34 

45 

— 


132 

48 

23 

— 


— 

132 

42 

8 

— " 


— 

122 

38 

46 

— 


132 

52 

23 

— 


— 

132 

46 

8 

i — 


— 

122 

41 

15 

— 


132 

54 

53 

— 


— 

132 

48 

.38 

— 


At sea. 

132 

. 0 

45 

+ 0 42 

48 

1-32 

43 

28 

- 8 

45 

A. on S!7t.h 

132 

31 

43 

0 E. 5 


— 

131 

51 

15 

— 


132 

33 

58 

— 


there 

132 

25 

13 

— 

13 28, 

— 

131 

51 

0 

! ' — 


132 

33 

43 

— 


b* iiig no 
other obs. 

132 

24 

58 

— 

— 

131 

47 

0 

— 


132 

29 

43 

— 


until 

132 

20 

58 

— 


— 

131 

50 

15 

— 


132 

32 

58 

— 


Feb. 5. 

132 

21 

13 

— 



131 

62 

45 

— 


132 

35 

28 

— 



132 

26 

43 

— 


On shore 

132 

30 

45 



132 

30 

45 

-i. 8 

30 

Ditto. , 

132 

22 

15 

Ditto. 

14 42, 

al Fowler's 

132 

24 

30 



132 

24 

30 

— 


— — 

132 

16 

,.o 

— 


1 

132 

19 

30 



132 

19 

30 

— 


__ 

132 

11 

0 

— 


— 

132 

19 

15 



132 

19 

15 






132 

10 

45 

— 

ruary 

** Af sea. 

135 

8 

0 

^2 37 

43 

132 

30 

17 

- 19 

45 

Two days. 

132 

10 

32 

* Aldeb. 

h / 

— 

135 

18 

15 

— 


132 

40 

82 

— 


— 

132 

20 

47 

w. a 

1 26 . 

— 

IM 

16 

30 

— 


132 

.38 

47 

— 


— 

132 

19 

2 



1 — 

135 

41 

15 

— 


133 

6 

32 

--19 

15 

— 

132 

47 

17 

! 

* 8p. Virg. 


— 

135 

81 

15 

— 


132 

63 

32 

— 


— 

132 

34 

17 

1 L. d 


L 

135 

21 

30 

— 


132 

48 

47 

— 


— 

132 

24 

32 

— 

itnde frem tweiity-tvvo 
s of lunar distances, 

1 Uncorrected 

1^2 39 24 

Corrected 

132 28 26,7 



Longitude of the Anchoraye Irom the two time keepers. 


On Jan. 28 at 11" 14' ofGreenwidi time, and using the 
King-George’s-Sound rates, the mean- longitude was 
Coi*rcction for variation in the rates found at Pt. Lincoln, 
Correction for supplemental error during 27,8 days. 

Corrected longitude, taken preferably to that above. 


132“ 32' 37" 

— 3 34,4 

— 3 36,8 

182 25 25,8 east. 


Observeri. 




Ltunar obscrvations^l . 


APPENDIX, 


TABLE IV. (Reference fmm p. 14?I.) 
Longitude of tlie Tents, at the head of Port LtNcoLN. 


Appt. Greenwich 
time of the 
observations. 

Place. 

Longit. E. 
from 

Naut, Aim. 

• 

Reduction 
by two 
time keepers. 

1802 Feb. 

^ At sea. 

1^5 8 d 

+6 44 58 



185 IB 15 

— 

^ ! 

' 

185 10 80 

— 

15 at 1 26< 

_ 

k85 41 15 

— 


■ ■ 

185 81 15 

— 



135 21 80 

1 


At I he tents. 

186 1 15 


2C at 13 22 

— 

185 52 30 
185 51 15 


March. 

At anrlior 

188 14 30 

,^2 5 5 

near the 

138 30 a 



0 at 16 36< 

head of 

138 13 45 



Spencer's 

Giilph. 

188 5 0 

— 




188 4 0 

— 

1 


137 50 30 

— 


* Ditto. 

188 4 30 

Ditto. 



138 2 15 

— 



138 3 45 

— 

10 at 18 42^ 


048 4 15 

i — 



137 55 0 

; 



137 57 15 

— 

1 

r Under sail. 

137 38 30 

_ 1 17 84 

25 at 12 42 < 

1 Invcstiga- 

137 46 45 

— 

[ tfir'.s Strait. 

i 

187 88 30 

— 

. 

! 

187 W 45 

— 


r Ditio. 

187 48 0 

- 1 57 54 


- 

187 41 15 

— . 

26 at 13 6' 

1 

187 80 45 

— 

1 - 

j 1 87 41 ] 5 

1 — 1 


L - 

• 

187 17 8 O 1 - 

Lonsritiule from thirty sets'! T ucorreclcd 

oMunar distances, 

• 

J 




of the 
Tenth. 


VMj 

UU) 


52 58 
1:5 
I 28 
2 J> 18 


10 18 
I8f> 0 28 
180 1 ]> 


185 

185 

IW 

180 

180 

185 

185 

185 

185 

185 

185 

185 

185 

185 

185 

185 

185 

185 

185 

185 

185 

185 

185 


52 80 

51 15 
if 25 

21 5> 
8 40 
50 55 
58 55 
54 25 
5fl 25 

57 10 

58 10 
50 10 
40 55 

52 10 
50 50 
5r> 11 
50 50 
50 11 
45 0 
48 21 
4? 51 
48 21 
40 80 


1 Cori’cction 

CfUTect.lAmgil 
of the 
Tents. 

M'lionce 

dedueed. 

for errors 
of tables. 

Tnterv. of 
([ 's error 

1 

- 10 15 

|t\vo day.^^. 

I 3.5 13 

* Aldeb. 1 

— 

— 

133 13 2S 

V". of ([ 

— 

, — 

135 41 13 

— 

— 10 1.5 

Ditto. 

136 f) 5,S 

^ Sp. Virg 

— 



135 ,56 58 

E. of d 

— 

— 

135 17 13 

— 

!- 1 80 

One tlay. 

185 56 I> 

0 1'- 4 

— 

— 

135 18 0 



1 — 

— 

135 l(i 15 



1- 15 80 ' 

Two ila^f. 

185 58 55 

G d 

1 — 

— 

136 6 25 

— , 

1 — 

— 

135 53 10 

— 

1 ~ 

— 

135 II 25 

— 

1 

1 — 

I 13.5 1:5 25 

— 

1 

i ““ 

'l-.W 38 .55 

j 

j'— 16 SO 

Ditlo. 

135 12 55 

1 Ditto. 

1 

— 

135 10 10 


1 

— 1 

135 12 10 , 

1 

— 

! 

135 12 ,10 

— 

— 

— 

135 3 :’. 25 

— 

— 

— 

135 :!5 10 

— 

- 7 15 

Five days 

135 13 11 

0 E. d 

— 

— 

135 51 56 

— 

— 

— 

135 13 11 

— 

— 

_ 

135 51 .56 

— 

-.10 45 

Ditto. 

135 3t 21 

, Ditto. 

— 

— 

135 32 36 

— 

— 

— 

135 31 6 

— 

— 

— 

135 32 36 


— 

■ — 

435 38 61 

— 


185 58 21,0* Corrected 185 44 51,1 and take 


From observulions wc^.l of the moon alone - - 

eiist of the /noon alone - - lo o 

Mean 1»5 44 51,1 easl. 
Solar Eclipse of March 4, 1802, observed at the tents. 

'Longitude deduced from beriming - - 4^' ^^’5 

'^85 ‘AO 8.2 psist. 



APPENDIX. 


Coast. 


TABLE V , (Reference from p. 220.) 

Longitude ‘of Point Nepean at the entrance of Port Phillip. 


i 

cnwich 

of 

ations. 

Place. 

Longitude E. 
from 

Naut. Aim. 

Reduction 
by two 
time kceperij. 

East Longitude 
of 

l*t. Nepean. 

Correi 

for errors 
of tables, j 

ction 1 

Interv. of 
([ ’s error. 

Correct. Longit. 
of 

Pt. Nepean. 

t 

Whence 

deduced. 

4 .. -11 1 

At sea. 

140 

/ 

6 

n 

45 

4 ; 4 57 25 

145 

4 

// 

10 

-21 

H 

45 

Four days. 

144 

42 

// 

25 

♦ Antarcg. 

vj)ril. 

— 

140 

6 

15 



145 

3 

40 

1 


— i 

144 

41 

55 

E. of a 

h , 

0 42^ 

— 

140 

140 

10 

2 

15 

15 

Ditto. 

145 

144 

7 

69 

40 

40 

-21 

15 

Ditto. 

144 

144 

46 

38 

55 

25 

* Regulus, 


— 

139 

55 

45 

- ■ 

144 

53 

10 

— 


— 

144 

31 

55 

W. of a 


— 

139 

52 

30 



144 

19 

55 

— 


— 

144 

28 

40 

— 

1 

f At Jst an- 

144 

45 

45 

— 0 8 10 

144 

37 

35 

- 11 

45 

days | 

144 

26 

50 

0 K. i 


chor.inPort 

1 Phillip. 

144 

144 

37 

,40 

15 

0 

by survey. 

144 

144 

29 

37 

35 

50 

— 


(April 25, 
to May 4.) 

144 

i44 

17 

26 

50 

5 


12 31< 

1 — 

144 

41 

30 

— 

144 

33 

20 

— 


— — 

144 

21 

35 

— 


— 

144 

43 

0 

— 

144 

34 

50 

— 


* — 

144 

23 

5 

— 


— 

144 

44 

0 

— 

114 

35 

50 

— 


— 

144 

24 

5 

— 


— 

144 

41 

45 

— 

144 

33 

35 

' 



144 

21 

50 

— 


f Ai ^id an- 

144 

53 

30 

-0 13 25 

144 

40 

6 

- 11 

15 

Ditto. 

144 

28 

50 

Ditto. 


1 chor. iu"do. 

144 

56 

30 

by siin'ey. 

144 

43 

5. 



— 

j41 

31 

60 

— 

16 28^ 

1 — 

144 

54 

45 

— 

144 

41 

20 

— 


— 

144 

30 

5 

— 

1 

1 — 

144 

56 

45 

• — 

144 

13 

20 

— 


— 

144 

32 

5 

— 

, 1 

1 

L — 

145 

3 

0 

— 

144 

49 

35 

— 

1 

— 

144 

38 

20 


Otude from eighteen sets 
lunar distances, / 

Lhi corrected 

1 14 

45 27,5 

Corrected 

144 

30 35,8 



Longitude of Point Nepean from the two time keepers. 


Dn April 20 at 1 1’‘ 1 1' of Greenwich time, and using the Kanguroo-I. 
rates, the mean longitude of first anchorage in Port Phillip was - 
Difference of longitude by the survey to Point Nepean, 
Correction for variation in the rates found at Port Jackson, 
Correction for supplemental error during 21 days, - - 


144" 57' 49,5" 
~ 8 10 
~ 0 53,8 
-9 14,4 


Corrected longitude from first set of observations, 

On May 2 at IP 46' of Greenwich time, and.using the Kanguroo-1. 
rates, the longitude ofthe ship (Pt. Nepean N. 1®W. 5^^') was 
Diffcrenccof Longitude to Point Nepean, - 
Correction for variation in the rates found at Fort Jackson, 
Correction for supplemental error during 27 days, - 

(Corrected longitude from second set of observations, 

Mean longitude froip both^ets, preferred to that above, - 


144 39 31,3 


144 50 5 
— 0 6 
- 1 28,1 
11 52,8 

114 36 38,1 


144 38 4,7 east. 


Lmnar otsenj^rfwnj.] APPENDIX. 2G7 

TABLE VI. (Reference from p. 237.) Longitude of Cattle Point, Port Japicson. 


ApptGrccnwicb 
time of 
obsei'vation.s 


1802 Aiiril. 
26 at 12 .34'<! 


Place. 


At 1st an- 
chor. in Port I 
Phillip. 


127 at 16 2H< 


f At 2(1 an 
j chor. in l*orl 
Philliii, 


May 


f On Cattle 
Point. 


21 at 11 hj< 


L — 

Ditto. 


27 at 16 28^ 


July r 

' J 

8 at 16 1^ 


Ditto. 


1 - 


Ditto. 


9 at 16 0< 


August 


f At anchor in 
I Port Curtis. 
1 


6 at 15 45-^, 


I — 

1 — 

L _ 

I r At anchor in 
Kep^d Ba) 


8 at 18 30< 


Longitude E? 
from 

Naut. Aim. 

Reduction 
by two 
time keepers. 

East Longitude 
of 

1 Cattle Point. 

1 • 

Correct ion 

• 

Cori’cct.L 

of 

Cattle P 

ongit. 

^^'bence 

dcdiWH'd. 

for erj’ors 
of tables. 

Interv. of 
^ ’s error. 

oint. 

144 

45 

if 

45 

o 1 II 

+ 6 29 32 

O 

151 

15 

if 

17 

, 

-11 

45 

hI days 

i5i 

8 

82 

O E. d 

141 

87 

45 

(From first 

151 

7 

17 

i — 

(A}»ril ‘^.5, 

150 

55 

82 


144 

144 

itj 

41 

0 

80 

rat OS fouml at 
Pt. Jackson.) 

151 

151 

15 

11 

82 

2 



to May L) 

151 

150 

8 

59 

47 

17 

— 

144 

48 

0 

— 

151 

12 

82 






151 

0 

17 


144 

44 


— 

151 

13 

82 




— 

151 

1 

17 


144 

41 

45 

— 

151 

ll 

17 




— 

150 

59 

82 


1 14 

•58 

80 

4- 6 28 2 

151 

16 

82 

- 11 

15 

Ditto. 

151 

5 

17 

Ditto. 

1 14 

56 

80 

(From ditto.) 

151 

19 

82 

— 



151 

8 

17 



144 

54 

45 

— 

151 

17 

47 






151 

6 

82 


Ji4 

56 

45 

— 

151 

19 

47 

— 



151 

8 

82 


145 

8 

0 

— 

151 

26 

2 




— 

151 

14 

47 


151 

18 

45 


151 

18 

15 

-~il 

0 

Two days. 

151 

7 

45 

Ditto. 

151 

21 

45 


151 

21 

15 




— 

151 

10 

45 

— 

151 

17 

15 

• 

151 

17 

15 

— , 



151 

i; 

J5 

— 

151 

21 

0 


151 

21 

0 





151 

10 

0 

— 

151 

11 

15 


151 

11 

15 

- ‘8 

15 

Cne day. 

151 

K 

0 

Ditto. 

151 

12 

80 


151 

12 

80 

— 


— 

151 

9 

15 


151 

8 

15 


151 

8 

45 

— 


— 

151 

5 

80 

— 

151 

15 

0 


151 

15 

0 

— 


— 

151 

11 

45 



151 

10 

0 


151 

10 

0 



— 

151 

6 

15 

— • 

Jol 

10 

0 


151 

10 

0 

— 


— 

151 

6 

45 

— i 

151 

47 

0 


151 

47 

0 

-- 12 

0 

days, 

151 

85 

0 ’ 

O W d 

151 

42 

0 

1 

151 

42 

0 



1 Bb 

151 

80 

0 

1 

151 

89 

45 


151 

89 

15 

— 


lo 

151 

27 

15 



151 

80 

80 


151 

80 

80 




— 

151 

18 

80 



151 

80 

80 


151 

80 

80 

- 10 

45 

Ditto. 

151 

19 

45 

Ditto. 

151 

81 

80 

i 

151 

81 

80 

‘ — 


— 

151 

20 

45 

- 

151 

81 

45 


151 

81 

45 

— 


— 

151 

21 

0 



151 

29 

80 


151 

29 

80 

— 


— 

151 

18 

45 

z 

151 

29 

45 


151 

29 

45 




— 

151 

19 

0 


151 

26 

80 


151 

26 

80 

— 


— 

151 

15 

45 



151 

26 

45 

0 8 8 

151 

18 

87 

~10 

1 J WO days. 

151 

8 

22 

Ditto. 

151 

28 

30 

(From last 

151 

20 

22 

— 




151 

10 

7 

— 

151 

88 

45 

rales.) 

151 

80 

87 

— 


— 

151 

20 

22 

— 

151 

84 


— 

151 

26 

22 



— 

151 

16 

7 

— 

151 

88 

80 

— 

151 

25 

22 

— 


— 

151 

15 

7 1 

1 — 

151 

27 

45 

— 

151 

19 

8/ 

— 


— 

151 

9 

22 

— 

151 

6 

15 

+ 0 14 6;151 

20 

21 

-6 

80 

Ditto 

151 

18 

51 

Ditto. 

151 

2 

45 

(Ditto.) 

151 


51 




— 

151 

10 

21 

— 

151 

11 

15 

— 

151 

25 

21 

— 


— 

151 

18 

51 

— 

151 

Is 

80 

— 

151 

22 

86 

— 


— 

151 


6- 

i 

151 

5 

0 

— 

151 

19 

1 

1 — 


— 

151 

12 

86 


151 

4 

80 

— 

151 

18 

86 

1 - 


— 

151 

12 

6 


s : nneorrected 

151 

21 

14,9 

Corrected 

fsT 

11 

49, 

and tak 


From observations cast of the moon alone 




I Obyer^er^.j 



268 


APPENDIX. 


[&«<& Cna»t. 

In addition to the tables of longitude for the south coast of 
Terra Australis, I subjoin, for the satisfaction of nautical and geo- 
graphical readers, a table of the rates of the tibie keepers, to show 
their deviations and the errors in longitude during the several 
passages from one fixed point to another ; commencing November i, 
1801, at the Cape of Good Hope, and ending May 9, i8oa, a*''^ort 
Jackson. From this table, the corrections for variation of rates and 
supplemental error, which have been applied to obtain the corrected 
longitudes by the time keepers, will be more distinctly seen. 


TABLE VII. 


Variations in rate and errors in longitude, made by Eamshaw's 
time keepers No. 543 and No. 520, between the Cape of Good 
Hope ancUPort Jackson. 


Departure taken. 

Ratesof time keepers losing. 

Variations in mean rate 

Errors in long, on arriving 

Daily part 
of »uppl«- 











mental 

Place. 

Longit. East. 

No, 5 13. 

No. 520. 

Mean. 

During 

Number 

Daily' ac- 

With rate 

With rate 

errors. 






the jiassage. 

of days. 

celeration. 

before found. 

accelerated. 


peof G. Hope 

0 / t! 

IH 2.5 7 

5,S13 

15,84 

1(»,585 

’ 






ng G. Sound 

117 m l(t 

6,4(i 

16,72 

11,590 

1,(K)5 

43,7 

0,0230 

13 56,8 E. 

8 18,8 E. 

11 41E. 

irt Lincobi 

li35 44 51 

8,43 

18,82 

13,625 

2,0-35 

57 

0,0357 

22 10,2 

7 25 

7;80 


(The time keepers were let down at Kanguroo Island, previously to the following rates.) 


inguroo Island 

1.S7 57 11 

8,46 

18,07 

13,265 







)rt Jackson 

151 11 49 

9,886 

17, :o 

18,793 

0,528 

34 

0,01553 

IT 16 

14 67,4 

26 40 

« 


1 (First rate.s on arriving.) 








In altering their rates between one station and another, the 
time keepers are supposed to have done it, not suddenly, {)ut gra- 
dviaWy and uniformly, by the quantities marked in the column of 
diii/y acceleration ; which quantities are the results of the variations 
in the mean rate during the passage, divided by the number of days. 
The daily acceleration ; is not much in any case, yet it makes' a 
materia] difference in the longitude after some time; and as the 
application of this difterence has always diminished the error found 
on arriving at any station, it is a satisfactory proof that the aeceler- 
ated rate, is nearer to the true going of the time keepers on the pas- 



APPENDIX. 


260 


TTie time keepers^ 

any given time, is the sum of all the terms of a series in arithmetic 
progression ; of which the 'daily acceleration, turned into longitude, 
is both the first term and common difference ; and the days elaiised 
form the number of terms. Therefore, 

Daily ac ' x 15, x number of days -f- x half number of days, 

= the dtjference of longitude in seconds. 

The differences thus obtained have been applied to the errors in 
longitude on^ arriving, as given by the rate before found; and the 
result is the error which remains with rate accelerated. 

Had the time keepers been so far perfect machines, as that 
the change in their rates liad been altogether gradual and uniform ; 
and were the stations, as fixed by the lunar distances, perfectly 
exact ; then the ei'ror on arriving, with rate accelerated, would have 
been o' o" in every case. But since neither the one nor the other may 
be perfect, and yet it is necessary to take one ’of them as being so, 
the difference which remains is considered to be the deviation of the 
time keepers from an uniformly accelerating rate ; and this 1 call 
their supplemental error. It is generally impossible to fix upon the 
manner how, or time when this error was contracted ; and there- 
fore it is distributed equally throughout the whole passage, day by day, 
according to the quantities marked in the last column of the table. 

• To recapitulate briefly : The longitudes of places given in this 
first Book of the voyage, and used in the construction of the charts 
of the South Coast, are those resulting from the time keepers, cor- 
rected as above for the acceleration of their mean rale and the sup- 
plemental error. The exceptions are. King George’s Sound, Port 
Lincoln, and Port Jackson, which are fixed By the lunar distances ; 
and with the position of Simon’s Town, Cape of Good Hope, consti- 
tute the basis of this chronometrical fabric. 


END OF VOL. I. 


London % Printed by W. Bultner and Co. 
Cleveland Row« St> Jamet's- 
